As elaborated earlier in Chapter 2, andrographolide can be subjected to various Phase I/II reactions and the a-alkylidene y-butyrolactone moiety of the phytochemical is also a metabolism target. Thus, a genotoxicity test will augment such findings.The in vitro cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay was used to assess the genotoxicity potential of andrographolide on three cell lines namely V-79, AHH-1 and MCL-5 where the latter two are metabolically competent with MCL-5 being more sensitive due to the presence of cDNAs for four human cytochromes plus microsomal epoxide hydrolase (Crespi et al.,1991). To the best of the author's knowledge, this is the first study utilising in vitro CBMA, which is a recommended Stage I assay (COM, 2000) in examining the genotoxicity potential of andrographolide.Andrographolide Induced Aneugenicity in Vitro,The phytochemical caused statistically significant (p<0.05) incidence of micronuclei between 10 and 50pM in AHH-1 and V-79 cell lines and the values decreased between 70 and 90pM.In MCL-5 cell line, which is metabolically superior to both AHH-1 and V-79 cells, exposure of the cells to lOpM for one cell cycle did not elicit substantial genotoxic damage.Copy I 139Y. SharifuddinChapter 3Statistically significant (p<0.05) inductions of micronuclei were only observed in MCL-5 cells challenged with 30 and 50pM but the two top doses tested did not cause increases in micronuclei frequency. The lower incidence of micronuclei witnessed in all cell lines at higher andrographolide concentrations of 70 and 90pM was primarily due to high cytotoxicity exerted by the phytochemical.The interesting part of the data obtained concerns the difference in micronuclei frequency between the cell lines tested. As summarised in Table 3.7, MCL-5 cells were capable of tolerating lOpM of andrographolide evident in the absence of significant micronuclei frequency unlike in AHH-1 and V-79 cells, where there was significant difference in values between AHH-1 and MCL-5, as well as V-79 against MCL-5. At 30pM, metabolically- deficient hamster lung fibroblast V-79 cells possess the highest percentage of micronuclei recorded which was significant against that observed in MCL-5 but not in AHH-1. All three cell lines harbour significantly different (p<0.05) micronuclei frequency at 50pM against untreated cells but there were no difference between them at the 50jiM dose. Thus, the metabolic capacity possesses by AHH-1 cell line may be insufficient in reducing the genotoxic activity of andrographolide compared to MCL-5 cells, which boast CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2A6, CYP3A4 and CYP2E1 as well as microsomal epoxide hydrolase activities (Crespi et al., 1991). Furthermore, there were no significant difference observed in the incidence of micronuclei at 10, 30 and 50pM andrographolide between metabolically- deficient V-79 cells and AHH-1 cells that has stable aryl hydrocarbon hydroxylase and CYP1A1 activities. As MCL-5 cells began to exhibit increased incidence of micronuclei at 30jliM and upwards, it can be proposed that the intrinsic metabolic capacity was overwhelmed and the cells were no longer able to tolerate the accumulation of andrographolide molecules between 30 and 90pM concentrations. The absence of a statistically significant increase of micronuclei frequency in mononucleated AHH-1 and MCL-5 cells ruled out the possibility of accumulation in mitotic slippage incidences.Mitomycin-C, a direct-acting clastogen was employed as a positive control in. As shown in Tables 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5 previously, mitomycin-C induced statistically significant micronucleiCopy 1 140Y. SharifuddinChapter 3against the negative control and these figures are within the range normally used in the laboratory.As shown in Tables 3.3, 3.4 and 3.5, the number of micronuclei and binucleated cells decreased at higher doses of andrographolide, in agreement with elevated level of cytotoxicity elicited by the phytochemical. It is conceivable that the higher cytotoxicity imposed a greater selective pressure on the cells and cell cycle kinetics where the scored binucleated cells might be the subpopulations that survived.Apart from disparity in metabolic potential, these cell lines also differ in p53 status. Both AHH-1 and MCL-5 are heterozygous for p53 but able to conduct normal DNA repair (Doherty et al., 1996) whereas V-79 is deficient in p53 (Chaung et al., 1997). p53 has been described to accumulate into micronuclei although its role has not been determined (Granetto et al., 1996; Sablina et al., 1998). Referring to the data generated, there were no indications that p53 may affect cellular response in concordance to previous findings that andrographolide activity is independent of a cell's p53 status (Rajagopal et al., 2003). Clearly, the Phase I biotransformation capacity exhibited by MCL-5 cell line may have played a role in reducing the genotoxic impact of andrographolide at lOpM concentrations.These data provided valuable insights into andrographolide biotransformation in human cell lines that also complement the in silico predictions derived from DEREK and METEOR.The incidence of mitotic slippages was absent based on the frequency of micronucleated mononucleate cells that did not change significantly.MCL-5 cells that were challenged with 10, 30 and 50pM of andrographolide and then labelled with anti-kinetochore CREST antibodies to determine the presence of kinetochores, revealed that the phytochemical induced mainly kinetochore positive micronuclei. This method identifies the presence of kinetochore protein associated with the centromeres of chromosomes or its absence from acentric chromosome fragments (Brinkley et al., 1985).This discovery suggest that andrographolide behaves primarily in an aneugenic manner in which whole chromosomes are lost as opposed to breakage producing chromosomal fragments that were manifested as kinetochore negative micronuclei. The ratio of kinetochoreCopy 1 141Y. SharifuddinChapter 3positive/kinetochore negative micronuclei in MCL-5 cell line was within the range normally observed in the laboratory and comparable to those observed in the literature (Parry et al.,2002; Kayani & Parry, 2008) as well as the percentage of kinetochore positive/negative induced by andrographolide against known clastogen and aneugen reported in Parry et al., (2002).The induction of damage by aneugenic compounds may involved the chromosomes and various other cellular components crucial for cell division including the signal transduction pathways which ensure the fidelity of the whole process (Parry & Parry 1989), hence the rise of aneuploidy may not always be attributed to direct chromosome aberration or gene mutation, both of which have DNA as primary target for chemical action. Since indirect mechanisms of a genotoxin involve interactions with non-DNA targets leading to a genotoxic effect (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003), various cellular targets would have to be damage before any manifestation of scorable biological effects can be observed. Therefore, aneugens exhibit threshold concentration-effect response curve (Aardema et al., 1998; Kirsch-Volders et al.,2003). Potential thresholds have been elucidated for aneugens which are spindle inhibitors such as benzonitrile, nitrobenzene (Bonacker et al., 2004) benomyl and its active metabolite carbendazim (Bentlery et al., 2000), colchicine, mebendazole and nocodazole (Elhajouji et al., 1995; 1997; 1998) using the in vitro micronucleus assay in combination with kinetochore labelling and fluorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH).Andrographolide Primarily Evoked Necrotic Cell Death in vitro.Genotoxicity assessment would be incomplete without the cytotoxicity level determination. Cytotoxicity of andrographolide was determined using replicative index calculation, microscopical identification of cell death and trypan-blue exclusion assay. Replicative index (RI) measures the relative number of nuclei in cells exposed to andrographolide compared to negative control cultures and the mean relative RI values for all cell lines significantly (p<0.05) decreased with dose, concomitant with a consistent increase in cytotoxicity values where the top two doses caused more than 50% cytotoxicity. It transpired that lOpM ofCopy I 142Y. SharifuddinChapter 3andrographolide was sufficient to significantly affect the replicative index but the caveat to this was the assumption that untreated cells possess 100% viability.The same trend was also observed in the incidence of necrotic cells where lOpM of the phytochemical initiated statistically significant and unfluctuating increases with the top two doses caused more than 50% necrotic death in the cell population, close to the 60% cytotoxicity mark. This was in stark contrast to apoptotic cells where the highest percentage of occurrence was lower than 2% of the cell population in all cell lines where 30 and 50pM of the phytochemical always induced the highest frequency of apoptosis in AHH-1 and MCL-5 cell lines. However, these figures were still low in comparison to population of cells that were primarily greeted by necrosis. The generally low frequency of apoptotic response at the two top doses compared to other treatment concentrations was due to profound damage to the cells and possibly the apoptotic machinery. Furthermore, andrographolide was found to trigger necrosis in a time- and dose-dependent manner, the longer duration of incubation from 8 to 24 hours increased necrotic cell frequencies but not apoptotic cells. The incidence of apoptosis in MCL-5 cell population remained almost constant between those exposed for 8 and 24 hours respectively, where less than 2% of cells experienced apoptosis. The dose of 30 and 50pM of andrographolide that induced high and significantly different apoptotic cells against negative controls also elicit significant micronuclei induction indicating possible correlation between the two. However, the prevalence of apoptosis amongst cells was low to affect micronuclei induction and cells mostly died via necrosis.Therefore, all cell lines treated with andrographolide exhibited one common trait in terms of cell death despite their differences in metabolic capacity and p53 status, that the cells died primarily via necrosis in a dose-dependent fashion as compared to programmed cell death. Furthermore, cell viability assessment performed using the trypan-blue exclusion method, which primarily measures cellular membrane integrity shows that the majority of cells died in a dose-related fashion. Since only cells with damaged membrane would be susceptible to the dye, it can be safely assumed that the dead cell population measured by this method experienced necrosis because apoptotic cells normally possess intact cellular membrane.Even though the dye itself is toxic, the exposure time for all samples were limited to 9Copy 1 143Y. SharifuddinChapter 3minutes, well below the maximum 15 minutes limit recommended by the manufacturer. The replicative index, the necrotic and apoptotic cells frequency determination as well as trypan- blue exclusion assay indicated the same trend of dose-dependent cytotoxicity exerted by andrographolide. Furthermore, trypan-blue exclusion assay and cellular replicative index measure different cytotoxicity endpoints, the cumulative effects are additive where andrographolide reduced the population of viable cells and caused inhibited cellular proliferation of the surviving cell population. The adoption of either measurement on its own negates accurate assessment of cytotoxicity.Exposure of HepG2 cells to andrographolide was reported to lead to the collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP) (Li et al., 2007). The damage caused to the glutathione (GSH) system in the mitochondria by andrographolide was found to be in a dose- dependent fashion with corresponding depletion of glutathione. Glutathione plays a crucial role in the maintenance of cellular function and defence against oxygen free radicals. The presence of andrographolide changed the normal intracellular redox status and the collapse of mitochondrial membrane potential but failed to elicit a potent apoptotic response in HepG2 cells (Li et al., 2007). As mentioned previously in the second Chapter, teucrin A was considered a comparable example since it is a diterpene-containing phytochemical and in the presence of CYP3A4, formed reactive epoxides that interacts with proteins and also caused mitochondrial membrane permeability and caspase activation. Teucrin A was also shown to reduced cytoskeleton-associated protein thiols, cellular glutathione levels but increased cytosolic concentration of Ca2+. Indeed, moderate accumulation of Ca2+ concentration leads to caspase activation and increase FasL expression that would initiate apoptosis. In contrast, higher levels of cytosolic Ca2+ can activate calpains, endonucleases and phospholipase A2, all of which have been implicated in necrotic cell death (Trump & Berezesky, 1995; Kass & Orrenius, 1999; Berridge et al., 2000). The chemical structure of teucrin A in comparison to andrographolide is shown in Figure 3.21. The MCL-5 cell line carries CYP3A4 cDNA, amongst other P450 cytochromes and CYP3A is known to possess wide substrate spectrum (Wienkers & Heath, 2005) as well as epoxide hydrolase. It can be proposed that andrographolide may behave in the same manner. Furthermore, predictions by METEOR demonstrated that andrographolide is capable of forming epoxides.Copy I 144Y. SharifuddinChapter 3OHTeucrin A AndrographolideFig. 3.21. Chemical structure comparison between teucrin A and andrographolide. Both phytochem icals contain b icyclic diterpene.Glutathione is a ubiquitous tripeptide consisting of glycine, cysteine and glutamate. One of the prediction made by METEOR was the conjugation of glutathione with andrographolide at the a,p-unsaturated moiety, where the cysteine part of GSH directly attached to andrographolide abolishing the A,2(13) double bond as shown in Figure 2.16c. Furthermore, Cui et al. (2004) reported the presence of 3-O-sulfate conjugates and 3-0-sulfate-12-S- cysteine conjugate metabolites in human urine, that were not within the list of possible metabolites suggested by METEOR. It may be possible that andrographolide is capable of reacting to cellular proteins that contains the thiol group. Its ability to attenuate inflammation was suggested via the inhibition of NF-kB activation by forming a molecular adduct with reduced cysteine62 of p50, hence blocking the binding of NF-kB oligonucleotide to nuclear proteins (Xia et al., 2004). Andrographolide was demonstrated to reduce cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) expression, which is an example of pro-inflammatory proteins also via binding to NF-kB (Hidalgo et al., 2005). Thus, it can be speculated that higher concentrations of andrographolide caused depletion of cellular proteins with thiol group such as GSH, changing redox status.These results might explain the observation made by Akbarsha & Murugaian (2000), where Sertoli cells in rats treated with andrographolide were highly vacuolated, indicating cell death. Indeed the presence of vacuoles within the cytoplasm is a mark of necrotic cell death. The seminiferous epithelium was also thoroughly distorted and disorganised with the epithelium and/or lumen contained multinucleated giant cells with several nuclei harbouringCopy I 145Y. SharifuddinChapter 3marginalised chromatin in rats subjected to andrographolide treatment (Akbarsha & Murugaian, 2000). These anomalies were observed to be more profound in rats given higher doses of andrographolide (Akbarsha & Murugaian, 2000). Sperms were also found to possess no or little motility with tail abnormalities (Akbarsha & Murugaian, 2000). Furthermore, all the female rats mated with control males delivered litters, whereas none of the females mated with andrographolide-treated males delivered any offspring. Whether this is due to abnormal sperms itself or development deficit at conceptus level are not entirely clear but aneuploidy is known to cause reproductive failure. Andrographolide it seemed affects cell growth by causing chromosome malsegregation, disrupting the mitotic machinery and caused necrotic cell death in a dose-dependent fashion.Thus, necrosis was a prevalent mode of cell death after andrographolide exposure, which was a surprise considering aneugens are known to primarily elicit programmed cell death (Decordier et al., 2002). Necrosis has long been considered as a consequence of physicochemical stress and thus as accidental and uncontrolled event. There are increasing number of evidence supporting the existence of caspase-independent cell death pathways responsible in a well-controlled cell death induction as observed in apoptosis (Zong & Thompson, 2006) and providing an alternative suicide mechanism in the event of apoptotic machinery failure (Fiers et al., 1999; Leist & Jaattela, 2001).