A 1. health related product cannot use a trademark which exaggerates functions or misleads consumers.The model should indicate the characteristics of products, such as material, volume, 2. capacity and advancement.The general name should be accurate and scientifi c, and indicate major materials, major 3. effective components or have words of function, but not indicate or hint of a curing effect.The name of property should indicate the objective form of product and should not use 4. the abstract name. For those products which consumers are familiar with, the name of property can be omitted, such as lipstick etc.Article 7 lists additional requirements: if the product has the same trademark, same general name, and same name of property but different taste or it is produced for special groups of people, the difference should be indicated after the name of property.It is forbidden to use the following contents in nomenclature of a health related product1278:professional terms not easily understood, and dialects,1. false, exaggerating and extreme terms such as highly effective, universal and "xx" 2. generation,vulgar or superstitious terms,3. the name of approved medicines4. ,letters of foreign language, Pinyin of Chinese and symbols. If it is a trademark or letters 5. and symbols of a foreign language that have to be used, it should be mentioned in specifi cation in Chinese.The Chinese name of an imported health related product should correspond to the foreign name as much as possible. The name can be translated according to meaning, pronunciation, or both. Generally, the foreign name is translated according to its meaning.12791276 Name of a tool should include the model of the product. This is related to disinfecting tools that are also included in the concept of health related products.1277 The list is given in Article 5 of the Regulation on Nomenclature of Health Related Products, but not in this order.1278 Article 8.1279 Article 9.-231-5.3.4.2 Nutrition ClaimsUntil recently, nutrition claims have not been regulated in China. In November 2007, the Chinese Ministry of Health issued Administrative Measures on Food Nutrition Labelling1280. The Measures are applicable from 1st May 2008. Nutrition labelling and nutrition claims are regulated by one single instrument.The new regulation stipulates the defi nition of food nutrition labelling and its scope, nutrition declaration and nutrition claim. The three technical annexes stipulate defi nition of nutrition ingredients, rounding rules, nutrients reference values, the conditions and terms of nutrition claims.1281 Companies are not allowed to state their products are high in calcium, iron or low in fat unless they meet certain strict criteria. They must not make false claims nor exaggerate the nutritional benefi ts of the product. The prohibition of medicinal claims is also repeated: labels must also not make direct or indirect claims of curing illness.12825.3.4.3 Health Food Effi cacy: the 27 ClaimsThe Health Food Regulation was discussed above in chapter 4 with regard to the safety aspect. Here we focus on marketing, and particularly on what can be claimed. Health food is defi ned as a food that has a specifi c health function, is suitable for certain groups of people, but is not for curing a disease. 1283 In Article 23 of the Food Hygiene Law, misleading advertising of health foods was prohibited: The content of the product description shall be accurate. The functions and ingredients of the product shall be identical with the information given in the product description and there shall be no false information. Article 51 of the new Food Safety Law states the same rules in new words. Claims that refer to prevention or treatment of disease (medicinal claims) are prohibited on health foods. Suitable and unsuitable user groups of the health food must be given, as also the functional ingredients and their content.As stated above, the Health Food Regulation establishes minimum safety and effi cacy requirements for health foods as follows:raw materials and fi nal products must comply with food hygiene requirements and shall -not cause any acute, sub chronic, or chronic harm to human body,necessary animal and/or human tests must have confi rmed a clear and stable health effect, -formulation and dosage must be based on scientifi c evidence (the functional ingredient -should be identifi ed but when that is impossible, at least the raw materials that cause the effect shall be listed),therapeutic effects shall not be claimed - in labelling or advertising.12841280 22 pages, in Chinese.1281 WTO TBT/SPS notifi cation. http://www.tbt-sps.gov.cn/sites/English/News/Lists/news/DispForm.aspx?ID=60.1282 Reuters Beijing January 11 2008.1283 Article 2.1284 Health Food Regulation, Article 4. Huang - Lapsley 2005, 266.-232-There is certain mandatory information that must be given to consumers on health foods. According to the Health Food Regulation1285, the label and specifi cation of health food must contain the following details: role of the product in health protection, suitable user groups, optimal dosage, storage method, name and quantity of effective components1286, order number of health food certifi cate, and the health food symbol. Names of health foods should be accurate, scientifi c and should not use names of peoples, names of places, names that are misleading or exaggerating, or names of minor effective components1287. Labels and advertisements of health foods must be accurate and compatible with the nature and quality of the products. There shall be no referrals to therapeutic effects. It is also forbidden to use superstition in health food advertisement.1288It is important to notice that in China, only health foods can bear health claims. Regular foods cannot bear health claims. On the other hand, health foods cannot bear medicinal claims. This way the health food regulation separates normal foods from health foods, foodstuffs from medicines, and food advertising from medicine advertising. To make the separate functions clear, health foods must bear the advice: 'this product cannot substitute any medicine'1289.There are currently 27 possible functions and claims for health foods, with other functions not accepted:Enhancing immune function1. Assisting in blood lipids reduction2. Assisting on blood sugar reduction3. Anti-oxidation (delay of aging)4. Assisting in memory improvement5. Reducing eye fatigue6. Facilitating lead excretion7. Thinning throat mucus (moistening of throat)8. Assisting in hypertension (blood pressure) reduction9. Enhancing sleep10. Promoting lactation11. Alleviating physical fatigue12. Enhancing anoxia endurance13. Assisting protection against irradiation hazard14. Weight reduction15. Enhancing child growth and development16. Increasing bone density17. Alleviating nutritional anaemia18. Assisting in protection against liver chemical injury19. Alleviating acne20. Eliminating skin pigmentation21. 1285 Article 21.1286 If components of effective function cannot be determined under present conditions, names of major raw materials having a health protection function should be listed.1287 Health Food Regulation, Article 22.1288 Health Food Regulation, Article 23.1289 Functional Ingredients December 2005 China News. Available at www.functionalingredientsmag.com.-233-Improving skin moisture22. Improving skin oil content23. Regulating gastrointestinal fl ora24. Facilitating digestion25. Alleviating constipation26. Assisting in protection against gastric mucosa injury.27. 1290The Chinese health claim categories cover all the important claims that are most interesting to Western functional food developers. The Ministry of Health revised the procedures for effi cacy evaluation in 2003, when the current list of 27 functions/claims came into force. Cosmetic claims were separated into four different claims instead of just one (claims 20-23 above). Similarly, stomach health claims were separated into four different claims (claims 24-27 above).1291It is not possible to market an all-purpose health food: a health food with the same recipe is not allowed to be used for the application of more than two functions. Applications for supplementary functions are not accepted.1292 Most of the important claims interesting to Western developers of functional foods are included in the list. Two important claim types are missing: claims related to cancer, and claims related to sexual functions. Some of the listed health issues are not familiar to the European people as they are not a part of European health policies. It is therefore not likely that a Western company will focus research and product development efforts particularly on these issues. Companies often build on their own experience and competencies and are best at what is familiar to them.In 2002, 60 percent of authorised health foods focused on three functions: immune regulation, regulating blood pressure, and anti-fatigue. Health foods were not often in regular food form; instead they were primarily in the form of liquid, capsule, tablet, or powder. It is noteworthy, that in about 90 percent of health foods, the active ingredients of the products were related to Traditional Chinese Medicine.1293 Today, other types of health foods are also emerging. For example, probiotic products are gaining interest. In 2002, 90 percent of health foods were marketed by Chinese companies, 10 percent were imported1294.It is noteworthy that many of the claims are currently formulated in a way that considers other factors than diet in improving one's health. The verb "assist" is now used in 6 claims. For example, one cannot say that a product lowers hypertension; instead it is allowed to say that it assists in hypertension alleviation. This approach is similar to the European rules on health claims reminding the consumer of lifestyle factors.The list of allowed claims would not give much guidance without rules on scientifi c substantiation of the claims. According to the current rules on health food effi cacy, animal trials are required for 22 of the 27 claims. Animal trials are not required for claims on:1290 Ministry of Health Notifi cation 2003, point A.1291 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 264.1292 Ministry of Health Notifi cation 2003, points B and C.1293 Wang et al. 2003. 1294 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 263.-234-alleviating eye fatigue, -cosmetic claims: alleviating acne, eliminating skin pigmentation, improving skin -moisture, and improving skin oil content.1295Human feeding trials are now required for 20 claim categories. Human trials are not required for claims on:enhancing immune function, -enhancing sleep, -alleviating physical fatigue, -enhancing anoxia endurance, -assisting in protection against irradiative hazard, -increasing bone density, -assisting in protection against liver chemical injury. - 1296If both animal and human tests are required, human tests are done after getting a positive result with animal tests. Before a human feeding trial can be started, it must receive approval from an ethical committee. The samples submitted for functional evaluation must have already passed safety evaluation.1297The testing parameters and trial designs are precisely regulated for each claim. Here we mention as an example a product, which claims to assist in hypertension alleviation. Both animal experiments and human feeding trials are required. Animals to be used are 10-12 week old rats with hypertension. The duration of a feeding experiment is 30-45 days. Testing parameters are body weight, blood pressure, and heart rate. Human trials must be done with 18-65 year-old hypertension patients. Systolic heart pressure should be at least 140 and diastolic at least 90. Testing parameters are the clinical syndrome & signs, blood pressure, and heart rate.1298The regulations do not give precise requirements on how effective a product must be. Similarly to the European rules on claims, the regulations only give the scientifi c criteria that are used in the evaluation of the application. Whether the product is effective enough is a question that the SFDA will have to evaluate on a case-by-case basis.5.4 General Rules on Medicine Marketing12995.4.1 EUNext we will discuss the general rules on medicine marketing, including rules on labelling and advertising, without yet going to regulations on medicinal claims. In the EU, labelling 1295 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 277-281.1296 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 277-281.1297 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 276.1298 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 278. For information on trial designs and testing parameters of other claims, see Huang - Lapsley 2005, 277-281.1299 This means rules other than those applicable to claims.-235-is regulated in Title V and advertising in Title VIII of the Medicinal Products Directive 2001/83/EC1300. Advertising is "any form of door-to-door information, canvassing activity or inducement designed to promote the prescription, supply, sale or consumption of medicinal products"1301.Like foodstuffs, there is certain information that a marketer must give to the consumer. These are to be given in the label and in the package leafl et of a medicinal product. Certain information must appear on the outer packaging of medicinal products or, where there is no outer packaging, the immediate packaging. These are: name of the medicinal product, qualitative and quantitative composition in respect of active substances, pharmaceutical form and contents by weight, route of administration, list of ingredients, expiry date, special storage precautions, disposal of unused medicinal products or waste materials, authorisation number and manufacturing batch number, and special warnings.1302 These particulars must be legible and clearly comprehensible1303.Member States may require the use of certain forms of labelling of the medicinal product making it possible to ascertain: the price, the reimbursement conditions of social security organisations, the legal status for supply, identifi cation and authenticity.1304 In Finland for example, the Nordic number is required on the label of all medicinal products, except radio pharmaceuticals and herbal remedies. It is written as "Vnr XX XX XX". Products containing infl ammable material must contain the international warning symbol (fl ame), and products that may reduce the ability to drive or operate machines must have a warning triangle.1305The packaging of all medicinal products must contain a package leafl et, unless all the information required features directly on the outer packaging or on the immediate packaging. The package leafl et must include certain particulars. These are: name of the medicinal product, therapeutic indications, information necessary before taking the medicinal product, the 1300 Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use.1301 It includes in particular: "the advertising of medicinal products to the general public, advertising of medicinal products to persons qualifi ed to prescribe or supply them, visits by medical sales representatives to persons qualifi ed to prescribe medicinal products, the supply of samples, the provision of inducements to prescribe or supply medicinal products by the gift, offer or promise of any benefi t or bonus, whether in money or in kind, except when their intrinsic value is minimal, sponsorship of promotional meetings attended by persons qualifi ed to prescribe or supply medicinal products, sponsorship of scientifi c congresses attended by persons qualifi ed to prescribe or supply medicinal products and in particular payment of their travelling and accommodation expenses in connection therewith". Article 86(1) of the Directive.1302 Article 54 of the Directive.1303 Article 56 of the Directive.1304 Article 57 of the Directive.1305 Notice to Applicants. Guideline on the packaging information of medicinal products for human use authorised by the Community. March 2007. Included in The Rules governing Medicinal Products in the European Community. Page 18.-236-necessary and usual instructions for proper use, description of the adverse reactions, reference to the expiry date and date on which the package leafl et was last updated.1306.Now we turn to actual advertising, voluntary messages of the marketer. First of all, advertising of a medicinal product must encourage rational use of the product and may not be misleading.1307 All advertising to the general public of a medicinal product must be clearly identifi able as such and must include the following minimum information: a) name of the medicinal product, b) the information necessary for correct use of the medicinal product; c) an express, legible invitation to carefully read the instructions on the package leafl et.1308The Medicinal Products Directive 2001/83/EC distinguishes between advertising to doctors and pharmacists, and advertising to the general public. Advertising a medicinal product to persons qualifi ed to prescribe or supply such products "shall include essential information compatible with the summary of product characteristics"1309. Advertising of medicines to the general public is more restricted and more precisely regulated. It may not include any information which:"gives the impression that a medical consultation or surgical operation is unnecessary; -compares the medicinal product with other treatments or products; -suggests that the health of the subject can be enhanced by taking the medicine or -affected by not taking it;is directed exclusively or principally at children; -refers to a recommendation by scientists, health professionals or persons who, because -of their celebrity, could encourage the consumption of medicinal products;suggests that the medicinal product is a foodstuff - , cosmetic or other consumer product;suggests that the safety or effi cacy of the product is due to the fact that it is natural; -could, by a description or detailed representation of the case history, lead to erroneous -self-diagnosis;refers, in improper, alarming or misleading terms, to claims of recovery; uses, in -improper, alarming or misleading terms, pictorial representations of changes in the human body caused by disease or injury, or of the action of a medicinal product on the human body;mentions that the medicinal product has been granted a marketing authorisation". - 13101306 Article 59 of the Directive. Specifi c provisions apply to the packaging and container of medicinal products containing radionuclides (Article 66), and to the labelling and package leafl ets of homeopathic medicinal products (Article 69).1307 Article 87 of the Directive.1308 Article 89 of the Directive.1309 Article 91 of the Directive.1310 Article 90 of the Directive.-237-Prescription medicines1311 cannot be advertised directly to consumers. Neither can medicines that contain psychotropic or narcotic substances. 1312 Further, the following therapeutic indications may not be mentioned in advertising to the general public: tuberculosis, sexually transmitted diseases, other serious infectious diseases, cancer and other tumoral diseases, chronic insomnia, diabetes and other metabolic illnesses1313. Direct distribution of medicinal products to the public for promotional purposes is totally prohibited1314.The prohibition of direct marketing of prescription medicines does not apply in certain cases.