First of all, it does not apply to vaccination campaigns carried out by the industry and approved by the competent authorities of the Member States1315.In 2001, the Commission proposed to allow a fi ve-year trial period for advertising of prescription medicines for three chronic conditions: HIV/AIDS, diabetes and asthma. The proposed experimentation provoked a debate on the benefi ts and disadvantages of allowing pharmaceutical companies to communicate directly with the public1316, and was rejected by the Parliament and the Council. Stakeholders thought the experiment would be a step towards direct-to-consumer advertising of medicines, which is only allowed in the United States and New Zealand, and against which there are good grounds1317. In Europe, the debate goes on. There are plans on public-private partnerships on patient information, on which consumer organisations have expressed their concerns1318.The rules prohibiting advertisements on prescription medicines still leave the door open for advertising that does not endorse a certain product, but rather gives information on a certain medical condition. Such "consumer guidance" has been carried out by medicine companies, for example, concerningerection disorders1319. In Finland, the National Agency of Medicines has given guidance on what is considered advertising: if the information for instance in a leafl et is intended to support proper use of the product, it is not considered advertising. In this case, also the name of the product can be mentioned. The materials can be considered advertising, if they promote the use of the product or praise benefi ts of the treatment compared to other treatments.13201311 When granting a marketing authorisation, the competent authorities must determine whether the medicinal product is subject to medical prescription or not. Article 70 of the Directive. This is done based on the criteria set in Article 71 of the Directive: "Medicinal products shall be subject to medical prescription where they: are likely to present a danger either directly or indirectly, even when used correctly, if utilized without medical supervision, or are frequently and to a very wide extent used incorrectly, and as a result are likely to present a direct or indirect danger to human health, or contain substances or preparations thereof, the activity and/or adverse reactions of which require further investigation, or are normally prescribed by a doctor to be administered parenterally. "1312 Article 88(1) of the Directive.1313 Article 88(2) of the Directive.1314 Article 88(6) of the Directive.1315 Article 88(4) of the Directive.1316 Meek 2002. 1317 Mintzes 2001, 1. Reasons to ban DTC medicine advertising include: it raises medicine costs, is not impartial enough, favours new medicines that might not be as safe as the old ones, and promotes the medicalisation of normal life. 1318 Mintzes 2006, 29. 1319 See for example http://www.miesjanainen.info/.1320 National Agency for Medicines web page at: http://www.nam.fi /laaketeollisuus/ukk/ukk_lt_markkinointi.html.-238-To facilitate access to information about medicines available in the EU and to complement the commercial information, the EMEA has launched a public database called EudraPharm. It includes information about the formulation, the strength, and the therapeutic area of the medicine. The EPHA (European Public Health Alliance) criticises this database for not being complete and not covering all the information patients would require, such as full details of clinical trials or the effi ciency of the medicine, side effects assessments, etc.1321A particular problem with medicine marketing is medicinal product information on the Internet. Material on the Internet is not excluded from the defi nition of an 'advertisement'. Internet material must fulfi l all the normal requirements for medicinal products advertising. According to UK guidelines, if a site has links to another site where additional information on the medicinal product is presented, this other site will also be included in determining whether the marketing is lawful1322.5.4.2 ChinaThe labelling and advertising rules of medicines are fairly similar in China as in Europe. Packages of pharmaceuticals must be labelled and include directions for use in accordance with the regulations. The label or directions must indicate certain mandatory information:the generic name of the medicine,components,specifi cations,the producer,registration number,batch number of the product,production date,expiry date,indications or major functions,directions for use,dosage,restrictions,adverse reactions, andprecautions.1323The label must coincide with the approved indications and directions for use, and must be in standard Chinese characters1324. Labels cannot be misleading or use unscientifi c promotional phrases.1321 European Publish Health Alliance web page at http://www.epha.org/a/2492.1322 MHRA: The Medicines Borderline Section and the Internet. Medicines Borderline Section March 2006.1323 Medicine Administration Law, Article 54.1324 Tsoi 2007.-239-Advertising can be described as giving voluntary information in order to sell the product. In China, medicinal product advertising is regulated both by the Advertisement law1325 and the Medicine Administration Law. There is a pre-clearance system for medicinal products advertising, discussed above in chapter 2.According to Advertisement law, advertisements relating to pharmaceuticals (and medical apparatus and instruments) cannot contain the following:Unscientifi c assertions or guarantees of effi cacy;1. The rate of treatment effi cacy;2. Comparisons with other medicines or medical apparatuses in effi cacy or safety;3. Titles or images of medical research institutes, academic institutions, medical 4. organisations or experts, doctors or patients; andOther content prohibited by laws and administrative decrees.5. 1326The content of an advertisement for a medicine should be based on the indications approved by the medicine control authorities.1327 According to the Medicine Administration Law, the contents of pharmaceutical advertisement must be true, legitimate and free of false claims. The advertisements of non-pharmaceuticals shall not be involved in the publicising of pharmaceuticals. Points 1) and 4) above are repeated by the Medicine Administration Law.1328Several experts are of the view that Chinese law on medicinal products advertising is not functioning properly as misleading medicine advertising has become a real problem in China. Ads on hospitals and medicinal products are very common in China, but according to the State Administration of Industry and Commerce, medicine advertising is the least trusted of all advertising by consumers in 20061329. A government fi gure says that about 2.5 million Chinese took the wrong medication because of misleading advertising1330. The SFDA conducted a national survey of 466 newspapers and 55 local TV channels from January to November in 2006, discovering 48,990 illegal advertisements on medicines1331.To counter-attack the described problems, China is tightening control over medicine advertising. The State Administration of Industry and Commerce and the State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA) promulgated:the Standards for the Examination and Publication of Medicine Advertisements, and1) the Measures for the Examination of Medicine Advertisements.2) 1325 Advertising Law of the People's Republic of China. Adopted at the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China on October 27, 1994 to be put Into Effect on February 1, 1995.1326 Advertisement law, Article 14.1327 Advertising Law, Article 15. Medicine Administration Law, Article 61.1328 Medicine Administration Law, Article 61.1329 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. www.tdctrade.com. Business Alert - China. Issue 05, 2007 (1 May). 1330 People's Daily Online: http://english.people.com.cn/200603/22/eng20060322_252583.html. March 22, 2006.1331 Tsoi 2007.-240-These both took effect on 1st May 2007.1332In addition to these, a new law called "Advertising Law on Public Interest" has been proposed. This law would add the amount of useful medicine advertising on TV in the form of "public service ads".1333According to the new Standards and Measures, the following fi ve categories of drugs are banned from advertising:narcotic drugs, psychotropic drugs, toxic drugs for medical use and radioactive drugs; -medicinal preparations made by medical institutions; -medicines specially needed by the army; -medicines which have been specifi cally banned or prohibited from production, sale and -use by SFDA; andmedicines which have been granted approval for trial production. - 1334Use of exaggerated expressions and unethical promotional phrases is also banned. In order to ensure the safety of drugs, proper guidance should be given to their reasonable use. Medicine advertisements may not encourage excessive use of medicines. They may not contain the following content:sales promotion offering free medical treatment, free gifts, premiums, gifts or prizes in -the form of medicines;"essential for every household" or similar expressions; -"money back if ineffective", "insured by insurance company" and other guarantees; -information such as comparison with other drugs, ranking, recommendation and awards -received.1335Further restrictions set by the new Standards to medicine advertising include the following:advertisements may not contain the name or image of army units or individual military -personnel, or use military equipment or facilities for promotion purposes;advertisements may not target children or promote the medicine in the name of -children;advertisements may not contain the name, address, contact information, and treatment -methods of medical institutions; or information regarding free medical consultation, medical (hotline) inquiry, special outpatient service and other medical services offered by medical institutions.13361332 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. www.tdctrade.com. Business Alert - China. Issue 05, 2007 (1 May). 1333 People's Daily Online: http://english.people.com.cn/200603/22/eng20060322_252583.html. March 22, 2006.1334 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. Key to Economy and Trade. Issue 05, 2007 (01 May) 1335 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. Key to Economy and Trade. Issue 05, 2007 (01 May) 1336 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. Key to Economy and Trade. Issue 05, 2007 (01 May) -241-In addition to banning certain types of medicine advertising, the new rules also created additional information requirements for both prescription medicines and over- the- counter medicines. Medicine advertisements must bear:the generic name of the medicine, -warning statement, -medicine advertising approval number, -medicine production approval number, and -name of the company producing or selling the medicine, and may not show the -"helpline" or "helpline number" separately.Since 2000, OTC and prescription medicines have been regulated separately. Encouraging patients to purchase OTC medicines for less serious diseases is considered benefi cial as it reduces government medication expenditures and hospital visits.1337 The warning statement for prescription medicine advertisements is: "This advertisement is intended only for medical and pharmaceutical professionals". The warning statement for over-the-counter (OTC) medicine advertisements is: "To be purchased and used according to the specifi cations of the drug or as recommended by pharmacist." Prescription medicines may not be advertised directly to the public. Like in Europe, they may only be advertised in designated medical and pharmaceutical journals. Non-prescription drug advertisements must bear the OTC label.1338Advertisements of medicines that claim to improve or boost sexual performance must be completely in line with the symptoms or indications shown in the approved drug specifi cations. Advertisements with this kind of content are banned from broadcast on TV or radio between 7 am and 10 pm.13395.5 Claims in Medicine MarketingAbove (chapter 5.4.) we have discussed the general rules on medicinal advertising. Here we focus on effi cacy and the rules on presenting the medicinal claim.5.5.1 EU Rules on Medicinal Claims5.5.1.1 Modern medicines1340A modern medicine (pharmaceutical, chemical medicine, synthetic medicine) must have a therapeutic (medical) indication. The therapeutic indication is mandatory information that must be included in an application for authorisation, more precisely in the Summary of Product Characteristics (SPC). This means that medicines always bear a claim stating a medical indication. The Summary of Product Characteristics sets out the scientifi cally agreed position of the medicinal product, which is distilled during the course of the 1337 Wikipedia. Article on pharmaceutical industry in China. 1338 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. Key to Economy and Trade. Issue 05, 2007 (01 May) 1339 Hong Kong Trade Development Council. Key to Economy and Trade. Issue 05, 2007 (01 May) 1340 Here we mean medicines that are not herbal or homeopathic medicines.-242-pre-market assessment process. The Summary of Product Characteristics, including the approved therapeutic indication(s), is the basis of information for health professionals on how to use the medicinal product safely and effectively, and it cannot be changed except with the approval of the originating competent authority. The label and the package leafl et are drawn up in accordance with the SPC.1341The therapeutic indication(s) should be stated clearly and concisely and should defi ne the target disease or condition distinguishing between: treatment A) (symptomatic, curative or modifying the evolution or progression of the disease) indication, preventionB) (primary or secondary1342) indication, and diagnosticC) indication.When appropriate, the indication should defi ne the target population especially when restrictions to the patient populations apply.1343The basic principle is that by the information in the label and the package leafl et, patients should be fully and correctly informed about the medicine they are using. There is only one case where the therapeutic indication is not allowed. According to Directive 2001/83/EC1344, "the competent authorities may decide that certain therapeutic indications shall not be mentioned in the package leafl et, where the dissemination of such information might have serious disadvantages for the patient". This clause was introduced to avoid circumstances where a patient might not have been informed of the diagnosis (cancer, for instance) and would learn about it when reading the package leafl et of the medicine. This derogation from general principles should only be used in exceptional circumstances.13455.5.1.2 Herbal MedicinesWhen discussing the effi cacy of herbal medicines, we should briefl y go back to the separation of foodstuffs and medicines discussed in chapter 3. Some herbal marketers intentionally blur the line between foodstuffs and medicines. Food supplements have a nutritional, not a medical use. They must not contain medicinal substances, medicinal plants or vitamins with medicinal effect. Many herbals classifi ed as food supplements are in practice used if not to prevent a 1341 Notice to Applicants. A guideline on summary of product characteristics. October 2005. Included in The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union. Volume 2C. Page 1.1342 We discussed different types of prevention in chapter 3.3. The difference between prevention and risk reduction separates foods from medicines. According to Wikipedia, primary prevention avoids the development of a disease, and secondary prevention prevents progression of a disease or the emergence of symptoms. For example, if a person has already had a heart attack, (s)he needs secondary prevention to prevent it happening again. Also the term 'tertiary prevention' is in use, but apparently activities that reduce the negative impact of the disease are in Europe classifi ed as 'treatment'.1343 Notice to Applicants. A guideline on summary of product characteristics. October 2005. Included in The Rules Governing Medicinal Products in the European Union Volume 2C Notice to Applicants. Page 4.1344 Article 59 (2).1345 Notice to Applicants. Guideline on the packaging information of medicinal products for human use authorised by the Community. March 2007. Included in The Rules governing Medicinal Products in the European Community. Page 9.-243-certain disease but at least to enhance health. The producers want to sell their products as foods because of the much simpler import, sales and marketing rules. But simultaneously, they want in their marketing to give the impression that the product acts like a medicinal product. Therefore, there are herbal products on the market that are sold as foods but still illegally marketed as medicines.1346As regards effi cacy, herbal medicines are totally different from synthetic drugs. The quality of the medicinal plant is decisive to the quality of the products. Preparing herbal medicines is a bit like preparing wine: every year it is a bit different even if the plants are grown in the same place. Herbs grown in different countries have even bigger differences. In the package of the herbal medicinal product, the amount of the plant extract is given. This is called the therapeutic ingredient. Therapeutic ingredient does not, therefore, mean any single chemical substance like with synthetic medicines. The plant extract can contain hundreds of chemical compounds, and the amount of each chemical is not usually known.1347Medicinal plants can be used as such either fresh or dried. For some plants, all above ground parts can be used. For others, only leaves, seeds, fl owers or roots are used. Plants or plant parts can be used to produce:herbal tea, -simple extracts (tincturae) or -extracts produced with more complex procedures (extracta). - 1348Herbal tea is produced like ordinary tea by infusing a dried medicinal plant in boiling water. Extracts are produced by using solvents that dissolve ingredients of the plant into the liquid, which is usually a mixture of water and alcohol. The goal is to dissolve as many medicinal ingredients as possible. The extract can be used either as such (tincture) or it can be concentrated by evaporating the solvent (extract). Extract reminds synthetic medicines because it is usually in form of pills, capsules or tablets. These are signifi cantly stronger than tinctures. Some plant ingredients can also be removed in the process. 1349 The producers often standardise the product in relation to one chemical substance in the product, usually the most important therapeutic ingredient. This way the fi nal product always contains the same amount of this one ingredient.1350In practise, herbal medicinal products are tablets, capsules, mixtures or enemas. They must contain only medicinal plants, not pharmaceuticals or synthetic vitamins.1351 Herbal medicines must apply for a Product License. The principal application procedure is the same as for chemical medicines. When marketing herbal medicinal products, the marketer must adhere to the therapeutic use accepted by the authorities and the product information presented in the Summary of Product Characteristics.