Selling foodstuffs that do not comply with food law requirements, and are possibly hazardous to health, constitutes health offence according to the Finnish Criminal Code, chapter 44, section 1. a medicine offence is defi ned in chapter 44, section 5 of the Finnish Criminal Code. Possible Finnish punishments for breaking the European or Finnish medicine laws or decisions based on these laws are a fi ne and a maximum of one-year imprisonment.Poisoning foodstuffs or selling poisonous foodstuffs and thus causing a public health hazard constitutes endangerment of health, chapter 34, section 4, or gross endangerment of health, chapter 34, section 5. The punishment for a health offense is a fi ne or a maximum of six months' imprisonment, for endangering health, four months to four years' imprisonment, and for gross endangerment of health, from two to ten years' imprisonment. Giving false or misleading marketing information constitutes a marketing offense according to chapter 30, section 1. The punishment for a marketing offense is a fi ne or a maximum of one-year imprisonment. The applicable criminal penalties when violating marketing regulations are usually of limited size, a few thousand euros.An example of a functional food -related case is Market Court, MT 1993:023, 9.11.1993, Ombudsman vs. Valio Oy where the Finnish company Valio was prohibited from using the claim that milk cures/relieves/prevents osteoporosis. There have also been a few cases where health claims have been used in an inappropriate way in the marketing of dietary supplements, for example MT:1993:008: PSK-Javidos Ab. vs. Vitabalans, which related "high potency garlic". There was also a fl agrant case in 1998 where the Food Agency prohibited the selling and importing of Noni Juice. The seller claimed that the product cures cancer, HIV, diabetes, rheumatism etc.In addition to criminal cases, civil cases for damages may be taken to courts on various levels. Damage might be caused to a consumer by unhealthy food or misleading food advertising. There are some differences in EU Member States concerning burden of proof. According to general legal principles applicable in most Member States, the burden of proof lies with the plaintiff. In practice, this creates fi nancial problems to consumer associations and also to authorities wishing to claim against a manufacturer. It requires enormous resources to 281 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, Article 17(2).282 Regulation 726/2004/EC, Article 84(1). Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 99. -47-prove scientifi c facts about a product.283. However, where a pre-market authorisation procedure exists, the burden of proof is always on the producer. This applies to safety of novel foods and substantiation of marketing claims.The use of unsafe or ineffective medicines may often lead to personal and fi nancial damage. Medicines are always somewhat unsafe, in a sense that they have side effects. This is one of the most important differences compared to foodstuffs. In most European countries including Finland, pharmaceutical injuries insurance covers certain severe284 unexpected adverse effects sustained by users of pharmaceuticals. The insurance covers pharmaceuticals manufactured, imported or marketed by companies who are members of The Finnish Cooperative for the Indemnifi cation of Medicine-Related Injuries. The insurance is voluntary for the pharmaceutical companies. The insurer is the Finnish Pharmaceutical Insurance Pool, which is made up of three insurance companies. The Finnish Pharmaceutical Insurance Pool handles the claims and pays accepted claims.The insurance only covers personal damage, not fi nancial losses.285 In addition, the insurance leaves important areas outside its scope. It does not cover: an injury resulting from medically necessary risk taking, injuries where the adverse effect of the pharmaceutical is reasonably tolerable, insignifi cant injuries, or failure of the drug to have the intended effect (ineffi cacy).286 Injuries resulting from use of illegally acquired medicines or misuse of medicines are not covered by the insurance, neither are injuries caused by herbal and homeopathic medicines. These restrictions might lead to the situation where only serious injuries caused by medicines taken for minor diseases are covered by the insurance. For damages other than those covered by the insurance scheme, a lawsuit against the pharmaceutical company is needed.If there is nothing wrong with the medicine itself, but it has been incorrectly prescribed or administered by a doctor or pharmacist, the injury is not covered by the pharmaceutical injuries insurance. In that case, the injury may be compensable under the Patient Injuries Act. The patient injury insurance is mandatory for hospitals etc.2.2.5 European StandardsFormal standardisation in Europe has a three-level structure, which includes the national standards bodies (NSB's), the three European Standards Organisations (ESO's), and the international organisations discussed above. The ESO's have been formally recognised by the EU by Directive 98/34/EC. These are: CEN287 for the majority of sectors, CENELEC288 for the electro-technical area, and ETSI289 in telecommunications. In addition, there are a multitude of 283 Hill & Knowlton 2000, 18.284 To qualify for compensation under pharmaceutical injuries insurance, use of pharmaceutical must result in a loss of functional ability lasting at least 14 days without interruption or in a permanent physical injury or illness or death. Finnish pharmaceutical insurance pool website www.lvp.fi .285 Finnish pharmaceutical insurance pool website www.lvp.fi .286 Finnish pharmaceutical insurance pool website www.lvp.fi .287 Comite Europeen de Normalisation. European Committee for Standardisation.288 Comite Europeen de Normalisation Electrotechnique. European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardisation.289 European Telecommunications Standards Institute.-48-informal standards bodies290 and of CEN standards for foods, mainly for methods of sampling and analysis291.According to the Commission, standards are an integral part of EU policies. Standards are expected to increase competitiveness of enterprises, and to remove barriers to trade at international level. They are also seen as part of "better regulation". According to the Commission, European standardisation has proven to be a successful tool for the completion of the Single Market for goods.292 Standards are seen as playing a supportive role in legislative acts and projects related to goods, services, environment, and consumer protection293. According to Schepel, the Commission is holding on to the fi ction that compliance with European standards is strictly voluntary. Instead of redefi ning law, hard law is trying to defend its monopoly as the only source of mandatory commands.294The Commission has presented the "New Approach" as a specifi c model of legislation where public interest and the interest of private business could be merged. It allows for "more fl exible and less stringent forms of legislation" in areas where there is a great need for detail. As legislation needs to be simplifi ed, the extension of use of standards beyond the goals of the Single Market is seen as "highly desirable".295 The Commission acknowledges that standardisation is "independent and market driven", but strongly encourages standards organisations to further develop standardisation procedures.296 In 2006, the EU created a legal basis for the fi nancing of European standardisation297. The Commission saw this as "a contribution from the EU side to add value to standardisation in the context of EU policies"298. The EU is enthusiastically supporting standards development, and willing to replace law with standards, as long as standards are not called 'law'.In a society, people share attitudes towards risk and technology, refl ecting a widely respected professional 'common sense'. These shared attitudes make standards, which link socially accepted behaviour with legally institutionalised requirements. According to Schepel, European standardisation needs to focus on mechanisms for social construction of common sense, because Europeanisation uproots standards from their (national) social beddings.299 This general question of central vs. local legislation is ultimately about whether a member can trust the coalition, union, central government, or global actor, etc. to promote the interests of all its members.290 Commission Communication on Standards 2008, 3.291 CEN webpage at: http://www.cen.eu/cenorm/sectors/sectors/food/index.asp.292 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 2.293 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 3.294 Schepel 2005, 406.295 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 4.296 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 3.297 Decision No 1673/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 2006 on the fi nancing of European standardisation.298 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 3.299 Schepel 2005, 144.-49-2.2.6 Self-RegulationSince the fi rst half of the 1990's, the EU Commission has been active in establishing a completely new framework of food law. It can be argued that food legislation is not only getting increasingly complicated, but it is also becoming stricter as more areas are covered. The European food industry has attempted to hold back the tide of legislation300, and instead favours self-regulation.The most important actor speaking for self-regulation is the CIAA, Confederation of the Food and Drink Industries in the EU.301 CIAA calls for simpler, clearer legislation and shorter, less burdensome legal procedures. According to the CIAA, the food and drink industry is one of the most regulated sectors in Europe. They claim "better regulation, including industry self-regulation, can deliver benefi ts to European consumers faster and help to promote higher growth and employment". They are working for "a better functioning single market, fewer administrative burdens, and a more supportive business environment". According to the CIAA, this is needed particularly to help small and medium-sized companies.302The CIAA considers that "many of the problems faced by the food and drink industry with existing legislation should be solved through a better, simpler, more proportionate and a more competitive EU regulatory framework". They recommend the following principles on food law:Legislation must be - clear to prevent diverging interpretation,Legal requirements must be practically - achievable and enforceable,Legislation must be based on - science,Procedures must be - clear and predictable, including precise timetables,Suffi cient - lead-in times, where possible, are needed to minimize implementation costs.303To support their argument that self-regulation is a viable alternative, the CIAA has indeed drafted numerous documents that can be classifi ed as soft law. The CIAA has for example created a voluntary nutrition labelling scheme. They claim that revision of the nutrition labelling Directive should be started by considering what self-regulatory initiatives have already delivered304. This means some legal requirements could be deleted as unnecessary, and the remaining legal requirements should be simplifi ed.305The food industry's concerns and suggestions need to be taken seriously by the Commission. In particular, the regulatory procedures should be transparent and not waste the efforts of all the parties involved. However, the food industry might not actually want to understand all the substantial laws as some of the complicated and inconveniently strict laws are burdensome. By demanding 'simple', we suspect that they simultaneously wish for 'less restrictive'.300 ElAmin 2006b. 301 CIAA membership is made up of 25 National Federations, including 3 observers, 30 EU sector associations representing different food industry sectors, and 20 major food and drink companies.302 http://www.ciaa.be/pages_en/homepage.asp.303 Review of CIAA Priorities and Objectives for Better Regulation in light of the Commission proposals to simplify EU legislation. CPT/003/07E-Final Brussels, 28 February 2007. Page 5.304 Review of CIAA Priorities and Objectives for Better Regulation in light of the Commission proposals to simplify EU legislation. CPT/003/07E-Final Brussels, 28 February 2007. Pages 2-3.305 Ibid, page 3.-50-Also national self-regulation on foods exists. For example in Finland, the food industry and the retail trade drafted (in 2003) their recommendations on good practices and recommended temperatures and sales times for fresh meat and fi sh. The recommendations included that operators agreed to use lower storage temperatures than required by the law. This was considered by the Ministry of Trade and Industry to be "a very good project".306 Self-regulation can work well if operators are committed into achieving a common goal like unhealthy competition.ElAmin claims that the industry should take self-regulation much more seriously if they want the legislators to step aside. The industry organizations are giving vague promises that they will follow a common line over issues such as advertising, obesity, health claims and nutritional content. If they really believe their own codes could be used instead of EU legislation, they should take up the challenge and actually draft these codes.307 Irresponsible companies cannot be given the responsibility of Europeans' health.General problems with self-regulation relate to unclear responsibilities, freeriders, implementation and control, and restricting competition308. Interests of dominant companies might overweigh public and societal interests309. Future business regulation might increasingly be in the form of co-regulation, combining the benefi ts of law and self-regulation310. According to Parker and Braithwaite, it is necessary to understand how law connects with other sources of normative ordering311. Regulation is pluralised and decentralised, and the new role of states is to steer public-private partnerships312.2.3 Chinese Law on Foodstuffs and Medicines2.3.1 Rule of Law in ChinaWhen discussing Chinese law, concepts such as state, law, or court must not be presumed to mean the same as in due to the fact that history and contemporary understanding of law in the Chinese society is different from ours. An outright hostility towards law in a Western sense is inherent in Chinese history and culture. According to Confucius, what is needed is a situation where there are no legal cases313. China started to create a legal system and law in a Western sense at the end of the 1970's, in conjunction with its new open-door policy. In China, law was traditionally seen as an instrument of governance for the rulers, and 'rule of man' was applied instead of 'rule of law'314. There was law, but it was occupied with implementing the Emperor's orders, and did not relate to agreements or disagreements between citizens, or rights of citizens. There was in fact no such thing as a citizen: people were subordinates.China has created large volumes of legislation in the past 30 years. However, laws are void without implementation. After writing the necessary positive laws, China has to create legal 306 Ministry of Trade and Industry. http://www.ktm.fi /index.phtml?s=1031.307 ElAmin, Ahmed 2006c. 308 Tala 2009, 330-331.309 Tala 2009, 330.310 See Tala 2009, 331-332 on benefi ts and problems of co-regulation.311 Parker - Braithwaite 2005, 137.312 Parker - Braithwaite 2005, 129.313 Jones 2003, 7. Here Jones cites Bodde - Morris 1967.314 Kobayashi 2008, 3.-51-institutions to make law work in practice. The legal reform is closely connected to the economic transition. Government agencies are no longer primarily responsible for managing economic entities or planning their economic transactions. In the new economic order, it is enterprises and individuals and their relationships that are important. Private actors must believe that they will be held to their legal obligations, and that their legal rights will be protected. As the government can no longer command market actors to make economic decisions, it needs the ability to use administrative sanctions, and the ability to resort to courts.315 Instead of command, the market now needs to be guided through law.This leads us to the concept "rule of law" and the discussion on modern Chinese law that revolves around this concept. Several scholars are discussing the development, current level, and future direction of rule of law in China316. Building the rule of law has been on the Party agenda since the mid-1990s, and the Constitution was amended in 1999 to include the concept317. It states in the Constitution that all agencies, administrators and enterprises must abide by law, all acts in violation of the law must be investigated, and that no one is above the law318. These are rather familiar concepts to Europeans, but novel to the Chinese.There are narrow and wide concepts of rule of law. The narrow concept is rather formal and requires the very basic parts of the legal system to exist, meaning signifi cant restraints on the use of powers, supremacy of law, and equality of citizens before the law. In a society governed by rule of law, laws need to be general, public, prospective, clear, consistent, and capable of being followed, stable, and enforced. Some insist the rule of law must include liberal democracy and human rights, and wider theories add political, social, and economic concepts. Some writers are of the view that China fulfi ls the narrow criteria. Some argue that China is a country of rule by law at best: law is used by the non-democratic state as an instrument for social control.319 Peerenboom sees China as following the 'East Asian model', where economic growth, legal reforms, democratization, and constitutionalism follow each other, in this order320.According to critics, China is far from achieving the rule of law. The Congress needs to be strengthened as legislator, the Constitution should be enforced, and the judiciary should be independent. Corruption is common among public offi cials: personal favours, bribery, and the taking of public monies happen at all levels of government. The legal profession has also been inadequate and China is now putting effort into training competent judges and attorneys.321 The 315 Lichtenstein 2003, 287.316 See the Rule of Law in China program at the Foundation for Law, Justice and Society, a think-tank affi liated with Oxford University's Centre for Socio-Legal Studies. The scholars in this program have written several articles in English on rule of law in China, both generally and as regards certain legal areas such as employment or intellectual property. See Foundation for Law, Justice and Society at http://www.fl js.org. See rule of law in China publications at http://www.fl js.org/section.aspx?id=607.317 Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_law.318 Article 5 of the Constitution.319 Qingjian 2002, 301, uses the words "rule through law". See also Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_law. Wikipedia article sites Randall Peerenboom: China's Long March Toward Rule of Law, Cambridge University Press 2002, and Albert Huhg-yee Chen: An Introduction to the Legal System of the People's Republic of China, 1992.320 Peerenboom 2008, 6.321 Wikipedia: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_law.