If we look at the 'claim' part of the defi nition, the ECJ has placed considerable emphasis on the impression that consumers are likely to form as a result of the product's presentation. [Van Bennekom 1982]: "It is necessary to take the view that a product is presented for treating or preventing disease.... whenever any averagely well-informed consumer gains the impression, which provided it is defi nite, may even result from implications, that the product in question should, regard being had to its presentation, have an effect such as is described by the fi rst part of the EC defi nition." The ECJ attaches importance to protecting vulnerable consumers from products that could not deliver the claimed medicinal results. [ibid]: "The Directive thereby seeks to protect consumers not only from harmful or toxic medicinal products as such but also from a variety of products used instead of the proper remedies." The ECJ has ruled557 that a product does not necessarily need to be presented explicitly for the prevention or treatment of human diseases to trigger medicinal status. A medicinal status may arise from the impression that an average, well-informed consumer would be likely to gain. This may derive from aspects such as the product's composition, pharmacological properties, claims and associated commercial and non-commercial communication, its presentation (including any similarity to medicinal products) and point of sale, any risk arising from prolonged consumption, the way it is used, and its familiarity to the consumer. The question whether or not a product is perceived as "medicinal" will be resolved, primarily, by reference to the balance of medical and non-medical uses on the label or advertising and not to the likelihood of sales for one use rather than another. The nature of the product's constituents is not usually the decisive factor, although if a product contains therapeutic levels of pharmacologically active substances, this could well result in it being considered a medicine, even if the base-line product is clearly a food. In reality it is likely that well established food products would be considered as foods and well-established medicines as medicines.558 557 Case C227-82.558 Coppens et al. 2001, 143.-91-On a literal interpretation of the existing legal texts, any food carrying a medicinal claim would become subject to medicinal legal procedures and would require a Product Licence. No medicinal product may be placed on the market of a Member State unless a marketing authorisation has been issued by the competent authorities of that Member State559 according to the Directive 83/2001/EC.560 In Ter Voort case561, the European Court of Justice ruled that a product that is recommended or described as having preventative or curative properties is a medicinal product even if it is generally considered as a foodstuff and even if it has no known therapeutic effects in the present state of scientifi c knowledge. Conversely, the advertising of a medicinal product to the general public shall not contain any material, which suggests that the medicinal product is a foodstuff562. This means that if a food-based product makes a medicinal claim, it is a medicinal product, probably an illegal one. As previously stated, ,a product can be considered as a medicinal product based on its functions as well as its claims. It has long been recognised that certain foods are able to restore and correct disturbed physiological functions caused by nutrient defi ciencies, e.g. vitamin C rich foods will cure scurvy, iodized salt will restore thyroid function, and vitamin A rich food will restore night vision. Recent scientifi c literature amply and increasingly indicates that many other foods are able to restore, correct or modify physiological functions by virtue of the non-nutrient substances they contain.563 This means we could classify almost all foods as medicines. In law, all foods can be considered medicinal products if ingested with the view to restoring, correcting or modifying physiological function. The Advocate General's Opinion in the Delattre case564 states that the function-based defi nition of medicinal products is formulated in such broad terms that, if read literally, it can apply both to medicinal products and foods. It is important to note that the Delattre case occurred in the period before the new defi nition where medicinal action is specifi ed as "modifying physiological functions by exerting pharmacological, immunological, or metabolic action". As discussed above, the terms 'pharmacological', 'immunological', and 'metabolic', still do not exclude foods. Our science-based understanding on the relationship between diet and health seems to make it impossible to defi ne medicines in a manner that would clearly exclude foods. That is why the legislators decided to establish the unoffi cial borderline category of "unclear cases", at the same time directing these products under medicine law. The European Court of Justice (ECJ) has ruled that it is the competence of Member States' National Authorities to judge whether a product is a food or a medicinal product. The consequence of this is that there cannot be legal certainty at a European level. National 559 A marketing authorisation for a medicinal product granted by a competent authority in one Member State ought to be recognized by the competent authorities of the other Member States unless there are serious grounds for supposing that the authorisation of the medicinal product concerned may present a risk to public health (Recital 12. )560 Some products are subjected to a centralised authorisation procedure according to Council Regulation No 2309/93 of 22 July. 561 Case C219-91.562 Medicinal Products Directive, Article 90(g).563 Coppens et al. 2001, 142.564 Case C369-88.-92-defi nitions might be broader than the European defi nitions.565 According to the European Food Lawyers Association, the borderline between foodstuffs and medicinal products is one of the remaining food law problems to be resolved. They see the situation where the categorisation decision lies with Member States as a severe obstacle to the achievement of the Single Market. The regulations on food supplements, fortifi ed products and nutrition and health claims have greatly harmonised the area of health-promoting foods.566 The proposed labelling regulation will continue this development, leaving only the issue of food vs. medicine unharmonised. As the foodstuff vs. medicine issue is still under the competence of EU Member States, we will examine the Finnish and UK strategies to cope with the categorisation task. The British system is fairly developed and might serve as a model for future EU system performed by the EFSA or the EMEA. 3.2.3 Finnish Practice According to section 6 of the Finnish Medicinal Products Act, when necessary, the National Agency of Medicines (Laakelaitos) determines whether or not a product is a medicine. When making the decision of categorisation, both the composition and the purpose of use are taken into account. The Food Act or other food legislation does not affect the decision. For medicinal products, the national authorities also resolve the retail channel of a medicinal product (pharmacy only or other stores as well), and whether a medicine requires a prescription or not. The National Agency of Medicines has published a Pharmacopoeia (1179/2006), where all the ordinary medicines and herbal medicinal products are listed. According to section 1 of the Pharmacopoeia, other substances and herbs that are medically equivalent to those listed and used in a medicinal way can be held as medicines. Also vitamin or mineral preparations, where the daily dose exceeds the limits in the pharmacopoeia can be held as medicines, as well as vitamin or mineral preparations for children. If it is unclear whether the product to be placed on the market is a medicine or not, the National Agency for Medicines will, on request, classify the product. It will normally do this only on request and requires a fee567. Information on the product should be submitted to the Pharmacovigilance Activities unit of the National Agency for Medicines for the decision on classifi cation.568 The National Agency for Medicines can also without request classify a product as a medicine, if it complies with the defi nition of medicines. The Food Safety Agency is also involved in classifi cation. It "recommends" a marketer to apply for a classifi cation decision if a food contains substances or herbs listed in the pharmacopoeia, or if the amount of vitamins or minerals exceeds the set limits. If the Food Safety Agency itself notices that a food supplement contains medicinal materials, it will specifi cally recommend the marketer to apply for a classifi cation decision. The Food Safety 565 Coppens et al. 2001, 142.566 European Food Law Association. Letter to the Commission. January 2007. 567 The fee was 85 euros in 2006.568 National Agency for Medicines web page. http://www.nam.fi /english/pharma_industry/herbal_remedy/herbal_medicinal_product/index.html.-93-Agency also notifi es the National Agency for Medicines of its recommendation.569 Because of the pre-market notifi cation procedure for food supplements, it is easy for the Food Safety Agency to follow what is put into food supplements. This is not the case for functional foods, for which there is not necessarily any pre-market clearance. Dosage is the key word in determining whether a product containing medicinal herbs, vitamins, or minerals is regarded a medicine. This means the distinction between medicines and foodstuffs is often (merely) gradual. With vitamins and minerals, the medicinal doses are set beforehand. With herbs, there is more room for discretion. We will look into Finnish examples of medicines and non-medicines in chapter 6 when trying to predict how our fi ctional products will be classifi ed. The system of voluntary clearance will lead to some products with medicinal effects being sold as foods. It is not mandatory to get a product classifi ed even if it contains medicinal herbs. One can just sell the product as a food and wait to see if the Food Agency and the Medicine Agency react. After products are classifi ed as medicines, the marketer must withdraw products from food stores. 3.2.4 UK PracticeIn the UK, 'borderline product' is a term for products that are not easy to distinguish from a medicine, for example, cosmetics or food supplements570. The decision of whether a product is a medicine is based on its functions and its marketing, as stipulated in the medicinal products directive. Normally, a product which is for use only as a toilet preparation, disinfectant, food or beverage is not regarded as a medicinal product, and, therefore, does not require a marketing authorisation. Similarly, dietary supplements, containing such familiar substances as vitamins, amino acids or minerals, are generally subject to food safety and marketing rules rather than medicines control.571 However, should any of the above contain a pharmacologically active substance or make medicinal claims, it would be regarded as a medicine. Medicinal claims are, according to MHRA, claims to treat or prevent disease, or to interfere with the normal operation of a physiological function of the human body572. The defi nition of a medicinal claim is of course based on the longer defi nition in the directive, but the UK defi nition is worth mentioning, as every EU member state will see the concept of 'medicine' a bit differently, which will infl uence the division of foods and medicines. Presenting medicinal claims in labelling and advertising will make any cosmetic or food a medicinal product. The MHRA's Borderline Section, similarly to the Finnish NAM, offers advice on the status of a product in cases of doubt. The MHRA's Borderline Section has an online "Borderline Medicine Advice Form" for this purpose. A full reply is promised "in due course". In making a decision, the MHRA considers "each individual product on its merits and any information which 569 The Food Safety Agency Guideline on Food Supplements. Updated December 2006.570 MHRA web page. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.571 MHRA web page. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.572 MHRA web page. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.-94-may have a bearing on the product's status, for example, the claims made for the product, the pharmacological properties of the ingredients, whether there are any similar licensed products on the market, and how it is presented to the public through labelling, packaging, promotional literature and advertisements".573 The MHRA has also issued a guidance note related to borderline products. Guidance Note 8, 'A guide to what is a medicinal product' provides detailed information and is intended for the guidance of companies who need to consider whether products they propose to place on the market are medicinal or not574. The food vs. medicine -issue is discussed in sections 7 and 8 of the guidance note. "Food" is defi ned as any food, drink or food supplement that is part of the diet. Every ingested product is either a food or a medicine. Also articles and substances of no nutritional value are foods. A product, which the average consumer would regard as something to be eaten, drunk or chewed as part of his/her diet, for example, because of its taste, fl avour, or nutritional value, is unlikely to be classifi ed as a medicinal product. However, if the product contains one or more ingredients generally regarded as medicinal and indicative of a medicinal purpose, it will likely be classifi ed as a medicine.575 In the guidance note, relevant guidance issued by the Local Authority Coordinating Body on Trading Standards (LACOTS) and the Joint Health Claims Initiative's published Code of Practice are also referred to. It is also emphasised, that foods for particular nutritional purposes (dietary foods), including dietary foods for special medical purposes, are under separate EC and UK legislation.576 The MHRA reaches a determination as to whether a product is a medicinal product on a case-by-case basis, and in the light of:the defi nitions of medicine and food; -relevant ECJ and UK precedents; and -an assessment of all the available evidence. - 577 Nothing defi nitive can be said about the weight of different pieces of evidence. It is stated that no single factor or combination of factors will necessarily be conclusive, or more or less important than others. On the contrary, a single factor or combination of factors may be more important than others, and may even be conclusive.578 Medicine based on claims In assessing whether a product is "presented for treating or preventing disease", the MHRA considers, explicit and implicit claims which are made for it, and with reference to its presentation as a whole. Claims of relief from symptoms, or to cure, remedy or heal a specifi c disease or adverse condition of body or mind will also be regarded as medicinal claims. If 573 MHRA web page. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.574 MHRA web page. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.575 Guidance note, paragraph 7.576 Guidance note, paragraph 8.577 Guidance note, paragraph 14.578 Guidance note, paragraph 14.-95-the product, for example, claims to help cope with stress, anxiety and nervous tension, these are considered claims to treat or prevent disease. Claims to "protect" or "avoid" may be perceived by consumers as having much the same meaning as "prevent", and would thus also be considered medicinal claims.579 The MHRA does not consider claims to "maintain" or "help to maintain" or "support" health or a healthy lifestyle, as medicinal in themselves. The key is whether the product is a) said to maintain health or b) to restore some function or organ to a normal state. The latter claim would in the UK be considered medicinal.580 To further help the applicants, the MHRA has listed factors particularly relevant to deciding whether a product is a medicine under the fi rst part of the defi nition (medicine based on presentation).These are: all claims made for the product, both explicit and implicit, including any made on linked -"helplines" or in linked publications. "Implicit" claims may include product names.the context in which the claims are made, and the overall presentation; -how a product appears to the public, or to those to whom it is promoted; -the labelling, and packaging/package inserts including any graphics; -the promotional literature, including testimonials and any literature issued by a third -party on behalf of the supplier;advertisements, including those appearing in "advertorials", on television, other media -and the Internet;the product form, (capsule, tablet, etc.) and the way it is to be used; -any particular target of the marketing information/advertising material, for example, -population groups with, or particularly vulnerable to, specifi c diseases or adverse conditions.581 In addition to general criteria for evaluating marketing, The MHRA has also produced an indicative list of the kind of claims that the MHRA may decide are present in the product as treating or preventing disease. The words and phrases listed in Appendix 1 of the Guidance note are ones the MHRA has previously decided to be medicinal, in their context. There are around 40 of these phrase examples. In addition to clear cases such as "prevents", "treats" and "cures", the list includes for example: "Alleviates""Avoids""Clears""Combats""Controls""Counteracts""Eliminates""Fights""Heals"579 Guidance note, paragraphs 15 and 16.580 Guidance note, paragraph 17.581 Guidance note, paragraph 18.-96-"Helps""Protects against""Remedies""Removes""Repairs""Restores" "Stops" and "Traditionally used for".Medicine based on FunctionA product may contain nutritional ingredients, and also ingredients having established use as medicine. In these cases, the product may be classifi ed a medicine because of its function. What is important is the dosage of the medicinal ingredient.