The EU defended the regulation by saying that there are genuine safety concerns for products within the loose category of "products of biodiversity".728 This is of course true as plants may very well contain poisonous materials. But this reasoning does not justify how some plant products can be considered safe just based on use (use in EU), and some other plant products cannot be considered safe just based on use (use outside EU). The EU also replied that the scope of application is not limited to third countries, but affects all producers operating in the EU market. This is true, as the regulation applies to all foods marketed in the EU after 1997. Also European producers using Southern plants as raw material must go through the novel food procedure if they would like to sell their product in Europe. The Southern countries have never claimed the regulation is discriminatory in relation to those who use the Southern plants. They merely cited the fact that Southern plants are considered novel, European plants not. As a sign of perhaps being willing to change the defi nition of novel food, the EU said it welcomed examples of products approved in other markets and for which the regulation creates obstacles for development. They said this kind of information is useful in the further elaboration of the regulation.729 The Commission has received this same message in gathering stakeholder opinions. The current situation in practice is that many exotic foods are sold without novel food authorisation. The marketers do not consider their foods novel or take the 725 The March meeting and the June meeting of the SPS Committee (the WTO committee dealing with plant and animal health and food safety - sanitary and phytosanitary measures).726 WTO web page. http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news06_e/sps_june06_e.htm.727 WTO web page. http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news06_e/sps_june06_e.htm.728 WTO web page. http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news06_e/sps_june06_e.htm.729 WTO web page. http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news06_e/sps_june06_e.htm.-128-deliberate risk of getting caught and being removed from the market. The novel food process is considered too burdensome and unpredictable. When a law is impossible to live by, it is not obeyed. According to the Proposal, plants not used in Europe are still considered novel but a simplifi ed procedure is created for them. "Traditional food from a third country" is defi ned as "novel food with a history of food use in a third country, meaning that the food in question has been and continues to be part of the normal diet for at least one generation in a large part of the population of the country"730. We will return to the principal and simplifi ed procedures in the next chapter. Currently, the marketer must himself determine whether his product is novel according to the Regulation. This means the burden of proof is on the marketer on whether for example his product has been sold before 1997 or whether there is substantial equivalence to another product. It the producer is unsure of whether the product is novel, he can consult the authorities. The process of determining whether a food or food ingredient falls within the scope of the defi nition is in Article 13 of the Novel Foods Regulation731. According to Article 13, the Commission Standing Committee for Foodstuffs can be consulted by the applicant or by the national authority of the member state. Several stakeholders have indicated that they would appreciate an instrument whereby they could obtain a decision on whether or not their products are novel foods. This kind of advanced decision could be made by EFSA. The ruling would have legal validity throughout the EU. This would remove some of the costs related to uncertainty and thus promote innovation in foods732. It has also been suggested that a publicly accessible novel food database be created. In this database or network, information on novel food status of individual products could be exchanged.733 According to the Proposal734, where necessary, it may be determined in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 14(2), whether a type of food falls within the scope of the Novel Food Regulation. The procedure in Article 14(2) means the Committee procedure. The Commission's Standing Committee on Food Chain and Animal Health will resolve the issue of whether the food is novel. According to the defi nition of novel food735, the Committee will also set further criteria for assessing if a food has been used for human consumption to a signifi cant degree within the Community before 15 May 1997. This will probably be done in the form of scientifi c opinion or guideline. 730 Article 3(2)(b) of the proposed Regulation.731 Art. 1(3).732 According to CIAA, uncertainty of novel food procedures is detrimental to innovation and new product development. The fi rst uncertain issue here is whether a food is novel in the fi rst place. CIAA: Economic impact assessment of the way in which the EU novel foods regulatory approval procedures affect the EU food sector.733 Novel food summary report 2003, 4.734 Article 2(3) of the proposed Regulation.735 Article 3(2)(a)(i) of the proposed Regulation.-129-4.2.1.7.3 Current Procedures of Evaluating SafetyCurrently, there are two different novel food procedures in use. Pre-market authorisation is the primary procedure. Pre-market notifi cation (the simplifi ed procedure) applies to foods that are substantially equivalent to existing foods.WHO and OECD originally introduced the concept of substantial equivalence with particular reference to GMO foods. The concept of substantial equivalence embodies the idea that existing organisms used as foods can serve as a basis for comparison when assessing the safety of a modifi ed or new food. If a new food is found to be substantially equivalent to an existing food, it can be treated in the same manner with respect to safety.736The application of the principle of substantial equivalence was extended from the evaluation of GMO foods to the evaluation of foods from novel sources and processes. In terms of safety, substantially equivalent novel foods are comparable to their conventional counterpart. Establishment of substantial equivalence is not a safety or nutritional assessment in itself. Conversely, if a novel food is not substantially equivalent to an existing food or food component, this does not imply that it is unsafe. It merely indicates that such a food must be evaluated on the basis of its unique composition and properties.The establishment of substantial equivalence is thus "an approach to compare a potential new food with its conventional counterpart". The notion implies that the substantially similar novel foods are presumed just as safe as traditional foods. From a risk management perspective, this leaves a lot of questions unanswered. We don't know exactly how safe traditional foods are. We just don't know all the diet-health mechanisms. A food might be similar to a traditional food that will later prove dangerous. A food might be almost identical to a safe food, but the slight difference might make it dangerous.According to the Commission, the establishment of substantial equivalence contains a dynamic element. This means that when a food is continually modifi ed, the basis of comparison changes. The most recent novel food is compared with an appropriate former novel food and not necessarily with the most traditional counterpart.737 A consumer is reassured by the presumption that "another little change will probably be meaningless".The comparison of the old food and the novel food may be simple or very lengthy depending upon experience with and the nature of the novel food in question. The technical approach to establishing substantial equivalence differs between whole animals, plants, microorganisms, chemical food ingredients and novel processes.738The advantages of the comparative approach are:the comparator defi nes a standard that meets the acceptable level of safety, - it is practicable, and - animal tests are restricted to situations where they are of real value. - 739Again we see that food law is not based on pure science but practical issues. We cannot analyse all the foods on the market, so we presume the old foods are safe. We also presume 736 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.3.737 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.3.738 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.3.739 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. -130-that novel foods are safe if they are equivalent to old foods. Besides being unscientifi c and discriminatory, the concept of substantial equivalence is unavoidably blurred. The decision on the authorisation of a novel food is made jointly for the whole EU and Member States, and Commission takes part in this decision-making. At present, novel food applications are lodged with Member States. They make the Initial Assessment of the safety of the product. In practice, the process has always continued from initial assessment to a Community decision740. For example in Finland, the Food Agency handles applications on novel foods. There is an expert body called the Board of Novel Foods that assesses the applications from the safety point of view.An alternative for the current system is that applications are to be lodged with the EFSA. This would be simpler, in that applicants would still deal with a single authority. Applicants would not have to go through the occasional artifi cial process of selecting which Member State is the one where they fi rst market a food. Also consistency of decisions might improve. This would promote legal certainty and equality of applicants. During the Commission's consultations, the majority of stakeholders were of the view that the EFSA should handle novel food applications, as it is an impartial scientifi c organisation consisting of food science experts.In its Discussion paper, the Commission identifi ed the major problem of the novel food process as being too lengthy. It has been a constant complaint that the current two to three years is too long of a period for the assessment to last. The novel food process signifi cantly postpones the time of the product accessing the market. With medicines, there are absolute timeframes in which the authorities must handle the application. The food industry is reasonable in demanding similar treatment. Setting exact timeframes would make the legal treatment more predictable and facilitate planning by entrepreneurs.In their comments to the Commission discussion paper, stakeholders were unanimous in urging the Commission to streamline the decision-making procedure in order to make it quicker. However, the quality of risk assessment and risk management cannot be compromised. One important suggestion by the stakeholders was that there should be strict deadlines for each stage of the procedure. These deadlines would apply to the EFSA and the Commission.741Many stakeholders believed that putting the EFSA in charge of the risk assessment would speed up things, particularly if applications will in the future be fi led directly with the EFSA. Stakeholders also trust the EFSA to make quality assessments, see above. All stakeholders agree that legal recourse against a decision to authorise or not authorise a novel food should be guaranteed. This would also be according to European on Human Rights, where every person is guaranteed to appeal a decision affecting his or her rights or responsibilities. The novel food process has been strongly criticised by the European food industry for being unpredictable and anti-innovation. According to the CIAA, most in the food industry have always known that "food innovation in Europe is not possible without a fundamental reform of current procedures"742. According to a report prepared for the CIAA in 2007, R&D expenditure on food products by companies tends to be lower in the EU compared to other countries. Also, the EU tends not to be the highest priority target market for new food product development. As a result, improved products are not available to European consumers. The 740 Novel Food Discussion paper 2002, 21.741 Summary Report 2003, 2.742 CIAA Statement on proposed Novel Food Regulation. 14.1.2008.-131-report also suspects that income and employment generation in the EU are lower than they would be in a "more innovation-friendly regulatory environment". 743 The CIAA report identifi es major impacts of the current EU Novel Foods Regulation that contribute to explaining why food companies tend to ignore the EU market for novel product development, as compared to the US market. First, there is the uncertainty regarding the novel food status and the timing of the procedure. There is a risk of delays of three years to fi ve years in obtaining approval. This uncertainty has made some investments of marginal value, and signifi cantly diminished the economic incentive to bring products to the EU market. Secondly, the current approval mechanism encourages companies to be market followers rather than innovators. Followers to market experience lower costs and risks than novel food innovators, and hence can easily earn higher rates of return than innovators.744 The report concludes that if the EU Novel Foods regulation is to better create an environment that encourages food innovation, each of these defi ciencies should be addressed. The time taken to authorise a novel food should be reduced. Incentives to encourage innovation should be considered. For this purpose, the report suggests exclusive access to markets or compensation for data provision. Uncertainties should be minimised.7454.2.1.7.4 Proposed Procedures Common Procedure According to the Commission proposal, novel foods will in the future be evaluated by the EFSA in the Common Procedure for novel foods, additives, fl avourings, and enzymes746. According to preamble 17 of the proposed Novel Food Regulation, "in order to simplify procedures, applicants should be allowed to present a single application for foods regulated under different sectoral food laws". This means that a substance that has multiple uses can be authorised in one procedure, for example as a novel food and as an additive. As regards the procedure for updating the Community list, the proposal for Novel Food Regulation, more particularly its Article 7, refers to the proposal on the Common Procedure, more particularly its Article 14, which in turn refers to the Council Decision 1999/468/EC laying down the procedures for the exercise of implementing powers conferred on the Commission. It would be clearer for the marketers if the novel food evaluation procedures were described in the Novel Food Regulation itself. The Common Procedure is based on risk assessment carried out by the EFSA and a risk management system in which the Commission and the Member States operate within the framework of a regulatory committee procedure. This means the Commission shall be assisted by the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health. On the basis of scientifi c assessments by EFSA, the Commission creates, maintains, and updates a general positive list for each category of substances concerned. The lists and their updates will be given in 743 Brookes 2007, 6.744 Brookes 2007, 6.745 Brookes 2007, 6.746 Regulation (EC) No 1331/2008 establishing a common authorisation procedure for food additives, food enzymes and food fl avourings.-132-the form of regulations. The inclusion of a substance on one of the lists means that its use is authorised in general for all operators on the Community market. 747 The Commission will make decisions on the lists based on EFSA opinions, Community law, and "other legitimate factors"748. There are strict timelines involved in the Common Procedure. Applications will be sent to the Commission, which will seek an opinion from the EFSA. The EFSA will have 6 months to give their opinion749. After this, the Commission will have 9 months to give their draft Regulation750. The Standing Committee on Food Chain and Animal Health shall deliver its opinion within a time limit, which the chairman may lay down according to the urgency of the matter751. After this, the Commission shall adopt the measures envisaged, if they are in accordance with the opinion of the Committee752. If the opinion is not in accordance with the draft regulation, the matter will be submitted to the Council, which will have 3 months to adopt it or oppose it. If the Council does neither, the Commission may adopt the proposed regulation.753 The timelines indicate that the procedure as a whole should generally last not much longer than one and a half years. Timelines are what the industry has wanted of novel food evaluation, and the proposed procedure is an improvement compared to current novel food procedures. Novel food producers should also be satisfi ed with the EFSA being in charge of risk assessment. The EFSA is trusted by the industry as an impartial actor. According to Article 6 of the proposed Novel Food Regulation, "a novel food may be included in the Community list only if it meets the following conditions:it does not, on the basis of the scientifi c evidence available, pose a safety concern to the a) health of the consumer under normal consumption conditions;it does not mislead the consumer, by the way it is presented or by its intended use;b) in the case where it is intended to replace another food, it does not differ from that food c) to such an extent that its normal consumption would be nutritionally disadvantageous for the consumer". According to Article 10 of the proposed Novel Food Regulation, in assessing the safety of novel foods, the EFSA shall: compare, where appropriate, if the food is as safe as food from a comparable food (a) category already existing on the market in the Community or as the food that the novel food is intended to replace;take into account for traditional food from a third country, the history of safe food use." (b) 747 Commission Proposal COM (2006) 423 fi nal, page 2 (Explanatory Memorandum).748 Article 3(4) and Article 7 of the proposed Regulation on the Common Procedure.749 In duly justifi ed cases where the EFSA requests additional information from applicants, the period may be extended. Article 6(1) of the proposed Regulation on the Common Procedure.750 Article 7 of the proposed Regulation on the Common Procedure. The 9-month period may be extended if the Commission needs additional information from applicants. Article 8(1).751 Decision 1999/468/EC, Article 5(2).752 Decision 1999/468/EC, Article 5(3).753 Article 14(2) of the proposed Regulation, referring to Article 5(6) of Decision 1999/468/EC. The Parliament will also be informed on the proposal, and it may force the Commission to re-examine the measures.-133-The safety test is a comparison. The novel food is compared to the old EU food, which is presumed safe. Also with third country foods, safety is presumed to be based on long-term use. Safety in absolute terms would be impossible to achieve. However, research will continue to bring negative impacts of old foods to our knowledge. The concept of presuming familiar things safe is used in law not only for scientifi c but for practical and political reasons. Even though used in regulation, this kind of presumption cannot be the base of natural science. Traditional Foods from Third CountriesBy the current Regulation, the novelty of plants, animals or microorganisms is defi ned by their novelty in the Community. Species not previously used in Europe are considered new, and a full description is needed to assess their role in the European food supply. With reference to history of the organism, the description should include information on the past and present use of the food in other parts of the world. Such information should also include past and present methods to obtain raw materials and food, e.g.