When discussing the level of regulation, all of the above-mentioned issues can be resolved either on local or global level. Both the European Community and China are members of WTO and other international organisations where food and drug law issues are discussed. On one hand, global agreements guide legislative actions of their parties. On the other hand, through global negotiations it is possible for the EU and China to affect global legal development. In the EU, Community level legislation is 9 Wilhelmsson (1991) divides consumer protection into protection against: dangerous products (product safety and product liability), unreasonable contract terms, inappropriate marketing and unconsidered decision-making. Kivivuori et al. (1978) divide consumer policy into four areas according to stages of the product life cycle: production, marketing, trade, and consumption. 10 Besides consumer protection, marketing regulation is particularly important also from competitor point of view.11 Krapohl 2004, 519. 12 Asch 1988, 55.13 Krapohl 2004, 521. According to Maatta, information asymmetry is one of the basic reasons for consumer protection laws. Maatta 2006, 22. 14 Asch 1988, 55.15 Asch 1988, 55. 16 Asch 1988, 56.-4-today often preferred to legislation on Member State level. Likewise in China, national laws are preferred to local laws.With regard to the types of regulation, the issues can be resolved either by legally binding or non-binding instruments. Governments need to consider their role in relation to other regulators such as governmental and non-governmental organisations. Soft law has many defi nitions, but it essentially means regulations that are not laws17. The binding nature of soft law materials will be an unresolved issue. These guideline-type norms are often considered suitable for regulating foodstuffs and medicines. This is due to the amount of scientifi c issues, the need for complex procedures, the need for rapid changes, and the need for some fl exibility in interpreting these complex issues. Soft law is mainly created by food and medicine control agencies. This means implementing the law actually includes creating the law. Also self-regulation by enterprises themselves has its limited space.1.3 Basic Defi nitions Used in this StudyLegally, the defi nitions of 'foodstuff' and 'medicine' exclude one another. If a product is a medicine, it is not a food. 'Foodstuff' or 'food' means any edible product suitable for people in general or for a certain group of people. This includes foods in food form and in other forms such as pills, capsules, powders, etc. 'Medicine' is synonymous with drug18. It means a product that is used to treat, prevent, or cure a disease. This includes modern medicines (pharmaceuticals), and traditional medicines, which in practice are often herbal medicines.The third signifi cant term used in this study, 'functional food', is more diffi cult to defi ne. As the laws do not defi ne the concept, we have to use our own defi nition to suit our purposes.Globally, there are many different defi nitions of the term 'functional food'. 'Functional food' often refers to products that are in food form, whereas the term 'nutraceutical' often refers to products isolated or purifi ed from foods.19 Both are generally understood as products demonstrated to have physiological benefi ts and/or to reduce the risk of chronic disease beyond basic nutritional functions. Functional foods can be understood either as fi nished food products or health-enhancing dietary components or ingredients.It is not clear what 'beyond basic nutrition' means. According to Agriculture and agri-food Canada, this means that there are so-called "bioactive compounds" involved20. Bioactive compounds are "naturally occurring chemical compounds contained in, or derived from, a plant, animal or marine source", that exert the desired health/wellness benefi t. They mention omega-3 fatty acids in fi sh oils and beta-glucan in oats and barley. According to Kris-Etherton et al, bioactive compounds are extranutritional constituents that typically occur in small 17 Tala 2005a. Korkea-aho 2005.18 'Drug' could also be defi ned to mean any chemical other than food that affects living processes. By this defi nition, a drug could either be a 'medicine' or a 'poison'. University of Elmhurst web page.19 The term 'medicinal food' is also used, often to include food-form and pill-form foods. See for example Journal of Medicinal Foods.20 Agriculture and agri-food Canada. What are Functional Foods and Nutraceuticals? -5-quantities in foods21. They mention for example phenolic compounds, including fl avonoids as their subcategory, and recommend consuming foods rich in bioactive compounds.Different layers of functional foods can be identifi ed. There are fresh foods such as carrot and tomato that have functional effects22 basic processed foods such as rye bread, oat bran cereal, and yogurt that have functional effects23and fortifi ed foods where certain nutritional ingredients are added24. In addition there are foods traditionally propagated or genetically engineered to have more of a functional component25.26 Heasman and Mellentin27 use the defi nition 'any modifi ed food or food ingredient that may provide a health benefi t beyond the traditional nutrients it contains'. They do not include 'natural' functional foods in their defi nition.Diplock et al.28 proposed, as a working defi nition, that a food can be regarded as 'functional', "if it is satisfactorily demonstrated to affect benefi cially one or more target functions in the body, beyond adequate nutritional effects, in a way that is relevant to either an improved state of health and well-being and/or reduction of risk of disease." It is also required that functional foods:remain as foodsa) 29,demonstrate their effects in amounts that can normally be expected to be consumed in b) the diet, andare consumed as part of a normal food pattern.c) Because functional food is not a legal term in the EU or China, the aforementioned defi nitions have no legal relevance. The legal rules on products are based on other concepts such as 'food', 'health food', 'novel food', 'medicine', 'herbal medicine', 'traditional herbal medicine', and 'traditional Chinese medicine'. The defi nition of functional foods by Diplock et al. seems to have transferred into principles that are used in health claim legislation.In this study, we use the term functional food to describe a certain type of product, the legal treatment of which we are interested: A functional food is - a fi nal product in any digestible form (food, pill, capsule, powder, etc.) A functional food might be - fortifi ed (unfamiliar ingredients added), possibly with novel ingredients, possibly genetically engineered. A functional food has - benefi cial health effects, which are either traditionally or scientifi cally established.21 Kris-Etherton et al. 2002. 22 Carrots have carotene. Tomatoes have lycopene.23 Oats has beta-glucan (fi bre). Rye has lignans (fi bre). Yogurt has benefi cial bacteria such as lactic acid bacteria.24 Vitamins and minerals such as calcium or magnesium are commonly added to several foods. For example plant sterols (phytosterols), plant stanols (phytostanols) and probiotics are also commonly added to foods where they normally are not present. 25 For example tomatoes with higher levels of lycopene.26 Categories by Agriculture and agri-food Canada. The Leatherhead Functional food report from 2006 identifi es two basic layers of functional foods from the marketing perspective, the health claim being the factor that separates 'actual' functional foods from 'healthy foods' merely perceived as functional.27 Heasman - Mellentin 2001, 5.28 Diplock et al. 1999, S6.29 This means food supplements do not go under this defi nition of functional foods.-6-Even though our concept 'functional food' includes the term 'food', we do not presuppose that a functional food is legally a foodstuff. Instead, we investigate the conditions on which a hypothetical product is legally a food and on which a medicine. The legal category will depend on product functions and on marketing claims used. We are particularly interested in the legal evaluation of healthy products made of three Chinese berries, which might in Europe be classifi ed as ordinary foods, foods for particular nutritional use, or herbal medicines. In China, the products could possibly be registered as health foods or traditional Chinese medicines. The determination of legal category will affect the evidence required on safety and effi cacy, and the marketing claims available.1.4 Comparative Law: EU and China as Objects of ResearchComparative law means the study of legal systems by comparison with each other. According to editors of Electronic Journal of Comparative Law, "substantive comparative ... law topics will have to discuss and compare at least two legal systems"30. The idea of the comparative approach is to collect information on several legal systems simultaneously, crossing national borders31. This is the simple and practical view to comparative law: if there are at least two legal systems under discussion, it is comparative law.According to Aarnio, comparative law is interested in the norm itself: it is about describing the structure and content of norms in a foreign legal order32. Mikkola sees comparative law more as understanding legal frameworks, structures, and principles rather than concrete rules. Rules are important, but only in their connection.33 Husa sees comparative legal research as explaining and evaluating solutions to certain problems within societies, and the reasons for differences in these solutions34. Also according to Watson, comparative law does not mean merely defi ning what is similar and what is different between two or more legal systems: it is about understanding the nature and development of legal systems. This includes analysing why certain institutions have been created in a legal system, and understanding the historical connections between legal systems and legal rules.35 Comparative law can also be seen as having various ambition levels. A researcher can merely describe foreign law as curiosity, or try to understand it as a phenomenon.36In recent years, comparative law has gained in practical importance. According to Norman37, there are two reasons for this. The fi rst is the increased globalisation of world trade, which involves the need to do business in unfamiliar legal systems. The second is the move towards global or regional harmonisation of laws. Before laws are harmonised, they have to be compared. Along with the trend, we have reached the comparative approach because of global trade. More particularly, we are interested in global trade of functional foods, and therefore 30 In addition to substantive topics, methodological aspects of comparative law are discussed under comparative law. Electronic Journal of Comparative Law. About EJCL. 31 Husa 2009, 123.32 Aarnio 1988, 50.33 Mikkola 2001, 2.34 Husa 1998, 15-16.35 Watson 1974, 6-7.36 See Huhtamaki 1993, 20.37 Norman 2007. -7-need to understand global rules and rules outside our own legal system. As Husa suggests, we try to examine, explain, and evaluate different legal solutions to the reasonably wide issue of how to regulate functional foods.The legal systems investigated here are the European Union legal system and the Chinese legal system. Generally, results of comparative legal research can be used in legal policy and lawmaking, in jurisdiction, and in creating legal theories. Regardless of how results are used, comparative law widens knowledge base. 38 We primarily aim at providing information for two audiences: businesses and regulators39. Initially, we will study existing and planned regulations as they interest a business operating in 2009. In addition, we will look at the law from a regulator's perspective, focusing on how regulation should be formulated in the future. This study is not comparative law in the history-oriented sense. We will only briefl y discuss the issue of how and why the European and Chinese legal systems have developed so far. We will, however, consider the fundamental differences of the two legal systems as they affect our conclusions both from business viewpoint and from the regulator's viewpoint.The practical reason for choosing the EU as object of research is because of our residency in the EU. The practical reason for choosing China is due to the University of Turku maintaining close connections with Chinese universities and researchers. In particular, the University of Turku40 has a project with the University of Beijing where we ultimately aim to bring new functional food products to European and Chinese markets. We have chosen the three berries (hawthorn, barbaric wolfberry, and emblic leaffl ower) because they are objects of interest in this project. We are aware that for a European lawyer, the Chinese part of this study is the more diffi cult one. Hence, the goals need to be somewhat different regarding European vs. Chinese law. With Chinese law, the aim is to achieve an understanding, and with European law, the aim is to add to the understanding.Legal systems can be divided in Western and non-Western systems, where Western systems are individual-centred and non-Western systems are community-centred. Westerns systems can be further divided in common law and Romano-Germanic civil law. Non-Western legal systems can be divided in religious (Islamic, Jewish, and Hindu law) and non-religious systems. Non-religious systems include Asian law and traditional law. Asian law relies on the Confucian principle of mediation and avoiding disputes, which means that courts and lawyers are not in a central role. Traditional law, which is typical of aboriginal people and tribes, relies on spiritual and supernatural forces.41 In this division, Chinese law is a member of the Asian family. There are also other classifi cations: some writers, for example, separate between Roman, German, and Scandinavian law.Today, Chinese law shares many of the characteristics of the Romano-Germanic system. The legislation refl ects a structural similarity to countries in the civil law family, and Chinese jurists value legal doctrines and hold written law in esteem. Concrete judicial decisions are not offi cially considered as a source of law.42 However, the Supreme People's Court is particularly 38 Husa 1998, 14.39 Instead of legislator, we use the term regulator here to include bodies other than governments. These are the WTO, international standards bodies, administrative agencies, self-regulation associations, etc.40 Department of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry.41 Husa 2009, 126-127. 42 This can be attributed to the Europeanization in China in the end of the 19th century and the beginning of the 20th century, and is also based on Chinese tradition: statutes or codes were highly valued already by the Qin Dynasty in 221-207 BC. Liu 2000.-8-infl uential in practice. Its decisions are factually used as a guideline in the practice of lower courts when the provision of law is obscure.43 According to Jones, China has succumbed to Western arguments and built a European-style legal system, but has never been entirely convinced44. The Chinese legal system is closely linked to the economy: China is still balancing between market economy and socialism. The need to balance market effi ciency and social stability has left administrators considerable discretion, which has resulted in legal and practical uncertainty as regards the roles of government vs. markets45.In China, the statutes and institutions involved in food and medicine law are rather similar to the European ones. Superfi cially, the Chinese legal system thus seems similar to ours; however, China is still heavily infl uenced by tradition. The most important trace of Chinese history is in the close connection between strong central government (previously headed by the Emperor) and the administration46. Historically, the Emperor had all the power. Each dynasty had its own legal code. There could be no discussion on separation of powers: local offi cials carried out all governmental functions at the bottom level47. Separation between legislation, its execution, and adjudication is still unfamiliar to the Chinese.Turning from the legal orders to business reality, European and Chinese food markets and food consumption patterns still differ greatly. This means the forms of business action regulated by food law differ in the EU as opposed to China. China faces the dual problem of malnutrition and over-eating. Use of milk and dairy products has been almost non-existent but is currently growing in China. The Europeans consume twice as much meat and fruit as the Chinese. In contrast, the Chinese consume twice as many vegetables. Only fi sh and seafood consumption fi gures are similar in the EU-15 and China.48 With regard to medicines, consumption of Western medicines is growing faster than consumption in general in China49.In China, functional foods could be used to allow malnourished citizens to have an adequate daily nutrient intake. This potential side of functional foods is not at focus here. Instead we focus on nutritional problems that are common to Europe and China. In Europe, diet-related diseases are very common. Health is an important driver for food innovation50, and the European market for functional foods is growing. Likewise, the Chinese market for functional foods is growing fast51 and in China the nutrition-related diseases are becoming more common, and consumers are acquiring affl uence.52.European and Chinese legislators are dealing with functional foods in their own ways. Chinese legal solutions concerning functional foods should be interesting to Western lawmakers 43 Liu 2000.44 Jones 2003, 8.45 Peerenboom 2008 a, 3.46 Jones 2003, 8-9. This system of government developed over 2000 years ago and remained similar until the 20th century.47 Jones 2000, 9.48 Data and Trends of the European Food and Drink Industry 2006. CIAA report. Figures are from 2003.49 Li & Fung 2003.50 Data and Trends of the European Food and Drink Industry 2006. CIAA report.51 Yeaman 2002. 52 The ratio of health products in the total expenditure of Chinese consumers is currently reaching that of Japanese or Western consumers China Health Products Association according to Functional Ingredients March 2005, China News. -9-because of thousands of years of Chinese tradition in treating diseases with nutrition53. Knowledge of Chinese legislation is also important for Western companies, because the market potential in China is great due to the size of the market54. Conversely, European legal solutions might be interesting for the Chinese. Currently, the EU is the largest food exporter in the world while China is fourth after the U.S. and Brazil55. However, the EU's share of exports is shrinking in favour of Brazil and China.56Simultaneously to product markets, the European and Chinese legal systems are becoming analogous. For the past 30 years, the Chinese have put focus on "socialist justice" and legality.