A lot of legislative work has been done, particularly economic reforms including modern legislation.57 That is why differences between European and Chinese legislation are no longer considerable, at least superfi cially. A comparative research approach should be neutral in a sense that it does not presume one legal order superior to others58. We try to avoid seeing European legal order as the inevitable endpoint for China, and look at both legal orders neutrally through a critical lens.Donald C. Clarke has described methods for comparing Chinese law to Western, particularly American law. First, the naive ignorance approach, which needs to be avoided, views the two legal systems as similar and looks only at legal texts. We could also compare Chinese reality to "Ideal Western Legal Order".59 An alternative would be to see the "errors" as normal features of the Chinese legal system60. A "disciplinary model" might be fruitful in understanding the Chinese legal system as the model is based on the assumption of state as Emperor. According to Clarke, no single model for describing Chinese law is perfect, and different models might be suitable for different fi elds of law or the same fi eld at different times61.1.5 Consumer Protection vs. Food Law and Medical LawIn this study, we discuss regulation of foodstuffs and medicines regarding the relationship between sellers and buyers. Guaranteeing safety and effi cacy are responsibilities of the seller, and typical issues of consumer protection.62 We could thus say this study discusses consumer 53 In the Chinese culture, it is deemed better to avoid illness by eating the right food at the right time, than curing it with medicine. There are even 'medicinal restaurants' in China, where one can order food on the basis of one's ailments. Giract China news March 2006. 54 China has a huge emerging middle class with high discretionary spending power. The middle class comprises of around 125 million people in 2005, and over 300 million by 2010. Doering 2005, 20. According to Doering, one of the main sectors that can benefi t from the explosion of consumer demand is processed foods. 55 China is followed by Canada, Australia, Thailand, Argentina, New Zealand, and Malaysia.56 CIAA: Data and Trends of the European Food and Drink Industry 2006.57 Huotari - Seppala 2005, 132-133.58 Poyhonen 1997, 247.59 A sophisticated researcher with this approach will notice features of the Chinese legal system that do not fi t the Western model, but still see them as errors. If we try to understand Chinese law and where it is going, we cannot simply presume it is going towards Ideal Western Legal Order. Clarke 2003, 99-100.60 Clarke 2003, 100.61 Clarke 2003, 102.62 For example Leonard 2005 discusses food and medicine regulations under European consumer law, acknowledging both the health and safety aspect and economic interest aspect. Pages 227-229.-10-protection. The two viewpoints of consumer protection are the seller's perspective and the legislator's perspective.However, regulation of foodstuffs and regulation of medicines are wider concepts than what is included in consumer protection. Safety and accurate marketing (in the case of functional foods: effi cacy) of foods is only one of food law areas. Similarly, safety and effi cacy of medicines is only one of medical law tasks.According to Zhang, the concept of food security encompasses: adequacy of food supply or availability; - stability of supply, without fl uctuations from year to year or from season to season; - accessibility of food or affordability; and - quality and safety of food. - 63First, there must be food before the regulation of its qualities has relevance. Food security is "the right to food", and is thus a human rights issue64. Second, because food is one of the main commodities of international trade65, food is a trade issue. This viewpoint relates to agricultural policies including subsidies, customs policies, and creating free trade areas. Harmonising consumer laws can be seen as one part of this international trade law regime. Third, as food production has wide consequences to the environment, food is also an environmental issue. At times food law is in fact classifi ed under environmental law, as it is in Finland. 'Food law' is a concept that could be used to cover all of the above-mentioned legal perspectives on the agri-food business. As previously stated, we only deal with the consumer protection portion of food law.Medical law is a rather young discipline and academic topic, but is gaining more interest. For example the Uppsala University in Sweden introduced a chair in this discipline in 2003. Their defi nition of medical law is the following: "Medical law deals with legal aspects of emerging scientifi c developments, concerning for example stem cell research, genetic diagnosis, reproduction technology or new e-health applications. Studies in this area of law can also include the regulation of pharmaceuticals and forensic medicine, as well as the organisation and supervision of health care and research, obligations and liability, the status and rights of patients and research subjects, etcetera." Medical law "transcends traditional divisions, since it involves a number of legal areas such as public law, private law, criminal law and international law, as well as the relationship between law and ethics".66 As stated above, here we only deal with the consumer-protection -part of medical law.1.6 Purpose of this Study: the Research QuestionsFrom a typical lawyer's viewpoint, food and medicine law is unremarkable. For example, Jaaskinen sees constitutional law, civil law, general administrative law, criminal law, and procedural law as legal system core. This leaves business law, such as the regulation of 63 Zhang 2004, 566. 64 Zhang 2004, 567.65 Zhang 2004, 567.66 Uppsala Universitet. Centre for Research Ethics and Bioethics. -11-foodstuffs and medicines, as periphery. Jaaskinen compares laws on pig slaughtering vs. extradition of citizens, and sees them as "different things".67 By Tuori's theory, we could also see principles of civil law, criminal law, etc. as part of the legal culture, and business law as a more labile surface-level phenomenon affected by changing market situations.We see the "legal system core" as an area of law where lawyers have less competition from other sciences. Lawyers see that part of the legal system as more personalised. As business law is typically affected by economic considerations, and food and medicine law additionally by natural science, it is not seen as much as "law". This means that even though periphery might be important in practice, it is less interesting for lawyers. According to Jaaskinen, resistance to change is smaller in normative periphery that is outside "general" law68. In other words, "real" law is more profound and stable than setting "technical" requirements on consumer goods that happen to be on the market this century. Historical perspective thus affects what is considered valuable legal research. We see this research as less traditional in this sense.The aim of this thesis is, from business law perspective, to evaluate the somewhat complicated fi eld of law that lies between food law and medicine law in the EU and China. We will focus on the law that typically affects functional foods as defi ned above, but will also discuss other relevant legislation. The reasons for the comparative approach were already discussed above. Primarily, businesses need to know of different rules that apply in different market areas. In addition, regulators might have something to learn from one another.Foundations of food law and medicine law are discussed in chapter 2. This means mapping out the global framework and principles behind European and Chinese rules, and explaining how regulation on foodstuffs and medicines is drafted and implemented. In chapter 3, the borderline between the two categories of foodstuffs and medicines is discussed, focusing particularly on the question of how functional foods fi t into these categories. Safety of foodstuffs vs. medicines is the topic of chapter 4, and effi cacy and marketing of foodstuffs vs. medicines is the topic of chapter 5.In chapters 6 and 7, the aforementioned legal issues will be summarised and conclusions will be drawn. This will be done separately from the entrepreneur's perspective (chapter 6) and regulator's perspective (chapter 7). 'Entrepreneur' here refers to a developer of functional foods, which refers to a certain type of product defi ned above.From the entrepreneur's position, the main legal questions to be answered are:What are the rules affecting my business?1) Where is the line between foodstuffs and medicines?2) How safe must my product be? What is the procedure to prove safety?3) How can I market my product? What is the procedure to prove effi cacy?4) An integral part of this viewpoint is a case study, included in chapter 6. Three Chinese berries (hawthorn fruit, emblic leaffl ower fruit, and barbary wolfberry) have been selected as test cases on how functional food legislation works. The three berries or their fractions could be used as raw material in different types of functional food products. The aim of the case study is to make the legislation more concrete and to fi nd out how product development faces regulation in practice.67 Jaaskinen 2008, 43.68 Jaaskinen 2008, 43.-12-The berries were chosen as objects of research in the above-mentioned project between the universities of Turku and Beijing, because the berries have scientifi cally proven benefi cial effects on metabolic syndrome69. Metabolic syndrome is a suitable test case, as it is a globally common medical condition, and treating it is expensive. The berries are suitable test cases also because they are legally evaluated very differently due to differences in their traditional uses.From a regulator's perspective, the main legal questions to be answered are:Whether and where to draw the line between foodstuffs and medicines?1) How to defi ne safety requirements for foodstuffs vs. medicines?2) How to regulate effi cacy and marketing of foodstuffs vs. medicines?3) When implementing safety and effi cacy requirements, whether to rely on pre-market 4) or post-market control?Whether to resolve the above-mentioned legal issues locally (EU member state, Chinese 5) province or city) or centrally (European Union, the People's Republic of China)?Whether to resolve the above-mentioned legal issues by binding or non-binding 6) instruments (hard law or soft law)?The ultimate aims of regulating functional foods are presumably consumer protection and health promotion. This is also the goal of legislation on functional foods as defi ned above. Our presumption is that legislation is needed to promote research and development of new raw materials and products, to ensure the consumer's right to buy safe and effective products and to make informed decisions, and possibly to fi nancially support healthy choices. Here we need to discuss whether food law, medicine law, and functional food law in particular are fulfi lling their goals, and put functional food legislation into its societal context.1.7 Materials for this StudyThe basic materials for this study are the statutes and soft law documents on foodstuffs and medicines, including their preparatory and explanatory materials. A literature study has been made on European and Chinese food law and medicine law. The literature concerns legal rules on safety, effi cacy and marketing of different types of health-related consumer products. Focus is on legal rules on functional foods. The literature used is mainly European, Chinese, and American.European Community legislation has been viewed at EU web pages www.europa.eu, and national law on national legal web pages. With European laws, the offi cial legal texts have been used. With Chinese legislation, we have had to rely on translations into English. Offi cial translations are not available. The translations used are by various translators: Chinese ministries, ChinaLawWeb by the University of Maryland, United States Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service, law fi rms situated in Europe, China or the United States, or by Miao Qing at University of Turku. For some laws, there have been several translations available. In these cases, selection of translation was based on perceived expertise of the translator.69 Encompassing obesity, type 2 diabetes, and cardiovascular disease.-13-The local laws of EU Member States and Chinese provinces and cities are not studied in detail. Local rules or procedures are mentioned or discussed when they are considered particularly important in legally evaluating functional foods, as is the case with the European food vs. medicine issue. The general trend in both Europe and China is towards harmonisation. This means European food and medicine laws are often given at Community level, and Chinese laws at national level70.As we have focused on legislation, discussion on administrative practice and court cases is limited in this study. We see food and medicine law as constant negotiation between authorities and entrepreneurs, where the role of courts is typically not important. Administrative guidelines as soft law will be discussed in connection with hard law. Instead of cases, we use these guidelines as proof on how legislation is implemented and interpreted in practice. This is a defi ciency, particularly with regard to China, where the role of administrative practice is important, and would deserve further study.70 The question of central vs. local legislation will be discussed below.-15-2 LEGAL FOUNDATIONSIn this chapter, we discuss the very basic foundations of European and Chinese law on foodstuffs and medicines71 by mapping out the global background, the legal institutions involved, and the sources of law. The question of 'hard law' vs. 'soft law' is integral here. Drafting the law and implementing the law cannot always be distinguished, as the regulatory agencies have their role in both.2.1 Global BackgroundBefore we turn to EU and Chinese law, we will briefl y discuss the global harmonisation of food and medicine laws, as it creates the framework in which the EU and China operate.2.1.1 WTO AgreementsThe World Trade Organization was established in 1994 after the Uruguay round of GATT negotiations. The WTO consists of negotiations, agreements, and dispute resolution. The most important agreements from our perspective are the Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement (TBT Agreement) and the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement). The TBT Agreement covers all mandatory and voluntary technical regulations and standards, including testing and certifi cation procedures. The aim of the agreement is that these technical measures do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade.72 The SPS Agreement defi nes the rights and obligations of members with respect to application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures meaning laws and standards on food safety, animal health and plant health. Basically, the SPS agreement defi nes how food is to be regulated in order to maintain TBT agreement goals73.71 From consumer protection perspective as described above.72 Wanhua 2002, 316. 73 Hollo 2008, 26.-16-The GATT agreement established the fundamental principles of international trade: the most-favoured-nation treatment74, and national treatment.75 Most-favoured-nation treatment means that if a Member grants an advantage to a product from another country, the same advantage shall be granted to similar products of all other Members. Likewise, restrictive practices must be applied in a universal fashion76. National treatment means that Members apply equal taxation and regulation to imports compared to domestically produced or supplied goods.77 The GATT agreement was incorporated into the WTO. The principles of non-discrimination are also included in GATS (services) and TRIPs (intellectual property rights) agreements, the TBT agreement78, and the SPS agreement79.In law, there are always exceptions to rules. Wilkinson distinguishes eight instances in the GATT agreement which allow Members to engage in discriminatory practices against each other. For example, free trade areas among certain members are allowed, new Members can be discriminated against, and infant industries can be protected80. The most interesting exception category is the 'general exceptions' that include a wide range of criteria including "the protection of human, animal or plant life or health". The GATT, the TBT, and the SPS Agreement allow Members to adopt exceptions on these grounds81. This means a country may, for example, prohibit imports of foods from a certain Member country. According to the TBT Agreement, risks must be assessed based on available scientifi c and technical information82. Sanitary and phytosanitary measures have to be based on scientifi c evidence83. Measures shall not constitute arbitrary or unjustifi able discrimination or disguised restrictions on international trade84.China joined the WTO in 200185. China is expected to comply with the WTO agreements and develop into a "more responsible member of the international community"86. Foreign businesses expected to benefi t from a more transparent and predictable business environment87. The worst possible scenario was that China would disrupt the whole WTO process that is 74 "Any advantage, favour, privilege or immunity granted by any contracting party to any product originating in or destined for any other country shall be accorded immediately and unconditionally to the like product originating in or destined for the territories of all other contracting parties." GATT 1994, Article I, paragraph 1. 75 "The products of the territory of any contracting party imported into the territory of any other contracting party shall not be subject, directly or indirectly, to internal taxes or other internal charges of any kind in excess of those applied, directly or indirectly, to like domestic products." GATT 1994, Article III, paragraph 2.76 "The exports of a Member must not be prohibited or encounter restriction into domestic markets, unless the importation of the like product of all third countries is similarly prohibited or restricted." GATT 1994, Article XIII, paragraph 1. 77 Wilkinson 2000, 81-82.78 Article 2 paragraph 1.79 Article 2 paragraph 3.80 In addition, the WTO does not say anything about discriminating against non-Members. Wilkinson 2000, 85.81 GATT Article XX, TBT Article 2 paragraph 2, SPS Article 2. Other grounds for these safeguard measures include ensuring the quality of the country's exports, protection of environment and prevention of deceptive practices. Wanhua 2002, 316.82 Article 2 paragraph 2.83 Article 2 paragraph 2.84 TBT preamble, SPS Agreement Article 2 paragraph 3.85 This happened after lengthy discussions with the most important trading partners. As a non-member, China's exports were often the subject of discriminatory treatment in overseas markets. By adjoining, China gained new market access opportunities and new legal protections against discrimination. Gong 2005.86 Kobayashi 2008, 1.87 Qingjiang 2002, v.-17-based on consensus88. According to US-China Business Council in 2008, China has gone a long way in fulfi lling its WTO obligations, but there are still problems related to the principle of national treatment in particular.