"700 Kwak - Jukes 2000b, 113.701 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. 702 European Commission Recommendation on Novel Foods, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.2.-122-During the 1970s, food technology developed rapidly. New products and processes were developed, especially in response to a perceived shortage of food, particularly a shortage of animal protein. Methods were developed to produce protein foods from new plant and microbial sources, and to use textured plant proteins as meat analogues and extenders. Many countries had experience in evaluating the safety of food additives and contaminants, but there was little experience in evaluating safety of new foods or food ingredients. It was recognised that it was inconsistent to require extensive testing for food additives but not for foods or food ingredients that might be consumed at much higher levels.703 In 1972, the Protein Advisory Group of the United Nations (PAG/UNU) issued Guidelines for the Preclinical Testing of Novel Sources of Protein and Guidelines for the Human Testing of Supplementary Food Mixtures. This was an attempt to ensure systematic safety evaluation of novel foods that had appeared on the market, and focused on novel microbial proteins. The Guidelines were revised and re-issued by the United Nations University in 1983. The scope of the revised Guidelines was expanded to cover Preclinical Testing of Novel Sources of Food and Human Testing of Novel Foods. Novel foods were defi ned as foods not previously eaten by humans. The guidelines identifi ed the main categories of information needed to evaluate the safety of novel foods. They also discussed some of the problems with testing novel food safety.704 Testing novel food safety is diffi cult because they are often complex mixtures of many substances, and because they are used in signifi cant levels and to replace other foods. The usual way to test the safety of a substance in food is to feed it to laboratory animals. There is ample experience of doing this with additives or contaminants. Feeding studies will show the level in the diet at which animals show no adverse effects. After this, the maximum level of intake from human food is estimated to ensure that there is a large safety margin, often more than 100 times. This is possible because the additive or contaminant can be included in animal diets at much higher levels than the anticipated level in human food.705 A novel food, on the other hand, is often used at signifi cant levels and might reach a level of 10 percent of a human diet. It is then impossible to feed the food to animals at 100 times higher levels. Even if it was possible to feed the food to animals at higher levels than intended for humans, and the animals would actually eat the food, the food would upset the nutritional balance of the diet. This means the diet of the animal would be worse simply because the test food replaces everything else. As foods are often complex mixtures of macro- and micro-nutrients, it is diffi cult to determine which nutrients cause the effects in animal studies. This is why new approaches to safety assessment have been developed for novel foods. For example, a novel food is always compared to a conventional counterpart, if applicable.706 The UK Government introduced a notifi cation scheme for novel foods including testing guidelines in 1984 and the Netherlands followed. Starting at the beginning of the 1990s, novel food regulation followed scientifi c development and focused on genetically modifi ed food. International organisations and governments developed guidelines on assessing GM food. 703 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. 704 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. 705 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. 706 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. -123-After many years of discussion the European Union Novel Food Regulation came into force in 1997.707 The Chinese Novel Food Regulation had already come into force in 1990. In Europe, the Regulation has been applied to all foods developed or imported after July 1997. GM foods were separated from the novel food regulation in 2002. Several problems still exist with the regulation of novel foods, and a new European regulation was proposed in 2008. 4.2.1.7.2 European Defi nition of Novel Food According to the current EU regulation708, novel foods are foods that are new in the context of normal foods: "This Regulation shall apply to the placing on the market within the Community of foods and food ingredients which have not hitherto been used for human consumption to a signifi cant degree within the Community..."709. The food (or food ingredient) must also fall under the following categories: It has - a new or intentionally modifi ed primary molecular structure.It consists of - micro-organisms, fungi or algae, or is isolated from them.It is a food or a food ingredient consisting of/isolated from - plants or a food ingredient isolated from animals, excluded foods and food ingredients obtained by traditional propagating or breeding practices and having a history of safe food use.To it has been applied - a novel production process, where the new process gives rise to signifi cant changes in the composition or structure of it, and the changes affect its nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances.710 This means that novel foods are foods containing components or ingredients that are not considered natural in relation to the food concerned. Two basic groups of novel foods are foods containing new synthetic ingredients and foods containing new biological ingredients.Verhagen et al. (2009) have identifi ed a 'grey area' of unidentifi ed novel foods. This means there are new foods on the European market that for some reason are not considered as novel foods. They further divide the grey area of novel foods into two categories: food products or ingredients for which the Regulation leaves too much space for (1) interpretations, andfood products or ingredients that are not novel according to the Regulation, because it (2) contains gaps. There are several products on the market that fi t into these categories. Camel milk, pitaya fruit, acai berry, argan oil, and mangosteen fruit are examples of products where the criterion 'human consumption to a signifi cant degree' may be an issue. The cryogenisation process for 707 Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 1997 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients.708 Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 1997 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients.709 Art. 1(2).710 Art. 1(2).-124-cocoa butter and the processes for making meat substitutes could be examples of 'signifi cant changes in production processes'.711Examples of gaps in legislation relate for example to new target groups, growth stages of crops, and single product intake vs. total ingredient intake.712 The EU novel food regulation is under reconstruction. The Commission gave its proposal713 in January 2008, six years after the Discussion Paper on Novel Foods in 2002714. A revision of the regulation is deemed necessary in order to "refl ect the fact that genetically modifi ed food no longer falls under its scope, to create a more favourable legislative environment for innovation in the food industry, and to better facilitate both internal and external trade in foodstuffs"715 The European Novel Food Regulation will most likely be totally rewritten with effects also on the defi nition of novel food. The Commission has proposed the following defi nition of novel food (Article 2(a) of the proposed Regulation): food that has not been used for human consumption to a signifi cant degree within the (i) Community before 15 May 1997;The use of a food exclusively as or in a food supplement shall not be suffi cient to show whether it has been used for human consumption to a signifi cant degree within the Community before 15 May 1997. However, if a food has been used exclusively as or in a food supplement prior to that date, it can be placed on the Community market after that date for the same use without being considered as a novel food. ...food of plant or animal origin when to the plant and animal is applied a non-traditional (ii) breeding technique not used before 15 May 1997; andfood to which is applied a new production process, not used before 15 May 1997, where that (iii) production process gives rise to signifi cant changes in the composition or structure of the food which affect its nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances. 711 Verhangen et al. 2009, 4.712 Verhagen et al. 2009, 5-6.713 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on novel foods and amending Regulation (EC) No XXX/XXXX [common procedure]. COM(2007) 872 fi nal. Brussels, 14.1.2008. The Regulation that will be amended is the Regulation on additives, fl avourings, and enzymes, 1331/2008/EC.714 Commission gave its discussion paper in 2002: "Discussion paper on implementation of Regulation (EC) No. 258/97 SANCO D4 July 2002". The discussion paper presented some of the issues that have emerged in relation to the regulation and it also gave future options regarding the possible revision of the regulation. About 40 stakeholders, including e.g. governments, industry, and scholars, gave their comments on the discussion paper. There was also a stakeholder meeting in January 2003. After this, a consult fi rm prepared a summary of stakeholder views in July 2003 in form of "Summary Report Stakeholder Submissions - Revision of the Novel Food Regulation". They also gave their recommendations on how to develop the regulation. The next step was that the Evaluation Section of the Commission prepared the "Evaluation Report on the Novel Food Regulation 258/97 Concerning Novel Foods and Novel Food Ingredients". They also gave their recommendations on how to change the regulation. This was in January 2004. The "summary report" and the "evaluation report" were then summarized in "Evaluation of Regulation (EC) no 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 1997 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients (Novel Food Regulation). Executive Summary." In June 2006, an online consultation on the revision of Novel Food Regulation (EC) Ndeg 258/97 was launched by the Commission. Based on this, the Commission carried out an impact assessment for a future legislative proposal. Based on the discussion paper, the stakeholder comments, the summary report, the evaluation report, the executive summary, the online consultation, and the impact assessments, novel food regulation is to be revised. 715 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/novelfood/initiatives_en.htm.-125-A novel food is not necessarily a so-called functional food, because 'functionality' is related to health. Likewise, a functional food is not necessarily novel, because the health effect might be based on ingredients that have been on the market for a long time. Therefore the two types of product are not related in terms of defi nition and legislative aspects.716 However, novel food legislation is the safety regulation that a functional food developer will most likely have to deal with. This is if the product in question is a normal food with some health-enhancing novel ingredient(s). Besides foods in food form, the novel food regulation has been interpreted to apply to food supplements as well, i.e. foods in pill form. These foods will have to go through the food supplement procedure and the novel food procedure. For example, novel food applications have been made using noni fruit powder, noni leaf powder, or tree lignan in food supplements717. There has been some confusion on the issue of whether novel food legislation applies also to food additives or fl avourings. There is a problem particularly with food ingredients that have multiple purposes, e.g. technological, nutritional and physiological uses. This kind of substance could be used as an additive, as a supplement or as an ingredient in other foods.718 If there are only technological uses for the novel substance, then authorisation under additive law only would be appropriate. Otherwise, it could be reasonable to authorise all uses in one procedure. The Commission has stated that under the current rules an additive might need an authorisation according to Novel Food Regulation if the safety level laid down for a type of additive does not correspond to the safety level laid down for novel foods.719The Commission novel food proposal clarifi es the scope of the Regulation. According to Article 2(2) of the proposed Regulation, it does not apply to additives, fl avourings, enzymes, extraction solvents, vitamins or minerals, or GMO foods. Applicability of novel food regulation to novel production procedures has also been unclear. It is generally understood that this category does not apply to production processes themselves but to foods signifi cantly changed by a new production process. It is generally not very well understood, what the "signifi cant changes" are in food composition or structure that bring the process under novel food regulation. According to the Regulation, the resulting product of a novel process is only considered to be a novel food, if the process results in changes in the chemical composition or structure of the food or food ingredient, which affect its nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances. According to the Commission Recommendation, this class of novel foods comprises foods and food ingredients which have been subjected to a process not currently used in food production. Examples of novel processes for food production are new types of heat processing, non-thermal preservation methods, new processes to chill or freeze products, to dehydrate products, and the application of new processes catalysed by enzymes720. In its discussion paper, the Commission suggested three possible options to deal with novel food production processes: 716 Mogensen 1998, 107.717 Finnish Food Agency guidelines on food supplements, updated 2006, pages 22-23.718 Executive Summary on Novel Foods 2004, 2.719 Executive Summary, 2.720 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 4.-126-Remove the category. General food safety regulations are enough to deal with safety of a) products produced by new techniques.Category remains. The concept of 'signifi cant change' is clarifi ed. This means drafting b) guidelines and giving expert advice to applicants.Both novel foods and novel processes are assessed according to Novel Food c) Regulation. Option c) was deemed unnecessary as there would not be clear public health or other benefi ts in subjecting all new processes to a heavy pre-market procedure. This requirement would probably have discouraged development of new processes.721 Most stakeholders supported the b) approach where the category of novel procedures remains in the Regulation. Practically everyone stated that the concept of "signifi cant change" should be clarifi ed. The problem with the approach is that the uncertainty can only be reduced, not eliminated altogether.722 There will always be borderline cases. The Commission has proposed to maintain the category for novel production processes. In preamble 6) of the proposal, it is stated that "novel food should ... include ... foods modifi ed by new production processes, such as nanotechnology and nanoscience, which might have an impact on food. The Commission has not defi ned 'signifi cant change' more accurately. Apparently, the Commission has decided to leave this task to EFSA or Committee guidelines. An important problem in the current defi nition of novel food is that a food is novel in the EU regardless of its use in third countries. This is a problem mainly to producers of plant-based products. For example, Chinese or Andean vegetables or berries that have not been used in Europe are novel foods requiring authorisation, even in cases where they have been used by people for millennia and are considered safe. This approach is similar to the strict European approach towards traditional herbal medicines, discussed below. Third-country representatives considered the novel food regulation a non-tariff barrier for trade. According to Hermann723, current practice of the regulation has discouraged investment in supply chains, and hindered market development. There might be markets in Europe for example for many different kinds of exotic vegetables, fruit and berries. European consumers might be willing to pay for these "new" products and more variable diets. Some of these might be so called functional foods; others might be interesting just for taste. In the other end of the supply chain, production and export of these plant-based products would generate income for poor farmers in developing countries. In addition, this would be good for biodiversity conservation. Both the third country producers and European consumers would thus benefi t from removal of hinders on South-North trade.724 It is notable that the novel food regulation seems to work in the opposite direction as our very own European public organisations and projects seek to assist developing countries in poverty alleviation. There are, for example, Swiss and Netherlands organisations and numerous research projects that are concerned with linking poor farmers with the market for exotic foods. Besides getting people out of poverty, these efforts aim at adding investment in 721 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 15.722 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 15.723 Hermann 2004, 1.724 Hermann 2004, 1.-127-biological resources, which have signifi cant underutilised potential in many Southern countries. Questions of ethical trade are closely related: the actors are trying to build economically, socially and environmentally sustainable development. These organisations or farmers do not understand why it is so diffi cult to get the products into the EU market. In this way there is also a humanitarian aspect to novel food legislation. In 2006, the EU novel food regulation was discussed as a trade concern at the WTO725. Concerns were raised by Peru, Ecuador, Colombia, Paraguay, the Philippines, India, Bolivia and Brazil.726 These are all countries where different plant-based products compared to Europe are used, putting these plants under the defi nition of 'novel food' in the EU. In the WTO meetings, Southern countries questioned the justifi cation for giving different treatment to "products of bio-diversity" traditionally consumed outside the EU, compared to foods consumed within the EU.727 This different treatment is of course due to the very defi nition of novel food: novel foods are essentially foods that have not been consumed in the EU area. There is no tangible scientifi c ground for this kind of defi nition. The defi nition could just as well divide countries into two lists: countries where use counts, and countries where use does not count and scientifi c evidence on safety is required. Instead of science, the defi nition is in fact based on practical reasons. It is easier to gather information on familiar substances that are close to the Europeans. It would be too much work to be aware of all the foods used in the world. The quarrel on the defi nition of novel food is, not surprisingly, about money. At the WTO meetings, Peru pointed to the cost involved in providing the scientifi c studies to back up claims of safety.