Page 4.213 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004. Page 3.214 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004.215 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004. Page 11.216 An exception to this rule is the "Note for guidance on minimising the risk of transmitting animal spongiform encephalopathy agents via human and veterinary medicinal products". In accordance with Directives 2001/82/EC and 2001/83/EC, this Note for Guidance has to be explicitly complied with. Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004. Page 4.217 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004. Page 3.-35-detailed requirements for the demonstration of quality, safety and effi cacy. They are intended to give guidance to applicants and/or sponsors in planning the overall pharmaceutical product development, as well as the non-clinical and clinical tests and studies of a compound intended to be used as human or veterinary medicinal products and to facilitate the preparation of applications for marketing authorisations by the pharmaceutical industry.In addition to scientifi c guidelines the EMEA also prepares other public documents, which do not follow the procedure for guideline preparation. These are public statements, refl ection papers, or "Questions and answers" documents.2182.2.4 Implementing the Law2.2.4.1 About Pre-Market Control, Post-Market Control, and PenaltiesLaws are void without implementation: turning them into practice and making sure they are followed. We are interested in how the rules on safety and effi cacy of foodstuffs and medicines are controlled. Two basic alternatives are outlined here:to examine products before they enter the market (pre-market), ora) to examine products already on the market (post-market).b) Problems with pre-market authorisations systems are that they are often time consuming, expensive, and might thus create anti-competitive barriers to or disincentives for entering a particular market. According to Philipson - Sun, a critical question in evaluating policies for regulating safety and effi cacy of medicines is the optimal point in the speed-safety trade-off219. The same question will probably be relevant also in regulating functional foods. A lengthier review process including larger clinical trials will reduce the probability that unsafe and ineffective products enter the market. Simultaneously, patients or consumers are denied access to useful products. The pre-market control agencies must search for the right balance. Pre-market control is used particularly where products pose a potentially signifi cant risk when unsafe. Cartwright sees medicines as the most "obvious" target for pre-market authorisation.220We also have to remember that market-based mechanisms exist to regulate safety and effi cacy: products with poor evidence of safety and effi cacy are less likely to be bought. This mechanism is, however, complicated by information asymmetries. In addition to questions related to demand and profi tability, product liability (fear of litigation) gives fi rms incentives to provide safer products. According to studies by Philipson - Sun, product liability might be wasteful with medicines. This is because safety levels mandated by the regulatory bodies are higher than the fi rms would choose to provide under product liability alone. Still, product 218 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004. Page 13.219 Philipson - Sun 2008. 220 Cartwright 2001, 133. -36-liability imposes costs on companies, which are then included in product prices.221 Product liability might thus benefi t the patient or consumer in question, but not consumers in general.Post-market control of consumer products is always necessary in spite of pre-market control. Something will always be missed in pre-market analysis, new information on raw materials and products will be discovered over time, and unethical fi rms will always market products with false claims. Continuous monitoring is needed to discover products that need to be taken off the market. Post-market monitoring is also important for the marketers themselves as it gives them information on how to improve their products222. With marketing issues particularly, competitors also monitor each other's actions and report false or misleading marketing to the offi cials.Penalties are here discussed as part of implementation of the rules on product safety and effi cacy. Penalties are used for many different reasons and are based on different philosophies such as prevention of crimes, retribution of crimes, and incapacitation of the offenders.2.2.4.2 Pre-Market Controls Used in Europe2.2.4.2.1 FoodsIn the EU, particular pre-market authorisation procedures related to foods are in place for: food additives and fl avourings, - novel foods, - GMO foods, and - nutrition and health claims. -All of the above procedures are Community procedures, meaning that the authorisation received applies in the whole EU area. According to a Commission proposal, procedures for additives, fl avourings, enzymes, and novel foods will be combined in one Common procedure. Details of the procedures will be discussed below in connection to safety and effi cacy requirements for each type of food products.In addition to authorisation systems, pre-market notifi cation systems exist in various Member States for food supplements, food fortifi cation, and some of dietetic foods. Other foods can be produced and marketed without pre-market approval or notifi cation.For foods where no pre-market control by the authorities exists, pre-market control is still performed by the operators themselves. According to the General Food Regulation223, a food business operator is best placed to devise a safe system for supplying food and ensuring that the food it supplies is safe. Thus, food business operators have primary legal responsibility for ensuring food safety224. Food business operators at all stages of production, processing and 221 Philipson - Sun 2008. These studies are on the American markets.222 This viewpoint is emphasized by Badea et al. 1996, page 169, as regards medical devices. 223 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, preamble 30.224 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, preamble 30.-37-distribution shall ensure that foods satisfy the requirements of food law which are relevant to their activities and shall verify that such requirements are met225.In Finland, food control performed by the operators themselves is called in-house control. A food business operator must recognise food safety risks related to his activities and take responsibility for controlling these risks. For this purpose, a company must draft a written plan of in-house control, which should list critical control points where hygiene or other hazards might appear, including methods to control these hazards. These critical points include the handling of food in too warm temperatures or possible contamination. Methods of in-house control must be effective, timely, and simple.226An international trend in food business is the weight of control shifting from authoritative control towards in-house control. This is perceived to be effective, as the food industry actor knows his own processes best. Industry operators are certifying their systems for quality control, which facilitates smoother international trade. Certifi ed products access foreign markets easier and faster, which promotes exports and lowers costs. Operator control is thus benefi cial also for the operators themselves as it enhances product safety and customer satisfaction.With fl exible laws leaving room for interpretation, regulatory agencies must be aware of not using their discretionary power in a discriminatory manner. This is the case with in-house control where the regulatory agencies have rather large discretionary powers and can, case by case, resolve whether a producer has fulfi lled his in-house control obligations. In Finland, fl exibility is seen as an important tool for judging whether self-control systems are adequate. The risk assessment rules allow the authorities to focus on most risky businesses. Intensity of offi cial control will depend on risk classes, into which business operators are divided. The risk class is economically signifi cant as the cost to the operators of offi cial controls depends on how frequently the offi cials must visit the operator. It is, however, not clear whether and how an operator can complain about falling into a certain risk class.2.2.4.2.2 MedicinesMedicines may be authorised in several European countries simultaneously by using one of three procedures:the 1) centralised procedure,the 2) mutual recognition procedure,the 3) decentralised procedure.Medicines may also be authorised in a single Member State by using the national authorisation procedure of that country. Here we discuss only the Community procedures, in which the EMEA and the circa 40 national medicine agencies that control which medicines access the market.We need to separately discuss new, innovative medicines vs. generic medicines. Developers of pharmaceuticals typically apply for patents that grant them exclusivity for a certain time 225 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, Article 17(1).226 Finnish Food Safety Authority web page. http://www.evira.fi /portal/fi /elintarvikkeet/valvonta_ja_yritt__j__t/omavalvonta/.-38-period. After the expiration of patent protection, there is a new market for so called generic medicines, which are inexpensive copies of the originator medicine and have a simpler authorisation procedure.The European Medicines Agency (EMEA) was discussed above regarding its role in drafting the legislation on medicines. While the EMEA is involved in drafting 'hard law', it also creates its own 'soft law'. In addition to this, the EMEA implements the law, meaning that it decides how the law is to be interpreted in single cases. Decisions applicable to private persons are subject to review by the European courts.The EMEA coordinates the evaluation and supervision of medicines in the EU227. The P most important task of the EMEA is probably pre-market control of medicines. The EMEA "contributes to the protection of public and animal health by ensuring that medicines for human and veterinary use are safe, effective and of high quality"228. EMEA is a scientifi c community like EFSA. The EMEA and its committees have a network of 3500 European experts229, who are involved in scientifi c assessment of the products. Inside the EMEA, there are different committees for different types of products: the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP), the Committee on Orphan Medicinal Products (COMP), the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC), and the Committee on Paediatric Medicinal Products (PDCO).230The CHPM handles applications for ordinary human medicines. The COMP was established in 2001. It reviews designation applications from persons or companies who intend to develop medicines for rare diseases, so-called 'orphan drugs'231. From the end of 2004 onwards a new Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) will provide scientifi c opinions on traditional herbal medicines.232 This latter Committee is the most interesting from our perspective, as we are developing berry-based functional food products. In 2007, a Paediatric Committee was established within the EMEA233.The EMEA began its work in 1995, when the European system for authorising medicinal products was introduced. This system provides for a centralised and a mutual recognition procedure. The EMEA also has a role in the mutual recognition procedure, but is primarily involved in the centralised procedure.In the centralized (Community) procedure234, a single evaluation of the dossier is carried out through the respective EMEA Committee. If the Committee concludes that quality, safety 227 According to European Union web page, the EMEA also cooperates with international partners bringing EU contribution to global harmonisation. http://europa.eu/agencies/community_agencies/emea/index_en.htm.228 European Union web page: http://europa.eu/agencies/community_agencies/emea/index_en.htm.229 European Union web page: http://europa.eu/agencies/community_agencies/emea/index_en.htm.230 The EMEA also controls veterinary medicines. The Committee for Medicinal Products for Veterinary Use (CVMP) is not discussed here.231 Because orphan diseases are rare, there are no commercial incentives to research these diseases and develop effective therapy. The question of incentives to develop orphan drugs is related to the important issue of access to medicines. Incentives used include fee waiver, market exclusivity, and protocol assistance. Shah - Griffi n 2003, 42. 232 European Union web page: http://europa.eu/agencies/community_agencies/emea/index_en.htm.233 Regulation 1901/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2006 on medicinal products for paediatric use and amending Regulation 1768/92/EEC, Directive 2001/20/EC, Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation 726/2004/EC. Article 3.1.234 The centralised procedure was created by Regulation 2309/93/EEC, and its scope widened by Regulation 726/2004/EC. ?-39-and effi cacy of the medicinal product are suffi ciently proven, it adopts a positive opinion, which is sent to the Commission to be transformed in a single market authorisation valid for the whole of the European Union.235 Regulation 726/2004/EC236 sets the standards as regards the centralised procedure.For certain human medicinal products237, the centralised procedure is mandatory. These products are:medicinal products derived from - biotechnology and other high-technology processes,medicines intended for the treatment of HIV/AIDS, cancer, diabetes or neurodegenerative -diseases238, anddesignated orphan medicines intended for the treatment of rare diseases. - 239For medicinal products that do not fall under any of the above-mentioned categories companies can submit an application for a centralised marketing authorisation to the EMEA, provided the medicinal product constitutes a signifi cant therapeutic, scientifi c or technical innovation or the product is in any other respect in the interest of patient health.240 This fl exibility was included by Regulation 726/2004/EC to promote EU-wide medicine research and circulation of new innovative products. Guidelines clarify which products fall under the optional scope of the Centralised Procedure241.The term of validity of a Community marketing authorisation is fi ve years. Upon the expiry of this term, authorisation must be renewed. Thereafter the marketing authorisation is normally of unlimited validity. The EMEA can assess the risk-benefi t balance of all medicinal products:when they are placed on the market, -at the time of the renewal of the authorisation, and -at any other time the competent authority deems appropriate - 242.Generic versions of medicinal products authorised through the Centralised Procedure will have the option of applying through either the Centralised or the Decentralised or Mutual Recognition Procedures. In practice, the Centralised procedure has been open for generic 235 European Union web page: http://europa.eu/agencies/community_agencies/emea/index_en.htm.236 Regulation 726/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal productsfor human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency237 EMEA controls also veterinary medicinal products in their own centralised authorisation procedure. This issue is not addressed here.238 And with effect from 20 May 2008, new medicines for treatment of auto-immune diseases and other immune dysfunctions, and viral diseases. Annex of Regulation 726/2004/EC.239 EMEA web page: http://www.emea.eu.int/htms/aboutus/emeaoverview.htm. The list of medicinal products to be authorized by the Community is in the Annex of Regulation 726/2004/EC.240 Regulation 726/2004/EC, Article 3(2).241 Human Medicines - EMEA Pre-Submission Procedural Advice. http://www.emea.europa.eu/htms/human/presub/q01.htm.242 Regulation 726/2004/EC, preamble 14.-40-applications since 2005 when the 10-year data exclusivity periods granted to originator products, authorised through the centralised procedure, began to expire.243The EMEA also takes the fi nal decision in the mutual recognition procedure. In the mutual recognition procedure, a competent authority of one Member State ("the Reference Member State") grants authorisation. The competent authorities of other Member States ("the Concerned Member States") should recognise this authorisation, unless there are serious grounds for supposing that the product may present a risk to public health. A scientifi c evaluation of a matter is undertaken by the respective EMEA Committee, according to a Community (EMEA) standard, if Member States disagree about the quality, safety or the effi cacy of a medicinal product. This evaluation by EMEA leads to a decision binding on the Member States concerned.244The mutual recognition procedure has to be used by the applicant whenever an application for marketing authorisation for a medicinal product concerns two or more Member States. The mutual recognition procedure offers an important fl exibility for those medicinal products intended only for a restricted part of the European market.245 One can exclude those countries from the procedure where markets are not interesting or where problems and opposition are suspected.Authorisation for generic medicines is normally applied for through the mutual recognition procedure. Generic medicinal products are not required to re-perform pre-clinical and clinical trials. Even so, the documentation and data required is extensive and specifi c. Generics applications typically include chemical-pharmaceutical data and the results of bioequivalence studies, which demonstrate the quality and the "essential similarity" of the product. For information concerning the safety and effi cacy of the molecule, the regulatory agencies are referred to the data that was established in the originator product's application for authorisation. This is only possible once the data exclusivity period has expired on that dossier246.247The decentralised procedure came into operation in late 2005. It is applicable in cases where an authorisation does not yet exist in any of the Member States. Identical dossiers will be submitted in all Member States where a marketing authorisation is sought. The applicant chooses a Reference Member State, which prepares draft assessment documents, which are sent to the Concerned Member States. They will either approve the assessment or the application will continue into arbitration procedures. The Decentralised Procedure involves concerned Member States at an earlier stage of the evaluation than under the mutual recognition procedure.