The producers of exotic food products have strong arguments supporting their view that either at least some of their products should 1552 Brookes 2007, 6. Under the current Novel Food Regulation, other companies can obtain authorisation to market similar novel products almost immediately after the original applicant. Companies second to market companies avoid some of the costs associated with seeking authorisation. Companies 'second to market' are also not subject to the same time delays as original applicants in terms of planning market entry. Brookes 2007, 4.1553 Brookes 2007, 6.-291-not be considered novel, or, alternatively, that the safety requirements including scientifi c evidence and the authorisation processes should be less burdensome for these products.To respond to the criticism, the European Commission has indeed proposed a simplifi ed novel food procedure for traditional foods from third countries. Traditional foods are still defi ned as novel, but they need not show all the evidence on safety that is required in the primary procedure. The marketer is still required to provide the proof on history of safe food use. This means he will have to provide the Commission with compositional data in addition to evidence on long-time food use that still continues in the third country in question.Novel production processes will continue to be evaluated under novel food law, if they lead to 'signifi cant changes' in the food product. Despite criticism, the Commission has not in its 2008 proposal clarifi ed the concept of 'signifi cant change'. This leaves room for soft law guidance. According to the current and the proposed Regulation, a novel process is evaluated under novel food legislation, if that production process "gives rise to signifi cant changes in the composition or structure of the food which affect its nutritional value, metabolism or level of undesirable substances". According to Chinese novel food law, food ingredients are novel if their original composition has changed by the adoption of new production techniques. This newly introduced legal phrase will also require clarifi cation on what is considered a signifi cant change.The issue of food ingredients with multiple purposes will be partly settled by the Commission's proposal. A novel substance could be used as an additive or as an ingredient in other foods. A producer will in the future be able to apply for authorisation in one procedure instead of two procedures. In 2006, the Commission has proposed a Common Procedure for additives, fl avourings, and enzymes. In 2008, the Commission proposed to include novel foods in this Common Procedure. If used both as an additive and an ingredient, the food can be authorised through one safety evaluation procedure. However, additives and ingredients have their own criteria according to which they are evaluated1554, and if authorised, they are included in two separate Community lists. The Common Procedure does not apply to food supplements: they are still to be authorised in their separate procedure. Also in China, additives are regulated in a separate mechanism to novel foods. Food supplements are in China regulated either as common foods of health foods. If health foods, they must be registered as such.The property nature of novel food authorisations is another important question to be answered. In addition to patents1555, originator medicine companies enjoy data exclusivity, which is another type of intellectual property. The 10-year of exclusivity1556 starts when an originator drug receives its license. During the exclusivity period, originator data cannot be used to authorise generic copies.For novel foods, a similar type of intellectual property has been suggested in Europe. The suggested period of data exclusivity is 5 years. Novel food authorisations could be given as regulations that apply to all producers instead of decisions that apply just to the applicant. 1554 The Additive Regulation vs. the Novel Food Regulation.1555 Patent protection is available for 20 years from the application. For medicines, this period can be increased by up to 5 years through a Supplementary Protection Certifi cate. Patents are also granted for new uses, indications, dosages, and changes in formulation. Producers or generics naturally think intellectual property protection for medicines is too strong. European Generic Medicines Association web page at: http://www.egagenerics.com/gen-patents.htm.1556 After 8 years, a generic producer may apply for authorisation. After 2 more years, the generic can be marketed.-292-Duplicating efforts will be avoided, and data exclusivity will be the reward for being fi rst to market and completing all the necessary safety tests. The regulations authorising novel foods could apply to all different uses of the new ingredient. This relates to the above-mentioned question of possibly combining the additive, supplement, and ingredient procedures.The benefi t of the data exclusivity period would be simplicity. There are problems, though. If the defi nition of novel food would not simultaneously be changed, also data on third country vegetables and berries would be granted exclusivity. This would sound unreasonable. One could also argue that patent protection, or in some countries utility model, is enough intellectual property for food developers. For unpatentable foods, this approach presumes that trademarks are enough protection, and being the fi rst to market is enough incentive.In China, decisions on novel food authorisation apply to all, and there is no data exclusivity. Due to history and economic reasons, the Chinese are generally not in favour of strong intellectual property or granting private monopolies. Also in Europe, there is a strong movement against creating more property rights. In the future, new types of intellectual property will at least have to be considered in many fi elds of economy. They are suggested because old types of intellectual property are not deemed to serve their goals properly. Reorganisation might include making some property rights stronger and others weaker.7.2.2. Medicine SafetyWith regard to medicine safety, there are considerable gaps in knowledge as regards plant-based medicines. The utilisation of herbal medicine in the prevention and treatment of diseases and the maintenance of health is currently not fully realised, partly due to lack of rules. Herbal medicines are completely legal and increasingly popular also in Europe. However, the legislation is not based on any detailed knowledge on safety, effi cacy or cost-effectiveness. Neither do European governments have clear strategies on how to develop the herbals industry and how to best guarantee consumers' rights. The European legislators' attitude towards herbal medicine is rather uninterested, even though the use of herbal medicine might often be an effective alternative with fewer serious side effects and lower cost.With the creation of the category of traditional herbal medicine by Directive 24/2004/EC, the EU decided to step away from the evidence based approach and justify marketing based on use only. According to the rules, it is legal to sell a product as a traditional herbal medicine if it has been used for such purpose without side effects for at least 30 years, of which 15 years in the Community area. The EMEA Committee for Herbal Medicinal Products is currently drafting a list of plants that have established use as traditional herbal medicines. National registrations will be granted based on this list.The decisive date with traditional herbal medicines is when the new law came into force. In Finland this was November 2005. The authorities look 30 years back from this date to determine the products that have been in use for at least 30 years. Any new products cannot after this require the status of traditional herbal medicines. This means that if the product has been used for thousands of years for example in China, it is not possible to acquire the European status of traditional herbal medicine. Traditional medicines of countries outside Europe must go through the primary procedure for herbal medicines.China has in recent years considerably strengthened its medicine legislation. This process was related to China's entry to the WTO in 2001. Requiring GMP (good manufacturing -293-practice) certifi cates of all medicine manufacturers has signifi cantly reduced the number of medicine manufacturers, thereby cleaning up the market. Counterfeiting medicines has been attacked with stricter legal consequences. However, more resources on medicine control are still needed.The Chinese have a long tradition in using plant-based medicines, and traditional medicine is strong in China. The Chinese are researching medicinal plants and developing this industry side-by-side with modern medicines. After thousands of years of practice, the Chinese are also putting legislative effort into further developing traditional medicine. The Regulations on traditional Chinese medicine were given in 2003. In 2007, the Ministry of Health drafted a law that will specify the requirements on traditional medicine. The Chinese have strategies in place to integrate traditional medicine with modern medicine and ambitious goals in creating research protocols and post-marketing surveillance systems for traditional medicine. They see traditional medicine as globally integral in bringing health for all.The Europeans might have something to learn from the Chinese approach where herbal medicine is taken seriously. The Chinese efforts will probably show in future global market shares of plant-based medicines. The potential of herbal medicine cannot be fully realised by settling for unscientifi c not to mention discriminatory regulatory solutions.7.3 Law on Health Claims and Medicinal Claims1557Consumers are often ignorant of the nutritional basis underlying functional foods, and thus susceptible to betrayal. Marketing of functional foods must thus be regulated. With marketing of functional foods, the legislator's tasks are to guarantee adequate information to consumers and to protect them from misleading claims. At the same time, the industry must not be burdened with overly heavy obligations. With no regulation, functional foods backed by considerable research efforts and investment could be undermined by less effective products. This would be frustrating to legitimate businesses.The European Regulation on nutrition and health claims1558 is a huge step in regulating functional foods and hopefully cleaning up the industry. Before the Regulation, companies had too much space to confuse consumers with impressive but imprecise claims. Consumers were confused by all kinds of health claims, which were more or less scientifi cally substantiated, and the role of traditional foodstuffs became unclear. The Regulation was preceded by years of discussion, frustration, and national rules. According to Commissioner Kyprianou, each side would have liked to go further with the nutritional claim and health claim regulation, but the decided outcome is a good compromise that takes account of all positions in a balanced way.1559In the future, only foods that comply with a certain nutrient profi le can bear claims. The EFSA will publish nutritional profi les for each product type by 19 January 2009. The nutritional profi le requirement means that if a food is high in fat, saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, salt/sodium, and sugar, it cannot be promoted by nutrition or health claims. This means that 1557 Nutrition claims are not discussed here as they are considered a rather simple issue where few controversies exist.1558 Regulation 1924/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods.1559 European Commission Press release IP/06/625, 16/05/2006.-294-health-related messages are available only to foods that are healthy as a whole. Without this rule, consumers would themselves have to calculate the health benefi t of the claim and relate it to other nutritional information on the product.However, in the fi nal compromise version of the Regulation, it was agreed that if one nutrient exceeds the nutrient profi le, the product could still bear a claim stating that another 'evil' is present in low quantities. In addition, the claim must be accompanied by a statement 'High [... (*)] content'. This one-nutrient exception rule has been criticised for being completely unscientifi c, as the effect of adding one of the three evils varies greatly in different products. The loophole might lead to a situation where claims will be on products that nutritionists would not consider healthy. The original plan was that the product would always have to comply with the nutrient profi le as a whole to make a nutrition claim or a health claim. The industry was opposed to this total ban, and a compromise was reached. Politics surpassed science, which sometimes happens in food law matters.The implementation of the new Regulation is a huge job. The EFSA has the most important role as the scientifi c advisor. Health claims are separated in two categories:Health claims other than those referring to the reduction of disease risk and to children's -development and health (Article 13), so called 'function' claims1560;Reduction of disease risk claims and claims referring to children's development and -health (Article 14).The national food safety agencies will gather their lists of established 'function' claims by end of January 2008, based on which the EFSA will publish the community list of established function claims by end of January 2010. In the future, all new function claims will be scientifi cally evaluated by the EFSA. Disease risk reduction claims and claims related to children's development and health will always have to be separately evaluated, and the EFSA has received applications for these claims since July 2007.With hindsight, the chosen approach seems like the only reasonable way to deal with scientifi c substantiation of claims. A horizontal approach to claims1561 was established instead of creating additional product categories. The lists of already accepted claims benefi t the whole business and duplicative work in substantiating claims is avoided. It is inevitable that innovative products, on which there is no scientifi c consensus yet, will have to go through complicated procedures.For example Winkler has been in favour of an even simpler approach where there are only two types of claims: content claims, about what is in the food, and effect claims, about what the food does to the consumer. The operating principle for this system would be to authorise 1560 Function claims are health claims describing or referring to:"(a) the role of a nutrient or other substance in growth, developmentand the functions of the body; or(b) psychological and behavioural functions; or(c) without prejudice to Directive 96/8/EC, slimming or weight control or a reduction in the sense of hunger or an increase in the sense of satiety or to the reduction of the available energy from the diet". Article 13(1).1561 The claim regulation applies to all foods irrespective of whether they are foods in food form, foods in pill form, foods for the general public, foods for certain groups of people, novel foods or GMO foods. For example, Kwak-Jukes was in favour of this approach. Kwak - Jukes 2000b, 116.-295-whatever claims science already substantiates and establish effective controls over the rest.1562 The European system is quite close to this 'simple' approach. Nutrition claims are the content claims, and health claims are the effect claims. It is just health claims that are separated into 'function' claims and disease risk reduction claims.It was discussed above that data protection for novel food applications has been suggested in Europe. A data protection rule already applies to applications for health claim authorisation. Any food business operator may use health claims included in the Community lists, if they are not restricted for use in accordance with the provisions of Article 21 of the Regulation. Article 21 grants 5-year exclusivity to an applicant that has provided his proprietary data to support the claim.Concerning medicines and medicinal claims, the creation of the category 'traditional herbal medicinal product' in 2004 manifests the European legislators' powerless attitude as regards plant-based products. A herbal medicinal product may be sold based on 'history of use', where 'history' is defi ned as 30 years, 15 of which in the Community area. In the marketing of traditional herbal medicinal products, the marketer must mention that the effi cacy of the product is not based on any clinical trials but instead on history of use only. Instead of an evidence-based approach, the EU decided to let the consumer decide whether to trust the product.The category of traditional herbal medicinal products was created because there simply is no scientifi c proof of effi cacy on several herbs that are sold in Europe. The alternatives were to require scientifi c proof or let the products be sold based on history of use only. The taken solution can only be temporary. The goal of foodstuffs and medicines legislation must be that there are scientifi c facts behind products that are used to promote health. To let herbal medicines be sold without proof of effi cacy is going to harm the business in the long run. The only way to properly utilise the potential of herbal medicines is to take the scientifi c approach and to get rid of categories not based on clinical evidence. The Chinese are developing traditional medicine side by side with modern medicine, but Europeans certainly are not.The same lack of science applies to homeopathic medicines. They are a similar category with traditional herbal medicines. Homeopathic medicines can be sold if homeopathic literature shows they have been used for a certain purpose. In addition, they must be diluted enough to make them safe. The marketer must mention that there is no proof of effi cacy.This situation means that herbal medicines and homeopathic medicinal products can be sold as medicines without proof of effi cacy, when at the same time functional foods must have solid proof to back up their claims. Homeopathic medicines are often promoted by saying that they "are under medicines regulation", which gives the impression that they are regulated similarly to modern medicines. Food legislation is in fact stricter science-based than medicines legislation.In China, marketing of foods and medicines is under tightening regulatory control. The Health Food Regulation of 1996 has proven helpful in cleaning up the industry and guiding the health food market towards scientifi c research and development. Only health foods can bear health claims in China. The Health Food Regulation establishes 27 different functions/claims that a health food may have. Each claim has its substantiation rules listing the required animal tests and human trials to support the claim. Data protection for applicants is not granted: 1562 Winkler 1997, 192.-296-an applicant may refer to data provided by another applicant. The Chinese intend to further improve the health food registration and inspection system.The Chinese rules on medicine marketing of 2007 aim to clean up medicine advertising mainly by two means:specifying the legislation: defi ning the prohibited marketing methods more precisely, and -hardening punishments. -Health claim legislation was created because it was scientifi cally established that foods in fact have health effects. The distinction between foods and medicines is now set between disease risk reduction and disease prevention. We concluded above that in the future, the categorisation decision on whether a product is a food or a medicine might lose its signifi cance, and that legislators should focus on safety and effi cacy of all products. Effi cacy would be relative to marketing, and would mean truthfulness of the marketing claims used.It is, for example, not interesting whether lemon juice is a medicine but more interesting that it prevents scurvy or reduces the risk of scurvy. We predict that new innovations and new scientifi c information on health effects of foods will lead to a situation where the distinction between foodstuffs and medicines will lose its relevance, and medicinal claims will be acceptable for foods. For example, if buckthorn oil can be used to prevent the episodes of atopic eczema, it will not be relevant whether the oil is categorised as a cosmetic, a food, or a medicine. A claim will be possible if the evidence supports it.