There may also be quantitative variations in constituents, which affect safe use of the product.953 Quality issues are not discussed here, as we are more interested in the safety of the therapeutic ingredient itself. As stated above, the law does not specify criteria on traditional medicines yet. The safety of traditional medicines is guaranteed by the traditional guidelines described in the previous chapter. At the beginning of 2007, the Chinese Ministry of Health completed the drafting of Law on Traditional Chinese Medicine, which was submitted to the State Council. The 949 Article 3.950 Regulations of the People's Republic of China on traditional Chinese medicine. Adopted at the Third Executive Meeting of the State Council on 2 April 2003. Promulgated by Decree No. 374 of the State Council of the People's Republic of China on 7 April 2003. (Gazette of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, 30 May 2003, Issue No. 15, Serial No. 1086.) 951 Summary of the Chinese Regulations on Traditional Chinese Medicines by the WHO's "international digest of health legislation". Available on the WHO web page at: http://www.who.int/idhl-rils/frame.cfm?language=english.952 Summary of the Chinese Regulations on Traditional Chinese Medicines by the WHO's "international digest of health legislation". Available on the WHO web page at: http://www.who.int/idhl-rils/frame.cfm?language=english.953 Barnes 2003.-170-drafting of the law had drawn considerable attention from the National People's Congress (NPC) and government departments.954 The goal of the Chinese government is to strengthen supervision on the sources of Chinese medicines, improve the administrative system for Good Chinese Medicine Production Practice (GCMP), push forward the implementation of GCMP and ensure the production quality of Chinese herbal medicines.955 Improving the legal framework on traditional medicine is among the important goals set by the Chinese government for the forthcoming years. The goal is to establish and improve a system of Chinese traditional medicine standards. A comprehensive classifi cation system of Chinese medicine is needed. Technical pre-market evaluation criteria shall be set, followed with post-market control criteria. To strengthen the knowledge base, research-guiding principles of reference materials will be formulated, and a Chinese medicine library for standard materials will be established. China will actively advocate the establishment of international standards for traditional medicines.956 In China, Traditional Chinese Medicine is under the administration of State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine and Pharmacology, which is under the Ministry of Health. National strategies, laws and regulations governing Traditional Chinese Medicine are in place to guide and promote the research and development in the industry.957 Also the Ministry of Science and Technology has initiated a programme that has ambitious goals related to Traditional Chinese Medicine. They have a programme called "International Traditional Chinese Medicine Programme for Cooperation in Science and Technology". The aim is to facilitate integration of traditional medicine with Western medicine all over the world. 4.4 Conclusions on Food and Medicine Safety in EU and China In law, there are no particular safety requirements for functional foods. This is because in law, there are no 'functional foods'. The legal safety criteria for functional foods are those that are stipulated for microbes, additives, contaminants and residues, fortifi cation, novel foods, and GMOs, or, they are the safety criteria stipulated for (herbal) medicines. The safety criteria set for foodstuffs vs. medicines differ considerably, the main difference being that medicines have side effects. The general aim of food safety legislation is the same in EU and China: protecting consumers from unhealthy products, encompassing biological and chemical hazards. Both in Europe and China, there are several regulatory categories with specifi c safety rules on different types of food products. These categories relate to different types of technological or chemical risks. In China, additives, health foods, novel foods, and GM foods are regulated separately. All have their separate pre-market authorisation procedures. In Europe, separate legislation exists on additives, food supplements, food fortifi cation, dietetic foods, novel foods, and GMO foods. The Chinese health food category covers a wide range of products and includes the European categories of food supplements, fortifi ed foods, and dietetic foods. Functional foods 954 People's Daily Online. January 17 2007. Available at: http://english.people.com.cn/200701/14/eng20070114_341062.html955 Five-Year Plan for Food and Drug Safety. April 2007. Page 12.956 Five-Year Plan for Food and Drug Safety. April 2007. Pages 12-13.957 Chinese Symbols web page. http://www.chinese-symbols.com/chinese-medicine/chinese-medicine.html.-171-will often fi t to the Chinese category of health foods. The category of novel foods is more restricted in China than in Europe, and functional foods will likely not be categorised as novel foods in China. In Europe, there is no single category for health foods or functional foods. Functional foods might legally be classifi ed as 'normal foods' or dietetic foods. This is basically a marketing question and will be discussed below. European fortifi cation rules and novel food regulations are often are relevant to functional foods if products contain something additional or new as compared to common, basic, old-fashioned food products. The rules on medicine safety are also largely the same in EU and China. Compared to food safety, medicine safety is more relative to the effi cacy of the product, whereas food safety is more of an absolute requirement. The risk/benefi t ratio is applied to medicines. All effective medicines have some side effects and should only be used if needed. 958 Medicine safety is guaranteed by strict procedures on tests and trials, scientifi c risk assessment, pharmacovigilance, and by comprehensive user information. With herbal medicines, safety assessment is affected by nature: the plants vary as to where they grow. In Europe, food that is familiar is presumed safe. Both the European novel food regulation and the European legislation on herbal medicines are more sympathetic to European products. This has been a constant cause for disputes in the international arena. In China, there have been serious incidents both with unsafe foods and unsafe medicines. China has the dual task of convincing both their own citizens and other countries of the safety of Chinese foodstuffs and medicines. 958 Kwak - Jukes 2000a, 105.-173-5 MARKETING OF FOODSTUFFS AND MEDICINES5.1 General Marketing Rules5.1.1 EURegulating advertising is one of the basic elements of consumer protection law. In the EU, the Misleading Advertising Directive from 1984959 provided minimum standards to ban misleading advertising. The directive was updated in 1997 to allow comparative advertising under certain conditions. That Directive stipulated that Member States shall ensure that adequate and effective means exist to combat misleading advertising960. As the Directive did not give any specifi c rules, national differences remained.The UCP directive of 2005961 introduced a general duty on all businesses not to trade unfairly with consumers. Member States should have implemented the directive by December 2007. The directive is applicable to all business-to-consumer commercial practices. The concept of 'commercial practice' is not limited to advertising. It encompasses "any act, omission, course of conduct or representation, commercial communication including advertising and marketing"962. The directive applies to unfair business-to-consumer commercial practices "during and after a commercial transaction in relation to a product"963.The general clause contains the general ban on unfair commercial practices. Two defi ning criteria are used to identify an unfair commercial practice - a commercial practice is regarded as unfair if it meets the following two, cumulative criteria:959 Council Directive 84/450/EEC of 10 September 1984 relating to the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning misleading advertising.960 For the purposes of the directive, 'advertising' means "the making of a representation in any form in connection with a trade, business, craft or profession in order to promote the supply of goods or services, including immovable property, rights and obligations". 'Misleading advertising' means "any advertising which in any way, including its presentation, deceives or is likely to deceive the persons to whom it is addressed or whom it reaches and which, by reasons of its deceptive nature, is likely to affect their economic behaviour or which, for those reasons, injures or is likely to injure a competitor". Article 4(1).961 The UCP Directive, directive on unfair commercial practices 2005/29/EC of 11 May 2005.962 Article 2(d).963 Article 3.1.-174-The practice is contrary to the requirement of 1. professional diligence. Professional diligence is "the special skill and care which a trader may reasonably be expected to exercise, commensurate with honest market practices and/or general principle of good faith in the trader's fi eld of activity. "The practice 2. materially distorts or is likely to materially distort the average consumer's economic behaviour. The criterion "to materially distort the economic behaviour of consumers" means using a commercial practice to appreciably impair the consumer's ability to make an informed decision, thereby causing the consumer to take a transactional decision that he would not have otherwise taken.Two main categories of unfair commercial practices - "misleading" and "aggressive" practices - are described in more detail. A commercial practice is misleading if it either:Contains false information and is therefore untruthful, - orIn any way, including overall presentation, deceives or is likely to deceive the - average consumer, even if the information is correct andCauses or is likely to cause him to take a transactional decision that he would not have -otherwise taken.Omissions might also be considered misleading. It is misleading to:Omit material information that the - average consumer needs, according to the context, to take an informed transactional decision;Hide or provide material information in an unclear, unintelligible, ambiguous or -untimely manner;Fail to identify the commercial intent of the commercial practice if not already apparent -from the context.Regulating aggressive commercial practices is new at the EU level. A practice is considered aggressive if the average consumer's freedom of choice or conduct is signifi cantly impaired. The Directive contains a list of criteria to help determine whether a commercial practice uses harassment, coercion, including physical force, or undue infl uence. "Undue infl uence" means "exploiting a position of power in relation to the consumer so as to apply pressure, even without using or threatening to use physical force, in a way which signifi cantly limits the consumer's ability to make an informed decision. "Finally, the Black List contains the list of those practices, which shall, in all circumstances, be regarded as unfair and thus banned - without applying the average consumer test964.964 The black list includes, without going into details of each marketing method:Trust marks and codes Bait advertising Bait and switch Limited offers: Special offer, today only! Language of after-sales service: Marketing in English, after-sales services in Swedish Advertising products which cannot be legally sold Misleading impression of consumers' rights: "Special for you" -175-The Directive provides for special protection to vulnerable consumers. When a commercial practice is targeted at a specifi c group of consumers, the impact of the practice will be assessed from the perspective of the average member of the group in question. For example, in the case of advertising to children, the average child of the relevant age group will be the benchmark. Certain commercial practices are prohibited since they typically affect vulnerable consumers in that case. Examples of such practices include: claiming that products are able to facilitate winning in games of chance, a) falsely claiming that a product is able to cure illnesses, dysfunction or b) malformation, orincluding in an advertisement a direct exhortation to children to buy advertised products or c) persuade their parents or other adults to buy advertised products to them.Some of the UCP protections replicate previous legislation of various Member States, but others are new.965 The Misleading Advertising Directive did not contain any Black List of practices that are banned under all circumstances, and there was no common standard for protecting vulnerable consumers. According to the Commission, the new legislation "harmonises EU rules on business-to-consumer commercial practices, with the aim of clarifying consumers' rights and boosting cross-border trading"966.Advertorials: "Mixed messages" Security as marketing argument: Unduly playing on fear of security risks Decoy: "Reputable brand, or maybe not?" Pyramid schemes False claims regarding moving premises or cessation of business: "End of lease! All stock must go!" Facilitation of winning chances: How to win the lottery False claims about curative capacity: "Trickium 24 cures disease" Market information Prizes: "Congratulations! You have won a prize" Falsely creating the impression of free offers: "Free sunglasses" Products not ordered Professional trader disguised as consumer After sales services: "Europe-wide guarantees" Pressure selling: "Yes, you can leave once the paperwork is done" Aggressive doorstep selling: "Yes, I will leave, once the paperwork is done" Persistent and unwanted solicitations: "With the third phone call maybe a contract will be agreed..." Insurance claims: No one picks up the phone Direct exhortations to children: "Go buy the book!" Inertia Selling Emotional pressure Prize Winning.965 The UK Department of Trade and Industry. The Unfair Commercial Practices (UCP) Directive. Executive Summary of the Consultation on implementing the EU directive on Unfair Commercial Practices and Amending Existing Consumer Legislation. December 2005. 966 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/dgs/health_consumer/dyna/enews/enews.cfm?al_id=37.-176-The directive uses maximum harmonisation, which means that Member States may not impose more restrictive national legislation. Dickie critiques the Commission's push for maximum harmonisation in consumer protection. According to Dickie, the idea of high common maximum level of consumer protection, presented as an objective in the Commission's Consumer Protection Strategy 2002-2006967, is novel and without grounds968. The Consumer Protection Strategy 2007-2013 clearly states that minimum harmonisation might have been suitable in the past but "full harmonisation" is the Commission's current approach969.Howells et al. also critique the maximum harmonisation approach in consumer protection. They point out that European consumers have different expectations concerning consumer law. There is empirical evidence suggesting that 80% of Finns trust regulators to guarantee consumer rights, as opposed to 20% of Greek consumers. This difference in expectations concerning legal protection means a difference in expectations concerning how cautiously one must behave when acting on the consumer market. It is diffi cult to adapt European legislation based on maximum harmonisation to such variations, without leading to considerable losses to consumers left with 'false' expectations. 970It has to be noted that the UCP Directive protects the economic interest of the consumer, and only indirectly other interests such as health or safety. In addition, taste and decency are outside the scope of application of the Directive.971 Health and safety are regulated separately by general product safety and sector-specifi c product safety requirements, discussed in chapter 4 above.972 The right to safe and healthy products and the right to adequate information are not actually far from each other. As opposed to physical safety, marketing rules could be seen as guaranteeing economic safety of consumers.The UCP directive only applies in business-to-consumer relationships. If interpreted literally, this means that competitor companies may not base claims on the directive. UK marketers have proposed an interpretation according to which competitor businesses are still entitled to retain rights of action under the directive, as companies are harmed if their consumers are deceived973. It is stated in the Directive that it "indirectly protects legitimate businesses from their competitors who do not play by the rules"974. This means the directive is not directly meant to protect competitors. However, the right of action is not exactly limited to consumers, either. It is also acknowledged that there are commercial practices which, although not harming consumers, may hurt competitors and business customers, and that Commission should consider further legislation addressing these issues975. In the future, competitor companies may base their demands on business-to-business legislation, without having to grasp on indirect protection through their consumers.967 EU Consumer policy strategy 2002-2006. 968 Dickie 2003. 969 EU Consumer policy strategy 2007-2013, 16. 970 Howells et al. 2006, 258.971 The Unfair Commercial Practices Directive. An information leafl et on European Commission web page at http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/cons_int/safe_shop/fair_bus_pract/ucp_en.pdf.972 The Unfair Commercial Practices Directive. An information leafl et on European Commission web page at http://ec.europa.eu/consumers/cons_int/safe_shop/fair_bus_pract/ucp_en.pdf.973 British Brands Group 2007. The British Brands Group is particularly worried about copycat packaging and inadequate means to tackle it.974 Preamble 8.975 Preamble 8.-177-Marketers continue to come up with new, innovative practices, which might be considered unfair. The UCP directive with its general clause may be used as a tool to contribute to uniform application of existing and future EU information, advertising, and labelling requirements. Where Lex specialis976 exists, it takes precedence over the UCP directive. However, the UCP directive potentially improves enforcement of Lex specialis rules, because it provides national consumer protection authorities with an additional legal basis to enforce the information requirements. An omission to provide material information which the average consumer needs can be misleading under UCP. Therefore, UCP may also be used as a tool to fi ll in gaps in labelling and advertising legislation.977 This applies for example to marketing of foodstuffs and medicines.However, interpretation of UCP through case law is slow. The UCP Directive foresees no committee where unclear issues could be settled. The Commission might therefore develop some kind of informal "guidance" system to alert business and enforcement authorities of Commission's interpretation of unfair commercial practices. Member States could not be legally obliged to comply with Commission interpretations. According to the Commission, the guidance approach has proved helpful to economic operators in similar cases where new law risked creating uncertainty.978The impossibility to include all the scientifi c and technical details in legislation together with the impossibility of leaving all the interpretation to courts here seems to lead to the guidance approach. The guidance approach leads to soft law, which is often welcomed by regulation targets but the binding nature of which is legally unclear. If we give a general directive like the UCP directive, we have to carefully consider who we want to interpret it and fi ll in the gaps. Making binding interpretation can be left either to courts or to a specifi c Committee. In addition, non-binding instruments can be used.5.1.2 ChinaThe general rules on marketing are in China given by the Advertisement law979. The law is formulated to "regulate advertising activities, to promote the sound development of the advertising sector, to protect the lawful rights and interests of consumers, to maintain the social and economic order, and to let advertisements play an active role in socialist market economy"980.