There is a report of the Scientifi c Committee on Food on composition and specifi cation of food intended to meet the expenditure of intense muscular effort, especially for sportsmen669, and an Opinion on safety aspects of creatine supplementation670. The Directive was circulating in draft form in 2004 and 2005. According to "Consumers for Health Choice", the publication of the proposal has been delayed by the successful campaign of the European Specialist Sports 664 Article 1(2) of the Directive.665 Commission Directive 1999/21/EC of 25 March 1999 on dietary foods for special medical purposes.666 More precisely: "patients with a limited, impaired or disturbed capacity to take, digest, absorb, metabolise or excrete ordinary foodstuffs or certain nutrients contained therein or metabolites, or with other medically-determined nutrient requirements, whose dietary management cannot be achieved only by modifi cation of the normal diet, by other foods for particular nutritional uses, or by a combination of the two". Article 1(2)(b) of the directive.667 Art. 2-3.668 Callard 2005. Sports nutrition is becoming more mainstream as more people are working out. Sports nutrition covers product areas such as energy and endurance, recovery and refuelling, and rehydration. Products are for example in the form of bars (high-complex carbohydrate and high-protein) or drinks (isotonic/hypotonic). Also caffeine and creatine are used in products. 669 Adopted by the SCF on 22 June 2000, corrected on 28 February 2001.670 Adopted by the Scientifi c Committee on Food on 7 September 2000.-117-Nutrition Alliance (ESSNA)671. The European and American supplement industries strongly oppose legislation on their products. They are mainly concerned about bans on several ingredients and stronger, "higher-potency" products. The framework directive also requires the Commission to report on the desirability of special legislation on foods intended for people suffering from diabetes. According to the Commission, "initial consultations with interested parties have been held on this issue". The Commission intends to report on the desirability of special provisions for foods for diabetics. The Commission also intends to put forward legislative proposals but the timing of this is unclear672. Dietetic foods differ from normal foods in that some of them include a pre-market notifi cation system. EU Member States must ensure that dietetic foods comply with the requirements set by the directives. They can use pre-market notifi cation to achieve this goal. In Finland, pre-market notifi cation is required for the following products:low lactose of lactose free dairy products, -low sodium products, including low sodium or no sodium table salts, -gluten free foods, -some weight loss products (others than meal or diet replacements), -some medical foods - 673, andother foods complying with the defi nition of dietetic food, for example foods for people -with high cholesterol.674 In Finland, pre-market notifi cation is not required for the following dietetic foods: infant formula and children's foods -some weight loss products (meal or diet replacements - 675)some medical foods -sports nutrition -foods for diabetics. - 676 671 Consumers for Health Choice describes itself as an exceptionally successful lobby. They are in practice lobbying for Health Product Manufacturers. Consumers for Health Choice web page. http://www.consumersforhealthchoice.com/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=35&Itemid=61.672 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/diabetic/index_en.htm.673 Medical foods must be notifi ed if they are manufactured in Finland or outside European Economic Area, and imported to Finland for the fi rst time. This means that if medical foods are already on the market in some other European country, they need not be notifi ed when imported to Finland.674 Food Safety Authority web page. http://www.evira.fi /portal/fi /elintarvikkeet/valvonta_ja_yritt__j__t/erityisruokavaliovalmisteet/ilmoitus_erityisruokavaliovalmisteen_markkinoille_saattamisesta/.675 As compositional criteria for meal or diet replacements are given by Directive 96/8/EC, they need not case-by-case pre-market control.676 Food Safety Authority web page. http://www.evira.fi /portal/fi /elintarvikkeet/valvonta_ja_yritt__j__t/erityisruokavaliovalmisteet/ilmoitus_erityisruokavaliovalmisteen_markkinoille_saattamisesta/.-118-4.2.1.5 Safety of Food Supplements Food supplements, regulated by Directive 2002/46/EC677, are concentrated sources of nutrients or other substances with a nutritional or physiological effect, whose purpose is to supplement the intake of nutrients in the normal diet. They are foods marketed in dose form, i.e. as pills, tablets, capsules, liquids in measured doses etc.678 Products typically contain vitamins, minerals, amino acids, fi bre, etc. Food supplements have no relevant energy content. Food supplements and dietetic foods are sometimes used for similar purposes, such as for weight loss or as sports nutrition. What often separates dietetic foods and food supplements is their energy content.679 Dietetic foods replace meals and diets; food supplements do not. Formulas that contain pure carbohydrates or proteins are dietetic foods.680 Food supplements are distinguishable from functional foods because of their form. The basic requirement for functional foods, as defi ned above in chapter 1.3., is that they can be consumed as a part of total diet and in the form of ordinary foods. From their appearance, food supplements are more like medicines. Medicinal claims are not, however, permitted in food supplements, either. This is because the defi nition of food supplements does not allow medical uses. Safety of food supplements is regulated in the EU by a list of permitted substances. Annex II of Directive 2002/46/EC is a list of permitted vitamin or mineral preparations that may be added for specifi c nutritional purposes in food supplements. Commission Directive 2006/37/EC to include additional substances has amended it. The trade of products containing vitamins and minerals not listed in Annex II has been prohibited since August 2005681. The European Food Safety Agency (EFSA) may consider vitamin and mineral substances for inclusion in the lists following the evaluation of an appropriate scientifi c dossier concerning the safety and bioavailability of the individual substance.682 Pre-market notifi cation applies to production or marketing of food supplements, if a Member State requires it. For example, Finland requires pre-market notifi cation. As far as vitamins and minerals are concerned, the Directive does two things. First, it establishes lists of the vitamins and minerals and their forms that can be used in the manufacture of food supplements. Second, it foresees the setting of maximum levels for vitamins and minerals in food supplements. These levels will be established in the next few years on the basis of the advice the Commissions will receive from the scientists. The setting of maximum 677 Directive 2002/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 10 June 2002 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to food supplements.678 More precisely, "food supplements" means foodstuffs the purpose of which is to supplement the normal diet and which are concentrated sources of nutrients or other substances with a nutritional or physiological effect, alone or in combination, marketed in dose form, namely forms such as capsules, pastilles, tablets, pills and other similar forms, sachets of powder, ampoules of liquids, drop dispensing bottles, and other similar forms of liquids and powders designed to be taken in measured small unit quantities. Article 1(a).679 The Finnish Food Safety Agency considers the energy content irrelevant, if the maximum dosage does not exceed 200 kJ per day. Finnish Food Safety Agency guidelines on food supplements, updated December 2006, page 5.680 Finnish Food Safety Agency guidelines on food supplements, updated December 2006, page 22.681 Under certain conditions, Member States may provide derogations until the end 2009, for vitamins and minerals and their forms not included in the Directive.682 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/supplements/index_en.htm.-119-limits is complicated, as the total intake of nutrients from all sources must be taken into consideration. In 2006, the Commission issued a Discussion Paper on the setting of maximum and minimum amounts for vitamins and minerals in foodstuffs683. The Commission received several comments684, and the Commissioner Kyprianou gave a collective answer to these comments685. In July 2007, the European Commission issued an "Orientation Paper" to selected parties including the Member States. Legislative proposals were awaited - or feared - in 2008. The maximum amounts of vitamins and minerals will probably be set both for fortifi ed foods as well as for food supplements686. Stakeholders, such as the Finnish government, supported this approach presented in the Discussion paper. At the end of 2007, the European Commission was "fi nalising approaches that allow the determination of maximum levels of vitamins and minerals for both food supplements and fortifi ed foods"687. Some health product manufacturers were concerned about the effects of the future legislation688. Others welcomed it and referred to it as a legally and scientifi cally "balanced" approach689. It is possible that maximum levels will be lower for fortifi ed foods than for food supplements, as the risks with fortifi ed foods are more diffi cult for the consumer to assess 690.Besides the maximum and minimum levels of vitamins and minerals, another important question related to food supplements remains to be answered. By July 2007, the European Commission was to present a report on the advisability to include additional categories of substances, besides vitamins and minerals, into the legal provisions for food supplements691. This would mean harmonising the rules on food supplements consisting of botanicals and herbals, amino acids, and fatty acids. Other substances in food supplements besides vitamins and minerals are at the moment regulated on national level692. In Finland, the rules are given in "the guide on food supplements" by the Food Safety Authority693. Above we have discussed problems with soft law, of which the food supplement guide is a good example. Important issues are resolved by a detailed document which is not binding and not available in languages other than Finnish. 683 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/supplements/discus_paper_amount_vitamins.pdf.684 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/supplements/resp_discus_paper_amount_vitamins.htm.685 January 2007.686 Fortifi ed foods will be discussed in the next chapter.687 Alliance for Natural Health. ANH Position Paper: Proposed European Model for MRLs not Fit for Purpose. 24 October 2007. Page 2. 688 Alliance for Natural Health. ANH Position Paper: Proposed European Model for MRLs not Fit for Purpose. 24 October 2007. 689 European Responsible Nutrition Alliance (ERNA) according to EAS news.690 Opinion of the Finnish Ministry of Trade and Industry. 29 September 2006. Available at European Commission web page: http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/supplements/documents/fi nland_en.pdf.691 This is required by Article 4(8) of the Directive: "Not later than 12 July 2007, the Commission shall submit to the European Parliament and the Council a report on the advisability of establishing specifi c rules, including, where appropriate, positive lists, on categories of nutrients or of substances with a nutritional or physiological effect other than those referred to in paragraph 1, accompanied by any proposals for amendment to this Directive which the Commission deems necessary." This means other nutrients than vitamins or minerals. The Commission has apparently failed to present the report in time.692 Silano et al. 2004, 115. 693 Available at http://www.palvelu.fi /evi/fi les/55_519_331.pdf.-120-4.2.1.6 Safety of Fortifi ed Foods According to the General Principles of the Codex for the Addition of Essential Nutrients for Foods, fortifi cation or enrichment means: the addition of one or more essential nutrients to a food, -whether or not it is normally contained in the food, -for the purpose of preventing or correcting a demonstrated defi ciency of one or more -nutrients,in the population or specifi c population groups. -The fortifi cation or enrichment of various foods is conducted for the purpose of nutritional need or for a commercial purpose. Taking into account that functional foods are often made by adding some functional substances, the law on enriched or fortifi ed foods has a signifi cant implication for functional foods694. There is a wide range of nutrients and other ingredients that might be used in food manufacturing, including vitamins, amino acids, essential fatty acids, fi bre, various plants and herbal extracts. The substances used in fortifi ed foods are thus practically the same as the substances used in food supplements. Regulation 1925/2006/EC695 harmonises the provisions on the addition of vitamins and minerals substances to foods696. Since January 2007, only certain vitamins and minerals can be added, and only in certain forms697. Annex I of the Regulation lists vitamins and minerals which may be added to foods. Annex II lists the sources of vitamins and minerals which may be added to foods. There are soft law guidelines on how to have substances added to these lists698. Annex III lists substances whose use in foods is prohibited, restricted or under Community scrutiny. Member states can impose a notifi cation requirement for food fortifi cation. For example in Finland, production or marketing of a fortifi ed food must be notifi ed beforehand to the Food Safety Agency. Minimum amounts of vitamins and minerals in fortifi ed foods are linked to the notion of signifi cant amount. The Regulation provides for the setting of maximum amounts of vitamins and minerals in fortifi ed foods. The Commission's discussion paper on the setting of maximum and 694 Kwak - Jukes 2000b, 112-113.695 Regulation (EC) No 1925/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on the addition of vitamins and minerals and of certain other substances to foods.696 "Annex I of the Regulation is a list of vitamins and minerals which may be added to foods. Annex II is a list of the sources of vitamins and minerals which may be added to foods. Annex III is a list of substances whose use in foods is prohibited, restricted or under Community scrutiny. At the end of a transitional period, only vitamins and/or minerals listed in Annex I, in the forms listed in Annex II, may be added to foods." http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/vitamins/index_en.htm. EFSA evaluates substances before changing the lists.697 There is a transitional period that lasts until January 2014. During this time, Member States may provide derogations for vitamins and minerals and their forms not included in the Directive. This applies to products that were on the European market in 2007 and on which there is no unfavourable EFSA opinion.698 European Commission. Health and Consumer Protection Directorate General. Administrative Guidance on Submissions for Safety Evaluation of Substances Added for Specifi c Nutritional Purposes in the Manufacture of Foods. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/nutritional/adm_guidance_safety_substances_en.pdf.-121-minimum amounts for vitamins and minerals in foodstuffs is related both to food supplements and fortifi ed foods, and was discussed above. This legislation is expected soon. Article 8 of the Regulation 1925/2006/EC also gives the possibility to legislate on substances other than vitamins and minerals699. This means that fi bre fortifi cation might in the future be regulated in the same manner as vitamin and mineral fortifi cation is. Currently, addition of these other substances is regulated only at member state level. The situation is thus the same as with food supplements. Foods can be fortifi ed for the whole population as well as a specifi c population group. Some of fortifi ed foods can be sold as dietetic foods. For example fortifi ed breakfast cereals cannot be considered as a dietetic food, since dietetic foods are for certain categories of people. If a certain food is distinctively fortifi ed with essential nutrients for the special dietary requirement of a specifi c group of the population, it could be sold as a dietetic food. A fortifi ed food might even be sold as a medical food (a subcategory of dietetic foods, see above) if its benefi ts are specifi ed for patients with conditions where medical supervision is necessary.7004.2.1.7 Safety of Novel Foods Finally, we will discuss the safety of novel foods. For a functional food developer, this might be the most important European legal category to be aware of.4.2.1.7.1 Background Throughout history, foods prepared and used in traditional ways have been judged to be safe on the basis of long-term experience. In today's risk analysis, a food is considered safe when we are reasonably certain that it will cause no harm if it is used as intended, under the anticipated conditions of consumption. Some foods are not safe in absolute terms but contain natural toxicants like solanin in potatoes.701 In these cases, safety is related to how the food is used. In the potato case, we simply do not eat the green part and consider the product safe. Foods are usually complex mixtures of macro- and micro-constituents. Foods provide energy and nutrients and have traditionally been regarded as natural, benefi cial and necessary products whose safety and nutritional value need not be questioned. Regulatory approaches have focused on restricting hazards outside the food itself. This means regulating food additives, processing aids, and contaminants of natural or industrial origin. Foods as such have traditionally not been systematically subjected to nutritional or toxicological evaluation. Nutritional evaluation of foods and of diets has not been performed, but such nutritional evaluations have not been used as a basis for a safety assessment of individual foods.702 699 "The procedure provided for in this Article shall be followed where a substance other than vitamins or minerals, or an ingredient containing a substance other than vitamins or minerals, is added to foods or used in the manufacture of foods under conditions that would result in the ingestion of amounts of this substance greatly exceeding those reasonably expected to be ingested under normal conditions of consumption of a balanced and varied diet and/or would otherwise represent a potential risk to consumers.