http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/dgs/index_en.htm.137 Nedergaard 2007, 7.138 Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation 726/2004/EC.139 European Union web page. http://europa.eu/scadplus/glossary/subsidiarity_en.htm.140 Tolonen 2003, 111-112.-23-Treaties141.142 The proportionality principle also applies to actions of Member States, and has been used particularly with regard to limiting the four freedoms143.Food safety is considered very important particularly from free trade and public health perspectives. This leads to the conclusion that EU legislation is usually considered necessary and to a situation where the amount of EU legislation is vast. At the moment, EU food law covers all the important aspects and functions in the food chain: biological safety (hygiene), chemical safety (contaminants, residues, additives etc.) and practically all aspects of food marketing. For example in the 2008 novel food proposal, it is stated that Member State action could lead to differing levels of food safety, confuse consumers, and endanger the free movement of food in the EU144. In the 2008 labelling proposal, it is stated that Community action is needed "for the internal market to function smoothly"145. The EU has regulated medicines since 1965, and the role of national regulators has been rather small for a long time.EU law can be divided in primary legislation, secondary legislation, international agreements, legal principles, and case law. Primary legislation means the Treaties, which are comparable to constitutional law. The two fundamental treaties are the Treaty establishing the European Community (EC Treaty) and the Treaty establishing the European Union (EU treaty). In this study, we are mainly interested in secondary legislation. Secondary legislation means Regulations, Directives, and soft law materials such as Recommendations or Opinions. Regulations are directly applicable and binding on everyone, whereas Directives are binding on the Member States.146When choosing a legal instrument, Regulations are today often favoured compared to Directives. In the 2008 labelling proposal, it states "a Directive would have lead to an inconsistent approach in the Community leading to uncertainty for both consumers and the industry". A Regulation provides "a consistent approach for industry to follow and reduces the administrative burden as they do not need to familiarise themselves with the individual Regulations in the Member States".147 With novel foods, the Directive option was not even considered in 2008, because there is already a novel food Regulation and the evaluation has, since 1997, been based on EU-wide approvals. Instead, the Commission stated why soft law is not considered adequate for addressing the issue in question: "Non-legislative action based, for example, on a code of good practice or guidelines could not give suffi cient protection and would lack legal certainty. "148Minimum harmonisation means that the EU sets ground which national legislation must meet. Legally, this is often done by a Directive, which includes a safeguard clause. In this case, EU Member States may enact more restrictive laws if unexpected events such as public health 141 European Union web page. http://europa.eu/scadplus/glossary/proportionality_en.htm.142 Both the principle of subsidiarity and the principal of proportionality are established by Article 5 of the Treaty establishing the European Community. Protocol (No 30) on the application of the principles of subsidiarity and proportionality was Annexed to the EC Treaty in 1997.143 Raitio 2006, 246. The four freedoms of the EU are: the free movement of persons, goods, services, and capital.144 The proposal for a Regulation on novel foods. Explanatory memorandum. Page 5.145 Food labelling proposal 2008. Explanatory memorandum. Page 9.146 European Union web page, EurLex, Process and players. http://eur-lex.europa.eu/en/droit_communautaire/droit_communautaire.htm#1.6.147 Food labelling proposal 2008. Explanatory memorandum. Page 11.148 The proposal for a Regulation on novel foods. Explanatory memorandum. Page 6.-24-reasons render the EU mandates too limiting. Of the general consumer protection laws, the product safety directive includes a safeguard clause. A problem with minimum harmonisation is that national rules can be used for protectionist purposes. According to the Commission's current Consumer Protection Strategy, minimum harmonisation is not a suitable alternative in consumer protection issues anymore as it leads to restrictions on free trade149.Maximum harmonisation means "full" harmonisation. The unfair commercial practices directive uses maximum harmonisation, and does not include a safeguard clause. Legislators in Member States cannot create rules that are more restrictive on trade than the Directive. However, national courts may create varying standards for acceptable commercial conduct on a case-by-case basis. Ultimately, the European Court of Justice may have to ensure harmonisation through case law, as it resolves disputes that challenge a Member State's trade practices laws.150 This means that not even maximum-harmonisation directives as such can amount to full harmonisation. Rules would have to be very detailed in order to fully harmonise a subject area, and general clauses would have to be avoided. Full harmonisation is thus hypothetical as it would mean no room or need for courts, however, in practice, harmonisation will have to come through courts dealing with cases, and ultimately through the ECJ.The Commission is of the view that consumer protection is better achieved by maximum harmonisation, but the foremost concern seems to be the removal of barriers to trade151. MacMaolain has criticised EU food laws for allowing the principle of free movement of goods to underlie all harmonising provisions152. This means the profi tability of the European food business is the Commission's foremost concern, at the expense of health and consumer protection. According to him, EU law has often become an artifi cially low regulatory "ceiling". He also argues that much of EU food law has developed in reaction to food safety crises and thus neglected quality aspects of food, such as nutritional value and ethical issues. MacMaolain believes national-level regulators could be more responsive to citizen's public health and other concerns.Above, we have discussed law that is harmonised in the EU either through maximum harmonisation or through minimum harmonisation. The actions of Member States would still be limited if law were not harmonised since free movement of goods in the EU is guaranteed by rules in the EC treaty. Customs duties are prohibited153, and Member States are not allowed to quantitatively restrict import154 or export155 of goods. The ultimate quantitative restriction is a ban to import for example a food or a medicine. A member state can, however, restrict imports if it is necessary for the protection of health and life of humans.156 The European Court 149 EU Consumer Policy strategy 2007-2013. COM(2007) 99 fi nal. Page 7.150 Nehf 2006. 151 EU Consumer Policy strategy 2007-2013. COM(2007) 99 fi nal.152 MacMaolain 2007, 2. 153 Article 25 of the Treaty.154 Article 28 of the Treaty.155 Article 29 of the Treaty.156 Article 30 of the Treaty is called the safeguard clause: "The provisions of Articles 28 and 29 shall not preclude prohibitions or restrictions on imports, exports or goods in transit justifi ed on grounds of public morality, public policy or public security; the protection of health and life of humans, animals or plants; the protection of national treasures possessing artistic, historic or archaeological value; or the protection of industrial and commercial property. Such prohibitions or restrictions shall not, however, constitute a means of arbitrary discrimination or a disguised restriction on trade between the Member States. "-25-of Justice has handled cases related to food and medicine law where it has decided whether certain Member State actions have or have not been necessary157.Different rules apply to maintaining vs. introducing derogations to harmonised rules. When legislation is harmonised according to Article 95 in order to achieve free movement of goods, a member state can still uphold certain existing national rules deemed necessary for Article 30 or other reasons158. Setting up new national rules requires scientifi c evidence on particular problems occurring after or caused by European legislation159.160 The Commission must be notifi ed of derogations, and if the Commission does not react, derogations are considered legal.The principle of mutual recognition further clarifi es the roles of the EU vs. its Member States when standards are not harmonised by EU level legislation. This principle was established by the Cassis de Dijon case already in 1979. It prevents a Member State from blocking a product at its borders if the product is approved according to another Member State's reasonable standards. Because food and medicine law is widely harmonised in the EU, the Cassis doctrine is not particularly relevant here.2.2.2 Administrative Soft LawSo far, we have discussed the creation of European hard law norms. Now we turn to soft law, which is in the fi eld of foodstuffs and medicines at the EU level created by the Commission and the regulatory agencies. Senden sees the European Commission as quite an aggressive maker of soft law, and warns that it may use recommendations, codes, etc. as a means to impose obligations, which are not in fact entailed in Community law161. To promote democratic legitimacy, she supports active participation of the European Parliament in the making of soft law162. The Council already consults the Parliament when making recommendations163.When turning to the agencies EFSA and EMEA, the democratic element is even thinner than with the Commission. Supranational regulatory agencies are an important institutional innovation in European law. These agencies have emerged since the 1990s, and are set up in sensitive policy areas. The agencies replace the traditional committee system as the main regulatory institution of the EU. The European Medicines Agency (EMEA) was established in 157 These cases from the 1970's and 1980's have involved for example certifi cates for medicines, food fortifi cation, additives, and sausages. Joutsamo et al. 2000, 436-437.158 Article 95(4): "If, after the adoption by the Council or by the Commission of a harmonisation measure, a Member State deems it necessary to maintain national provisions on grounds of major needs referred to in Article 30, or relating to the protection of the environment or the working environment, it shall notify the Commission of these provisions as well as the grounds for maintaining them. "159 Article 95(5): "Moreover, ... if, after the adoption ... of a harmonisation measure, a Member State deems it necessary to introduce national provisions based on new scientifi c evidence relating to the protection of the environment or the working environment on grounds of a problem specifi c to that Member State arising after the adoption of the harmonisation measure, it shall notify the Commission of the envisaged provisions as well as the grounds for introducing them. "160 Hollo 2008, 38.161 Senden 2004, 492.162 Senden 2004, 482.163 Senden 2004, 502.-26-1993. The European Food Safety Authority (EFSA) was set up in 2002, following the example of medicines regulation.164According to Regulation 726/2004/EC, European medicine law should be based on science165. The European Medicines Agency (EMEA) is responsible for preparing scientifi c opinions on medicinal product legislation, providing the industry with regulatory and scientifi c guidelines, and handling applications in the centralised procedure. The opinions are prepared by the EMEA Committees, which are: the Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP), the Committee on Orphan Medicinal Products (COMP), the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC), and the Committee on Paediatric Medicinal Products (PDCO).166 According to Krapohl, the establishment of the EMEA led to a successful regulation of pharmaceuticals in the EU. A real single market is emerging and the regulatory policymaking seems to function. The EU Member States and the industry evaluate the EMEA very positively.167One goal of setting up the EMEA was that scientifi c advice for future applicants seeking marketing authorisation would be generally provided and in greater depth168. The EMEA publishes its own guidelines on quality, safety and effi cacy testing requirements; which is described as giving scientifi c advice and protocol assistance. The "advice" by the EMEA, while understood as law, is not legally binding, so it is in reality soft law, and is in practice very important as it gives the regulation target the actual rules on how to act.According to the General Food Regulation, food law should be based on scientifi c risk assessment, which is further defi ned by the precautionary principle. Scientifi c risk assessment is the task of the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), established in 2002. The EFSA gives scientifi c advice to the Commission when drafting new laws or making pre-market approvals. The EFSA also gives advice to national legislators and food agencies. Similar to the EMEA, the EFSA also addresses regulation targets by their opinions and guidelines. They advise the applicants on how to draft applications and what information is needed, forming the hard law requirements into practical demands.The reason for setting up the EFSA was to regain the public's trust after scares related to BSE and dioxin. Before EFSA, a committee that was directly a part of the Commission handled scientifi c risk assessment in food issues. It had become obvious that the Member States and the Commission could not agree among themselves on food law issues based on science, and an impartial expert authority was seen as the answer. EFSA's structure and their use of outside experts are meant to ensure that science and politics are distinguished.169164 Krapohl 2004, 518.165 Preambles of the Regulation refer to "high level of scientifi c evaluation", "objective scientifi c criteria of quality, safety and effi cacy", "scientifi c expertise", and "scientifi c role and independence of the committees".166 Regulation 726/2004/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency. The Committee on Pediatric Medicinal Products was established in 2007. There is also the fi fth Committee for veterinary medicinal products, which are not discussed in this thesis.167 Krapohl 2004, 519.168 Regulation 726/2004/EC, preamble 25.169 ElAmin 2006. -27-The EU faces the task of balancing the interests and goals of 27 economically and culturally different Member States in regulating foods or medicines. The crucial issue for successful risk regulation is how Member State interests and scientifi c expertise can be integrated. The issue of science vs. politics applies both to medicines and foodstuffs. The Member States have long-term interests in appropriate risk regulation based on science, but they also have short-term interests to protect their domestic economy in single cases. Agencies like the EMEA and the EFSA were established so that the common long-term interests could prevail.170Expertise and independence are valuable assets in the current EU where all the Member States are perceived to pursue their own interests. Compared to democracy, in other words politics, the targets of regulation prefer a scientifi c community to resolve the issues. Separate regulatory agencies are preferred compared to the Commission and its committees, because the Commission is no model example of transparency.171 For example, with novel foods, most stakeholders want EFSA to resolve the issues of whether a food can be regarded as novel and whether a food can be authorised. National governments are also distrusted and seen as creating nothing but hurdles to trade, often on political grounds.As a result of the control problem, the Member States have not given the Agencies total independency, though. The decision-making procedures still involve the Commission and Member-State bodies. In this situation, one has to be aware that the short-term interests of the Member States are blocked from being involved. As regards the European regulatory agencies of foodstuffs and medicines, the EFSA has been criticised for not being as independent as the EMEA.172 Member States of the EU have a larger role in the EFSA decision-making procedures than within EMEA procedures. This way politics and national interests infl uence European food law more than European medicines law.According to Herman Koeter, the EFSA's deputy executive director, it is a challenging task for the EFSA to maintain their independence. The EFSA receives pressure from the European Parliament, the Commission, national legislators, regulatory agencies, and the food industry. There is a push to dilute or strengthen results, and sometimes push for a fi rm opinion in cases where science is unable to yield a clear answer. Risk communication is also a sensitive issue. The EFSA has decided to inform the public directly on key issues and scientifi c fi ndings, in spite of the public sometimes misinterpreting science and turning away from a particular type of food.173 Scandal-type media attention is naturally bound to damage a member state or an economic sector. Thus there is sometimes political pressure against basing food law on science.174While the EFSA has trouble in being independent enough, some critics have argued that both the EFSA and the EMEA are too independent, as they have no accountability to democratically elected agencies. Leino has questioned the legal grounds for EU agencies such as the EFSA and the EMEA, and according to her, the role of agencies should be clearly -and strictly- defi ned in law. She demands that all legislative acts and also decision-making affecting private rights and obligations should be made by politically accountable actors. Such powers should not be delegated to agencies,175 and this is far from reality at the moment. With 170 Krapohl 2004, 520.171 Leino 2003, 48.172 Krapohl 2004, 521.173 Koeter according to ElAmin 2006. 174 The decision on EFSA location in Parma was itself clearly a political one. 175 Leino 2003, 49-50.-28-foodstuffs and medicines, EU level and national regulatory agencies have very important roles in both drafting the law and implementing the law. Aside from giving advice for drafters of hard law, the agencies have created a vast amount of documents defi ned as soft law, which gives hard law its actual contents. The agencies also have signifi cant discretionary powers in law implementation.According to Krapohl, the solutions are rather simple: the law and the courts. Member States must bind the Agencies and also the Commission with substantive legal decision-making criteria, which can be enforced by the European Courts.176 This means the laws need to be clear enough and not replete with concepts open to interpretation, such as "the proportionality principle" and "other legitimate concerns besides science".