This will mean we have come full circle and the ancient adage "let your food be your medicine" is valid again.7.4 About the Roles of Pre-Market and Post-Market ControlIt is easy to agree that foodstuffs and medicines must be regulated to avoid potentially high risks to consumers. Without regulating safety, effi cacy, and marketing, markets would not function properly as the consumers would not know what they were buying. Legislation is not effective unless implemented properly. This can be seen with medicine advertising in China, or marketing of weight-loss products in Europe. There are two basic alternatives on how the rules can be implemented: through pre-market control or through post-market control.There are important differences between medicines and foodstuffs. Medicines can be precisely regulated and evaluated before they access the market, and pre-market control is thus the dominant regulatory mechanism for medicines. Pre-market control is made possible by the fact that pharmaceuticals are relatively homogenous products produced by big companies.1563 In contrast to the case of medicines, strong pre-market control is usually not possible for foodstuffs. This is because the food market is much more fragmented, in China even more so than in Europe.Before discussing offi cial pre-market and post-market control, we must mention the control done by entrepreneurs themselves. Both in the EU and in China, the producers themselves are responsible for the safety and effi cacy of their products. This means that offi cial control does not free the entrepreneur from responsibility for faulty products. This applies both to foodstuffs and medicines. Implementation of self-control mechanisms is fundamentally a 1563 Krapohl 2004, 519.-297-question of trust, supplemented by GMP1564 documents and reports drafted by the entrepreneurs themselves. The self-monitoring system will save money if authorities can divide operators in separate risk categories and focus on the more risky operations, according to scientifi c risk assessment principles.Pre-market control means that offi cials in an application must authorise a product authorised or notifi cation procedure before it can be sold to consumers. By means of pre-market control, authorities have a chance to make sure that the product as a whole complies with the laws. A lighter version of authorisation procedure is the notifi cation procedure, where a producer or marketer informs the authorities before bringing a new product onto the market, enabling authorities to react if deemed necessary.There are problems to pre-clearance: gathering the necessary information into a dossier takes time and delays the placing of a product on the market. The time taken by the authorities in reviewing the product further delays market access, sometimes unpredictably. There are possible confi dentiality and intellectual property issues. Pre-market control also demands public resources, unless totally funded by the regulated industry.On the other hand, pre-market control enables broad review of products accessing the market, and will block some products that would have caused serious health incidents if used by patients or consumers. Pre-market control is also more predictable from the applicant's point of view. For this reason, entrepreneurs sometimes voluntarily discuss their product and it's marketing with authorities already in the product development phase, even if there is no legislative requirement of pre-market control. The authorities sometimes take charges for these services.At the moment, authorisation procedures are in Europe and China applied to all medicines, GMO foods, novel foods, and additives. Authorisation procedures apply also to health foods in China and novel health claims in Europe1565. In Europe, notifi cation procedures apply to food supplements and some of dietetic foods. The regulatory agencies of foodstuffs and medicines do not just implement the laws; they also create the law. In the pre-market procedures, the authorities often take the negotiation and counselling strategy and discuss with the applicant on how to make the product legal. Due to this practice, lawyers are not often needed to settle issues between companies and the control authorities1566. The limits of the discussion and persuasion approach are further discussed below in chapter 7.6.3.In Europe, safety and effi cacy of functional foods will possibly in the future be evaluated simultaneously in one EFSA procedure. The separation of the two evaluations in food law is not due to any practical or scientifi c reasons but the two separate roots of novel food and health claim regulations. First, in the 70s, appeared foods that had previously unresolved safety issues to be dealt with. The European novel food legislation followed this technological development in 1997. Later, in the 90s, appeared functional foods where also effi cacy issues had to be resolved. Legislation on health claims followed in 2007. With medicines, safety and effi cacy have always been evaluated simultaneously, and now often by the EMEA. In China, safety and effi cacy of health foods is evaluated in one procedure by the SFDA.1564 Good Manufacturing Practice.1565 Regulation on nutrition and health claims widened the area of pre-market control so that all new marketing claims must be authorised by the EFSA before appearance on labels and advertisements.1566 On the contrary, lawyers are often needed to settle issues between states protecting their own industries.-298-Functional foods have forced regulators to create new pre-market control mechanisms. When deciding on how to regulate functional foods, governments must weigh the benefi ts and costs of pre-market control. The pre-market system might be considered adequate as to safety issues, but disproportional to the possible problems of health claims. In the spirit of freedom of speech, marketing is not usually disposed under pre-market control. By misleading marketing communication, the severity of health risks caused is usually not as great as with products that are unsafe. However, it seems that regulators ended up with total pre-market control of functional foods, including their marketing. When creating new pre-market procedures, precise time limits should be given in law. This has already been done regarding pharmaceutical legislation and should also be done in the fi eld of food law.Today there seems to be a need for three different pre-market procedures for foods:Innovative foods without health claims (novelty relates to other feature than health 1) effect).Innovative foods with health claims (functional foods).2) Natural materials (mainly plants) that have not previously been used as foods.3) These procedures would apply to foods in food form and foods in pill form. Procedure 1) would include additives, fl avourings, and enzymes. Procedure 2) would include dietetic foods, fortifi ed foods and GMO foods.There is also a continuous need for two different pre-market procedures for medicines:Herbal medicines.1) Chemical medicines.2) With herbal medicines, applications can be based on literature or on preclinical and clinical trials. It is questionable whether it is suitable to uphold medicine categories for products without any proof of therapeutic effect and without referral to therapeutic effi cacy. Instead of creating legal categories for products on which information is not available, we could focus on scientifi c research to produce this information.All of the above-mentioned fi ve procedures would also have to include simpler versions for products that are novel but essentially similar to previously authorised products. At the moment, there are already simplifi ed procedures to generic medicines and novel foods that are similar to previously authorised ones.Even when a pre-market procedure exists, someone will always dismiss the authorisation procedure and put unauthorised products where only post-market control applies. Post-market control means controlling products already on the market. This means the authorities use various means to verify that product safety; effi cacy and marketing are according to the law. If this is not the case, the product can be withdrawn from the market and penalties imposed.If governments were to rely on post-market control only, the marketer of a medicine or foodstuff could basically do as he pleases but the authorities could forbid the product or marketing action afterwards. The health risks caused to consumers are the most obvious problem with this approach. This would also lead to uncertainty and waste of resources. To avoid the waste of product development and marketing efforts, companies would ask the authorities for pre-market advice on how the product would be treated. With complex issues, pre-market control is thus the only practical solution.-299-It is generally agreed that better post-clearance systems are needed. There are numerous problems related to post-market control of foodstuffs and medicines. 'Wonder drugs' are one of them. These are products claiming to cure just about everything are marketed throughout the world. Internet complicates the issue further. Responsible producers are of course against these wonder drugs, because it affects the reputation and consumer confi dence in the whole business of health foods, functional foods, and herbal medicines. These 'wonder drugs' are not legally registered as medicines, but still marketed with medicinal claims. It is diffi cult to control this activity because:it is sometimes diffi cult for authorities to fi nd the company or person that is legally -responsible for marketing of the product,enforcement of penalties is a slow procedure because the accused can always appeal, so -the marketer has plenty of time to collect cash before he can be stopped,the penalties for illegal marketing are not economically signifi cant. - 1567With post-market control, legislators should focus on increasing transparencies in the food chain and the medicine industry, entrepreneur responsibility, effective implementation, and effective penalties. The issue of burden of proof is also important with post-market control. The burden of proof should be on the producer and marketer of a product. The entrepreneur should be able to prove the safety of his product and to substantiate the marketing claims used.7.5 Central vs. Local LegislationIn this chapter, we discuss the competences between Central and Local legislators. In the EU, this means EU vs. its Member States. In China, this means national vs. provincial legislation. Before discussing these issues, we must discuss the relationship between global rules and the rules of EU and China. Global agreements are in a sense above both EU and China. According to the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, a Member shall ensure the conformity of its laws, regulations and administrative procedures with its WTO obligations1568.The WTO is about negotiations, agreements, and dispute resolution. International trade rules are created through negotiations, currently the Doha round. The Dispute Settlement Body can resolve whether certain trade-related legislation passed in a national democracy is against the WTO rules. This means a WTO member state cannot legislate freely regarding protectionist purposes. WTO member states can set their own environmental or health rules, but they cannot discriminate between domestic and foreign companies. The principles of most-favoured-nation and national treatment are the cornerstones of free trade.The WTO settles trade disputes based on trade agreements. It is not an environmental or public health organisation.1569 However, the WTO Dispute Settlement Body cannot avoid natural science when a case is for example on a chemical and its health effects. Decisions 1567 Enkovaara 2002, 32.1568 Qingjian 2002, 298.1569 See Palmujoki 2003, 719-720.-300-on such cases are often based on complex and sometimes confl icting scientifi c evidence1570. To uphold WTO legitimacy, it is important to openly develop legal and scientifi c principles that WTO member states can agree upon. This is diffi cult as the interests of industrialised countries and developing countries often differ. Codex Alimentarius rules and other standards are referred to in WTO agreements. This referral makes international soft-law standards important sources of WTO law.In Europe and China, similar trends of legal centralisation can be noticed. In Europe, the EU, not its Member States, regulates foodstuffs and medicines. In China, several national laws have been enacted since the 1990s. Where local legislation still exists, it has led to problems. The reasons for harmonisation are the same in the EU and in China: harmonisation is considered necessary in order to guarantee consumer rights, and for the proper functioning of the internal market.Most of the important European food law has been harmonised by the EU Commission. This harmonised legislation includes hygiene rules, restrictions on additive use, pesticides and maximum levels of pesticide residues, novel food and GMO food authorisation, food supplements, food labelling and nutrition information, nutrition claims and marketing claims, etc. Food law is now frequently given in the form of Regulations instead of Directives. This is because differing interpretations are deemed to undermine the ideas of the internal market and equal consumer rights. With medicines, there is even less room for national interpretations. Medicine quality, safety, and effi cacy are stipulated in exact manner by European level hard law and soft law.European harmonisation of health-promoting foods has come a long way through regulations on food supplements, fortifi ed products and nutrition and health claims. Areas where variations still exist between Member States are probable targets for future harmonisation. However, European national food agencies still have their various guidelines on how they interpret the European law and implement it in practice. Different practices in different states are seen as obstacles to trade. Increasing harmonisation of European food law decreases the need for both national legislation and national soft law. We predict the next issues to be harmonised in European foodstuffs and medicines law to be:The foodstuff vs. medicine -issue.1) Food supplements containing other ingredients than vitamins or minerals.2) Food fortifi cation with other substances than vitamins or minerals.3) The decision on whether a product is a foodstuff or a medicine is at the moment made by EU Member States, the categorisation decisions being based on national soft law materials. This central scientifi c and political question is often related to functional foods, where disease risk reduction has to be compared to disease prevention. In the future, a European law on how to separate foodstuffs and medicines might be considered necessary. Simultaneously, the categorisation decision might be shifted onto the EFSA or the EMEA.European rules on food supplements and fortifi ed foods using for example fi bre, phytosterols, or lactic acid bacteria, might be harmonised in the future. At the moment, these products are regulated by national rules. Some are also scrutinised as novel foods. Harmonisation of fortifi cation rules would make the rules clearer for some functional food businesses.1570 See Kulovesi 2003, 65-66.-301-The size and diversity of China has led the government to use a system of local autonomy. In environmental issues, the resistance of local and provincial governments is a serious obstacle to sustainable development policy. Similar problems relate to regulation of foodstuffs and medicines. The Chinese Food Hygiene Law of 1995 declared that precise food safety standards are to be decided locally. The new Food Safety Law upholds this principle. Standards vary, and national and local standards contradict one another. Implementation and control of the rules differs among provinces and cities. The national Food Safety Standard will solve some of the problems. However, it is not possible for the central government to be aware of all the day-to-day decisions and actions of localities. Local offi cials might see national laws as obstacles to their cities' growth and personal promotion, and hence readily defy them. Promotions are often based on meeting economic targets, and cooperation with other provinces or cities is not rewarded. This enhances local protectionism.1571 Distrust in food and medicine marketing describes consumer attitudes in China.An important step towards centralisation in China is that currently all food and medicine pre-market authorisations are under the competence of the SFDA. This has eliminated the confl icting standards that previously prevailed among provincial government agencies. The Health Food Regulation was important in setting common national rules for functional food products. The proposed national law on traditional herbal medicines will strengthen patient confi dence in China, and also promote acceptance of herbal medicine and related business opportunities in foreign countries. In the future, China will probably have to harmonise all important food and medicine standards nationally in a similar manner that is being done with exported foods. Chinese laws as such already guarantee that foodstuffs and medicines are safe and effective. As stated above, China can build confi dence in the food and medicine industries by strengthening implementation and control of laws, and particularly at the local level.In Europe, there have been complaints that it is diffi cult to understand the totality of Community and national laws. For example, the Finnish Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry has stated that "the totality of foodstuff legislation will inevitably be unclear", because European regulations are not repeated in the Finnish law1572. European law both adds volume and complicates structure. Hallberg states this from a court's perspective1573. Likewise in China, the relationship of national laws and local laws is not clear. Laws are often broad and hard to understand as such. In China, national and local laws at times contradict one another, and national government agencies have to take action to revoke local laws1574.There are solutions to complexity stemming from central vs. local laws. The obvious solution is abolishing local laws. The European approach is not in fact far from this situation. Central regulation would guarantee equal consumer and patient rights, and also free movement of goods. However, there are also positive sides to local legislation. The most persuasive argument in favour of local legislation is that it is easier for citizens and local experts to get their voice heard. It does not serve any purpose to enact the same laws both on central and local level. The local laws must serve local needs and be based on genuine local differences in these needs.15751571 Lam 2006. 1572 Maa- ja metsatalousministerio. Selvitys lainsaadannon muutostekijoista 2005. Page 13.1573 Hallberg 1997, 69. 1574 Lam 2006.1575 See Tala 2005b on the role of national legal policies. -302-If both central and local legislation are considered necessary, regulation targets can be served by using a referral technique, where local laws refer to central laws. In China, implementation and control of central laws must be enhanced. This will require a culture where pursuing national aims is awarded instead of pursuing local aims. Also in Europe, national and local favouritism can sometimes be detected behind food and medicine law. European laws are still often compromises between national interests rather than instruments based on scientifi c risk analysis and common economical goals.As opposed to minimum harmonisation, maximum harmonisation is today preferred in EU consumer protection. Simultaneously, it seems that the focus has shifted from the consumer onto the entrepreneur. First, consumer protection was primarily about protecting the consumer. Now the goal rather seems to be to keep the protection at a reasonable level to facilitate trade. For example, the UCP directive tries to make the rules on consumer marketing clear, as national rules cease to exist. Simultaneously, positive aspects of diversity might be missed. Nehf suspects1576 that at least in the short term, the UCP Directive might increase legal complexity rather than simplify the rules. According to him, simple solutions often fail to fi x complex problems.MacMaolain (2007) is of the view that national regulators would, more likely than the EU Commission, pay attention to food quality such as nutritional properties (for example to fi ght obesity) and ethical questions. He thinks that in order to promote free trade, the EU sets unnecessarily low requirements on foods.