But prevention in the meaning of food and drug law does not cover this kind of malnutrition prevention. The concept in food and drug law is restricted to concern drug effects with the goal to prevent particular diseases.605 Commission Directive 1999/21/EC of 25 March 1999 on dietary foods for special medical purposes.-103-Coppens et al. (2001) proposed a concept of disease risk reduction. The key characteristics of disease risk reduction are: The disease is not present. -The cause of the disease is multi-factorial, including dietary, behavioural, environmental, -and genetic factors.Modifi cation of certain dietary components, alone, cannot ensure that the disease will -not develop, since it does not affect the other factors but, nevertheless, it may help signifi cantly to reduce the likelihood of getting a disease.606 In the current European legal framework for foods and medicines, there are still no defi nitions for prevention and risk reduction. There is, however, a defi nition of "reduction of disease risk claim": "any health claim that states, suggests or implies that the consumption of a food category, a food or one of its constituents signifi cantly reduces a risk factor in the development of a human disease"607. This means that according to European law, reducing disease risk means reducing a risk factor in the development of a disease. The concept of disease risk reduction takes into account the complexity and the multi-factor nature of diseases as well as the complexity of diet.608 This fi ts to Coppens' et al. idea that a nutrient can signifi cantly lower one risk factor in a multi-factorial disease. Based on the previous chapters, a functional food could legally be judged as a medicinal product, if it is presented for disease prevention.609 In this thesis, 'functional food' is used as a practical term to describe the products we are interested in. These are products with health effects. Legal requirements for so-called functional foods are analysed regarding A) safety and B) effi cacy/marketing. This means we end up with novel food legislation and health claim legislation, where the term 'functional food' has no relevance. In one Finnish study of 1999610, consumers found it curious that there was no legal defi nition of functional foods. Because there has been a lot of public attention surrounding functional foods, some people might have thought that functional foods were a product category with an offi cial defi nition. This was not the case so many consumers suspected that the concept was just another marketing trick to hoax consumers.611 A legal defi nition of 'functional food' might have thus strengthened the whole concept of functional foods. Instead of defi ning the term 'functional food', the Europeans have taken the approach to precisely regulate nutrition and health claims. 'Functional food' can be understood as just one type of marketing claim. The Chinese, on the contrary, have created a separate health food category for products on which health claims are allowed. The Chinese Health Food Regulation defi nes health foods as food products proven to have specifi c health functions, designed for a specifi c population to consume, but which are not for the purpose of disease treatment. Neither in the EU nor in China is it conclusive whether it is possible to bite, chew, taste or swallow the substance. The form of the object does not 606 Coppens et al. 2001, 144.607 Nutritional and Health Claim Regulation Article 2(2) (6).608 Council of Europe guidelines, 17.609 Coppens et al. 2001, 143.610 Niva - Jauho 1999.611 Niva - Jauho 1999, 46.-104-determine whether it is a food or a medicine. This is how the law sees it, and this is also how consumers see it. Consumers often do not see the two as legal concepts, even though they are widely affected by their legal defi nitions. The decision on whether the product is a foodstuff or a medicine is important, because there are separate pre-market procedures for foodstuffs and medicines with separate laws and scientifi c requirements. The functional difference between a foodstuff and a medicine is simultaneously a difference in the marketing claim. The function, the product effi cacy, is the marketing message. As stated above, one cannot make medicinal claims on foods. It is similarly true that: one cannot make health claims on medicinal products. The Finnish report on Article 13 health claims contains various claims on products that are considered medicinal according to the Medicines Agency. This is because they contain ingredients listed in the Pharmacopoeias and/or prevent, treat or cure diseases according to scientifi c studies.612 The operators do not see their products as medicines, but sell or plan to sell them as foods using health claims. However, this is not possible if the product has medicinal functions. After the categorisation decision (foodstuff/medicine), one cannot choose between a health claim and a medicinal claim. As Tuori points out, legal concepts are not innocent: they confer rights and obligations. Concepts frame a legal issue and place it in a certain normative context, at the same time limiting the possible solutions to regulatory issues.613 This is the case with functional foods and the issue of how to regulate them. The concepts of 'food' and 'medicine' are part of the legal culture, and limit our ability to solve the questions of safety and effi cacy of functional foods. Therefore, the concepts themselves need to be critically examined. Legal reasoning and justifi cation can adhere to sources of law, legal concepts, legal principles, or ideological choices. These can be seen as levels, where sources of law form the ground level as they are most attached to positive law, and where different types of arguments (for example: linguistic, systemic, teleological, moral) are relevant and typical on different levels of justifi cation.614 We are of the view that all argument types are relevant when legally defi ning the concepts of foodstuff and medicine. Linguistically, legal defi nitions create meanings and legal categories that are not the same as in everyday language. Coherence naturally requires the meaning of the concepts to be the same across all legislation in a certain legal system. This is the systemic argument. However, the legal concepts of foodstuff and medicine as against each other will change through time, based on practical, economical, and moral reasons. Grounds for the strict separation of foods and medicines appear to have changed, which allows us to consider changes in the legal concepts. On legislators' wish, the two concepts could be replaced by three concepts, one concept, or no legal concept at all. In the last case, we would focus on safety and effi cacy of for example berries, herbs, and chemical substances without the need to categorise fi rst. The two legal concepts originally evolved in different circumstances compared to the present. In times of fi rst food laws (for example in Finland in the 1940s), health-effects of foods were not widely established, and there was no functional food business. The concepts of food and medicine are also currently used in Chinese law, even 612 Report on health claims used in marketing of foodstuffs in Finland, page 25.613 Tuori 2000, 310.614 See Raitio 2006, 30-35, on justifi cation levels and argument types.-105-though Chinese tradition clearly speaks against the strict separation. The concepts of food and medicine came to China in the 1980s from Western laws. Both in the EU and in China, there are products that can be sold either as food or medicine, depending on whether they are used by and marketed to healthy vs. sick people as is the case with garlic, for example. Still, there are the two legal categories that marketers and the administrators must recognise. One product cannot be a food and a medicine at the same time, two of the same products can. The rationality of this deserves critique. -107-4 SAFETY OF FOODSTUFFS AND MEDICINES Safety of foodstuffs and medicines is a highly important issue to consumers. New ingredients in particular in functional foods, herbal medicines, etc. might be hazardous to health. It is possible to overdose on even healthy products or ingredients.4.1 General Product Safety4.1.1 EuropeIn the EU, directive 2001/95/EC615 governs general product safety. The directive sets responsibilities on both the producers and distributors of products. They must be aware of the qualities and use of the products, give adequate information to consumers, and take dangerous products off the market.616 This means they must themselves be active in ensuring product safety. The general product directive applies to products that are: intended for consumers or likely to be used by consumers, and -supplied in the course of a commercial activity - 617. Among other consumer products, the directive applies to foodstuffs, medicines, and everything in between, including functional foods. However, the general product safety directive applies only where there are no specifi c provisions with the same objective in rules of Community law. Where products are subject to specifi c safety requirements imposed by Community legislation, the general product safety directive applies only to the aspects and risks not covered by those requirements.618 615 Directive 2001/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 3 December 2001. Applicable as from 15 January 2004.616 Article 5 of the directive.617 Article 2 (a). The exact defi nition of "product" is "any product - including in the context of providing a service - which is intended for consumers or likely, under reasonably foreseeable conditions, to be used by consumers even if not intended for them, and is supplied or made available, whether for consideration or not, in the course of a commercial activity, and whether new, used or reconditioned".618 Article 1(2).-108-Requirements for safe foodstuffs and medicines are usually to be found in EU food and medicine law. However, the general product safety directive might also still have its role regarding these products. According to preamble 5 of the directive, it is very diffi cult to adopt Community legislation for every product which exists or which may be developed. That is why "there is a need for a broad-based, legislative framework of a horizontal nature to deal with such products, and also to cover lacunae, in particular pending revision of the existing specifi c legislation, and to complement provisions in existing or forthcoming specifi c legislation, in particular with a view to ensuring a high level of protection of safety and health of consumers, as required by Article 95 of the Treaty"619. According to Article 3(1) of the general product safety directive, "producers shall be obliged to place only safe products on the market". In the absence of a specifi c EU law governing the safety of a product, the product shall be deemed safe if it conforms to national law of the Member State in whose territory the product is marketed620. If there is no Member State law, safety assessment is based on European and member state standards, Commission recommendations, product safety codes of good practice, the state of the art and technology, and reasonable consumer expectations621. There is a safeguard clause included in the directive: even if the product complies with all of the above-mentioned norms and criteria, the competent authorities of the Member States can still restrict marketing of the product, or require its withdrawal from the market. This is if there is evidence that, despite such conformity to norms, the product is dangerous.622 In general marketing law, a safeguard clause like this is not included because it leads to restrictions on free movement of goods, see chapter 5 below. 4.1.2 China In China, general product safety is regulated by the Consumer Protection Law (1993) and by the Product Quality Law (1993, amended 2000). The Chinese consumer protection law can be seen as instructions for three different actors: consumers themselves, marketers of consumer products, and control authorities. According to Article 7 of the Consumer Protection Law, the consumer has the right to purchase only safe products: "In purchasing and utilising commodities or accepting services, the consumers enjoy the inviolable right of the personal and property safety. The consumers have the right to demand the commodities or services provided by the operators agree with the requirements of ensuring the personal and property safety." Article 18 states the same from the viewpoint of the sellers: "The operators shall guarantee that the commodities or services they provide agree with the requirements of ensuring the personal and property safety. In regard to the commodities or 619 Preamble 5 of the directive.620 Article 3(2) of the directive.621 Article 3(3) of the directive.622 Article 3(4) of the directive. The Member States must inform the Commission of the restrictive measure taken. The Commission communicates the information to other Member States unless the Commission decides that the measure does not conform to Community law. Article 11 of the directive.-109-services which pose potential hazard to personal and property safety, the operators shall make true to fact descriptions and clear warning to the consumers, specify and label the correct method in utilising the commodities or accepting services and the method of preventing the occurrence of injury and damage. When the operators discover that the commodities or services they provide cause serious defects and might cause injury or damage to the personal and property safety even under correct utilisation of the commodities and acceptance of the services, the operators shall promptly report to relevant administrative departments and inform the consumers and take measures to prevent the occurrence of such injury and damage." Article 27 states the same one more time, from the viewpoint of the governments: "People's governments at all levels shall strengthen their supervision, prevent the occurrence of the act which hazards the personal and property safety of the consumers, and timely put an end to the act which hazards the personal and property safety of the consumers." The Chinese Product Quality Law is more specifi c when it comes to product safety. Chapter II on Product Quality Supervision states the following: "Industrial products which might endanger the health and personal or property safety must comply with the national or sector standards for safeguarding the health and personal or property safety; and in case of absence of such national or sector standards, they must comply with the requirements for safeguarding the health and personal or property safety. It is forbidden to produce or to sell industrial products which fail to comply with the standards and requirements for safeguarding the health and personal or property safety. The concrete measures therefore are provided by the State Council. "623 The producer and seller's liability is stated in chapter III: "Producers shall be liable for the quality of products they produce. The quality of a product shall satisfy the following requirements:1. being free from unreasonable dangers to the personal or property safety, and conforming to the national or sector standards for safeguarding the health and personal or property safety if such standards are available;..." Also the product labelling is important regarding product safety: there must be a warning mark or warning explanatory words in Chinese language if a product, due to improper use, might cause damage to the product itself or might endanger the personal or property safety.624 Consumer protection laws in China have been accused of being vague and unintelligible. Article 7 of the Consumer Protection Law calls on companies to maintain standards of safety defi ned as "contemporary technical and professional standards of...the sold goods launched into the market." This can be interpreted to mean that safety standards fl uctuate with the shifts of the market, and that companies are only expected to maintain the standards currently established by other companies. Article 8 states that businesses cannot be punished for falling behind raised standards established by goods entering the market at a later time. 623 Article 13.624 Product Quality Law, Article 27(5).-110-4.2 Food Safety4.2.1 EU4.2.1.1 General Rules on Food Safety According to EU General Food Regulation, food shall not be placed on the market if it is unsafe625. Food shall be deemed to be unsafe if it is considered to be: injurious to health;(a) unfi t for human consumption. (b) 626 Article 14(3) clarifi es the evaluation of safety: "In determining whether any food is unsafe, regard shall be had:to the (a) normal conditions of use of the food by the consumer and at each stage of production, processing and distribution, andto the (b) information provided to the consumer, including information on the label, or other information generally available to the consumer concerning the avoidance of specifi c adverse health effects from a particular food or category of foods." Article 14(4) takes into account also long-term and cumulative effects, plus particular consumer groups: "In determining whether any food is injurious to health, regard shall be had: not only to the probable immediate and/or short-term and/or long-term effects of that a) food on the health of a person consuming it, but also on subsequent generations;to the probable b) cumulative toxic effects;to the particular health sensitivities of a c) specifi c category of consumers where the food is intended for that category of consumers." Article 14(5) concerns mainly food going bad under time and external conditions: "In determining whether any food is unfi t for human consumption, regard shall be had to whether the food is unacceptable for human consumption according to its intended use, for reasons of contamination, whether by extraneous matter or otherwise, or through putrefaction, deterioration or decay." Article 14(6) takes the precautionary principle seriously: "Where any food which is unsafe is part of a batch, lot or consignment of food of the same class or description, it shall be presumed that all the food in that batch, lot or consignment is also unsafe, unless following a detailed assessment there is no evidence that the rest of the batch, lot or consignment is unsafe." 625 Article 14(1).626 Article 14(2).-111-Articles 14(7) to 14(9) clarify the role of more specifi c Community or Member State safety standards: Food that complies with "7. specifi c Community provisions governing food safety shall be deemed to be safe insofar as the aspects covered by the specifi c Community provisions are concerned.Conformity of a food with specifi c provisions applicable to that food shall not bar the 8. competent authorities from taking appropriate measures to impose restrictions on it being placed on the market or to require its withdrawal from the market where there are reasons to suspect that, despite such conformity, the food is unsafe.Where there are no specifi c Community provisions, food shall be deemed to be safe 9. when it conforms to the specifi c provisions of national food law of the Member State in whose territory the food is marketed, such provisions being drawn up and applied without prejudice to the Treaty, in particular Articles 28 and 30 thereof." 4.2.1.2 Biological Safety of Food: Hygiene EU legislation on biological safety of foods has been revised as of 2006 by the so called "hygiene package".