This means that foreign companies experience adverse treatment compared to Chinese companies. Discrimination comes in the form of stricter regulations and enforcement, more stringent, time consuming, or costly application and licence approval processes, exclusion from the standards setting process, and bias towards domestic goods in government procurement.89 According to Peerenboom, some of the areas listed by foreign investors are actually required of China by the WTO, while others are just wishful thinking seeking to further foreign interests90. Besides factors related to the Chinese legal culture, employment and income levels of the Chinese people will determine whether China will fulfi l its WTO obligations91.Disputes arise when trade restrictions are justifi ed by somewhat ambiguous goals such as human health. The most famous food disputes resolved by the WTO Dispute Settlement Body are the 'hormones in beef case'92 of 1998 and the 'sardine case'93 of 2002. The EC banning beef hormones was not justifi ed according to the SPS agreement, nor was the EC restriction of the use of the term 'sardine' justifi ed according to the TBT agreement, because neither was based on Codex. Here we see the connection between Codex standards and WTO disputes. With regard to China, absence of disputes against China is seen as a sign of China's reasonably effective implementation of the WTO rules94. Lack of disputes could also be a sign of lack of confi dence on the WTO system. Jackson is of the view that WTO members do trust the dispute settlement procedures, and sees dispute resolution as the heart of the WTO95.If WTO law is breached, the primary obligation is to bring the unlawful measure into conformity with WTO law. If a state does not implement the ruling of the Dispute Settlement Body, the WTO agreements provide for remedies: compensation or countermeasures. Both are temporary, emphasising that the primary obligation is to remove the unlawfulness. Compensation is preferred to countermeasures, but as compensation must be agreed between the parties of the dispute, countermeasures are often the only alternative in practice.96Trade sanctions, which proved to be ineffi cient against large trade powers97, are anticipated to be inadequate against China. The WTO mechanisms generally resolve whether certain national legislation contravenes WTO agreements. The WTO does not resolve issues such as hierarchy of norms, competences of authorities, resources for implementation, or enforcement of judgments.98 These general legal issues remain the important factors of legal risk management that foreign businesses must face in China.88 Qingjian 2002, vi.89 US-China Business Council 2008, 10.90 Peerenboom 2008 b, 8.91 Qingjiang 2002, 308.92 EC measures concerning meat and meat products (Hormones), WT/DS48/AB/R of 16 January 1998. (AB-1997-4).93 WT/DS231/R of 29 May 2002.94 Mertha 2008, 1.95 Jackson 1998, 59.96 Nordblad 2003, 88.97 See Lindblad analysis of the Bananas case and the Hormones case, Lindblad 2003, 99.98 Seppanen 2005, 587.-18-The EC and China are simultaneously recipients and makers of international standards. There are several parties involved in making these standards, the United States among them. This makes international food law a constant negotiation and a series of compromises. Every state pursues individual ideas on how the law should be developed. Lately Codex Alimentarius Commission has paid more attention to horizontal standards applicable to all foods. Emphasis has been placed on principles of scientifi c risk assessment, the precautionary principle, traceability, and views from consumers and NGOs. Besides plain natural science, other legitimate factors are considered, such as economics and characteristics of different regions and countries.99The precautionary principle and the need to consider factors other than science in determining food standards are something the EU has demanded, and the United States have resisted100. The EU earlier argued in the above-mentioned EU - Hormones case that the precautionary principle is a customary rule of international law or at least a general principle of international law. The EU had prohibited import of beef hormones. According to the precautionary principle, WTO member states are allowed to take precautionary measures in the absence of full scientifi c certainty. According to Wanhua, the EU lost the hormone case because the precautionary principle was still considered to await authoritative formulation.101 The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety entered into force in 2003, and clearly embraces the precautionary principle. The Cartagena Protocol refers to the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development 1992 in this issue, and the Rio Declaration was already written in 1992. It seems that those in favour of the precautionary principle see it emerging in the 1990s at the latest, and those against it still resist its existence.The role of the WTO in building international legal principles is under discussion. The WTO can either focus on resolving disputes in a bilateral and practical case-to-case approach, or it can build international rule of law. Consistency and abiding by the rules is integral for the credibility of the Dispute Settlement Body102. Nordblad is of the view that the WTO needs stronger remedies to be able to achieve rule-oriented dispute settlement. He is also of the view that effective remedies are those that repair damage and induce compliance, and thus compensation and countermeasures are both needed. Compensation and countermeasures should be considered separate issues. Rule integrity would be enhanced by the situation where countermeasures were free of the compensatory element.1032.1.2 Global Standards2.1.2.1 ISO StandardsThe TBT Agreement requires that technical regulations and international standards are developed and implemented in a non- discriminatory manner, and without creating unnecessary 99 Kan - Zhang 2002.100 Poli 2004, 614. The European Community applied for full membership of Codex so that it could better pursue its goals, which often clash with US goals.101 Wanhua 2002. 102 See Palmujoki 2003, 719, as regards the role of the WTO dispute resolution body in evaluating the acceptability of national environmental legislation.103 Nordblad 2003, 103.-19-obstacles to trade. The TBT Agreement also recommends the recourse to international standards wherever possible while drafting technical regulations.104 ISO/IEC105 standards are particularly referred to in the TBT Agreement106. ISO is the International Organisation for Standardisation, and has published several standards related to the food industry. For example the International Standard ISO 22000:2005 is promoted in the following manner: "food safety management system meeting the requirements of the Standard could be the entry ticket to increased business in the global market and participation in cross-border food supply chains"107.108.ISO is a non-governmental organisation "forming a bridge between the public and private sectors", and a network of the national standards institutes of its 157 member countries. Many of the member institutes are part of the governmental structure of their countries, while others have been set up by national partnerships of industry associations.109 Legally describing ISO standards is diffi cult. They are not agreements between states as Codex standards, and they are not self-regulating because governments are involved. They are followed voluntarily, although abiding by a standard might be required in practice. In any case, ISO standards can be defi ned as soft law.The EU sees international standards as a positive phenomenon. According to the European Commission, it will, in co-operation with the European Standards Organisations, "continue to encourage the development of international standards and promote their use". International standards shall be transposed into European standards and European law, "wherever possible". And vice versa, the EU is willing to diffuse European standards internationally, particularly to neighbouring countries.110 The lead in developing globally accepted standards is seen as a lead to markets.2.1.2.2 Food Standards: CodexCodex Alimentarius is an international organisation governing foodstuffs and operating under United Nations organisations FAO111 and WHO112. Codex documents are global food law113. Codex Alimentarius pursues to protect the health of consumers and to promote fair international food trade.114 Codex Alimentarius Commission is the highest decision-making body, where the 104 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 7.105 "The International Electrotechnical Commission is the international standards and conformity assessment body for all fi elds of electrotechnology." http://www.iec.ch/.106 Annex 1 of the Agreement.107 ISO web page. http://www.iso.org/iso/publications_and_e-products/checklists.htm.108 ISO 22000 is the standard on food safety management systems, including requirements for any operator in the food chain. Other important standards related to the food industry are: ISO/TS 22003:2007, which includes requirements for bodies that provide audits and certifi cation of food safety management systems, ISO 22005:2007, which is about traceability in the feed and food chain, and ISO 24276:2006, which standardises methods of analysis for detecting GMOs. ISO web page. http://www.iso.org/iso/catalogue_detail?csnumber=35466.109 ISO web page. http://www.iso.org/iso/about.htm.110 Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 3-4.111 Food and Agriculture Organization.112 World Health Organization.113 Codex Alimentarius means food law.114 www.codexalimentarius.net.-20-representatives of the approximately 180115 member states meet. The Commission assembles every year. The Codex Alimentarius Commission is the most important global actor drafting food standards. The European Community, represented by the Commission116, EU Member States separately, and China are members of Codex.Codex documents are in the forms of standards, codes of practice, guidelines, principles, recommendations, etc. Standards often relate to product features and can be very precise setting for example MRLs (maximum residue levels) for pesticides or medicinal substances in foods. For example there is a standard for canned baby food and a standard for frozen spinach. Codes of practice guide procedure concerning production, preparation, transport and storage, including HACCP systems. Guidelines exist on nutrition and health claims117whereas principles are more general and relate to import and export certifi cates. The division between different document types is not important as none of the Codex documents are directly binding on food industry operators. All of the above-mentioned document types are listed under 'standards' on the Codex web page118.What makes Codex rules more important is the fact that they are specifi cally referred to in two WTO119 agreements: the Technical Barriers to Trade Agreement (TBT Agreement120) and the Agreement on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement121). This means Codex standards are used as a reference in trade disputes at the WTO.122 It is important for the EC and China to defend their interests in Codex, as they are also members of the WTO123. The role of the Codex Commission is to provide a political forum to debate issues. The role of the WTO Dispute Settlement Body is to ultimately resolve the issues that cannot be agreed upon.2.1.2.3 Medicine StandardsThe above-mentioned WTO agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (the TBT agreement) applies also to medicines. For example, in the November 2007 meeting of the Technical Barriers to Trade Committee, Columbia raised a concern on Argentina's regulations for 115 Counted on Codex web page http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/members_area.jsp?lang=EN, April 2007.116 More precisely its Directorate General on Health and Consumer Protection.117 CAC/GL 23. 1997. Revised 2004, amended 2008.118 http://www.codexalimentarius.net/web/standard_list.do?lang=en.119 World Trade Organization.120 The TBT Agreement covers all mandatory and voluntary technical regulations and standards, including testing and certifi cation procedures. The aim of the agreement is that these technical measures do not create unnecessary obstacles to trade. Wanhua 2002, 316. 121 The SPS Agreement defi nes the rights and obligations of members with respect to application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures. This means laws and standards on food safety, animal health and plant health. 122 World Health Organisation web page. Biotech: 20 questions. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/. 123 The EC Member States including Finland have been WTO members since its inception in January 1995, and China since December 2001. WTO has 150 members as at June 2009.-21-pharmaceuticals. These regulations involve, for example, application of tariffs or fees for undertaking verifi cation visits to plants located in the countries of origin124.The WHO is involved in developing international medicinal products law. They develop international norms, standards and guidelines, and provide guidance, technical assistance and training to support countries in adopting these standards on medicinal products.125 The WHO also organises international conferences of drug regulatory authorities, where medicinal products law is discussed. The outcome of these meetings is "Recommendations", in which various areas of medicinal products laws are discussed. They take the form "Member States should...". In 2006, it was agreed that member states should support clinical studies of herbal medicines126, and seek effi cient sanctions for false drug advertising, particularly internet advertising127. According to European law, the European Medicines Agency (EMEA) shall "participate actively in international scientifi c dialogue and to contribute to international scientifi c harmonisation and technical cooperation with the WHO"128. China is also involved in the WHO discussions and drafting recommendations on medicinal products law.The ICH (International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use) is a project for global harmonisation of the medicine authorisation procedures. Its Steering Committee selects the topics for international harmonisation. However, the ICH is not global: it brings together the regulatory authorities of Europe, Japan and the United States, in addition to experts from these three regions129. In the EU, draft ICH guidelines are subject to EU-wide public consultation. Once adopted by the CHMP130 of the EMEA, the ICH guidelines have the same status as other European scientifi c guidelines and replace existing guidelines on the subjects covered. ICH guidelines may also be developed on subjects that do not come within the scope of scientifi c guidelines.131The EU and China also work bilaterally on issues of medicine law. The agreement on "Consultation and Cooperation Mechanism" was signed in 2008. In 2009, the Chinese SFDA met with DG Enterprise of the EC in the fi rst annual high-level working conference under the "mechanism". According to the SFDA, the conference announced the achievements of the medicine and medical device workgroups, and discussed establishment of a workgroup on cosmetics. In addition, the EMEA was present.132124 World Trade Organization. Committee on Technical Barriers to Trade. Specifi c Trade Concerns Relating to Access of Pharmaceuticals to the Argentine Market. Communication from Colombia. G/TBT/W/280. 30 October 2007. 125 WHO web page. http://www.who.int/medicines/areas/quality_safety/regulation_legislation/en/index.html.126 Icdra. 12th International Conference of Drug Regulatory Authorities. Recommendations. Page 5.127 Icdra. 12th International Conference of Drug Regulatory Authorities. Recommendations. Page 8.128 Regulation 726/2004/EC, preamble 27.129 ICH web page : http://www.ich.org.130 The Committee for Human Medicinal Products.131 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004. Page 8.132 SFDA web page at: http://former.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W43879541/A64029996.html.-22-2.2 EU Law on Foodstuffs and Medicines2.2.1 Hard law133European law on foodstuffs and medicines is a puzzle consisting of EU laws and Member State Laws. Both consist of hard law (binding) and soft law (non-binding) instruments. European Union law is prepared by the European Commission. Food safety is under the competence of Directorate General on Health and Consumer Protection (DG SANCO)134. DG SANCO is responsible for public health, general consumer protection, and food safety in particular. Medicine law is drafted by the Commission's Directorate General for Enterprise & Industry (DG Enterprise)135. The main goal of DG Enterprise is to ensure competitiveness of European enterprises and facilitate job creation and economic growth136.The EU Member States also have their own food and medicine laws. The EU has 27 Member States as of 2007. The division of work between EU level and member state level legislators is the basic question in EU law. According to Nedergaard, European cooperation clearly has federalist as well as intergovernmental traits. The mixed traits refl ect the basic contrast in the EU between the desire for some degree of supranational governance and the Member States' perceived need for control.137 The EU cannot operate without competences, which are outlined in the articles in the EC Treaty. If a question does not belong to EU competence, then Member States have the authority to decide upon it.The competence of the Commission to act in the area of food law can be based on Treaty Articles 37, 95, 152 and 153. Sometimes food law is based on more than one Article, such as Article 95 on creating the internal market, and Article 152 on safeguarding public health. Article 37 concerns agriculture and Article 153 consumer protection. The central legislation on medicines from consumer perspective138 is based on Articles 95 and 152. Apparently, food and medicine laws are not seen primarily as consumer issues but rather as issues of free trade and public health.Certain questions fall under the exclusive competence of the Community. On food and medicine issues, both the EU and the Member States have the competence to enact legislation. In this case, the principle of subsidiarity applies, meaning the EU shall take action only when it is more effective than action taken at national, regional or local levels139. In case of contradiction, the principle of primacy applies: EU law is to be enforced instead of contradictory national law.140 Another important principle is the principle of proportionality: the EU involvement must be limited to what is necessary to achieve the objectives of the 133 Hard law here means regulations that are enforceable by courts.134 The Commissioner in charge of DG SANCO at the moment (2009) is Androulla Vassiliou.135 The Commissioner at the moment (2009) is Gunter Verheugen.136 European Commission web page.