The plant was kept in the home to represent the goddess Virinda Tulsi and used during prayers as an offering to the Gods. During a research visit to a commercial tulsi supplier in Bangalore, India (April 2014), the problem of tulsi sales and waste were highlighted. Hinduism is the main religion in India (Census of India, 2011), with over 80% of the population identified as being Hindu. The demand for tulsi plants and leaves to be used as offerings to the gods during prayers and religious ceremonies is a big business. Therefore, tulsi needs to be quickly and widely available. Once the plants and leaves have been used for the religious ceremonies they are usually discarded as waste. Dr Velusamy Sundaresan and his researcher team at the Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Bangalore, have tried to explore the possibilities of recycling the vast amounts of tulsi which are being wasted; however, progress has been slow and issues with authentication have been highlighted (Sundaresan, 2014). What are the medicinal benefits of using Tulsi? The significant proportion of participants (87%) were aware of the diverse range of health conditions for which tulsi could be used. Participant B02 made reference to tulsi being the cure to all conditions as it was a God given plant; this opinion was shared by many others who were aware of both the religious and medicinal values of the plant. Participants listed the use of tulsi for: asthma, chest infections, sore throat, cough, colds and flu, fever, diabetes, skin conditions (e.g. eczema and itchy skin), mouth freshener, excessive stomach acid production, and period pains. 172 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra For many of the conditions the most common way to consume tulsi was by infusing it in warm water or tea. For conditions such as cough, sore throat, and the use as a mouth freshener - one or two leaves could be chewed. For skin conditions participants recommended bathing in tulsi infused water or rubbing the leaf directly onto the affected area of the skin. A small minority of participants (n=2) did not state any medicinal benefits of tulsi as they said they did not know any; they said they only knew the religious uses and had never heard about it being used as medicine. Is there any other information which you think is important/ interesting to know about Tulsi? Participants were given the opportunity to share any additional information about tulsi. Table 4-2 outlines the comments participants made, including some of the 'terms and conditions' to keeping a tulsi plant. Table 4-2 Participants Comments about Tulsi Participant Comments B02 -The only thing tulsi maa needs is water. No artificial food, chemicals or fertilisers are needed. -If I have a cough I just take a few leaves and chew them. -Keep the tulsi in a warm place; I keep mine near the radiator. B03 -Tulsi mala has 108 beads made from the woody stems of the tulsi plant. It is used to help you concentrate when you pray. -Tulsi should be kept in the centre of the home. B04 -Do not touch tulsi on a Sunday. -If you keep the seeds you must do the plants marriage. -Can make holy water blessed with tulsi. B05 -Tulsi represents lord Krishna so I tie a rakhi (cotton thread) on the plant, as I do not have any brothers of my own. -The plant does not survive in all homes only the lucky people can grow this plant in their home. -Cannot pick leaves in the evening. B06 -Cannot keep it outside as will not grow so have to keep it inside the house. L10 -If a lady is on her period and she touches or waters the tulsi, it will die. So do not touch the plant during this time. B102 -It is a very important plant to my family - it is maintained very well and my parents nurture their plants. As it has a religious purpose it is very valuable for us. B105 -It's a very sacred plant for us; it means you're very lucky if it grows. These comments illustrate the religious significance of tulsi and the traditions associated with keeping the plant which are evidently closely followed by communities in the UK at present. 173 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Summary of The Interview Results The interviews have helped gain a deeper understanding of why tulsi is so important to people and why it might be kept in the home. Evidently, a strong religious affiliation for Hindus means the plant has a special place in many of the participants' homes; although, this may not be the only reason for keeping tulsi. The numerous health benefits associated with tulsi may also be a reason for keeping the plant. Family, friends, and religion all have a role in transmitting the knowledge of the uses and benefits of tulsi. The 'terms and conditions' attached to the prosperous growth of the plant may just be a myth; but, they still have a strong precedence amongst SA communities in the UK today. The results have revealed that tulsi is culturally, medicinally and commercially an important plant. Several types of tulsi samples were collected from participants. As different varieties are available, the importance of selecting the correct species will now be explored by looking at the DNA of the plant species. 174 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.6.2 DNA Authentication of Tulsi Samples The following section details the findings from the DNA analysis. It will describe how samples were collected and classified, some of the challenges faced during the study, and the achievements of using this novel molecular technique. Classification of Tulsi samples A total of 111 tulsi samples were collected through the duration of this research (Appendix 12). The samples collected were categorised as community, commercial, reference, or miscellaneous; 26 community samples were collected from participants encountered throughout the research period who donated their personal tulsi plants, leaves, or seeds. Forty-seven commercial samples included products such as teas, tablets, capsules, soaps, shampoos, creams, and oils, these were bought from shops, markets, and online; in the UK and abroad. Raw tulsi material ready to be used in commercial products which was obtained from Pukka Herbs, was classified in the commercial samples sub-group. Thirty-three Ocimum samples obtained from sources where the plants had been authenticated by expert botanists formed the 'reference' specimens. Six samples which were not identified as community, commercial, or reference were labelled as miscellaneous; these samples were collected by the researcher from various places while travelling throughout the research period. Of the total 111 samples collected, 29 samples were excluded from the analysis as the quality of DNA of the sample was very poor and in many cases no DNA was isolated during the extraction process (Appendix 12). Two of the samples were seeds which failed to germinate on numerous occasions; a DNA extraction from the seeds was attempted, but was unsuccessful. It is difficult to extract DNA from seeds due to the high level of primary (polysaccharides and lipids) and secondary metabolites (e.g. in the case of Lamiaceae, caffeic acid and other polyphenols), as well as proteins, which can degrade the quality of the DNA (Hassan et al., 2012). These samples did not give a positive PCR result and the lack of DNA in the sample was confirmed by results from the NanoDrop analysis. A potential reason why DNA was not extracted from the samples could have been due to the types of products used, e.g. soap, syrup, capsules, and oils; in which the DNA may have been degraded during manufacturing processing. 175 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The plastid matK and rbcL Regions The Consortium for the Barcode of Life (CBOL) Plant Working Group, proposed two coding regions from the plastid genome - matK and rbcL as ''core barcodes'' for plants (Kress et al., 2005; Chase et al., 2005; Hollingsworth, 2011). Thus, initially the matK and rbcL regions were selected for PCR amplification and DNA analysis of the Ocimum samples. The first 13 samples collected were a mixture of community and commercial samples. The PCR results for these samples were highly variable (Figure 4-12) and did not sequence as well as expected (Figure 4-13). Poor sequence data could not be used to search the reference DNA database for identification of the species, or to create contigs. The few samples which had good quality sequences which could be used for identification were put into BLAST; where most of the samples were identified as being similar to one reference O. basilicum sequence. No suitable O. tenuiflorum reference sequences were found in the database. Key: 1. Negative control 2. Positive control 3. - 4. B08 5. B07 6. B02 7. B00 8. B05 9. B01 10. B02a 11. B03 12. B04 13. B07 14. C20 15. C08 The image illustrates the results of the gel electrophoresis of community and commercial tulsi samples amplified by the matK and rbcL regions. Negative control - distilled water; positive control - DNA sample known to amplify. Figure 4-12 Gel Image of matK and rbcL PCR Products Sample B06g represents a tulsi sample collected from participant B06 (Appendix 12). Figure 4-13 Section of the Electropherogram for the Forward rbcL Sequence for Sample B06g 176 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Reference Ocimum Barcodes During the initial background research it was clear that there was a lack of reliable reference barcodes to identify the tulsi samples, in the existing DNA databases (GenBank and BOLD). This meant reference DNA barcodes for the Ocimum species needed to be created before any identification of unknown samples could commence. Thus, authenticated Ocimum plants, seeds, leaves, dried material, and DNA were collected to create the reference Ocimum DNA sequences. During later stages of this research, in 2014, reference sequences were submitted by various sources into GenBank (Appendix 14), these were also used for the identification of unknown samples. The reference sequences created throughout this study will also be submitted to the GenBank and BOLD databases. Creating Reference Ocimum barcodes A range of authenticated Ocimum samples (n=33) were obtained and used to create the reference DNA sequences (Appendix 12 and 13). When a good quality DNA sequence was obtained, three reads were ordered (usually, two forward and one reverse read) to produce a reliable contig (Figure 4-14). The consensus sequence was analysed to identify any conflicts between the three sequences which needed to be resolved before it was used as the reference DNA sequence; to compare with other samples and produce a multiple alignment. Full DNA sequences and multiple alignments can be found in Appendix 13. The electropherograms of three ITS sequences (one reverse ITS 4 and two forward ITS 1 reads) for reference O. tenuiflorum sample G26 from Professor Peter Nick. Figure 4-14 Image of a Section of a Contig Produced from Three Electropherograms of ITS Sequences from a Reference O. tenuiflorum Sample 177 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra For some species more than one authenticated specimen was available (i.e. from the reference specimens and DNA sequences on GenBank) and the sequences were all identical or very similar, a consensus sequence was made (Figure 4-15). Figure 4-15 shows part of a multiple alignment created with the DNA sequences of seven different authenticated O. tenuiflorum samples showing all the sequences were identical. The consensus sequence from the authenticated Ocimum samples was then used as the reference sequence to compare unknown tulsi samples with (Figure 4-16). Figure 4-16 is a multiple alignment of several samples of which the species were unknown, with the O. tenuiflorum consensus reference sequence. The alignment identifies some differences between the reference and query sequences; the illustration below shows the process involved in checking whether or not the base differences are reliable. The alignment of reference O. tenuiflorum ITS sequences represents four samples (G26, G27, G36 and G37) from Professor Peter Nick and three samples (V93, V94 and V99) from Dr. Eike Reich. Figure 4-15 Multiple Alignment of Several Authenticated O. tenuiflorum ITS Sequences Differences in bases need to be checked against the original sample sequence. From the original electropherogram of sample B15b, two peaks can be seen at base position 173, where the base difference is on the alignment. Therefore, it can be concluded that there should be a C instead of a T at this base position. The multiple alignment represents a reference O. tenuiflorum sequence (a consensus of seven different reference samples) aligned with several tulsi samples for which the species were unknown (Oci_unk). Key: Oci_unk_ sample identification code_extraction number_ region amplified Figure 4-16 Section of a Multiple Alignment of ITS Sequences of Reference O. tenuiflorum Samples Used to Identify the Species of Unknown Tulsi Samples 178 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra From the example shown (Figure 4-16) the base difference at position 173 may be a technical error as two peaks can be seen at this position on the original electropherogram of the three sequences for sample B15b; or there may really be two different bases at this position, suggesting a polymorphism is present in the species. The quality of the electropherogram is important in helping to identify how to proceed with the analysis. In this instance the T peak seen at position 173 may be a shoulder from the previous T base continuing across the electropherogram. ITS Sequencing of Reference Ocimum Specimen Thirty three reference Ocimum specimens were obtained; of which 14 samples were successfully amplified with the ITS primers (ITS1 and ITS4) (Table 4-3). The sequence data for O. tenuiflorum and O. gratissimum was of high quality and the differences in the sequences can be clearly seen (Figure 4-17) along the entire sequence (546 bases), this alignment shows 75 base differences which clearly portray the differences between the two species (Appendix 13). A further twelve Ocimum sequences were obtained from GenBank (Appendix 14) for comparison with the reference specimens collected. O. gratissimum and O. selloi sequences matched the reference sequences from GenBank. However, the reference O. tenuiflorum, O. Oci_ten_Ref_7_ITS represents a consensus sequence of seven reference O. tenuiflorum sequences aligned in Figure 4-15 with Oci_gra_Ref_G30_768_ITS which represents the ITS sequence of the reference O. gratissimum specimen G30. Figure 4-17 Multiple Alignment of O. tenuiflorum and O. gratissimum ITS Sequences 179 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra basilicum, and O. americanum sequences did not align with the sequences for the same species from GenBank. Upon further investigation of the O. basilicum samples, it was noted that all four of the sequences (one reference specimen from Peter Nick and three sequences from GenBank) were very different (Figure 4-18); this could be explained by the complex nature of the ITS region, natural variance within the Ocimum species, or misidentification of the samples. Some of the reference Ocimum species did not sequence as well as O. tenuiflorum and O. gratissimum with the ITS region. The sequence data was not good enough to produce reliable reference DNA barcodes (Figure 4-19). For good practice a combination of forward and reverse sequences should be used to produce a contig, the electropherograms in Figure 4-19 illustrates the problem of obtaining good quality reads in both directions. The multiple alignment represents four O. basilicum reference sequences - three sequences from GenBank and G34 from Professor Peter Nick. Figure 4-18 Multiple Alignment of Several O. basilicum ITS Sequences The electropherograms represent poor ITS sequences for three reference Ocimum species (O. africanum, O. citridorum, and O. kilimandscharicum). Figure 4-19 Electropherograms of Three Reference Ocimum Species with Poor ITS Sequencing Data 180 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra trnH-psbA Sequencing of Reference Ocimum Specimen Of the 33 reference Ocimum specimens obtained, 25 samples were successfully amplified using the trnH-psbA region. As the sequencing results were of high quality for most of the reference Ocimum specimen, reliable contigs and consensus sequences were made (Figure 4-20). Several reference Ocimum DNA sequences were also available on GenBank (Appendix 14). Reference specimens obtained and sequenced matched with reference DNA sequences available on GenBank, included: O. tenuiflorum, O. gratissimum, O. basilicum, O. kilimandscharicum, O. africanum, O. americanum, and O. citridorum. Therefore, these sequences were aligned with the reference consensus sequences and used to identify unknown Ocimum species. Table 4-3 summarises whether or not a sequence was created for the reference specimens using the ITS and trnH-psbA regions. The identification of the samples was confirmed by aligning the sequences in a multiple alignment and also by entering the sequence into BLAST to compare it with other reference samples. Once a consensus sequence was created from the reference specimens these were used to identify the species of tulsi samples collected throughout the investigation. All of the sequences were also put into BLAST to confirm the identity of the species. Samples which did not match 100% with the reference sequences created were identified by their closest match to reference sequences on the database. The electropherograms represent trnH-psbA sequences for three reference Ocimum species (O. africanum, O. citridorum, and O. kilimandscharicum).