It is an occupationalhazard among celery pickers.SPINACH. Spinacia oleracea is probably the mostcommonly consumed of the "greens." Spinach isnative to Southwest Asia. It was first cultivated inPersia, thousands of years ago. It came to Europe viathe Arab world. Italians are said to be especially fondof spinach, which gives rise to the phrase a laflorentine, which means a dish made with spinach.The amount of soluble oxalate in its tissues can behigh enough to cause poisoning under improperdietary conditions. About half of the U. S. crop isgrown here in California; Texas is the other leadingproducer.NEW ZEALAND SPINACH. Tetragonia tetra-gonioides is a member of the ice plant family and notat all related to spinach. It is native to the islands ofthe Pacific and to New Zealand. It was named byCaptain Cook when he was in that part of the world in1771. Here in California, you will encounter this plantas a weedy escape along the coast.EDIBLE AERIAL STEMSASPARAGUS. Asparagus officinalis, a member of thelily family, is native to the eastern Mediterranean. Itsyoung shoots, spears, are typically boiled or steamed. It has been a favorite food plant since the time of theancient Greeks and Romans. Originally it was amedicinal plant, eaten for its diuretic effects. Our mostpopular cultivar, "Mary Washington," was developedby the U. S. Dept. of Agriculture. Asparagus has otheruses. Its seeds have been used as a coffee substituteand its stems for paper-making.And then, there is that little problem associated witheating asparagus. As Lemery noted in 1702, "Theycause a filthy and disagreeable Smell in the Urine, asevery Body knows." As it turns out, some of ussecrete this smelly urine, and some of us do not.Perhaps it was under genetic control. It now appearsthat all of us make this sulfur-containing compound(methyl mercaptan), but we vary in our ability todetect it. In other words, this explains why some ofyou know what I am talking about in this paragraphand others are scratching their heads.Caesar Augustus defined haste as "quicker than youcan cook asparagus. "FLOWER CLUSTERS/HEADSARTICHOKE. Cynara scolymus is native to theMediterranean and to the Canary Islands. Today it iswidely planted and grows best along sea coasts. Theplant is a member of the thistle tribe of the sunflowerfamily. The edible portion is a head of tiny flowerssurrounded by a series of bracts, modified leaves. Welike to eat a coating found on the bracts and theartichoke heart, the tissue to which the immatureflowers are attached. When the artichoke was firstgrown, it was the regular foliage leaves that wereconsumed. The plant has little food value. It has beensuggested that, "Eating an artichoke is like getting toknow someone really well!"CARDOON. A close relative of the artichoke is thecardoon (Cynara cardunculus). The blanched leavesare the edible part of this plant. They are covered withblack plastic bags or with newspaper to keep out thesunlight. The pale green leaves are typically harvestedin the fall. They taste like artichoke x asparagus xsalsify. CAULIFLOWER. Brassica oleracea var. botrytis is anOld World plant, probably native to the Near East. Wehave been eating cauliflower for at least 2500 years.It reached the U. S. in the 17th century, being grownfirst in Long Island, New York. The edible portion, the curd, is a mass of undevelopedflower buds that are attached to branches that are, inturn, from a central stalk. They come in white, green,and purple. The surrounding leaves are used to coverthe curd in the cvs. that will be white. Cutting off thesunlight prevents chlorophyll and other pigments fromforming. The curd may be eaten raw or cooked.Broccoflower is a cauliflower x broccoli hybrid.As Mark Twain noted, "Cauliflower is nothing morethan cabbage with a college education. "-67-EDIBLE FLOWERS, LEAVES, AND AERIAL STEMSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Family Commentsartichoke (Cynara scolymus) Sunflower Domesticated in Mediterraneanarugula (Eruca vesicaria) Mustard Pungent leaves; Mediterraneanasparagus (Asparagus officinalis) Lily Native to Mediterraneanbamboo (Bambusa and other genera) Grass Young shoots widely usedbroccoli (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Stems, lvs, and flws usedBrussel sprouts (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Leafy buds eatencabbage, Chinese (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Primarily Oriental cropcabbage, common (Brassica oleracea) Mustard In use for 8000 yearscabbage palm (various genera) Palm Central leafy bud eatencardoon (Cynara cardunculus) Sunflower Blanched leaves eatencauliflower (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Immature flower cluster eatencelery (Apium graveolens) Carrot Domesticated in Mediterraneanchard (Beta vulgaris var. cicla) Goosefoot Beet relative without swollen rootchervil (Anthriscus cerefolium) Carrot Native to Europe and Near EastChinese-spinach (Amaranthus tricolor) Pigweed Long use in Orientchives (Allium schoenoprasum) Lily Native to Old Worldcollards (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Southern U. S. favoritecress, garden (Lepidium sativum) Mustard European salad plantcress, spring (Barbarea verna) Mustard European salad plantcress, water (Nasturtium officinale) Mustard Favorite wild edible plantdandelion (Taraxacum officinale) Sunflower Tender, young leaves eatenendive (Cichorium endivia) Sunflower Relative of chicoryescarole (Cichorium endivia) Sunflower Another name for endivekale (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Southern U. S. favoritelettuce (Lactuca sativa) Sunflower Asiatic; giant leafy bud eatenmustard, Indian (Brassica juncea) Mustard Native to Central Asiamustard, leaf (Brassica juncea) Mustard Another name for Indian mustardN. Zealand spinach (Tetragonia tetragonioides) Mollugo Native to Old Worldpak-choi (Brassica pekinensis) Mustard Also called Chinese cabbageparsley (Petroselinum crispum) Mustard Used as garnish and flavoringpe-tsai (Brassica rapa) Mustard Autumn and winter vegetablepokeweed (Phytolacca americana) Pokeweed Southern U. S. favorite; also toxicradicchio (radiccio) (Cichorium intybus) Sunflower Leaves red-purple, white-veinedrhubarb (Rheum rhabarbarum) Knotweed Petiole eaten; blade toxic!samphire (Salicornia spp.) Goosefoot Leaves and stems eaten; coastal sea kale (Crambe maritima) Mustard European plantshungiku (Chrysanthemum coronarium) Sunflower Cooked vegetable and ornamentalspinach (Spinacia oleracea) Goosefoot Leaves toxic in large amountstampala (Amaranthus tricolor) Pigweed South American favoriteudo (Aralia cordata) Spikenard Favorite in Japanwater-spinach (Ipomoea aquatica) Morning glory Native to Old Worldwitloof (Cichorium endivia) Sunflower Another name for endive-68-5.5 ! MAJOR CEREALS"All flesh is grass." (Book of Isaiah, 40:6)"No civilization worthy of the name has ever beenfounded on any agricultural basis other than thecereals." (Paul Mangelsdorf)INTRODUCTIONThe great civilizations, past and present, have beenbased upon agriculture. These agricultural systems, inturn, have been founded upon a handful of cereals orgrains. Those of the Near and Middle East, notablythose of Greece, Rome, and Egypt, were basedprimarily on wheat; as were those of Europe and laterNorth America. The well-developed agriculture of theMaya, Aztecs, and Incas rested on maize. The greatsocieties of China, India, and the Far East were basedupon rice. While all of the great civilizations cultivatedmany different kinds of plants for a variety ofpurposes, it is almost impossible to overestimate theimportance of the cereals. We devote 70% of ourfarmland to growing cereals and we derive about 50%of our calories from them. As a group they are,without question, the most important source of ourfood and they have been throughout our entirecultural history.WHY SO IMPORTANT? There are several features ofcereals that make them useful to us. They areannuals, which means that we can rely on getting acrop in a relatively short time. They are also adaptableand efficient producers of food. The yield perhectare/acre is high. Cereals are very nutritious.Grains can be easily harvested, cleaned, andprocessed.NUTRITIONAL VALUE. The cereal grain contains acarbohydrate-rich tissue called endosperm, whichserves as food for the germinating embryo. Theembryo itself contains oils and about 8-15 % protein.Vitamins and minerals are also present. The aminoacids cysteine and methionine occur at levelsadequate to meet our needs. Other amino acids,notably lysine and tryptophan, may be insufficient,depending on the cereal consumed. See the tablebelow for amino acid content. Cereals are alsodeficient in calcium and Vitamin C.TRUE AND FALSE CEREALSAll of the true cereals belong to the grass family. Itis common to recognize maize (corn), rice, and wheatas the major cereals. Barley, rye, and oats are thebetter known minor cereals. In addition to the truecereals is an artificial group of plants called the falsecereals. They are characterized by small, grain-likefruits. Sunflower and buckwheat "seeds" are perhapsthe best known examples.The most important part of the cereal plant is its seed-like fruit, the caryopsis. It is more commonly knownas a grain or a berry. It contains a single seed whoseouter coat is fused to the inner wall of the fruit. Theouter layer of the grain (ovary wall and seed coat) areoften called bran; the embryo within the grain is thegerm. Hulled and crushed grains are called groats.The caryopsis is found within a very complicatedstructure called a spikelet. It is a highly modified andreduced flower system. The spikelet is composed of acentral stalk, a series of tiny overlapping bracts, andvery small flowers. Some spikelets, as in those of therice plant, may yield only one grain; those of oats willproduce more than one. The caryopsis is typicallyenclosed by two bracts, the palea and lemma. Incommon parlance they are called hulls. These bractsmay be fused to the grain or free from it. This is nota trivial matter when it comes to the processing of thecereal grains.WHEATTriticum aestivum is most widely cultivated crop plant.It is the second oldest cereal, after barley.Archeological remains dating to 6700 B. P. have beenfound in Jarmo, Iraq. These were relatively primitivewheats. But, even the advanced bread wheat is knownfrom 5000 BCE. from the Nile Valley. Wheat wasbrought to the New World by the Spanish in 1529. Ithas been in cultivated in the United States since about1602.Today there are literally tens of thousands of cultivarsof wheat. They are classified informally as follows:Winter wheats are planted in the fall, remaindormant during the winter, and then mature in theearly summer. Winter wheats are grown in the UnitedStates from Texas to South Dakota. Spring wheat is planted in the spring and maturesthat same summer. It is adapted for growing seasonsas short as 90 days. Spring wheat is grown in thenorthern regions of the U. S. and Canada. It is arehardy as far north as the Arctic Circle.Hard wheat has a protein content of 13-16%, morethan does soft wheat. It is typically used to make longlasting breads. These cultivars are usually grown inareas of low rainfall. Soft wheat grains have about 8-11% protein andthey are often used for pastries and breads that willbe consumed quickly, such as French bread. They aregrown in more humid regions.One of the popular cereals is bulgur wheat. Itconsists of kernels that have been steamed, dried,and then crushed. In that sense, it is a kind of crackedwheat; but not all cracked wheat is bulgur wheat. It isa staple in the Middle East countries. We also see it insalads, such as tabbouleh.Semolina is made from very hard strains of durumwheat. Its flour is tough and it will not become astarchy paste when cooked. Bakery products madefrom it tend to be of a light texture. It is also used tomake a variety of puddings.Kamut is a relative of durum wheat. The name comesfrom the ancient Egyptian name for wheat. Its grainsare two or three times larger than regular wheat, itsprotein content much higher, and it also containssignificant amounts of other nutrients. Look for it inhippie food stores; otherwise it is not commonlyencountered.SPECIES OF WHEAT (TRITICUM)There are about 14-16 commonly recognized speciesof wheat. They fall easily into three groups, differing-69-in chromosome number and morphology. In Triticum,x = 7. Two of the wheats are diploid (2x = 14); eightare tetraploids (4x = 28); and six are hexaploids (6x= 42). A more detailed summary is presented below.The diploids and tetraploids are of little economicimportance, except for durum or macaroni wheat.Species (common name) Chromosome SetDiploids [2n = 2x = 14]:T. boeoticum (wild einkorn) AAT. monococcum (einkorn) AATetraploids [2n = 4x = 28]:T. dicoccoides (wild emmer wheat) AABBT. dicoccon (emmer wheat) AABBT. durum (durum or macaroni) AABBT. turgidum (poulard or rivet) AABBT. polonicum (Polish wheat) AABBT. carthlicum (Persian wheat) AABBT. timopheevii (Timopheevi wheat) AAGGT. araraticum AAGGHexaploids [2n = 6x = 42]:T. spelta (spelt wheat) AABBDDT. macha (macha wheat) AABBDDT. vavilovii (Vavilov's wheat) AABBDDT. compactum (club wheat) AABBDDT. sphaerococcum (shot wheat) AABBDDT. aestivum (bread wheat) AABBDD* This summary is modified after Simmons, N. W. (editor).1976. Evolution of crop plants. Longman. London, England.P. 121. The nomenclature for the various wheat speciesfollows Terrell, et al. (1986).EVOLUTION OF BREAD WHEATAs you can see from this table, bread wheat and itsimmediate relatives are hexaploids; they have sixcomplete sets of chromosomes. Each set containsseven chromosomes. Further inspection will show thatthe six sets are not six different sets, but three ofthem (A, B, & D) in duplicate. In other words, breadwheat contains three different genomes, eachrepresented twice. The evolutionary process that ledto our modern day bread wheat began with a natural,spontaneous crossing of a wild einkorn wheat with akind of goat grass (Aegilops speltoides) that occurredin the same area. Both were diploids (2x = 14). Thisprimitive wheat is the source of the A genome inmodern bread wheat; the goat grass is the donor ofthe B genome. The hybrid that resulted from thenatural crossings would be designated AB and it wasat least partially sterile because of the differences inthe chromosomes in the A and B sets (genomes).Eventually, by a procedure in which unreducedgametes (egg and sperm nuclei that have twice asmany chromosomes as they ought to have) combine,the chromosome complement in these primitivehybrids doubled. The result was wild emmer wheatwith 28 chromosomes (AABB). The inhabitants of theNear East domesticated this grass and used it alongwith einkorn wheat.A few thousand years later, a domesticated form ofemmer wheat crossed spontaneously with a secondkind of goat grass (Aegilops squarrosa). It has beenidentified as the source of the D genome in modernbread wheat. Again, the immediate result of thishybridization was a sterile grass with three genomes(ABD) and a chromosome number of 21. The union ofunreduced gametes would eventually yield offspringthat were AABBDD.Here is the same explanation, this time in the form ofa diagram.PHASE I: DIPLOID TO TETRAPLOIDTriticum boeoticum Aegilops speltoides(wild einkorn wheat) (goat grass)[2n = 2x = 14] X [2n = 2x = 14][genome: AA] [genome: BB]?Sterile First Generation Hybrid[2n = 2x = 14][genomes: AB]?Unreduced Gametes("chromosome doubling")?Triticum dicoccoides(wild emmer wheat)[2n = 4x = 28][genomes: AABB]?Domestication?