There are a few regions, most of them in the OldWorld, where domestication began.' Only a few plants (coconut, bottle gourd, sweetpotato) were in use in both the Old World and inthe New World in Pre-Columbian times.' Today most crop plants are not growncommercially where they are native.' We have modified plants to meet our needs, withlittle regard to the biological consequences to theplants themselves.' The wild ancestors of several of our mostimportant crops are now extinct.' The destruction of wild populations of ancestralforms is endangering the genetic viability of anumber of our crop plants.' The domesticated forms of some of our mostimportant crops are now incapable of livingwithout our assistance.' Many of our crops are reproduced asexually.' Asexual reproduction means genetic stability;sexual reproduction means variation. Therein liesthe great paradox -- in homogeneity liesproductivity; in diversity lies survival.' The natural crossing of plants in closely relatedspecies or genera has been an important processin the origin and evolution of many of our crops.' Many of our crop plants have three or morecomplete sets of chromosomes in each nucleus,while their wild ancestors typically had only twosets.' The domestication of plants is intimatelyassociated with the rise of great civilizations.' There have been three great revolutions:agriculture, the Green Revolution, andbiotechnology (genetic engineering).' We are losing plant species, possible sources offood and cures, at an ever increasing rate.2.2 ! DOMESTICATION"Agriculture is the first of all arts. Without it therewould exist neither merchants nor poets norphilosophers." [Frederick the Great]"... the offspring of the ancient marriage of plants andpeople are far stranger and more marvelous than werealize." [Michael Pollan, "The Botany of Desire"]"Economic botany is a necessity for human survivalbut a potential hazard to the survival of Nature."[G. Kunkel]"One day a little band of these odd apes - for apesthey were - shambled out upon the grass: the humanstory had begun. Apes were to become men, in theinscrutable wisdom of nature, because flowers hadproduced seeds and fruits in such tremendousquantities that a new and totally different store ofenergy had become available in concentrated form.The great Ice Age herds were destined to vanish.When they did so, [a] hand ... would pluck a handfulof grass seed and hold it contemplatively.In that moment, the golden towers of man, hisswarming millions, his turning wheels, the vastlearning of his libraries, would glimmer dimly there inthe ancestor of wheat, a few seeds in a muddy hand.Without the gift of flowers and the infinite diversity oftheir fruits, man and bird, if they had continued toexist at all, would be today unrecognizable.Archaeopteryx, the lizard-bird, might still be snappingat beetles on a sequoia limb; man might still be anocturnal insectivore gnawing a roach in the dark. Theweight of a petal has changed the face of the worldand made it ours. "[Loren Eiseley, "The Immense Journey']' ' ' ' 'We have lived on Earth in a recognizably distinct formfor about 2 million years. For the vast majority of thattime, we have hunted beasts, gathered roots andfruits of various kinds, and eaten wild grasses. Of theestimated 80 billion "cultural people" who have livedon our planet, about 90% have been hunters andgatherers.Please refer to the "Chronicle of Economic Botany"earlier in the syllabus. You will note that it was about14 million years ago when the first human-likeprimate evolved and that it was about 3-4 millionyears ago that our closest relatives (Australopithecusspp.) came on the scene. It was only about 250,000years ago that we began to make standardized tools. But the monumental event that is often called thesingle most significant occurrence in human culturalevolution happened a scant 10,000 years ago. Thatevent is the cultivation and domestication of plantsand animals.To emphasize how recent this was in the scheme ofthings, I will switch time scales. Assume that theentire history of the universe can be collapsed into asingle year.HISTORY IN A SINGLE YEARJanuary 01 Creation of the UniverseSeptember 25 Origin of life on earthDecember 20 Plants colonize the landDecember 28 First flowering plants appearDecember 31 (10:30 p.m.) First humansDecember 31 (11:00 p.m.) Use of toolsDecember 31 (11:59 p.m.) Agriculture-34-In other words, this monumental event (or process)that has so changed the way we live on this planetoccurred one minute before midnight on the very lastday of the "Cosmic Year. "THE PROCESS OF DOMESTICATION"Domestication is a biological process that invokeschanges in the genotype and physical characteristicsof plants and animals as they become dependent uponhumans for reproductive success." [Price & Gebauer, 1995]What do we mean by cultivation and domestication ofplants and what are the processes involved? Tocultivate means to care for a plant; to till the soil,water, weed, and prune. To domesticate means tobring into the household and in so doing, to alter itfrom its wild state. We have domesticated a hundredor so plants and 50 or so animals, such as the dog,pig, cattle, horse, water buffalo, goat, sheep, andchicken.Domestication is really directed evolution, which inturn is based upon two basic phenomena: variation,the concept that not all individuals are the same andthat some are better adapted for survival than others,and natural selection, the view that nature selectsfor those individuals that are best adapted toreproduce the species. When it comes to our cropplants, natural selection has been largely replaced byartificial selection -- by people consciously andunconsciously selecting those individuals that we wantto preserve.Domestication involves three important steps:(1) moving seeds, tubers, etc. from their nativehabitats and planting them in new areas;(2) removing selective pressures and therebyallowing more variants to survive; and (3) selecting for characteristics that are useful to us,but not necessarily for the plant under its naturalconditions.CHANGES BROUGHT ABOUT BYDOMESTICATIONSome changes in plants that have occurred as a resultof domestication include:Ecological:' spread into a greater diversity of environmentsand a wider geographic rangeLife History/Reproduction:' flowering and fruiting simultaneously;' reduction or loss of dispersal mechanisms;' conversion from perennials to annuals;' absence of normal pollinators;' loss of defense mechanisms (thorns, spines, etc. );' development of seedless fruits;' reproduction by vegetative means;' change in chromosome number;' increased susceptibility to disease;' loss of seed dormancy;' loss of photoperiod controls;' change from cross- to self-pollination;' conversion of flower partsSize of Plants/Plant Parts:' Increase (as in maize and potato)' Decrease (as in dwarf wheats)Chemical Constituents:' Increase (as in % of corn oil, THC, etc.)' Decrease (as in % of nicotine, HCN, etc. )Aesthetics:' Palatability' Uniformity' Color and textureWHY DID IT TAKE SO LONG?The overriding question about the domestication ofplants is why did it take so long for us to make sosimple a "discovery" or to take this step. A number oftheories have been put forth:' While we lived by hunting, fishing, and gatheringwe had too little time for such cultural luxuries.' Domestication became a necessity after dramaticshifts in climate.' For thousands of years, we would be satisfied justto meet our basic needs for food, shelter, andclothing. Domestication occurred as theculmination of an ever increasing differentiationand specialization of human communities.' Some plants and animals may have beendomesticated as parts of religious ceremonies.' No particular motive or advance was required;only the revelation that seeds can be sown toproduce plants when and where desired ("TheEureka! Model").' There is no single explanation; all of them havecontributed to our understanding of the problem("The No-Model Model").IDENTIFYING THE ANCESTORSThere are two schools of thought, each championed bya giant figure in this field. ALPHONSE DE CANDOLLE (1806-1893) was amember of a distinguished family of Swiss botanists.In his two great works ("Geographie BotaniqueRaisonnee," 1885 and "Origine des Plantes Cultivees,"1882) he attempted to demonstrate that the differentkinds of cultivated plants that we now see could betraced back to wild ancestors that were still with usand recognizable as their wild progenitors. DeCandolle determined that there were 247 ancestralspecies: 199 in the Old World, 45 in the New World, 7now extinct, and 3 whose origin was uncertain.The following concluding remarks from his "Origin ofCultivated Plants" provide an excellent summary of histhinking:"Cultivated plants do not belong to any particularcategory, for they belong to fifty-one differentfamilies. They are, however, all phanerogamous[flowering plants] except the mushroom.... Thecharacters which have most varied in cultivation are,beginning with the most variable: a. The size, form,and colour of the fleshy parts...; b. The number ofseeds, which is often in inverse ratio to thedevelopment of the fleshy parts of the plant; c. Theform, size, or pubescence [hairiness] of the floralorgans which persist round the fruits or seeds; d. The-35-rapidity of the phenomena of vegetation -- whenceoften results the quality of ligneous [woody] orherbaceous plants, and of perennial, biennial, orannual. ""The classification of varieties made by agriculturistsand gardeners are generally based on thosecharacters which vary most (form, size, colour, tasteof the fleshy parts, beard in the ears of corn, etc. ).Botanists are mistaken when they follow this example;they should consult those more fixed characters of theorgans for the sake of which the species are notcultivated. ""No distinctive character is known between anaturalized plant which arose several generations backfrom a cultivated plant, and a wild plant sprung fromplants which have always been wild. ""A species may have had, previous to cultivation, arestricted habitation, and subsequently occupy animmense area as a cultivated and sometimes anaturalized plant. ""In the history of cultivated plants, I have noticed notrace of communication between the peoples of theold and new worlds before the discovery of America byColumbus.... Between America and Asia twotransports of useful plants perhaps took place, the oneby man (the Batata, or sweet potato) the other by theagency of man or of the sea (the cocoa-nut palm). "CHARLES ROBERT DARWIN (1809-1882) isprobably best known for his great work, "The Origin ofSpecies by Means of Natural Selection." Another of hismost important contributions to the field of naturalhistory is "The Variation of Animals and Plants underDomestication." In these quotes from the secondedition, you will see that Darwin took a very differentapproach to the problem. "The subject is involved in much difficulty. Botanistshave generally neglected cultivated varieties, asbeneath their notice. In several cases the wildprototype is unknown or doubtfully known; and inother cases it is hardly possible to distinguish betweenescaped seedling and truly wild plants, so that thereis no safe standard of comparison by which to judgeof any supposed amount of change. Not a fewbotanists believe that several of our ancientlycultivated plants have become so profoundly modifiedthat it is not possible now to recognise their aboriginalparent-forms.""... M. De Candolle concludes that plants have rarelybeen so much modified by culture that they cannot beidentified with their wild prototypes. But on this view,considering that savages probably would not havechosen rare plants for cultivation, that useful plantsare generally conspicuous, and that they could nothave been the inhabitants of deserts or of remote andrecently discovered islands, it appears strange to methat so many of our cultivated plants should still beunknown or only doubtfully known in the wild state. If,on the other hand, many of these plants have beenprofoundly modified by culture, the difficultydisappears. The difficulty would also be removed ifthey have been exterminated during the progress ofcivilisation; but M. De Candolle has shown that thisprobably has seldom occurred. ""From innumerable experiments made through direnecessity by the savages of every land, with theresults handed down by tradition, the nutritious,stimulating, and medicinal properties of the mostunpromising plants were probably first discovered....We probably owe our knowledge of the uses of almostall plants to man having originally existed in abarbarous state, and having been often compelled bysevere want to try as food almost everything which hecould chew and swallow. "WHEN DID IT OCCUR?The answer is reasonably straightforward - at varioustimes in different places around the world. Thequestion also implies that domestication is a pastevent. We continue to guide the evolution of plantsand animals around us.DOMESTICATED PLANTSB. C. E. Where ?9000 Emmer wheat Near East9000 Barley Near East8500 Lima bean South America8000 Potato Peru8000 Pumpkin Central America8000 Sweet potato Peru8000 Common bean South America7500 Rice Indochina7500 Rye Syria7000 Einkorn wheat Syria7000 Durum wheat Anatolia7000 Yam Indonesia7000 Banana Indonesia7000 Coconut Indonesia7000 Sugar cane New Guinea6500 Gourds Mexico6500 Flax Central Europe6300 Quinoa South America6000 Bread wheat Southwest Asia6000 Citrus Indochina6000 Lentil Southwest Asia6000 Squash Mexico6000 Finger millet Ethiopia5500 Maize Mexico5500 Foxtail millet China5500 Peach China5000 Avocado Mexico4500 Date palm India4500 Sorghum Sudan4300 Upland cotton Mexico4300 Tepary bean Mexico4000 Grape Turkestan4000 Oil palm Sudan3500 Olive Crete3300 Jack bean South America3300 Coca South America3000 Cotton India3000 Peanut Peru2500 African yam West Africa2000 Alfalfa Iran1500 Soybean Manchuria1500 African rice West Africa1300 Cassava South America1300 Sunflower North America1000 Oats Europe500 Tea Tibet500 Cloves Indonesia500 Currant Eurasia400 Tobacco South America100 Sieva bean MexicoC. E.200 Potato Peru/Bolivia500 Sweet potato Polynesia1400 Coffee Arabia-36-1800 Jute India1801 Sugar beet Silesia1958 Kiwi fruit1972 Wild rice North AmericaDOMESTICATED ANIMALSB. C. E.15,000 Dog East Asia9000 Sheep Iran/Afghanistan8000 Goat Near East7500 Water buffalo Indochina7500 Pig East Asia7000 Cattle Turkey5000 Chicken Asia5000 Llama Peru5000 Alpaca Peru4500 Horse Ukraine4000 Silkworm China3000 Donkey Palestine3000 Arabian camel Iran3000 Elephant India3000 Mule Palestine2500 Cat Egypt2500 Yak Tibet2000 Guinea-pig Peru500 Reindeer Central Asia300 Turkey MexicoWHERE DID IT FIRST OCCUR?In 1807, Baron Alexander von Humboldt observed,"The birthplace, the original homeland of plants mostuseful to man is as impenetrable a secret as thequestion of the origins of domestic animals... We donot know in what region first appeared in their wildform wheat, barley, oats and rye."Habitat. Since that time, a variety of habitats havebeen suggested, including (1) arid hillsides ormountainous regions; (2) grasslands; (3) edges offorests; (4) rubbish heaps; (5) stream terraces; and(6) edges of lakes and rivers.Geography. In attempting to locate the geographicregion where domestication arose, attention was firstdirected to locations in the Old World. Fossil remains,although scanty, were there. The earliest come frompresent-day Iraq and Iran, from sites in the ZagrosMountains. The fossils have been dated at 8000 B. C.E. They consist of grinding stones, obsidian tools,bones of domesticated sheep and goats, and a fewgrains of two kinds of domesticated wheat and one ofdomesticated barley. Three or four thousand yearslater, a second major center of domesticationappeared in China or Southeast Asia. The people ofthat region first domesticated a small-grained cerealcalled millet. Rice and the soybean came later.In the New World, studies have centered onMesoamerica and South America, especially sites inMexico and Peru. The great Indian civilizations ofthese areas were based upon the domestication ofmaize, squashes, beans, quinoa, and the potato.CENTERS OF ORIGINNickolay Ivanovich Vavilov (1887-1943) was oneof the leading investigators of the origin of cultivatedplants. He held several high positions in the Sovietscientific establishment, including President of theLenin Academy of Agricultural Sciences and Directorof the Institute of Plant Industry. Vavilov was incharge of over 400 research units and experimentstations in the U. S. S. R. from 1921 to 1934. Heengaged in extensive field work in Afghanistan,Ethiopia, China, Central America, and South America.It was the detailed knowledge from this vast amountof field work that formed the basis of many of histheories.Much of Vavilov's work on the origin of cultivatedplants is summarized in "Phytogeographic Basis ofPlant Breeding" (1951). Vavilov recognized eightindependent areas that are now variously referred toas centers of origin or as centers of diversity. Thetwo concepts are not the same, although the termsare often used interchangeably. These centers areseparated from one another by extensive deserts ormountain ranges that acted as barriers to themovement of plants and primitive peoples. Taken asa whole, the eight areas occupy only 1/40th of theland surface of the earth.Vavilov's early work, resulting in his designating theseeight centers of origin, rests on the premise that theplace of origin of a particular kind of cultivated plantis that area where we encounter the greatest numberof genetic varieties or strains of that plant. This ideawas not original with Vavilov, but he did much tosubstantiate it by collecting tremendous amounts ofdata on his numerous expeditions. At first, theconcept was widely accepted.