They are-146-typically a mixture of several of these fatty acids. Thedistinction between the two is rather simple andarbitrary: fats are more or less solid at roomtemperate, while oils are liquids. A fat on a summerday in Humboldt County may be an oil in Redding.An important chemical consideration in vegetable oilsis the degree of saturation of chemical bonds in thefatty acids. The more double bonds, the more likely itis that the oil will dry to a waterproof film. Less doublebonding means that the oil will remain a liquid for along period of time after exposure to air. The ability ofa fixed oil to absorb iodine correlates directly with itsdrying properties. The higher the number of iodineions incorporated into the positions of double bondsalong the fatty acid chain, the more likely it is that theoil will oxidize to an elastic film. This index is knownas the iodine number. It is the number of grams ofiodine absorbed by 100 grams of fat. The range iniodine numbers is about 7 to 200+.IODINE NUMBERS OF FIXED OILSFixed Oil Iodine NumberLinseed oil 165-204Tung oil 160-175Soybean oil 137-143Safflower oil 140-150Sunflower oil 119-135Corn oil 111-135Cottonseed oil 108-110Canola oil 94-105Sesame oil 103-108Rapeseed oil 94-102Peanut oil 84-100Caster oil 81-89Olive oil 78-88Palm oil 51-77Cacao butter 32-41Palm kernel oil 13-17Coconut oil 7-10Source: Schery (1972) and Simpson & Ogorzaly (1995)DRYING CAPACITY OF FIXED OILSNondrying oils have little or no linoleic or linolenicacid and a low iodine number (less than 100).Examples include: palm oil, peanut oil, olive oil, castoroil, rapeseed oil, almond oil, avocado oil, cacao butter,cashew oil.Semi-drying oils lack appreciable amounts oflinolenic acid, often are rich in linoleic acid, and haveintermediate iodine numbers (100-130). Examplesinclude: cottonseed oil, sunflower oil, sesame oil,croton oil, corn oil.Drying oils are high in both linoleic and linolenicacids and have high iodine numbers (over 130).Examples include: linseed oil, soybean oil, tung nutoil, hemp seed oil, poppy seed oil, safflower oil, perillaoil, Para rubber oil.Source: Schery (1972) and Simpson & Ogorzaly (1995)SATURATION OF EDIBLE OILSThis feature of the degree to which vegetable oils aresaturated carries over into dietary concerns. Saturatedfats and oils have a hydrogen atom bonded to eachcarbon atom of its molecule. If there is one unbondedsite, the fat or oil is mono-unsaturated; if there areseveral, it is poly-unsaturated. Saturated fats/oilscome mostly from consuming animal products (meat,milk, butter, and cheese), but they also come fromthe "tropical oils," such as coconut, cocoa, and palm.Common examples of monounsaturated oils includeolive, avocado, peanut, and canola. Polyunsaturatedfats and oils may be further subdivided into omega-3'sthat come from flax, seafood, and lean meat; andomega-6's that come primarily from various fruits andseeds.EXTRACTION AND PROCESSINGA variety of both tropical and temperate plants yieldfixed oils. While vegetable oils are found present invarious plant organs, most of the important ones arefound in seeds. They are extracted in much the sameway that we get essential oils out of a plant. The seedcoat is removed and the interior reduced to a finemeal. The oil is removed by a solvent or by expressingit under pressure. It is then filtered and often purifiedfurther. Higher grades of fixed oils go into foodproducts; the lower grades have a variety of industrialuses. The oils may also be bleached and deodorized.SURVEY OF FIXED OIL PLANTSSoybean oil (Glycine max). The soybean, native toeastern Asia, is one of our most ancient oil sources. Itwas one of the five "sacred grains" of China. The oilcontent is 13-25%. Soybean oil is used in margarine,shortening, salad oils, whipped toppings, and icings.Its industrial uses include paint, linoleum, printing ink,soap, candles, insecticides, disinfectants, cosmetics,and plastics.Coconut oil (Cocos nucifera). The oil is expressedfrom copra, the dried coconut flesh. The oil content ishigh, 65-70%. The refined oil is used in foods,especially margarines. Lower grades are found insoaps, cosmetics, salves, shaving creams, shampoos,and as an illuminant.Oil palms. Two other palms are also importantsources of fixed oils. The African oil palm (Elaeisguineensis) bears fruit after about 4 or 5 years. Theyare cut from or knocked off the tree and thenprocessed quickly to keep naturally occurring enzymesfrom destroying the oil. The fleshy meso-carp yields45-55% oil used in margarine, cooking fats, soaps,and candles. Taxi cabs in some tropical cities run onpalm oil. A different fixed oil is found in theendosperm of the seed (palm kernel oil). It ischemically similar to coconut oil and is used in icecreams, mayonnaise, toilet soaps, and detergents.The endosperm is about 50% oil. The cake thatremains after expressing the palm oils is used inlivestock food. This plant has the highest yield of oil ofany crop (3475 kg per hectare per year).The American oil palm (Elaeis oleifera) appears to benative to Central and South America. It is closelyrelated to the African oil palm and the two hybridizefreely. It is not as important a source of fixed oil.Canola oil (Brassica spp.). There is no canola plantgrowing out there. The name derives from theCanadian Oil Low Acid research project that developedit in the 1960's from rapeseed oil. Some cultivars arehigh in toxic erucic acid. These oils are used inindustry, often as lubricants. The strains that are lowin erucic acid were approved by the United StatesFood and Drug Administration in 1985 as a food.Canola low has a long shelf life.-147-Meadowfoam oil (Limnanthes spp.). Variousspecies of meadowfoam are native to valleygrasslands and vernal pools in California and Oregon.It is a current subject of much research. It can becultivated as an annual crop and perhaps grown in ricefields. The plan is to use the oil as a substitute forsperm whale oil. The U. S. once imported about 50million pounds per year.Castor oil (Ricinus communis). The ornamentalcastor bean plant is also the source of an importantindustrial oil. The United States is the largestimporter. The oil content of the seed varies from 35-55%. Castor oil is found in soap, synthetic rubber,linoleum, inks, nylons, and as a lubricant in airplaneand rocket engines. About 1% of the production goesinto a more refined version that is used in medicine,where it is called "oleum ricini." It is a very effectivepurgative, an agent that causes evacuation of thebowels.Olive oil (Olea europea). The olive tree, native towestern Asia, is another of our most ancient plants. Itis probably the most important of the non-drying oils.The oil is not extracted from the seed itself, but fromthe fruit pulp that surrounds it. Two to four pressingsare often involved, the first of which yields thegreenish-yellow "virgin" oil. If the fruits were from thehighest quality trees, processed in a particular way(mechanical vs. chemical extraction), meet certainaesthetic standards, and have less than 1% free oleicacid, then the product can be called "extra virgin"olive oil. Use of the term is regulated by theInternational Olive Oil Council (IOOC). The U. S. is nota member, but California producers have formed theCOOC. Olive oil has a prominent role as a salad andcooking oil. It has a long shelf life. Hippies andYuppies have been known to get all misty-eyed whendiscussing the virtues of olive oil. Later pressings findtheir way into soap, lubricants, and medicines.Linseed oil (Linum usitatissimum). We grow somecultivars of flax for their fibers and others for the oilcontent in their seeds (32-43%). Linseed oil is used inpaint, oilcloth, soft soaps, varnish, ink, linoleum, andto seal various surfaces, including concrete highways.Safflower oil (Carthamus tinctorius). This memberof the sunflower family is known only in cultivation.The ancient Egyptians appear to be the first to haveused it. The oil content of the seeds is about 40%. Ithas the highest percentage of linoleic acid. Saffloweroil has become a very popular cooking oil because itis low in cholesterol. It is also used in shortening,margarine, salad oils, and mayonnaise.Peanut oil (Arachis hypogaea). The peanut isnative to South America, perhaps to Brazil. It hasbecome a major crop in the United States, especiallyin the South. The seeds have oil content of 30-45%.The higher grades of peanut oil are used in margarineand shortening, and to pack sardines. The inferiorgrades end up in soap, lubricants, and illuminants.Corn oil (Zea mays). The oil content is about 50%.Corn oil is used in cooking and salads (Mazola oil), andto make margarine. It smokes when heated to hightemperatures. Industrial uses include soap, paints,and in rubber substitutes.Cottonseed oil (Gossypium spp.). Cotton seedscontain about 35% oil. Refined oils are used incooking and salad oils, margarine, and shortening.Processing inactivates gossypol, a toxin found inglands within the seed. Inferior grades end up insoaps. Cottonseed oil is the most important of thesemi-drying oils.FIXED (NON-AROMATIC) OIL PLANTSFixed Oil Scientific Name FamilyMAJOR OIL CROPS:African palm oil Elaeis guineensis palmAmerican palm oil Elaeis oleifera palmcastor oil Ricinus communis spurgecoconut oil Cocos nucifera palmcorn oil Zea mays grasscotton seed oil Gossypium spp. mallowlinseed oil Linum usitatissimum flaxolive oil Olea europaea olivepeanut oil Arachis hypogaea beanrapeseed (rape) oil Brassica spp. mustardsesame oil Sesamum indicum pedaliumsoybean oil Glycine max beansunflower oil Helianthus annuus sunflowerMINOR OIL CROPS:babassu oil Orbignya phalerata palmben oil Moringa pterygosperma moringaBrazil nut oil Bertholletia excelsa Brazil nutbuffalo gourd oil Cucurbita foetidissima squashcajeput oil Melaleuca leucadendron myrtlecandlenut oil Aleurites moluccana spurgecanola oil Brassica napus, B. campestris mustardcarapa oil Carapa guianensis mahoganycashew nut oil Anacardium occidentale cashewchaulmoogra oil Hydnocarpus kurzii flacourtia-148-China wood oil Aleurites fordii spurgecocoa butter oil Theobroma cacao sterculiacohune oil Orbignya cohune palmcolza oil Brassica napus mustardcroton oil Croton tiglium spurgeeng oil Dipterocarpus tuberculatus dipterocarpgorli oil Oncoba echinata flacourtiagurgum (gurjun) oil Dipterocarpus spp. dipterocarphempseed oil Cannabis sativa hempillipe nut oil Shorea macrophylla dipterocarpjojoba oil Simmondsia chinensis simmondsiakapok seed oil Ceiba pentandra bombaxlicuri oil Syagrus coronata palmmacassar oil Schleichera oleosa soapberrymeadowfoam Limnanthes spp. meadowfoammurumuru oil Astrocaryum murumuru palmmustard oil Sinapis spp. and Brassica spp. mustardNiger seed oil Guizotia abyssinica sunfloweroiticica oil Licania rigida coco plumpeach oil Prunus persica roseperilla oil Perilla frutescens mintpistachio oil Pistacia vera cashewpoppy seed oil Papaver somniferum poppysafflower oil Carthamus tinctorius sunflowertung oil Aleurites fordii spurgewalnut oil Juglans regia walnut -149-8.9 ! TANNINS AND DYESTannins and dyes are secretion products found almostuniversally in plants. They are usually notconcentrated enough to make extractions worthwhile.Tannins and dyes are combinations of carbon,hydrogen, and oxygen. Nitrogen is present in somecases. Dyes, in particular, have been largely replacedby synthetic derivatives of coal tars. Only about 10%of our currently used dyes are of natural origins.TANNINSThis term is applied to a wide variety of astringentsubstances. Generally speaking, they are metabolicbreakdown products of sugars. Tannins are watersoluble and are chemical reducing agents. Thefunction of tannins within the plant body is obscure.Perhaps they play a protective role. They are usuallyfound in out of the way places, such as heartwood orthe cork, rather than sites of active growth ormovement of materials.The principal use of tannins is in the tanning industry.They combine with proteins in animal skin to yieldleather, which is resistant to water, air, temperaturechanges, and bacterial attack. During the tanningprocess, the animal skin is soaked in a tanninextraction for a period of time ranging from just a fewhours to several months. The leather can then befurther treated with oils to restore some pliability anddyed.Tannins also combine with iron salts to form the basisof several inks. Tannins have some medical uses, suchas antidotes to alkaloid and heavy metal poisoning,and in reducing gastric bleeding and diarrhea.SURVEY OF TANNIN PLANTSChestnut (Castanea dentata). Tannins are extractedfrom the wood. This source has practicallydisappeared in the U.S. because of excessive loggingand the chestnut blight.Tanner's dock or canaigre (Rumex hymeno-sepalus). An annual species of the south-western U.S.The roots contain 25-35% tannins.Sumac (Rhus coriaria). The species is native to Sicily.The leaves contain about 35% tannins. Our nativespecies of Rhus also have tannins in them, but theyare inferior in their tanning ability.Hemlock (Tsuga canadensis). This coniferous treelargely replaced the chestnut, but now it is alsodisappearing. The bark contains 8-14% tannins. T.heterophylla of the western U.S. has become moreimportant as a tannin source since the decline of theeastern hemlock.Quebracho (Schinopsis lorentzii). This plant is theforemost source of natural tannins. The tree is nativeto Argentina and Paraguay. The wood contains about22% tannins. The U.S. imports great quantities ofquebracho tannins each year.Mangrove (Rhizophora mangle). The bark contains55-58% tannins after concentration. This is one of thecheapest tannin sources. The U.S. is the chiefimporter.Wattle (Acacia spp.). These trees are usually nativeto Australia. They are now widely planted. The barkcontains about 50% tannins.Gambier (Uncaria gambir). This species is native tothe East Indies. A resin in the leaves contains 35-40%tannins.DYESWhether natural or synthetic, dyes are chemicallyrelatively straightforward. Fustic, for example, has theempirical formula C13H10O6. As with tannins, thefunction that the dye performs in plants is not wellunderstood.Dyes have been in use for thousands of years. No oneknows how many different dyes there are, but aconservative estimate is at least 2000.When dyes were first used to color and decorate cloth,they were impermanent and faded rather quickly. Thecolors would also change with time. It was necessaryto fix and bind the dye with the fibers of the cloth.This was done by using a mordant. Most of themordants are salts of metals. By using a differentmordant with a specific dye, the color value of the dyemay be changed.SURVEY OF DYE PLANTSWoad (Isatis tinctoria). This plant is perhaps native tosouthern Russia. Its use spread rapidly, however. Theleaves contain a glucoside, indican. The leaves arecrushed by rollers to extract a pulpy material. This isrolled into a ball and dried. The balls are laterpulverized, wetted, and fermented. The woad is thendried once more and may be stored in this form.When it is to be used, fermentation is once morerequired. Two uses of woad are of some historicalinterest. When the Romans invaded Briton, they foundthe inhabitants using woad to decorate their bodies.Later in English history, woad and a yellow dye weremixed to yield the "Saxon Green" dye worn by RobinHood and his Merry Men.Indigo (Indigofera tinctoria). This is one of the bestknown dyes. It is a brilliant blue. Oxidation is requiredbefore the color develops.