Po'i, the famous Hawai'ian dish, issteamed taro that has been crushed and fermented.So much of it is grown for local consumption thatprecise production figures are unavailable.Taro is only one of several important root cropsderived from the philodendron or aroid family. Thereis much confusion as to their common names.ARROWROOTSThere are several unrelated Old World and New Worldroot crops that are collectively known as arrowroots.They are important starch sources that we use as foodin the tropics and for a variety of other purposes. Thestarch is deposited in tubers or rhizomes.THE ARROWROOTSMaranta arundinacea arrowroot, W. Indian a.Tacca leontopetaloides Tahiti a., African a.Curcuma angustifolia Bombay arrowrootZamia pumila Florida arrowrootManihot esculenta Brazilian arrowroot, Para a.Canna indica Queensland arrowrootArrowroot (Maranta arundinacea) is the best knownmember of the group. Its rhizomes are cleaned,peeled, crushed, grated, and then washed to free thestarch. The resulting liquid is then centrifuged orpoured on to a flat surface to allow the starch to settleout. The air-dried starch lumps are pulverized to yielda very fine, small-grained starch. The highly-digestiblestarch is a favorite in foods for infants and invalids. Itis also used in various jellies and pastes. The starch isalso applied externally as a face powder and to treatwounds, ulcers, insect bites, and snake bites. Mostarrowroot comes from St. Vincent, in the West Indies.The United States is the chief importer.Tahiti arrowroot is a favorite starch crop of the SouthPacific. Its tubers are treated to remove taccalin, abitter chemical. Besides being a food plant, the starchis also processed to make the coating used on carbon-less computer paper. Tahiti arrowroot leaves are usedto make hats.-63-TABLE BEET AND SUGAR BEETThe many cultivars of Beta vulgaris that we now useare presumably derived from B. maritima of northernEurope. Close relatives include chard (edible leaves)and the mangelwurzel, all of which freely interbreed.Our own production of the sugar beet increaseddramatically in the early 1960's, after we boycottedcane sugar from Cuba. The sugar in sugar beets isidentical to that of cane sugar. The main ingredient inborsch, a Russian soup, is a puree of beets. Beetrootwine is a popular homemade wine.CARROTDaucus carota var. sativa is another of our ancientfood plants. It is perhaps native to the Afghanistanarea. It was highly prized by Europeans and wasbrought to America by the early colonists. The carrotis a biennial, although the plant is mature after thefirst year. There are many kinds of carrots, some withenormous root systems three feet long. The carrot isrich in vitamin A and sugar. At first it was considereda medicinal plant, its seeds used as a stimulant and asa diuretic. After many centuries it was considered afood plant. Eating carrots raw is a very recent habit.The early cultivars were purple. The orange onesbecame popular when they were exported fromHolland in the 17th and 18th centuries.PARSNIPPastinaca sativa, a carrot relative, has been cultivatedas a food plant since the days of the ancient Romans.However, the development of fleshy roots did notcome until the Middle Ages. The parsnip is high insugars and starch. We also make parsnip wine.JERUSALEM ARTICHOKEHelianthus tuberosus is a close relative of our nativeNorth American sunflower. The common name wouldcertainly suggest otherwise. According to oneexplanation, "Jerusalem" is a corruption of the Italianword for sunflower. The plants produce tubers that aresomewhat like the potato in appearance. Althoughnative to the New World, the Jerusalem artichoke isbetter appreciated in Europe and China. In the UnitedStates it is most often used as a food for hogs. Wheneaten by humans it is usually boiled or baked. TheJerusalem artichoke contains inulin, a sugar that maybe used by diabetics.THE BRASSICA ROOT CROPSSeveral different root crops are derived from thegenus Brassica, a member of the mustard family. Theturnip is a combination of edible stem and roottissue. There is considerable variation in the size,shape, and flesh color in different cultivars. The turniphas been used since prehistoric times. The rutabagais of recent origin, the result of hybridization betweenthe turnip and the cabbage sometime in the 17thcentury. The kohlrabi is a leafy stem base. It can getto be about the size of an orange when fully grown,but it is best eaten before it gets that large.THREE S. AMERICAN ROOT CROPSThere are several South American root crops that arein wide use there, but which are almost completelyunknown to us in this country. Chief among them isoca (Oxalis tuberosa), a relative of our local redwoodsorrel or sour-grass. It is used primarily in Peru,Ecuador, and Bolivia. The tubers are acid when fresh.They are usually dried in the sun so that they getmore floury and less acid. If dried for several weeks,oca takes on the flavor of dried figs.Two other crops of note are the anu (Tropaeolumtuberosum), a relative of the garden nasturtium, andullucu (Ullucus tuberosus), an important Andean foodplant with no well known relatives in North America.-64-SURVEY OF ROOT CROPSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Plant Family Commentanu (Tropaeolum tuberosum) Nasturtium South American tuberarracacha (Arracacia xanthorrhiza) Carrot Used in Peruvian regionarrowroot (Maranta arundinacea) Prayer plant Starchy rhizomesarrowroot, African (Tacca leotopetaloides) Tacca Starch sourcearrowroot, Indian (Curcuma angustifolia) Ginger Starch sourcearrowroot, Queensland (Canna edulis) Canna Starchy rhizomeartichoke, Chinese (Stachys floridana) Mint See crosneartichoke, Japanese (Stachys floridana) Mint See crosneartichoke, Jerusalem (Helianthus tuberosus) Sunflower Native to North Americabeet (Beta vulgaris) Goosefoot Relative of sugar beetcarrot (Daucus carota) Carrot Native to Near Eastcassava (Manihot esculenta) Spurge Important pantropical foodceleriac (Apium graveolens) Carrot Used in soups and stewschavar (Hitchenia caulina) Ginger Used like arrowroot; Indomalaysiachicory (Cichorium intybus) Sunflower Coffee flavoring/substitutechufa (Cyperus esculentus) Sedge Tubers rich in starch, sugar, oil; pantropicalcrosne (Stachys floridana) Mint Edible tubers; popular in Europe, esp. Francedaikon (Raphanus sativus) Mustard Relative of the radishdasheen (Colocasia esculenta) Philodendron Important pantropical foodfalse yam (Icacina oliviformis) Icacina Tubers to 50 kg; West Africagarlic (Allium sativum) Lily Native to Central Asiagobo root (Arctium lappa) Sunflower Old World; contains inulingroundnut (Apios americana) Bean Native to North Americahausa-potato (Solenostemon rotundifolius) Mint See fra-fra potatohorseradish (Armoracia lapathifolia) Mustard Native to Europe; potent!jicama (Pachyrrhizus erosus) Bean Native to Mexicokohlrabi (Brassica oleracea) Mustard Fleshy lower stems eatenleek (Allium ampeloprasum) Lily Native to Mediterraneanlotus (Nelumbo nucifera) Lotus Rhizomes; source of Chinese arrowrootmaca (Lepidium meyenii) Mustard Andean; baked in pitsmalanga (Xanthosoma sagittata) Philodendron Pantropical food plant; = yautiamaloga bean (Vigna lanceolata) Bean Taproot also edible; Australiamanioc (Manihot esculenta) Spurge Another name for cassavanami (Dioscorea hispida) Yam Also called intoxicating yamoca (Oxalis tuberosa) Oxalis Tubers of Andean plantonion (Allium cepa) Lily Ancient; origin uncertainonion, Welsh (Allium fistulosum) Lily From Asia, not Walesoyster plant (Tragopogon porrifolius) Sunflower Dandelion relativeparsley root (Petroselinum crispum) Carrot Native to Mediterraneanparsnip (Pastinaca sativa) Carrot Perhaps native to Chinapotato, fra-fra (Solenostemon rotundifolius) Mint Tubers; West Africanpotato, Irish or white (Solanum tuberosum) Nightshade Native to Andes mountainspotato, Spanish (Ipomoea batata) Morning glory Another name for sweet potatoradish (Raphanus sativus) Mustard Now unknown in wildrutabaga (Brassica napus) Mustard Turnip and cabbage hybridsalsify (Tragopogon porrifolius) Sunflower Another name for oyster plantsalsify, Spanish (Scorzonera hispanica) Sunflower Native to southern Europeshallot (Allium cepa) Lily Produces cluster of bulbsshoti (Cucurma zedoria) Ginger Starchy rhizomes; Southeast Asiaskirret (Sium sisarum) Carrot Tuberous rootssugar beet (Beta vulgaris) Goosefoot Native to Europeswede (Brassica napus) Mustard Hybrid of recent originSweet potato (Ipomoea batata) Morning glory Not same as true yamtannia (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) Philodendron African tuber plant; = yautiataro (Colocasia esculenta) Philodendron Important pantropical foodtiger nut (Cyperus esculentus) Sedge Native to West Africatopee tambo (Calathea allouia) Prayer plant Potato-like tubers; West Indiesturnip (Brassica rapa) Mustard Perhaps from western Asiaturnip-root chervil (Chaerophyllum bulbosum) Carrot Carrot-like roots boiled-65-ullucu (Ullucus tuberosus) Basella Important Andean root cropwater chestnut (Eleocharis dulcis) Sedge Old World native; cormsyam, Asiatic (Dioscorea alata) Yam Native to Southeast Asiayam, Chinese (Dioscorea esculenta) Yam Native to Southeast Asiayam, cush-cush (Dioscorea trifida) Yam Native to American tropicsyam, elephant (Amorphophallus campanulatus) Philodendron Tubers; SE Asia & Pacificyam, white (Diosocrea rotunda) Yam Native to west Africayam, yellow (Dioscorea cayenensis) Yam Native to west Africayam bean (Pachyrrhizus erosus) Bean Native to American tropicsyam bean (Sphenostylis stenocarpa) Bean Native to west Africayautia (Xanthosoma sagittifolium) Philodendron Pantropical food plantysano (Tropaeolum tuberosum) Nasturtium Another name for anuyuca (Manihot esculenta) Spurge Another name for cassava5.4 ! STEMS, LEAVES, &FLOWERSThis group of food plants is relatively straight-forward.We tend, for obvious reasons, to consume thesevarious leaves and flowers while they are young andtender. The flower clusters are often so immature thatyou may not realize what you are eating.ONIONS AND THEIR ALLIESThe edible portion of various Allium spp. is the bulb,a modified stem system bearing a series ofoverlapping, fleshy leaves. The outer leaves are oftendry and papery. The stem itself is reduced and is oftendiscarded before the rest of the bulb is eaten.Chives A. schoenoprasumEgyptian onion A. cepa var. proliferumGarlic A. sativumGarlic chives A. tuberosumKurrats A. ampeloprasumLeeks A. ampeloprasumOnion A. cepaPotato onion A. cepa var. aggregatumRakkyo A. chinenseRocambole A. ampeloprasumShallots A. cepa var. aggregatumTree onion A. cepa var. proliferumWelsh onion A. fistulosumONION. The onion (Allium cepa) is of uncertainorigin. The common name derives from the Latin(unio), the French (oignon), and the Anglo-Saxon(onyon). It was in use by the Egyptians in 3000 B. C.It was a common food in Europe in the Middle Ages.Long ago, the onion had another reputation. It "...serves no other thing but to provoke and stirre folksto the act of carnal copulation. "There are numerous cultivars. Yellow onions oftenhave golden-brown skins; red or Italian onions haveruby-red skins; white onions are white. The famoussweet and juicy Vidalia onion is named after the cityin Georgia.Why do we get all teary-eyed when we slice an onion?The cause is propanethial-S-oxide, a volatile sulfurcompound. It changes quickly to sulfuric acid, whichirritates our eyes and causes the tears. Put the onionunder water when slicing it to reduce the effect.GARLIC. This onion relative is another ancient plant.We have Egyptian inscriptions from 3200 BCE. Inthose days, garlic had a number of ceremonial uses.The Greeks and Romans ascribed magical propertiesto the plant. It was offered to the gods. Warriors ateit for added strength. It was also tied around babiesnecks to ward off evil spirits. Its medicinal uses alsodate to ancient times. Garlic was used to treateczema, toothaches, and snake bites.SHALLOTS. Shallots are not simply baby onions. Theyare a type of slender onion with a long neck andcopper skins. They have a more delicate flavor andthey dissolve more easily in liquids during cooking.LEEKS. This plant was also used by the ancientGreeks, Romans, and Egyptians. It is sometimescalled the "King of the soup onions." CABBAGE AND ITS ALLIESWe have been eating Brassica oleracea for thousandsof years. It was a favorite of the Greeks and Romans.The Emperor Claudius once asked the Senate of Rometo confirm that corned beef and cabbage was indeedthe best dinner dish. Its wild ancestor may still befound along the coasts of Great Britain and Europe.Today cabbages are cultivated in almost everycountry, from the Arctic to the subtropics. This singlespecies is the source of an amazing variety of leaf,stem, and root crops. Some yield edible leaves, as inkale and collards; kohlrabi is an aerial stem;broccoli and cauliflower are edible leafy buds andimmature flower clusters, respectively. Headcabbage is essentially a large bud made up ofnumerous broad leaves. It is about 91% water, alongwith some lime salts and proteins. Slaw is merelyuncooked cabbage. In this form it is not too easilydigested and it is often boiled or steamed. We also eatpartially decomposed cabbage leaves in the form ofsauerkraut.Cabbage has a characteristic odor when cooked. Atabout the point when the leaves begin to soften, theygive off hydrogen sulfide. This is the smell that weassociate with rotten eggs and sewer gases. -66-OTHER EDIBLE LEAVESARUGULA. Also known as rocket, Eruca sativa is amember of the mustard family. It is native to Eurasia.I have added it to the syllabus because arugula isshowing up in our markets, especially in the fancysalad mixes. For a long time, its bitter, peppery flavorwas not that popular with Americans. The ancientGreeks and Romans enjoyed arugula. They ate it asan aphrodisiac, to balance the "dampening" effect oflettuce. Arugula adorned statues of Priapus, son ofAphrodite and Dionysus, and himself the Greek god offertility. He was also the protector of gardens andherbs.LETTUCE. Lactuca sativa, a member of the sunflowerfamily, is derived from the weedy wild lettuce (L.serriola) that is native to southern Europe and Asia.As in the cabbages, lettuce is another ancient plant.Early on it was used for a variety of medicinalpurposes. The leaves contain alcohols that have asoporific effect. Lettuce is 95% water; it has littlefood value. Several hundred cultivars are now in use.RHUBARB. Rheum rhabarbaratum is native to Asia.It is one of the very few food plants in which we eatthe leaf stalk (petiole) and throw everything elseaway. Many people mistakenly believe that the edibleportion is the stem and that the leaf is poisonous. It isthe leaf stalk that is edible and the leaf blade thatmust be discarded. The petiole is about 95% water,along with citric and malic acids. The blade containsoxalic acids, soluble oxalates, and other toxicsubstances in high enough concentrations to causepoisoning and even death in humans.CELERY. Apium graveolens, a member of the carrotfamily, is native to coastal marshes in Eurasia. Itsearly history is that of a medicinal plant, touted as acure for impotence, hangovers, constipation, and forits diuretic effects. Plants contain a family of chemicalscalled psoralens, that can cause severe allergicreactions in sensitive individuals.