Hereare some of the conclusions reached in two classicalstudies:The India Hemp Commission Report (1894):' no substantial evidence that moderate use willproduce mental or moral injury;' no proof of connection between moderate use ofCannabis and disease; and' no proof that moderate use leads to excess anymore than in alcohol.The Laguardia Report (1944), named after the famousmayor of New York City, concluded that marijuanadoes not:' cause crime;' lead to aggressive or antisocial behavior;' alter basic personality structure;' cause sexual overstimulation;' lead to addiction (in strict sense);' lead to morphine, heroin, or cocaine addiction; ' cause juvenile delinquency.The most recent research suggests that chronic use ofmarijuana:' effects mood, perception, and psychomotorcoordination;' causes reduction in motility - initial sluggishnessfollowed in some cases by almost completeimmobility;' has profound effects on the brain, both in themanner in which sensory inputs are processedand the thinking process itself;' has little or no effect on the ability to recallpreviously learned material;' causes a relatively severe impairment of workingmemory;' does not cause structural damage to the brain;' impairs short-term memory and slows learning;' may cause transient episodes of confusion oranxiety;' increases heart rate and initially blood pressure,then lowers blood pressure;' causes dilation of air passages;' impairs pulmonary function with prolonged heavyuse;' smoke, because of its tars, is carcinogenic;' suppresses the number and motility of humansperm;-205-' does not cause any permanent damage to themale or female reproductive system;' may affect chromosome segregation during celldivision;' has no effect on the health of offspring;' can suppress the immune system, but only indoses much higher than humans consume;' may lead to tolerance and dependence in someusers.MEDICAL USE OF MARIJUANAOne of the controversies raging in the medical andlegal communities centers on whether marijuana hasany use in the treatment of disease or in providingrelief to those suffering from serious, even terminaldiseases. As recently as 1995, Governor Wilson vetoedlegislation here in California that would have mademarijuana legally available to certain individuals. In1996, the electorate passed Proposition 215 thatwould permit limited medicinal use. In 2001, theUnited States Supreme Court ruled that medicinal useof marijuana violated federal law.Advocates of its medical use argue that it is effectivein the treatment of glaucoma, side effects of cancerchemotherapy, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, AIDS,chronic pain in general, migraine headaches,osteoarthritis, severe itching, premenstrual syndrome,menstrual pain, labor pain, and depression. Lesscommonly marijuana has been used to treat asthma,insomnia, severe nausea, Adult Attention DeficitSyndrome, schizophrenia, Crohn's Disease, ringing inthe ears, violence, post-traumatic stress syndrome,phantom limb pain, alcoholism, scleroderma, andterminal illnesses (Grinspoon & Bakalar, 1997).FLY AGARIC"... [This] puts me in mind of a custom among theTartars.... The Russians, who trade with them, carrythither a kind of mushroom, which they exchange forfurs of squirrels, ermines, sables, and foxes. Thesemushrooms the rich Tartars lay up in large quantitiesfor the winter, and when a nobleman makes amushroom feast all the neighbors around are invited.The mushrooms are prepared by boiling, by which thewater acquires an intoxicating quality, and is a sort ofdrink which the Tartars prize beyond all other. Whenthe nobility and ladies are assembled, and theceremonies usual between people of distinction over,the mushroom-broth goes freely round; they laugh,talk double entendre, grow fuddled, and becomeexcellent company. The poorer sort, who lovemushroom-broth to distraction as well as the rich, butcannot afford it at the first hand, post themselves onthese occasions round the huts of the rich, and watchthe opportunity of the ladies and gentlemen as theycome down to pass their liquor; and, holding awooden bowl, catch the delicious fluid, very littlealtered by filtration, being still strongly tinctured withthe intoxicating quality. Of this they drink with utmostsatisfaction, and thus they get as drunk and as jovialas their betters." (Oliver Goldsmith.1762)"Soma was at the same time a god, a plant, and thejuice of that plant. So far as we know, Soma is theonly plant that man has ever deified.... In the courseof the Soma sacrifice the juice was pounded out withstones on resounding planks and was drunk by theofficiating priests. Soma -- the three somas -- inspiredhymns vibrant with ecstasy, composed over centuriesby priests who lived in centers remote from eachother.... Some of the hymns are [of] so exalted, evendelirious, a tenor that the modern reader is led toexclaim: 'This surely was composed under theinfluence of a divine inebriant.' It takes littleperception to sense the difference in tone between theawe-inspired hymns to Soma and the rowdy drinkingsongs of the West prompted by alcohol." (R. GordonWasson. 1971. Soma. Divine Mushroom ofImmortality)' ' ' ' 'Fly agaric (Amanita muscaria) is a mushroom that iscommon in the north temperate zone of bothhemispheres. It was once probably widely employedfrom Siberia through northern Europe. The use of themushroom by the Siberians came to the attention ofWesterners in the 18th century. One of the earliestreports is that of a Swedish officer who was heldprisoner by the Siberians for about twelve years. Theyapparently had no other intoxicant until the Russiansintroduced alcohol.The fly agaric is usually eaten by the men of thecommunity. It is not eaten fresh, but only after it hasbeen dried in the sun or over a fire. The dose varies,but often three are eaten; one large mushroom andtwo small ones. Some have reported consumption ofas many as twelve. The fly agaric may be eatenseparately or incorporated into soups, stews, reindeermilk, or mixed with the juices of certain plants, suchas fireweed. It may even be added to alcohol.As with all of the psychoactive plants, the mental andphysical state of the user plays an important role indetermining the effects of fly agaric. Early symptomsinclude a twitching, trembling, and slight convulsionsof the arms and legs. This is followed by a numbnessof the feet, euphoria, and a strong desire to dance.Subjects often carry on elaborate conversations withpeople who are not present and recount fantastic talesof courage and prowess. In some, there is a strongurge to confess misdeeds and sins in general. Somepeople occasionally become violent and dash aboutuntil they are exhausted and fall into a deep sleep.One of the more fascinating features of fly agaric useis that the intoxicating effect can be obtained bydrinking the urine of a person who has eaten Amanita.One can only speculate as to how this was discovered.There are stories of poor people waiting outside thehuts of the wealthy members of the community whocould afford the fly agaric. When a gentleman cameout of his hut to urinate, someone was there with abowl to collect his urine. Fly agaric users also savedtheir own urine in containers to take with them onlong trips.The psychoactive properties of Amanita have beenattributed to muscarine, but more recent work byEugster and Waser indicate the active principle ismuscimol(e), unsaturated hydroxamic acid. This isformed by the decarboxylation and loss of water fromibotenic acid.The late Gordon Wasson, a most respected amateurbotanist associated with Harvard University, suggested that the fly agaric is the famous "soma. "About 3500 years ago, the Aryan peoples moved intothe Indus Valley from the north. They brought withthem the cult of soma. To them the plant was divine.The Aryans composed over a thousand hymns to it.The problem is that no one today knows the identityof the plant. The cult is now dead and no physicaldescriptions of the plant have been uncovered.-206-Various workers have suggested that it was Ephedra,a peculiar gymnosperm; others that the soma ismarijuana; still others that the plant is completelymythical. Wasson, using certain linguistic devices andreferences to urine-drinking believes that soma isAmanita muscaria.NUTMEGThe nutmeg tree, Myristica fragrans, is native to theEast Indian Archipelago. In addition to providingnutmeg and mace, the seeds have been used forhundreds of years as an hallucinogen. The plant hasenjoyed a recent popularity among college students inthe United States and Europe. It must certainly be themost easily accessible of the hallucinogens.One teaspoon or so taken orally will usually producesome response. The effects are variable, but theyoften include some distortion of space and time and afeeling of detachment. Visual hallucinations are notcommon, but do occur in some users. Some aredisappointed because they get no reactions at all,while others describe illusions similar to those produceby LSD. Users complain of headaches, dry mouth,dizziness, and a general malaise. The oil in the seedscontains safrole, myristicin, and elemicin.KHATCatha edulis is a shrub native to East Africa. It isvariously called khat, kat, and qat. It is the leastknown of the masticatories in the West. MostAmerican had not heard of this stimulant until the"Desert Storm" operation when our newspapersreported that enemy soldiers were getting hopped-upon some exotic drug plant over there. Its leaves havebeen chewed by the inhabitants of that region and theArabian peninsula for centuries. It is a stimulant thatMuslims are permitted to use. The leaves containabout 1% d-norpseudo-ephedrine, a stimulant to thecentral nervous system.11.4 ! SOUTH PACIFICAlthough the South Pacific is a botanist's delightbecause of its rich flora, it is relatively poor inpsychoactive plants. The three species described hereare relatively unknown to those who have not visitedthe region. They are very popular masticatories.KAVAKava goes by several other names, including kava-kava, yangona, yaqona, and grog. It is prepared fromthe masticated roots of Piper methysticum, a relativeof black pepper. The shrub is widely cultivated in theSouth Pacific. A mildly intoxicating drink is prepared.Outsiders compare its flavor to dirty dish water. Itsactive principles, a series of pyrones, act on thecentral nervous system and the skeletal system toproduce a feeling of relaxation and reduced irritability,along with localized anesthetic effects. The lips andtongue go numb. The use of kava is often associatedwith important events in the life of a village, such asa wedding or the visit of an important person.Traditionally, kava ceremonies follow very preciserules. It is important that you know how to sit, whento sing, when to clap your hands, etc.' ' ' ' '"Kava drinking on Tongariki is a relatively relaxed andunceremonious affair, without the strict adherence toprescribed etiquette characteristic of kava drinking inmuch of the Pacific. It is prepared entirely by chewing,never by the use of mortars, graters, or othermechanical aids. Boys from pre-adolescent age toyoung adulthood usually do the chewing for theirkinsmen or guests, or out of courtesy to others. Olderyouths or young men mix, wash, and wring the kavafrom the chewed pulp. Girls and women mayoccasionally participate in the chewing, whereas thiswas not so in the past. Adolescents and, more rarely,women may drink kava without censure. It is drunk invarious places within the village proper, usually in aquiet house, and strict exclusion of children andwomen from the proximity and view of theproceedings has lapsed.Usually, half of a cocoanut shell or a bowl of the samecapacity is used to prepare kava and the full contents-- about 100 ml -- drunk slowly in one draught.Sometimes twice this quantity is drunk. A kava drinkerusually eats immediately after taking the kava; thekava is prepared while the evening meal is beingcooked. The effects come on in a half our or less, andthe drinking is thus usually postponed until food isready. Those who have drunk kava find a comfortableplace to sit, often beside a dying fire in the darkhouse, where they remain hunched over and avoidinglight and sound disturbances of all sorts. Conversationceases, and slowly they fall into a kava-inducedstupor, which is not true sleep. This stage occursabout an hour after drinking. From it they can bearoused by being addressed or gently shaken, but thisruins the effect they are seeking from the kava. A fewhours after they have drunk kava they arise and walkto their own houses to fall asleep promptly again;others remain where they have first 'fallen.' In earlymorning they appear fresh and without any 'hangover-'like sequelae. Those whom we have seen walking afew hours after the drinking are usually somewhatataxic [loss of motor coordination], photophobic[sensitive to light], and slowed in their reactions. Afew who have had a higher dose are extremely ataxicand could return to their homes only with assistancefrom the children or myself. There is no belligerencyor irritability -- only a quiet and friendly somnolenceassociated with the weakness of the lower limbs andthe accompanying ataxia.The drinkers reply rationally and are well oriented totime, place, and person; they respond intelligently,even sometimes quickly, to complex questions. Brightor moving lights, noise or other sound, touch, andeven the subdued bustle of nearby activities annoythem, and the villagers of all ages have extremerespect for this. In discussions the kava users refer toa heaviness and weakness of their extremities,particularly of the feet and legs, and to an earlierparesthesia ascending from their feet to their trunkand described with such words as 'numbness,''tingling,' and 'coldness.' ... I have taken pulse ratesand blood pressure measurements on a number ofkava drinkers at varying intervals from one to threehours after drinking and found no significant changein either from that observed on the same subjectsduring examinations in the daytime, when they had nokava for the preceding eighteen hours or more.Respiration is shallow and regular; deep tendonreflexes remain intact."-207-(D. C. Gajdusek in Holmstedt & Kline, 1967)BETEL NUT"She had few teeth... and had thin ravines running outfrom the corners of her mouth... usually filled withbetel juice which made her look as if her mouth hadbeen gashed by a rusty razor." (James A. Michener. Tales of the South Pacific)"Bloody Mary's chewing betel nuts; She is alwayschewing betel nuts; Bloody Mary's chewing betel nuts,and she don't use Pepsodent." (Oscar Hammerstein II. South Pacific)'''''Betel nut is the world's most popular masticatory. Itis estimated that about 10% of the world's people useit regularly. In Hindi, it is called pan. The betel nut isthe seed of Areca catechu, a member of the palmfamily. A sliver of seed is placed on the leaf of Piperbetle, a close relative of the more familiar blackpepper. A layer of lime is sprinkled over this. Thewhole thing is rolled up and placed in the mouthwhere we use our tongues to move it around, withoutbeing chewed up or swallowed. Early writers claimedthat the betel nut would, "... expel wind, removephlegm, kill germs, subdue bad odors, beautify themouth, remove impurities and induce love...." On theother hand, lime deposits on the teeth of old betel nutusers and the revolting habit of spitting red-stainedsaliva make it fairly easy to spot the habitue.The seeds contain several pyridine alkaloids, witharecoline being the most common and the mostphysiological active. The plant is used in human andin veterinary medicine to expel tapeworms.PITURIDouboisia hopwoodii is a member of the nightshadefamily. Plants of the genus are known for theirtoxicity, and the Australian aborigines have used themas fish and emu poisons, and as insecticides. They arecommercial sources of one of the belladonna alkaloids,scopolamine.Vegetative plant parts are smoked, often after havingbeen mixed with charcoal. Leaves are also formed intoa quid and then chewed as a masticatory. The quid istypically passed from one user to another, and storedtemporarily in the ear.11.5 ! NEW WORLDIn that we have occupied the Old World for a muchlonger time, it would be tempting to assume that thelist of psychoactive plants is much longer than that ofthe New World. For reasons that have not been fullyexplained, just the opposite is true.TOBACCO"In the middle of the gulf... I found a man in a canoecarrying a little piece of bread... a gourd of water...and some dry leaves which must be a thing very muchappreciated among them..." [Christopher Columbus, 13 October 1492]"One of the merveilles of the Hearbe, and that whichedoeth bryng most admiration, is the maner how thepriests of the Indias did use it.... [He] toke certainleaves of the Tabaco, and caste theim into the fire,and did receive the smoke of them at his mouthe, andat his nose with a cane, and in takyng of it, he felldoune uppon the grounde, as a dedde manne, andremainyng so, accordyng to the quantitie of the smokethat he had taken, and when the hearbe had doen hiswoorke, he did revive and awake, and gave theimtheir aunsweres, accordyng to the visions, andillusions which he sawe.... [Nicolas Monardes.