Not all outcomes were positive, as exemplifiedin the Physicians Health Study, including 499 patients withcardiovascular disorders, not revealing any association of higherplasma lycopene and CVD (Muller et al., 2016). Within theKuopio Ischaemic Heart Disease Risk Factor (KIHD), norelationship was reported between low serum lycopene and anincreased CVDmortality and sudden cardiac death, respectively,in Finnish, middle-aged men (Karppi et al., 2012; Muller et al.,2016).Vascular health depends on endothelial function, arterialstiffness, and the presence of atherosclerotic plaques. Thefollowing section will discuss the different methods to measurevascular health. Endothelial dysfunction enables developmentof the atherosclerotic plaque. The flow mediated dilatation ofthe brachial artery was traditionally used to assess endothelialfunction for a long period, but forearm plethysmographyand reactive hyperemia--peripheral arterial tonometry havebecome the gold standards for assessing endothelial vascularfunction (Kim et al., 2011; Gajendragadkar et al., 2014). Whilehyperemia--peripheral arterial tonometry is less operator-dependent and non-invasive, while being as reliable as thetraditional method, forearm plethysmography additionallyprovides mechanistic information related to nitric oxidesynthesis, is a marker for cardiovascular risk, and can improverisk prediction (Kim et al., 2011; Gajendragadkar et al., 2014).An increased arterial stiffness is one of the first structuraland functional changes of the vessel wall and is mainly causedby arteriosclerosis, atherosclerosis and vessel wall calcification(Cavalcante et al., 2011). Arterial stiffness is associated withcardiovascular risk and predicts cardiovascular disorders andmortality (Vlachopoulos et al., 2010; Mozos et al., 2017c). Pulsewave velocity (PWV) and augmentation indices are simple,noninvasive, inexpensive and validated methods used to assessarterial stiffness and as screening methods for the detection ofpre-clinical cardiovascular disorders (Vlachopoulos et al., 2010;Mozos et al., 2017a).Carotid intima-media thickness (IMT) assessed non-invasivelyby B-mode ultrasonography, is a simple, validated and safemethod used to measure the extent of subclinical atherosclerosis(Dwyer et al., 2004; Wood and Johnson, 2004; Hosseini et al.,2017; Kim and Youn, 2017). IMT is defined by the measurementof the dimension of the intima and media of the arterial wall,whereas a value >0.9mm is considered abnormal (Cooneyet al., 2015; Piepoli et al., 2016). Although IMT has beenconsidered as a surrogate measure of cardiovascular risk,predicting cardiovascular events, especiallymyocardial infarctionand stroke (O'Leary et al., 1999; Touboul, 2015; Piepoli et al.,2016; Hosseini et al., 2017; Pleskovic et al., 2017), both theAmerican and the European guidelines on cardiovascular diseaseprevention do not recommend the systematic measurement ofIMT to improve risk assessment (Goff et al., 2014; Piepoli et al.,2016). Major concerns of IMT include lack of standardization, itshigh variability and low intra-individual reproducibility (Piepoliet al., 2016). Additionally, a trained sonographer is requiredto limit variability of the results due to the patient or medicalequipment (Touboul, 2015). There are also methods availablethat can better predict cardiovascular events than IMT, mostprominently MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) that can be usedto monitor atherosclerotic plaques. Several methods are strongerpredictor of myocardial infarction than IMT, such as monitoringatherosclerotic plaques and exploring the carotid wall by MRI(because the adventitia is also included in the measurement ofthe wall thickness; Zhang et al., 2014). However, the resourcesneeded to access wall thickness by MRI are manifold higherthan using ultrasonography, but especially for patients withabnormal findings in IMT screenings, a subsequent MRI scanmight be useful to provide a more accurate description of theatherosclerotic plaque and the risk of major cardiovascular events(Zhang et al., 2014).Despite the inevitable influence of aging, vascular changes areat least partially reversible, and dietary changes may improvevascular function. Lycopene has several advantages, such asalmost no adverse reactions, its wide availability and lowcost (Gao et al., 2016). The present review aims to give acurrent overview of the mechanisms linking lycopene in thehuman diet and vascular changes, considering epidemiologicaldata, clinical observational, retrospective, intervention andrandomized studies, dietary and biomarker studies, in vitro andin vivo research and discussing preventive benefits of lycopeneintake in context of cardiovascular disease prevention.LYCOPENELycopene is a lipophilic, biologically active, unsaturated, acycliccarotenoid, with the chemical formula C40H56 (Figure 1). Inplants it is considered as an important intermediate of carotenoidsynthesis, but in human nutrition lycopene plays no role asprovitamin A precursor due to the absence of appropriateenzymes. Plant lycopene is usually present as all-trans isomer.Isomerization of the all-trans isomer into the more bioavailablecis-isomer, occurs under acidic conditions (e.g., gastric acid),due to exposure to light and thermal energy. Lycopene canbe found in tomatoes, watermelon, papaya, red grapefruits,apricots, and guava, and gives their red color (Kong et al., 2010;Gajendragadkar et al., 2014; Mozos et al., 2017c). Lycopenecontent increases during different stages of ripening of fruits,e.g., for tomatoes there is a steady increase in lycopene contentfrom the breaker to the red stage (Saini et al., 2017). WatermelonFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 521106Mozos et al. Lycopene and Vascular Healthpulp can also be used for lycopene extraction (Oberoi andSoqi, 2017) and is a rich source of cis-isomeric lycopene,abundant in higher concentrations than in tomatoes (Naz et al.,2014). Interestingly also the fungal plant pathogen Blakesleatrispora has been recognized as a commercial source to producelycopene (Mantzouridou and Tsimidou, 2008). Several foodshigh in lycopene content are classified as functional foods (Nazet al., 2014). Tomato juice, paste, puree, ketchup, sauce or souprepresent lycopene sources with improved bioavailability due tothermal treatment, but also because processing releases lycopenefrom the fibrous cell structure matrix (Basu and Imrhan, 2007;Thies et al., 2012; Burton-Freeman and Sesso, 2014).Not only lycopene intake counts, but also its serumconcentration may influence cardiovascular risk. Low serumand adipose tissue lycopene levels were correlated with earlyatherosclerosis, and major acute coronary and cerebrovascularevents, and were found to bemore reliable in risk assessment thanthe daily intake of lycopene (Agarwal and Rao, 2000; Rissanenet al., 2001; Kim et al., 2011). Oxidative stress and inflammationare responsible for a reduced level of antioxidants (Kim et al.,2010). Smoking is a potent oxidative stressor, able to impairarterial elasticity and endothelial function (Kim et al., 2010;Mozos et al., 2017b), and lycopene was the only major serumcarotenoid able to reduce the atherosclerotic risk in current andformer smokers according to the Rotterdam Study (Klipstein-Grobusch et al., 2000).CARDIOVASCULAR PROTECTIVEMECHANISMSLycopene has several cardiovascular beneficial effects, suchas an antioxidative, antiinflammatory, anti-atherogenic,cardioprotective, and antiplatelet effect, improving endothelialfunction (nitric oxide bioavailability and blood flow), themetabolic profile (by impairing cholesterol synthesis) and bloodpressure control (Figure 2) (Klipstein-Grobusch et al., 2000;Heber and Lu, 2002; Ahuja et al., 2006; Basu and Imrhan, 2007;Verghese et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2010; Kong et al., 2010; Riccioniet al., 2010; Ried and Fakler, 2011; Bohm, 2012; Wolak andParan, 2013; Gajendragadkar et al., 2014; Naz et al., 2014; Mulleret al., 2016; Cheng et al., 2017; Milani et al., 2017).Antioxidative and Protective EndothelialEffectsLycopene is considered an effective singlet oxygen quencherin the carotenoids group (Kong et al., 2010; Viuda-Martoset al., 2014). It is a much more potent antioxidant than alpha-tocopherol (10xmore potent) or beta-carotene (twice as potent)(Kim et al., 2010; Kong et al., 2010). Lycopene modulates alsothe production of antioxidant enzymes, such as superoxidedismutase and catalase (Bohm, 2012; Pereira et al., 2017).Lycopene can also scavenge peroxynitrite, resulting oxidizedlycopene products (Pisoschi and Pop, 2015).Oxidative stress causes endothelial dysfunction due touncoupling of the nitric oxide synthase and oxidative injury ofthe endothelial cells (Mozos and Luca, 2017). Both are associatedwith inflammation. By reducing oxidative stress and reactiveoxygen species, lycopene increases the bioavailability of nitricoxide (NO), improves endothelium-dependent vasodilationand reduces protein, lipids, DNA, and mitochondrial damage(Hollman et al., 2011; Naz et al., 2014; Nakamura et al., 2017;Abdel-Daim et al., 2018).Endothelial NO enables vasodilation, inhibits plateletfunctions, and adhesion and transmigration of white blood cells,and reduces smooth muscle cell proliferation (Opatrilova et al.,2017). Watermelon supplementation, due to L-citrulline content,increases plasma L-arginine, enabling NO production (Figueroaet al., 2017), because NO is synthesized from L-arginine byNO synthase in virtually all cell types (Jobgen et al., 2006).Lycopene supplementation improved endothelial mediatedvasodilation in cardiovascular disease patients, but not inhealthy controls (Gajendragadkar et al., 2014), suggesting theimportance of lycopene in secondary cardiovascular prevention(Costa-Rodrigues et al., 2018).In summary, lycopene scavenges both reactive oxygenand nitrogen species, increases the production of antioxidantenzymes and protects the endothelial cells from oxidativedamage.Anti-inflammatory EffectInflammation is related to atherosclerosis, arterial stiffness, andmajor cardiovascular events. The anti-inflammatory role oflycopene was demonstrated by several studies (Hung et al., 2008;Kim et al., 2010; Xu et al., 2012; He et al., 2016). Hung et al.revealed that lycopene can inhibit TNF-alpha induced NF-kappaB activation, expression of intracellular adhesion molecule-1(ICAM-1), and interaction between monocytes and endothelialcells, which might explain the cardiovascular benefits of lycopene(Hung et al., 2008). In a different study with Korean women,lycopene levels were found to correlate with cytokines, but nocorrelation with acute phase reactants was found, probably dueto lycopene's inhibitory effect on the formation of oxidizedLDL (Kim et al., 2010). Xu et al. found an inverse associationof lycopene with vascular cell adhesion protein 1 (VCAM-1),which enable adhesion of monocytes to the endothelial cells,but could not verify any association between serum lycopeneconcentration and atherosclerosis in their study as suggested byearlier studies (Xu et al., 2012). In the same context, Gianetti et al.reported no significant correlations between plasma lycopeneand soluble adhesion molecules (Gianetti et al., 2002). Lycopeneobtained from red guava exerts several anti-inflammatoryeffects besides modulation of inflammatory mediators, suchas inhibition of leukocyte mobilization, stabilization of mastcells, and inhibition of genes which expression is involved ininflammation (Vasconcelos et al., 2017).Lycopene can also reduce the secretion of metalloproteinasesby macrophages and inhibit T lymphocyte activation (Thieset al., 2017). Recently, lycopene was found as an effectiveantiglycation agent, able to reduce the synthesis of advancedglycation end-products (AGE), downregulating the expressionof their receptors (RAGE), which further contributes to vesselprotection (Tabrez et al., 2015; Thies et al., 2017).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 521107Mozos et al. Lycopene and Vascular HealthFIGURE 1 | Chemical structures of lycopene and other carotenoids.Tomato products reduced oxidative stress related topostprandial lipemia and the associated inflammatory reactionin a study including normal weight participants (Burton-Freeman et al., 2012). He et al. reported the benefits of lycopenein preventing transplant vasculopathy, demonstrating thatintimal hyperplasia and smooth muscle cell proliferation werereduced by the administration of lycopene and the infiltrationof inflammatory cells in allograft vessels was reduced in ananimal model (He et al., 2016). Lycopene can ameliorate allograftatherosclerosis via downregulating Rho-associated kinases andregulating the expression of key factors through NO/cGMPpathways (He et al., 2016). On the other hand, the benefitsof the tomato-rich diet were not directly related to the anti-inflammatory effect according to a randomized study including103 apparently healthy volunteers, after 300 g tomatoes daily for1 month or placebo (Blum et al., 2007).Watermelon was shown to reduce levels of inflammationby downregulation of the proinflammatory mediatorcyclooxygenase 2 (COX-2), impairing prostaglandin E2 and I2production, which reduces the progression of cardiovasculardisorders (Sellers et al., 2010; Hong et al., 2015). Watermelonpowder supplementation exerts an anti-inflammatory effectsimilar to COX-2 inhibitors or conventional non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs (Hong et al., 2015).High mobility group box 1 (HMGB1), a non-histone DNAbinding protein, produced by necrotic and immune cells,exposed to pro-inflammatory signals, has an important pro-inflammatory effect by attracting and activating inflammatorycells and mediators and binding to RAGE and toll-likereceptors, related to fatal outcomes (Lee et al., 2012). Leeet al. demonstrated that lycopene inhibits adhesion moleculesexpression, which impair HMGB1--induced monocyte adhesionFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 521108Mozos et al. Lycopene and Vascular HealthFIGURE 2 | Cardiovascular benefits of lycopene [supported by in vivo (*) and/or in vitro (8) findings].and transmigration (Lee et al., 2012). Lycopene has been alsoshown to inhibit lipopolysaccharide-induced HMGB1 releaseand HMGB1-mediated secretion of TNF-alpha and secretoryphospholipase A2 (Lee et al., 2012).Oxysterols, the result of cholesterol auto-oxidation,accumulate in the subendothelial arterial layer, exertingoxidative and pro-inflammatory roles and favoring theatherosclerotic process (Palozza et al., 2011). Lycopene impairsoxysterol-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines production inhuman macrophages and oxysterol-induced ROS production,limiting the formation of atherosclerotic plaque (Palozza et al.,2011).Lycopene exerts a cardioprotective effect against atrazineinduced cardiac injury due to its anti-inflammatory effect, byblocking the NF-kappa B pathway and NO production (Li et al.,2017).Considering the mentioned anti-inflammatory mechanisms(Figure 3), including decrease of adhesion molecules, pro-inflammatory cytokines, inhibition of leukocyte migrationand genes involved in inflammation, impaired monocyte-endothelium interaction, T lymphocytes activation and synthesisof AGE and RAGE and downregulation of cyclooxygenase 2,lycopene can be useful in the therapy for vascular inflammatorydisorders.Modulation of LipidsLycopene is transported in the circulation by lipoproteins andis actively taken up into adipocytes (McEneny et al., 2013).Lycopene is a regulator of cholesterol levels by inhibition ofHMG-CoA reductase (like statins) and down-regulation ofproprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 mRNA synthesis.These results suggest that lycopene supplementation could beespecially beneficial for patients with statin intolerance (SultanAlvi et al., 2017). Changes in hepatic gene expression, suchas reduced expression in fatty acid synthase, responsible forfatty acid storage, were described after watermelon powderconsumption in rats (Hong et al., 2015). Carbonic anhydrase IIIand adenylate kinase 2 were involved in the lipid-lowering andantioxidant effects of tomatoes (Hsu et al., 2008).