However, inHCT-1 colon cancer cell line treated with chelidonine [1], theNFkB activation was blocked by inhibition of IkBa degradationand nuclear translocation of p65 (an NFkB subunit) as well asmitogen-activated protein kinase pathway activation by blockingc-Jun N-terminal kinase and p38 phosphorylation (Zhang et al.,2018).Alkaloid fraction and sanguinarine [12] were efficient againstcarrageenan-induced rat paw edema but chelerythrine [9]showed lower activity (Lanfeld et al., 1981). However, in the laterstudy by Mikolajczak et al. (2015), various fractions of waterextract at relatively high doses of 200 mg/kg body weight failed toalleviate the inflammation in the similar model. The crude waterextract treatment actually aggravated the paw inflammation.Conversely, the extracts containing mainly coptisine [31] andchelidonine [1] were effective in hot plate test for antinociceptiveproperties that suggests a supramedullary way of action.Chelerythrine [9] inhibited inflammatory and pain reaction inseveral in vivo and cell models employed by Niu et al. (2011).In vivo, i.p administration of the alkaloid (1-5 mg/kg) alleviatedmouse ear edema, rat paw edema, and abdominal constriction(pain reaction). Also, the isolated peritoneal macrophages upontreatment with 0.0001-1ug/ml chelerythrine [9] had dosedependently reduced PGE2 and COX-2 expression.In NC/Nga mice model for atopic dermatitis induced byDNCB (1-chloro-2,4-dinitrobenzene), the hydroethanolic extractfrom aerial parts alleviated several measures of dermatitissuch as itching behavior and skin severity (Yang et al., 2011).Interestingly, the oral administration at doses of 200mg and 400mg/kg were even more efficient than topical application as 1and 2% smear. The IgE levels were put back to control valuesupon the higher dose oral administration and reduced by about50% after topical treatment. Also, IL-4 and TNF-a serum levelswere significantly reduced but remained higher than in controlanimals.In an animal model of ovoalbumine-provoked asthma,chelidonine [1] suppressed eosinophile-mediated inflammation.The activity at the doses of 1 and 5 mg/kg body weight wassimilar to 0.5 mg/kg body weight dexamethasone. Among theseveral monitored parameters such as different pro-inflammatorycell population counts in bronchoalveolar lovage fluid and lungs,IgE, and cytokine protein and transcripts levels, some wereinhibited even stronger than by dexamethasone (total BALF cells,Gr-1+/CD11b+ cells, IL-4), whereas others were inhibited eitherFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299184Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majussimilarly or weaker than the standard drug. It suggests a specificmechanism involving STAT6 and Foxp3 transcription pathways(Kim et al., 2015).Yet another inflammation-based conditionabsent from list of traditional indications, in which C. majus wasfound to be efficient is arthritis (Lee et al., 2007). In the micemodel of collagen-induced arthritis, aqueous-methanol extractat the oral doses of 40 and 400 mg/kg body weight, suppressedprogress of joint damage as well as a set of studied inflammation-related cellular and biochemical parameters. In the higher doseregime, the incidence of arthritis decreased from 100 to <40%during 4 weeks. Cell invasion into lymph nodes, spleen, thymusand synovial fluid was inhibited in all organs, but most markedeffect was in lymph nodes and joints. Among the tested Tcells populations, there was an insignificant decrease of CD4+,CD8+, and CD3e+ cells, but a quite remarkable decrease ofCD19+ B cells, almost to the level of non-arthritic animals.On the other hand, the number of regulatory CD4+CD25+T cells increased significantly that suggests mobilizing adaptiveresponse of the immune system to counteract and balance theexcessive inflammatory processes. Suppression of inflammationmediators such as IL-6, TNFa, IFNg was observed as well aslowered level of IgG and IgM but the latter only upon the higherdose treatment. However, the extract was not standardized an noparticular compound or phytochemical class could be pinpointedas determining this potent anti-arthritic action.A couple of reports indicate a potential of C. majusagainst Alzheimer's progression due to significant inhibitionof acetylcholinesterase (AChE) without influence onbutyrylcholinesterase (BuChE), which is a desired profilefor potential drug-likeliness. The extract inhibited AChE in vitroby 98% at a concentration of 200ug/ml and BuChE by only 13%.The isolated alkaloid 8-hydroxydihydrochelerythrine [10a] wasthe most active and AChE-selective (IC50 0.61uM and selectivityindex 56.7) (Cho et al., 2006). In another study, chelidonine[1] and other active alkaloids were completely unselective withsimilar IC50 values against AChE and BuChE (Cahlikova et al.,2010). Interestingly, the specific AChE inhibiting activity bycoptisine [31]-rich extract was discovered in vivo in a herbivoreinsect Lymantria dispar in which this activity contributes tokilling the pest (Zou et al., 2017). By this property the plant isprotecting itself from herbivore attack and it would be a feasiblebiological explanation of the therapeutic potential existence inthe wild growing species.The analgetic properties of alkaloids, mentioned before(Mikolajczak et al., 2015) can be explained by the observationsof interaction with glycine transporters (Shin et al., 2003;Jursky and Baliova, 2011). The water extract inhibited theglycine-activated and enhanced glutamate-activated ion currentin isolated rat periaqueductal gray (PAG) neurons studied bypatch-clamp technique (Shin et al., 2003). Chelerythrine [9] andsanguinarine [12] selectively inhibited GlyT1 (but not GlyT2)in the micromolar concentrations (5-10uM) while berberine[28] showed no inhibition in transfected HEK293T cells. GlyT1inhibition was time-dependent, noncompetitive and increasedwith glycine concentration. Interestingly, chelerythrine [9] effectwas reversible while sanguinarine [12] persisted through washingout (Jursky and Baliova, 2011).Clinical StudiesQuite typically for many traditionally used medicinal plants, theclinical evidence of efficacy remains scarce and C. majus is noexception. Therefore, the relatively numerous pharmacologicalstudies need rigorous verification by properly designed andsupervised clinical studies. At present, most of the allegedlycurative properties toward some important complaints remainunconfirmed, even if there is strong pre-clinical evidence. Themillennia long tradition of use becomes confirmed in a significantpart even if some mythical indications turned out to be invalidor perhaps have been misunderstood or distorted when passedthrough generations of practitioners and authors.Several clinical studies exist on the compound preparationSTW-5 containing 10% of C. majus herb extract (Drug-to-Extract Ratio = 1:3) as one of nine ingredients. The gastricdisorders are the main indications and was evidenced bothclinically and pharmacologically (Von Arnim et al., 2007; Abdel-Aziz et al., 2017). Certainly, there is no proof that C. majus wasthe essential ingredient in this preparation but the functionaldyspepsia/postprandial distress syndrome it seems to be oneof the most active (Abdel-Aziz et al., 2017) influencing acidregulation and antrum contraction as well asmoderatemitigationof inflammatory reactions. The mechanisms behind these effectswere also studied in vitro using cell lines showing anti-inflammatory activity (Schneider et al., 2016). IFN-g dependentstat1 phosphorylation was postulated as a putative mechanism ofaction in which C. majus extract was among the averagely active,but apparently the whole composition had superior propertiessuggesting synergistic rather than additive effect.A series of older clinical trials were performed on aproduct containing C. majus extract to test the efficacy inpatients with bile tract and gall bladder complaints and gallstones. These studies, reviewed in detail in the EMA report,suggest significant improvement of many clinical parameters.These included: subjective complaints (pain attacks, feelingof fullness), physician's examination (sonography of gallbladder and liver, liver palpation, meteorism, jaundice) andlaboratory tests (bilirubin, transaminases, blood sedimentation).The patient conditions in which the preparation containingC. majus alkaloids (in daily doses of ca. 0.2mg alkaloid sumas chelidonine [1]) was administered with positive outcomewere for example: cholelithiasis, cholangitis/cholecystitis, post-cholecystectomy, and alcohol toxic liver damage. In the entirearea of gastrointestinal/hepatic complaints, one can estimate thenumber of human subjects involved in to date published clinicalliterature as exceeding 1,500.An impressive number of studies suggest antitumor propertiesof the apparently semisynthetic product--UkrainR(c)that showedefficiency in several in vitro studies on an assortment of neoplasticand non-transformed cell lines (Capistrano et al., 2015) but it bylarge failed to demonstrate clinically relevant activity in humans.Several case reports have been published that suggest its beneficialaction in a range of malignancies, such as melanoma, metastaticbreast cancer, various carcinomas.The randomized clinical trials (RCTs) using Ukrain R(c) werereviewed over a decade ago (Ernst and Schmidt, 2005) with aconclusion that despite the intensive publishing activity of severalFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299185Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majusgroups testing Ukrain R(c) against miscellaneous malignacies withvery promising outcome, most of these data are full ofshortcomings that prevent unequivocal credibility. Since then,only a few more studies have been realized but it is still far fromdefinite resolving of this issue, especially in the situation that thechemical analyses, some of which were even co-authored by theinventor (Jesionek et al., 2016) proved that it is not the compoundwhich was initially claimed.Most of the RTCs published were full of inconsistencies oreven appeared unreliable due to the insufficient informationregarding the methodology. Despite the spectacular results insuch malignancies as pancreatic or terminal colorectal cancer,serious doubts remain about the evidence provided in some ofthese trials. Some of the studies are so poorly documented that itwould undermine the validity of the results. For example, missingor suspect randomization method, missing methods for tumordimensions measuring, unclear protocols, subjective outcomeevaluation, lack of proper statistics. Also, a great majority of theclinical trials and case reports were published in one journal.Nonetheless, these few reports on Ukrain R(c) remain the onlyavailable clinical data focusing specifically on C. majus andstrongly suggesting extraordinary antitumor potential.Since the potential conflicts of interest, reliability of theclinical and chemical data of this product have been disputedrepeatedly (Farrugia and Slevin, 2000, 2001; Nowicky, 2001; Ernstand Schmidt, 2005), more studies are indeed mandatory also inthis aspect of C. majus as a source of highly potent substanceswith multidirectional mechanisms of action. Nonetheless, itshould be borne in mind that approval of an extract/mixturebased drug for clinical practice in such a sensitive field asoncology is highly improbable at the moment, and most likelyit would remain so in the near future. Thus, further studies aremandatory that would focus on using individual alkaloids aslead structures for drugs that would target multiple anticancermechanisms. On the other hand, clinical data on efficacy ofvarious C. majus products used in complementary or adjuvanttherapy may facilitate the tedious process of drug developmentwithout changing the existing paradigm of chemotherapybased on combination of chemically defined substances. Quitedifferently from the relatively safe (with limitations describedbelow) gastrointestinal and cutaneous indications, the cautiouspolicies of EMA and other agencies demonstrated in caseof declared anticancer actions are reasonable and should becontinued.Toxicology and Safety IssuesRepeatedly, studies and case reports occur that suggest hepaticinjury/hepatotoxicity. It is especially important because one ofthe main indications of C. majus relates to liver and biliarytract disorders due to its cholagogue and hepatoprotectiveactivities. The incidence of hepatotoxic cases and the possibleclinical importance and safety issues have been reviewedrecently (Pantano et al., 2017). Specifically, the results fromanimal studies are ambiguous and suggest a rather complexmixture of various mechanisms, such as inducing or alleviatingoxidative stress or modulation of hepatic enzymes such asMAO and SOD, or slowing down mitochondrial respiration.The mitochondrial toxicity was related to DNA intercalatingproperties of sanguinarine [12] and chelerythrine [9].In humans, numerous reports have been recorded since the1990's. The main symptoms included cholestasis and mild tosevere liver impairments with quite well documented causality ina majority of cases. In total, over 50 such cases have been reportedfrom Europe, mostly from Germany (Etxenagusia et al., 2000;Stickel et al., 2003).However, no certain constituent has been directly linked to thetoxicity of the herb. On the contrary, it has been suggested thatdrug interactions rather than intrinsic toxicity are responsible forreported cases. Also, individual hypersensitivity or allergy has tobe considered. Latex contained in the fresh plant is also possiblymore toxic or allergenic than the dried material (EMA report,2011).In an in vitro study on HepG2 cells treated with varioussolvent extracts (Orland et al., 2014), the biotransformationand toxicity-related gene expression was enhanced, butthe dichloromethane extract richest in chelidonine [1] andtotal alkaloids was the weakest inducer and least cytotoxic,whereas ethanolic extracts containing more coptisine [31] andsanguinarine [12] were more cytotoxic. However, the in vivorelevance of these results is uncertain. In rats, the high doses (upto 3g/kg body weight; Mazzanti et al., 2009) did not elicit anysymptoms of hepatic injury and did not alter liver function.Despite proven interaction of sanguinarine [12] and otheralkaloids with DNA, no genotoxicity was observed using wellestablished methods such as Ames tests or in vivo DNA damage(EMA report, 2011).Nonetheless, uncontrolled internal use of unstandardizedpreparations should be discouraged and appropriatepharmacovigilance measures should be implemented to preventunnecessary complications following C. majus administration.The comprehensive pharmacotoxicological investigation is alsoneeded and should encompass establishing toxic doses range ofvarious forms and preparations as well as individual constituents.The European Medicine Agency therefore published thefollowing recommendation:"Two possible therapeutic indications were proposed for themonograph:Traditional herbal medicinal product:1) For symptomatic relief of digestive disorders such asdyspepsia and flatulence (oral intake)2) For treatment of warts, callus and corns (cutaneous use)"(EMA, 2011).However, based on the reported undesirable effects, includingcases of liver damage, special precautions are necessary, especiallyduring pregnancy and lactation, people suffering from liverdiseases or taking liver-damaging drugs.CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE OUTLOOKSMuch effort has been put into the recognition of bioactivecompounds contained in the extracts of C. majus and themechanisms of their action. Numerous reports have beenFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299186Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majuspublished about its effectiveness in treatment of different medicalcomplaints, such as gastrointenstinal and hepatobiliary disordersor cutaneous ailments caused by a microbial or viral infection.Next to the huge number of scientific reports indicating thebeneficial effect of C. majus, information about its potentialtoxic properties emerged. The use of herbal remedy carriesthe risk of adverse effects, which is why it is important toknow the raw material. Official recommendations do not excludethe use of C. majus as traditional herbal medicinal product.Therefore, further research on the mechanisms of action duringtreatment should be carried out. It is also important to controlthe phytochemical composition of the raw material both inconventional growing conditions and in vitro cultures. The moreso, because the potential risk of carcinogenesis and hepatotoxicityis still not well documented.Finally, we conclude that the millenia long history ofChelidonium in folk, traditional, and official medicine is far fromcoming to the end. On the contrary, recent years witnessed arevival of advanced pharmacological andmechanistic approachesusing both native complexes and individual components indiscovery of the therapeutic potential of this herb. We arequite convinced that in the near future, at least some ofthe already known and evidence-based properties should andwould find their place in officially recognized therapeuticprocedures. Moreover, new discoveries should broaden the scopeof traditional usage and deliver better preparations, especiallycombining different classes of active molecules such as proteins,alkaloids, chelidonic acid, and perhaps also polyphenols. Toachieve it, much more joined and interdisciplinary efforts arenecessary. Further, the plant's diversity on different levels must bethoroughly evaluated and optimal combination of the complexprofile should be established for various target applications.