On the otherhand, NO stimulates fatty acid oxidation and lipolysis in adiposecells (Jobgen et al., 2006; Hong et al., 2015).Lycopene is not able to increase HDL cholesterol, but wasshown to improve the LDL/HDL ratio, HDL functionality andreduced the accumulation of cholesterol in the rabbit aorta,Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 521109Mozos et al. Lycopene and Vascular HealthFIGURE 3 | Anti-inflammatory effects of lycopene. MMPs, matrixmetalloproteinases; COX-2, cyclooxigenase 2; AGE, advanced glycationend-products; RAGE, receptors of AGE.underlining the beneficial effects of lycopene during initialstages of atherosclerosis (Lorenz et al., 2012; Thies et al.,2017). However, a recent meta-analysis found that significantreductions in total and LDL cholesterol were revealed only atdoses of, at least, 25mg lycopene/day in human subjects, and theeffects were comparable with low-dose statinmedication, withoutconcomitant side effects (Ried and Fakler, 2011; Lorenz et al.,2012). Fecal cholesterol excretion increases with levels of dietarylycopene due to decreased intestinal cholesterol absorption. Thiscan be explained by the insight that increased fecal excretionimpairs the enterohepatic circuit of bile acids, thus increasing theconversion of cholesterol to bile acids (Verghese et al., 2008). Thelipid lowering properties of lycopene involve also an increasedactivity of LDL receptors in macrophages (Li et al., 2015; Chenget al., 2017).Lycopene can lower synthesis of dysfunctional HDL,modulating HDL functionality toward an antiatherogenicphenotype, with a low serum amyloid A level and beneficialchanges of the activity of HDL remodeling enzymes (cholesterolester transfer protein and lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase)(McEneny et al., 2013). A hypotriglyceridemic effect of tomatojuice was seen only in subjects with initial high serum triglyceridelevels (Li et al., 2015).Lycopen can also regulate the hepatic lipid metabolism andcounteracts the hepatic steatosis induced by a high-fat diet,due to sirtuins (SIRT1) induction and activation, being able tosuppresses lipogenesis, to stimulate lipid catabolism in the liverand skeletal muscles and lipid mobilization in the white adiposetissue (Lomb et al., 2010; Li et al., 2015). Another mechanism ableto ameliorate liver steatosis, by lycopene, was described in miceand is related to decrease of fatty acid binding protein 7 due tobinding to microRNA-21 (Ahn et al., 2012; Li et al., 2015).In summary, lycopene has lipid lowering properties, reducingthe total and LDL cholesterol, triglyceride level, LDL oxidation,and synthesis of dysfunctional HDL.Anti-aggregative EffectPlatelets are involved in the pathogenesis of the atheroscleroticplaque, development of acute thrombotic events and restenosisafter endovascular procedures (Krasinska et al., 2017; O'Kennedyet al., 2017). Another cardiovascular beneficial effect of lycopene,protecting against myocardial infarction and stroke, is itsantiplatelet activity, which is concentration dependent, and wasdemonstrated in vivo and in vitro (Sawardekar et al., 2016).Several mechanisms were considered in explaining the reversibleantiplatelet effect of lycopene, such as the interaction withthromboxane, thrombin, collagen, von Willebrand factor, P-selectin and inflammatory mediators, the influence on calciumand cyclic guanosine monophosphate signaling and ADP-mediated aggregation (Sawardekar et al., 2016; Krasinskaet al., 2017). It was noticed that lycopene can potentiatethe antiplatelet effect of aspirin, which requires low lycopenediet in patients on secondary prophylaxis with aspirin due tothe potential bleeding risk (Sawardekar et al., 2016). On theother hand, in high cardiovascular risk, aspirin (ASP) resistantpatients, or those with ASP contraindications, high risk ofcomplications after antiplatelet therapy or hyperactive platelets(obese, sedentary, hypertensive, diabetic, aging patients, andsmokers), lycopene could have an important contribution incardiovascular prophylaxis (Sawardekar et al., 2016; Krasinskaet al., 2017; O'Kennedy et al., 2017).Antihypertensive EffectLycopene has antihypertensive effects due to inhibition of theangiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) and due to its antioxidanteffect, reducing oxidative stress induced by angiotensin-IIand indirectly enhancing production of nitric oxide in theendothelium (Li and Xu, 2013; Belovic et al., 2016; Khanet al., 2016; Han and Liu, 2017). A study including 8,556 adultoverweight and obese participants demonstrated association oflycopene and lycopene/uric acid ratio with lower prevalenceof hypertension (Han and Liu, 2017). Paran et al. reporteda decrease in both systolic and diastolic blood pressure in54 patients with moderate hypertension, treated with ACEinhibitors or calcium channel blockers, after 6 weeks of tomatoextract supplementation, suggesting a cause-effect relationship(Paran et al., 2009). Li et al. concluded, in a metanalysis,that lycopene supplementation (more than 12 mg/day) mightsignificantly reduce systolic, but not diastolic blood pressure, inprehypertensive or hypertensive patients (Li and Xu, 2013).Angiotensin II induces, besides direct vasoconstriction andoxidative stress, also vascular smooth muscle cells phenotypictransformation and production of inflammatory cytokines (Renet al., 2017), and lycopene might impair the mentioned pathways,as well.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 521110Mozos et al. Lycopene and Vascular HealthAnti-atherosclerotic MechanismsBesides improving endothelial function, oxidative stress(preventing oxidation of LDL) and metabolic profile, the anti-inflammatory and antiplatelet effect, lycopene has several otheranti-atherosclerotic contributions (Figure 4), such as inhibitionof vascular smooth muscle cell (VSMC) proliferation and foamcell formation (Napolitano et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2014).In general, not all studies confirm the relationship betweenlycopene and early atherosclerosis (Kim et al., 2010).Contractile VSMC change to a proliferative and migratoryphenotype during the atherosclerotic process, enablingmigrationof VSMC into the intima and production of the extracellularmatrix of the plaque (Karagiannis et al., 2013). Such changesin phenotype are called "phenotypic modulation" (Manabe andNagai, 2003) and play an important role in vascular remodeling,not only due to atherosclerosis, but also in hypertension anddiabetic macroangiopathy (Ren et al., 2017). Lycopene cansuppress VSMCs proliferation, due to inhibiting G1 phase cellsentry into the S phase of the cell cycle, related to its antioxidativeeffect (Chen et al., 2010), and not due to the inhibition ofmatrix metalloproteinases (Lo et al., 2007). Minimally-oxidizedLDL can induce phenotypic modulation of VSMC (Karagianniset al., 2013), and synthesis of oxidized LDL may be impairedby lycopene (Kim et al., 2010). Lycopene may block VSMCmigration and proliferation also by direct binding to platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and inhibiting PDGF-signaling(Lo et al., 2007), or due to it antioxidant effect, considering thatreactive oxygen species accelerate the switch from the contractileto the synthetic phenotype (Sung et al., 2005).Lycopene has also barrier integrity activity in the endothelialmembrane, by blocking the activation of CD14 and TollFIGURE 4 | Anti-atherosclerotic effect of lycopene. oxLDL, oxidized LDL;VSMC, vascular smooth muscle cells.like receptor-4 expression (Bae and Bae, 2011) and impairsthe apoptosis of endothelial cells in vitro, by disrupting theupregulation of p53 and caspase 3 mRNA (Tang et al., 2009).Cardioprotective EffectsRecent studies emphasized the cardioprotective effectsof lycopene. An experimental study including rats withisoproterenol induced myocardial infarction, demonstratedimproved ECG findings (shorter QT and RR intervals andQRS complexes, reduced ST segment elevation) if lycopene waspreviously administrated, related to its cell membrane stabilizingand antioxidant properties (Aman et al., 2012). Supplementationof lycopene in the same study also prevented alteration inhemodynamic parameters (systolic, diastolic, and mean bloodpressure), biochemical and inflammatory markers, apoptoticchanges, and reduced the size of myocardial infarction due tothe antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties of lycopene(Aman et al., 2012; Wong et al., 2017).Tomato and lycopene supplementation attenuated cardiac-remodeling and improved diastolic dysfunction after myocardialinfarction according to a study including male Wistar rats,enabled by impairing type I and type III collagen content inthe left ventricle, reduced cardiomyocyte death, expression ofmiRNAs and by the anti-inflammatory effect and reduction ofoxidative stress (Pereira et al., 2017). Wang et al. administeredlycopene in infarcted rats for 28 days, revealing an increasedejection fraction compared to controls, associated with decreasedcollagen fraction in the peri-infarct zone, due to inhibition of p38mitogen-activated protein kinase and matrix metalloproteinase9 expression (Wang et al., 2014). Lycopene effect on interstitialcollagen accumulation was not confirmed by Anjos Ferreira et al.,in a study including male Wistar rats and testing the effect oflycopene on doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity (Anjos Ferreiraet al., 2007). The anti-inflammatory effect of lycopene has alsoa contribution in reversing ventricular remodeling, by inhibitingthe nuclear factor-kB signaling pathway (He et al., 2015).Lycopene might also serve as a cardioprotective agentagainst several drugs. The cardioprotective effect of lycopenewas demonstrated in the case of tulathromycin, a macrolideantibiotic, and diclofenac sodium, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, by Abdel-Daim et al., in a study includingSwiss albino mice, and was attributed to its antioxidant activity(Abdel-Daim et al., 2018). Lycopene can also protect againstthe cardiotoxicity induced by doxorubicin (Karimi et al., 2005;Anjos Ferreira et al., 2007; Abushouk et al., 2017), isoproterenol(Aman et al., 2012; Mohamadin et al., 2012), and atrazine (Liet al., 2017).Concluding, lycopene supplementation is beneficial for earlyand late prognosis in myocardial infarction. It may reducemyocardial infarction size and related electrocardiographic,hemodynamic, and biochemical changes (Aman et al.,2012). Lycopene also reverses ventricular extracellular matrixremodeling after an acute coronary event, by inhibitingmyocardial fibrosis and preventing apoptosis and necrosis ofcardiomyocytes, its anti-inflammatory effect and the ability toincrease left ventricular function, preventing development ofheart failure and increasing survival rates (Aman et al., 2012;Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 521111Mozos et al. Lycopene and Vascular HealthWang et al., 2014; He et al., 2015). Considering difficultiesand high cost of early revascularization and significant sideeffects of cardiovascular drugs, lycopene could represent a safeand effective option in controlling post infarction ventricularremodeling (Wang et al., 2014).Lycopene and Endoplasmic ReticulumStress (ERS)The endoplasmic reticulum has several functions related tointracellular calcium storage, lipid and protein synthesis, andmodification (Schonthal, 2012). Disturbance of those functionscauses "endoplasmic reticulum stress" (ERS) involved inmyocardial ischemia/reperfusion injury (Gao et al., 2016). Thecell reacts to ERS by initiating an "unfolded protein response,"including several mechanisms, enabling cellular adaptation andsurvival or, in severe cases, apoptosis (Schonthal, 2012).Lycopene protects the cardiomyocytes by relieving ERSand preventing apoptosis, through stimulation of adenosine 5-monophosphate-activated proteinkinase, the transcription factorCHOP (C/EBP homologous protein), p-JNK and Caspasepathways (Xu et al., 2015; Gao et al., 2016). However, highlycopene levels might be toxic to the cardiomyocytes (Gao et al.,2016).PRECLINICAL STUDIESLycopene supplementation for 4 weeks strongly reduced totaland LDL serum cholesterol and the amount of cholesterolin the aorta, but the surface lipid accumulation in the aortaand IMT were not significantly reduced and no impairmentof vasoreactivity or increase of pro-oxidant parameters weredetected in New Zealand White rabbits after either a standard ora high-cholesterol diet (Lorenz et al., 2012). Although lycopenesuppressed cholesterol uptake and intestinal absorption andincreased fecal cholesterol excretion in rabbits, it did not decreasethe expression of HMG-CoA reductase (Lorenz et al., 2012).Hu et al. reported anti-atherosclerotic effects for bothlycopene and fluvastatin, in the aorta, in rabbits, after a high-fatdiet (Hu et al., 2008; He et al., 2009). Verghese et al. also revealeda significant decrease in the atherosclerotic plaque formationwith the consumption of lycopene in a study including NewZealand male rabbits, receiving a high cholesterol diet. Furtherobserved effects include an improved serum lipid profile as wellas reduction in total cholesterol, LDL and triglycerides (Vergheseet al., 2008). Hsu reported, besides reduction in total and LDLcholesterol and plasma malondialdehyde (MDA) levels, also anincrease in HDL cholesterol in hamsters fed a 9% tomato pastecontaining 0.2% cholesterol, after 8 weeks (Hsu et al., 2008).Watanabe Heritable Hyperlipidemic rabbits were used in astudy by Frederiksen et al. demonstrating that lycopene didnot influence cholesterol and triacylglycerol levels, lipoproteinfractions, oxidation of lipids, and aortic atherosclerosis evaluatedbiochemically and by microscopy (Frederiksen et al., 2007).The lack of response of lycopene in Watanabe HeritableHyperlipidemic rabbits is, probably, related to their defectiveLDL receptors (Tanazawa et al., 1980; Lorenz et al., 2012),which would suggest the involvement of these receptors inthe cardiovascular benefits of lycopene (Perera and Yen, 2007).Considering the bloodstream transport of lycopene in LDLparticles, functional LDL receptors enable cardiovascular benefitsof lycopene (Lorenz et al., 2012). Bansal et al. reporteda beneficial cardioprotective effect of lycopene, due to thereduction of oxidative stress and myocardial injury, in anexperimental model of myocardial ischemia-reperfusion injuryin adult male albino Wistar rats (Bansal et al., 2006). Lycopeneprotects also endothelial progenitor cells, necessary to replacethe injured vascular endothelium and for angiogenesis, in amicroenvironment of advanced glycation end products (AGEs),which act as damage-causing agents (Zeng et al., 2017). Lycopeneimproved cell proliferation and regulated protective mechanismsof AGEs-induced autophagy in endothelial progenitor cellsfrom diabetic rats, suggesting that supplementation with thiscompound might be a new therapeutic option for diabeticvascular complications (Zeng et al., 2017).CLINICAL RESEARCHEndothelial FunctionBoth cross-sectional and supplementation studies emphasizedthe benefits of tomato products on vascular function, mainlydue to the antioxidative effects of lycopene (Kim et al., 2010;Thies et al., 2012; Xaplanteris et al., 2012; Gajendragadkar et al.,2014). However, several articles failed to show improvement ofendothelial function after tomato consumption (Stangl et al.,2011; Table 1).Gajendragadkar et al. concluded that lycopenesupplementation can improve endothelial function in patientswith cardiovascular disorders, but not in age-matched healthyvolunteers (Gajendragadkar et al., 2014). Forearm responsesto intraarterial infusions of acetylcholine were assessed usingvenous plethysmography, which resulted in an improvement by53% of endothelium-dependent vasodilatation (EDV) in patientswith cardiovascular disorders post-lycopene (Gajendragadkaret al., 2014).