Photomicrographs fromsoy lecithin- or Casp-only-treated mice and soy lecithin plus LPS-treated mice are not depicted separately since they did not differ from controls or LPS-only-treatedmice, respectively. A-F: Immunohistochemistry (red-brown color), counterstaining with hematoxylin; G-I: periodic acid-Schiff staining; original magnification: x400.Arrows in B mark iNOS-positive neutrophils, arrows in E and F indicate TNF-a-positive monocytes/macrophages.tested in comparison to the glucocorticoid dexamethasone.After pre-incubation with the test compounds, freshly isolatedhuman primary monocytes were stimulated with 10 ng/mlLPS to elicit cytokine release (assessed by ELISA). At aconcentration of 30 ug/ml, Casp decreased the levels of allpro-inflammatory cytokines measured. Thus, TNF-a release wasreduced by 32% with similar efficiency as for dexamethasone(30% reduction). Even stronger effects of Casp were detectedfor release of IL-6 and the chemokine IL-8 (Figure 10A).Additionally, Casp and dexamethasone blocked the releaseof the anti-inflammatory cytokine IL-10. To exclude anycytotoxicity being responsible for diminished cytokine release,Casp was evaluated in a cell viability (MTT) assay. As shownin Figure 10B, 30 ug/ml Casp produced no detrimental impacton monocyte viability after 24 h incubation in comparisonto control, whereas staurosporine reduced cell viability toabout 54% of control values. Thus, these data supportCasp as a potent anti-inflammatory agent without cytotoxiceffects.DISCUSSIONSince the beneficial effects of frankincense in the treatmentof chronic inflammatory diseases have already been welldocumented (see e.g., Poeckel and Werz, 2006; Moussaieff andMechoulam, 2009; Abdel-Tawab et al., 2011; Du et al., 2015), theaim of the present study was to assess possible protective effectsof frankincense on acute systemic inflammation for the first time.Because of the well-documented influence of the boswellic acidson cytokine production by monocytes/macrophages (Syrovetset al., 2000; Pandey et al., 2005; Gayathri et al., 2007; Sharmaet al., 2016), we focused on cytokine plasma levels, immunecell redistribution, and oxidative stress as well as liver function.The latter parameter is known to be critical for overall patientoutcome during systemic inflammation and has been shown to benegatively influenced by pro-inflammatory cytokines (Morgan,2001; Novotny et al., 2007; Jacob et al., 2009; Nesseler et al., 2012).After LPS challenge, reduced b.wt. of the animals, decreasedblood glucose levels, and almost complete glycogen depletion ofFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387131fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 12Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 8 | CYP 1A1 (A-C), CYP2B1 (D-F), and CYP3A2 (G-I) expression in the livers of control (A,D,G), LPS (B,E,H), or Casp plus LPS (C,F,I)-treated mice.Mice were administered either vehicle (control), soy lecithin, Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Representativephotomicrographs from one of eight different tissue samples from control mice, LPS-treated, and LPS plus Casp-treated animals are shown. Photomicrographs fromsoy lecithin- or Casp-only-treated mice and soy lecithin plus LPS-treated mice are not depicted separately since they did not differ from controls or LPS-only-treatedmice, respectively. Immunohistochemistry (red-brown color), counterstaining with hematoxylin; original magnification: x400. CYP expression was mainly confined tothe hepatocytes around the central veins (asterisks).the livers were observed, which is in line with literature data(Raetzsch et al., 2009; Santos et al., 2013; Seemann and Lupp,2015, 2016; Seemann et al., 2017). On the one hand, these effectscould be explained by the distinctly reduced health status ofthe animals, mirrored by low CSS scores, which may have ledto reduced food intake. On the other hand, it has been shownthat (partially mediated via increased TNF-a expression) LPSis able to reduce gluconeogenesis (Goto et al., 2001; Raetzschet al., 2009; Santos et al., 2013) and to increase glycogenolysis(Casteleijn et al., 1988). Presumably by direct binding of theboswellic acids to LPS and thus blunting TLR4, MyD88, andNFkB signaling (and, consequently, TNF-a release and COX-2induction), but probably also by a direct interaction with NFkBand COX-2, co-administration of Casp significantly increasedblood glucose values and liver glycogen content compared tothe LPS-only treatment group. Additionally, general health statusof the animals was significantly improved after co-treatmentwith Casp with increased food consumption, lower levels ofcirculating pro-inflammatory cytokines, a lower severity ofthe inflammatory processes, and a normalization of the bodytemperatures, compared to the LPS-only-treated animals.In the present investigation, markedly increased serumlevels of the pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-a and IL-6 wereobserved in LPS-treated animals, as expected from literature data(Seemann and Lupp, 2015, 2016; Seemann et al., 2017). Theseincreased levels were distinctly reduced after Casp co-treatmentof the mice. Thus, the reported suppression of pro-inflammatorycytokine release from monocytes/macrophages by boswellicacids (Syrovets et al., 2000; Pandey et al., 2005; Gayathriet al., 2007; Sharma et al., 2016) could be reproduced alsowith the frankincense extract Casp in vivo in acute systemicinflammation. These results were further confirmed by cell-based assays using human primary monocytes, which revealeda distinct reduction of the LPS-induced TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-8release after Casp treatment. In contrast to the suppressiveeffects on pro-inflammatory cytokines, murine serum levels ofthe anti-inflammatory IL-10 were slightly enhanced by Caspco-treatment, whereas in the cell-based assay IL-10 release wasFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387132fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 13Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 9 | Biotransformation capacity as determined by a panel of model reactions for different CYP isoforms. Mice were administered either vehicle (control), soylecithin (Phyto), Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). ECOD (A), BROD (B), EROD (C), MROD (D), PROD (E), and EMND(F) were determined in the 9000 x g supernatants of the livers. Data are given as means +- SEM, n = 8 for each group. *, significantly different from controls; +,significantly different from LPS-treated animals; o, significantly different from soy lecithin plus LPS-treated animals (p <= 0.05; Mann-Whitney U-test followed byHolm-Bonferroni correction).strongly decreased. This discrepancy may be due to the fact thatin vivo IL-10 is not only released by monocytes/macrophagesbut also by many other immune cells such as TH2- or Treg-lymphocytes. IL-10 released from these cells has a central role inlimiting immune responses to pathogens to protect the organismfrom damage due to exaggerated inflammatory processes (Saraivaand O'Garra, 2010). Thus, in addition to the inhibitory effectsseen on cytokine production by monocytes and macrophages,stimulation of IL-10 release from these other immune cells mayhave also contributed to the overall better outcome observed afterco-treatment with Casp, compared to LPS-only-treated mice.In parallel to the influence of Casp on pro-inflammatoryand anti-inflammatory cytokines, also immune cell redistributionwas distinctly reduced by the frankincense extract. In spleens,LPS caused a massive appearance of iNOS-positive neutrophilsand of CD68/iNOS/TNF-a-positive monocytes/macrophages,but a depletion of CD3+ T-lymphocytes, whereas in liversimmigration of iNOS positive neutrophils as well as CD3+cells was observed. All these effects were distinctly amelioratedafter co-administration of Casp. Especially the influence oniNOS expression may be of importance, since increased iNOSexpression and, most importantly, immigration of iNOS-positiveFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387133fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 14Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 10 | Effect of Casp on cytokine release and cytotoxicity in human monocytes. (A) Human primary monocytes were pre-incubated with vehicle orcompounds (Casp; dexamethasone, dex) for 30 min prior to stimulation with LPS for 4 (TNF-a, IL-8) or 18 h (IL-6, IL-10). Formed cytokines were measured byELISA. Data are means +- SEM; n = 3; ***p < 0.001; **p < 0.01; *p < 0.05; inhibitor vs. stimulated control (100%), one-way ANOVA plus Bonferroni test. (B) Effectof Casp on cell viability. Intact human monocytes were incubated with compounds (Casp; staurosporine, stsp) or vehicle for 24 h and cell viability was analyzed byMTT assay. Data are means +- SEM; n = 3; *p < 0.05; inhibitor vs. vehicle control (100%), one-way ANOVA plus Bonferroni test.neutrophils, but also of iNOS-positive macrophages, into thetissues has been shown to be critical for the course of the diseaseand overall outcome (Kirkeboen and Strand, 1999; Tsukaharaet al., 2001; Farley et al., 2006; Wang et al., 2012). Finally,in parallel to the positive influence on TNF-a serum values,Casp was also able to ameliorate LPS-induced increases inTNF-a expression by monocytes/macrophages and sinusoidalendothelial cells in liver tissue.In contrast to average b.wt., spleen weights were distinctlyenhanced after LPS treatment. The occurrence of splenomegalyin response to severe systemic inflammation has been shownalso in humans (Arismendi-Morillo et al., 2004) and has beencorrelated with, among others, TNF-a- and IL-6-mediatedelevation of serum high-mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) levelsin spleen tissue (Valdes-Ferrer et al., 2013). The increase involume has been demonstrated for both red and white pulpand has been shown to be due to hyperemia and enhancedimmigration of white blood cells into the splenic tissue, especiallyneutrophils and macrophages (Valdes-Ferrer et al., 2013;Seemann et al., 2017). As mentioned above, an increased presenceof iNOS-positive neutrophils and CD68/iNOS/TNF-a-positivemonocytes/macrophages was observed in the spleens after LPSchallenge also in the present investigation. Additionally, a distinctrise in apoptotic processes was also noted, demonstrated byincreased cleaved caspase-3 stainings, and mirrored by increasedpresence of tingible body macrophages in spleens after LPStreatment. Probably, there is an increased need for degradationof nonfunctional erythrocytes and white blood cells as a resultof systemic inflammation. In contrast to these processes, massiveemigration of CD3+ T-lymphocytes from spleens was observedafter LPS challenge, which is in line with previous investigations(Valdes-Ferrer et al., 2013; Seemann et al., 2017). Since thepresent investigation demonstrated increased immigration ofCD3+ cells into liver tissue, these cells may leave the spleento enter other organs in response to systemic inflammation.Probably by suppressing increased levels of pro-inflammatorycytokines, spleen weights were significantly decreased back tonormal values after co-administration of Casp. Additionally,less neutrophils and macrophages were present in spleen tissuewhile apoptotic processes as well as presence of tingible bodymacrophages were distinctly reduced in comparison to LPS-only-treated animals. Furthermore, emigration of CD3+ cells fromspleen into other organs was significantly attenuated, suggesting anoticeable immunomodulatory and anti-inflammatory action ofthe frankincense extract.Lipopolysaccharides-only-treated animals also showedadrenal hypertrophy, which may be explained by activation ofthe hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical axis in response tothe inflammatory event (Prigent et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2007;Zhang et al., 2014), but also by stimulation of adrenal medullarycatecholamine synthesis to stabilize cardiovascular function(Flierl et al., 2008). Probably by decreasing pro-inflammatoryFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387134fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 15Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic Inflammationcytokine levels, thus exerting anti-inflammatory effects, Caspwas evidently able to counteract these effects, since adrenalweights were significantly returned back to normal values in ourinvestigation.In contrast to spleen and adrenals, thymus weights weredistinctly reduced after LPS treatment. As in spleen, this effectmay be due to a massive emigration of T-lymphocytes into otherorgans, but also to increased apoptotic processes as has beenshown in other sepsis animal experiments before (Hiramatsuet al., 1997, Seemann and Lupp, 2015). There was, however, alsoa comparable decrease in thymus weights and also a reductionin spleen weights after sole soy lecithin or Casp treatment. Theseeffects remain unclear since no overt histological changes werenoticed in the histological stainings of both organs after solesoy lecithin or Casp administration. The effects of Casp on theweights of these two immune organs could be, however, anexpression of the known immunomodulatory properties of theboswellic acids (see e.g., Poeckel and Werz, 2006; Moussaieffand Mechoulam, 2009; Abdel-Tawab et al., 2011; Sturner et al.,2017), which in our mouse model evidently helped the animals tobetter cope with the LPS-induced systemic inflammation. Aftercombined treatment with LPS, clear-cut protective effects wereseen on all parameters tested, including spleen weights, plasmalevels of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines, and immune cellredistribution, and there was no additional negative influence onthymus weights. Nevertheless, in future experiments, the effectsof Casp (but also of soy lecithin) on the immune system insystemic inflammation should be elaborated in more detail inorder to elucidate the underlying mechanisms of the protectivefindings of the present investigation more precisely and toexclude any adverse effects.Lipopolysaccharides can lead to enhanced generation ofreactive oxygen (ROS) and nitrogen species (RNS), both directlyand via increased pro-inflammatory cytokine expression. ROS arethe result of elevated NADPH-oxidase expression in neutrophilsand monocytes/macrophages after LPS challenge (Kim et al.,2007), but may also be caused by increased mitochondrial leakage(Shoji et al., 1995; Galley, 2011). RNSs are generated both viaenhanced NADPH-oxidase and iNOS expression in neutrophilsand monocytes/macrophages. ROS/RNS are neutralized, amongothers, by the glutathione system, which represents an importantanti-oxidative mechanism of the body to protect cellularmacromolecules such as DNA, lipids, and proteins from chemicaldamage and degradation (Hayes and McLellan, 1999). In thepresent investigation, a distinct decrease in glutathione contentin livers was observed after LPS treatment of the animals. Thisglutathione loss may either be caused by LPS-induced livercell damage, as indicated by increased serum ALAT values,and subsequent impairment of glutathione synthesis, but mayalso be caused by intensified export to other organs, such askidneys, lungs, and spleens. This latter hypothesis is supportedby the observation that in these organs, and in contrast toliver, an increase in glutathione content was observed afterLPS treatment. Lipid peroxidation products are the result ofexcessive oxidative stress which has overwhelmed the overallanti-oxidative capacity of the body and has led to a degradation ofmembrane lipids (Ayala et al., 2014). In the present investigation,corresponding to elevated ALAT values, a strong increasein lipid peroxidation products was seen especially in liversafter LPS treatment, but also in all other organs tested.