It decreases thedisintegration time 4 - 12 times, depending on its concentration. CONCLUSIONThe evaluated excipients in the metronidazole tablets, have significantinfluence on physical properties of the hard compact. The presence ofthe binder contributes to the achievement of higher hardness andmechanical strength, but increases the disintegration time. Thedisintegrant has a remarkable influence on the disintegration timeperforming rapid disintegration and dissolution, but it decreases thehardness of the tablets. The influence of the excipients, alone or in interaction with oneanother, will be evident and more precisely determined withoptimization of this formulation. REFERENCES1. Amidon G. L. Lennernas H.., Shah V.P..,et al. A Theoretical basis for aBiopharmaceutic Drug Classification, Pharm Res. 1995 March;12(3):412-20.2. Augsburger, L. Larry and Zellhofer, J. Mark, Tablet formulation Encyclopadia ofPharmaceutical Technology, Second edition, Vol.3 Marccel Dekker, 20023. Herbert A. Lieberman, Leon Lachman, Pharmaceutical dosage forms, TabletsMarcel Deker, Vol.1.(289-337)4. Itiola O A, Pilpel N. Formulation effects on the mechanical properties ofMetronidazole tablets J. Pharm Pharmacol, 1991 March;43(3):145-75. Zhang, Y., Law, Y, and Chakrabarti, S., 2003, Physical properties and compactanalysis of commonly used direct compression binders, AAPS Pharm Sci Tech 2003,4(4) article 62VLIJANIETO NA EKTsIPIENSITE VRZ INPROTsES PARAMETRI NAMETRONIDAZOL TABLETIMeri Davcheva AD Alkaloid, bul. Aleksandar Makedonski br 12, Skopje, R.MakedonijaVOVED I TsELMetronidazolot pripagja na klasata imidazoli i e karakterizirankako antiprotozoen i antibakteriski agens. Zemen e vo obzirnajvazhniot kriterium za dizajn na tabletna formulatsija -postignuvanje na optimalna disolutsija na lekot, odnosno mozhnostza absorptsija od dozazhnata forma soglasno sakanata upotreba zabrzo osloboduvanje. Metronidazolot pripagja na prvata grupa na supstantsi sporedbiofarmatsevtskiot klasifikatsionen sistem, lesno rastvorlivii visokopermeabilni supstantsi. Zatoa se nasochivme konfizichkite karakteristiki na tabletite, so tsel utvrduvanje navlijanieto na ektsipiensite vrz in protses parametrite naMetronidazol tableti.METODIIstrazhuvanjeto e napraveno vo oddelite Proizvodstvo tsvrstiformi i R&D, Alkaloid Skopje. Izbrana e direktnata kompresijakako poefikasen metod za priprema na tableti so brzoosloboduvanje. Pretkhodno proseanite komponenti na sito 0,8 mmse meshaat vo bure khomogenizator, ERWEKA tip PM 5. Ta ble ti ra -njeto e izvedeno na rotatsiona tablet mashina Fette - Perfecta 2, soklipovi so bikonveksni povrshini, dijametar 12 mm. Trgnavme odpraviloto shto pomalku vklucheni ektsipiensi, toa e podobraformulatsijata. Pripremeni se pet formulatsii vo koimikrokristalnata tseluloza (Avicel PH 101), e osnovniot polnitelpokraj aktivnata supstantsa i potrebnite lubrikansi. Vo ostanatite formulatsii vkluchen e vrzuvach, kopovidon (Kollidon K-25), vo ista nepromenliva kontsetratsija (1%). Poslednite triformulatsii sodrzhat dezintegrans, krospovidon (Kollidon CL), vorazlichna kontsetratsija (0,2 ; 0,7 i 1,2 %).Parametri za protsenuvanje na tabletite bea: Tsvrstina - odreduvana so Erweka tablet hardness tester TBH 300 MD, Mekhanichka jakost - odreduvana od silata na krshenje na tabletite (izrazena preku tsvrstinata na tabletite ) i dimenziite na tabl e ta -ta, po metoda na Fell i Newton, Frijabilnost - odreduvana so Erweka friability tester TAR 100 i Vreme na dezintegratsija - odreduvano so Erweka disintegrationtester type ZT . REZULTATIGeneralno gledano od site formulatsii dobivme tableti sozadovolitelna mekhanichka jakost, tsvrstina, frijabilnost i vremena raspagjanje. Vo formulatsijata kade e vkluchena samomikrokristalnata tseluloza, taa se javuva kako superiorenpolnitel so uloga na vrzuvach i dezintegrans. Vkluchuvanjeto navrzuvachot (Kollidon K-25), vo slednite formulatsii rezultira votableti so pogolema mekhanichka jakost, tsvrstina i frijabilnost,no prodolzheno vreme na raspagjanje. Jasno se zabelezhuva ulogatana dezintegransot (Kollidon CL), vo formulatsiite vo koi e vkluchen.Toj go namaluva vremeto na raspagjanje od 4 - 12 pati, pro por tsi ona -l n o so negovata zastapenost. ZAKLUChOKIspituvanite ektsipiensi vo formulatsiite na metronidazoltableti, imaat znachajno vlijanie vrz fizichkite karakteristiki natsvrstiot kompakt. Prisustvoto na vrzuvachot ovozmozhuva posti g nu -vanje pogolema tsvrstina i mekhanichka jakost, no go zgolemuvavremeto na dezintegratsija. Dezintegransot ima zabelezhitelnovlijanie na vremeto na raspagjanje, ovozmozhuvajkji brza de zin te gra -tsija i brza disolutsija, no ja namaluva tsvrstinata na tabletite. Popretsizno utvrduvanje na vlijanieto na ekstsipiensite, po edi ne -chno i vo interaktsija, kje dade optimizatsija na ovaa formulatsija.LITERATURA1. Amidon G. L. Lennernas H.., Shah V.P..,et al. A Theoretical basis for aBiopharmaceutic Drug Classification, Pharm Res. 1995 March;12(3):412-20.2. Augsburger, L. Larry and Zellhofer, J. Mark, Tablet formulation Encyclopadia ofPharmaceutical Technology, Second edition, Vol.3 Marccel Dekker, 20023. Herbert A. Lieberman, Leon Lachman, Pharmaceutical dosage forms, TabletsMarcel Deker, Vol.1.(289-337)4. Itiola O A, Pilpel N. Formulation effects on the mechanical properties ofMetronidazole tablets J. Pharm Pharmacol, 1991 March;43(3):145-75. Zhang, Y., Law, Y, and Chakrabarti, S., 2003, Physical properties and compactanalysis of commonly used direct compression binders, AAPS Pharm Sci Tech 2003,4(4) article 62290Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOPROCESS CAPABILITY INDEXES DETERMI-NATION DURING THE VALIDATION OF THETABLETS PRODUCTION PROCESSVioleta Dinic Milisavljevic1, Natasa Anevska Sto-janovska2, Sonja Ugarkovic2, Marija Glavas Dodov31Alkaloid d.o.o. Beograd,2Alkaloid AD Skopje,3Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, SkopjeThe prime objective of any pharmaceutical plant is to manufactureproducts of requisite attribute and quality consistently, at the lowestpossible cost. Although validation studies have been conducted in thepharmaceutical industry for a long time, there is an ever-increasing in-terest in validation owing to their industry's greater emphasis in re-cent years on quality assurance and productivity improvement.Validation is a necessary part of a quality assurance program and isfundamental to an efficient production operation. USFDA defines val-idation as "Establishing documented evidence, which provides a highdegree of assurance that specific process will consistently produce aproduct meeting its predetermined specifications and quality Themost compelling reason for validation is to guarantee, as far as possi-ble, that all processes and machinery in the pharmaceutical manu-facturing process are being used in a way, which will ensure safety,integrity, quality and strength of a dosage form.Validation requires documented evidence that a process consistentlyconforms to requirements and then to carry out studies demon stra -ting that this is the case. Statistical tools can aid in both tasks. Sta-tistical tools can enhance process understanding and foster innovativeapproaches to process validation and pharmaceutical development.Among the statistical tools, the process-capability indices (Cp and Cpk)measure the process's ability to manufacture products that meetspecifications and requirements. Usually, specifications have upperspecification limit (USL) and lower specification limits (LSL). Some-times, as in a case of dissolution studies, there is only one specifica-tion limit.Process capability indexes can be estimated:Cp = (USL-LSL) / 6sCpk = min [ x - LSL / 3s, USL - x / 3s]where x, stands for an average value and s for standard deviation.The purpose of the present study was to establish documentedevidence which provides a high degree of assurance thatmanufacturing process of AB tablets 20/25 mg will consistentlyproduce the product meeting its pre-determined specifications andquality attributes.Validation of the manufacturing process of AB tablets 20/25 mg wasperformed according to the previously approved validation protocolwhere the method of production, equipment used, process controlsand finished product specification limits, critical steps, sampling planand acceptance criteria were described. Validation study has been performed on three consecutive batches. AB tablets 20/25 mg have been manufacured with the method of wetgranulation. All three batches have been manufactured under thesame conditions and there were no process changes during the period.Frequent control tests assured that appropriate reproducibility hasbeen achieved.The production equipment and analytical method used has beenvalidated prior starting of the tests.The goal of the data evaluation was to assess the potential process ca-pability index (Cp) and the actual process capability index (Cpk) usingthe content uniformity and dissolution behavior of AB tablets 20/25mg.The obtained values of all manufactured batches for the processcapability indexes, Cp and Cpk, using the content uniformity and dis-solution behavior of AB tablets 20/25 mg were above 1,3. Hence, it was concluded that the manufacturing process can beconsidered capable of producing product meeting the predeterminedstandards and quality attributes at Alkaloid AD.REFERENCES1. John M. Dietrick, Bernard T. Loftus, REGULATORY BASIS FOR PROCESSVALIDATION (Chapter 1), Robert A. Nash (Editor), Alfred H. Wachter (Editor)-PHARMACEUTICAL PROCESS VALIDATION: An International Third Edition (Drugs and the Pharmaceutical Sciences) MARCEL DEKKER INC, 2003. 2. Thomas D. Murphy, Shailesh K.Singh, and Merlin L. Utter, STATISTICAL PROCESSCONTROL AND PROCESS CAPABILITY (3499-3512), James Swarbick (Editor),ENCYCLOPEDIA OF PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY, Thirt Edition, InformaHealthcare USA, 2007. 3. Janos Pogany, pharmacist, PhD, consultant to WHO, MANUFACTURINGPROCESS VALIDATION, SOLID DOSAGE FORMS, Pretoria, South Africa,Supplementary Training Workshop on Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) , 2005CONTINUOUS GRANULATION, A NEW APPROACH IN PHARMACEUTICAL MANUFACTURINGEmilija Spaseska Aleksovska, AleksandarAleksovski, Emina ZahirovicZADA pharmaceuticals, Bosnia and HercegovinaIn recent years, continuous processing has gained importance in thepharmaceutical industry, evidenced by the prevalence of seminars andconferences discussing this topic, as well as the increasing number ofinstallations. Regulatory bodies have also elicited a large interest inmoving to continuous processing as a method to improvethe quality and efficiency of pharmaceutical production. In recentyears, speakers from the FDA have held presentations at numerousconferences and seminars, discussing the advantages of continuousprocessing using Quality by Design and PAT philosophy (1,4,5,6).Continuous equipment for the production of pharmaceutical granulesis not new; it has been around for many years (often adapted fromequipment for the food or chemical industry). These early systems,however, had major drawbacks that made them impractical for thepharmaceutical industry as high waste at start-up and shut-down.R&D on these systems was often difficult; the systems had issues withplug flow, were not easily cleanable and could not be used as flexibleR&D equipment(2,4).A new generation of continuous production equipment overcomesthese problems and ensures no - or only minimal - waste at start-upand shut-down. According to the FDA, manufacturing without interruption with aconstant flow of materials fits very well within the concept of QbD be-cause it is more modern manufacturing approach, potential toimprove assurance of quality and consistency of drugs and enablesquality to be directly built into process design. It provides manyopportunities to adjust the process to meet the critical qualityattributes and thus patient safety (2, 8, 9).291Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONNo specific regulations or guidance for continuous manufacturing,other than the definition of "lot". Nothing in regulations or guidanceprohibiting continuous manufacturing (1,6).What is also very important for this new approach is that during thecontinuous process different methods and procedures can be used forin process control:>> Spectroscopic methods (NIR, FTIR, Raman) for concentration/assay analysis of APIs and excipients >> Laser light scattering for particle size distribution>> NIR for moisture content during drying process>> NMR for weight detection>> In-line GC for solvent contentConsiGma(tm), a revolutionary continuous high shear granulation anddrying system installed in ZADA pharmaceuticals is manufactured byGEA Pharma Systems nv - Collette(tm), manufacturer of the state-of-the-art machines used in pharmaceutical production. ConsiGmaTMcontinuous granulation line was developed in concurrence with theFDA's QbD initiative and was designed to satisfy the industry's need forcontinuous production to provide improved quality, flexibility andconsistency for pharmaceutical processes.The system is designed in such a way that both R&D and productioncan use the same size of equipment, thus eliminating scaleup.Further advantages are a higher yield and very stable, plug flow-basedprocesses leading to increased quality levels and higher efficiency. This scope allows to bring the products to the market faster, in a moreflexible and environmentally conscious way.The main advantages of ConSigma continuous granulation system are (7):>> Flexible batch size: One ConsiGma(tm)>> can run 500g in R&D, but can also run clinical trial, launch size,and any production size batches. >> There is no need for scale-up and fast product development ispossible>> Compact, modular construction with very short installationtime, Consistent granule quality with improved compressibility>> Reduced investment and running costs: reduced spacerequirements, reduced use of utilitiesThe scope design provide possibilities to change many parameters tillacceptable quality of granulate is obtained. Parameters that are changeable are: >> In the granulator module: powder flow, granulator speed, gran-ulator configuration, liquid flow, barrel temperature;In the drying module: quantity of wet granulate (filling time), air flow:air temperature, drying time;>> In the calibration module: mill speed, screen size;As per our experience with ConSigma we obtained good quality ofgranulate and further expected quality of solid dosage form, tablets,with a quite wide range of APIs. We succeed to produce granulate with excellent characteristics, flowa-bility and compressibility, with very bulky powder mixtures, bulk den-sity cca 0,2g/ml, and also with materials with high bulk density 0,9g/ml.As per our expirence future of continuous granulation which can beupgraded with tabletting in line with the recent advances intechnology, with the quality of products that is obtained, and theendorsement of continuous processing by the FDA, is lookingextremely bright.REFERENCES1. Christine M. V. Moore, Ph.D. Deputy Director for Science and PolicyONDQA/CDER/FDA; FIP Pharmaceutical Sciences & AAPS Annual Meeting,November 20102. F. Pavlou,K.Nepveux,K. Schoeters,A. Weiler,S.WhitfieldContinuous Processing: Is The Pharma Industry FinallyComing Round To The Idea?, PTE article, September 1, 20103.