With specific questions we positionbrands of examined company, their strengths, weaknesess and threats.With gained results and SWOT analysis we create strategy for furtherbrand management.CONCLUSION -brand management is constant process of interactive brand research,in terms of foloving brands health, for identifuing threats, makingstrategy and appropriately react on brand defense.ISTRAZhUVANjE NA MENADzhIRANjETO SO BRENDOVI NA MAKEDONSKIOTFARMATsEVTSKI PAZARAtsevski StevcheFarmaSvis DOOEL, Skopje, Republika MakedonijaTsEL - da se izvrshi ispituvanje na menadzhiranjeto so brendovi namakedonskiot farmatsevtski pazar.VOVED - kompaniskata vrednost i kapital mozhe da se zgolemi prekusozdavanje, razvivanje i menadzhiranje na brendovi. Toa e dolgotraenprotses koj bara postojano ispituvanje na nachinot na menadzhiranjeso brendovite na pazarot, so tsel uspeshno identifikuvanje,iskoristuvanje i sprotistavuvanje na sekojdnevnite predizvitsi nabrendot.MATERIJALI I METODI- Anketen prashalnik so koj se utvrdi sostojbata so brendovite, voprimarniot farmatsevtski sektor. Opfateni bea farmatsevtite ifarmatsevtskite tekhnichari vraboteni vo aptekite niz gradovite voRepublika Makedonija. Se sostoi od 26 prashanja podeleni vonekolku delovi so chija pomosh treba da se utvrdat razlichnite tse li:opredeluvanje na profilot na makedonskiot farmatsevtski pazari opredeluvanje na pozitsijata, konkurentite i svesnosta zabrendovite na ispituvanata kompanijaREZULATI - Anketata beshe sprovedena vo 42 apteki, opfateni 35 farmatsevtii 7 farmatsevtski te kh nichari. Chetvrtina od ispitanitsite smetaatdeka osnovna dejnost e izdavanje lekovi od pozitivna lista, apolovina smetaat deka i pozitivna i negativna lista imaat udel voprometot. So spetsifichni prashanja e utvrdena pozitsijata nabrendovite na ispituvanata kompanija, nivnite prednosti,slabosti i zakani. Na osnova na dobienite rezultati i izvrshenataSVOT (SWOT) analiza kreirana e predlog strategija za natamoshnomenadzhiranje so brendovite.ZAKLUChOK - menadzhiranjeto so brendovite bara postojano interaktivnosledenje na ,,zdravjeto" na brendot, so tsel da se identifikuvaatpostojanite zakani, da se podgotvi strategija i da se reagirasoodvetno vo odbrana na bredot.INTERNET INFOVIGILANCE - PRACTICAL APPROACH IN BULGARIAHristina Lebanova, Malina Bileva, Ilko GetovMedical University - Sofia, Faculty of PharmacyThe theoretical definition of infovigilance is: "activity of error orinaccuracy notification in information sources which could beresponsible for medication errors". Information disseminated by druginformation systems is not always easy to apply. Sometimes there isconflicting information in reference books, in journals, or in officialsources.The aim of the study is to assess the reliability of the drug-relatedinformation in the 10 most visited internet health related sites inBulgaria, according to the search engine www.google.com. Thefollowing criteria were used: accuracy of the information, error/lackof information, discordance between the dates of the last revision ofthe patient leaflet, etc.The test results show that in many cases the drug information in theinternet sites contains errors and discrepancies. There is a need ofmonitoring the drug information available online in order to preventpatient confusion that could lead to medication errors.In conclusion the internet gives the patients a rapid access to druginformation. No one edits the vast amount of drug information on theinternet to ensure its quality and accuracy. Some web sites may beaccurate while others offer information that only may be advertisingor worse harmful. There is a need of strict regulatory measuresconcerning the drug-related information in internet and its reliability.REFERENCES1. Astrom K., J. Carlsson, I. Bates, D.G. Webb, C. Duggan, P. Sanghani and D.McRobbie, Desire for information about drugs - a multi-method study in generalmedical inpatients, Pharm World Sci 2000;22(4): 159-164.2. Bouvy Marcel L., J. van Berkel, C. M. de Roos-Huisman, R. H.B. Meijboom,Patients' drug-information needs: a brief view on questions asked by telephone andon the internet, Pharm World Sci 2002;24(2): 43-45.3. Fusier Isabelle, C.Tollier, M. Husson, Infovigilance: reporting errors in official druginformation sources, Pharm Wolrd Sci (2005) 27: 166-1694. Nader Forouz, K. Mousavizadeh, P. Ghafourifar, Patient sources for druginformation in Iran: A questionnaire-based survey, Pharm World Sci (2008) 30: 764-7675. Pharmaceuticals and the Internet, Drug Regulatory Authorities' perspective,World Health Organization 2001102Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNA FARMATsIJA / FARMAKOINFORMATIKA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOACTIVITIES OF HOSPITAL PHARMACISTSASSOCIATION ON EUROPEAN LEVELTajda Miharija GalaUniversity Medical Centre Ljubljana, Slovenia The European Association of Hospital Pharmacists (EAHP) is the fed-eration of national associations of hospital pharmacists, and repre-sents more than 21000 hospital pharmacists in 31 countries acrossEurope. The main goal of the association is: to develop hospital phar-macy and to establish a common pharmaceutical policy in Europe, towork for the advancement of the position and role of the pharmacistsin hospitals, to uphold the interests of hospital pharmacists from themember states of the European Union and the Council of Europe andto promote co-operation with other professional bodies. EAHP ensures that the voice of hospital pharmacists is heard whennew pieces of legislation of concern to them are being drafted and re-views all EU public documents that could affect their job. It was/is in-volved in several projects on EU level such as: a pan-European projecton Patient Safety (EuNetPaS), the European pharmacovigilance sys-tem, a project on preparation of curriculum for the specialisation inhospital pharmacy recognised by the EU (PHARMINE), medicationsafety projects through use of codes on unit/single doses, the PHISproject - pharma ceutical pricing and reimbursement systems whichaims to establish a comprehensive Pharma ceutical Health Informa-tion System and many others.Numerous EAHP activities foster research and educational activitiesto allow hospital pharmacists of every European country to developtheir activities like: Congress EAHP, Academy Summits, Academy Sem-inars, participation in working groups. Academy seminar is intendedfor hospital pharmacists from member states that joined the EU since2004 and new EAHP members. The members are encouraged to publish their research work and theadvancement in hospital pharmacy practice on national level in theofficial journal of the EAHP: European Journal of Hospital PharmacyEJHP (Practice and Science edition).EAHP follows the development of the hospital pharmacy throughoutEurope. Since 1995 a pan European survey is carried out in 5 years in-terval and a comparison of the results is performed, showing thetrends of hospital pharmacy service in Europe. In 2010 the fourthEAHP survey was carried out and some preliminary results will de-scribe the state of the art of hospital pharmacy services across Eu-rope as well as their progress in the last five years. The involvement of hospital pharmacists in various pharmacy activi-ties will be presented: distribution of drugs in the hospital and distri-bution to outpatients, production and preparation, clinicalengagement, new technologies used in practice, as well as trends inoptimizing the safety and economic value of pharmacotherapy.The outcomes of the survey are intended to help hospital pharmacymanagers reflect on the extent to which pharmacists are engaged invarious activities and to assess the role of pharmacists within theirhospital. The results are useful for the comparative analysis of the cur-rent service level and future planning. The knowledge on services and research provided by hospital phar-macists is fundamental to the educational and development pro-grammes of the EAHP which will lead to diminishing the differences inhospital pharmacy practice in the European countries in future.103Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACOECONOMY / SOCIAL PHARMACY / PHARMACOINFORMATICS oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOFARMAKOEKONOMIJA /SOTsIJALNA FARMATsIJA /FARMAKOINFORMATIKAposter prezentatsiiPHARMACOECONOMY/SOCIAL PHARMACY/PHARMACOINFORMATICSposter presentationsDisplay the top ten Drugsby consumption in 2009. year in rsMirjana Dermanovic, Slobodan Stanic, Sasa MaricInstitute of Public Health of Republika SrpskaintroDuctionAnatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification of drugs and asystem of defined daily doses (DDD Defined Daily Dose) as the measu-rement unit is officially adopted and proposed by the World HealthOrganization (WHO) to monitor the use of drugs in specific popula-tions or health care institution.objectiveOur goal is to show the ten drugs with the regime of issue of prescription,which is commonly used in 2009 in Republika Srpska in pharmacies.methoDsDisplay of medicaments traffic is based on data submitted from 281 phar-macies or 90.35% of the total number of registered pharmacies. The basisof making the display is a list of medications licensed for marketing.The database medicines are classified into 14 groups of the Anatomi-cal Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system of drugs by WHOATC and international non-proprietary name (INN).DDD value for the INN depending on the manner of its application aretaken from "ATC classification of drugs and monitoring their use ofthe methodology with DDD units for drugs registered in Republika Sr-pska 2007" where we have used data from the "ATC index with DDDs2006, the WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistis METODOLOGY,Oslo. Data on the number of Serbian population (1,437,477) were ob-tained from the Statistical Office.resultsExpressed in the number of DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day1.enalapril 39.902.amlodipin 29.453.enalapril, hydrochlorothiazide 18:284.diklofenak 15.245.diazepam 10.406.izosorbid mononitrate 10.377.ranitidin 9.818.amoksicilin 7.609.metoprolol 7.4810.bromazepam 7.48DiscussionIf we look at consumption top ten drugs, with the regime of issue ofprescription, in Republika Srpska in 2009. , in pharmacies expressed innumber of DDD per 1000 inhabitants per day, these are medicationsfrom the following groups on the anatomical level:1. Cardiovascular system2. Nervous system3. Musculo skeletal system4. Alimentary tract and metabolism5. Anti-infective drugs for systemic useconclusionThe most common are drugs used to treat diseases of the cardiova-scular and nervous systems.references1. ATC klasifikacija lijekova i pracenje njihove upotrebe metodologijom sa DDDjedinicama za lijekove registrovane u Republici Srpskoj 20072. ATC index with DDDs 2006, WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug StatistisMetodology, Osloretail anD reference prices oftwenty most useD meDicines from thepositive list after the introDuctionof the reference pricing system inthe republic of maceDoniaBistra Angelovska1, Verica Ivanovska1,Slavica Maleska Stojadinovik21UGD Faculty of Medical Sciences, 2JZU General Hospital OhridIn Republic of Macedonia the supply of medicines reimbursable by theHealth Insurance Fund (Positive list) was done centrally by interna-tional tenders up until 2004. The main selection criterion for choos-ing the best offer on the tender was the medicines price, whichdetermined their price on the Positive list. The last international ten-der was conducted in 2004 and it was in force until the agreed quan-tities were exhausted.In 2007, the first set of rules was introduced that determined the cri-teria and the procedure for setting up reference prices of medicines onthe Positive list. It took under consideration the lowest offered pricefrom the last medicines tender. In 2009 the second set of rules wasadopted which used a comparative analysis of prices in the referentcountries in the region. Reference price is the highest amount thatthe Fund would reimburse for a particular prescription medicine.the aimThe aim of the study is to determine whether and how much the pa-tient has to pay as a discrepancy between the retail and the referenceprice for twenty most used medicines from the Positive list availablein the pharmacies in 2009.methoDologyFor this study a comparative statistical analysis was undertaken to de-termine the difference between the reference price and the retail priceof twenty most used medicines from the Positive list in 2009.The prices of all marketed medicines with same INN and strengthswere published in the Register of the Ministry of Health in 2009.resultsThe introduction of the reference pricing system for medicines on thePositive list lead to reduced prices paid by the Health Insurance Fund,while the patients have to pay the discrepancy between the medicinesretail and reference pricesDiscussionThe methodology of reference pricing of medicines enables the price re-duction of the most used medicines by enlarging the market offer of med-icines with the same generic name. That is probably due to two factors: (1)the grouping of medicines according to ATC classification and (2) the pricecomparison of same generics in the reference countries in the region.106PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNAFARMATsIJA/ FARMAKOINFORMATIKA poster prezentatsiiAs a comparison, in 2005 when the supply of medicines from the Pos-itive list was done by tenders, the patient did not pay extra for themedicines. With this methodology, the variety of same generics waslimited to only those medicines on the Positive list that won the ten-der, and their price was fixed.the conclusionWith the reference price methodology the variety of medicines withthe same generic name is increased and the Health Insurance Fundsaves money on money dedicated to medicines. But this has an im-pact on the patient standard as the patient often has to pay the dif-ference between the reference and the retail price of medicinesavailable in the pharmacies.referencesAngelovska B. Ratsionalna lekarstvena upotreba, farmatsevtichna dostavka itsenoobrazuvane, kato elementi na natsionalnata lekarstvena strategiia vRepublika Makedoniia, avtoreferat dokt. disertatsiia, Sofija,2006;Petrova G. Model na reformata na farmatsevtichniia sektor v strani v prekhod otBalkanskiia region - analiz na ispolzvanite teoretichni kontseptsii, avtoreferatdokt. disertatsiia, Sofija, 2004;Sobranie na Republika Makedonija, Zakon za zdravstvenoto osiguruvanje, Sl.Vesnik 119/2005, 50/2010 Skopje, 2005, 2010;Sobranie na Republika Makedonija, Zakon za lekovite i meditsinskite pomagala,Sl.