Indeed, 25% of these expenditures are spent on the treatment of dia-betes, while 75% is spent on late stage complications; only 7% is spenton anti-diabetic drugs, while 55% is related to hospitalisation.Cost- effectiveness evaluations provide reliable information support-ing a decision making process. It helps pricing and reimbursement spe-cialists from governments to choose best options from clinical andeconomic point of view. It has a special importance in case of inno-vative, usually expensive therapies and diagnostic procedures. For thispurpose, especially in chronic disease health economic modeling isfrequently used. Diabetes is a good example of such a disease. Mod-eling allows extrapolation of treatment results and costs beyond theclinical study period.New health technologies have an impact on quality of life evaluation,which is a part of patient- reported outcomes, which is growing in im-portance in contemporary pharmacoeconomics and outcomes re-search. These considerations are included in cost- utility analyses,which are obligatory in many jurisdictions including countries of Cen-tral and Eastern Europe. This domain is regulated by law, described bydetailed pharmacoeconomic guidelines and driven by specific institu-tions like health technology assessment agencies. All these efforts, an involvement of different stakeholders are aimedat ensuring the most rational use of scarce resources of health caresystems. Special emphasis should be placed on these aspects in theperiod of global crisis coupled with cost containment measures and inthe case of diseases with a strong impact on the society like diabetesmellitus.TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENT AND PHARMACOECONOMICS TODAYDinko VitezicUniversity of Rijeka School of Medicine and University Hospital CentreRijeka, Rijeka, CroatiaHealth technology assessment (HTA) is a new rapidly developing field,accepted internationally as a multidisciplinary process that summa-rizes information about the medical, social, economic, and ethical is-sues related to the use of health technology (drugs, medical devices,procedures, etc.) in a systematic, transparent, unbiased and robustmanner. The main aim of HTA is to support health policy decisions ondifferent levels. Today, in many of developed and developing countriesagencies for HTA have been established on national and also on in-ternational level. Part of HTA is health economy and pharmacoeco-nomics which can be defined as the branch of economics that usesfour main types of evaluation (cost-benefit, cost-effectiveness, cost-minimization, and cost-utility analyses) to compare pharmaceuticalproducts and treatment strategies (Table). Table. Classification of economic evaluations according to the meas-urement of health gain94Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNA FARMATsIJA / FARMAKOINFORMATIKA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOThese evaluations provide healthcare decision-makers with valuableinformation, allowing optimal allocation of limited resources. Whenconducting pharmacoeconomic analyses, researchers often strugglewith limited local epidemiological and cost data. The most frequently used analysis is cost-effectiveness analysis (CEA)which is a technique that is most appropriately applied when a choicemust be made between two or more competing options for which theexpected health gains can be expressed in terms of a common out-come measure. CEA has been described as a technique for making de-cisions at the margin, in situations where the question may be framedas, "Is it worth spending an additional financial mean (e.g. Euro) toachieve the additional benefits offered by the new drug compared toexisting therapy?" It would be complicated and time-consuming torank all available health care technologies according to their cost-ef-fectiveness, therefore the cost-effectiveness criteria are assessedmainly for the new and expensive therapies in the majority of coun-tries. The importance of evidence based health policy is widely acknowl-edged among health care policy-makers all over the world. The trans-parent method of HTA may improve the consistency ofpharmaceutical reimbursement decisions and makes this process inaccordance to the Transparency Directive of the European Union. Forthe adequate usage of HTA process and pharmacoeconomics, healtheconomic training and education of local professionals, including de-cision-makers, is of utmost importance. PHARMACOECONOMY AND OUTCOMES RESEARCH: INDUSTRY PERSPECTIVEMonika Szkultecka-DebekRoche PolandNowadays more and more countries are looking for tools which canbe helpful when taking decisions related to spending the budget fundson new technologies. Pharmacoeconomics and outcomes researchcan be such a tool. It can support decision making process and be oneof the integral elements of the reimbursement process. Both activitiesareas can provide answer to the questions that the decision makerscan face, not only about the value of the drugs but also of other healthrelated technologies. To ensure proper and common understanding it is important for allstakeholders to have guidelines on what is required, how to approachthe topic and a transparent decision making criteria should be de-fined. It is of importance to consider in the process all stakeholders,allowing for open communication with the industry, not forgettingabout patients and their preferences as they are those who know thebest the disease they have to live with. Such complex approach willallow all involved parties to work and deliver high quality level results.In some countries with established HTA agencies and where pharma-coeconomics has been already implemented in the reimbursementprocess, recommendations of HTA agencies are not always imple-mented. What could be done at the very early stage of pharma-coeconomics implementation to use it in the best and mostproductive way?DEVELOPING THE NATIONAL FRAMEWORKFOR GOOD GOVERNANCE IN THE PUBLICPHARMACEUTICAL SECTORRenata Slaveska Raichki1, Arta Kuli2, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska1 and Merjem Hadjihamza31Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Re-public of Macedonia2WHO Regional Office, Republic of Macedonia, 2Ministry of Health, Republic of MacedoniaGood governance is an essential factor for economic growth and sus-tainable development at all levels and within all sectors of society. Theestablishment of a national integrity system is a basic prerequisite forthe performance of good governance. An integrity system is basedupon a set of elements that ensure and reflect the characteristics of"Good Governance" and comply with established moral values and eth-ical principles in structuring and implementing policies and enforcinglaws (1). In 2004, World Health Organization (WHO) established theGood Governance for Medicines (GGM) programme in line with theWHO Global Medicine Strategy. The programme's goal is to supportcountries in maintaining efficient pharmaceutical system through theimplementation of transparent, accountable administrative proce-dures, supported by the promotion of ethical practices (2). Our coun-try, recognizing the concept of the GGM as one of the priority of theMedicines Strategy is among the countries which pioneered work re-lated to this issue. With the aim of encouraging and supporting thedevelopment and maintenance of a sound health system with highstandards, based upon the clearance of the Ministry of Health and incollaboration with WHO regional office, Macedonia joined the GGMproject at the end of 2007. The GGM program is implemented in a 3-steps approach. Phase I, "Measuring transparency in the public phar-maceutical sector", provides a comprehensive picture of the level oftransparency and the vulnerability to unethical practices in key func-tions of the pharmaceutical sector (3). The Phase II includes the de-velopment of "Ethical Framework for Good Governance in thePharmaceutical Sector" after wide consultation with key stakehold-ers. The 3rd phase aims to implement and institutionalize the nationalGGM programme through a set of officially adopted long-term strate-gic activities. Recommendations for Good Governance Practices inthe pharmaceutical sector suggest building and following two ap-proaches:>> Values approach: 1. A framework of moral values and ethical prin-ciples; 2. A code of conduct; 3. A programme for the socializationof an ethical framework and code of conduct; 4. Promotion ofmoral leadership. >> Disciplinary approach: 1. Established anti-corruption legislation;95Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACOECONOMY / SOCIAL PHARMACY / PHARMACOINFORMATICS oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATION2. Mechanisms for whistle-blowing; 3.Sanctions on reprehensibleacts based on anticorruption legislation; 4. Established manage-ment procedures, including internal and external financial audits;5. Collaboration between anti-corruption agencies, NGOs and pri-vate sector; 6. Management, coordination and evaluation of the in-tegrity system. Development of a national framework for Good Governance in thepharmaceutical sector requires consensus building through the disci-pline approach ("top to bottom") which is based on the developmentand review anti-corruption laws, policies, by-laws and administrativeprocedures. Values approach ("from bottom to top") starts inside in-stitutions based on consensus building on shared moral values andethical principles and standards.Based on WHO model framework document (4) and its contextualiza-tion to Macedonian context, Ethical framework defines the elementsthat need to be in place at country level including; moral values andethical principles necessary for the building of Good Governance inthe pharmaceutical sector. In addition, the document includes thecode of conduct in order to establish ethical standards, norms andbasic principles of public service ethics, values and high professionalstandards for public servants, and to enhance adherence to thesestandards and values and consolidate the foundations of good prac-tices and good governance.The GGM Project is motivating in terms of its overall strategic andbroad impact. It has a clear dimension of upgrading the capacity andcapability (strengthened competitiveness of human potential, sub-stantial improvement of drug management, new services and appli-cations that are tailored to specific needs). Thereby it has a potentialto make an essential contribution to the pharmaceutical functions,societal issues, health policy and the health system in the country.REFERENCES1. National integrity system: a guiding framework. Kuala Lumpur, Integrity Instituteof Malaysia and United Nations Development Programme, 2007(http://iim.com.my).2. Measuring Transparency in Medicines Registration, Selection and Procurement.Geneva, WHO, 20063. Report on "Measuring Transparency in Medicines Registration, Promotion,Inspection, Selection, Procurement and Distribution in the former YugoslavRepublic of Macedonia",National Assessment, WHO, 20094. Eloy Anello, A framework for good governance in the pharmaceutical sector,Department of Essential Medicines and Pharmaceutical Policies, Geneva,WHO, 2008RAZVOJ NA NATsIONALNA RAMKA ZADOBRO UPRAVUVANjE VO JAVNIOTFARMATsEVTSKI SEKTOR Renata Slaveska Raichki1, Arta Kuli2, TatjanaKadifkova Panovska1 i Merjem Khadzhikhamza31Farmatsevtski fakultet, Univerzitet "Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Skopje,Republika Makedonija2SZO Regionalna kantselarija, Republika Makedonija, 3Ministerstvo za zdravstvo, Republika Makedonija"Dobro upravuvanje" e neopkhoden faktor za ekonomski rast iodrzhliv razvoj na site nivoa i vo site sektori na edno opshtestvo.Vospostavuvanje na natsionalen sistem na integritet pretstavuvaosnoven preduslov za ispolnuvanje na "Dobro upravuvanje".Sistemot za integritet e vtemelen na serija elementi koi shto giobezbeduvaat i odrazhuvaat karakteristikite na "Dobroupravuvanje" i se vo soglasnost so vostanovenite moralnivrednosti i etichki printsipi vo oblikuvanje i primena na politikii sproveduvanje zakoni (1). Vo linija so globalnata strategija zalekovi, vo 2004 godina, Svetskata zdravstvena organizatsija (SZO-WHO) ja voveduva programata "Dobro upravuvanje so lekovi" (GGM).Programskata tsel e da se obezbedi poddrshka na zemjite voodrzhuvanje na efikasen farmatsevtski sistem so implementatsijana transparentni, otchetni administrativni protseduri potkrepeniso promotsija na etichki praktiki (2). Nashata zemja, raspoznavajkjigo kontseptot na GGM kako eden od prioritetite vo stategijata zalekovite, e megju zemjite predvodnitsi koi shto se posvetija na ovaprashanje. So tsel da se pottikni i poddrzhi razvoj i odrzhuvanje nazdravstven sistem so visoki standardi, Makedonija se pridruzhina GGM proektot, kon karajot na 2007 godina, vrz osnova naodobrenie od strana na Ministerstvoto za zdravstvo i vosorabotka so SZO Regionalnata kantselarija. GGM programata se sproveduva kako protses vo tri fazi. Prvatafaza e posvetena na "Protsenka na transparentnost vo javniotfarmatsevtski sektor", so shto se obezbeduva detalna slika zanivoto na transparentnost i ranlivost od neetichki praktiki vokluchnite funktsii na sektorot (3). Vtorata faza e posvetena narazvoj na "Etichka ramka za dobro upravuvanje vo farmatsevtskiotsektor" vrz osnova na shiroki konsultatsii so kluchnite zasegnatistrani. Tselta na tretata faza e da se implementira iinstitutsionalizira natsionalnata GGM programa so serija naofitsijalno prifateni, dolgorochni aktivnosti od strateshkikaraker. Preporakite za "Dobri praktiki vo upravuvanje sofarmatsevtskiot sektor" upatuvaat na gradenje i sledenje na dvapristapi:A. "Pristap na vrednosti": 1. Ramka na moralni vrednosti i etichkipintsipi; 2. Kodeks na odnesuvanje; 3. Programa za sotsijalizatsija naetichkata ramka i kodeksot na odnesuvanje 4. Promotsija na moralnoliderstvo. B. "Distsiplinski pristap": 1. Vospostavuvanje na anti-koruptsiskalegislativa; 2. Mekhanizmi za alarmiranje; 3. Sproveduvanjesanktsii i merki za ukor vrz osnova na antikoruptsskatalegislativa; 4. Vospostavuvanje na postapki za upravuvanje koivkluchuvaat vnatreshni i nadvoreshni finansiski revizii; 5.Sorabotka so anti-koruptsiski agentsii, nevladini organizatsii iprivatniot sektor; 6. Upravuvanje, koordiniranje i otsenka nasistemot na integritet. 96Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNA FARMATsIJA / FARMAKOINFORMATIKA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVORazvojot na natsionalnata ramaka za "Dobro upravuvanje vofarmatsevtskiot sektor" bara kontsenzus izgraden nizdistsiplinskiot pristap (t.n. "od vrvot kon osnovata"), postaven narazvoj i pregled na anti-koruptsiskite zakoni, politiki,podzakonski akti i administrativni protseduri. Pristapotbaziran na vrednosti, (t.n. "od osnovata kon vrvot") pochnuva voinstitutsiite vrz osnova na izgradba na kontsenzus za zaednichkimoralni vrednosti, etichki nachela i standardi. Vrz osnova naWHO modelot za dokumentot na ramkata (4) i adaptatsija na negovatasodrzhina na postoechkite uslovi, etichkata ramka gi definiraelementite koi shto treba da se postavat na natsionalno nivo avkluchuvaat: moralni vrednosti i etichki printsipi potrebni zaizgradba na "Dobro upravuvanje" vo farmatsevtskiot sektor.Dopolnitelno, dokumentot vkluchuva kodeks na odnesuvanje so tselda se postavat etichki standardi, nachela i osnovni printsipi naetikata za javnite uslugu, vrednosti i visoko profesionalnistandardi za drzhavnite sluzhbenitsi. Isto taka, se unapreduvapochituvanjeto na ovie standardi i vrednosti so shto sekonsolidiraat i temelite za "Dobri praktiki" i "Dobroupravuvanje".