Our aim was to develop an HPLC method for related and degradationproducts of Losartan in our finished product Losartan film coatedtablets that evaluate all impurities declared by European Pharma-copoeia. The European Pharmacopoeia specifies impurities D, J, K, L and M.There are 7 more impurities that are declared as other detectable im-purities (B, C, E, F, G, H and I) for which is not necessary to be identi-fied. Imp. B, Imp. C (losartan isomer), Imp. D (BCFI), Imp. E (methyl-biphenyl tetrazole), Imp. F (isopropyl losartan), Imp. G (tritanol-triph-enylmethanol) Imp. H (N-trityl losartan), Imp. I (O-trityl losartan), Imp.J (O-acetyl losartan) and Imp. K (losartan aldehide) are process relatedand Imp. L (losartan degradant-1) and Imp. M (losartan degradant-2)are process/degradation impurities. The identification of the impuri-ties is made by comparison of the chromatogram supplied with losar-tan for system suitability CRS with the chromatogram gained fromthe standard solution made from losartan for system suitability CRScontaining impurities J, K, L, M, spiked with standard of Imp. G. Thesystem suitability criteria is the peak-to-valley ratio of minimum 2.0between Imp. M and Imp. G from this solution. The European Phar-macopoeia method is applicable for all 12 impurities.Our method is different from this method but applicable for the sameimpurities and gives better chromatography and suitability. The method that was developed is a gradient method with constantflow rate. The column is Hypersil BDS 250mm x 4.6mm i.d., 5 mm atroom temperature. The mobile phase A is phosphate buffer pH=2.5and mobile phase B is Acetonitrile. The detection is at 230nm and the injection volume is 20 ml. The sol-vent is a mixture of acetonitrile and water, in ratio 80:20.The system suitability parameter that needs to be achieved in thepharmacopoeia is a peak-to-valley between Imp. M and Imp. G, whichis after Imp. M in the chromatogram. In our method the order of elution for Imp. G is changed and it is be-fore Imp. M but the separation is significant. The achieved resolutionbetween those peaks is 8.12. The order of the other impurities fromthe standard for system suitability (J, K, L and M) is as the one fromthe chromatogram supplied with losartan for system suitability CRS.There is a very good separation between all the identified peaks of im-purities: D, J, K, L, M and G and Losartan peak. The Relative Retention Times of the specified impurities with respectto the Losartan peak were calculated and are as follows:Imp. D-0.54, Imp. J-1.59, Imp. K-1.72, Imp. L-2.11, Imp. M-2.46.The Response Factor for Imp. D was calculated and is 0.14.The method was validated through Specificity, Limit of Detection andQuantitation, Linearity and Range, Accuracy, Precision, Robustness,Filter retention studies and Stability of solutions.REFERENCES1. Drug Master File-Losartan Potassium (Aurobindo Pharma Limited)2. Ph. Eur. 6.03. Validating chromatographic methods, A practical guide, David M. Bliesner4. http://www.drugs.com/search.php?searchterm=losartan25PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011RAZVOJ NA HPLC METODA ZAOPREDELUVANjE NA SRODNI IDEGRADATsIONI PRODUKTI VOLOSARTAN FILM TABLETI Marija Spasevska, Gordana Evgenievska, MenaIvanovska, Tatjana Bogovska, KhristinaBabunovskaKontrola na kvalitet, AD Alkaloid-Skopje, Farmatsevtska, Khemiskai Kozametichka Kompanija, A. Makedonski br.12, MakedonijaLosartanot e antagonist na angiotenzin 2 retseptorite koj sekoristi glavno za lekuvanje na visok krven pritisok (khipertenzija).Mozhe da se koristi i za odlozhuvanje na diabetska nefropatija iza namaluvanje na progresijata na renalni zaboluvanja. Sepreporachuva kako lek od primaren izbor kaj patsienti pomladi od55 godini koi ne mozhe da go toleriraat ACE inkhibitor.Nashata tsel beshe da razvieme HPLC metoda za srodni idegradatsioni produkti na Losartan vo nashiot preparat Losartanfilm tableti, koja kje gi opfati site onechistuvanja deklariraniso Evropskata Farmakopeja. Evropskata Farmakopeja gi spetsifitsira onechistuvanjata D, J, K, Li M. Ima ushte 7 drugi onechistuvanja koi se deklarirani kako drugionechistuvanja shto mozhe da se detektiraat (B, C, E, F, G, H i I) koi nee potrebno da se identifitsiraat.Onechistuvanjeto B, Onechistuvanjeto C (losartan isomer),Onechistuvanjeto D (BCFI), Onechistuvanjeto E (methylbiphenyltetrazole), Onechistuvanjeto F (isopropyl losartan), Onechistuvanjeto G(tritanol-triphenylmethanol) Onechistuvanjeto H (N-trityl losartan),Onechistuvanjeto I (O-trityl losartan), Onechistuvanjeto J (O-acetyllosartan) i Onechistuvanjeto K (losartan aldehide) se onechistuvanjapovrzani so proizvodstveniot protses, a Onechistuvanjeto L(losartan degradant-1) i Onechistuvanjeto M (losartan degradant-2) seonechistuvanja povrzani so proizvodstveniot protses/degradatsioniprodukti. Identifikatsijata na onechistuvanjata se pravi sosporedba na khromatogramot shto se dobiva so standardot losartanza soodvetnost na sistemot CRS i dobieniot khromatogram odstandardniot rastvor napraven od toj standard koj gi sodrzhionechistuvanjata J, K, L, M, spajkuvan so standard od onechistuvanjetoG. Uslovot za soodvetnost na sistemot e peak-to-valley odnos odminimum 2.0 pomegju onetsistuvanjeto between M i onechistuvanjeto God ovoj rastvor. Metodot vo Evropska Farmakopeja se koristi za site 12 one chi st uv anja.Nashata metoda e razlichna od taa i isto taka primenliva za istiteonechistuvanja, so toa shto dava podobra khromatografija isoodvetnost.Razvienata metoda e so gradienten odnos na mobilnite fazi prikonstanten protok. Kolonata e Hypersil BDS 250mm x 4.6mm i.d., 5mm, na sobna temperatura. Mobilnata faza A e fosfaten pufer sopH=2.5, a mobilnata faza B e Atsetonitril. Detektsijata se vrshi na branova dolzhina od 230nm, a volumenot nainjektiranje e 20 ml. Rastvoruvachot shto se koristi e atse to ni t ri l:voda, voodnos The 80:20. Parametarot za soodvetnost na sistemot spored EvropskaFarmakopeja shto treba da se ispolni e peak-to-valley pomegjuonechistuvanjeto M i onechistuvanjeto G, koe izleguva posle onechi -stu vanjeto M na khromatogramot. So nashata metoda redosledot na eluiranje na onechistuvanjeto G epromenet i sega izleguva pred onechistuvanjeto M, no razde l u va nje -to e znachitelno. Postignatata rezolutsija megju pikovite e 8,12.Redosledot na eluitanje na ostanatite onechistuvanja od standardotza soodvetnost na sistemot (J, K, L i M) e ist kako toj od khro ma to r -ga mot za standardot losartan za soodvetnost na sistemot CRS.Postoi mnogu dobro razedeluvanje pomegju site identifikuvanipikovi na onechistuvanjata D, J, K, L, M i G i pikot na Losartan.Presmetani se relativnite retentsioni vreminja na spetsifi tsi ra -ni te onechistuvanja vo odnos na pikot na Losartan i se dobienislednite vrednosti:Onechistuvanje D - 0.54, Onechistuvanje J - 1.59, Onechistuvanje K - 1.72,Onechistuvanje L-2.11, Onechistuvanje M - 2.46.Response faktorot na onechistuvanjeto. D e presmetan i negovatavrednost e 0.14.Metodata e validirana preku, spetsifichnost, limit na detektsija ikvantifikatsija, linearnost i opseg, tochnost, pretsiznost,robustnost, zadrshka pri filtriranje i stabilnost na rastvori.REFERENTsI1. Drug Master File-Losartan Potassium (Aurobindo Pharma Limited)2. Ph. Eur. 6.03. Validating chromatographic methods, A practical guide, David M. Bliesner4. http://www.drugs.com/search.php?searchterm=losartanPRODUCT QUALITY REVIEWVerce Jovanovska Jankovska, Jasminka VeleskaIvanovska, Sonja Sterjevska, Miroslava IlievskaAlkaloid AD Skopje, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Re-public of MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONProduct Quality Review is regular periodic or rolling quality reviews ofall licensed medicinal products, including export only products, whichare conducted with the objective of verifying the consistency of theexisting process, the appropriateness of current specifications forboth starting materials and finished product to highlight any trendsand to identify product and process improvements1.There are significant differences between the United States and Eu-ropean Union requirements for the annual review of records relatedto the manufacturing and control for pharmaceutical products andactive pharmaceutical ingredients2.The Product Quality Review is an effective quality improvement toolto enhance the consistency of the process and the overall quality ofthe product. The PQR will capture a broader view of product data,capturing trends and will help determine the need for revalidation andchanges if any1.SCOPEThe purpose of the document is to communicate expectations withregard to the conduct of Product Quality review. Product QualityReview is a GMP requirement listed under Chapter 1 of the PIC/sGMP guide for medicinal product effective since 1 January 2006.Product Quality Review3,4.26Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMETHODSThere are 12 spots in product that should be outlined within one PQR3:A review of starting materials and product contact primary packag-ing materials used for the product especially those from new sources,a review of critical in process controls and finished product results, areview of all batches that failed to meet established specification(s)and their investigation, a review of all significant deviations or non-conformances, their related investigation, and the effectiveness of re-sultant corrective and preventive actions taken, a review of all changescarried out to the processes or analytical methods, a review of Mar-keting Authorization variation submitted/granted/refused/, a reviewof the results of the stability monitoring program and any adversetrends, a review of quality related product returns, complaints and re-calls and the investigation performed at the time, a review of ade-quacy of any other previous product process or equipment correctiveactions, for new marketing authorizations post marketing commit-ments, the qualification status of relevant critical equipment and util-ities, a review of technical agreements to ensure that they are up todate1. Microsoft office tools were used to calculate average, max, min,standard deviation, relative standard deviation. Statistical tools wereused in a manner to achieve potential capability (CP), capability ratio(CR), demonstrated excellence (Cpk), non-centering correction (K), +-3slimits, results (observed, expected), above specification limit (ob-served, expected), below specification limit, Stnd. skewness, Stnd.kurtosis, run tests [(to outline some trends and searches for andidentifies any unusual patterns in the data. This is helpful in detectingprocesses which are slowly drifting away from target, even though nopoints fall outside the control limits (3 sigma)], individual and movingrange. Analysis of Lisinopril tablets 20 mg was performed for period of01.01.2009 - 31.12.2009. Three year analysis of the results was also per-formed, using the same Statistical and Microsoft office tools.OBTAINED RESULTSRegarding the review of the Lisinopril tablets 20mg obtained resultsfor starting materials as well as finished product were within specifi-cation limits. CONCLUSIONAll the data for drug product Lisinopril tablets 20mg for 2009 as wellas taking into consideration three years period (2007-2009) and otherrelevant information, can confirm that process is in the state ofcontrol5. REFERENCES1 HEALTH SCIENCES AUTHORITY - Guidance notes on Product Quality Review2 Product Annual/Quality Review: US-EU Comparative Analysis and Interpretations3 PIC/s - Guide to good manufacturing pactice for medicinal products - part I4 Eudralex - The rules governing medicinal products in the European union -Volume 4 EU Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice Medicinal Products forHuman and Veterinary use - Part 1 chapter 1 Qualiry Management5Western Electric Rules (zone rules), 1956PREGLED NA KVALITET NA PROIZVODOTVerche Jovanovska Jankovska, Jasminka VelevskaIvanovska, Sonja Sterjevska, Marija Davcheva,Miroslava IlievskaAlkaloid AD Skopje, Bul. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje,Republika MakedonijaVOVEDPregled na kvalitetot na proizvodot e redovna periodichen ilipostojan pregled na kvalitetot za site litsentsirani meditsinskiproizvodi, vkluchuvajkji gi i proizvodite za izvoz, koi sesproveduvaat so tsel proverka na konzistentnosta na postojanostana protsesot, soodvetnosta so tekovnite spetsifikatsii kako zavleznite materijali taka i za gotoviot proizvod za da sepotentsiraat bilo kakvi trendovi, i da se identifikuvaatpodobruvanja na proizvodot i protsesot1.Postojat znachajni razliki pomegju baranjata vo SoedinetiteAmerikanski Drzhavi i Evropskata Unija za godishniot pregled nazapisite povrzani so proizvodstvo i kontrola na farmatsevtskiteproizvodi i aktivnite farmatsevtski ingredienti2.Pregledot na kvalitetot na proizvodot e efikasna alatka zapodobruvanje na postojanosta na protsesot i tselosniot kvalitet naproizvodot. Pregledot na kvalitetot na proizvodot opfakja edenposhirok pogled na podatotsi za proizvodot, zemajkji gi predvidtrendovite so shto ovozmozhuva da se odredi potreba odrevalidatsija i promeni dokolku gi ima1.TsELTselta na ovoj dokument e da se povrzat ochekuvanjata za da seizgotvi dobar Pregled na kvalitetot na proizvodot.