Kirklees NHS, Primary Health care Trust: Nursing Giidelines for Safe Handling andAdministration of Cytotoxic Drugs. Online: www.kirklees.gov.uk, page 1-148. HSE Information, HSE Safe handling of Cytotoxic Drugs: on line (www.hse.gov.uk),2003 page 1-79.Ministry of Labour, Ontario, Canada, Jeanne Beauchamp Hewitt, RN, PhD, Universityof Wisconsin, Milwaukee, 1997: Health effects of Occupational exposure toAntineoplastic Drugs: An Interactive Research, p.1-3510. Prof. Alain Astier, PharmD, PhD: Oncology Pharmacy: Support the best Quality inPatients Care. In European Journal of Hospital Pharmacy Practice (EJHPP) and ESMO(European Society of medical Oncology), supplement, 200811. Professor Samuel Limat, PharmD: The Role of Oncology Pharmacist in theDecision -Making Process, EJHPP and ESMO, supplement, 200812. Jean Francois Latour, PhD: Contaminations from Handling Cytotoxic Agents.EJHPP&ESMO supplement 2008, p.23-2513. Dr. Gjergji Koja; Prof. As. Agim Shehi, Antoneta Njehrrena, Ilir Minga: LegjislacioniShendetesor ne Republiken e Shqiperise per periudhen 1992-2010.14.Esther Green BScN, mSCG; Mary Johnson, BSc, Maureen Trudeau,BSc; MA,MD;Susan Poirier, BSc Pharm, Gail Macartney RN(EC),BScH,MSc (A,CONCC), DeborahMiliken, BSc Pharm: 'Safe Handling of Cytotoxics: Reccomendation of Onrario" onAmerican Society of Clinical Oncology, October, 9, 200815. Dhurata Tarifa, Agim Sallaku, Sotiraq Lako: Kimioterapia dhe trajtimi sistemik ikancerit, 200716. Rang, Dale, Ritter, Flower: Farmacologia, 6a edizione, Elsevier, 2008, p. 72317. Katzung: Farmacologia generale e clinica, 10a edizione inglese, Piccin, 2007, p.887influence of iMMunosuPPressivetheraPY on biocheMical ParaMetersin kidneY transPlant PatientsNikola Stefanovic1,Radmila Velickovic-Radovanovic1,2,Aleksandra Catic-Djordjevic1, Tatjana Cvetkovic 1,21Medical Faculty, University of Nis, Nis, Serbia,2Clinic of nephrology and haemodialysis, Clinical centre Nis, SerbiaintroductionCombined immunosuppressive therapy in patients after kidney tran-splantation consists of tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil, cortico-steroid and basiliximab. Due to narrow therapeutic range and highlyvariable pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus, as well as numerous side ef-fects of drug immunosuppression, it is important to monitor bioche-mical parameters, which represent kidney and liver function.objectiveMonitoring of biochemical parameters in patients after renal trans-plantation who take combined immunosuppressive therapy. Also, weevaluate possibility to use biochemical monitoring in rational phar-macotharapy.Patients and MethodsThis study was conducted among 30 patients with renal transplanta-tion, who were on quaternary immunosuppressive therapy treated inthe Clinic of nephrology and hemodialysis of Clinical Centre Nis, Ser-bia, during 2010. Determination of serum creatinine level (sCr), levelof cholesterol (Chl), level of urea (Ure), level of triglyceride (Tg) and ac-tivity of following enzymes, alanin aminotransferaza (ALT), aspartateaminotransferase (AST), gamma glutamyl transferase(GGT) and alka-line phosphatase (ALP) was performed little before transplantation aswell as 7th, 14th, 21th, 60th and 180th day after transplantation. Weused nonparametric Friedman test to analyse obtained results.resultsDuring the six-month period after transplantation, average values ofsCr and Ure were significantly lower the pre-operative values (p<0.001).Cholesterol post-operative values were significantly higher than pre-operative (p<0.001), but trygliceride levels became significantly highertwo months after transplantation (p<0.001). Activity of AST didn'tchange significantly during observing period. ALT, GGT and ALP acti-vities were higher after transplantation (p<0.001, p<0.01, p<0.001, re-spectively).conclusionObtained results show that biochemical monitoring in patients oncombined immunosuppressive therapy is relevant indicator of ratio-nal pharmacotherapy.referencesChen Y, Yheng K, Chen L, et al. Clinical pharmacokinetics of tacrolimus after the firstoral administration in combination with mycophenolate mofetil and prednisone inChinese kidney transplantation recipients. Transplant Proc. 2005;37:4246- 4250.Kuypers DR, Claes K, Evenepoel P, et al. Time-related clinical determinants of long-term tacrolimus pharmacokinetics in combination therapy with mycophenolic acidand corticosteroids: a prospective study in one hundred de novo kidney transplant re-cipients. Clin Pharmacokinet. 2004;43:741-762.Armstrong V, Oellerich M. New developments in the immunosuppressive drug moni-toring of cyclosporine, tacrolimus, and azathioprine. Clin Biochem. 2001;34: 9-16.Kahan B, Keown P, Levy G, Johnston A. Therapeutic drug monitoring of immunosup-pressant drugs in clinical practice. Clin Ther. 2002; 24:330-350.Hoshinaga K, Aikawa A, Murai M, et al. Regimen of tacrolimus - based immunosup-pression with basiliximab, mycophenolate mofetil, and low-dose steroid reducesacute rejection in kidney transplants. Transplant Proc. 2005;37:1762-1763.329fifth congress of PharMacY of Macedonia With international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL PHARMACY poster presentationsMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011330saMe target different PathWaYs:clinical PharMacist and clinicalPharMacologistGolocorbin-Kon S.1,3, Lalic-Popovic M.1, Mikov M.21Department of Pharmacy, Medical Faculty Novi Sad, Serbia2Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacol-ogy, Medical faculty Novi Sad, Serbia3Faculty of Pharmacy, Podgorica, University of MontenegrointroductionClinical pharmacist and Clinical pharmacologist have much in com-mon. Both professionals aim to improve the safety and efficacy oftreatments for the benefits of patients but there are clear differences.discussionClinical pharmacist is part of a much larger group of professionals rep-resented in most hospitals in developed countries. While formerly sub-ordinate and restricted to supplying the medicines requested by themedical prescribers, the pharmacist's role has progressively developedto includemonitoring outcomes of drug therapy and patient safety, re-port management and budgetary responsibilities. Pharmacists arenow proficient to take on prescribing responsibilities in certain coun-tries and have been actively involved in collaborative prescribing prac-tices with physicians. They also take on much of the educational rolerelated to rational prescribing that was once considered the realm ofthe clinical pharmacologists. Clinical pharmacist care for patients inall health care settings. They possess in - depth knowledge of med-ications that is integrated with a foundational understanding of thebiomedical, pharmaceutical, sociobehavioral, and clinical sciences. Toachieve desired therapeutic goals, the clinical pharmacist applies ev-idence based therapeutic guidelines, evolving sciences, emerging tech-nologies, and relevant legal, ethical, social, cultural, professional andeconomic principles. Accordingly, clinical pharmacist assumes re-sponsibility and accountability for managing medication therapy in di-rect patient care settings, whether practicing independently or inconsultation/collaboration with other health care professionals. Clin-ical pharmacist researchers generate, disseminate, and apply newknowledge that contributes to improved health and quality of life.Within the health care system, clinical pharmacists are experts in thetherapeutic use of medications. They routinely provide medicationtherapy evaluations and recommendations to patients and health careprofessionals. Clinical pharmacists are a primary source of scientifi-cally valid information and advice regarding the safe, appropriate, andcost-effective use of medications. Pharmacists in community and am-bulatory care settings are in a unique position to reduce drug-relatedmorbidity and optimize patient outcomes by identifying, resolving,and preventing drug therapy problems.Clinical pharmacologists are generally physicians with an additionaldegree in clinical pharmacology, many of whom are prescribers ofmedicine in active practice but are usually connected to academicunits responsible for research and teaching. They belong to a well rec-ognized but small sub-specialty of medicine.conclusionPhysician's education in the field of pharmacology and pharmacy hasdecreased. The patway from pharmacy student to clinical pharmacistis usually shorter and cheaper than that frommedical student to clin-ical pharmacologist. Clinical pharmacists and clinical pharmacologistsare accountable for the same target groups. Clinical pharmacy andclinical pharmacology share similar and parallel development, history,the same goal and the same financial resources (they compete forthe same financial sources). Reality is that there is insufficient cover-age by either group throughout the World. Many errors continue, drugrelated problems continue etc. The purpose of each is similar. Theyneed to work together in order to improve care. Collaboration be-tween clinical pharmacists and clinical pharmacologists should be pos-sible. In practice, competition and domination of one group can alwaysbe discerned depending on the coutry or the area of the country. Inshort: clinical pharmacists, clinical pharamacologists interaction is therepetition of the historical relations between physicians and pharma-cists: deja vu phenomenon. Clinical pharmacists - clinical pharmacol-ogists collaboration? It is Important for the benefit of patients,education, authorities and clinical pharmacy and clinical pharmacol-ogy associations and development.This work has been supported by Ministry of Science and Technologi-cal development of Serbia N0 41012referencesCzaky TZ., Clinical pharmacy and Pharmacology: Friends or Foes. J. Med Edu1973;48;905-910DiPiro JT (editor) Encyclopedia of Clinical Pharmacy, Marsel Dekker, New York, Basel,2003.Dollery CT., Clinical pharmacology - the first 75 years and view of the future. Br. J. Clin.Pharmacol. 2006; 61:650-665Hepler CD Clinical pharmacy, pharmaceutical care, and quality of drug therapy. Phar-macotherapy. 2004;24 (11):1491-1498Laters CM., Lessons learned from the past: A quide for the future of clinical pharma-cology in the 21st century. J.Clin. Pharmacol. 2000;40:946-966Martin JE., Manasse HR., ASHP Leadership report on strategic direction: paving theway for pharmacy's future. Am J Health Syst Pharm 2006;63: 1549-1558Maxwell SRJ., Webb DJ., Clinical pharmacology - too young to die? Lancet2006;367:799-800Park GD., A proposal for clinical pharmacy and clinical pharmacology collaborationDrug intell Clin Pharm. 1986;20:310-311Rietord A., Nunn T., Launay-Vacher V., et al. European Fellowship for Pharmacistspromoting clinical pharmacy in Europe. Pharm World Sci 2005; 27: 278WalkerR., Edwards CRW. Clinical Pharmacy and Therapeutics, 3rd Ed. Churchill Liv-ingstone, London 2003.bone Mineral densitY in WoMenWith risk factors for osteoPorosisTamara Vojnovic1, Tanja Lazova2, Slobodan Gigov1,Ivana Indic1, Jelena Zivkovic1, Jelena Gigov31University of Novi Sad, Medical faculty, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad,Republic of Serbia2AD Dr. Panoski - Skopje, Skupi 3 bb, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia3Pharmacy "Galen", Cara Dusana 50, Novi Sad, Republic of SerbiaintroductionThe World Health Organisation defines osteoporosis as a bonemineraldensity (BMD) that is 2.5 standard deviations or more (as measured bydual-energy X-ray absorptiometry) below the reference mean forhealthy, young white women. Reduced bone strength, which isdetermined by BMD and bone quality, predisposes increased risk offractures. Measuring BMD by quantitative ultrasound (QUS) provides adetermination of certain bone characteristics, related to the qualityMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011331and structure of bones, which can be useful for predicting the degreeof fracture risk.study objectives is to determine bonemineral density, in women olderthan 40 years with at least one risk factor for osteoporosis, to predictthe risk of fractures.MethodIn order to obtain data about presence of osteoporosis risk factors,86 women, older than 40 years, were surveyed. Afterwards, out of 80women, who had at least one risk factor, 17 were randomly chosen andtheir bone density was measured by BMD quantitative ultrasound.resultsOut of 86 respondents, 80 had at least one risk factor (93.02%). Meanof measured T-scores is -1.63.discussionValues of measured T-scores indicate an increased risk of fractures inwomen who have at least one osteoporosis risk factor. QUS parame-ters are better and more precise predictive indicators of risk factorsfor osteoporosis then well known clinical factors. However, theycannot be used in precise diagnosis of osteoporosis and axial BMD(DEXA) is necessary to be done.conclusionThe process of bone loss is 'silent' and that is the reason why personswith osteoporosis should be found, especially among female popula-tion, older than 40 years and with at least one risk factor present. Bonemineral density tests and early diagnosis of osteoporosis enable totake prevention measures or to start a treatment, which significantlydecreases risk of fractures.references1. http://scindeks.nb.rs/article.aspx?query=ARTAK%26and%26osteoporoza&page=0&sort=1&stype=0&backurl=%2fSearchResults.aspx%3fquery%3dARTAK%2526and%2526osteoporoza%26page%3d0%26sort%3d1%26stype%3d02. http://www.doiserbia.nb.rs/img/doi/0042-8450/2008/0042-84500812919J.pdf3. http://scindeks.nb.rs/article.aspx?query=ARTAK%26and%26QUS&page=0&sort=1&stype=0&backurl=%2fSearchResults.aspx%3fquery%3dARTAK%2526and%2526QUS%26page%3d0%26sort%3d1%26stype%3d04. http://scindeks.nb.rs/article.aspx?query=ARTAK%26and%26osteoporoza&page=168&sort=1&stype=0&backurl=%2fSearchResults.aspx%3fquery%3dARTAK%2526and%2526osteoporoza%26page%3d0%26sort%3d1%26stype%3d0Monitoring the iMPleMentation andsecuritY of Montelucast in childrenMarija Popovic MilenkovicPharmacy Kragujevacintroduction and objectiveMontelukast (Singulair) is leukotriene receptor antagonist. It is indicatedfor the prophylaxis and chronic treatment of asthma, for prevention of ex-ercize-inducedbronchoconstriction and for the relief of symptomsof sea-sonal allergic rhinitis. Goal of this paper is to investigate themost commontherapeutic indications, populations that havemostbenefit fromthedrug,common adverse reactions, as well as how often these reactions occur.MethodologYResearch has been conducted in one pharmacy within Apoteka Kragu-jevac, Kragujevac, Serbia. The patients filled in questionnarie in phar-macy independently or with the help of pharmacist. Following questionswere included:Patient's age and sexIndications, dosage and duration of montelucast usageHas patient been informed what the drug was expected to achieveHas patient been informed about adverse effectsAll adverse effects have been taken from patient's leaflet. They havebeen divided to four groups, according to system: digestive disorders,nervous system/psychiatric disroders, respiratory system and other.results and discussion40 patients of both sexes have been investigated. Among them, 40percent have been females. Patients have been between 3 and 17years old, with an average of 8. Duration of drug usage has been be-tween 1 and 42months, with an average of 10.7. Most common dosagehas been 5 mg. Three most common indications have been asthma(72%), alergic rhinitis (23%) and exercise-induced bronhoconstriction.60 percent of patients have been informed about adverse effects. 65percent have not experienced any adverse effects. Of the remaining 35percent, as much as 61 percent of patients have reported more thenone adverse event. 54 percent of adverse events belong to nervoussystem/physiatric group. 23 percent belong to respiratory disrodersgroup. 11 percent belong to digestive group.In nervous system/physiatric group, aggressiveness (46%) and irrita-bleness (31%) have been most common. Cough (67%) and stomackache have been most common effects in respiratory and digestivegroups, respectively.As much as 80 percent of patients have stated that they are satisfiedwith the drug.