2011, Submitted manuscript.228PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAoralni prezentatsiicurrent PersPectiveson disintegration evaluation of odtJachowicz R.1, Brniak W.1, Krupa A.1, Skorka T.2,Niwinski K.11Chair and Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biophar-maceutics Jagiellonian University Medical College, Cracow, Poland2Department of Magnetic Resonance Imaging, Institute of NuclearPhysics Polish Academy of Sciences, Cracow, Poland.Nowadays, increasing numbers of active principle ingredients (API) areformulated into orodispersible tablets (ODTs), which are suitable formany patients with swallowing difficulties of solid dosage forms. Asmall amount of saliva is sufficient for dispersing tablets in the oralcavity. After swallowing particles in normal way, released drug is ab-sorbed from gastro-intestinal tract resulting in desired therapeutic ac-tion. According to the European Pharmacopoeia 6th edition, thedisintegration time of tablets in mouth should not be longer than 3minutes, according to FDA guidance for ODTs (2008) approximately 30s. Therefore the main properties of ODTs are rapid absorption of waterresulting in disintegration into individual particles. Until today neitherEur. Ph. nor USP specified disintegration test for ODTs provide thecorrelation with disintegration time in the oral cavity.There are many different approaches to develop disintegrationmethod, which is more determinant and biorelevant. The proposedtests employ a modified dissolution apparatus, novel type of appara-tus with CCD-camera, texture analyser instrument, or sieve method.Last year a new disintegration testing apparatus (ODT 101) was pro-posed by Harada et al. for further improvement disintegration evalu-ation.Several methods have been developed to prepare ODTs and differentexcipients have been tested. Tablets can be manufactured by lyophili-sation moulding or compression. Direct compression is the mostpreferable method because of its simplicity and cost - effectivenessbut the properties of active substance and excipients influencetablet's characteristics. Among different excipients co-processed sys-tems for direct compression process are also commercially availablee.g. Pharmaburst, F-Melt, Ludiflash, Pearlitol. During co-processing twoor more known excipients are combined together in a technologicalprocess and form material with new properties. They are characterisedby a fixed and homogenous distribution of ingredients that preventstheir segregation during compaction process. Moreover their applica-tion of spray-drying process results in the formulation of highly porousgranules, which assure rapid disintegration of tablets in the saliva.For evaluation disintegration properties in this study two co-processedexcipients for direct compression of orodispersible tablets: F-Melt typeC, and Pharmaburst were used. Placebo tablets containing one of theexcipients and sodium stearyl fumarate as a lubricant were preparedwith compression force of 10-20 kN. Tablet properties and their me-chanical parameters (hardness and friability) were evaluated.The disintegration time was measured by using standard pharma-copeial disintegration apparatus and modified version of rotatingshaft apparatus constructed in the Department (based on propositionof Narazaki et al.). To determine disintegration time, 2-15 ml of dis-tilled water or simulated salivary fluid were used. Computer softwareallowed a plotting of disintegration profiles.In order to obtain additional data on disintegration process of pre-pared formulations magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) technique andwetting test with visual observation were applied. The results werecompared with disintegration time in the oral cavity.Moreover, the influence of ibuprofen as a practically insoluble drug ondisintegration time of tablets was evaluated.The varied hardness of placebo tablets was directly related to com-pression force. The friability of Pharmaburst tablets was approximatelytwo times higher than F-Melt tablets compressed with the same com-pression force.In comparison to the pharmacopoeial disintegration apparatus the in-fluence of compression force on disintegration time was intensivelymarked in the case of modified rotary shaft apparatus.There was a good correlation between the values obtained by usingmodified rotary shaft apparatus and those obtained in oral cavity.Moreover, the modified rotary shaft method showed better discrimi-natory power in analysis of ODT's disintegration characteristics thanpharmacopeial test. Taking into account the values of correlation co-efficient R2 the better in vitro/in vivo correlation was achieved formodified rotary shaft apparatus (R2 = 0,7058) than for pharmacopoeialdisintegration test (R2 = 0,5223).The incorporation of ibuprofen into the tablet mass changed tabletsproperties. The analysis revealed that using F-Melt resulted in drasticelongation of disintegration time. Such formulations disintegrated in4-12 minutes, when placebo tablets only 24 - 46 seconds. Pharmabursttablets with ibuprofen disintegrated in similar time (33-116 s) asplacebo (36-95 s).The computer software connected with rotary shaft apparatus regis-tered tablet's thickness changes during disintegration, due to swellingor erosion.Application of magnetic resonance imaging method allowed the bet-ter understanding of disintegration process. Solvent penetration in-side the tablet, wetting of tablet mass, swelling, and erosion wereobserved.The application of both co-processed excipients were useful in devel-opment of orally disintegrating tablets. However, only Pharmaburstformulations characterized with appropriate disintegration propertiesindependently on drug amount.The work was supported by the Polish Ministry of Science and HigherEducation, grant no. N N405 024439.referencesGohel M.C. : A review of co-processed directly compressible excipients , J. Pharm.Pharmaceut. Sci. 8, 1, 2005, 76-90.Okuda Y., Irisawa Y., Okimoto K., Osawa T., Yamashita S.: A new formulation for orallydisintegrating tablets using a suspension spray-coating method, Int. J. Pharm. 382,2009, 80-87.Harada T., Narazaki R., Ohwaki T., Uchida T.: Effect of physical properties of orally dis-integrating tablets on disintegration time as determined by a new apparatus, J. DrugDel. Sci. Tech. 20(5), 2010, p. 377-383.229fifth congress of PharMacy of Macedonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYoral presentationsidentification of differentsolid-state Modificationsof atorvastatin calciuMin filM-coated tabletsby derivative ft-ir sPectroscoPyGjorgji Petrusevski, Suzan Memed-Sejfulah,Sanja Simeonovska, Marina Kajdzanoska,Irena Brasnarska, Natasa Karalija,Ema Kikovska-Stojanovska, Biljana Sapkareva,Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia1. introductionAtorvastatin is HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor, mostly marketed ascalcium salt. It is a new generation synthetic lipid lowering agent [1].Numerous polymorphic forms of atorvastatin calcium have beenreported in the literature [2], including amorphous, anhydrous andcrystalohydrate modifications. The control of the polymorphic form inthe finished formulation is of great importance as the differentpolymorphs usually exhibit different physical and chemical properties.Generally, if induced polymorphic change can occur during theproduction process, it will most probably alter the dissolution profileand eventually affect the bioavailability of the drug product. On theother hand, different solid forms of one active pharmaceuticalingredient (API) can have different impurity profiles [3]. Therefore, herewe present the application of second-derivative Fourier transforminfrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy in direct identification of amorphous,anhydrous and one crystalohydrate modification of atorvastatincalcium in film-coated tablets.2. Methods and MaterialsInfrared spectra were obtained on Varian-660 FT-IR spectrometer. Asmodel drug compounds amorphous, anhydrous (Form VIII) andtrihydrate (Form I) atorvastatin calcium compounds were used. Asmodel drug product, atorvastatin 80 mg film-coated tablets, based onthe mentioned polymorphic forms were produced as small laboratorybatches.3. results and disscusionStudying the polymorphic form of the API in low dosage film-coatedtablets, where the content of the drug compound is less than 10% isgenerally considered as very complicated and demanding researchtask. Different solid-state techniques are applied for these purposes,from which most common are the powder X-ray diffraction and thevibrational spectroscopy (infrared and Raman) [1]. The FT-IRspectroscopy involves the simplest instrumentation and it is the mostwidely spread analytical technique for identification purposes in thepharmaceutical industry. The main obstacle for application of thistechnique in identification of the polymorphic form in low dosage film-coated tablets is the low intensity of the bands from the incorporatedAPI as a consequence of very low concentration.In the case of atorvastatin calcium, FT-IR spectroscopy can be easilyapplied for identification of the different polymorphic forms of thepure API (Fig. 1). As it can be seen, characteristic spectral differencesamong the studied polymorphic forms can be identified in the:combined OH and NH stretching region (above 3100 cm-1), thecarbonyl stretching (~1650 cm-1), ring related vibrations (1600-1500 cm-1) and etc.Figure 1. FT-IR spectra of atorvastatin calcium: (a) trihydrate-form I,(b) anhydrous - form VIII and (c) amorphous.On the other hand, situation is much more complicated when FT-IRspectra of film-coated tablets (same placebo with differentpolymorphic form) are being compared (Fig. 2).Figure 2. FT-IR spectra of atorvastatin 80 mg film-coated tabletsproduced with different polymorphic form: (a) trihydrate-form I, (b)anhydrous - form VIII and (c) amorphous.It can be seen that most of the bands originating from the API aretotally obscured, except the carbonyl stretching and ring relatedvibrations (1660-1500 cm-1). Although, they are visible in the spectrumof the formulation, the corresponding intensity is very low, makingthem unreliable for polymorph identification purposes. In order toamplify the signal, second derivative in the studied spectral region wascalculated for each FT-IR spectrum of the pure polymorphic forms andthe corresponding film-coated tablets. It can be noticed (Fig. 3) thatthe derivation of the signal affords better resolution between thestudied bands in the FT-IR spectra of the film-coated tablets, makingthe comparison with spectra of the pure compounds more precise andreliable.230PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAoralni prezentatsiiFigure 3. Derivative FT-IR spectra of atorvastatin 80 mg film-coatedtablets, compared to the derivative FT-IR spectra of the correspondingpolymorphic form: (a) trihydrate-form I, (b) anhydrous - form VIII and (c)amorphous.4. conclusionThe obtained data revealed that second-derivative FT-IR spectroscopycan be successfully applied in identification of amorphous, anhydrous(Form VIII) and trihydrate (Form I) polymorphic forms of atorvastatincalcium in film-coated tablets.references[1] D. Skorda, C. G. Kontoyannis, Talanta, 74 (2008) 1066-1070. [2] V. M. Sonje, L Kumar, C. L. Meena, G. Kohli, V. Puri, R. Jain, A. Bansal, H. G. Brittain,Profiles of Drug Substances, Excipients, and Related Methodology, Volume 35, 2010,Elsevier Inc.[3] G. Petrusevski, S. Ugarkovic, P. Makreski, J. Mol. Struct. 993 (2011), 328-335.IDENTIFIKATsIJA NA RAzlIChNITsVRSTI FORMI NA ATORVASTATINKAlTsIUM VO FIlM-OblOzhENITAblETI SO PRIMENANA DERIVATIVNA INFRATsRVENASPEKTROSKOPIJAGjorgji Petrushevski, Suzan Memed-Sejfulakh,Sanja Simeonovska, Marina Kajdzhanoska,Irena Brashnarska, Natasha Karalija,Ema Kikovska-Stojanovska,Biljana Shapkareva, Sonja UgarkovikjIstrazhuvanje i razvoj, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republika Makedonija1. VOVEDAtorvastatinot e inkhibitor na HMG-CoA reduktaza, najchesto do-stapen kako kaltsiumova sol. Toj e sintetichki statin od nova genera-tsija i se upotrebuva za namaluvanje i kontrola trigilitseridite ikholesterolot vo krvta. Vo literaturata se poznati golem broj ra-zlichni polimorfni oblitsi na atorvastatin kaltsium [2]. Kontro-lata na polimorfnata forma na farmatsevtski aktivnoto soedi-nenie (FAS) vo krajniot proizvod e od golema vazhnost bidejkji ra-zlichnite polimorfni oblitsi najchesto pokazhuvaat razlichni fi-zichki i khemiski svojstva. Ako za vreme na proizvodstveniot protsesmozhe da dojde do polimorfna transformatsija, toa najverojatnokje se odrazi vrz profilot na rastvorlivost, shto pak mozhe indi-rektno da vlijae na bioraspolozhivosta na lekot. Od druga strana,razlichnite tsvrsti formi na edno FAS mozhe da imaat razlichenprofil na srodni onechistuvanja [3]. Vo ovoj trud e prezentirananova metoda za direktna identifikatsija na tri tsvrsti modifi-katsi na atorvastatin kaltsium vo film-oblozheni tableti so prime-na na derivativna (vtor izvod) Furie transformna infratsrvena(FT-ITs) spektroskopija.2. METODI I MATERIJAlIInfratsrvenite spektri bea snimeni na Varian-660 FT-ITs spektro-metar. Kako model za FAS bea koristeni: amorfna, bezvodna(Forma VIII) i trikhidratna (Forma I) modifikatsija na atorvastatinkaltsium. Vrz baza na ovie polimorfi, bea izraboteni laborato-riski primerotsi na atorvastatin 80 mg film-oblozheni tableti.3. REzUlTATI I DISKUSIJAIzuchuvanjeto na polimorfnata forma na FAS kaj nisko-doziranitefilm-oblozheni tableti, kade sodrzhinata na aktivnata komponentae poniska od 10 %, pretstavuva slozhena istrazhuvachka zadacha. Zaovie tseli dosega se primenuvani razlichni instrumentalni tekhni-ki, vo prv red, rendgenskata difraktsija od sprasheni primerotsi ivibratsionata (infratsrvena i Ramanska) spektroskopija [1]. FT-ITsspektroskopija vkluchuva najednostavna instrumentatsija i e najra-sprostraneta analitichka tekhnika za identifikatsija vo farmatsev-tskata industrija. Glavnata prechka za primena na ovaa tekhnika zaidentifikatsija na polimorfnite formi vo nisko-doziranitefarmatsevtski preparati e slabiot intenzitet na lentite od inkor-poriranoto FAS, kako posleditsa na niskata kontsentratsija.Vo sluchajot na atorvastatin kaltsium, FT-ITs spektroskopija mozhelesno da bide primeneta za identifikatsija na razlichnite poli-231fifth congress of PharMacy of Macedonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYoral presentationsmorfni formi na chistoto FAS (Sl. 1).