Vanaja K, Guzel D, Jandaghi D, Wald K, Wolburg H, Wahl M, Bukarica L, Heinle H.Liposomes as a delivery system for lipid soluble antioxidant resveratrol. In H.Heinle, N. Marx, S. Lorkowski, J. Schafer. Inflammation, lipids and immunologicreactions during atherogenesis. Deutche gesellschaft fur arterioskleroseforschung,e.V.,Tubingen 2010; 196-201.PHYSICAL STABILITY ANALYSIS OF TOTALPARENTERAL NUTRITION ADMIXTUREMarija Pavlovic1, Mirjana Antunovic2, DusicaMirkovic2, Aleksandar Petrovic31Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis,2Institute of Pharmacy, Military Medical Academy, Belgrade,3Institute of Histology and Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Universityof Nis, Republic of Serbia INTRODUCTIONTotal parenteral nutrition (TPN) purpose is to provide all nutrients ac-cording to individual nutritional needs of every patient whose digestivetract is non-functional or inaccessible 1,2,3. All-in-One system (all com-ponents are mixed in one bag), is TPN standard, as it maximizes nu-trition support by tailoring nutritional formula for each patientrequirements 2,3. The TPN admixtures are sterile, large volume, com-plex formulations, containing over 50 individual components (e.g.amino acids, glucose, lipids, electrolytes, trace elements, vitamins andwater) 3,4. Due to the oil/water emulsion character of TPN admixture,and its multi-composition and chemically reactive nature, its stabilitycan be easily disturbed by physicochemical factors (e.g. low pH, highof concentration cations, trace elements) 3,5. Lipid emulsions are ther-modynamically unstable systems as two phases tend to separate overtime 6. Creaming can occur without a significant change in meandroplet size (MDS) diameter and TPN admixture can be administeredif the fat is first dispersed by gentle shaking, but if coalescence orcracking are present it must not be administered to the patient 5. Hos-pital pharmacist is responsible for physiochemical and microbiologicalstability and safety of TPN admixture which is often extemporane-ously prepared and given to patient right away 4. However, during hol-idays and weekends, after being prepared, TPN admixtures need to bestored (at 2-8 degC), so their time-dependent stability and expiry dateneed to be known. Stability refers to TPN admixture being stable dur-ing its preparation, storage and administration. The most critical TPNadmixtures stability parameter is lipid particle diameter, as lipid emul-sion particles greater than 6 m in diameter can potentially obstructpulmonary arterioles and accumulate 5. Lipid droplets diameter mustbe less than 5 m (Ph. Jug. IV request), and USP request are MDS < 500nm and that volume-weight percentage of fat globules (PFAT5) > 5 mmust not exceed 0.05% 7,8. Different methods may be used to deter-mine physical stability (particle size and size distribution), but only inlaboratory, not in daily clinical practice 5.Objectives: To manufacture TPN admixture (with lipid emulsion whichdeclaration claimed expiry date was in 6 months), determine its phys-ical stability (lipid particles diameter and their distribution) in orderto state its expiry date.Materials and methods: The commercial preparations used for prepar-ing the analyzed TPN admixture were: Lipovenoes 10% and Aminosol15% (by Fresenius Kabii), Glucosi injectio 500 mg/ml, Glucosi infundibile100 g/l, Natrii chloridi conc. ad infundibile 100 g/l, Kalii chloridi conc.ad infudibile 74, 5 g/l, Calcii chloridi injectio 100 mg/ml, Magnesii sul-fatis injectio 250 mg/ml (by Institute of pharmacy, Military MedicalAcademy). The TPN admixture contained: amino acids 75 g, glucose250 g, lipids 50 g, electrolytes (90 mmol Na+, 50 mmol K+, 4 mmol Mg2+and 4 mmol Ca2+); total volume was 2009,4 ml. Following protocols forcomponent mixing order and preparation in laminar air - flow envi-ronment, TPN admixture was aseptically prepared into ethyl-vinyl ac-256Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOetate (EVA) bag, and after slow homogenization, physical stability ofTPN admixture was analyzed just after preparation (0h) and after 24,48, and 72h. The TPN admixture was kept at 2-8 degC between takingsamples that were diluted with sterile water in ratio 1:3 (v/v), and 2 mlwere put on microscopic slide, covered with cover slip and immersionoil, and analyzed on light microscope equipped with digital camera.Sample of intact Lipovenoes 10% was previously taken and analyzed,too. For each period, several digital pictures were taken (1000x mag-nification), and analyzed by Image J, that was set to determine lipiddroplets diameter; 100 droplets (including aggregated forms, if pres-ent) per picture were chosen by grid option for measuring. The datawere sorted to calculate the distribution of lipid particles diameter. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe maximal lipid droplets diameter detected in intact lipid emulsion(Lipovenoes 10%) was close to 3,5 m, while the most frequent (69,72%)lipids droplets were from 0,5 to 1 m (Table 1.). The highest percent(71,4%) of same lipid droplets diameter range is present in TPN ad-mixture right after its preparation, too. Commercially available lipidemulsions have a MDS of about 0.25-0.5 m in diameter, like naturalchylomicrons 5, but the emulsion we used had MDS diameter of0.93+-0.50 m and 0,97% of larger droplets (3-4 m), most likely becauseof used emulsion age as there were 6 months left before its expirydate. Previous EVA bag homogenization of TPN admixture had causedTable 1. Percentage of lipid particles diameter in timepercent of 3-4 mm droplets to be less at start. Although MDS diame-ter in TPN admixture was similar during first 24h, the particles from 4to 5 mm are detectable after 24h, and their percent rises over time,plus more and more lipid droplets diameter grows to 2 mm. Despite oflarger lipid particles growth, this TPN admixture fulfils pharma-copoeias' requests during first 48h regarding lipid particle diameter(<5 mm) 7,8. However, distribution of lipid particles diameter after 72h,shows further decrease of small lipid droplets (<1mm) percents, plusaggregated lipid forms that have exceeded 5 mm in diameter are de-tected (1,91%) so pharmacopoeias' requests 7,8 are not fulfilled. Theseresults confirm this TPN admixture is physically unstable and unsafefor clinical use after 72h, and its expiry date would be 48h.CONCLUSIONSThe lipid particle diameter distribution is an important parameter fordetermining physical stability of emulsion systems. The age of usedemulsion should be considered if preparing a TPN admixture thatwould not be used the same day. We showed that in that case, theTPN admixture prepared by hospital pharmacist could be used duringthe following 48h, if kept at 2-8 C.REFERENCES:1. ASPEN Board of Directors and the Clinical Guidelines Task Force. Guidelines forthe use of parenteral and enteral nutrition in adults and pediatric patients:administration of specialized nutrition support. JPEN 2002; 26: 18S. 2. Singer P., et al. ESPEN Guidelines on Parenteral Nutrition: Intensive care. ClinicalNutrition 2009; 28: 387-400. 3. Sobotka L., et al. Basics in clinical nutrition, 3rd edition. Prague: House Galen,2004; 253-274. 4. Barnett M.I., et al. Basics in clinical nutrition: Parenteral nutrition admixtures,how to prepare parenteral nutrition (PN) admixture. e-SPEN, the European e-Journal of Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism, 2009; 4 (3): e114-e116. 5. Pertkiewicz M., et al. Basics in clinical nutrition: Stability of parenteral nutritionadmixtures. e-SPEN, the European e-Journal of Clinical Nutrition and Metabolism2009; 4: e117-e119. 6. Sinko PJ. Martin's Physical Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences, fifth ed.Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, PA, 2006; 509-519. 7. Pharmacopoea Jugoslavica. Editio Quarta. Volumen II. Belgrade: Savezni zavodza zastitu i unapredenje zdravlja, 1984.8. United States Pharmacopoeia 26th. Rockville: The United States PharmacopoealConvention, 2003.THE UPDATE OF COSMETIC LEGISLATION IN THE SOUTHERN BALKAN COUNTRIES,AS A NECESSITY IN ORDER TO HAVE SAFEAND EFFECTIVE COSMETIC PRODUCTSMirela Miraci, Brunilda Basha Suela Kellici, Vilma Toska, University of Tirana, Faculty of Medicine, Pharmaceutical DepartmentSITUATIONAs retailers are expanding their presence in the Albania and all over ourregion, levels of consumer awareness and usage of cosmetic productsare increasing. Product lines, which have reached maturity in WesternEurope, can potentially be shifted to Eastern Europe into a young andgrowing market, but consumers exhibit low brand loyalty and theprime consumption criterion is price. The Albanian cosmetic legisla-tion cannot protect human health from fake products or other harm-ful products as it is. They go straight to consumers' hand.In this situation we undertook this investigation on how it works thecosmetic market in our neighbor countries and found out quite thesame situation. Albania and Macedonia are emerging markets in whichthe cosmetics "boom"has not yet started, but is likely to come.Legislation drives the market but if companies are not proactive incomplying with it can also become a restraint for growth.OBJECTIVESthe aim of this study is to ensure safe and effective cosmetic prod-ucts to our customers. We're intending to do reach this objective viathe following steps: first to get to know the real situation on cosmeticmarket in Albania. Second: compare it with Macedonia, Montenegro,Third: furnish an overview of cosmetic legislation in EU, USA andChina. The final objective is to suggest which one is best to be imple-mented in Albania.257Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMATERIALS AND METHODS: EU Cosmetics Directive 2004/27/EC [3] The Commission proposal fora "Cosmetics Regulation" was adopted on 5 February 2008 with theprimary aim to remove legal uncertainties and inconsistencies ashighlighted by the large number of amendments (55 to date) and thecomplete absence of any set of definitions. Several measures areincluded to facilitate management of the Cosmetics Directive withregard to implementing measures. In addition, the aim of thesimplification is to avoid divergences in the incorporation of theprovisions of the EU directive into a Member State's domestic lawensuring the product safety and avoiding additional regulatory burdenand administrative costs.Finally, the role of the Cosmetics Directive isto ensure that cosmetic products placed on the EU market are safe inthe light of innovation in this sector. [5] USA: FD & Cosmetic Act ChinaRegulation on CosmeticsRESULTS AND DISCUSSIONLabeling: EU countries apply the article 6 of Eu Cosmetics Directive.The cosmetic label should include ManS, MAH, Batch no, qty., proddate, exp date, use and warnings. The list of ingredients in the de-scending order is a must.USA FDC-Act has the same requests as EU di-rective. It relies on FPLA. While in China the cosmetic label shouldinclude ManS, MAH, Batch no, qty., prod date, exp date, use and warn-ings. The list of ingredients is not requested. Regarding registration ofcosmetic products in EU an USA is not necessary. [2] While in China itdepends on the product. Only special cosmetic products must be reg-istered. The company, for all other products, must only notify thehealth authorities that is placing in the market a new cosmetic prod-uct. If they want to import such a product the company must have aspecial permission from MoH. [4] .Ingredients of cosmetic product:Both USA and EU have a negative list and a positive list of excipientswhile China rely on EU negative list, has its own positive list and ispreparing a definitive list. Every new substance must be approved byMoH while this is not necessary in EU and USA. The producer is re-sponsible for the safety and efficacy of a new ingredient In Albaniathere are only 2 official companies producing cosmetic products. Mostpart of cosmetic products in the market are imported. Albanian com-panies import cosmetics on the bases of documentation (Invoice,packing list, Certificate of Origin). [6] The authorities don't exerciseany physical chemical control of these products. During this investi-gation it was found out that the same situation on cosmetics exists inMacedonia and Republic of Kosovo.CONCLUSIONAlbania needs to implement the EU legislation. Accompanying theseregulatory measures with randomized physical chemical control, wouldguarantee safety and effectiveness of cosmetic products. This way wewill protect the health of Albanian customers.REFERENCES1. COLIPA's Response to Consultation for Comparative Study on CosmeticLegislation. COLIPA, Belgium. 2004:2. CFTA International Regulatory Resource Manual, 5th Eds, CFTA USA. 20013. Directive 2004/27/EC EC Belgium 20044. Particulars of Implementation of Production Licence of Cosmetics SFDA China1994.5. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council. EC,20036. Regulation on import of cosmetic products in Albania.A COMPARISON BETWEEN RANITIDINE150MG FILM-COATED TABLETS OF DIFFERENT BALCAN MANUFACTURERSWITH THE PATENTED DRUG USING 'IN VITRO' DISSOLUTION TEST Ledjan Malaj, Delina HudhraUniversiteti i Tiranes, Fakulteti i Mjekesise, Departamenti i Farmacise'Pirro Goda' INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, the Drug Regolatory Agencies have placed more em-phasis on a dissolution profile comparison in the area of post-approvalchanges and generics. Under appropriate test conditions, a dissolu-tion profile can characterize the product more precisely and helps toassure similarity in product performance and signals bioinequivalence.The purpose of this study was to compare the dissolution profiles ofdifferent Balcan productions of ranitidine 150 mg film-coated tabletsto the reference and see if there is any difference between the Balcanproduction and the patented drug. MATERIAL AND METHODSFour different Balcan manufacturers of Ranitidine 150 mg film coatedregistered in Albania and the patented Ranitidine of British manufac-turer were taken in consideration. In addition, their costs per dosageform unity and intra-day have been compared. Tablet dissolution wascarried out in a multibath (n=6) dissolution test system (Varian Disso-lution Apparatus) in accordance with the USP general methods. Theapparatus 2 was used with a stirring speed of 50 rpm. The dissolutionmedium, bidistillated water (pH 7.0), was thermostated at 37.0+-0.5 oC.An UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Cary 100, Varian) was used to deter-mine ranitidine concentration at wavelength 315 nm. The similarity between dissolution profiles of two given drugs indi-cates their bioequivalence. Moore e Flanner have proposed an inde-pendent mathematical pattern to compare the dissolution profilesusing two factors f1 equation (1) and f2 equation (2).Eq (1) Eq (2)RESULTSFrom the obtained values (f1; f2,) it can be assumed that dissolutionprofiles between the patented drug and the Balcan productions arenot comparable, whereas those between Balcan tablets were not sig-nificantly different. However, all brands complied with USP 29 specifi-cation. CONCLUSIONThe dissolution profile comparison is an important indicator of 'qual-ity' and furthermore an evaluation of cost - quality of these tablets onAlbanian market showed that there is a positive correlation betweenquality and price.258Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOREFERENCESU. S. Pharmacopoeia, 29th Revision (2006).www.moh.gov.al/WHO Technical Report Series, No. 937, Annex 8 (2006)www.gsk.com GRAHAM L. PATRICK 'An Introduction to Medicinal Chemistry', OXFORDUNIVERSITY PRESS,1995, p308Prof. John A. Henry 'Concise guide to medicines and drugs', The British MedicalAssociation, DK 2001, p355H.P.Rang, M.M.Dale, J.M.Ritter, R.J.