90 days before start of the proce-dure: discussion between applicant and RMS about upgradingdocumentation, RMS preparing draft exert report)>> Submission of documentation and validation (D -14)>> Start of the procedure (D0)>> CMS comments/questions (D50)>> CMS final opinion (D85)>> End of the procedure (D90).Main DCP phases:>> Preliminary phase (short: discussion between applicant andRMS about application)>> Submission of documentation and validation (D -14)>> Start of the procedure (D0)>> RMS assessment of documentation and preparing preliminaryreport (D0 - D70) >> CMS comments/questions (D70-D100)>> RMS finishes draft expert report (D120)>> CMS comments/questions (D145)>> CMS final opinion on draft expert report (D205)>> End of the procedure (D210).In cases of different opinions, unsolved problems regarding procedu-ral or scientific issues, and if no consensus is reached among MS, helpis provided by the CMD group and CHMP.After the end of the procedure, the national phase starts, in whicheach MS grants its licence for the product.All MS are connected through common database (Communication andTracking System - CTS) which contains all the important informationabout each procedure. The procedure is initiated and finished by theRMS, and data are regularly filled into the database by each MS as theprocedure goes on. Member states have close cooperation in assessment of documenta-tion, and after the procedure is finished, the marketing authorisationis granted in each MS.ALIMS POSITIONDuring past few years, ALIMS received many applications for medicinalproducts that were already registered in EU through MRP or DCP.These applications are processed through national procedure. Thesame documentation as submitted in EU for MRP/DCP is required, to-gether with all the later variations that were approved for the productuntil the date of the submission of the documentation to ALIMS. Thefinal expert report issued by RMS is sometimes required to furthersupport and clarify submitted documentation.CONCLUSIONFor granting marketing authorisation for a medicinal product in morethan one EU MS at the same time, MRP or DCP applications are of-tenly used. Getting more familiar with these procedures enable coun-tries who aim to join EU to be better prepared for the processes thatare expecting them in the future. ALIMS has a lot of experiance in assessing documentation for medici-nal products that were already registered in EU through MRP or DCP.For taking part in these procedures in EU, resources and internal pro-cedures need to be additionally developed.REFERENCES1. Directive 2004/27/EC.2. Notice to Applicants Volume 2A Procedures for marketing authorisationCHAPTER 2 Mutual Recognition February 2007.3. www.hma.eu.48Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOWHICH ONE IS COUNTERFEIT DRUG?Golocorbin-Kon S.1,3, Mikov M.,2.,31Department of Pharmacy, Medical Faculty Novi Sad, Serbia2Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacol-ogy, Medical faculty Novi Sad, Serbia3Faculty of Pharmacy, Podgorica, University of MontenegroINTRODUCTIONAccording to the World Health organization, counterfeit drugs becomea growing threat for population. Counterfeit medicines are medicinethat are deliberately and fraudulently mislabeled with respect to iden-tity and/or source. All kinds of medicines have been counterfeit,branded and generic. Counterfeit medicines may include productswith the correct or with wrong ingredients, without active or with in-sufficient or too much active ingredients, or with fake packaging.DISCUSSIONThe counterfeiting of medicines has been known of since around 1990and is a growing problem-in both developing and developed countries.Around 2500 people are believed to have died in Niger in 1995 afterthey were given a fake meningitis vaccine. The consumption of parac-etamol syrup prepared using glycerol, which was contaminated with di-ethyl glycol (a toxic chemical used as an anti-freeze), resulted in thedeath of 89 people in Haiti in 1995. Up until 1999, of 771 cases of coun-terfeit drugs reported to WHO, indications about the quality of theactive ingredients contained were supplied only for 325 cases. Ofthese, about 59% contained no active ingredients, 7% contained theincorrect amount of active ingredients and 16% contained differentactive ingredients. The majority of counterfeit cases involve tabletsand capsules. Antibiotics account for almost half of the reported casesof counterfeit drugs.Counterfeit medicines are estimated as more than 10% of the globalmedicine market and in some developing countries it is thought to beas high as50%. Since counterfeit drugs first time appeared, they havebeen more sophisticated and more difficult for detection. The in-creased occurrence of counterfeit medicines has several serous con-sequences. These may include illness or death of patients, highermedical insurance and lost revenues to pharmaceutical manufacturerand governments. Children are particularly at risk. Counterfeiting of pharmaceuticals is a criminal activity often under-taken by people and organizations involved in other types of crime.The supply of counterfeit drugs is more pronounced in countries wherethe manufacture, importation, distribution, supply and sale of medi-cines are less regulated and enforcement weak. The growth in inter-national trade of pharmaceutical ingredients and medicines adds afurther dimension of complexity to this issue. For example, tradetrough brokers and free zones where regulation is lax or absent (andmedicines repackaged and relabeled to conceal country of origin) isincreasing. In over 50% of cases , medicines purchased over the Inter-net from illegal sites that conceal thei physical address have beenfound to be counterfeit.In most industrialized countries with effective regulatory system andmarket control (i.e. Australia, Canada, New Zealand, most of the Eu-ropean Union and the United States of America), incidence of coun-terfeit medicines is extremely low-less than 1% of market valueaccording to the estimates of the countries concerned. Counterfeiting medicines can be very lucrative. Since many countrieshave not yet enacted deterrent legislation, counterfeiters often donot fear prosecution. Stringent regulatory control of medicines andenforcement by national medicines regulatory authorities contributessignificantly to prevention and detection of counterfeit medicines.WHO provides direct country and regional support for strengtheningmedicines regulation. In 2006, WHO helped to create the International Medical productsAnti- Counterfeiting Taskforce, or IMPACT. The aim is to involve a rangeof stakeholders in collaborative efforts to protect people from buyingand taking counterfeit medicines. To prevent the manufacture anddistribution of counterfeit medicines, IMPACT'a areas of focus are: leg-islative and regulatory infrastructure, regulatory implementation, en-forcement, technology and communication.CONCLUSIONThe fight counterfeit medicines effectively, a range of stakeholders-not just health professionals-is needed. Governments should establishand/or strengthen their drug regulatory authorities with responsibilityfor the registration and inspection locally manufactured and importedmedicines. National laws should ensue that the manufacture, trade,distribution and sale of medicines are effectively regulated. Adequatetraining and powers of enforcement against counterfeits should begiven to personnel from drug regulatory authorities, the judiciary, cus-toms and policy. Drug regulatory authorities should initiate wide-spread use of screening tests for the detection of counterfeits.Partnership should be established between health professionals, im-porters, industry and local authorities to combat counterfeits. Coun-tries in the same region should work towards the harmonization oftheir marketing authorization procedures . Countries with experiencein combanting counterfeit drugs should provide assistance to othersfor training in areas related to quality control, drug detection and en-forcement.REFERENCES1. Bogdanich W., Hooker J., Lehren AW. An article reported by and written byBogdanich W in New York Times, October 31, 2007, "Chinese chemicals flowunchecked to World Drug Market". Available from: 2.http://w.w.w.nytimes.com/2007/10/31/world/asia/31chemical.html2. CALIMS, Agencija ya lijekove I medicinska sredstav Crne Gore. Available from:http://calims.me/3. Counterfeit pharmaceuticals in Canada, August, 2006. Availablefrom:http://www.cisc.gs.ca/pharmaceuticals/documents/counerfeitpharmaceuticals e.pdf4. FDA Counterfeit drugs: question and answers, accessed February 13, 2004,October 1, 2008, January 7, 2010. Available from:http://fda.gov./oc/initiatives/counterfeit/qa.html5. Reggi V., IMPACT, WHO, Counterfeit medicines: an intent to deceive. WHOPharmaceut Newsletter 2006; 5:7-96.World Health Organisation. Substandard and counterfeit medicines. Availablefrom: http://who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/2003/fs275/en/This work has been supported by Ministry of Science and technologi-cal development of Serbia N0 4101249PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011DETERMINATION OF ALL-RAC-ALPHA-TO-COPHEROL AND ALL-RAC-ALPHA-TOCO-PHERYL ACETATE (SYNTHETIC VITAMIN E)IN COSMETIC PREPARATIONSBiljana Nastova, Sandra Atanasovska, DragicaDoneva, Zorica Arsova-SarafinovskaInstitute for Public Health of the Republic of Macedonia, Departmentfor Quality Control of Medicines, Skopje, Republic of MacedoniaDifferent forms of tocopherols, together with tocotrienols, are col-lectively named as vitamin E, (a lipid-soluble vitamin with antioxidationeffect in several stages of peroxidation of lipids in vivo) and each pos-sesses different degree of medical, biological and physiochemical sig-nificance. Among four tocopherols (a-, b-, g- and d-tocopherol),alpha-tocopherol has been reported to possess the highest biologicalactivity (1). In order to obtain the larger amounts, vitamin E issynthetized as a racemic mixture of D- and L- forms which are opticalisomers, unlike a natural tocopherol that is found only in the D-form.Synthetic vitamin E is derived from petroleum products as all-racemic alpha tocopherol and its ester form all-racemic alphatocopheryl acetate (or DL-tocopheryl acetate). The tocopheryl estersare more stable for an extended time of use (2).In the belief that vitamin E is a natural skin conditioner and humidifier,it is used in cosmetic industry in the preparation of lipsticks, shadows,powders, humidifiers, soaps, creams, shampons etc. (3). The recentpopularity of vitamin E preparations for topical application, togetherwith reports of adverse dermatological reactions linked to cosmeticscontaining this vitamin led to concern about the desirability ofincluding these compounds in such products (4). Therefore, a sensitive,accurate and rapid HPLC method was developed for determination ofalpha-tocopherol and its ester form in cosmetics.The chromatographic separation was performed on a columnPurospher Star(r) RP 18 (150 x 4.0 mm i.d., 5mm), with a mobile phaseconsisted of a methanol - n-hexane (90:10, V/V) The flow rate was keptat 1.2 ml min-1. Detection of all-racemic alpha-tocopherol and the esterform all-racemic alpha-tocopheryl acetate was carried out at 220 nm.Effect of various parameters (different concentration of methanol andn-hexane in the mobile phase composition and different columnsused), and the separation of alpha-tocopherol and alpha-tocopherylacetate from other numerous ingredients present in cosmeticpreparations was studied.The proposed method was fully validated according to the ICH guide-lines in terms of accuracy, precision, linearity, limit of detection andquantification and range (5). The method is sensitive and allows de-tection of active components in concentrations of 0,007 mg and 0,011mg for a-tocopherol, and a-tocopherol acetate, respectively, while thelowest concentrations that could be determined were 0,023 mg, and0,033 mg for a-tocopheryl acetate and a-tocopherol, respectively.REFERENCES1. Changa LC, Chang HT, Suna SW. Cyclodextrin modified microemulsionelectrokinetic chromatography for separation of a-, g-, d-tocopherol and a-tocopherolacetate. J. Chromatogr. A, 1110 2006;1110: 227-234.2. Burton GW, Ingold KU, Foster DO, Cheng SC, Webb A, Hughes L, Lusztyk E. Com-parison of free a-tocopherol and a-tocopheryl acetate as sources of vitamin E in ratsand humans. Lipids 1988; 23 (9): 834-40.3. Pehr K, Forsey RR. Why don't we use vitamin E in dermatology? Can. Med. Assoc.J. 1993;149: 1247-1253 4. Sheppard PE, Stutsman MJ. Determination of vitamin E in cosmetic products bygas-liquid chromatography (GLC). J. Soc. Cosmet. Chem. 1977;28: 115-123.5. ICH Q2R1: Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and Methodology, Proceedingof the International Conference on Harmonisation of technical Requirements forRegistration of pharmaceuticals for Human Use, Geneva, Switzerland, 1996.OPREDELUVANjE NA ALL-RAC-ALFA-TOKOFEROL I ALL-RAC-ALFA-TOKOFERIL ATsETAT (SINTETSKI VITAMIN E) VOKOZMETIChKI PROIZVODIBiljana Nastova, Sandra Atanasovska, DragitsaDoneva, Zoritsa Arsova-SarafinovskaInstitut za javno zdravje na Republika Makedonija, Sektor zaispituvanje i kontrola i na lekovi, 50 Divizija Br. 6, 1000Skopje, Republika MakedonijaRazlichni formi na tokoferoli i tokotrienoli se narekuvaat sozaednichko ime - vitamin E (liposolubilen vitamin soantioksidativen efekt vo protsesot na peroksidatsija na lipidi invivo) i poseduvaat razlichen stepen na meditsinsko, bioloshko ifiziko-khemisko znachenje. Od site formi (a-, b-, g- and d-tokoferol)najgolema bioloshka aktivnost ima alfa-tokoferolot (1).So tsel da se dobie pogolemo kolichestvo na vitamin E, toj se dobivasintetski kako ratsemska smesha od D- and L-formi, koi se optichkiizomeri, za razlika od prirodniot tokoferol koj se sretnuvasamo vo D-forma. Sintetskiot vitamin E se dobiva od petroleum-bazirani proizvodi kako all-rac-alfa-tokoferol i vo esterskaforma kako all-rac-alfa-tokoferil atsetat (ili DL-alfa-tokoferilatsetat). Estrite na tokoferolot se postabilni za podolg rok naupotreba (2).Poznato e deka vitaminot E e priroden konditsioner za kozha inavlazhnuvach, zaradi shto se upotrebuva vo kozmetichkata industrija,vo podgotvuvanje na karmini, senki za ochi, pudri, navlazhnuvachi,sapuni, kremi, shamponi i dr. (3). Vo ponovo vreme vo literaturatase izvestuva za pojava na nesakani dermatoloshki reaktsii priupotreba na kozmetichki preparati shto go sodrzhat ovoj vitamin,shto ja doveduva vo prashanje shirokata upotreba na vitamin E vopreparatite za lokalna upotreba (4). Zaradi toa, nie razvivmesenzitiven, tochen i brz HPLC metod za opredeluvanje na alfa-tokoferol i negoviot ester vo kozmetichkite preparati. Khromatografskoto razdvojuvanje se izveduva na kolona PurospherStar(r) RP 18 (150 x 4.0 mm i.d., 5mm), so mobilna faza od metanol-n-kheksan (90:10, V/V) izokratno, so brzina na protok od 1, 2 ml min-1.Detektsijata na all-rac-alfa-tokoferol i all-rac-alfa-tokoferilatsetat se izveduva na branova dolzhina od 220 nm. Se ispituvaefektot na razlichnite parametri (razlichna kontsentratsija nametanol i n-kheksan vo mobilnata faza, kako i razlichnikhromatografski koloni) na razdeluvanjeto na alfa-tokoferol ialfa-tokoferil atsetat od ostanatite brojni sostojki prisutni vokozmetichkite preparati. Predlozheniot metod e tselosno validiran spored ICH upatstvatapreku ispituvanje na tochnost, pretsiznost, linearnost, limit nadetektsija i kvantifikatsija i opseg (5).