Regard-ing the samples with added microparticles, the particles were removedfrom juice by filtration, washed with sterile saline solution and lique-fied with phosphate buffer (pH 6.9). The suspension of particles wasvortexed 30 s followed by standing at room temperature and then enu-merate as described above. The pH of synbiotic carrot juices were alsoexamined (pH meter PB 11 Sartorius, Germany).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONDuring the fermentation of carrot juice L. casei grew rapidly with in-creased population of free cells compared to encapsulated ones. Atthe end of the fermentation period the pH value of the juice inocu-lated with free cells was found to be lower than that of the micropar-ticles added juice (Fig. 1). Fig. 1. Changes in viability and pH values during fermentation of car-rot juice with free and microencapsulated L. caseiThe viable cell counts of microencapsulated L. casei in fermented car-rot juice was 8.1+-0.13 log10 cfu/ml after 6 weeks of cold storage at 4degC, while that of free cells was only 4.89+-0.1 log10 cfu/ml. In addition,the pH values of the synbiotic carrot juices with free cells were lowerthan pH values of carrot juice with microencapsulated cells during allinvestigation period (Fig. 2).Fig. 2. Changes in viability and pH values during cold storage of fer-mented carrot juice with free and microencapsulated L. caseiThe results showed that the survival rate of free probiotic cells in car-rot juice was below the therapeutic level at the end of the test due totheir sensitivity to the acidic conditions in the medium and need pro-tection to maintain the viability during storage. Results also showedthat adding of encapsulated L. casei in carrot juice as synbiotic chi-tosan-Ca-alginate microparticles might solve the problem. Regardingthe sensory characteristics of the carrot juice with microparticles non-significant changes of the textural quality due to the low particle sizewas observed. Therefore, carrot juice containing synbiotic micropar-ticles may be a new functional product and the effect of particles onthe consumer acceptance should be further studied.REFERENCES1.Sheehan, V.M., Ross, P., & Fitzgerald, G.F. Assessing the acid tolerance and thetechnological robustness of probiotic cultures for fortification in fruit juices. Innov.Food Sci. Emerg. Technol., 2007, 8(2):279-284.2.Ray, R.C., & Sivakumar, P.S. Traditional and novel fermented foods and beveragesfrom tropical root and tuber crops: review. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2009;44(6):1073-1087.3.Yoon, K.Y., Woodams, E.E., and Hang, Y.D. Probiotication of tomato juice by lacticacid bacteria. J. Microbiol., 2004, 42(4):315-318.4.Vinderola, G.C., & Reinheimer, J.A. Enumeration of Lactobacillus casei in thepresence of L. acidophilus. Bifidobacteria and lactic starter bacteria in fermenteddairy products. Int. Dairy J., 2000, 14(4):271-275.5.Mladenovska, K., Raicki, R.S., Janevik, E.I., Ristoski, T., Pavlova, M.J., Kavrakovski,Z., Dodov, M.G., Goracinova, K. Colon-specific delivery of 5-aminosalicylic acid fromchitosan-Ca-alginate microparticles. Int. J. Pharm. 2007; 342(1-2):124-136.VITALNOST NA L. CASEI VOSINBIOTSKI SOK OD MORKOV VOUSLOVI NA FERMENTATsIJA I ChUVANjE T. Petreska Ivanovska1, L. Petrushevska Tozi1, J.Khadzhieva1, K. Smilkov2, N. Geshkovski1, K.Mladenovska11Univerzitet "Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Farmatsevtski fakultet,Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, Makedonija2Univerzitet "Gotse Delchev", Fakultet za meditsinski nauki -farmatsija, Krste Misirkov bb, 2000 Shtip, MakedonijaVOVEDPokraj traditsionalnata primena na mlechnite proizvodi zaisporaka na probiotitsi vo khumaniot GIT, prijatniot iosvezhuvachki vkus na ovoshnite sokovi go zgolemuva interesot zaaplikatsija na probiotitsite vo razlichni sokovi (1). Interesot sedolzhi na otsustvoto na mlechni alergeni i kholesterol vo ovoshnitesokovi (2), kako i na prisutnite minerali, vitamini iantioksidansi vo ovoshjeto i zelenchukot (3). Kiselata sredina nasokot mozhe znachajno da ja namali vitalnosta na probiotitsite, azgolemuvanje na vitalnosta mozhe da se postigne so inkapsuliranjena kletkite. Vo ovoj trud, sledena e vitalnosta na L. casei vosinbiotski sok od morkov so slobodni i inkapsulirani kletki zavreme na fermentatsija i chuvanje vo tek na 6 nedeli. MATERIJALI I METODISokot od morkov beshe podgotven so ekstraktsija na izmieni iizlupeni morkovi bez dodadena voda i nutrienti i so primena napasterizatsija (80 degC, 20 min). Kletochnata suspenzija na L. casei (Chr.Han sen, Denmark) beshe podelena na dva dela. Edniot beshe namenetza mikroinkapsuliranje, dodeka drugiot beshe aplitsiran vo sokot127Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY / FOOD AND NUTRITION oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONzaedno so prebiotikot fruktooligosakharid (FOS) (Sigma-Aldrich,USA). Pochetnata kontsen-tratsija na L. casei (7.4+-0.1 log10 cfu/ml)beshe izbrana vrz osnova na preporakite za minimalen broj navitalni kletki na g ili ml proizvod za predizvikuvanje napozitivni efekti vrz zdravjeto (4). Mikrochestichkite beapodgotveni so modifitsiran metod na sprej sushenje (5), taka shtovodna disperzija na alginat (LF 10/60, Protanal, FMC Bio po ly mers,USA), FOS i L. casei beshe rasprsnata so sushenje (d dizna 0.7 mm,protok 6 ml/min, aspiratsija 90%, vlezna i izlezna temperatura, 120degC and 60 degC, Buchi Mini Spray Dryer B-290, SW) prosledeno sopolielektrolitno kompleksiranje i vkrsteno povrzuvanje vorastvor na tsitozan (Chitine, France) i CaCl2 (Merck, Germany) vo 1%w/w otsetna kiselina. Po 3 h meshanje, chestichkite bea oddeleni sotsentrifugiranje i liofilizirani (-50 degC, 0.070 mbar, 24 h, Freeze-Dryer, Labconco, USA). So primena na 4% (w/w) alginat, 0.5% (w/w)tsitozan i 5% (w/w) CaCl2, beshe podgotvena optimalna formulatsijana chestichki so pozitiven povrshinski polnezh (21.5+-1.5 mV),golemina od 9.1+-0.8 nm, sodrzhina na Ca od 9.4+-0.1% i vitalnostna L. casei od 11.3+-0.15 log10 cfu/g. Mikrochestichkite bea vednashaplitsirani vo sokot. Potoa, primerotsite bea smesteni vosterilni Erlenmeyer sadovi so pamuchni zatvoruvachi ifermentirani vo tek na 24 h na 37 degC vo inkubator. Vitalnosta naL. casei beshe odreduvana periodichno vo tek na 24 h i potoa ednashnedelno vo uslovi na chuvanje na 4 degC. Vitalnosta na L. casei besheopredelena so dodavanje na 9 ml peptonska voda na 1 ml primerok,vorteksiranje na sodrzhinata 15 s i serisko razreduvanje sopeptonska voda. Broenjeto na koloniite beshe vrsheno so primenana metodot na broenje na plocha na MRS agar (Merck, Germany) poinkubatsija na zasadenite plochi za vreme od 72 h na 37 degC.Vitalnosta na inkapsuliranite kletki beshe odredena sooddeluvanje na chestichkite od sokot so filtriranje. Suspenzijatana chestichki vo fosfaten pufer (pH 6.9) beshe vorteksirana 30 s iostavena na sobna temperatura. Potoa postapkata za odreduvanjena vitalnosta e identichna kako shto e pretkhodno opishano. pHvrednostite na sinbiotskite sokovi od morkov so slobodni iinkapsulirani kletki od L. casei bea isto taka ispituvani (pHmeter PB 11 Sartorius, Germany).REZULTATI I DISKUSIJAPri fermentiranje na sokot od morkov beshe zabelezhan brz rast naL. casei, i toa povisok rast pokazhaa slobodnite kletki. Na krajotod fermentatsiskiot period, rN vrednosta na sokot so slobodniprobiotski kletki beshe poniska od sokot koj sodrzhiinkapsulirani kletki (Sl. 1). Sl. 1. Promeni na vitalnosta na L. casei i pH vrednosta nasinbiotskiot sok od morkov za vreme na fermentatsijaPo 6 nedeli chuvanje na 4 degC, vitalnosta na mikroinkapsuliraniotL. casei vo fermen- tiran sok od morkov beshe 8.1+-0.13 log10 cfu/ml,dodeka vitalnosta na slobodnite kletki beshe 4.89+-0.1 log10cfu/ml. pH vrednosta na sokot so slobodni kletki beshe poniska odrN vrednosta na sokot so inkapsulirani kletki za tselokupniotperiod na chuvanje na 4 degC (Sl. 2).Sl. 2. Promeni na vitalnosta na L. casei i pH vrednosta nafermentiraniot sok od morkov za vreme na chuvanje na 4 degCRezultatite pokazhaa deka vitalnosta na slobodnite probiotskikletki vo sok od morkov ne go zadovoluva terapevtskoto nivo vouslovi na chuvanje shto se dolzhi na nivnata osetlivost kon kiselatarN na sokot. Odrzhuvanjeto na vitalnosta na L. casei pri chuvanje nasokot mozhe da se podobri so inkapsuliranje na kletkite vo oblikna tsitozan-Ca-alginatni chestichki. So aplitsiranje na sinbiotskitemikro- chestichki ne bea zabelezhani znachajni promeni naorganoleptichkite svojstva i teksturata na sokot od morkov kakorezultat na malite chestichki. Ottuka proizleguva mozhnata upotrebana sokot od morkov so sinbiotski mikrochestichki kako novfunktsionalen proizvod, pri shto sledi protsenka na efektot nachestichkite vrz prifatlivosta od potroshuvachite.LITERATURA1.Sheehan, V.M., Ross, P., & Fitzgerald, G.F. Assessing the acid tolerance and thetechnological robustness of probiotic cultures for fortification in fruit juices. Innov.Food Sci. Emerg. Technol., 2007, 8(2):279-284.2.Ray, R.C., & Sivakumar, P.S. Traditional and novel fermented foods and beveragesfrom tropical root and tuber crops: review. Int. J. Food Sci. Technol., 2009;44(6):1073-1087.3.Yoon, K.Y., Woodams, E.E., and Hang, Y.D. Probiotication of tomato juice by lacticacid bacteria. J. Microbiol., 2004, 42(4):315-318.4.Vinderola, G.C., & Reinheimer, J.A. Enumeration of Lactobacillus casei in thepresence of L. acidophilus. Bifidobacteria and lactic starter bacteria in fermenteddairy products. Int. Dairy J., 2000, 14(4):271-275.5.Mladenovska, K., Raicki, R.S., Janevik, E.I., Ristoski, T., Pavlova, M.J., Kavrakovski,Z., Dodov, M.G., Goracinova, K. Colon-specific delivery of 5-aminosalicylic acid fromchitosan-Ca-alginate microparticles. Int. J. Pharm. 2007; 342(1-2):124-136. 128Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA /TOKSIKOLOGIJA / KhRANA I ISKhRANA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOTARGETED AND NON-TARGETED LCMSMETHODS FOR DETECTION AND IDENTIFI-CATION OF TOXICOLOGICALLY RELEVANTCOMPOUNDSShaun BilsboroughAgilent TechnologiesScreening of complex samples using mass spectrometry may followtwo independent workflows applying either targeted or non-targetedmethods. With target analysis, triple quadrupole mass spectrometersare used to screen and quantitate a specific predefined list of com-pounds. Additionally, recent developments in spectral library search-ing based upon multiple MRM transitions of each compound allowsfor confirmation of the identity of the target analyte. Although suchmethods remain the most sensitive with the lowest limit of quantita-tion, there is a clear disadvantage when applied to toxicology screen-ing as analytes that are not part of the target list are not detected. Forcomplete screening of complex samples, non-target analysis usingtime of flight mass spectrometry offers the advantage of generatingfull scan data, allowing the analyst to mine the results and find all com-pounds present within the sample. Additionally, the accurate mass ca-pability of such instruments allows for elemental compositionprediction to facilitate identification of relevant compounds using ac-curate mass databases. However, in such cases, false positives are rou-tinely encountered and accurate mass alone will not help with theidentification of isomeric drugs. This has led to the development ofthe Broecker, Herre and Pragst accurate mass MSMS spectral library,which allows confirmation of identity through comparison of accuratemass MSMS data with library spectra. In this presentation, we providean overview of the two techniques applied to toxicology screening to-gether with recent developments allowing confirmation of identity.MYELOPEROXIDASE - RISK FACTOR FORCARDIOVASCULAR DISEASEMilena Spasovska1 , Despina Efremova2, SilvijaNesova3, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska41P.H.U. "Prima"- Ohrid , 2 Replek AD- Skopje, 3P.H.U. "Naris" -Veles ,4Faculty of Pharmacy- Skopje Myeloperoxidase (MPO) is a leukocyte-derived enzyme that catalyzesthe formation of a number of reactive oxidant species. In addition tobeing an integral component of the innate immune response, evidencehas emerged that MPO-derived oxidants contribute to tissue damageduring inflammation. MPO-catalyzed reactions have been attributedto potentially proatherogenic biological activities throughout the evo-lution of cardiovascular disease, including during initiation, propaga-tion, and acute complication phases of the atherosclerotic process.