Asotsijatsijata pomegjuTSER polimorfizmot i khemoterapiskata efikasnosta pri tretmanna kolorektalen kartsinom (KRK) e potvrdena vo golem broj na stu-dii, no seushte ne postojat jasni dokazi vo odnos na korelatsijatapomegju TSER polimorfizmot i rizikot za razvoj na KRK 3-5.TsElOpredeluvanje na vlijanieto na TYMS TSER (2R/3R) polimorfizmotkako nezavisen prediktiven faktor za razvoj na KRK vo R.Make-donija.MATERIJAlI I METODIStudiskata grupa vo ovaa populatsija- bazirana studija na sluchaj-kontrola ja sochinuvaat 327 patsienti so klinichko patoloshki po-tvrden KRK (178 mazhi i 144 zheni, sredna vozrast 60, 27 +- 11, 08),dodeka pak kontrolnata grupa e sochineta od 105 zdravi dobrovoltsi(40 mazhi i 65 zheni; vozrast 74.52 +- 10.46) bez istorija na malignabolest. Kako materijal za analiza beshe koristena DNA izoliranaod periferna krv ili tumorsko tkivo dobieno posle khirurshkatainterventsija, so primena na klasichen metod na proteinaza K dige-stija, fenol-khloroform ekstraktsija i pretsipitatsija so etanol.Za genotipizatsijata na TYMS TSER polimorfizmot beshe koristen me-todot na amplifikatsija so polimeraza verizhna reaktsija (PolymeraseChain Reaction-PCR) i oligonukleotidni prajmeri chija nukleo-tidnata sekventsata e sledna: za direktniot (5'- TCC GAG CCG GCCACA GGC AT-3'), za reverzniot (5'-GCC GAA GGG GTC CTG CCA-3').Dobienite PCR amplifitsiranite DNA fragmenti bea analizira-ni posle elektoforetsko razdeluvanje na 10% etidium-bromid oboenpoliakrialamiden gel (PAGE elektroforeza). Alelnata frekfen-tsija i genotipskita distributsija na TYMS TSER polimorfizmot kajdvete studiski grupi bea evaluirani so Hardy-Weinberg equilibriumtestot. So primena na univarijantna analiza beshe utvrdena kore-latsijata pomegju vozrasta (<50 vs. >=50 godini, <60 vs. >=60 godini, )polot, lokalizatsijata na tumorot (desno vs. levo lokaliziran), TNMstatusot (I + II vs. III+IV) na tumorot kaj patsientite i kontrolite,stratifitsirani vrz osnova na TYMS genotipot. Rizikot za pojavana KRK, definiran kako Odds ratio (OR) i soodvetnite granitsi nasigurnost (95% C.I) bea opredeleni so primena na chi-square iFischer-oviot test za znachajnost. Za statistichki znachajni rezultatise smetaa onie so p <=0.05.REzUlTATI I DISKUSIJADobienite rezultati i sporedbata na alelnite frekfentsii igenotipskata distributsija na TYMS TSER (2R/3R) polimorfizmotpomegju 327 patsienti i 105 kontrolni ispitanitsi se prikazhani voTabela 1. Genotipskite distributsii za dvete studiski grupi bea voramkite na prifatlivite otstapuvanja spored Hardy - Weinbergequilibrium testot. Statistichkata analiza na rezultatite ukazhuvana znachajna asotsijatsija pomegju TYMS 2R/2R i zgolemeniot rizikza razvoj na KRK (OR=2.009, 95% C.I. =1.004-4.022; p=0.046).Dopolnitelno, TYMS TSER * 3R alelot beshe asotsiran so pomal ri-zik za pojava na KRK vo ko-dominantniot [2R/2R vs. 3R/3R, (p=0.046)i 2R/2R vs. 2R/3R (p=0.032)] i vo dominantniot [2R/2R vs. 2R/3R+3R/3R,(p=0.0264)] model na statistichka analiza. Ne e utvrdena statistichkiznachajna korelatsija pomegju rizikot za razvoj na KRK i patsientitestratifitsirani spored definiranite klinichko-patoloshki kara-kteristiki. Rezultatite od ovaa studija se sprotivni na vekje obja-venite za KRK, no se vo soglasnost so studiite koi posochuvaat naasotsijatsija na 2R/2R genotipot i rizikot za razvoj na akutna lim-fotsitna leukemija (ALL), maligna limfoma i kartsinom na belidrobovi 3-5. Faktot deka niskite folat- plazmatski kontsentratsii,koi ja zgolemuvaat verojatnosta za DNA oshtetuvanje i go inkhibiraatprotsesot na DNA reparatsijata, se asotsirani so TYMS *2R alelot,ja objasnuvaat mozhnata povrzanosta na 2R/2R genotipot i zgoleme-niot rizik za razvoj na KRK.zAKlUChOKPatsientite koi se nositeli na 2R/2R genotipot imaat znachajnozgolemen rizik za razvoj na KRK vo sporedba so onie koi se nosi-teli na 3R/3R genotipot. Spored nashite literaturni soznanija, ovapretstavuva prva studija na vo koja se ukazhuva na asotsijatsijapomegju TYMS 2R/2R genotipot i zgolemeniot rizik za pojava na KRK.Ovie rezultati posochuvaat na populatsiono-spetsifichen efekt naTYMS TSER polimorfizmot i folatniot metabolizam vo razvojotna KRK vo Republika Makedonija.350PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA KhEMIJA / BIOMOLEKULARNI NAUKIposter prezentatsiiTabela 1. Rizik za pojava na KRK asotsiran so TSER 2R/3R polimor-fizmot na TYMS genot vo populatsija od R. MakedonijaOznaki: a- 3R/3R kako referent za sporedba ; b-2R/2R kakoreferent za sporedbaKORISTENA lITERATURA1. Chen,J., Hunter,D.J., Stampfer,M.J., Kyte,C., Chan,W., Wetmur,J.G., Mosig,R.,Selhub,J. and Ma,J. (2003) Polymorphism in the thymidylate synthase promoterenhancer region modifies the risk and survival of colorectal cancer. Cancer Epidemiol.Biomarkers Prev., 12, 958--962.2. Curtin, K.,, Ulrich, C.M., Samowitz, W.S., Bigler,J., Caan,B., John D. Potter.J.D.,Slattery,M. (2007) Thymidylate synthase polymorphisms and colon cancer:Associations with tumor stage, tumor characteristics and survival. Int. J. Cancer.,120, 2226-2232.3. Shi,Q., Zhang, Z., Neumann,A.S., Li,G., Margaret R.Spitz,M.R., Wei,Q. (2005) Case--control analysis of thymidylate synthase polymorphisms and risk of lung cancer.Carcinogenesis, 26 (3),649--656.4.Jensen,S.A., Ben Vainer,B., Jens Benn Sshrensen,J.B. (2006) The prognosticsignificance of thymidylate synthase and dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase incolorectal cancer of 303 patients adjuvantly treated with 5-fluorouracil. Int. J.Cancer., 120, 694-7015. Skibola,C.F., Smith,M.T., Hubbard,A. et al. (2002) Polymorphisms in the thymidylatesynthase and serine hydroxymethyltransferase genes and risk of adult acutelymphocytic leukemia. Blood, 99, 3786--3791.351fifth congress of phArmAcy of mAcedoniA with internAtionAl pArticipAtionMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTRY / BIOMOLECULAR SCIENCESposter presentationsAKADEMSKA SEKTsIJAoralni prezentatsiiACADEMIC SECTIONoral presentationsPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOPHARMINE - PHARMACY EDUCATION IN EUROPEJeffrey Atkinson1 and Bart Rombaut2, 1Pharmacolor Consultants Nancy, Villers, France 2School of Pharmacy, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. Pharmacy education and training (PET) faces the challenge of main-taining a polyvalent, pharmacy diploma based on a 5-year period ofeducation and training within the context of:>> Evolution in the organisation and use of public health resourceswithin an increasingly difficult economic situation>> Rapidly developing changes in the EU pharmaceutical andbiotechnological industries>> The implementation of the Bologna philosophy and especiallythe application of the 3+2+3 years B+M+D system>> The need to tune PET in the different member states for freemovement in a profession that is sectorally regulated by an EU di-rective 2005/36, and the need to develop a position for the revi-sion of this directive in 2012/3.The consortium centred around 4 EU universities with solid interna-tional reputations in the teaching and training of pharmacists:>> Brussels VUB Pharmacy Faculty>> Nancy Pharmacy Faculty>> London School of Pharmacy>> Lisbon Pharmacy FacultyThese were supported by the main EU groups dealing with pharma-ceutical affairs: >> the pharmacy students union (EPSA)>> the pharmaceutical group of the EU (PGEU, representing com-munity pharmacists), >> the hospital (EAHP) pharmacist group>> the industrial (EIPG) pharmacist group The 14 associated partners included at the offset represent profes-sional pharmacy organisations in Europe and in the USA and otheruniversities with a wide range of experience in culturally and linguisti-cally diverse areas of Europe. This number was increased to 23 asso-ciated partners by the end of the project, essentially with theincorporation of Eastern European partners in provision of thePHARM-EE TEMPUS bid.The coordinator of the consortium was Bart Rombaut from VRIJEUNIVERSITEIT BRUSSEL, Brussels. The consortium was run by the SMEPHARMACOLOR CONSULTANTS NANCY (executive director: JeffreyAtkinson).PHARMINE (http://www.pharmine.org): >> Identified pharmacy faculties within Europe and produced adatabank >> Evaluated how faculties are adapting to the 4 exigencies above >> Produced a recommendations for a European model for PET The consortium worked in three phases: 1. A survey of the existing state of pharmacy education and train-ing in the Europe witha. A study of similarities and differencesi. How education and training conforms with the EU di-rective on the sectoral profession of pharmacyii. How the Bologna philosophy has affected educa-tion and training so far. iii. Summary position papers will be produced foruse in the TEMPUS project PHARM-EE on the ex-tension of PHARMINE principles to Eastern Europe 2. Reflection and discussion on pharmacy competency core cur-riculum3. Dissemination to stakeholders 4. Reflexion on the creation of an accreditation scheme (this will bepart of the future bid: PHARM-QA "Quality Assurance in Pharmacy")PHARMINE worked in collaboration with MEDINE-2(http://medine2.com/) - the EU-funded consortium that deals withsimilar problems in another healthcare sectoral profession that it isregulated by the same EU directive - medicine. A combinedPHARMINE-2 / MEDINE-2 strategy is being developed.HARMONIZATION AND REFORMATION OFTHE MASTER IN PHARMACY STUDY PRO-GRAMME AT THE FACULTY OF PHARMACY,UNIVERSITY OF LJUBLJANAIrena Mlinaric-Rascan, Mirjana Gasperlin, BorutBozicFaculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, SloveniaMaster in Pharmacy study programme have in recent years undergoneharmonization and reformation processes. Some of those were initi-ated as the accession requirements in negation of EU membership.Slovenia became a member of the EU on 1 May 2004 and has under-taken also the process of harmonization of the study and the regula-tion of the pharmacist profession. The Faculty of Pharmacy hadharmonized the study programme in Pharmacy in compliance with therequirements of the directive 2005/36/EC (formerly 85/432/EEC). Themajor difference with the previous curricula is the extension of pro-gram from 9 to 10 semesters, which is due to the inclusion of a 6-month practical training in the curriculum, and substitutes the pre-existing traineeship. Other changes included extension of elective sub-jects. Following many discussions in recent years, we came to a uniform de-cision that the only acceptable model of study for the pharmacist pro-fession with qualifications in the EU is 5 + 0, corresponding to 300ECTS, which enables direct enrolment in doctoral study. In 2007, theprogramme was checked and accredited by the Council for Higher Ed-ucation as the Uniform master's study programme in Pharmacy, andthe Faculty of Pharmacy launched the first-time enrolment procedurein the academic year 2008/09. The programme is balanced in phar-356Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011AKADEMSKA SEKTsIJA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOmaceutical, natural sciences, medical and other subjects to generatecompetent professionals qualified to perform jobs and tasks in anypharmaceutical segment; at the same time it forms a solid basis fordoctoral studies and is open for lifelong professional training. The method of course selection was included in the study already dur-ing the harmonization of the programme, and it was extended to threelevels in the unified master's study: alternative courses, electives of-fered by the Faculty, including a selection of the area of Master's the-sis creation, and general selectiveness within the University. Electivesare offered in such specter that covers all standard areas of narrowspecializations, and follow the trends of professional developments.At the same time, we take care that the quality of teaching does notdrop due to a high dispersion of students. Higher selectiveness is lim-ited with time and spatial possibilities, as we are unable to make thestudy schedule in the way that would enable students to choose anycombination of electives. Harmonized MPharm. program has commenced in the academic year2008/09. In the same year we have enrolled the first generation of stu-dents in Bologna- reformed program and offered the practical trainingto the last year students.The current challenges involve fine tuning of programme (supervisionof student load through ECTS), solving the financial aspects of theadditional semester, and activities related to reaccreditation in 2014. THE SCIENCE AND PRACTICE IN THE CUR-RICULA OF THE FACULTY OF PHARMACYAT THE UNIVERSITY "SS CYRIL ANDMETHODIUS" IN SKOPJE, MACEDONIAAleksandar J. Dimovski, K. MladenovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, University Ss Cyril and Methodius in Skopje,Republic of MacedoniaIn creating pharmacy curriculum, one must embrace many sciences(natural, health, law, economy, philosophy ...) and incorporate all at-tributes of the pharmacist (sociable, communicative, patient, trust-worthy, persistent, methodical, analytical, well-organized,responsible,). Both types of study programs are offered at the Facultyof Pharmacy in Skopje (UKIM), academic and professional (health spe-cialist) studies.