167, Informa healthcare.THE IMPORTANCE OF MONITORING POLYMORPHIC FORMS OF PHARMACEUTICAL SOLIDSGordana Zigic, Svjetlana Mihaljica, Vesna PoprzenMedicines and Medical Devices Agency of SerbiaPolymorphism is defined as the ability of a compound in the solid stateto exist in different crystalline forms having the same chemicalcomposition. Substances that exist in a non-crystalline solid state aresaid to be amorphous. The term pseudopolymorphism is used todescribe solvates (including hydrates), where a solvent is present in thecrystal matrix in a stoichiometric proportions.In this study the influence of different polimorphic forms of an activepharmaceutical ingredient (API) on quality, safety, and efficacy of thedrug product is discussed and the general principles applied in moni-toring and control of polymorphs from the regulatory point of vieware presented. Control of the physical form of the API is very important becausephysicochemical differences in polimorphic forms of the same activesubstance could, in some cases, affect the drug product characteri-stics such as stability, dissolution profile, and bioavailability. Thus,polymorphism can affect the quality, safety, and efficacy of the drugproduct. Active substance polymorphic forms can also exhibitdifferent physical and mechanical properties, including hygroscopicity,particle shape, density, flowability, and compactibility, which in turnmay affect processing of the drug substance and/or manufacturing ofthe drug product.It is the goal in pharmaceutical manufacturing to produce the drugsubstance or to formulate the drug substance in a manner that itremains in the same phase-pure state during the manufacture andsubsequent storage of the drug product. Polymorphic forms of theAPI can undergo phase conversion when exposed to extremeconditions (extensive mechanical and thermal stress and exposure tosolvents) used in different steps of the manufacturing process, suchas drying, milling, micronization, wet granulation, spray-drying, andcompaction. Exposure to environmental conditions such as humidityand temperature during the storage can also induce polymorphconversion. For these reasons the use of suitable techniques for the physicalcharacterization of polymorphic forms of pharmaceutical solids is veryimportant. There are plenty of analytical techniques available tocharacterize pharmaceutical solids and solid-state transformations,which are applied in various stages during the whole life span of a drugproduct, including development, stability studies, and post-approvalmanagement stage. The following techniques are frequently used inpolimorphism studies: X-ray diffraction (X-ray powder diffraction, sin-gle crystal X-ray diffraction), thermal methods of analysis (differentialscanning calorimetry, thermogravimetry, thermal microscopy), solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectrometry, vibrational spectro-scopy (infrared absorption spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy,near-infrared spectroscopy), moisture absorption analysis, and opticaland electronic microscopy. Obtained results on polymorphism investigation of the API are inclu-ded in marketing authorization documentation of medicines. Depen-ding on whether polymorphism is exhibited by the drug substance,whether the polymorphic forms have different properties (solubility,stability, melting point), and finally if the different polymorphs canaffect the drug product quality, efficasy and/or safety, the polymorp-hic forms identification and quantification tests should be includedin the active substance specification. In some cases, when drug pro-duct performance testing (e.g. dissolution testing) does not provideadequate control if polymorph ratio changes for poorly soluble APIsthat can influence drug product bioavailability, it is nessesery to setspecifications for polymorphs in drug products as well. In such in-stances, control of polimorphs is usually done during the stabilitystudy of solid oral dosage forms or oral suspensions. Polymorphs areunlikely to have a significant effect on bioavailability when all formshave the same apparent solubilities or all forms are highly soluble. It can be concluded that the physical form of an API might have agreat impact on bioavailability and as a consequence on drug productperformance. For this reason, control of physical purity of both theAPI itself and the API in the formulated product is of utmost impor-tance during different stages of drug development. The choice of ana-lytical techniques used for the qualitative and quantitative analysis ofdifferent crystalline forms should be made on a case by case basis.The use of combined techniques is recommended since thecomprehensive characterization of the physical properties ofpharmaceutical active substances often requires a multi-disciplinaryapproach. REFERENCES1. European Pharmacopoeia (PhEur), 7th ed., 2011, p. 6492. S. Ahuja and K.M. Alsante (Ed. ), Handbook of Isolation and Characterization ofImpurities in Pharmaceuticals, Vol.5, Separation Science and Technology,Academic Press, San Diego, USA, 2003, p. 39-69 3. ICH Topic Q6A: Specifications: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria for NewDrug Substances and New Drug Products: Chemical Substances(CPMP/ICH/367/96), EMEA, May 20004. D. Giron, Investigations of polymorphism and pseudo-polymorphism inpharmaceuticals by combined thermoanalytical techniques, J. Therm. Anal. Cal.,Vol. 64 (2001) 37-605. N. Chieng, T. Rades and J. Aaltonen, An overview of recent studies on theanalysis of pharmaceutical polymorphs, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. Article in Press,Available online 22 December 20106. Guidance for Industry, ANDAs: Pharmaceutical Solid Polymorphism, Chemistry,Manufacturing, and Controls Information, U.S. Department of Health and HumanServices, FDA, CDER, July 20077. R. Hilfiker (Ed. ), Polymorphism in the Pharmaceutical Industry, Wiley-Vch VerlagGmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany, 2006, p. 15, 117247Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONRISK ANALYSIS AS AN EFFICIENT TOOLFOR AUDIT OF STARTING MATERIAL SUP-PLIERSBorche Stamatoski, Miroslav Popovski, MiroslavaIlievska, Maja Velinovska-Cadinoska, Katerina Alek-sievska Beldedovska.ALKALOID AD Skopje, Pharmaceutical, Chemical and Cosmetics Com-pany, Boul. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Mace-doniaINTRODUCTIONSuppliers are legal subjects (companies or persons) that deliver or pro-duce raw materials or packaging materials, or perform services for theclient company. Qualified Supplier is a supplier that meets high qual-ity standards, based on its: preliminary assessment, review of retro-spective data, certificate of inspection carried out by regulatoryauthority, conducted audit of its production facilities and quality / en-vironment system and the successful fulfillment of the required crite-ria. The qualification of suppliers is carried out to determine theirability to deliver materials in accordance with the legal regulations forthe appropriate materials and the quality requirements [1]. The regu-latory requirements for active pharmaceutical ingredients (API) are themost demanding so it is expected from the manufacturers of medi-cines for human use to perform evaluation of its API manufacturersthrough regular audits of their manufacturing facilities [2]. Accordingto the Directive of the European Parliament and Council [3], the man-ufacturer of medicines for human use must use active substances (insome cases this also applies for excipients) that are produced ac-cording to the requirements of good manufacturing practice (GMP)[4]. A similar attention should be given to the supply, handling and con-trol of the primary and secondary packaging materials as that of ac-tive substances and excipients [5]. The user of the starting materialsshould take into account the supplier's reliability, previous quality ofthe supplied material or service, and should assess the quality systemand production conditions [6]. SCOPETaking into account the regulatory requirements and expectations, Al-kaloid AD has established a system of risk assessment as a tool forsimple and efficient planning of supplier audits, for the new and ex-isting suppliers, while following the recommendations given in theguidelines for risk management [7]. The main scope of this paper is to present the process of audit plan-ning for the numerous suppliers of Alkaloid AD and to highlight thebenefits from such audits. METHODSAccording to the recommendations given in the guidelines for riskmanagement [7] and the criteria set for risk analysis of suppliers, athree-year plan (2009, 2010 and 2011) for audit was prepared. Five cri-teria were set that relate to quality of material / service provided bythe supplier, previous regulatory inspections, and prior audits con-ducted by Alkaloid AD. According to the criteria, suppliers are classi-fied into three groups: low, medium and high risk. High-risk suppliersare planned for audit in the first year, medium-risk suppliers areplanned for the first year (when there is an agreed audit term) or thesecond year, and the low-risk suppliers are planned for the third yearof a three-year plan. An additional criterion called regulatory priorityexists and is not associated with quality but relates to regulatory re-quirements. If a supplier audit is necessary according to this criterion,then it is planned in the first year of the three-year plan, regardless ofsupplier's status in the risk analysis. The risk analysis and the auditplan are regularly updated, by monitoring the quality of the suppliedmaterials (via the software program AlkaSAP) or the provided service,supplier's regulatory status (certification by regulatory agencies) andthe everyday communication. This means that a low-risk supplier mayquickly become a medium or high risk and its audit to be prioritized orvice versa. The audits are conducted by trained and experienced per-sonnel from Alkaloid AD. In addition, an independent specializedagency could by hired to conduct a so called "Third Party Audit" ofthe suppliers, on behalf of Alkaloid AD. RESULTSDuring 2009, 2010 and the first three months of 2011, 15 audits of APImanufacturers were conducted which of 12 audits were conducted bytrained personnel from Alkaloid AD, and 3 audits were conducted bythird party auditors on behalf of Alkaloid AD. The audits covered atotal of 26 API. In early 2011 one audit of an excipients manufacturerwas conducted. One audit of a contract laboratory and two audits ofcontract manufacturers were also conducted. During the same period,two producers of primary packaging materials and four suppliers ofsecondary packaging materials were audited. The most common rea-son for delayed implementation of the audit plan check is the overloadof the suppliers (especially of the API manufacturers) with audits fromtheir customers, so the audits are scheduled for the first possible dateprovided by the suppliers. CONCLUSIONSRisk analysis upon which the audit plan is based, represents an excel-lent system for complete tracking of supplier's status, and allows Al-kaloid AD to prioritize the audits of the suppliers which are eitherhigh-risk or a regulatory priority. The audit of starting material suppliers represents a tool for evalua-tion of their quality system and manufacturing facilities, and might ul-timately result in reduced testing [8]. Alkaloid AD has a clear policythat treats its suppliers as partners. Through the system of regular au-dits, daily communication and testing of the quality of starting mate-rials, Alkaloid AD is confident in the quality of the starting materials,while meeting the regulatory requirements that apply to the suppli-ers of starting materials. REFERENCES[1] Procedure for Supplier Assessment A 2 7.4. 02 ver. 2 [2] McKilligan R G., MHRA GMP Inspector: API Focussed MHRA Inspections atDosage Form Manufacturers, 2010[3] Directive 2001/83/EC/ 46f of the European parliament and of the council from06.11.2001 [4] EudraLex, Volume 4 Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Guidelines, Part I[5] EudraLex, Volume 4 Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Guidelines, Part II, 5.40[6] EU GMP Annex 8 - Sampling of Starting and Packaging Materials [7] ICH Q9 Quality Risk Management adopted by the European Medicines Agencyon 31.01.2011[8] EudraLex, Volume 4 Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) Guidelines, Part I, Draftversion Chapter 5248Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOANALIZA NA RIZIK KAKO EFIKASNA ALATKA ZA PROVERKA NA ISPORAChATELI NA VLEZNI MATERIJALI Borche Stamatoski, Miroslav Popovski,Miroslava Ilievska, Maja Velinovska-Chadinoska, Katerina Aleksievska BeldedovskaALKALOID AD - Skopje, Farmatseutska, Khemiska i Kozmetichka Kom pa -nija, Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republika Make do nijaVOVEDIsporachateli se pravni litsa (pretprijatie ili litse) koiisporachuvaat ili proizveduvaat surovini i pakovni materijaliili izvrshuvaat uslugi za kompanijata narachatel. Kvalifitsiranisporachatel pretstavuva isporachatel koj ispolnuva visokistandardi za kvalitet, i toa vrz osnova na pretkhodna otsena,pregled na retrospektivni podatotsi, sertifikat od inspektsijaizvrshena od regulatoren organ i proverka na proizvodnite pogonii sistemot za kvalitet i zhivotna sredina, kako i ispolnuvanje nabaranjata od postavenite kriteriumi. Kvalifikatsijata naisporachatelite se vrshi za da se utvrdi nivnata sposobnost daisporachaat materijali vo soglasnost so zakonskite propisi zasoodvetnite materijali, kako i utvrdenite spetsifikatsii zakvalitet [1] Pritoa regulatornite baranjata za Aktivnitefarmatsevtski ingredienti se najstrogi i zatoa od proizvoditelotna lekovi za khumana upotreba se ochekuva da vrshi evaluatsija naproizvoditelite na aktivni farmatsevtski ingredienti prekuredovni proverki na nivnite proizvodni kapatsiteti [2]. SporedDirektivata na Evropskiot parlament i sovet [3] proizvoditelot nalekovi za khumana upotreba mora da upotrebuva aktivni supstantsi (vonekoi sluchai ova se odnesuva i za ektsipienti) koi se proizvedenispored baranjata na Dobrata proizvodna praksa [4]. Nasnabduvanjeto, rakuvanjeto i kontrolata na primarnata isekundarnata ambalazha treba da se posveti slichno vnimanie kakotoa za Aktivnite supstantsi i ekstsipientite [5]. Korisnikot navleznite materijali treba da ja zeme vo predvid doverlivosta naisporachatelot, minatiot kvalitet na materijalot ili uslugata shtoja dobavuvaat i treba da vrshi otsenka na sistemot za kvalitet iuslovite za proizvodstvo [6]. TsELI NA TRUDOTImajkji gi predvid regulatornite baranja i ochekuvanja, AlkaloidAD vospostavi sistem za protsenka na rizik kako alatka zaednostavno i efikasno planiranje na proverkite na svoiteisporachateli, bilo da se raboti za nov ili vekje postoechkiisporachatel a pritoa sledejkji gi preporakite dadeni vo Vodichotza upravuvanje so rizik [7]. Glavna tsel na ovoj trud e da se prikazhe nachinot na planiranje naproverkite na golemiot broj isporachateli na Alkaloid AD i da senaglasi benefitot za kompanijata od vakvite proverki. METODISoglasno preporakite dadeni vo Vodichot za Upravuvanje so rizik[7] i postavenite kriteriumi vo rizik analizata na isporachatelitenapraven e trigodishen plan (2009, 2010 i 2011) za proverka.Postaveni se pet kriteriumi, koi se odnesuvaat na kvalitetot namaterijalot/uslugata koja isporachatelot ja dobavuva, pretkhodnitepominati regulatorni inspektsii, kako i pretkhodna proverka odstrana na Alkaloid AD. Spored niv, isporachatelite seklasifitsirani vo tri grupi: nisko, sredno i visoko rizichni. Zavisoko rizichnite isporachateli se planira proverka vo prvatagodina od trigodishniot plan, sredno rizichnite se planiraat zaprvata godina (dokolku ima dogovoren termin) ili vtorata godina,a nisko rizichnite dobavuvachi se planiraat za tretata godina odtrigodishniot plan.