Part II: Gradient experiments", 20072. Lucie Novakova, Ludmila Matysova, Petr Solich, "Advantages of application ofUPLC in pharmaceutical analysis", 20053. Stephen A.C. Wren and Pierre, Tchelitchef, "Use of ultra-performance liquidchromatography in pharmaceutical development", 20044. M.E. Swartz, "UPLC: An Introduction and Review", J. Liq. Chrom., 20055. J.R. Mazzeo, U.D. Neue, M. Kele, R. Plumb, "Ultra Performance LiquidChromatography," Anal. Chem., 20056. M. Swartz and B. Murphy, "New Frontiers in Chromatography," Am. Lab., 2005HPLC METHOD VS. UPLC METHOD FORQUANTITATIVE DETERMINATION OF RE-LATED SUBSTANCES IN CEFACLOR CAP-SULES 500mgMilosh Todorovski, Ana Giceva, Tasika Kovacevic,Slavica Janeva, Hristina BabunovskaQuality Control department,ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Pharmaceutical, Chemical and Cosmetics CompanyINTRODUCTIONA typical HPLC method was optimized for UPLC method in order toachieve higher sample analysis throughput, better sensitivity, and ro-bust, rapid, simple, accurate and economic analysis. Method transferwas performed on Cefaclor capsules 500mg, on parameter "Determi-nation of related substances". Cefaclor is a semi synthetic broad-spec-33PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011trum antibiotic and an oral second generation cephalosporin, which iswidely used in treatment of variety of both gram positive and gramnegative aerobic bacteria. In this work, an HPLC method for qualitycontrol (QC) was optimized for UPLC. Strategies to reduce total run-time, lower cost per assay, and promote instrument uptime were con-sidered.METHODS AND MATERIALSThe original 55-min HPLC QC method which was used to quantify thecontent of degradation products in Cefaclor capsules 500mg was per-formed on Varian HPLC chromatographic system, on LiChrospher 100RP 18, 250 x 4 mm; 5mm column, using gradient elution with mobilephase consisting of phosphate buffer (pH 4,0) as mobile phase A andmixture of phosphate buffer (pH 4,0) and acetonitrile as mobile phaseB, with flow rate 1.0ml/min and injection volume 20 ml. Gradient elu-tion was performed in range of 5 to 100 volumes mobile phase B.Wavelength was fixed at 220nm. Cefaclor was separated from the Im-purity delta-3-Cefaclor. System suitability parameters, as resolutionbetween Cefaclor and delta-3-Cefaclor, were calculated on the typi-cal chromatogram of the resolution solution.The UPLC method was performed on Nexera Shimadzu UFLC chro-matographic system, on Acquity BEH C 18, 50 x 2.1 mm; 1.7mm col-umn, using gradient elution with mobile phase consisting of phosphatebuffer (pH 4,0) as mobile phase A and mixture of phosphate buffer (pH4,0) and acetonitrile as mobile phase B, with flow rate 0.4ml/min andinjection volume 1 ml. Gradient elution was performed in range of 5 to100 volumes mobile phase B at wavelength of 220nm. Cefaclor wasseparated from the Impurity delta-3-Cefaclor. System suitability pa-rameters, as resolution between delta-3-Cefaclor and Cefaclor, werecalculated on the typical chromatogram of the resolution solution.RESULTSThe HPLC method was validated with standard solution of delta-3-Cefaclor with concentration of 0.06mg/ml which is equal to 1.2% ofthe delta-3-Cefaclor test solution used in the determination of thechromatographic purity.The Retention Times of delta-3-Cefaclor and Cefaclor in the resolu-tion solution using HPLC method were 15.34 and 18.26 respectively,achieving resolution of 7.55. The Relative Retention Time of delta-3-Cefaclor was 0.84. Run time for the analysis is 55 minutes for UV detection and additional15 minutes for equilibrating, with total run time of 70 minutes.Using the transferred UPLC method we achieved separation of thetwo components with retention times of 4.07 and 4.92 minutes. Res-olution between delta-3-Cefaclor and Cefaclor was 4.56 with Relativeretention time of delta-3-Cefaclor 0.83. Achieved run time for the analysis was 18 minutes for UV detectionand additional 4 minutes for equilibrating, with total run time of 22minutes which is 3.18 times faster than the HPLC analysis. CONCLUSIONThe transferred UPLC method has shown that is robust, rapid, simple,accurate and economical and therefore suitable for routine control inthe Quality Control department. The results from both HPLC andUPLC analysis of the same batches of Cefaclor capsules 500mg werecompared and were found to be identical so using the UPLC methodis recommended whenever possible for saving time and money. REFERENCES1.Davy Guillarme, Dao T.T. Nguyen, Serge Rudaz , Jean-Luc Veuthey, "Methodtransfer for fast liquid chromatography in pharmaceutical analysis: Application toshort columns packed with small particle. Part II: Gradient experiments", 20072. Lucie Novakova, Ludmila Matysova, Petr Solich, "Advantages of application ofUPLC in pharmaceutical analysis", 20053. Stephen A.C. Wren and Pierre, Tchelitchef, "Use of ultra-performance liquidchromatography in pharmaceutical development", 20044. M.E. Swartz, "UPLC: An Introduction and Review", J. Liq. Chrom., 20055. J.R. Mazzeo, U.D. Neue, M. Kele, R. Plumb, "Ultra Performance LiquidChromatography," Anal. Chem., 20056. M. Swartz and B. Murphy, "New Frontiers in Chromatography," Am. Lab., 2005HPLC I UPLC METODA ZAKVANTITATIVNO OPREDELUVANjE NASRODNI SUPSTANTsII VO CEFACLORKAPSULI 500mgMilosh Todorovski, Ana Gicheva, TasikaKovachevikj, Slavitsa Janeva, Khristina BabunovskaKontrola na kvalitet, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Farmatsevtsko-khemisko-kozmetichka industrijaVOVEDSo tsel da se postigne pogolem analitichki kapatsitet, pogolemaosetlivost i dobivanje na robustna, brza, ednostavna, tochna iekonomski opravdana analiza, napravena e optimizatsija natipichen HPLC metod do UPLC metod. Transferot na metodot eizveden na Cefaclor kapsuli 500mg, na parametarot "Opredeluvanjena srodni supstantsii" Tsefaklor pretstavuva polusintetskiantibiotik so shirok spektar na deluvanje i tsefalosporin odvtora generatsija, koj se upotrebuva vo tretman na infektsiipredizvikani od gram-pozitivni i gram-negativni aerobnibakterii. Vo ovaa studija napravena e optimizatsija na HPLCmetodot, koj se upotrebuva vo kontrolata na kvalitet do UPLCmetod. Namaluvanjeto na vremetraenjeto na tselokupnata analiza,poniskite troshotsi za iveduvanje na istata i zgolemuvanjeto nazhivotniot vek na instrumentot se zemeni kako strategii priizveduvanje na studijata. METODI I MATERIJALIOriginalniot HPLC metod, koj trae 55 minuti, i se upotrebuva zakvantifikatsija na degradatsionite produkti vo Cefaclor kapsuli500mg e izveden na Varian HPLC khromatografski sitem, soupotreba na kolona LiChrospher 100 RP 18, so dimenzii 250 x 4 mm;5mm. Kako mobilna faza za gradientno eluiranje so protok1.0ml/min se upotrebeni fosfaten pufer (pH 4,0) kako rastvoruvachA i smesa od fosfaten pufer (pH 4,0) i atsetonitril, kakorastvoruvach B . Gradientnoto eluiranje se dvizhi vo opseg od 5 do100 volumeni rastvoruvach B. Primerokot e aplitsiran na kolonataso volumen na injektiranje od 20 ml. Za ultravioletova detektsija eupotrebena branova dolzhina od 220nm. Ovaa metoda ovozmozhuvakhromatografsko razdeluvanje na Cefaclor od onechistuvanjeto delta-3-Cefaclor. Parametrite za soodvetnost na sistemot, megju koi irezolutsijata pomegju Cefaclor i delta-3-Cefaclor se presmetani nakhromatogramot, koj e dobien od rezolutsioniot rastvor.UPLC metodata e izvedena na Nexera Shumadzu UFLC khroma to graf -ski sitem, so upotreba na kolona Acquity BEH C18, so dimenzii 5034Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOx 2.1 mm; 1.7mm. Kako mobilna faza za gradientno eluiranje sopro tok 0,4ml/min se upotrebeni fosfaten pufer (pH 4,0) kakorastvoruvach A i smesa od fosfaten pufer (pH 4,0) i atsetonitril,kako rastvoruvach B. Gradientnoto eluiranje se dvizhi vo opseg od 5do 100 volumeni rastvoruvach B. Primerokot e aplitsiran nakolonata so volumen na injektiranje od 1 ml. Ovaa metodaovozmozhuva khromatografsko razdeluvanje na Cefaclor od neogovotoonechistuvanje delta-3-Cefaclor. Parametrite za soodvetnost nasistemot, megju koi i rezolutsijata pomegju Cefaclor i delta-3-Cefaclor se presmetani na khromatogramot, koj e dobien odrezolutsioniot rastvor.REZULTATIHPLC - metodot e validiran so standarden rastvor od delta - 3 -Cefaclor so kontsentratsija od 0.06 mg/ml shto e ednakvo na 1.2% oddelta - 3 - Cefaclor vo test rastvorot koristen za opredeluvanje nakhromatografskata chistota.Retentsionite vreminja na delta - 3 - Cefaclor i Cefaclor vorezolutsioniot rastvor koristejkji go HPLC metodot se 15.34 i 18.26soodvetno, pri toa postignuvajkji rezolutsija od 7.55. Relativnotoretentsiono vreme na delta - 3 - Cefaclor e 0.84.Vremetranjeto na analiza za eden primerok iznesuva 55 minuti zaUV detektsija i dopolnitelni 15 minuti za ekvilibratsija dopochetnata sostojba na gradientot, so vkupno vremetranje od 70minuti.Koristejkji go transferiraniot UPLC metod postignavmeoddeluvanje na dvete komponenti so retentsioni vreminja od 4.07 i4.92 minuti. Rezolutsijata pomegju delta - 3 - Cefaclor i Cefaclor beshe4.56 so Relativno Retentsiono Vreme na delta - 3 - Cefaclor od 0.83.Vremetranjeto na analiza za eden primerok iznesuva 8 minuti zaUV detektsija i dopolnitelni 4 minuti za ekvilibratsija dopochetnata sostojba na gradientot, shto e za povekje od 3 patipokratko vo sporedba so konventsionalnata HPLC metoda.ZAKLUChOKTransferiraniot UPLC metod se pokazha kako robusten,ednostaven, tochen i ekonomichen i zatoa e soodveten za rutinskakontrola vo laboratoriite za Kontrola na Kvalitet. Rezultatite iod HPLC i od UPLC analizite od istite serii na primerotsi od Ce-faclor kapsuli 500mg se sporeduvani i e zaklucheno deka se ide n -tichni taka shto koristenjeto na UPLC metodot e pozhelno i potrebnosekogash koga e toa vozmozhno so tsel zashteda na vreme i pari.REFERENCES1.Davy Guillarme, Dao T.T. Nguyen, Serge Rudaz , Jean-Luc Veuthey, "Methodtransfer for fast liquid chromatography in pharmaceutical analysis: Application toshort columns packed with small particle. Part II: Gradient experiments", 20072. Lucie Novakova, Ludmila Matysova, Petr Solich, "Advantages of application ofUPLC in pharmaceutical analysis", 20053. Stephen A.C. Wren and Pierre, Tchelitchef, "Use of ultra-performance liquidchromatography in pharmaceutical development", 20044. M.E. Swartz, "UPLC: An Introduction and Review", J. Liq. Chrom., 20055. J.R. Mazzeo, U.D. Neue, M. Kele, R. Plumb, "Ultra Performance LiquidChromatography," Anal. Chem., 20056. M. Swartz and B. Murphy, "New Frontiers in Chromatography," Am. Lab., 2005THE ROLE OF TEMPERATURE DEPENDENCEOF CHROMATOGRAPHIC RETENTION COEF-FICIENT IN SEPARATION OF BILE ACIDSINTO CONGENERIC GROUPSAna Pilipovic, Mihaj Posa, Mladena LalicDepartment of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad,Hajduk Veljka 3, 21000 Novi Sad, SerbiaINTRODUCTIONThis work deals with finding temperature dependence of bile acids'retention coefficient obtained in reversed phase chromatography andits role in separation of bile acids into different congeneric groups.Bile acids with one, two and three hydroxyl group and their glico-,tauro and oxo derivatives are investigated. Particular attention is paidon bile acids' oxo derivatives that have a growing pharmacological usedue to a lower membranolythic activity.MATERIALS AND METHODS The HPLC capacity factor was calculated from the obtained elutedpeak retention time [1]. Linear equation that connects bile acids'retention coefficient with temperature fits very well with experimentaldata. Linear model explains 96% to 99% of the whole variance. Thereis a good correlation between the slope (b) and intercept (a) in the ob-tained equation in a group of the examined bile acids. RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThis correlation indicates the possibility of forming homologic seriesin the examined bile acids' molecule group [2]. On a - b plot bile acidsform three groups. Lithocholic acid and its' conjugates (bile acids withone hydroxyl group in the steroid skeleton) belong to the first group.In the second group there are deoxycholic and chenodeoxycholic acidand their conjugates while the third group contains bile acids oxoderivatives and next hydroxyl bile acids derivatives: ursodeoxycholic(UD), hyocholic (HC), and hyodeoxycholic acid (HD). For UD, HC and HDmolecules it is characteristic that beside C3 hydroxyl group (that hasthe same spatial orientation in each examined bile acids) they possesadditional hydroxyl group with equatorial (e) orientation (HC and HD:C6 a(e) OH; UD: C7 b(e) OH). Oxo groups' oxygen atom has equatorialorientation as well, so it is characteristic for bile acids of the thirdgroup that oxygen atoms of the hydroxyl or oxo group are switched tothe b side of the steroid skeleton (i.e.