The possibility of having private conversation with a profes-sional staff member in the pharmacy according to different regionsTested differences between the three age groups are statisticallyhighly significant (p <0.01), in terms of their general impressions of theemployee in the pharmacy, the impressions they have from informa-tion given by the employee, the cost of medication and participationof the Health Insurance Fund in the total cost the drugs.116PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNAFARMATsIJA/ FARMAKOINFORMATIKA poster prezentatsiiEVAlUATsIJA NA SATISFAKTsIJATANA RAzlIChNI VOzRASNI GRUPINA PATsIENTI zA KVAlITETOTNA FARMATsEVTSKIOT SERVISVO REPUblIKA MAKEDONIJASterjev.Z, Vlacho.B, Nestorovska.KA, Naumoska.Z,Grozdanova.A, Shuturkova. LjNatsionalen Farmakoinformativen Tsentar, Univerzitet Sv. Kirili Metodij-Skopje, R.MakedonijaVOVEDGlavnata tsel na farmatsevtskiot servis e preku optimalno upravu-vanje so terapijata so lekovi da se ovozmozhi najvisoko mozhno nivona funktsionalna i psikho-sotsijalna blagosostojba na patsientite.Razvoj na kompetentsii vo apteka e osnoven preduslov za obezbedu-vanje soodvetna farmatsevtska grizha koja krajno podrazbira odgo-vornost kon postignatite rezultatite od tretmanot.Tselta na ova istrazhvanje e da se izvrshi evaluatsija na kvalitetotna uslugite, koi patsientite gi dobivaat vo aptekite na teritorijatana Republika Makedonija.METODISprovedena e vkrstena deskriptivna studija koja se bazira naintervjua so patsienti so tsel da se opredeli nivnata satisfaktsijaso kvalitetot na farmatsevtskiot servis vo Republika MakedonijaVo ovaa studija bea vklucheni 653 ispitanitsi, odnosno patsienti,koi pri svojata poseta na apteka dobrovolno popolnuvaa anketenprashalnik, spetsijalno dizajniran za potrebata na ova istrazhuva-nje. Podatotsite od anketnite prashalnitsi se analizirani i obra-boteni vo statistichkiot program Statistica for Windows 8,0. Vostudijata se otsenuva uslugata koja patsientite ja dobivaat vo apteka,vo zavisnost od nivnata pripadnost na edna od trite vozrasnigrupi (16-34 godini, 35-54 godini, i postari od 55 godini). Ispita-nitsite od vozrasnite grupi od 16 do 34 godini, i od 35 do 54 godi-ni, najchesto odat vo apteka za da zemat lekovi i za sebe i za drug(36,3% i 43%), dodeka povekje od 50% ispitanitsi postari od 55 go-dini, potochno 107(58.5%) najchesto vo apteka zemaat lekovi za sebe.Samo 9(5%) od niv aptekata ne ja posetuvaat za lichni potrebi. Sta-tistichki ovie razliki vo distributsijata na odgovorite kaj tritevozrasni grupi se potvrduvaat kako signifikantni, odnosnoznachajni (p<0.001).Tabela 1.Izborot na aptekata znachajno zavisi od vozrasta na ispitanitsite.Taka, blizinata na aptekata ima pogolem prioritet za pomladiteispitanitsi (37.7%), dodeka kaj onie na vozrast od 35 do 54 godini,i postari od 55 godini tsenata na lekovite povekje vlijae voizborot na aptekata (18.8% i 18.1%). Isto taka znachajno zapomladata populatsija e i snabdenosta na aptekata. Vo odnos nakombinatsiite na ponudenite odgovori, najstarite, nad 55 godinimnogu pochesto od dvete drugi analizirani vozrasni grupi kakoprioriteti gi zemaat blizinata na aptekata, no i tsenata nalekovite. Interesen e podatokot od istrazhuvanjeto deka struchnitesoveti na vrabotenite se podednakvo znachajni vo izborot naaptekata za site vozrasti.Ispitanitsite postari od 55 godini statistichki signifikantnopochesto od ostanatite "se vrzuvaat" za edna ista apteka i vo neasekogash gi kupuvaat potrebnite lekarstva. Ovoj komentar e rezultatna testiranata razlika vo distributsijata na odgovorite na tritevozrasni grupi ispitanitsi, na prashanjeto "dali Vashite lekovi gizemate sekogash vo ista apteka" Tabela 2.117fifth congress of pharmacy of maceDonia with international participationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACOECONOMY / SOCIAL PHARMACY/ PHARMACOINFORMATICS poster presentationsTabela 2.Mozhnosta da se razgovara so struchno litse vo apteka bez pritoanekoj da go slusha razgovorot ispitanitsite od 16 do 34 godini jaotsenile so prosechna otsena 2,5+-1,4, ispitanitse od 35 do 54 godiniso prosechna otsena od 2,7+-1,4, dodeka postaite od 55 godini daleprosechna otsena od 3,7+-1,5. Ovie poniski otseni od drugiteparametri ukazhuvaat deka privatnosta koja aptekata ja nudi naklientot e na nisko nivo. Statistichkata analiza megju tritevozrasni grupi pokazha deka ispitanitsite na vozrast nad 55 godinistatistichki signifikantno povisoko ja otsenile mozhnosta darazgovaraat vo apteka so struchno litse bez prisustvo na drugi litsa,sporedeno so ispitanitsite na vozrast od 16 do 34 i od 35 do 54godini. Tabela 3Tabela 3. "Otsenete ja mozhnosta da razgovarate so struchno litse bezpritoa nekoj da go slusha razgovorot"Testiranite razliki megju trite vozrasni grupi se statistichkivisoko signifikantni (p<0.01) i vo odnos na nivnite generalnivpechatotsi za vraboteniot vo aptekata, vpechatotsite koi gi imaat zainformatsiite dadeni od vraboteniot, tsenata na lekovite ipartitsipiranjeto na Fondot za Zdrastveno Osiguruvanje vovkupnata tsena na lekot.the importance of braille alphabetapplication on Drugs packagingQendro Gentiana1, Malaj Ledjan2, Hoti Ela31University "Kristal", Faculty of Medical Sciences, Departmentof Pharmacy, Tirana-Albania.2University of Tirana, Faculty of Medicine, Departmentof Pharmacy, Tirana-Albania3University of Tirana, Faculty of Medicine, Departmentof Pharmacy, Tirana-AlbaniaintroDuctionPackaging form and the information written on the box play asignificant role to the confident use of medicament.In most cases, packaging is designed for patients who do not haveproblems with eyes. In this study is pointed out the importance ofapplying braille alphabet on package of drugs analyzing the healthconsequences caused by difficulties the blind people encounter inusing the right drug at a certain time.methoDA group of people of various ages, sick or not, who have the blindstatus, answered to a questionnaire about several basic problems wehad ascertained in our everyday work. The survey was addressed to500 blind people. It was a direct canvass. The questionnaire was forthe inhabitants of Tirana mainly because extending it in other cities ofthe country came across subjective barriers.The study included 600 native and imported drugs. Their exterior packagesgot analyzed if they contained any use explanation in braille writing or not.No selection of medicaments or producing pharmaceutical companies wasapplied. A selection was made only among the persons with blind statusbasing on the fact that the questionnaire would be made only with themwho knew braille alphabet. The persons who did not know braille alphabetat all and children under school age were left out of this questionnaire, asthey had no possibility to read the name of drug. A simple test was madewith canvassed people who accepted to collaborate, placing before themsome drugs which had the same form and size and beside them somepackages of drugs which had the title of drugs written in braille alphabet.At this stage of survey, a selection of drugs which had a frequent use wasmade. It was seen that they were surer to use the drugs which had theirnames written in braille alphabet upon.resultsIn Albania 10500 citizens have the blind status, 6300 of them are above 60years old, 1050 are between 0 month - 25 years old, 400 are with highereducation, 1000 with secondary education. From them 2010 blind personsknow the braille alphabet. After statistic processing of results we concludedthat: 320 blinds had difficulties in finding the name of drug by simplytouching, 135 were chronic patients or patients who suffer from otherdiagnosis, 438 had to ask for the help of their family or friends, 450 wereconsumers of more than one medicament, 110 had undergone troublesat least once by using the wrong drug. From 600 drugs taken in survey, 420of them did not have their commercial names written in braille alphabet.conclusionsApplication of braille writing on exterior of drugs' packages is a necessityfor all producers. In these cases, EU Directive finds the application for usingthis sort of writing helping this way that category of people who keep the118PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNAFARMATsIJA/ FARMAKOINFORMATIKA poster prezentatsiistatus of a blind person and at the same time their health goes underprotection. This will lead to reduce the incidence of toxemia fromconfusing drugs one with another during their use.referencesDirective 2004/27/EC of the European ParliamentDirective 2001/83/ of the European Council (amending)Law Nr. 9323 dated, 25.11.2004 "Medicines and health servis in Albania"Law Nr. 9902 dated 17.04.2008 " The protection of consumers".the role of pharmacists inDecreasing antimicrobial resistanceMarija Nadazdin, Lela Radakovic, Martika IvkovicPharmacy BorintroDuctionThe World Health Organization (WHO) dedicated this year's Health Day toantimicrobial resistancewithamessage- "Noactiontoday,nocuretomorrow".Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) is the resistance of microorganisms toantibiotic medicines to which the microorganisms were previously sensitiveto. Antimicrobial resistance risks our control of infectious disease,threatens our return to an era before the discovery of antibiotic medicine,and increases spending for health care. This is the consequence of use,especially misuse, of antimicrobial medicine. Since pharmacists at publicpharmacies are the most available health workers to the general public,this slogan for action calls us to prove our readiness in being the strongestlink in promoting health, educating the population, and showing correctuse of medicine--all which fits with the profile of a modern pharmacist.objectivesThe objective of this work is to introduce consumers who come to thepharmacy with the concept of antimicrobial resistance (AMR), researchtheir behavior before the use of antibiotic medicine and--accordingto the results of the research--plan out our future activities.methoDIn 3 federal pharmacies in Bor's counties (Federal Pharmacy ofMajdanpek, Pharmacy of Donji Milanovac, Pharmacy II Kilometar Bor)adult users, who were chosen by a random method on 07.04.2011, weregiven educational materials and a questionnaire with 10 questionsabout their experience in using oral antibiotics and their knowledge ofAMR. 173 brochures and questionnaires were distributed and a totalof 106 which were completely filled out were returned to us.resultsFrom the 106 questionnaires that were collected, 21 were done in Bor,37 in Donji Milanovac, and 48 in Majdanpek. The average age of theparticipants in our study was 43-64 years old (ages ranged from 18-77).The majority of those questioned were female (64.00%) and high schoolgraduates. The questions were separated into 3 segments- behavior ofparticipants with symptoms of infection, use of antibiotics, andresistance to antibiotics. When they have symptoms of infection, thepharmacy is the first stop of the patients (47.17%) and then theirchosen doctor (42.45%). When customers come to the pharmacy withsymptoms most have faith in what their pharmacist recommends(66.99%) others self-medicate with antibiotics (29.13%) and an evensmaller percentage (3.88%) rely on information from televisioncommercials. A quarter of those questioned do not use antibioticswithout the direction of a doctor, 64.15% say they don't often useantibiotics without doctors' direction, and 10.38% say they often useunprescribed antibiotics. A majority of those questioned (59.05%)report to taking the prescribed antibiotics until the end of the therapywhile 22.89% used the antibiotic until the end of their first symptoms.A third of clients questioned (32.10%) did not know aboutantimicrobial resistance while a half (52.80%) were familiar with thisconcept. Almost all (90%) were interested in increasing their knowledgeof this area. Out of the 56 participants who claimed to know whatantimicrobial resistance was 46 did not prove that knowledge throughcorrect use of antibiotics. Out of 50 participants who were not sure ordid not know what antimicrobial resistance was 47 were not usingantibiotics correctly. Thus according to our study, out of 106participants, 93 needed further advice--which could be given by theirpharmacist--on utilizing antibiotics and decreasing their chances ofantimicrobial resistance.In light of the special role that parents play in the development of theirchildren--both in their responsibility for the welfare of their child aswell as their role in health education for their child--the last questionin the questionnaire was, "Do you give your children antibioticswithout a prescription?" The disturbing statistic was that almost afourth of parents questioned give their children antibiotics without aprescription--4.35% do it often and 18.84% do it from time to time.conclusionActivities that were put into action due to the World Health Day showthat there is a need, and a want, from consumers, as well aspharmacists, for both sides to take part in furthering education,improving compliance to health rules and changing current behaviors.The conclusions reached through these questionnaires have shown usincomplete knowledge on the part of the patient about correct use oforal antibiotics as well as antimicrobial resistance. We must keep inmind that 80% of all antibiotics that are used in human medicine aretaken outside of hospital environments thus pharmacists in apharmacy find themselves in an ideal position to cut down the numberof mistakes made by consumers (self-prescribing themselves certainmedicine, correct dosing, and the duration of their therapy).Knowledge and skills that pharmacists posses can be utilized tominimize the causes of antimicrobial resistance. The fact that patientscome to pharmacists first is a sign that we must organize for furtheraction. Antimicrobial resistance is a global problem. The statistic fromthe United States, which tells us that 63% of adult patients with acuterespiratory problems take antibiotics but that in 55% of cases theantibiotics are resistant, shows us that the solution to the problem ofantimicrobial resistance requires a more active team effort frompharmacists and primary care physicians. Collectively responsibleattitudes towards health in society are developed early in life andeducating parents today is a requirement towards reducing the spreadof antimicrobial resistance tomorrow. Our next step is to conductworkshops on antimicrobial resistance in cooperation with theemployees of the Educational Institution "Marija Muncan" as well asthe parents whose children attend kindergarten at the school.referencesWHO - World health day, available from http://www.who.int/world-health-day/2011/en/index.html, cited 20.04.2011.WHO/97, Seven stars Pharmacist, FIP, Resolution, 58.