1991, 41, 469-474phEnylalaninE dEriVatEs,nEW sElEctiVE ligandsfor ampa- and kainatE rEcEptorsubunits of ionotropicglutamatE rEcEptorsSerafimoska Zorica1, Kapedanovska NestororvskaAleksandra1, Suturkova Ljubica1, Tommy N. Jo-hansen2, Karla Frydenvang21Institute for Pharmaceutical chemistry, faculty of Pharmacy, "St Cyriland Methodius" University Skopje,2Department of Medical chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sci-ences, University of Copenhagen, DenmarkIonotropic glutamate receptors (iGluRs) constitute a family of ligandgated ion channels subdivided in three classes, NMDA, AMPA (iGluR1-4) and KA (iGluR5-7 and KA1,2) according to the agonists that selec-tively activate them. iGluRs are tetrameric assemblies of highlyhomologous receptor subunits. They are critically important for nor-mal brain function and are considered to be involved on neurologicaldisorders and degenerative diseases such as schizophrenia, Alzheimer'sdisease, brain damage following stroke and epilepsy.AMPA receptor antagonists are considered to have clinical potentialas neuroprotective drug candidates. None of the competitive AMPAreceptor antagonists known today is able to discriminate between in-dividual AMPA and KA subunits. In order to identify the structural de-terminants for receptor selectivity between homomeric AMPA and KAreceptors a serial of rigid as well as flexible biaromatic alanine deriva-tives carrying selected hydrogen bond acceptors and donors has beensynthesized based on the published X-ray structure of competitive an-tagonist (S)-ATPO co-crystallized with the ligand-binding domain ofiGluR2 (S1S2J). The compounds were pharmacologically characterizedby radioligand binding at native AMPA receptors in rat brain mem-branes and at homomeric recombinant rat iGluR1-7 receptors ex-pressed in Sf9 insect cell membranes. Based on these results as wellas on the results obtained from molecular modeling studies, impor-tant structure-activity relationships at AMPA and KA were established.A group of compounds selective for either AMPA iGluR5 or iGluR7 re-ceptors were identified. One particular substituent position appearedto be of special importance for control of ligand selectivity.Suitable crystals for X-ray crystallography were obtained from (S)-EL-7-iGluR2 (S1S2J) complex. The structure was determined with a reso-lution of 1.9 A. (S)-EL-7 is competitive antagonist slightly more potentthan ATPO that prevents domain closure by two mechanisms. First,by direct interactions with the residues in domain 2 and steric inter-ference between the receptor and ligand substituent, and the secondmechanism acts by preventing the domain closure with interruption ofinterdomain interactions between Glu402 of domain 1 and Thr686 ofdomain 2. The new structure provides also interesting structural in-formation on the water mediated interactions between the ligand andthe particular amino acid residue Tyr702, which is the only one non-conserved amino acid residue among the four AMPA receptor subunitsand has been identified as important determinant for AMPA receptoragonist subunit selectivity. This position is not responsible for the ob-served subunit selectivity of (S)-EL7 as it was expected. Another in-teresting finding is the domain closure which is in range between6.9@-9.2@. This range of domain closure is in close to be in between whathas been observed previously for antagonists (ATPO: 2.5@-5.1@ andDNQX: 3deg-6deg) and partial agonist (KA:13@).FENIlAlANINSKI DERIVATI,NOVI SElEKTIVNI lIGANDIzA AMPA- I KAINATNITE REPTsETORNIPODEDINITsI NA JONOTROPNITEGlUTAMINSKI RETsEPTORISerafimoska Zoritsa1, KapedanovskaNestorovska Aleksandra1, Shuturkova Ljubitsa1,Tomi N. Jokhansen2, Karla Fridenvang21Institut za farmatsevtska khemija, Farmatsevtski fakultet,Univerzitet "Sv. Kuril i Metodij"-Skopje,2 Institut za meditsinska khemija, Fakultet za farmatsevtski nauki,Univerzitet od Kopenkhagen, DanskaJonotropnite glutaminski retseptori (iGluRs) ja sochinuvaat famili-jata na ligand vrzuvachki jonski kanali podeleni vo tri klasi,NMDA, AMPA (iGluR1-4) i KA (iGluR5-7 i KA1,2) spored agonistite koiselektivno gi aktiviraat. iGluRs se organizirani kako tertameriod khomologni retseptorni podedinitsi. Tie se osobeno znachajni zanormalnata funktsija na mozokot i se smeta deka se vklucheni vo336PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA KhEMIJA / BIOMOLEKULARNI NAUKIoralni prezentatsiibrojni nevroloshki poremetuvanja i nevrodegenerativni bolesti,kako shizofrenija, Altskhajmerova bolest i mozochni oshtetuvanja koise javuvaat posle mozochni udari i epilepsija.Antgonistite na AMPA retseptornite podedinitsi se smeta deka seklinichki znachajni kako nevroprotektivni kandidati za lekovi.Nitu eden od dosega dobienite kompetitivni AMPA retseptorniantagonisti ne pokazhuva selektivnost megju AMPA i KA retseptor-nite podedinitsi. So tsel da se identifikuvaat strukturnite deter-minanti znachajni za retseptornata selektivnost megju khomomerniteAMPA i KA retseptori, beshe sintetizirana serija kako na rigidnitaka i na fleksibilni biaromatichni alaninski derivati koi so-drzhat supstituenti koi se aktseptori i donori na vodorodni vrski.Sintezta e napravena vrz na pretkhodno publikuvanata strukturadobiena so difraktsija so kh-zdratsi na kompetitivniot antagonist(S)-ATPO ko-kristaliziran so ligand-vrzuvachkiot domen na iGluR2(S1S2J). Farmakoloshkata karakterizatsija na soedinenijata enapravena so vrzuvanje na ligandite so radioaktiven obelezhuvach,so nativnite AMRA retseptori vo membranite na mozok od staoretsi so khomomerni rekombinantni iGluR1-7 retseptori od staoretsekspresirani vo Sf9 insektni kletochni membrani. Vrz osnova nafarmakoloshkite rezultati kako i vrz osnova na rezultatite dobie-ni od studiite na molekularno modeliranje, vosopostavena eznachajna strukturata-aktivnost zavisnost na ovie soedinenija konAMRA i KA retseptorite. Identifikuvana e grupa na soedinenijaselektivni za AMRA, za iGluR5 ili za iGluR7 retseptorite. Defi-nirana e edna karakteristichna pozitsija na supstituentite koja eod osobeno znachaenje za kontrola na selektivnosta na ligandite.Dobieni se kristali so kristalografija so kh-zratsi od kompleksot(S)-EL-7-iGluR2 (S1S2J) Strukturata e opredelena na rezolutsija od1.9 A. (S)-EL-7 e kompetitiven antagonist koj e malku popotenten odATRO i go sprechuva zatvaranjeto na dvata domenite preku dva mekha-nizimi. Prvo, preku direktni interaktsii so reziduite od domenot2 i stentite prechki megju retseptorot i supstituentite na ligandot,a vtoriot mekhanizam e preku sprechuvanje na zatvoranjeto nadomenite preku sprechuvanje na interdomenskite interaktsii megjuGlu402 od domenot 1 i Thr686 od domenot 2. Novata struktura istotaka obezbeduva interesni strukturni informatsii za interaktsi-ite posreduvani preku molekulite na voda megju ligandot i karakte-ristichnata aminokiselinska rezidua Tyr702, koja e edinstvenataaminokiselina koja se razlikuva vo AMRA retseptornite podedini-tsi i e okarakterizirana kako znachajna determinanta na AMRAretseptornata selektivnost na agonistite. Ovaa aminokiselina nee odgovorna za selektivnosta na (S)-EL7, kako shto beshe ochekuvano.Drugo interesno soznanie od ovaa struktura e zatvoranjeto nadomenite koe e vo opseg od 6.9@-9.2@. Opseg koj se naogja megju pret-khodno determiniranoto zatvaranje na domenite predizvikano privrzuvanje na iGluR2 so antagonistite (ATPO: 2.5@-5.1@ i DNQX: 3deg-6deg) ipartsionalniot agonist (KA:13@).337fifth congrEss of pharmacy of macEdonia With intErnational participationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTRY / BIOMOLECULAR SCIENCESoral presentationsPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOFARMATsEVTSKAKhEMIJA /BIOMOLEKULARNI NAUKIposter prezentatsiiPHARMACEUTICALCHEMISTRY /BIOMOLECULAR SCIENCESposter presentationsAngiogenesis inhibitors- new ApproAch to treAtmentof mAlignAnt diseAseVera Dabanovic1, Ana Pantovic21Public Pharmacy Institution of Montenegro "Montefarm", Podgorica,2Pharmacy "Galen" Beraneintroduction And objectiveAngiogenesis is the process of creating new blood vessels from existingones, which consists of the activation, proliferation and migration ofendothelial cells. Activation of endothelial cells occurs under theinfluence of cytokines and the process of angiogenesis is regulated byvarious paracrine growth factors that are shared on stimulators andinhibitors. These molecules maintain balance, and consequently keepmicrovasculataure in the state of rest. The state of excessive angio-genesis is the result of overweight of stimulators over inhibitors re-sulting various pathological processes. One of them is the growth oftumor. As an angiogenesis plays a significant role in tumor growth,angiogenesis inhibitors thus represent an attractive therapeutictarget. Only a few drugs are used in the clinical practice. Medicinesapproved by the FDA as antiangiogenetic agents are: bevacizumab(anti-VEGF neutralizing antibody) and protein tyrosine kinase -sorafenib, sunitinib and pazopanib. A large number of drugs are cur-rently in the different phases of clinical trials. The main objective ofthis article is to analyze and compare, data on efficacy of chemothe-rapy in combination with angiogenesis inhibitors vs. chemotherapyalone, from selected clinical trials. Primary objectives of these studieswere: response rate, overall survival and progression-free survival.methodologyMost data were collected by searching large databases Mediline andEMBASE where articles and meta-analysis concerning the effectivenessand safety of inhibitors of angiogenesis were looking for.results And discussionReviewed studies show high efficacy of angiogenesis inhibitors, es-specially, prolonged survival compared to standard regimes in the va-rious indications such are: metastatic colorectal cancer, non-small celllung cancer, metastatic Renal Cell Cancer and metastatic breastcancer.conclusionAngiogenesis is a key process in tumor growth and progressivedevelopment of distant metastases. Angiogenesis inhibitors reducetumor vascularity, which leads to regression of existing tumor bloodvessels, inhibition of new tumor vasculature growth and consequentlydecreasing of tumor size. On the other hand, inhibition of angiogene-sis leads to normalization of tumor vasculature and decreasing tumorinterstitial pressure, thus increase the flow of cytostatics into thetumor, thereby increasing their effect.ArylpiperAzines Active on 5ht1Areceptor - QsAr AnAlysisIvaValkova, Irini DoytchinovaFaculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Sofia, 2 Dunav st, 1000Sofia, BulgariaThe 5-HT1A receptor is a subtype of 5-HT receptor that binds theendogenous neurotransmitter serotonin. It is a member of the G-protein-coupled (GPR) family of signal transducing receptors andmodulate the release of dopamine as well as many hormones[1,2]. 5-HT1A receptor influence various biological and neurological processessuch as blood pressure and heart rate, aggression, appetite, cognition,learning, memory, mood [3,4]. 1-Arylpiperazines are well known 5-HTreceptor ligands with 5-HT1A activity [5]. The aim of the present studyis to investigate the quantitative structure - affinity relationships in aseries of arylpiperazines with terminal pyrid-2(1H)-on and diphenyl-methylamino fragments at N4.The data set consists of 34 compounds, tested previously for 5-HT1Aaffinity [6-8]. The structures were built and optimized in HyperChem7.5 (HyperCube Ltd.) by MM+ force field [9]. The electron density dis-tribution and the set of electronic descriptors were calculated bysemiempirical method AM1 [10]. Molecular properties and 3D de-scriptors were calculated by MDL QSAR software, version 2.2 (Symyx).LogP values were calculated by ACD Labs software (ACD Inc.). A ge-netic algorithm (GA) [11] and stepwise regression, as implemented inthe MDL QSAR package, were used as variable selection procedures.The GA regression equations were generated on the basis of the se-lected variables by ordinary multiple linear regression (MLR).Both variable selection procedures, GA and stepwise regression, ledto an identical model for affinity to 5-HT1A receptor:pKi = -3.15qN1pip - 0.01Vol + 21.69n = 32 r2 = 0.7115 SEE = 0.4635F = 32.89 q2 = 0.65The descriptor qN1pip shows the partial atomic charge of piperazineN1 atom. The negative regression coefficient means that as more neg-ative is the piperazine N1 atom as more affine is the compound. Thecharge of N1 depends on the aryl substituent. The inductive effect ofthe N1 substituents decrease in the order: o-methoxyphenyl > p-chlor-phenyl. In the same order decreases the 5-HT1A binding affinity of theinvestigated piperazines.The descriptor Vol represents the molecular volume of a moleculecomputed by the grid method. Volume of the investigated structuresranges from 278.56 to 485.87. The negative correlarion between Voland affinity suggests that bulky substituents at piperazine N4 are notfavor for the 5-HT1A affinity. Elongation of the spacer also increasesVol and should decrease affinity.The 2D-QSAR study reveals the structural features responsible for theaffinity of 5-HT ligands with o-methoxyphenyl and p-chlorophenyl sub-stituent at N1 and terminal pyrid-2(1H)-on and diphenylmethylaminofragments at N4. The results from the QSAR study could directed tofuture synthesis of ligands.references1.Frazer A, Hensler JG (1999). "Chapter 13: Serotonin Receptors". In Siegel GJ, Agra-noff BW, Albers RW, Fisher SK, Uhler MD, editors. Basic Neurochemistry: Molecular,Cellular, and Medical Aspects. Philadelphia: Lippincott-Raven. pp. 263-292.340PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA KhEMIJA / BIOMOLEKULARNI NAUKIposter prezentatsii2.Van de Kar LD, Levy AD, Li Q, Brownfield MS. (1998).