Flower, 'Farmacologia', sesta edizione, ElsieverMasson 2008, p388Polli et al. J. Pharm. Sci. 86, 690-700 (1997).Katzung, 'Farmacologia generale e clinica', VII edizione italiana, Piccin 2009D.A.Williams, TH.L.Lemke, 'Foye's principi di chimica farmaceutica', IV edizioneitaliana, Piccin 2005, p808Yihong Qiu, Yisheng Chen, Lirong Liu, Geoff G. Z. Zhang 'Developing solid oraldosage forms: pharmaceutical theory and practice', Elsevier 2009, p320Annex 7. Multisource (Generic) Pharmaceutical Products: Guidelines onRegistration Requirements to Establish Interchangeability. WHO Technical ReportSeries, No. 937I. E. Smekhova,1 B. L. Moldaver,1 and Yu. M. Perova1, 'Equivalence of ranitidinegeneric tablets studied using the in vitro dissolution test' Khimiko-Farmatsevticheskii Zhurnal, Vol. 43, No.11, pp. 44 - 48, November, 2009L. X. Ju, J. T. Wang, and A. S. Hussain, AAPS PharmSci, 4(1), 1 - 5 (2002). P. Colombo, P.L. Catellani, A. Gazzaniga, E. Menegatti, E. Vidale, 'Principi diTecnologie Farmaceutiche', Casa Editrice Ambrosiana 2004, p.311.A COMPARISON BETWEEN DSC AND HPLCMETHODS IN ASSESSING DRUG-EXCIPIENTCOMPATIBILITYEla Hoti1, Ledjan Malaj1, Suela Kellici1, Piera DiMartino21Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tirana, Albania2Department of Chemical Sciences, University of Camerino, ItalyINTRODUCTIONAn important issue during preformulation studies is the identificationof possible incompatibilities between the active pharmaceutical in-gredient (API) and various excipients. The aim of this study is to findand optimise methods by which drug-excipient compatibility can bereliably and quickly assessed. Two different experimental techniquesDifferential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC) and High Performance LiquidChromatography (HPLC) were used to investigate the compatibilitybetween different APIs and some currently employed excipients. MATERIALS AND METHODSCompatibility studies were conducted on APIs as ibuprofen, nime-sulide, and excipients like magnesium stearate, lactose monohydrateand polyvinylpirrolidone (PVP). Each active ingredient was mixed in a1:1 ratio with every different excipient. The influence of processing ef-fects (simple blending, co-grinding, kneading or tabletting) on drug sta-bility, were also evaluated. The mixtures as well as the pure substanceswere analysed with both DSC and HPLC at time = 0, stored in plasticepprouvets at room temperature, and re-analysed to evaluate theirstability after 6 months. RESULTSThe results obtained were attentively evaluated considering thespecifics of each technique. The outcome of the DSC analysis for allibuprofen-magnesium stearate and ibuprofen-PVP mixtures revealedincompatibilities between the drug and the excipient. The results wereconfirmed even in the stored samples analyzed after 6 months. Addi-tionally, the DSC analysis of the mixtures containing nimesulide andexcipient showed physical interaction and chemical instability be-tween nimesulide and PVP. The interaction intensified after 6 months.On the other hand, during the evaluation of the chromatograms ob-tained with HPLC, differences were observed only in the mixtures con-taining ibuprofen-PVP. The small peak at the retention time of 4.14minutes is present in all the chromatograms of the mixture before andafter the storage, but it is more evident in the mixture processed withco-grinding. CONCLUSIONThe DSC analysis is being proposed as a substitute to accelerated sta-bility test. However, it has some limitation related to the difficultiesencountered in the interpretation of the thermograms, being basedmostly in the thermal characteristics of the pure substance. Moreover,it points out mainly qualitative rather than quantitative effects. The identification of degradation products is one of the advantages ofHPLC. This technique can detect degradation products that have beenformed during the experiment. Therefore, the techniques investi-gated were able to provide different but complementary information,enabling a complete understanding of the possible interactions thatoccurred in the binary mixtures drug-excipient.REFERENCESBruni, G.; Amici, L.; Berbenni, V.; Marini, A.; Orlandi, A. Drug-Excipient compatibilitystudies search of interaction indicators. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 68, 561-573(2002).Balestrieri, F.; Magri, A.D.; Magri, A.; Marini, D.; Sacchini, A. Application ofdifferential scanning calorimetry to the study of drug - excipient compatibility.Termochim. Acta, 285, 337-345 (1996).Botha, S.A. and Lotter, A.P. Compatibility study between naproxen and tabletexcipients using differential scanning calorimetry. Drug Dev. Ind. Pharm., 16, 673-683 (1990 b).Botha, S.A. and Lotter, A.P. Compatibility study between oxprenolol hidrochloride,temazepan and tablet excipients using differential scanning calorimetry. Drug Dev.Ind. Pharm., 16, 331-345 (1990 a).COMPOUNDING SORBITOL-MANNITOL IRRIGAN FOR TRANSURETHAL SURGICALPROCEDURES IN HOSPITAL PHARMACYElena Najdovska, Zora VeljanovaClinical Hospital, Department for Compounding Sterile Products, Bitola INTRODUCTIONTransurethral resection of the prostate involves resection of theprostate(TURP) by modified cystoscope, wich cuts tissue and coagu-lates blood vessels. The procedure is facilitatedby means of irrigatingfluid that flows throught the cystoscope.This fluid washes blood awayfrom the cut prostatic tissue so that operative site can be seen. Re-quiments for urological Irrigating fluids are: >> Prevents dispersal of electrical current >> Clear for visibility>> Sterile>> Nontoxic locally>> Nontoxic systemically>> Isotermic>> Isononic(or slighty hypotonic)259Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATION>> Nonhaemolytic>> InexpensiveTURP requires large amounts of irrigation fluid.The absorption of thisfluid can cause TUR-syndrome because of its effects on the cardiovas-cular and nervous system (cardiovascular - system problems followingrapid fluid -electrolyte balance changes, resulting fromabsorption ofirrigation fluid, dilution of proteins and electrolytes in body fluids, de-terioration of renal functions).The most widespread solute used is Mix-ture of Sorbitol-Mannitol.OBJECTIVESThe fact that is lack of Sorbitol-Mannito Irrigant on the drug marketin our country, the aim of presented work was to create the conditionsto start small scale productions of our first batch of this formulationand to evaluate its quality and stability.METHODSSorbitol-Mannitol Irrigation is a sterile, nonpyrogenic, hypotonic, aque-ous solution for urologic nonelectrolyte irrigation during transurethralsurgical procedures.Each 100 ml contains sorbitol 2,70 g. and manni-tol 0,54 g. in water for injection.The solution is nonelectrolitic and hy-potonic(178 mOsmol/l);pH 5,2 (4,0-7,0).The solution contains nobacteriostat, antimicrobial agent or added buffer and is intended onlyfor use as a single-dose irrigation.When smaller volumes are requiredthe unused portion should be discarded.The minimum conditions required for the small scale production wereresearched:>> The Responsible Person has relevant knowledge and currentpractical and theoretical experience in the preparation of sterileproducts>> All preparation is caring out by appropriately trained personnel >> Premises are situating in an environment witch, presents minimalrisks of causing contamination of material and products>> Sterile preparation is caring out in clean dedicated areas>> Standard Operating Procedures are written and implementedfor all equipment used for processing>> Clean areas are regularly cleaned according to a documentedand approved procedure.The main steps of the production process were:>> calculations>> pharmaceutical validation>> compounding>> labeling>> storage>> distribution>> administrationRESULTSThe formulation must be prepared in laminar flow cabinet, using anaseptic technique together with sterile filtration is used to fill the ster-ile primary packaging.Solution is sterilized by autoclaving.The final so-lution is then submitted to quality control, where a set of selectedassays have been defined that ensures both raw material and finalproducts are of assured quality.The formulationmanifested good qual-ity in respect to physical properties, physicochemical parameters andmicrobiological quality according to USP.The dosage form was stablefor a year storage in our conditions.ConclusionIt was possible to accomplish this challenge,and create the conditionsto start the small scale productions of this formulation:Sorbitol-Man-nitol Irigant for transurethral surgical procedures in our Departmentfor Compounding Sterile Products.REFERENCES1.Handbook of Extemporaneous Preparation;A Guide to Pharmaceutical By Mark Jackson (Editor), Andrew Lowey (Editor)2.Pharmaceutical Compounding and DispensingJohn F., PhDMarriot (Autor);Keith A. PhDWilson (Autor)Christopher Andrew Langley(Autor);Daw Belcher (Autor)3.USP charperter <797>4.http/www.picscheme.org5.mhtml://H:/New folder/Teaching goals and learning objectives -BEAM 20106.Webber R (2006). Benign prostatic hyperplasia, search date May 2005. Onlineversion of BMJ Clinical Evidence. ce.com. Also available online:http://www.clinicaleviden7. Fitzpatrick JM (2007). Minimally invasive and endoscopic management of benignprostatic hyperplasia. In AJ Wein, ed., Campbell-Walsh Urology, 9th ed., vol. 3. pp.2803-2844. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier8.Brookes ST, et al. (2002). Sexual dysfunction in men after treatment for lowerurinary tract symptoms: Evidence from randomised controlled study. BMJ,324(7345): 1059-1061.9. Paterson R, Goldenberg L (2001). Benign prostatic hyperplasia. In J Teichman,ed., 20 Common Problems in Urology, part 2, pp. 185-198. New York: McGraw-Hill.MAGISTRALNA PRIPREMA NASORBITOL-MANITOL IRIGATsIJA ZATRANSURETRALNA KhIRURShKAINTERVENTsIJA VO INFUZIONOODDELENIE PRI KLINIChKATABOLNITsA-BITOLAElena Najdovska, Zora VeljanovaInfuziono oddelenie, Klinichka bolnitsa BitolaVOVEDTransuretralnata resektsija na prostata, vkljuchuva resektsija naprostatata (TURP) so modifitsiran tsistoskop, koj go rezhe tkivotoi gi koagulira krvnite sadovi. Protsedurata e olesneta so upotrebana irigatsiono sredstvo koe teche niz tsistoskopot.Ovaa technost goispira tkivoto i ovozmozhuva preglednost na operatsionotopole.Irigatsijata mora da gi ispolnuva slednite uslovi:>> da preprechuva sproveduvanje na elektrichnata struja>> bistrina na preparatot>> sterilnost>> netoksichnost lokalno>> netoksichnost sistemski>> izotermichnost>> izotonichnost (ili slabo khipotonichno)>> nekhemolitichnostTURP potrebuva golemi kolichini na irigatsiona technost.Absorptsijata na ovaa technost mozhe da predizvika TUR-sindrom,zaradi efektot vrz kardiovaskularniot i nervniot sistem(kardiovaskularen sistem-sistemski problemi zaradi brzo me nu -va nje na elektrolitskiot balans, rezultat od absorptsijata na iri -ga tsi jata, razreduvanje na proteinite i elektrolitite vo telesnitetech nosti, narushuvanje na renalnata funktsija).