Megjutoa, voodnos na printsipot, kaj difuziskiot test se meri protokot na gasotshto difundira preku navlazhnetata membrana, dodeka kaj testot navodena intruzija se meri volumenot na voda koja intrudira (senabiva) vo membranozniot matriks. Padot na pritisokot shtopritoa se registrira, e od dve prichini. Prvata e protsesot nakompaktiranje, kompresija na membranskata struktura i pasazha nazarobeniot vozdukh (vreme na stabilizatsija vo testot), a vtorataglavna prichina e evaporatsija na vodeni molekuli preku porite nafilterot. Ako membranata e oshtetena (punkturirana), vodataglavno istekuva niz otvorite. Testot e mnogu senzitiven i mal padna pritisokot (zgolemen protok), detektira narushena filterskastruktura. Zakluchotsi: In-line difuziskiot test na khidrofobni, sterilni, ventfiltri e nepraktichen. Za off-line difuziski test, neopkhodna evalidatsija na chistenje posle testiranje. Bezbednosniot rizikfaktor e naglasen vo dvata sluchai.Testot na vodena intruzija e praktichen, nekontaminirachki ibezbeden za testiranje na integritet na khidrofobni, sterilni,vent filtri.KORISTENA LITERATURA: 1. Pall Corporation, The Pall Water Intrusion Test for Integrity Testing Sterile GasFilters, Publication No. : USTR 16032. Sartorius, Water Intrusion Test, Publication No. : SP-4504-e040143. Jornitz M. W., Levy R.V., Madsen R. E., Meltzer T. H., Reif O.W., Sterile Filtration,Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2006 314Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOKLINIChKA FARMATsIJAoralni prezentatsiiCLINICAL PHARMACYoral presentationsIntravenous ImmunoblobulIn In thetreatment of neurologIcal dIseasesSlobodan ApostolskiOutpatient Neurological Clinic, Belgrade, SerbiaIntravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) preparations are produced from apool of more than 5000 healthy donors. IVIG contain IgG antibodiesagainst a wide spectrum of normal human proteins and anti-idiotypicantibodies directed against Fab, the antigen-binding region of theseantibodies. 40% of the IgG molecules form dimers by double-arm orsingle-arm binding between their F(ab')2 domains. The dimers repre-sent complexes of idiotypic-anti-idiotypic antibodies. The larger thepool of donors, the higher the number of the F(ab')2 dimeric pairs andthe wider the expected spectrum of idiotypic-anti-idiotypic specifici-ties. Preparations of IVIG also contain immunomodulating peptides(soluble CD4, CD8 and human leucocyte antigen molecules) and anti-bodies against exogeneous antigens, viruses, and bacteria. Im-munomodulating action of IVIG is mediated by the effect on B cells,antibodies, T cells and complement system. IVIG have influence onmolecular mechanism involved in cell migration, suppresses the proin-flammatory cytokines and promote remyelination. The main effect ofIVIG on humoral immunity is composed Fc-mediated inhibition of an-tibody production and neutralization of autoantibodies by anti-idio-types. IVIG bind to complement components C1, C3b, and C4, increasedegradation of C3b, and bind of anaphylatoxins C3a and C5b. Mecha-nisms of IVIG that influence the T cells include antibodies against T-cellreceptor b-chain, antibodies against CD4 and CD8, soluble CD4 andCD8, antibodies against HLA molecules, superantigens, and antibod-ies against chemokine receptor CCR5. IVIG modulate the expression ofadhesion molecules (ICAM) and have antibodies against integrins, RGDmotif, and antibodies against CCR5 affecting the cell migration. IVIGinhibit T cell activation by inhibition of maturation of dendritic cells.Proinflammatory cytokines intelekin-1, tumor necrosis factor-a andinterferon-g are suppressed by IVIG. IVIG have been successfully usedto treat a number of immune-mediated diseases of the central andperipheral nervous system as well as immune mediated muscle dis-eases. IVIG have been used as a first-line therapy in : Guillain-Barre syn-drome (GBS), chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy(CIDP), multifocal motor neuropathy (MMN), and dermatomyositis (DM).IVIG may be used also in neuromuscular junction diseases (myastheniagravis, myasthenic syndrome), multiple sclerosis (MS), Rasmunssen'sencephalitis (RE), Stiff-person syndrome (SPS), and Post-polio syn-drome. IVIG treatment should be administered in a dose of 2 gr/kggiven over 2-5 days and it could be sufficient therapy for an acute neu-rological diseases (GBS, myasthenic crisis). In patients with chronic dis-eases (CIDP,MMN, DM, MS...) repeated IVIg treatment should beconsidered and the frequency of IVIG maintence therapy should beguided by the response. Typical treatment regimens are 1 g/kg every 2-4 weeks, or 2 g/kg every 1-2 months. Patients with selective IgA deficiencyand anti-IgA antibodies are at risk to develop an anaphylactic shock dueto IgA contaminations in the IVIG preparation. A general screening forIgA deficiency prior to IVIG infusion is thought to be not necessary. Incases with known hypersensitivity reactions it is recommended to ad-minister 1-2 mg/kg of hydrocortisone intravenously approximately 30 minbefore IVIG infusion. Side effects of IVIG include mild headache whichoccurrs in 30% of treatment courses. Severe adverse events (thrombosisof the jugular vein, allergic reaction, retrosternal pressure) leading to dis-continuation of the treatment were noted in 4% of all treatmen courses.congenItal malformatIonsand pharmacologIcal treatmentof epIlepsy In pregnancyGordana Kiteva-TrencevskaUniversity clinic of neurology, Skopje, R. MacedoniaIntroductIonPregnant women with epilepsy are confronted with 3 major risks: therisk that maternal seizures during pregnancy could do harm to motherand embryo or foetus; the risk of the potential teratogenic effects ofantiepileptic drugs (AEDs); and the genetic risk of the maternaldisease-epilepsy, if caused in part by genetic predisposition. Pregnantwomen with epilepsy and their doctors are faced with the need tobalance the teratogenic risks resulting from seizures during pregnancyagainst the risks of taking AEDs to prevent seizures. AEDs of the firstgeneration (phenobarbital, phenytoin, and primidone) and the secondgeneration (valproate, carbamazepine) were all found to be more orless teratogenic. The human teratogenic potential of newerantiepileptic drugs (clobazam, felbamate, gabapentin, lamotrigine,levtiracetam, oxcarbazepine, tiagabine, topiramate, vigabatrin,zonisamide, etc.) is still under evaluation. Some women with epilepsyneed to be treated with more than one antiepileptic drug. Thisincreases the number of different treatment regimens. So a greatnumber of cases are needed for better understanding of theconnection between AEDs, epilepsy and teratogenicity. The results ofpre-clinical toxicological studies of teratogenicity in at least twodifferent species are difficult to extrapolate to the humans, becauseof the well-known interspecies differences in teratogen susceptibility,partly determined by differences in pharmacokinetics andpharmacodynamics. Furthermore, combinations of antiepileptic drugsare not tested pre-clinically, although metabolic interactions betweenindividual components of such drug combinations may affectteratogenic risks. That is why EURAP is started as an inernationalobservational cohort study of AEDs and teratogenicity in pregnantwomen. R. Macedonia is contributing in this international projectreporting pregnancies from R. Macedonia according the EURAP studyprotocol.The aim of this paper is to report the congenital malformationoutcome in pregnant women with epilepsy from R. Macedonia.materIal and methodsThe EURAP epilepsy and pregnancy registry is an observational cohortstudy representing a collaboration of physicians from 42 countries.We report cases from R. Macedonia. We prospectively monitored 84pregnancies exposed to AEDs as monotherapy or polytherapy withdifferent doses of common AEDs registered for use in R. Macedonia.In this paper our primary aim is to evaluate the major congenitalmalformations detected up to 12 months after birth. We assessedpregnancy outcomesaccording to AEDs, as monotherapy or polytherapy, use of folansupplementation, exposure to alcohol, smoking, X-rays. Evaluation ofrisk factors includes, among others: maternal age at conception,maternal educational level, type, dose, and administration scheduleof antiepileptic drugs, type and aetiology of maternal epilepsy, onsetand duration of epilepsy, type and frequency of seizures duringpregnancy, other chronic or intercurrent maternal diseases, familyhistory of major malformations, known hereditary diseases, and316PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA FARMATsIJA oralni prezentatsiiepilepsy among first-degree relatives of the foetus.resultsAfter excluding pregnancies that ended in spontaneous abortions orinduced abortions we assessed pregnancy outcome concerning majorcongenital malformations in 84 pregnancies form R. MacedoniaMajor congenital malformations were found in 3 pregnancies, one ofthem being a first pregnancy and the others being second pregnancies,with an outcome of a healthy child in the first pregnancy in both. Thefirst pregnancy that ended in a male newborn with tetralogia Fallothappened in a mother with idiopathic generalized epilepsy (IGE) takingonce daily 100 mg phenobarboiton. She was seizure free duringpregnancy from GTCS or other seizures, but she used folansupplementational treatment of 5 mg only during one month in the firsttrimester. She was exposed to alcohol, and smoking up to 10 cigarettesper day. Her second pregnancy was a healthy female child. During hersecond pregnancy she was using valproate immunotherapy, 5 mg folansupplementation during whole pregnancy and was not exposed tosmoking and alcohol. The outcome of the second pregnancy in onepatient was a female newborn with polydactylia, a sixth finger comingup from the first finger on the hand on both sides. The mother of thisnewborn had a healthy male child from her first pregnancy. She hadcryptogenic temporal lobe epilepsy, without seizure control. Shemanifested partial complex seizures during pregnancy with a frequencyof a few in a month. She used AED polytherapy. The outcome of thesecond pregnancy in the other patient was lumbal meningomyelocela.She had IGE and was seizure free on valproate 300 mg twice daily duringsecond pregnancy, but she was using folan supplementation of 0,4 mgonly instead of 5 mg that she was using during her first pregnancy witha favourable outcome.conclusIonThe risk of major congenital malformations is influenced not only bytype of antiepileptic drug, but also by other variables, which shouldbe taken into account in the management of epilepsy in women ofchildbearing potential.KONGENITAlNI MAlFORMATsIII FARMAKOlOshKI TRETMANNA EPIlEPSII PRI bREMENOSTGordana Kiteva-TrenchevskaUniverzitetska klinika za nevrologija, Skopje, R. MakedonijaVOVEDKaj trudnitsite so epilepsija postojat 3 glavni rizitsi: rizik odepileptichni napadi pri bremenost koi mozhe da i nashtetat namajkata, na embrionot ili na fetusot; rizik od potentsijalen tera-togen efekt od antiepileptichnite lekovi (AEL) i genetski rizikza prenesuvanje na bolesta od majkata - epilepsijata, ako epi-lepsijata e prichineta i od genetska predispozitsija. Trudnitsite soepilepsija i nivnite doktori se soocheni so potrebata da go balan-siraat teratogeniot rizik shto mozhe da go imaat napadite za vremena bremenost so teratogeniot rizikot od zemanje AEL koi trebada gi sprechat napadite. AEL od prvata generatsija (fenobarbi-ton,fenitoin i primidon) i od vtorata generatsija (valproat i kar-bamazepin) se pokazhaa kako terapogeni, povekje ili pomalku.Teratogeniot potentsijal za chovekot na novite AEL (klobazam, fel-bamat, gabapentin, lamotrigin, levetiratsetam, okskarbazepin, tia-gabin, topiramat, vigabatrin, zonisamid i dr) se ushte se evaluira.Nekoi zheni so epilepsija treba da primaat povekje od eden AEL.Ova go zgolemuva brojot na razlichni terapiski kombinatsii. Zatoae potreben golem broj na sluchai za da se razbere podobro vrskatapomegju AEL, epilepsijata i teratogenosta. Rezultatite od pred-klinichkite toksikoloshki studii za teratogenosta dobieni od ba-rem dve razlichni vrsti organizmi teshko mozhe da se ekstrapo-liraat kaj lugje, poradi dobro poznatite razliki vo teratogeniotefekt kaj razlichni vrsti organizmi, delumno determinirani odrazlichnata farmakokinetika i farmakodinamika. Pokraj toa,razni kombinatsii na AEL ne se testiraat pred-klinichki, iako me-tabolichkite interaktsii na poedinite komponenti na kombinirani-te AEL mozhe da imaat vlijanie na teratogeniot rizik. Zatoa ezapochnata studijata narechena EURAP ( European registry of antiepilep-tic drugs and pregnancy), internatsionalna observatsiska kokhortnastudija za AEL i teratogenost kaj trudnitsi. Republika Makedonijae vkluchena vo ovoj internatsionalen proekt so isprakjanje na re-zultati od bremenosti od R. Makedonija, soglasno protokolot naEURAP studijata.Tselta na ovoj trud e da se prikazhe iskhodot od bremenosta vo odnosna pojavata na kongenitalni malformatsii kaj trudnitsite so epi-lepsija od R. Makedonija koi koristat AEL za vreme na bremenosta.MATERIJAl I METODIEURAP studijata za epilepsija i bremenost e internatsionalnaopservatsiska kokhortna studija vo koja uchestvuvaat doktori od 42zemji. Nie gi iznesuvame rezultatite od sluchaite od R. Makedonija.Monitorirani bea prospektivno 84 bremenosti izlozheni nadejstvo na AEL, lekovi koi se registrirani za koristenje vo R.Makedonija, bilo kako monoterapija ili politerapija, so razlichnidozi. Vo ovoj trud imame za tsel da gi izneseme majornite kongeni-talni malformatsii detektirani do prvata god po ragjanjeto. Nie goevaluiravme iskhodot od bremenosta vo odnos na AEL, kako mono-terapija ili politerapija, vo odnos na upotrebata na folan do-polnitelna terapija, vo odnos na izlozhenost na alkokhol, tsigari,"x" zrachenje.