3), verojatno poradikompetitivnost na polimerite i probiotikot za isti vrzivnimesta.Sl. 3: Vlijanie na formulatsiskite promenlivi vrz vitalnostana L. casei vo tekot na proizvodstvo.ZAKLUChOKPodgotoveni se mikrochestichki od surutkin protein-Sa-alginat soL. casei, vo koi vitalnosta na probiotikot e nad terapevtskiotminimum od 107-109cfu/g, a goleminata na chestichkite soodvetna zaisporaka vo dolniot intestinum.LITERATURA1. Capela, P., Hay, TKC., Shah, NP. Effect of homogenization on bead size andsurvival of encapsulated probiotic bacteria, Food Res. Int. 2007, 40: 1261-12692. Mandal, S., Puniya, A. K., Singh, K.: Effect of alginate concentration on survival ofmicroencapsulated Lactobacillus casei NCDC-298, Int. Dairy J. 2006; 16: 1190-11953. Krasaekoopt, W., Bhandari, B., Deeth, H.: Evaluation of encapsulation techniquesof ptobiotics for yoghurt, Int. Dairy J. 2003; 13: 3-13. 4. Gbassi, G. K., Vandamme, T., Ennahar, S., Marchioni, E.: Microencapsulation ofLactobacillus plantarum spp in an alginate matrix coated with whey proteins, Int. J.Food Microbiol 2009; 129: 103-105.5. Kitabatake, N., Kinekawa, Y.I.,. Digestibility of bovine milk whey protein and b-lactoglobulin in vitro and in vivo. J. Agric. Food Chem. 1998; 46 (12): 4917-4923.QUALIFICATION AND PROCESS VALIDA-TION ON BLISTER PACKAGING LINEMaja Stojevska, Biljana Pavicevic, Sonja Sterjevska, Darko Atanasoski, Biljana Nanova, Milkica GligorovaAlkaloid AD Skopje, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Re-public of MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONQualification is the documented evidence that the equipment worksefficiently and generates the expected results.Process validation is the documented eviden-ce that the process, op-erated within establish-ed parameters, can perform effectively and re-producibly and produces a product meeting its predeterminedspecifications and quality attributes.OBJECTIVESAim of this work is to qualify the equipment for blister packaging andto perform a process validation on a blister packaging line.DESCRIPTIONThe packaging process on the blister line IMA C80/A81 with HAPA 729and the packaging process consists of: adjustment of PVC and Alufoil, filling the recipient with bulk product, Alu foil printing, nestsforming, fill-ing tablets into blisters, blister sealing, print-ing of batchnumber and expiry date on the blisters, blisters perforating, blisterscutting, leaflets folding, cardboxes opening, inserta-tion of proper287Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONnumber of blisters and leaflet, printing of batch number and expirydate on the cardboard boxes, closing of the cardboard boxes, weightchecking, overwraping, final packaging in collective packs.INSTALLATION QUALIFICATIONThe documented verification that the faci-lities, systems and equip-ment, as installed or modified, comply with the approved design andthe manufacturer's recommendations. OPERATIONAL QUALIFICATIONThe documented verification that the faci-lities, systems and equip-ment as installed or modified, perform as intended throughout theanticipated operating ranges.PERFORMANCE QUALIFICATIONThe documented verification that facilities, systems and equipment,as connected toge-ther, can perform effectively and reproducibly toproduce a medicinal product meeting its predetermined specifica-tions and quality attributes. PRODUCT CHARACTERISTICSAldizem 60 mg are white round biconvex tablets with bisection line onone side with dimensions: diameter 9 mm, height 3,9-4,1 mm, packag-ing format JZ3. Aldizem 60 mg uses transparent rigid PVC film 250mm.Torvex 80 mg are white oblong biconvex film coated tablets with a bi-section line on one side, with dimensions: 20 mm x 8 mm, height 3,9-4,1 mm, packaging format JZ2. Torvex 80 mg uses transparentPVC/PVDC film (120 g/m2 PVDC). PVDC-coating gives the foil very highwater vapour barrier.Validation of the packaging process includes a description of thephases of the packaging, and equipment parts that are tested forproper operation, determination of critical process parameters, a de-scription of the tests per-formed, in-process controls, acceptable cri-teria, frequency and the quantity of the samples for process controls. Methods for performing the tests are pre-determined in the SOPs. Forsuccessfully per-forming the tests in the process validation, all meas-uring instruments of the equipment are calibrated, all the packagingmaterials comply with quality specifications, all the operators andmaintenance personnel are trained , and adequate SOPs are followed.DETERMINATION OF THE CRITICAL TESTS OF THE EQUIPMENT>> Test for detection of tablet presence in the blister with Laetus camera;>> Test for detection presence of splicing on Alu foil;>> Test for detection presence of splicing on PVC or PVDC foil;>> Test for detection of positioning of Alu foil on the PVC or PVDCfoil (lidding foil print registration);>> Test for pharma code reading on the boxes;>> Test for pharma code reading on the leaflet;>> Test for detector checking for leaflet presence;>> Test for weight check.RESULTSResults of the tests are shown in final validation report. All tests in theIQ, OQ, PQ are performed successfully. CONCLUSIONThe packaging process on the blister line IMA C80/A81 with HAPA 729is capable to perform effectively and reproducibly and produces aproduct meeting its predetermined specifications and quality attrib-utes.REFERENCESManufacturer's qualification documentationPIC/S, Recommendations on Validation Master Plan,Installation Qualification, Operational Qualification,Non Sterile Process Validation, Cleaning Validation,PI- 006-2, (July 2004),http://www.picscheme.orgEuropean Commision, 2001, Qualification and validation, Final version of Annex 15to the EU guide to good manufacturing practice.Berry, I. & Nash, R., 1993. Pharmaceutical process validation. 2nd edition. MarcelDekker, Inc., NY, USA.R. Pilchik, "Pharmaceutical Blister Packaging,Part I: Rationale and Materials," Pharm.Technol. 24 (11), 68-78 (2000).KVALIFIKATsIJA I VALIDATsIJA NA PROTsES NA PAKUVANjE NA OPREMA ZA BLISTER PAKUVANjEMaja Stojevska, Biljana Pavikjevikj, SonjaSterjevska, Darko Atanasoski, Biljana Nanova,Milkitsa GligorovaAD Alkaloid , SkopjeVOVEDKvalifikatsija na oprema za blister pakuva-nje prestavuvadokumentirana evidentsija de-ka opremata raboti efikasno i gidava oche-kuvanite rezultati. Validatsija na protses na pakuvanjeprestavuva dokumentirana eviden-tsija deka protsesot, koj rabotivo definira-nite parametri, e sposoben konzistentno da davaproizvodi so reprodutsibilen kva-litet, koi se sovpagjaat soregulatornite spetsifikatsii i atributi za kvalitet. TsELTselta na ovoj trud e kvalifikatsija na proiz-vodna oprema zablister pakuvanje i valida-tsija na protsesot na pakuvanje na istata.OPISProtsesot na pakuvanje na opremata IMA C80/A81 so HAPA 729 sesostoi od slednite fazi: podesuvanje na PVC i aluminiumskafolija, polnenje na retsepientot so polupro-izvod, formiranjegnezda na PVC film, polnenje tableti vo formiran PVC film, pe-chatenje na aluminiumska folija, lepenje na PVC i aluminiumskafolija i formiranje blister, pechatenje seriski broj i rok na tra-enje na blister, perforiranje i sechenje na blisteri, previtkuvanjeupatstva, otvoranje kutii, vnesuvanje soodveten broj blisteri iupatstvo vo kutija, pechatenje seriski broj i rok na traenje na kutija,zatvoranje na kutii, proverka na masa na skatula, obvitkuvanjeskatuli vo polietilenska folija, pakuvanje vo zbirna kutijaspored normativ.INSTALATsIONA KVALIFIKATsIJAInstalatsionata kvalifikatsija ima za tsel da dokazhe deka opre ma -ta e pravilno i soodvetno instalirana vo soglasnost so dizajnot,288Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOtsrte zhite, spetsifikatsiite, spe-tsifikatsijata od proizvoditelotna opre-mata i vazhechkite propisi.OPERATIVNA KVALIFIKATsIJATselta na operativnata kvalifikatsija e da pokazhe deka oprematafunktsionira vo sog-lasnost so spetsifikatsiite na proizvodit-elot.PERFORMANSNA KVALIFIKATsIJASo performansnata kvalifikatsija se do-kazhuva deka oprematadava proizvodi so reprodutsibilen kvalitet koga raboti vogranitsite na zadadenite spetsifikatsiiKARAKTERISTIKI NA PROIZVODITEAldizem 60 mg se beli okrugli bikonveksni tableti so razdelnalinija od ednata strana so dimenzii: dijametar 9 mm, visina 3,9 -4,1 mm, garnitura za pakuvanje JZ3. Aldizem 60 mg se pakuva vo PVCfolija (250mm).Torvex 80 mg se beli dolgnavesti bikonveksni film oblozhenitableti so razdelna linija od ednata strana,so dimenzii: 20 mm kh8 mm, visina 5,1-5,5 mm, garnitura za pakuvanje JZ2. Torvex 80 mg se pakuva vo PVC/PVDCfolija (120 g/m2 PVDC). Kako rezultat na oblozhuvanjeto na PVCfolijata so PVDC film folijata ima mnogu pogolemi bariernisvojstva za propustlivost na vlaga.Validatsijata na protsesot na pakuvanje vklu-chuva opis na fazite napakuvanje i delovite od opremata koi se testiraat za ispravno ra-botenje, determiniranje na kritichnite pro-tsesni parametri koi setestiraat, opis na testovite koi se izveduvaat, in-protses kon-troli, prifatlivi kriteriumi, frekven-tsija i kolichina na mostriza protsesnite kontroli. Metodite za izveduvanje na tes-tovite sevo soglasnost so SOP-ovi. Za us-peshno izveduvanje na testovitepri vali-datsijata kalibrirani se kritichnite mer-ni instrumentina opremata, ambalazhnite komponenti odgovaraat naspetsifikatsi-ite na kvalitet, operatorite i serviseri-te seobucheni za rabota, se sledat soodvet-nite SOP -ovi za rabota.DETERMINIRANjE NA KRITIChNITE PARAMETRI ZATESTIRANjE>> Testiranje na rabotata na Laetus ka-mera;>> Testiranje na snimanje na spojuvanje na Al folija;>> Testiranje na snimanje na spojuvanje na PVC ili PVC/PVDCfolija;>> Testiranje na pozitsioniranje na Al folija vrz PVC iliPVC/PVDC foli-ja;>> Testiranje na chitanje na farmakod na kutija;>> Testiranje na snimanje na farmakod na upatstvo;>> Testiranje na funktsijata na detektorot za prisustvo naupatstvo vo kutija;>> Testiranje na mashina za proverka na masa na skatula.REZULTATIRezultatite od testiranjata se prikazhani vo finalen vali da tsi -onen izveshtaj. Site testo-vi vo IQ, OQ, PQ se izvedeni uspeshno.ZAKLUChOKProtsesot na pakuvanje e sposoben konzis-tentno da dava proizvodiso reprodutsibi-len kvalitet, koi se sovpagjaat so regula-tornitespetsifikatsii i atributi za kva-litet. LITERATURAManufacturer's qualification documentationPIC/S, Recommendations on Validation Master Plan,Installation Qualification, Operational Qualification,Non Sterile Process Validation, Cleaning Validation,PI- 006-2, (July 2004),http://www.picscheme.orgEuropean Commision, 2001, Qualification and validation, Final version of Annex 15to the EU guide to good manufacturing practice.Berry, I. & Nash, R., 1993. Pharmaceutical process validation. 2nd edition. MarcelDekker, Inc., NY, USA.R. Pilchik, "Pharmaceutical Blister Packaging,Part I: Rationale and Materials," Pharm.Technol. 24 (11), 68-78 (2000).INFLUENCE OF EXCIPIENTS ON IN-PROCESS PARAMETERS ON METRONIDA-ZOLE TABLETS Meri DavcevaAlkaloid AD, Blvd Aleksandar Makedonski 12, Skopje, Macedonia INTRODUCTION AND AIMMetronidazole belongs to the class of imidazole and has beenclassified as an antiprotozoal and antibacterial drug. The mostimportant criteria for tablet formulation design is being considered -achieving the desired dissolution of the active pharmaceuticalingredient, i.e. the ability for absorption from the dosage formaccording to intended use for immediate release. Metronidazole resides in Class I API of the BiopharmaceuticsClassification System, API with high permeability and high solubility.That's why we focused on the physical tablet properties, evaluatingthe influence of excipients on in-process parameters on Metronidazoletablets. METHODOLOGYThe study was performed in Production of solid dosage forms andR&D departments in Alkaloid, Skopje. Direct compression was chosenbecause it is a more efficient method for preparation of immediaterelease tablets. The components were first sieved through 0,8 mmsieve, then mixed in ERWEKA drum PM 5. The tableting was performedon a rotary press Fette Perfecta 2, using 12 mm biconvex punches.The starting point was the following rule: the less involved theexcipients are, the better the formulation is. Five formulations wereprepaired in which microcristaline cellulose (Avicel PH 101), was themain diluent beside the active ingredient and the required lubricants.In the other formulations a binder, polyvinylpyrrolidone (Kollidon K-25),was added in the same concentration (1 %). The last threeformulations contained disintegrant, the cross-linkedpolyvinylpyrrolidone (Kollidon CL), in various concentrations (0,2 ; 0,7and 1,2 %).The parameters for evaluating the tablets were: >> hardness - determined by Erweka tablet hardness tester TBH300 MD, >> mechanical strength - determined by the tablet-crushingstrength (got by the hardness and the dimensions of the tablet)according to Fell and Newton's method, >> friability - determined by Erweka friability tester TAR 100 and>> disintegration time - determined by Erweka disintegration testertype ZT . 289Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONRESULTSIn general the prepared tablets from all formulations showedappropriate mechanical strength, hardness, friability anddisintegration time. In the formulation where only the microcristalinecellulose was included, it functioned as a superior diluent with the roleof a binder and a disintegrant. The involvment of the binder (KollidonK-25), in the next formulation, resulted in tablets with biggermechanical strength, hardness and friability, but with prolongeddisintegration time. The role of the disintegrant, Kollidon CL, in theformulation where it is involved is obvious.