Fullerenes are the third purecrystal form of carbon in addition to diamond and graphite. Fullerenesconsist of a spherical (C60), ellipsoid (C70), or cylindrical (carbon nan-otubes) carbon atoms. They were named after Richard BuckminsterFuller. A spherical fullerene C60 looks like a soccer ball and thereforeit is often called "buckyball" or "footballene". Robert F. Curl, Jr., RichardE. Smalley, and Sir Harold W. Kroto discovered fullerenes as an unex-pected surprise during laser spectroscopy experiments at Rice Uni-versity in September 1985. The Nobel Prize in Chemistry in 1996 wasawarded to this American-English research team for discovery of thismolecule with the perfect symmetry existing in nature. Fullerenes C60are polyhedral closed cages made up entirely of n three-coordinatecarbon atoms and having 12 pentagon and 20 hexagonal faces.Fullerene C60 molecule possesses geometry of truncated icosahe-drons fulerene-60-Ih. Diameter of the molecule C60 is 0.710+-0.007 nm.The outer and inner diameters of p electron cloud can be estimatedas 0.340 nm and 0.350 nm respectively, and bond energy per atom is7.40 eV. Pure fullerenes are black crystals and powder insoluble inwater and proton-acceptor solvents. It is soluble in halogen and alkyl-substituted benzene (1,2-dihlorbenzen 27mg/ml). Using combinationsof nucleophilic and electrophilic additions, cyclo-additions and radicaladditions, it is possible to covalently bond any class of organic com-pounds to a fullerene core. These structural and electronic charac-teristics of fullerene C60 provide possibility for conducting varioustypes of chemical transformations that resulted in a wide variety ofbiologically active water-soluble fullerenes. Fullerenes derivatives takeimportant place in the development of nano-biotechnology and nano-medicine related products. The chemical modification of fullerene C60molecule by attachment of hydroxyl groups was an easy and straight-forward method to synthesis water-soluble fullerenes, named fullerolsor fullerenols (C60(OH)n n=2-36). Structure of fullerenol C60(OH)24shown in Figure 1. [1-3].Figure 1. Fulerenol C60(OH)24.Fullerenol C60(OH)24 has diameter of around 1 nm with symmetricallyarranged hydroxyl groups on the C60 sphere. Fullerenol is a dark brownamorphous substance, soluble in water and in DMSO. Fullerenol can bedissolved in water, in concentration ranging from 10-3 mol/dm3 to 5x10-3 mol/dm3 and in pH interval from 3.5 to 9.8; it forms nano-aggregates,with up to 40 presences of aggregates larger than 400 nm (Figure 2. )[4].Fullerenol may react rapidly and irreversibly with a variety of metalsalts under ambient aqueous conditions to produce insoluble metal-hydroxyfullerene cross-linked polymers (M-fullerenol). Interaction offullerenols with bio-metal is important with regards to fullerene-basedpharmaceutical agents and waste treatment as well. Several chemi-cal properties of fullerenols may significantly influence their biologicalactivity. Similar to nonhydroxylated water-soluble fullerene derivatives,the most important characteristics of fullerenols regarding mecha-nisms of their biological activity are photosensitizing property andfree radical scavenging activity [6-12].Figure 2. Propertis of fullernol C60(OH)24.Antioxidative and free radical scavenging activity of fullerenols aretheir most exploited properties in biomedical studies. Antiprolifera-tive, and cytotoxic effects of various water-soluble fullerenol C60(OH)nhave been observed in different experimental models (in vivo as well asin in vitro). References[1] Injac R, et al. Farm Vest 59 (2008) 257. [2] Injac & Strukelj, Technol Cancer Res T, 7 (2008) 497. [3] Injac R, et al. Afr. J. Biotechnol. 25 (2008) 4940. [4] Injac et al., Biomaterials, 29 (2008) 3451. [5] Injac et al., Tech. Cancer Res. T., 7 (2008) 15. [6] Injac et al., Pharm. Rep., 5 (2008) 492. [7] Injac et al., Pharm. Rep., 2 (2009) 335. [8] Djordjevic-Milic V, et al. Mater Sci Forum 518 (2006) 525. [9] Djordjevic-Milic V, et al. Toxicol Mech Method 19 (2009) 24. [10] Injac et al. Biomaterials 30 (2009) 1184. [11] Injac et al., Hem. Ind., 62 (2008) 197. [12] Dragojevic-Simic, et al. Dig. J. Nanomater. Bios. 6 (2011) 819.124Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA /TOKSIKOLOGIJA / KhRANA I ISKhRANA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVODERIVATIVE SPECTROPHOTOMETRY IN EN-VIRONMENTAL, FOOD AND CLINICAL SAM-PLES ANALYSES - EVALUATION OF EP7MONOGRAPHK.Karljikovic-Rajic1, B.Markovic2, University of Belgrade, Faculty of Pharmacy, 1Department of Analyti-cal Chemistry, 2Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, SerbiaINTRODUCTIONDerivative spectrophotometry (DS) is one of the advanced modernspectrophotometric techniques (since 2002 official in 4th Ph.Eur.-EP)which consist in the differentiation of zero-order spectra. This tech-nique usually improves: a) resolution of overlapping spectra due tohigher separation efficiency as the band is much sharpened; b) elimi-nates the influence of background or matrix; c) enhances the de-tectability of minor spectral features (required for trace analyses) andd) provides more defined fingerprints than the conventional UV-Visspectrophotometry. Fig.1. Discrimination against broad bandsAnalytical advantage of derivative spectra originates from the factthat the derivative process discriminates in favor of sharp bands andagainst broad (Fig.1) to an extent that increases with derivative order.Derivative transformations (mainly even derivatives) permit discrimi-nation against broad band interferences arising from turbidity or non-specific matrix absorption and it tends to emphasize subtle spectrafeatures, allowing the enhancement of the sensitivity and specificityin mixture analyses most frequently assayed by zero-crossing-pointtechnique (Fig.2). Fig.2. Zero-crossing-point technique for multicomponent analysesIt is worth noting that though higher derivatives appear to improveresolution, the spectra obtained are also significantly distorted bynoise. Since 1996 several reviews have been published (1-6). APPLICATIONSWithin environmental analyses applications of DS will be presented inchemical oxygen demand (COD) analysis as it is often used to reflectthe degree of pollution and characterizes pulping effluents, as well asfor monitoring of dissolved organic matter (DOM) composition in nat-ural waters and engineered treatment systems using first- throughfourth-order derivative absorption spectra. Among the environmen-tal pollutants such as: phenol and mononitrophenol isomers; mixturesof phenols and herbicides (HPLC-DS supporting technique); aromaticamines (HPLC-DS complementary technique); fungicides (thiram-fourth derivative assays); herbicides and pesticides (diquat andparaquat-second derivative, parathion and p-nitrophenol in vegetabletissues) as well as simultaneous determinations of nitrite and nitrate(first- and second-order derivative) have received considerable atten-tion. Textile and other industrial dyes and pigments (emitted intowastewaters) represent an increasing environmental danger thus theDS applications are focused on: determination of dyes contents in bi-component solutions by means of zero-crossing point DS; simultane-ous determination of three textile dyes in industrial effluents as wellas removal (adsorption) of basic dyes from single and binary compo-nent systems. Different applications of DS in clinical samples analyses in the first pe-riod included quantitation of urinary porphyrins; plasma paraquat con-centration as an index of severity of poisoning; methemoglobin inblood as well as diverse analyses of amino acids. The relevance of DSassays for antibiotics; trapidil and gemcitabine in urine/plasma sam-ples; drug and corresponding metabolite (naproxen in presence of 6-desmethyl metabolite with importance of an interaction graph); incombination therapy (methotrexate and leucovorin in biological fluids)were established. Clinical samples such as amniotic fluid (analyses ofbilirubin, oxyhemoglobin and albumin), human serum (malondialde-hyde as widely accepted biomarker of lipid peroxidation in evaluationof oxidative stress), post-haemodialysis fluids (Fe(III)/Al(III)), plasmacoenzyme Q10 and partition of drugs into model systems of bio-membranes were considered. In our laboratories direct determinationof paracetamol in urine using second-order DS was used for biophar-maceutical characterization of drug products. Lead, cadmium andthallium in clinical samples were evaluated using DS.125Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY / FOOD AND NUTRITION oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONIn food samples analyses mainly determined compounds are colorants(Tartrazine, Sunset Yellow, Ponceau 4R in various combinations). DSwas used to evaluate the efficiency of phenylalanine removal for di-etary supplements. Assays for malondialdehyde contents in infant milkformulas, protein and casein in milk as well as RPHPLC-second andfourth DS for milk proteins were evaluated. Applications of DS for thecontrol of lipid oxidation in meats along with effectiveness of carno-sine and dietary supplementation with a-tocopherol as well as assay ofaromatic acids in cooked meat were outlined. Content of Vitamin C,plant pigments chlorophyll a and b, soy protein isolate, energizers inenergy drinks, sorbic and bezoic acids in soft drinks and antibiotics infeeds were investigated using DS.EVALUATION OF EP7 MONOGRAPHWithin our inter-laboratory evaluation of DS monograph (Ph.Eur.7) thecomparison of analogue and digital (Savitzky-Golay algorithm) of sec-ond-order derivative spectra was carried out recording spectra onGBC-Cintra 20 (digital - smoothing points 5-21) and Thermo-Scientific- Evolution - 300 (analogue - smoothing - Low, Medium, High and Very-high or digital - smoothing points 3-121) using 0.02% V/V toluene inmethanol solution. Requirement for resolution power defined as ratioA/B (A-amplitude 2D265,263; B-amplitude 2D263,261) is not less then0.2 corresponds to resolution of shoulder and peak within the band.The results showed that the only possible comparison of instrumentsis for smoothing 7, and for both analogue and digital spectra withsmoothing 7 and Medium.IN CONCLUSION, along with substantial advantages of DS the limi-tations are caused by: a) dependence on instrumental parameters; b)non-robust character of the selected parameters of elaborated meth-ods-parameters can be used only for system for which they are chosenand c) lack of harmonized protocol of parameter's optimization andresults presentation.REFERENCES1. C.B. Ojeda, F.S. Rojas, J.M.C. Pavon, Talanta 42 (1995) 1195-1214.2. J. Kaprinska, Talanta 64 (2004) 801-822.3. C.B. Ojeda, F.S. Rojas, Anal. Chim. Acta 518 (2004) 1-24.4. A.A.Y. El-Sayed, N.A. El-Salem, Anal. Sci. 21 (2005) 595-6145. F.S. Royas, C.B. Ojeda, Anal. Chim. Acta 635 (2009) 22-44.6. K.N. Patel, J.K. Patel, G.C. Rajput, N.B. Rajgor, 7. Der Pharmacia Lettre 2 (2010) 139-150.VIABILITY OF L. CASEI IN SYMBIOTIC CAR-ROT JUICE DURING FERMENTATION ANDSTORAGE T. Petreska Ivanovska1, L. Petrusevska Tozi1, J.Hadzieva1, K. Smilkov2, N. Geskovski1, K. Mladen-ovska11University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Pharmacy, Vodnjanska17, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia2University "Goce Delcev", Faculty of Medical Sciences - Pharmacy,Krste Misirkov bb, 2000 Stip, MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONAlthough dairy products are generally good matrices for the deliveryof probiotics to humans and traditionally the most used, fruit juicesare of growing interest due to their pleasant taste profile andrefreshing characteristics (1). The increased demand of fruit juices forprobiotic carriers can be explained by the lack of milk allergens andcholesterol (2). In addition, fruits and vegetables inherently contain es-sential nutrients such as vitamins, minerals and antioxidants (3).However, the low survival rate of probiotics in fruit juices resultingfrom acid environment is of concern. The viability of probiotic cells infruit juices can be improved by adding of microencapsulated cells tothe juice. In this study, carrot juice was inoculated with free probioticcells of L. casei and synbiotic microparticles loaded with L. casei tocompare the survival rate of the probiotic during fermentation andstorage of the synbiotic beverages at 4 degC for 6 weeks. MATERIALS AND METHODSCarrot juice was prepared by extraction of washed and peeled carrotswith no added water or any other nutrient. Then, the juice was pas-teurized at 80 degC for 20 min. The cell suspension of probiotic Lacto -bacillus casei (Chr. Han sen, Denmark) was divided into two parts: onepart was used for microencapsulation and another was used as freecells for direct adding in carrot juice. Prebiotic fructooligosaccha ri de(FOS) (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) was added simultaneously with free probi-otic cells. The initial cell concentration of 7.4+-0.1 log10 cfu/ml was ap-plied to ferment carrot juice using L. casei and FOS or synbioticmicroparticles. This concentration was chosen according to therecommendations for minimum counts of 7.0 log10 cfu per g or ml ofprobiotic food to exert beneficial effects (4). The microparticles wereprepared by modified spray-drying method (5) when aqueousdispersion of alginate (LF 10/60, Protanal, FMC Bio po ly mers, USA), FOSand L. casei was submitted to spray-drying (nozzle diameter 0.7 mm,aspirator pressure 90%, flow rate 6 ml/min, inlet and outlettemperature, 120 degC and 60 degC, Buchi Mini Spray Dryer B-290, SW)followed by subsequent cross-linking and coating in solution of CaCl2(Merck, Germany) and chitosan (Chitine, France) in 1% w/w acetic acid.The microparticles formed were cured at least 3 h, separated andfreeze-dried (-50 degC, 0.070 mbar, 24 h, Freeze-Dryer, Labconco, USA).An optimal formulation of micro- particles was prepared, with 4% w/walginate, 0.5% w/w chitosan and 5% w/w CaCl2. Positively charged mi-croparticles (21.5+-1.5 mV) with dvs 9.1+-0.8 nm, Ca-content of 9.4+-0.1% and high cell viability of L. casei (11.3+-0.15 log10 cfu/g) were ob-tained. Synbiotic microparticles were added to the carrot juice on thesame day of preparation. All samples of synbiotic carrot juices werepacked into sterile Erlenmeyers flasks closed with cotton plugs. Thesamples inoculated with free cells and added particles were firstly sub-126Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA /TOKSIKOLOGIJA / KhRANA I ISKhRANA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOmit to fermentation and then stored at 4 degC. The fermentation processwas carried out in an incubator for 24 h at 37 degC. The viability of L.casei in all experiments was determined periodically during 24 h andthen on a weekly basis for 6 weeks of storage. When enumeration ofbacteria was performed, 1 ml of the sample was mixed with 9.0 ml ofpeptone water, vortexed for 15 s and serially diluted with peptonewater. The viable count was determined using plate-count method onMRS agar (Merck, Germany) after 72 h of incubation at 37 degC.