Terat., volume 73, number 2, February 2005, pages 114-222.oxiDative Damage of Proteinsin Plasma of rats exPoseD to acuteoral or intraPeritoneal treatmentwith caDmiumAleksandra Buha1, Jelena Kotur-Stevuljevic2,Zorica Bulat1, Danijela Djukic-Cosic1,Jasmina Ivanisevic2, Vesna Matovic11Department of Toxicology "Akademik Danilo Soldatovic", Faculty ofPharmacy, University of Belgrade2Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universityof BelgradeVarious studies have shown that cadmium (Cd) toxicity is associatedwith the induction of oxidative stress. Although it is generally acceptedthat oxidative stress plays important role in acute Cd poisoning, theCd pro-oxidant activity and interference with the cell antioxidant sys-tem are still not completely understood.The aim of this study was to investigate the influence of acute oraland intraperitoneal Cd treatment on parameters indicative of oxida-tive stress and protein damage in plasma of rats.The study was performed on male albino Wistar rats (n=24) that wererandomly divided into three groups, each containing 8 animals: 1.control non-treated group; 2. cadmium-treated group that received Cdas an aqueous solution of CdCl2 in a dose of 30 mg Cd/kg bw by oralgavage and 3. cadmium-treated group that received Cd as an aqueoussolution of CdCl2 in a dose of 1.5 mg Cd/kg bw. by intraperitoneal (i.p.)injection. Twenty-four hours after cadmium administration the ratswere sacrificed after ether anesthesia and blood samples werecollected from heart. Plasma was prepared from collected bloodsamples and used for determination of oxidative stress parameters.Superoxide-dismutase (SOD) activity, levels of superoxide anion (O2*-)and advanced oxidation protein products (AOPP) were measured asmarkers of oxidative stress in plasma. Method for determination ofplasma SOD activity is based on the measurement of the activity thatinhibits the auto-oxidation of adrenalin by 50%. The rate of nitrob-lue tetrazolium reduction was used to measure the level of O2*-. AOPPdetermination was based on the spectroscopic analysis of modifiedproteins at 340 nm.Data comparisons were carried out using Kruskal-Wallis nonparamet-ric test followed by post-hoc Conover test for pairwise comparison.SOD activity was markedly decreased after cadmium intraperitonealadministration in contrast to the control group and orally treatedgroup (p<0.01). Intraperitoneal Cd intoxication also led to significantincrease of O2*- and AOPP levels in plasma (p<0.01) when compared toother two groups. Spearman's correlation was also performed in orderto determine the relationship between these parameters in the groupthat was intraperitoneally treated with Cd. There was a strong nega-tive correlation between SOD activity and O2*- concentration (rs=-0.77)and this can be clarified by the fact that SOD is an enzyme that cat-alyze dismutation of this primary free radical. Strong positive correla-tion between O2*- and AOPP concentration (rs=0.78) was also foundand this is in accordance with radical mediated protein oxidation. Bycontrast, Cd oral treatment failed to alter oxidative status in plasmawhen compared to control group. Accordingly, Cd oral administrationalso had no statistically significant influence on the level of proteinoxidation in plasma.These findings contribute to the investigations of the effect of Cd onthe induction of oxidative stress as one of the important mechanismsof its toxicity. However, the obtained results show that the inductionof oxidative stress and oxidative damage of proteins in plasmadepends on the administered dose of Cd and its route of exposure.referencesLiu, J., Qu, W., Kadiiska, M.B.. Role of oxidative stress in cadmium toxicity and car-cinogenesis. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol 2009;238:209-14.Matovic V, Buha A, Bulat Z, Dukic-Cosic D. Cadmium toxicity revisited:focus on ox-idative stress induction and interactions with zinc and magnesium. Arh Hig Rada Tok-sikol 2011;62:65-76.Matovic V, Plameac-Bulat Z, Dukic D. Influence of increased cadmium intake on an-tioxidative defence system. Jugoslov Med Biohem 2004; 23:117-126.Valko, M., Morris, H., Cronin, M.T.D., 2005. Metals, toxicity and oxidative stress. CurrMed Chem 2005;12:1161-208.carbon monoxiDe levels in blooDof smokers anD non-smokersDetermineD by gas chromatograPhyAleksandra Buha1, Zorica Bulat1, Veljko Petrovic2,Ivana Jakovljevic2, Teodora Dikic2,Aleksandra Grkovic2, Vesna Matovic11Department of Toxicology "Akademik Danilo Soldatovic", Faculty ofPharmacy, University of Belgrade,2Student's Center for Scientific Research, Faculty of Pharmacy,University of BelgradeCarbon monoxide (CO) is one of the most important environmentalpollutants that humans are exposed to from the earliest days. It cancause accidental, professional and suicidal acute poisonings. However,recent studies showed that chronic exposure to CO can also causeserious health problems. Since tobacco smoke contains high amountsof CO, smoking can be regarded as a relevant source of prolongedexposure of general population to this toxic agent.The aim of this study was to determine CO levels in the blood of smok-149fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsers and non-smokers using gas chromatography. A further aim of thisstudy was to evaluate the impact of smoking habits and the time in-terval between the last smoke cigarette and blood sampling on COblood levels.Blood samples were collected from 44 Belgrade residents of differentage and gender divided into two groups: smokers (23 individuals of dif-ferent smoking experience) and non-smokers (21 subjects). Carboxy-hemoglobin (HbCO) is an adduction product of hemoglobin and COand only a small amount of CO is present in blood in a free state.Hence, releasing of CO from HbCO was needed and this was per-formed by treating blood with 0.5 ml mixture of conc. sulfuric acid andsaponins. After 24 hours concentration of released gas was measuredusing the gas chromatography system Agilent Technologies6890N/Network with thermal conducitivity detector under the fol-lowing conditions (temperature of detector and oven 200degC and 40degC,respectively; column pressure 6.4 bar; carrier gas helium at flow rateof 4.3 ml/min; retention time for CO 5 minutes). Since blood HbCOconcentrations obtained in this study in general do not follow normaldistribution (Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, p<0.05), nonparametric testswere used in statistical calculation for comparison of smokers andnon-smokers' HbCO blood levels, while parametric tests were used forcomparision of different groups of smokers (Kolmogorov-Smirnov testfor smokers, p=0.2).HbCO contents in the blood were in the range of 1.79% to 9.01% forsmokers, and from 1.13% to 4.58% for non-smokers. Statistically sig-nificant difference was obtained using Mann-Whitney test betweenthe concentration of HbCO in the blood of smokers and non-smokers(p<0.001). Analyzing the difference between concentrations of twogroups of smokers, divided according to smoking duration(longer/shorter than 10 years) with T-test of independent samplesshowed no statistically significant difference. Nevertheless, the dif-ference between HbCO blood levels in smokers with regard to recentsmoking (<= 30 min since the last cigarette) versus late smoking (> 30min since the last cigarette) was found to be significant (T-test,p<0.01). Furthermore, strong negative correlation (Pearson's r=-0.529)was obtained between the concentration of HbCO and time intervalfrom the last smoked cigarette and blood sampling (HbCO was higherwith shorter time interval).These results confirm the fact that smoking is a relevant source of COexposure. Furtheremore, CO levels in the smokers' blood present cau-tion of possible occurrence of symptoms such as dizziness, headaches,mental and physical fatigue and even permanent brain damage andcardiovascular problems.referencesAberg AM, Sojka Nilson B, Winso O, Abrahamsson P, Johansson G and Larsson JE. Car-bon monoxide concentration in donated blood: relation to cigarette smoking andother sources. Transfusion 2009;49:347-53.Czogala J, Wardas W, Goniewicz ML. Determination of low carboxyhemoglobin bloodlevels by gas chromatography. Analytica Chimica Acta 2006;556:295-300Mannaioni PF, Vannacci A, Masini E. Carbon monoxide: the bad and the good side ofthe coin, from neuronal death to anti-iflammatory activity. Inflamm Res 2006;55:261-73.Sundin AM, Larsson JE. Rapid and sensitive method for the analysis of carbon monox-ide in blood using gas chromatography with flame ionization detection. J ChromatogrB Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 2002;766:115-21.trace elementslevels in Patients on treatmentwith atyPical antiPsychoticsBojana Vidovic1, Brizita Dordevic1, Zorica Bulat21Department of Bromatology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Universityof Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia2Department of Toxicology Academic D. Soldatovic, Facultyof Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, SerbiaintroDuction anD aimResults of numerous studies indicate that essential trace elements playan important role in many brain disorders, including schizophrenia. Thefindings of previous research on the status of trace elements in patientswith schizophrenia have been controversial. There is very limitedinformation about levels of trace elements in schizophrenic patients onatypical antipsychotic treatment. The aim of this study was to investigateblood serum concentrations of iron (Fe), copper (Cu) and zinc (Zn) levels inschizophrenic patients on treatment with atypical antipsychotics andcompared them with sex- and age- matched healthy control.Patients anD methoDsWe evaluated serum Fe, Zn and Cu concentrations in 18 patients withschizophrenia (diagnosis were made according to DSM-IV, mean age 33.6+- 9.1) and in 18 healthy controls (mean age 29.4 +- 6.7). All schizophrenic pa-tients were on treatment with various atypical antipsychotic drugs. Exc-lusion criteria for all subjects included other psychiatric disorder, pregnancyand medical disorder or drugs known to affect trace element metabolism.Serum Fe, Zn and Cu concentrations were determined by flame atomicabsorption spectrophotometry (AAS, apparatus GBC 932AA).Comparisons between patients with schizophrenia and the controlgroup were made using Student's t-test. The Spearman rank correlationtest was used to evaluate the strength of association betweenvariables. A p-value of less than 0.05 was considered statisticallysignificant. All data were analyzed using SPSS software, version 11.5.resultsSerum Fe concentrations were significantly lower (0.88 +- 0.54 mg/L vs1.46 +- 0.76; p<0.05) and Zn and Cu concentrations were significantlyhigher (1.08 +- 0.27 mg/L vs 0.88 +- 0.23 p<0.05 and 0.89 +- 0.15 vs 0.76+-0.16; p<0.05, respectively) in schizophrenic patients than in healthycontrols. There was no association between BMI, age, duration of ill-ness and these element changes.conclusionThe results of our study demonstrated that serum Fe, Cu and Znconcentrations are different between .patients with schizophrenia andhealthy subjects, and may play a role in the etiopathogenesis ofschizophrenia. Altered levels of trace elements in schizophrenicpatients may be a consequence of antipsychotic treatment.references[1] Nakamura M (2005) Trace elements and neuropsychiatric disorders. Biomed ResTrace Elements 16(1):12-18[2] Yanik M, Kocyigit A, Tutkun H et al (2004) Plasma manganese, selenium, zinc,copper, and iron concentrations in patients with schizophrenia. Biol Trace Elem Res98(2):109-11[3] Nechifor M, Vaideanu C, Palamaru I et al (2004) The influence of someantipsychotics on erythrocyte magnesium and plasma magnesium, calcium, copperand zinc in patients with paranoid schizophrenia. J Am Coll Nutr 23(5):549S-551S150PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiserum immune resPonse for igaanD igg antiboDies of helicobacterPylori from Patients with gastricDifficultiesBiserka Simonovska1, Elizabeta Popovska2, Nikola Si-monovski3, Slavko Kostoski41Dijagnostika FARMAHEM, 4ti Juli 2/3, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia2Alkaloid AD, Bld. A. Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia3Faculty of Pharmacy, Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia4AstraMedical, Mile Popjordanov 21, 1000 Skopje, MacedoniaintroDuctionHelicobacter pylori is a spiral Gram-negative bacterium (2-6 um in size,flagellated), which colonizes the human gastric mucosa. Infection ratein Europe is about 30-40%, worldwide about 50%. The contaminationbegins in the childhood and can be found in 100% of adult persons wholive in areas with low hygienic conditions. Not every infection gives thecommon symptoms of this disease. H. pylori infection is transmitted byoral path and it is of human nature. However, only about 10% ofinfected individuals develop ulcer, and only 1% develops gastric cancer.objectivesIn this article data is processed from patients who visited our diag-nostic laboratory. These patients had symptoms similar to H. pyloriinfection. Quantitative analysis were made for antibodies IgA and IgGand it is determined how many patients are showing negative reac-tion on this infection, how many of them are on the borderline (grayzone) and how many of the patients are positive on this infection. Thepercentage of diseased patients from H.pylori is determined and theobtained results are assorted by sex and age of the patients.aPPlieD methoDsThe principle of this test is ELISA method (Enzyme-linked Im-munosorbent Assay). It is a quantitative immunoenzymatic determi-nation of IgA-class and IgG-class antibodies of H.pylori. Microtiter stripwells are precoated with H. pylori antigens to bind corresponding an-tibodies of the specimen. After washing the wells to remove all un-bound sample material horseradish peroxidase (HRP) labeledanti-human IgG conjugate is added. This conjugate binds to the cap-tured Helicobacter specific antibodies.The immune complex formed by the bound conjugate is visualized byadding Tetramethylbenzidine (TMB) substrate which gives a blue reac-tion product. The intensity of this product is proportional to theamount of Helicobacter specific antibodies in the specimen. Sulphuricacid is added to stop the reaction. This produces yellow endpoint color.Absorbance at 450nm is read using an ELISA microwell plate reader.resultsObtained results are made analysis of antibodies to H.pylori - IgA, in275 patients with mean 29,48 NTU/ml.Of the total number of patients, 123 patients are with normal values(<15 NTU/ml), with mean 10,29 NTU/ml, 46 patients are in the "grayzone", ie of limit values (15-20 NTU/ml), with an average value of 17,82NTU/ml, and a 106 patients are with elevated values (> 20 NTU/ml),with mean 56,82 NTU/ml.Of these, 126 patients were male and 149 female patients, with the averagevalueformalepatients30,64NTU/ml,while in femalepatients -28,44NTU/ml.Analyses are made of antibodies to H.pylori - IgG, in 353 patients, withmean 67,3 NTU/ml. Of the total number of patients, 103 patients arewith normal values (<15 NTU/ml), with mean 8,00 NTU/ml, 17 patientsare in the "gray zone", ie of limit values (15-20 NTU/ml), with an averagevalue of 16,9 NTU/ml, a 233 patients are with elevated values (> 20NTU/ml), with mean 97,19 NTU/ml.Of these, 155 patients were male and 198 female patients, with theaverage value for male patients 70,62 NTU/ml, while in female patients- 64,23 NTU/ml.conclusionFrom the results it can be concluded that the mean value of IgGantibodies is greater than the mean value of IgA antibodies to H.pylori,ie by determination of IgG antibodies, they have a higher titer.