The aim was to focus on supplement use as a practice in its own right, rather than to view it as just another one of the broader range of complementary and alternative (CAM) therapies or to provide an answer to the criticisms of orthodox medicine about supplements and those who use them. However, these issues have been taken into account at times when the data were directly relevant to them. The methods for the study were primarily humanist; that is, the data were generated in interviews with participants. As the study progressed, however, it became clear that the material products of the supplements were also important and that they needed to be recognised as having a force of their own rather than being treated as inert matter of incidental relevance only (Coole & Frost, 2010). The methodology and analysis, therefore, have incorporated a broadly post-humanist approach so as to give due weight to the material presence of the supplements. I have taken the view in this study that non-human 'things', are always culturally and socially produced (Coole & Frost, 2010; Jackson & Mazzei, 2012) just as the knowledge and practices of their users are deeply entwined in materiality. Moreover, that the practices that result from this co-production of the human and non-human have the power to influence not only individual lives, but also wider social, cultural, commercial, and regulatory discourses, relationships, and activities. Assemblage thinking using Deleuze and Guattari's metaphor of the rhizome (1987) has been used throughout the analysis. The concept of the rhizomatic assemblage reveals the messy tangle of interconnected and competing actants that are involved in supplement use and the way that they constantly form and reform in temporary arrangements: material things, people, discourses, relationships, social, political and economic concerns, technologies, and power. So that the reason why any individual uses supplements is likely to be interwoven with a complex network of actants that come from their background and upbringing, their life experiences and current world view, personal connections, social interactions and discourses, commercial transactions, previous contacts with orthodox health services, and information acquired through the global and local media (Gubbi et al., 2013; Zanella et al., 2014). Supplement users are not outside the assemblage, 'pulling the strings' but are themselves actants within the complex and constantly evolving network. They act but are also acted upon by the multiplicity of 182 components, and while their actions add to its complexity and richness, they themselves are also enriched and changed in an ongoing process, experimenting with what they are now and what they might become (Fox 2012: 99). Within the overall concept of the evolving rhizomatic assemblage, the three analysis chapters focused in turn on a particular set of actants that addressed the research gaps identified in the introduction. Each chapter drew on different theoretical concepts to examine the multiple connections between them in the light of the data. Chapter 4, focused in depth on popular discourses about supplements. Using Derrida's ideas of deconstruction, naturalness, holistic health, and health risk were examined in turn, shown to be contested and diverse, yet rather than losing their overall salience, the complex nuances of these discourses added exponentially to the interconnections that took place between them and from which the participants drew. Chapter 5 foregrounded the physical matter of the supplement products. Using Bennett's concept of 'thing power' it demonstrated how the non-human and human interacted to create effects that spread out far beyond the actions of individuals. Chapter 6 then looked at issues of power drawing from Foucault's notion of biopower and its manifestation in the modern neoliberal state. It showed how supplement users were bringing together their views on responsibility, the material products of supplements, the freedom of the market, and their access to global information to develop an identity as experts in their own health. All three chapters demonstrated how the ongoing interaction between the various actants in the assemblage gave rise to continual change and development. Discourse, materiality and power, though examined separately in the analysis chapters, come together in this final chapter. I have found that these three aspects are deeply and inextricably entangled together in the way supplements and supplement practices are manifested in the world. Each of them is necessary but none is sufficient on its own to understand how people make sense of their practices with supplements. By taking all three into account together, I believe a different and potentially more comprehensive understanding of what supplements do for those who use them is produced. This is the principal result of my research and I believe it opens up a new way of thinking about supplements and those who use them. I stop short of calling it a definitive 'finding'; the theoretical framework of the rhizomatic assemblage of actants would appear to preclude any such absolute conclusion. Instead I describe it as revealing new insights into the possibilities that supplements create for those whose lives are entangled with them. Seeing supplements in this way gets beyond the previous approaches which do not appear to have considered these three forces in combination. 183 To further explain how I believe these three aspects to be co-constituted in the many ways that supplements are used and understood I have turned to the concept of intra-action proposed by Karen Barad (2007). Barad's ideas originated from her work in quantum physics, but she came to apply them more generally to the ordinary events of daily life. Barad's key concept is her insistence that: Matter and meaning are not separate elements. They are inextricably fused together, and no event, no matter how energetic can tear them asunder (Barad 2007: 3). Therefore all phenomena, as the results of this fusion are termed, are contextual rather than absolutes, brought about by what Barad terms intra-action, that is, the mutual entanglement of both the "human and non-human, material and discursive, natural and cultural factors" (Barad 2007: 26) [original emphasis]. The most crucial point about intra-action is that it is more than simply an inter-connection where the connecting bodies (whether human or non-human) retain their separate identities: ...in contrast to the usual 'interaction', which assumes that there are separate individual agencies that preceded their interaction, the notion of intra-action recognizes that distinct agencies do not precede but rather emerge through, their intra-action (Barad 2007: 33). So when bodies intra-act, they come together to produce something quite new and different that emerges from "within the relationship rather than outside it" (Kerr et al 2014). The phenomena that come into being through intra-action are temporary, existing for that moment only, and each of them is just one of an endless array of possibilities that are always ongoing. They are "forever being reenfolded and reformed" (Barad, 2007: 177), brought into being by "different agential cuts that materialize different phenomena" (Barad, 2007: 178). The 'agency' here is the action or the 'doing' of the process, an enactment that "reworks [or 'cuts' together] what matters and what is excluded from mattering" in that moment (Barad, 2007: 178). The concept of agential cuts is a way of conceptualising how these differences are made or unmade depending on how the various components of matter and meaning, nature and culture, human and non-human are 'cut together' (or entangled) through intra-action to bring about the different events, actions, things, and ideas that go to make up the world as we know it. Interestingly, Barad credits Foucault's concept of the disciplined subject as a co-production of bodies, knowledge and power as prefiguring her ideas of intra-action, but considers that something more than biopower is now needed to account for "contemporary technoscientific 184 practices which provide for a much more intimate, pervasive and profound reconfigurings of bodies, power, knowledge" (Barad 2007: 200). I chose to use Barad at this point in addition to Deleuze and Guattari's overarching concept of the rhizomatic network of actants, because I found that the concepts of intra-action and agential cuts enabled me to better understand the way that discourse, materiality and power come together in a such a variety of combinations to produce the multiple phenomena of supplements and their use. I viewed these concepts from Barad as building further on the idea of the rhizomatic network (at least as I understood it), where the nodes, shoots, and lines of flight, though tangled together, seemed to be inter-connected rather than engaged in creating new phenomena. Fox and Alldred (2017: 26) also appear to make this distinction between Barad and Deleuze and Guattari, writing that the latter "consider how the physical and cultural assemble together to produce bodies, social formations and events." While something akin to intra-action may be implied by Deleuze and Guattari (1987), or at least not ruled out, Barad's ideas appear to be arguing for something beyond simply 'assembling together'. Assembling, suggests, to take an example from the very practical world of food preparation, a salad of greens, tomatoes, cucumber and capsicum tossed together in a bowl. While they are interconnected - or assembled together to make the salad - the individual pieces retain their identity and can be picked out again, perhaps if someone dislikes the cucumber. A cake or custard, on the hand, is a result of intra-action; an entirely new 'thing' which cannot be disassembled into the parts from which it has been co-constituted. Barad's concept was also helpful for me in bringing a more practical focus to Deleuze and Guattari's rather abstract philosophy (Jackson & Mazzei, 2012: 111). She has applied intra-action to specific contemporary issues in technology, science, education, politics, and gender and given useful concrete examples: the material-discursive enactments that produce ultrasound images, for instance, or the 'the worker' in a factory (Barad 2007: 243). The concepts of intra-action and agential cuts therefore seemed to illuminate the myriad of diverse phenomena of everyday life which are mostly taken for granted, as described in the food preparation example above. They seemed therefore to be directly relatable to the apparently mundane actions of buying, selling, and ingesting supplements. Turning to Barad, however, did not mean setting aside the other theoretical concepts I had used but seeing them all as complementing one another. All of them are consistent with the ideas of fluidity, change, the rejection of fixed divisions and categories, and the recognition that 185 competing elements exist within all unities, even those that appear entirely coherent (see Barad, 2010: 176). Barad and Deleuze and Guattari all understand the world as being in a constant state of continual, but non-linear evolution; Barad uses the term dynamic, whereas Deleuze and Guattari (1987: 27) write about "a stream without beginning or end." Both include the idea of randomness in the way this evolution happens; Barad describes unexpected happenings as contingent, while for Deleuze and Guattari they are the lines of flight. Derrida does not focus directly on the non-human, but insists that there are no fixed states and bounded entities (1997), and Bennett writes of the dynamic agency of material things that while not intentional, is "bound up with the idea of a trajectory, a directionality, a movement away from somewhere, even if the toward-which it moves is obscure or absent" (Bennett 2010: 32). Foucault's genealogical approach also sees "history in terms of an ongoing chaotic struggle between different forces and between different levels - or patterns - of time" (Danaher et al., 2000: 101). These ideas underpin the discussion that follows. In the first section, I show how different agential cuts materialise the multitude of different phenomena that are enacted around supplements and supplement practices. I look not just at the products themselves and the people who use them but also at the phenomena that constitute their manufacture, promotion and sale, regulation, and the counter-discourses about them. The second section then returns to focus on the supplement users and the core aim of the thesis; to provide new insights into why and how supplement users make meaning from their practices. The chapter, and the thesis, concludes with final comments on the contribution of supplement practices to the ongoing life journey, and how they link back to ancient themes of the quest and the substances that strengthen and fortify those who pursue it. Supplement practices: entangled phenomena Drawing from Barad's concept of intra-action, supplements and supplement practices can be seen as series of never ending temporary phenomena, constituted from the entanglement of elements of materiality, discourse and power in different agential cuts. I start the discussion here with the entangled phenomena of personal supplement purchase and ingestion, as they were the original inspiration for the thesis. These are the spontaneous or deliberate decisions people make, the purchases they conclude, and the products they ingest, all of which emerge from the intra-action of the human and non-human actors. Each individual action may seem unremarkable on the surface, yet every one is the end result of a chain of complexities which has brought together a product (matter), the surrounding context of the individual's beliefs about 186 the product (discourse and meaning) and capabilities that allow them to control how and where they obtain and use the material products (power). Moreover each enactment is unique to that moment, depending on the particularities of the individual's needs, the product they are taking at that point, the technologies and sources of supply through which they have learnt about and obtained it, their personal history, relationships, world views, and their expertise and knowledge of options for managing their health. All these and more are entangled together in an agential cut that "reworks what matters and what is excluded from mattering" at that particular moment (Barad 2007: 177). The moment is both in and outside of linear time in a dimension Barad calls "spacetimemattering" (2014: 176). So while it is taking place in the here and now, each agential cut carries within it different memories, habits and meanings of the past as well as expectations and hopes for the future (Neale & Flowerdew, 2003), all bound together in a "thick web of specificities" (Barad 2014: 176) that come together in that momentary enactment. A different entanglement occurs where personal supplement use merges with commerce in the assemblage around supplement users who also enact an identity as user-sellers. They may embrace this role with enthusiasm if they believe in the material products they sell and see themselves as helping and guiding others or enact it somewhat reluctantly if they see it as peripheral to their core role, for example in a pharmacy. Whatever their underlying attitude, however, they enter a space that brings into being the "marriage of pragmatism and idealism" (Bardaglio, 2005: 18) that goes to make up entrepreneurship. Even those who deal reluctantly with the commercial side of selling and are motivated primarily by idealism and a desire to help others, are pragmatic enough to know that meeting the customer demand for supplements is necessary to maintain the viability of their business in a competitive market. While a certain amount of selectivity may take place among user sellers when talking about their work, with most highlighting the ideological aspects and downplaying the commercial side, it is too simplistic to see them as being driven solely by self-interest (see Lewis, 2019). Rather their activities are a co-production of matter and discourse "laced together in an entrepreneurial entity that maintains its overall integrity" (Jones et al., 2008: 330) in the context of the neoliberal economy that values activities that promote innovation and growth (Herrick; Morrison, 2000: 68), and encourages citizens to be entrepreneurs of the self (Foucault, 1988). These personal practices, however, are not the only way that elements of discourse, materiality and power come together around supplements. The production and marketing of supplements too, from large corporations to small niche companies can also be seen as a series of material discursive phenomena where the raw materials that make up the products, the technical 187 processes, data analytics, the human shareholders and staff are all brought together. All these can be cut together with discourses of profit making and commercial power to confirm the company's viability to the share market and wider business world, or alternatively be presented through idealistic discourses of health and wellbeing to market products to the public. While not all of these phenomena will succeed in their aim of profitability and may sometimes fade out, the overall co-production of commerce, technology and discourse is never static but simply moves on to a new iteration (perhaps leaving the retailer to unload those surplus products). Loyalty cards, for instance, are a perfect example of the intra-action of matter and discourse which brings together the material products, a range of discourses about cheaper prices, good value, and rewards for repeat business for the consumers. The same discourses and products are cut together in another way for the product companies and their shareholders that results in power to amass the personal details and buying habits of card holders to track sales and create data to support future promotions and product developments. The products themselves can also be seen as phenomena emerging through intra-action of meaning and matter. A single material product like echinacea or olive leaf, for example, can perform as a natural-simple-safe 'thing', an ethically produced sustainable thing; it can enact a story of historical use in traditional societies, or a story of modern technology that has found a new way of extracting it in a more concentrated form or combining it with other products for a novel or more powerful effect. Other products offer the reassurance and support of a being a 'helping-hand', calming stress, or 'managing' blood sugar. Equally they can be constituted to offer vitality and energy, or bargain prices and value for money. Nor do these individual phenomena necessarily have inner coherence, but may be co-constituted from contradictory elements. Take for example, the obvious discordance between the heavily promoted 'natural' aspects of the products and their manufactured capsule or powdered formats and packaging. Whichever way that the differences are brought together, however, they keep (be)coming, a constant stream of products that combine matter and meaning in a seemingly endless variety of combinations that fit with the discourses of the moment. At the same time, however, other phenomena materialise to resist the 'things' that are produced by the commercial supplement producers, and continually push back against their power.