Her independent decision making shows she does not need a health professional to tell her what to take or advise her on its use, but at the same time, she resists being treated as a 'commodity' in the market, carrying out her own tests on what works for her and disregarding the claims that the health store staff make about the advantage of their more expensive product. Participants cited many instances to demonstrate that they had a well-developed sense of scepticism about overblown advertising claims that were designed to encourage them to buy products they did not want. Far from being cynically manipulated by the wiles of self-interested commercial entities, they tended to approach their supplements purchases or sales much as any other commercial transaction, many mentioning their sensitivity to various brands, prices and services that gave them the best value. As a group, they appeared well able to use their considerable consumer skills to resist being turned into a "commodity item to be utilised for 152 commercial advantage" (Lewis, 2019; Sturgeon, 2014: 414). They were also conscious that they were fortunate to have the personal and financial resources that allowed them this freedom of choice in the market: It's bloody expensive. To actually treat yourself with supplements is extremely expensive so obviously not everybody can do it. So I'm very lucky that I can experiment with these things. When I retire it might be a slightly different thing. (Tessa) Supplements and alternative therapies are not cheap and the full range of the products in the health 'supermarket' is only accessible to those who are well established economically (Vatanparast et al., 2010). Although I chose not to question participants about their income level, education, or other circumstances, it was nevertheless clear from the discussions with them that most were well enough off to have at least some level of discretionary income that gave them the capacity to buy supplements. In spite of the participants' apparent success in resisting commercial pressure, it is nevertheless clear that supplement marketing is highly successful on a global scale (Grand View Research, 2019). The promotion of products for personal health is sophisticated and extensive so that they appeal to the widest range of people who might be encouraged to buy them, whether they need them or not. Supplements were the consumer choice for the participants, but they are just one part of the much wider assemblage of health-associated products. These include extensive ranges of exercise and sports equipment, clothing, and special accessories designed to appeal to individuals of any age, personality type, or physical ability whether they are already leading a purist healthy lifestyle or are "merely mainstream people who are attempting to live a little healthier" [sic] (Divine & Lepisto, 2005: 276). These products are continually being developed and refreshed in the same way as supplements to fill the needs of people who are looking for products and services that make the pursuit of the responsible, healthy lifestyle "both pleasurable and possible" (Herrick, 2011: 29). The success of the techniques that 'sell health' in this way (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2012) is just one of the ways that health and commerce have become entangled. Individuals, such as the participants do appear to view health care as a 'product' that they can assess for value against other alternatives in the same way as they would do with any commercial transaction. Jordan, a pharmacist, reported that he frequently became aware of a history of 'shopping around' in the people who came to him hoping they might be able to 'buy' better health: 153 "I don't like my doctor or what he's doing any more. What else can you give me instead?" "I'm sick and tired of being sick and tired and I've gone to the doctor and tells me that I am old and put up with it." Or "I'm this or I'm that and this is all he can do", or "I don't like doctors at all; I'm not going to the doctor at all, I would much rather come to you." Or, "I've been to six specialists, three GPs and a crystal gazer and massage and none of them have helped so I thought I would try you". (Jordan) The promotion of supplements may be one factor that has contributed to people taking a commercial approach to health care, but there are others too. Within health care itself, 'social marketing' campaigns have widely adopted tactics that "mimick the political rationality of the market ... and reflect the dominance of capitalist logics of production, consumption and organisation" (Crawshaw, 2012: 2000-2201). Social marketing is constructed as being different from 'ordinary' marketing because it aims for social good rather than commercial gain (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2012; Farr et al., 2008). The uncritical adoption of such overtly commercial techniques, however, has been recognised as being an uncomfortable fit with health (Peattie & Peattie, 2003) and credited with causing a "creeping commodification" (Sturgeon, 2014: 405) of public attitudes to health care (Pellegrino, 1999; Wildes, 1999). In parallel, the change in vocabulary whereby the patient has been reframed a 'health care consumer' and the doctor as a 'health care provider' has also, according to Tomes (2006), led to an undermining of the nature of the one-to-one doctor-patient relationship. Indeed the normalisation of the terminology implies that the health care consumer can simply go elsewhere and 'shop' in a different place if they do not feel they are being well served. It is easy to see how the shift to the provider/consumer vocabulary in health care subtly undermines the idea of continuity of care and the personal rapport that is assumed to be present in the doctor-patient relationship. Certainly many participants seemed to take it for granted that it was part of being a responsible health consumer to weigh up competing care options before deciding the best value for money in a particular situation. For example, they would balance the cost of self-treatment with supplements against the cost of a medical visit when they had an issue that they thought they could treat themselves. Vonnie had been used to a public insurance scheme for health cover in her home country, and considered "the cost of seeing a GP here is incredible". She reported that she found it cheaper to use supplements and herbal therapies as a preventive measure - in her case for her reported tendency to depression - and for minor illnesses in her family. Others weighed up more than the monetary cost, including time and convenience. Pharmacies and 154 health stores, for example, gave free advice, there was no need to make an appointment and little or any waiting: ... well, it's cheaper. It's probably cheaper to go and buy some supplements than it is to sit down with the doctor. It's also quicker to whip in there and grab something and the pace of life is quick. (Bryony) Being made more welcome and comfortable with a service was also something to weigh up against other options even if both were costly in monetary terms. Olivia reported that she preferred to consult a herbalist for most health problems to avoid the unpleasant situations which she had encountered with medical services in the past, particularly when she had needed care during weekends: It's expensive. ... If I have to go in the weekend, maybe I can't afford do that and wait until next pay to eat so I might not pay it immediately. I've had arguments at the counter with After Hours, saying I'm not going to pay before I go in ... you're going to have to invoice me and it's caused a big [fuss]. Well why should that be a drama? I've said, look, I will pay your invoice but I can't pay today. And that's not their policy. It goes completely against their policy. So they had to go and ask the GP manager. I know if I'm doing something like that to get myself seen I know the majority of Pacific11 people in the world are not going to do that. They're just going to go away, go home, they are going to stay in pain all weekend - or they might go to the hospital. But I know that that's a really dumb idea, so I don't want to do that. ...it is so unpleasant and just causes you another headache when you are weighing up the emotional cost, the monetary cost. (Olivia) These criticisms of orthodox health care did not, however, make participants any more willing to accept poor treatment in the sphere of alternative health products and therapies. They expected equally high standards, perhaps because of the considerable costs, and were able to bring together their ideas of responsibility, their consumer skills and purchasing power to walk away from non-orthodox providers if they felt they had been taken advantage of, as this incident related by Molly demonstrates: I went to the naturopath and then my brother did as well and we are different people and we got literally the same things.... I think that's what naturopaths should be about 11 That is, of Pasifika ethnicity. 155 - an individual person. He took a photo of your eye up close and he was a bit of a fear monger because ...he was looking at it and he was "Oh, I don't know how you ever walk around, man you must be so tired all the time." And then of course then you go, actually I am quite tired. And then after I walked out I thought, what a sucker. I felt like he was there to make money... But he hasn't done very well. His business seems to have moved several times and it doesn't seem to go very well so I'm not really too surprised. (Molly) These comments and others made it clear that the participants had a well-honed sense of scepticism that they applied to buying any kind of product or service - health related or otherwise - and they were fully able to mobilise their consumer skills when it came to deciding what supplements or alternative therapies they would buy. Reconfiguring responsibility: as a supplement seller Almost all of the participants who sold supplements were engaged in balancing different types of responsibility within their business context. Nearly all of them also spoke about their own supplement use, but once they became sellers, their responsibilities had an additional layer of complexity. On the one hand they needed to become well informed about the full range of products they sold so that they could provide accurate guidance to their customers, but on the other, they needed to maintain the viability of their businesses and ensure they kept their customers coming to them rather than going elsewhere. While these two responsibilities were aligned, they required more than simply being knowledgeable about their products and willing to pass on what they knew. One of the pharmacists, for example, noted the importance of considering what their customers could afford and pricing products accordingly so that they were offering good value. She spoke about the benefits of joining with a group of pharmacies who all sourced their products from the same supplier. Through the group's purchasing power they were able to reduce their own costs and offer discounting on supplements which made the prices more attractive to customers: Natural health is definitely getting more affordable than it has been. .... being with a group ... the price comes down significantly. You get some really good prices for things that previously would have been really expensive. ... Fish oil is an interesting example because they are a dime a dozen and basically from a price perspective people chop and change between brands because of whatever's on special because it is going to do the same thing. (Jo) 156 Pat, one of the health store managers, openly discussed the commercial imperative needed to maintain sales and therefore the viability of his business. Without any prompting on my part, he spoke about the importance of his staff being both knowledgeable about the products they stocked but also to have commercial flair: It's not about selling for the sake of selling, it's what will complement what they want. So when they walk in, let's greet them ...don't pounce on them but "Oh how are you going, John? How are you going Sue?" You know, keep them engaged. .... You've got to be able to sell stuff. Because how do you survive? You survive based on your profit. If you're not making a profit you are not going to survive. So they have to know how to sell. (Pat) He went on to speak enthusiastically about the extra services he offered to attract customers and give good value for money. He noted that he stocked unique products; he prided himself on his responsiveness to customer requests and inquiries, and the quick turnaround he provided for phone or email orders so that he retained their good will and future business. The network marketers too were quite open about the necessity of their work being financially worthwhile but all of them also emphasised that they aimed to help others while also helping themselves: So initially my focus was creating a residual income - royalties for life - and then it changed to helping people with health issues, challenges and chronic conditions. (Murray) Some seller participants largely skirted round the necessity of remaining commercially viable but instead focused on their responsibility to take on the role of being an expert in supplements so that they could care for and guide members of the public. I did not interpret this as being a particularly significant or deliberate omission; I had made it clear that my principal interest was in people's practices in relation to supplements and I did not question any of the providers about the commercial side of their business. The existence of such a variety of well-established sellers and providers suggested that each of them had carved out a place in the market that appealed to and satisfied a particular group of clients and that they had mastered what was needed to remain in business. Moreover, the commercial aspects of all these businesses were entirely consistent with the neoliberal encouragement for economic activity. The fact that they provided a source of products which were generally frowned on by official health care experts was just another example of the different discourses and interests that are loosely tied together under neoliberal policy but interact in different configurations of power and resistance (Herrick, 2011). 157 From my discussions with the participants, it appeared that the combination of normative consumer behaviour with its emphasis on choice and spending to support the economy, combined with the critical awareness developed through taking responsibility for themselves had brought them to the point where they were confident in their own expertise as knowledgeable consumers or sellers of supplements. They had learnt to make judicious choices, even if, at times, by trial and error, and to navigate their way round the pressures of the supplement and alternative health market. For those who used supplements, it lessened their chances of spending money to no purpose and for those who sold supplements, it provided a feeling of having a more secure and informed footing in the particular niche they occupied in the commercial space. How they had reached this level of self-direction where they were willing and able to challenge authorised wisdom about health was something that I explored directly with the participants. Their perceptions and practices are detailed in the following section. Becoming your own expert Almost all the participants were independent and avid seekers and users of health information within a continually evolving network of interconnecting online, print, and interpersonal sources. They drew from it but then in their turn added to it through interacting with others and sharing their experiences. The key area that many focused on in our discussions was their ability to discover what they wanted to know by searching the internet: You can find information out about anything via the internet, so you know, people are checking things out themselves, feeling like they want to be more - I don't know - more in charge of their own health. That it's not always about an expert. That you are the expert, to a certain extent...Information - that whole "information is power" thing. It's so much bigger now because we've got so much access to a huge range of information that wasn't as easily accessible in the past. (Tessa) As Tessa points out, there is a vast spectrum of resources that is now available to anyone who takes the time to search for it. She does not specify the kind of information that she was not able to access in the past, but appears to be referring to the advent and exponential growth of the internet and the accompanying changes in technology which have democratised 'expert' material to a large extent since the mid-1990s. The Open Access movement for academic publications (Albert, 2006; Davis, 2011; Xia, 2010) has been a major change, allowing members of the public to find literature that was previously restricted to those in professional circles. Perhaps even more significant have been the links provided by powerful search engines to the 158 abstracts of expert material from databases such as Medline even if the full documents remain behind paywalls. The result has been that knowledge which was once the exclusive preserve of health professionals is now more accessible for the lay public to access and interpret for themselves. Moreover, thanks to the advantages of global internet coverage and intuitive user interfaces both for publishing and accessing material, many other sources of information have developed that provide commentary and opinion on health issues. These cover a wide variety of perspectives, including those run by consumer health support groups, websites of companies that market products, and unfiltered opinion pieces or personal stories from individual members of the public. Some participants had well-established skills with online searching through their work or interests elsewhere, while to others it was a novelty that they were still excited about as they discovered more and more. Cliff, for example, had acquired his skills only recently as a direct result of wanting to research the supplements he used and order them online. Others such as Bob appeared to take it for granted that they would look up anything they wanted to know about supplements online and would be able to compare various opinions: I looked up, when I first went on to glucosamine, that's how I knew it came from the green mussel and I've read articles about it and of course you've got the sceptics who think that it doesn't do any good. There's articles on that. (Bob) The participants clearly found that locating information and advice on health topics was a simple matter. They could get immediate access on virtually any topic, use what they read to develop ideas of their own and decide whether to seek professional help or to treat themselves independently. Moreover, even recent users, like Cliff, had quickly become aware that the information they found was variable and they need to treat it with caution: Advertising is huge into all that and a lot of these things, you know, if you can believe even ten percent of what you read, you've got to take it with a grain of salt...you've really got to be careful with the quality. (Cliff) The participants' positivity and confidence, however, is not generally shared by health professionals, who tend to take an opposite view. It was recognised early in the era of widespread internet availability that the stream of unregulated and widely variable information presented an unprecedented challenge to medicine's privileged status. As early as 20 years ago, there was a realisation that this increased 159 availability to health information had, in effect, ended the "exclusive access to expert knowledge and the ability to define areas of expertise and practice" (Hardey, 1999: 823) that had hitherto existed.