By the mid-1990s, health professionals were already expressing concerns that losing their exclusive knowledge would see medicine become deprofessionalised as patients turned to online sources of information and made their own decisions about what health care they needed (Coiera, 1996). More than two decades later, 'Dr Google' is here to stay (Lee et al., 2014, 2017), a fact which no longer surprises health professionals, even if they only reluctantly accept its reality (Huovila & Saikkonen, 2016; Naghieh & Parvizi, 2016; Robertson et al., 2014). According to Naghieh & Parvisi (2016:332) the availability of these widespread sources of information creates a "complex medical predicament ..." where consumers form their health knowledge from "non-medically sanctioned online information". The same arguments about ignorance and over-confidence that put people 'at risk' are put forward, as have been previously discussed (Fugh-Berman, 2000; Izzo & Ernst, 2009; Jefferies et al., 2012; Martinez et al., 2012; Mazzanti et al., 2008; Morris & Avorn, 2003; Stoneman et al., 2013). There is also a belief that people who consult online information or seek alternative therapies are more likely to under-report their use to their doctor (Hensrud et al., 1999; Wold et al., 2007), thereby undermining the supposedly better outcomes they might have gained by consulting a health professional, and increasing the risk of something serious being overlooked. The excerpt below is representative of the tone taken by the majority of these commentators: Arguably, consumers who possess the required operant resources and use e-health tools appropriately can become more engaged in effectively managing their own health. Unfortunately however, the majority of consumers are resource deficient and have difficulty effectively engaging with these online services...[which is likely to] negatively influence consumer wellbeing ... including consumers' disengagement with health care professionals. (Robertson et al., 2014: 253) However, in the light of the discussions with the participants, these are simplistic explanations which overlook the nuances that underpin the relationship between patient and doctor. They miss the different frame of reference within which the participants were acting and the wider network of interconnections that underpinned their actions; the complex interconnections between the material things they used, their ideas on naturalness and risk, and their intention to genuinely 'self- manage' their health options rather than under the guidance and monitoring of a health professional (Bodenheimer et al., 2002). Developing their own network of expertise was a deliberate strategy that enabled them to resist being made fully and transparently visible as 160 governed subjects (Hansen & Flyverbom, 2015) within the "surveillant assemblage" of orthodox medicine (Haggerty & Ericson, 2000: 605). While the impersonal sources of online expertise that they deliberately sought out were a prominent focus for participants, they also mentioned gathering information serendipitously from items they read or heard about, and talking to friends and family who could offer relevant advice about supplements from their own experience. Murray, for example, mentioned a friend and Rana a work colleague who had recommended products to try or people to ask for advice. Although doctors tended to be avoided in their professional capacity, personal contacts with health professionals were valued even if their area of expertise was remote from anything to do with the particular health issue. Bob, for example, made a special point of noting that a doctor acquaintance he knew slightly through his running group had directed him to a particular supplement, but he had not mentioned anything of this to his own doctor. Even those few participants who were not confident in their own judgement still preferred to outsource expertise on supplements to anyone other than their doctor. Jane was one who mentioned that she found too much conflicting advice when she looked online herself and instead trusted the guidance of the alternative therapists she consulted: ...most of the alternate medicines I take are through either naturopaths, reflexologists, chiropractors, or B [her kinesiologist]. (Jane) The network marketers too, rather than become involved with researching information themselves, tended to rely on the expertise claimed by their international companies, who, they reported, had their own teams of doctors and scientists: So that's the big thing for us - they do all the science so we don't have to. ... I have met them - they are amazing [original emphasis]. ... they talked about the science behind the products (Molly) Participants demonstrated, moreover, that they had become skilled at analysing and synthesising the various threads of information on offer in the wide assemblage that was at their disposal. They frequently sought advice from several sources before making a decision. Before trying a new supplement most would conduct their own online research first and then check it with a pharmacist or health store staff member; others would seek advice first from a pharmacy or health store and then cross check themselves with online information: 161 I would probably look it up on the internet. I would also speak to the pharmacist, but no matter what I was purchasing I would look it up on the internet to see if there was any good evidence, and wouldn't just take that advice. Even though I went in and spoke to the pharmacist about it, I still had to look it up for myself. (Penny) In the same way as Penny, others mentioned that they assessed each situation on its own merits and considered the level of advice needed. They spoke confidently about judging if and when they needed to call on someone whom they judged more expert than themselves at interpreting conflicting advice that they had found: ... sometimes if it's something that I think I don't really know enough about I'd go to the herbal dispensary and actually talk to a herbalist. ...so in that case, I'd definitely ask for advice. Other things - I read a lot about what works and what doesn't work, so I do read stuff, because there have been more and more trials of supplements, so I definitely look all that up, look all that stuff up, so I try to make an informed choice, I suppose. (Tessa) Both Tessa and Penny talk about 'trials', and 'evidence', implying, though not directly stating that they have internalised and accepted, at least to some extent, the value of scientific orthodoxy about evidence of effectiveness, (i.e. what works). They both 'look up' and find what they want, constructing themselves as well informed and independent consumers but also speak about getting additional opinions as confirmation if they have any uncertainty about their decision. 'Expert' advice is not necessarily rejected, but is also brought into consideration. Then all of these threads are gathered together to compile their personal assemblage of expertise. Other investigators have also shown that people gather together 'hybrids' of "experiential expertise" (Castro et al., 2019) from multiple sources that they trust to make decisions about their health. These bodies of personal expertise, in the same way as those the participants spoke of, form a challenge to orthodox medicine because they are "not readily visible and therefore not readily disciplined" (Dew et al., 2014: 29). While very different from one another, an important characteristic that all participants shared was being willing to be "undisciplined patients" (Keshet & Popper-Giveon, 2018) who consciously chose to be active health consumers rather than 'patients'.12 Being aware that their doctor was likely to disapprove if they did mention the supplements they took was a disincentive to enter into discussion on the topic and there was usually no need to. As Paul remarked, "I imagine that a long discussion with him [his doctor] would probably produce the result that, no, I 12 The word 'patient' is derived from the Latin passive verb patior meaning I suffer. 162 wouldn't recommend that." Those who had mentioned their supplement use might be reprimanded as Frances had been: He said, well you are probably very silly to have done that because you just don't know. You have to be careful. (Frances) Rather than being told they were 'silly', they were more likely to avoid the issue altogether, actively choosing to obscure some of their practices from becoming questioned and contested. They were then free to decide what to do or not to do without comment from a professional; their purchases did not have to be recorded against dispensing data or their health records and they did not need to be checked on to see if they were 'adherent' as is the case with prescribed medicines (Nafradi et al., 2016). Moreover, as their experience of supplement use grew and they gained more confidence and expertise about them, the participants reported that they believed their doctor would not necessarily know more than they did, even if they did ask them for advice: Well, personally I feel that the doctors - not being disrespectful - but to be honest, they don't have any training in nutrition and diet. (Pat) Other participants too had found that doctors usually prescribed a drug as the first option and were unlikely to give advice on alternatives: I think drugs have got their place but I just feel it would be nice if alternatives were offered, were pushed as much as medication is. ... I don't particularly want to move the girls and myself to a practice that just does natural medicine because I think that swings completely the other way so yes, I just feel that it's not very well balanced perhaps in terms of the advice you get. (Penny) The perceptions of the generally poor knowledge of health professionals about the use of alternatives and their unwillingness to enter into discussions about them was not unique to the study participants but is consistent with studies done elsewhere (Chang & Wang, 2009; Eliason et al., 1999; Humpel & Jones, 2006; Peters et al., 2003; Reedy et al., 2005; Vickers et al., 2006). The point is not so much whether any piece of information that consumers come across is right or wrong, scientifically based or not, 'objective' or commercially biased (Schwitzer et al., 2005) but that they all exist and all make use of up-to-date communication strategies to disseminate their particular version of expertise and therefore extend their influence. The sheer variety of the information and the way it is interpreted undermines the idea that there can ever be one 163 authorised, stable version of expertise held by an all-knowing medical profession (Annas & Elias, 1999; Waxman 2005). Given this plethora of conflicting information about health and medicine, it does not seem surprising that some consumers may 'tune out' official advice and take their own steps to become informed. Indeed, several participants mentioned that they made use of their personal expertise as another type of counter-conduct to reverse the surveilling gaze (Ganesh, 2016) and scrutinise the experts themselves: Susan: If you decided to take something would you look it up on the internet first to see? Frances: Oh, yes I would. Even sometimes if I am given a prescription I will look up sometimes what it is. A particular trigger which generated 'counter conduct' and the resistance to orthodox expertise among participants was what they referred to as being 'fobbed off'. This expression was used by a number of participants as a way of capturing their frustration about their need for a problem to be taken seriously by their doctor but receiving only a disappointing and dismissive response: I had irritable bowel and basically got fobbed off by the doctors as you would imagine so I went to a naturopath, changed the way I ate and changed my lifestyle and took on board a lot of the common sense suggestions that she made at the time. Some that you probably already know yourself but you have got too lazy to do any more. (Trudy) It is interesting here how Trudy comments "as you would imagine" underlining her low expectations of the medical profession. Others too expressed frustration at aspects of medical treatment they had received. Wendy felt that she had been disregarded as an individual, being "thrown statins or whatever the drug of choice is" and Olivia was even more emphatic, speaking about being "disempowered" by the "extreme, awful experiences with people working in health". The participants' independent actions were directly in contrast to the concept of 'patient empowerment' through shared decision making, an approach that is promoted for people with chronic disease so that they become able to better 'self-mange' their conditions (Elwyn et al., 2012; Nolte & Osborne, 2013; Schulman-Green et al., 2012). This approach is presented as handing over power to the patient (not referred to here as a health consumer), who will then achieve 'activation' and 'engagement' in their own care, leading to better outcomes and fewer health care costs (Brady et al., 2013; Nolte & Osborne, 2013; Powers et al., 2015). The discourses around self-management construct the patient as receiving expert advice on the 164 correct behaviours to adopt and why they will benefit, and therefore being motivated to carry out what is recommended, clearly reflecting that Foucauldian concept of the autonomous subject and the conduct of conduct (Andreassen & Trondsen, 2010; Veitch, 2010). Any reading of the literature, however, demonstrates the underlying assumption that the doctor is in charge but the patient takes on the responsibility of doing what they are told. Salmon and Hall argue that constructing patients in this way allows the doctor to withdraw from the "problematic responsibilities" (2003: 1971) presented by people with chronic illness and that the approach is more likely to disempower patients rather than offer them control. In contrast, the participants' version of self-management, in which they were highly engaged, needed no authorisation or instruction from an expert. Nevertheless, none of the participants, no matter what their previous experiences, had turned away entirely from mainstream health care when they believed it was appropriate. The concerns raised in the literature, particularly the idea that consumers who treat themselves with supplements will fail to seek treatment for serious conditions (Robertson et al., 2014) were simply not borne out in this study. All participants were very aware that self-care could only be used up to a point and that there were times when the expertise and professional training of health professionals was essential: I am very grateful that there is a whole medical environment out there in case of emergency, serious stuff, but I would also have to say that we keep getting letters from the doctor saying "Are you still enrolled, because we haven't seen you for three years" (Catherine) In Foucauldian terms, they were willing to submit to being 'conducted' and their bodies opened to the gaze of the health professions in some situations when they considered it appropriate, but it would be their own, active decision to do so. They did not appear to have any difficulty in making the distinction between such cases and the routine, chronic, or simply annoying conditions that they believed they could confidently look after themselves: I mean, obviously it's a bit different when you are thinking about diagnosing cancer and all of that stuff, but there are things you can work out for yourself. (Tessa) It may seem an obvious point that serious or emergency conditions need orthodox medicine, and that self-care or alternatives are suitable only for less serious conditions but it is worth highlighting that this group of participants, at least, believed they were able to make the distinction. Seen in this way, not raising their supplement use with their doctor was also likely to 165 be driven by the practicality of avoiding unsettling an ongoing and positive relationship which they knew they may need in the future. The participants not only balanced orthodox care against their own self-care alternative behaviour, but were willing to 'shop around' for a doctor that suited them. They were cognisant that there was a spectrum of views within the ranks of health professionals and were able to use this variation to their own advantage. One enterprising participant reported that in addition to his own self-care practices, he consulted two different doctors in different parts of town to achieve the balance of orthodox and alternative health care he felt was most appropriate depending on the particular circumstances: I've got one doctor there but I've got a doctor out here as well. The one at [name of integrative practice] will treat me naturally because he knows who I am but it got to the point that something I was dealing with - try this and try that, it's not working. ... I took the antibiotic, I got myself right then I went back to him ... and I have been good ever since. At some point you can't keep saying bean sprouts and garlic juice will fix it because it may not fix it, so you hit it hard. (Pat) As individuals are not able to be enrolled in two practices at once in the New Zealand system, Pat must have been prepared to pay the extra costs that unenrolled patients attract for some of his consultations, but appears to have felt it was worthwhile. Other participants also spoke about weighing up what they would tolerate and what was unacceptable in a medical provider. Devon, a herbalist, for example, had a neutral approach to selecting a doctor but had a 'bottom line' in that she would not deal with anyone "who openly antagonises the idea of using herbal medicine, which doesn't really happen so much anymore". Moreover, all participants were willing to exercise consumer behaviour and take their 'custom' elsewhere if they were unsatisfied with the service they received: I changed medical practice because I wasn't satisfied with the doctor that I was seeing. ... I wasn't getting anywhere with the other fellow and I said to [current doctor] I've got this, this and this and he sorted it all out. (Murray) It was clear here that Murray believed he knew what his diagnosis was and had decided in this particular case, self-care was not appropriate. He was calling on a doctor with an appropriate level of expertise to "sort it out" and was prepared to move from one practice to another to find one. Murray does not say why he believed he was "not getting anywhere" and at the time I spoke to him I did not follow up on the reason. It is unclear whether he had lost confidence in 166 the "other fellow's" competence, or whether he felt that he was not being listened to and his concerns 'fobbed of' as other participants called it. In any case, he, like the participants above, knew what level of expertise he wanted and was prepared to use his resources to engage what he judged was necessary. Being willing to switch between health providers requires a degree of assertiveness to declare oneself a dissatisfied 'customer' from that particular practice and being prepared to accept the potential bad feeling and emotional cost it may involve in explaining oneself to get one's medical records transferred elsewhere.