Many traditional healers have been credited with supernatural powers to do good, or if their healing arts did not work as expected, have been demonised and suspected of being witches (Horsley, 1979; Mead, 1965; Minkowski, 1992). The vast history of traditional medicinal substances across the many cultures of the world is far more than can be covered here. The next section, however, highlights some aspects of relevance to the topic of the thesis. Traditional medicines Archeological records show that since prehistoric times, people have always sought traditional medicines from healers to ease their pain and cure their ailments (Anderson, 2005; Smith, 1953). Evidence is available, for example, that shows plant substances were used in prehistoric times to treat intestinal worm infestations (Chaves & Reinhard, 2006) or to reduce the pain of dental extractions (Facco & Zanette, 2017). Indian Aryurvedic medicine and Chinese healing systems using herbs and acupuncture are highly developed systems that reach back into history and have continued into the present day (Kumar & Navaratnam, 2013; Yang et al., 2011). Although less known in developed countries, healing traditions from indigenous peoples in all continents also date back over centuries and are still practised, including those from Canadian First Nations (Cook, 2005; Wilson, 2003; Wilson & Rosenberg, 2002), New Zealand Maori (known as rongoa) (Ahuriri-Driscoll et al., 2008; Durie, 1993) South American peoples (Neuwinger, 2000; Vanderbroek et al., 2004) and the many traditions from Africa (Mahomoodally, 2013), each of which is a topic in its own right. 25 The origin of making medicinal substances that eventually developed into the practice of medicine as it is known today in Western countries was influenced, according to Court (2005), by five civilisations: Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, Rome and Arabia. However, it was with the Greeks that particular individuals first became identified with medicine, starting with Hippocrates (460-377 BC), and followed by the two Romans, Dioscorides (50-100 AD) and Galen (129-199AD), and then the Arabic scholar Ibn Sina (980-1037AD), known as the Hippocrates of the Arab world (Court, 2005: 35). It appears however, that folk medicine continued as it always had independently from the writings of these learned men of the time. For ordinary people traditional remedies were passed down from one generation to another or learnt by observation and experience. The folk healing practices of the time are not well documented and what is known about them has been constructed from the arts of the period: engravings, sculpture, song and story (Minkowski, 1992). In this period before the founding of university medical schools, healing was pragmatic and non-academic, practised by those of both high and low birth, using therapies based on botanicals, traditional home remedies, bloodletting and native intelligence, sometimes accompanied by amulets, incantations and magic (Demaitre, 2013). The 'healer' was a fluid concept and could extend to anyone who treated the sick; medical care outside the family circle was available from herbalists and 'wise women', as well as specialist infirmarians in convents and monasteries (Minkowski, 1992). The hospitals offered care rather than cure, and what welfare they provided was linked to the health of the soul as well as the body, offering their services as a religious expression that combined the prayers of the sick and their living benefactors to help the souls of the departed through purgatory to heaven (Horden, 1988). There were in existence, however, a number of medical manuals for educated people who could read Latin, with literacy being a distinguishing mark of the elite healer. Demaitre (2013), lists 24 manuals of practica medicinae (the practice of medicine) evenly spread across the period from 1000 to 1500. Several of the earliest of these were translations of Arabic texts, particularly the translation into Latin by Gerard of Cremona (1114-1187) of a large volume compiled by Avicenna that incorporated Greek and Roman as well as Persian, Arabic and far Eastern teaching (Demaitre, 2013: 10). This volume became known as the Canon of Medicine. In Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, the description of the Doctor of Physic shows his status by itemising all the learned men of medicine with whom he (and clearly Chaucer himself) was familiar: Well knew he the old Esculapius, And Deiscorides and eek Rufus, 26 Old Ypocras, Hali and Galien, Serapion, Razis, and Avicen, Averrois, Damascien, and Constantin, Bernard, and Gatesden, and Gilbertin. (Demaitre, 2013: 4) These fifteen authorities span one and a half millennia from classical Greece through the peak of Islamic culture, right through to Chaucer's own time. Illustrations from the illuminated manuscripts of the time show that many of the medical practitioners were monks, identified by the way they were depicted with their tonsure and robes. Manuscripts were rare and prized items, copied by hand on to parchment or vellum, and they became closely associated with advanced medical learning, leading to a situation where pieces of parchment became a proxy for medicine and gullible people could be exploited by being sold them as 'healing' amulets (Demaitre, 2013: 5-6). The foundation of hospitals in Europe can be documented from around the beginning of the 13th century and at the same time the teaching of medicine in universities became increasingly structured, drawing from the classical sources and the texts mentioned by Chaucer. Ideas about health and illness of the time were based on the four humours that were said to make up the human body: blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile. These components were associated, respectively, with sanguine, phlegmatic, choleric and melancholic characteristics. The individual combination of each of these components was believed to shape each person's emotional make up and determine the working of their bodily organs (Demaitre, 2013: 17). The details of how the medieval practitioners thought about the body and its workings are complex and the concepts that underpinned their approach to healing are completely different from the modern understanding of anatomy and physiology that are the foundation of modern biomedicine. However, two factors that resonate with contemporary critiques of the biomedical model of medicine are important: firstly, that each person was considered to be unique and the treatment was individually designed for them alone, and secondly, that treatment had a conservative approach, starting with lifestyle changes, or advising the use or avoidance of certain foods and drinks rather than employing drugs. Wallis (2006: 18) cites the casebook of a physician from the 16th century showing that in only 12 percent of cases did patients receive a potion or pill. According to Cook (1994: 1), people who consulted the physicians of the time were more likely to receive "good advise [sic] and little medicine." 27 In the late medieval and early modern period before industrialisation in Britain, the sick person had a range of options to choose from in seeking treatment. Curth (2006: 4) describes this period as the era of "kitchen physik". Anybody could buy drugs, including poisons, from druggists or apothecaries and make up their own medicines as the craft guilds of spicers and grocers carried out an organised trade in the supply of drugs in the major cities of England (Holloway, 1995). The translation into English in the early modern period of the Latin Pharmacoepoeia by Nicholas Culpeper was also instrumental in giving access to information about curative plants and remedies. Doctors were not particularly esteemed socially, and were considered as inferiors to their better-off clients. They anyway had limited means at their disposal for curing illness, and if people wanted someone outside their family, they might, instead of consulting a doctor, just as well ask a 'wise woman' or take advice from their squire or local members of the clergy (Porter, 1993). As well as trading in drugs, apothecaries also prescribed, compounded and administered medicines and were the mainstay of the general public of London and more likely than the physicians to assist the less well-off (Cook, 1990; Curth, 2006; Holloway, 1995; Porter, 1993). At some point most people would pay for medical advice from a practitioner, but self-care or advice and care from family or friends was usually the first line of treatment. Common herbs and ingredients were freely available in the wild or in gardens and these could be supplemented with drugs and compounds from apothecaries. Throughout the early modern period and "well into the nineteenth century all drugs - even dangerous ones like opium- and poisons could be freely bought over the counter" (Porter, 1993: 24). There was nothing to prevent a lay person using the entire range of medicines as they wished and no one thought that they would offend a doctor by trying to treat themselves first. In this period, it was "virtually impossible to draw a line between 'lay' or 'folk' herbal remedies and those of learned medicine" (Wallis, 2006: 15). The separation of healing professions into formal experts credentialed through registration in colleges or associations and endorsed by the state in contrast to those 'alternative' therapies that did not have official authorisation took place only gradually. It had its beginnings in the 16th century when various guilds of druggists, apothecaries and physicians combined into societies so as to have a greater power of numbers over the prescribing and selling of medicines. The Royal College of Physicians was founded in 1518 and the Society of Apothecaries in 1617. Both had governmental authorisation to practice pharmacy and medicine and they jockeyed for control of 'physic' during the 17th Century (Holloway, 1988: 79). Court cases brought by the College of Physicians with the aim of undermining the status of apothecaries during this period were not 28 successful. The legal points turned on what exactly 'physic' was, and even if physicians practised it, whether they had the right to stop others from doing it too (Cook, 1990; Curth, 2006; Holloway, 1995; Porter, 1993). The transition from a guild-based economy to a free market in Britain during the 17th and 18th centuries had a far-reaching effect on the supply of medicines (Holloway, 1995). The commercial possibilities available in the open market saw the emergence of an increasing number of chemists and druggists who advertised and sold their own brand of medicines which they publicised in the popular press along with testimonials from satisfied customers (Curth, 2006). Although the College of Physicians made attempts to limit this activity, it appears that their members too, actively developed and marketed their own patented products. Bivins (2007: 6) describes this era as a "flowering of medical commercialism and ingenuity and luxuriant growth in the medical marketplace". Those marketing or providing the different cures and therapies did not propose different medical systems or models of the body or even a different understanding of disease processes but just that their remedies were more effective than those of anyone else (Bivins, 2007). A wide range of what would now be considered 'alternative therapies' flourished including homeopathy, mesmerism, and Coffinism3 (medical botany). There were also therapies from Chinese systems such as acupuncture, moxibustion (the burning of dried mugwort on acupuncture points of the body), and Ayurvedic medicines from India which had come to Europe from the spread of European trade and colonisation of those countries (Bivins, 2007). The beginnings of professional and 'alternative' health care The professionalisation of medicine and pharmacy that saw them gradually develop into the way they are in New Zealand today dates from the 19th century in Britain. Worling (2005) describes the period between 1617 and 1841 as a time of constant disputes between physicians and apothecaries and between apothecaries and chemists and druggists. It was a period when medical practitioners increased their efforts to contain the power of the chemists and druggists by emphasising the value of their specialist training and knowledge and sought to place consumers firmly under the doctor's expertise. At the same time pharmacists gradually became established as the officially sanctioned dispensers of the medicines that doctors prescribed, with the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain being formed in 1841 and granted a Royal Charter 3 Named after American herbalist Albert Isaiah Coffin whose book The Botanic Guide to Health (1845) was a guide for lay people to treat themselves using the properties of plants. 29 two years later (Worling, 2005). During the 1850s, several pieces of legislation were enacted4 which restricted the title pharmacist, chemist or druggist to registered persons, gave the Pharmaceutical Society the right to examine and register those who were licensed and therefore legally able to operate under these titles (Hunt, 2005: 79). However, it was not until the early years of the 20th century that registered pharmacists secured the exclusive right to dispense prescriptions for those people who were insured under the National Insurance Act of 1911. By 1946 when the National Health Service Act extended health coverage to the entire population, it became normal for medical prescriptions to be dispensed only by qualified pharmacists (Hunt, 2005: 92). The changes that began in Britain in the mid-nineteenth century were paralleled in New Zealand though at slightly later dates (Combes, 1981), so that by the middle of the 20th century registered medical professionals controlled all the prescribing of medicines, and registered pharmacists controlled their dispensing.5 The regulation and professionalisation of medicine and pharmacy created a context where forms of health care that operated under the mandate of government authorisation through registered professions could therefore be contrasted with informal 'alternative' practices which were not. Informal home remedies in colonial New Zealand While this formalisation of the respective roles of medicine and pharmacy was taking place, ordinary people continued to use home remedies and informal treatments as they had always done. During the 19th century, the period of European colonisation of New Zealand, treating most injuries and illnesses independently of medical advice whenever possible was a feature of almost all households. It was essential outside the main centres as travel was difficult and doctors often many hours journey away (Coleborne & Godtschalk, 2013). Moreover, even in bigger towns, doctors and medicines were expensive unless people were well resourced, so that home remedies were a necessity rather than a choice. Substances (including poisons) could be purchased directly from pharmacies without a doctor's prescription and pharmacists also made up their own products, and sold patent medicines, so that self-prescribed 'alternative' medicines continued in parallel with the formal system (Homan, 2005). In the colonial era, the current distinction between herbal and formally prescribed medicines was less clear anyway as pharmacists primarily worked with "natural or crude drugs, ie. roots, rhizomes, leaves, barks and 4The Arsenic Act of 1851, followed by the Pharmacy Act of 1852 and the Pharmacy and Poisons Act 1868 (Bartrip 1992:55). 5 This remains largely the same today apart from the extension of some prescribing rights to nurses and pharmacists. 30 flowers using the processes of maceration, percolation and infusion" (Combes, 1981: 41) to extract the active ingredients. Contemporary letters, recipe books, and compendia of household hints illustrate the advice that was given and the substances used to treat various conditions; Coleborne and Godtschalk (2013), drawing from 19th century diaries of pioneer families, describe the need for households to help one another out at times of illness or accident, and the financial difficulties that resulted if a doctor needed to be called in. Women generally bore the greatest load in tending to the sick, even when they themselves were unwell. Brewis (1982), in her compilation of recipes from letters, diaries and cookbooks of the period includes a section of home remedies for treating conditions ranging from asthma to 'melancholia' and dropsy. Brett's Colonists Guide and Cyclopedia of Useful Knowledge (Leys, 1883) has a medical care section curiously sandwiched between a section on raising poultry and another on curing and storing produce. It includes 'family doctor' advice from a member of the Royal College of Surgeons, followed by a section on homeopathy by one James A. Pond, described as a homeopathic chemist. Both these sections on health have a similar alphabetical list of advice on the treatment of illness, except that general preventive advice on diet, exercise, fresh air, and cleanliness are given at the start of the homeopathy section but absent from the 'family doctor' list. Interestingly, there is considerable cross over between the two lists of remedies mentioned with sulphur, camphor, opium and laudanum among those that are mentioned in both. These last two were in frequent use and easily available for anyone to buy in the 19th century (Acker, 1995). One remedy for diarrhoea and 'English cholera' (Brewis, 1982: 123) calls for 40 drops of peppermint, 80 drops of laudanum and half a pint of brandy with a large tablespoon to be taken half hourly and the warning that it is for adults only. Maori also had an established system of healing known as rongoa consisting of five modalities; karakia (prayer and incantation), rongoa rakau (medicinal herbs), mirimiri (massage), wai/hauwai (water or steam and matakite (prophecy) (Ahuriri-Driscoll et al., 2008; Durie, 1993). The 19th century colonists, particularly the chemists among them, took a considerable interest in the properties of the plants used in Maori medicines. A four page entry in the Colonists' Guide described them as being a fruitful area that chemists might benefit from further researching. The author of this section was said to have "rescued from oblivion nearly all that is known of the old Maori [sic] uses of the New Zealand medicinal plants" (Leys, 1883: 480).