These come not only from orthodox health care and regulatory authorities (discussed below) but also from the co-production of discourses about consumer rights, the purchasing power of consumers, and the learned experience of operating in the modern neoliberal economy, which, after all, exists on a much wider scale than the supplement market alone 188 (Izberk-Bilgin, 2010; Mejri et al., 2012; Ulver-Sneistrup et al., 2011). The supplement companies, on their part, are well aware of scepticism and resistance that exists around their products and take pains to understand and develop strategies to counteract it (Amawate & Deb, 2019; Elving, 2013; Mimouni Chaabane, 2016). In this way, the push-pull of supply and demand, cost and value are constantly moving material-discursive enactments that bring together bodies, discourses, material products and power. None would come into being without the others; if there were no discourses, the products would have no place or meaning, and without the products, there would nothing to discourse about and nothing over which to assume power. The policies and regulations around supplements, too, are worthy of attention as an area where discourse, matter and power intra-act to produce supplements as legitimate or not, and therefore freely accessible or not to consumers. Supplements are valuable economically within an economy that promotes growth in the sale of material things even if they are incompatible with the advice recommended by orthodox health experts. They therefore continue to be produced as (mostly) legitimate items in the policy and regulatory world, depending on the particular bodies that hold the power of decision-making about them. Melatonin, is one example of a product that may be freely sold over the counter in the United States for promoting sleep and reducing jet lag, but is restricted to being prescribed by a doctor or pharmacist in New Zealand and for certain ages and conditions only (Medsafe, 2018). The same kind of variable differentiation takes place within orthodox medicine itself in a number of situations. Products may be approved 'evidence-based' entities if prescribed by a health professional exercising the power vested in them (Bjelakovic et al., 2014) but cut apart from legitimacy as 'alternative' and 'risky' if sold or used without medical direction (Geyer et al., 2008; Sarino et al., 2007; Stickel et al., 2009; Werner, 2014). Alternatively, they may be enacted as legitimate or not over time. The status of calcium supplements, for example, which were commonly prescribed as bone strengthening medicinal products for menopausal women at one time, has been called into question, with the risk of engendering adverse cardiac events now said to outweigh any benefits they might have (Li et al., 2013; Reid et al., 2015; Zittermann et al., 2011). On the other hand, a form of glucosamine and some probiotic supplements now appear to be hovering on the cusp of being legitimised treatments rather than their previous status as non-effective supplements (AGA, 2019; Kucharz et al., 2016). Evolution across time in the way particular substances are produced as suitable or unsuitable for the public is nothing new. Throughout the history of medicine from blood-letting and leeches to cocaine, laudanum and tonics (Crellin, 2004) matter and discourse have been cut together in different ways to enact 189 medicinal treatments as legitimate or not. These examples serve to demonstrate that not only in the world of supplements, but across the entire world of health care, there is constant fluidity in the way medicinal substances are enacted; nothing is fixed and permanent, but always evolving and changing. And, while "intra-actions always involve particular exclusions...possibilities aren't narrowed in their realisation; new possibilities open up as others are excluded" (Barad, 2007: 177). This fluidity also applies to the intra-action of matter, discourse, and power in the ongoing critique of supplements and their users by orthodox medicine. While the focus of the study was to explore supplements in depth rather than to answer the objectivist-realist arguments about ineffectiveness and lack of evidence, it would seem incomplete not to raise these issues at all, particularly as it was partly the nature of the oppositional discourses about supplements that sparked my original engagement with the topic. Moreover, these discourses are well rehearsed, frequently appear in the popular media and were raised, unprompted, by many of the study participants themselves. Lewis (2019) has discussed the concerted efforts of a particular group of actors in Australia through the use of media releases and other material-discursive enactments to produce all complementary and alternative practices (CAM) in Australia as illegitimate. Although Lewis (2019) does not overtly take a post-humanist stance, her critique highlights the way these statements about alternatives tend to be presented as a truth that is "altogether natural, self-evident, and indispensable" (Foucault, 1991: 75). Her analysis shows, however, that the arguments have also evolved and changed over time, gradually moving away from discourses about the potential harm and ineffectiveness of supplements to focus on those that see them as being driven by commercially motivated global businesses that are exploiting a naive public taken in by slick marketing. By "foregrounding rather than bracketing" (Mauthner, 2015: 327) the concerted campaign of this particular group of Australian actors to issue press releases and other statements that support their viewpoint (Lewis, 2019), the same process of material-discursive intra-action can be seen to be taking place. The material products (supplements), assertions of power through professional knowledge and control over health treatments, and discourses of commercial self- interest and problematisation of lay claims to understand their own health are brought together in a series of agential cuts that materialise supplement use as a baffling and frustrating phenomenon to health professionals (Guallar et al., 2013; Lewis, 2019; Ronda et al., 2009), or, at times, as a purposeful undermining of expertise developed through professional training and practice in the prescribing of medicines (Barnes et al., 2016; Guallar et al., 2013). For even 190 though groups of health professionals may disagree over inclusion or exclusion of a particular treatment or who should be credentialed in a particular sphere of practice, they are nevertheless all part of an assemblage that has a common philosophy based on the currently accepted form of scientific knowledge that may be mobilised for patient care (Lamont & Molnar, 2002). Supplement users, however, are enacting their own material-discursive practices resulting from different agential cuts in the assemblage of actants. As Jackson and Mazzei (2012: 126) point out, multiple becomings can result from intra-action, not only between different groups of people (for example the health professionals and supplement users described above), but there is a multiplicity of becomings for every individual as well. As Barad puts it (2010: 176) "each moment is alive with different possibilities for the world's becoming and different reconfigurings of what may yet be possible". Many supplement users do ascribe a range of physical, mental, and spiritual effects to the products that they take and relate these to their overall health and wellbeing. While these effects are clearly meaningful to those who report them, others note that they continue to take products even if they have no idea if they 'work' or not, suggesting that the meanings that matter lie elsewhere. For supplement users, the question is not about bioavailability or any other physiological explanation of how the products work (Wahlberg, 2008), but rather what they do for those who use them, what that means, and why it matters. Thinking about supplements in this way cuts across the rival epistemologies of realism and constructionism and focuses on the "dynamic, generative and rhizomatic production and actualisation of the world in which both matter and meaning play a part" (Fox and Alldred, 2017: 26). The next section, therefore, examines the meanings that may be produced from intra-action in the supplement assemblage and how these become woven in to their users' continuing quest for a meaningful life. Meaning, matter, ritual and symbolism What makes a meaningful life is one of the 'big questions', perhaps the big question; it has been endlessly explored since antiquity in philosophy, literature, the arts, and science and continues to be the subject of fascination in contemporary times. Tolstoy, Socrates, Camus, among many others considered it to be the ultimate philosophical question (Martela & Steger, 2016: 535- 536). If we do not believe our lives are meaningful then we may feel that everything we do is simply displacement activity until we die, or in Shakespeare's words, "a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing" (Macbeth V:V). Discussions of what makes for a 191 meaningful life often begin by referring to Aristotle's concept of eudaimonia, a word made up from the Greek daimon being the 'true self' and the prefix eu meaning 'good' or 'well' (Waterman, 1990). Eudaimonia has been interpreted in a variety of different ways by philosophers and psychologists, but all of them convey the idea of a continual striving after what an individual perceives as being the most desirable and truly worthwhile kind of life (Bauer et al., 2008; Baumeister et al., 2013; Deci & Ryan, 2008; Hardie, 1979; Martela & Steger, 2016; Nagel, 1972; Ryan et al., 2008; Ryan & Martela, 2016; Ryff, 2012; Ryff & Singer, 2008; Waterman, 1990). Qualities that have been proposed as contributing to eudaimonia have included coherence, autonomy, self-understanding, competence, relatedness and existential mattering where mattering is "transcending the trivial"..., [and feeling] "that one's actions make a difference in the world" (Costin & Vignoles, 2019: 2). As this variety of explanations demonstrates, eudaimonia eludes any precise definition. Perhaps its greatest strength is its openness to be interpreted as Derrida would have it, in different ways (autrement) (1997: 77), according to the complexities of the personal, cultural, and societal contexts and relationships which differ for every individual. Nevertheless, there are two consistent ideas that can be drawn from the concept of eudaimonia: firstly, that it involves living in a way that feels personally meaningful and true to oneself, whatever that might be, and secondly, that living meaningfully is continually being enacted, a process of becoming, not a state that can be achieved once and for all. Religious belief has traditionally provided a way of making meaning from the joys and vicissitudes of human life and reducing uncertainty about our purpose for being in the world (Emmons, 2005; Hogg et al., 2010; Krause & Hayward, 2012; Park, 2005; Park et al., 2013) but religious belief, at least in established religions has declined in the modern age (Gorski & Altinordu, 2008; Houtman & Mascini, 2002). A large number of people in Western countries hold to rationalist beliefs that exclude any notion of life after death (Garcia & Blankholm, 2016; Manning, 2016; O'Brien & Noy, 2015). New Zealand in particular is said to have an identity as a "pre-eminently secular country" (Matheson, 2006: 177). If we are no longer living on earth as preparation for a life in some kind of divine hereafter, we are left with the need to find some other way to come to terms with the existential anxiety that is generated by the awareness of our own mortality (Hoelterhoff, 2015; Marino & Mountain, 2015; Varki, 2009), and a longing to find an explanation for "our birth, our death, and the pain of the journey in between" (McCormick, 1996: 620). Alternatively, the absence of a belief in a life after death may instead inspire a determination to make the most of the life we have, exploring all the opportunities that offer to make it 192 meaningful (Hoelterhof, 2015). Physical or mental illness, however, can creep up slowly or arrive dramatically and reduce or close off possibilities and hopes for the future (Bury, 1982; Locock et al., 2009; Sanders et al., 2002; Sinding & Wiernikowski, 2008). This dilemma of theoretical freedom to live fulfilling lives but only if we can ward off the bodily constraints of illness or disability, has become more pressing with the extension of longevity since the mid-20th century (Carey & Judge, 2001; Kinsella, 2005; Kraai et al., 2013). Advances in medical care over the past half century have made it possible for people who would otherwise have died in previous eras to live longer and better than at any time in history (Gawande, 2014). Modern medicine has tended to promote the idea that everything can be 'fixed' by following guidelines for a healthy life, and submitting oneself to the care and guidance of health professionals who will ensure that health problems are identified, treated and 'managed' (Fishman et al., 2008; Lamb, 2014; Mykytyn, 2006). Research studies lend their weight to the same assemblage of optimistic discourses of 'longevism' (Dumas & Turner, 2015) by demonstrating incremental gains in survival for particular drugs or interventions (Berger et al., 2011; Prinz & Endres, 2011; Wald & Wald, 2012). There have even been suggestions that the normal life span can be almost indefinitely extended with the assistance of 'regeneration medicine' (Lafontaine, 2009, 2015), including strategies such as genetic manipulation and the availability of computer printed organs and other body parts (Dumas & Turner, 2015; Katz & Gish, 2015). As Crawford (2004:505) argues, death itself has been deconstructed into innumerable specific causes against which "a technical war - a spiritual war in fact - must be waged." In contrast with these discourses that appear to promote an endlessly positive future, the same medical advances have also created a continually growing number of people who may be alive, but are also chronically ill, unable to carry out daily activities as they would wish, and sometimes also cognitively impaired (Bahler et al., 2015; Lafontaine, 2015; Lehnert et al., 2011). Moreover, those who have lost independence and agency, may become stigmatised as contributors to the 'silver tsunami' that is depriving current and future generations of their access to health and social services (Bartels & Naslund, 2013; Bluethmann et al., 2016; Bodker et al., 2019; Dumas & Turner, 2015; Hartt & Biglieri, 2018). It has become clear that simply extending the number of years of life may not be desirable if the quality of that life is more and more limited in scope, leading to social isolation and depression (Blakemore et al., 2014; DeJean et al., 2013; Duggleby et al., 2012; Earnshaw & Quinn, 2012; Liddy et al., 2014). It is this fear, the horror of ending up in a life without the agency to create ongoing meaning that would seem to underlie many of the fundamental urges that give rise to supplement practices. 193 Supplement users of all ages appear to have a keen feeling of uncertainty about their imagined future. While they do not seem to be fearful of death itself, many have already encountered the shadow of disability and appear to share a horror of being humiliated (Waskul & van der Riet, 2002) by the "precarious dependencies" (Bodker et al., 2019: 1358) that accompany the loss of physical and cognitive function leading to terminal decline and the final end-of-life cascade (Gerstorf et al., 2013; Rajan et al., 2012). They may have the beginnings of a chronic disease and are fearful of it worsening; they may have experienced long-lasting sports injuries, depression, or witnessed someone they love dwindle and deteriorate slowly and have resolved to avoid the same fate. Even if they are in the best of health now, and are proactive about maintaining their healthy status, somewhere in the past, they have become aware that at any time their body has the potential to turn on them and betray them. Minor and "mundane exposures" (Hoelterhof, 2015: 1) can trigger anxiety that the body which they had commanded at will, might turn on them and let them down, or as Kristeva (1982: 4) has so pertinently put it, become "the friend who stabs you." Kristeva's concept of the abject (1982) is a useful way of conceptualizing the horror that supplement users seem to sense of ceasing to become, being "excluded from the rhythms of daily life, [experiencing] a pitiable loss of personal control and social agency" (Gilleard & Higgs, 2011: 139). For what use is a longer life if it is merely an existence without the possibility of meaning, purpose and enjoyment? Being abject in this way is repugnant, loathsome, defiling; it is something that needs to be "thrust aside in order to live" (Kristeva, 1982: 3). But once the thought is recognised, it seems that it can never quite be banished: In the heartlands of non-disability the abject is a cause for concern because it is too close for comfort...Repressed, denied but lurking, hovering, whispering barely audibly from some liminal place in the recesses of the imaginary... it is the stranger that we despise but fear we might become (Hughes, 2009: 405,406).