The four pillars encompass physical, mental, spiritual and family health and are all linked together, reaching beyond the individual to the extended community and the wider cosmos (Waitangi Tribunal, 2011: 64). I don't know, whether because of being Maori or thinking differently that I look at it as more holistic, it's every part of you. So for example, really simply to put it, te whare tapa wha [the Maori model of health]. [If] you are not looking after one particular area ...you can balance, but if there's any stress comes on, then you can lapse. (Tracy) A second theme that came through strongly from the participants was when they spoke about using supplements and other alternative health care modalities because they desired 'more holistic' health care. Although the statement is vague, in essence there seemed to be several 73 related aspects that were important to participants. Holistic health for Trudy was about having underlying beliefs that supported their whole persona and enabled them to enjoy living; it was not necessarily about their physical state: How do you know what perfect health is? I don't know. What is it? What does it look like for people? Perfect health might be you are able to walk? That for some people might be perfect health. For other people it is never being sick. I don't know, is it a worthwhile quest for people? I don't know that it is. I think there is a lot of time and effort wasted in not enjoying what you've got currently ... my family are all completely different and they all have their own set of beliefs equally as valid as what mine are and just as soul nurturing in their own way. So really, the holistic thing coming into it. (Trudy) It is interesting here that Trudy refers to the idea of the quest, indicating that it goes beyond health to the meaning that can be drawn from life even if physical health has limitations. Sally also saw holistic health as being beyond the biomedical approach. She related how disappointed and humiliated she felt at the attitude she had experienced from doctors in relation to her longstanding pain. She had been through many investigations and referrals without any explanation being found, yet her pain persisted. Her account showed that she believed that the medical profession had come to find her tiresome because they were unable to find any cause that fitted their disease model and had 'washed their hands' of her problem: ...the doctors just don't want to know. Put me into pain clinic. All in the head in the end. And that was the most awful thing. (Sally) Sally's comment here suggests that she interpreted the referral to the pain clinic as a rejection by the medical people she had consulted; a message without precisely saying so, that she was imagining her pain and so they were unable to help her any more. The referral was the catalyst, she reported, for consulting an alternative therapist who treated her with kinesiology, massage and supplements and whom she found to be: ...the loveliest guy... a nice guy who is effective": ... I mentioned it [the abdominal pain] to this guy and he tested me - I was lying down...and he massaged it and it has been absolutely fine. So I go to him when I need. ... Oh, I will tell you what it's called, the iliocecal valve and it's either open or shut ... and he has shut it or opened it. (Sally) 74 Sally's account seems to indicate that it was the empathy of the alternative practitioner and the therapeutic touch of the massage (Monroe, 2009) that finally relieved her longstanding problem. Other participants also spoke about massage, oils, and supplements that had been used or recommended by alternative therapists. These tangible 'things appeared to be an important element of alternative approaches for Sally and for other participants and are examined in detail in the following chapter. Sally's experiences also had an element of another aspect of holistic care that the participants spoke of; the desire to be treated as unique individuals rather than being categorised, referred between services, or boxed into standard treatments that took no account of their personal situation and context: ...each time we've had medical contacts is seeing that GPs are just trying to throw statins at people or whatever the drug of choice is. (Wendy) Models of primary health care in New Zealand are continually evolving, with many beginning to branch out into health hubs with collaboration between various professionals offering services such as physiotherapy, massage, nutrition, counselling and social work consultations (Breton et al., 2017; Pullon et al., 2016). There is also more explicit acknowledgement in recent commentary that doctors need to deal with people as individuals, yet the model of care they work within is still one where "the evidence is steeped in averages" (Lawson, 2019: 441). The aspiration may be to provide 'person centred care' (Richards et al., 2015; Van Royen et al., 2010) but it does not yet appear to have been translated into the type of doctor-patient encounters that the study participants said they were looking for. Moreover, in the publicly subsidised primary care system in New Zealand, the time allowed for each appointment with a general practitioner is usually no more than 15 minutes (RNZCGP undated), well below the hour or more that the participants who practiced as alternative therapists said they allocated for each client: At an initial consultation sometimes it is quite hard to fit into an hour and a half; longer than that and it feels like it's getting too long for the client but the longer the better in terms of getting information. (Catherine) This last is an important point; as well as their own decisions about supplements, some participants had consulted alternative therapists of various kinds who had recommended various products to take (or avoid), and sometimes provided them directly to their clients as part of the treatment. However, rather than the supplements, it was the time that the therapists were willing to spend to listen to them and understand their individual concerns in detail that 75 appeared to be congruent with the participants' construction of what holistic health care should be. Invariably, the participants commented first on these interpersonal factors and the rapport they felt with the therapists, only afterwards mentioning what help they found for their health concerns. Holistic care was also consistently framed by participants as simply 'nicer' than orthodox care. Olivia contrasted her experiences of the orthodox health system with her visits to alternative health providers: Gosh people are nice in alternative health. ... They've got a perspective that you are a whole person so they are willing to engage with whatever your questions are ... it's just a much nicer experience. ... The [orthodox medical] system, you know, you go in feeling sick, to a place that deals with sick people, and you end up coming out feeling more sick - at least mentally - by the experience that you have had there. (Olivia) The therapeutic effect of an empathetic practitioner who provides reassurance by listening to their client intently and taking their concerns seriously, thereby sparking a sense of relief and corresponding improvement, is well documented (Feller & Cottone, 2003; Kaptchuk et al., 2008; Kelley et al., 2009; Larson & Yao, 2005). It was clear that those participants who had developed a rapport with a particular practitioner found it to have a healing effect. The desire for wholeness The participants also appeared to transfer the positive associations of therapist-mediated holistic care to supplement products that were described as being an overall or 'all-in-one' way of looking after themselves. Although supplement product labelling does not tend to draw on holism vocabulary directly (or at least I did not come across any during my study), the implication that a product will cover all needs links to both philosophical approaches to holism, which both carry the idea of unity, whether in all things (metaphysical holism) or within the one individual. Many participants made special mention of products that they used because they were a whole 'package' that would work on any need, even if the need could not be identified precisely. Frances was one of several who took a product labelled 'A to Zinc'; it seemed that the all-encompassing 'A to Z' descriptor answered her need to deal with non-specific symptoms she was experiencing but which she was unable to attribute to any particular cause: Well, lately I seem to be losing a lot of hair and I noticed I've got ridges in my nails - that can be a zinc deficiency, so I went off the Biomag and put myself just on a general Centrum vitamin that's got a bit of zinc and everything in it. (Frances) 76 The name seemed to reassure her that it would take care of whatever was causing her symptoms, and set her mind at rest about whether she ought to be doing more to look after herself. The same idea seemed to underpin the 'Manager' products. Like the A to Zinc, such products do not tend to make a feature of their naturalness but the (very) small print on the container generally shows a range of vitamins, minerals and herbal ingredients. They have down-to-earth names describing their function and seem to suggest that the consumer can do their part by buying and taking the product, then relax because the product will take over and do everything they need: I currently take a product, one called Cholesterol Manager and I basically probably haven't stopped taking that for eight or nine years. Another one called Glucose Manager because I am diabetic and the longer I can stay off, or keep the medications from the doctor lower, the better. Whether it's actually doing any good or not I've got no idea. It certainly doesn't seem to be doing me any harm. (Paul) Paul's lack of concern here suggests that he leaves everything up to his 'managers'. He describes being on them for a long time, and even though he claims he does not know whether they are doing him any good, there is an implication in his comment that he is confident that the products are 'taking care' of his conditions for him. Other supplements also draw from concepts implicit in holism by using generalised words for desirable qualities such as balance, 'multi-zone' and 'all in one'. They appear to be a modern version of the 19th and early 20th century health tonic, an all-encompassing general remedy that was said to have an enlivening effect on the whole body (Hands, 2018). Tonics were popular in the past for a wide range of non-specific conditions such as 'weakness', 'nervous instability', nutritional deficiencies or to 'purify the blood' (Crellin, 2004: 65-66). Patented tonics in advertisements from old magazines and newspapers include items such as Dr William's Pink Pills for Pale People (Brewis, 1982: 125) which were said to give "pure blood and strong nerves" to 'ladies' who took them. Not so very long ago, orthodox medicine too, subscribed to the idea of a tonic, advising substances such as cod liver oil, malt, iron, alcohol, and even cocaine (Houston, 1959; Musto, 1992; Nabarro, 1934). However, by the 1950s, tonics had fallen out of favour and came to be seen as unsophisticated and unscientific compared to vitamins, antibiotics and other modern drugs (Crellin, 2004). Today, the concept of the tonic appears to be undergoing a revival. The free magazines from the health food store chain that I collected during the study had products billed as "a century old immune booster" (Anonymous, 2017: 11) and many examples 77 of 'detox' products which, like the tonics of the 19th century, were promoted as having an overall effect by purifying the blood or the liver (Anonymous, 2018a: 6). Yet another form of the all-encompassing 'holistic' product was raised by participants who used or sold the 'total nutrition' supplement packages available through network marketing companies. Usually these were in a powdered 'shake' format to be mixed with milk or water, and as they were said to provide a complete range of nutritional needs, they could be used as meal replacements. Molly, who both used and sold these packages, was enthusiastic about their benefits. She described them as being "like a tonic. ...basically that just helps your system process things and all that sort of stuff". Several participants gave me brochures about products which used similar language (energy, vitality etc) as those sold in health stores and pharmacies, but also coined their own terms, 'neo-life plus' being one example. Unlike the retail products, however, the contents on these packages were not specified. Instead the products were described in an accompanying pamphlet as: ... based in nature: backed by science ... delivered in highly bio-efficient forms in exclusive clinically proven formulas that maximize nutrient absorption, utilisation and benefits by using the most advanced scientific methods and proprietary processes (Anonymous, Undated). The idea of a tonic for 'everything' appears to have a particular power. It may be that choosing not to know what is in a product or how it works somehow invests the substance with a type of mystique which may be spoilt for the user if it were to be itemised into a list of active ingredients and their percentages. One herbal handbook I examined seemed to endorse this view, stating that herbal tonics are "... gifts of Mother Earth to her children. To ask how they work, is to ask how life works" (Hoffmann, 1988: 87-88). The implication here is that the process at work is beyond human understanding and there is no need to know more or try to investigate it. It may be that the concept links back to memories of the substances in myths and fairy tales, as discussed in Chapter 2, that have such powerful effects. While these views may seem counter-intuitive in the modern age, several participants with widely differing world views indicated that they were not interested in how things they ingested worked. Olivia, speaking about the products she used, remarked simply that "It works; I don't need to know how it works." Molly, rather more pragmatically simply placed her faith in the expertise of the international product company she used, noting that "They [the company] do all the science so we [the users/sellers] don't have to." While she did not deny that science needed to be 78 involved, she seemed to prefer not to know anything about the details and to simply take assurances on trust. World views like these clearly clash with those who like to find out exactly what is in their products and understand the scientific basis behind them. Moreover they give a ready platform to critics of alternative health care products to label the people who use them indiscriminately as being superstitious and anti-science (Ernst & Singh, 2008; Freeman, 2005: 155). A more measured view than these opposing dualisms, suggests that people who have faith in products like tonics because they see them as holistic rather than directed solely at a biomedical result is a result of a strong medical counterculture in the last several decades which has led to: ...an increasing awareness of the limits to orthodox biomedicine in terms of safety and efficacy and a desire by consumers to gain greater control over their own health care and well-being - especially when orthodoxy had failed to produce results for them individually (Saks, 2003: 144). As Saks points out, there are many more nuances across the spectrum of products and opinions about supplements and alternative medicines that sit between the avid supporters on the one end and the vociferous critics on the other. The issue cannot simply be dismissed as one between 'experts' on the one hand and misguided or ignorant members of the public on the other. It is just as well documented that a degree of faith, rather than strong evidence, underpins some of the most widely used drugs in orthodox medicine. The mechanism of action of paracetamol (acetaminophen) is still regarded as not entirely certain (Bonnefont et al., 2003; Graham et al., 2013; Graham & Scott, 2005), and evidence about whether SSRIs (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors) are effective for depression is said by a number of commentators to be weak (Ioannidis, 2008; Moncrieff & Kirsch, 2005). While the comments of the participants about holistic approaches to health were framed in an entirely positive light, holism and the concept of holistic health does have its critics. Both metaphysical holism and the integrated individual approaches to holism have been seen as moralistic and to have a tendency to blame people who do not use illness or adversity as an opportunity for personal growth; they are expected to use their experiences to finding meaning in all aspects of life, including those which are unpleasant or painful (Erickson, 2007; Goldstein et al., 1988; Hoffmann, 1988; McColl, 1994). Because both approaches require the individual to take responsibility for rising above their problems - putting aside their worldly desires (metaphysical holism) or reconciling their body, mind, and spirit - they have been criticised as 79 ignoring social determinants of health such as poverty and unemployment, over which individuals have little control (Lowenberg & Davis, 1994; Madden, 2012; Marmot, 2005). Condemning the individual regardless of their circumstances if they 'fail' to achieve the desired level of integration or inner peace, according to this critique, as Madden (2012: 31) has commented, may "actually strengthen biomedical hegemony." None of the participants mentioned or even appeared to be aware of the negative views of holism and holistic health. The criticisms raised in the academic literature were simply absent from the discussion. Moreover, participants' comments indicated that they were acutely aware of the problems faced by their own networks of family and friends and how these in turn were often driven by societal conditions. They appeared to see this as an additional reason to seek what they interpreted as holistic care rather than being in conflict with it or burdening them with more responsibility than they desired. As Caro pointed out, there are much wider contributors to wellbeing than health care services alone: So you have to sweep the yard before you can see the floor sort of thing ... all the other things around that need to be good before you can get to the Type 2 diabetes ... the person with the diabetes is thinking about their mokopuna [grandchildren] not having any shoes or not being able to pay. .... when you are working in a Maori holistic, a kaupapa Maori organisation, you are looking at the whole picture, not just the Type 2 diabetes. (Caro) Many of the participants made comments in a similar vein; it was a rare conversation that did not touch on the influence of socio-economic circumstances and the wider environment on their own health and that of others. Far from it being an oppressive duty, almost all participants indicated that being responsible for their health was something they aspired to, and wanted to be actively involved in.