These transformation stories consistently combined elements of a crisis and a material 'thing' which resulted from it, as Derrida would say "something absolutely new and a break" (Derrida 1997:6): ...my father was very, very, very ill and the priest came to basically give him the last rites and his father said... I'm going to this friend of mine who's got homeopathic stuff, came back, gave it to my father and from that point the fever broke. They firmly believed it was related to the homeopathic medicine and from that point forward Dad always, his parents, always used that in conjunction with mainstream medicine. So it has been part of our culture, our family culture for a long time and our family continues as a whole to use alternative medicine in different forms. (Trudy) Trudy draws attention to this as a seminal event marking a crucial watershed in her family's history which she designates as a moment of change "from that point forward". However, as the events took place when her father was a child, and therefore before her own lifetime, it appears it had created a new assemblage around homeopathic 'things' which had become part of her own cultural habitus. She went on to note that, as a child, she found her family's habitus somewhat difficult; her European immigrant family was 'different' from the accepted norm, not 123 just in their use of homeopathy but the things they ate, which marked her out as unusual, especially at school where she was often "reeking of garlic". Her family experiences, however, had been a stronger influence on her subsequent attitudes and practices than the opinions of outsiders and according to her comments, it had strongly influenced her throughout her adult life. For another participant the 'rupture' was also a 'line of flight' that took place in a crisis. A crucial moment of decision, in her case, was at a point when she rejected taking a 'thing' she believed would have intolerable effects: ..[the doctor] said, well go to the pain specialist and see what he says but I think he will want to put you on morphine. I said, well I am not going. ... I thought well if I'm only going to be told I've got to go on morphine I'm not going to take it so I will try other things. So I tried reflexology, [name of therapist] for the kinesiology and chiropractic, and of course I had to give up walking. I could hardly get out of bed at times. I did push myself and go swimming and all that but I found the omega-3 and those people with reflexology and kinesiology - my back's not any different - I haven't done anything - I haven't had an operation, but I do not take one thing. I don't even take a Panadol for it. (Jane) Here the things Jane ended up using appear to have been of lesser importance than the thing she was avoiding. Rather than the positive agency that Trudy attributed to the homeopathic medicines in her family crisis, it was the negative agency of the morphine that was the turning point for Jane. She does not say why she was so determined not to take the morphine, and it appeared to be something within her own assemblage of cultural and background assumptions. These two accounts were each examples of the way that both positive and negative 'thing power' had agency that could be seen to generate effects for the participants, acting as a catalyst that was mobilised at a time of crisis in their lives. Interconnecting things Naturally, in the course of their everyday lives, participants came across the ideas and stories about supplements in their interactions with other people within and beyond their own circle of friends and acquaintances and reciprocated with their own experiences. So supplements were a topic of discourse in their lives, 'things' that started conversations with others. It was apparent from the participants' accounts that personal recommendations, especially those made face-to- face, were a powerful way of disseminating information about supplements and encouraging 124 others to adopt them. They gave numerous examples of ideas that they had heard from their family members or other people they came into contact with through shared activities. Hearing recommendations for products from people in their own network appeared to set up a background of common social capital between them and the participants which reinforced the trustworthiness and salience of the advice. Trudy had started taking fish oil on the recommendation of a friend: ... a friend of mine had been telling me about fish oil .... I looked up online because I always like to know and there didn't seem to be any negative side effects as such, not any serious ones, and most of what I could see it was actually quite beneficial so I thought, yes, I'll start taking it. (Trudy) Rana, had confided in a work colleague about an emotionally stressful time she was going through and her thoughts about needing to see a doctor for antidepressants. The colleague recommended instead that she consult a kinesiologist first and see if it helped. Rana acted on the advice in spite of her initial skepticism, and found it so helpful that she had since encouraged three others in her family network to do the same. The advice does not necessarily need to come from someone well known to the recipient; it can be important and influential from a mere acquaintance if that person is knowledgeable in an area that is of mutual interest. Sally heard about cranberry for preventing urinary tract infections through the rest home where her mother lived: It's pretty amazing stuff...(indicating the cranberry) I just hate having urinary tract infections. Having to go to the jolly doctor - [being given] the same old things ... But I don't need it now. (Sally) Similarly, Bob heard about his supplements from passing acquaintances that he met through different social activities. In all cases the advice was also timely, coming along at a time when these participants were grappling with a specific problem and open to hearing about 'things' that might resolve it. The intersection of the problem to be solved coinciding with the right person offering advice at the right time seemed to be a trigger to act on the advice and take up the 'thing' suggested, particularly as it was readily available from any number of easily accessed sources. Personal recommendations like this tap into the cultural meanings that the endorser brings to the product (Biswas et al., 2006; McCracken, 1989), giving rise to emotional, cognitive and behavioural responses in the recipient that make the advice trustworthy and personally relevant (Lewis and Weigert, 1985). 125 The personalisation of the advice appears to hold true even if the recommender is not personally known, but familiar through exposure in the media, or if their credentials are meaningful to the person viewing or hearing the advice (Briggs et al., 2002). Celebrity and expert endorsements work in the same way as personal recommendations because they are easily recognised by diverse members of the public who admire their achievements (Walseth, 2008). Murray, for example, was eager to point out to me that the brand of supplements he used were also used by well-known elite sports people: ...they [the company] sponsor the Women's Tennis Association, 16 of the top 20 women's tennis players are on [product brand name] and seven of the top ten. (Murray) Murray was a former tennis player himself, and the endorsement of these famous tennis players who were familiar to him through the media seemed to be in the same category as if it had come from someone he knew well. His respect for these players, based on his knowledge of their sporting prowess, translated into an affirmation for him that he was taking the right products, even though he was never likely to meet any of these people face-to-face or have a conversation with them. As well as personal contacts, the rhizomatic assemblage connects human actants through the popular and scientific media with an enormous variety of ideas about things that may help or harm (for example, (Berge et al., 2013; Crighton et al., 2013; Hatch et al., 2010; Meeker, 2012; Nicolopoulou-Stamati et al., 2015). The perceptions of risk these give rise to were discussed in detail in the previous chapter. However, it is worth drawing attention to these discourses of harmful/helpful things from another angle, that is, to highlight the constant presence of the 'thing' that one either must use or must avoid for their health's sake, which is never far from the headlines. Against this background, the actual 'thing' that is the object of interest comes and goes over time. Bernie, for example, talked about the changes he had seen in the years that he had been in his shop: Sixteen years ago it used to be multivitamins, Vitamin C and treatments for a bit of congestion but I don't think I've sold a multivitamin now for months. Now it is people coming in looking for answers that they're not getting elsewhere. That would be for things like rheumatoid arthritis, allergies, eczema, ankylosing spondylitis, MS, cancer, a whole variety of illnesses. (Bernie) A particular 'thing' may become the object of attention in the media that creates a flurry of interest and/or concern only to be replaced by something else a few days or weeks later. Very 126 often the media items are based on research studies but the limited framings of science journalism create a cycle which oscillates back and forth "from Gee whiz to Shock Horror" (Reed, 2002: 43), omitting the important caveats and nuances that the original study may well have presented. Over the last several years in the Christchurch area, concerns about various bad 'things' have come and gone in just such a cycle; studies about the weed killer glyphosphate (Roundup) and the migration of the plastics in food packaging and storage containers into foods (Chang et al., 2014; Guart et al., 2011; Mink et al., 2011; Portier et al., 2016) became headlines in popular and local media during 2018 (Anonymous, 2018b; Hutching, 2018). By 2019 these appeared to be fading and being replaced by concerns about nitrates in drinking water (Clague et al., 2015; Foote et al., 2015) and the effects of climate change exposing old and still toxic landfills (Brand et al., 2018; Northcott, 2019). Though the 'gee whiz' ('amazing thing') headline is also popular, for example, reports of break through discoveries in cancer or dementia, that hold out hope for a cure where none was previously available (Clopton, 2019; Haridy, 2018), the 'shock horror' stories about 'bad things' tend to be more powerful. Bad news is held to engage more people and to sell better, leading to the belief that the popular media are generally biased towards highlighting the negative aspects of any issue (not just health) and that the general public also has an asymmetric response that is drawn to reports about bad things rather than good (Arango-Kure et al., 2014; Garz, 2014; Soroka, 2006). The concept of bad things was aligned to, but different from the social discourses discussed in the previous chapter when participants had been personally affected by a specific bad thing. The bad things that were reported in the media then seemed to act as a reinforcement of their personal experiences. Charles was one participant who held very strong views about prescribed medicines as being 'bad things.' He gave an account of a life-threatening adverse drug reaction where he had ended up in intensive care for a lengthy period. He had been intensely disturbed by this event, and, had lost trust in doctors and prescribed medicines. He indicated that other accounts he had read or heard about since had led him to believe that his experiences were widespread and applied much more widely to 'people' in general who, like him, were using supplements instead: ... why are people turning to these things? The thing is that they are getting so hacked off what they get from the medical world. They are not getting the results they expect; some of the stuff they are being given is so discomforting that it drives them demented. (Charles) 127 Another participant, Wendy, reported that her husband had a similar intense dislike of prescribed medicines which he believed were harmful things promoted by drug companies for their own profit. He would go to great lengths to avoid them: My husband absolutely hates pharmaceuticals. He thinks it's a racket... he got a really horrendous chest infection ... that morning I was thinking O my God, I am going to have to take him to A&E. But Mister had been upstairs on the internet and he had read these things about silver, so being ready to try anything ... he went and found his silver ring and he went and grated it and put it into hot water and then inhaled it. .... within 24 hours most of those crackles had subsided and by 72 hours he was practically back to normal. (Wendy) This somewhat unusual reaction was not typical of the majority of participants, most of whom comfortably combined prescribed medicines with their supplements. Nevertheless, the 'harmful thing' headline appears to have much capacity to cause confirmation bias (Montibeller & von Winterfeldt, 2015) for those who are looking for it. There are plentiful reports of adverse reactions to prescribed drugs that can be found on even the most casual of searches (for example, (Bellosta & Corsini, 2012; Hoffelt & Gross, 2016; Perucca & Gilliam, 2012), as well as items in both the academic and popular media that show the pharmaceutical industry in a poor light (Davis & Abraham, 2013; MacDonald, 2018). The channels of communication that spread the discourses about the good or bad things are an additional category of non-human actants with their own agency that are an integral part of the assemblage of supplement things. People use them to access information and opinion, solicit advice, buy products, and connect with one another through a vast network of modern and traditional communication tools that are available across the globe in real time and are constantly changing and evolving. They link across the globe, connecting things with people who may seek them out deliberately or come across them by chance. These communication things, which form immense rhizomatic assemblages in their own right, enable people to have convenient access any time of the day or night to the vast pool of resources that is the world of the modern internet (Siliquini et al., 2011; Suziedelyte, 2012; Tustin, 2010). Moreover, the electronic things through which consumers connect with this assemblage of information continue to evolve in their ease of use, their connection speed and the amount of information they can hold. Even the cheapest devices - the mobile phones, tablets, computers - are now able to connect to online databases of vast capacity (Maggiani, 2009). These tools have not completely replaced older media formats such as radio and print but they have greatly enhanced 128 the ability of anyone with an internet-enabled device to connect more often and more widely to an immense pool of information. They can find out what products are available anywhere in the world and buy them, given that they have the financial resources, all without leaving home. Moreover, individuals such as the participants are not just passively waiting for reports of things that help or harm to come to them. They are also testing their own ideas and searching for new ones, and adding their own pieces of information to the mix, so that the evolving assemblage of information about these things is always in process. Almost all participants mentioned using a variety of communication channels to search for, find, and follow up supplement products. They might search online to cross check their own ideas or advice they had received in person or read about in a magazine to discover whether it tallied with what they found online. Alternatively they might follow a link from something they found online and then seek further online and in-person advice from another source they considered reliable. Paul was a particularly adept user of all sorts of communication modes as his story of bee pollen shows: I started taking bee pollen ... I heard about bee pollen because I was listening to Radio Pacific.... allegedly it boosted your immune system and gave you energy. ... I guess initially I felt that I was getting a boost specially if I felt that I was getting run down or a cold I would up the intake of it for a while and feel a little better (Paul) As Paul indicated, he was not searching deliberately for a supplement here but came across the information incidentally when listening to the radio. However, he then used his online resources to find a source of supply and order the pollen, firstly for himself, and then in bulk. For a while he and his wife would fill gelatin capsules by hand and sell them as a sideline to the online section of their gardening business or at garden shows they attended. Although it was time- consuming, they did well enough out of it, he said, at a time when the product was little known. The communication actants involved in this small part of the complex network covered both the old (radio) and new (online) communication tools which were variously used to learn information, obtain the 'thing' (the pollen) and then to market and sell it online through his business connections. In turn the communication things were part of a wider web of human actants and social discourses which focused on a particular thing, bee pollen. Other participants, like Cliff, had developed proficiency in searching the internet as a direct result of wanting to learn more about supplements and obtain them: 129 I only got computer literate about two years ago - I'm a total newbie in all those, Youtube all that sort of stuff. But if you use it right you can get information and also I buy most of my herbs from I-Herb now in America - I can go on their research sites. (Cliff) By the time I spoke to Cliff, he was an adept internet user who described a range of products he had bought to try out for himself and recommended websites that he thought I should look at to help with the study. He pointed out that supplements can be ordered from anywhere with the click of a mouse and a credit card and are often cheaper than in a local store. In addition, the non-human devices and websites that enable users to make these transactions never get tired, stop work or go on holiday as a human would, so can be used any time of the day or night in any part of the world. Once the buyer initiates the order, the entire subsequent chain of reaction is handled through technological things, acknowledging the order, charging the credit card, then the packing, dispatching and delivery. Although there are humans involved along the way, the personal interaction between buyer and seller is replaced with the non-human devices, software and connections. Walk-in stores promote the personal service and advice they can offer, but once a person is confident about what they need, the appeal and convenience of online shopping seems hard to resist.