I want to keep on going. And for about three months I felt I was going to have to give up. I was so stiff and not feeling too good at all, hobbling when I am running - didn't have a specific injury but my legs were very, very tight. (Bob) After his decades' long participation in running, it was clearly an important activity for Bob and part of his identity was that he was 'a runner'. Being faced with losing this part of himself set him off on a line of flight when a chance conversation at a church service with a passing acquaintance alerted him to the possibility of taking glucosamine for his joints as his informant was "sure it worked". The random interaction with this person set off a series of actions where he formed new connections with different people, places and things. Some were deliberate and planned; he did his own research online, noting that he read a spectrum of opinions, articles by "sceptics" as well as those that were positive. Through his decision to buy the glucosamine he 174 found a pharmacy where he believed he received trustworthy advice, and owing to the repeat business he brought, he now received a discount on his products. Other connections were quite random; he chanced to hear from a different acquaintance, a doctor stationed with the US Navy in their base in New Zealand, who told him that fish oil was also "great for the joints and it lubricates the eyes". This was an important connection in another and completely unexpected direction; Bob's father had gone blind at the end of his life and Bob thought it was likely to be hereditary, so he was drawn to the idea fish oil may help him in both ways. He had added fish oil to the glucosamine, and since then made refinements to his supplement regime, taking more before a competitive event or a planned long run, but otherwise a little less. Through all this he believed he had been able to retain his identity as a runner that he feared he might lose, and keep his body fit for what he wanted to do. He also commented that being able to do so had reduced his stress and "kept me mentally sound ...That's the odd thing. You go for a run, instead of being tired, you actually power up". The aptness of the rhizome metaphor is shown here through Bob's narrative. Its multiple connections with people that passed unexpectedly in and out of his acquaintance, pieces of information they happened to mention by chance that they did not know would be important to him, the non-human actors that were part of the overall story - the information modalities, the material substances he took, and even the loyalty card that he had at his favourite pharmacy. These were all part of the evolving direction of the lines of flight as they twisted and turned; the chance discovery about eye health, and the optimism he reported about his future mental and physical health that had kept him moving in an away direction from the blockage he had come up against in his desire to keep running. Tracy, similarly, described in moving terms how her back pain had become an unwanted presence, dominating her life and stopping her doing what she wanted to: All I wanted to do was to go for a run. .... I was feeling so frustrated and I just wanted to cry all the time. I still actually - the thought of it makes me cry again because I was so miserable... (Tracy) The continuation of her story into better times, like Bob's, illustrated the role that interconnections with people and things had played for her, reinvigorating her with the desire to take action, keep evolving, or in the language of the rhizome, to continue 'becoming'. Illness, wrote Deleuze (1997: 228), is not a process but the stopping of the process of becoming. It is a "state into which we fall". In contrast to this stoppage: 175 Becoming begins as a desire to escape bodily limitation. Whether the constraint in question is generally characterized as a 'natural' or 'cultural' necessity makes little difference. ... What matters is that the constraint is there, and there is a counterdesire [sic] to leave it behind (Massumi, 1992: 94). This counter desire was a recurrent theme in all the discussions I had with the participants; their desire to do rather than just be, to be active, to avoid their lives becoming stuck in a place where they were centred on the limitations imposed by pain or dysfunction. Some of them were just small vignettes that presupposed a long background story which would have taken much time to relate. Interestingly, most participants could recall the precise event that connected them with the supplement assemblage and in most cases it was because of a physical or mental health problem which threatened to create a blockage in their life that would undermine their identity. Jane, for example, recalled the precise moment when, after an unsatisfactory medical encounter, she made the decision to turn away from accepting that she was always going to be a medical problem (Shilling, 2002) and actively seek out other options, noting that "I am prepared to experiment if there is nothing to lose". Such situations were presented as a turning point in participants' lives, where they realised that they had an opportunity to assume control over circumstances, explore other avenues that were open to them and find other possibilities on which they could act. These encounters where there was a chance to grasp an opportunity that offered or allow it to pass by, also featured among those who provided advice to the public. All the pharmacists spoke about being confronted with situations where they felt the tension between remaining strictly within their formal training or branching out beyond the orthodox response. Jo found she was not able to opt out of helping people who asked for advice about alternative products and say "I don't know anything about that". Lou similarly reported he was driven to learn more because he felt "quite ignorant" and "silly" when people asked for his advice. According to their accounts, these opportunities had led down a line of flight that opened up a different world view beyond their professional training, even if they set off down that road as a sceptic: If you've got someone that is addicted to sleeping pills ... which is better? Either going to the GP and getting prescribed something that may result in a life-time addiction, or get some placebo which might just help them think they are going to get a good night's sleep and actually does. And they help. (Lyndsay) 176 Many others in the study referred in a similar way to a point where there had taken up an opportunity to learn, to change, to take on a different world view, to become rather than remaining the same. They had experienced: ... a tension between two modes of desire - being and becoming; sameness and difference. At the point of departure from the constraint, there is a 'bifurcating future' and a choice whether to fall back into the one or to set out instead on a singular path of becoming, leading into undreamed of horizons (Massumi 1992: 95). Coming up against a barrier that affects what their body can do 'deterritorialises' people (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 9), figuratively, cutting the ground from under their feet, and moving their sense of self from autonomy to dependency (Fox 2012: 78). Being diagnosed with a chronic disease or becoming disabled even in the medium term through accident or injury threatens to disrupt how they envisaged their future unfolding (Morden et al., 2017; Williams, 2000). They may lose the ability to engage in sport or other activities which are part of their identity and their opportunities for social contact with others are narrowed (Theou et al., 2017). They may no longer be able to get themselves independently to where they want to go, and so their lives become restricted to a smaller circle of contacts and interactions and they become dependent on others. Becoming socially isolated leads to feelings of loss, a decline in feelings of competence and self-worth, a feeling of purposeless and an erosion of identity (Alpass & Neville, 2003; Pinquart & Sorensen, 2001): Identity is a feature of the clustering of relations around specific aspects of embodiment, such as health, gender, sport and exercise, body medication, disability or growing old. Just as embodiment emerges from activity and practice (what a body can do), so does a sense of self (Fox 2012: 80) Taking action, on the other hand is an opening up to becoming, and evolving, making the decision to move forward wherever it might lead. It does not presuppose a particular destination or an end goal. Participants' descriptions captured this idea of openness and emphasis on taking action, as the following excerpt where Bryony describes what being healthy meant to her: ... [it's] an absence of symptoms, but it's also just a general state of mind. So it's my body being able to move freely and do all the things I need to do in a day; and it's my mind being happy, bright, and alert and me having energy .... So that's healthy (Bryony/VB) [underlining added for emphasis] 177 Numerous studies have documented the importance to overall wellbeing of being able to maintain activities which allow people to participate in society in the way they choose (Mammen & Faulkner, 2013; Teychenne et al., 2008; Warburton et al., 2006). If illness and disability, or even fear of it, can deterritorialise a person's sense of self, then taking action in the way the participants had done was a process of reterritorialisation. This is not to suggest that participants found their health problems magically 'cured' - though certainly some reported improvements - but rather that they gained a sense of control and coping, allowing them to face whatever might lie ahead in the future. Moving outwards from any blockage and 'reterritorialising' seemed to infuse participants with new energy, determination and a sense of purpose, a feeling of being "creative rather than reactive to meet their real (not symbolic) needs" (Fox & Ward, 2008: 1008). Their accounts focused almost entirely on what they believed the supplements had allowed them to do, rather than expecting to find a perfect cure from whatever physical condition they had: ... I've got arthritis, mainly in my thumbs ..... I've been on these for ages - glucosamine with chondroitin and it's the chondroitin that helps. When I'm only on glucosamine I need more. And that has kept it at bay. It's amazing actually, combined with the fish oil.... Well I'm 63 and I feel young and I want to be young for my grandchildren. I've got two grandchildren now, so doing what I'm doing, is allowing that to happen. (Sally) Sally's comment indicates that she feels she is moving into the future with confidence that she will be able to evolve with her grandchildren. Another participant, Vonnie, similarly spoke about the supplement she took now and again for her low mood had "helped me through some really rough patches". The way she phrased it suggests a sense of movement, overcoming a barrier and an increase in confidence that she can move on and cope with what may come. For both Sally and Vonnie, their supplement use seems to have become be part of their identity, incorporated into how they see themselves and how they wish to be seen by others, in the same way that pharmaceuticals may be for those who rely on them as an enabler to participating in everyday activities (Dew et al., 2015). It was clear from talking to these participants that though they were optimistic, they were also realistic. Their focus was much more about keeping their problem "at bay", so that it did not cut them off from whatever opportunities they might come across in the future. Deleuze and Guatarri argued that the root of a person's identity was in the dynamic interaction between the social context and "... the affirming, creative, and embodied 178 experimentation/engagement of the living body .... the sum of psychological, emotional and physical connections that a body has (Fox and Ward 2008: 1008). Many of the participants clearly enjoyed being creative in all sorts of ways, experimenting and improvising, not simply in trying out supplements and other alternative health care options, but in other areas of their lives as well. None illustrated this more vividly than Duncan's account of his diverse experiences. He had a thirst for experimentation and although he grew up in a somewhat unconventional family who already used alternative health modalities, as a young adult he wanted to explore horizons beyond what he already knew: ... out of curiosity [I] went into other things ... to see what was out there and how it worked. I wanted to try a bunch of different healers to see which one I liked and see what I would potentially be interested in ...I got hypnotherapy ... I've done all sorts of things. Duncan's adventures took him to Peru to visit a shaman and take ayahuasca, as I have already described, but that was only one of many lines of flight through diverse modalities, therapies and alternative products that he experimented with. He had briefly been involved with network marketing, and had enrolled in various courses in modalities that interested him. He had touched on Chinese medicine through an acquaintance, experimented with body building supplements as well as herbals, and dabbled in reiki. Tracing Duncan's narrative, was a verbal representation of a rhizomatic network in the process of becoming; a heterogeneous mix of connections with many people, things, sources of information, therapies, world views on health and illness, various countries he had lived in or passed through and jobs he had been engaged in. It traced his deterritorialisation and reterritorialisation both literally in terms of changing modalities, countries and employment, and figuratively in terms of his changing views. At the time I spoke to him he told me that he was tending towards a greater interest in and respect for orthodox medicine but still mixed in a range of other practices, such as using reiki to calm his young son, and was clearly still evolving his ideas and practices as he accumulated more life experiences. A number of other participants echoed this theme of "experimentation in the world" (Holland, 2013: 34). Far from being the earnest people portrayed in the academic literature as 'worried well', they seemed to find it engaging and fun to explore various products and therapies that they came across. Pat, Tessa and Molly all commented directly that they enjoyed experimenting with a range of alternative options, and many others recounted the different products and therapies, both orthodox and alternative that they had come into contact with and tried. Rana 179 related her experience with a product that had not worked out for her. It appeared to be from a network marketer rather than bought over the counter from a pharmacy or health store: ...there was somebody that was selling them. I can't remember the name of the product but they were selling supplements and I tried them and what happened was I ended up getting more migraines. So I stopped taking that particular brand and then I went and I bought some evening primrose oil. It would have been from the health food shop. (Rana) She was undeterred by the failure of the first product and pleased she had learned from the experience. Similarly, Tessa also spoke about experimenting with products, in her case homeopathics, some that she had bought herself and others that she had prescribed by a homeopath. Although she considered them to have been harmless, she believed they had been a waste of money in her case, and not something that she would buy again: "I don't think homeopathics work very well for me in general...I really don't think it's made much difference. The same with bach flower remedies." The key factor in these experiences was that the participants continued to learn what suited them and what did not. They seemed unconcerned about 'failures'. In contrast to the ideas of health risk as something to avoid, covered in Chapter 5, these forays into new fields were more like counter-risk discourses (Casas-Cortes et al., 2008; Keshet & Popper-Giveon, 2018; Soane et al., 2010) that pushed boundaries and created new knowledge about products that suited them or not. They clearly viewed whatever element of risk there might have been as something they could control and felt comfortable, even enthusiastic about (Lyng, 2008). They spoke just as if it were a hobby or creative outlet, trying out new cooking styles, attempting new sports, or delving into different forms of art or music. In effect it was the same sort risk taking that Lupton and Tulloch (2002: 117) identify as self- improvement, that gives "movement and progression ... to the trajectory of one's life." Their 'failures' thus were not something that they regretted, but became a further step on the path to greater knowledge and their overall identity development Conclusion The sense of self and life-satisfaction that the participants appeared to have gained from their experiences with supplements is where all three aspects of this chapter come together and address the research gap identified in the introduction. At one point each of the participants had made a seemingly small decision to take (or sell) a product for a health concern, a decision which had its origins in the coming together of their internalised ideas of responsibility and the freedom to wield that responsibility. They had set their own terms as to when they would use 180 orthodox medicine and when they would use that freedom to resist its control and use alternative methods of health care they chose for themselves. Similarly, the same responsibility and freedom could be mobilised to participate in the commercial market to the extent that it suited them but resist being drawn in to its power. Because they were also well connected to other areas of the modern neoliberal economy they had been able to use economic and technical means to experiment with what supplements and alternative therapies they found useful and so were continually developing expertise in the way they chose to care for themselves. This ongoing process was contributing to their sense of self through the bringing together of the many inter-related connections within the assemblage around the activities they enjoyed participating in, which were in turn enriching their feeling of meaning and purpose as they moved on with their life journey. This chapter draws to a close the analysis of the data generated in the interviews with the study participants. The chapter that follows moves on from the participants and draws from the wider assemblage of ideas developed from all three analysis chapters to discuss what they add to a new understanding of people's engagement with practices around supplement use. 181 Chapter 7: Concluding discussion Supplement practices: the intra-action of discourse, materiality and power This study set out to investigate how people make sense of their supplement use; to explore what they say about the products they take and to develop a greater understanding of how and why they had come to use them.