Analysis of the data from the 2007-2010 US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey found that adults most commonly reported that they took supplements to improve or maintain overall health (Bailey et al., 2013; Cardini et al., 2010; Dickinson et al., 2014). Perceptions that herbal medicines were natural and less harmful than prescription drugs were reported in a number of investigations (Durante et al., 2001; Taylor et al., 2006). Several smaller surveys have looked at supplement use by people who are being treated for cancer or who are cancer survivors (Damery et al., 2011; Ma et al., 2011; Saquib et al., 2011). There are also many surveys of people with a particular condition (for example, tart cherry juice to relieve gout (Singh et al., 2015)), but these are narrowly focused rather than relating to general supplement use. There is considerable commentary on supplement use in the academic medical literature, much of which notes the lack of evidence of biomedical effectiveness of supplements. The phrase "expensive urine and little else" (Binns et al., 2018: 413) tends to be used in the literature lamenting the futility of taking supplements. They have been described as "pseudoscience and nonsense" (Lewis, 2019: 840) or the "province of modern day Humpty Dumptys"(Freeman, 2005: 155). 'Alternatives' that is, anything not accepted by orthodox medicine, are considered to be ineffective (Ernst & Singh, 2008) and their use to be regrettable and even dangerous. 11 Cases have been reported where supplements have been contaminated with harmful substances (Genuis et al., 2012; Geyer et al., 2008; Maughan, 2005; Stickel et al., 2009), or caused interactions with prescribed medicines (Fugh-Berman, 2000; Izzo, 2004; Sarino et al., 2007). Other investigations have reported poor communication between supplement users and health professionals and recommended that hospital and family physicians need to question patients more closely because people tend not to disclose what they are taking to their health professionals (Ben-Arye et al., 2017; Gardiner et al., 2015; Tarn et al., 2014)et al 2014). A number of researchers have looked at issues related to regulation, particularly the intricacies of the United States Dietary Supplements Health Education Act (DSHEA) of 1994, its strengths and weaknesses, issues of enforcement, and the loopholes that marketing companies have been able to exploit (Cooper, 2010; Noonan & Patrick Noonan, 2006; Onel, 2005; Temple, 2010). Several studies have examined websites that promote dietary supplements for their compliance with the Act (Dennehy et al., 2005; Jordan & Haywood, 2007; Morris & Avorn, 2003) and have recorded concerns about those that do not mention adverse effects or interactions in their promotional material. A Canadian study took a different approach, speaking directly to key informants from 20 companies about their intention to comply with the Canadian Natural Health Products (NHP) regulations of 2004 (Laeeque et al., 2006). Investigations of the advice provided by pharmacists and health food stores to customers have found a lack of emphasis on safety and interactions with prescribed medicines, recommendations for products which were contraindicated in pregnancy, and recommending costly products judged to be unsupported by evidence (Buckner et al., 2005; Mills et al., 2003). Pharmacies were generally found to give more reliable advice than health stores (Jefferies et al., 2012; Sarino et al., 2007; Temple et al., 2009), but even so their advice was found to frequently be inadequate, particularly at identifying potentially serious interactions (Sarino et al., 2007; Waddington et al., 2015). Pharmacists, for their part, have long maintained that, while they are strongly supportive of their role in advising the public about supplements, they feel poorly equipped to do so and in need of further training (Howard et al., 2001; Kemper et al., 2003; Kwan et al., 2006; Zeolla & Cerulli, 2008). Two systematic reviews ten years apart (Boon et al., 2009; Ung et al., 2017) investigated pharmacist knowledge about supplements. Both reported the expectations placed on pharmacists that they would know about supplements and provide well-informed advice, yet they did not have the training to do so and lacked guidance on the scope of their responsibilities. Many of these studies concluded by calling for stronger regulation of supplements unless under the guidance of a doctor (Dwyer et al., 2018; Starr, 12 2015). However, the limited number of studies that have investigated the knowledge of medical professionals about supplements found that they too needed to be better informed so as to have the knowledge and confidence to discuss supplement use with patients (Kemper et al., 2006; Ventola, 2010). There appear to be few articles in the health literature on the marketing of supplements, an exception being a small study of Taiwanese students (Wu et al., 2012) examining the role of endorsements, framing and rewards on the effectiveness of dietary supplement advertisements. Commentary and opinion in the health marketing literature itself (Cunningham, 2001; LaPenna, 2010; Tanaka & Blatman, 2010) has tended to discuss how to frame their products in a positive light, partner with health organisations, and offset negative publicity about supplements from health professionals. It also features success stories, for example a report of a consumer website campaign which had promoted supplements as one of "three pillars" of health and wellness (healthy diet, exercise, and supplements) (LaPenna, 2010). It is interesting to note the discrepancy between the marketing literature which tends to target affluent, middle-aged women, with a good education (Cunningham, 2001) as a primary user group, in contrast to the framing of supplement users in the health literature as being poorly educated, having no understanding of science and as being duped by marketing claims into wasting money on ineffective products and are lining the pockets of the companies that market them (Lewis, 2019; Morris & Avorn, 2003; Stoneman et al., 2013; Temple, 2010). There have been some qualitative investigations where supplement users have been interviewed in more depth about their practices. These studies have reported that users believed supplements were more natural and therefore safer than prescribed medicines, were effective for some ailments, helped to prevent chronic disease, gave them peace of mind, supplemented a poor diet, and saved money on health care (Eliason et al., 1999; Peters et al., 2003; Thompson & Nichter, 2007; Vickers et al., 2006). Women with diabetes were found to be focused on preventing or lessening diabetic complications (Oldham et al., 2004), and cancer patients to be motivated by the desire to support their immune system and to offset the effect of conventional drugs that they were taking for their illness (Haddon, 2001; Hok et al., 2011; Humpel & Jones, 2006; Paul et al., 2013). The qualitative studies also showed that though supplement users appear to be aware of the risks publicised in the medical literature, rather than deterring them, it was more likely to discourage them from sharing information about what they take with their doctor. Participants were reported as saying they believed their doctors would disapprove and, even if they did not 13 actively oppose their use, were poorly informed about supplements and lacked the ability to provide clear guidance about them (Chang & Wang, 2009; Eliason et al., 1999; Peters et al., 2003; Reedy et al., 2005; Vickers et al., 2006). Participants in these studies tended to believe they were more knowledgeable than their doctor about their supplements and were sceptical about the reliance that conventional medicine placed on clinical trial evidence as the standard for proving effectiveness. They noted, for example, that trials did not take place in real world conditions and they cited instances where trial data had later been proved wrong or the drugs had led to unexpected adverse events (Little, 2009; Thompson & Nichter, 2007). Instead, supplement users drew their information from friends and family members, social networks, all types of public media, and conducting their own internet research including accessing scientific papers (Humpel & Jones, 2006; Oldham et al., 2004; Peters et al., 2003; Sekhri & Kaur, 2014; Thompson & Nichter, 2007). Investigations of herbalism and naturopathy have a degree of commonality with studies of supplement use, as ingested products form a key part of the treatment offered in those modalities. There is a limited body of literature, however, that has examined naturopathy or herbalism independently of other CAM treatments (Zick et al., 2009), and within it, only a few studies appear to have directed their attention to the substances used. One example that does focus on the products was a study of traditional herbal remedies from the Andes used by 40 Peruvian and Bolivian immigrants living in London (Ceuterick & Vandebroek, 2017). Three distinctive but overlapping positions in the way the participants made sense of their practices were identified. They connected the participants to their home country, to their traditions and therefore to their identity. They also served as a means of coping for those who were not doing well in their new location, were economically marginalised and struggling to access orthodox health care. In contrast, they were also put to use as a way for these immigrants to demonstrate that their practices were in keeping with currently popular discourses in their new country; that they were health conscious consumers who preferred natural products and wished to avoid the side effects of pharmaceuticals. Similar studies of Ukranians living in the United States and Koreans in Australia, have found that links to traditional knowledge played a large part in their choice to use herbal therapists and remedies, though often they relied on home-prepared rather than commercially marketed products (Franic & Kleyman, 2012; Han, 2001). Concepts of identity and tradition in users of herbalism and naturopathy were also identified in naturopathy practitioners and clients in rural areas of Australia (Wardle et al., 2010). This study concluded that country people had an 14 enduring affinity with familiar natural substances which had always been part of their lives and were likely to maintain traditional knowledge and remedies that had been passed down to them from previous generations. These notions of tradition and identity cross over with independent supplement use (Bignante & Tecco, 2013), where people make decisions about caring for health that draw on knowledge and remedies passed down to the current generation from their mothers, grandmothers and others, mostly women, in their families (Thompson & Nichter, 2007). Even though they may use some of the same products, herbalism and naturopathy are nevertheless very different from self-prescribed over-the-counter supplement use. The formal modalities are whole systems of healing, underpinned by bodies of theory and practice which guide practitioners' decisions about prescribing and advising their clients. Herbalism has a number of different approaches depending on the framework within which herbal products are used as a source of healing. These include bodies of traditional knowledge, such as Native American or Maori healing, broader philosophical approaches within Ayurvedic, Chinese or Tibetan systems that integrate herbal medicine into mental and physical practices, and Western herbal medicine based on traditions that arise from European thought (Hoffmann, 1988; Nissen, 2010). Naturopathy is wider than herbalism as it includes treatment with herbal and homeopathic substances, but also employs acupuncture, massage, chiropractic and any other CAM modalities considered relevant for a particular individual (College of Naturopathic Medicine, undated ). Ingested substances are also a key part of homeopathy, a system based on the premise of 'like cures like' or, what a substance can cause in large amounts, it can also cure, when taken in small amounts (Owen, 2007; Waisse & Bonamin, 2016). Homeopathy, however, is different from herbalism and naturopathy; the substances prescribed are diluted so that they are present in infinitesimal amounts, and the precise remedy that has been chosen is not always revealed to the patient, particularly before they have tried it (Eyles et al., 2012; Frank, 2002). The other major feature of herbalism, naturopathy and homeopathy is the importance of the well-developed relationship between the practitioner and the patient or client who seeks their help. Supplement users, in contrast, tend to have only short interactions in a retail outlet, or, for those who order online, no interaction at all. Herbalists, naturopaths and homeopaths all place an emphasis on carrying out an in-depth investigation of each individual's history, taking plenty of time (sometimes several hours), and the intuition combined with reasoned deduction that the practitioner brings to bear on the person's concerns (Brien et al., 2011; Bussing et al., 2010; Eyles et al., 2012; Eyles et al., 2011; Legenne et al., 2015; Little, 2009; Oberg et al., 2014; 15 Viksveen & Relton, 2017; Wardle et al., 2010). The dominant themes in these studies are around the empathy and skill shown by practitioners, providing the ability for people to tell their stories, and the resulting optimism and feelings of coping that they engender. Patients and clients report that they appreciate these skills, feel listened to and like the collaborative approach where the practitioner treats them in a way that is "understandable in a personalised rather than theoretical way" (Little, 2009: 304). These studies are aligned with broader investigations across the spectrum of CAM therapies where the primary focus is on the benefits of the patient- practitioner experience and its implied (or explicitly stated) contrast with orthodox care (Wardle et al., 2010). Participants commented in such studies that they wanted a more holistic approach to health than the orthodox system offered; they desired a system of care that took into account the importance of the mind-body interaction for healing and wellness, and offered a spiritual component (Chang & Wang, 2009; Haddon, 2001; Little, 2009). Additionally, CAM treatments were said to allow individuals to have more autonomy over their personal health care and experience a more collaborative and empowering form of care than they received with conventional care (Haddon, 2001; Hedderson et al., 2004; Stoneman et al., 2013). However, although it was common for participants in many of these studies to report that they sought out alternative treatments because of negative experiences with orthodox health care (Furnham et al., 1995; Klein et al., 2005; O'Callaghan & Jordan, 2003), most people continued to use the two systems in parallel, seeing them as complementary rather than mutually exclusive (Legenne et al., 2015; Nichol et al., 2013; Viksveen & Relton, 2017). Research gaps In spite of the number of studies covered above, they provide only a limited understanding about the reasons that underlie the widespread and growing use of supplements. It is one thing to hear from users that they consider these products more natural, that they want to improve and maintain their health or that they are disillusioned with experiences from their usual health care provider so they turn elsewhere. However, these statements simply raise more complex questions that beg for further investigation. What did people mean by 'natural' for example? What experiences had led them to distrust usual medical care? Why did they believe that treating themselves in this way would keep them healthy? What was behind their satisfaction with these independent health practices? Moreover, many of the studies available are now more than a decade old. It appeared that after a flurry of studies published between 2000 and 2010, interest had waned. Was this an indication that there was little more to investigate? Was the continually increasing popularity of these products simply a result of clever marketing to 16 those who continued to ignore expert advice? And if these products were as ineffective and/or risky as claimed, how, in such a risk- averse age (Lupton, 1999) could more and more of them continue to be so widely sold to the public without the regulation that medical professionals were calling for? It seemed important to hear more from supplement users themselves about their supplement use; why they had started taking them and what their experiences had been. As a broad framing of the study overall, I wanted to look briefly at the role of ingested substances on a wider historical scale. The literature around supplement use appeared to assume that it was a modern phenomenon, yet the taking of substances which become embodied and lead to feelings of healing and enablement has been a focus of traditional medicine from the earliest times. Moreover, references to the power of substances are threaded through myths and legends as well as literature both ancient and modern. It seemed to me that there was a long tradition of ingesting substances that was linked to human efforts to enhance wellbeing and overcome obstacles that must be playing some part in self-care practices with supplements, yet I had not seen any reference to this in the literature I had read. Within this wider framework, several other key areas stood out as in need of investigation. The first of these was the taken-for-granted assumption in reported studies that 'natural' products were intrinsically safe and a means of offsetting risks to health. These concepts had been frequently raised by participants in previous investigations but appeared to be under-theorised; they had largely been treated at face value and the discourses about them assumed to be clear- cut and unproblematic, having a single uncontested meaning that everyone understood and shared (Durante et al., 2001; Eliason et al., 1999; Joos et al., 2012; Little, 2009; Peters et al., 2003; Rozin et al., 2004; Taylor et al., 2006; Thompson & Nichter, 2007; Vickers et al., 2006).