I also drew their attention to the fact that my own questions were sometimes disjointed and took care not to edit my own questions to look smoothly phrased when they had not been. Nevertheless, one participant did spend the time editing their transcript before returning it to me some months later. When I had completed all interviewing and transcribing I prepared a descriptive overview of the main ideas that had come from the interview data but without any verbatim excerpts from the transcripts and sent it out to all participants. As it was going to be several years before the final thesis was ready, I believed it was important to acknowledge their contribution to the research by sharing my findings in this preliminary way. Somewhat disappointingly, I received only one or two brief acknowledgements thanking me for sending it but no comments on the content. It was a salutary reminder for me that while I was to spend the next few years thinking in depth about what they had said, being interviewed for my study was likely to have been a passing event of little importance in their lives and they would have long since moved on from that day. Compiling the overview, however, was helpful as a basis from which to approach the analysis. I assigned pseudonyms to each of my participants, as a means of retaining their anonymity but being more interesting and recognisable in a lengthy text than referring to them by a participant number. Analytical approach I had originally intended to conduct a critical thematic analysis, that is, coding the data in a systematic iterative process to identify recurring themes as described in the literature by various authors on qualitative methods (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Green & Thorogood, 2009; Pope & Mays, 2006). Essentially this means taking an aspect of the data and summarising it using a particular word, phrase, or theme. For example, the idea of having personal control over one's health, which was mentioned in various ways by many of the interviewees, could be represented as 46 'control' whenever this idea appeared in the transcripts. Once the major themes were identified, I would draw from the theoretical and other literature to present an in-depth and nuanced analysis, supported by the data, to develop an understanding of how people use dietary supplements and herbal medicines to care for their own health, and how this fits with contemporary ideas of maintaining health and preventing illness. I could easily have identified and presented several major themes and patterns from the interview data in an analysis based on this type of coding. Sections would have included, for example, personal empowerment by taking control over one's own health; holistic health care versus the biomedical model of health; the concept of natural versus artificial therapeutic products; and the influence of marketing on health conscious consumers. My summary for the participants included all these aspects and several more. All these ideas, however, had already been identified and explored to some extent in the literature, even though supplements were very often treated as just one of the modalities in studies of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) users in general (Barrett et al., 2003; Brosnan et al., 2018; Furnham, 2002; Lewis, 2019; Stoneman et al., 2013). While it could be argued that a more intensive analysis of these themes, or examining them in combination with one another might add to the body of literature, it seemed unlikely that it would deepen thinking about the underlying personal and societal forces at play within and around the topic. During the interview process I became more and more convinced that limiting my analysis to an iterative thematic approach based only on the spoken data would be a mechanistic and unsatisfactory way of capturing the wide range of complex ideas and the connections and disconnections between them that had been generated through my interaction with the participants. Brinkman's remark (2014) that he experienced "astonishment, mystery and breakdowns in understanding" resonated with the way I felt as I reflected on the experiences over the 14 months of interviewing. Limiting the analysis to the transcribed words of the participants alone would certainly fail to do justice to some of the non-verbal elements of my contact with them that I have already mentioned above. I wanted to capture the new possibilities that might be developed using a different approach from simply relying on conventional coding. Jackson and Mazzei (2012: 12) make the case for moving beyond coding alone, arguing that the focus on reducing the different codes into a few "macro" codes "locks us into more of a territorialized placed of fixed, recognizable meaning" limited by the current knowledge of the participants and the researcher and works against the production of new knowledge. 47 I needed to find an approach that would offer something different and at another level from the studies I had already examined and which would include more than just the recorded data from the discussions with the participants. I did this in a two stage process. The first stage was to do a preliminary coding exercise, which was helpful in allowing me to familiarise myself with the interview data in its entirety. It also provided the basis for the descriptive overview (see previous section) that I sent out to the participants. However, I then, under the guidance of my supervisors, turned to Jackson and Mazzei's (2012) concept of 'thinking with theory'. These authors propose that through a process of "arranging, organising, fitting together" (Jackson & Mazzei, 2012: 1), the data, relevant theoretical concepts, the variety of actants that are involved in a phenomenon, as well as the researcher's own prior knowledge and the recollections they take away from their contact with the research participants generates "something new, something different, from mere themes and patterns generated by coding (Jackson & Mazzei, 2012: 6). This idea from Jackson and Mazzei resonated with me as I had the same rich assemblage of previous personal and professional experiences, the transcribed data, memories of the interviews with the participants and especially of the way they engaged with the material substances of their supplements. I wanted to be able to take the whole experience into account, not just the transcribed words of the participants which I believed were of course, important, but only one part of the whole. MacLure (2015: 106-107) too, draws attention to the limitations of analyses that privilege the spoken word without taking into account how discourse is intermingled with "matter, affect and virtuality". She acknowledges that this involves giving up the safety and comfort of well-known methodology and casting oneself into an adventure into the unknown. I did not find I needed to jettison the results of the coding exercise entirely, but rather to take them forward into a second stage of analysis where I was able to incorporate both discourse and materiality by exploring them using different theoretical concepts. This proved, however, to be more than just one step into the unknown but an ongoing process of exploring new territory throughout much of the writing of the thesis. Little did I know when I began, what a broad range of literature in diverse subject areas and how many theoretical ideas I would need to read and think about during the study. The trajectory of my own understanding of the theoretical ideas I came across, in particular, changed my way of thinking about qualitative research entirely. My initial ideas about the quest (see Chapter 2) became a personal journey that had rich discoveries but also many difficult and thorny paths. I was constantly reminded that while I was making observations about other people and things and 48 writing about them, I was also contemporaneously in a process of my own quest, striking out into new territories as I learned about the theoretical ideas I had chosen to use, and grappled with understanding them and putting them to work in analysing my research in a convincing way. The next section gives a brief overview of the theoretical framing that I chose to work with. Theoretical framing The theoretical framework for the analysis draws from Deleuze and Guatttari's concept of the rhizomatic network of actants that are interconnected in a moving assemblage around a particular phenomenon (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987)8. Assemblages are not a domain of reality or a 'thing', but are a process that designates movement and transformation (Jackson and Mazzei 2012:1; Latour 2005:64). The rhizomatic network takes its inspiration from the botanical world. Bamboo, the ginger plant, couch grass, and the mushroom mycelium are all examples of rhizomes, that is, structures which are made up of an untidy, tangled network of nodes and connections and that spread out randomly, largely under the ground, with no apparent starting or finishing point. Like the botanical rhizome, Deleuze and Guattari's conceptual rhizome is similarly made up of heterogeneous threads (Holland, 2013) that are in a constant process of spreading into new areas without any regular pattern or organised structure. The rhizomatic network has been described as a "chaotic network of habitual and non-habitual connections, always in flux, always reassembling in different ways" (Potts, 2004: 19) like "a crazy patchwork quilt" (Holland, 2013: 37). Any thread in the rhizome can be connected to any other one, and the threads can merge or split apart (Dewsbury, 2011), breaking away in a new direction, yet remaining connected to where they came from. I have applied the concept of the rhizomatic network to my study as a way of thinking about the multiple actants that come together in the assemblage around supplements and their use. These include the individual people, their cultural background and personal experiences, their relationships with others, and the products, discourses, regulations, and commercial activities, all of which are temporarily in a dynamic relationship with one another. Each of these actants is connected to the others in some way, and as the supplement assemblage evolves over time with new products, users, information and events coming in, the actants within it change it and are changed by it. This process of constant flux was described by Deleuze and Guattari as "movements of deterritorialisation and processes of reterritorialisation that are always 8 I used a 2013 reprint of A Thousand Plateaus but have not indicated this in the reference to avoid the clumsy 2013 [1987] being repeated multiple times. 49 connected, caught up in one another" (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987: 9). In other words, some products or ideas fall out of fashion (are deterritorialised) and others move in to take over their space (reterritorialise); the new developments are seeded from the experience and knowledge that went before them which is never entirely discarded or 'unlearned.' Moreover, the previous actants may 'reterritorialise' in a newly animated form that fits with the discourses of the time. As a current example, one need only think of the way the cloth and jute shopping bags of former decades have reterritorialised the space left vacant by the plastic ones that were dominant for so long but are now being 'deterritorialised' by current environmental concerns. These changes in the rhizomatic assemblage may build incrementally in a constant slow process, or at times may also be abrupt and swift. These are the unexpected developments that Deleuze and Guattari described as "lines of flight": There is a rupture in the rhizome whenever segmentary lines explode into a line of flight, but the line of flight is part of the rhizome (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987: 9). The 'explosion' indicates a dramatic shift; perhaps a chance discovery or random encounter. Yet even while there is a transformative change in one direction, the connection to the overall network remains in place. As a practical illustration of this concept Deleuze and Guattari (1987: 10) used the example of a virus which can "take flight, move into the cells of a different species but not without bringing with it genetic information from the first host." Deleuze suggested that his theories should be used like a box of tools to "pry open vacant spaces" (Massumi, 1992: 8). Deleuze himself used his toolbox to examine areas as diverse as linguistics, geology, psychoanalysis, and music but the ideas can equally be applied to "any body of choice: a sexual body; a bicycle; a language, a body of art, a film" - the concepts work for them all" (Malins, 2004: 85). The aim of using Deleuze's toolkit to pry things open is not to define how things are in the world or what they mean in a bounded way, but to trace their tendencies and how they evolve - their way of becoming (Holland, 2013). The concept of the rhizomatic assemblage of actants is used throughout the analysis and discussion of the thesis to conceptualise the in-process nature of the supplement assemblage and its constant state of moving away from sameness to become something different. This "philosophy of immanence" as Jackson and Mazzei (2012: 87) have termed it, has no absolutes or boundaries but embraces the idea of flow and change (Dovey, 2011). Becoming, with its nature of being always "au milieu" - in process (Deleuze, 1997: 226), is not understood as going towards a designated destination. It is a "stream without beginning or end" (Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 27) that operates in the spaces in between. It is not an essence or a position but 50 a tendency, an orientation to change (Holland 2013: 34). It opens up the possibility of competing interpretations, avoids attempting to create categories and definitions and brings into view the ambiguities that are threaded through people's lives (Biehl & Locke, 2010). Within this overall framework, I have taken an eclectic approach, drawing on a range of other theoretical concepts as they became appropriate. Examining the data from a range of different perspectives as I worked through the analysis, was somewhat akin to shaking up the pieces of a kaleidoscope, revealing new patterns that emerge from the same fragments of material when they are arranged differently. While this approach was important and useful, it was also challenging, because separating some actants from the whole assemblage was, to some extent, counter to the whole idea of the inextricably interconnected nature of their relationship with one another. Aspects from one chapter constantly threatened to intrude on others and risk repetition, and yet structuring the thesis required some form of separating them out in order to avoid becoming overwhelmed with trying to write about them all at once. Each of the next three chapters discusses in turn one major theme that proved to be integral to the overall thesis. Chapter Four investigates and deconstructs the discourses around supplements that were raised by the participants. Chapter Five then examines the role of the material products of the supplements in the participants' lives. Chapter Six looks at the way participants developed a sense of power in their decisions about their health management through combining their experiences of supplement use with ideas of personal responsibility, expertise, and narratives of identity. The discussion chapter brings all these ideas together - discourse, materiality, and power - to show how they form a new way of understanding supplements and those who use them. 51 Chapter 4: Natural, holistic and safe: deconstructing discourses about supplements Introduction In the discussions I had with the participants, many of them spoke about the particular qualities of supplements as being the reason why they used them; that they were natural, holistic and safe. They also contrasted these qualities in terms of what supplements were not; that is, not artificial or made from 'chemicals', not narrowly focused on biomedical health, and not risky. On the surface, these remarks seemed to add little to what had been reported in previous studies (Durante et al., 2001; Rozin et al., 2004; Taylor et al., 2006; Vickers et al., 2006). However, examining the data closely, it was clear that even though the participants seemed to understand that these qualities were self-evident and uncontested, they interpreted them in widely varying ways. This chapter, therefore, aims to get beyond the assumptions in previous studies that have taken these qualities of supplements for granted and by deconstructing them, to show "the tensions and omissions which have been produced without interrogation" (Jackson and Mazzei, 2012: 15). To think more deeply about the way these concepts were expressed by the participants, this chapter draws on theoretical concepts from Derrida's (1997) writing on deconstruction. While deconstructing the binaries in the debate around these three concepts is hardly new (see for example, (Anderson, 2009; Lupton, 1999; Thorne, 2001; Tulloch & Lupton, 2003), it has not necessarily been applied to supplements and herbal medicines in any detail. The basic concept of deconstruction is that things - whether beliefs, practices, institutions, texts or anything else - do not have exactly determinable meanings and are always more than they currently seem (Caputo, 1997). For Derrida, there is no such thing as a bounded definition; everything has differences within it and the more one tries to tie anything down and limit it, the more it slips away from "...every attempt to totalize, to gather..." (Derrida, 1997: 13), to bring things together and make them into a totality that closes off possibilities for difference, development and change. Deconstruction, on the other hand, means being open to different understandings, new interpretations and to meanings that are emerging as well as those that are current. It does not mean simply tearing things apart into multiplicity or disassociation. That would mean only "anarchistic relativism" (Caputo, 1997: 36) where words or texts could mean anything the reader wanted them to mean. On the contrary, deconstruction should be "affirmative, not in a way that 52 is simply positive... repeating the given" (Derrida, 1997: 5-6) but transformative, opening [the thing examined] to the future. It must reveal what is not obvious, unspoken or overlooked: ...something in the text which tends to drop out of view [which can]...open things up, to find a way to read "otherwise" (autrement) in the name of the incoming of the other (l'invention de l'autre) (Derrida, 1997: 77). I understand Derrida's writing on deconstruction to mean that nothing is fixed in a state where it is utterly stable and consistent through and through; there are always differences and shades of meaning that can be revealed. Seeing things as fluid in this way, transforms the kind of attitudes that seek to shut down differences as being threatening and instead welcomes them because they indicate multiplicity, evolution and refreshment.