Individual interviews within a constructionist epistemology allow the opportunity for new ideas which one participant may introduce to be taken forward into subsequent interviews, thus developing the richness and depth of the data as the process proceeds (Green & Thorogood, 2009; Pope & Mays, 2006; Rice & Ezzy, 1999) For this study, interviews were also the most practical method of generating data from supplement users, who were not a defined group and who needed to be recruited individually over a relatively lengthy period of time. In qualitative research within a constructionist epistemology, the interviewer and participant collaborate in generating the data as "interaction partners" (Kelly, 2010: 308) and the resulting data are explicitly understood to be the product of this interaction. The relationship should be understood as one of reciprocity and co-creation where the researcher and participant make different contributions to a matter of common interest, "developing and constructing new knowledge" (Ben-Ari & Enosh, 2013: 246). Subjectivity on the part of both interview partners needs to be acknowledged (Liamputtong, 2013). Interviews in this framework are not transparent accounts, however, and can only record what participants say they think or do rather than being "a direct window into their lives, thoughts, and meanings" (Kelly, 2010: 309). Moreover, because it is the interaction between the researcher and participant that generates the data, the interviewee may give a different account on another occasion, or to another researcher, depending on the particular context for each one of them and the social, cultural and personal attributes that each one brings to the interview on the day (Liamputtong, 2013). Interviews need to be treated as 'accounts' rather than an objective report of firm beliefs (Green & Thorogood, 2009: 104). The circumstances in which the interview takes place have an important role in "construct[ing] the power and positionality of the participants" (Elwood & Martin, 2000: 650). It is more likely 39 that the interview will generate rich data if the participants feel comfortable, and that they will be more guarded if they feel at any kind of disadvantage (Elwood & Martin, 2000; Sin, 2003). It is well documented that the gender, ethnicity, age, nationality, and the social and educational status of both the researcher and participants influence the way the researchers present themselves to the participants and how the participants react to them (Green & Thorogood, 2009:107; Kelly, 2010:309; Liamputtong, 2013:71). Ensuring that participants are able to choose the venue and time of the interview and paying attention to matters such as choice of language and even dress may all contribute to putting the participant at their ease. The cautions about the power differential usually assume that the researcher is the one whose power is the greater, and while this may often be the case (Ben-Ari & Enosh, 2013), it may also be the reverse, where a participant feels the researcher is of lesser importance or professional standing than themselves, and does not take them seriously (Harvey, 2010; Neal & McLaughlin, 2009). Even though the researcher has set the agenda by their choice of topic and asks the questions, the generation of data depends on how well the researcher is able to build rapport between themselves and the interviewee to establish a sympathetic relationship and sense of mutual trust (Karnieli-Miller et al., 2009: 283). Moreover, the researcher is dependent on the participants' agreement to take part and the degree of openness with which they choose to share their experiences, so the power differential can be weighted in their favour if they decide, for any reason, to limit their cooperation. Once the researcher has the data, however, the power lies with the researcher who takes away the participants' words and works with them to transcribe them, select what they find to be salient, analyse and interpret what they find. In arranging the interviews for my study, I tried to address all these factors as best as I could and in the light of my previous experience of conducting many interviews with a diverse range of people over the years. All participants received information about the study before the interview and had consented to participate. Each of them was invited to choose the time and venue where the interview would take place. Most of the participants had busy lives and by interviewing them individually I was able to accommodate myself to their schedule rather than ask them to work around mine. Most of them chose to invite me into their own environment, whether their home or workplace. A few chose to come to my office either for the convenience of the location or because I was able to provide a private room without interruptions. Several chose a cafe close to their workplace as they had no suitable space to talk privately where they worked and they needed to avoid disturbing the work of others. It also ensured a higher level of confidentiality for those participants with business interests who may have been reluctant to 40 disclose particular types of information in a more open forum such as a focus group or did not wish others to know they were participating. The words of the interviewees that are recorded and then transcribed to become data, however, are not a full reflection of what happens during an interview. The transcriptions cannot convey in totality the emphases and tone of the participants, or their use of humour and irony, their facial expressions and body language, and the ambience of the setting in which the interview takes place. These can perhaps to some extent be captured by interpolating a phrase in brackets to indicate laughing or underlining to indicate emphasis but are still a relatively pale reflection of the dynamics of the interview, which all, to some extent remain with me to this day. However, it was the unexpected addition to the spoken word that proved so influential in the course of the study which prompted me to look beyond the limits of the spoken data itself and allow room for the material things that formed a significant presence in so many of the interviews. These included displays of supplements participants showed me, websites they opened up for my benefit, and brochures and other printed material they gave me. This aspect became increasingly pertinent as the interviews progressed and I came to see that these 'extras', though unexpected, were also part of the overall data. During the study I also collected and made an informal study of the free magazines distributed widely in Christchurch by a health store chain, finding the language and images they used to promote their products of particular interest as well as the products themselves. The sample For this study, absolute numbers were less relevant than being able to hear the perceptions of a diverse range of people in terms of gender, ethnicity, and age as well as socio-economic and cultural backgrounds, within the constraints of what I could realistically expect to achieve within the scope of a PhD study. Guidance from qualitative methods texts indicates that there is no set formula for deciding on the number of participants (Liamputtong, 2013). The key points are that the number should be sufficient to explore the research questions in depth within a broad spectrum of opinion so as to obtain "as full a range of observations of the phenomenon as possible" (Charmaz 2004: 986 cited in Bourgeault et al., 2010: 9) from people who would be most likely to contribute information-rich data (Green & Thorogood, 2009: 138; Kelly, 2010: 317). Liamputtong (2013: 19) recommends continuing to recruit additional participants until no new information is being generated, the state known as data saturation. It has been suggested that this may occur with as few as twelve participants (Guest et al., 2006). However, there are 41 other considerations, such as the scope of the project, the type of research question, the available pool of participants from which to recruit, and the amount of useful data generated in each interview (Hagaman & Wutich, 2017; Hennink et al., 2017; O'Reilly & Parker, 2013). Even though The New Zealand study (Ministry of Health, 2009) was already five years old at the time of recruitment of participants and is even older now, it was the only New Zealand wide study available, was therefore locally relevant and provided a clear definition of dietary supplements. According to the 2009 survey, 'regular' users - defined as those who took a supplement or herbal medicine more frequently than once a week - were more likely to be female than male, older rather than younger, and of non- Maori, non-Pacific ethnicity. Without any defined user group to be approached, however, I found I needed a combination of methods to recruit participants, something which is not unusual in qualitative research (Liamputtong, 2013: 20). In accordance with the focus of my study, the participants I recruited needed to be using supplements more frequently than once a week for a specific health reason or for supporting their general wellbeing. I made it clear that I was not studying protein powders or sports supplements for performance enhancement. I began by using snowball sampling, the method where a researcher selects an initial few participants whom they know meet the criteria and ask them to recommend others who might be interested in taking part (Liamputtong, 2013). Snowball sampling is suitable for studies where there is no identifiable group that can be approached and participants are relatively difficult to locate. I recruited the first four participants from known contacts who had already expressed an interest in my study. Each of my four initial participants came from a different background; two were known to each other (though each was unaware the other was participating in the study); each of the other two were self-employed, and were unknown to any of the other three. This approach was only moderately successful in recruiting a further group of participants. However, one of these initial participants introduced me to the organisers of a Maori hui (community meeting), and was able to get permission for me to talk about my study there and appeal for volunteers to participate. This was successful in enabling me to recruit further Maori participants. After that I simply approached people I had contact with through my current and previous workplaces, and people I came across on social occasions or through interest groups that I and other members of my family belonged to. I focused on those I considered were more likely to put me in touch with people from different age groups and with different cultural and social backgrounds. I had been prepared to advertise on noticeboards or use social media, but this did not prove necessary. An unexpected issue that arose in the course of recruiting was that a number of my friends and 42 acquaintances took a keen interest in my study and wanted to participate themselves. I had to explain that it was not appropriate to include people whom I knew well or include too many participants who were too much like me, and turn them down as tactfully as possible. I had planned to include people who sold supplements and/or provided advice about them in pharmacies and health stores so as to get another perspective on the way people approached the buying of supplement products. I wanted to find out the kind of queries they received, what advice they provided, and more generally how they decided what products to stock, and if they observed trends in the rise and fall of sales of particular products. I excluded supermarkets and online sales outlets even though supplements are easily (and often more cheaply) available from both sources, as I was interested in the face-to-face contact between buyers and sellers. However, I discovered fairly quickly that my assumptions about the users and sellers of supplements being two distinct categories had been too simplistic; people's roles were much more complex and blurred across the spectrum of user/advisor/provider/seller than I had supposed. So while I did approach a number of retail businesses directly in recruiting, and used a different information sheet for them, the concept of two separate categories of participants proved to be unsustainable. All but a very small minority of those who sold or advised on supplements also spoke at length about their own use. As well, a considerable number of the participants who initially presented themselves as users when approached for the study, also proved to have a stake in selling or recommending supplements in some way. Several had current or previous experience as providers of different kinds of alternative therapies (medical herbalism, acupuncture, homeopathy), and some were currently or had previously been involved in network marketing of supplements and herbal products through international companies. There proved to be a two-way avenue into these mixed roles; some had begun selling or promoting products as a business venture or being assigned to a workplace role and then begun to find the products useful for themselves; others had been users and subsequently had taken on working in a business as their interest in the area grew and to offset the cost of their own supplies. These methods were ultimately successful in recruiting a total of 37 participants, all but two from within Canterbury and two from a connection in the Auckland region. One participant subsequently asked to withdraw, leaving a total of 36 participants: 23 women and 13 men ranging in age from their early 20s to late 70s. There were five participants with Maori and two with Pacific ethnicity; five were originally from countries other than New Zealand. Most were currently employed full or part time; six were officially retired but three of these also ran a part- 43 time small business selling supplements. All but five participants lived in the greater Christchurch area and three of these lived rurally. I did not ask participants their exact age, their educational background or financial status, as I considered it irrelevant to the study, and that it would therefore have been over intrusive. I was confident that this number of participants ensured a diverse range of perspectives as the participants easily covered the main characteristics that had been listed in the New Zealand study and included others as well. All interviewees were sent the information sheet judged to be more relevant to their primary involvement with supplements (i.e. as a user or seller) prior to the interview (Appendix A,C), and a consent form to read and sign (Appendix B,D). An interview guide was developed as an aide memoire for areas to be explored during the interview and to ensure that none were omitted (Appendix E). Ethical approval and Maori consultation Ethical considerations are important for protection of the participants, to ensure that they are fully informed and that there is no pressure put on them to consent to take part. For this study, the ethics application outlined the purpose of the study, the general nature of the questions, and noted that participants could refuse to answer any particular question, or could withdraw from the study at any time without explanation up until the submission of the thesis. Issues of confidentiality were covered; that participants would not be identified by name, initials, occupation or location in the thesis or any subsequent publication, and that their identity would not be disclosed to any other participant. It was noted, however, that the use of snowball sampling as one method of recruitment meant that a recommender would potentially know the identity of another individual who had been approached to participate. The ethics application also set out the arrangements for ensuring that the audio recordings and completed transcripts would be held securely and only seen by myself and my two supervisors. Consultation with the Maori Research Advisor of the University of Otago, Christchurch was also carried out, and on her advice I undertook to include Maori participants in the study in proportion to their percentage of the population in the region, at the time, approximately 7% (Statistics New Zealand, 2013). The participants I subsequently recruited comfortably met this requirement. The ethics application was submitted and approval was subsequently confirmed by the University of Otago Human Ethics Committee in June 2014. Ethics reference number: D14/187. 44 The interview process I began each interview by going over the consent form and the purpose of the study. After these preliminaries the order of discussion varied as a number of interviewees began to tell me their ideas about their supplement use as soon as I arrived, even before I could ask the first question. However, the flexibility of the semi-structured approach meant it was not a problem to move between the areas of interest in any order. Five initial interviews were carried out during the months of August and September 2014. These were recorded and transcribed in full before going any further, to allow for some preliminary analysis and reflection on the content and to identify any further areas that should be explored with subsequent participants. This process of moving back and forth between examining the data and then conducting further interviewing allows the researcher to examine and reflect on the data generated so far (Liamputtong, 2013). It allows refinements and adjustments if needed to the interviewing technique, and the ideas from the initial interviews taken forward to generate new areas for discussion and data generation. This process can also prove to be "a healthy corrective for built in blind spots" (Liamputtong, 2013: 242). The remaining participants were interviewed between mid-January and mid-October 2015. All participants were given a $30 petrol voucher for their participation in the research. At the end of each interview I explained the arrangements about returning transcripts so that interviewees could review them and comment further if they wished. Forbat and Henderson (2005) discuss at length the appropriateness and complexities of returning verbatim transcripts to participants. They note that the purpose is not to check the accuracy or truthfulness of the account generated, but can be fruitful in allowing participants to reflect further on the topic as well as providing a check on details, for example if words have been misheard in the transcription. They and others have pointed out that there are challenges for participants in revisiting the interview in written form and the process is not unproblematic, with participants sometimes feeling embarrassed about what they had said or how they had said it (Forbat & Henderson, 2005; Karnieli-Miller et al., 2009) and becoming concerned at how they would be represented in the finished document. Corden and Sainsbury (2006) also studied participant reaction to verbatim excerpts in completed research reports, finding that opinions were divided on whether or not they should be 'tidied' up. While some preferred the oral account to be represented exactly as it had been said, others felt that unedited excerpts of their interviews presented them in a negative light as being uneducated or unattractive, and would mean that their comments would not be taken seriously. My experience in a previous study had been 45 consistent with the latter response, and based on this as well as the literature, I believed a limited amount of 'tidying' was warranted. I transcribed all interviews verbatim myself, though I made the decision to omit the 'fillers' such as 'I mean', and 'you know' where I felt these added nothing to the meaning. The decision also had a practical basis in that omitting these filler phrases helped speed the transcribing, particularly in cases where the participant used them numerous times. In my covering email with the transcripts I warned participants that oral speech was likely to look different from a written document when transcribed, and as long as the meaning was clear, any disjointed phrases or repetitions were no reflection on their credibility.