When modern or herbal medicine claim a superior efficacy, on what grounds do they do so: what claims to truth are invoked and for what kind of subject? Such a history of present ways of doing and knowing herbal medicine is critical, not suspicious, of these normative grounds in the sense that it seeks to demonstrate the historical contingency of the bodies of knowledge, ways of doing, and modes of being that make herbal medicine feasible, suitable or dangerous at this particular moment in the two countries under scrutiny. In other words, it is an approach that 14 For comprehensive contemporary studies of Vietnamese herbal medicine see Hoang et al. (1999), Craig (2002) and Marr (1987), and for studies of British or 'western' herbal medicine see Griggs (1997), Mills (1993), O'Sullivan (2005) and McIntyre (1988). 43 works to establish the historicity of the objects and subjects of herbal medicine by approaching it as an ensemble of interlinked practices, acts and thoughts. The relations between ways of knowing and ways of doing have been central to Bachelard's (1984) notion of phenomenotechnology in his studies of what he saw as the "technical activity" of thought carried out by chemists and physicists in their laboratories, and to Canguilhem's (1989) work on the role of biological concepts (e.g. of the normal, the pathological, the reflex, regulation) in biological experimentation. In setting out to characterise The New Scientific Spirit that organised the new sciences of non-Euclidian geometry, quantum mechanics and relativity, Bachelard proposed to "examine the fundamental metaphysical question of the reality of the external world in terms of scientific practice" (1984: 10). For Bachelard, realism and rationalism were not to be taken as opposites, rather each scientific experiment had to be approached as both a demonstration and an application so as to reduce "the gap between explicated reality and applied thought" (ibid.). His point being that some form of thought was intrinsic to any scientific practice; it was not a case of abstract hypotheses vs. real experiments, rather "to the extent that hypotheses have been linked to experiment, they must be considered just as real as the experiments themselves - they are 'realized'" (ibid. : 6). According to Bachelard, "the only way to achieve objectivity is to set forth, in a discursive and detailed manner, a method of objectification" (ibid. : 12), and as a result it was the task of the historian of science to map out the historicity of such systems of objectification. However primitive or given, objectivity "is something that is learned with great difficulty" (ibid. : 11), and, indeed, one should be humble enough to recognize that its pursuit is an always unfinished and endlessly transforming task (cf. Gadamer 1996). As such, scientific development was not so much a linear progression as a series of epistemological ruptures, rectifications and breaks, often against the odds (or epistemological obstacles) that common sense and conformist thinking placed in its way (Bachelard 2001; see also Gutting 1989). Epistemology, for Bachelard, was historical and for this reason it was necessary to demonstrate how even those systems of objectification which might seem somehow outdated or even 'primitive' to scientists today, in fact had their own empirically-grounded forms of logic in their day. 44 It is this sense of a historically locatable inseparability of 'realisations of the rational' from 'rationalisations of the real' that Canguilhem would take into his analyses of the formation (through biological experimentation) of various and often competing theories of the relations between the normal and the pathological. For Canguilhem, it was the concept that was crucial in the development of methods of objectification for the very practical 'work' that it performed, not just in developing certain codes of observation or conventions of experimentation, but also in making experimentally-observed phenomena intelligible and practicable. Indeed, it is these concepts that are necessary for the emergence of particular ways of knowing or 'styles of reasoning' (Hacking 2002) about, for example, health and illness. In his classic "Essay on some problems concerning the normal and the pathological", Canguilhem (1989) contrasts a way of thinking which sees illness as the direct effect of either excesses or deficiencies in physiological phenomena and health as the restoration of these variations to normal levels (as Claude Bernard put it "there are only differences of degree" between health and illness), with one in which health is the capability of organisms to tolerate and/or adjust to infractions or deviations from habitual norms, and in doing so to instigate new norms. In this latter view, illness is not so much a deviation from the normal as an inability to adapt to physiological changes, whether internally or externally induced (see also Gutting 1989: 46-8). Thought spaces - when a form of rationality/system of practices is but one among many For Foucault, this crucial insight into how historically contingent ways of thinking were intimately intertwined with ways of doing was in no way confined to the laboratories of chemists, physicists and pathologists where concrete problems were tackled through experimentation. Instead, such an approach could also be innovatively applied to studies of how social problems were tackled in the poor houses, hospitals, infirmaries, schools, barracks, workshops and prisons of social workers, doctors, pedagogues, wardens and managers. Crime, illness, prostitution, idleness, poverty, etc. Foucault argued, are social problems which become both intelligible and amenable to intervention through certain historically contingent dispositifs understood as "resolutely heterogeneous grouping[s] composing discourses, institutions, architectural arrangements, policy decisions, laws, administrative measures, scientific statements, philosophic, moral and philanthropic propositions; in sum, the said and the not-said" (Foucault, et al. 2003: 11). And, in the same way that Bachelard and Canguilhem showed how epistemologies were historical, 45 throughout his work, Foucault (1967; 1973; 1977; 1978) empirically demonstrated the historicity of the regimes of practices that epistemologies both fostered and depended on in a social arena. Drawing on such an approach, the task of historians of social practices becomes one of making sense of what might appear as oddities, absurdities or even atrocities from the point of view of current ways of thinking (e.g. giving sufferers of hysteria cold baths, torturing bodies as public spectacles, rounding up 'degenerates' into poor houses) by locating these practices within the systems of thought or ways of thinking which organised and gave credence to them. That is to say, for every set of historically locatable healing, punitive, or reformative practices there are interrelated medical, penal or pedagogical gazes or grids of intelligibility/visibility which provide more or less circumscribed logics to them. This is not to say that dispositifs comprise a neat and orderly set of corresponding rationalities and practices, rather, within them, a multiplicity of rationalities and practices meet, interact, and come into tension in attempts to address very concrete, practical and 'messy' problems. And one can be sure that for every 'success' claimed there will be 'failures' derided, as has so clearly been the case in 20th century medicine. It is this sense of a de-exoticising of the odd and peculiar that can help us trouble the givens and self-evidences of today, for if there is a rationality to the 'odd' practices of, say 19th century doctors, then surely there is an oddity to the 'rational' practice of medicine today. And so the task of historians of the present becomes one of making the commonsensical, the taken-for-granted appear odd. In the context of my study of herbal medicine, it is a dispositif of practitioner associations, safety and efficacy legislation, institutes of drug quality control, herbal self-help manuals, practitioner training programmes, clinical trials, phytochemical elucidations, pharmacology laboratories, health promotion programmes, internet communities, and much more that will be the object of my research, in both of the countries I have chosen. And what links this heterogeneous grouping together in these countries are certain arrangements of grids of perception and prescription that make space for a whole set of assessing, diagnostic and prognostic judgements, which in turn provide the normative bases, justifications and rules for ways of conducting the conduct of others (herbal practitioners, producers of herbal remedies, herbal medicine users) and of ourselves (as 'whole persons', responsible herbal remedy producers, qualified practitioners) (see Foucault 1991). The point to be made, as will become abundantly clear in the chapters that follow, is that the problematisation of 46 herbal medicine takes place within a thought space, or better yet, within an array of thought spaces, where ways of thinking (rationalities) are inseparably linked to ways of doing (regimes of practices). It is within such thought spaces that suitabilities of means to ends are formed, reformed and transformed. Now, where Weber, Habermas and many other sociologists have seen in rationalisation and modernisation processes that have teleologically introduced administrative and economic forms of systematised organisation of action into almost all corners of society, Foucault, Canguilhem, Rabinow, Rose, Dean and others have instead asked what forms relations between ways of thinking and ways of doing have come to take that we can speak of them as modern. In this latter sense, modernity is not so much an epoch or an age, nor a destructive force of ossification, alienation, repression, anxiety or disorientation. Instead it is an 'attitude of mind'; a mode of relating to contemporary reality which values, indeed 'heroizes' the present with "a desperate eagerness to imagine it, to imagine it otherwise than it is, and to transform it not by destroying it but by grasping it in what it is" (Foucault 1997b: 311). There is not one form of Rationality that is somehow representative of modernity. Rather, as an attitude of mind, modernity allows for numerous (sometimes overlapping, sometimes contradicting) rationalities and systems of practices to emerge, flourish, transform or fall into disrepute (see Dean 1994, especially chapter 4). There are not just methods of objectification in the so-called 'hard' and life sciences, these are also found in the human and social sciences. It is the expert bodies of knowledge (even pockets of knowledge or sub-theories within these) that emerge out of all of these various methods of objectification which make claims to truth in a battle to establish epistemological authority, to surpass certain epistemological thresholds. Some knowledges never quite attain such veridical authority however persistent (e.g. mesmerism, phrenology or spiritism), while others, having initially achieved it, lose out in the face of sustained challenges (e.g. social evolutionism, humoral medicine or psychoanalysis), and still other so-called 'popular' or 'folk' forms of it never having achieved sufficient 'formalisation' to allow them to stake their claims other than in certain localised contexts15 (see Moreira 2000; Triantafillou and Moreira 2005). These games of truth are far from globally universal and often have their unique trajectories and particularities in different geo-political 15 Although we will be seeing later how during the course of the 20th century various ethno-sciences emerged as sub-disciplines with the explicit remit of rescuing and formalising these, often hitherto undocumented, 'folk' or 'popular' forms of knowledge. 47 localities and socio-cultural settings no matter how 'globalised' a world we have come to live in, as we will be seeing. Nevertheless, while modernity in this sense can easily encompass a multitude of interweaving and sometimes competing grids of intelligibility (rationalities) and regimes of practices, there have been certain forms of relations between ways of knowing and ways of doing that can be linked to a modern attitude of mind. It is these forms of relations between knowledges and practices that Foucault sought to capture with the term 'governmentality' (see Burchell, et al. 1991). It is a form of relation where the government of individuals and populations came to rely specifically on the building up of expert bodies of knowledge - disciplines - which have in turn provided grids of perception and prescription for the conduct of the conduct of these individuals and their aggregates. That is to say discipline as an expert branch of knowledge (biology, psychology, economics, anthropology, sociology, etc.) and as a form of instructing, educating and training. And so where many have suggested that modernity has been characterised by the rise of the nation state and a kind of statisation and rationalisation of society, Foucault and others have suggested that it is more a kind of governmentalisation of the state/statecraft - the building up of particular ensembles of institutions, procedures, analyses, and reflections informed by expert bodies of knowledge - that has emerged out of the particular mode of relating to contemporary reality that we have come to know as modernity (see Barry, et al. 1996). It is also a form of relation where concepts of the norm and normal have played a kind of mediating role in the formulation and execution of normative projects. Just as it has been through the study of the pathological that we came to know the normal in biology, it is through the systematised accumulation of knowledge about certain circumscribed social problems and deviations that we come to know the normal as well as the norms that stabilise and indicate it in social contexts. If "a norm is that which can be used to right, to square, to straighten", Canguilhem argued, then "to normalise, is to impose a requirement on an existence, a given whose variety [and] disparity with regard to the requirement, present themselves as a hostile" (1989: 238). It is to the re-alignment of such hostilities that normalisations (of, for example, the technical means of education, health, economic development, etc.) are addressed as a way of achieving normative goals that are considered 'for the good'. For example, as an effect of modern attempts to secure the 'health, wealth and happiness' of individuals and populations, Foucault (1978) famously argued that the 48 governmentalisation of life over the past few centuries resulted in the formation of what he called the two poles of bio-power - an anatomo-politics of the body and a bio-politics of the population. While the first is directed towards the disciplining and normalising of individual bodies as a means of enhancing their capacities, extorting their forces and securing certain distributions of them, the second is geared towards the regularising and normalising of aggregated mortality rates, birth rates, life expectancy statistics, etc. In the following analysis we will see how the concept of bio-power, as well as the normalisations and governmentalisations of life that have allowed for it to operate, can be helpful in my task of accounting for the revivals of herbal medicine in the United Kingdom and Vietnam, albeit in significantly reconfigured ways. Subjectivities - when modes of knowing overflow into modes of being As might be guessed from my introduction, further to the normalisations and governmentalisations that have facilitated modern forms of intervening, it is the subjectivities that have emerged from the assemblages of problematisations in the fields of British and Vietnamese herbal medicine - is it safe, does it work, what does it do - that will form another one of the leitmotifs of my analysis. For, not only has modernity been characterised by particular forms of relations between rationalities and systems of practices, it has also engendered particular forms of interlinkages between modes of knowing and modes of being. Such relations can be usefully characterised and described with the help of a Foucauldian understanding of ethics in the sense of particular ways of relating to, understanding and working on oneself (Foucault 1978; 1985; 1986; Foucault and Rabinow 1997). Indeed, there has in recent years been a growing field of Foucauldian-inspired research into the ethics of modernity, including Rose's accounts of the role of 20th century psy-disciplines in the inventing and managing of our selves (Rose 1996b; 1999), Rabinow's writings on anthropos today (Rabinow 1996; 2003), as well as Hacking's work on the looping effects of human kinds in the making up of people (Hacking 1995; 2002). In articulating how one might carry out a genealogy of modern modes of subjectification, Rose (drawing on Canguilhem) has argued that in the past few centuries, "vocabularies and techniques of the person, by and large, have not emerged in a field of reflection on the normal individual, the normal character, the normal personality, the normal intelligence, but rather, the very notion of normality has emerged out of a concern with types of conduct, thought, expression deemed troublesome or dangerous" (1996b: 26). While Rose's work on 49 a genealogy of subjectification has specifically engaged with the role of the psy-sciences in building up certain ways of thinking about human beings, as well as practices for working on and ways of relating to ourselves as selves, what I will be demonstrating in the following chapters is how, when it comes to the practice, production and use of herbal medicine, the disciplines of sociology, anthropology, Vietnamese traditional medicine, Western herbal medicine, and neuropharmacology have also had plenty to say about how these selves are constituted (as 'whole persons', coping subjects or neurochemical selves (Rose 2003)), how they come to be pathologised and indeed how they can be recuperated and normalised. Of particular interest to me will be the role of anthropology and sociology (especially their medical sub-disciplines) in the subjectification of modern herbal medicine users. As pointed out earlier, many sociologists have argued that the mid-20th century marked a turning point in the history of modernity, a time when Man could finally emancipate - by way of increased self-reflexivity, raised awareness or improved communicative competences - his/her colonised lifeworlds, alienated subjectivities or repressed creative drives. In contrast, rather than seeing in processes of modernisation and rationalisation the mechanisms of a kind of colonisation or suppression of individual and collective lifeworlds (cf.