Such approaches tend to account for the history of TM and CAM in relation to biomedicine in terms of a politics of (self-)interests between rival groups, movements or professions. Crucially, the professionalisation of biomedicine that started in most industrialised countries in the 1800s, quickly spreading to the colonies, is seen as having led to a good century's worth of (self-interested) biomedical monopoly, hegemony or domination that the biomedical profession continues to actively protect in the face of challenges stemming from the increasing popularity of traditional, complementary and alternative medicines (Cant and Sharma 1999; Dew 2003; Freidson 1970; Goldstein 2000; Saks 1995; Tillman 2002). These studies tend to focus on regulatory aspects of TM and CAM, analysing ways in which a demand-driven new medical pluralism or state-led traditional medicine revivals are leading to concrete efforts to integrate or 'mainstream' them into national public health delivery systems. This mainstreaming is seen by some as "a direct challenge to the authority of the orthodox medical profession" (Sharma 1992: 3) or "a potential threat to the biomedical principles underpinning the activities and professional standing of medical orthodoxy" (Saks 1994: 85), while others warn that TM and CAM is at risk of being "co-opted by the medical establishment and distributed without concern for (or understanding of) possible iatrogenic consequences" (Janes 1999: 1804). The key problem for these studies from a sociology of professions perspective seems to be what it is governments, doctors, alternative therapists and traditional healers are/should be doing to respond to the growing demand/need for alternative and traditional medicine. Seeing as contemporary users of health services tend to shop around and to combine various treatments to fit their own particular situations, it is argued that governments and doctors are increasingly obliged to come to terms with this new medical pluralism and that health reforms and legislation should reflect this. On their part, alternative practitioners must correspondingly come to terms with their own growing popularity and live up to the responsibilities of accountability and liability that accompany it, e.g. by professionalising their occupations (see Cant and Sharma 1999; Dew 2003; Frank 2002; Sale 1994; Stone and Matthews 1996; Welsh, et al. 2004). In a developing country context, medical pluralism is of course not so 'new',11 and 11 Johnston et al. (2004) have argued this same point in a North American context, showing that even if alternative medicines have become more visible through media and popular literature in recent decades, this does not mean that people were not using them throughout the 20th century. A similar point can also be made 29 so studies in these settings have tended to focus on what governments should be doing to support the integration of traditional medicine into national health delivery and how the qualifications of traditional healers can be improved (see Bodeker and Kronenberg 2002; Janes 1999; Jeffery 1982; Last, et al. 1986). The term 'complementary medicine' has been especially salient in these studies as 'medical pluralism' or 'integrated medicine' appears as an ideal to be sought after since it is argued that the "further integration of orthodox and alternative medicine could bring great benefit to the consumer" (Saks 2003: 154). Also approaching the field of alternative and traditional medicine from a regulatory perspective, a number of field studies have looked specifically at the practicalities and problems of integrating alternative and traditional medicine into conventional medicine settings like the hospital, village clinic or general practice. These studies have focused on the difficulties faced by alternative practitioners and those doctors interested in their therapies, as well as the pragmatic solutions they seek. For example, Dew's study of medical acupuncturists in New Zealand (medical doctors who practice acupuncture) found that by virtue of their being identified as 'deviant insiders' by orthodox colleagues, medical acupuncturists had to constantly negotiate the problems of "how to promote an identity which does not reject the social norms of the wider community, and how to disassociate themselves from the auxiliary traits associated with deviant acts" (Dew 2000: 1792). Another study on how Israeli alternative practitioners operate in hospital settings found "a division of labour expressed by a focusing of biomedical practitioners on the diagnosis and treatment of specific disease entities while the alternative practitioners worked in the illness context, concentrating on feelings and affective states involving the alleviation of pain, suffering and efforts to improve quality of life" (Shuval, et al. 2002: 1752). Oyebola's study of Yoruba traditional healers in Nigeria where "scientific medicine and traditional medicine co-exist" found that while professional associations for traditional healers did exist, they were not well-organised, a fact that "weaken[ed] their bargaining power with the government" in policy debates on the integration of traditional medicine into public health care delivery (Oyebola 1981: 92). And Ladinsky et al. have described what they see as a "harmonious merging of Chinese, Vietnamese and Western medical systems" (1987: 1105) in the provision of healthcare in Vietnam, at national, district and village levels where in a European context (see Inglis 1964). Nevertheless, the term 'new medical pluralism' does indicate that some novel initiatives and programmes emerged in many western countries in the late 20th century, a point we will return to in chapter 3. 30 herbal medicines and acupuncture are often used to off-set or ameliorate harmful side-effects caused by, for example, radiotherapy in cancer treatment. Finally, perhaps the most contentious of the distinctions between traditional and alternative medicines on the one hand, and modern medicine on the other, has to do with their 'scientific evidence base', not only as regards its efficacy but also as regards explanations for this efficacy. In this sense, treatments, therapies and medicines are regarded as 'alternative' or 'traditional' in that they provide an entirely unique diagnostic and therapeutic approach to healing when compared with biomedicine.12 For example, Coward (1989, especially Chapter 1) and Fulder (1996) have shown how alternative medicine is often contrasted to biomedicine in terms of not only its 'humanness' but also its 'naturalness', as therapies that work with the body as opposed to against it by supporting the body's self-healing abilities rather than attacking symptoms. This distinction is directly related to ecological critiques of modernity that see industrialisation and modernisation as degenerative, life-enfeebling processes which negatively impact on the balance, vitality and harmony of nature (including the body). Alternative medicine is, in this sense, again presented as the direct opposite of biomedicine and even as a potential antidote to all the harm that modern medicine has been charged with iatrogenically causing over the years. According to Coward, behind this kind of distinction lies an "intense belief in the virtues of using something in its original, 'natural' form, rather than something which has been... 'synthetically' produced" (1989: 20-1) although, as Kaptchuk and Eisenberg have pointed out, one does get the sense that "the metaphor is pliable, relative, and honorific; anything in the alternative alliance is allowed this approbation. Thus, acupuncture needles, megavitamins, and meditation are all 'natural'" (1998: 1062). It is also a distinction that is linked to sociological and anthropological critiques of what are seen as the reductionist or limited definitions of health and illness in biomedicine. If evidence of efficacy is necessary for confirming the legitimacy of a therapy (e.g. in justifications for why these therapies and treatments should or should not be available to the public) then, it is argued, it is necessary to broaden biomedicine's reductionist 12 In this kind of distinction the term 'complementary medicine' suggests that some therapies do not necessarily provide entirely unique diagnostic and therapeutic approaches but rather can be used to complement, for example, a biomedical approach in a supportive fashion (see, for example, Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000). 31 definitions of efficacy. There are in effect two central points to the debate over whether there are/should be fundamental distinctions between different therapies when it comes to their efficacy, as well as explanations hereof. Firstly, a number of social scientists argue that the concepts of health, illness and the healing process found in alternative and traditional systems of medicine are fundamentally and epistemologically different from those utilised by biomedical practitioners. And although there is debate about the extent to which different alternative and traditional therapies share the same concepts, there has been a tendency to generalise in terms of binaries like natural/synthetic, holistic/reductionist, healing support/symptom-busting or whole person/body when distinguishing between TMCAM and biomedicine (see Fulder 1996). Secondly, mechanistic biomedical concepts of pathology and dysfunction are often counterposed with vitalistic notions of imbalance or 'blocked energy flows' (see Kaptchuk 1983; McIntyre 1988). Such definitions of health, illness and the healing process are of course reliant on the highly contested concept of efficacy, as they indicate both the pathways of healing (e.g. neurochemical receptors, qi-energy meridians or the psyche) and the desired outcomes of the healing process (e.g. balance, well-being, ability to cope, or biological normality). This debate tends to be highly polarised, with one side arguing that without plausible biological pathway explanations, any beneficial effects resulting from an alternative or traditional therapy can only be understood as a placebo response, and the other arguing that there is more to health than biology, for example, quality of life, balance, sense of well-being and ability to cope which can all be influenced and shaped by "pathways of words, feelings, values, expectations and beliefs" (Kleinman 1973: 210). And finally, a number of studies, often citing a kind of Kuhnian incommensurability, have also questioned whether or not traditional and alternative medicines can/should be tested using scientific methodologies such as the randomised controlled trial that are seen as ideological by some and objectively neutral by others. Stone and Matthews, for example, suggest that, "certain aspects of the practice of complementary medicine are simply not amenable to proof" (1996: 6). Similarly, Cohen has argued that alternative and complementary medicines "may challenge legal and medical structures that are based entirely on scientific measurement, justification and validation" since these forms of therapy are often "not fully measurable through conventional scientific epistemologies" (1998: 116-17). Kopelman, on the other hand, argues that "[t]herapeutic interventions, by 32 virtue of being called therapies, need to in fact help, not harm, or help more than harm patients or clients, creating a duty to test... using either the best available methods or the same methods used to test conventional therapies" (2000: 44, 36). Parker concurs, arguing that while it may well be that "in a world of pure postmodern particularity and choice, no perspective would command greater epistemic authority than another, and there would be no way of choosing critically between different healthcare modalities, distinguishing better from worse educational courses, or distinguishing competent from incompetent healthcare practitioners[;] the only way we can make these choices is through scientific assessment" (2003: 317). And finally, Angell and Kassirer are adamant that "there cannot be two kinds of medicine - conventional and alternative. There is only medicine that has been adequately tested and medicine that has not, medicine that works and medicine that may or may not work" (1998: 841). The debate is far from over and it seems to be moving towards more pragmatic grounds with attempts at suggesting more 'appropriate' scientific methodologies for testing alternative and traditional medicines to reflect their different therapeutic objectives (e.g. Lewith, et al. 2002). Thompson argues that, at the end of the day, the efficacy debate boils down to: 'What evidence?' and 'Whose evidence?'. These are the very questions that have been and will continue to be highly contested... They are questions that always emerge when incommensurable truth claims meet and the framework for adjudicating these differences eludes us. (Thompson 2002: 61-2) And so, to sum up, while it is almost customary to acknowledge an incredible diversity in the different forms and types of alternative and traditional medicines,13 an emerging sociology of complementary, alternative and traditional medicine has nevertheless tended to view these therapies en masse as indicated by the popular abbreviations of TM 13 It is difficult to provide an all-inclusive list of such therapies, but for the sake of illustration a recent report from the United Kingdom's House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology mentions Acupuncture, Chiropractic, Herbal medicine, Homeopathy, Osteopathy, Alexander Technique, Aromatherapy, Bach and other flower remedies, Body work therapies (including massage), Counselling stress therapy, Hypnotherapy, Meditation, Reflexology, Shiatsu, Healing, Maharishi Ayurvedic Medicine, Nutritional medicine, Yoga, Anthroposophical medicine, Ayurvedic Medicine, Chinese Herbal Medicine, Eastern Medicine (Tibb), Naturopathy, Traditional Chinese medicine, Crystal therapy, Dowsing, Iridology, Kinesiology and Radionics. These are then sub-divided in the report into Professionally Organised Alternative Therapies, Complementary Therapies and Alternative Disciplines (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000). 33 (traditional medicine) or CAM (complementary and alternative medicine). As such, TM and CAM are often portrayed as being in direct opposition to a hegemonic, reductionist and synthetic biomedicine, as something to be (complementarily) integrated into otherwise discriminatorily biomedical health delivery and insurance systems, or as operating according to fundamentally different concepts of health, illness and the healing process (a good part of which are shared across the spectrum of different treatments and therapies) that are not necessarily amenable to scientific proof. At the same time, it also seems fair to conclude that this relatively new field of sociological research has its roots in an unabashedly activist social research agenda that played a significant role in diagnosing a crisis of modern medicine while simultaneously promoting an alternative (bio)medicine. The sociological work done so far on TM and CAM has mostly chosen to cast the fields in terms of a hegemonic biomedical approach, which for many years was able to successfully reject 'fringe' or 'primitive' medicines but that is now under increasing pressure as more and more people look to TM and CAM in their quests for healing. As Cooter has put it, "the hegemony of the 'church [of medicine]' begins to look more fragile and less absolute" (1988: xiii). A fragility that has been more than encouraged by the sociological shift away from studying 'fringe', 'marginal', 'primitive', or 'quack' medicines towards studying TM and CAM that started in the 1960s. Indeed, Goldstein has gone as far as to suggest that "the growing acceptability of alternative medicine reflects the success of medical sociology" (2000: 295). From why to how - doing a history of present herbal healing practices It seems, then, that while sociologists have carried out numerous critical studies of biomedicine - demonstrating its historicity, slating its limitations, and questioning the legitimacy of its monopoly - surprisingly little critical sociological attention has been paid so far to the conditions of possibility that allow complementary, alternative and traditional medicine to succeed where it is claimed that biomedicine has failed (and by critical attention I do not mean the kind of sceptical belittling of these modes of therapy that is in no short supply in contemporary debates on alternative medicine). To be sure, a lot of the more recent sociological studies of complementary, alternative and traditional medicine have done much to unsettle the standard history of alternative and traditional medicine discussed above. McClean, for example, has shown how spiritual and crystal healers "infuse their practice with some of the language and science of biomedicine... throw[ing] 34 into question the conventional biomedicine/alternative medicine interface" (2003: 483), seconded by Tovey et al. (2004: 2) who have argued that: we should not fall back on the conventional picture that presents CAM versus orthodox medicine as the key to understanding CAM. Neither orthodox medicine nor CAM is a monolith. There are disputes and boundary claims being made both within orthodox medicine and within CAM. Not all medical practitioners agree on what constitutes the alternative or the complementary. And Johnston et al. have also "challeng[ed] the notion that the entire regime of alternatives was frozen in social and intellectual disrepute" (2004: 2) in the period leading up to the alleged late 20th century renaissance of alternative medicines. Nevertheless, it is my contention that the bulk of contemporary sociological research continues to approach the field by asking why alternative medicine? As important as this research has been to date, rather than continuing hitherto research into why growing numbers are turning to (or indeed why consistently high numbers have turned to) complementary, alternative and traditional medicine, why a powerful medical establishment continues to subjugate these therapies, why biomedical concepts of health and illness are inadequate, or why alternative and traditional medicines are not being sufficiently integrated into national health delivery systems, I propose here a critical examination of the normative grounds of a specific form of alternative and traditional medicine, namely herbal medicine, as practiced in Vietnam and the United Kingdom respectively. That is to say, a critical history of the present how of herbal medicine in these two countries. In doing so, I hope to look past the dichotomised portrayal of TM and CAM as holistic, natural, traditional, subjugated, Eastern, empowering or people-centred on the one hand and biomedicine as reductionist, synthetic, modern, hegemonic, Western, 'deadening' or impersonal on the other, in favour of seeing how a whole range of different rationalities and practices come into play in contemporary efforts to heal with herbs. Far from setting out to uncover some kind of a failure, fallacy or deception, whether on the part of biomedicine or TMCAM, or indeed to highlight any comparative advantages that one form of healing might have over another, the kind of critical analysis I am proposing here will approach herbal medicine as the problem that it is, or more accurately, as the field of problematisation that it is.