These include: Denmark's State Procurement Agency's "Committee investigating natural products and unauthorised healing therapies" which reported in 1983; the Swedish Minister of Health's Alternative Medicine Committee formed in 1984; the Australian Parliament Social Development Committee's "Inquiry into alternative medicine and the health food industry" reporting in 1986; the French Ministry of Social Affairs and Solidarity's expert group to evaluate "Medecines differentes" formed in 1986; the United States Congressional Subcommittee on Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, Education, and Related Agencies' hearings on "Alternative medicine" in 1993; the Norwegian Ministry of Health and Social Affairs' "Public Assessment of Alternative medicine" from 1998; the USA's White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine reporting in 2002; and more recently, a Ministerial Advisory Committee's reporting on "Complementary and Alternative Health Care in New Zealand" for the Minister of Health in 2004. 72 In the United Kingdom, the BMA had tried to shrug off "growing interest in complementary medicine" as nothing more than a "passing fashion", citing their duty to warn patients "that consultation with practitioners of some alternative therapies may be attended by the risk of great harm" (British Medical Association. Board of Science and Education. 1986: 1, 73-4). Not too surprisingly, however, instead of stifling debate, this report would end up as the catalyst for a series of debates, legislative proposals and regulatory initiatives that have paved the way for some kind of official sanctioning of a new age of medical pluralism in the UK. Since then, osteopaths and chiropractors have achieved statutory recognition through parliamentary Acts in 1993 and 1994 respectively, and more recently a similar route has been embarked on by acupuncturists and herbalists. The numerous and fragmented organisations representing practitioners of other therapies, such as homeopathy, aromatherapy and naturopathy, have also begun exploring ways of uniting as single occupations, with their own practitioner registers, educational standards and disciplinary procedures. As a provisional culmination of this move towards mainstreaming CAM in the United Kingdom, the House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology published their report on "Complementary and Alternative Medicine" in November 2000, making a range of recommendations which are currently under debate (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000). Promoting or protecting public health How then should we understand this relatively recent mobilisation of traditional medicine in Vietnam and complementary and alternative medicine in the United Kingdom?24 In Vietnam, concerted efforts to actively mobilise traditional medicine have been in place since 1955 with the clear objective of promoting public health and, as a result, there has been a particular emphasis on integrating traditional medicine into national health delivery systems. As already pointed out, a newly independent Vietnam was facing massive public health challenges when President Ho Chi Minh called for the combination of traditional and modern medicine. Upon being asked ten years later whether the government had hesitated 24 I am indebted to Anna Dixon for pointing out and helping me sharpen the distinction between promoting and protecting public health in the regulation of TMCAM during the course of a number of discussions concerning the regulation of herbal medicine in 2004-05. 73 before resorting to traditional medicine as a means to address these challenges, Minister of Health Pham Ngoc Thach responded: There are about 16,000 people practising traditional medicine. Shall we 'outlaw' them, or shall we pay the greatest respect to this ancient science of which they keep the secrets, and integrate them into our medical machinery? We have followed the second path. Together with physicians trained in modern methods those 'quacks' are now studying the scientific application of traditional medications to numerous diseases. While they become acquainted with the fundamental notions of modern medicine, our physicians learn the principles and important methods of treatment used in traditional medicine. Thus, we gain a substantial increase of both personnel and prescriptions, and an important new orientation in our scientific research. (Pham 1965: 12-3) Nevertheless, this enlisting of traditional practitioners was not without its hurdles following a prolonged period of colonial medicalisation. Whereas doctors of modern medicine had been trained in state-run schools such as the Hanoi Medical School, practitioners of traditional medicine were "self-taught and family-trained, hence their medical qualifications varied greatly" (Nguyen 1965: 26). Conversely, western-trained 'auxiliary' physicians who had been more or less instructed to deride traditional medicine would have to be reacquainted with the traditions and treatments of their ancestors. To address these impediments to integration, the Vietnamese government set about expanding its network of institutions, associations, schools and departments of traditional medicine such that by now there are around 40 national or provincial traditional medicine hospitals,25 over 50 Departments of Traditional Medicine in various provincial hospitals, and all seven of Vietnam's medical colleges have a Department of Traditional Medicine. Moreover the National Association of Traditional Practitioners has expanded into a network of associations at the provincial and district levels,26 with membership estimates ranging from 20,000 to 34,000, which in turn is estimated to represent some 50-60% of all traditional medicine practitioners in Vietnam (Huu and Borton 2003; World Bank 1993).27 25 The National Institute of Traditional Medicine today goes by the name of the National Hospital of Traditional Medicine. 26 With an estimated population of over 80 million, Vietnam is today administratively divided into 61 provinces, 500 districts and approximately 8,850 communes. 27 This means that there are anywhere between 30,000 - 70,000 traditional medicine practitioners in Vietnam which is comparable to the country's corps of ca. 40,000 trained medical doctors (of which 7,800 have specialised in traditional medicine) (cf. United Nations Development Programme 2004; Vietnam Economy 2003a). Interestingly, that would bring the total number of modern and traditional practitioners to around 90,000, which is similar to the UK's total of 98,000 biomedical practitioners and ca. 4,000 herbalists and acupuncturists. The populations of Vietnam and the UK are comparable at 80 and 60 million respectively. 74 State-sanctioned traditional medicine in Vietnam today comprises two components, a Sino-Vietnamese theory and system of healing referred to as northern medicine (thuoc bac) which includes herbal medicine, acupuncture, massage and exercise techniques, and a plant remedy-based form of medicine referred to as southern medicine (thuoc nam). And while Chinese influence is clear, the two Vietnamese scholars Tue Tinh (14th century) and Lan Ong (18th century) are considered the fathers of a form of traditional medicine that was specifically adapted "to the physical and physiological characteristics of the Vietnamese person as well as to the particularities of Vietnamese pathology, which depends on the tropical climate of Vietnam" (Hoang, et al. 1999: 13). In a recent book on Vietnamese Traditional Medicine, Bui has argued that half-a-century into Vietnam's programme of integration, traditional medicine practitioners can today be classed into three different groups: firstly, a 'dying breed' of elder practitioners who have been trained in classical traditional medical techniques with a classical theoretical and philosophical base (thuoc bac);28 secondly, those who have received training at the traditional medicine faculties of medical colleges or secondary schools of traditional medicine; and finally, 'herb doctors' who have received no formal training but have acquired knowledge and experience through apprenticeships (thuoc nam) (Bui 1999: 34-36). There are also an estimated 10,000 traditional 'healers' in Vietnam who can be divided into fortune tellers (thay boi), bonzes (thay phap), and 'witchdoctors' (thay phu tuy) (Nguyen 2003: 28), but tellingly these kinds of practitioners are invariably excluded from national programmes to integrate Vietnamese traditional medicine into national health delivery on grounds of 'backwardness'. Although we will be seeing later how efforts aimed at protecting the public from insufficiently trained practitioners have taken on increasing importance in recent years, it is clear that the aim of the first efforts to integrate traditional medicine not only into the national health delivery system but also into national medical education and research programmes has been to promote public health by building "a medical service that is suitable to our needs" (Nguyen 1965: 27).29 And while it might well be questioned whether 28 Bui suggests that "nowadays, for reasons of advanced age, few practitioners want to participate in the area of classical medicine, but are dedicated to teaching and treatment in well-organised centres where they are able to transfer their valuable experience to younger generations of physicians" (1999: 34). 29 It is in this connection that Vietnam's postcolonial history of isolation, trade embargos and conflict is especially relevant. For not only was the drive to integrate traditional medicine rooted in a conviction in its 75 initial objectives to fully integrate traditional medicine "with all practitioners of a hospital trying to learn traditional medicine and apply it" (ibid.) have been achieved, Vietnam today stands as one of the few countries in the world (together with China and Korea) that is credited with having an "integrated approach" to healthcare, where traditional medicine plays a substantial role in medical education, research and practice (WHO 2002b: 9). In contrast, the past twenty years worth of efforts to unify, regulate and thereby mobilise some of the many forms of therapy that have come to be classed as CAM in the United Kingdom have been primarily justified in terms of a concern for public health protection - "the widespread and increasing use of CAM... raises significant issues of public health policy such as whether good structures of regulation to protect the public are in place" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: I). As a result, rather than work towards an integration of CAM into national health delivery, authorities have focused their efforts on a kind of contained (self-)regulation of CAM practice. And while the officially-endorsed moves towards statutory and voluntary self-regulation (starting in the early 1990s) underscore the fact that far from all non-biomedical practitioners are considered a public health hazard today (as they were to a much larger extent in the past), it is also clear that one of the primary, explicitly stated goals of (self-)regulation is to "ensure that the public are protected from incompetent and dangerous practitioners... whose continuing practice presents an unacceptable risk" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 5.1, 6.1). In somewhat of a change in tactics, the BMA had already conceded in a 1993 report on new approaches to good practice in CAM that "it is not the place of the medical profession to proscribe the legitimate activities of consumers in health care" (British Medical Association 1993: 2). That did not, however, mean that growing use of CAM could be ignored as "doctors [do] have a duty to... safeguard the public health and, to this end, it is important that patients are protected against unskilled or unscrupulous practitioners of health care" (ibid.). The novelty in this change of heart is of course not the suggestion that there are dangerous, incompetent, unskilled and unscrupulous CAM practitioners who pose a threat to the public, but rather it is the acceptance that there is in fact such a thing as a competent, utility and efficacy, it was in many ways also a question of economic necessity and feasibility (see Wahlberg 2006). 76 skilled and responsible CAM practitioner.30 As a result, and echoing the preamble to the 1858 Medical Act, the House of Lords Select Committee argued that "the effective regulation of [CAM]... allows the public to understand where to look in order to get safe treatment from well-trained practitioners" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 5.1), a regulatory function that until very recently had been pretty much reserved for the biomedical profession in the United Kingdom. And so it is precisely here that we can see the outline of a transformed public health protection rationality: rather than directly advise against using 'fringe medicines' or discourage their practitioners from practicing, public health protection today entails helping the public to know where to look on the one hand and ensuring that CAM practitioners are well-trained and qualified on the other. This very much developing public health protection strategy of consumer enlightenment has to date employed two specific routes, firstly a comprehensive mapping out of just what kinds of different therapies are on offer to CAM consumers, and secondly, a taxonomising and ranking of these therapies according to criteria of public health value/danger. Probably the most famous of such hierarchisations can be found in the Select Committee report from 2000, but more recently a consumer guide from the Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Medicine has also grouped CAM therapies under headings of 'statutorily regulated', 'proposals made for statutory regulation' and 'other' (see Table 1).31 It is important to understand what the key principle of taxonomy has been in each case. According to the House of Lords Select Committee, an important means of helping the public know where to look is first of all to rank CAM therapies according to their 'scientifically established' evidence base.32 The Select Committee's ranking of therapies into three separate groups was undoubtedly the most contentious element of their report, sparking wide debate as to what criteria were appropriate for such an exercise. For the 30 Recall the Chief Medical Officer's argument from 1923 referred to earlier that it is "doubtful whether a trained herbalist is any less dangerous than a trained one". 31 As an interesting aside, The Times recently provided their readers with a guide to alternative medicine in which they rated various CAM therapies according to "research evidence" and "research quantity". Western Herbal Medicine and acupuncture came out with a top ranking of 4 stars, Chinese Herbal Medicine was given 3 stars, chiropractic and osteopathy 2 stars, while homeopathy, aromatherapy and reflexology were given only 1 star. Bi-aura therapy, radionics, holographic repatterning and watsu were rated as "well, just don't go there" (Ahuja 2006). 32 The Select Committee did also use degrees of self-organisation as a further criterion in their taxonomy, but it is clear that a 'credible evidence base' was their primary criterion. 77 Committee, the first group of 'principal disciplines' (or the Big 5) were distinguished by "scientifically established efficacy in the treatment of a limited number of ailments". The second group consisted of 'complementary therapies' which "give help and comfort to many patients when used in a complementary sense to support conventional medical care even though most of them lack a firm scientific basis". And finally, the last group of 'alternative disciplines' were described as "indifferent to the scientific principles of conventional medicine" and "lack[ing] a credible evidence base". While consumers are not explicitly advised against using Group 3 therapies, the Select Committee does argue that these therapies "cannot be supported unless and until convincing research evidence of efficacy based upon the results of well designed trials can be produced" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 2.1-2.11). Table 1: CAM hierarchies House of Lords Select Committee PW Foundation for Integrated Health Group 1: Principal disciplines Acupuncture, Chiropractic, Herbal medicine, Homeopathy, Osteopathy Statutorily regulated Chiropractic, Osteopathy Group 2: Complementary Therapies Alexander Technique, Aromatherapy, Bach remedies, Body work therapies (including massage), Counselling stress therapy, Hypnotherapy, Meditation, Reflexology, Shiatsu, Healing, Maharishi Ayurvedic Medicine, Nutritional medicine, Yoga Proposals made for statutory regulation Acupuncture, Herbal medicine Group 3: Alternative Disciplines 3a Long-established and traditional systems of healthcare: Anthroposophy, Ayurvedic Medicine, Chinese Herbal Medicine, Eastern Medicine, Naturopathy, Traditional Chinese medicine 3b Other alternative disciplines: Crystal therapy, Dowsing, Iridology, Kinesiology, Radionics Other therapies Aromatherapy, Craniosacral therapy, Healing, Homeopathy, Hypnotherapy, Massage therapy, Naturopathy, Nutritional therapy, Reflexology, Reiki, Shiatsu, Yoga therapy (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000; Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005) On the other hand, the main principle of taxonomy used by the Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Medicine in their threefold grouping of the "most widely used" therapies was not so much a therapy's evidence base, but rather the extent to which they protect consumers from "untrained or insufficiently trained" practitioners (Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005: 7). For the Foundation, regulation is the key to ensuring safe and responsible practice and while "osteopaths and chiropractors are 78 regulated by law, like doctors and nurses... the other complementary healthcare professions are at different stages of developing voluntary systems of regulation" (Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005: 13). In other words, the three groupings of therapies used in their report indicate the respective "stages" of their systems of regulation. The aim of the Foundation's guide is to help consumers "find a properly trained and qualified practitioner of that therapy" and in the absence of effective regulatory systems (e.g. for therapies classed as 'Other') to suggest "questions to ask a practitioner before going for treatment" (Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005: 7, 16). The point to be made about the Select Committee's and Foundation's respective hierarchisations of CAM therapies is that they demonstrate how dividing practices are in the first instance being internalised into a differentiated CAM field in general. It is evident that the blocs often associated with the 'golden age of biomedicine' (i.e. a biomedical 'us' vs. a non-biomedical 'them') are in the process of being nuanced to reflect medical pluralism in the UK today. And as I have suggested, this nuancing has been made possible in the first instance by mapping out and taxonomising the different forms of therapy on offer to consumers as a means to helping them know where to look. Consumer vigilance33 is encouraged all the more if a therapy's regulatory mechanisms are seen as fragmented or, as argued by the Select Committee, if a 'credible evidence base' is lacking.