And just as Foucault (1978) has argued that life and its mechanisms, in both individual bodily (anatomo-politics) and collective population (bio-politics) forms, were brought into a realm 123 Critiques which as I have already pointed out date back to at least the 19th century. 124 This argument builds on Rose's (1996b) suggestion that in the latter half of the 20th century advanced liberal political rationalities introduced an entire host of techniques for governing through individuals' subjectivities, as well as Armstrong's suggestion that the patient's view was reconstructed in post-war medicine such that "the patient can no longer be encapsulated in a single gaze; the whole person is a multi-dimensional rather than unitary being... the patient as subjective body" (1983: 110; see also Armstrong 2002: chapter 7). 202 of explicit calculation enabling it to be intervened upon and improved, so too have the mechanisms of individual psychological life (what we might think of as a psy-politics) and a collective sociological/anthropological life (what we might think of as an anthropo-politics), making these realms of both individual and collective human subjectivity amenable to intervention, as we will be seeing.125 We should not, however, confuse this relatively new neo-vitalistic concept of 'quality of life' with the 'life force' that, for example Vietnamese and British herbal practitioners have long since suggested somehow animates or gives purpose to otherwise lifeless or 'inert matter'. As we saw in the previous chapter, whether described in terms of vital rhythms that ensure a kind of homeostatic balance in the body, a driving force which secures the movements and activations that are necessary for vital balance and harmony, or a universal vital force which must be allowed to flow unimpeded to maintain harmony and health, vitalism in this sense is that which animates, provides direction, or gives vital purpose to what would otherwise be a "mere assemblage of materials" (Bergson 1911: 252). It is seen as the source, origin, texture or cause of life, without which human life itself would not be possible. Neo-vitalistic quality of life and the human capabilities and skills that foster it on the other hand are neither an invisible, fluid-like vital force nor are they a life-enabling vital rhythm or pulse. Indeed, they are in no way a precondition for, although they can have a direct effect on, human subsistence, and vice versa. Rather, they are linked to another, perhaps less explored, side of vitalism today; namely that of human existence and experience - or human subjectivity itself. I will now turn my attention towards how this understanding of a neo-vitalistically configured bio-power can help us to situate the revival of traditional herbal medicine use in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom, albeit in very different ways. As I map out some of the key characteristics of herbal medicine use in both countries, I will demonstrate how different ways of thinking about subjects and subjectivities derived from anthropology and sociology (especially its medical sub-disciplines) have been particularly salient in the ways 125 With this distinction between a psy-politics of individual subjectivities and an anthropo-politics of multiple subjectivities I do not intend to suggest that anthropology has nothing to say on the formation of individual subjectivities (see, for example, chapter 5), or that the psy-disciplines have nothing to say on the formation of collective subjectivities (take, for instance, social psychology). The use of these two terms is purely strategic. Incidentally, a similar point can also be made about anatomo- and bio-politics. 203 in which herbal medicine use has come to be thought about, problematised, governed and managed in both countries today. Managing lifestyles - the swarming of grassroots techniques of life optimisation As we saw in chapter 4, in the United Kingdom, herbal medicine is by far mostly being used as a form of self-medication, with an estimated 7-12% of the British population having used some kind of herbal medicine during the course of a year, compared to 1% who in a given year actively seek out and consult a medical herbalist (O'Sullivan 2005: 184). We also saw how public health strategies in the United Kingdom have shifted away from directly discouraging use towards promoting the 'safe' and 'responsible' use of herbal medicine. Moreover, in evoking the teachings of American herbalist John Christopher, Chairman of the British Association of Master Herbalists Peter Jackson-Main has argued that the ideal to work for is to "have a herbalist in every home" (2005: 97). If we take St. John's Wort use in recent years as a case in point, such a pattern of responsibilised self-treatment becomes more than evident in its over-the-counter sales figures, as well as in a recent proliferation of self-help literature, patient guides and FAQ internet sites offering potential users with practical advice on how to manage a course of treatment with St. John's Wort, not to mention general lifestyle instructions.126 These are what we might think of as grassroots techniques of life optimisation, made available to herbal patients via word of mouth, awareness programmes, popular media, internet searches, as well as through consultations with herbal practitioners. Since the late 1990s, some twenty popular St. John's Wort self-help guides have been published in English, including: Rosenthal's St. John's Wort: The Herbal Way to Feeling Good (1998), Bloomfield et al. 's Hypericum (St John's Wort) and Depression (1998), Turkington's The Hypericum Handbook (1998), Zuess's The Natural Prozac Program: How to Use St. John's Wort, the Anti-Depressant Herb (1997), Knishinsky's The Prozac Alternative (1998), Chevallier's Hypericum - the Natural Anti-Depressant and More (1999) and Cass's St. John's Wort: Nature's Blues Buster (1999). On the internet, sites like "Kelly's St. John's Wort info pages" (www.sjwinfo.org), the "St. John's Wort & Depression HomePage" (www.hypericum.com) and "Herbal relief for depression" (http://www.all- 126 Ironically enough, so popular has St. John's Wort become that herbalists often lament that the high media exposure of St. John's Wort has "fuelled a mistaken idea that a particular herb can 'fix' a particular problem, and that all people need do is go and buy a bottle" (Great Britain. Mind. 2004: 12). 204 natural.com) boast of visits in the "tens of millions". And finally, in the past few years, organisations like Mind (Britain's National Association of Mental Health) and Patient UK have put out leaflets to help guide potential St. John's Wort users through safe and responsible self-medication with herbs. I will highlight four key features from these grassroots techniques of life optimisation, all of which are available to "people of all ages who are trying to cope with short or long-term problems" and allow them to place their suffering within a holistic context of "medical, dietary and emotional history and lifestyle" (Great Britain. Mind. 2004: 9). The first aspect worth noting is their emphasis on providing cognitive meaning frameworks for patients as a concrete coping technique, in chapters with titles such as "Understanding Depression", "Hypericum - Herbal Anti-Depressant" and "What is Depression?". Interestingly, what emerges from these different practical guides is an eclectic mix of symbolic frameworks intended to provide users with what herbalist Simon Mills has referred to as "imagery and models of their illness" (1993: 21). These include suggestions that depression can result from any combination of a stressful lifestyle, disturbance in brain chemistry, unhealthy diet, emotional problems stemming from relationships, family or work as well as underfed and undernourished nervous systems: Never before have people been subjected to so much social stress. Until this century, most people lived in communities where people all knew each other... These days, our society has become increasingly fragmented. Most people live in small, nuclear families, or alone, far from their relatives and childhood friends. And we interact with more strangers in one day than people who lived two hundred years ago did in a whole year. This combination of isolation amidst the crowd is a setup for social stress and for feelings of rejection... St. John's Wort helps make people less vulnerable to this stress. (Zuess 1997: 23) Each of us has our comfort zone in which we can function happily and efficiently, and each of us has our limit, beyond which our capacity to function breaks down. When someone becomes depressed, that breaking point has been exceeded... [M]odifying elements of one's life can contribute enormously to an antidepressant lifestyle that works beautifully in conjunction with... St. John's Wort. (Rosenthal 1998: 91, 136) The brain is an intricate system of chemistry and connections that are currently being discovered... [Depression] is thought of as a disruption of normal connections in the brain. The brain's transmitters of information function like a network of interdependent computers. When one computer misfires, the connections between all the computers crash... Hypericum 205 [has] the ability to inhibit the reuptake of [these] neurotransmitters. (Knishinsky 1998: 24-5, 48) Depression is often due to nervous exhaustion, adrenal 'burn-out' or viral infection... [St. John's Wort] acts to strengthen the nervous system as a whole. (Chevallier 1999: 38) There are countless 'testimonials' that suggest a symbolic efficacy for these explanatory frameworks scattered throughout the self-help guides on St. John's Wort: "I now understand how a lack of serotonin depleted by stress can really affect mental health", "his story reminded me once again of how important it is to add healthy activities to any antidepressant intervention" and "what it really comes down to is a change in lifestyle... I really think that a combination of things is what is needed to overcome depression, therapy, medication, nutrition, exercise, prayer, meditation" (cited in Martin 2006; Rosenthal 1998). In a Levi-Straussian reading of such testimonials, one might say that for these St. John's Wort users "protagonists have resumed their places and returned to an order which is no longer threatened" (see chapter 5), the protagonists being neurotransmitters (which can misfire like computers), nervous systems (which can 'burn out'), lifestyles (which can take us past our breaking point), social ties (which can become fragmented and isolated), and of course St. John's Wort which is enlisted to redress these disturbances. This is the point that the House of Lords Select Committee raised in their CAM report when pointing out that there may well be "a better fit between patient's view and... CAM explanatory models [as these] are more likely to consider factors such as emotional and social factors in disease and so will be concerned with the patient's overall experience" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 3.17). It is also the point that Sharma, in her sociological study of CAM use in the UK, was making when arguing that the appeal of CAM treatments such as herbal medicine can in good part be explained by its offer to patients of "a new way of looking at their illnesses, that sense of a more relevant order being imposed on problematic experiences [and]... insofar as this new interpretation is found acceptable and creates positive feelings of comfort and confidence on the part of the patient, then there is a sense in which it has 'worked'" (Sharma 1992: 72). At the same time, however, just as medical anthropologists have argued that subjects in the so-called 'developing world' are notoriously eclectic in the ways in which they enlist various symbolic frameworks (from spirit possession to germ theory), the same argument can certainly be made in a western context like that of the 206 United Kingdom. Sharma suggests that "it need not surprise us that individuals may prefer orthodox medicine for one purpose, homeopathy or herbalism for another... [since] choosing to consult a non-orthodox practitioner does not in itself mean a rejection of orthodox medicine as a total cultural system (nor total acceptance of an 'alternative' system)" (1992: 81-7). With St. John's Wort, as we have seen in the previous and current chapters, explanatory frameworks range from the cutting-edge neuroscientific theories of pharmacologists to the age-old vital life force theories of herbalists. A second feature common to these grassroots techniques of life optimisation is the responsibilising cautions and warnings they communicate to self-medicating users of over-the-counter St. John's Wort products. While self-medicating is seen as more than appropriate for the kind of "everyday problems" or "mild to moderate" depressions suffered by many, it is also stressed that self-help guides "are not intended as a substitute for medical care" and that a patient should "consult a qualified herbalist or GP" if symptoms persist or before switching from prescription medications to herbal medicines (Bloomfield, et al. 1998: 5; Great Britain. Mind. 2004: 8; Rosenthal 1998: xx). Each of these cautions is linked to concerns about what former NIMH president Trudy Norris has referred to as "self-prescrib[ing] in an inappropriate way" (BBC News Online 2002). Patients are also advised to keep their GPs informed of any herbal medications that they take (Great Britain. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 2004b; Patient UK 2005). Recalling the safety and quality issues arising from the industrialisation of herbal medicine discussed in chapter 4, it is also interesting to note that these self-help guides provide advice on "how to shop for St. John's Wort" or "how to obtain research-grade hypericum", highlighting that there has been an explosion in the range of St. John's Wort products available leaving the consumer with little chance of knowing where to look for good quality - "do a bit of research before you buy anything". Overall, herbal users are urged to be vigilant and to monitor their own treatments, being sure to note "any side effects you experience" or "if the symptoms aren't getting better within a few days" (Bloomfield, et al. 1998: 79; Great Britain. Mind. 2004: 7, 9). The point being that herbal medicine is to be used in an appropriate and responsible manner that requires users to constantly monitor themselves and if ever in doubt to consult a qualified practitioner (either modern or herbal). All of these responsibilising cautions are examples of what I, in chapter 4, suggested can be 207 understood as awareness-raising techniques for promoting herbal vigilance on the part of self-medicating users of herbal medicines. Thirdly, self-help guides on St. John's Wort are filled with lifestyle-related advice. Treating depression holistically, it is asserted, has to do with much more than taking 300 mg of hypericum two or three times a day, as patients are urged to evaluate their own lifestyles in terms of sleep patterns, diet, exercise, family life and work life. This is perhaps especially the case with a condition such as depression, which is often described as an inevitable side effect of modern living - eating on the run, overworking, no exercise, little 'quality time' with family, over-consumption of toxins such as alcohol or caffeine, etc. As a consequence, users of St. John's Wort are encouraged to engage in "healthy activities" as an adjunct to the herbal remedy, thereby ensuring holistic self-treatment which makes St. John's Wort not an instant fix but rather "part of an anti-depressant lifestyle" (Rosenthal 1998: 135). Importantly, much emphasis is placed on the notion of empowering patients into "taking control of your life", as it is argued that "people like the idea of having more control over their own treatment" (Great Britain. Mind. 2004: 4). And Rosenthal (1998: xviii), in his St. John's Wort guide, argues that: Obtaining knowledge about how you can fight depression is one way of regaining a sense of mastery. As you take each successive step toward combating it, you will begin to turn the problem around and feel increasingly better, closer and closer to recovery. As we saw earlier, one of the most common critiques of an overly bureaucratised and rationalised modern medicine is that it turns people into passive patients, mechanically transferred from specialist to specialist. Put in another way, patients in advanced liberal countries such as the United Kingdom are seen to have become increasingly ossified and dehumanised, conditions that herbal medicine users are encouraged to remedy by reclaiming charge of their lives and their health. To overcome their passivity, herbal medicine users are provided with an entire range of concrete methods and activities for taking control of looking after their conditions and selves, this being the final and perhaps most important feature of the grassroots techniques of life optimisation. These include concrete treatment plans which include information on dosages, practical ways to monitor progress during treatment, as well as instructions on when it is best to contact a qualified medical worker. 208 Table 4: Log for Monitoring Effects of St. John's Wort on Target Symptoms of Depression127 Target Symptom (e.g. anxiety, low energy, etc.) Baseline and Weeks 1 through 6 Baseline Week 1 Week 2 Week 3 Week 4 Week 5 Week 6 Scale: 0 = no change -1 = a little worse 1 = a little better -2 = quite a bit worse 2 = quite a bit better -3 = a lot worse 3 = a lot better 4 = completely better In a chapter entitled "Developing a game plan for using St. John's Wort to treat depression", Rosenthal provides readers with methods for diagnosing the severity of their depression, advice on getting the dose right, a suggested dosing schedule, as well as a log for monitoring the effects of St. John's Wort on target symptoms (see Table 4). Such tools for the practical management of depression are of course very common to the self-help literature not only on St. John's Wort but also on many other anti-depressant medications, and they should be understood as specific techniques of 'safe', 'responsible' and 'active' medication for those patients who choose not to see a qualified medical herbalist or doctor about their depression and instead take affairs into their own hands. They are concrete guides on "how to use the herbal remedy in an informed and effective way to overcome depression and enhance quality of life" (Rosenthal 1998). There is a consistent emphasis on ensuring that self-treating users of St. John's Wort concentrate not just on the medicinal side of the treatment, but also on aspects of quality such as their emotional wellbeing, experience of family life, coping with work-related stress, etc.