Habermas, Freud, Simmel, Weber and others), what I will be arguing is that one way to characterise the forms of relations between modern ways of knowing and being is in terms of not just a normalisation but also a governmentalisation of human subjectivities which actively bring these subjectivities into being, rendering them intelligible, and thereby amenable to intervention. Never before have individual and collective cognitive frameworks and lifeworlds been mapped out with such intensity. It is a disciplining that has been made possible by branches of knowledge that have flourished since the early 20th century, including psychology, anthropology, ethnography and a whole range of ethno-sciences, the latter of which eventually 'came home from the tropics' resulting in a distinctive ethnographic turn in late 20th century sociology (Latour 1993). Moreover, it is precisely through this mapping out that pathologies of immaturity, unawareness, alienation, repression, disorientation and anxiety, which are considered particular to human subjectivities in both their individual and collective forms, have emerged and become accessible to normalising intervention. As we will see, if individuals or indeed populations are seen as having been held back in states of 50 'backwardness' by their traditions and superstitions, then it is through 'civilising' interventions that they can be 'righted' (in Canguilhem's sense of the word); if they are seen as having been alienated by processes of industrialisation, then it is through 'emancipating' or 'empowering' interventions that ossified lifeworlds can be recuperated; or if they are seen as having become disoriented and anxious in the face of the forces of globalisation, then it is through 'coping' interventions that these anxieties can be stabilised and grounded. Hacking has argued that the classification of humans - for example, into primitive/ civilised, alienated/emancipated or disoriented/grounded (a speciality of anthropologists and sociologists in the past two centuries) - has looping effects: "there is a looping or feedback effect involving the introduction of classifications of people. New sorting and theorising induces changes in self-conception and in behaviour of the people classified. Those changes demand revisions of the classification and theories", and so on (1995: 370). Put in another way, we might say that different modes of knowing or styles of reasoning which emerge out of the human and social sciences can and do transmogrify into ways of being, as they provide individuals with certain ways of relating to, understanding and acting upon them selves as certain 'kinds' of people. Rabinow (2003) speaks of how logoi (reasoned or true discourses) can transform into different forms of ethos (relationships with your self) through practices of phronesis (practical wisdom) and ascesis (self-forming activity), underlining that when it comes to anthropos today this is an always-unfinished relation: The fact that there is a problem in thinking about human things [e.g. health], and that part of that problem lies in the inability to provide a stable solution, is coexistent and cotemporal with the practice itself... However, the form of the problem - and therefore the practices that produce it and that it produces - has not always been the same. (Rabinow 2003: 4) Yet, as already mentioned, it is not only the human and social sciences that have contributed to the making up of the 'whole person' subjectivities which herbal medicine rely on. I will also show how the vitalistic theories of Sino-Vietnamese and British herbal medicine provide herbal medicine users with particular ways of relating to and understanding themselves, as do the serotonin and dopamine hypotheses of neuroscientists working on depression and addiction. While each of these ways of knowing is at one level in competition to establish an epistemological authority in matters of human illness and 51 health, as will become clear, they are not necessarily mutually exclusive, and indeed often co-circulate in the consultation rooms of herbal practitioners, public health programmes to promote the proper use of herbal medicine, or in self-help literature intended for self-treating herbal medicine users. And just as Canguilhem has shown how it is concepts that do the 'work' in making certain codes of observation or forms of medical intervention intelligible and practical, I will be showing how it is concepts (e.g. coping, balance, efficacy) that do the 'work' in the looping or transmogrification of ways of knowing into ways of being. Dispositif As discussed in the previous chapter, there is no shortage of sociological approaches and questions one can bring to the field of alternative and traditional medicine. I have suggested that one might highlight three predominant approaches to doing sociology in the field of TM and CAM - roughly divided into sociology of health and illness, sociology of professions and sociology of knowledge approaches - which is of course not to say that any particular studies or researchers are necessarily bound by these distinctions. But in grouping these three ways of doing the sociology of TM and CAM, I have tried to bring together some of the most important sociological findings from the past couple of decades in a field that is growing by the day, not least as pertains to Vietnam and the United Kingdom. Clearly inspired by some of the first early-20th century medical anthropology studies of 'primitive medicine', we have seen how some sociologists have focused on highlighting symbolic effectiveness as a crucial part of TM and CAM treatments. What these rich ethnographic and narrative accounts of TMCAM practice and use have served to remind us is that however corporeal a disease, there is much more to healing than biology. These studies have meticulously mapped out both the centrality of cognitive frameworks in facilitating healing encounters, and the pragmatic and eclectic nature of users' health seeking strategies. That is to say, what we have learned from these studies is that not only are there bodies to be mended there are also subjectivities to be healed, a distinction solidified in ethnographic accounts of illness experiences, health-seeking behaviours, lay referral networks and coping strategies involving TMCAM. In a Vietnamese setting, Craig (2002) has carried out just such an ethnography of everyday health knowledge and practice, providing us with fascinating insight into how antibiotics and age-old family remedies 52 eclectically combine and transform in the daily health practices of a number of families in northern Vietnam. And in the United Kingdom, Cant and Sharma (1996; Sharma 1992) have carried out comprehensive qualitative research into both the reasons for use of CAM therapies by lay persons, including herbal medicine, and the challenges faced by its practitioners. What they found was considerable frustration with modern medicine on the part of lay persons who suffered especially from chronic conditions, but also a general pragmatic eclecticism as patients 'shopped around' and 'tried out' different forms of therapy. We also saw how a number of researchers have adopted a sociology of professions take on relations between TM and CAM practitioners on the one hand, and state-sponsored biomedical monopolies on the other. These studies have historically demonstrated how divisions between orthodox and unorthodox, regular and irregular, or modern and traditional have shifted through the past centuries or indeed remained constantly fluid and blurred. They have also shown how contestations and power relationships at the fringes and margins of medicine have been a consistent feature of medical practice in recent centuries, not only in industrialised country settings but also in colonial and postcolonial contexts - where there is medicine, there is quackery. Saks' (1986) pioneering study into the introduction, dismissal, and eventual co-optation of acupuncture in the United Kingdom stands as a forceful account of how policies, regulations, as well as other authoritative practices, such as publishing in key medical journals, allowed the biomedical profession to fend off what it saw as incursions into its state-protected monopoly of professional medical practice. Moreover, O'Sullivan et al. (2005) have recently highlighted the debates surrounding ongoing efforts to professionalise herbal medicine in the UK through the establishment of accreditation systems, practitioner registers, and codes of conduct, which in turn are resulting in new sets of power relationships within herbal medicine. In Vietnam, Bodeker (World Bank 1993), working as a consultant for the World Bank, has carried out an analysis of the policies and regulatory frameworks that have allowed for the combination of traditional and modern medicine in postcolonial Vietnamese health delivery, especially highlighting resource inequalities and a particular development-aid-driven bias towards modern medicine. And finally, I have also suggested that a growing number of researchers have chosen to approach the field of TM and CAM from a sociology of knowledge perspective. By 53 outlining the epistemological foundations of modern medicine, these studies have scrutinised the procedures and techniques of medical truth making, questioning their adequacy and legitimacy especially when dealing with epistemologically 'incommensurable' healing paradigms such as those of TM and CAM therapies. Unschuld (1985) and Kaptchuk (1983) have demonstrated to Western audiences the social context, rationality, and coherence of what for long were written off as the 'esoteric' and 'mystical' philosophies and traditions of traditional Chinese medicine (very much related, as we will be seeing, to Vietnamese medicine).16 They have also shown how Chinese medicine has come to be scientificised in recent decades. In the case of what is nowadays known as 'western herbal medicine' in the United Kingdom, herbalists Mills (1993) and McIntyre (1988) have accounted for the concepts guiding their healing practices as well as their historical and geo-cultural origins, underlining the globalised nature of herbal medicine today. A recurring theme in these studies has been that of reductionism vs. holism and how to reconcile this split in clinical and laboratory settings. There is a grave risk, it is increasingly argued, that in the face of pressures to build up an evidence base, herbal medicine will be scientifically colonised, forced into translating essentially vitalist concepts of health and healing into the reductionist and mechanistic concepts of biomedicine. As a result, studies are increasingly exploring ways of reforming scientific research into TM and CAM such that it takes into account its holistic specificities and therapeutic goals. What this current study shares with those mentioned above is a preoccupation with the much acclaimed revival and renaissance of herbal medicine in Vietnam/East Asia and the United Kingdom. However, it is not the cognitive lifeworlds that ethnographers emically map out, the regulatory frameworks that policy and risk analysts hold to account, the scientific (arte)facts that science and technology studies seek to situate, or the ideas that historians of ideas go about tracing to their origins and beginnings that are the object of my analysis. Instead, it is the interrelated grids of intelligibility and regimes of practices - the dispositifs - through which herbal medicine has come to be viewed as a problem, as well as through which solutions have come to be formulated and put into operation in recent decades. If I am at pains to distinguish the kind of history of the present that I will be carrying out in the following from ethnography, policy analysis, STS or histories of ideas, it 16 See Craig (2002, especially Chapter 3) for a discussion on some of the key health concepts of Vietnamese traditional medicine. 54 is not so much to explain how these other approaches have got it all wrong, rather it is to highlight that what is at stake in this dissertation is an entirely different set of questions. Should we understand the revival of traditional herbal medicine in the United Kingdom and Vietnam, as has been argued, in terms of its superiority in attending to a subject's inherent need for ontological security and existential coherence, as symptomatic of a general 'post-modern' rejection of a monopolised medical authority, or as simply safer and more efficacious in dealing with the chronic conditions that have emerged out of 'our modern way of living'? Perhaps. Yet if this is the case, then it becomes all the more tempting for a historian of the present to describe the formations of power-knowledge relations which have allowed Vietnamese and British herbal medicine to challenge biomedical monopolies since the latter half of the 20th century, to identify the techniques of truth making which either suggest or contest a superior efficacy for herbal medicine in the treatment of the modern scourges of, for example, depression and addiction, and to begin asking about the historical ontology of this so-called 'post-modern' subject who is in permanent need of cognitive coherence and existential reassurance. As I pointed out in the opening chapter to this dissertation, there can be no question that TMCAM/biomedicine dichotomies persist to this day in most of the sociological research being carried out in this field. Whether cast in terms of objectifying-subjectifying, dominant-subjugated, reductionist-holistic or mechanist-vitalist divides, there seems to be an insistence on incommensurability even if, as mentioned, some of the more recent sociological work being done has begun questioning the rigidity of these dichotomies. What I suggest is to change tack by asking not what it is that makes therapies essentially different, but rather what it is that allows one to group this entire range of seemingly 'incommensurable' therapies, remedies and cures - from modern, traditional, alternative to complementary - as healing practices today. This is the conceptual move that will be unfolded in my analysis of the revival and renaissance of herbal medicine in Vietnam and the United Kingdom. In all the controversies, clashes and quarrels that have surrounded traditional and alternative medicine, it seems what is lost sight of is the fact that there nevertheless appears to be a common problem at stake - how best to promote individual and public health. This is not to say that everybody is after all proposing the same thing, rather it is to suggest, as Foucault has argued: 55 To one single set of difficulties, several responses can be made. And most of the time different responses actually are proposed. But what must be understood is what makes them simultaneously possible: it is the point in which their simultaneity is rooted; it is the soil that can nourish them all in their diversity and sometimes in spite of their contradictions. (Foucault 1997a: 118) It is from this perspective that I will be analysing practices and rationalities of regulation, validation, and use of herbal medicine in Vietnam and the United Kingdom. Herbal medicine, as we will learn, has been a problem to which countless solutions have been proposed through the past many centuries, solutions that have aimed at protecting the public from the dangers it might pose to their health, at ensuring its 'safe' and 'proper' use, or at improving its safety, quality and efficacy as a means to optimise its health benefits and minimise its liabilities. Each suggested solution has been intensely contested, with some eventually embraced only to be repealed and overruled at a later point. In other words, herbal medicine is a field in constant motion, ever adapting and rectifying according to new knowledge that comes to light about its efficacy, appalling scandals arising from its irresponsible production, or novel collaborations between herbalists and pharmacologists to standardise herbal preparations. Yet, if we were to bracket out say the last forty years or so of responses and solutions to the problem of herbal medicine, then it might be useful to ask what has made these various and differing solutions simultaneously possible, and whether or not they result from specific forms of problematisation. Quackery, efficacy, life - accessing herbal dispositifs in Vietnam and Britain How then should one go about accessing and describing herbal dispositifs, especially after having chosen to pursue a comparative analysis of two countries and two cases in such different social, economic, cultural, and historical contexts for the reasons outlined in the previous chapter? As always, research design calls for a number of strategic methodological choices which are to be informed by both an insistence on meticulousness and the dull limits of feasibility. My very first methodological choice has been to build up a robust document base upon which to perform the bulk of my analysis, which is perhaps somewhat in contrast to the ethnographic and narrative-based forms of analysis that have largely been favoured in sociological and anthropological studies of TMCAM. Nevertheless, I have not chosen to collate and sift through these documents in isolation. Instead, I have made every effort to visit and speak with the herbalists, pharmacologists, chemists, regulators and herbal medicine users who have produced this body of documents. 56 Not to carry out systematised or semi-structured interviews with them, but rather to talk and learn from them through conversations in their offices, practices, homes or laboratories. And so while it is primarily a rigorous document base that informs the following analysis, my reading and understanding of this base has been immensely facilitated by listening and speaking to those who have been instrumental in their preparation and dissemination. My second strategic choice has been to narrow the scope of analysis to what I have found to be some of the most important controversies in both Vietnamese and British herbal medicine in recent decades. Controversies are often valuable entry points for an analysis, not because of the polemic and sensationalism that surround them, but rather because they often serve to sharpen the various truth claims that are invoked in the different ways in which herbal medicine is problematised. And in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom debates around quackery, efficacy and life have been central to the ways in which the transforming practice and use of herbal medicine in these two countries has been problematised, although as we will see, the particular ways in which they have been addressed have certainly been very different. Is it safe, does it work, what does it do? These questions have occupied regulators, herbalists, scientists, doctors, and herbal medicine users alike in both countries, and it is the problematisations and dispositifs that have emerged around attempts to answer them that I will be exploring. Gathering documents and texts for this dissertation has taken me from Hanoi, Hoa Binh, Mai Chau and Siem Reap in Asia to London, Cambridge, Nottingham, Halle, Munich, Essen and Frankfurt in Europe. It has also taught me how to build up a robust and systematised library of documents (electronic and print) from Ministries of Health, Institutes of Bio-Chemistry, medical and scientific journals, international organisations, herbal practitioner associations, herbalists, patients, consumer organisations, and media. It has been an at times frustrating, mostly absorbing, and often detective-like effort to consolidate a solid empirical foundation from which to identify and discern rationalities and practices of herbal healing in two different countries. Along the way I have spoken at length with herbal practitioners and users, government officials, representatives of international organisations, chemists, pharmacologists, botanists, clinicians, doctors and fellow academics. And amidst all the confusion, excitement and jetlag, it is the three controversies over quackery, efficacy and life that have served as a kind of organising 57 schematic for the ways in which I went about collecting and organising empirical documentation for my research. As a result, the material I have obtained can be broadly divided into three groupings: Quackery: The first grouping concerns the regulation of herbal medicine in the United Kingdom and Vietnam. This includes government policies, legislation, memorandums and statutes of herbal practitioner associations, consultation papers, working papers, opinion pieces by practitioners and newspaper articles.