Ironically enough, increased attention to St. John's Wort also resulted in a number of media reports suggesting that St. John's Wort negatively interacted with a number of commonly used conventional drugs, which resulted in an almost immediate sales decline in Europe and America (Blumenthal 1999; Kelly 2001; Lawson 2000). 86 An updated meta-analysis by Linde et al. from 2005 identified a total of 68 randomised or possibly randomised trials with St. John's Wort (Linde, et al. 2005). 87 See, for example, Davidson et al. (2002) for a review of a trial which did not find St. John's Wort more effective than placebo in the treatment of major depression. 152 Notwithstanding these various important clinical debates, a common theme to emerge from the past two decade's worth of clinical literature on St. John's Wort is once again the pivotal role that standardised diagnostic criteria, rating scales and clinical outcome measures have played in efforts to confirm or dismiss its claims to efficacy. Clinical efficacy is simply not feasible without this infrastructure. Just as the scientific committee charged with the re-evaluation of Heantos had been faced with the task of building up psychological and physiological templates of healing as a prerequisite for quantifying clinical observations into recordable and visualisable clinical outcomes, so too have the many clinicians who over the past years have studied the antidepressant efficacy claims of St. John's Wort had to build up similar templates of healing. And also, in the same way that the emergence of drug addiction as a key object of clinical research spawned an entire range of standardised diagnostic criteria (for trial subject selection) and clinical rating scales (for measuring clinical outcomes), so too did the emergence of depression as an object of clinical research. Starting with Max Hamilton's "rating scale for depression" from 1960 (now known as the Hamilton Depression Rating Scale or HAM-D) and Aaron Beck's "inventory for measuring depression" from 1961 (now known as the Beck Depression Inventory or BDI), designing diagnostic criteria and rating scales for depression has become an industry of its own. Table 3 lists those diagnostic criteria and rating scales that have to date been used in clinical trials with St. John's Wort. While it is normal for trial protocols to include up to four or five different rating scales, by far the most-used scale for outcome measuring in these trials has been the HAM-D, the "gold standard" for the clinical assessment of depression in general (Bagby, et al. 2004). The HAM-D is a quantifiable depression scale that allows clinicians to rate the intensity of depression (absent, mild, moderate or severe) that a patient is suffering from at any given time. A clinical trial protocol will specify diagnostic criteria, length of observation period as well as the number of times a trial subject's level of depression is to be measured. The HAM-D is a so-called "observer-rated" scale meaning that it is the clinician rather than the patient who carries out the rating - although it would perhaps be more accurate to describe it as an elicitor-rated scale, since scoring on the bulk of the 17 indicators that make up the HAM-D questionnaire relies on the trial participant "indicating", "communicating", "expressing" or "agreeing on" symptoms of depression such as "guilt feelings", "lack of motivation", "anxiety" or 153 "irritability", often after prompting by the clinician. Even the somatic or physiological indicators on the HAM-D scale rely largely on the subjective accounts of the trial participant regarding, for example, "feelings of fatigue", "abdominal symptom experiences", "insomnia" or "gastro-intestinal complaints". The few indicators that are observed without elicitation by the clinician are "non-verbal communications", such as agitation, retardation and "estimations of weight loss". In the words of MD Norman Rosenthal in his St. John's Wort - The Herbal Way to Feeling Good, "although a skilful clinician will see traces of depression in a person's face, observe sluggishness or agitation in the body's movements, and hear the slow cadence of the voice, it is the depressed person's own story that will carry the day in making the diagnosis" (Rosenthal 1998: 103). Table 3: Rating scales and diagnostic criteria used in SJW trials88 HAM-D Hamilton Depression Scale CGI Clinical Global Impression Index GAF Global Assessment of Functioning HAM-A Hamilton Anxiety Scale MADRS Montgomery Asberg Depression Rating Scale D-S Depression Scale von Zerssen SRSD Self-Rating Scale for Depression BDI Beck Depression Inventory Bf-S Adjective Mood Scale SDS Sheehan Disability Scale QoL Fragebogen Alltagsleben B-L Complaint List von Zerssen GPA Patient's Global Assessment Scale SCL-58 Symptom Check List SB-S Subjective Complaints Scale STAI State Trait Anxiety Inventory ZDS Zung Depression Scale SCL-90-R Symptom Check List Derogatis ICD-10 International Classification of Diseases DSM-IV Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 88 Extracted from Linde et al. 's (2005) meta-analysis of 37 randomised trials. 154 Once each of the 17 indicators has been evaluated by the clinician (with some indicators given 0 to 2 points and others 0 to 4 points), a trial subject can be given a total score out of a maximum of 52. These total scores can then be monitored over time at periodic intervals, tabulated and eventually graphed. And while there is no universal agreement on what each score signifies, there is a tendency to grade scores in the low 10s as mild, the high 10s as mild to moderate, and the 20s as moderate to severe.89 For a treatment to be considered efficacious in the treatment of depression, it has to demonstrate a reduction in HAM-D (or other scale) scores that is greater than reductions experienced by trial subjects receiving placebo to a statistically significant degree. Importantly, just as was the case with the Himmelsbach withdrawal scale scores in the Heantos trials, the visual presentation of HAM-D scores over time have played a key role in this 'demonstration of efficacy' in St. John's Wort trials (see Plate 1).90 It is crucial to point out just how significant a role the infamous 'placebo effect' has played in clinical trials investigating the efficacy of St. John's Wort in the treatment of depression. Put in simple terms, patients who are given a placebo rather than St. John's Wort get significantly better during the course of a clinical trial. For example, in Sommer and Harrer's (1994) double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the efficacy of St. John's Wort in the treatment of mildly depressed patients, the mean reduction in HAM-D scores of the 42 patients receiving St. John's Wort was -9 points compared to -5 points for those who received placebos (both from a baseline of 16) after 4 weeks of treatment. In Hansgen et al. 's (1994) multicentre, double-blind trial of the efficacy of St. John's Wort in the treatment of major depression, the mean reduction in HAM-D scores of the 33 patients receiving St. John's Wort was -13 points (from a baseline of 22), compared to -6 points (from a baseline of 20) for those who received placebos after 4 weeks of treatment. In Lecrubier et al. 's (2002) double-blind, placebo-controlled trial of the efficacy of St. John's Wort in the treatment of major depression, the mean reduction in HAM-D scores of the 186 89 These categorisations, it turns out, have come to be crucial in debates over the efficacy of St. John's Wort extracts, as clinical trials that have suggested an efficacy that is not superior to placebo in trials targeting patients suffering from moderate to severe depression have not silenced proponents of St. John's Wort as a "mild antidepressant". 90 Further to such "observer-rated" scales as the HAM-D or the Clinical Global Impression Index, a number of self-rating scales for depression have also been developed which typically present trial participants with a number of statements, such as "I feel down-hearted and blue", "I have crying spells" or "I still enjoy sex", to which they have to indicate a little, some, good part or most of the time. These answers are then tabulated into total scores and can be monitored over time. 155 patients who received St. John's Wort was -10 points compared to -8 points for those who received a placebo after 42 days (both from a baseline of 22). And finally, in Shelton et al. 's (2001) randomized controlled trial on the effectiveness of St. John's Wort in the treatment of major depression, the mean reduction in HAM-D scores was -7 points (from a baseline of 22) for those who received St. John's Wort, and -6 points (from a baseline of 23) for those who received a placebo after 8 weeks. Now, while it would be far too simplistic to conclude something like 'at least 50%' of the efficacy of St. John's Wort is due to the placebo effect, it is nevertheless important to understand that when it comes to treating depression with St. John's Wort (or any other antidepressant for that matter) there is a lot more going on than bio-pharmacological activity.91 Indeed, as was discussed earlier, randomised controlled trials have emerged out of a need to demonstrate an efficacy that is 'above and beyond placebo', and are rooted in a relatively recent positing of inevitable and measurable treatment effects (detectable "in the end organs") which are not specific to the medicine or treatment under trial. As the argument goes, even in the controlled settings of a clinical trial, "non-specific" effects resulting from an authoritative clinician-trial subject relationship, expectation on the part of the patient, the act of self-rating, or being interviewed periodically by a clinician are inevitable. That is to say, it is suggested that the clinical trial itself - in much the same way that a consultation with a GP or herbalist might - can generate symbolic efficacy in clinical trial participants which may then spill-over into measurable outcomes. Moreover, it is also argued that further to taking part in a clinical trial, a patient may also be actively reading up on St. John's Wort literature, introducing changes to his or her lifestyle and in general embracing an active approach to getting better, all of which may contribute to both symbolic and physiological efficacy. And finally, it is also pointed out that it cannot be excluded that the "natural history" or "self-limiting nature" of a condition such as depression in some patients mean that they 'would have gotten better anyway' with or without treatment (see Kaptchuk 1998b; Kirsch and Sapirstein 1998). It is in these different 91 In a meta-analysis of 19 double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical trials of standard anti-depressants, Kirsch and Sapirstein (1998) controversially argued that "inactive placebos produced improvement that was 75% of the effect of the active drug", and consequently that "approximately one quarter of the drug response is due to the administration of an active medication, one half is a placebo effect, and the remaining quarter is due to other nonspecific factors". While their article has been subject to considerable methodological critique, their point concerning the significant role that "placebo response" plays in overall treatment is relevant nonetheless. 156 ways that bio-efficacy, placebo efficacy and symbolic efficacy circulate in efforts to clinically test St. John's Wort in the treatment of depression. In the particular case of depression, a confounding factor arises from the fact that although depression has in recent years, as we will see in the following chapter, acquired some kind of a neurochemical-pathway-facilitated physiological base, assessments of a drug treatment's efficacy are reliant on a patient's subjective recounting of any self-perceived therapeutic change. That is to say, it is not serotonin, dopamine, noradrenaline or glutamate levels that are measured over time to demonstrate efficacy, rather it is a patient's symptomatic experiences (as reported by him or herself) of helplessness, guilt and insufficiency that are recorded, quantified and monitored over time. So there is an inbuilt tension (not unlike that found in debates over the placebo effect) in clinical trials between "bloodless, gutless theories of cognition" (Wilson 2004: 42) on the one hand, and neurological, 'end-organ' theories on the other.92 Are "observer-rated" feelings symptomatic manifestations of essentially (bio-)physiological disturbances as suggested by "pre-clinical" pharmacological studies of antidepressant mechanisms of action, or are they symptomatic utterances resulting from essentially non-physiological affective disorders? Whatever the case, it is clear that assessments of efficacy in depression treatment trials today rely on the 'objective' quantification of a range of 'subjective' indicators. Conclusion In this chapter, it has been my intention to demonstrate the many and often overlapping assumptions that have arisen over the past century or so out of a persistent and stubborn attendance to the central question of "does it work?" in herbal medicine. What I have argued is that concepts of efficacy are dependent on the objects to which they refer/ describe. By distinguishing between the bloodless, gutless symbolic efficacy that medical anthropologists have meticulously sought to describe in their ethnographic accounts of healing rituals on the one hand, and the physiological bio-efficacy that clinicians and pharmacologists have equally painstakingly sought to document through in vivo, in vitro 92 It must be underlined that this tension is particularily relevant in cases of chronic disease (such as depression and addiction) where improving quality of life is much more the therapeutic object than longevity, even if this latter object also plays a significant part in treatment considerations. With acutely life-threatening conditions (e.g. many forms of cancer) "survival is the gold standard by which [treatments] are judged" (Edwards cited in BBC News Online 2006). See chapter 7 for an in depth discussion on the distinction between quality of life and life itself. 157 and clinical experimentation on the other, I have shown how it is the placebo effect that has emerged as a possible intermediate link between the two. For the placebo effect relies at one and the same time on both symbolic (hope, expectation, cognitive homeostasis, etc.) and physiological (end-organ normalisation) concepts of efficacy. What should be clear from the experiences of Heantos and St. John's Wort that I have recounted here, is that even after a battery of clinical trials, expert group reports and meta-analyses, answers to the question of whether a therapy or medicine works are far from simple and clear-cut: they are complex and rarely definitive. Herbal medicine purports to work not just symbolically by providing users with ways of thinking about and relating to their conditions, but also via specific biological effects in the organs of the body. The intermediate pathways that link the symbolic and the physiological facilitate both cure and pathology, with stress, anxiety or fear potentially leading to physiologically manifest psychosomatic disorders, and their opposites in hope, expectation and 'peace of mind' potentially generating physiologically therapeutic (placebo) effects. They also allow for the reverse, as somatic manifestations of disease can generate anxiety and fear while somatic improvements can generate hope and expectation. And so it is somewhere within this complex of inter-crossing pathways which can be symbolic, physiological or somehow intermediary, that assurances of efficacy are sought after by anthropologists, clinicians, herbalists and pharmacologists alike. The randomised controlled trial in its current form has sought to separate out what is seen as the "specific" efficacy of a treatment or remedy (an efficacy that is directly dependent on that treatment or remedy and nothing else), as opposed to "non-specific" efficacy which is often seen as arising in good part from the symbolic efficacy that participation in a clinical trial will invariably generate. Yet, the role of blinding and the use of placebo or 'sham' treatments as comparisons is not so much for the purpose of exposing a fraud, but rather more for determining whether or not a treatment or remedy has an efficacy that is "above and beyond" the efficacy that almost any healing intervention will generate. Nevertheless, following Wilson (2006), we might say that herbal medicine 'works' not in spite of but rather in active collaboration with the placebo; 'true drug effect', 'placebo effect' and 'symbolic effect' are inseparable and indeed each contribute to a drug or treatment's 'total effect' and thereby to a patient's self-reported experience of 'getting better', however "non-specific" placebo and symbolic effects are considered. 158 In the following chapter we will turn our attention towards what are known as 'pre-clinical' accounts of the mechanisms of action which might explain any clinically-experienced efficacy that is above and beyond placebo, although in the cases of St. John's Wort and Heantos this mechanism of action research has most certainly been post-clinical. As we will see, also in the field of mechanism of action research - which seeks to answer not whether, but how a medicine or therapy works - contestation and dispute prevails. For, as Canguilhem (1989) has shown us, to discover how a medicine works depends entirely on the concepts, objects and norms that are seen to allow for this 'working' to take place. 159 6 Pathways to plausibility In giving evidence on the growing use of complementary and alternative medicines to the House of Lords Scientific Committee in 1999, Professor Tom Meade, of the UK-based scientific academy The Royal Society, argued that "the distinction between the effect and the explanation for the effect is central, and you do not need to believe in the explanation in order to believe in the effect" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 4.32). In doing so, Professor Meade underlined the kind of clinical/pre-clinical split that has been characteristic of recent research into both Heantos and St. John's Wort - a split that is reflected in the largely separate worlds of clinical trial research and pharmacological laboratory research. This split is perhaps even more accentuated when dealing with chronic rather than acute conditions, with clinicians, on the one hand, engaged in observing, measuring and calculating trial subjects' experience of a condition (such as addiction or depression) before, during and after a particular treatment regimen as a means to address the central question of whether this treatment works. Pharmacologists, on the other hand, are engaged in mapping out possible bio-physiological pathways often with the help of animal models as a means to address how a particular treatment works. At the same time, Professor Meade's distinction between believing in the effect of a treatment as opposed to explanations for that effect also highlights one of the key battlegrounds of debates not just about traditional, complementary and alternative medicines, but also within modern medicine.