And herbalist Peter Conway argues that "to understand what St. John's Wort does exactly, we need first to have a basic understanding of the special chemicals (called neurotransmitters) that are involved in nervous system functions" (2003: 23). Perhaps the by now very familiar anthropological argument that patients notoriously lack loyalty to any one particular coherent cognitive framework should be extended to practitioners as well. At any rate, what is clear from recent efforts to standardise and further develop Heantos and St. John's Wort is that the search for "plausible mechanisms of action" is currently taking place in German neuropharmacology laboratories. That is of course not to say that what some might describe as 'esoteric' explanations of a treatment's 181 action which are "not congruent with current scientific thought" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 4.31) - for example, ones which describe meridian-based pathways of Yin-Yang rebalancing, the vital nourishing of nervous systems or the maintaining of vital rhythms in the organs of the body - are dismissed by all, far from it. But neither does it suggest that a herbal practitioner who engages with the neurosciences does so at the betrayal of some kind of an epistemological authenticity. Rather what emerges, is an eclectic meeting of knowledges which are in turn picked up, modified, rectified and transformed. As we will see, to insist on fundamental incommensurability between modern and herbal medicine would make the task of describing two decades worth of efforts to further develop and improve St. John's Wort and Heantos arduous to say the least. The first point to be made is that St. John's Wort and Heantos have become prominent as treatments against depression and addiction respectively, two famous DSM IV diagnostic classifications. This is not to say that they aren't also used by herbalists as restorative tonics against diagnoses of battered nervous systems or extreme yin,108 but when these two remedies are consistently described and promoted as a "natural anti-depressant", "nature's Prozac" or a "traditional herbal treatment against addiction" by herbalists, clinicians and phytochemists alike, then they cannot help but engage with the current state of medical knowledge about these two particular conditions. And for all the singular, reductionist coherence that is often attributed to modern medicine, if there is one thing that has been characteristic of pharmacologic research into depression and addiction over the past century or so then it is surely not uniformity. Instead we find a number of constantly modified and often competing hypotheses about possible plausible mechanisms of action. In a chapter on 'The Development of the Concept of Biological Regulation in the Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries', Canguilhem argues that "when embryologists discovered in the egg's blastomeres what they called 'total potentiality', by which they meant a capacity to influence the development of each part in keeping with the structure of 108 For example, herbalist Andrew Chevallier is at pains to underline that "as a nervine, hypericum is usually prescribed with three or four other herbs that reflect the individual needs of a patient... From an holistic perspective, hypericum will 'earn its place' in a prescription for chronic ill health of almost any kind, even where nervous exhaustion or depression is not the main problem" (Chevallier 1999: 92). This is a point that is crucial for herbalists who more often than not engage in 'polypharmacy' (mixing of different herbs) in their prescribing practices. 182 the whole, they complemented and confirmed what physiologists already knew, namely, that there exist organic functions whose purpose is to control other functions and thus, by regulating certain invariants, to enable the organism to comport itself as a whole" (1988: 81-2). And although it was only in the late nineteenth century that these functions came to be known as "regulatory", Canguilhem shows how eighteenth century debates between Leibniz and supporters of Newton set the stage for the scientific investigation of a number of autocratic biological regulatory systems - respiratory, nervous, digestive, circulatory - in the ensuing centuries. For Newton and his followers God was not only the "Cause of motion, but also the Governor, Regulator and Methodizer of the same", whereas Leibniz saw this as a "curious opinion of God's work [a]ccording to [which] God needs to reset his watch occasionally". Leibniz, Canguilhem suggests, countered this view of God as both author and regulator of nature's laws, by proposing a cosmology sans theology, a universe that was "immutable, regulated by virtue of its original creation" (ibid. : 84-5). Consequently, the idea of a regulatory function built into the very laws of nature was taken up in 19th century physiology and biology, as the stubborn persistence of life in organisms in the face of external hazards came to be described in terms of an inherent biological tendency towards equilibrium or homeostasis via pathways of adaptation, compensation and stabilisation. Today, in neuroscience, biological regulation has become a neurochemical affair involving axons, vesicles, neurotransmitters, neuromodulators, synapses, post-synaptic receptors and dendrites.109 It has also become a genetic affair involving brain-derived neurotrophic factor genes, binding proteins, repressors and activators. And it is dysregulations or imbalances in these complex systems of neurotransmission and gene expression that in recent decades have come to be seen as underlying both depression and addiction. That is to say, whereas 'normal' regulation of neurotransmission and gene expression are associated with 'normal' states of unaffected mood and non-dependency, depression and addiction have since the 1960s been pharmacologically conceptualised as regulatory pathologies in systems of neurotransmission and gene expression. As a consequence, ongoing development of possible pharmacologic treatments for these two diagnostic conditions is for the most part a matter of identifying chemical compounds (molecules), which can assist in the normalisation of these regulatory pathologies by working on the molecular synaptic 109 I am greatly indebted to Nikolas Rose and Scott Vrecko for sharing their insight into the neurochemistry of depression and addiction with me (see especially Rose 2000; Rose 2003; Vrecko 2006). 183 structures of the brain in a targeted way. In other words, pharmacologic treatments for depression and addiction aim to normalise pathologies in the brain's 'mood circuitry' and 'pleasure circuitry' respectively. As Rose (2000) and Vrecko (2006) have shown, although the "cascade" of neurochemical hypotheses concerning the biological bases of affective disorders and addiction that have appeared in the past four decades remain contested and ambiguous at best, they have nevertheless brought about a particular 'style of thinking' that continues to guide pharmacologic and clinical investigations today, all of which have centred around biological dysregulations in neurochemical systems. If addiction can be thought of in terms of a dysregulation of the brain's endogenous neurochemical reward system (a hyperactive 'pleasure circuitry'), then it is by pharmacologically modulating this system that addiction can be treated. Similarly, if depression can be thought of in terms of dysregulations in monoamine or protein systems (deficiencies/excesses in levels of biogenic amines and proteins in the brain's 'mood circuitry') then it is by pharmacologically down- or upregulating these amines and proteins by manipulating their expression, secretion, breakdown, depletion and/or reuptake that depression can be treated (Rose 2000: 15). Notwithstanding this neurochemical 'style of thinking', what any kind of review of available pharmacological research findings on addiction and depression treatments shows is that there is nothing even approaching some kind of clear 'biomedical' consensus when it comes to accounting for the biochemical aetiologies of depression and addiction. Rather, what one finds is a number of hypotheses, each highlighting particular possible pathways which sometimes overlap and sometimes appear to contradict each other. External factors such as biography, 'life events' and socio-economic circumstances have not disappeared in neurochemical accounts of these two conditions. Instead, the question has come to be posed in terms of how these external factors influence brain chemistry, e.g. how exposure to stress over long periods of time can atrophy the brain's hippocampus thereby decreasing the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor, or how an addict's exposure to drug-related stimuli (behaviours, places or sounds that the addict associates with drug use) gives rise to cravings by activating dopamine pathways (Vrecko 2006: 138). Nevertheless, with the rapid growth in marketing, prescription, use and media coverage of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) like Prozac and anti-craving medications like Naltrexone in recent decades, it is perhaps not too surprising that the 'serotonin hypothesis of depression' 184 and the 'dopamine hypothesis of addiction' have come to be taken as yet more instances of biomedicine's typically reductionist accounts of very complex conditions (see Healy 2004; Vrecko 2006). Synergy As already noted, the search for "plausible mechanisms of action" to account for the therapeutic effects of St. John's Wort and Heantos is currently taking place in German pharmacology laboratories. This being the case, it appears that 'plausibility' implies some kind of grounding in the aforementioned bio-psychiatric style of thinking, which has emphasised dysregulations in the brain's biogenic amine and protein systems as possible explanations for depression and addiction. That is to say, with some kind of efficacy having been established via clinical trials to date, hitherto vitalistic explanations of this efficacy, in terms of a nourishing of nervous systems or rebalancing of vital energies, are brought into a so-called "pre-clinical" pharmacological realm, where balancing and regulating refer to genes, neurochemicals, synapses and receptors. And while it might well be tempting to describe this in terms of a 'colonisation' of herbal medicine by biomedicine, as we will see, such an account would miss out on the numerous interactions between the two medical traditions that, for example, have resulted in scientists resisting the classic 'single compound' approach that pharmacologists are often charged with blindly following. In an article reviewing ten years worth of pharmacologic research into the mechanisms of action of St. John's Wort in the treatment of depression, Butterweck (2003: 558) concludes: Herbal medicines are complex mixtures of more than one active ingredient. Therefore, pharmacological work is complicated by the fact that active compounds are often unknown. Further, synergistic or antagonistic effects of the different compounds cannot be excluded... Today, several compounds from different structural groups and with different mechanisms of action seem to be responsible for the observed antidepressant efficacy of St. John's Wort. Based on recent research, it seems likely that flavonoids, hyperforins and hypericins contribute to the antidepressant efficacy... [Yet] the mechanism of action of the plant is still not fully understood. Our understanding of the mode of action of St. John's Wort is complicated by the fact that the molecular basis of depression itself is still unclear. And so, it is amidst this complex of chemical compounds, their synergistic and antagonistic interactions, and their separate yet supplementing pathways of pharmacologic action that scientific plausibility for St. John's Wort's efficacy in treating a complex condition like 185 depression has been sought after with the help of in vitro receptor binding assays on the compounds found in St. John's Wort extract, ex vivo studies of rat brains following chronic administration of St. John's Wort, and in vivo efficacy studies using animal models of depression. The very first pharmacologic investigations from the early 1980s (Suzuki, et al. 1984; 1981) had unsurprisingly focussed on one of the plant's most conspicuous chemical constituents, mistakenly attributing hypericin (rather than the whole plant extract) monoamine oxidase inhibiting properties.110 Butterweck et al. (1998) have argued that hypericin does nevertheless generate anti-depressant activity, but, interestingly, seems to require the services of procyanidins (also present in whole plant St. John's Wort extract) in increasing its water solubility and thereby its bioavailability. Most recently, hyperforin (a phloroglucinol unique to hypericum) has emerged as another prime candidate when accounting for the therapeutic efficacy of St. John's Wort, this time as an inhibitor of the synaptosomal reuptake of neurotransmitters (Chatterjee, et al. 1998; Muller, et al. 1998). Pharmacologic studies of hyperforin have suggested that St. John's Wort is a broad spectrum reuptake inhibitor of not only serotonin and noradrenaline but also dopamine, GABA and L-glutamate. The precise mechanism of inhibition is yet to be established conclusively, but studies suggest that inhibition is noncompetitive - i.e. St. John's Wort "does not inhibit neurotransmitter uptake via direct interaction with the specific binding sites of the neurotransmitter transporter molecules" (Muller 2005: 38). Instead, the inhibitory mechanism of St. John's Wort has been hypothesised in terms of its elevation of intracellular sodium concentration, which in turn reduces the drive for neurotransmitter accumulation within the cell. Studies have also suggested that St. John's Wort extract might reduce stress-induced increases in gene transcription as another possible mechanism of anti-depressant action. Experimental animal models of depression have also played a central role in St. John's Wort mechanism-of-action research including the tail suspension test (TST), the forced swimming test (FST), the chronic mild stress (CMS), the escape deficit test (ED), the stress disruption of Vanilla-sugar sustained Appetitive Behaviour (VAB), the elevated plus-maze, the behavioural despair test and the conditioned-avoidance response test. These models 110 It has been suggested that the hypericin samples used by Suzuki et al. were not 'pure', but contained at least 20% of other constituents, notably flavonoids, which would explain why subsequent experiments have confirmed monoamine oxidase inhibiting properties of full plant extracts but not of purified hypericin (Butterweck 2003: 541-44). 186 seek to artificially recreate a "stressful, inescapable (and unpredictable in the CMS) situation that has been interpreted as inducing a state of behavioural despair, akin to the hopelessness of depressive patients" (Muller 2005: 60). A review of how St. John's Wort extract has performed against these preclinical templates of depression has suggested that it produces antidepressant like activities, facilitates learning ability and memory consolidation, produces anxiolytic effects, reduces alcohol intake as well as appeases nicotine withdrawal (Muller 2005: 93). Tying up the major results to come out of this flurry of research, a number of reviews of the pharmacology of St. John's Wort have been published in the past couple of years. And although one might well have expected these reviews to pinpoint a single compound as responsible for its efficacy as an antidepressant treatment, conclusions seem instead to point towards a "synergistic" effect where multiple compounds act along multiple pathways with multiple targets contributing to a combined efficacy (Butterweck 2003: 554; Muller 2005: 26, 81).111 Interestingly, it is also hypothesised that it is this synergistic combined effect that accounts for St. John's Wort's favourable safety profile (in comparison with standard antidepressant treatments), as, rather than exhibiting a single highly potent antidepressant activity, St. John's Wort extract exhibits multiple lower potency antidepressant activities that when combined, it is argued, can match standard antidepressants in efficacy while sparing the patient from side effects. Nevertheless, it is important to underscore that 'synergy' between the various active compounds found in St. John's Wort is understood in different ways in the pharmacological literature. On the one hand, synergistic effect is described as a strictly "additive" (Butterweck 2003: 554) sense whereby "various relatively weak effects result in the overall pharmacological effect" (Gobbi and Mennini 2005: 26), while on the other, it is suggested that "the pharmacological effects of the single constituents differ when given alone or in combination with other constituents, indicating that the extract is more than the sum of the single compounds" (Noldner 2005: 81). This latter view is congruent with that found in many texts by herbal practitioners who suggest that "the whole plant is much more than the sum of its parts" (Chevallier 1999: 17; McIntyre 1988: 53; Mills 1993: 263). Whatever the understanding of 'synergy', what pharmacological efforts to account for the pathways of action of St. John's 111 While pharmacologic investigations into the active ingredients of Heantos has only just begun and it is difficult therefore to say anything specific about the pharmacology of Heantos, as we saw earlier, scientists have so far rejected pursuing a 'single compound' approach. 187 Wort have shown is that it is an over-simplification at best to suggest that all pharmacologists insist on breaking down plant extracts "by isolating and synthesising the [single] active principles of herbs to use as drugs" (McIntyre 1988: 53). Just as Watt and Wood (1988) have argued that there is no monopoly on holism in a clinical context, we might say that neither is there one in a preclinical context. Conclusion It is interesting to note that the House of Lords Select Committee on Science and Technology ended up taking Professor Tom Meade's evidence with which I started this chapter to heart. In summing up their position on debates about efficacy in the field of complementary and alternative medicine, the Select Committee accentuated the clinical/ preclinical split that I have suggested has been characteristic of research into both Heantos and St. John's Wort: "Any medicine with credible, accepted evidence for efficacy should be available, whatever the controversy over its underlying mechanisms... [i]t is our opinion that mechanisms of action are of secondary importance to efficacy, a view shared by National Institute of Clinical Excellence" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 4.40). The irony of this position, of course, is that there is probably just as much controversy surrounding evidence of efficacy as there is around evidence of underlying mechanisms of action. Yet, at the same time, the Select Committee's position makes space for what seems to be a standard state of affairs in mechanism of action research - whether traditional, alternative or modern - namely the persistence of numerous hypotheses as to possible plausible pathways.