If we are to believe classic sociological critiques of modernity then it is the individual - the subject - who is all the worse for it, something that the BMA working group seems to concur with in reflecting over the achievements and shortcomings of their own profession. Even in those contexts where developments in medicine and technology are maintained to have secured dramatic advances in longevity and welfare, the subject is nevertheless seen as having been swallowed up by vast societal programmes that have effectively torn him or her out of a personal realm of traditional and familial relations and into a social realm of impersonal 15 statistical inevitabilities and bureaucratised interaction. The rationalisation of doctor-patient relations, for example, is charged with having turned patients into passive recipients of healthcare, trapped in a 'spiritless' technocracy of GPs, specialists, and medical technologists. Yet, it is not only the interiority of the subject, the modern soul, that is seen as having been corrupted by modernity's isations; the very vitality of Man - as well as that of the flora and fauna surrounding him - it would appear has also been compromised by these same societal processes. Some nine thousand kilometres to the east of the United Kingdom, Vietnamese health practitioners have been actively engaged in half-a-century's worth of efforts to revive and reintegrate Vietnamese traditional herbal medicine into their national health delivery system, not only because of its economic viability but also because it is considered "less aggressive" than modern medicine which despite its many advances is seen as "powerless before many diseases" (Bui 1999; Huu and Borton 2003; Nguyen, et al. 1965). In Vietnam, modern medicines are often described as toxic (doc), addictive (quen thuoc), chemical (hoa chat), and, consequently, as causing a wasting of the body (sut), weakness (suy nhuoc) and lethargy (met moi) in persons using them. In contrast, traditional medicine is considered nutritious (bo), harmless (lanh), natural (thien nhien) and therefore virtually side-effect-free (khong cong phat gi) (Craig 2002: 105, 152). Far from promoting traditional medicine as an alternative to modern medicine, however, programmes to revitalise the practice and use of traditional herbal medicines in Vietnam have instead been built up around a combined approach where age-old medicinal herbs, for example, can be used as an indispensable means to ameliorate or even avoid altogether the harmful side effects of modern treatments as well as to tackle newly emerging health problems such as the "social evils" of drug addiction, obesity, cardiovascular diseases and other lifestyle-related illnesses (Vietnam. Communist Party of Vietnam. 2005). Further to their soul-battering effects, critiques of modernisation and technologisation have also singled out unwanted effects in the form of life-enfeebling contaminations that have had a degradatory effect on not only our ability to live but also our 'quality of life'. From the toxicities and side effects of synthetic pharmaceuticals and processed foods to the smog and waste of factories and automobiles, the life effects of modernisation have increasingly come to be seen as liabilities. A modern way of life, it is argued, has come at the cost of a degenerated 'nature' which, while not necessarily diminishing our longevity (we are after 16 all living longer these days), has certainly diminished the quality of life of individuals and populations. Bearing such accounts of the soul-battering and life-enfeebling effects of modernity in mind, it is not too hard to understand the sheer explosion in sociological critique built up around a theory of the subject that started somewhere around the mid-20th century. It was after all this subject that had been alienated, dehumanised, repressed, and degenerated by those very same institutions that had allowed Man to free himself from the constraints of an unpredictable Nature with its famines, floods and epidemics. In stark contrast to the optimism of Enlightenment writers who had celebrated humanity's liberation from a 'self-incurred immaturity' characterised by "profound darkness, ... theological day-dreaming, superstitious imposture and priestly tyranny" (Condorcet 1955 [1795]: 77), late 19th and early 20th century social scientists vividly recorded their impressions of another kind of imprisonment. Both Marx ([1867] 1999) and Durkheim ([1893] 1984) described how the herding of people into the urban workshops of the industrial revolution "imposed upon mankind monotonous and unceasing labour... of which [he] gradually becomes a prisoner" (Durkheim 1984: 187, 270), ultimately "convert[ing] the labourer into a crippled monstrosity, by forcing his detail dexterity at the expense of a world of productive capabilities and instincts" (Marx 1999: 209). Only a few decades later, Simmel, Freud and Weber took this analysis out of the sweat and grime of the factory floor and into the white-collar world of 20th century bureaucratisation and urbanised metropolitanism. Simmel argued that "punctuality, calculability, exactness are forced upon life by the complexity and extension of metropolitan existence... favour[ing] the exclusion of those irrational, instinctive, sovereign traits and impulses which aim at determining the mode of life from within, instead of receiving the general and precisely schematized form of life from without" ([1903] 1950: 411). For Freud, this "instinctual renunciation" was an inevitable effect of an ongoing and general process of civilisation through which "external coercion gradually becomes internalized", relieving men of foreboding "states of anxious expectation" that might otherwise arise ([1927] 1961: 13-4). And Weber ([1922] 1976: 361-2), of course, famously lamented that: It is horrible to think that the world could one day be filled with nothing but those little cogs, little men clinging to little jobs and striving toward bigger 17 ones... This passion for bureaucracy ...is enough to drive one to despair. It is as if in politics... we were deliberately to become men who need 'order' and nothing but order, become nervous and cowardly if for one moment this order wavers, and helpless if they are torn away from their total incorporation in it. That the world should know no men but these: it is in such an evolution that we are already caught up, and the great question is, therefore, not how we can promote and hasten it, but what can we oppose to this machinery in order to keep a portion of mankind free from this parcelling-out of the soul, from this supreme mastery of the bureaucratic way of life. Habermas would eventually summarise this most famous of sociological hypotheses as a colonization of the lifeworld, which is to say a "penetration of forms of economic and administrative rationality into areas of action that resist being converted over to the media of money and power because they are specialised in cultural transmission, social integration, and child rearing" (1987: 330). It was precisely as antidotes to such alienation, repression and dehumanisation, that the experience, agency, identity, vitality, and reflexivity of the subject were theoretically 'rediscovered' and celebrated in the mid-20th century, opening up new possibilities of emancipation and revitalisation for the alienated and degenerated. It was around this time that a 'hegemonic' and 'Eurocentric' modernity was being ditched in favour of a 'post-modernity' that was permanently suspicious of grand meta-narratives, while encouraging of the specificities and dynamics of local identity politics that allowed individual subjects to negotiate their personal lifeworlds and world-views (albeit within the context of their own communities) as well as to construct more balanced life strategies that were in tune with 'nature'. A 'post-modern' ethical telos emerged around the subject's capacities of agency, reflexivity, vitality, and identity. It is as if the enlightened optimism that surrounded 18th century social engineering projects was reignited in the 20th century with the discovery that Man could once again be emancipated, this time from the soul-battering and degenerative side effects that modernisation had brought in its wake. Not only was the latter half of the 20th century a time of intensifying post-modern critique, it was also a time when alternatives to the grand projects of modernity began to be formulated amidst a growing melee of protests, post-colonial independence declarations, ecological movements, cultural revolutions and 18 lifestyle experiments.1 The appalling shortcomings and failures of medicine, education and economic development were to be remedied by an alternative medicine, an alternative education, an alternative development. These alternative movements opened up numerous sites of resistance and contestation as they began to question 'expert knowledge' as well as those authorities who could speak it. Their criticisms, fuelled by social indignation, were especially directed at the hitherto neglect of the 'whole person' as one of the crucial failures of what were seen as hegemonies of westernised and rationalised education, medicine or development. In this way, the alternative became synonymous with the emancipatory, and the alternative project became one of activating, liberating, and engaging the 'missing persons' of social government, not in the least by encouraging a critical attitude towards authorities, by appealing to an identity politics and by promoting radically new lifestyles (cf. Rose 1996a).2 And so, it was from within the alienated and degenerated subject of modernity that an emancipatory potential to counteract these same side effects could be rescued - all that was needed were new forms of ascesis or ethical work on the self to secure a kind of recuperation of our ossified lifeworlds and a revitalisation of our toxified bodies. This was to be not so much a liberation from a self-incurred immaturity as an emancipation from a self-incurred alienation and toxication, as we will be seeing. Nowhere have the contestations and pronouncements of failure that make up the alternative been more striking than in the field of medicine.3 And it should come as no surprise to learn that the birth and subsequent rise of an 'alternative medicine' around the 1960s coincided with a steadily escalating critique of modern medicine by a number of anthropologists, sociologists, patients, alternative therapists, post-colonial administrators, traditional practitioners, psychologists, and even medical doctors - a motley group of professionals, academics and grassroots activists that amounted to what Saks (2003) has aptly described 1 According to Habermas these events constituted "the painful manifestations of deprivation in a culturally impoverished and one-sidedly rationalised practice of everyday life" (1987: 395). 2 It is interesting to note that in the closing decades of the 20th century, the contestations, identity politics and lifestyles of the 'alternative' and the 'subaltern' became key features of contemporary forms of social resistance, embracing an expanding range of fields. By now, further to the pioneer sites of resistance in alternative medicine, education and development, we also find alternative media, alternative music, alternative energy, alternative globalisation, alternative technology, and even alternative travel (for all those resisting the 'Lonely Planet hegemony'). Although diverse, the movements behind these alternatives seem to share not only in a general scepticism towards authorities, but also in a forceful critique of what are seen as the inhumane and/or non-ecological antagonists of these movements (e.g. multinational corporations, the World Bank, oil companies, corporate media and entertainment conglomerations, etc.). 3 Something the BMA found "hardly surprising, [since] modern medicine - preventive, curative or palliative - impinges on the lives of everyone" (British Medical Association. Board of Science and Education. 1986: 3). 19 as an emergent medical counter-culture. No doubt a direct result of these overlapping events, it has become common to explain a growing use and practice of traditional, alternative and later complementary medicines (TM and CAM for short) in terms of a collective movement to '(re)humanise medicine' that is actively challenging and by now even reforming a cold, cynical and century-old monopoly or hegemony of modern medicine. In other words, the histories of TM and CAM are often told as a struggle against a restrictive and repressive regulatory system that has privileged a single form of medicine to the detriment of its patients, who, it is argued, have not only been alienated and degenerated by the kinds of effects identified by the British Medical Association and their Vietnamese counterparts, but also been denied access to more 'human' and more 'natural' therapies that are safer and perhaps even more efficacious than modern medicines. Alternative and traditional medicines have emerged from this history not only as economically viable alternatives to expensive modern medicines, but also as remedies (literally so) to the dehumanisation and degeneration associated with modernity. By recommending 'natural', 'whole person' lifestyles that embrace organic foods and natural medicines, these alternative medicines promote balance, harmony, agency, responsibility, and quality of life. Now, what makes the sociological contribution to this ongoing history of modernity all the more engaging is the more recent analysis put forth by a number of late 20th century sociologists as to the side effects of this latest of liberations; this time from mono-scientific rather than ecclesiastic dogma. In sociological studies of our current 'post', 'late' or 'high modern' condition by contemporary social theorists such as Bauman, Giddens and Beck, it is suggested that emancipation (to the extent that it has been achieved) has come at the cost of increasing existential fragmentation, liquidity, anxiety, uncertainty, and insecurity. Now more than ever, set adrift from modernity's grand meta-narratives, we are left to cope and negotiate in a world riddled with a plurality of (hybrid) worldviews, lifeworlds, meanings and identities. If once we were 'kept immature' by priestly tyrannies and superstitious imposture or 'deadened' by the dull and monotonous disciplining of our factories, schools, and barracks, we are today 'thrown off balance' by the sheer barrage of meanings, symbols and knowledges coming at us from our televisions, supermarkets, social movements, local communities, peer groups and universities not to mention left anxious and disconcerted in the face of the unforeseeable ecological, political and existential consequences of hyper-modernisation and globalisation. 20 As argued by Giddens, late modernity "fuels a general climate of uncertainty which an individual finds disturbing no matter how far he seeks to put it to the back of his mind; and it inevitably exposes everyone to a diversity of crisis situations of greater or lesser importance, crisis situations which may sometimes threaten the very core of self-identity" (1991: 184-5). What is more, Beck suggests that this climate of uncertainty has arisen at a time when "traditional forms of coping with anxiety and insecurity in socio-moral milieus, families, marriage and male-female roles are failing" (1992: 153). And so we are left stranded in "a state of uncertainty never before so agonizing [while] we yearn for guidance we can trust and rely upon... but the authorities we may entrust are all contested, and none seems to be powerful enough to give us the degree of reassurance we seek" (Bauman 1993: 21). Out of this latest chapter of modernity, as we will be seeing, alternative and traditional medicines have emerged as new and 'alternative' sources of existential grounding and guidance, providing patients who have lost faith in their doctors with novel forms of coping strategies which, it is argued, take into consideration the patient as a 'whole person' to a far greater extent than modern medicine. But what if, following Foucault (1977), we were to, in a sense, invert this history? What if the dividing practices that have characterised modern systems of medical regulation are analysed, not solely in terms of their 'repressive' effects, but also their productive effects in providing possible solutions to the contested questions of how to distinguish good from bad medicine, safe from toxic remedies, competent from incompetent practitioners, and responsible from irresponsible patients? What if the strategies and practices of alternative healing are viewed, not as liberating an alienated subject from the clutches of an impersonal modern medicine, but rather as important elements in the contemporary making up and managing of new, whole person subjectivities, providing individuals with innovative ways of understanding and relating to themselves as well as concrete strategies for working on and transforming themselves into these whole persons? What if these same practices are seen, not as restoring a degenerated subject to a 'natural' state of balance, but rather as cornerstones in the inauguration of quality of life as a key site of therapeutic intervention? Such an inversion entails an entirely different approach to the history of present alternative and traditional medicine practices, not as politics or polemics, but rather as problematisation. It requires analysing herbal medicine "not from the point of view of politics, but always to ask politics what it has to say about the problems with which it was 21 confronted..., [to] question it about the positions it takes and the reasons it gives for this" (Foucault 1997a: 115). That is to say, it requires not determining whether a form of medicine is proper, good or better, but rather asking how the problems of what is good as opposed to bad medicine, an efficacious as opposed to an inefficacious remedy, a competent as a opposed to an incompetent practitioner, an active as opposed to a passive patient, or a dangerous as opposed to a safe herbal medicine, have come to be posed, as well as how solutions to these problems have come to be suggested. But before unfolding the purpose of this study any further, let us take a closer look at the ways in which traditional, alternative and complementary medicines have been sociologically accounted for to date. The crisis of modern medicine Notwithstanding acknowledgment of important advances made possible by hygiene practices, antibiotics and anaesthetics, modern medicine was regularly described as in crisis by the 1960s. It was a crisis that has since come to be seen as partly iatrogenic (i.e. brought on by the ignorance and/or inability of doctors, as well as by the harmful effects of their medications), partly organisational (i.e. brought on by the ill effects of bureaucratised doctor-patient relations) and partly conceptual (i.e. brought on by the limitations of doctors' reductionist concepts and definitions of health and illness). This, at least, is the picture that has emerged from a good half-century of sociological and anthropological studies in the field of medicine.