1 mL of this solution was put in headspace vial of 20 mL and 5 mL water was added. The sample was prepared with weighting 50 mg of Sodium citrate in a headspace vial and 6 mL water was added. 6 mL in a headspace vial was used as blank. S2 PP 77172Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 171 - 172 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsResults and discussionSeveral modifications of the general method for determining water soluble residual solvents Class 1 and 2, were made (USP, 2015). The general method is: chromatography system, composed of gas chromatograph equipped with a flame-ionization detector, 0.32 mm x 30 m fused-silica column coated with a 1.8 um layer of phase G43 (6% cyanopropylphenyl 94% dimethylpolysiloxane). The temperature of the column is maintained at 40 degC for 20 minutes, then raised at a rate of 10 degC per minute to 240 degC, and maintained at 240 degC for 20 minutes. The headspace conditions are: incubation at 80 degC for 60 minutes and syringe temperature of 90 degC (USP, 2015). This method has undergone several modifications and adaptations during the verification process. The adaptation was made in the temperature program of the column. The peak of methanol was at ~2.2 min, and since the diluent was water, there are no other peaks than methanol; consequently it was not necessary to run the full temperature program. Therefore finally, the method was as follows: injector temperature 140 degC, detector temperature 250 degC, temperature program for the column: 40 degC /hold 20 min, then raised to 120 degC, at a rate of 30 degC per minute. In addition, adaptation in the headspace condition was made, precisely the incubation time was shorted to 30 minutes, and because it has been proven that there are no extra peaks, other than methanol. Tests that were performed during the verification were: specificity, repeatability, accuracy, detection limit (LOD) and quantification limit (LOQ).The specificity of the method was validated with demonstrating that there is no other peak from the diluent that interfere with the peak of methanol. The repeatability of the chromatographic system was determined with ten replicate injections of the standard and determining the Relative Standard Deviation (RSD). This RSD value for organic volatile solvents should be below 15. The accuracy of the method was determined by interaction studies for constant amount of sample, but varying concentration of methanol. The concentrations are: 50 ppm, 150 ppm, 300 ppm, 500 ppm, 2000 ppm and 3500 ppm. On each concentration level, three samples were injected and calculations were made. The limits for the recovery are 80 - 120% or RSD below 15%. For determination of the LOQ and LOD, criteria of signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio of about 10:1 and 3:1, respectively was employed. In the first step S/N ratio was determined on the standard of 150 ppm and that standard is used as a stock solution. Consequently several dilutions were prepared and S/N ratio was determined. S/N ratio of about 10:1 was obtained at concentration of 10 ug/ml, and that concentration was taken as LOQ. S/N ratio of about 3:1 was obtained at concentration of 3 ug/ml, and that concentration was taken as LOD.ConclusionThe verified method was proven to be suitable for determination of residual solvent methanol in Sodium Citrate.ReferencesCommittee for Human Medicinal Products (CHMP), 2015. Guideline Q3C (R5) on impurities: guideline for residual solvents. European Medicines Agency. EMA/CHMP/ICH/82260/2006. London. UK.Shimadzu corporation, 2013. Measurement of residual solvents in pharmaceuticals by Headspace GC residual solvents - Procedure A. Application Data Sheet No. 1.United States Pharmacopeial (USP) Convention, 2015. United States Pharmacopeia 38, National Formulary 33, Rockville, MD, USA.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 173 - 174 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.076Short communicationValidation and quantification of bacterial endotoxins with turbidimetric kinetic method for (S)-Lactic acidSilvana Ilioska-Zlatanovikj*, Elizabeta Popovska , Hristina BabunovskaALKALOID A. D, Blvd. A. Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, R.Macedonia* szlatanovic@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionEndotoxins are high-molecular-weight complexes as-sociated with the outer membrane of Gram-negative bac-teria, and are the most significant pyrogen for the pharma-ceutical industry. The importance of endotoxin contamina-tion in sterile manufacturing becomes apparent when con-fronted with four aspects of its existence: its ubiquity in nature, potent toxicity, stability or ability to retain after be-ing subjected to extreme conditions and relative likelihood of its occurrence in pharmaceutical products. Any prepara-tion administered parenterally should be sterile and com-ply with the test for bacterial endotoxins, BET (Ph. Eur., 2014).Lactic acid is an organic compound with the formu-la CH3CH(OH)CO2H. It is a white, water-soluble solid or clear liquid that is produced both naturally and synthetical-ly. Lactic acid is chiral, consisting of two optical isomers. One is known as L-(+)-lactic acid or (S)-lactic acid and the other, its mirror image, is D-(-)-lactic acid or (R)-lac-tic acid. In humans, L-lactate is constantly produced from pyruvate via the enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in a process of fermentation during normal metabolism and exercise. In industry, lactic acid fermentation is performed by lactic acid bacteria, which convert simple carbohydrates such as glucose, sucrose, or galactose to lactic acid.Lactic acid is used as an excipient in medicinal prod-ucts that are for intravenous administration. In medicine, lactate is one of the main components of antibiotics and in-fusion solutions. These intravenous fluids consist of sodi-um and potassium cations along with lactate and chloride anions in solution with distilled water, generally in concen-trations isotonic with human blood. Objective: Validation and quantification of BET (Bac-terial endotoxins test) with Turbidimetric kinetic method for Lactic acid. Materials and methodsMaterials (S)-Lactic acid; LAL reagent Water; Sodium Hydrox-ide 0.1 N for pH adjustment of sample; reagents for Kinetic turbidimetric method; PYROGENT-5000(tm), LAL Reagent Water, disposable endotoxin-free glass dilution tubes; dis-posable sterile microplates; automatic hand - held pipettes with sterile tips; timer; vortex mixer; Microplate read-er Elx808cse from BIO-TEK(r) (BIO-TEK Instruments, INC.,P.O.BOX998, Highlsand Park, Winooski, Vermont 05404 USA).The results are calculated and stored with Win QCL 4.0.2 software(tm) (Lonza(r) Walkersville, MD21793).MethodsThe Kinetic turbidimetric method is based on measur-ing the turbidity (optical density) of LAL/sample mixture at regular interval troughout the test. The time required be-fore the appearance of turbidity (reaction time) is inversely proportional to the amount of endotoxin present. In accordance with the Ph.Eur., 2014 and British phar-macopoeia commission, 2014, substances to be used in parenteral preparations must comply with BET, whatever their origin, since:- contamination by bacterial endotoxins can take place prior to or during the manufacturing pro-cess;- bacterial endotoxins cannot easily be removed by the manufacturing process;S2 PP 78174Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 173 - 174 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentations- bacterial endotoxins should be detected as ear-ly as possible in the manufacturing process.It is to be noted that the ICH Guideline Q6B: Specifi-cations: Test Procedures and Acceptance Criteria for Bio-technological/Biological Products provides the following recommendation under section 4.1 Drug Substance Speci-fication: "Pharmacopoeial tests (e.g., endotoxin detection) should be performed on the drug substance, where appro-priate". Lactic acid, as an excipient in parenteral prepara-tions, has strongly inhibitory effect on Bacterial endotox-ins test (Kinetic Turbidimetric method) because of its pH value and it is necessary to overcome this problem. Prob-lems with pH value are the most significant biochemical cause of LAL-test inhibition. When dealing with acid or base solutions, correction of pH should be made in opti-mum rang 6-8. Lactic acid has pH value of 1.2 and the correction should be done by diluting in with 0.1N NaOH (Zink McCullough, 2011; Williams, 2009). Results and discussionValidation was performed begining with screening (In-hibition / Enhancement) test (FDA, 2012 ). The validation was performed on three batches. For that purpose Lonza(r) reagents were used; lysate sensitivity l = 0,01 EU/ml; MVD = ELCxPP/l = 0.005x10/0.01 = 5. Dilutions used for preliminary, Inhibition/ Enhancement test were as fol-lows: 1:2, 1:4 and the MVD (maximum valid dilution) = 1:5 with LRW.To overcome the inhibition of lactic acid, the first di-lution was made with 0.1N NaOH from Lonza(r) and vor-tex for 1 minute. Test solutions (at dilutions: 1:2, 1:4 and 1:5) were obtained by diluting with LRW(tm) from Lonza(r). Lactic acid is not inhibitory in 1:2 dilution (pH=6.85-6.92), showing PPC recovery 120%. Test solutions (at dilutions 1:4 and 1:5, MVD) gave PPC recovery of 105% and 118% respectively. Upon received results the validation was done on three consecutive batches of lactic acid with dilution 1:2 (considering that recovery must be close to 100%). The endotoxin concentration reported for the three consecutive batches is less than 0.00200 EU/mg with PPC 78%, 94% and 91% respectively. All three batches of the tested lac-tic acid showed endotoxin recovery between 50 and 200%.Conclusion Validation of the Bacterial endotoxins test on (S)-Lac-tic acid was successfully done. The inhibition was over-come. Routine testing of (S)-Lactic acid should be done with dilution 1:2 (conc. 5 mg/ml) using LRW from Lon-za(r). According to the results, the bacterial endotoxins test - Turbidimetric kinetic method for (S)-lactic acid was vali-dated and can be used for routine testing.ReferencesBritish pharmacopoeia commission, 2014. Expert Advisory Group ABS: Antibiotics. Summary minutes. A meeting of the Expert Advisory Group on Antibiotics was held at 151 Buckingham Palace Road,London, SW1W 9SZ.European Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2014. European Pharmacopoeia 8th edition. Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare of the Council of Europe (EDQM).Strasbourg, France.U.S. Department of Health and human Services Food and Drug Administration Center for Drug Evaluation and Research (CDER) Center for Biologics Evaluation and Research (CBER) Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM) Center for Devices and Radiological Health (CDRH) Office of Regulatory Affairs (ORA). 2012. Guidance for industry Pyrogen and Endotoxins Testing: Questions and Answers.International Conference on Harmonization of Technical Requirements for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH). 1999. Q6B: Specifications: test procedures and acceptance criteria. For biotechnological/biological products. Harmonized tripartite guideline.Williams, K. L., 2009. Endotoxins: Pyrogens, LAL Testing and Depyrogenation, 3rd ed. Informa Healthcare USA, Inc. pp. 285-301.Zink McCullough, K., 2011. The Bacterial endotoxins test A practical guide, PDA &DHI, pp.195-271.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 175 - 176 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 636.09:[615.2:347.77.038(497.7)Short communicationMarketing authorization of veterinary medicinal products in MacedoniaTodor Sapov1*, Suzana Trajkovic-Jolevska1, Romel Velev2, Jasmina Tonic-Ribarska1, Natasa Krleska-Veleva3, Biljana Shapova41University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Pharmacy, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia 2University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Lazar Pop Trajkov 5-7, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia3Replek Farm, Kozle 188, Skopje, R. Macedonia 4St.Naum Ohridski City Surgical Clinic-11Oktomvri bb,Skopje, R.Macedonia* tshapov@gmail.comIntroductionThe regulatory approval process of the new veterinary medicinal products is intricate and rigorous, since its pri-mary purpose is to have a drug on the market that can guar-antee quality, effectiveness and safety to both, animals and humans. This is part of the marketing authorization proce-dures, strictly stipulated and regulated by law. Macedonian Law on Veterinarian medicinal products (2010) is harmo-nized with the standards defined within the EU legislation. The main aim of this study is to present the current sit-uation regarding the marketing authorization of veterinary medicinal products in Macedonia and to identify strengths and weaknesses in the process of registration.Materials and methodsResearch presented in the study was completed with-in the period September-November 2015, through direct contact with the distributors of veterinary medicinal prod-ucts from all over Macedonia. Main research method was a questionnaire composed of 20 questions with option of an-swers. In order to reduce subjectivity the questionnaire of-fered a binary model with yes, no and not familiar as pos-sible answers. All questions in the questionnaire were con-crete and specific, targeting issues related with registration and selection of veterinary medicinal product, distribution practice, pharmacovigilance etc. All answers were careful-ly examined and the results of the research have indicated the current situation of the marketing authorization process of the veterinary medicinal products in the Macedonia. To all contacted companies anonymity in responding as well as data confidentiality was guaranteed.Results and discussionAll new veterinary medicinal products need to be ap-proved by the competent authority. After positive scientific evaluation of the submitted documentation, competent au-thority issues marketing authorization that allows the vet-erinary medicinal products to be placed on the market. Na-tional procedure is a type of authorization for veterinary medicinal products in Macedonia. The applicants need to submit an application to the Food and Veterinary Agency as a competent authority. The registration process of the vet-erinary medicinal products in Macedonia is governing by the Law on Veterinary Medicinal Products (2010), but its implementation is closely defined by the rulebooks, where it is clearly described troughs of the entire procedure. The report of this research contains qualitative infor-mation of the structural indicators and perceptions which were subsequently used for obtaining the qualitative pa-rameter with which reflect the present situation of knowl-edge of registration process for veterinary medicinal prod-ucts.In the Republic of Macedonia there are 23 veterinary medicinal products wholesalers which are registered by the Food and Veterinary Agency, and authorized to distribute veterinary medicinal products. Only 16 of them are active S2 PP 79176Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 175 - 176 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsin the field. During the preparation of this study, in order to receive more accurate information, all of them were con-tacted, but only 9 of them responded positively to our re-quest.The results of this research showed that veterinary me-dicinal products wholesalers in some points are familiar with the process of marketing authorization and post-mar-keting authorization and the Law on Veterinary medicinal products (2010), but there in certain areas of the epony-mous Law are not familiarized. On the basis of their an-swers, it can be concluded that most companies are famil-iar with the basics of the process, such as, the procedure for marketing authorization for veterinary medicinal product and legal obligations, the existence of a register of veteri-nary medicinal products, good distribution practice, good storage practice and procedure for withdrawal of veteri-nary medicinal products. On the questions such as: infor-mation of public interest, the existence of national refer-ence laboratories, the existence of a national list of essen-tial veterinary medicinal products, pharmacovigilance sys-tem, some of respondents did not know the exact answer, indicating a poorly knowledge of the marketing authoriza-tion and post-marketing authorization of veterinary medic-inal product on these specific issues.The results also show that the Good distribution prac-tice and Good storage practice are implemented and that the cooperation between companies and Food and Veteri-nary Agency is on satisfactory level.