Aliquots were taken at regular time intervals (after 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 and 45 min) and replaced with an equal volume of pre-warmed hydrochloric acid buffer. Withdrawn ali-quots were analysed for drug content using previously val-idated HPLC method (Hitachi HPLC system, Japan), col-umn 150 mm x 4.6 mm, 5um, at 25 degC and flow rate of 1.5 ml/min. Quantification of API was detected by UV at 250 nm.Results and discussionLOD as a parameter is extremely important for the pro-cess of fluid-bed granulation and drying. Obtained results indicated that sample 2 has the lowest loss of mass (3.1%) in comparison with samples 1 and 3 (3.25 and 3.74%, re-spectively) probably due to the presence of microcrystal-line cellulose into the granule matrix. Even though micro-crystalline cellulose allows rapid addition of the granulat-ing fluid, the water does not become bound inside, but rath-er it is easily given up during drying process. This proper-ty aids in preventing case hardening and uniform moisture content in granules (FMC Pharma, 2000). Results obtained for the flow properties of the final blends indicated that the flowability was excellent for all prepared samples (10, 8.7 and 10.8 sec for sample 1, 2 and 3, respectively). The macroscopic appearance of the tablets was satis-fying. All prepared tablets were smooth and elegant and no mottling was observed. Uniform appearance of the tab-lets was probably due to presence of microcrystalline cel-lulose, which enables equal migration of added dyes (FMC Pharma, 2000). The results of disintegration time show that all pre-pared samples have disintegration time less than 15 min-utes (1.38, 2.35 and 1.21 min for sample 1, 2 and 3, re-spectively). Sample 1 did not meet acceptance criteria for immedi-ate release tablet dosage forms (80.22% were dissolved for 30 minutes). On the other hand, sample 2 and 3 were char-acterized by > 85% dissolved API at the time interval of 30 min (90.06% and 91.82%, respectively). Obtained results pointed to the rationality of microcrystalline cellulose in-tragranular incorporation (sample 2) as well as addition of croscarmellose sodium (sample 3) equally between the in-tra and extra granulation. ConclusionIn the present work efforts have been made to develop immediate release tablets with water insoluble API using fluid-bed granulation as a promising approach to enhance the drug release profile. The results showed that the release of the drug was depended on type of excipient used in the formulation. Formulation containing 2% croscarmellose sodium showed minimum disintegration time and better drug release profile as compare to other formulations.ReferencesFMC Pharma, B., 2000. Avicel(r)PH Microcrystalline Cellulose functionality in the Wet Granulation Manufacturing process.FMC Corporation, pp. 1-14.Parikh, D., 1997. Handbook of Pharmaceutical Granulation Technology. New York: Marcel Dekker. Inc, pp. 237-242.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 425 - 426 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.276:615.454Short communicationEvaluation of physical properties on nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory gel formulation with different polymersMilka Mijalkova Dokova*, Ljiljana Krsteska, Dejan Kostovski, Sonja UgarkovicResearch & Development, Alkaloid AD, Blvd.AleksandarMakedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* mdokova@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionPharmaceutical semisolid preparations may be de-fined as topical products intended for application on the skinor accessible mucous membranes to provide local-ized and sometimes systemic effects at the site of applica-tion. However, most of the semisolid preparations are ap-plied to the skin for topical relief in dermatologic condi-tions (Swarbrick et al., 1990). Several categories of semi-solid preparations for cutaneous application may bedistin-guished: ointments, creams, gels and pastes. These topical formulations are composed of drug in asuitable semisolid base which is either hydrophobic or hydrophilic in charac-ter (Allen et al., 2011).Depending on the physicochemical properties, desired site of action and formulation strategies for the drug de-livery incorporation into semisolids can show their activ-ity on the surface layers of tissues or via penetration into deeper layers to reach the site of action or through system-ic delivery. Nonetheless if the drug is to act locally or sys-temically, it must first penetrate the stratum corneum (Raw et al., 2013).To treat a number of painful conditions affecting the joints and muscles, such as backache, rheumatic and mus-cular pain, sprains, strains and sports injuries, an active in-gredient that belongs to a group of non-steroid anti-inflam-matory drug (NSAID) was used. During formulation de-velopment, in order to obtain a stable, transparent, homo-geneous hydro-alcoholic gel for topical use with satisfacto-ry rheological properties, several gelling agents were test-ed such as hydroxyethyl cellulose, sodium carboxymethyl-cellulose, poloxamer and carbomers.The aim of this research work wasto show the influ-ence of different types of polymers as gelling agents on physical properties of gel, like grittiness, viscosity and spreadability which are important for achieving therapeu-tic efficiency.Materials and methodsMaterialsNSAID (BCS class II), Poloxamertype 407, Carbomer, grade 940,C10-30 alkyl acrylate crosspolymer,ethanol 96%, diisopropanolamine, sodium hydroxide, propylene glycol, levomenthol.EquipmentLaboratory mixer homogenizer (IMA Stephan UMC 5,Germany), magnetic stirrer (IKA Ret control/t, Germa-ny), viscometer (Brookfield model DV2T with T- bar spin-dle, USA), pH meter (Seven Compact Mettler Toledo, Germany),Morphologi-G3S, (Malvern instruments, UK).Preparation of gelsMethod of preparation of samples iskept to be same. Processing steps include hydration of the polymer with mixing until complete hydration is obtained. Next is the gel forming step,where with appropriate gel forming agent clear gelwasachieved. Separately, process of dissolving of active ingredient, levomentholand propylene glycol into ethanol 96% is performed.This solution is added to gel base and homogenized.Sample S1 contains cross-linked polyacrylate polymer as a gelling agent and diisopropanolamineas a pH balanc-er. Organic amines are commonly used to neutralize poly-mers as agents for gel formation. In sample S2, C10-30 al-kyl acrylate crosspolymer, polymer of the same group, but with different physical characteristics was used. The sam-ple S3 was prepared with Poloxamer as a gelling agent. So-S4 PP 202426Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 425 - 426 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsdium hydroxide solution as a pH balancer is used in the op-timal amount to obtain a transparent gel.Propylene glycol and ethanol (96 %) were includ-ed in formulation as co-solvent and solvent for the ac-tive ingredient. As a medium for hydration and swelling of polymer,water purified was used. Levomenthol in the for-mulation was chosen as a cooling agent and skin penetra-tion enhancer.Physical properties of the prepared formulationThe produced gels were evaluated for grittiness, vis-cosity and spreadability as physical tests.Grittiness (texture)The samples were evaluated microscopically for the presence of any appreciable particulate matter, seen un-der light microscope. Proper quantity from the samples was applied directly to the glass for viewing under a mi-croscope with a thickness that is appropriate for the lens.The gel should fulfil the requirement of absence of par-ticular matter and from grittiness as desired for any topi-cal preparation.This test was performed on three selected samples with differentpolymers on Morphologi-G3S Malvern in-struments, UK.ViscosityRheological properties such as viscosity of semisolid dosage forms can influence their drug delivery. The vis-cosity of the formulations was performed using Brookfield viscometer DV2T model with T - Bar spindle, Brookfield. The test was developed according to European Pharmaco-poeia test 2.2.10 (Ph. Eur. current version).For the measurement approximately 50 g of gel were filled in a 100 ml beaker and the T-bar spindlewas lowered perpendicular in the centre taking care that the spindle does not touch bottom of the beaker. The viscosity was read as a single point measurement after 60 s, rotating with 5 rpm at room temperature. Spreadability testThe spreadability is a test of the gel easiness of appli-cation. The spreadability of the samples was determined according to in-house test and is referenced according to Rao et al. (2010) by measuring 1 g gel between horizon-tal plates (20 x 20 cm2), after 1 minute. The standardized weight tied on the upper glass was 125 g. The results were calculated according to a formula.The spreadability (S) can be calculated using formula:Where: S -spreadability(g.cm/sec) m - weighttied to upper glass slide (g) l - lengthmove on the glass slide (cm) t -timetaken (sec)Results and discussionFor this purpose three different hydro-alcoholic gels-were prepared for testing certainphysical properties.Grittiness (texture)All samples have a homogeneous appearance without particulate matter.That is an expected result for this kind of topical formulations.ViscosityThe results from measurements are 54 000, 41 600 and 700 000 cP for the samples S1, S2 and S3 respectively.Viscosity results were influenced by the gelling properties andmolecular weight of thepolymers.Spreadability testAverage result from ten measurementsof the samples S1, S2 and S3 were 10.04 g.cm/sec, 10.96 g.cm/secand 5.67 g.cm/sec, respectively. Results are in accordance with the viscosity values, similar between S1 and S2, S3 being least spreadable.ConclusionAll examined samples for the physical parameter grit-tiness gave satisfactory results.From the presented results it can be concluded that gel sample with Poloxamer is the most viscous and it has weaker spreadability properties compared to the samples with cross-linked polyacrylate-polymer and C10-30 alkyl acrylate crosspolymer. Samples S1 and S2 have optimal viscosity values, provide good spreadability properties and are easy to apply on the affect-ed skin area.ReferencesAllen, L.V., Popovich, N.G., Ansel, H.C., (Eds. ), 2011, Ansel's Pharmaceutical Dosage Forms and Drug Delivery Systems, 9-th ed., Lippincott Williams and Wilkins, New York.European Pharmacopoeia, 8.7, European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and Health Care, 2015.Rao, P.K., Khaliq, K., Kharat, S., Sagare, P., Patil, S.K, 2010. Preparation and evaluation o/w cream for skin psoriasis. IJPBS. 1 (3) (available at http://www.ijpbs.net/issue-3/86.pdf).Raw, A., Chang, R.K., Lionberger, R., Yu, L., 2013. Generic Development of Topical Dermatologic Products: Formulation Development, Process Development, and Testing of Topical Dermatologic Products. AAPS J. 15(1), 41-52.Swarbrick, J., 1990. Encyclopedia of pharmaceutical technology: Semisolid preparations,third ed. Informa healthcare Inc.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 427 - 428 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.276.032.311:615.451.2Short communicationTaste masking approach in oral suspension with nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory drugRoza Markovska Dameska*, Liljana Krsteska, Milka Mijalkova Dokova, Dejan Kostovski, Sonja UgarkovicAlkaloid AD, Blvd. AleksandarMakedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* rmarkovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionOral liquid pharmaceutical dosage forms are designed to provide maximum therapeutic response in a targeted population, especially for children and people with diffi-culty in swallowing tablets and capsules, and to produce rapid therapeutic effects. Suspensions as dispersed sys-tems are composed of two or more phases, where the solid phase, usually the drug substance, is distributed throughout the polymeric matrix (Cox, 2008).Oral suspension described in this study is composed of active substance which belongs to BCS class II, and is nonsteroidal anti - inflammatory agent with very intensive burning taste, as is literally described as "burning mouth effect". Taste masking effect is very difficult to achieve, but is inevitable step which must be satisfied during de-velopment of successful formulation of such oral suspen-sion. Different approaches are reported in the literature to achieve successful taste masking of bitter or unpleasant taste of drug, as follows: addition of flavoring and sweeten-ing agents, taste suppressants and enhancers, viscosity en-hancer, pH modifier, microencapsulation, coating with in-ert material, ion-exchange, inclusion complexation, granu-lation, adsorption, prodrug approach, by using liposomes, by effervescent agent etc. (Baig et al., 2014; Bhalerao et al., 2013; Suthar et al., 2010).During formulation development several combination of polymers and ion exchange resins in different ratio are being used. Polymers used for achieving the desired vis-cosity range were xanthan gum, carboxymethylcellulose sodium, microcrystalline cellulose and carboxymethylcel-lulose sodium complex, maize starch, lambda carrageenan gum, and cross linked polyacrylic polymer. Materials and methodsFor preparation of the oral suspension, the following materials were used: xanthan gum, carboxymethylcellu-lose sodium, microcrystalline cellulose/ carboxymethyl-cellulose sodium , maize starch, lambda carrageenan gum, polacrillin potassium, cross linked polyacrylic polymer, surfactants, flavor, pH regulatory agents, sweeteners and purified water. All the experimental trials were prepared in sever-al continued steps including polymers hydration, swelling and incorporation of the active substance, using appropri-ate equipment: table balance (Sartorius CP 4202 S, Mettler PM 200, Germany), stirrer (IKA UltraTurrax T-50 basic, Germany), magnetic stirrer (Heidolph MR Hei-Tec, Ger-many), viscometer (Brookfield model RV with standard spindle set, Germany), pH meter (Seven Compact Mettler Toledo, electrode Inlab(r) Solids Pro, Germany). Seven different formulations were prepared. Combi-nations of different percentage of xanthan gum, and the same percentage of carboxymethylcellulose sodium and microcrystalline cellulose/ carboxymethylcellulose sodi-um, were included into 3 experimental trials (F1, F2 and F3). In the fourth formulation (F4), maize starch was in-corporated instead of carboxymethylcellulose sodium, and the fifth formula (F5) included lambda carrageenan gum instead of carboxymethylcellulose sodium. Method of preparation of the above mentioned trials consists of several processes which include preparation of polymer medium with hydration and swelling process un-der continuously stirring, and after that incorporation of the active substance into polymeric matrix. Additional in-active ingredients which enhance the organoleptic proper-ties and consistency of the suspension were added, such as sweetening agents, flavors, pH modifiers and surfactants. S4 PP 203428Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 427 - 428 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsInto the last two formulations (F6 and F7) ion-ex-change resins were included. They were prepared with complexation process between the ion-exchange resins and the active substance.Viscosity measurements were done of all of the pre-pared experimental trials using laboratory viscometer (Brookfield DV2T RV with standard spindle set, Germa-ny).The experimental conditions (600 ml beaker, filled with 350 ml suspension, viscosity measured after 60 sec-onds at 50 rpm of spindle rotation) are kept the same for all of the performed trials which means that the obtained re-sults are comparable with each other.The palatability study for the prepared experimental trials was performed by panel method. The study protocol was explained and written. Also, the consent was obtained from the volunteers. For this purpose, 10 human volunteers were selected. About 5 ml of the suspension was placed on tongue and taste evaluated after 15 seconds, using a nu-merical scale. The numerical scale consists of values as 0 = excellent, 1 = good, 2 = slightly burning mouth effect, 3 = burning mouth effect, 4 = intensive burning mouth effect, which were determined by the formulator.Also, measurement of the sedimentation volume of all of the experimental trials in the study was done. Sedimen-tation volume (F) is a ratio of the final or ultimate volume of sediment (Vu) to the original volume of sediment (Vo) before settling.