The association of KRAS mutations with poor DFS was even more evident in patients with microsatellite stable tumors. The 5-year survival of patients with MSS tu-mors harboring KRAS mutation in codon 12 or 13 was 31.8% versus patients with wild-type KRAS, where the survival is 71.9% (p=0.001). The hazard ratio of 2.64 (CI 1.22 - 5.70; p=0.014) indicate an increase in the risk of relapse in patients with MSS tumors compared to unselected group of patients. In models stratified according to clinicopathologic character-istics, no difference in DFS was observed in patients with stage II and III, i.e. the presence of KRAS mutation was asso-ciated with poor outcome of treatment with capecitabine re-gardless of stage. However, different patterns in survival were observed according to gender of the patients, where the pres-ence of the KRAS mutation remained a strong negative pre-dictive factor for DFS only in male patients (HR 4.87; 95% CI 1.94 - 12.20; p< 0,001), where the average five-year sur-vival of carriers of KRAS mutation was 29 months compared to 83.5 months in patients with wild-type KRAS (p<0.001). In contrast, in the female subgroup of patients, the presence of KRAS mutations had no significant effect on survival (58 vs. 79.7 months, p=0.93). Since there is no significant difference in the frequency of KRAS mutations according to the gender (p=0.71), these differences in survival are probably not due a statistical error, and represent the possible protective effect of the estrogen hormones.ConclusionThe mutations in the KRAS gene are a strong negative predictive factor for survival after adjuvant capecitabine monotherapy, especially in male patients. Routine KRAS testing can give significant contribution towards decision making regarding the treatment strategies in CRC by identi-fying patients with a highly aggressive disease and poor sur-vival irrespective of the capecitabine adjuvant monotherapy.ReferencesArtale, S., Sartore-Bianchi, A., Veronese, S.M., Gambi, V., Sarnataro, C.S., Gambacorta, M., Lauricella, C., Siena, S., 2008. Mutations of KRAS and BRAF in primary and matched metastatic sites of colorectal cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 26, 4217-4219.Boland, C.R., Thibodeau, S.N., Hamilton, S.R., Sidransky, D., Eshleman, J.R., Burt, R.W., Meltzer, S.J., Rodriguez-Bigas, M.A., Fodde, R., Ranzani, G.N., Srivastava, S., 1998. A National Cancer Institute Workshop on Microsatellite Instability for cancer detection and familial predisposition: development of international criteria for the determination of microsatellite instability in colorectal cancer. Cancer Res. 58, 5248-5257.Croce, C.M., 2008. Oncogenes and cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 358, 502-511.Jass, J.R., 2007. Classification of colorectal cancer based on correlation of clinical, morphological and molecular features. Histopathology 50, 113-130.Javle M., Hsueh C-T., 2009. Updates in Gastrointestinal Oncology - insights from the 2008 44th annual meeting of the American Society of Clinical Oncology. J. Hematol. Oncol. 2, 9-22. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 543 - 544 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33.015.4Short communicationBinding site description of 2-substituted benzothiazoles as potential RND efflux pump inhibitorsIsmail Yalcin1*, Serap Yilmaz1, Kayhan Bolelli1, Esin Aki-Yalcin1, Ufuk Over-Hasdemir21Pharmaceutical Chemistry Dept., Faculty of Pharmacy, Ankara University, Ankara, Turkey2Medical Microbiology Dept., Faculty of Medicine, Marmara University, Istanbul, Turkey* yalcin@ankara.edu.trIntroductionThe resistance-nodulation-cell division family (RND) efflux pumps exemplify a unique phenomenon with drug resistance in different gram negative bacterial strains as a single mechanism causing resistance against several differ-ent classes of antibiotics. In Escherichia coli AG102 and Acinetobacter baumannii SBMox2 strains the well char-acterized RND efflux pumps are AcrAB-TolC and the Ad-eABC respectively. Most of the antibiotics were found to be substrates for these pumps by increasing the expression of the efflux pump genes, leading to multidrug resistance (MDR) and the treatment failure and death caused by these gram negative bacterial infections or underlying diseases are common (Sun et al., 2014). Consequently, the need of searching new therapeutic solutions that suppress the ac-tivity of efflux pumps and restore the sensitivity of com-monly used antibiotic is essential.RND efflux pumps, which are only found in Gram-neg-ative bacteria, have a tripartite composition. RND type ef-flux pumps contain an inner membrane transporter protein (RND pump), an outer membrane protein (OMP) channel, and a periplasmic membrane fusion protein (MFP). They are allowed direct extrusion of various antibiotics from the cytosol or periplasmic space to the outside of the bacteri-al cell, and have been found to be associated extensive-ly with clinically significant antibiotic resistance (Sun et al., 2014).Recent studies reported that RND type efflux pumps, which are named AcrAB-TolC in E. coli and AdeABC in A. baumannii, comprise a transporter protein (RND pump) AcrB in E. coli or AdeB in A. baumannii acting as a pro-ton/drug antiporter, an outer membrane channel protein TolC in E. coli or AdeC in A. baumannii, and a periplasmic membrane fusion protein AcrA, which serves as a linker between TolC and AcrB in E. coli or AdeB, which serves as a linker between AdelC and AdeB in A. baumannii (Sun et al., 2014). The emergence of MDR strains of Gram-negative bac-teria pathogens is a problem of ever increasing significance (Sun et al. 2014). Interestingly, these RND efflux pumps decrease the antibacterial activity of dissimilar antibiotic structures, which can be considered a MDR mechanism. Because of bacteria become insensitive to different classes of antibiotic therapy, new therapeutic approaches must be looked for, searching for new molecules to block efflux, to restore drug susceptibility to resistant clinical strains.The goal of this study is (i) to define the potential RND efflux pump inhibitor (EPI) activity of our previously syn-thesized BSN coded 2-substituted benzothiazoles by ob-serving the reversal antibacterial activity of antibiotics particularly to chloramphenicol (CHL) and/or ciprofloxa-cin (CIP) in the AdeABC efflux pump overexpressor Aci-netobacter baumannii SbMox2 and/or AcrAB-TolC ef-flux pump overexpressor E. coli AG102 clinical isolates, and (ii) to examine the structure activity relationships by describing the binding site features of these tested com-pounds and to analyze the active site protein-ligand inter-actions of RND efflux pump AdeABC in A. baumannii by generating pharmacophore hypothesis.Materials and methodsA well-known standard microdilution assay was used to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of our previously synthesized BSN coded 2-substituted S6 PP 259544Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 543 - 544 (2016)Poster presentationsClinical pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular sciencesbenzothiazoles derivatives (Yilmaz et al. 2013), CHL and CIP and MICs of CHL and CIP were determined in the presence and absence of the BSN coded compounds. A common feature pharmacophore hypothesis, Hi-pHop method, was generated by using the Accelrys Dis-covery Studio 2.1 software to explain the specification of the structure activity relationships of pharmacophoric sites of the tested BSN coded 2-substituted benzothiazoles in the targeted AdeABC efflux pump. This tool builds phar-macophore hypotheses (overlaying common features) for which the fit of individual molecules to a hypothesis could be correlated with activity of the molecule. A set of potential AdeABC efflux pump inhibitors of BSN coded 2-substituted benzothiazoles, which exhibited 16-folds or greater reduction in the MIC value of CHL af-ter used in combination in A. baumannii SbMox-2, was se-lected as the EPI active training set to use in the HipHop pharmacophore generation method. Among the tested BSN coded compounds, the most active molecules, BSN4, BSN6, and BSN23, were used to derive common fea-ture-based alignments and considered as "reference com-pounds" specifying a principal value of 2 and a maximum omitting features value of 0.Results and discussionFor the antibacterial activity test against A. bauman-nii SbMox-2 and/or E. coli AG102 clinical isolates, BSN coded 2-substituted benzothiazoles were first tested alone to observe their intrinsic antibacterial affinity. Howev-er, when they were tested alone they did not exhibit any significant intrinsic antibacterial activity. But, when they were tested in combinations with CHL or CIP against the AdeABC overexpressor A. baumannii SbMox-2 mutant, a reversal in the antibacterial activity of 22, 20 fold dou-ble dilution better MIC values were observed respectively for CHL and CIP. Moreover, the combinations of the test-ed compounds with CHL or CIP against the AcrAB-TolC overexpressor E. coli AG102 strain were exhibited a rever-sal antibacterial activity of 6, 10 fold double dilution better MIC values respectively for CHL and CIP. Among the test-ed BSN coded benzothiazoles, BSN4, BSN6, and BSN23 reversal the antibacterial activity of CHL revealing a MIC values of 0.125 ug/ml against the AdeABC overexpressor A. baumannii SbMox-2 strain.The generated 3D-common feature pharmacophore hypothesis containing two Hydrogen Bond Acceptors (HBA) and three Hydrophobic Aromatics (HpAr) was an-ticipated as the common-feature functions to explain the pharmacophoric site specifications of the EPI activity of BSN coded 2-substituted benzothiazole compounds. The generated pharmacophore model reveals that the two HBA and three HpAr features are found significant for binding to the active site of the target protein. Three HpAr features demonstrate the appropriate active shape of the molecule, displaying the required place of bulky aromatic moieties. Two HBA atoms or groups at the given positions are neces-sary in the molecule to bind to the target protein.ConclusionThe generated pharmacophore model revealed that when the tested compounds substituted by a benzyl group instead of phenyl ring attached to the benzothiazole nu-cleus then, they could not be able to show any match with the hydrogen bond acceptor feature of nitrogen atom in the thiazole ring at the fused ring system. Therefore, these compounds showed lower fit value and were not able to match with all the mapped pharmacophore common-fea-tures in the anticipated model. This observation explains why 2-phenylbenzotiazole structure is more favourable than 2-benzylbenzotiazole for increasing potency in this set of compounds.In conclusion, the generated 3D-common feature pharmacophore hypothesis reveals that the conformation-al properties of the compounds are significant for the Ade-ABC efflux pump inhibitor activity against the multi-drug resistant A. baumannii SbMox-2 strain and compounds possessing 2-[4-(4-substituted-2-phenyl-acetamido)phe-nyl]benzothiazole and/or 2-[4-(4-substituted-3-phenylpro-pionamido)phenyl]benzothiazole structures are important for improving the AdeABC efflux pump inhibitor potency.ReferencesSun, J., Deng, Z., Yan, A., 2014. Bacterial multidrug efflux pumps: Mechanisms, physology and pharmacological exploitations. Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 453, 254-267.Yilmaz, S., Yalcin, I., Kaynak-Onurdag, F., Ozgen, S., Yildiz, I., Aki, E., 2013. Synthesis and in vitro antimicrobial activity of novel 2-(4-(substituted-carboxamido)benzyl/phenyl)benzothiazoles. Croat. Chem. Acta. 86, 223-231.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 545 - 546 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.218.032.21:616.211-002-056.3 616.211-002-056.3-085.218.032.21Short communicationEctoine nasal spray in treatment of allergic rhinitisVladimir SaranovicSrpsko Lekarsko Drustvo, ORL sekcijaKBC Zvezdara , ENT Clinic, Presevska 31, Belgrade, Serbia* jelena.ognjenovic@esensa.co.rsAllergic rhinitis definition and treatmentAllergic rhinitis is clinically defined as an inflammation of the nose with characteristic symptoms such as rhinorrhoea, nasal obstruction, sneezing, and/or itching of the nose. The symptomatic disorder of the nasal mucosa and tissue is associated with an IgE-mediated immune response to allergens and is characterized by two phases: an immediate response after allergen exposure (early phase) and a late phase occurring up to 12 hours later, which predominantly causes nasal congestion (Calderon Moises et al., 2010). If a concurrent respiratory infection is present, a patient's probability of developing bronchial asthma as comorbidity increases. Likewise, the risk of developing further allergies with more severe symptoms rises over the time of the disease (http://www.bitop.de).The optimal treatment of allergic rhinitis depends on several individual factors. A stepwise therapeutic approach, however, is generally recommended. Current guidelines favour second-generation oral or topical H1 antihistamines for treating allergic rhinitis (Angier et al., 2010). More-over, intranasal glucocorticosteroids and intranasal decon-gestants are highly recommended as effective treatments for nasal blockage (Bousquet et al., 2008).Azelastine is a new-generation antihistamine applied topically as nasal spray or eye drops. It is used as treatment of allergic rhinitis, hay fever, and allergic conjunctivitis. Although azelastine is regarded as effective possible first-line treatment for allergic rhinitis, common side effects, such as bitter taste of the drug and local irritation reactions and rare side effects such as fatigue or headache, can occur.Ectoine (2-methyl-1,4,5,6-tetrahydropyrimidine-4-carboxyclic acid) is a compatible solute which is natural-ly produced by bacteria, conferring resistance to external stress factors such as extreme temperatures, high salt con-centrations, and ultraviolet radiation. It acts via a mecha-nism called "preferential exclusion" and "preferential hy-dration (DEGAM, 2008). Ectoine is expelled from proteins or lipid membranes, resulting in the modulation of the sol-vent characteristic of surrounding water. Thus, ectoine is able to form a protective and stabilizing hydrate cap-sule around the protein and therefore helps to protect bio-molecules and proteins from irreversible structural mod-ifications by inhibiting dehydration. This indirect effect leads to a more compact and more stable folding of pro-teins and increases the stability of lipid membranes by in-creasing their fluidity (Dirschka, 2008). The effect derives from the mechanism of halophilic bacteria which stabilis-es the osmotic balance in the microorganic cell, where ex-tremolytes such as ectoine are accumulated in the cytosol to equal out the varying salt concentration in the outer area (Lentzen and Schwarz, 2012). Stabilization of membranes such as those lining the airways or eyes might reduce the potential water loss of such membranes and protect them against invading allergens, thereby limiting the inflamma-tory cascade induced by stress mediators at the membrane level, as has been shown for lung epithelia and skin cells (Lentzen and Schwarz, 2012). In vitro experiments have further shown that ectoine inhibits apoptosis, triggered by nanoparticles (Smiatek et al., 2012), and likewise blocks the activity of ceramides, which are regarded as central molecules in the sphingolipid metabolism as well as in the induction of apoptosis (Sydlik et al. (a), 2009). Current-ly, ectoine is used in dermatological products for success-fully treating skin diseases such as atopic dermatitis (Syd-lik et al. (b), 2013). Still widely unknown is the use of ec-toine in nasal sprays or eye drops. In such medical devic-es, ectoine may strengthen the hydroprotection of the nasal membrane and may alleviate the infection of the inflamed tissue (Vestweber, 2009).S6 PP 260546Maced. pharm.