22, Ukraine* v.narokha@ukr.netIntroductionCardiovascular diseases (CVDs) are the foremost health problem in the world today and hold the lead in mortality causes. This is why the search and development of new effective pharmaceutical substances for the protection of cardiovascular system are among the priority directions of scientific research. A lot of drugs that are used for correction of cardiovascular system disturbances can be in certain manner placed among membrane-stabilizing substances that reduce the accumulation of free radicals and reactive oxygen species (ROS) in cells. Among the most attractive are original complex substances of germanium with organic bio ligands that are characterized by wide spectrum of pharmaceutical activity and low toxicity.AimThe goal of this work was to determine a potential car-dioprotective activity of a new coordinational compound of germanium and nicotinic acid (MIGU-1) that was syn-thesized in laboratory of Department of General Chemis-try and Polymers of Odessa I.I.Mechnikov National Uni-versity under the supervision of professor Seifullina I. I. using a model of experimental chronic heart failure (Kre-syun et al., 2004).Materials and methodsStudies were conducted in adult male Wistar rats (weight: 180-220 g). The animals were maintained (in-cluding euthanasia) pursuant to the European Convention for the Protection of Vertebrate Animals used for Exper-imental and Other Scientific Purposes (2016/63/EU) The animals were fed a normal, balanced diet and had free ac-cess to water in the animal house (vivarium) of the Bogo-molets National Medical University (Kyiv City, Ukraine). Experimetal chronic heart failure (CHF) was induced by intramuscular injection of doxorubicin (DXR) (manufac-tured by Kyivmedpreparat, OJSC, Ukraine 5 mg/kg once a week for 5 weeks. Investigated compound was admin-istered intraperitoneally daily for 5 weeks. Control group consisted of animals that had solution of nicotinic acid (NA) (niacin, BP, crystal powder (substance), manufac-tured by Aarti Drugs Ltd, India) administered to them in-traperitoneally daily for 5 weeks, 10 mg/kg. Intact ani-mals had physiological solution administered to them in-traperitoneally daily for 5 weeks. After the end of exper-iment the animals were decapitated under light ether an-esthesia, followed by extirpation of a heart for biochemi-cal analysis. Index of antioxidant protection system (APS) of a cell, products of peroxide oxidation of lipids (POL) and oxidative modification of proteins (OMP) of cardio-cytes were measured using spectrophotonometry and fluo-rescent methods (Nizhenkovska,2009. Kolesov et al.,1984, Chevari et al.,1985, Dubinina,1995). Amounts of protein in tissue were measured using Lowry method (Lowry et al., 1951). Results were computed using the Student t-test or Mann-Whitney test for distribution-free quantitative sam-pling (n=10) and estimated with p<0,05.Results and discussionDXR belongs to anticell antibiotics and is one of the most used drugs during chemotherapy of cancerous growth. On the other hand it is widely known that DXR is characterized by a several negative side effects, first of all - big cardiotoxicity (Klaunig et al., 2010).S1 PP 3484Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 83 - 84 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsOxidative stress is caused by an imbalance between excessive ROS formation and decrease in the body's anti-oxidant defense. ROS play a dual role in a variety of phys-iologically normal and pathological conditions. In physi-ological concentrations, ROS transmit signals of external and internal environment of the body through regulatory metabolic cascades, act as mediators and redox messen-gers in various cellular processes and intracellular signal-ling systems. At the same time, in certain pathological con-ditions, excessive ROS accumulation promotes cell death through induction of oxidative damage to cellular macro-molecules, such as lipids, proteins and DNA. Increased damage from ROS determines the cell fate through induc-tion of cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Normal tissues, bal-ancing between synthesis and elimination of ROS, main-tain intracellular redox homeostasis (Olson et al.,1981; Saleem et al., 2014).As opposed to free-radical processes in the body, there is an antioxidant system consisting of a complex network of protective mechanisms for cells, tissues and organs that preserve and maintain body homeostasis. Balance between these two opposing components, in a state of physiologi-cal optimum, keeps peroxidation at a certain low level, pre-venting chain oxidative process, and describes the antiox-idant status in the body. One of the ways to prevent oxida-tive stress is antioxidant system activation, the components of which, in small concentrations, can inhibit the excessive free radical generation. In this work animals were observed to have an intense formation of ROS that leads to failure of exchange of lipids and proteins of cardiocytes in experimental animals under the chronic DXR intoxication. Administration of NA and MIGU-1 led to decrease of toxic effect of DXR on heart tissue. It was proven that MIGU-1 complex has more pro-nounced antioxidant properties compared to NA.ConclusionsResults of experiments prove expediency and efficien-cy of MIGU-1, member of a new class of chemical com-pounds - coordination compound of germanium and nic-otinic acid, in preventing problems that develop during chronic heart failure.ReferencesChevari, C., Csaba, I., Szekely, J., 1985. The role of superoxide dismutase in cell oxidation process and the method of its determination in biological materials. Lab. Delo. 11, 678-681. Dubinina, E.E., 1995. Oxidative modification of proteins, human serum, the method of determining. Questions Med. Chem. 41, 24-26.Klaunig, J.E., Kamendulis, L.M., Hocevar, B.A., 2010. Oxidative stress and oxidative damage in carcinogenesis. Toxicol. Pathol. 38, 96-109.Kolesov, O.E., Markov, A.A., Fedorova, T.N., 1984. Lipid peroxidation and methods for the determination of lipid peroxidation products in biological media. Lab. Delo. 9, 540-546.Kresyun, V., Shemonayeva, K., Vidavska, A.G., 2004. Pharmacological characterization of compounds of germanium. 2004. Clin. Pharm. 4, 64-68.Lowry, O.H., Rosebrough, N.J., Farr, A.L., Randal, R.I., 1951. Protein measurement with Folin phenol reagent 193, 265-275.Nizhenkovska, I.V., 2009. Biochemical and membrane mechanisms of myocardial damage for experimental heart failure and its correction physiologically active compounds metabolic actions, Kiev.Olson, R.D., Boerth, R.C., Gerber, J.G., Nies, A.S., 1981. Mechanism of adriamycincardiotoxicity: Evidence for oxidative stress. Life Sci. 29(14), 1393-1401.Saleem, M.T., Chetty, M.C., Kavimani, S., 2014. General oxidative stress during doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity in rats: absence of cardioprotection and low antioxidant efficiency of alpha-lipoic acid. Ther. Adv. Cardiovasc. Dis. 8(1), 4-11.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 85 - 86 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.03(497.6)Short communicationImportance of clinical pharmacist in system of health care in Bosnia and HerzegovinaVedina Cordalija1*, Fahir Becic2, Tea Music-Drekovic3, Esma Karahmet41 Psychiatric hospital of Canton Sarajevo, Nahorevska 248, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina2 Faculty of pharmacy, University of Sarajevo, Zmaja od Bosne 8, 71000Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina3 Mobis pharm d.o.o. ,BiscePolje bb, 88000 Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina4 Private pharmacy"Vedypharm", Panjina Kula 78, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina* cordalija.vedina@gmail.comIntroductionClinical pharmacy as defined by European Society of Clinical Pharmacy is a branch specialized for health which includes all activities and services of clinical pharmacists to ensure development and growth of rational, proper and safe administration of drugs (ESCP, 2010).Our country, Bosnia and Herzegovina, is a member of European Association of Hospital Pharmacists (EAHP), and we also have Hospital Pharmacy section. Needs for health care are growing, as well as the health departments` costs due to demographic changes, aging of population (number of people older than age of 65), needs for more and more resources because of other health services and polytherapy (use of multiple drugs in the therapy). Also, there are appearances of new diseases, growing number of diseases that require long-term and expensive treatments, arrival of modern medical procedures and expensive drugs with progress of technology. That is the reason why the Bosnia and Herzegovina government and the Ministry of health have decided to conducte reforms in health depart-ment for reduction of the costs and system sustainability.Nowadays, clinical pharmacists have more roles than it was in the past. Pharmacists as health care professionals are expected to be more included in process of prescrip-tion, drug administration as well as tracking of efficiency and safety of therapy, which means an equal role of phar-macists and physicians in order to achieve a better effect in patient treatment. One of the modern roles of pharmacist is conductance of rational pharmacotherapy in developed boundaries and pharmaceutical care, focused on direct relation of phar-macist and the patient, meaning an individual approach to each patient, collecting data about drugs used by the pa-tient from the disease history - therapy list, as well as by patinet direct contact. Individual approach to patient is foundation of rational pharmacotherapy for achieving optimal therapy effect with minimal side effects (Bacic Vrca at al., 2000). Patients` individual and constant medical status tracking (ex. drug concentration in body fluids) (Crnkovic and Bacic Vrca, 2013), enable determination of eventual interactions and side effects. However, the certain role of hospital pharma-cists has not been into the practice as much as it should be in Bosnia and Herzegovina hospitals and clinics. The purpose of this paper is to show the importance of clinical pharmacist in health care system, including phar-macoeconomic aspects, patient safety and to establish the role of clinical pharmacist in hospital pharmacy in Bosnia and Herzegovina.Materials and methodsType of this research is of retrospective and descrip-tive character. Official reports from Psychiatric hospital of Canton Sarajevo for period of three years (2013, 2014 and 2015), that contain all relevant data about drug consump-tion and financial reports were used. Those reports were analyzed and obtained results were compared.S1 PP 3586Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 85 - 86 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsResults and discussionDrugs in hospital pharmacy of Psychiatric hospital of Canton Sarajevo that have been dispensed from this de-partment to other department in hospital is based on their needs.Since 2015 we've have new procedures that leads to rationalizing pharmacotherapy. We have noted less drug consumption per patient, thus resulting with lower drug cost.Pharmacoeconomy analysis, as it was previously men-tioned was done for period of three years (2013, 2014 and 2015) and it showed significant reduction in drug usage. Namely, analysis has shown that in 2013 in Psychiatric hospital in Canton of Sarajevo 91.285 BAM (Bosnia-Her-zegovina Convertible Mark) were spent, or it was 41% of the budget. The same analysis for 2014 showed that 80.337 BAM were spent or 37% of the budget, while in 2015 in Psychiatric hospital in Canton of Sarajevo 48.880 BAM were spent or 22% of the budget for analyzed period.Comparison of traditional system of drug distribu-tion with new established system distribution per patient where pharmacist can control the dosage, interval of dos-age, clinically significant interaction of drugs etc., resulted with significantly lower usage of drugs expressed in daily defined doses (DDD)/100 thus indicating enhanced quali-ty in drug distribution with new established system. Clini-cal pharmacists helped to reduce polytherapy, medical mis-takes and gives recommendations based on guidelines for engaging on untreated conditions or stoppage of unneeded therapy. The most common mistakes that might happen are drug administration in wrong time, missing out drug dos-age and wrong dosage. Official Gazette of Sarajevo Canton in 2015 men-tioned for the first time Decision on the positive, the hos-pital and in-house compounded list of medicines in Sara-jevo Canton, that contained drug distribution in hospital pharmacy and modern role of clinical pharmacist, which means that even cantonal government had accepted the im-portance of clinical pharmacist in rationalization of phar-macotherapy and reducing the costs for drugs (Official Ga-zette of Sarajevo Canton 39/2015).ConclusionClinical pharmacists as health care professionals have very important role in system of health care, with their knowledge and skills, thus improving the quality of health care by rationalization of pharmacotherapy leading to reduction of polypragmasy, reduced costs and improved quality of patient's time in hospital.As it can be seen from the results, new procedures im-plemented in 2015, have brought positive results in re-ducing costs for drugs in our hospital pharmacy for near-ly 50%, thus pointing to the importance of clinical phar-macists. We should pay attention that in current sitiation clin-ical/hospital pharmacist in Bosnia and Herzegovina does not have the role that they should really have in order to work with physician and other health care professionals as a multidisciplinary team. So, the hospital management and Ministry of health should strengthen the importance of role of clinical pharmacist in hospital usage of drugs as well as that head of department of hospital pharmacy should be pharmacist who held specialist degree in clinical/hospital pharmacy. ReferencesBacic Vrca, V., Bozikov, V., Crncec Ciric, M., Sutlic, Z., Simic, D., Becirevic, M., 2000. The impact of the application of the unit treatment system to the consumption of drugs [In Bosnian]. Lijecnicki Vjesnik 122, 110-118.Crnkovic, A., Bacic Vrca, V., 2013. The impact of clinical pharmacy at the quality of care in hospitals [In Bosnian]. Farmaceutski glasnik 69(6), 379-396.ESCP, 2010. European Society of Clinical Pharmacy. Clinical Pharmacy - a Definition. avvailable at http://www.escpweb.org (accessed February 2016)Official Gazette of Sarajevo Canton 39/2015, The decision on the positive, the hospital and in-house compounded list of medicines in Sarajevo Canton [In Bosnian].Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 87 - 88 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.84(474.5)Short communicationPerception about health promotion and smoking cessation counselling among community pharmacists in LithuaniaJurgita Dauksiene 1,2, Greta Pavasaryte1, Aurelija Batakyte1, Gediminas Dauksys3, Daisy Volmer41 Lithuanian University of Health sciences, Academy of Medicine, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Drug technology and Social pharmacy, Sukileliu 13, LT-50009 Kaunas Lithuania2 Kaunas University of Applied Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacy, K. Petrausko g.15, LT-44162 Kaunas Lithuania3 Kaunas University of Applied Engineering Sciences, Faculty of Engineering Science, Tvirtoves al. 35, LT-50155 Kaunas, Lithuania4 University of Tartu, Faculty of Medicines, Institute of Pharmacy, 1 Nooruse Str., 50411 Tartu, Estonia* jurgita.dauksiene@gmail.comIntroductionHealth promotion has been described by the World Health Organization as a process of enabling people to in-crease control over and improve their health (WHO, 2008). In primary care, community pharmacists are well accessi-ble health care providers who could easily support health promotion initiatives at the individual, community and so-cietal levels. A number of studies in UK, Australia and oth-er countries give evidence that pharmacist interventions are willingly accepted by patients. Tobacco smoking is the main risk factor for several leading causes in death includ-ing cancer and heart disease and also the leading cause of early death. Today, community pharmacies provide dif-ferent extended services connected to health promotion and smoking cessation could be listed as one of these ser-vices. It is important to emphasize that counselling about smoking cessation consists of different type of communi-cation: identification of patient's willingness to quit smok-ing, evaluation of his/her health condition and providing information about nicotine replacement therapy. Earlier in-ternational research has demonstrated that quality of smok-ing cessation consultation given at community pharmacies could be improved by covering all above listed counsel-ling aspects.Materials and methodsCross-sectional survey among community pharmacists and assistant pharmacists was undertaken in January till June 2015. The participants were recruited using universal sampling from six different districts of Lithuania. Ques-tionnaires were distributed to randomly selected commu-nity pharmacies and collected one week after the first visit. All pharmacists and assistant pharmacists who worked at the selected pharmacies were asked to fill in the question-naire. The questionnaire consisted of 26 closed and open questions about health promotion and smoking cessation at community pharmacy and 12 questions about demograph-ics of the respondents.