In order to make "healthy nutrition as a never ending pro-cess", independent authorities (i.e. EFSA) should be estab-lished. There exist unfair competitions (both internal and external). There is very easily licensing process/easy cer-tification process on food production. Lots of misleading information are observed Consumers are unconscious in many ways. There is a deterioration of the food because of the long distances, etc. Unconsciousness exists in the steps of healthy food production.Institutions' working together is a must. On the oth-er hand bureaucracy is huge. Scientific data are not avail-able or accessible. Furthermore the ones those are accessi-ble lacks quality. There is a slow process in research and publication. Lack of national database is a big problem. Lack of National Policies for Sustainable Agriculture is an-other issue.ConclusionIn the light of the conducted EASWs we concluded that the projects should be handled according to the nation-al policies other than governmental policies. An indepen-dent institution is a must which will make healthy nutrition researches. This institution should also raise awareness among the community and make risk assessment. Innova-tion studies based on reliable and scientific data should be conducted. Three should be continuous dialogue/trialogue between/among NPO, government/public and academia/research institutions.ReferencesGallus, S., Lugo, A., Murisic B., Bosetti, C., Boffetta, P., La Vecchia, C., 2015. Overweight and obesity in 16 European countries. Eur. J. Nutr. 54, 679-689.http://www.cipast..org/cipast.php?section=1012.http://toolbox.climate-protection.eu/list-of-all-methodologies/.van Vliet-Ostaptchouk, J.V., Nuotio, M.L., Slagter, S.N., Doiron, D., Fischer, K., Foco, L., Gaye, A., Gogele, M., Heier, M., Hiekkalinna, T., Joensuu, A., Newby, C., Pang, C., Partinen, E., Reischl, E., Schwienbacher, C., Tammesoo, M.L., Swertz, M.A., Burton, P., Ferretti, V., Fortier, I., Giepmans, L., Harris, J.R., Hillege, H.L., Holmen, J., Jula, A., Kootstra-Ros, J.E., Kvaloy, K., Holmen, T.L., Mannisto, S., Metspalu, A., Midthjell, K., Murtagh, M.J., Peters, A., Pramstaller, P.P., Saaristo, T., Salomaa, V., Stolk, R.P., Uusitupa, M., van der Harst, P,, van der Klauw, M.M., Waldenberger, M., Perola, M., Wolffenbuttel, B.H., 2014. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome and metabolically healthy obesity in Europe: a collaborative analysis of ten large cohort studies. BMC Endocr. Disord., 14, 9. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-14-9.World Health Organization, 2009. Global Health Risks: Mortality and burden of disease attributable to selected major risks. France.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 267 - 268 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 614.876:575.224.46]:614.23(560)Short communicationAssessment of cytogenetic damage and oxidative stress status in hospital staff occupationally exposed to ionizing radiation Ayse Eken1,2*, Ahmet Aydin1,3, Onur Erdem1, Cemal Akay1, Ahmet Sayal1, Ibrahim Somuncu41Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Toxicology, 06018 Ankara, Turkey2Erciyes University, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology, 38039 Kayseri, Turkey3Yeditepe University, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Toxicology, 34755 Istanbul, Turkey 4Gulhane Military Medical Academy, Department of Radiology, 06018 Ankara, Turkey* eken.ayse@gmail.comIntroductionIonizing radiation (IR) has been found to produce del-eterious effects on the biological systems. IR is known to induce mutations and cell transformations, predominant-ly by causing single-strand and double-strand DNA break-age, thereby leading to chromosome instability and carci-nogenesis (Hayata, 2005). Genetic instability can be ana-lyzed by using cytogenetic parameters such as sister chro-matid exchange (SCE), and micronuclei (MN). It is known that cytogenetic damage accumulates in humans with age, due to the prolonged exposure to oxidative damage, chemi-cals as well as occupational, therapeutic or accidental radi-ation (Ramsey et al., 1995). However, studies on genotox-ic effects of low dose occupational exposure is limited and with contradicting results. IR is known to induce oxidative stress through gen-eration of reactive oxygen species (ROS) resulting in ox-idative damage to biomolecules such as deoxyribonucle-ic acid (DNA), proteins, and lipids (Chi et al., 2005). Aer-obic organisms possess antioxidant defense systems that deal with free radicals produced as a consequence of aero-bic respiration and substrate oxidation. Cells maintain their vital functions against oxidative stress status with the help of an antioxidant defense system that includes three major classes of antioxidant enzymes: the superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) (Sies, 1997). It has been hypothesized that chronic low-dose IR leads to oxidative stress but there are few studies to clarify oxidative stress status in radiology workers (Male-kirad et al., 2005). The aim of this study was to evaluate the genotoxic ef-fects and oxidative stress status of occupational radiation exposure in radiology unit staff. Materials and methodsThe study population of 40 hospital workers occupa-tionally exposed to IR was comprised of 12 physicians and 28 technicians in the units of radiology at the Gulhane Mil-itary Medical Academy in Ankara, Turkey. Radiology unit personnel were healthy volunteers occupationally exposed to IR working 5 h/day in the hospital for a period of one to 30 years. The control group consisted of 30 individu-als (10 physicians and 20 administrative staff) working in the same hospital who had never been occupationally ex-posed to IR or chemicals. None of the study group partici-pants had reported unusual alcohol consumption. Vegetari-ans and those who used vitamin supplements, antioxidants or any therapeutic drugs were excluded. No one had under-taken any medical radiological examination or any carci-nogenic agent in the 6 months before blood sampling. The occupational exposure group were routinely mon-itored by personal exposure measurements devices (film badges), every 40 days. The radiation dose was estimat-ed from the official personal dosimeters based on thermo-luminiscent dosimeters. This dose range represents only the dose from a single month exposure and was measured within 6 months prior to enrolment in the study.Genotoxic effects were determined by using the cyto-kinesis-blocked micronucleus (CB-MN) and SCE tests in peripheral blood lymphocytes. Oxidative stress status was assessed by measuring the antioxidant enzyme activities of copper-zinc superoxide dismutase (CuZn-SOD), selenium S3 PP 124268Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 267 - 268 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationsdependent glutathione peroxidase (Se-GPx), CAT and the malondialdehyde (MDA) levels as lipid peroxidation in-dex in erythrocytes. All statistical analyses were performed using the soft-ware SPSS 13.0 for Windows statistical package. Groups were compared with the Student t-test. The results were expressed as mean value +- standard deviation (SD). Val-ues of p<0.05 and p<0.001 were considered to be statisti-cally significant. Results and discussionThe mean exposure dose of the radiological staff was 0.32+-0.69 mSv ranging from 0.10 to 3.86 mSvper month according to their individual dosimeters. None of them had recorded doses above the permitted levels of 20 mSv.It was found that the mean frequency of MN was sig-nificantly increased in radiation-exposed group compared to control group (p<0.05). This finding is in agreement with other studies (Maluf et al,2001; Zakeri and Assaei, 2004; Angelini et al., 2005). The mean frequency of SCE did not show any significant difference in the exposed in-dividuals in comparison to the controls (p>0.05). However, Engin et al. (2005) and Mrdjanovic et al. (2005) revealed that the frequency of SCE was significantly increased in all radiation-exposed individuals compared with controls. The enzymes activities of CuZn-SOD and Se-GPx observed for the exposed group were very significantly higher than in the control group (p<0.001). Oxidative stress causes various types of damage fol-lowed by cell death or an activation of the repair systems. Antioxidant enzymes are considered as a very important component of cell defense mechanisms which protect or-ganisms from the detrimental action of ROS damaging DNA and other biomolecules (Dimova et al. 2008). The enzyme activity of CAT and MDA levels in the exposed group were found significantly lower than in the control group (p<0.05, p<0.001, respectively). Our findings may be explained in terms of chronic low-dose radiation in-duced radiation hormesis. Low-dose radiation has been re-ported to induce hormesis, which is a beneficial stimulant effect of chronic low-dose radiation and radiation-adap-tive response (Prasad et al. 2004). However, its molecu-lar mechanism or signaling pathway is not yet known and needs to be clarified (Miura et al. 2002). Additional studies will provide essential information; in particular, larger and well-designed studies may be helpful. ConclusionWe observed that low dose chronic occupational ex-posure to ionizing radiation causes an increase of MN fre-quency in chromosomes, even though the absorbed dos-es were below the permissible limits. Although the small sample size prevents a definitive conclusion on the oxi-dative stress induced by occupational low dose IR expo-sure, nevertheless, our experimental evidences highlight the stimulant effect of the low dose IR on oxidative stress related parameters in hospital staff and enhanced resistance to oxidative stress. ReferencesAngelini, S., Kumar, R., Carbone, F., Maffei, F., Forti, G.C., Violante, F.S., Lodi, V., Curti, S., Hemminki, K., Hrelia, P., 2005. Micronuclei in humans induced by exposure to low level of ionizing radiation: influence of polymorphisms in DNA repair genes. Mut. Res. 570, 105-117. Chi, C., Tanaka, R., Okuda, Y., Ikota, N., Yamamoto, H., Urano, S., Ozawa, T., Anzai, K. 2005.Quantative measurements of oxidative stress in mouse skin induced by x-ray irradiation. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 53, 1411-1415.Dimova, E.G., Bryant, P.E., Chankova, S.G., 2008. "Adaptive response"-Some underlying mechanisms and open questions. Gen. Mol. Biol. 31, 396-408.Engin, A.B., Ergun, M.A., Yurtcu, E., Kan, D., Sahin, G., 2005. Effect of ionizing radiation on the pteridine metabolic pathway and evaluation of its cytotoxicity in exposed hospital staff. Mut. Res. 585, 184-192.Hayata, I., 2005. Chromosomal mutations by low dose radiation vs. those by other mutagenic factors. Int. Cong. Ser. 1276, 17-20.Malekirad, A.A., Ranjbar, A., Rahzani, K., Pilehvarian, A.A., Zamani, M.J., Abdollahi, M., 2005. Oxidative stress in radiology staff. Env. Tox. Pharm. 20, 215-218. Maluf, S.W., Passos, D.F., Bacelar, A., Speit, G., and Erdtmann, B., 2001. Assessment of DNA damage in lymphocytes of workers exposed to X-radiation using the micronucleus test and the comet assay. Env. Mol. Mut. 38, 311-315. Miura, Y., Abe, K., Suzuki, S., 2002. Cellular mechanisms of adaptive response in cultured glial cells. Int. Cong. Ser. 1236, 303-307. Mrdjanovic, J., Jakimov, D., Tursijan, S., Bogdanovic, G., 2005.Evaluation of sister chromatid exchanges, micronuclei, and proliferating rate index in hospital workers chronically exposed to ionizing radiation. J. BUON 10(1), 99-103. Prasad, K.N., Cole, W.C., Hasse, G.M., 2004. Health risks of low dose ionizing radiation in humans: A review. Exp. Biol. Med. 229, 378-382. Ramsey, M.J., Moore, II D.H., Briner, J.F., Lee, D.A., Olsen, L., Senft, J.R., Tucker, J.D., 1995. The effects of age and life style factors on the accumulation of cytogenetic damage as measured by chromosome painting. Mut. Res. 338, 95-106. Sies, H. 1997. Oxidative stress: oxidant and antioxidants. Exp. Phys. 82, 291-295.Zakeri, F., Assaei, R.G. 2004.Cytogenetic monitoring of personnel working in angiocardiography laboratories in Iran hospitals.Mut. Res. 562, 1-9. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 269 - 270 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.929-053.6Short communicationDietary supplement use among adolescentsGordana Svonja ParezanovicMedical High School "7 April" Novi Sad, Serbia* gsvonja@yahoo.comIntroductionDietary supplements are defined as products intended to supplement the diet. They may contain a variety of in-gredients including vitamins, minerals, amino acids, herbs or other botanicals, or other dietary substances "for use by man to supplement the diet by increasing the total dietary intake". Dietary supplements are in the form of capsules, tablets, pills, and other similar pharmaceutical forms (Di-etary Supplement Health and Education Act, 1994).Medical evidence has suggested that dietary supple-mentation can be beneficial for a group of people, who do not have a balanced diet. In such cases, after nutritional deficiency has been detected, the increase in the intake of such nutrients is recommended, either by means of food or supplements (Gardiner et al., 2004).Age range that constitutes youth is important in many aspects. Physical growth and mental development of young population in adolescence will affect future physical and psychological chances as adults. The use of dietary supple-ments among adolescents seems to be influenced by their beliefs and attitudes that dietary supplements work. The media has contributed to stimulate the use of dietary sup-plements by spreading, for instance, the myth of the ide-al body. Consumption of supplements in European countries ranged between 17.9% and 60% of the population (Flynn et al., 2009, Tetens et al., 2011).During adolescence, a period when self-assurance is being developed, many adolescents do anything they can to meet that goal. Dietary supplements are sold in drug-stores or gyms as over-the-counter products without advice from a pharmacist.Based on the issues mentioned above, the objective of this study was to determine the frequency of dietary sup-plements consumption, types of supplements being con-sumed and reasons for consumption among high medical school students.Materials and methodsThe survey was conducted using an anonymous ques-tionnaire. The total of 238 students of medical high school, of which 162 were girls and 76 boys, were surveyed. The questionnaire includes gender and grade, as well as ques-tions concerning types and quantities of dietary supple-ments respondents use. The survey was conducted in April 2015. The methods of descriptive statistics were used in processing and analysing data, and then the differences of the obtained values were assessed via the chi-square test. In all analyses, differences were interpreted as statistically significant if the p-value is less than 0.05, and statistically significant if the p-value is less than 0.01.Results and discussionOf the total number of respondents 67.2% had used di-etary supplements. Overall, 79% of participants were fe-male. To determine the differences between gender with respect to dietary supplements consumption, chi-square test was used. Based on this test, it can be concluded that there is a statistically significant difference between the groups analysed (p = 0.00012, kh2 = 20,626). No significant association was observed between supplement use and age. Of the total number of users of dietary supplements, 64.78% mostly bought in pharmacies, while others were purchased in supermarkets. Information on these medi-cines 38.8% search on the Internet, 26.12% of pharmacists, and 11.94% of the doctors. The most commonly used di-etary supplements are vitamin C, then multi-vitamins and minerals (66.26%). Most of the respondents pleaded not regularly read the declaration of the purchased products (72.4%), while 73.88% thought that there was insufficient S3 PP 125270Maced. pharm.