The quality of life was measured by the Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy-Hepatobiliary cancer (liver, bile duct and pancreas) (FACT-Hep) scale. The FACT-Hep contains specific subscales assessing physical well being (seven questions), social/family well being (seven questions), emotional well being (six questions), functional well being (seven questions), and additional concerns (18 questions) (FACT-Hep, 2007). The collected data were analyzed with STATA Version 11 program. Baseline characteristics were analyzed with t-tests for continuous data and Pearson's kh2 was used for categorical variables. The focus of the analysis was to test whether significant differences existed between the age of patients, components of FACIT, surgery, radiotherapy, stage of cancer, quality of life, and clinical effect of the treatment. A P value of less than 0.05 shows the criterion for statistically significant results.S1 PP 2872Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 71 - 72 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsResults and discussionFrom 50 patients, 26 (52%) were newly diagnosed and 24 (48%) had prior treatment history. Median age is 62 years (range 18-79 years), 28 males (56%), 22 females (44%). A majority, 34 patients (68%) had stage IV dis-ease at diagnosis, 10 patients (20%) had stage III, and 6 patients (12%) had stage I-II at diagnosis. Only 8 patients (16%) underwent surgery, where 3 (6%) of them had whipple`spancreaticoduodenectomy, while 5 (10%) had gas-troenterostomy. None of them went through radiation ther-apy and all of them 50 (100%) were treated with chemo-therapy -gemicitabine. Overall QOL, FACT-Hep, p-val-ue shows significance of correlation between components of FACIT and stage of tumour. Physical well being shows significant p-value (p=0.0000). Social/family well-being shows significant p-value (p=0.003). Emotional well-be-ing shows significant p-value (p=0.0001). Functional well being shows significant p-value (p=0.0000). Addition-al well-being shows significant p-value (p=0.0000). All of these scales were significantly associated with surviv-al, after inspecting the effects of stage at diagnosis. On av-erage, about 50% of patients (25) with pancreatic cancer survived beyond 12 months. About 4% (2 patients) lived 3-6 months, 6% (3 patients) 6-9 months, and 34% (17 pa-tients) had a median of survival from 9-12 months. Two pa-tients (4%) are still alive, which means they have survived over 18 months. Median survival time for the entire co-hort was 10.3 months (range 1-24 months), p-value shows significance of correlation between survival rate and stage of tumour, respectively (p=0.0003). The best available evi-dence relating to the use of gemcitabine as a first line ther-apy has been shown to be well tolerated and to have a mild toxicity profile. Pancreatic cancer is the seventh most com-mon cause of cancer death, according to Institute of Oncol-ogy, Kosovo. Three-quarters of deaths are in people over 60 years old. The findings in this study shows that the clin-ical effect of gemcitabine on the QoL of patients with pan-creatic cancer may improve it. This is in accordance with several other studies (Bourgade et al., 2013; Burris et al., 1997; Halm et al., 2000; Kamar et al., 2003; Kuwahara et al., 2012) which shows beneficial effects of gemcitabine on overall QOL and psychological distress.ConclusionThis study demonstrates that gemcitabine can improve quality of life in advanced pancreatic cancer patients. There is evidence of a very small survival possibility and an improvement in QoL. The QoL satisfaction of patients with pancreatic cancer measured by the FACIT-Hep, provides helpful information and they may have significant implications, as well as relief in getting clinical decisions.ReferencesBourgade, S.G., Mollevi, C.B., Desseigne, F., Ychou, M., Bouche, O., 2013. Impact of FOLFIRINOX Compared With Gemcitabine on Quality of Life in Patients With Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer: Results From the PRODIGE 4/ACCORD 11 Randomized Trial. JCO 31, 23-29.Burris, H.A., Moore, M.J., Andersen, J., 1997. Improvements in survival and clinical benefit with gemcitabine as first-line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas cancer: a randomized trial. J. Clin. Oncol. 15,2403-2413.FACT-Hep, ENG, Final Ver4, 16 Nov 2007. http://www.facit.org/FACITOrg/QuestionnairesHalm, U., Schumann, T., Schiefke, I., 2000. Decrease of CA 19-9 during chemotherapy with gemcitabine predicts survival time in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. Br. J. Cancer. 82, 1013-1016.Kamar, F.G., Grossbard, M.L., Kozuch, P.S., 2003. Metastatic Pancreatic Cancer: Emerging Strategies in Chemotherapy and Palliative Care. The Oncologist 8, 18-34.Kuwahara, A., Mitsunaga, S., Ohno, I., 2012. Symptom change that predict disease control by systemic chemotherapy in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer. J. Clin. Oncol. 30, 195.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 73 - 74 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.065(497.2)Short communicationAd-hoc comparative analysis of regulatory safety information and web-based data for recombinant medicines for assisted reproduction techniquesSvetoslav Stoev1*, Hristina Lebanova2, Emilia Naseva3, Vladimir Atanasov1, Ilko Getov11Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University-Sofia, 2"Dunav" Str., 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria2Pharmacy College, Medical University- Pleven, 1 "Kliment Ohridski" Str, 5800 Pleven, Bulgaria3Faculty of Public Health, Medical University- Sofia , 8 "Byalo more" Str, 1527 Sofia, Bulgaria* slavi1702@gmail.comIntroductionSpontaneous reporting of adverse drug reactions (ADR) is one of the most effective ways to monitor the safety profile of a medicinal product during its post-au-thorization life-cycle. Patients are direct participants in the spontaneous reporting system in Bulgaria since 2012 (Lebanova et al., 2015). However the rate of ADRs report-ed by patients to the competent authorities is still low. On the background of the significant under-reporting of ADRs through official channels, new medically orientated inter-net forums have given voice to patients who share infor-mation about their therapy, including experiences with ad-verse events (Ginn et al., 2015 and Lardon et al., 2015). As a result some risks, which could be vital, are being dis-cussed online. The effectiveness of several different gonadotro-pin preparations, used for ovarian stimulation of wom-en, undergoing therapy for assisted reproduction technol-ogies (ART) has been widely discussed. Being focused on the comparative effectiveness studies of menotropins and FSH, derived by recombinant technologies, the issue of safety of these preparations is neglected and reduced only to the lack of ovarian hyper stimulation syndrome (OHSS) and multiple pregnancies, which are usually set as safety endpoints in clinical trials (Lebanova et al., 2015). How-ever, as far as the safety monitoring of these medicines is concerned, there is still not enough and reliable post mar-keting data for the safety profile of stimulation hormones. ObjectivesTo compare ADRs of recombinant medicines, used in ART, identified in consumer reviews from online forums and the corresponding data, mentioned in the Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC) and the data, collected from the Bulgarian Drug Agency reporting system. Materials and methodsBoth Google, social media and selected medical web-based forums search was conducted using the follow-ing key words in Bulgarian language: Adverse drug reac-tion, side effects, assisted reproduction, in vitro fertiliza-tion (IVF), ovarian stimulation. In addition a search for the INN and the trade names of medicines from the fo-cus group was performed - Corfollitropin, Follitropinalfa, Follitropin beta, Urofollitropin, Menotropin, human meno-pausal gonadotropine. It was conducted a systematic re-view of the SPCs of the medicines, approved by the BDA, current to the date of the consumers' web posts. A leading aim of the current research was harvesting the information from user archives and posts to identify both expected (i.e., mentioned in the SPC) and unexpected ADRs. As most of the lexicon, used by forum participants, while sharing their experience with investigated medicines in the collected messages, does not correlate with the me-dicinal terminology, some kind of "reference list" was cre-ated for the purpose of this study to refer user content slang to the medical explanation of a clinical condition. S1 PP 2974Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 73 - 74 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsResults and discussionThe study identified 201 valid reports with resemblance to adverse events, among a sample of 1000 posts collected from 25 specialized forums, posted between November 2013 and May 2015. In comparison, there are no adverse events reported to the BDA for the same period for the studied drugs. Forum discussions, used for extracting the consumer reviews are locked for changes and/or deletion by moderators. The analysis of the user generated content showed that the majority of reviews and comments, which possi-bly could contain adverse event information are connect-ed with the application of recombinant gonadotropins. The most often recombinant preparation, being detected in up-loaded comments is Follitorpin beta (Puregon(r)) - 34% of all collected on-line posts, followed by Follitropinalfa (Go-nal F(r)) - 25% of all the messages, concerning stimulation hormones and Corifollitropinalfa (Elonva(r)), which is less discussed and was found in only 13% of the investigated posts. The rest 28% of the analysed web content, obtained during the study, is connected with on-line discussions con-cerning purified urinary gonadotropins and are not object to the current article. An important fact that should be noticed here is the de-scriptive statistics mentioned above does not claim to re-flect significantly the frequency of ADRs, observed in the real clinical practice. Current dissemination of user-related content can only result in conclusions about the frequency of on-line discussion of the mentioned recombinant stimu-lating hormones, without pointing a tendency of prescrib-ing or valid statements for benefit/risk ratio of these me-dicinal products. What should be considered here are bias-es like prescribing preferences of physicians at the time of the on line discussions, social-economic status of the pa-tients, who are authors of the on-line comments, and the at-titude of treated women to the Internet as source of medi-cal information. The analysis of signals, detected in the user comments showed that social media based signals issued potential un-expected adverse events for all of the investigated recombi-nant medicinal products. Regarding Follitropinalfa, social media users electronically share descriptions of 4 condi-tions that can be possibly associated with and following the administration of the product: weight gain, ovarian pain, frequent urination and emotional instability. None of this possible ADRs has been listed in the section 4.8. "Adverse Drug Reactions" of the SmPCs, where the following pos-sible adverse events are categorized in accordance to their frequency: ovarian cysts, stomach ache and gastrointestinal disorders, ovarian torsion, thromboembolism, mild to se-vere hypersensitivity, reactions, including anaphylactic re-actions and shock. Comparison of the two lists showed that both internet signals and the SmPC provide information for two potential adverse reactions - headache and the OHSS syndrome. Consumers, who discuss electronically their experience with Follitropin beta cite 7 conditions, they suffered while using the medicine and can be read in the ADR section of the SmPC- local reactions at the site of injection, OHSS, headache, gastrointestinal disorders, pelvic pain, general-ized hypersensitivity reaction, mood swings. In contrast, user-generated web signals offer 4 unexpected conditions, which can be possible adverse reactions: emotional insta-bility, hot flashes, weight gain, and excessive hair growth. In support of the hypothesis that social media can be a valid source of reliable information about adverse reactions to recombinant gonadotropins, the current study found a significant parity between signals, provided on-line by us-ers and the approved product characteristic. Both sources were found to offer reports for the following conditions, associated with the Corifollitropin administration: head-ache, dizziness, nausea, back pain, OHSS, pelvic pain, pel-vic discomfort, breast tenderness. All the collected user re-views were checked for statements, corresponding with all the rest ADRs, mentioned in the SmPC: hot flushes, abdom-inal distention, vomiting, diarrhea, constipation, spontane-ous abortion, ovarian torsion, adnexa uteri pain, premature ovulation, breast pain, fatigue, injection site hematoma, pain at the injection site, irritability, increased level of Ala-nine aminotransferase and Aspartate aminotransferase, pro-cedural pain, but none of them were cited during the on-line discussions. Instead there were signals, detected which con-tribute to the list of conditions, potentially connected with the product by describing palpitation, joint pain and fatigue and sleepiness, which might prove to be unexpected ADRs. ConclusionThe rate of reporting of ADRs by the official pharmacovigilance channels is still extremely low, especially for hormones, used for ovarian stimulation during fertility therapies. At the same time internet forums and chat rooms can be a source of valuable first-hand information for disorders, resulting from application of hormones mentioned above.ReferencesGinn, R., Nikfarjam, A., O.Conner, K, Smith, K., Swetha, J., Upadhaya, T., Gonzalez, G., 2015. Utilizing social media data for pharmacovigilance: A review. J. Biomed. Inform. 54, 202-212.Lardon, J., Abdellaoui, R., Bellet, F., Asfari, H., Souvignet, J., Texier, N, Jaulent, M., Beyens, M., Burgun, A., Bousquet, C., 2015. Adverse Ddug reaction identification and extraction in social media: A Scoping Review. J.Med. Internet. Res.17(7), e171. Lebanova, H., Stoev, S., Naseva, E., Getov, I., 2015. Factors influencing adverse drug reactions reporting by patients - a cross-sectional study from Bulgaria. Drug Safety 38(10), 949.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 75 - 76 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33(497.115)"2015"Short communicationResults from PPS of antimicrobial prescribing in University Clinical Center of Kosovo Denis Raka1*, Kreshnik Hoti1, Naim Morina1, JetemiraBytyci3, Albiona Rashiti2, Zana Deva3, Besa Bahtiri3, Lul Raka2,31Pharmacy Department, Medical Faculty, University of Prishtina "Hasan Prishtina", St. Deshmoret e Kombit p.n., 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo2National Institute of Public Health of Kosovo, Prishtina, St. Deshmoret e Kombit p.n., 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo3Medical Faculty, University of Prishtina "Hasan Prishtina", St. Deshmoret e Kombit p.n., 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo* denisraka@hotmail.comIntroductionA major concern of public health worldwide is the emergence of antimicrobial resistance due to inappropriate use of antimicrobials and their impact on increasing mor-bidity, mortality and costs (Herrera, 2013; Huttner et al., 2013). To combat this phenomenon there is a consensus that coordinated action and measures are needed (Huttner et al., 2013, Maddocks, 2013). A simple, feasible way to provide information on antibiotic use on hospital level is conducting Point Prevalence Surveys (PPS). This survey is a part of a worldwide project on antibiotic surveillance called Global PPS, which will enable to make result com-parisons between hospitals in Kosovo and abroad.The aims of this survey were to monitor patterns of an-tibiotic use in the hospital and to identify targets for quality improvement within the aim to optimize antimicrobial pre-scribing for children and adults.Materials and methodsThe survey was implemented in June 2015. The sur-vey included all inpatients (adults, children and neonates admitted on medical, surgical and intensive care units) at 8 o'clock. Detailed data were collected only for patients who were being treated with antibiotic on the day of survey. These data included gender, age, weight (children and neo-nates), antibiotic used (type, dose, dosage, route of admin-istration), type of treatment (empiric, targeted), reason for treatment (community acquired infection CAI, hospital ac-quired infection HAI, surgical or medical prophylaxis), use of treatment protocols, reason in notes. Surgical prophy-laxis was encoded as single dose, 1 day or more than one day prophylactic prescribing.