From the times of I. P. Semelweiss, we know that clean hands are the most important single fac-tor that can decrease the extent of the health-care associ-ated infections. Handwashing frequently is called the sin-gle most important and the cheapest measure to reduce the risks of transmitting skin microorganisms from one per-son to another or from one site to another on the same pa-tient (Borges et al., 2012). Since alcohol-based hand sani-tizers combine high immediate antimicrobial efficacy with ease of use (Christiaens et al., 2006) they are the main dis-infectants in our hospital as they are in almost every hos-pital worldwide. The pharmacists from the hospital phar-macy in our hospital are obviously members in the tender commission for selections of the disinfectants and the in-evitable link in the supplying of disinfectants as well, so a complaint from the intensive care ward nurse, for inappro-priate selection of the disinfectants was directly addressed to us. Considering that we decided to conduct microbiolog-ical tests of antimicrobial efficacy of the two rapid alcohol-based hand disinfectants used by caregivers in the hospital.Materials and methodsWe selected "fingerpad method"-appropriate samples collected from the subject's fingers, as a suitable model for testing the in vivo efficacy of hand-washing agents (Ansa-ri et al., 1989), for our purpose-to test microbiological ef-ficacy of two rapid alcohol-based hand disinfectants. The examination consisted of two parts on the randomly select-ed health care workers including nurses, physicians and subsidiary hospital staff. In the first part of the examina-tion these seven clinical wards were included: Maxilo-fa-cial surgery, Ophthalmology with ophthalmo-surgery, Ot-S2 PP 67152Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 151 - 152 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsto-Rhino-Laringology, Gynecology and Obstetrics, An-aesthesia Reanimation and Intensive Care, General sur-gery and Orthopedy. The selection of the clinical wards was planed according to grade of risk for developing nos-ocomial infection. One of the selected wards was the one that the complaint for the inappropriate selection and sup-ply of disinfectants came. The observers and facilitators of the test procedures were three pharmacists and one nurse. Each pharmacist had different task in the examination with intention of minimizing the bias. Total number of included respondents (health care givers) was 54; 34 in the first part and 20 in the second part of the examination. 54 (Biomer-ieux) COUNT-TACT AGAR for aerobic mesophyllic bac-teria and 54 (Biomerieux) VRBG AGAR for Gram nega-tive/enterobacteria determination were used, for each part of the examination proportionally to the respondents. Eco-sal(r) Forte an ethanol/2-propanol based disinfectant and Ecosal(r) Ultra a 1-propanol, 2-propanol+benzalconium chloride disinfectant were used. Incubation, cultivation and determination of the bacterial growth were done in the Centre for public health at the Department for sanitary mi-crobiology (accredited according to ISO 17025).Results and discussionFingerpad/touch method with not disinfected hands showed abundant bacterial growth on both type of agar. There was only one VRBG AGAR for Gram negative/en-terobacteria determination, from the undisinfected hands, without any bacterial growth, that represented 2.940% of total VRBG AGAR in the first part of examination. There were 9 cases (of total 34) of aerobic mesophyllic bacteri-al growth on disinfected hands. That number represented 26.471% of which, 2 plates were for Ecosal(r) Forte and 7 plates for Ecosal(r) Ultra. Those were from the hands of subsidiary hospital workers that were not very familiar with the hand disinfection protocol and from staff not applied sufficient volume of disinfectant or/and didn>t let sufficient time (30 sec.) for antimicrobial action. Both, facilitators and observers of the examination, noticed and reported various irregularities in the hand disinfection protocol during first part of examination (Alkaloid-AD Skopje, 2014). Trend of recontamination of the hands of the health care workers included in the study, with touch-ing other objects or part/s of the face, after the hand dis-infection was reported. Those irregularities were decisive for performing the second examination part-repetition of the test on the clinical departments where microbial growth appeared after disinfection of the hands, on the same work-ers as in the first part, but after a lesson of appropriate edu-cation. In the first part of examination there was no case of Gram negative/entherobacteria growth. In the second part of the examination, i.e. the repeated tests with both dis-infectants, there was no case of any bacterial growth, nor aerobic mesophylic or entherobacteria neither on Ecosal(r) Forte nor on Ecosal(r) Ultra. The presence of aerobic me-sophyllic bacterial growth, in the first part of the examina-tion, after the disinfection of the hands appeared from the air or from the weaknesses stated above.ConclusionThis examination highlighted the importance of effi-cient disinfection of health care workers' hands. Absence of any bacterial growth on the repeated controls implied of efficient antimicrobial activity of both disinfectant. Select-ed rapid hand disinfectants were effective. Non-adherence to the hand hygiene protocol was reason for bacteriological contaminated smears occurrence. That confirmed that the hand hygiene on the medical staff is a quality indicator for nosocomial infections prevention. In the Commission for prevention of nosocomial infection in our hospital, a phar-macist should be incorporated for education of the medi-cal and subsidiary staff for the importance of hand disin-fectants selection and of the adherence to the hand hygiene protocols. That will contribute for reducing of the nosoco-mial infections and improvement of the patients' care, out-comes and safety.ReferencesAlkaloid-AD Skopje, 2014. Instruction for use for the both disinfectants from the manufacturer. (accessed on 09.10.2015).Ansari, S.A., Sattar, S.A., Springthorpe, V.S., Wells, G.A., Tostowaryk, W., 1989. In vivo protocol for testing efficacy of hand-washing agents against viruses and bacteria: experiments with rotavirus and Escherichia coli. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 55(12), 3113-3118. Borges, L.F., Rocha, L.A., Nunes, M.J., Gontijo, Filho, P.P., 2012. Low compliance to handwashing program and high nosocomial infection in a brazilian hospital. Interdiscip. Perspect. Infect. Dis. doi: 10.1155/2012/579681. Christiaens, G., Barbier, C., Mutsers, J., Warnotte, J., De Mol, P., Bouffioux, C., 2006. Hand hygiene: first measure to control nosocomial infection. Rev. Med. Liege. 61(1), 31-36.Inweregbu, K., Dave, J., Pittard, A., 2005. Nosocomial Infections, Brit. J. Anaesth. 5(1), 14-17.World Health Organization, 2007. WHO Collaborating Centre for Patient Safety Solutions, Joint Comission International, Patient Safety Solutions | volume 1, solution 9 | May 2007 (accessed on 09.10.2015).Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 153 - 154 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.076Short communicationBacterial endotoxin test: a microbiological challengeEva TrojaProfarma SH.A. Pharmaceutical industry, Microbiology laboratory, Tirana, Albania* eva_troja@yahoo.comBackgroundSterile drugs and medical devices must be tested with the bacterial endotoxin test (BET) and must be shown to contain less than Endotoxin Limit. BET testing is a catego-ry IV test as listed in United States Pharmacopeia <1225> and requires specificity testing. Procedure should be veri-fied to establish its suitability for use, such as their accura-cy and absence of interference when used for a new prod-uct or raw material. In common with many other Quality Control (QC) tests, validation is a key element in preparing for testing and product release. Bacterial endotoxin test The three essentials for BET include endotoxin lim-its for pharmaceutical and medical devices, procedures for validation in laboratory, and procedures for conducting routine testing. Different pharmacopoeias, LAL manufac-turer's documentation, and US Food and Drug Adminis-tration (FDA) document are available to the user when un-dertaking validation. Finished preparation release checks are still required according to United States Pharmacopeia (USP) Chapter <797> (USP, 2006). The QC laboratory fa-cilitates these release checks by utilizing its staff's thor-ough understanding of the regulatory requirements and em-ploying analytical techniques that ensure preparation safe-ty. Even with this knowledge, challenges arise in microbi-ological testing of some preparations. The key challeng-es are the development of new and more sensitive meth-ods and the interpretations of some results (Troja, 2010). On june 22, 2011, FDA withdrew the LAL test Guide-line, which was issued in 1987 (Cooper, 2011). Elements of Guideline continued to impact current methods because they can be found in other references relied on by the in-dustry. Following European, Japanese, and US Pharma-copeia harmonization, the tests methods are identical and these tests are described in the Bacterial Endotoxins Test chapter in the USP (Chapter <85>) and in the equivalent chapters in the European pharmacopeia (Chapter 2.6.14) and the Japanese Pharmacopoeia (General Tests, No. 4.01). Endotoxin testing presents many challenges, yet trouble-shooting is generally more effective because of the infor-mation generated from each test (USP, 2006). It is critical that the user know the concentration of active substance, excipients, final pH and maximum human dose per hour, and whether the preparation contains a suspending agent such as carboxymethyl cellulose. The analyst must deter-mine the conditions under which the product does not in-terfere with BET. The dilution of product is the best choice to overcome inhibition or enhancement. This information is helpful in performing calculations to find the maximum valid concentration, and in determining the endotoxin lim-it when not published. The maximum human dose is es-pecially important in establishing an endotoxin limit for combination medicines such as multivitamins. On the ba-sis of this information, the laboratory can test the prepara-tion and obtain the accurate endotoxin data. By incorporat-ing the patient's body weight (EU/kg) into a suitable equa-tion, the allowable endotoxin limit (EL) can be calculated for the preparation class (e.g., intrathecal, subcutaneous-ly, or radiopharmaceuticals). The potency of an endotox-in to cause pyrogenic reaction is variable according to dif-ferent factors, such as the nature of the toxin, the weight of the subject and the maximum human dose. Therefore, the endotoxin concentrations are expressed as Endotoxin Units (EU) for result comparisons. The endotoxin limit for pharmaceuticals products is calculated using the formula: K/M, where K is the threshold human pyrogenic dose of endotoxin per kilogram (kg) of body weight per hour, and M is the maximum recommended human dose/kg of body weight that would be administered in a single one-hour pe-S2 PP 68154Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 153 - 154 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsriod. The creation of the general endotoxin limit of 5 EU/kg/hour enabled the industry to develop dose-related lim-its for individual and classes of parenteral drugs and de-vices. However the EL for intrathecal administration was assigned arbitrarily and was not science-based (Munson, 2010). Williams (2007) has recently shown endotoxin tol-erance or allowable limit by type of parenteral products. FDA proposed to the USP Micro committee an endotox-in limit of 2.0 EU/dose/eye for intraocular administration, consistent with ISO 11979-9:2006 Ophthalmic Implants, Intraocular Lenses. An endotoxin limit for topical ophthal-mic administration was not proposed. FDA suggests to ap-plicants that EU for topical eye drops is 0.5 EU/ml, but BET interference is high because of additives. A major-ity of the substances tested for endotoxin interfere with the LAL test to some degree (the obvious exception being water samples). An understanding of the chemistry of the test sample and its possible effects upon endotoxin and/or LAL, can aid in overcoming interference problems (Daw-son, 2005). It is often possible to overcome interference by diluting the sample at which the endotoxin limit concen-tration is still detectable or choosing ultrafiltration meth-od. The greatest dilution at which the endotoxin limit can be detected is the maximum valid dilution (MVD). Dilu-tion is always the technique of choice and should be at-tempted first. The LAL Guideline described ways to devel-op test parameters by use of the MVD and Minimum Val-id Concentration (MVC) to prepare samples for endotox-in testing, independent of the method. MVD and MVC are calculated as below: MVD= EL/l ; MVC= l/EL, where l is sensitivity of lysate. MVD is used for products with EL in EU/mL. MVC is used for products with EL in EU/mg or some other unit. Once calculations of EL, MVD, MVC are done, the analyst can start the interference/validation test-ing. The user should prepare several sample dilutions be-tween undiluted and the MDV or MVC. The other steps of product validation are Control Standard Curve, Positive Product Control (PPC) and Positive and Negative Sample and Water Controls. The critical components are a test ma-terial (diluted to an extent that was validated) and a posi-tive control, which must be recovered within a prescribed range. Recovery of the PPC allows the analyst to have con-fidence in test results. Several researchers have found that even the selection of lysate reagent source can contribute to variability in test results. Therefore, if any change in re-agent source is made, the test must be re-validated.ConclusionsAfter the determination of EL, MVD, and MVC, the analyst should undertake validation to confirm perfor-mance and to assure reproducibility. Product validation steps include reagent and sample preparation, selection of sample preparation, and calculation of endotoxin value in product. Final choice to set up efficient BET testing meth-od is up to the budget, application (water, raw material, in-process sample or final products), material and volume to be tested, endotoxin limit and degree of compliance. ReferencesCooper, J.F., 2011. FDA withdraws the LAL test Guideline. Endosafe Times 15(1), 1-3. Dawson, M.E., 2005. Interference with the LAL test and how to address it. LAL update 22(3), 1-5.Munson, T.E., 2010. The LAL Guideline, the rest of the story. Endosafe Times 14(2), 1-3. Troja E. 2010. The methods for determination of the evolution of pyrogenic substances. Bulletin of Medical Sciences 2, 111-124. (Text in Albanian).The United States Pharmacopeia Convention (USP). 2006. The United States Pharmacopeia and National Formulary (USP 29-NF 24). The United States Pharmacopeia Convention, Inc.: Rockville, MD, USA, pp. 2521-2524, 2744.Williams, K.L., 2007. Drugs and Pharmaceutical Sciences. Endotoxins: pyrogens, LAL testing and depyrogenation. third ed. Vol 167, Informa Healthcare USA, Inc, New York, pp. 294-297.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 155 - 156 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.28:614.2(497.715)Short communicationQuantity of disinfectants and antiseptics used in general hospital in Gevgelija in relation to appearance of intra-hospital infections Biljana Gjorgjeska*, Sofija PetkovskaDepartment of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medical Sciences, Goce Delcev University, str. "Krste Misirkov" no.10-A, 2000 Stip, Republic of Macedonia* biljana.gorgeska@ugd.edu.mkIntroductionA number of chemical preparations in recent years are used as disinfectants and antiseptics. Disinfectants are chemicals that act as microbicides or microbiostatics of ob-jects and the environment. They are present on the market as finished industrial products obtained in different concen-trations and forms depending of its purpose. In the compo-sition of disinfectants enter a wide variety of active chem-ical agents (biocides). According to their chemical compo-sition they represent alcohols, aldehydes, anilides, bigua-nides, diamines, halogen release agents, silver compounds, peroxides, phenols, bis-phenols, halophenols, quaterna-ry ammonium compounds, volatile compounds for ster-ilization. Biocide is a general term describing a chemical agent, usually with a broad spectrum of activity that inac-tivates microorganisms.