Appearance and homogeneity of suspension, viscosity, sedimentation volume and disso-lution were evaluated.Materials and methodsMaterials Active pharmaceutical ingredient, sparingly soluble in water, para-aminophenol derivative that exhibits anal-gesic and antipyretic activity with bitter taste was used. Solvents, co-solvent, stabilising agent, sweetening agent, buffering agent and preservative were used. Xanthan gum (Jungbunzlauer, Austria) and hydroxyethyl cellulose (Ash-land, France) were used as viscosity building agents. Fla-vour and taste masking agent were used to mask the bitter taste of the active ingredient. All excipients are approved for use in pharmaceutical industry.MethodsSuspensions were produced by a common process for preparation of oral suspension by method of mixing with-out heating, dispersing of active ingredient and homoge-nization. Each of the laboratory trials was prepared under the same condition and with the same method. Suspensions were prepared with different concentration of xanthan gum 0.15%; 0.17%; 0.20%; 0.25% and 0.35%. The concentra-tion of hydroxyethyl cellulose was kept constant in all five laboratory trials. Visual inspection for appearance and ho-mogeneity of suspension, viscosity, sedimentation volume and dissolution was evaluated as critical parameters. Homogeneity of the prepared suspensions was evalu-ated using optical microscopy (Morphologi-G3S, Malvern instruments, UK). Viscosity of the suspensions was mea-sured with rotating viscometer (Brookfield, USA, with RV spindle No. 3; temperature 20oC). Sedimentation volume is defined as the ratio of the final, equilibrium volume of the sediment to the total volume before settling (F = Vu /V0 x100; Vu - volume of sediment in ml; V0 - total volume of suspension in ml). The values for F range from 0 to 1. Val-ues of F = 1 indicate that no sediment is apparent and that the suspension is stable and flocculated (Mohammad et al., 2010). Sedimentation volume was observed and calculat-ed for a period of 30 days, in the following intervals: 60 minutes; 180 minutes; 24 hours; 7 days and 30 days. Con-tent of dissolved active component was determinate with S4 PP 205432Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 431 - 432 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsHPLC method. Dissolution testing was conducted in 900 ml + 1% phosphate buffer pH 6.8+ 0.05 using USP appara-tus II (paddle), set at rotation speed of 50 rpm and temper-ature of the medium of 37 +- 0.5oC.Results and discussionHomogeneity of the prepared suspensions was evalu-ated microscopically and differences due to different con-centration of viscosity building agent were not observed. Suspensions with concentration of xanthan gum in range from 0.15%; 0.17%; 0.20; 0.25% to 0.35% were measured and results from 562 cP; 687cP; 752 cP; 1005 cP to 1233 cP, respectively for each concentration, were obtained. The increase of the concentration of xanthan gum resulted with an increase of viscosity of the suspensions, which was eas-ily visually noticed and after that confirmed by measure-ment with a rotating viscometer. The suspension with vis-cosity above 1000 cP showed bad pourability which can directly influences the proper dosing of the oral suspen-sion (Zatzx and Knapp, 1984). The suspensions were ob-served during a period of 30 days and sedimentation ef-fect was not observed. Sedimentation volumes for all eval-uated concentrations were 1, indicating that xanthan gum used in a range from 0.15% to 0.35% is capable of forming and maintaining a stable suspension for this period. The increase in viscosity avoids the particle aggregation and helps particles to remain in a flocculated state (Tempio and Zatz, 1980). Dissolution testing was performed on the pre-pared suspension and the following results were obtained 98.22%, 95.15%, 92.22%, 89.42% and 67.95% for each concentration respectively, for the time point of 30 min-utes and 99.52%, 98.21%, 97.36%, 91.50% and 81.65%, for the time point of 45 minutes. The percent of dissolved active component decrease by increasing the concentration of xanthan gum, or viscosity of the suspensions. Obtained results from dissolution of the suspensions were higher for the time point of 45 minutes in comparison with the results for 30 minutes. From the results can be noticed that due to its polysaccharide nature the viscosity building agent has the ability to decrease the dissolution rate of the ac-tive component when added in higher concentration (Ver-hoeven et al., 2006). As the viscosity of the dispersion me-dium increases, the terminal settling velocity decreases thus the dispersed phase settle at a slower rate and remain dispersed for longer time yielding higher stability of the suspension. On the other hand as the viscosity of the sus-pension increases, it's pourability decreases and the incon-venience to the patients for dosing increases. Also the in-crease of the viscosity resulted in decrease of the dissolu-tion rate of the active component, directly influencing the bioavailability of the drug.ConclusionWith concentration optimization of viscosity build-ing agent xanthan gum, viscosity of the suspension can be maintained within optimum range to yield a homogenous, stable suspension appropriate for oral delivery of the drug. ReferencesMoreton, C. R., 2010. Commonly Used Excipients in Pharmaceutical Suspensions in: Kulshreshtha Alok K., Singh Onkar N., Wall Michael G. (Eds.) Pharmaceutical Suspensions - From Formulation Development to Manufacturing, Springer New York, pp. 67-102.Mohammad, N.T.H., Reddy, I.K., 2010. General principles of suspensions in: Kulshreshtha Alok K., Singh Onkar N., Wall Michael G. (Eds.) Pharmaceutical Suspensions - From Formulation Development to Manufacturing, Springer New York, pp. 39-65. Tempio, J.S., Zatz, J.L., 1980. Flocculation effect of xanthan gum in pharmaceutical suspensions. J. Pharm. Sci. 69, 1209-1214.Verhoeven, E., Vervaet, C., Remon, J.P., 2006. Xanthan gum to tailor drug release of sustained-release ethylcellulose mini-matrices prepared via hot-melt extrusion: in vitro and in vivo evaluation. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 63, 320-330.Zatzx, J.L., Knapp, S., 1984. Viscosity of xanthan gum solutions at low shear rates. J. Pharm. Sci.73, 468-471.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 433 - 434 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.4Short communicationRisk assessment of excipients in medicinal drug products: a short reviewBorche Stamatoski*, Elisaveta Adamova Abraseva, Miroslav Popovski, Suzan Memed Sejfulah, Sonja Ugarkovic, Miroslava IlievskaALKALOID AD - SKOPJE, Blvd. AleksandarMakedonski No. 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* bstamatoski@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionPharmaceutical excipients are substances other than the active pharmaceutical ingredient(API), which are in-tentionally included in a drug delivery system. They are inert substances by definition but in many cases represent high proportion of the finished dosage form and their qual-ity significantly influences the effectiveness or safety of the drug. Excipients support the processing of the finished dos-age form during its manufacture; they protect, support or enhance stability, bioavailability or patient acceptability; help in product identification, or enhance other attribute of the general product quality attributes. Despite their critical role in the pharmaceutical formu-lation, there are no specific GMP regulations obligatory for their manufacturers. On the other hand, there are a huge number of applications of these materials which makes the development of appropriate guidelines very demanding. Currently, in the pharmaceutical industry there is a gener-al expectation that excipients are manufactured to recog-nised GMP principles (The Joint IPEC - PQG Good Man-ufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients, 2006).The major problem for Marketing Authorization Holders(MAHs) is that the excipient manufacturers pro-duce ingredients that are not only intended for use in phar-maceuticals but also in food, cosmetics, or as chemicals. The quantitative requirement for excipients in pharmaceu-tical products is often insignificant compared to their use in other applications; however, the quality of the ingredients for use in medicinal products could be essential to the safe-ty, quality and efficacy of the finished drug product (IPEC Federation Position Paper on EU Risk Assessment Guide-lines for Excipients 2015C/ 95/02).Most important global organizations which instruct and facilitate implementation of excipient quality stan-dards are EDQM (European Directorate for Quality of Medicines and Healthcare) and the IPEC (International Pharmaceutical Excipients Council). EDQM positionAt the moment it is the Eudralex Vol. 4, Part 2 guide-line, which refers to the quality system of API manufactur-ers and is sufficient and even higher standard for the excip-ient manufacturers.According to this guideline excipients and excipient manufacturers should be controlled based on the results of a formalised quality risk assessment (EudraLex, Volume 4 Good manufacturing practice (GMP) Guidelines, Part 1, Chapter 5: Production). The MAHs are required to have a documented risk assessment/management system for ap-propriate GMPs for excipients, available on site for review by EU GMP inspectors.According to The Guideline of 19 March 2015 on the formalised risk assessment for ascertaining the appropri-ate good manufacturing practice for excipients of medici-nal products for human use, the risk assessment principle consists of three parts:1. Determine the appropriate GMP level that the excip-ient manufacturer needs to achieve; 2. Determine the current GMP level that the excipient manufacturer has; 3. GAP analysis between these two GMP levels and proposing actions.The following specific areas of potential risks should be considered, understood and assessed when reviewing the excipient manufacturers' GMP level: risk aspects relat-ed to excipient quality and safety, and risk aspects related to excipient function in the drug product.S4 PP 206434Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 433 - 434 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsOnce the appropriate GMP for the excipient and the risk profile of the excipient manufacturer have been de-fined, the EU guidelines specify that ongoing risk review should be performed.IPEC's position The newest and customized guideline for excipient manufacturers that covers topics from the EU GMP guide-lines and ISO 9001 chapters is The Joint IPEC - PQG Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipi-ents, 2006, which represents good base for implementation of the highest GMP for the excipient manufacturers.The major concern is that the risk assessment process by different MAHs could eventually classify one manufac-turer into different categories of risk (high, medium, low) depending on the different approaches and intended use. This could lead to different quality requirements by differ-ent companies for the same excipient. It would be impos-sible to comply with these different requirements in one quality system unless the highest level of GMP was to be implemented. IPEC is concerned that there is not enough time to complete risk assessments for all excipients by the March 21, 2016 deadline, and that incomplete assessments may jeopardize the availability of high-quality excipients that have been in use for many years. IPEC will share their views with the EDQM on the challenges to comply with the current timeline and request more realistic goals and timelines (IPEC Federation Posi-tion Paper on EU Risk Assessment Guidelines for Excipi-ents 2015/C 95/02).IPEC views third-party auditing and certification schemes, such as EXCiPACT, and national standards, such as NSF/IPEC/ANSI 363-2014, as playing an essential role to achieve compliance with new requirements for the qual-ification of excipients and their suppliers. Without addi-tional information about GMP and GDP compliance of the excipient manufacturers through independent third-party audits, it will be nearly impossible for MAHs on their own to gather all the necessary data required (Quality Risk As-sessment for Excipients: An Industry Perspective, 2015).Regulatory authority's position Even though the groundwork for standardization is es-tablished, there is a concern from the regulatory author-ities: Ewan Norton of the UK Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) gave an inspector's view of the new EU requirements on risk-assessment of excipients, expressing concern that despite a 12-month introduction period some pharma companies may not be ready to meet the deadline of 21 March, 2016. A survey carried out at an MHRA conference last year revealed that a considerable number of pharma industry had either not started the risk assessment process or were unaware of the upcoming requirements. Norton suggest-ed that inspectors would be inclined to serve companies with a deficiency in their report if they were not compliant with the requirements (Excipients insight January/Febru-ary 2016, IPEC e-newsletter, 2016).Pharmaceutical industry position EFPIA (European Federation of Pharmaceutical In-dustries and Associations) supports the new legislation but is concerned that its implementation may lead to an abun-dance of regulatory guidance. EFPIA recommends that in-stead of formalized risk assessment the process should be integrated into existing supplier qualification management programmes. They recommend that it is not necessary to develop additional GMP guidelines for excipients since the risk management principle is already embedded in Part III EU GMP: Quality Risk Management (ICH Q9). They propose more effective legislation without un-necessary regulatory burden on manufacturers and suppli-ers to ensure continuous supply of quality excipients and finished drug products (EFPIA TDOC Position Paper).ConclusionIn the literature, depending on the standpoint there are an abundant number of guidelines, papers and articles that explain the general recommendations for risk assessment principle, but lack those describing hands-on application. There are a limited number of case studies of the pharma-ceutical companies applying those guidelines and showing significance of those guidelines and practices.It is recommended that the literature invests more in the area of application and significance of guidelines and practices. New case studies should be done to prove the success of such practices in risk assessment of excipients.ReferencesEFPIA TDOC Position Paper. (http://www.efpia.eu/uploads/Modules/Documents/efpia_tdoc_position_paper_gmp_for_excipients_final_2011_11__-20120612-005-en-v1.pdf)EudraLex, Volume 4 Good manufacturing practice (GMP) Guidelines, Part 1, Chapter 5: Production. Excipients insight January/February 2016, IPEC e-newsletter, 29.02.2016. (http://ipec-europe.org/newsletter_print.asp?nlid=63&nlaid)IPEC Federation Position Paper on EU Risk Assessment Guidelines for Excipients 2015/C 95/02.Quality Risk Assessment for Excipients: An Industry Perspective, 2015. (http://connect.dcat.org/blogs/patricia-van-arnum/2015/05/26/ipec-issues-position)The Joint IPEC-PQG Good Manufacturing Practices Guide for Pharmaceutical Excipients, 2006.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 435 - 436 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.4Short communicationHold-time stability study - a "must-do" for pharmaceutical industryOgnjenka Rahic , Edina Vranic*, Jasmina Hadziabdic , Alisa Elezovic, Marija Glavas DodovDepartment of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Sarajevo, Zmaja od Bosne 8, 71 000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and HerzegovinaInstitute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Majka Terza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* evranic@yahoo.comIntroductionThree crucial characteristics of medicinal product are its safety, effectiveness and quality required for its intend-ed use. In order to obtain and retain those characteristics, special consideration must be paid to proper storage of me-dicinal product. Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) re-quires that raw materials, packaging materials, interme-diates, bulk and finished product are stored under appro-priate conditions. This also means that a maximum hold-ing period for intermediates and bulk products before their further processing should be established. In order to avoid any misunderstanding, it is important to define terms "in-termediates" and "bulk products" The term "Intermediate" is partly processed product that must undergo further man-ufacturing steps before it becomes a bulk product. "Bulk product" refers to any pharmaceutical product that has completed all processing stages up to, but not including, fi-nal packaging (Eudralex, 2010).Hold-time studies guidanceUntil 2015, relevant guidelines (CPMP/QWP/122/02, 2003; ICH Q1A(R2), 2003; Eudralex, 2014; FDA Q1A(R2), 2003) thoroughly described the requirements for stability testing of finished drug product. The only statement in guidelines with regard to pharmaceutical bulk products or intermediates is that they have to be stored "in a suitable way".In 2015, World Health Organization (WHO) released a final version of "General guidance on hold-time studies" as a part of WHO Technical Report Series No. 992 (WHO, 2015). Although this guidance describes the principles of establishing criteria for performing hold-time studies on coated tablets, those principles can be applied to other non-sterile dosage forms.