Pharmaceutical care in community pharmacy In order for the pharmacist to successfully perform all the duties in the pharmaceutical practice, he/she must possess specific knowledge, competencies and skills and to continually upgrade them. The findings confirm that the pharmacist in a community pharmacy about 80% of his/her time devotes only to the process of medicines dispensing, while the remaining of the time is focused on giving infor-mation about the medicines. This data impose the need for significant changes in the profile of community pharmacist work. In regards to the pharmaceutical services, offered by the PHI Pharmacies which have significant importance and direct influence on the health state of the patients, as one of the strategic goal, is the continuous increase of the num-ber of services and their modernization through monitor-ing of the impressions of the users related to the provid-ed services. Namely, the community pharmacists active-ly participate in: promotion of the healthy lifestyle, pro-viding advice to the patients and consumers and stimulate them to look after their health, they organize presentations, run health campaigns, etc. From the services offered by the PHI community pharmacies one can emphasize: measure-ment of bodyweight, blood pressure, taking pregnancy test, further on, running programs for quitting of smoking, for reducing of bodyweight etc. ReferencesHIFM, 2015a: Annual report, http://www.fzo.org.mk/default.asp?ItemID=71140AA89564884A8568ECE6C89D90390 assessed, January, 2016. HIFM, 2015b: Annual report, http://www.fzo.org.mk/WBStorage/Files/Polugodisen%20izveshtaj%202015%20potrosuvacka.pdf assessed, January, 2016. LHI, 2000. Law on Health Insurance, Official Gazette of RM, 25/2000, with series of upgrades and amendments.LHP, 2004. Law on Health Protection, Official Gazette of RM, 10/2004. LMMD, 2007. Law on Medicines and Medical Devices, Official Gazette of RM, 106/2007 with series of upgrades and amendments.RB, 2010. Rulebook on dispensing and compounding, Official Gazette of RM, 14/2010.WHO, 2006. Developing pharmacy practice. A focus on patient care. World Health Organization Department of Medicines Policy and Standards Geneva, Switzerland In collaboration with International Pharmaceutical Federation, The Hague, The Netherlands (Eds. ).Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 611 - 612 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.15:37.035Short communicationLifelong learning - reality and perspectiveElizabeta Tomevska Ilievska1*, Jasmina Tonic Ribarska2, Suzana Trajkovic Jolevska2, Katerina Ancevska Netkovska2, Goran Ajdinski1 1Faculty of Philosophy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Blvd. Goce Delcev 9A, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia2 Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* beti@fzf.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionOmnes, omnia, omnio. (To teach everything, in-depth to everyone)John Amos Komensky Education is the basis for social transformation of hu-man society. It represents a motivator, in its own right, to-wards democratization and the development of human so-ciety. Its effects on economic growth are indisputable, also on workforce mobility, as well as on the ability of integrat-ing into international economic trends.Current perspective shows that EU countries, and the whole world as well, are faced with challenges brought on by globalization, issues in demographic trends, and the enormous changes in labor market, based on technological development. The last challenge underlines the need for a society firmly grounded on learning (knowledge-based-so-ciety), where training and education must come first. "The purpose of lifelong learning is to maintain and preserve a positive and active approach towards learning at all ages, in the course of a lifetime" (MES, 2004).Education and learning has enabled mankind an 'easi-er and more successful placement, not only concerning labor market, but also in knowledge in general, in a world of con-stant engagements' thereby, irrefutably imposing the neces-sity of an 'intervention' for improving the educational sys-tem in each country. Knowledge, skills, and attitudes, ac-quired and developed in surroundings varying from family to academia, are not permanent. A firm integration and learning in the life of an adult is a very important aspect of lifelong learning. From the viewpoint of lifelong learning (LLL), learning is defined as an 'endless continuum' alongside the building of a positive attitude towards learning in general. From the standpoint of pharmacy, as a regulated pro-fession, LLL is of great importance. LLL in pharmacy is self-directed and practitioner centered, and it emphasizes the importance of practice-based learning. Pharmacists, as health professionals, in order to perform their healthcare activities with patients, need a license to work, thus they are obliged to continuous education. The purpose is to en-sure that pharmacists maintain and/or enhance their knowl-edge, skills, and competencies to practice throughout their careers in their specific area of practice.The Republic of Macedonia, as one of the countries that signed the Declaration of Bologna, an in the same time, a candidate for EU membership, tends to follow ev-ery European trend, including education. As in other Euro-pean countries 'the purpose of educational policy, of each one, is to provide the opportunity for a suitable education-al level for everyone and for all' (MES, 2004) age groups, ensuring that they are in possession of knowledge, skills and attitudes, in accordance with the demands of society and the labor market, which is at the same time integrated into the concept of lifelong learning. The pharmacist of the 21st century should be in possession of a large amount of knowledge, but also personal skills, such as communica-tion, critical thinking, problem-solving, the ability to work in teams and perceive lifelong learning. In the time period between 2007 until the end of 2013, the leading EU program in the domain of education and training is the program called "Lifelong learning|, imple-mented by the European commission. On national level, the national agencies, formed in participant countries, have been granted the implementation and running of the pro-gram. Provided the main goals of strategic documents for education and training in R. M. have been analyzed, it is noted that their definitions are to a great extent, compati-ble with the goals of European policies, but also with the "Lifelong learning" program 2007 - 2013. S7 OP 292612Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 611 - 612 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional developmentThe Copenhagen protocol and the initiatives in the context of the Bologna protocol have been responsible for the beginning and significant progress in support of nation-al reforms of lifelong learning, higher education modern-ization, and the development of communal European in-struments, promoting quality, transparency and mobility (European Union, 2009).The new strategic framework of European collabo-ration in education and training |Education and training 2020" has a particular focus on four strategic goals:1. Making lifelong learning and mobility a reality;2. Improvement of quality and efficiency of education and training;3. Promoting equality, social cohesion and active cit-izenship;4. Strengthening creativity and innovation, including entrepreneurship on all levels of education and training Making lifelong learning and mobility a realityEven though in the domain of lifelong learning, there can be new initiatives that will develop, reflecting future challenges, there is still a need of further improvement, particularly in the implementation of ubiquitous lifelong learning strategies (European Union, 2009). The need of "action" s stressed, through which the development of na-tional frameworks for qualifications based on relevant edu-cational gateways will ensure their development, and their connection to the European qualification framework, the creation of more flexible learning pathways, including bet-ter passages between different sectors of education and training, a more open approach to non-formal and informal learning and improved transparency and acknowledgement of educational gateways. Further efforts are at the same time the need of promoting learning among adults, the improvement of quality of guiding systems and learning, to make it generally more attractive, and including new forms of learning and implementation of new technologies of teaching and learning. As an indispensable element of lifelong learning, and also an important means raising em-ployability and adaptability of people is the enlargement of mobility of all those learning, and the time periods spent in learning abroad, making them more of a rule than an ex-ception. While at the same time, already established prin-ciples in the European protocol for quality and mobility should be implemented.European programs for education and training have the tendency of promoting education that will strengthen the sustainability of economic growth. The ultimate gain is effectuating of the process of creating more and better po-sitions and a better social cohesion, thus leading to a soci-ety based on knowledge.At this very point we find the source of the claim that strengthening of educational capacities of the Republic of Macedonia, is largely conditioned by the use of Europe-an programs of education and training "Lifelong learning" and consequently the new program for education and train-ing of youth and sports "Erasmus plus 2014 - 2020". Useful linksCompetences supporting lifelong learning and the "new skills for new jobs" initiative http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2010:135:0008:0011:EN:PDFTowards more knowledge-based policy and practice in education and training http://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong-learning-policy/doc/policy/sec1098_en.pdfBetter integrating lifelong guidance into lifelong learning strategies http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2008:319:0004:0007:EN:PDFEuropean Qualifications Framework for lifelong learninghttp://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2008:111:0001:0007:EN:PDFKey competences for lifelong learning http://europa.eu/eur-lex/lex/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2006:394:0010:0018:EN:PDFEuropean Qualifications Framework for lifelong learning - Implementing the Community Lisbon Programmeh t t p : / / e u r - l e x . e u r o p a . e u / L e x U r i S e r v / L e x U r i S e r v.do?uri=COM:2006:0479:FIN:EN:PDFA new impetus for European cooperation in Vocational Education and Training to support the Europe 2020 http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=COM:2010:0296:FIN:EN:PDFEstablishment of a European Quality Assurance Reference Framework for Vocational Education and Traininghttp://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:C:2009:155:0001:0010:EN:PDFEstablishment of the European Credit system for Vocational Education and Training h t t p : / / e u r - l e x . e u r o p a . e u / L e x U r i S e r v / L e x U r i S e r v.do?uri=COM:2008:0180:FIN:EN:PDFCopenhagen Declarationhttp://ec.europa.eu/education/lifelong-learning-policy/doc/policy/copenhagen_en.pdfAction programme in the field of lifelong learning (2007-2013)http://eur-lex.europa.eu/lex/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=OJ:L:2006:327:0045:0068:EN:PDFReferencesEuropean Union, 2009. Council conclusions of 12 May 2009 on a strategic framework for European cooperation in education and training ('ET 2020') 2009/C 119/02. Official Journal of the European Union.52. Ministry of Education and Science, 2004. National Programme for the Development of Education in Macedonia 2005-2015. Ministry of Education and Science of the Republic of Macedonia.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 613 - 614 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.15:174Short communicationEthics, professionalism and autonomy of pharmacist - vision for the futureArijana Mestrovic Pharma Expert Competency development manager, Dunjevac 2, 10 000 Zagreb, Croatia* arijana.mestrovic@pharmaexpert.hrPharmacists in all practice settings (including com-munity pharmacy, hospital pharmacy, academia, public health pharmacy, managed care pharmacy, clinical labo-ratory pharmacy, and industrial pharmacy) are confront-ed with ethical challenges, and those challenges are like-ly to increase in the future (IPF, 2013). There is not a con-sistent approach among countries in seeking compliance with pharmacist codes of ethics, and the level of pharma-cists' professional autonomy, which varies greatly around the world, is influenced by many factors, including a coun-try's history, social structures, social systems (e.g., eco-nomic, legal, political, and cultural systems), method of health care delivery and financing, and system of pharma-cy education (FIP, 2002).Issues of ethical behavior and autonomy are especially important to pharmacy practice because the profession is in transition, moving from largely a supply function to a pa-tient-care function. This transition will be impeded if prac-titioners do not have sufficient autonomy to act in support of patients' best interests. If pharmacy practice were to lim-it itself strictly to a supply function, various forces - eco-nomic, technologic, social, and political - would likely co-alesce over time to replace the pharmacist with other less expensive means of safely supplying medicines to patients. On the other hand, if pharmacists move toward assuming responsibility for helping patients and health profession-als make the best use of medicines, they will be providing a higher value service than a mere supply function - a vi-tal and complex service that is generally lacking in health care today. As pharmacist associations attempt to stimulate pharmacy's professional transition, they should help their members understand and address the ethical and moral di-mensions of this transition. In countries in which the ed-ucation of pharmacists has prepared them to enlarge their role in fostering responsible use of medicines, pharmacy practitioners have a moral obligation to put that education to its fullest use (FIP, 2002). In countries in which laws re-quire pharmacists to own community pharmacies, the case for preserving those laws will be stronger if pharmacists are engaged in professional activities beyond the supply func-tion and have demonstrated that they are a vital force in im-proving outcomes from the use of medicines.The FIP identified the following four categories (with specific examples) of ethical issues experienced by phar-macists in all areas of practice (IPF, 2013):1. Ethical challenges originating from individual and per-sonal considerations. - Lack of a sense of professional responsibility. - Lack of competence. - Personal values in conflict with professional val-ues, including conflicts that lead to refusal to provide service. - Stigma (e.g., denying service due to stigma [or in-convenience] towards illicit drug users or persons with disabilities). - Lack of awareness of principles of ethics in phar-macy. - Lack of care to apply ethical principles in prac-tice. - Cultural, religious, or national interests in conflict with professional ethics. - Personal characteristics and traits (e.g., lack of moral courage). 2. Ethical challenges originating from economic consider-ations, either by limiting costs or by increasing revenues. - Managing resources - allocating limited resources. - Profitability and viability of business (greed vs. reasonable profit). - Advertising to promote inappropriate consump-tion. S7 OP 293614Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 613 - 614 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional development- Insurance company policies that conflict with pa-tients' best interests. - Financial incentives offered by industry to sell certain products. - Workload pressures. - Products selected for sale in the pharmacy (e.g., tobacco, complementary medicines of unproven efficacy or quality, slimming products that don't work). - Counterfeit drugs. - Conflict of interest in continuing education pre-sentations. - Conflict of interest in publishing research find-ings. 3. Ethical challenges originating from human interactions (employer-employee or between colleagues). - Inter professional conflict. - Policy of the owner/employer. - Conflicts between the employer and the practitio-ner's commitments to engagement with profes-sional organizations. - Reporting colleagues ("whistle-blowing"). - Power imbalance and bullying/harassment (and subsequent job insecurity). - Lack of respect for colleagues. - Lack of good role modeling and initiative to teach younger practitioners. - Patient rights (e.g., privacy/confidentiality) (FIP, 2004). 4. Ethical challenges arising from the system or framework of practice.- Barriers imposed by institutional authorities. - Restrictions/challenges in adopting new technol-ogies. - Lack of revision (updating) of codes of ethics. - Varying interpretations of codes of ethics. - Perceptions that codes of ethics are nonbinding. - Legislative or regulatory constraints. - Paradigm shifts; new scientific knowledge (e.g., pharmacogenomics). Professional autonomy is the right and privilege grant-ed by a governmental authority to a class of professionals, and to each licensed individual within that profession, to exercise independent, expert judgment within a legally de-fined scope of practice, to provide services in the best in-terests of the client.Professional autonomy helps pharmacists fulfill their societal mission. That mission, as expressed in FIP's Cen-tennial Declaration, is to help patients make responsible use of medicines.Throughout its history, the profession of pharmacy has served humanity well around the globe. Although pharma-cy has great potential for extending its record of service, it faces many obstacles in attempting to do so, not the least of which are challenges related to professional ethics and autonomy.