Benefits of using homeopathic remedies are multiple: they are not teratogen, non-toxic and do not produce side effects, in acute cases they act faster than conventional drugs, they may be effective in the cases where conventional medicine has nothing to offer, their shelf-life is very long and possible unlimited, they are well tolerated by patients of all ages, their application is not invasive in conditions where swallowing is difficult (e.g. vomiting, coma, epilepsy) and they have very low cost (Vithoulkas, 2008).There are two main approaches in use of homeopathic remedies - the use of single remedy made in single potency and only of one substance (classical homeopathic remedies) and the use of several substances in different potencies combined together in such a way to cover specific disturbing symptoms (complex homeopathic remedies). In both situations the use of homeopathic remedies may or may not be associated with the use of conventional, mostly chemical drugs. This paper discusses specificity of these approaches within Serbian settings. In classical homeopathy whole patient is treated by taking in account his mental (e.g. disposition, attitude etc. ), general (e.g. tolerance to coldness, heat, damp, wind etc.) and particular or peculiar symptoms (worse from movement, better by hard pressure, throbbing pain, pulsating pain, etc.). This information helps determine one homeopathic remedy that is prescribed in one potency, in a posology that is adjusted to the individual patient's health state. This remedy may be so compatible with constitution of the patient that outcome is amelioration or complete disappearing of the troubling symptoms, while at the same time patient feels better on a general level. That is the main aim for patients that choose homeopathy- either because the conventional medicine has failed to help them or they prefer it as the gentlest way of healing during acute or chronic ailments.Complex homeopathy, on the other hand, tries to bridge classical homeopathy and conventional medicine offering partial benefits of both. A complex homeopathic remedy, made of several different substances, all in low potencies and combined with the aim that each is targeting different symptoms, can be used independently of a homeopathic consultation - either by advice of a conventional doctor, a pharmacist or as a part of self-medication. Complex homeopathic remedy of different content may be commercialized under a brand name and can undergo research that proves its efficacy (Thinesse-Mallwitz et al., 2015). A complex remedy cannot offer constitutional healing to the patient, but one of its benefits is that it attempts to achieve clinical efficacy in cases when a classical homeopathic consultation is not available (Malapane et al., 2014). Still, many classical homeopaths never prescribe complex homeopathic remedies. Their negative attitude is based on the premise that use of complex homeopathic medicine compromises effects of classical prescribing and spoils the case.S5 PP 223470Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 469 - 470 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsPoster presentationsHomeopathic remedies, either classical or complex, can be used in conjunction with conventional medicine, although their action may be less effective in that case due to the difference in the mechanism of action. Homeopathic medicine acts on body's auto regulatory mechanisms. If these have already been influenced by powerful drugs, the action of homeopathic remedy may be impaired. However, in the case of the maintenance therapy for deficiency diseases (e.g. insulin, thyroxine, etc.) conventional medicine must not be discontinued during the homeopathic treatment. A homeopathy is an effective additional form of therapy, but in a multi-medicated patient it should be used with high doctor's prudence and experience.There are several specificities in homeopathy in Serbia. One-component remedies for classical homeopathy are not imported and readily available in pharmacies since they are not registered. Patients self supply themselves in a difficult manner - mostly from abroad (Cupara et al., 2013). Moreover, legislation and education of homeopaths are roughly regulated and there are practical inadequacies. Many homeopaths due to the above mentioned problems have small volume of consultations on annual level, which consequently lead to less experienced practice. There is a lack of competent structural information about practitioners and patients have obstacles in choosing and reaching a homeopath. The additional difficulty is the self-medication that patients practice, which is also a driving force for unjustified use of many conventional drugs, even in a case when a proper pharmacist's advice is given. In this specific situation, in which patient cannot easily reach a competent homeopath of his choice or cannot easily obtain the prescribed remedy, together with tendency for unjustified self medication by conventional drugs and slow, but steadily growing number of patients that require alternative to conventional drug, a complex homeopathic remedy seems to be a possible choice that harms the least.ReferencesCupara, S.M., Djordjevic, V., Jakovljevic, M.B., 2013. Current legal status and research on complementary and alternative medicine in Serbia. J. Altern. Med. Res. 5, 195-198.Malapane, E., Solomon, E.M., Pellow, J., 2014. Efficacy of a homeopathic complex on acute viral tonsillitis. J. Altern. Complement. Med. 20, 868-873.Thinesse-Mallwitz, M., Maydannik, V., Keller, T., Klement, P., 2015. A homeopathic combination preparation in the treatment of feverish upper respiratory tract infections: An international randomized controlled trial. Forsch. Komplementmed. 22, 163- 170. Vithoulkas, G., 2008. Homeopathy - Medicine for the new Millennium, International Academy of Classical Homeopathy, Alonissos. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 471 - 472 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 633.888:615.212.7Short communicationIs cannabis addictive?Svetlana Golocorbin-Kon1*, Nebojsa Pavlovic1, Maja Danic2, Mladena Lalic-Popovic1, Slobodan Gigov3, Nikola Jojic3, Momir Mikov21 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad, Serbia2 Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad, Serbia 3 Faculty of Pharmacy, University Business Academy in Novi Sad, Trg Mladenaca 5, Novi Sad, Serbia* magistrakon@orcon.net.nzCannabis is a tall plant with a stiff upright stem, divided serrated leaves, and glandular hairs. Cannabis has an extremely long history of use. Although cannabis is indigenous to Central and South Asia, it spread all over the world very early in human history. While humans in Taiwan were growing hemp as early as 8 000 BCE, the historical use of cannabis as a physical and psychological medicine began over 5 000 years ago. Therapeutic properties of cannabis have been known since ancient times, although the application has been limited mainly due to narcotic characteristics of this plant. Cannabis is also known as marijuana and numerous other street names such as ganja, pot, astro turf, grass, hemp, dagga, kiff, weed, hash, purple, etc. Hashish is related form of the drug made from the resins of the Indian hemp plant. Also called chocolate, shit or hash, it is on average six times stronger than marijuana (Mikuriya, 1969).Nowadays, the pharmacologically active substanc-es in cannabis - cannabinoids, are very interesting group of compounds with potentially significant applications in medicine and pharmacy. Research studies have clear-ly shown that cannabinoids are highly efficient, primarily in the treatment of nausea and vomiting and the manage-ment of chronic pain. For patients who suffer from severe, chronic diseases, such as cancer and AIDS, cannabis has been shown to relieve several symptoms at the same time, in more efficient way than some registered medicines. Be-sides, there is a great potential of cannabinoids to be ap-plied for the treatment of many other pathological condi-tions, such as multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, epi-lepsy, hypertension, glaucoma, although it is necessary to complete the last phases of clinical trials in order to reg-ister these compounds as drugs, i.e. in order to assure the safe therapy for these diseases (Grotenhermen and Russo, 2002). Although tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) proved to be very efficient in the treatment of numerous diseases, new drugs have been intensively developing that tend to possess improved selectivity, better pharmacokinetic properties, and favorable relationship between desired pharmacolog-ical effect and side effects. Laws and attitudes toward can-nabis are changing these days. Legalization of cannabis use for medical purposes is a hot topic at the global level and in most countries there have been initiatives to amend the ex-isting laws in order to make drugs based on natural ingredi-ents of cannabis, as well as other related products, synthet-ically produced, available to patients, that would certainly, based on the results of investigations, contribute to a better quality of patients' lives (Clark et al., 2004). On the other hands, there is a question: "Is cannabis addictive?" What would be a proper answer? Cannabis, like other analgesics, can cause dependence and addiction. Over time, the per-sistent overstimulation of the endocannabinoid system can cause changes in the brain that result in addiction. This is much more likely in people who start using cannabis (mar-ijuana) when young and who are heavy users. An estimated 9% of people who use cannabis become dependent on the drug. Teenage users have a 17% risk of becoming addicted, and 25-50% of regular, daily, users become addicted. Short term effects of cannabis are both pleasant and unpleasant and short term cannabis effects are not the same for ev-eryone. Short term cannabis effects vary depending on the person's size, experience with the drug, the amount of drug consumed and individual physiology. Desirable short term effects of cannabis are generally characterized as "high". Pleasant short term cannabis effects include: euphoria, in-toxication, relaxation, detachment, decreased anxiety and S5 PP 224472Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 471 - 472 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsPoster presentationsalertness, altered perception of time and space, intensified experiences, laughter, talkativeness. However, while those short term effects of cannabis are pleasant, short term ef-fects of cannabis also include: depression, anxiety, panic, paranoia, amnesia, confusion, delusions, hallucinations, psychosis, mania, short term memory impairment, sudden increase in heart rate, at risk for heart complications, diz-ziness, lack of coordination and muscle strength, lethargy, decreased concentration, slurred speech. It is also known that mental illness and cannabis use are linked, particularly to schizophrenia, but at this time it's not clear whether can-nabis causes, exacerbates or is simply a predictor of men-tal illness. Even the short term effects of cannabis can in-clude an increase in the severity of existing mental illness-es. Long term effects of cannabis tend to be more negative than the short term effects. This is primarily because toler-ance builds to the drug's effects and the user takes great-er doses of cannabis, increasing the short and long term ef-fects of cannabis as well as its potential for abuse. Once tolerance to the drug is achieved, one of the long term ef-fects of cannabis becomes cannabis withdrawal after us-ing it and during periods of abstinence (http //www.drug-freeworld.org/drugfacts/marijuana/short-and-long-term-effects.html). The withdrawal syndrome begins on the sec-ond day of stopping and may persist for two weeks. Dis-continuation symptoms include anxiety, irritability, insom-nia, stomach pain and decreased appetite. Sleep problems can potentially persist beyond that time frame. Cannabis is an illicit drug that has the potential to lead to abuse and ad-diction. Despite the commonly held belief that herbal can-nabis is harmless, its use is not without adverse effects and undesirable outcomes. The full extent of long-term health risks of chronic cannabis use is currently unknown. It is also important to note that "synthetic cannabis" is not ac-tually cannabis (http://www.addictions.com/marijuana/). There are many research projects that are examining the medical benefits of individual cannabinoid chemicals de-rived from or related to those in the marijuana plant, not the plant itself, although a few use unprocessed plant mate-rial. Individual cannabinoid chemicals may be isolated and purified from the marijuana plant or synthesized in the lab-oratory, or they may be naturally occurring (endogenous) cannabinoids found in the body and modified using other, non-cannabinoid chemicals (Boyd, 2013).ReferencesBoyd, W.J., 2013. Is Marujuana Addictive? https://www.psychologytoday.com/blog/almost-addicted/201311/is-marijuana-addictive (accessed on April, 2016).Clark, A.J., Ware, M.A., Yazer, E., Murray, T.J., Lynch, M.E., 2004. Patterns of cannabis use among patients with multiple sclerosis. Neurology 62, 2098-2100.Grotenhermen, F., Russo, E., 2002. Cannabis and cannabinoids: pharmacology, toxicology and therapeutic potential. London: Routledge.Mikuriya, T.H., 1969. Marijuana in medicine: past, present and future. Calif. Med. 110, 34-40.http://www.addictions.com/marijuana/ (accessed on April, 2016).http //www.drugfreeworld.org/drugfacts/marijuana/short-and-long-term-effects.html (accessed on April, 2016).Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 473 - 474 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 635.65(497.7)Short communicationMacedonian bean diversity and its health benefits potentialSonja Ivanovska1*, Mirjana Jankulovska1, Gjoshe Stefkov21Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Aleksandar Makedonski bb, Skopje 1000, Republic of Macedonia2Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, Skopje 1000, Republic of Macedonia* s_ivanovska@yahoo.comIntroductionCommon bean (Phaseolus vulgaris L.) is a legume crop native to Central America and Mexico. As huge di-versity of bean varieties and landraces are cultivated at the Balkan countries, this region is considered as second-ary centre of origin. Cooked bean's seed is traditional dish in Macedonia and although the white seeded varieties are more popular, farmers also preserve landraces varied in shape, size, color and pattern of seeds. This valuable diver-sity is passed through generations for more than two centu-ries (Ivanovska et al., 2013; Maras et al., 2009).Lately, the trend of balanced diet essential for healthy life is increasing and the consumption of many agricultur-al crops is recommended. In this sense, bean is considered as healthy food due to its nutritional and health benefits (Mesina, 2014). Its main nutritional component is starch, predominantly consisted of amylose and amylopectin. The specific ratio of these two polysaccharides along with the slow digestion of amylose raises blood sugar more gradu-ally and keeps it lower, compared to other types of starch. Thus, bean ranks very low according to the glycemic in-dex and is beneficial particularly for diabetics (Barrett and Udani, 2011; Hutchins et al., 2012). Beans are one of the richest sources of plant proteins, out of which widely stud-ied are phaseolin, lectins and protease inhibitors. In partic-ular, they are among the only plant foods that provide sig-nificant amounts of the indispensable amino acid lysine. It also contains insoluble fibers alpha-galactosides that cause flatulence in some individuals and substantial quantity of resistant starch which may be used in weight control. Both substances are fermented in the colon by beneficial bac-teria, stimulating their growth and function as prebiotics. Beside, as a result of the fermentation short-chain fatty ac-ids are formed, such as butyrate, acetate and propionate that may reduce the risk of colon cancer (Havenaar, 2011). Beans are also rich in various vitamins and minerals, like molybdenum, vitamin B9, iron, copper, manganese, potas-sium, vitamin K1 and phosphorus. Other positive bioac-tive compounds of beans are the antioxidants isoflavones, known as phytoestrogens (Konar et al., 2012) and antho-cyanins found in the colored seed coat (Lin et al., 2008). Bean also contains negative compounds such as phytic acid (found in all edible seeds) which reduces the absorp-tion of minerals and can be eliminated by soaking and fer-menting the beans, and a toxic lectin phytohaemagglutinin which is eliminated with cooking (Queiroz et al., 2002).Beside its nutritional value, several studies have linked bean consumption with reducing the LDL cholesterol and systolic blood pressure, as well as the risk of overweight and obesity (Papanikolaou and Fulgoni, 2008), metabolic syndrome and ischemic heart disease (Mesina, 2014). As starch blockers are completely inactivated when seeds are boiled at 100 oC for 10 min., they are extracted from raw white kidney beans and sold like a weight loss supplement (Grube et al., 2014).Having all this in mind the aim of this study was to explore the existing bean diversity in Macedonia starting with creation of a landrace germplasm collection. Further on, they will be tested for different plant characteristics in-cluding their nutritive value. The final goal of this initiative is to promote bean consumption in everyday diet and to ex-plore the potential of different landraces as raw material for production of supplements.Materials and methodsIn order to assess the existing bean diversity in Mace-donia, a collection mission was initiated in 2015 by the re-S5 PP 225474Maced. pharm.