bull., 62 (suppl) 419 - 420 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsty systems in the Radiopharmacy laboratory could be im-proved significantly with the better training. This competency-based training is the first step to pro-vide the essentials of a trainingprogramme for all radio-pharmacy practitioners that addresses the following re-quirements:- Standardization of training for staff members that operate in hospital radiopharmacy prac-tice;- To improve performance and management of the radiopharmacy service;- To encourage good radiopharmacy practices for the preparation and quality assurance;- To establish a quality management system which encourages continuous update of core competencies in hot laboratory staff.- Encourages continuous update of core compe-tencies in hot laboratory staff.ResultsOne of the key bottlenecks for Nuclear Medicine is a human resources shortfall, especially radiopharmacists. There is an acute shortage and in many countries absenc-es of pharmacists with radiopharmacy experience. Most of Nuclear Medicine facilities operate at IAEA operational level 1 and 2' mainly with support of technologists. There is a global need for effective implementation of the 'oper-ational guidance on hospital radiopharmacy-a safe and ef-fective approach' under which there is a strong recommen-dation to strengthen skills, competencies and professional qualifications of all staff involved in clinical radiopharma-cy practice. They should be empowered to address the poor state of Radiopharmaceutical laboratories in many coun-tries and be more aware of cost of radiopharmaceuticals. For safety of patient they should be aware of proper registration of radiopharmaceuticals and quality assess-ment required locally. At the time when there are difficul-ties with supply and relative high cost of routine radiophar-maceuticals, trained staffin Radiopharmaceutical laborato-ries could make the difference to Nuclear Medicine (IAEA NUMDAB, 2009).The trained radiopharmacist should have a:1. working knowledge of the radiopharmaceuti-cal terms, abbreviations, and symbols commonly used in prescribing, compounding and dispensing radiopharmaceuticals2. working knowledge of the procedures and tech-niques relating to aseptic compounding and par-enteral admixture operations.3. working knowledge of the procedures and opera-tions relating to the reconstitution, packaging and labeling of radiopharmaceuticals4. the ability to perform the usual functions associat-ed with a specific radiopharmacy.5. the ability to perform the manipulative and record keeping functions associated with the compound-ing and dispensing of radiopharmaceuticals6. manipulative and record keeping function sassoci-ated with quality control testing of radiopharma-ceuticals7. working knowledge of drug dosage by imaging-procedure, routes of administration, dosage forms, and be able to distinguish8. the ability to perform the essential functions relat-ing to drugpurchasing and inventory control9. appropriate knowledge and understanding of the specific nuclearpharmacy site with emphasis on the technician duties and responsibilities, includ-ing standards of ethics governing pharmacy prac-tice therapeutic from diagnostic radiopharmaceu-tical utilization10. ability to perform them a thematical calculations required for the usual dosage determinations and solution preparations in the compounding and dis-pensing of radiopharmaceuticals.11. Demonstrate appropriate working knowledge of any additionaltraining or safety requirements mandated by the pharmacy or by any local, state, or federal agency by successful completion of any required program (DAT on-line, 2011).ConclusionThis paper present our idea how to create suitable training and network of all professionals and state author-ities for establishing and develop education for Good Ra-diopharmacy Practice, qualified personnel and appropriate regulation according to the local and international parame-ters that will be step forward to have advanced health care system and confidence of the patients.ReferencesDAT on-line, 2011. Welcome to DATOL (DAT on-line). Distance assisted training for nuclear medicine professionals Web site. Available at: http://www.datnmt.org/. Accessed July 21, 2011.Dondi, M., Andreo, P., 2006. Developing nuclear medicine in developing countries: IAEA's possibl emission. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. Mol. Imaging 33, 514-515.Graham, M., Metter, M., 2007. Evolution of nuclear medicine training: past, present, and future. J. Nucl. Med. 48, 257-268.IAEA NUMDAB, 2009. International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA NUMDAB: taking the pulse of nuclear medicine worldwide. J. Nucl. Med. 50(5),16N.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 423 - 424 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.074:543.422.3-74Short communicationSolid-state compatibility screening of CaCO3 and MgCO3 with selection of excipients suitable for development of solid-dosage formulationMarina Chachorovska*, Sonja Dimchevska, Sonja Ugarkovic, Gjorgji PetrushevskiResearch and Development, Alkaloid AD, AleksandarMakedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* mkajdzanoska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionFourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FT-IR) was applied as suitable screening analytical method to assess the compatibility screening of CaCO3 and MgCO3 with several excipients aimed for development of solid-dosage formulation. The solid-state compatibility testing of the active phar-maceutical ingredients (APIs) CaCO3 and MgCO3 and the selected excipients was performed by Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. The compatibility was stud-ied by comparison of the FT-IR spectra of the pure samples (APIs and excipients) and freshly prepared binary mixture with the FT-IR spectra of the corresponding stressed binary mixtures. The appearance of new bands in the FT-IR spec-trum, non-typical for the APIs or excipients, can be consid-ered as most significant sign of possible solid-state inter-action and formation of new molecular species. Changes due the water/moisture intake, resulting in band broaden-ing or changes in the band resolution and intensities in the FT-IR spectra, can be considered normal, because the sam-ples were exposed directly to the external influence, with-out any protection or packaging.The aim of this experiment was to investigate possible solid state interaction between APIs and the described ex-cipients, based on the induced changes in the infrared spec-tra of the binary mixtures exposed at different external con-ditions, compared to the infrared spectra of the pure com-pounds and the freshly prepared mixtures. The obtained re-sults afforded deeper insight into the solid-state stability of the studied binary mixture.Materials and methodsDuring development of the CaCO3 and MgCO3 tablets several excipients were evaluated for compatibility with the active ingredients as a screening for potential choice for tablet formulation. APIs: Calcium carbonate (CaCO3, purchased from Solvay Osterreich GmbH, Austria) and Magnesium carbonate heavy (MgCO3, purchased from Dr.PaulLohmann, Germany); Excipients: Silica, colloidal anhydrous (purchased from Evonik Resource Efficiency GmbH, Germany); partially pre-gelatinized maize starch (purchased from Colorcon, USA); copovidone (purchased from BASF (BTC Europe GmbH), Germany); xylitol (pur-chased from Roquette, France); low-substituted hydroxy-propylcellulose (purchased from ShinEtsu, Japan); spear-mint flavor SD (purchased from Symrise AG, Germany); menthol L flavourspraydried (purchased from Symrise AG, Germany); talc (purchased from Merck, Germany) and Mg stearate (purchased from FACI SpA, Italy).Binary mixtures were prepared by dry mixing of equal amounts of APIs and each excipient in 1:1 ratio (w/w). This ratio is different than the ratio used in the formulation, but according to the literature (Cunha-Filho et al., 2007), the equal masses afford bigger possibility for solid-state in-teraction among the constituents of the mixture. Pure APIs, excipients, and corresponding binary mixtures were stressed by 30 days exposure in stability testing chambers, at open Petri dishes, at temperatures of 40 oC and 25 oC, with a relative humidity (RH) of 75% and 60%, respec-tively. FT-IR spectra of pure APIs and excipients, freshly pre-pared binary mixture and stressed binary mixtures after 30 days were recorded and evaluated.The FT-IR spectra were recorded using ATR method, in the 4000-550 cm-1 region, on Varian 660 FT-IR spec-S4 PP 201422Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 423 - 424 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationstrometer (Varian, Australia) (resolution 4 cm-1, 16 scans per spectrum). Attenuated total reflectance (ATR) spectra were obtained by MIRAcleZnSe ATR module (PIKE tech-nologies) with low pressure micrometer clamp.Results and discussionBased on the comparison of the FT-IR spectra of pure CaCO3 and pure MgCO3, with fresh prepared binary mix-tures and corresponding excipients, it can be concluded that in all cases the most prominent vibrational bands of the APIs can be identified in the initial prepared binary mix-tures. Although, generally being obscured and overlapped by strong bands of the APIs, few stronger bands originat-ing from the present excipient can be identified in some of the binary mixture. No additional bands, of unknown ori-gin, were observed. In regards of the FT-IR spectra of the starting bina-ry mixture and the FT-IR spectra of the same mixture af-ter exposure for 30 days at 25 oC/60% RH and 40 oC/75% RH, it can be concluded that no significant spectral chang-es were observed, except in binary mixtures between stud-ied APIs with xylitol and copovidone. In the FT-IR spec-tra of these binary mixture exposed at stressed conditions some spectral changes were observed according to higher moisture. Having in mind that both of excipients are hygro-scopic at high moisture (Raymond et al., 2009), pure xy-litol and copovidone were exposed 30 days at 40 oC/75% RH. Based on the obtained FT-IR spectra, it can be con-cluded that spectral changes observed in the FT-IR spec-tra of the stressed binary mixtures are results from the ab-sorbed moisture from xylitol and copovidone, which can be confirmed by their FT-IR spectra.ConclusionThe closer inspection of the FT-IR spectra of the ob-tained binary mixtures of CaCO3 and MgCO3 with the pro-posed excipients, clearly demonstrated that there are no significant spectral changes induced in the FT-IR spectra during the screening period at all testing conditions. The preformulation studies have shown that in the FT-IR spec-tra in the binary mixtures between: CaCO3 with xylitol and CaCO3 with copovidone; and MgCO3 with xylitol and MgCO3 with copovidone; exposed at stressed conditions, some spectral changes were observed due to moisture up-take by the excipient with hygroscopic properties. These findings were confirmed by comparison of the spectral changes observed in the FT-IR spectra of the stressed binary mixtures and the individually stressed xyli-tol and copovidone. The compatibility studies as a part of preformula-tion screening of the excipients aimed for development of CaCO3 and MgCO3 solid dosage form were beneficial and give useful directions for development of a stable and ef-fective formulation.ReferencesCunha-Filho, M.S.S., Martinez-Pacehco, R., Landin,M., 2007. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 45, 590-598.Raymond,R.C., Paul,S.J., Marian,Q.E., 2009. Handbook of pharmaceutical excipients, 6thEd, Pharmaceutical Press and American Pharmacists Association.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 421 - 422 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.453.6.015Short communicationFormulation development of immediate release tablets with water insoluble drug using fluid-bed granulation Sanja Simeonovska Gushic1*, Dejan Kostovski1, Aleksandra Petrovska1, Marija Velickovska1 Sonja Ugarkovic1, Marija Glavas Dodov21Research & Development, Alkaloid AD-Skopje, Blv. AleksandarMakedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Center for Pharmaceutical Nanotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* ssimeonovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionTablets as solid preparations can range from relative-ly simple immediate release formulations to complex mod-ified release drug dosage forms. The desired drug release properties could be adjusted by proper selection of excip-ients used in the formulation as well as by technological process and process conditions selected.Numerous unit processes are involved in making tab-lets, including blending, granulating, drying, compaction and coating. Various factors deriving from these processes can affect content uniformity, drug release rate and/or sta-bility of tablets.The fluid-bed method of wet granulation is well known in the pharmaceutical and other industries as a one-step, enclosed operation. Because several ingredients can be mixed, granulated, and dried in the same vessel, the technique reduces material handling and shortens process times compared with other wet granulation techniques. In addition to granulation for tableting, the fluid-bed top-spray method produces highly dispersible granules with a characteristic porous structure that enhances wettabili-ty and improves many of the powder properties for tablet compression. Granules of high quality can be obtained by understanding and controlling the critical process parame-ters by timely measurements (Parikh, 1997).The aim of this study was to develop immediate re-lease tablets with water insoluble drug (API), using fluid- bed granulation technique.Materials and methodsMaterials API from BCS Class II/IV (particle size D50 less than 20um, freely soluble in dichloromethane, sparingly solu-ble in toluene, insoluble in methanol and water) as model drug substance was used. Other excipients used in the for-mulation were: lactose monohydrate, microcrystalline cel-lulose, starch maize, hydroxypropylcellulose, croscarmel-lose sodium, magnesium stearate and iron oxide. All chem-ical used in this present study are approved for use in phar-maceutical industry.Preparation of the granulesThree different formulations of granules were pre-pared using fluid-bed granulation process (Huttlin GmbH, Hohe-Flum-Strasse 42, Schopfheim, top spray configu-ration, Germany). Water solution of hydroxypropylcellu-lose was used as granulation vehicle. Fluid-bed granula-tion was performed under the following working condi-tions: air volume 15 m3/h; inlet temperature 66 degS; atom-izing pressure 0.5-1 bar; mycroclimate 0.3-0.8 bar; filter pressure 0.8-1 bar; filter cleaning period 2 sec. ; filter blow time 0.2 sec. After finishing the atomization of the binder solution, the granules were dried for a variable period of time in the same apparatus at 66 degC inlet temperature and air volume 15 m3/h.For preparation of sample 1, API was granulated to-gether with lactose monohydrate, while starch maize, mi-crocrystalline cellulose and iron oxide were added extra-granularly. For sample 2, API was granulated together with all excipients used in the formulation (lactose monohy-S4 PP 200424Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 421 - 422 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsdrate, starch maize, microcrystalline cellulose and iron ox-ide). For sample 3, API was granulated together with lac-tose, part of croscarmelose sodium and starch maize, while microcrystalline cellulose, iron oxide and the other part of croscarmelose sodium were added extragranulary.All prepared samples were finally mixed with magne-sium stearate (5 min. ; Drum blender, Erweka PM5, Ger-many) and compressed by a rotary tablet press (KorschXL 100 Pro, Korsch AG, Germany), using round shaped 6 mm punches.Determination of granules and tablets characteristicsFinal blends were evaluated for loss on drying and flow properties. Loss on drying (LOD) was analyzed in Sartori-us Infrared dryer MA 35 (Germany). Granulate in quanti-ty of 1 g was dried to constant mass. The loss of mass was presented as percent m/m (Ph. Eur 8.7). Flowability of granulates was determined according to Ph. Eur 8.7 with Granulate flow tester (Erweka type GTB, Erweka, Germany). Nearly 50 g of granulate was poured from funnel and the time required to empty the funnel was measured. Determination of disintegration time and dissolution test of the compressed tablets was performed according to the official methods from the European Pharmacopoeia. For that purpose 6 tablets were placed in baskets of appa-ratus for disintegration (Erweka type ZT302, Erweka, Ger-many). Time required for disintegration was measured au-tomatically. Dissolution testing was conducted in 900 ml of disso-lution medium hydrochloric acid buffer pH 1.2 (USP 38 NF 33) at 37 +- 0.5 degC using Apparatus II paddle (Varian VK, USA). Apparatus was adjusted to a speed of 60 rpm.