Hydrazinyldiene-chroman-2,4-diones in inducing growth arrest and apoptosis in breast cancer cells: synergism with doxorubicin and relation with physicochemical properties, submitted for publication.Ballazhi, L., Popovski, E., Jashari. A., Imeri. F., Ibrahimi. I., Mikhova. B., Mladenovska. K., 2015. Potential antiproliferative effect of isoxazolo- and thiazolo coumarin derivatives on breast cancer mediated bone and lung metastases. Acta Pharm. 65, 53-63.Belluti, F,, Fontana, G., Dal, L.B., Carenini, N., Giommarelli, C., Zunino, F. 2010. Design, synthesis and anticancer activities of stilbene-coumarin hybrid compounds: Identification of novel proapoptotic agents. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 18, 3543-3550.Hadjipavlou-Litina, J.D., Litinas, E.K., Kontogiorgis, C., 2007. The anti-inflammatory effect of coumarin and its derivatives. Anti-Inflammatory & Anti-Allergy Agents in Medicinal Chemistry (Formerly Current Medicinal Chemistry - Anti-Inflammatory and Anti-Allergy Agents) 6, 293-306.Jashari, A., Imeri, F., Ballazhi, L., Shabani, A., Mikhova, B., Drager, G., Popovski, E., Huwiler, A., 2014. Synthesis and cellular characterization of novel isoxazolo- and thiazolohydrazinyldiene-chroman-2,4-diones on cancer and non-cancer cell growth and death. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 22, 2655-2661.Mousa, S. A., 2002. Anticoagulants in thrombosis and cancer. Expert Rev. Anticancer Ther. 2, 227-33.Nimavat, K.S., Vyas, K.B., Jani, G.R., Hathi, M.V., 2009. Synthesis and antimicrobial activity of coumarin derivatives metal complexes: an in vitro evaluation. Orbital - The Electronic J. Chem. 1, 183-192.Riveiro, M., De Kimpe, N., Moglioni, A., Vazquez, R., Monczor, F., Shayo, C., Davio, C., 2010. Coumarins: old compounds with novel promising therapeutic perspectives. Curr. Med. Chem. 17, 1325-1338.van der Giesen, W. F., Janssen, L.H., 1982. Influence of ionization and ion-pair formation on Iipophilicity of some 4-hydroxy-coumarin derivatives in the octanol-water system. Int. J. Pharm. 12, 231-249.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 561 - 562 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616-097-085:602.9Short communicationMesenchimal stem cells as a new approach in treatment of systematic lupus erythematosusMagdalena Vrchkovska1*, Tatjana Dimitrovska Manojlovik2 , Marija Vrchkovska31Pharmacy Organization Medika Karta, Partizanska 110, 7000 Bitola, R. Macedonia2DIC / Clinical hospital "D-r Trifun Panovski", Partizanska bb, 7000 Bitola, R. Macedonia3Centar for Public Health, Bitola, Partizanska bb, 7000 Bitola, R. Macedonia* magivrckovska@yahoo.comIntroductionSystematic lupus erithematosus (SLE) is multi siste-matic autoimmune disease with wide range of clinical symptoms on almost every organ and tissue, with a high level of morbidity and mortality as a result. There is no clear cause for SLE and is hard to be cured (Bertsias et al., 2012).In recent years, with increasing levels of health care, there are new drugs to treat SLE. Although the survival rate from 1990 till today has increased by 68% (Urowitz and Gladman, 2000) due to the use of glucocorticoids and cy-totoxic drugs, excessive use of these drugs leads to many side effects and death cases. Also, significant concerns re-lated to opportunistic infections and secondary malignancy due to immunosuppressive treatments emerge the need for safer and more effective therapy. In recent decades, stem cell transplantation has emerged as a new treatment mo-dality for refractory and severe SLE, mainly hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) and mesenchymal stem cell transplantation (MSCT). The study of Liang and Sun (2015) is related to the rationale and current status of the MSCT in the treatment of SLE.SLE therapy If the HSC defects are from aquired response, auto-logus HSCT can be a treatable method after removing the cause of risk, and making reconstruction of the immune system with deleting the auto-reactive lymphocyte clone of hematopoietic origin. No matter of any of this, if genet-ics is a dominant factor, allogenetic HSCT will be more ef-fective and logically applicative approach (Liang and Sun, 2015). In the most cases, patients are treated with an alloge-netic HSCT for SLE and concominant hematological dis-eases, and will have complete remission from the first and second conditions. But, beside the encouraging result, there might be some problems with HSCT treatment in SLE (Kushida et al., 2001). Allogenetic HSCT seems to have a huge curative po-tential, but also, comes with enormous risk of GVHD (graft versus host disease) that have high occurrence and hold responsibility for worst results of allogenetic trans-plantation in hematologic disease, with limitation of wider consideration of in autoimmune disease. GVHD are linked with some symptoms, like acute organ toxicity, delayed re-constitution of immune system, increase TRM (transplan-tation-related mortality), longer remaining of autoreactive lymphocytes, and high rate of opportunistic infections. As a conclusion of above written, autologus and allogenetic HSCT can't be considered as best stem cell therapy (Bert-sias et al., 2012).In recent days, MSCT is new, hopeful stem cell thera-py for SLE. Mesenchymal stem cells are multipotent, non-hematopoietic cells that are being considered as a promis-ing new treatment for tissue regeneration. It has demon-strated that mesenchymal stem cells can differentiate into bone and cartilage, and have immunomodulatory effects on T-cells and B-cells. They also can't be detected by the im-mune system because they lack co-stimulatory molecules.Combination of anti-proliferative and immunomod-ulatory characteristics of MSCs and their immunological privilege will make a new approach in treatment of variety of autoimmune inflammatory diseases. By today, MSCs are used in cases with multiple sclerosis, neuromyelitis op-tica, chronic and acute GVHD.S6 PP 268562Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 561 - 562 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsCombinations of MSC deficiency and SLE began with making some experiments. Transplantation of allogeneic HSCs with bones to get MSCs is a path for prevention of the recurrence of autoimmune diseases in MRL/lpr mice, a murine model of lupus, in cases of easy relapse if HSCs are infused alone. Also, a positive response is found in trans-plantation with allogeneic HSCs and MSCs namely it in-creased survival level of MRL/lpr mice, but also with bone marrow transplantation (Ishida et al., 1994).The named above results stress deficiency in lupus MSC populations and gave a strong impact for greater use of MSCT in lupus treatment, it is hard to see abnormality is from genetic or acquired factors is alike. This problem is very important in HSCT also, because it will determine the best and appropriate source for MSCT, or it would be au-tologous or allogeneic.The first study of MSC infusions in humans is the one from 1995, which demonstrates the appropriance of ex vivo expansion and subsequent infusion of autologous MSCs in 15 patient volunteers. From that point, MSCT was consid-ered as a great tool in the usage of engraftment, manage-ment graft failure, prevention or treatment of GVHD after HSCT, and treatment of several other autoimmune diseas-es (Liang et al., 2010).The most important result of human MSC therapy is arising from clinical trials which have an aim of severe and refractory SLE patient, even with mechanisms with which MSCs conduct their functions of immune modulation and are still not completely understood, but will involve vari-ety of paths. Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital (ADTH) of Nanjing University Medical School is the very first sec-tion involved in in MSCT for treatment of autoimmune disease. More than 300 patients with active and persistent SLE, refractory to standard treatment, was under treatment with allogeneic MSCT. The treatment was due from March 2007 through December 2013. Four patients had a great improvement in creatinine levels in serum. Anti-dsDNA titers decreased after 1 month post-MSCT in all cases. All patients could lower the doses of steroids and CTX, and also there were two cases where patients weren't taking CTX anymore after 6 months re-sults. There was no GVHD and TRM after allogenetic MSCT (Liang et al., 2010). Results clearly show that MSCs have large therapeu-tic potential but also have many problems that have to be solved for making way for MSCT to treatment of lupus. One of the problems is getting standard cell production without considering heterogeneity, potential, influence of expansion media on the phenotype, and suitability of the source. Some factors possible change capability of expan-sion, potency and phenotype, like age of donor and condi-tion of growth, for even the surface makers of MSCs (Li-ang and Sun, 2015). Lupus is a mesenchymal stem cell disease, not only hematopoietic, in light of defects in HSCs and also MSCs in SLE patients. At recent days risks of GVHD are limited in great range for the clinical use of allogenetic. Howev-er, allogenetic MSCT will be better and more attractive to use then the allogenetic HSCT in treatment of lupus, with preliminary results in efficacy and safety. This will make a new platform in treatment of SLE patients with refractory and severe disease (Liang and Sun, 2015).ConclusionThe number of patients with SLE in our country is higher to date and unfortunately in Macedonia, doctors use conventional therapy in treatment of SLE. That arise a need for implementation of the latest method in treatment of SLE with aim to improve the quality of life. Also, the number of hospital days will be lower, as well as the need of cure in countries abroad, and costs for medicines. The most important result will be improved quality of patinets` life, where people will have longer life and lower rate of mortality. For that cause, we should promote implementing conditions where this treatment will be in use, with simpli-fying and making life better for SLE patinets. ReferencesBertsias, G., Cervera, R., Boumpas, T.D., 2012. Systemic lupus erythematosus: pathogenesis and clinical features. EULAR textbook on rheumatic diseases, Geneva, Switzerland: European League Against Rheumatism, pp.476-505.Ishida, T., Inaba, M., Hisha, H., Sugiura, K., Adachi, Y., Nagata, N., Ogawa, R., Good, R.A., Ikehara, S., 1994. Requirement of donor-derived stromal cells in the bone marrow for successful allogeneic bone marrow transplantation. Complete prevention of recurrence of autoimmune diseases in MRL/MP-Ipr/Ipr mice by transplantation of bone marrow plus bones (stromal cells) from the same donor. J. Immunol. 152(6), 3119-3127. Kushida, T., Inaba, M., Hisha, H., Ichioka, N., Esumi, T., Ogawa, R., Iida, H., Ikehara, S., 2001. Crucial Role of Donor-Derived Stromal Cells in Successful Treatment for Intractable Autoimmune Diseases in MRL/lpr Mice by BMT Via Portal Vein. Stem Cells 19(3), 226-235.Liang, J., Sun, L., 2015. Mesenchymal stem cells transplantation for systemic lupus erythematosus. Int. J. Rheum. Dis. 18 (4), 164-171.Liang, J., Zhang, H., Hua, B., Wang, H., Lu, L., Shi, S., Hou, Y., Zeng, X., Gilkeson, G.S., Sun, L., 2010. Allogenic mesenchymal stem cells transplantation in refractory systemic lupus erythematosus: a pilot clinical study. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 69(8), 1423-1429.Tyndall, A., Houssiau, F.A., 2010. Mesenchymal stem cells in the treatment of autoimmune diseases. Ann. Rheum. Dis. 69(8), 1413-1414.Urowitz, M.B., Gladman, D.D., 2000. How to improve morbidity and mortality in systemic lupus erythematosus. Rheumatology 39(3), 238-244.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 563 - 564 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.277Short communicationMay bile acids be utilized to enrich oncological armamentarium?Bojan Stanimirov, Nebojsa Pavlovic*, Karmen Stankov, Maja Danic, Vesna Kojic, Svetlana Golocorbin-Kon, Momir MikovFaculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Republic of Serbia* nebojsa.pavlovic@mf.uns.ac.rsIntroductionBile acids, a main product of cholesterol catabolism, have traditionally been considered as intestinal emulsifiers of lipophilic xenobiotics. Due to an amphiphathic structure, bile acids have been recognized to facilitate a transport of various substances across biological membranes, influencing their physiological and pharmacological activity (Stojancevic et al., 2013). During the past fifteen years bile acids were endowed with a hormone function since these steroid molecule species regulate numerous metabolic processes, determine metabolism and cell fate not only in enterohepatic tissues, but also on a systemic level (Stanimirov et al., 2015). In addition, bile acids and bile acid-activated receptors play a profound role in the process of carcinogenesis; however, this function has not been clearly elucidated jet. All of these peculiar functions are mediated by the interaction of bile acids with several proteins including nuclear and G-protein-coupled receptors as well as cell kinase pathways (Stanimirov et al., 2012). This raises the complexity of bile acid functions on a novel level, emphasizing their role not only as a passive carrier that promotes transport of pharmacological agents across biological membranes, but also as the agents with potential pharmacodynamic function. Doxorubicin is one of the most potent and most commonly used antineoplastic agents for the treatment of both solid and hematological malignancies. Doxorubicin induces the programmed cell death in malignant cell through several pathways, including the DNA strand breaks by topoisomerase 2a inhibition, DNA alkylation, oxidative stress and oxidative damage of nucleic acids, proteins and lipid membranes, ATP depletion etc. However, cumulative, dose-dependent toxicity of this agent may result in hepatotoxic and cardiotoxic events which cast shadow on the quality of life of oncological survivors. Therefore, the enhancement of doxorubicin function along with reducing dose-dependent undesirable effects is one of the main challenges in developing novel doxorubicin formulations. The aim of this study was to determine an effect of secondary bile acid, ursodeoxycholic acid, on the cytotoxic activity and proapoptotic potential of doxorubicin in vitro, in a model of human breast adenocarcinoma.Materials and methodsHuman breast adenocarcinoma MCF-7 cells were treated with increasing concentrations of doxorubicin and ursodeoxycholic acid, and the cytotoxic activity was assessed using colorimetric MTT test. Cells were also simultaneously treated with selected concentration of doxorubicin and the concentration of ursodeoxycholic acid within the range of physiological level. The quantitative analysis of expression of genes involved in apoptosis, Bax and Bcl-2, was assessed using real-time quantitative PCR method. Gene expression was calculated using DDCt method for relative quantification and normalized to b-actin as a housekeeping gene. The statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance with SPSS statistical software and if the p <= 0.05the results were considered as significant.Results and discussionBoth doxorubicin and ursodeoxycholic acid expressed dose-dependent cytotoxic activity with half inhibitory S6 PP 269564Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 563 - 564 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsconcentration (IC50) values of 0.64 mM and 320.5 mM, respectively. When the cells were co-treated with 0.25 mM of doxorubicin and non toxic concentration of ursodeoxycholic acid, the cytotoxicity increased up to 39.6% (p <= 0.05), compared to doxorubicin alone which inhibited 33% of cell growth.