When p<0.05, the correlation was statistically significant, while when p<0.1, the correlation was considered marginally sig-nificant. Results and discussionIn total, 200 patients were included in this study, 160 of them were diagnosed with heart failure. 117 (58.5%) of them answered the questionnaire during their stay in the hospital, while for the other 83 (41.5 %) patients, we ob-tained their data from their clinical files. From 200 patients included in this study, females represented 52.5% and males represented 47.5%. Meanwhile, among patients di-agnosed with heart failure, females and males represented equally 50%. This ratio is in accordance with other stud-ies in the world, where the prevalence of heart failure in fe-males and males is similar. This can be explained with the fact that females live longer than males, even though males have higher incidence than females (Mehta and Cowie, 2006). The mean age of 200 patients was 66.9, while the mean age of patients diagnosed with heart failure was 70.1. 81% patients lived in the city and 19% lived in the village. From 117 patients that were asked about their level of edu-cation, 31.6% patients answered that they had finished pre-elementary school or less, 23.1% patients had finished ele-mentary school, 35% had finished high school and 10.3% had been graduated. Furthermore, 53.8% of the patients in-terviewed indicated their income as low, 45.3% as average and 0.9% as high. Another question that was asked to patients was if they performed any physical activity; in regards to this ques-tion, 41.9 % answered Yes and 58.1 % answered No. To the question if they kept a healthy diet, 44% answered Yes and 56% answered No. Also, patients were asked if they smoke and the responses were as below: 7.7% were active users, 36% used to smoke in the past, but they no longer did and 56.3% had never smoked. With regards to the use of alco-hol, 72.6% of the patients answered that they never used S1 PP 3994Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 93 - 94 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsit, 23.9% answered that they used it rarely and 3.4% an-swered that they used it frequently. From the Chi-squared test was found a strong corre-lation between age and heart failure (p=0.001). Heart fail-ure becomes more common with increasing age. This re-sult is consistent with studies in North America and Eu-rope, where few patients with heart failure are 50 years of age or under and more than 80% are 65 years of age or over (Bui et al, 2011) Another strong correlation was also found between physical activity and heart failure (p=0.001). Pa-tients that did physical activity had lower risk to develop heart failure than patients who did not. This correlation has also been found from other studies in the world. Further-more, physical activity is one of the elements where there can be intervention to prevent heart failure (Young et al., 2014)Our study didn't find any correlation between income level, smoke, place where patients lived and heart failure (p-values, respectively: 0.262, 0.563 and 0.787). On the other hand, there was a correlation between the level of ed-ucation and heart failure (p=0.041). Lastly, the results of this study indicated a marginally significant correlation be-tween healthy diet, alcohol use and heart failure (p-values, respectively: 0.084 and 0.068). ConclusionBased on our findings, it can be concluded that phys-ical activity and healthy diet should be part of patient's lives, because they have an important role in preventing heart failure. Health professionals should be the ones to promote a healthy lifestyle, which has a direct impact on the development of heart failure and the disease recidivism. ReferencesBui, A.L., Horwich, T.B., Fonarow, G.C., 2011. Epidemiology and risk profile of heart failure. Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 8, 30-41.Heidenreich, P.A., Trogdon, J.G., Khavjou, O.A., Butler, J., Dracup, K., Ezekowitz, M.D., Finkelstein, E.A., Hong, Y., Johnston, S.C., Khera, A., Lloyd-Jones, D.M., Nelson, S.A., Nichol, G., Orenstein, D., Wilson, P.W., Woo, Y.J. 2011. American Heart Association Advocacy Coordinating Committee. Forecasting the future of cardiovascular disease in the United States: a policy statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation 123(8), 935.McMurray, J.J., Adamopoulos, S., Anker, S.D., Auricchio, A., Bohm, M., Dickstein, K., Falk, V., Filippatos, G., Fonseca, C., Gomez-Sanchez, M.A., Jaarsma, T., Kober, L., Lip, G.Y., Maggioni, A.P., Parkhomenko, A., Pieske, B.M., Popescu, B.A., Ronnevik, P.K., Rutten, F.H., Schwitter, J., Seferovic, P., Stepinska, J., Trindade, P.T., Voors, A.A., Zannad, F., Zeiher, A., 2012. ESC Committee for Practice Guidelines, 2012. ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure 2012: The Task Force for the Diagnosis and Treatment of Acute and Chronic Heart Failure 2012 of the European Society of Cardiology. Developed in collaboration with the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC. Eur. Heart J. 33, 1792.Mehta, P.A., Cowie, M.R., 2006. Gender and heart failure: a population perspective. Heart 92 (Supp 3), iii14-iii18.Young, D.R., Reynolds, K., Sidell, M., Brar, S., Ghai, N.R., Sternfeld, B., Jacobsen, S.J., Slezak, J.M., Caan, B., Quinn, V.P., 2014. Effects of Physical Activity and Sedentary Time on the Risk of Heart Failure. Circ. Heart Fail. 7, 21-27. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 95 - 96 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 628.4.045/.046:615]:502.13(100) 628.4.045/.046:615]:502.13(497.11)Short communicationThe approach to the pharmaceutical waste management in the world and in SerbiaSvetlana Golocorbin-Kon1*, Mladena Lalic-Popovic1, Nebojsa Pavlovic1, Maja Danic2, Jelena Cvejic1, Velibor Ilic3, Momir Mikov21Medical Faculty, Department of Pharmacy, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia2Medical Faculty, Department of Pharmacology, toxicology and clinical pharmacology, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia3Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia* magistrakon@orcon.net.nzWaste represents an enormous loss of resources in the form of both materials and energy. The amount of waste produced can be seen as an indicator of how efficient we are as a society, particularly in relation to our use of nat-ural resources and waste treatment operations. Historical-ly, waste management systems were introduced to protect public health. In the 1970s and 1980s, waste management systems focused on controlling outlets to air, water and groundwa-ter. In recent years, the focus has been increasingly on uti-lizing waste as a resource. Even though several measures have been introduced to reduce waste quantity, waste vol-umes still increase. Environmental pollution by pharma-ceutical waste can become a hazardous waste if it is not disposed of in accordance with law and if you are irrespon-sible and out of control delayed and thrown in the trash container, poured into drains or buried in the ground. Haz-ardous waste at its origin, composition or concentration of hazardous substances can cause harm to the environment and human health. Considerable concern has been raised regarding potential effects on human health due to pres-ence of pharmaceuticals from environmental to drinking water. Thus, drugs and their degradation products can pol-lute underground waters or enter the food chain. Some studies show that several common drugs were present in the final effluent in concentrations high enough to poten-tially affect ecosystems (UK Water Industry Research, 2014). Expired household drugs often end up in waste-waters or in municipal wastes. In accordance with the EU regulations, throwing away unused drugs has been forbid-den since 1994 (European Union: European Council Di-rective 94/67/EC, 1994). Yet, it was established that a third of all sold drugs in Germany, as well as around 25% of those sold in Austria is disposed of with other household waste or ends up in wastewaters (Greiner and Ronnefarhrt, 2003). A survey showed that 17.7% of respondents dispose of the expired and surplus drugs by flushing them down the toilet. More than half the respondents of the USA-made study threw drugs into wastewater, while only 23% of the respondents had returned drugs to the pharmacist (Bound and Voulvoulis, 2005).Research conducted in other countries has shown that unused drugs are mostly stored in households and that they are most often thrown into municipal waste or spilled into wastewater. All of the previously mentioned facts are im-portant from the aspects of estimate of ways in which drugs get into the environment. Due to the continuous release of active substances, their bioactive metabolites accumulate in the ground and sediments and have an unfavorable im-pact on natural ecosystem (Tong et al., 2011).In Serbia, particularly in Novi Sad, most of expired drugs citizens have returned to the special containers placed within the pharmacies of Public Pharmacy Institu-tion of Novi Sad, Autonomous Province of Vojvodina.At the Public Pharmacy Institution of Novi Sad, was established Pharmacy Waste transfer station in 2011. There were collected and classified drugs from 34 pharmacies that people dispose in containers placed in pharmacies. It can be seen that the percentage of deferred and unused medications is large. Boxes and blisters that make phar-maceutical waste, indicating that some of the prescribed S1 PP 4096Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 95 - 96 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsdrugs, because most of the drugs are from the list of pre-scription, half- used and unopened. It would be a huge harm that drugs were not used and did not contribute to im-proving therapeutic outcomes, were not collected as phar-maceutical waste, and accidentally found exposed to the influence of atmospheric factors and reaches the soil or wa-ter, which is an immense and immeasurable danger to the environment and for human health.In addition to the organized collection and classifica-tion, pharmacists at Public Pharmacy Institution of Novi Sad organized and proper storage of pharmaceutical waste for transport and destruction are is done by registered com-panies. This waste with appropriate documentation is ex-ported and destroyed in the neighboring countries that have organized incinerators such as Hungary and Poland.IPA grants supported transport and destruction of ex-pired drugs stored in Pharmacy Waste transfer station 2011 to 2013. From 2013, more than 5 tones of expired drugs are stored in Pharmacy Waste transfer station and still waiting to be destroyed.The Law on pharmaceutical waste in Serbia has not regulated who is responsible for payment of transport and destruction of pharmaceutical waste. Most of stored drugs in Pharmacy Waste transfer station in Public Pharmacy In-stitution of Novi Sad are drugs for cardiovascular diseases (angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors, diuretics, beta-blockers, calcium channel Blockers), antipsychotics, anal-gesics (diclofenak), antibiotics, drug for diabetes (metfor-min, sulfonylureas, insulins), sleeping pills (barbiturates) and some antineoplastics.The action performed by pharmacists within Public Pharmacy Institution of Novi Sad contributed to the dis-posal of a part of pharmaceutical waste arising in the ter-ritory of Novi Sad and its surroundings, but it is not suffi-cient, since remained uncovered other possible " produc-ers " of pharmaceutical waste such as hospitals, outpatients department, within the dental, medical centers, institutes, private pharmacies, veterinary clinics and others. It is nec-essary a large-scale action that will lead to the organized collection of pharmaceutical waste from all sorts of "pro-ducers" and then the waste must be classified and kept un-til destruction.ReferencesBound, J.P., Voulvoulis, N., 2005. Household disposal of pharmaceuticals as a patway for aquatic contamination in the United Kingdom. Environ. Health Perspect. 113, 1705-1711. Greiner, P. and Ronnefarhrt, I., 2003. Management of environmental risks in the life cycle of pharmaceuticals. In 2003, European conference Lyon, France. European Union, 1994. European Council Directive 94/67/EC: ec.europa.eu/environment/waste/packaging/index_en.htm Tong, Y.C.A., Peake, B.M., Rhiannon, B., 2010. Disposal practices for unused medications around the World. Environ. Int. 37(1), 292-298.UK Water Industry Research, 2014. Available on: http://www.water.org.ukOral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 97 - 98 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.379-008.64-085.252.349.7-052-047.22(469)Short communicationType 2 diabetes risk assessment in patients of a Portuguese community pharmacyEsperanca Maria Simoes da Silva1, Maria Margarida Duarte Caramona2*1Communnity pharmacy, Farmacia Rocha, Rua do Brasil,70, 3030-775 Coimbra, Portugal2Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Care Goup, Faculty of Pharmacy, Institute for Biomedical Imaging and Life Sciences (IBILI), University of Coimbra, Polo das Ciencias da Saude, Azinhaga de Santa Comba, 3000-548 Coimbra, Portugal* caramona@ci.uc.ptIntroductionMore than 1 million Portuguese have diabetes and of these, about half don't know to have the disease, which progresses silently until appear the first complications. Given the extent of this problem there is the need to find integrated approaches across society in an effort to prevent and identify individuals at risk.There is a significant opportunity for a coordinated and synergistic action between pharmacies and primary care regarding the promotion of primary and secondary preven-tion of diabetes.AimThis study aim was to assess the risk of diabetes type 2 in the patients of the community pharmacy and subsequent personalized assistance, in particular the recommendation for the medical consultation of patients with high and very high risk of type 2 diabetes. Has also aimed sensitize the population to the problem of diabetes, inform and educate about the risk factors and promote ways to control them.Materials and methodsFor two weeks between, 14 to 28 November 2015 the pharmacy assessed the risk of type 2 diabetes of its pa-tients. Promoting information and education about the dis-ease, informed about the risk factors and strategies to con-trol, advising also individually each patient to adopt the most appropriate measures, maintaining healthy lifestyles. Prompting the patient for the necessary monitoring, includ-ing medical, in situations where there was a greater risk of diabetes.Thus, all patients over 18 years old, who visited the pharmacy were invited to participate in the study.It was made a qualitative interview to all patients in-cluded in the study, and all data was collected in order to follow the design observational study.Patients diagnosed with diabetes or taking medications for diabetes and pregnant women were excludedWe applied the questionnaire "Evaluation Sheet Dia-betes Risk Type 2" of the Portuguese national program for diabetes, (adapted from the WHO International Diabetes Program, with the international score purpose, DGS 2008) to determine the risk of getting type 2 diabetes within 10 years.Questionnaire variables were: gender, age, weight and height, waist circumference, anti-hypertensives in taking, family history of diabetes, habits and lifestyles and history of high blood glucose levels.The questionnaire consists of 8 Likert questions, al-lowing immediate calculation of the score based on the responses. Since the scale determines the risk of having type 2 diabetes within 10 years. A score less than 7 points, was considered very low risk, the patient was only warned to keep styles and healthy life. A score between 7 and 11 points, was considered low risk, although the risk is slight the patient was warned to continue maintaining healthy lifestyles. A score between 12 and 14 points, was consid-ered moderate risk, the patient should adopt healthy life-styles and review their risk factors. A score between 15 and 20 points, was considered high risk, the patient should in the next doctor's appointment tell the doctor about his risk S1 PP 4198Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 97 - 98 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsof diabetes. Finally a score higher than 20 points, was con-sidered very high risk, the patient was informed that he must consult his doctor and inform it about his risk of di-abetes.In light of this evaluation, each of the assessed pa-tients had specific information about his individual risk and about the needs and behaviors that should adopt regard-ing the prevention of diabetes.