Green "cage" nanocarriersWill be presented a few examples of "cage" nanopar-ticles composed of cyclodextrins (CDs) (Gref et al., 2006) or made of highly porous Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) (Horcajada et al., 2010). "Cage"nanoparticles were produced by solvent-free green procedures such as microwave assisted hydrothermal synthesis. The nanopar-ticles were fully characterized to determine their chemi-cal composition, morphology, size distribution and specif-ic surface. Drug substances were encapsulated in the "cages" of these nanoparticles, thus ensuring optimal interactions with the matrices, leading to high loadings and controlled release properties. Antibiotics, anticancer and antiviral drugs were load-ed simply by soaking the nanoparticles in aqueous solu-tions of the drugs, reaching in most cases efficiencies close to 100%. Remarkably, drugs with different physico-chem-ical properties could be co-encapsulated in different inter-connected cages inside the porous nanoparticles. Further-more, to achieve stable, versatile coatings on highly porous MOF nanoparticles without altering their ability to entrap molecules of interest, the outer surface of the nanoparticles was functionalized with CDs in a biofriendly, non-cova-lent manner (Agostoni et al. 2015). Versatile coatings were obtained in aqueous media, within a few minutes. Ligands could be coupled to the shell, to ensure specific interaction with cancer cells.The coatings were remarkably stable in cell culture media, despite their non-covalent nature. ConclusionDrug loaded, surface modified "cage" nanoparticles were prepared using only biofriendly solvent free proce-dures. Each step of the fabrication procedure (systhesis, drug encapsulation, coating) was performed in aqueous medium, at room temperature, without the need of cou-pling reagents nor protective surfactants. References Gref, R., Amiel, C., Molinard, K., Daoud-Mahammed, S., Sebille, B., Gillet, B., Beloeil, J.C., Ringard, C., Rosilio, V., Poupaert, J., Couvreur, P.., 2006. New self-assembled nanogels based on host-guest interactions: Characterization and drug loading. J. Control. Rel. 111(3), 316-324. Horcajada, P.,Chalati, T., Serre, C., Gillet,B., Sebrie, C., Baati, T., Eubank, J.F., Heurtaux, D., Clayette, P., Kreuz, C., Chang, J., Hwang, Y.K., Marsaud, V., Bories, P., Cynober, L., Gil, S., Ferey, G.,Couvreur, P., Gref, R., 2010. Porous metal organic-framework nanoscale carriers as a potential platform for drug delivery and imaging. Nat. Mater. 9, 172-178.Agostoni, V., Horcajada, P., Noiray, M., Malanga, M., Aykac, A., Jicsinszky, L., Vargas-Berenguel, A., Semiramoth, N., Daoud-Mahammed, S., V. Nicolas, V., Martineau, C., Taulelle, F., Vigneron, J., Etcheberry, A.,Serre, C., Gref, R., 2015. A green strategy to construct non-covalent, stable and bioactive coatings on MOF nanoparticles. Scientific Reports 5, DOI:10.1038/srep07925.PL 418Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 17 - 18 (2016)Ruxandra GrefMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 19 - 20 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 61-027.12(569.4)Short communicationData-driven innovation in health policyRan BalicerClalit Research Institute, Tel-Aviv &Public Health Department, Faculty of Health SciencesBen-Gurion University of the Negev, P.O.B. 653 Beer-Sheva 84105, IsraelWe live in an era of ensuing prevalence rates of non-communicable disease, which pose an increasing risk to the financial sustainability of health systems worldwide. It has been suggested that a paradigm shift is required if we are to properly deal with these challenges, transforming our healthcare system to one which can bridge the silos of care provision in a patient-centered approach, move from reactive therapeutic to proactive preventive care, and aban-don our paternalistic narrative to a participatory and engag-ing patient-physician relationship.It has been realized in recent years that a key driving force and a pre-requisite for these changes is the availabil-ity and intelligent integrated use of data and information technology. Israel has benchmarked high in global NCD mortality and complications measures. Over the last two decades. These clinical improvements were supported by wide early adoption of Electronic Health Records through-out the country, all tiers of community care. Clalit is Israel's largest healthcare organization which serves as insurer/payer and integrated care provider for over half of the Israeli population - over 4.3 million peo-ple. Clalit has been leading innovative interventions using clinical data to drive people-centered targeted and effective care models, for NCD prevention and control. In its strate-gic plans, Clalit aims to perform a paradigm shift to prop-erly deal with these challenges, transforming the health-care system to one which can bridge the silos of care pro-vision in a patient-centered approach, move from reactive therapeutic to proactive preventive care, and abandon our paternalistic narrative to a participatory and engaging pa-tient-physician relationship (Balicer et al., 2015; Leventer-Roberts et al., 2015; Feldman et al., 2014; Shadmi et al., 2015).We at Clalit believe that a key driving force and a pre-requisite for these changes is the availability and intelligent integrated use of EHR-based clinical data, and have been practicing innovative utilization of this data for quite a few years with successful measurable outcomes. Many of the unique innovative interventions introduced by Clalit are data-driven, made possible by real-time data provided to physicians and nurses, in an actionable, decision-support-ing format. Clalit has 100% (single software) Electronic Health Records coverage of ambulatory and hospital care, with an aggregated data warehouse that received feeds from both, on our 4.3 million members, for well over 1.5 decades. This data included detailed and full demographic (i.e. place of birth of person and parents), diagnoses (both EMRs and Claims), measures (i.e. as BMI, blood pres-sure), full laboratory test data, imaging data, patient report-ed such as smoking status and willingness to quit smoking, cost (pricelist and real-life monthly cost per patient), both prescription and dispensing medication data, and admin-istrative health services consumption data. These data are augmented in Clalit by the largest ongoing patient experi-ences survey performed in Israel, ongoing all year long to a very large patient sample, and an increasing amount of data becoming available through Clalit's patient portal and Per-sonal Health Record (PHR). Quality of care, patient expe-riences and financial benchmarks are all part of an online balanced scorecard system available to all managers at all levels of the organization. To turn this abundance of data into actionable insights, Clalit launched in 2010 its Research Institute, which now holds over 30 professionals of multidisciplinary qualifica-tions - top notch clinicians, epidemiologists, biostatisti-cians, IT experts, algorithm specialists and public health experts. The institute associates gained invaluable expe-rience in mining and interpreting the organizational data-base, and creating tools introduced into policy and medi-cal practice. These tools allowed for implementing innova-tive clinical interventions to tackle key health issues such as reducing healthcare disparities, preventing avoidable re-admissions, tackling inadequate treatment adherence, as-sessing the impact of multi-morbidity, improving control PL 520Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 19 - 20 (2016)Ran Balicerof key chronic diseases, performing comparative effective-ness real-life studies and using predictive modeling and ad-vanced analytics to allow targeted care in high risk groups. The institute is augmented by its affiliates - leading clini-cians from Clalit's 8 districts and 14 public hospitals that initiate and perform advanced studies with the support of the institute. The Clalit Research Institute has focused in creating data-driven tools for enabling, supporting and assessing innovative clinical interventions to tackle key health and healthcare issues. These include including measuring and tackling inadequate treatment adherence, assessing and tackling the impact of NCDs and multi-morbidity, using predictive modeling and advanced analytics in the point of practice to allow targeted care in high risk groups, and comparative effectiveness real-life studies.In the presentation at this conference we will review the driving forces and the need for such disruptive inno-vations, and detail specific examples that allowed for re-ducing healthcare disparities, preventing avoidable read-missions, and improving control of key chronic diseases. Key conclusion can be drawn from of these case studies to be presented - that integrated data systems allow a wide potential for implementing innovations in care integration. Integrated data allows for innovative patient selection ap-proach, in-depth program planning, real-time implementa-tion support IT tools and real-time monitoring of interven-tion outcomes thus allowing multi-level effective interven-tion management. ReferencesBalicer, R.D., Hoshen, M., Cohen-Stavi, C., Shohat-Spitzer, S., Kay, C., Bitterman, H., Lieberman, N., Jacobson, O., Shadmi, E., 2015. Sustained Reduction in Health Disparities Achieved through Targeted Quality Improvement: One-Year Follow-up on a Three-Year Intervention. Health Serv. Res. 50(6), 1891-1909. Leventer-Roberts, M., Feldman, B.S., Brufman, I., Cohen-Stavi, C.J., Hoshen, M., Balicer, R.D., 2015. Effectiveness of 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine against invasive disease and hospital-treated pneumonia among people aged >=65 years: a retrospective case-control study. Clin Infect Dis. 60(10), 1472-1480.Shadmi, E., Flaks-Manov, N., Hoshen, M., Goldman, O., Bitterman, H., Balicer, R.D., 2015. Predicting 30-day readmissions with preadmission electronic health record data. Med. Care 53(3), 283-289. Feldman, B.S., Cohen-Stavi, C.J., Leibowitz, M., Hoshen, M.B., Singer, S.R., Bitterman, H., Lieberman, N., Balicer, R.D., 2014. Defining the role of medication adherence in poor glycemic control among a general adult population with diabetes. PLoS One9(9), e108145. Macedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 21 - 23 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.12Short communicationClinical pharmacy - established paths and new opportunitiesDorothea RudorfMassachusetts College of Pharmacy/Health Sciences, 179 Longwood Ave., Boston MA 02115, USA* dorothea.rudorf@mcphs.eduClinical pharmacy - development and standardsOver the past 5 decades the role of a pharmacist has significantly changed, from traditionally dispensing med-ications, to performing clinical services or pharmaceuti-cal care (ACCP - American College of Clinical Pharma-cy, 2008). Although there is no international consensus on the definition of clinical pharmacy/pharmaceutical care, it is agreed that a clinical pharmacist, as a member of an in-terdisciplinary health care team in direct patient care en-vironments, contributes through comprehensive medica-tion management to optimal drug therapy (ACCP, 2008; Frankin and Van Mil, 2005; Van Mil and Fernandez-Lli-mos, 2013). The American College of Clinical Pharmacy has recently published specific requirements for clinical pharmacists practicing in the USA and around the world (ACCP, 2014).Clinical pharmacy - specialty services, certification, job satisfactionClinical Pharmacy services are performed in various health care settings (e.g. community, ambulatory, hospital) and may differ for patient populations (e.g. pediatric, geri-atric). Accordingly, clinical pharmacists may specialize to acquire the unique skills and expertise needed for specif-ic patient groups. Specialization can be in different forms, e.g. on the job training, gradually transitioning into the spe-cialty field, or via specific postgraduate training (Schom-mer et al., 2008). Clinical Pharmacy specialists practice in many different areas (e.g. cardiology, psychopharmacy, oncology) (CPP - Certification Programs for Pharmacists, 2012; Schommer et al., 2008). Advanced practice pharma-cists provide clinical services in primary care clinics ad-dressing common diseases (e.g. hypertension, hyperlipid-emia, COPD) and may have prescribing privileges under collaborative practice arrangements with physicians (Mu-rawski et al., 2011).To demonstrate specialized clinical knowledge beyond licensing standards increasingly more clinical pharmacists seek national, state or organization certification or creden-tialing, in specific disease state management (e.g. antico-agulation, diabetes, poison information specialist) (CPP, 2012; Schommer et al., 2008). Survey results indicate that most clinical pharmacy specialists are extremely satisfied with their job and con-sider direct patient care, interaction with others, autono-my, practicing in a unique environment and applying their knowledge as very attractive aspects of their job. Howev-er, long hours (average work time/week 50.6 h) and heavy workload are challenges, yet also welcomed as stimuli for professional growth and innovative services (Schommer et al., 2008).Clinical pharmacy practice - newer trends Recent trends are clinical pharmacist involvement in ID subspecialties (i.e. HIV care, Hepatitis C disease, An-tibiotic Stewardship programs) and in Transition of Care, and respective practice guidelines have been published (ASHP, 2010; Hume et al., 2012; Schafer et al., 2016; SIDP, 2010).Pharmacist in HIV and hepatitis C management Management of HIV disease/AIDS and Hepatitis C provide excellent clinical pharmacy opportunities as both diseases are affecting millions of people, are predominant-PL 622Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 21 - 23 (2016)Dorothea Rudorfly chronic illnesses with major morbidity, known challeng-es (e.g. poor medication adherence, numerous drug relat-ed concerns) and new considerations (i.e. HIV in the aging population or pre-exposure prophylaxis, recent treatment options for hepatitis C, coinfections, high costs) (Schafer et al., 2016; Spooner, 2011). Pharmacist involvement in HIV/Hep C testing, treatment selection and monitoring, man-agement and prevention of drug-related problems, compli-cations or opportunistic infections, and education will pro-vide effective disease state management and optimal pa-tient support.Antimicrobial stewardship Antimicrobial Stewardship (AS) is another opportuni-ty for clinical pharmacists (ASHP, 2010; Dellit et al., 2007; MacKenzie et al., 2007). Data show that unnecessary and inappropriate prescription of antibiotics exposes patients to serious adverse drug effects and superinfections (i.e. Clos-tridium difficile); antibiotic misuse is a critical factor in rising antibiotic resistance and poses a public health threat (CDC, 2013). Regarding improvement of antibiotic use and patient safety as a national priority (CDC, 2013a), and based on evidence that designated programs can optimize treatment of infections and reduce adverse effects (Dav-ey et al., 2013; Ohl and Luther, 2011) the CDC in 2014 recommended that all hospitals implement AS programs (CDC, 2014). Designated ID pharmacist leaders collabo-rate with ID specialists in infection prevention and con-trol by tracking/optimizing antibiotic prescribing and use, reporting outcomes, implementing policies (i.e. "antibiot-ic time out", IV to PO changes, dose adjustments) and ed-ucating clinicians. Transition of careMajor medication errors can occur when patients are transferring between different care locations or lev-els (e.g. admission to, transfer or discharge from hospi-tal) resulting in significant adverse drug events, increased length of stay, high readmission rates and costs (Hume et al., 2012). Official organizations (e.g. US Joint Commis-sion, ASHP/APhA) (ASHP-APhA, 2013; Joint Commis-sion, 2012) have established national patient safety goals requiring accurate patient information in hospitals to pre-vent readmission rates, and potential payment penalties by insurers (Kristeller, 2014). Transition of Care (TOC) phar-macists plays an instrumental role in facilitating the pro-cess of continuing/coordinating therapeutic care (ACCP, 2008; ASHP-APhA, 2013; Hume et al., 2012). Obtaining patient medication histories, performing medication recon-ciliation, inpatient education, patient discharge counseling and post-discharge follow-up are key activities of the TOC pharmacist. Clinical pharmacy practice - future trends It is envisioned that most future clinical pharmacists (and all clinical faculty) will have post-graduate training, will be board-certified specialists, and will be formally rec-ognized and reimbursed as health care providers who en-sure optimal drug therapy outcomes (Gubbins et al., 2014; Saseen et al. 2006).Pharmacy faculty and pharmacists will work in in-terdisciplinary patient-centered medical homes (PCMH), where an entire team delivers comprehensive and coordi-nated health care (Smith et al., 2010; Zellmer, 2012) Phar-macists will provide medication therapy management uti-lizing health information technology and will engage in: handling, administering and monitoring of complex spe-cialty drugs and of medications delivered in innovative dosage forms (e.g. nanoscale devices); digitally moni-toring drug levels; and personalized medicine (Guglie-mo, 2015).