The pulsatile drug de-livery system is intended to deliver a rapid drug release af-ter a predetermined lag time (Kalantzi et al., 2009). Sim-ple and inexpensive production methods, such as compres-sion-coating of tablets, might be effective for these formu-lations to gain widespread use. Compression-coated tablets are composed of an inner core (immediate release tablet) which is embedded in an outer coating shell containing ei-ther a hydrophilic, hydrophobic or a mixture of both poly-mers, that dissolves or disintegrates slowly to produce the lag time. The outer layer surrounds the inner core, there-fore selection of the outer layer materials has a significant impact on the performance of the tablet, including the me-chanical strength, drug release characteristics, and tablet stability (Lin and Kawashima, 2012).The possibility of formulating compression-coat-ed tablets of verapamil hydrochloride was examined us-ing polyethylene oxide (PEO) as polymer in the outer lay-er. The influence of different types and concentrations of polyethylene oxides (PEOs) on the drug release rate was investigated. Verapamil hydrochloride was selected as the model drug since the symptoms of hypertension are more prevalent during the early hours of the morning and devel-opment of chronotherapeutic formulation could be useful to fulfill the needs of drug delivery at the required time.Materials and MethodsMaterialsDifferent grades of polyethylene oxide polymers - Polyox(r) WSR 1105 (Mr ~ 0.9 x 106) and Polyox(r) WSR 301 (Mr ~ 7 x 106) were kindly provided by the manufac-turer (Dow Chemical Company, USA). Verapamil Hydro-chloride (Ph. Eur. 8.0), direct compression excipient based on coprocessed lactose and polyvinylpyrrolidone (Ludi-press(r), BASF AG, Germany), and anhydrous colloidal sil-icon dioxide (AEROSIL(r) 200 Pharma, EVONIK Indus-tries AG, Germany) were used for the tablets preparation.MethodsPreparation of tablet cores and compression-coated tabletsThe inner cores of the compression-coated tablets were prepared by direct compression on an eccentric tableting machine (Korsch EK-0, Germany) using 9 mm concave punches. Tableting blend consisted of verapamil hydro-chloride (30% w/w), anhydrous colloidal silicon dioxide (1% w/w) and Ludipress(r) as a diluent.Compression-coated tablets consisted of the core tab-let and the PEO polymer (Polyox(r) WSR 1105 or Polyox(r) WSR 301) as the outer coating agent. F 1 and F 2 batches were prepared using Polyox(r) WSR 1105 with core: poly-mer at the following ratios 1:1 and 1:2, respectively. Batch-S4 OP 161344Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 343 - 344 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationses P 1 and P 2 were prepared using Polyox(r) WSR 301 with core: polymer at the same ratios 1:1 and 1:2, respectively. Firstly, half of the amount of the polymer (outer layer) was placed in the die to make a powder bed. Then, the core tab-let was carefully placed in the centre of the die and the re-maining half of the polymer was filled into the die. The contents were then compressed using the eccentric tablet-ing machine (Korsch EK-0, Germany) to form a flat-faced tablet with a diameter of 12 mm.In vitro drug release studies The prepared core and compression coated tablets were subjected to in-vitro drug release studies in suitable dissolution media to assess their ability to provide the de-sired release. The in-vitro drug release study of the core tablets was performed in the rotating paddle apparatus (Er-weka DT600, Germany). The dissolution medium was 900 mL of phosphate buffer (pH=6.8) maintained at tempera-ture 37 +- 0.5 degC, and the rotating paddle speed was 50 rpm. The in-vitro drug release study of the compression coated tablets was performed in the reciprocating cylinder appara-tus (VanKel's Bio-Dis, USA). The dissolution medium was 250 mL of 0.1 N HCl for the first 2 h followed by 6.8 pH phosphate buffer for the remaining period. Temperature of the medium was maintained at 37 +- 0.5 degC, and the dpm rate was set at 10 dpm.In all experiments, an aliquot of 5 mL sample was withdrawn at the predetermined time intervals and re-placed with an equal volume of drug-free dissolution fluid in order to maintain the sink conditions. The samples were filtered and analyzed spectrophotometrically at 273 nm by using UV/VIS spectrophotometer Evolution 300 (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Cambridge, UK). The amounts released were expressed as a percentage of the drug content.Results and discussionThe prepared core tablets showed immediate release with more than 80% of the drug released in less than 15 minutes. With compressed-coated tablets, different re-lease patterns were obtained using either different polymer type or polymer concentration. It was observed that the lag time increased as the concentration of the PEO in the out-er coat increased. For instance, formulation F 1 had a lag time of 2 hrs before burst release. On the other hand, F 2 had lag time of 4 hrs. For batches P 1 and P 2, the results indicated that that the burst release of the drug occurred at 3 and 6 hrs, respectively. This also confirms that the lag time increased as the concentration of the PEO in the out-er coat increased, but this increase were different with dif-ferent types of polymers. An increased molecular weight leads to increase in polymer chain length and greater de-gree of chain entanglement, therefore stronger gel layers are formed in contact with water (Colorcon, 2009). Stron-ger gel layer with the greater viscosity decreases drug dif-fusion rate and water diffusion within the core tablet which consequently delays the drug release. Lower molecular weight PEOs form weaker gel layer, which is more sus-ceptible to erosion. There is no general rule for selection of the appropriate polymer concentration that should be op-timized taking into account the formulation composition, polymer molecular weight and drug solubility.ConclusionIn the present investigation, compression-coated tab-lets with Polyox(r) WSR 1105 and Polyox(r) WSR 301 in outer layer showed delayed-release, and drug release from formulated tablets showed the dependence on both poly-mer concentration and its molecular weight. Further op-timization of the Polyox(r) WSR 1105 and Polyox(r) WSR 301 coated tablets could produce the desired predeter-mined lag time.ReferencesColorcon, 2009. Formulation of Polyox(tm) ER Matrices for a Highly Soluble Active. Polyox(r) Water Soluble Resins. Application Data. www.colorcon.com Lin, S.Y., Kawashima, Y., 2012. Current status and approaches to developing press-coated chronodelivery drug systems. J. Control. Release 157, 331-353.Kalantzi, L.E., Karavas, E., Koutris, E.X., Bikiaris, D.N., 2009. Recent advances in oral pulsatile drug delivery, Recent Pat. Drug Deliv. Formul. 3, 49-63.Sajan, J., Cinu, T.A., Chacko, A.J., Litty, J., Jaseeda, T., 2009. Chronotherapeutics and chronotherapeutic drug delivery systems. Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 8(5), 467-475.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 345 - 346 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.015.4Short communicationThe role of cocrystallization screening for the assessment of structure-activity relationship in drug development Aleksandar Cvetkovski*, Bistra AngelovskaFaculty of Medical Sciences, University "GoceDelcev", Krste Misirkov 10-A, P.O 201, 2000 Stip, Republic of Macedonia* aleksandar.cvetkovski@ugd.edu.mkIntroductionThe selection of the crystalline phases in a form of mo-lecular co-crystals has become scientific challenge at the early stage of drug development of pharmaceutical formu-lations and in the late stage of synthesis and isolation of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) in desirable de-fined crystalline forms. Optimal crystal form of API inter-actively interrelates and impacts its aqueous solubility and dissolution rate that are benchmark for drug delivery and absorption determining the extent of its bioavailability and pharmacokinetics profile. Determining the crystal struc-ture and revealing the crystal packing forces and geometry of the API has impact its physicochemical properties. This approach is the criteria for assessment of the performance of the API. The range of crystal forms in which molecular co-crystals of APIs may exist is advantageous comparing to their polymorphs, salts, solvates and hydrates due to the vast number of potential co-formers which extend the lim-ited counterions for salt formation implying the existence of more complex intermolecular interactions based on dif-ferent H-bonding patterns with API that lead to conforma-tional changes and flexibility for crystal packing in process of co-crystallization.Co-crystallization became well known bottom-up ap-proach starting from intermolecular interactions among either selected neutral, ionic or zwitterionic molecules to design and control the properties of the multicomponent crystals (Braga, 2004). In the scope of interest for drug de-sign and formulation, Good et al. (2009) and Cheney et al. (2011) emphasized that the main advantage for designing pharmaceutical co-crystals (PCCs) is, through their mod-ulating properties, to improve the performance of the na-tive APIs such are: biopharmaceutical profile (solubili-ty and dissolution rate), thermodynamical stability (phase transition of polymorphs, solvate/ hydrate formation, de-composition) or bulk powder processability (flowability, compressibility, particle size and shape control). Childs et al. (2007) has pointed out the necessity co-crystals (CCs) semantically to be classify based on accomplishments in research of supramolecular chemistry. This approach en-lightens the complex reality of multi-component systems and the wide scope associated between salts and co-crys-tals, and their differences based on the location of the trans-ferred proton within the salt - co-crystal continuum. Biguanide drugs are well known and wide used oral antidiabetic drugs for oral therapy of diabetes type-2 that directly improve insulin action. Recent studies in the re-search work carried out by Vujic et al. (2015) has point-ed out that biguanides in combination with targeted in-hibitors in order to obtain synergy in reduction cell via-bility, inhibited tumor growth in the mutated neuroblasto-ma rat sarcoma oncogene (NRAS) protein from melano-ma cells. Hence, it is expected that combination of bigu-anides which affect activation of the AMP-activated pro-tein kinases (AMPK) and the regulation of energy metabo-lism with outcome to cell's energy sparing, in combination with other anti-cancer drug-models would influence direct blocking cell's signaling and hinder the resistance.Materials and methodsCo-crystallization screening reveals protocol was un-dertaken in order to grown single crystalline phases of PCCs composed of drug model metformin (MET), selected from biguanides class of drugs and coformers that belong to different pharmacotherapy and functional group class-es, respectively.Co-crystallization screening was carried out on apply-ing slow-rate solvent evaporation method for growing sin-S4 OP 162346Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 345 - 346 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsgle crystalline phases at room temperature with quality ab-solute structure to be determined. An equimolar quantity of MET and co-crystal partner was dissolved in the min-imum quantity of ethanol and left for slow evaporation at room temperature. Colorless crystals were observed after a few days. For four MET PCC models, the methods of prepara-tion reproducible batches were optimized. The quality of batches was controlled by Powder x-ray diffractometer comparing the obtained experimental diffractograms with the same one that was theoretically generated from the sin-gle crystal for each of four PCC models.Single-crystal diffraction data were collected on a Nonius Kappa diffractometer equipped with a CCD de-tector with graphite-monochromatized MoKa radiation (l = 0.71069 A). Intensities were corrected for Lorentz and polarization effects. The structures were solved by direct methods with the SIR97 suite of programs and refinement were performed on F2 by full-matrix least-squares meth-ods with all non-hydrogen atoms anisotropic.Flow-cytometry was applied for measuring viability of the two PCC models.Results and discussionVujic et al. (2015) has carried out research for both pro-cancer and anti-cancer effects of biguanides on cancer cells, indicating existence of association of the antidiabetic therapy and reduced risk of cancer in diabetic patients. Be-cause biguanide represents the p-conjugated system, MET can exist in three resonance-stabilized forms, i.e. as neutral molecule (MET), monoprotonated (MET+) or diprotonat-ed (MET2+) cation, with dissociation constants in water in range from pKa1  12.00 to pKa2  2.00.A search of the biguanide fragments in the structur-al literature, both in the CCDC (Cambridge Crystallogra-phy Database Center) database and in patents, shows that in crystals MET exists as monoprotonated (MET+) or de-protonated (MET2+) but never in its neutral form MET. We have undertaken a systematic study of the crystal chemistry of MET with the aim of understanding its prop-erties in the solid state and finding relationships with its biopharmaceutical profile. We have determined the struc-tures of the 29 MET PCCs. Four of this MET PCC mod-els are "drug-drug" type of co-crystals. The ligand used for co-crystallyzation was from the following classes: inor-ganic acids (nitric, phosphoric and carbonic acid); organic NH-type acids (saccharine and acesulfame); organic OH-type acids (squaric and picric acid); monocarboxylic ac-ids (fumaric, acetic, trifluoroacetic, trichloroacetic, dichlo-roacetic, monochloroacetic, glycolic, salicylic, diclofenac) and dicarboxylic acids (oxalic, malonic, maleic, fumaric, succinic, adipic acid). ConclusionIn the paper are presented structure analyses for "drug-drug" type of PCCs where both API and CF exhibit phar-macological effect. This approach of designing "drug-drug" type of PCC aligned to the strategy for drug repo-sitioning, the idea for use of a drug for treating diseases other than the drug-specified. This concept was prompt-ed in 2012 through the Discovering New Uses for Exist-ing Molecules program, initiated by US's National Insti-tute of Health (NIH).The case study underlines the crystal growth and the method of preparation for "drug-drug" type of PCCs wherein two different APIs cocrystallized in single crystal cell, and that represent new paradigm for approaching in development of "fixed-doses" or "combo" pharmaceutical formulations. Preliminary results of the Structure-Activi-ty Relationship study on the co-crystals composed of MET with dichloroacetic acid indicate dual and complementary anti-cancer activities of the two selected drug models for co-crystallization. ReferencesBraga, D., 2003. Crystal engineering, Where from? Where to? Chem. Comm. 17, 2751-2754.Cheney, M.L., Weyna, D.R., Shan, N., Hanna, M., Wojtas, L., Zaworotko, M.J., 2011. Coformerselection in pharmaceutical cocrystaldevelopment: a case study of a meloxicam aspirin cocrystalthat exhibits enhanced solubility and pharmacokinetics. J. Pharm. Sci. 100, 2172-2181.Childs, S.L., Stahly, G., Park, A., 2007. The salt-cocrystal continuum: the influence of crystal structure on ionization state. Mol. Pharm. 4, 323-338.Good, D.J.,Rodriguez-Hornedo, N., 2009. Solubility advantage of pharmaceutical cocrystals J. Cryst Growth Des. 9, 2252-2264.Vujic, I., Sanlorenzo, M., Posch, C., Esteve-Puig, R., Yen, A.J., Kwong, A., Tsumura, A., Murphy, R., Rappersberger, K., Ortiz-Urda, S., 2015. Metformin and trametinib have synergistic effects on cell viability and tumor growth in NRAS mutant cancer.