Almost the same results were obtained when the two developed methods were used in analysis of tablets con-taining Cyanocobalamin. The absolute difference between values for Cyanocobalamin assay obtained using the pro-posed UV-spectrophotometric and HPLC method was in-significant (far lower than 2%), which indicates that both can be used in quality control laboratories for Cyanocobal-amin determination.ConclusionThe two developed methods are suitable for routine analysis of the active compound Cyanocobalamin in di-etary supplements or pharmaceutical dosage forms, and can be used as an alternative to each other in quality con-trol laboratories in pharmaceutical/chemical industry.Both methods are simple, fast, cost-effective, sensi-tive, accurate, reproducible and rugged. We suggest use of the spectrophotometric method as a routine for industri-al application and analysis of Vitamin B12 in more simple matrixes. The chromatographic method is more selective and can be used either in routine analyses or in more com-plex analyses and can be further optimized for purpose of analysis of various multivitamin dosage forms.ReferencesBritish Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2012. British Pharmacopoeia 2013; Norwich: The Stationery Office, UK.Chen, P., Wolf, W.R., Castanheirab, I., Sanches-Silva, A., 2010. A LC/UV/Vis method for determination of Cyanocobalamin (VB12) in multivitamin dietary supplements with on-line sample clean-up. Anal. Methods 2, 1171-1175. Eitenmiller, R.R., Landen, W.O., Ye, J.L., 2007. Vitamin analysis for the health and food sciences, Second Edition, CRC Press.pp. 507-534.Food and Nutrition Board, National Research Council, 1981. Food Chemicals Codex, 3rd ed., National Academy Press, Washington DC. pp. 363.Hurst, W.J., 2002. Methods of analysis for functional foods and nutraceuticals, CRC Press. pp. 416-417.Institute of Medicine (US) Standing Committee, 1998. Dietary reference intakes for Thiamin, Riboflavin, Niacin, Vitamin B6, Folate, Vitamin B12, Pantothenic Acid, Biotin, and Choline, Institute of Medicine. National Academy Press, Washington, D.C. pp. 306-356.National Center for Biotechnology Information. PubChem Compound Database; CID=5311498, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/compound/5311498 (accessed on 28 February 2016).Perveen, S., Arfa Yasmina, A., Khanb, K.M., 2009. Quantitative simultaneous estimation of water soluble vitamins, Riboflavin, Pyridoxine, Cyanocobalamin and Folic Acid in neutraceutical products by HPLC. Open Anal. Chem. J. 3, 1-5.Radhika, K., Srinath, N., Sumanth, K.S., Neelima, S., Prasanna, V.K., 2012. Method development and validation for the simultaneous estimation of Nicotinic acid, Folic acid, and Cyanocobalamin using RP-HPLC. Int. J. Res. Ayurveda Pharm. 3(5), 701-705. Trang, H. K., 2013. Development of HPLC methods for the determination of water-soluble vitamins in pharmaceuticals and fortified food products. Clemson University, South Carolina, United states. All Theses. Paper 1745.The United States Pharmacopeia Convention. 2012. The United States Pharmacopeia and National Formulary (USP 36-NF 31); The United States Pharmacopeia Convention, Inc.: Rockville, MD, USA.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 207 - 208 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.015.4.074Short communicationAnalytical approach in development of a new drug product formulationAleksandra Petrovska*, Marija Veliia Veli, Veronika P. Jakimovska, Sonja UgarkovicInstitute for Research and Development, Alkaloid AD-Skopje, Blv. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* apetrovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionThe objective of this study was to develop a new drug product formulation with amino acid as active substance. The direct detection by ultraviolet absorbance of amino ac-ids is possible only at low wavelengths, where sensitivi-ty is poor and interference in background absorption is po-tentially high (Petritis et al., 1999). There are two report-ed spectrophotometric methods with UV detection at 210 nm of this active substance in pharmaceutical preparation (Onal and Sagirli, 2009). Several derivatization methods have been proposed, by using derivatizing reagents such as potassium iodide for spectrophotometric detection (Gu-jral et al., 2009), fluorescamine, 2,4-nitrofluorobenzen and 2,3,5,6-tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinon (Shaalan, 2010) for spectrofluorometric detection. The HPLC methods with precolumn (Vermeij and Edelbroek, 2004) and post col-umn derivatization of this active substance with o-phthal-dialdehyde (Douou et al., 2010) and derivatization with fluorescamine (Martinc et al., 2010) were also reported. All these methods with derivatization and fluorescence de-tection cannot be applied for determination of related and degradation products, because the main degradation prod-uct produced by cyclization between amino and carbox-ylic acid group has lactam ring in the structure, which is a strong chromophore group. The ultraviolet absorption method is suitable for its detection (Dee-Noor et al., 2009).To establish degradation pathways of the active sub-stance, its stability in a combination with excipients in fi-nal formulation mixture and detection of interactions be-tween the drug and excipients, all in order to develop the most stable drug product, forced degradation study was performed by applying different stress conditions (Baerts-chi et al., 2005).Materials and methodsTesting formulation I was consisted of amino acid as active substance and excipients in a ratio of 1:3 (% w/w), respectively, with filler 1, which was excipient without car-bonyl group in the chemical structure.Testing formulation II was consisted of the same filler 1, but active substance and excipients were in a ratio of 3:1 (% w/w), respectively. Testing formulation III was consisted of amino acid as active substance and excipients in a ratio of 1:3 (% w/w), respectively, but with filler 2, which is reducing sugar with carbonyl group in the chemical structure.The following forced degradation study was applied:a) Thermal degradation: the samples were kept in dry-ing oven at 80 degC for 20 days;b) Thermal/humidity degradation: the opened and cap-sulated samples sprayed in thin layer on Petri of 1:3 (% w/w),ept in pharmaceutical stability chamber at 40 degC and 75% RH for 90 days;c) Photo degradation: the samples were kept in photo stability chamber under maximum radiation of the xenon lamp (765Wh/m2) for 35 hours;d) Acid hydrolysis: the samples were treated with 0.5M hydrochloric acid at 50 degC for 2 hours; e) Base hydrolysis: the samples were treated with 0.5M sodium hydroxide at 50 degC for 2 hours;f) Oxidative degradation: the samples were treated with 1% (v/v) hydrogen peroxide at room temperature for 1 hour.All samples, control and treated, were analyzed by the in-house developed HPLC method for determination of re-lated and degradation products in the drug product.S2 PP 95208Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 207 - 208 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsResults and discussionConsidering all of the reported data for the Maillard reaction between carbonyl group from reducing sugar and amino group (Qiu et al., 2005) the main goal was to find the adequate filler in the development of the drug prod-uct formulation containing amino acid as active substance. The first differences caused by the type of excipient used as filler and the second differences caused by the content of excipients in the formulation, have been fully identified and understood. The active substance was unstable under elevated tem-perature, acid and base hydrolysis. No degradation of ex-cipients was found under all applied stress conditions. It has been observed different modes of degradation accord-ing to the type of formulation mixture. Under thermal deg-radation the main degradation product, lactam, was formed in the same amounts, regardless of the type of filler and the content of the excipients in the formulation. Further, in for-mulation III one unspecified impurity with RRT 2.37 was slightly increased, which is the product of the Maillard re-action between amino acid and reducing sugar used as fill-er 2. Under thermal and humidity degradation, many dif-ferences between the formulations were observed because the samples were treated in two different ways: as opened capsule masses sprayed in thin layer on Petri's dishes and as capsulated samples. Two degradation pathways, cycliza-tion to lactam and the interaction between amino and car-bonyl group were enhanced due to several factors for in-stance, the higher content of the excipients in terms of the active component, the hygroscopic characteristics of an an-other filler, filler 3, used in amount of 33% w/w and the capsule shell, especially in the formulation I and III.As was expected, the acid hydrolysis causes the reac-tion of cyclization of amino acid to lactam (Dee-Noor et al., 2009), where the most susceptible formulations in our study were formulation I and III. After the base hydrolysis, lactam was increased in greater, but in the same amounts in all samples. Besides lactam, formulation I and III with the higher content of the excipients were shown as much unstable, degraded to a few unspecified impurities, where total impurities of 10.56% and 12.01%, respectively, were obtained. The ef-fect of photo degradation was insignificant. Under oxida-tion, the content of the active substance in all samples was not decreased. All samples treated with mild oxidative con-ditions, 1% H2O2, room temperature for 1 hour, degrad-ed to several products with higher ultraviolet absorption than active substance, due to the new formed chromophore groups in the structure. ConclusionIn this study, it has been shown that the amino acid as active substance in the presence of reducing sugar used as filler in the drug product formulation undergoes a Maillard reaction over time, especially enhanced by increased tem-perature and humidity. In order to produce the most stable formulation during the manufacturing process and during the proposed shelf-life of the drug product, the proposed filler without carbonyl group in the chemical structure was proved as a suitable excipient, avoiding the drug-excipi-ent interaction, and further, lower content of excipients in terms of the active component in the drug product formu-lation, has been suggested.AcknowledgmentWe are grateful to Prof. Dr. Aneta Dimitrovska from Faculty of Pharmacy, Cyril and Methodius University, for valuable discussion and support of this research.ReferencesBaertschi, S.W., Lilly, E. and Company Indianapolis, Indiana, USA, 2005. Pharmaceutical Stress Testing: Predicting Drug Degradation, Taylor & Francis Group.Dee-Noor, Z., Hedvati, L., Pilarski, G., Raizi, Y., Singer, C., Tomer, S., 2009. Pregabalin free of lactam and a process for preparation thereof. Patent number US7488846 B2.Douen, M., Gibala, P., Lemr, K., 2010. Liquid chromatographic separation of pregabalin, and its possible impurities with fluorescence detection after post column derivatization with o-phthalaldehyde. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 53, 717-722.Gujral, R.S., Manirul Haque, S.K., Kumar, S., 2009. A novel method for the determination of pregabalin inbulk, pharmaceutical formulations and human urine samples. Afr. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 3 (6), 327-334.Martinc, B., Grabnar, I., Mrhar, A., Vovk, T., 2010. Rapid high-performance liquid chromatography method for determination of pregabalin in a pharmaceutical dosage form following derivatization with fluorescamine. J. AOAC. Int. 93(4), 1069-1076.Onal, A., Sagirli, O., 2009. Spectrophotometric and spectrofluorimetric methods for the determination of pregabalin in bulk and pharmaceutical preparation. Spectrochim. Acta. A. Mol. Biomol. Spectrosc. 72(1), 68-71. Qiu, Z., Stowell, J.G., Morris, K.R., Byrn, S.R., Pinal, R., 2005. Kinetic study of the Maillard reaction between metoclopramide hydrochloride and lactose. Int. J. Pharm. 303, 20-30.Petritis, K.N., Chaimbault, P., Elfakir, C., Dreux, M., 1999. Ion-pair reversed-phase liquid chromatography for determination of polar underivatized amino acids using perfluorinated carboxylic acids as ion pairing agent. J. Chromatogr. A 833, 147-155.Shaalan, R.A., 2010. Spectrofluorimetric and spectrophotometric determination of pregabalin in capsules and urine samples. Int. J. Biomed. Sci. 6(3), 260-267.Vermeij, T.A.C., Edelbroek, P.M., 2004. Simultaneous high-performance liquid chromatographic analysis of pregabalin, gabapentin and vigabatrin in human serum by pre column derivatization with o-phthalaldehyde and fluorescence detection. J. Chromatogr. B 810, 297-303.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 209 - 210 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.12:614.35Short communicationStrengthening the position of OMCLsJelena Acevska1*, Katerina Brezovska1, Liljana Ugrinova1, Suzana Trajkovic Jolevska1, Aneta Dimitrovska1, Richard Wanko2, Kevin O'Donnell31 Center for Drug Quality Control, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss.Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia2 Biological Standardisation, OMCL Network & HealthCare Department (DBO), EDQM - Council of Europe, Strasbourg France3 Health Products Regulatory Authority, Dublin, Ireland* jelena_petrusevska@ff.ukim.edu.mkBackground "An Official Medicines Control Laboratory (OMCL) is a public institution, which performs laboratory testing of medicinal products on behalf of National Competent Au-thority (NCA) and in fulfilment of other national obliga-tions, independently from the manufacturer or Marketing Authorisation Holders (MAH). Testing is carried out in the interest of official market surveillance of medicinal prod-ucts in relation to the safety of human patient and/or ani-mals, prior to and/or after marketing of the respective med-icines and is demonstrated to be free from conflicts of in-terest" (Directive 2001/83/EC, Directive 2001/82/EC, PA/PH/OMCL (07) 89 14R, 2015).The role of the OMCLs is focussed on the independent quality control of medicines and it includes a number of different pre and post-marketing surveillance programmes. These extend to the sampling and testing of branded and ge-neric medicines, unlicensed (unauthorized) medicines, ille-gal medicines (counterfeits / medicines with falsified label-ling), vaccines, blood and plasma-derived medicinal prod-ucts, and active substances. OMCL surveillance work also includes examinations of product packaging and labelling. It supports the evaluation of the quality part of MA files, as well as pharmacovigilance assessments, quality defect in-vestigations, and GMP inspections. In the framework of the European Pharmacopoeia, the work of OMCLs plays a vital part, in relation for example to monograph develop-ment activities, etc. Beside medicines, a number of OM-CLs also perform laboratory testing on cosmetics, medi-cal devices, diagnostics, food, feed (premixes) for veteri-nary use, and other "borderline products" (PA/PH/OMCL (07) 89 14R, 2015).Public and stakeholder awareness of the importance of OMCL workThe public and animal health benefits of having a well-established and resourced system of quality control sur-veillance of medicines placed on the market are numerous - such work helps to independently assure the quality of the medicines on the market, and it results in regulatory ac-tions when sub-standard or illegal medicines are found in the market. However, the benefits of this work are not al-ways apparent to the various stakeholders, especially in re-lation to the routine surveillance day-to-day testing work that is carried out. This lack of awareness can lead to ques-tions among stakeholders about the usefulness of the work of OMCLs, and about the level of resources and funding that OMCLs require.