Pharmacy cannot achieve its full potential, and patients will not benefit from that potential, unless pharma-cists are committed to the highest standards of profession-al conduct and have sufficient autonomy to serve patients' best interests (The Tokyo Declaration, 1997).In every country, the appropriate association of phar-macists should produce a Code of Ethics for pharmacists setting out their professional obligations and take steps to ensure that pharmacists comply with the provisions of that Code. The obligations of pharmacists set out in these codes should include to act with fairness and equity in the alloca-tion of any health resources made available to them, to en-sure that their priorities are the safety, well being and best interests of those to whom they provide professional ser-vices and that they act at all times with integrity in their dealings with them, to collaborate with other health pro-fessionals to ensure that the best possible quality of health-care is provided both to individuals and the community at large (IPF, 2013). ReferencesFIP Statement of Policy on Confidentiality of Information gained in the course of Pharmacy Practice, 2002. FIP Statement of Professional Standards on Continuing Professional Development, 2004.IPF (International Pharmaceutical Federation), 2013. Pharmacist Ethics and Professional Autonomy: Imperatives for Keeping Pharmacy Aligned with the Public Interest. Report of the Working Group on Pharmacist Ethics and Professional Autonomy, The Hague. The Tokyo Declaration, 1997. Standards for quality of pharmacy services, FIP Guidelines for Good Pharmacy Practice, revised version FIP/WHO GPP Vancouver. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 615 - 616 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615:174Short communicationEthical dimensions of pharmacyKiril Temkov Faculty of Philosophy, Ss. Cyril & Methodius University, Goce Delcev 9A, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* etika1958@gmail.comIn the recent world all human activities are subjected to the ethical evaluation. The values of Good and Evil consist part of thinking as well as the behaviour of the people, af-firming and seeking the goodness, criticizing and escaping from bad purposes and actions. So is in all kinds of living, in the professions (which are almost 20.000) and in the scienc-es (more then 400), as everyday and special appearances of human acts. Professional and scientific ethics are very im-portant moral issues and visions of the modern civilisation.Pharmacy is one of the most important and the most interest contemporary activity and science. For this, its philosophy and ethics are instructive for understanding the world and the human orientations (on pharmacy and its ethics I wrote in 2008-th in text "Bioethics, the Good Phar-maceutical Practice, and Protection of Moral Principles", in my book Professional Ethics, 2011, pp. 68-83). Basic for the pharmacy is that it (although one of the oldest occu-pation and one of the very first science) is not one-dimen-sional, but one of the most complex new science with in-ter-disciplinary, even more correct with poly-disciplinary approach. It is part of medicine, as the most important and the most developed recent science and practice for saving and improving the human health, but part of biology too, as well as of the chemistry, of the economy and the others dif-ferent kinds of human thought and interests. The pharmacy is also defining by its relation to the bioethics, as modern and in the same time the most pompous orientation in the people's spiritual and social life, with whom moral aims and purposes are treating as model for almighty and par-ticular human practice in every region and act. So pharma-cy present oneself as exceptional instructive type of activi-ty to-day which can to show us on problems and necessery values in many districts of human services which reflect to the human condition. With that ethics of pharmacy is one of the most eminent and the most influential for the new (bio)ethical sights and axiological principles.For understanding the ethics of pharmacy is very con-siderable its complexity of activities-from definition the most difficult tasks before mind and the scientific inquir-ers, from numberless and capable laboratory examinations and improvings of medicines worldwide, from highqual-ified (offen industrial) performance of medicines, from its rigorous (the most frequently international) control for employment approval, from very advance organization of trade as well as the daily distribution for medical prac-tice and for individual necessary. Every of this steps of the large pharmaceutics activity are not only structure part of the medical practice as well as of the medical ethics also, they have special meaning and particular professional eth-ical norms, which compose general ethics of health. Phar-maceutics stores are indispensable portion for connection and realizing of medical treatment with personal aims of patients, but also centers for high higienical purposes, dis-tributors of healthy food, vitamins, and minerals, necessary services for small healthy aids etc. Every pharmaceutics levels have its very severe ethi-cal sense and values. Biotechnology and practical pharma-cy are expanded worldwide. But forfrom the pharmacy are not important only its simple and pointed norms. It helps to rethink the problems of human existence but also the ethics which concern us with the universal visions of human uni-ty with nature. In this case, in modern pharmacy we sense the tracks of classical alchemy, which is not lost for the humankind. As was said in Renaissance, we stand on the shoulders of countless people who worked of this fields-and this can not be forget and wipe out. To the ethics of pharmacy that give new and very interesting dimensions.ReferencesTemkov, K., 2011. Professional Ethics. Dom na kulturata "Ivan Mazov - Klime", Kavadarci. S7 OP 294616Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 615 - 616 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional developmentPoster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 617 - 618 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.15:37.035Short communicationContinuing professional development - challenge for professional organizationSvetlana Stojkov1*, Dragana Rajkovic1, Bistra Angelovska 2, Zahida Binakaj 31 Pharmaceutical Chamber of Serbia, Mutapova 25, Belgrade, Serbia 2 Pharmaceutical Chamber of Macedonia, 50 Divizija 34, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia 3Pharmaceutical Chamber of Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Tuzlanska bb, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina* snezanacupara@yahoo.comIntroductionProfessions, as one of key sectors of social systems, bear a leading role in the existing social work organization. Free professions take up a special place and significance, all the way from Roman artes liberales to our times.Pharmaceutical profession, as one of the oldest, led by ethical principles, is regulated by postulates accepted by the profession members, and in modern times established through legislations. Typical determinants of the regulat-ed professions, which also refer to pharmacists, as cham-ber members, are as follows: following ethical principles, specific skills and knowledge, professional development, autonomy at work, continuing improvement, competen-cies development, professional associations, licensing. Up-dated legislations in Europe recognize chambers as most widespread professional organizations of pharmacists as healthcare professionals. Specificities of the field, as well as responsibilities in providing healthcare, ask of the phar-macists to possess optimum level of knowledge, skills, at-titude, and competency. The need for continuing profes-sional development is recognized by professional author-ity, employers, practices, as well as professional associa-tions, which, through their activities and projects, repre-sent support to pharmacists' professional development. Tools that allow development and competencies assess-ment of the pharmacists, are accepted by international as-sociations (WHO, FIP) and are applied in the South-East Europe (Stojkov et al., 2014). By analyzing legislations of the countries in the region - Serbia, Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and Mace-donia, a mutual platform can be noticed, which emphasiz-es pharmacists' professional identity, profession protection and care for patients' interests. It was confirmed through the Memorandum on cooperation, signed in Sarajevo in 2015.Goals of the paper are to perceive difficulties and pos-sible solutions when renewing the license for the first time and to collect data on pharmacists' continuing education and professional development, their attitudes and prefer-ences of the fields and types of education, form of organi-zation, limiting and facilitating factors.Materials and methodsData that were used are the ones on the number of pharmacists who need to renew their license with Pharma-ceutical Chamber of Serbia (FKS) in accordance with al-ready existing legislations, and the number of pharmacist who do not fulfill set conditions. The causes and possibility of overcoming this problem were also discussed.A research was conducted on pharmacists' continu-ing education and professional development, attitudes and preferences of the fields and types of education, form of organization, limiting and facilitating factors, structured in electronic questionnaire, put up on the FKS website during 2015. Electronic questionnaire was voluntarily filled in by 490 pharmacists.The results were presented in percentages, depend-ing on the total amount of participants, discussed and com-pared to relevant literature data on similar conducted re-search.S7 PP 295618Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 617 - 618 (2016)Poster presentationsContinuing professional developmentResults and discussionDuring 2015, FKS has initiated preparations for phar-macists' license renewal. According to the available data, from the total of 5500 Chamber members, 2500 pharma-cists needed to renew their license, after the expiration of the first seven-year period. The key condition for work per-mit -license renewal is the number of points gathered dur-ing licensed period, acquired through participation in ac-credited education. Preliminary analysis, which included data on pharmacists' education, pointed out that a signifi-cant number does not fulfill the required conditions (over 70%). In order to prevent the difficulties in the unobstruct-ed professional improvement and work permit renewal, the Chamber has launched a legislation modification.Pharmacists who participated in the poll, primarily employed in community pharmacies (93.9%), recognised professional competencies as the most needed profession-al improvement (55.7%), whereas expressed needs for per-sonal competencies and organization, as well as manage-ment competencies are significantly lower (26.4%; 17.4%). Pharmacists' familiarity with competencies and compe-tencies framework, is the result of a project, which last-ed for several years, on assessment and competencies de-velopment of pharmacists in Serbia (Stojkov et al., 2014), as well as the National document (www.farmkom.rs/index.php?) enacted by the FKS Assembly. The Chamber, as a professional organization, provides continuing education of pharmacists, and their areas of interest, so the poll in-cluded a question on the fields that are of interest to phar-macists, and the preference was given to safety and effi-ciency of nutrients in polytherapy (28.7%), as well as spe-cial populations (children and elderly) and medicine safety (27.2%). The participants in the poll have shown high pref-erence towards the following forms of learning: showcase and workshops; and when it comes to study models, the internet and interactive workshops were the first choice. Day of the week that suits most participants was Saturday (49.5%), and the limiting factors were expenses and time (34.9%; 51%). The research conducted in Australia (Mari-ot et al., 2007), stated availability and relevance of the con-tent as the limiting factors, next to time. Also, more flex-ible education programmes of education were suggested, and they are becoming more significant in Serbia as well - digital formats available on the internet are dominant as first choice of learning (48.6%). Access to the internet and foreign language knowledge were not recognized as rele-vant limiting factors among the participating pharmacists: 48.6% and 32.6% of participants respectfully marked these factors as least relevant in the sense of limitation. From the answers to the question: "How many continuing ed-ucations did you participate in last year", it can be deter-mined that pharmacists took an active part in their profes-sional improvement: over 40% took part in 2-5, and 45.3% in more than 5 continuing educations. Only 5.1% stated that they did not participate.ConclusionThe road that leads professions of the modern times to-wards modern formatting is drafted through several stages of professionalism: modification of legislation and protec-tion of professions by means of law, improvement in prac-tice through professional development, establishing spe-cial trust relationship between free professions representa-tives and beneficiaries, providing professional associations with wider authorization, and finally cooperation on a re-gional level. The chambers, as most widespread pharma-ceutical organizations should provide support to continu-ing professional development, protection of profession's interests, as well as be important factors in improvement of pharmaceutical healthcare.ReferencesMarriott, J.L., Duncan, G.J., McNamara, K., 2007. Barriers to pharmacist participation in continuing education in Australia. Pharm. Educ. 7(1), 11-17.Stojkov, S., Tadic, I., Crnjanski, T., Krajnovic, D., Bates, I., 2014. Evaluation of competences at the community pharmacy settings. IJPER 48(4), 22-30. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 619 - 620 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.12:614.35Short communicationImplementation of standards for good compounding practices in hospital pharmacyVasilka Nicha1*, Maja Simonoska Crcareska2, Marija Glavas Dodov2, Renata Slaveska Raichki21Public Institution in the Health Sector, for the needs of PHI University Clinics, Institution and Urgent Centre, Majka Teresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Majka Teresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* vasilkanica@yahoo.comBackgroundCompounding in a hospital pharmacy (HP) setting is a comprehensive essential function of the pharmacy practice and, also important core element of the provision of health-care tailored to the needs of an individual patient. In gener-al, for the purpose of compounding, many unit operations and decision making processes are required that, on the one hand, more fully define this activity in several ways; one of the simpler definitions is as follows:"The act of prepa-ration, mixing, assembling, altering, packaging, and label-ing of a drug, drug-delivery device or device in accordance with a licensed practitioner's prescription, medication or-der, or initiative based on the practitioner-patient-phar-macist-compounder relationship in the course of profes-sional practice (GSP, 2016). As acknowledged, compound-ed medicines, medicinal products and devices in HP are not approved by competent regulatory body thus, the reg-ulatory approval process for medicines do not verify their quality, safety or effectiveness. All these underlining rea-sons can serve as further evidence of the paramount impor-tance for establishing contemporary compounding practice in HPto comprise not only the art, current scientific princi-ples, good pharmacy practice, facility, equipment, person-nel and etc., but also provisions for pharmacists to comply with policy, regulations and guidelines in this filed. Addi-tionally, it is required to put the focus on issues and chal-lenges related to the implementation of the official stan-dards for Good Compounding Practice (GCP), if they ex-ist. In continuum, with the development of the sciences re-lated to the dosage form formulation and advanced thera-pies, the position and responsibilities of hospital pharma-cists (HPs) requires enhancing their knowledge and skills in the field of patient centered pharmaceutical care.Recommendations for implementation of standardsIt is known that compounding of medicines in HP is followed by clinical and technical risks. Therefore, for the purpose of risk reduction, guideline or algorithm adopt-ed on national level to facilitate decision making process within this function is strongly recommended. For exam-ple, in many cases the HPs should have to verify wheth-er an equivalent medicine is available on the national mar-ket or not, and consequently, to consider certain alternative therapies including risk evaluation concept. In line with this, the HPt, for instance, can suggest usage of a less po-tent steroid molecule or dosage form instead of dilution of certain formulation or in other case, to advice differ-ent route of drug administration for patient (GMC, 2013). When all solutions are exhausted, HPs have to compound a dosage form compliant with the best health care needs of patient. Additionally, the basic principles of good prac-tices in compounding demand HPs to comply with nation-al regulations and with all relevant international standards were developed by the World Health Organization (Good Manufacturing Practices-GMP Guide), EudraLex and the Pharmaceutical Inspection Convention and Pharmaceuti-cal Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S-Good Prepa-ration Practices-GPP Guide) including requirements in rel-evant Pharmacopeias. To start with, an appropriate quali-S7 PP 296620Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 619 - 620 (2016)Continuing professional developmentPoster presentationsty assurance system has to be established with the aim to reduce the risks linked with compounding medicinal prod-ucts- whether it is sterile or non-sterile. Therefore, a risk assessment for compounded medical products should al-ways be carried out in order to define their quality assur-ance level. According to the references presented in the Resolution CM/Res (2011)1 on quality and safety assur-ance requirements for medicinal products compounded in pharmacies for the special needs of patients (Council of Europe, 2011), there is a need of establishing a "risk evalu-ation system" for the assessment of "high- risk" and "low- risk" compounded medicinal products. In this context, it is recommended that the GMP guideline has to be used as a reference for an appropriate quality assurance for "high risk preparations", while the PIC/S GPP Guide can be used for so called, "low-risk preparations". However, the appli-cation of other guidelines with an equivalent quality level is possible, depending on the national legislation or guid-ance.