After 6 days of continued treatment the S3 OP 117254Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 253 - 254 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationsrats were sacrificed. Negative controls treated with 0.9% NaCl were also included in the protocol. The anti-inflam-matory effects of functional ayran samples were evaluated in respect to the clinical activity/total damage score (quan-tified by loss on weight, consistency of feces and rectal bleeding), macroscopic and histopathological changes, co-lon weight/colon length and colon weight/body weight ra-tios, and myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity.Results and discussionAt the day of preparation, probiotic counts of 9.43, 9.7 and 9.58 log CFU/mL were determined in ayran enriched with non-encapsulated probiotic and synbiotic, and encap-sulated synbiotic, respectively. Viability loss during the shelf-life of the product was significant with viable level above the therapeutic minimum in ayran containing encap-sulated synbiotic of 8.22 log CFU/mL. Total solids in the ayran samples fortified with probiotic, synbiotic and synbi-otic microparticles were moderately increased due to add-ed dry matters with no negative effect on the texture or sen-sory properties of the product. Significant differences of acidity and pH values were not detected between the sam-ples, which showed no excess of acidity when probiotic was added. The content of proteins and fats in ayran sam-ples was in accordance with the required levels (2.8 and 1 g per 100 mL of product, respectively) during the shelf-life of 15 days at 4 degC. Analyses of carbohydrates have shown increased content in samples containing non-encapsulated and encapsulated synbiotic due to the carbohydrate nature of the prebiotic, with the latter to be more significant. No significant difference for sodium content in prepared sam-ples were observed compared to the plain ayran, while po-tassium and calcium content differed significantly among the samples with decreasing trend probably due to the abil-ity of probiotic bacteria to use these minerals as nutrient sources. Exception was observed with the increased calci-um content in the sample containing synbiotic microparti-cles which were prepared using calcium as a cross-linking agent. Increased metabolic activity of the probiotic was ob-served in ayran containing encapsulated synbiotic due to the higher production of lactic and acetic acid up to 81.83 mmol/L and 79.93 mmol/L, respectively. Low quantity of propionic acid (12.15-15.03 mmol/L) was determined in functional ayran samples only, but no butyric acid was de-tected.In rats with induced colitis using 10 mg/kg TNBS, most significant reduction of parameters of inflammation was found in group treated by ayran containing encapsu-lated synbiotic. Microscopic assessment have shown ul-cerations on mucosa and sub-mucosa, accompanied by ex-tensive inflammatory infiltrate and congested blood ves-sels, in groups receiving plain ayran or drinking water. In the groups treated with ayran containing non-encapsulat-ed probiotic/synbiotic visible segments of ulcerations and subepithelial polymorph nuclear infiltration were found, while higher integrity of mucosal architecture of colon tis-sue was seen in group treated with ayran enriched by en-capsulated synbiotic. Hence, when colitis was induced us-ing 30 mg/kg TNBS, sample containing encapsulated syn-biotic was administered. The lowest value of MPO activi-ty was observed when ayran with microparticulated synbi-otic was given twice daily, but parameters of inflammation were not significantly different between groups adminis-tered once and twice daily. Dilated blood vessels in submu-cosal layer as well dilated intestinal glands were observed in the rats treated by ayran with microencapsulated synbi-otic, regardless of the frequency of administration. These findings indicate that a single administration of ayran en-riched by microencapsulated formulation successfully pro-tect the viability of the probiotic through the upper GIT and ensure prolonged residence time of viable cells in the lower intestinum with no necessity to increase the frequen-cy of usage.ConclusionFunctional samples with maintained quality of the product ayran within its shelf-life were developed, while the ayran containing synbiotic microparticles has the ad-vantage of increased probiotic viability and better profile of the bacterial metabolism end products known to main-tain morphologic and functional integrity of colonic epi-thelium. Ayran enriched by microencapsulated synbiotic administered once a day provided efficient anti-inflamma-tory activity due to adhesive properties of the microparti-cles and their favorable interaction with the ayran as me-dium, thus showing potential to be used as adjuvant ther-apy in IBD.ReferencesFigueroa-Gonzalez, I., Quijano, G., Ramirez, G., Cruz-Guerrero, A., 2011. Probiotics and prebiotics - perspectives and challenges. J. Sci. Food Agric. 91, 1341-1348.Petreska Ivanovska, T., Petrushevska-Tozi, L., Grozdanov, A., Petkovska, R., Hadjieva, J., Popovski, E., Stafilov, T., Mladenovska, K., 2014. From optimization of synbiotic microparticles prepared by spray-drying to development of new functional carrot juice. Chem. Ind. Chem. Eng. Q. 20, 549-564.Sanchez B., Ruiz L., Gueimonde M., Ruas-Madiedo P., Margolles A., 2012. Toward improving technological and functional properties of probiotics in foods. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 26, 56-63.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 255 - 256 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.2:577.112.388Short communicationApproved health claims for amino acids in/as food supplements Ermira Krasniqi*, Lidija Petrusevska Tozi Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* ph.ermirakrasniqi@gmail.comIntroductionFood supplements in European Union (EU) are initial-ly regulated by Directive 2002/46/EC (2002), according to which, a range of nutrients and other ingredients may be present in food supplements, including: vitamins, minerals, amino acids, essential fatty acids, fiber and various plants and herbal extracts. In 2006, EU adopted the new Regula-tion on nutrition and health claims made on food - Regula-tion 1924/2006, which applies to nutrition and health claims made in commercial communication, labeling, presentation or advertising on foods. Health claims are defined as 'any claim that states, suggests or implies that a relationship ex-ists between a food category, a food or one of its constituents and health" (Reg. 1924/2006), currently the list of permitted health claims made on food in EU, is established by Com-mission Regulation (EU) No 432/2012 (Reg.432/2012).Meanwhile, defined by the congress of Dietary Sup-plement Health and Education Act (DSHEA, 1994), sim-ilarly with the Directive 2002/46/EC (2002), a "dietary supplement" is a product containing a "dietary ingredi-ent" intended to supplement the diet. According to FDA - DSHEA (1994) these products are not subject to pre-market safety evaluations, allowing for products labeling claims as long as it does not diagnose, prevent, treat or cure a specific disease.Amino acidsAmino acids are big part of cells, muscle and tissue, this way carrying out a big role in many body functions, cells structure, transport and storage of nutritious. Ami-no acids have been object of many scientific studies and there are many ongoing studies, consequently research over years claim for the possibility of useful of amino acids against osteoporosis, diabetes, heart trouble, metabolic dis-orders, erectile dysfunction, menopausal complaints etc.This paper presents a literature review of health claims on the current state of the health claims of amino acids as dietary ingredient of dietary supplements in general, focus-ing in amino acids, such as: Arginine (conditionally essen-tial amino acid in humans); Glutamine (non-essential and conditionally essential in humans); Lysine (an essential amino acid in humans).Arginine is the precursor of nitric oxide, an endoge-nous messenger molecule involved in a variety of endo-thelium-mediated physic ological effects in the vascular system. Generally speaking, is involved in many metabol-ic processes and many studies so far argue for its impor-tance in heart disease and high blood pressure, improve-ment of circulation, strengthening of immune system and a positive influence on male libido. Arginine supplementa-tion is considered safe, but people with renal failure or he-patic disease may be unable to appropriately metabolize and excrete supplemental arginine, this way they should be monitored. According to Scientific opinion of EFSA Pan-el on Dietetic Products, Nutrition and Allergies (NDA) for Health Claims of L-arginine (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2015) the claimed effects "erection", "supporting spermatogene-sis", effect "vascular system", "normal blood pressure" are considered of a beneficial physiological effect and L-argi-nine itself is considered to be sufficiently characterized but there is no cause-effect relationship established apart from the role of arginine contributing to protein synthesis.Glutamine is the most abundant free amino acid in human blood. Glutamine is important as a constituent of proteins, means of nitrogen transport between tissues, im-portant in acid base regulation, gluconeogenesis, as a pre-cursor of nucleotide bases and the antioxidant glutathi-one. Also glutamine is considered important in prolifera-tion of lymphocytes and other rapidly dividing cell, includ-S3 OP 118256Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 255 - 256 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationsing the gut mucosa and bone marrow stem cells. Many re-searchers suggest that glutamine may provide benefit for surgery, trauma, help support digestive system health af-ter periods of physical stress, wound healing, helps sup-port immune system health after periods of physical stress, helps to assist in muscle cell repair after exercise, cancer and bone marrow transplantation and it`s administration is well tolerated. Meanwhile, according to Scientific opin-ion of EFSA - NDA for Health Claims of glutamine such as "immune health" and "intestinal health" are considered of a beneficial physiological effect (EFSA FEEDAP Pan-el, 2015) and health claim referees to faster restoration of glycogen stores in skeletal muscle after strenuous exercise, "increasing cell swelling, volumization", "muscle protein metabolism" and "improves muscles metabolism" (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2015) are considered of a beneficial phys-iological effect but based on scientific data the Panel con-cludes the relationship of cause and efficacy of the above claimed effects has not been established.Lysine is converted to acetyl CoA, a critical compo-nent in carbohydrate metabolism and the production of en-ergy. Lysine is precursor of the carnitine, which is transport-ing long-chain fatty acids into the mitochondria for energy production. According to studies, supplemental L-lysine has putative anti-herpes simplex virus activity, also because ly-sine seems to have an antagonist effect with arginine, which is required for the replication of HSV. However, according to Scientific opinion of EFSA (EFSA FEEDAP Panel, 2015) for Health Claim of L-lysine maintenance of bone is con-sidered of a beneficial physiological effect and other health claims such as "immune defense against herpes virus", "maintenance of normal blood LDL-cholesterol concentra-tions", "increase in appetite leading to an increase in energy intake", "contribution to normal protein synthesis" might be of a beneficial physiological effect but no cause and effect relationship has not been established. Studies have shown that L-lysine can contribute to a positive Ca balance, sug-gesting a potential use of L-lysine supplements for preven-tive and therapeutic intervention in osteoporosis.ConclusionGenerally speaking, food supplements can be benefi-cial to the health of consumers, but based on a general re-view any health claim of food should be scientifically jus-tified toward protection of people from any bed interpreta-tion and information.But still, a part of all the studies and researches, ami-no acids still don`t take their credit yet and are not properly recognized in medical sciences in Europe, since the health claims of food containing amino acids are still considered to be not established in terms of cause and effect relation-ship. Therefore, analyzing all the publications in this di-rection, the faster this process goes, the greater will be the chances for health benefits amongst population in relation to amino acids uses.As it is well said by the Millward: "Few issues in nutri-tional science have aroused such long-standing and deep-seated controversies as protein and amino acid require-ments?" (Millward et al., 1997).ReferencesCommission regulation (EU) No 432/2012, 2012. Establishing a list of permitted health claims made on foods, other than those referring to the reduction of disease risk and to children's development and health. OJ L136, 1-40.DSHEA (Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act of 25 October 1994), 1994. Food and Drug Administration (FDA),.30 Public Law 103-417.EFSA FEEDAP Panel (EFSA Panel on Additives and Products or Substances used in Animal Feed), 2015. Scientific Opinion on the safety and efficacy of L-lysine monohydrochloride produced by fermentation with Escherichia coli for all animal species based on a dossier submitted by HELM AG on behalf of Meihua Holdings Group Co. Ltd. EFSA Journal, 13, 4052, doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2015.4052 .Regulation (EC) No. 1924/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 Dec 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods, 2006. O.J. L404, 9-25.Millward, D.J., Fereday, A., Gibson, N., Pacy, P.J., 1997. Aging, protein requirements, and protein turnover. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 66(4), 774-786. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 257 - 258 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.373:616.006.6Short communicationPreclinical studies for evaluation of antitumor effects and normal tissue toxicity of antibody conjugatesDarinka Gjorgieva Ackova*, Katarina Smilkov, Emilija Janevik-Ivanovska Faculty of Medical Sciences, Goce Delcev University, Krste Misirkov 10-A, P.O 201, Stip 2000, R. Macedonia* darinka.gorgieva@ugd.edu.mkIntroductionAntibody conjugates are therapeutics that function through mediating alterations in antigen or receptor func-tion, modulating the immune system (for example, changing Fc function and T cell activation) or delivering of a specif-ic drug conjugated to antibody that targets a specific antigen (Scott et al., 2012; Weiner et al., 2010). Four main classes using antibodies are investigated to target cytotoxic agents to cancer cells: antibody-protein toxin conjugates, antibody-chelated radionuclide conjugates, antibody-small-molecule drug conjugates, and antibody-enzyme conjugates (admin-istered together with small-molecule prodrugs) (Teicher and Chari, 2011). Only antibody-radionuclide conjugates and antibody-drug conjugates have reached the regulatory ap-proval stage. Radio immunotherapy, exploits the specifici-ty of an antibody to deliver a radionuclide, and affords some potential benefits over conventional radiotherapy. Antibody-radionuclide conjugates have been successfully developed for the treatment of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL), re-sulting in the approval of 131I-tositumomab (Bexxar) and 90Y-ibritumomab tiuxetan (Zevalin), which are CD20-tar-geted agents (Maloney et al., 2010). Important steps that are necessary to transform monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) in drugs for human use must be followed to achieve success in treatment of cancer patients with antibodies. Furthermore, dealing with the challenges in the process of target selection and selection of conjugate elements including the design of antibody formulation is also imperative. Development and evaluation of antibody conjugatesThe successful development of candidate antibodies involves complex evaluations, concerning cancer biology and the properties of antibodies in vivo. Essential preclin-ical characterization includes identification of the physical and chemical properties of the antibody; detailed analysis of antigen expression using normal and malignant tissues; study of the immune effector functions and signaling path-way effects of the antibody; toxicity assessment; analysis of in vivo antibody localization and distribution in tumor systems; and observation of the in vivo therapeutic activity of the antibody, alone or conjugated with radioactive iso-topes or other drugs.In case of NHLs, the biodistribution studies of a radio-conjugate in the tumor tissue and an assessment of whole-body toxicity and dosimetry were essential in preclinical trials leading to approval of CD20 specific radioimmuno-conjugates tositumomab and ibritumomab for treatment by US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (de Bono and Ashworth, 2010). Rituximab also has considerable suc-cess in treatment of patients with CD20 positive NHL and chronic lymphocytic leukemia. Radioimmunotherapy with rituximab labeled with suitable radioisotopes, is new op-portunity after promising preliminary results where pre-clinical data demonstrated improved tumor response (Scott et al., 2012).