Establishing the association between concentrations of risperidone and its active metabolite 9-OH risperidone in the body (plasma and urine) with the genetic profile of the metabolic and transporter proteins will enable better therapeutic approach and achievement of desired therapeu-tic outcome (Zhu et al., 2007).ObjectiveThe aim of this research is to determine the association of polymorphic variability of ABCB1 gene with the relative mRNA expression of the transport protein in the body, to determine the relationship of P-glycoprotein with the pre-disposition to schizophrenia and bipolar disorder, as well as to evaluate the inadequate response and the occurrence of side effects in patients treated with risperidone.Materials and methodsThe total of 222 subjects, of which 124 healthy sub-jects (107 healthy volunteers and 45 postmortem individ-uals) and 54 patients (bipolar disorder and schizophrenia) from Republic of Macedonia were included in the study. The presence of single nucleotide polymorphisms for the ABCB1 for three polymorphisms C1236T [rs1128503], G2677A/T [rs2032582] and C3435T [rs1045642] were an-alyzed by Real-Time PCR while the relative expression of ABCB1 gene in different tissues (blood, brain, liver, kid-ney, duodenum, jejunum, ileum colon) from the same indi-viduals. Plasma and urinary concentrations of risperidone and 9-OH risperidon in healthy volunteers and patients with psychiatric disorders are determined using a validated HPLC-MS / MS and HPLC. Results and discussionOur result confirmed the influence of AVSV1gene po-limorhosms, gender and age on P-gp mRNA relative ex-pression. Determination of relative expression of ABCB1 gene in different tissues (blood, brain, liver, kidney, duode-num, jejunum, ileum colon) from the same individuals al-lows interpretation of the tissue distribution of the trans-port protein in the body. The homogeneity of the data en-abled building of a predictive model for determining the relative expression of mRNA of the transporter protein in different tissues with an acceptable error (4-11%). The model is based on the obtained results for the influence of C1236T, G2677T/A and C3435T polymorphisms and hap-lotypes, gender, age relative expression of ABCB1 in blood and their mutual interactions on the relative mRNA expres-S6 OP 251528Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 527 - 528 (2016)Oral presentationsClinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular Sciencession of P-glycoprotein (Marzolini et al., 2004).Due to the active role of P-glycoprotein in the trans-port through the blood brain barrier (BBB), ABCB1 has a possible role in the predisposition for occurrence of cen-tral nervous system diseases. The results of this study have confirmed the role of the ABCB1 gene in predisposition to psychiatric disorders and increased risk of developing bipolar disorder in carriers of the heterozygotes and mu-tant homozygotes for polymorphic variations in 1236 and 2677 in comparison to the normal genotype carriers (Ab-bott, 2013).HPLS-UV method for determination of the concentra-tions of risperidone and 9-OH risperidone in plasma and urine, that can be used in clinical practice for therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) was optimized and validated (Jo-vanovic et al., 2010).Pharmacogenetic analyzes confirmed the influence of polymorphic variability of the transporter to the pharma-cokinetic properties of risperidone in healthy individuals from the study of bioequivalence and patient population. It gives an opportunity for clinical application of this analy-sis in order to avoid side effects and to improve the thera-peutic activity.Our findings suggest that the allele frequencies in Macedonians are similar to those reported for Caucasians of European descendant and have shown statistically sig-nificant differences in comparison with the Asians and Af-rican population. We have identified eight different haplo-types in our population but, three haplotypes CGC, TTT and CGT represent almost 90% of ethnical Macedonians. This study may contribute to population specific data on ABCB1 gene and has to be taken into account in order to for future establishment of the association and function-al impact of ABCB1 polymorphisms with various drug re-sponses and disease predispositions in R. Macedonia (Nau-movska et al., 2014).This study suggested influence of ABCB1 genetic variation on P-gp activity or expression and predisposition to mood disorders, but not to schizophrenia. One of the fu-tures prospective of our work might be the evaluation of the influences of polymorphic variants in the promoter re-gion on ABCB1 expression and estimation of its influence of predisposition for certain psychiatric disorders. One of the most important limiting factors in the study was the re-stricted number of the patients, but obtained results are in agreement with most of the findings from other relevant studies.ConclusionObtained results confirm the role of pharmacogenetics as a modern tool for rational pharmacotherapy, which is ec-onomically justified.ReferencesAbbott, N.J., 2013. Blood-brain barrier structure and function and the challenges for CNS drug delivery. J. Inherit. Metab. Dis. 36, 437-449.Bruhn, O., Cascorbi, I., 2014. Polymorphisms of the drug transporters ABCB1, ABCG2, ABCC2 and ABCC3 and their impact on drug bioavailability and clinical relevance. Expert. Opin. Drug. Metab. Toxicol.10, 1337-1354. Jovanovic, N., Bozina, N., Lovric, M., Medved, V., Jakovljevic, M., Peles, A.M., 2010. The role of CYP2D6 and ABCB1 pharmacogenetics in drug-naive patients with first-episode schizophrenia treated with risperidone. Eur. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 66, 1109-1117.Marzolini, C., Paus, E., Buclin, T., Kim, R.B., 2004. Polymorphisms in human MDR1 (P-glycoprotein): recent advances and clinical relevance. Clin. Pharmacol. Ther. 75, 13-33. Naumovska, Z., Kapedanovska Nestorovska, A., Sterjev, Z., Filipce, A., Dimovski, A., Suturkova, Lj., 2014. Genotype variability and haplotype profile of abcb1 (mdr1) gene polymorphisms in Macedonian population. Pril. (Makedon Akad Nauk Umet Odd Med Nauki) 35, 121-133.Zhu Hao-Jie, Wang Jun-Sheng, Markowitz, S.J., Donovan, L.J., Gibson, B.B., DeVane, C.L., 2007. Risperidone and Paliperidone inhibit P-Glycoprotein activity in vitro. Neuropsychopharmacology 32, 757-764.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 529 - 530 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.419-006.448-08Short communicationWhat do we learned from new treatment of multiple myeloma?Sonja Genadieva StavrikUniversity Hermatology Clinic, Medical Faculty, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* sgenstav@yahoo.comMyeloma multiplex still remains incurable disease. In the recent years there is a huge improvement in treatment of patients with multiple myeloma, particularly in younger patients with less than 65 years, mainly based on the intro-duction of novel agents, such as bortezomib, thalidomide and lenalidomide. Doubling survival in myeloma patients as compared to the 1990s when only chemotherapy was used is based on introducing of autologous stem cell trans-plantation and novel agents such as bortezomib, thalido-mide and lenalidomide. So the main question is what do we learn nowadays from these improvement?First of all today, we are facing the redefinition the therapeutic goal: "cure"or "disease control", that means to convert the disease in a chronic condition which en-ables the patient to survive more than 20 years with a good quality of life. Conventional chemotherapy did not ful-fill these expectations and in the era of conservative ap-proach with conservative chemotherapy younger patients lost 18 years of life, and most of them suffered the emo-tional burden of several relapses until disease become re-fractory. But the mainstay of these is based in the tests that are currently used to define complete remission. It become clear that previous evaluation have not enough strength to predict disease outcome. Low relative sensitivity is land-mark of the criteria that have been recently used to define treatment response such as less than 5% plasma cells in the bone marrow, the disappearance of the M-protein by im-munofixation, and the complete disappearance of any ex-tra-osseus plasmocytoma (Palumbo et al., 2011). Today we have more sensitive tools which are required and enable us to improve the assessment of treatment efficacy in the pa-tients with multiple myeloma.Today, physicians are able to offer wider variety of treatment options for both young and elderly patients with multiple myeloma. Therapeutic options should be tailored and personalized according to patient's characteristics by balancing efficacy and toxicity of each drug. Effective treatment should be concentrated at the early phase of dis-ease, when clones are more drug sensitive, long - lasting remission are more frequent, and serious adverse events are less prominent. This approach significantly improves quality of life and may ultimately prolong overall survival (Genadieva Stavric et al., 2014; Moreau et al., 2015).Initial therapy for multiple myeloma depends to a cer-tain extent on patients characteristics such as: eligibility for autologous stem cell transplantation per se; age and co-morbidities. The role of induction therapy is to induce re-mission, but patient's characteristics have a significant role in the initial treatment approach. Goals of treatment are: to eradicate the tumor clone, including cancer stem cell, to search for an appropriate balance between efficacy and toxicity with three different but complementary aims: qual-ity of life, survival prolongation and eventually the dream of cure. This can be achieved if we use appropriate tools to evaluate treatment efficacy (Rajkumar et al., 2014; Ria et al., 2014). Achieving the lowest level of minimal residual disease can be an important goal of therapy, a step in the path to cure (Bianchi et al., 2015; Paiva et al., 2015).When autologous stem cell transplantation is a thera-peutic option for a newly diagnosed young, fit patient, the patient must be treated with agents that do not compro-mise hematopoetic stem/progenitor cell collection, so af-ter a few cycles of induction therapy progenitor stem cells should be collected. Nowadays initial treatment options for a young newly diagnosed patient with multiple myeloma should be based by a risk adopted approach conforming to the maxim of optimizing the therapeutic index by balanc-ing efficacy with potential side effect (Paiva et al., 2015; Rajkumar et al., 2014; Ria et al., 2014).If an hematologist would search for cured patients with multiple myeloma, he would stop in the registry of trans-planted patients who underwent allogeneic transplantation. Unfortunately there is only a small number of these pa-S6 OP 252530Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 529 - 530 (2016)Oral presentationsClinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular Sciencestients. The main reasons for that are: high transplant related mortality, donor limitations, advanced age. In the field of autologous transplantation there is operationally "cure" for only 3-10% of multiple myeloma patients which will re-main in complete remission after high-dose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell transplant. The main advantages of autologous transplantation are: achieving complete re-mission in 15-30%, the possibility of long treatment-free period with excellent quality of life; prolongation of sur-vival by one year. There is still a role of autologous stem cell transplantation in the era of novel agents. With autolo-gous transplantation after induction therapy there is a pos-sibility for further decrease of the tumor mass. Incorporat-ing the novel agents in the induction protocols improved the complete remission rates and this is the first step to-wards higher complete remission rate after transplantation. Today, complete remission is considered as "condition sine qua non" for an improved survival (Paiva et al., 2015). The efficacy of treatment is mainly related to the achievement of a durable response. We already know that mechanism of action of high-dose melphalan and novel agent are differ-ent, so they are acting complementary. There are at least five active classes of treatment: alkylators, corticosteroids, proteasome inhibitors, immunomodulatory drugs, and an-tracyclines. All these drugs have significant activity against multiple myeloma when are used alone, but having in mind that they may have complementary mechanism of action, their activity is increased further when they are combined between each-other. So, today we are facing numerous doublet, triplet and quadruplet combinations which have been tested through the use of these drugs. Therapeutic options should be tailored and personal-ized according to patient's characteristics by balancing ef-ficacy and toxicity of each drug which is especially impor-tant for elderly patients. In the mode of sequencing treat-ment for elderly patients with multiple myeloma, our goal is to achieve and maintain maximal response while limit-ing treatment-related toxicities as much as possible. Sec-ond-generation novel agents, such as carfilzomib, pomalid-omide, elotuzumab, bendamustine are currently being evaluated as an option to improve treatment outcome in myeloma patients (Bianchi et al., 2015).ReferencesBianchi, G., Munshi, N.C., 2015. Pathogenesis beyond the can-cer clone(s) in multiple myeloma. Blood 125(20), 3049-3058.Genadieva Stavric, S., Cavalo, F., Palumbo, A,, 2014. New ap-proaches to managment of multiple myeloma. Current Treat-ment Options in Oncology 15, 157-170.Moreau, P., Attal, M., Facon, T., 2015. Frontline therapy of mul-tiple myeloma. Blood 125(20), 3076-3084.Palumbo, A, Anderson, K., 2011. Multiple myeloma. N. Engl. J. Med. 364, 1046-1060.Paiva, B., Jacques, J.M., van Dongen, A.O., 2015. New criteria for response assessment: role of minimal residual disease in multiple myeloma. Blood 125(20), 3059-3068.Rajkumar, V.S., Dimopoulos, M.A., Palumbo, A., et al., 2014. International Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 15, e538-48.Ria, R, Reale, A., Vacca, A., 2014. Novel agents and new thera-peutic approaches for treatment of multiple myeloma. World J. Methodol . 4(2), 73-90.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 531 - 532 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.212Short communicationImproved analgesics: BU08028 a novel, bifunctional NOP/MOP ligandGerta Cami-Kobeci1*, Mei-Chuan Ko2,Lawrence Toll3 and Stephen M. Husbands1 1Department of Pharmacy and Pharmacology, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK 2Wake Forest University, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA3Torrey Pines Institute for Molecular Studies, Port St. Lucie, Fl, USA* snezanacupara@yahoo.comIntroductionAlthough mu opioid (MOP) analgesics, such as mor-phine, are the preferred analgesics, they possess well char-acterised, unwanted effects such as respiratory depression and abuse potential.When a NOP (nociceptin receptor) agonist is co-ad-ministered with a MOP agonist, the combination produc-es a synergistic effect, resulting in enhanced analgesia (Ko and Husbands, 2013). This suggests the possibility of ob-taining strong analgesia with only low efficacy partial ago-nism at both MOP and NOP receptors. Buprenorphine pos-sesses partial MOP agonist activity and, importantly, low efficacy, modest potency NOP partial agonism. Howev-er, one study has detected no NOP receptor involvement in buprenorphine-induced physiological responses in pri-mates (Cremeans et al., 2012) and so an improved anal-gesic might have a buprenorphine-like profile but with en-hanced NOP activity. Structure-activity relationship stud-ies suggested that the region of space occupied by the tert-butyl group in buprenorphine was key to good NOP recep-tor activity (Cami-Kobeci et al., 2011a, 2011b; Khroyan et al., 2011).To this end we have synthesized novel buprenorphine-like analogs with increased NOP affinity and efficacy.