This new state-of-the-art Positron Emission Tomography (PET) Institute and with included research capabilities is dedicated to pro-viding the highest quality of nuclear imaging research.Positron emission tomography in the last decade is one of the most promising methods of detecting oncological, cardiological, neurological diseases and enters slowly in the other fields showing hopeful results. The introduction of the new radiopharmaceutical for diagnosis and therapy in the clinical practice including the clinical trials are pos-sible only with the appropriate production site according all cGMP requirements. The new University Institute for Positron Emission To-mography is in the final official establishment as a unique facility in the country and in the Balkan Region. The new facility is result of the Government investment and joint project with International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA).Methodology Establishing a PET institution is a large scale process that requires careful planning, inputs from multiple stake-holders, the support and approval of the authorities, secure funding, and a detailed implementation strategy. The need for a carefully planned strategy is even more essential in the conditions prevailing in a developing country, where the introduction of PET may be impeded by a scarcity of fi-nancial resources and, in many cases, an inadequate under-standing of the potential roles and contributions PET imag-ing can play in a health care system.Our new institution integrates Department for Produc-tion of Radiopharmaceuticals and Department of Molecu-lar Imaging. They are connected in one unique system of Radiation protection, QA, BMS, Informatics and technical and administrative support of the network from the unified Health Care System in the country (IAEA, No.1, 2009).S4 OP 159340Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 339 - 340 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsResults The facility include cyclotron (GE, PET trace 860) for production of ultra-short-lived isotopes (F-18, C-11, N-13 and optional for solid targets that is planned already during the construction). Adjacent to the cyclotron is an area that houses the support equipment and a large dedicated work-shop to support machine maintenance and target develop-ment. The Radiopharmacy production site contains two clean room with controlled-air environment class 10,000 (M5.5) and access via an interlocking entry change area. One completely dedicated for FDG production and sec-ond for the production of other F18, C-11, N-13, Ga-68 ra-diopharmaceuticals and Cu-64. The third production labo-ratory is dedicated for small scale production of diagnos-tic and therapeutical radiopharmaceuticals for clinical tri-als and investigation (White S, 2016). A fully shielded hot cells (class 100 [M3.5]) is located in all clean rooms. The PET radiopharmaceuticals are delivered via shielded tub-ing between the synthesizers and hot cells. Inside the hot cells, there is an automated device for dispensing the PET radiopharmaceuticals into either a bulk-activity vial or a unit-dose syringe (IAEA 2008). The dispensed PET radio-pharmaceutical then passes through a hatch to a dedicat-ed area where it is packaged for in-house use or commer-cial distribution. Unit doses for in-house patients are trans-ported via elevator to the PET imaging area away. There is extensive radiation area monitoring throughout the facili-ty that continuously measures radiation levels (IAEA No.1, No.58, 2009).The integrated parts are two QC laboratories well equipped and one research laboratory for preclinical inves-tigation including toxicological studies of new radiophar-maceuticals and imaging of small animal models.The Department of Molecular Imaging is located in the second floor with two PET/CT cameras dedicated for clinical investigation and advanced biomedical imaging in human using extensive suite of state-of-the-art internally produced radiopharmaceuticals as imaging tools (IAEA 2010, Calabria and Schillaci, 2016).This institution will be the full partner to the physi-cians not only in the country, but also in the region.PET in that condition may serve as a magnet for re-cruitment in many areas and promote national and inter-national interdisciplinary cooperation, to provide universi-ty educational opportunities for master, doctoral and post-doctoral studies, specialties in Nuclear Medicine, Radio-pharmacy and Medical Physics with distinctive strength in education and research and an entrepreneurial dimension.ConclusionThe University Institute for Positron Emission Tomog-raphy in Skopje will move a nationally and international-ly recognized unit with true integration of research and ser-vice to the high level. The heath care for patients will be improved in many aspects and will help keeping the PET at the forefront of imaging procedures. Our Institute will serve as a model for future and more widespread clinical use of PET radiopharmaceuticals and provide proficiencies how PET technology may facilitate research and develop-ment opportunities.ReferencesInternational Atomic Energy Agency, Quality Assurance for PET and PET/CT systems. IAEA Human Health Series No. 1, IAEA, Vienna (2009).International Atomic Energy Agency, Operational Guidance on Hospital Radiopharmacy: A Safe and Effective Approach, IAEA, Vienna (2008).International Atomic Energy Agency, Radiation Protection in Newer Medical Imaging Techniques: PET/CT, Safety Reports Series No. 58, IAEA, Vienna (2009).International Atomic Energy Agency, Planning a clinical PET Centre. IAEA Human Health Series No. 11, IAEA, Vienna (2010).Calabria, F., Schillaci, O., 2016.The biodistribution of the radiolabeled kinds of choline in male patients, assessed by PET/CT. Nucl. Med. Commun. 37, 329-330.Benetar N. A., Cronin B. F., O'Doherty M. J., "Radiation dose rates from patients undergoing PET: implications for technologists and waiting areas," Eur. J. Nucl. Med. 27, 583-589 (2000).White, S., Binns, D., Johnston, V., Fawcett, M., Greer, B., Ciavarella, F., Hicks, R., 2000.Occupational exposure in nuclear medicine and PET, Clinical Positron Imaging 3, 127-129.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 341 - 342 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.453.6.014.2Short communicationDesign and evaluation of differently produced glyceride based mini-matrices as extended release systems for highly soluble model drugAleksandar Aleksovski1*, Chris Vervaet2, Rok Dreu11Department of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Univeristy of Ljubljana, Askerceva 7, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia.2Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Ghent University, Ottergemsesteenweg 460, 9000 Ghent, Belgium* aleksandar.aleksovski@ffa.uni-lj.siIntroductionMini-tablets (d<=3mm or 5 mm) are emerging as prom-ising type of drug delivery platoform suitable in the pro-duction of both single- or multiple-unit systems. Mini-tab-lets proved to be suitable dosage forms for targeted pa-tient groups such as pediatrics, geriatrics and hospitalized patients since they may offer ease in swallowing (alone or mixed with soft food) and flexible dosing regarding age/weight/condition. When formulated as multiple unit sys-tems, mini-tablets offer broad GIT distribution, less signifi-cant ''all or nothing'' effect and combining different release kinetics/compounds in one system (Aleksovski et al., 2015).Hot-melt extrusion (HME) using circular dies and sub-sequent extrudate cut is emerging as promising technolo-gy in the production of mini-matrices aimed to deliver API by modified fashion. HME is solvent free process based on mixing, kneading, melting and transporting powdered ma-terials through a pre-heated barrel equipped with one or two rotating screws up to an end plate die which determines fi-nal size and shape of the extrudate (Repka et al., 2012).The aim of this research was to develop and evaluate mini-matrices based on either glyceryl behenate (GB) or glyceryl palmitostearate (GPS) for extended drug release of highly soluble model drug metoprolol tartrate. Mini-ma-trices were produced by two different techniques: hot-melt extrusion (mini-extrudates, EX) and compression of mini-tablets from untreated powder mixtures (direct compressed mini-tablets, DCMT) or granules obtained by milling ex-trudates (granule based mini-tablets, GMT).Materials and methodsThe following materials were used: metopro-lol tartrate (MPT, EsteveQuimica) (20-40%), glyceryl behenate(GB, Compritol 888 ATO, Gattefosse) or glycer-yl palmitostearate(GPS, Precirol ATO 5, Gattefosse) (80-60%), colloidal Si dioxide (0.5% in extrudates and tablets) and magnesium stearate (1% in tablets). The last two were replacing suitable amount of the glyceride.Production methods: HME was performedon a co-ro-tating twin screw extruder with pre-heated barrel segments (entry to die TdegC, GB EX -77/75/75/75/72/66 and GPS EX - 57/57/57/55/53/50). Obtained strains (d=3mm) were manually cut into mini-extrudates of 3 or 5 mm height. Mini-tablets (30 mg, d = 4mm) were produced on a single punch tablet press by compressing untreated powder mix-tures (DCMT) or milled extrudates (GMT) 3kN compres-sion force. When investigating influence of granule size on drug release, GMT samples were prepared by granules in the range of 0.150 mm <= d <= 0.250 mm (GMT S) or gran-ules ranging 0.500 mm <= d <= 0.750 mm (GMT L).Evaluation methods: Drug release studies (USP I) were carried out in H2O, 0.1 M HCl, phosphate buffer pH 6.8, FESSIF with addition of pancreatin and CaCl2 and blank FESSIF (without pancreatin, CaCl2, lechitin, and Na tauro-cholate). Calculation of similarity factor f2 was performed. Solid state studies were performed using DSC and X-ray diffracttometry. Drug- glyceride interactions were evaluat-ed by ATR-FTIR, while drug distribution by Raman map-ping. Matrix porosity was determined by microcomputed tomography (mCT). Stability testing was performed at room and accelerated conditions in vapor protective bags.S4 OP 160342Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 341 - 342 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsResults and discussionHME and granule compression proved to be robust and reliable techniques when producing mini-matrices for ex-tended drug release in all drug to glyceride ratios. Direct compression was seen as unsuitable technique due to poor flow properties of powders. Drug release from both fresh-ly produced GB and GPS EX, GMT and DCMT was affect-ed by the MPT loading.Increasing the loading (from 20% up to 40%) led into faster drug delivery, supposedly due to increase in system's hydrophilicity and formation of more open pore structure and thus more rapid MPT leaching in the medium. Formulations produced by melting technology (EX and GMT) provided increased embedment of the drug in the hydrophobic carrier and thus provided slower extend-ed release pattern compared to formulations made by direct compression (DCMT). EX and GMT formulations based on 20% MPT were chosen for further studies due to most suit-able prolonged drug release outcome over 24 hours. DCMT was not selected as further platform due to abovementioned problems with poor flow properties and the low extent of drug release retardation. When comparing the delivery of 20% MPT form either GB or GPS units, GBEX and GB GMT matrices gave similar delivery patterns between them-selves (square root of time pattern, f2=72) while in case of GPS EX and GPS GMT release outcomes were versatile with EX sample showing specific sigmoidal release fash-ion and GMT square root of time release profile (f2=28). The sigmoidal outcome could be related to the appearance of ''wall depletion'' effect, where due to shearing appear-ance at the inner surface of the extruder MPT is emerging towards the extrudateinterior leaving very thin layer con-taining mainly glyceride which behaves as a diffusion bar-rier and thus limits drug release just from the cut sides of the matrix surface. During dissolution GPS EX cracks (af-ter 8 h) which provides faster delivery rate and thus appear-ance of sigmoidal release pattern. GB EX and GB GMT showed higher porosity and thus faster drug release com-pared to the same units based on GPS. Porosity of GB EX is probably high enough to overcome the ''wall depletion'' ef-fect. GB EX has more porous and less dense surface appear-ance compared to GPS EX. Milling the EX breaks the thin glyceride layer and thus disable its action as diffusion barri-er and results in faster release profile of GPS GMT sample. Solid state properties (thermal and diffractional) of fresh-ly produced matrices were slightly different than the ones of physical mixtures and also pointed partial solubilisation of MPT in the molten glyceride. Raman mapping and ATR-FTIR measurements indicated uniform drug distribution through either GB or GPS matrices and no significant inter-actions between the drug and used glycerides, respectively. Increasing the size of the EX from 3mm to 5mm in both GB and GPS samples led into decreased delivery rate due to in-creased diffusion route and decreased specific surface area of the units. Increasing the size of the granules in GB GMT led to faster release pattern of GB GMT L compared to GB GMT S due to higher porosity and larger pores of first ones compared to last ones. GPS GMT showed in general low-er porosity compared to GB GMT and thus probably bet-ter compactibility of GPS granulate, which minimized the impact of the particle size on the drug delivery profile. GB units were insignificantly affected by the pH of the dissolu-tion medium and presence of biorelevant compounds while GPS samples demonstrated faster delivery rate in phosphate buffer pH 6.8 compared to 0.1 M HCl and in FESSIF com-pared to blank FESSIF. Glycerides having higher acid num-ber (GPS <= 6mg KOH/g vs GB <= 4mg KOH/g) and shorter fatty acid chains (GPS: C16 and C18 vs GB: C22) tend to ex-hibit increased ionization at phosphate buffer pH (decreas-ing hydrophobicity) and are more prone to lypolisis respec-tively, therefore giving slightly faster drug release outcome. Storing of GB units and GPS units at increased temperature for two months provoked changes in glyceride's solid state properties (GB - thermal changes: increased enthalpy and melting point maximum; GPS -thermal changes: increased enthalpy and peak maximum and change in the peak appear-ance; x-ray pattern changes), which was related to the alter-ations seen in the unit's drug release outcome after storage. GB units gave slower drug release probably due to bloom-ing effect, while GPS units gave faster release probably due to increase in unit's porosity after storage. Storing units at room conditions affected only GPS samples,leading to fast-er drug release compared to freshly prepared units.Drug re-lease changes were again connected to changes in the sol-id state properties of the glyceride. After thermal process-ing glycerides appear in a layered forms with lower crystal-linityand are with time and other factors (increased temper-ature) transformed to a more stable state. Glycerides com-posed of longer fatty acid chains such as GB tend to change their crystalline form slower and at more extreme environ-ment conditions, while glycerides based on shorter fatty acid chains such as GPS are prone to faster crystal altera-tions already at less extreme conditions.ConclusionObtained results outline GB as more reliable matrix for-mer for developing extended release mini-matrices com-pared to GPS. HME appeared as robust and reproducible process for mini-matrix production. However, understand-ing of material features and, HME equipment, process opti-mization and coupling with suitable down-stream processing are prerequisites for successful introduction of this technique as a viable alternative to the compression of mini-tablets.ReferencesAleksovski, A., Dreu, R., Gasperlin, M., Planinsek, O., 2015. Mini-tablets: A contemporary system for oral drug delivery in targeted patient groups. Expert Opin. Drug Del. 12(1), 65-84.Repka, M.A., Shah, S., Lu, J., Maddineni, S., Morott, J., Patwardhan, K., Mohammed, N.N., 2012. Melt extrusion: process to product. Expert Opin.Drug.Deliv. 9(1), 105-125.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 343 - 344 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.222.015.153Short communicationFormulation of chronotherapeutic delivery systems for delayed release of verapamil hydrochloride using polyethylene oxide polymersSanja Bundalo1,2*, Jelena Duris1, Svetlana Ibric1, Zorica Duric11Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Cosmetology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia2University Clinical Centre of Republic of Srpska, Dvanaest beba bb, 78000 Banja Luka, Bosnia and Herzegovina* sanja.bund@gmail.comIntroductionChronotherapy refers to a treatment method in which in vivo drug availability is timed to match rhythms of dis-ease in order to optimize therapeutic outcomes and mini-mize side effects (Sajan et al, 2009).