was 13.22+-1.35 hours, where 30% have open-ing hours from 8:00-21:00 h, 15.83% from 8:00-22:00 h and 10% from 7:30-21:00 h. Sunday was working day in 35.83% of surveyed CPs with 7.15+-2.03 working hours on average with only 3.33% working 12 or more hours. Only 8.1% of the respondents worked within small chain (up to 3 CP), where majority (69.7%) worked in large chain and the rest of 22.1% worked in single CPs. CP location in 46.3% of the cases was in central city region and in 21.1% near the general practitioner and/or hospital (15.4%). The findings related to workforce indicated that aver-age number of total staff per CP was 4+-1.52 persons. On average, there were 2.34 +- 1.04 LPs reported as working in each CP with the most common response (mode) being 2 (39.2%) while the maximum reported number of LPs was 5. In 21.7% of cases only one LP was employed. Isolat-ed consultation/counseling area for PTs was not available in 86.3% of the CPs. Only 7.4% CPs dispensed in-house compounded medications. Related to medication (MED) therapy management, 61.7% of the LPs would like to have information about previous use of the certain MED, 37.4% if the PT knows how to use the MED, 34.6% were there any allergies or in-tolerances noted, 33.6% about other used MEDs and only 4.7% were asking the PT if he/she was familiar with pos-sible side/adverse effects of the drug dispensed. Preferenc-es about the drug manufacturer were asked in 19.6%. LPs in 93.5% of the cases audited possible physicians' errors, 71.5% check out drug interactions, 74% allergy to the pre-scribed drug or its excipients, 51.2% other allergies pres-ent and something else in 14.6%. MED therapy errors were solved and evidenced in 64.4%, while in 32.2% were solved but not evidenced. Only 9.4% of the respondents re-ported adverse drug reactions. More than 90% of the respondents advised PTs for eye drops and inhaler use, ~82% for pregnancy testing, ~40% for insulin pen and ~28% for other matters. Drug use instruc-tions were written on MED package by ~97% of the LPs. Respondents' opinion about the availability of infor-mation needed for efficient MED therapy management was as follows: - all of them would like to know if there is history of drug related allergies and ~80% about other allergies pres-ent, where more than 56% appreciated to obtain the in-formation both from the PT and medical dossier,- diagnosis was stated to be valuable by ~87% while med-ical history (past 6 months) was valued by 58.5%. Med-ical dossier as source was selected by more than 50%,- adverse drug reactions was found to be valuable for 97.3%, and both medical dossier and PT as source by 39.1%,- discharge summary and results from screening and lab-oratory tests were valued by ~41%, 29% and 52% re-spectively and medical dossier as source by ~64%, 60% and 71% of the respondents accordingly. PT adherence to chronic therapy was followed via di-rect PT questioning by 70% of the respondents.Blood glucose could be monitored in 18.7%, while blood pressure in 35.8% of surveyed CPs. Health promo-tions (eg. colon cancer, nutrition dietetic regimens) and pregnancy advices were practiced in 18.7% and 36.6% of the cases respectively. Nearly 84% responded that PTs were seeking advic-es for smoking cessation and nutrition, ~65% for vaccines, and ~55% were asked regarding alcohol drinking as well as physical activity. More than 95% of the respondents stated that PTs sought an advice concerning drugs cur-rently used, side/adverse drug reaction, change of therapy/treatment, health related issues in general and herbal drugs. Urgent contraception, dietetic regimen in time of ongoing therapy, MED storage conditions and need of physician visit were issues of PTs` interest in more than 80% of the cases. Nearly 60% of the respondents stated that they were asked about therapy monitoring and ~66% about new ap-proved drugs. Only 26.2% responded that unwanted medicines were returned to CP for disposal.Survey for PTs` experience from CP work and activi-ties in the past year was conducted in 16.1%, but howev-er 51.3% stated that they were planning to conduct such a survey in the future. PTs ` compliant procedure was estab-lished in 26.5% of the surveyed CPs. Continuing education preferences were expressed by 75% of the respondents, but however when it comes to the type and topic, response rate from the surveyed LPs was relatively low, 52.8% and 37.4% respectively. From those responded 84.6% preferred conventional lectures, semi-nars, symposia, congresses, and only 10.8% e-education. Topics related to new approved drugs and CP practice & communication were preferred by 21.7% and 19.6% from the respondents, accordingly. The vast majority of the respondents were satisfied by introduction and use of e- Px. Only 25% of the surveyed LPs provided their opinion in relation to CP work improvement where 29% of the re-spondents suggested less administrative tasks, e- Px only and PTs` part in the e- Px to be automatically filled by data already present in the system and 22.6% suggested to make clear distinction between duties of LPs and pharmaceutical technicians working in CPs, as well as different person re-sponsible for Px and OTC drugs.ConclusionThis study enabled baseline establishment for the cur-rent situation in CP practice in R. Macedonia. The results could be used for further development and improvement of CPs sector in our country.ReferencesTraulsen, J.M., Almarsdottir, A.B., 2005. Pharmaceutical policy and the pharmacy profession. Pharm. World Sci. 27, 359-363.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 637 - 638 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33.015.8Short communicationAntimicrobial resistance to antibacterial agents in common respiratory tract pathogens in pediatric populationStefan Matik*, Ana Vavlukis*, Aleksandra Kapedanovska Nestorovska, Zorica Naumovska, Aleksandra Grozdanova, Zoran SterjevInstitute of pharmaceutical chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* stefanm_bt@hotmail.comIntroductionBackground and Aims: Antibiotics have always been considered one of the wonder discoveries of the 20th cen-tury. This is true, but the real wonder is the rise of antimi-crobial resistance in hospitals, communities, and the en-vironment concomitant with their use. The extraordinary genetic capacities of microbes have benefited from man's overuse of antibiotics to exploit every source of resistance genes and every means of horizontal gene transmission to develop multiple mechanisms of resistance for each and every antibiotic introduced into practice clinically or oth-erwise (Davies and Davies, 2010). Resistance mechanisms have been identified and described for all known antimi-crobials. Acquired bacterial antibiotic resistance can result from the mutation of normal cellular genes, the acquisition of foreign resistance genes, or a combination. The most common resistance mechanisms employed by bacteria in-clude enzymatic degradation or alteration of the antimicro-bial, mutation in the antimicrobial target site, decreased cell wall permeability to the antimicrobial, and active ef-flux of the antimicrobial (Harbottle et al., 2006). With re-spect to the pediatric population, respiratory tract infec-tions (RTIs) are a common reason for health care provider visits and the primary reason for antimicrobials prescrib-ing in this population. The overuse of antibiotics in chil-dren is becoming a major public health problem. Although most of the common childhood infections, such as the up-per respiratory tract infections, are caused by viruses, large volumes of antibiotics are prescribed for these infections in children in the primary care setting. It is estimated that 90% of upper respiratory tract infections are self-limiting viral illnesses and even bacterial infections like acute otitis media often run a self-limiting course. Clinical trials have shown that antibiotic use to treat common upper respirato-ry tract infection like sore throat, nasopharyngitis and oti-tis media has no or minimal benefit on the clinical outcome (Kutty, 2011). Given the proven relationship between the resistance rate of a specific pathogen and the rate of antibi-otic usage (community setting and nosocomial), the aim of this study was to evaluate the resistance rate to specific an-tibiotics in common respiratory tract pathogens in pediat-ric population in R. Macedonia. Materials and methodsRetrospective analysis of medical data from 7079 pa-tients was done in the period July 2013 - January 2014. The analyzed isolates were taken from: nose (2141), throat, epipharynx, pharynx, deep swab from pharynx, tonsils (2752); drainage secretions (2186). The testing was per-formed by the Cabinet for microbiological analysis, Insti-tute for respiratory diseases in children - ,,Kozle" (Skopje). Data from sensitivity tests (antibiograms) were analyzed for 6 RTIs pathogens - Moraxella catarrhalis, Streptococ-cus pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae type b, Staphy-lococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes and Escherich-ia coli. The isolates were obtained using standard microbi-ological procedures and screened using disc-diffusion test. Sensitivity was tested to penicillins (Amoxicillin, Oxacil-lin), cephalosporins (Cefadroxil, Cefuroxime, Cefixime, Ceftriaxone) and macrolides (Azithromycin, Clarithromy-cin, Erythromycin). The antibiotics were selected based on the institute's prescription practices for RTIs. The patho-gen sensitivity to a specific antibiotic in the antibiogram reports was numerically labeled - 3 (sensitive), 2 (moder-S8 OP 304638Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 637 - 638 (2016)Oral presentationsStudent sessionately sensitive), 0 (resistant). Data from oxacillin test (3/0) were analyzed for Streptococcus pneumoniae. A basic sta-tistical analysis was performed to calculate the resistance rate (percentage value) of every individual pathogen to ev-ery specific antibiotic. The resistance rate (lack of suscep-tibility) was calculated by dividing the number of isolates with an identified resistant pathogen (numerically labeled as 0 in the antibiogram reports) and the total number of iso-lates of that given pathogen. Results and discussionMoraxella catarrhalis demonstrated 9.5% resistance rate to Cefixime, and an average resistance to macro-lides - 10-12%. Streptococcus pneumoniae had a sizeable (30.9%) resistance rate to Cefixime, 38-43% to macrolides, and a dramatically high (70.1%) resistance rate on the Ox-acillin test. The oxacillin test for S.pneumoniae is consid-ered a test for penicillin susceptibility in the first place, but unsusceptible isolates are also considered unsuscep-tible to extended-spectrum cephalosporins (e.g. Ceftriax-one or Cefotaxime). Haemophilus influenzae demonstrat-ed significant resistance to Cefixime (10.6%). There were no cases of resistance to Amoxicillin. Staphylococcus au-reus showed a substantial (14-23%) resistance rate to the macrolides. Streptococcus pyogenes showed no resistance to any of the tested antibacterial agents. Escherichia coli showed a very high resistance rate to the class of chepal-osporins: Cefadroxil - 77.8%, Cefuroxime - 61.5%, Cefix-ime - 71.3%, and Ceftriaxone - 67.3%. The study revealed a 28-35% resistance rate of Klebsiella pneumoniae to the group of cephalosporins. K. pneumoniae is considered in-trinsically resistant to amoxicillin. If on the other hand, we take into account the data for antimicrobials consumption in Europe for the aforemen-tioned period - a causative relationship between the antimi-crobials use and the rate of antimicrobial resistance could clearly be established. For example, in 2011, Greece was on the first place with antimicrobials consumption in Eu-rope (35 DDD/1000/day), and at the same time the data for antimicrobials resistance rates in Greece demonstrat-ed very high values for various isolates. The same could be concluded for Cyprus and other countries that are po-sitioned on the top of the list for antimicrobials consump-tion. Contrary to this, Netherlands, Estonia, Latvia and the Scandinavian countries, which are positioned on the bot-tom of the same list, are also the countries in Europe with the least percentage of antimicrobial resistance (EARS-Net Annual Report, 2013). The situation in Macedonia was much like that in Greece and Cyprus. The consumption of antimicrobials for the period 2008-2012 was approximately 32 DDD/1000/day. For that period, the most commonly utilized antibi-otics were the beta-lactams. During this time, the con-sumption of antimicrobials dropped compared to the pre-vious period for all groups of antibiotics, except for the penicillins, where an increase was noticed. The most com-monly prescribed anti-infective agent for systemic use was Amoxicillin + clavulanic acid. Amoxicillin followed on the second place, whereas Cefuroxime and Cefixime placed fourth and fifth. Ciprofloxacin was positioned on the third place (Annual report 2012, Health Insurance Fund of Macedonia). Furthermore, also to be considered is the fact that in the time of conduction of this research, Cefix-ime was the only oral third-generation cephalosporin reg-istered in Macedonia, and even more, available as a pedi-atric oral suspension. To this, could partially be attributed the observed great percentage of resistance to Cefixime. If we take into consideration the data obtained in this research, we can clearly postulate that the high consump-tion of antimicrobials in Macedonia could be in a great manner responsible for the substantial percentage of an-timicrobial resistance, by constantly increasing the ever-growing positive pressure on microorganisms to continu-ously acquire new means of resistance.ConclusionThe results from the susceptibility tests on one side, and the total antibiotics use (32 DDD/1000/day) in the Macedonian population on the other, proved the previous-ly stated proportional relationship between the population antibiotics consumption level and pathogen resistance rate. ReferencesAnnual report, 2012. Health Insurance Fund of Macedonia.Davies, J., Davies, D., 2010. Origins and evolution of antibiotic resistence. Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev. 74(3), 417-433.European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control, 2013. Antimicrobial resistance surveillance in Europe 2012. Annual Report of the European Antimicrobial Resistance Surveillance Network (EARS-Net).Stockholm: ECDC,Harbottle, H., Thakur, S., Zhao, S., White, D.G., 2006. Genetics of antimicrobial resistence. Anim, Biotechnol. 17(2), 111-124.Kutty, N., 2011. Treating children without antibiotics in primary healthcare. Oman Med. J. 26(5), 303-305.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 639 - 640 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.214.015Short communicationRisperidone loaded nanostructured lipid carriers: formulation optimisation and characterisationNikola Lazarevski*, Hristina Litovin, Maja Simonoska Crcarevska, Marija Glavas DodovInstitute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* nkllazarevski@yahoo.comIntroductionRisperidone (RPD) is an antipsychoticdrug commonly used for the treatment of schizophrenia. The treatment for this disease is generally life-long, so the oral route is the most convenient and non-invasive way of drug administra-tion. However, RPD is a poorly water-soluble BCS class II drug that undergoes extensive first-pass hepatic metab-olism and has poor oral bioavailability. Moreover, it binds about 90% to plasma proteins, which renders its delivery across the blood-brain barrier (Kumar et al., 2009).Literature data suggests that nanoparticles could avoid the first-pass effect and provide prolonged release, thus enabling significant reduction of the RPD dose and min-imising its undesired side-effects (Patel et al., 2011). Lip-id nanoparticles are a promising strategy for drug deliv-ery to the brain due to their rapid uptake, bio-acceptabili-ty, biodegradability and lower toxicity compared to poly-meric nanoparticles.