In all performed supervisions it was found that the healthcare workers - pharmacists work profession-ally, respect legal requirements, educate continuously, re-spect patients' rights and confidentiality of the data, com-municate with other healthcare workers, take care of the environment where they work, equipment and inventory. It was also determined that there were not irregularities in the overall work of the pharmacies as healthcare institutions. The condition settled in performed professional supervi-sions indicates several facts. Most of the pharmacies don't produce magistral preparations. They order them from oth-er legal entities - galenic laboratories. Most of them have contract with Health Insurance Fund, and only for the med-icines that are reimbursed they obligatory keep electronic record for the patients. Only 2 pharmacies have Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for the most of the processes performed in the pharmacy. In the supervised pharmacies, no one from the pharmacists has reported adverse reaction in the National center for reporting adverse reactions. No one at the pharmacies keeps evidence for shortages of the medicines. The performers of the supervision in individu-al cases have given instructions and guidelines, for exam-ple, haw to improve area for dissolving syrups, which data to be put in the electronic records, development and imple-mentation of SOPs for individual processes in pharmacy, conflict management and else. Professional supervision is being performed in 2016 according to the Plan for the current year.Future developments and expectationsIn the future, the Chamber regarding the public autho-rization - professional supervision aims: to increase the number of the performers to be able to carry out more su-pervisions simultaneously on the territory of Macedonia, to develop lists of indicators for other healthcare institu-tions where pharmacists work and to begin to conduct pro-fessional supervisionReferencesLHP (Law on Healthcare Protection), 2012. Off. Gazette of RM, No. 43/2012.Rulebook, 2014. Rulebook on conducting the work of the healthcare institutions and healthcare workers with high education in the field of pharmacy, Pharmaceutical Chamber of Macedonia, Off. Gazette of RM, No. 33/2014.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 607 - 608 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.2:339.13.025.3Short communicationModel framework for off label use of medicinesBlerina Koshi1*, Elizabeta Zisovska2, Vasilka Nica3, Maja Simonoska Crcarevska4, Marija Glavas Dodov4, Renata Slaveska-Raicki41Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina "Hasan Prishtina", 10 000, Prishtina, Republic of Kosovo2University Clinic for Gynecology and Obstetrics, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University "Goce Delcev", Krste Misirkov, bb, Stip, Macedonia3Public Institution in the Health Sector, for the needs of PHI University Clinics, Institution and Urgent Centre, Majka Teresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia4Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Majka Teresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* sblerinakoshi@hotmail.comBackgroundThe drug licensing regulatory system ensures that mar-keted drugs to be used, meet the high standards and re-quirements for quality, efficacy and safety. Unfortunately, in practice, prescribers are often obliged to deviate from granted medicine marketing authorisation, due to the lack of availability of appropriate medicines for patient's thera-peutic needs and progress. This concept of medicines use not mentioned in the approved labelling (FDA Modern-ization Act) or outside of the terms of Summary of Prod-uct Characteristics regarding indication, age, dosage, phar-maceutical form and route of administration (British NHS Guideline) is defined as off-label use of licensed medicines.On the global level, many supportive evidence and health care needs confirm that off-label medicines use occurs in every country and each level or specialty area of healthcare (Conroy, 2003). Moreover, it is an integral part of Good Medical Practice and may provide the best available option or even the standard of care in a particu-lar health condition (Dresser and Frader, 2009). In general, this concept is legal and may be appropriate, but it can be associated with safety, clinical and ethical concerns, em-phasizing the increased incidence of adverse events associ-ated with off-label medicines uses in particularly vulnera-ble patient groups (Gazarian and Kelly, 2006). A concerning issue is that the majority of all off-la-bel uses have limited to no scientific support (Radley et al., 2006) and a considerable number of prescribers have no or limited knowledge about off-label medicine use or do not meet regulations regarding off-label use, if they exist. (Pi-neiro Perez et al., 2014). Experience shows that to ensure the quality of off-la-bel use of medicines, there should be a formal mechanism to assess the feasibility, monitoring the safety and efficien-cy of medication used based on this concept.Thus, in con-tinuum, the off-label use of medicines has been an essen-tial part of the ethical and legal considerations as well as, many regulatory initiatives. The overall objective is to present a model regulatory framework setting out guidelines and recommendations for quality use of off-label medicines within the national pro-file of health care policy. A literature search was undertaken to identify the is-sues and challenges related to off-label medicines use in-cluding clinical, safety and ethical concerns. Recommendations for model framework Principles of good practice for off-label use of med-icines should include the following elements: identifying the medical needs; compilation of a consensus list of ac-cepted, scientific based off-label uses; creating an official expert group for the evaluation and approval of specific off-label uses; and, providing a safe and effective supply. The main guiding principles and developed activities to sup-port a responsible decision-making with regard to off-la-bel medicines include: 1) the medical need- the best avail-S7 OP 290608Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 607 - 608 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional developmentable treatment in cases of specific characteristics when au-thorized medicines cannot meet the patients' need; 2) suf-ficient scientific basis and/or clinical practice experience to justify their action. Distinguish the routine off-label use, which is the use of these medicines based on "high qual-ity" evidence and the use in specific exceptional circum-stances; 3) information duty and a high degree of respect for patient rights, involving the patient/carer in decision-making process; 4) monitoring and reporting the outcomes, efficiency and adverse reactions; 5) considering self-mon-itoring of prescribing practices, liability and accountabili-ty. An additional special responsibility which among others falls on pharmacists should be to ensure that the prescrib-er is conscious for off-label prescribing and the reasons for that 6) production of compendia of certain medicines, en-listing those off-label uses judged to be legitimate.7) fi-nancial sustainability of an off-label use in medical prac-tice. Before deciding to compound a patient-specific prep-aration, a step by step evaluation of alternatives should be made. These alternatives include a therapeutic alternative, dose rounding or manipulation of licensed dosage forms (splitting tablets, crushing tablets/opening capsules, dis-persing their content in water or food, splitting supposito-ries, the use of a preparation designed for another route of administration). ConclusionPrescription, compounding, dispensing and adminis-tration of off label use of medicines should be regulated within the national profile of health care policy.The regulation regarding the practice of off-label med-icine use differs between countries. Some countries have this practice regulated by law, while in others it is cov-ered by good practice regulations or general profession-al recommendations and ethical standards. Assuming that there is no any general rule to regulate the "accurate" off-label use of medicines it is of paramount importance for the countries to find a national solution to fulfil the ethical and legal demand, especially in the areas of pharmaceuti-cal law and health insurance law. The common elements of these regulatory frameworks are the physicians' freedom to prescribe off-label medicines if the scientific evidence ex-ists and the need to inform patients when making this deci-sion. Making policy efforts, by adopting appropriate guide-lines for off-label medicines use, based on scientific evi-dence, with specifications of healthcare professionals' re-sponsibilities and a registry of off-label drug use in every day practice, would make possible a valuable approach to-wards ensuring a quality use of these medicines. Recom-mended solutions, as practiced in some countries, would support prescribes in more direct and active approach to handle the ethical and legal phenomenon associated with the off-label use of medicinesReferencesConroy, S., 2003. Unlicensed and off label drug use in acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and other malignancies in children. Ann. Oncol. 14, 42-47. Dresser, R. and Frader, J., 2009. Off-label prescribing: A call for heightened professional and government oversight. J. Law. Med. Ethics. 37, 476-486. Gazarian, M. and Kelly, M., 2006. Off-label use of medicines: Consensus recommendations for evaluating appropriateness. Med. J.Aust. 185, 544-548.Pineiro Perez, R., Ruiz Antoran, M. B., Avedano Sola, C., Roman Riechmann, E., Cabrera Garcia, L., Cilleruelo Ortega, M.,J., Mellado Pena, M.J., 2014. [Results from the 2012-2013 paediatric national survey on off-label drug use in children in Spain (OL-PED study)]. An Pediatr. 81, 16-21. Radley, D.C., Finkelstein, S.N. and Stafford, R.S., 2006. Off-label prescribing among office-based physicians. Arch. Intern. Med. 166, 1021-1026. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 609 - 610 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.1(497.7) 614.27(497.7)Short communicationDeveloping community pharmacy practiceVesna Stavrova1*, Maja Simonoska Crcarevska2, Marija Glavash Dodov2 and Renata Slaveska-Raicki21Pzu Apteka Sara farm Skopje, Teodosie Gologanov 58, Skopje, Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Majka Teresa 47, Skopje, Macedonia* apt.studentska@gmail.comBackground With the independence of the Republic of Macedonia (RM) in 1991, in parallel with the transition from planned to market economy, the Health System has also under-gone through phases of transition from centrally planned towards market-guided. In 2005 with the amendments of the Law on Healthcare (LH), the Primary Healthcare Re-form started to be intensively implemented, by primary health system transformation from Public to Private Sector. With this process which is almost entirely completed, all community pharmacies in RM have been privatized in the course of 2007, hence today, there are a total of 846 orga-nizational units out of which 714 have concluded contract with the Health Insurance Fund of Macedonia (HIFM). The Community Pharmacy is the basic unit in the phar-maceutical sector and it poses a primary level of pharma-ceutical care. The contemporary community pharmacy prac-tice in RM is clearly positioned in the Health Care System (LMMD, 2007) it acts in accordance with the principles of Good Pharmacy Practice (GPP), and it is organized in ac-cordance with the requirements of the International Quality Management Standards ISO 9001:2000, as well as the Envi-ronment protection standards ISO 14001:2004. The activi-ties for implementation of GPP in Community Pharmacy are also based on the established standards by the World Health Organization (WHO), in regards to the definition of health, illness, as well as the role of the pharmacist in the Healthcare system (WHO, 2006). In line with all these improvements in 01.07.2013 the system of e-prescription has been introduced. Turnover of medicines in the Private Health Institution (PHI) community pharmacy The pharmaceutical sector in RM has been regulated, in accordance with the Laws on: 1) medicines and medi-cal devices; 2) Health care; 3) Health Insurance, further on, the Decree for Health Institutions Network, a series of rule-books and other bylaws (LHP, 2004; LHI, 2010; LMMD, 2007). The work in the community pharmacies with the HIFM is regulated with a special Rulebook referring to the way of prescription and dispensing medicines and narcot-ic drugs (RB, 2010). In regards to the turnover of medi-cines, the medicines from "the list of medicines for prima-ry healthcare" which are issued on prescription are provid-ed through the PHI Community Pharmacies which have con-cluded contracts with the HIFM. The rulebook for determin-ing the monthly funds that the PHI Community Pharmacies receive from the HIFM for the dispensed medicines on pre-scription from the abovementioned list funded by the HIFM, is in force. With the latest contracts and technical instruc-tions of HIFM from 2014, electronic communication has been established between HIFM and the pharmacies by in-troducing a system of electronic way of invoicing of the per-formed healthcare services. The pharmacies which have con-cluded contracts with the HIFM, submit monthly invoices for the dispensed medicines on prescription which are fund-ed by the HIFM in written and electronic form, together with the relevant supporting documentation. From the HIFM data on dispensed medicines on prescription, for the period 2013-2015 the trend of continuous growth in usage of medicines in the past years has been evident and this trend continues on in the first half of 2015 (HIFM, 2015a). Namely, most of the funds (27,5% from the total amount of HIFM) are foreseen for the ATC Group C - medicines for the cardiovascular sys-tem, while on the second place with about 15%, are the med-icines for the R group i.e., for treatment of illnesses of the re-spiratory system. The medicines that affect the CNS (ATC Group N) are on the third place with a share of 14, 5%. The most dispensed medicine according to the number of pre-scriptions in the first half of 2015 is the medicine enalapril with a total of 971.540 dispensed prescriptions. S7 OP 291610Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 609 - 610 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional developmentMedicines pricing policy Another important aspect from the work of the Com-munity Pharmacy is the medicines pricing policy. Namely, there is a national medicines pricing policy in RM for the medicines from the essential medicines list and the medi-cines from the list of medicines funded by HIFM (positive list). In addition, a rulebook has been adopted which deter-mines the criteria and the procedure for determination of the reference prices of the medicines. In 2014, HIFM made the fifth in a row annual revision of all the reference prices from the positive list and determined new reference pric-es harmonized with the prices of medicines in the region and the new marketing approved process of the medicines from the National Agency of medicines and medical devic-es. The reference prices of medicines are guaranteed for all the insured persons. As a result of the entire process, the latest data confirm that out of the total of 426 registered generic medicines from the Primary positive list, around 75% are without additional participation from the patients. The total num-ber of the medicines without participation per nonpropri-etary name of medicines is still the highest until now and in 2014 it was 42% of the total number of dispensed med-icines on prescription funded by the HIFM. Regarding the medicines per INN which are with participation, the larg-est part (82%) are with minimum participation or without participation. From the remaining medicines, 14% are with minimum participation and 4% are with maximum one. In the first half of 2015 the total increase of the number of dispensed prescriptions was around 10% compared to the same period of 2014 (HIFM, 2015b). PHI community pharmacy inspection and most frequent irregularities detected in the workThe inspection of the PHI Community Pharmacy is performed on the bases of: 1) Law on Health Insurance, 2) bylaws, and 3) contracts concluded between HIFM and the PHI Pharmacies. The inspection is performed in the prem-ises of the PHI Pharmacies and with a person authorized for the finances. Defined representative control sample is at least 15 randomly selected medicines. The licensed inspec-tors from the HIFM and the inspectors from the Pharma-ceutical Sector have conducted a total number of 852 con-trols; 98% of the total number of pharmacies which have a contract with the HIFM have been controlled in 2014 (HIFM, 2015b). Regarding the noncompliance in the work of a certain PHI Pharmacy - working unit according to the Legal reg-ulations and the Contractual provisions, contractual penal-ties are foreseen from a measure reprimand to a measure one-sided termination of the contract. From the conduct-ed inspections of the PHI Pharmacies most frequent deter-mined irregularities in their work are the following: 1) the pharmacy does not have one or more medicines on pre-scription from the generic medicines for which it is obliged to have at all times; 2) irregularities for which a measure reprimand is issued (if these irregularities are not elimi-nated within 8 days the pharmacy is subject to contractu-al penalty); 3) problems with the documentation related to the pharmacy or the pharmaceutical staff; 4) irregularities in the way the medicines are dispensed; 5) the pharmacy does not have internet connection and 6) "other". Upon the concluded noncompliance in the work of the pharmacies determined through the inspections, HIFM undertakes ad-equate measures.