Also, higher concentration of TPP resulted in production of larger parti-cles with very broad particle size distribution and substan-tial formation of aggregates with increasing concentrations of the cross-linker.ReferencesYucel, O.O., 2015. Inflammatory cytokines and the pathogenesis of periodontal disease. Immunome Res. 11, 093.Deshmukl, J., Jawali, M.A., Kulkarni, V.K., 2011. Host modulation therapy - a promising new concept in treating periodontal diseases. International Journal of Dental Clinics 3, 48-53.Desai, K.G.H., Park, H.J., 2004. Encapsulation of vitamin C in tripolyphosphate cross-linked chitosan microspheres by spray drying. Journal of Microencapsulation 22(2), 179-192.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 413 - 414 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.453.074Short communicationPreformulation studies as initial phase in development of film-coated tablets with BCS class II active componentBosilka Stefanova*, Packa Antovska, Sonja Ugarkovic, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Marina ChachorovskaResearch & Development, Alkaloid AD, blvd. AleksandarMakedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* bstefanova@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionIt may seem obvious to state that a new product should be adequately defined before anyserious product develop-ment is undertaken. In many cases, the value of the design phase is often underestimated in the rush to start develop-ment and get products to the market quickly.This can result in much wasted time and valuable re-sources. Since tablets and capsules account for approx-imately 70% of pharmaceutical preparations, an inves-tigation into the solid-state properties of candidate drugs is an important task to be undertaken during preformula-tion (Wells, 1988). Generally speaking, when dealing with high strength solid dosage forms, this formulation will be more susceptible to any drug substance variability. Howev-er, other studies are also important since, for example, the same chemical compound can have different crystal struc-tures (polymorphs), external shapes (habits), and hence different flow and compression properties.Preformulation is the initial phase in the development of pharmaceutical products. Suitable preformulation will inevitably result in obtaining simple and elegant formula-tion and successful dosage form from a commercial aspect.The performance of a solid dosage form is dependent on the physicochemical properties of the active ingredient and the excipients.Preformulation is a critical phase in drug development where the physicochemical profiling of the active pharma-ceutical ingredients (APIs) and excipients are determined and prototype formulations are made. Selection of stable polymorph and solid-state compat-ibility studies of the compounds proposed for development of new pharmaceutical formulations are essential in the ini-tial stage of formulation in order to identify possible in-compatibilities that may affect the stability of the finished product (Gibson, 2004). A wide variety of methodologies that exist make it possible for the preformulation scientist to effectively study whatever needs.The aim of this study was to choose the most stabile polymorph as well as to investigate possible solid-state in-teractions between API of BCS class II and excipients pro-posed for development of film-coated tablets, based on the changes in the infrared spectra of the both polymorphs and induced changes in the infrared spectra of the stressed bi-nary mixtures compared to the infrared spectra of initial bi-nary mixture, as consequence of possible solid-state chem-ical reaction. Additionally, differential scanning calorim-etry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) were used to distinguish between the pseudopolymorphs of the studied API. Materials and methodsMaterials used are: anhydrous pseudopolymorph of BCS class II active compound, monohydrate pseudopoly-morph of BCS class II active compound, mannitol, dical-cium phosphate, povidone, hydroxypropyl cellulose, low-substituted, sodium stearyl fumarate, cellulose, microcrys-talline, partially pre-gelatinazed maize starch and sodium lauryl sulfate.Fourier Transform Infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy has proved to be suitable technique for these trials. The FT-IR spectra were recorded using ATR method, in the 4000-550 cm-1 region, on Varian 660 FT-IR spectrometer (Vari-an, Australia) (resolution 4 cm-1, 16 scans per spectrum). Attenuated total reflectance (ATR) spectra were obtained by MIRAcleZnSe ATR module (PIKE technologies) with S4 PP 196414Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 413 - 414 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationslow pressure micrometer clamp.FT-IR spectra of the binary mixtures were recorded initially and then the same samples were placed in the sta-bility chambers under various conditions (40 degC/75% RH, 25 degC/60% RH).Weighed samples of 2-3 mg of the studied API (mono-hydrate and anhydrous form) were scanned in aluminum pans with a perforated lid at speed of 10 K/min from room temperature to 260 degC. All of the samples were analyzed in dry nitrogen atmosphere using a Netzsch DSC 204F1 Phoenix instrument (Netzsch, Germany). The TGA curves were recorded in the 25-400 degC range, on a Netzsch TG 209 F1 Iris analyzer (Netzsch, Germany) using aluminum oxide pans. Results and discussionResults showed spontaneous transition of API from anhydrous to monohydrate form. Significant difference between these pseudopolymorphs was shown in data ob-tained by Differential Scanning Calorimetry and Thermo-gravimetric analysis. In the TG curves of monohydrate and anhydrous forms losses of mass of 5.11% and 1.27%, re-spectively was observed which is in accordance with the-oretical value for monohydrate and anhydrous form. The melting endothermic peak at around 253 degC (with decom-position) in the both DSC curves, and continuous evapo-ration of water in the DSC curve of the monohydrate form was observed. These observations are in good agreement with the studied pseudopolymorphic forms. Stability of the molecule of the monohydratepseudopolymorph was the main reason this polymorph to be chosen as more suitable for the development of film-coated tablet formulation.Careful inspection of the obtained spectra of the pure API (fresh and stressed) and fresh and stressed binary mix-tures, leads to conclusion that no changes in the position and shape of bands in regards to the spectrum of the ini-tial sample are observable. This confirms that the applied stress conditions do not affect the overall appearance of the FT-IR spectra of the API. Therefore, the characteris-tic vibrational bands from API as well, can be used as rel-evant spectroscopic markers in order to assess the solid-state stability between APIs in the presence of the stud-ied excipients. Based on the comparison of the FT-IR spec-tra of the initial and stressed binary mixtures it can be con-cluded that after exposure on accelerated temperature and humidity levels during the screening period, there is no sig-nificant change in the FT-IR spectra of the binary mixtures of API and described excipients in comparison to the cor-responding FT-IR spectra of the freshly prepared samples. Minor spectral changes, in the binary mixture with po-vidone stored at higher temperature/moisture levels were observed at 1660 cm-1 probably due to the higher presence of moisture and hygroscopic nature of the excipients. For this purpose binary mixture with povidone in formulation ratio was prepared and tested by the same procedure as pre-viously described. In this binary mixture there were no sig-nificant changes in the FT-IR spectra.ConclusionResults showed spontaneous transition of API from anhydrous to monohydrate form. Stability of the molecule of the monohydrate pseudopolymorph was the main reason this polymorph to be chosen as more suitable for the devel-opment of film-coated tablet formulation.The dedicated FT-IR spectroscopy of the binary mix-tures between API and the proposed excipients clear-ly demonstrated the solid-state compatibility of the API and the described excipients. The conclusion was derived based on the absence of significant changes in the FT-IR spectra of the stressed binary mixtures in comparison with the corresponding data obtained from the freshly prepared binary mixtures and the starting materials. ReferencesGibson, M., 2004. Pharmaceutical preformulation and formulation, A Partical Guide from Candidate Drug Selection to Commercial Dosage Forme, IHS Health Group, pp. 157-176; pp. 382-391.Wells, J.I., 1998. Pharmaceutical Preformulation.The Physicochemical Properties of Drug Substances. Chichester: Ellis Horwood Ltd.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 415 - 416 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.212.015.11Short communicationInfluence of the formulation factors on the dissolution of highly dose water soluble active pharmaceutical ingredientDejan Kuneski*, Packa Antovska, Sonja Dimcevska, Bosilka Stefanova, Blagica Mancevska, Dusica Angelovska, Zoran Zivic, Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development, Alkaloid AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* dkuneski@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionHighly dose water soluble active pharmaceutical in-gredient (API) with analgesic effect was formulated as an immediate-release film-coated tablet. This formulation is indicated for treatment of mild to moderate pain and to ex-press the analgesic effect faster.It is important to note that the film is not functional, and the presented data are related to the tablet core.The purpose of our study was to examine the influence of some formulation factors, such as particle size of the API, disin-tegrant type and concentration (Bolhuiset al., 1994), mass of tablet core and concentration of starch (starch 1500/ par-tially pre-gelatinized Maize starch) (Cunningham, 1999) on the dissolution profile of the API.Materials and methodsAPI, Prosolv HD 90(Silicified microcrystalline cel-lulose) was supplied from JRS Pharma Rosenberg, Ger-many, Starch 1500 (partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch) was supplied from Colorcon, Indianapolis USA, Kollidon VA 64 (Copovidone) was supplied from BASF, Ludwig-shaften, Germany, Primojel (Sodium starch glycolate) was supplied from DFE Pharma, Goch, Germany, L-Hydroxy-propyl cellulose LH-11 was supplied from Shin-Etsu, To-kyo, Japan, Ac-Di-Sol (Croscarmellose sodium) was sup-plied from FMC Bio Polymer, Wallingstown, Little Island, Cork , Ireland, Aerosil 200 (Silica, colloidal anhydrous) was supplied from Evonik Industries , Rheinfelden, Ger-many, Kolliphor SLS Fine (Sodium Lauryl Sulphate) was supplied from BASF, Ludwigshaften, Germany, Magne-sium stearate was supplied from FACI SpA, Carasco, Italy and Talc from Merck, Darmstadt.API used in the experimental trials is character-ized with high water solubility and has molecular weight 352.48. Formulations with different disintegrants, partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch (Starch 1500) concentration, different tablet core mass and API's particle size were pre-pared: - Formulation I: API is not sieved, has not Starch 1500/ partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, with mass of tablet core 875 mg and 5% pro tablet (Rowe et al., 2013) of L-hydroxypropyl cellulose.- Formulation II: API is not sieved, with 5% pro tablet Starch 1500/ partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 875 mg and 5% pro tab-let of L-hydroxypropyl cellulose.- Formulation III: API is not sieved, with 10.83 % Starch 1500/ partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 875 mg and 5% pro tab-let of L-hydroxypropyl cellulose.- Formulation IV: API is not sieved, has not Starch 1500/ partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 875 mg and 10% pro tablet of L-hy-droxypropyl cellulose.- Formulation V: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 11.83 % pro tablet Starch 1500/par-tially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 875 mg and 5% pro tablet of L-hydroxypro-pyl cellulose.- Formulation VI: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 6.33 % pro tablet Starch 1500/partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 875 mg, 5% pro tablet of L-hydroxypropyl cellu-lose and 5% pro tablet Ac_Di-Sol/croscarmellose sodium.- Formulation VII: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 5.67 % pro tablet Starch 1500, mass of S4 PP 197416Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 415 - 416 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationstablet core 860 mg and 4% pro tablet of Primojel/sodium starch glycolate.- Formulation VIII: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 10.42 % pro tablet Starch 1500/ par-tially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 865 mg and 5% pro tablet of Primojel/sodi-um starch glycolate.- Formulation IX: API is sieved through 315 um sieve, with 5.67 % pro tablet Starch 1500/par-tially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 860 mg and 4% pro tablet of Primojel/sodi-um starch glycolate.- Formulation X: API is sieved through 315 um sieve, with 10.42 % pro tablet Starch 1500/par-tially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 865 mg and 5% pro tablet of Primojel/sodi-um starch glycolate.- Formulation XI: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 8.00 % pro tablet Starch 1500/sodium starch glycolate, mass of tablet core 880 mg and 4% pro tablet of Primojel/sodium starch glycolate.- Formulation XII: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 8.00 % pro tablet Starch 1500/partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 865 mg and 5% pro tablet of L-hydroxypropyl cel-lulose.- Formulation XIII: API is sieved through 610 um sieve, with 8.00 % pro tablet Starch 1500/partially pre-gelatinized Maize starch, mass of tablet core 880 mg, 3% pro tablet of L-hydroxypropyl cellu-lose and 3% pro tablet of Primojel/sodium starch glycolate.Dissolution profile is being conducted on the experi-mental trials.The dissolution method conditions were: apparatus II (paddle apparatus) at speed of 75 rpm, dissolution medium (900 ml +- 1% phosphate buffer pH 7.2 +- 0.05), 10 ml sam-ple volume, dissolution medium temperature 37 +- 0.5 *C. Samples were collected at six time points: 5, 10, 15, 20, 30 and 45 minutes. For determination of dissolution rate of active sub-stance UV absorptionspectrophotometric method was used.The content of dissolved API was calculated by mea-suring the UV absorptions of the test and standard solution at detection of 221 nm.Results and discussionBased on the results from the extensive dissolution evaluation on the experimental trials one may conclude that the most influential factor among the following: dis-integrant type, tablet average mass and API particle size is the disintegrant type. Namely, the dissolution profile is most highly affected when pre-gelatinized starch is in-corporated into the formulation in comparison to sodium starch glycolate and crosscarmelose sodium. This results point to conclusion that dissolution of the highly dosage highly water-soluble API is rather fastened by the parti-tioning of the dissolution media between the pre-gelati-nized starch and the API than with the use of a classical su-per-disintegrants.