5, 41-51.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 439 - 440 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.246:616.345Short communicationComparison of biopharmaceutical properties of 5-FU loaded TEOS and TEOS/APTES microparticles for colon targetingBeti Djurdjic1,2*, Nikola Geskovski1, Simona Dimchevska1, Katerina Goracinova11Institute of Pharmaceutical technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia 2Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Montenegro, Krusevac bb, 81000 Podgorica, Montenegro* betibd@t-com.meIntroductionColon drug targeting is valuable approach for the treat-ment of serious GIT diseases like ulcerative colitis, Chron's disease, colon carcinomas and infections; considering that high local concentration at the site of action can be achieved, and systemic exposure to the active substance as well as se-rious side effects can be avoided (Chourasia and Jain, 2003). Different studies point to the connection of the inflamma-tion and tumorigenesis and the presence of immunoinflam-matory mediators and inflammation in virtually all steps of colon cancer development, including initiation, promo-tion, progression, and metastasis. Therefore, the design con-cept of increased localization of micro and/or nanoparticles at the site of inflammation/cancer due to enhanced permea-bility and retention in the tissue damaged by inflammation/cancer may also be favourable for colon cancer targeting. Additionally, prolonged intimate contact with the epitheli-al membranes at the site of action, which may be enhanced by incorporation of bioadhesive polymers into the carriers is crucial for improvement of specific interaction with mu-cin and cell surfaces as well as for improved localization of the drug delivery systems at the site of action. Whence, the aim of this study was to design 5-fluorouracil loaded or-ganomodified silica microparticles as systems for controlled and site specific colon delivery as well as to investigate the influence of the concentration of the silane coupling agent 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) upon the micropar-ticle properties.Materials and methodsMaterials Silica microparticles were prepared using the follow-ing reagents: tetraethoxysilane (TEOS; Sigma, Germany), 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES; Sigma, Germany), ethanol 96% (v/v) (Merck, Germany), acetic acid (Merck, Germany), 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU; EBEWE Pharma, Aus-tria), and deionised water. All other used chemicals and re-agents were of analytical grade.Preparation of silica microparticlesSilica microparticles were prepared from tetraethoxysi-lane (samples MP1) and tetraethoxysilane co-hydrolyzed with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane by combining sol-gel technology with spray-drying. TEOS-based silica micropar-ticles (MP1) were synthesized by sol-gel method at room temperature using a one-step acid-catalized hydrolysis. Sil-ica sol was prepared by hydrolysis and polycondensation of TEOS with deionised water, ethanol and acetic acid as a cat-alyst. The molar ratio of the silica sol was TEOS: water : ethanol : acetic acid = 0.01 : 1.39 : 0.43 : 0.009. Hydrolised silica sol was spray dried with a mini spray dryer (B-290, Buchi Labortechik AG, Switzerland). 5-FU was added after completed hydrolysis and incorporated in microparticles in network synthesis phase at concentration 12 wt%. For par-tial substitution of TEOS, 2.5 mol% (MP2) and 5 mol% (MP3) organomodified alkoxide was used. 5-FU was dis-solved in the hydrolised sol before spray drying at concen-tration of 12 wt%.Characterization of silica microparticlesPrepared silica microparticles were characterized in a terms of mean particle size and particle size distribution S4 PP 209440Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 439 - 440 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentations(Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK), surface morphology (SEM; Jeol-SEM6400, Japan) and drug load-ing efficiency (HPLC Agilent 1200 with UV detector).Ex vivo mucoadhesion studies was performed and the percent of mucoadhesion was determined with modified everted sac method (Santos et al., 1999). In vitro drug release studiesThe dissolution test from prepared silica microparticles were carried out in closed glass tubes at 37 degC and 50 hori-zontal strikes/min (horizontal shaker; Shaker Unitronik OR, Selecta. Spain). To compare the drug release under differ-ent pH conditions, 50 mg of the microparticles mixed with 10 ml buffer solution with pH 1.2 and 10 ml buffer solution with pH 7.4. At appropriate intervals, 2 ml of samples were withdrawn, filtered through 0.45 mm membrane filter, and assayed by HPLC method.In order to investigate the possible drug release mecha-nisms, data obtained from in vitro drug release studies were analyzed using different kinetic models (Higuchi equation, the traditional power law and modified power law) (Viitala et al., 2007). Determined n value indicated most probable drug release mechanisam, while goodness of fit was evalu-ated using the r (correlation coefficient) values.Results and discussionPrepared particles were spherical with smooth sur-faces and unimodal narrow size distribution. Median vol-ume diameter of microparticles was 1.3876 mm (SPAN fac-tor 1.745), 2.1405 mm (SPAN factor 1.133) and 3.3763 mm (SPAN factor 1.713) for MP1, MP2 and MP3, respectively. The content of 5-fluorouracil was 89.5 mg (MP1), 145.71 mg (MP2) and 160.78 mg 5-FU/g microparticles (MP3). The experimental results suggest that addition of precursor 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane in the silica sol influenced the inner structure of the matrix, resulting with increased porosity and hydrophilicity of the network, resulting in in-creased average paricle size and drug loading efficiency.The results from the in vitro drug release studies of TEOS based microparticles showed that the silica matrices are capable for controlled release of 5-FU during prolonged time periods. However, the dissolution rate was proportional to 5-FU loading, most probably because of possible strong 5-FU - silica interactions that could initiate formation of matrix microdeformations during the sol-gel process, result-ing in overall increase of matrix porosity (Djurdjic et al., 2011). pH dependent drug release was noticed from TEOS based particles with lower percent of 5-FU (2 and 6wt%) (Djurdjic et al., 2010, 2011), but pH dependency was lost when higher percent of 5-FU (12 wt%) was incorporated in the processed silica sol during production of the micropar-ticles, most probably because of increased matrix porosity. The drug release data showed the best fit to modified pow-er law equation; r2 were 0.967 and 0.963 at pH 1.2 and pH 7.4, respectively for sample MP1. Values n for sample MP1 (0.07 and 0.09 at pH 1.2 and pH 7.4, respectively) point to drug diffusion through very porous matrix without capacity for control of the release during time. Organically modified microparticles showed increased burst and increased drug release rate compared to TEOS based microparticles. Burst release varied accordingly to the percent of APTES. For formulations with highest percent of APTES and drug loading, the total ammount of incorporated 5-FU was released within few hours. The drug release data of organically modified microparticles show the best fit to modified power law model and r2 were 0.859 and 0.955 (at pH 1.2 and pH 7.4, respectively) for MP2. Values n for sam-ple MP2 (0.16 and 0.13 at pH 1.2 and pH 7.4, respectively) indicating to drug diffusion through highly porous system. Formulations with high percent of APTES were unable to control the 5-FU release in time. The presence of -amino groups at the surface of AP-TES particles affected the intensity of interaction with cell membranes and lead to increased muco/bioadhesive poten-tial relative to the unmodified TEOS particles (Djurdjic et al., 2011). Percent of mucoadhesion for organically modi-fied microparticles increased with increased proportion of APTES (55.7% of mucoadhesion for MP3).ConclusionThe addition of precursor APTES modifies the mor-phology of silica microparticles, resulting in increased par-ticle size, drug loading efficiency, muco/bioadhesive poten-tial and 5-FU release rate compared to TEOS based parti-cles. Mucoadhesive potential, burst release and dissolution rate for organically modified particles varied accordingly to the percent of APTES.ReferencesChourasia, M.K., Jain, S.K., 2003. Pharmaceutical approaches to colon targeted drug delivery systems. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 6(1), 33-66.Santos, C.A., Jacob, J.S., Hertzog, B.A., Freedman, B.D., Press, D.L., Harnpicharnchai, P., Mathiowitz, E. 1999. Correlation of two bioadhesion assays: the everted sac technique and the CAHN microbalance. J. Control. Release 61, 113-122.Djurdjic, B., Cvetkovska, M., Dodov, M.G., Crcarevska, M.S., Petrovska, V., Geskovski, N., Goracinova, K., 2010. Silica based xerogel microparticles loaded with 5-FU: Formulation and characterization. 7th World Meeting on Pharmaceutics, Biopharmaceuticsand Pharmaceutical Technology, Valleta, Malta.Djurdjic, B., Geskovski, N., Petrusevski, G., Crcarevska, M.S., Dodov, M.G., Cvetkovska, M., Goracinova, K., 2011. Characterization of silica xerogel microparticles as 5-FU carriers for colon cancer therapy. Maced. Pharm. Bull. 57 (l), 297-299.Viitala, R., Jokinen, M., Rosenholm, J., 2007. Mechanistic studies on release of large and small molecules from biodegradable SiO2. Int. J. Pharm. 336, 382-390.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 441 - 442 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33:616.314.17 616.314.17-085.33Short communicationDoxycycline hyclate-enriched gelatine nanoparticles for periodontal disease treatment: preparation and evaluation studySelestina Gorgieva1, Vanja Kokol1, Nikola Geskovski2, Simona Dimchevska2 and Katerina Goracinova2*1University of Maribor, Institute of Engineering Materials and Design, Smetanova ulica 17, 2000 Maribor, Slovenia2Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University in Skopje, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* kago@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionPeriodontal disease is chronic inflammatory disorder, believed to be generally caused by pathogenic microorgan-isms colonising the toot surface, amongst which the most popular are Actonobacilius actinomyycetem comitans, Bacteroides forsitus, Porphyromonas gingivalis, etc., be-ing ~75% GRAM- anaerobic type. This disease affect the structural organs supporting the teeth, causing gingiva de-tachment from the tooth and periodontal pockets forma-tion as an ideal ecological niche for the bacteria prolifera-tion. Doxycycline (DOXY) is a wide spectrum antibacte-rial, bacteriostatic drug, effective against the aerob-/anaer-obic type of GRAM+ and GRAM- bacteria as well as pro-tozoa. It is a member of the tetracycline group, which is frequently used in dental treatments due to matrix metal-lo-proteinase- inhibitory effect and strong activity against periodontal pathogens (Tamimi et al., 2008). DOXY is al-most completely absorbed in duodenum with a bioavail-ability of more than 80% with an average of 95%, and half-life of absorption is 0.85+-0.41h.Various drug delivery systems have been trailed in periodontitis treatments, such as fibres, gels, injectable systems, micro-spheres/particles, strips, compacts, films, and nanoparticles (NPs) (Raheja et al., 2013). Use of the later was found advantageous over the others due to their size allowing penetration in extra- and intracellular areas, such as gingival fluid, bacterial cells, from the gingival sul-cus to the underlying connective tissue and to periodon-tal pocket areas below the gum line, being otherwise hard-ly accessible by different systems (Segundo-Pinon et al., 2000). Variety of materials have been proposed for drug-NPs processing; the important biomimetic merits of par-ent biopolymer (the biocompatibility and presence of mul-tiple functional moieties) makes the gelatin (GEL) NPs ef-fective delivery vehicles to be applicable for diverse thera-peutics (Khan and Schneider 2013). By this respect, presented study examines the applica-bility of nanoprecipitation as preferable methodology for DOXY-enriched GNPs processing. The variations range of processing factors, being selected within primary, trial-er-ror experiments (i.e. the pH of GEL solution, DOXY con-centration and EDC/NHS concentration) were established with utilization of "one factor each time" experimental ap-proach. The limiting factor in all cases was drug/biopoly-mer precipitation. The influence of processing and formu-lation factors upon the particle size, drug content and en-capsulation efficiency were estimate for processed formu-lation using MODDE software- generated experimental design. Chemical modification (crosslinking degree) and (in vitro) dissolution behaviour of selected DOXY-GNP formulation will be also discussed in this paper.Materials and methodsMaterials. GEL type B from bovine skin Bloom 225 (Sigma Aldrich, Germany), Doxycicline hyclate (DOXI) (Tocris, UK), Lutrol F-127 was kindly donated by BASF, Germany. 1-ethyl-3-(-3-dimethylaminopropyl) carbodi-imide hydrochloride (EDC) and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Germany. All other chemicals were of analytical grade and were used as received, without additional purification.GNPs preparation. 0.5% w/v GEL/H2O solutions were prepared at 50degC under moderate stirring for 1h. The S4 PP 210442Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 441 - 442 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationstwo separate solutions were prepared in parallel, and sub-sequently adjusted to pH 7.5 and pH 9.5. 1mL of select-ed solution was added dropwise to 10mL of 7% w/v Plu-ronic F-127 solution in 96% EtOH, latter being vigorous-ly stirred onto magnetic stirred with 700rpm. Addition-al 10mL EtOH were added afterwards, just prior addi-tion of different concentrations of cross linkers (20-25% w/w, relative to gelatin), being dissolved in 1.250 mL de-ionised water just prior experiments. One set of samples were removed from the magnetic stirred, while the other half were subjected to mild stirring for 24h. In parallel with DOXY-free HNPs, the DOXY-loaded one slight modifica-tion of above procedure, by simple mixing of pre- prepared DOXY and GEL solutions in quantities described within experimental design.Characterization. Scanning Electron Microscopy /SEM/ imaging and Differential Light Scattering /DLS/ analysis were performed to evaluate particle size, PDI and aggregation behaviour in different physiological me-dia and particle morphology. Drug content (%), encapsu-lation efficiency (%) and drug release (%) were quantified by optimised HPLC method (according to European Phar-macopoeia 5.0). Uv-Vis Spectroscopy (using tri nitro-ben-zene-sulfonic acid /TNBS/ reagent) and Attenuated Total Reflectance - Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy /ATR-FTIR/ method were used to identify the crosslinking efficiency.