MTX has also been found efficacious in the treatment of other diseases, including psoriasis, asthma, systemic lupus erythematosus, Crohn's disease, myositis and vasculitis. Many physicians use MTX for its steroid-sparing proper-ties in patients with asthma and others who may have side effects related to corticosteroid use. The key of the success of MTX in the treatment any of these diseases (with the exception of ALL) is the recognition that low-dose thera-py achieves efficacy while minimizing side effects (Moss, 1995).MTX is a toxic medication, but if it is dosed correctly and monitored appropriately, its toxic effects can be min-imized. These effects are categorized as minor or major. Minor toxic effects such as stomatitis, malaise, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, headaches and mild alopecia are not life threatening but occur in 20 to 30 percents of patients. Other effects in this category include fatigue, mood alter-ation, dizziness, fever, myalgia and polyarthralgia. Most minor toxic effects are associated with depletion of fo-late. Folate supplementation with 1 mg daily or 7 mg once weekly should be considered for all patients. Studies show that low-dose folate does not interfere with the efficacy of MTX (ACRM, 1996). Most rheumatologists advise pa-tients to avoid taking the folate dose on the same day as the MTX dose. Often, minor toxic effects respond to a re-S6 PP 276578Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 577 - 578 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsduction in the MTX dose or an adjustment in the dosing schedule. Major toxic effects of MTX, such as hepatic, re-nal, pulmonary and bone marrow disorders, occur less fre-quently than the minor effects but may be life threatening.In order to improve therapeutic efficacy and the com-fort of the application of MTX, new pharmaceutical for-mulation is ongoing. Controlled release of MTX has been achieved by several techniques, but mostly in in vitro and preclinical animal models. Formulations of MTX that have been recently developed in order to improve cancer treat-ment include injectable thermosensitive hydrogels con-taining MTX-loaded chitosan-based microspheres, folic acid-chitosan-MTX core-shell nanoparticles, thermosensi-tive systems prepared on biocompatible polymer Pluron-ic F-127 as a vehicle, MTX-loaded alpha-lactalbumin mi-croparticles, MTX-monoclonal antibody conjugates, MTX intercalated in a nanoceramic vehicle magnesium alumin-ium layered double hydroxide, coated with poly(D,L-lac-tide-co-glycolide) (PLGA). Most of these pharmaceutical formulations have demonstrated superiority when com-pared to conventional formulations of MTX in terms of localized drug delivery, long-term sustained drug release, and good biocompatibility (Beidokhti et al., 2016). Nov-el topical formulations of MTX have been also evaluated for the potential use in the treatment of psoriasis. Some of these formulations with enhanced skin penetration of MTX include microemulsions, nanogels, niosomes, liposomal hydrogels, deformable liposomes and solid lipid nanopar-ticles (SLN) (Avasatthi et al., 2015). The latest topical formulations of MTX for the treatment of psoriasis pre-pared as nano-vesicles use mostly bioadhesive surfactant systems containing polysorbate 60 or 80 as surfactants. NLC-based smart gel of MTX composed of lipids, surfac-tant Tween 80 and co-surfactant PEG 400, was formulated for intra-articular administration that could give site-spe-cific delivery of a drug to the rheumatic joints (Shinde et al., 2016). MTX was also formulated in transdermal patch-es with different ratios of ethyl-cellulose and hydroxypro-pylmethyl-cellulose, and permeation enhancers Tween-80, Span-80, dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), and isopropyl my-ristate. These transdermal patches were evaluated for in vi-tro release, ex vivo permeation and pharmacokinetics in vivo, and all formulations exerted improved bioavailabili-ty in comparison to MTX without enhancers (Rama et al., 2012).In summary, MTX plays a significant role in the treat-ment of various diseases, but toxicity remains the main is-sue of the use of MTX. Therefore, novel pharmaceutical formulations, which have reduced toxicity, better pharma-cokinetic properties and targeted delivery, have emerged. Promising results have been obtained, but mostly in in vi-tro and in vivo animal studies. Therefore, these new formu-lations and drug delivery systems of MTX need to be fur-ther evaluated, especially in clinical settings.Acknowledgement: This project has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 690876ReferencesRossi, S., 2013. Australian Medicines Handbook, Adelaide.Ward, J.R., 1985. Historical perspective on the use of methotrexate for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis. J. Rheumatol. 12, 3-6.Jundt, J.W., Browne, B.A., Fiocco, G.P., Steele, A.D., Mock, D., 1993. A comparison of low dose methotrexate bioavailability: oral solution, oral tablet, subcutaneous and intramuscular dosing. J. Rheumatol. 20, 1845-1849.Moss, R.B., 1995. Alternative pharmacotherapies for steroid-dependent asthma. Chest. 107, 817-825.Guidelines for monitoring drug therapy in rheumatoid arthritis. American College of Rheumatology Ad Hoc Committee on Clinical Guidelines. Arthritis Rheum. 1996. 39, 723-731.Beidokhti, H.R.N., Ghaffarzadegan, R., Mirzakhanlouei, S., Ghazizadeh, L., Dorkoosh, F.A., 2016. Preparation, Characterization, and Optimization of Folic Acid-Chitosan-Methotrexate Core-Shell Nanoparticles by Box-Behnken Design for Tumor-Targeted Drug Delivery. AAPS PharmSciTech. [In Press]Avasatthi, V., Pawar, H., Dora, C.P., Bansod, P., Gill, M.S., Suresh, S., 2015. A novel nanogel formulation of methotrexate for topical treatment of psoriasis: optimization, in vitro and in vivo evaluation. Pharm. Dev. Technol. 29, 1-9.Rama, B., Shantha, A., 2012. Chemical penetration enhancers for enhance transdermal delivery of methotrexate: formulation, in vitro, ex vivo and in vivo characterization. Int. J. Pharm. Bio Sci. 3, 36-47.Shinde, C. G., Venkatesh, M. P., Rajesh, K. S., Srivastava, A., Osmani, R. A. M., Sonawane, Y. H, 2016. Intra-articular delivery of a methotrexate loaded nanostructured lipid carrier based smart gel for effective treatment of rheumatic diseases. RSC Advances, 6, 12913-12924.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 579 - 580 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 576.311.33:616.379-008.64Short communicationTargeting endoplasmic reticulum stress in diabetesBojan Stanimirov, Karmen Stankov, Nebojsa Pavlovic*, Maja Danic, Svetlana Golocorbin-Kon, Momir MikovFaculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia* nebojsa.pavlovic@mf.uns.ac.rsIntroductionThe endoplasmic reticulum (ER) represents a mem-branous labyrinth of branching interlinked tubules and flat-tened sacs extending from the perinuclear space through-out the cytoplasm, being responsible for an assortment of critical cellular housekeeping functions. The rough ER, as-sembled with ribosomes, plays a key role in protein syn-thesis, folding, posttranslational modification, and trans-port. The smooth ER has a central role in the biosynthesis of lipids and steroids, assembly of lipid bilayers, metabo-lism of carbohydrates, metabolism of drugs and xenobi-otics and regulation of calcium intracellular homeostasis. Quality control mechanisms of the cell ensure that new-ly synthesized proteins are folded into their correct config-uration according to their function and destination in the cell. Therefore, protein folding in particular represents an exquisitely orchestrated aspect of protein synthesis in the ER that involves pathways for folding, assembly, modifi-cation, quality control, and recycling. In addition to an ox-idizing environment, protein folding requires the participa-tion of chaperone proteins, glycosylating enzymes and ad-equately high calcium levels. Appropriate folding of the nascent polypeptide chain is achieved through the actions of a series of molecular chaperones and foldases, which keep the polypeptide in soluble form and facilitate folding into a thermodynamically favored structure. Since the ER provides high fidelity quality control in protein synthesis, maturation and transport, it is a highly dynamic organelle, whose complex function can be significantly influenced by various factors both inside the cell and in its microenviron-ment. Failures in control mechanisms lead to accumulation of unfolded, misfolded, insoluble or otherwise damaged proteins in the lumen of the ER resulting in a state known as ER stress (Stankov et al, 2013). Continued accumulation of incorrectly folded proteins can irreversibly and irrepara-bly damage cellular functions leading to cell death. There-fore, several cellular sensors and pathways have evolved to respond to this threat and to reduce the risk. Prime among these is the unfolded protein response (UPR), a signaling pathway primarily aiming at protecting cellular integrity by restoring proper ER folding capacity and overall pro-tein processing. However, terminally misfolded proteins that cannot be repaired may be removed from the cell by one of two separate processes. One process is ER-associat-ed degradation (ERAD), which involves the retro-translo-cation of irreparably misfolded proteins from the ER back into the cytosol, where they are ubiquitinated and subse-quently subjected to degradation via the proteasome. Fur-thermore, insoluble misfolded proteins may be assembled together with other cellular debris into aggresomes (jux-tanuclear complexes that occur as a cell culture phenom-enon, for sequestration of toxic, aggregated proteins) and then recycled via autophagy.Material and methodsDetailed and comprehensive search of PubMed and Scopus databases was carried out for original and review articles using the key words: endoplasmic reticulum stress, unfolded protein response, diabetes mellitus, in order to determine patophysiological implications of ER stress in type 2 diabetes (T2D) and to identify potential ER stress-targeting antidiabetic agent.Results and discussionAn imbalance in energy intake and expenditure leads to obesity, a major health threat that increases the risk of S6 PP 277580Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 579 - 580 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsT2D, cardiovascular disease and cancer. Obese subjects show activation of UPR in metabolic tissues including ad-ipose tissue, liver, and the pancreas. Obesity is also asso-ciated with both hepatic and peripheral insulin resistance, along with elevated levels of proinflammatory cytokines. Studies with genetically obese or diet-induced obese mice revealed elevated levels of ER stress-associated markers: RNA (PKR)-like ER kinase (PERK) and eukaryotic trans-lation initiation factor-2 alpha phosphorylation, inositol-requiring enzyme-1 (IRE1)-mediated JNK activation, and higher amounts of ER chaperone protein, glucose-regulat-ed protein 78 (GRP78) in the liver and adipose tissue. ER stress in obesity is thought to be induced by an augment-ed demand for protein synthesis under nutrient excess and by elevated levels of saturated free fatty acids (FFA). Ex-cess in saturated FFA, especially palmitate has been shown to cause ER stress and to activate the UPR in pancreat-ic b-cells and hepatocytes by altering the integrity of ER membrane. It is well-recognized that hyperglycemia, high plasma levels of saturated FFAs and obesity in general are key risk factors for the development of T2D. The same conditions are identified as triggers of ER stress, particu-larly in organs such as the liver and pancreas. In addition, leptin resistance, a condition that has been documented in the majority of the obese population, has been shown to contribute to obesity-linked disorders via ER stress. Obe-sity induces T2D, a metabolic disorder characterized by a combination of insulin resistance, dysregulated hepat-ic glucose production, and inadequate insulin secretion by pancreatic b-cells. At the molecular level, it involves per-turbations in insulin signaling, such as reduced insulin re-ceptor function and reduced post-insulin receptor phos-phorylation steps. ER stress parameters such as phosphor-ylation of PERK and IRE1, ER-associated protein kinas-es that determine cell fate during UPR, are increased in the liver and adipose tissues of T2D animals (Stankov, 2010). The three branches of the UPR: IRE1, PERK, and activat-ing transcription factor 6 (ATF6), have been implicated in the cellular inflammatory processes. Increased activation of IRE1, X-box binding protein-1 (XBP1) and JNK results in decreased insulin receptor signaling and insulin resis-tance. Moreover, ER stress parameters including Grp78, XBP1s, phospho-eIF2a, and phospho-JNK, are increased in the liver and adipose tissues of obese insulin-resistant non-diabetic humans and these parameters are significant-ly reduced after weight loss. Interestingly, ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), a naturally occurring hydrophilic bile acid that has long been used to treat chronic cholestatic liver disease is emerged as the agent that mitigates ER stress at the cellular level (Stanimirov et al, 2015). The administra-tion of UDCA resulted in normalization of hyperglycemia and restoration of hepatic and muscle insulin sensitivity in obese humans. Additionally, UDCA has been shown to act as leptin-sensitizing agent. Therefore, UDCA represents an ER stress-modifying agent with therapeutic potential in ER stress-induced complications of obesity. In accordance, UDCA has been shown to exert an anti-atherogenic activ-ity in diabetic atherosclerosis by targeting ER stress. Ad-ditionally, by ameliorating ER stress-associated detrimen-tal signaling, UDCA improves function of dysfunctional endothelial cells and prevents formation of atherosclerot-ic plaque. However, the detailed molecular mechanisms of UDCA-mediated alleviation of ER stress are still to be elu-cidated.ConclusionsMore detailed insight in ER stress mechanisms will provide opportunity to develop UPR-manipulating anti-di-abetic therapeutic strategies. Therapeutic agents aimed at ameliorating ER stress by promoting proper protein pro-cessing and generally supporting proper ER maintenance may have useful effects in the therapy of obesity, T2D, and cardiovascular disease. Ursodeoxycholic acid administra-tion showed some promising results so far; however, fur-ther studies are highly recommendable in order to decipher beneficial effects of its administration on ER stress signal-ing in diabetic patients.AcknowledgmentSupported by the Ministry of education, science and technological development, the Republic of Serbia, Grant III41012.ReferencesStanimirov, B., Stankov, K., Mikov, M., 2015. Bile acid signaling through farnesoid X and TGR5 receptors in hepatobiliary and intestinal diseases. Hepatobiliary Pancreat. Dis. Int. 14, 18-33.Stankov, K., 2010. Genetic predisposition for type 1 diabetes mellitus - The role of endoplasmic reticulum stress in human disease etiopathogenesis. J. Med. Biochem. 29, 139-149.Stankov, K., Stanimirov, B., Mikov, M., 2013. Cellular responses to endoplasmic reticulum stress. Biologia Serbica 35, 15-23.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 581 - 582 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616-056.7:575.224.23Short communicationDetection of chromosomal abnormalities with multiplex ligation dependent probe amplification in patients with myelodisplastic syndromesTatjana Sotirova1*, Borce Georgievski1, Oliver Karanfilski1, Aleksandar Stojanovic1, Sonja Genadieva-Stavric1, Aleksandar Eftimov2, Aleksandar J. Dimovski21University Clinic of Hematology, "Ss Cyril and Methodius" University, Majka Tereza 17, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, "Ss Cyril and Methodius" University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* tatjanaso@hotmail.comIntroductionDetection of chromosomal abnormalities in myelodys-plastic syndromes (MDS) enables classification according to WHO and risk stratification according to IPSS and R-IP-SS, providing physicians with data regarding personal ther-apy approach. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe ampli-fication (MLPA) is a technique for targeted copy number variation (CNV) identification in many human genes simul-taneously. MLPA is a multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based technique that can quantify up to 50 differ-ent genomic targets simultaneously in a single experiment through amplification of specific hybridizing probes (Fab-ris et al., 2011).