Environment and Empire (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007); James Beattie, Empire and Environmental Anxiety: Health, Science, Art and Conservation in South Asia and Australasia, 1800-1920 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011); Paul Fox, Clearings: Six Colonial Gardeners and their Landscapes, (Victoria: Carlton South, 2004); Peter Holland, Home in the 'Howling Wilderness': Settlers and Environment in Southern New Zealand (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 2013); Libby Robin, How a Continent Created a Nation (Sydney: University of New South Wales Press, 2007); Judith Ann Bennett, Natives and Exotics: World War II and Environment in the Southern Pacific (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i 26 brought about through the acclimatisation of plants and animals during European colonisation, New Zealand's environmental historians have taken particular interest in the movement of flora and fauna during the nineteenth century.48 This research reveals dynamic networks of exchange and the diversity of individuals and institutions involved. Beattie, Edward Melillo and Emily O'Gorman, for example explore the financial systems, ecological changes and exchange of knowledge within so-called _eco-cultural networks' that support the exploitation of new resources.49 Academics such as Tom Brooking, Eric Pawson and Jodi Frawley apply a focus to their research that allows the specificity of ecological exchange, as well as the existence of various interpretations of the environment and elements within it to be explored.50 For example, research by Brooking and Pawson highlights the significance of pasture in the environmental transformation of New Zealand. It focuses on processes largely ignored but integral to the construction of New Zealand's economy and industry. Similarly, Frawley's analysis of the exchange and movement of mangoes demonstrates adeptly how plants are assigned different Press, 2009); Paul D'Arcy, The People of the Sea: Environment, Identity, and History in Oceania (Honolulu: University of Hawai'i Press, 2006). 48 For example, R. Peden and P. Holland, 'Settlers Transforming the Open Country', in Making a New Land: Environmental Histories of New Zealand, ed. by Tom Brooking and Eric Pawson, 2nd edn (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2013), pp. 89-105; Tom Brooking and Eric Pawson, Seeds of Empire: The Environmental Transformation of New Zealand (London: I.B. Tauris, 2011); Don Garden, Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific: An Environmental History (California: ABC-CLIO, 2005); Tom Brooking and Eric Pawson (eds), Environmental Histories of New Zealand: Making a New Land, 2nd edn (Dunedin: Otago University Press, 2013); Tom Brooking and Eric Pawson (eds), Environmental Histories of New Zealand (Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2002). 49 James Beattie, Edward Melillo and Emily O'Gorman (eds), Eco-Cultural Networks in the British Empire: New views on Environmental History (London: Bloomsbury, 2014); Paul Star, 'New Zealand's Biota Barons: Ecological Transformation In Colonial New Zealand', ENNZ: Environment and Nature in New Zealand, 6, 2 (2002), environmentalhistory-au-nz.org, [accessed May 9 2014]; James Beattie, 'Exploring Trans-Tasman Environmental Connections, 1850s-1900s through the Imperial 'Careering' of Alfred Sharpe', ENNZ: Environment and Nature in New Zealand, 4, 1 (2014); Matt Henry, 'Trans-Tasman Meteorology and the Production of a Tasman Airspace, 1920-1941', ENNZ: Environment and Nature in New Zealand, 4, 1 (2014); Mike Roche, Latter Day 'Imperial Careering': L. M. Ellis - A Canadian Forester in Australia and New Zealand, 1920-1941', ENNZ: Environment and Nature in New Zealand, 4, 1 (2014); Eric Pawson, 'Plants, Motilities and Landscapes: Environmental Histories of Botanical Exchange', in Geography Compass, 2, 5 (2008), pp. 1464-1477; James Beattie and Paul Star, 'Global Influences and Local Environments: Forestry and Forest Conservation in New Zealand, 1850s-1925, British Scholar, 3, 2 (2010), pp. 191-218. 50 Brooking and Pawson, 2011; Jodi Frawley, 'Making Mangoes Move', Transforming Cultures eJournal, 3, 1 (2008), pp. 169-170, http://epress.lib.uts.edu.au/journals/Tfc, [accessed July 4 2013]. 27 meanings or _translations' in response to context, method and the motivation of enquirers.51 In a similar vein, this thesis explores various _translations' of medicinal plants, and suggests a unique network of exchange and group of actors specific to their movement and use. This network involved medical practitioners, botanists, lay healers and traders. Exploring it, therefore, justifies this thesis' focus on medical history alongside environmental history. In doing so, this thesis specifically answers the appeal by scholars to explore associations between perceptions of health and the environment.52 Historians such as Beattie, Gregg Mitman, Richard Drayton and Thomas Dunlap have also revealed the significance of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century medical theories in the development of environmental thought and planning.53 Beattie identifies the influence of miasmic theory on settlement patterns and environmental perceptions during New Zealand's colonisation.54 In later research, Beattie reveals certain _environmental anxieties', expressed by colonists in response to environmental destruction.55 Through case studies of individual scientists, he describes the transfer, movement and adaptation of medical and environmental knowledge and acknowledges the networks through which this travelled. In a similar fashion to medical historians, Beattie appeals to others to consider the _interconnections and comparative environmental histories within the Empire'.56 This thesis posits a unique network of institutions and actors who 51 Frawley, 2008. 52 James Beattie, 'Colonial Geographies of Settlement: Vegetation, Towns, Disease and Well-Being in Aotearoa/New Zealand, 1830s-1930s', Environment and History, 14, 4 (2008), pp. 583-610; Gregg Mitman, 'In Search of Health: Landscape and Disease in American Environmental History', Environmental History, 10 (April, 2005), pp. 184-210. 53 Beattie, 2008; Drayton, 2000; Dunlap, 1999; Mitman, 2005. 54 James Beattie, 'Colonial Geographies of Settlement', pp. 583-610. 55 James Beattie, 'Empire and nxiety', 2011. 56 James Beattie, 'Recent Themes', p. 129. Environmental historians Paul Star and Eric Pawson adopt the 'Actor Network Theory' (ANT) to illustrate the networks and associations - throughout the British Empire and beyond - through which plants, information and people travelled during the nineteenth century. Analyses that employ the 'Actor-Network Theory' as described by French social scientist Michel Callon, reveal how objects (actants) and people (actors) participate in networks of exchange, prompting, initiating and perpetuating environmental change. Eric Pawson, 'Plants, Motilities', pp. 1464-1477; Brooking and Pawson, 2011; Paul Star, 'New Zealand's Biota Barons', 2002; Eric Pawson, 'Biotic Exchange in an Imperial World: Developments in the Grass Seed Trade', in Agri-Food Commodity Chains and Globalising Networks, ed. by 28 participated in the introduction, exchange and use of medicinal plants in colonial New Zealand. Methodology: Weaving multiple sources As discussed in the previous section, examining the use and introduction of medicinal plants in New Zealand combines histories of medicine, environment and gardens. This thesis also engages with histories of science, botany, colonialism and imperialism. To access the fragmentary and scattered references to medicinal plants in New Zealand it crosses academic boundaries and relies on traditional and non-traditional source material. This research, therefore, employs quantitative and qualitative methodologies that reflect this eclectic approach and combines these in order for me collate, analyse and draw conclusions on the role medicinal plants played in colonial medical culture. This collective approach is necessary because within the narrative of individual achievement and evolving medical technologies, there was little room for early medical historians, such as Fulton, to include the remedies and plants they applied in the histories they wrote.57 Analyses such as Belgrave's, that rely on a statistical analysis of New Zealand's colonial medical culture, ignore the private side of health and healing and diminish the contribution made by healers not counted through registration or licensing.58 Furthermore, while the themes addressed by social historians, such as gender and class paved the way for studies on domestic health and _irregular' medical care, they effectively side-lined the practical elements of care, including medicinal plants. Environmental and garden historians Christina Stringer and Richard Le Heron (Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing, 2008), pp. 229-239; John Law, 'Actor Network Theory and Material Semiotics,' (2007), http://www. net/publications/Law2007ANTandMaterialSemiotics.pdf, [accessed May 11 2014]. 57 Fulton's book for example refers briefly to Dr Joseph Crocome and Dr Frances Monckton who both used and experimented with native New Zealand medicinal plants. Fulton, pp. 7, 62, 209. 58 Michael Belgrave proves how street directories, censuses and the medical register can reveal the spatial development of doctor's practices in New Zealand. However domestic healers cannot be included in these analyses as they were never registered or licensed. Coleborne and Godtschalk have recently explored evidence of domestic healing in colonial correspondence such as letters and diaries. But little reference is given to the elements of care, an omission that reflects the absence of this in traditional primary source material. Belgrave, 1985, p. 242; Coleborne and Godtschalk, 2013. 29 turn the lens towards the environment. However, virtually no analysis of medicinal plants has been made.59 This thesis demonstrates the value of exploring little used sources such as collections of medical receipts and nursery catalogues, to strengthen and extend research and include aspects of society and people otherwise overlooked. A Domestic Medical Curriculum As Chapter Three will discuss, domestic medicine was a selective and subjective system that combined numerous philosophies and approaches. By the late nineteenth century, biochemical analysis created new criteria for determining the value of medicinal plants. Nevertheless, experimentation, experience and anecdotal information remained important indicators of worth, particularly for domestic healers. The use of medicinal plants by domestic healers often went beyond that which was advocated by official medical curricula or pharmaceutical research -_evidence' was broad and evaluated in relation to factors such as efficacy, popularity, monetary value, testimony and authority. In a similar fashion, this research has employed an overlapping research methodology to determine the scope and impact of domestic medicine in New Zealand. It has extracted references from a scattered collection of handwritten receipts, focused on materia medica chapters in domestic medical manuals, and analysed the material objects that reflect both context and application. This eclectic methodology is vital in revealing the broader ideas and opinions relating to the use of medicinal plants. Encouraged by British historians, including Elaine Leong and Sarah Pennell, I have explored personal collections of medical receipts and recipes to uncover the plants used by domestic healers.60 This research is among the first in New Zealand 59 Exceptions to this include Londa Schiebinger, Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic World (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007). Richard Drayton discusses medicinal plants in relation to the creation of botanical gardens and economic botany. See, Drayton, pp. 6-19, 26-30. 60 Leong and Pennell, 2007; Katharine Allen, England's Domestic Chemists: Science and Consumerism in Eighteenth-Century Recipe Collections, Unpublished MA thesis, University of Saskatchewan, 2011; Sara Pennel (ed. ), Women and Medicine: Remedy Books, 1533-1865, From the Wellcome Library for the History and Understanding of Medicine (London: Primary Source Microfilm Library for the Wellcome Library for the History and Understanding of Medicine, 2004); 30 to analyse these collections and illustrates their potential and value as historic sources.61 Exploring collections - both those brought to New Zealand and created in the colony - reveals the selective nature of domestic medicine and affords insight into the adaptation of medical knowledge in New Zealand. Unlike published medical material, the majority of which was written by male British and American physicians, these collections reveal women's perspectives and experiences of health and disease. The crinkled paper and splattered pages of notebooks used to collect seemingly miscellaneous household information, such as that shown in Figure 1, conjure images of _kitchen physic', and reveal anxieties and concerted attempts to stay healthy and mitigate sickness. Collections of medical receipts, this thesis argues, formed part of a _domestic medical curriculum' that guided domestic healers and made their opinions, assessment and use of medicinal plants different from that of doctors and herbalists. Domestic medical manuals were also important components of the domestic medical curriculum. From domestic medical manuals, healers selected recipes and combined them with anecdotal information in hand-written personal collections of medical receipts. By the nineteenth century, most western physicians agreed on the basics of health maintenance. In this sense, manuals provided a constant flow of information, translated into popular terms in medical manuals, articles or pamphlets.62 Historian Richard Travers demonstrates how surviving editions of Aileen Ireland, 'Some Unusual Sources for the History of Medicine in the National Archives of Ireland', Journal of the Irish Society for Archives, 15, (2008), pp. 36-50. http://www.ucd.ie/archives/isa/isa-journal.html, [accessed May 12 2014]. 61 This work could be extended by further concerted appeals to the public for family collections and recipes. I made a few appeals during the course of this research and was rewarded with a couple of miscellaneous recipes. Unfortunately one was undecipherable and the other lacked sufficient information to be included. The recipes and receipts I discuss in Chapter Three are all held in archives and libraries around the country. Joanna Bishop, 'Request: Medicinal Plants In New Zealand, 1850s-1920s', ENNZ: Environment and Nature in New Zealand, 6, 2 (2012); Joanna Bishop, 'Medicinal Plants in New Zealand, 1850-1920,' Australian Forest History Society Inc, 59, (2012), pp. 10-11. 62 For example, Robert John Thornton, A New Family Herbal or Popular Account of the Nature and properties of the Various Plants Used in Medicine, Diet and the Arts (London: Richard Philips, 1810); Arnold J. Cooley and J.C. Brough, Coo ey's Cy opaedia of Pra ti a Re eipts, Pro esses and Collateral Information in the Arts and Manufacture Professions and Trades Including Medicine, Pharmacy and Domestic Economy 4th edn, (London: John Churchill and Sons, 1851). Colonial newspapers also published medical advice although this was largely lifestyle based. The Southland Times (ST) published 'Medical Hints for Country Settlers' while the The Manawatu 31 nineteenth-century manuals can prove to be useful starting points for investigations into domestic health.63 Figure 1: An example of a medical receipt showing notes to the author Source: Alexander Turnbull Library, Wellington, MS-Papers-7262, McKain, Douglas Mary, 1789-1873, Diary and commonplace book, transcribed by J B Moles. Prescriptions in domestic medical manuals were often simple, with crude measurements, such as _one to two teaspoons of herb' or _handful of dried plant Standard (MS), The Northern Advocate (NA), The Thames Star (TS) and the Auckland Star (AS) ,among others, published a series of 'Health Hints'. The Otago Witness (OW) had a 'Health Column' and the Marlborough Express (ME) provided 'Health Notes'. 63 Richard Travers, Domestic Medicine, with Special Reference to Australia (Sydney: The Royal Australian College of Physicians, 1990), p. 8. 32 material'. Unlike official pharmacopoeias dating from the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, which contain precise and seemingly indisputable advice, domestic manuals often include anecdotal information and acknowledge a variety of sources. This is important to note, as it illustrates the wide criteria used by domestic healers and writers of domestic manuals to determine the worth of medicinal plants and associated information. Domestic medical commodities such as sick-room requisites and patent and proprietary medicines also provide insight into domestic medical culture. As historian Karen Harvey points out, objects can be valuable sources that can enrich historical research.64 Patent and propriety medicines, for example, their ingredients and labels, reflect medical fashions and trends often difficult to assess through literature. Exploring their ingredients reveals how these healers utilised plants in their practices and how the pharmaceutical industry was processing medicinal species. By the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries, the production of medical implements and medicines increased rapidly. Evidence for this can found in advertisements from the period.65 In his account of Indian tea-drinking and the _consumption of Asia' in nineteenth-century New Zealand, Tony Ballantyne shows how marketing was used to promote different perceptions and opinions of certain products.66 In relation to domestic medicine, well-known manufacturers produced domestic treatments and associated implements and presented them in a way that supported the value and respectability of domestic medical practices. Analysing advertisements provides another little-used line of enquiry into how plants were used and featured in domestic health practices.67 Similarly, advertisements placed by New Zealand herbalists in early colonial newspapers 64 Karen Harvey (ed. ), istory and Materia Cu ture: Student's Guide to pproa hin ternati e Sources (London: Routledge, Taylor and Francis Group, 2009), p. 6. 65 Farmers Trading Company Limited, Catalogue May 1931 (Auckland: The Company, 1931), pp. 60-63, 237. 66 Tony Ballantyne, 'India in New Zealand: The Fault Lines of Colonial Culture', in India in New Zealand: Local Identities, Global Relations, ed. by Sekhar Bandyopadhyay (Dunedin: Otgao Univerity Press ), pp. 21- 45.