132 nature, knowledge of flowers and botanical artistry.8 According to Lawrence, while colonial women grew seeds and plants from around the world, many - such as Adela Stewart and Christchurch settler Jane Deans - also displayed an enthusiasm for growing native New Zealand plants.9 Stewart also took delight in the practical and productive side of gardening, making frequent references in her memoirs to the productivity of her garden, bottling and storing excess produce.10 The kitchen garden, which was often hidden from view lest it disrupt the serenity and order of the flower garden or front garden, typically required more work than other relatively permanent plants. It was, according to Lawrence, structured and rigorously maintained and as such, would have precise areas for herbs. Most colonists grew vegetables, pulses and grains, as well as culinary and medicinal herbs in kitchen gardens to feed and sustain growing families.11 Farmer's guides, newspaper columns and colonial guides encouraged the cultivation of plants that had both culinary and medicinal virtues, such as marjoram, parsley, thyme, chamomile and chives. According to nineteenth-century garden writer George Johnson, _every housewife knows their [herbs'] great value, not only to give relish to her cooking, but in making teas for sick members of a household'.12 It is important to note that _the image of household medicine as being [solely] from the garden to the kitchen is perhaps an over-sentimental one' that overlooks the already by then extensive commodification of health.13 Despite this, as revealed in Chapter One, medicinal plants were included in many New Zealand gardening guides and nursery lists, suggesting their continued cultivation in private gardens in the colony. As noted by Johnson above, wives and mothers were charged with cultivating and preparing medicinal plants. The garden, and in particular the kitchen garden, was in many ways an extension of the domestic sphere in which men and women attended to specific duties as 8 Lawrence, p. 137. 9 Lawrence, p. 157. 10 Adela Stewart, My Simple Life in New Zealand (London: Robert Banks and Son, 1908). 11 Katharine Raine, 'The First European Gardens' in A History of the Garden in New Zealand, ed. by Matthew Bradbury, (Auckland: Penguin Books, 1995), pp. 53- 65. 12 The Taranaki Almanac and Directory-Farm and Garden, (New Plymouth: W. H. J. Seffren, 1868), pp. 37-62; George Johnson, The Cottage Gardener; or Amateur and Cottages Guide to Outdoor Gardening and Spade Cultivation, Vol. 1 (London: WMS Orr, c. 1859), p. 27. 13 Allen, p. 70. 133 decreed by nineteenth-century gender stereotypes well established in Britain by the 1830s and 1840s.14 For centuries, scholars proposed reasons and causes for the separation of the sexes. Ancient texts, including the teachings of Aristotle and the bible, provided biological explanations that fed the debate.15 By the nineteenth century, physicians aimed to reveal the workings and influence of female generative organs. Most agreed that a woman's anatomy and physiology made her more susceptible than men to mental and emotional distress or hysteria, and ultimately better suited for domestic duties.16 Many women supported these ideas in books such as The Women of England, Their Social Duties and Domestic Habits (1839) by Mrs Sarah Stickney Ellis which described and defined appropriate feminine behaviour and etiquette.17 Furthermore, by the 1840s, European intellectuals considered childhood a natural stage in human development and the bourgeois ideal of the family expressed in gender-specific roles became part of the dominant culture, promoted in popular society as the only proper way to live.18 Against the backdrop of increasing capitalism, the advent of the middle class and campaigns against slavery, British homes became primary sites for the struggle against sin, as defined by religious groups such as the Evangelicals and the Methodists.19 Links between morality and 14 Catherine Hall, 'The Early Formation of Victorian Domestic Ideology' in Fit Work for Women, ed. by Sandra Burman (London: Croom Helm, 1979), pp. 15-31; Carroll Smith-Rosenberg, Disorderly Conduct : Visions of Gender in Victorian America (New York: Oxford University Press, 1986). 15 According to Aristotelian decree, men and women possess a similar physiology, although in perfect (male) and flawed (female) versions. Roy Porter, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present (London: Harper Collins Publisher, 1999), pp. 128-131. 16 Hall, p. 25. By the late nineteenth century, medical handbooks such as the Ladies' andbook of Home Treatment (1895) and Kellogg's Ladies' Guide in ea th and Disease (1895) enforced these ideas, adding a scientific justification that encouraged gender stereotypes and the division of labour. E. S. Richards, Ladies' andbook of Home Treatment (Warbuton, Victoria: Signs Publishing Company, 1939); John Harvey Kellogg, Ladies' Guide in ea th and Disease (London: International Tract Society, 1895). 17 Raewyn Dalziel, 'Colonial Helpmeet', in Women in History: Essays on European Women in New Zealand, ed. by Barbara Brookes, Charlotte Macdonald and Margaret Tennant (Wellington: Allen and Unwin Limited, 1986), pp. 55-69; Mary Wilson Carpenter, Health, Medicine and Society in Victorian England. Victorian Life and Time Series (Santa Barbara: Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data, 2010), p. 149. 18 Hall, p. 31; Eric Olssen, 'Families and the Gendering of European New Zealand in the Colonial Period, 1840-80',, in The Gendered Kiwi, ed. by Caroline Daley and Deborah Montgomerie (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1999), pp. 37-63. 19 Hall, pp. 21-23. 134 health emerged over the course of European history and by the nineteenth century, popular medical discourse further encouraged this association. Medical manuals advised the public to avoid unnatural excesses and monitor personal habits.20 Those who fell ill were judged morally culpable and, in a colonial context, were considered dangerous and redundant. In New Zealand, maintaining a healthy home and mitigating disease were tasks considered conducive to a progressive and civil society. Early colonisers encouraged virtuous women to settle in New Zealand and to fulfil the role of social and moral guardians.21 Victorian ideologies and understandings of biology contributed to the belief that women were natural healers. Several domestic medical texts, such as William Buchan's Domestic Medicine (1769), identified women as primary domestic care givers. Despite this, historian Lisa Smith argues that _men were more involved in domestic medicine than medical historians have considered'.22 According to Smith, the tendency for researchers to define male and female medical knowledge is problematic and overlooks the role played by men in the domestic sphere. Indeed, in New Zealand, a tradition of self-care that relied heavily on domestic remedies and practices extended to single men. William Rysdale emigrated to New Zealand in 1863 and served with the 3rd Regiment Waikato Militia from October 1863 until August 1865. During this period, he wrote regularly to his family in Lincolnshire. Headaches, writes Rysdale - from which he suffered from regularly _back home'- happened infrequently in New Zealand and he offers a cure for them to his sister:23 20 Deborah Lupton, 'The Social Construction of Medicine and the Body', in The Handbook of Social Studies in Health and Medicine, ed. by Gary Albrecht, Ray Fitzpatrick and Susan Scrimshaw (2000), pp. 51-63. 21 Edward Wakefield believed that European notions of family and gender were central to successful systematic colonisation and that European women, with their natural inclination as 'moral guardians', would ensure civility and order in the seemingly unruly frontier. Angela Wanhalla, 'Family, Community and Gender', in The New Oxford History of New Zealand, ed. by Giselle Byrnes (Melbourne: Oxford University Press, 2009), pp. 447-465. 22 Lisa Smith, 'The Relative Duties of a Man: Domestic Medicine in England and France, ca. 1685-1740' , Journal of Family History, 31 (2006), pp. 237-256 23 Hamilton City Library Archives, MS, 190, 1881, Rysdale, William; Papers, p. 5-7. 135 the best remedy I have for them [headaches] is to get Dandelion roots, just rinse the dirt off in cold water, don't let them stand in it, as you will lose some of the strength, then just four or five handfuls into a pot with about a gallon to half a gallon, then strain it, and drink it hot sweetened at meal times instead of tea, and between meals, drink it cold, it acts upon the liver.24 Despite the number of single men forced to care for themselves, evidence suggests that in colonial New Zealand, most domestic healers were women. Women compiled the personal collections of receipts used as evidence in this chapter, and frequent references in colonial literature point toward a prevalence of female domestic healers. Furthermore, women made up the majority of domestic servants and governesses in New Zealand throughout the nineteenth century, occupations that involved the provision of domestic medical care.25 By identifying the importance and prominence of domestic healers and their use of medicinal plants, this thesis also acknowledges the role of women in colonial medical culture and their contribution to the construct of medico-botanical knowledge. The nature and scope of care provided by healers during this period depended largely on the availability or absence of doctors and the limitations of medical practice. By the mid-nineteenth century, medical developments such as the so-called bacterial revolution and the increasing influence of pharmaceutical science, bolstered physicians' claims to authority and encouraged the professionalisation of medicine.26 Yet regardless of such developments, domestic medicine provided the first line of defence against most illness or disease. Even when doctors attended patients, their advice and care often relied on the continued ministrations of domestic healers. Although most medical manuals attempt to define the limits of domestic care - encouraging the attendance and presence of physicians for 24 The detail in Rysdales' letter displays a depth of understanding of the plant, its properties and use as a hepatic tonic. Later, he refers to his use of podophyllin pills, a popular pill used during the nineteenth century for colic and glandular conditions, made from the rhizome of American Mayapple, Podophyllum peltatum. He combines these pills with his dandelion cure, demonstrating the compatibility of commercial pharmaceuticals and home grown medicines. Rysdale, p. 6. 25 Charlotte Macdonald, 'The Eclipse of Domestic Service in New Zealand Homes c.1830s-1940s', in At Home in New Zealand: History, Houses, People, ed. by Barbara Brookes (Wellington: Bridget Williams Books, 2000), p. 157; Olssen, p. 42. 26 Peter Freund and Meredith McGuire, Health, Illness and the Social Body (New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 1999); Lupton, 1994. 136 certain situations - evidence suggests domestic healers performed the same treatments and procedures as practiced by educated physicians. There was no doctor within thirty miles. Indeed, no one knew where one was to be found. The women learnt to nurse very well. Two neighbours, one with ten children and the other with twelve, used to help each other turn about, and a finer, healthier lot of children were never born.27 Before the turn of the twentieth century, for example, particularly in rural areas -as illustrated in the quote above - New Zealand women provided the majority of midwifery and gynaecological care in a domestic setting.28 Many were trained midwives who claimed formal learning at overseas institutions such as City of London Lying-in Institution or Melbourne's Lying-in Hospital and Infirmary for Disease Peculiar to Women and Children. Others relied on the advice of local doctors and their own often extensive experience.29 As well as midwifery, domestic healers attended to everyday conditions such as headaches, toothache and boils. Success in dealing with more serious ailments - such as consumption, 27 Women's Division of the New Zealand Farmers' Union (W.D.N.Z.F.U.) (eds), Brave Days: Pioneer Women of New Zealand (Dunedin: A. H. & A. W. Reed for the Women's Division of the New Zealand Farmers' Union, 1939), p. 36. 28 According to early hospital reports, out of the 393 cases admitted to Hokitika hospital in 1869-68, only four were gynecological and in 1858, at Auckland Hospital, only six of the 225 patients admitted were evidently gynecological (uterine disease and ovarian dropsy). During 1882, a total of 5496 patients were admitted to New Zealand provincial hospitals and out of these, only 153 were females admitted for 'diseases of the generative system' (Dunedin admitted 85 of these and Christchurch, 25). In 1886, only 187 cases out of 6381 patients admitted to New Zealand hospitals, were obviously gynaecological in origin. The County of Westland Gazette (CWG), June 7, 1869; Auckland Provincial Government Gazette (APG), February 15, 1859, p. 22; George Wallington Grabham, 'Hospitals in New Zealand', Appendix of the Journals of the House of Representatives (AJHR) (1886), H-19, pp. 1 -22; George Wallington Grabham, 'Hospitals in New Zealand', AJHR (1882), H-3A, pp. 1-34; Alison Clarke, Born to a Changing World: Childbirth in Nineteenth-Century New Zealand (Wellington: Bridget Williams Books, 2012). 29 New Zealand midwifes, like their Australian counterparts, advertised in colonial newspapers and for some colonial women, midwifery was an important source of income, although before registration, payment was irregular and varied in amount and type. Madonna Grehan, Heroes or Villains? Midwifes, Nurses and Maternity Care in Mid-Nineteenth Century Australia, http://www.thefreelibrary.com/_/print/PrintArticle.aspx?id=214458324, [accessed February 27, 2013]; Sally Pearman, 'From Autonomy and Back Again: Educating Midwives Across a Century', New Zealand College of Midwifes Journal, 33 (2005), pp. 4-9. In 1857, Mrs Isabella Stewart of Milton Grove, Nelson, claimed a first-class certificate from the Professor of Midwifery at Edinburgh University. New Zealand Examiner and New Zealand Chronicle, (NZENZC), 11 April 1857, p. 1. 137 rheumatism, scrofula, abscesses, ulcers and injuries - bolstered their reputations and further developed their skills.30 Early Reliance on Familiar Plants, 1850s -1880s As discussed in Chapter One, nurserymen, botanists, agriculturists and gardeners introduced medicinal plants into New Zealand throughout the nineteenth century. Many popular species, used regularly by British practitioners, such as dandelion, plantain and dock, naturalised easily and readily in their new environment. This caused concern for some - a concern that depended on the individual's perception and interpretation of the plant as a pest or weed. In 1894, the newly-created Department of Agriculture, for example, lamented the spread of datura (from which the popular drug stramonium is made) in the Rangitikei district, and the introduction of Scotch thistle by patriotic Scottish settlers wreaked havoc in sown pastures in Canterbury.31 For others, particularly domestic healers, the introduction of medicinal plants supported the use of medical practices that relied on familiar plants and their products. From their perspective, so-called weed species, like the dandelion, were useful and to be encouraged. Colonists were quick to recognise and use familiar introduced medicinal species. Plantain, first recorded in New Zealand in 1839, was a particular favourite, growing readily in various locations and _quite as general[ly] as in England'.32 Maori and European healers prepared plantain poultices for skin eruptions, irritations, burns and sprains.33 Watercress, which by 1860 was threatening to choke the river Avon in Christchurch, was used in cases of eye infections.34 The common dock, which almost certainly arrived by accident in agricultural seed mixes and quickly spread throughout the colony, was applied to stings and 30 Porter and Macdonald, p. 89. 31The Chemist and Druggist of Australasia (CDA), 9, 7 (1894), p. 145; Riley, p. 238. 32 Murdoch Riley, Maori ea in and erba : e Zea and Ethnobotani a Sour ebook (Paraparaumu: Viking Sevenseas, New Zealand, 1994), p. 222. 33 Riley, pp. 224-5. 34 Riley, p. 247; John Armstrong, 'On the Naturalized Plants of the Province of Canterbury', Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute (TPNZI), 4 (1871), pp. 284-290. 138 wounds, and used as a blood cleanser.35 Raspberry leaves and tansy, when brewed together, created a _squaw-tea' that Agnes Harrold, a Canadian emigrant who settled on Rakiura/Stewart Island in the 1860s, gave to local women in labour.36 Medicinal plants also arrived in the Colony as dried ingredients for plant-based medicines. Many colonists arrived with _cases of drugs' and ready-made medicine chests sold alongside medical manuals in Britain. Commissioned by chemists and made by cabinet-makers, these chests contained both compound medicines such as Dover's Powder, developed in the eighteenth century by the physician Thomas Dover and consisting largely of powdered opium, ipecacuanha and potassium sulphate.37 Popular _simples' - remedies that are made up of one plant - such as rhubarb, jalap, aloes, ginger and ipecacuanha were also included. Domestic medical manuals and colonists' handbooks often provided a list of recommended medicines as well as directives for their use. For emigrants destined for the Antipodes, British and American manuals were most popular and were readily available in bookstores, grocers and chemists throughout New Zealand and Australia.