78 funded and received little support from the New Zealand Government.222 This began to change in the 1880s, due in part to developments and institutions established by Premier Julius Vogel. In the 1870s, in the wake of years of war between Maori and Europeans, public debt, increasing tension between provincial and central Government, the beginnings of an economic recession, and low levels of immigration, Vogel initiated an expansionist policy. This included an extensive assisted emigration scheme, the purchase of more Maori land and the construction of infrastructure, including railways, telegraph lines, roads and bridges. Aimed at reviving a flagging economy, Vogel borrowed considerable sums of money on the London capital market, and New Zealand's economy underwent a temporary boom. Under Vogel's policy, _the central Government assumed responsibility for colonisation and development', and attempted to establish a tradition of state involvement in scientific research.223 By the 1880s, colonial botanists received increased support and through state-funded institutions such as experimental farms and agricultural colleges, they explored the economic potential of economic plants, including medicinal species. While nurseries continued to supply medicinal plants to home gardeners and healers, the Government placed greater emphasis on agricultural development, including exploring the potential for profit afforded by a growing international pharmaceutical market. Government Science and Agricultural Alternatives, 1880s -1920s By 1881, thanks to on-going continued organised emigration, the European population of New Zealand soared to 470,000.224 The Maori population officially stood at 44, 099.225 English emigrants continued to be a significant majority of New Zealand's settler population, while the Irish and Scots made up most of the remainder.226 Agricultural labourers still made up a large proportion of emigrants 222 King, pp. 228-235; History on-line - British and Irish Emigration, http://www.nzhistory.net.nz/culture/home-away-from-home/where-to, [accessed December 19 2012]. 223 Raewyn Dalziel, 'The Politics of Settlement', in The Oxford History of New Zealand, ed. by Geoffrey Rice, 2nd edn (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992), pp. 87-112. Quote from p. 103. 224 King, pp. 210, 231. 225 Various Authors, 'Census of the Maori Population, AJHR (1881), G-03, pp. 1-26. 226 Wellington and Canterbury settlements were made up largely of English emigrants - a reflection of their New Zealand Company origins. The Irish dominated in Auckland due to the and 79 and in 1881, around eighty per cent of all colonists professed to be Protestants.227 As mentioned, the New Zealand Government became increasingly involved in scientific research, encouraging experiments with potentially profitable plants and animals. Scientific institutions and an increasing centralisation of science in New Zealand supported these endeavours. The Otago Provincial Government had earlier confirmed the advantage of employing scientifically-trained men, taking on a young Scotsman, James Hector, to survey and discover alluvial gold deposits. Hector soon moulded New Zealand's scientific community, creating roles and institutions for himself and many of his fellow Scots.228 Following a move to Wellington - the new colonial capital - Hector gained Government support and financial backing to resurrect the New Zealand Society. Revived and renamed the New Zealand Institute, under Hector's direction this organisation incorporated several provincial societies, including the Philosophical Institute of Canterbury, the Auckland Institute, the Otago Institute and the Westland Naturalists' and Acclimatisation Society. The consolidation of these societies was consistent with an increasing centralisation of Government encouraged by the abolition of provincial Governments in 1876.229 also made up a large proportion of the population in the South Islands West Coast Gold fields. Otago and Southland were home to a large number of Scots who were instrumental in establishing Dunedin and Otago settlements. See, 'New Zealand History On-line - British and Irish Emigration', 2012. Jock Phillips and Terry Hearn, Settlers: New Zealand Immigrants from England, Ireland and Scotland, 1840-1945 (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 2008); Donald Harman Arkenson, Half a World from Home: Perspectives on the Ireland in New Zealand, 1860-1959 (Wellingotn: Victoria University Press, 1990); Brad Patterson, Tom, Brooking and Jim McAloon, Unpacking the Kists: The Scots in New Zealand (Montreal: McGill-Queens University Press with Otago University Press, 2013); Lydon Fraser and Angela McCarthy (eds) Far From Home: The English in New Zealand (Dunedin: Otago University Press, 2012). 227 Despite this, according to historian John Stenhouse, 'the religious temperature of the Colony seldom rose above lukewarm'. John Stenhouse, 'Darwinism in New Zealand', in Disseminating Darwinism: The Role of Place, Race, Religion and Gender, ed. by Ronald L. Numbers and John Stenhouse (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 21999), pp. 61-91. 228 At this time Scotland was producing more scientists than could be locally employed. See, Francis Lucian Reid, 'Promoting Science: New Zealand Institute', in The Amazing World of James Hector: Explorer, Doctor, Geo o ist, Botanist, atura istorian and one of e Zea and's Most Remarkable Figures, ed. by Simon Nathan and Mary Varnham (Wellington: Awa Press, 2009), pp. 63-73. 229 Ross Galbreath, DSIR, Making Science Work for New Zealand: Themes from the History of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1926-1992 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1998), pp. 11-34. 80 The New Zealand Institute brought provincial scientists together and received just enough funding to produce an annual journal, the Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute (TPNZI). The journal soon became the most distinguished - and the primary - forum for the publication of scientific research in New Zealand.230 From its second edition, botany formed a distinct section that regularly included botanical surveys of specific regions as well as anatomical and physiological investigations of localised naturalised plants. Colonial botanist, Thomas Kirk was a regular contributor, presenting detailed sketches, such as Figure 1:4, which accompanied his investigations. Figure 1:4: Botanical illustration by Colonial botanist Thomas Kirk Source: Thomas Kirk, _On the Occurrence of Orobanche: A New Genus to the Flora of New Zealand', Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute, 2, (1869), p. 106, http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_02/rsnz_02_00_002180.html, [accessed May 28 2014] 230 Reid, p. 68; James Beattie, 'Natural History, Conservation', p. 19. 81 Hector's extensive influence and pervasive presence in New Zealand's scientific community was afforded largely by the Colony's place in the British Empire. His life's work is an excellent example of historians David Lambert and Alan Lester's conception of imperial careering - the establishment and maintenance of occupations and positions forged and influenced by imperial motivations and pursuits.231 Thomas Kirk, Hector's contemporary and Government employee in New Zealand during the last half of the nineteenth century, also worked in an imperial context. The associations both men made were controlled, enabled and constructed through imperial networks.232 Kirk corresponded regularly with British authorities and institutions, particularly Joseph Hooker at Kew, and the numerous positions he held in New Zealand illustrate the opportunities made available by an ever-expanding Empire.233 Kirk's work in New Zealand illustrates the influence of changing international and national understandings of nature and industry that became entwined with notions of nationhood and the creation of wealth. According to Livingstone: Regional cultures have appropriated scientific knowledge differently according to their sense of self-understanding and put it to different uses. The very meaning of a particular scientific theory or text has shifted from one place to another. Indeed scientific inquiry itself has signified different things in different regional environments.234 In New Zealand, scientific research supported visions of progress, self-sufficiency and nation building, and according to Ross Galbreath, was driven largely by the prospect of economic benefits.235 New Zealand scientists such as Kirk were employed by newly-established scientific organisations, and work, such as investigations into medicinal plants, was conducted at specialised research stations. This helped to bolster colonial science and reinforced affiliations between colonial and overseas institutions. 231 Lambert and Lester, pp. 1-32. 232 Lambert and Lester, p. 23. 233 Lambert and Lester, p. 22. Lanna Brown, The Forestry Era of Thomas Kirk, F.L.S. : First Chief Conservator of State Forest, New Zealand (Wellington: New Zealand Forestry Service, 1968), p. 3. 234 Livingstone, p. 89. 235 Galbreath, pp. 11-34. 82 Arriving in New Zealand from Coventry on 9 February 1863, Kirk wasted no time pursuing his interest in botany, collecting and cataloguing specimens within one month of his arrival.236 He quickly impressed New Zealand's scientific community with his aptitude and fervour for botanical collecting, mapping and classifying. In 1866, Kirk accepted the role of surveyor and became meteorological observer in 1868. One month later he became Secretary for the Auckland Institute and Curator of the Auckland museum, a post he held for over ten years.237 In Auckland, Kirk undertook numerous expeditions and began publishing furiously. He visited and made extensive botanical surveys on Great and Little Barrier Islands, and with fellow botanist and trained geologist Frederick Hutton, around the East Coast of Northland, Thames, Waikato, Rotorua and Taupo.238 As an integral member of New Zealand's scientific community, Kirk contributed to information that converted New Zealand's diverse and dynamic environment into universal terms, placing it into a context of international academic discourse. His knowledge and skills were ideally suited to assess the economic potential of New Zealand's flora and introduced plants. By the 1870s, Kirk held various posts and positions, including Secretary and Treasurer of the Auckland Acclimatisation Society (1869-73), and botany lecturer at Auckland College and Grammar School; in 1871, he was elected a fellow of the Linnaean Society of London.239 In 1874, Kirk, his wife and children moved to Wellington, where opportunities equally abounded. Kirk lectured in Natural Sciences at Wellington College, joined the Wellington Philosophical Society in 1874, and became its president in 1889. He also served several terms as Governor of the New Zealand Institute. 240 Of the 138 papers Kirk submitted to the 236 F. Bruce Sampson, Early New Zealand Botanical Art (Auckland: Reed Methuen, 1985), pp. 116-117. 237 John Adam, 'III. The Kirk Years, 1870-1874' in The Auckland Horticultural Society Newsletter (date unknown). 238 Rewa Glenn, The Botanical Explorers of New Zealand (Wellington: A.H. & A.W. Reed, 1950), pp. 141-148. 239 Kirk also lectured in botany at Lincoln College from 1881-1884. 240 During this period, Kirk became acquainted with Premier Julius Vogel who lived close by, and with whom Kirk discussed matters of forestry and conservation. Vogel acknowledged Kirk's input when he passed the first Forestry Act in 1874. After the second Forests Act passed in 1885, Kirk was made Chief Conservator of Forests and formed the Forest and Agricultural Branch of the Lands Department. Kirk's work in this capacity reflects growing ecological concerns regarding conservation of the land, plants and species displacement. Kirk's position as Chief Conservator of 83 Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute, many describe previously unrecorded species or discuss plant distribution and occurrence. Others discuss the suitability of introduced species for agricultural or horticultural application and debate the impact on, and economic potential of, native species. The diverse nature of Kirk's work highlights the number of sites in which scientific research took place during this period and the demands placed upon a relatively small number of Government-funded colonial scientists.241 Vogel's policy had initiated increased state-support for science. However, by the 1880s, parliamentarians in response to an economic recession were more concerned with _practical solutions to immediate problems than in advancing scientific understanding in the hope of future benefit'.242 Experiments with economic plants continued in specialised scientific sites, although support for these and other agricultural developments was often limited and subject to financial constraint. Indeed, by the early 1880s, funding had been largely withdrawn from botanic gardens, bringing to a halt their propagation and distribution of amenity plants. However, most gardens continued as sites of botanical research and investigation. Medicinal plants were included in lists of _economic plants' trialled in Wellington, Christchurch and Dunedin. Exploring these lists of plants provides insight into those species most popular during this period, and those that presumably had the potential to contribute to the colonial economy. Botanist, surveyor and artist, John Buchanan compiled a list of medicinal plants _which might be cultivated in the Botanical Garden - Wellington, if seeds could be got'. This list includes jalap, several varieties of capsicum, datura, henbane, foxglove, lavender, peppermint, thyme, rosemary, horehound, camphor and hops.243 In Dunedin, in the early 1880s, the government supported trials of soapwort and medicinal rhubarb and in 1882, the Secretary of the Pharmaceutical Society wrote to the Dunedin Domain Board, requesting that space be set aside for medicinal plants in the botanic garden. The Board replied that they were bound to attend to the cultivation of medicinal plants Forests was short-lived and after three years and a change of Government, Kirk's position was disbanded. Lanna, pp. 5-15 241 Galbreath, p. 12. 242 Galbreath, pp. 11-15. 243 Hocken Library, Dunedin, MS-603/12, John Buchanan, 'List of Medicinal Plants which might be Cultivated in the Botanical Garden -Wellington if Seeds Could be Got'. 84 and a fair collection was already in the garden. They requested a list of possible plants.244 In November 1881, John Armstrong, curator at Christchurch Domain wrote that a number of economic plants - including ornamental and medicinal species - had already been distributed in the colony. In the same year, Thomas Potts appealed to the Domain Board to pay greater attention to economic plants, including arrowroot, Peruvian bark, liquorice, lavender and opium poppy.245 In 1884, with the help of an unemployed relief gang, Armstrong prepared a plot designed specifically to trial economic plants. That same year he prepared a report entitled _Notes on the Economic Plants - Suitable for Cultivation in New Zealand'. This report, published in The New Zealand Country Journal, includes the following medicinal plants: mustard, caraway, chicory, and coriander.246 By the late 1880s, still in the midst of an economic recession and in an era where scientific method prevailed, farmers in New Zealand and Australia began to participate in research that linked the trained and untrained, and the state with the individual.247 New Zealand botanists took great interest in Australian endeavours to commercially cultivate medicinal plants, noting growing and processing techniques and the potential market for specific plants. These observations influenced and guided New Zealand endeavours. News and information relating to trials and experiments with medicinal plants appeared in trans-Tasman publications, including The Chemist and Druggist of Australasia (CDA), established in 1859.248 This journal and others kept botanists and chemists in both Australia and New Zealand abreast of the developments occurring in each country. 244 Dunlop, p. 48; Otago Daily Times (ODT), 10 August 1882, p. 4. 245 John Armstrong, Canterbury Public Domain Minutes, 1864-1906 #1 , p. 126. 246 John Armstrong, 'Notes on Economic Plants-Suitable for Cultivation in New Zealand', The New Zealand Country Journal, 8, 3, (1884), pp. 259-260. 247 Vaughan Wood and Eric Pawson, 'Flows of Agricultural Information', in Seeds of Empire: The Environmental Transformation of New Zealand (London: I. B. Taurus, 2011), pp. 139-159. 248 Trans-Tasman scientific associations such as the Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science also encouraged the exchange of botanical information. Established in 1888, this Association, according to historian Roy MacLeod, 'was to become one of the greatest factors in the spread of knowledge throughout the colonies' and enhanced communications and co-operation between New Zealand and Australia. Roy MacLeod, 'From Imperial to National Science', in The Commonwealth of Science: ANZAAS and the Scientific Enterprise in Australasia, 1888-1988, ed. by Roy MacLeod, (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988), p. 40. 85 According to Chemist and Druggist correspondent Thomas G. Pearce, by 1895, the number of growers cultivating opium poppies in Bacchus Marsh, Victoria, had risen from seven to twenty-three in the space of a few years.249 Victoria growers supplied a ready-made market in Melbourne and many employed young men from the poorest parts of Melbourne to harvest the opium. The output of opium from the region reached 1,045 pounds in the season of 1894 and one grower alone supplied over 20,000 poppy-heads to a Melbourne firm in 1895.250 In Adelaide, homeopaths were appealing for the cultivation of medicinal plants, particularly poke root, used to treat diphtheria. In 1882 in Gippsland, east of Melbourne in Australia's Victoria State, the cultivation of chicory and arrowroot was trialled by local growers.251 In 1890 Paul Kleesattel, a chemist in Gippsland who turned to commercial herb growing, sent the editorial board of the Chemist and Druggist a sample of insect powder he had grown after procuring seed with much trouble from Zara, the capital of Dalmatia.252 Kirk kept abreast of these international developments and trials with medicinal plants and in 1880, presented a report on economic plants to the Commissioners on Local Industries in Wellington. In this he recommends further investigation and possible trails on several medicinal plant species, including the castor oil plant, cinchona, opium poppy, hemlock, foxglove and wormwood, henbane and liquorice.