Co-operation between chemists and doctors and an international exchange of 40 Susan Leigh Star and James R. Griesemer, 'Institutional Ecology, 'Translations and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39', Social Studies of Science, 19, (1989), pp. 387-420; Susan Leigh Star 'This is not a Boundary Object: Reflections on the Origin of the Concept', Science, Technology and Human Values, 35, 5 (2010), pp. 601- 617. 41 Take for example the following excerpt from the Naturopathic College of New Zealand. 'Naturopathy is not a therapy but a philosophy of health, combining vitalistic principles with biological sciences. All civilisations have used natural means to assist the body's natural healing processes. Naturopathic medicine today draws on these ancient understandings and integrates it with modern day scientific knowledge'. http://www.ncnz.co.nz/naturopathydiploma.html, [accessed January 12 2012]. 295 scientific medical and botanical information supported the increased standardisation of knowledge required. Chapter Six explored the dominant translation of medicinal plants through scientific analysis. Through case studies on two plants - thymus vulgaris and aconitum napellus - it revealed how domestic healers, herbalists and doctors supported or rejected this scientific translation in different ways and for different reasons. The conversion of thyme into its isolated constituent, thymol, required scientific techniques and analysis, and the acceptance of this conversion also implied an acceptance of a scientific approach to health and wellness and the use of medicinal plants. Domestic healers accepted this approach and used thymol in patent and proprietary medicines. Doctors strongly advocated the scientific analysis of plants, employing the rhetoric of progress associated with science to boost the status of their trade. The British Medical Journal gave doctors directions on how to include thymol in the prescriptions they prepared and prescribed.42 For doctors, the scientific analysis of aconite - the active constituent in aconitum - helped to justify the continued use of the plant despite its high degree of toxicity.43 Domestic healers, on the other hand, mitigated the risks involved in using aconite by using minute amounts of the plant in homeopathic tinctures. Herbalists acknowledged the efficacy of the drug, but chose not to use it, and in the process defined their practices as different from those of both domestic healers and doctors.44 By exploring the medicines vital to nineteenth-century medical systems and the ways in which different healers understood and promoted these, this thesis has paved the way for further research into European medicaments. It has suggested the need for greater examination of the use of Maori practices among Europeans 42 Author Unknown, 'Reports and Analyses and Descriptions of New Inventions in Medicine, Surgery, Dietetics, and the Allied Sciences', BMJ, 2, 659 (1879), p. 336. 43 William Murrell, 'Aconite and Aconitia', BMJ, 1, 111 (1882), pp. 555-556; 'Poisoning by aconitum napellus, BMJ, 1, 14 (1861), pp.360-361. 44 Neil, p. 155; John Broadbent, The Australian Botanic Guide, Being a Family Handbook of Botanic Treatment 2nd ed. (Melbourne: Centennial Printing and Publishing, date unknown), p. 190. 296 in New Zealand's colonial society and has encouraged a line of enquiry into seemingly disparate medical cultures that came together in colonial contexts.45 Like the medicinal uses of rhubarb described in the beginning of this chapter, the plants examined in this thesis were important components of a colonial medical culture that was constantly shifting in response to factors such as changes in government, economics, and the influence of overseas developments and industry. Accordingly, the role of medicinal plants was varied, changing over time and given different emphasis and attention by healers with disparate ideas on health and wellness. This thesis has explored the different fascinating and changing role plants played in colonial medial culture and has shown the value in exploring, not only the organisation of colonial medicine, but also the practical elements of medical care. In the process it has contributed new perspectives to the fields of environmental history, medical history and scientific professionalism. 45 A good starting point would be an examination of missionary records from New Zealand as well as Maori sources. Evidence suggests missionaries played a role in the introduction and distribution of several medicinal plant species in New Zealand. For example, Herbert Guthrie-Smith, recognised a relationship between the distribution of potherbs in New Zealand and mission stations, suggesting missionaries also used and cultivated introduced medicinal plants. For example, thorn apple (Datura stramonium), writes Guthrie-Smith, was commonly called "Priest's Weed" in the Colony, and was distributed throughout pa (Maori villages) in the Hawke's Bay (west central region of New Zealand's North Island) by the Reverend Father Regnier of the Meanee Mission Station. This plant was used regularly during the nineteenth century, most commonly in the form of the drug stramonium which had antispasmodic, anodyne and narcotic properties. The drug was also included in therapeutic smoking compounds in the early twentieth century.Herbert Guthrie-Smith, Tutira: A Story of a new Zealand Sheep Sataion, 1926, pp. 269-271; Mark Jackson, 'Devine Stramonium: The Rise and Fall of Smoking for Asthma' in Medical History, 54, 2 (2010), pp. 171-194. See also, Laurie Gluckman, Tangiwai: Medical History of New Zealand prior to 1860 (Auckland: Dr L.K. Gluckman, 1976). 45 Brooking and Pawson, 2011; Katharine Raine, 'Domesticating the Land' in Fragments: New Zealand Social and Cultural History, ed. by Bronwyn Dalley and Bronwyn Labrum (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 2000), pp. 76-97. Derek Dow, Maori ea th and Go ernment Po i y, 1840-1940 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1999); Raeburn Lange, May the People Live: A istory of Maori ea th De e opment 1900-1920 (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1999). 297 Glossary __________________________________________________________________ Botanical name Common name Medicinal uses Aconite napellus L. monkshood Anodyne (pain killer), diuretic (increase urine output) and diaphoretic (promotes perspiration) Allium sativum L. garlic Antimicrobial, anthelmintic (expels worms), expectorant, anti-inflammatory, cholagogue (stimulates the release of bile), diaphoretic Althea officinalis L. marsh mallow Demulcent (soothes irritated tissues), emollient (soothes protects skin) diuretic Anethum graveolen L. dill Stimulant, aromatic, carminative (reduces flatulence), stomachic (relieves stomach pain) Artemesia absinthum L. wormwood Bitter tonic, stomachic anthelmintic, choleretic (stimulates the release of bile) Arctium lappa L. burdock Depurative (promotes natural elimination ), diuretic, antibiotic Armoracia rustica Schur. horseradish General debility, arthritis, gout, sciatica, respiratory and urinary infections Arnica Montana L. arnica Short-term treatment of heart failure, externally in liniments and creams for dislocations, sprains, bruises and chilblains Austroderia fulvida (Buchanan) N. P. Barker et H. P. Linder. toe toe Used to treat goitre Atropa Belladonna L. datura Asthma, kidney stones and gall stones. Externally in liniments for rheumatisms, muscular pain, infections and inflammation Bryonia L. bryony Hydragogue (promotes the release of fluid from the bowel), cathartic Cannabis indica Lam. cannabis Nausea, vomiting, reduces pressure associated with glaucoma Capsicum annumm L. capsicum Debility, poor circulation, asthma, digestive problems Carum carvi L. carroway Carminative (reduces flatulence and improves digestion), emmenagogue (promotes menstruation), expectorant, antispasmodic, astringent Cichorium intybus L. chicory Bitter tonic, laxative, diuretic 298 Botanical name Common name Medicinal uses Cimicifuga racemosa L. (Syn. Actaea racemosa) black cohosh Sedative, antitussive (reduces coughing), antirheumatic, emmenagogue Cinchona L. peruvian bark Malaria, fever, muscle cramps, cardiac fibrillation, colds and coughs Cinnamomum camphora L. J. Presl camphor plant In liniments for muscle and joint pain, chilblains, chapped lips and an inhalant for nasal and bronchial conditions Conium maculatum L. hemlock Epilepsy, mania, cholera and cramps Convolvulus arvensis L. native wood bine Laxative, cholagogue, diuretic, purgative Convolvulus scammonia L. scamonium Cathartic Coriaria ruscifolia L. tu pakihi, tutu, toot Used to treat poisoning by depressants of the nervous system Coriandrum sativum L. corrinader Internally for minor digestive problems Curcuma angustifolia Oxb. arrowroot Demulcent, convalescent food Dacrydium cupressinum Sol. ex Lamb. rimu Taken internally to prevent bleeding from stomach and lungs Datura stramonium L. thorn apple Febrifuge (promotes fever), diaphoretic Digitalis officianalis L. foxglove Cardiac herb, anti-haemorrhagic (staunches bleeding), antidote for aconite poisoning Dysoxylum spectabile Hook. f. kohe-kohe Throat infections and diarrhoea Elaeocarpus hinau A. Cunn. hinau Externally for severe skin complaints Eucalyptus globulus Labill. blue gum Stimulant, antiseptic, aromatic Ferula assa-foetida L. assafoetida Digestive aid, asthma and bronchitis, contraceptive, arbortifacient Foeniculum vulgare Mill. fennel Carminative, diuretic, anti-inflammatory, galactogogue (promotes the secretion of milk) Fumaria officinalis L. fumitory Diaphoretic, diuretic Gallium aparine L. cleavers Diuretic, astringent, lymphatic alterative (promotes lymphatic health) Gentiana spp. L. gentian Bitter tonic, gastric stimulant, cholagogue Ginko biloba L. ginko biloba Vasodilator, antifungal, antispasmodic, insecticidal, anti-inflammatory 299 Botanical name Common name Medicinal uses Glycyrrhiza glabra L. liquorish root Expectorant, demulcent, spasmolytic, anti-inflammatory, mild laxative, adrenocorticotropic (supports kidney function) Hebe salicifolia (G. Forst) Pennell. koromiko Young leaves a remedy for diarrhoea Hummulus lupulus L. hops Sedative, soporific (promotes sleep), spasmolytic, diuretic, bitter, antibacterial Hydrastis Canadensis L. goldenseal Anti-haemorrhagic, choleretic, antimicrobial, astringent, laxative Hyssopus officinalis L. hyssop Spasmolytic, anticatarrhal, expectorant, sedative, diaphoretic Hypericum perforatum L. St. John's wort Anti-inflammatory, antiviral, antidepressant, astringent, relaxant Ipomoea purge L. jalap Constipation, colic, internal parasites Laurelia novae-zelandiae A.Cunn. pukatea Analgesic leonarus cardiac L. motherwort Sedative, cardiac tonic, hypotensive, antispasmodic Leptospernum scoparium Forster et Forster. manuka Anthelmintic, reduces fever Macropiper excelsum (G.Forst.) Miq. kawakawa, pepper tree Analgesic, chewed to reduce tooth ache Mandragora officinarum L. mandrake Ulcerative, anodyne, anti-rheumatic, soporific, emetic, purgative Matricaria recutita L. chamomile Relaxant, carminative, antispasmodic, anti-inflammatory, anti-allergic, vulnerary (speeds the healing of wounds) Marrubium vulgare L. horehound Expectorant, bitter, spasmolytic, vulnerary Melissa officianalis L. lemon balm Carminative, relaxant, antispasmodic, diaphoretic Mentha pulegium L. pennyroyal Purifies water, expectorant, spasmolytic. Menthe x piperita L. Peppermint Carminative, spasmolytic, choleretic, hepatic (liver restorative), uterine relaxant, diaphoretic, anti-emetic Metrosiderus robusta A. Cunn. Rata bark Inner bark for diarrhoea and dysentery Monarda punctate L. Bergamot Antiseptic, fungicide Myoporum laetum G. Forst. ngaio Insecticide 300 Botanical name Common name Medicinal uses Myroxylon toluiferum J. R. Forst. & G. Forst. balsam of Peru Used in cough mixtures and pastilles Papaver somniferum L. opium poppy Pain relive, coughs, diarrhoea, shock, apathy, alcohol poisoning and breathing difficulties Passiflora tetrandra Banks ex DC. ko-hia Externally for skin conditions Phormuim tenax J. R. Forst. & G. Forst. flax, harakeke The roots as a laxative and externally for burns and wounds Physostigma venenosum Balf. calabar bean Used for diseases of the eye, vasodilator, antispasmolytic Phytolacca decandra L. poke root Alterative, anti-inflammatory, anticatarrhal, lymphatic stimulant, immunostimulant Pimpinella anisum L. anise Expectorant, spasmolytic, carminative, parasiticide Plantago major L. plantain Anti-inflammatory, diuretic, anti-haemorrhagic Polygonatum Mill. Solomon's seal Pseudowintera axillaris (J. R. Forst. & G. Forst.) Dandy. horopito Remedy for skin conditions Rhamnus purshana DC. cascara segrada Laxative, cholagogue, antiparisitic Rheum palmatum L. Rhubarb Purgative, astringent, stomachic Rhipogonum parviflorum R. Br. kare-ao, supple jack Used to treat the secondary symptoms of syphilis, arbotifacient Ricinus communis, L. castor oil plant Laxative Rosemarinus officinalis L. rosemary Carminative, tonic, antimicrobial, mild analgesic, spasmolytic, stimulant, rubefacient Ruta graveolens L. rue Spasmolytic, emmenagogue, antitussive Saponaria officinalis L. soapwort Demulcent, diaphoretic, alterative Sassafras officinale (Nutt.) Nees. sassafras Aromatic, stimulant, diaphoretic, alterative 301 Botanical name Common name Medicinal uses Sinapsis alba L. and Sinapsis nigra L. mustard Externally in poultices for respiratory infections, arthritis, skin eruptions, bronchial congestion Smilax regelii Hook. f. sarsaparilla Antirheumatic, antipruritic (relieves itching), antiseptic, anti-inflammatory, diuretic Solanum aviculare G. Forst. porporo Poultice for scabies, the _itch', and in recipes for bruises Sophora tetraptera J. F. Mill. kowhai Scabies, skin conditions Stellaria medica (l.) Cirillo. chickweed Antirheumatic, antipruritic, vulnerary, emolient Symphytum officinale L. comfrey Vulnerary, astringent, demulcent, anti-inflammatory Tanacetum vulgare L. tansy Anthelmintic, carminative, emmenogogue, spasmolytic Taraxacum officianalis F. I. Wiggs. dandelion Hepatic tonic, laxative, antirheumatic, choleretic, diuretic, antilithic (prevents the formation of gravel un the urinary system) Thymus vulgaris L. thyme Anti-bacterial, expectorant, antitussive, carminative, spasmolytic, bitter tonic, astringent, anthelmintic Trachyspermum ammi Sprague.