International historians have produced a number of specific plant histories, such as the history of the opium poppy and reports on localised herbal systems that provide some analysis and exception to this omission.4 Additionally, self-help herbal guides often include a generic history of medicinal plants, but the information presented is typically divorced from social context, or designed simply to promote a growing resistance to modern pharmaceuticals.5 These books reinforce an association between _alternative' medicine and the use of medicinal plants and rewrite into the past modern opinions of herbalism, including the belief that herbal medicine is unscientific and unrelated to popular medical theory or developments. They typically ignore the use of plants by the medical profession and the changing nature in which plants were processed and understood. This thesis extends and challenges these histories and assumptions. It engages with medical, environmental and garden historical scholarship to illustrate the compatibility of, and value in, combining methodologies and historiographies. Focusing on the use of medicinal plants situates my research within existing 3 S. G. Brooker, R.C. Cambie and R. C. Cooper, New Zealand Medicinal Plants (Auckland: Heinemann, 1981); Christina Macdonald, Medicines of the Maori: From their Trees, Shrubs, and other Plants, Together with Foods from the Same Sources (Auckland: Collins, 1973); Derek Dow, Safeguarding the Public Health: A History of the New Zealand Department of Health (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1995); Frances Sydney Maclean, Challenge for Health: A History of Public Health in New Zealand (Wellington: Government Printer, 1964). 4 For example, R Cambie and J. Ash, Fijian Medicinal Plants (Melbourne: CSIRO, 1994); Martin Booth, Opium: A History (London: Simon & Schuster, 1996); Leslie Taylor, The Healing Power of Rainforest Herbs: A Guide to Understanding and Using Herbal Medicines (New York: Square One Publishers, 2005); W Arthur Whistler, Samoan erba Medi ine: o a au ma ai fof o (Honolulu: Isle Botanica, 1996); Paul Petard, Raau Tahiti: The Use of Polynesian Medicinal Plants in Tahitian Medicine (Noumea, New Caledonia: South Pacific Commission, 1972). 5 Literally hundreds of herbal manuals have been published since the revival of western herbalism in the 1970s. Most include a generic global history of medicinal plants. For example, Barty Phillips, The Book of Herbs: An Illustrated A-Z of the Wor d's Most Popu ar Cu inary and medicinal Plants (London: Arcturus, 2007), Deni Brown, The Royal Horticultural Society Encyclopedia of Herbs and their Uses: The Definitive A-Z Guide to Herbs (London: Dorling Kindersley Limited, 2002); Van Wyk and Wink, 2004; Antoine Al-Achi, An Introduction to Botanical Medicines: History, Science, Uses and Dangers (Connecticut: Praeger Publishers, 2008); Frank Lipp, Herbalism (London: Macmillan in association with Duncan Baird, c.1996). 15 medical historiography, but also moves it into the fields of environmental and garden history, as well as the history of science. Environmental and garden historians often engage with scientific research and the history of science by combining empirical investigations and observations with historical discourse in their analyses. In a similar way, this thesis assays early botanical and medical research to determine nineteenth-century perceptions of plants and science and considers how these are expressed in New Zealand's colonial medical culture. Furthermore, it uses quantitative methodologies to determine the introduction of specific plants and the popularity of medicinal species and highlights the advantages of an interdisciplinary approach to historical research. New Zealand's history of health is an obvious place to begin my search for references to the use of medicinal plants. New Zealand scholarship in this field has followed a trajectory characterised by an initial emphasis on individual achievement and scientific success, to an account of public health services and institutions, and more recently a critically-informed social historical research that incorporates elements of class, gender and race in its analysis. Early research, an example of which is Robert Fulton's Medical Practice in Otago and Southland in the Early Days (1922) presents the role of colonial doctor as fraught with frustration but as ultimately heroic and enduring.6 Described as _stridently Anglo-Saxon' by medical historian Michael Belgrave, books such as Fulton's initiated an era of medical history that showcased both the pioneer _backblocks' doctor, as well as scientific progress. During the 1950s and 1960s, autobiographies written by mainly rural doctors for an audience drawn to the image of community service and colonial hardship continued this tradition.7 With doctors in the dominant role, plants appear only rarely as adjuncts to anecdotes and the heroic work of the medics themselves. 6 Robert Valpy Fulton, Medical Practice in Otago and Southland in the Early Days. A Description of the Manner of Life, Trials, and Difficulties of some of the Pioneer Doctors, of the Places in which, and of the People among whom they Laboured (Dunedin: Otago Daily Times and Witness Newspapers Co., 1922). 7 For example, Bernard Myers, The Reminiscences of a Physician (Wellington: Reed, 1949); Elaine Grundy, Who'd Marry a Doctor? A Chatham Islands Casebook (Christchurch: Whitcombe and Tombs, 1968); Dorothea Joblin, Harvey Come Quick : The Story of the Little Doctor of Waverley (Auckland: Paul's Book Arcade, 1963); Doris Gordon, Doctor Down Under 1890-1956 (London: Faber, 1957); R. Burns Watson, The Doctor Must Get Through: 50 Years a General-Practitioner-Surgeon (Wellington: Reed, 1971). 16 By the 1960s, an era of institutional health histories commenced by Frances Sydney Maclean, addressed the role of the state and public health policy in New Zealand and provided statistics for further analysis.8 In 1964, Maclean produced a systematic chronological account of the development of public health services in New Zealand, together with a brief epidemiology on a select number of introduced diseases. In a similar vein to the previously published medical biographies, and in a format followed by later publications on public institutions, Maclean's work presents the history of medicine in New Zealand as a lineal progression towards greater understandings and medical acumen.9 Institutional histories such as Maclean's focus on the changing nature of medical theory and practice. However, they often completely ignore the elements and nature of care, producing a top-down history that overlooks the experience of health and wellness in its myriad forms. By the 1970s, a new wave of historians using new perspectives aimed to broaden the scope of this research. According to historians Frank Huisman and John Harley Warner, in America and Britain, scholars moved away from producing _stories of great doctors' and towards social histories of medicine that explore the influence of social attitudes and values.10 In New Zealand, during this period, historian Laurie Gluckman, although still largely committed to doctors' stories, moved closer towards this approach.11 In his investigation into New Zealand's medical services prior to 1860, Gluckman reveals an interest in native medicinal plants expressed by European doctors and scientists. As such, his findings encourage and support my own investigations into the exchange of medical knowledge in colonial New Zealand. Motivated by his background in medicine and interest in traditional Maori medicine, Gluckman's book reveals the contrary 8 Maclean, 1964; D. Macdonald Wilson, A Hundred Years of Healing: Wellington Hospital, 1847-1947 (Wellington: A.H Reed & A.W. Reed, 1948); F. O Bennet, Hospital on the Avon: The History of the Christchurch hospital, 1862-1962 (Christchurch: North Canterbury Hospital Board. 1962); Sir Charles Hercus and Sir Gordon Bell, The Otago Medical School Under the First Three Deans (Edinburgh: E. & S. Livingstone, 1964). 9 Maclean, 1964. 10 Frank Huisman and John Harley Warner, Locating Medical History: The Stories and Their Meanings (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007), p. 173. 11 Laurie Gluckman, Tangiwai: A Medical History of New Zealand Prior to 1860 (Christchurch: Whitcoulls Limited, 1976). 17 opinions and perspectives of doctors and missionaries and the varied nature of medical care, knowledge and opinions during this early period of settlement.12 Gluckman's focus on Maori health extends into an analysis of traditional Maori medical practices, including brief descriptions of the Maori pharmacopeia. By the 1970 and 1980s, social histories of medicine became increasingly popular and medical historical scholarship began to encompass aspects of gender, race and class - research that was presented in journals and forums, such as Social History of Medicine and the Society for the Social History of Medicine.13 Academic developments and broader influences, such occupational health and safety and racial disparities in health care delivery, affected the direction and scope of medical historical enquiry during this period.14 As an interdisciplinary project, this thesis sits within, and contributes to, the wider scope of social medical history that has taken place since the 1970s. Furthermore, the social history of medicine, I argue, shares qualities and characteristics with the field of environmental historical research - the nature of which is discussed in more detail later in this section - making both approaches compatible and indeed complementary. A number of health historians in New Zealand have embraced a social and cultural approach to the history of medicine, and their work provides valuable context and insight for this thesis.15 Michael Belgrave, Rex Wright-St Clair and 12 Many early health initiatives in nineteenth-century New Zealand were race specific. As medical historical research became increasingly focused on legislation and professionalisation, Maori health became typically studied in isolation. For example, Raeburn Lange, May the People Live: A istory of Maori ea th De e opment 1900-1920 (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1999); Derek Dow, Maori ea th and Go ernment Policy, 1840-1940 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1999). 13 Susan Reverby and David Rosner, '"Beyond the Great Doctors" Revisited: A Generation of the "New" Social History of Medicine', in Locating Medical History: The Stories and Their Meanings, ed. by Frank Warner Huisman and John Harley, (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007), pp. 167-194. The Oxford journal, The Social History of Medicine, published on behalf of The Society for the Social History of Medicine started in 1988 and is a prominent forum for this research. http://shm.oxfordjournals.org/, [accessed February 12 2012]. Susan Reverby and David Rosner, '"Beyond the Great Doctors" Revisited: A Generation of the "New" Social History of Medicine', in Locating Medical History: The Stories and Their Meanings, ed. by Frank Warner Huisman and John Harley, (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2007), pp. 167-194. 14 Reverby and Rosner, p. 117. 15 Lynda Bryder, 'History of Medicine in Australia and New Zealand', in The Oxford Handbook of the History of Medicine, ed. by Mark Jackson ( Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2013), pp. 302-321; Rex Wright-St Clair, A History of the New Zealand Medical Association: The First Hundred Years (Butterworths of New Zealand, 1987); Pamela Wood, Dirt: Filth and Decay in a New World 18 Derek Dow, for example, have explored public health and the professionalisation of medicine in New Zealand, producing concise and informative research that focuses on university-educated doctors and the political and cultural context that governed their organisations and practices.16 Belgrave's 1985 doctoral thesis contains a rich analysis of colonial medical culture and provides useful statistics.17 Doctor/historian Wright-St Clair, described in 1985 as _one of New Zealand's foremost contemporary writers of medical history', produced over fifty publications and contributed significantly to New Zealand's history of public and professional health care.18 Belgrave's analysis acknowledges the influence of British medical theories, policies and culture, as does that of Wright-St Clair, who maintains that, _with British culture and civilisation transplanted to the Antipodes.... [doctors] saw themselves as British doctors practicing British medicine in a British Colony'.19 Indeed, histories of public health in New Zealand, such as Dow's history of New Zealand's Health Department, highlight the influence of British medical culture.20 This focus on British influences and the writings of professional men leave little room to explore the interest taken by colonists in New Zealand in health and cultures of healing expressed elsewhere during this period, such as in America. Arcadia (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 2005); Barbara Brookes, 'The Making of a Controversy: History, Medicine and Politics', in The Cartwright Papers: Essays on the Cervical Cancer Inquiry 1987-88, ed. by J. Manning (Wellington: Bridget Williams Books, 2009), pp. 100-117; Lynda Bryder (ed. ), A Healthy Country. Essays on the Social History of Medicine in New Zealand (Wellington: Bridget Williams Books, 1991); Catharine Coleborne, 'Health and Illness, 1840s-1900s', in New Zealand Oxford History of New Zealand, ed. by Giselle Byrnes (Auckland: Oxford University Press, 2009); Derek Dow, 1995; Michael Belgrave, 'The Rise of the Health Professional in New Zealand, 1860-1939', in A Healthy Country: Essays on the Social History of Medicine in New Zealand, ed. by Lynda Bryder (Wellington: Bridget Williams Books, 1991), pp. 7-25. 16 Michael Belgrave, "Medical Men" and "Lady Doctors" The Making of a New Zealand Profession, 1867-1941 , Unpublished PhD. Thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, 1985; Belgrave, 1991; Rex Wright-St Clair, 1987; Rex Wright-St. Clair, A History of General Practice and of the Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners (Wellington: The Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners, 1989); Dow, 1995. 17 Belgrave, 1985. 18 Derek Dow, 'Rex Wright-St. Clair', Journal of the New Zealand Medical Association, 118, 1216 (2005), http://journal.nzma.org.nz/journal/118-1216/1504/, [accessed April 19 2014]. 19 Wright-St. Clair, 1989, p. 11. 20 Derek Dow's revision of Mclean's history reveals the number of health policies and initiatives in New Zealand that stemmed from British associations, examples and developments. Dow, 1995; Barbara Brookes, 'A Corresponding Community: Dr Agnes Bennett and her Friends from the Edinburgh Medical College for Women of the 1890s', Medical History, 52, 2 (2008), pp. 237-256. 19 This thesis extends this scholarship and reveals important intersecting ideologies that complicate the historiographical presentation of a strictly British, and strictly delineated medical system in New Zealand in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.21 Including women and so-called _irregular' practitioners in New Zealand's history of health, such as this thesis does, reveals a broader set of influences, and challenges the idea that in New Zealand, _colonial medicine' was solely _British medicine'.22 It highlights the importance of place, arguing that responses to the colonial environment as well as imperial encounters and endeavours influenced the direction and construction of colonial medicine in New Zealand. Furthermore, this thesis reveals common practices and philosophies among healers who presented themselves as distinctly different. The condemnation of certain medical practices and practitioners began in Britain as early as the late 1700s, encouraging an _alternative' industry that placed itself in opposition to biomedical practices while it sought validation and accreditation through its alliance with scientific thought. In describing this process, critical medical anthropologists, such as Peter Freund and Meredith McGuire give the mistaken impression of clear and precise lines demarcating the philosophies and practices of regular from irregular practitioners.23 Given the influence of British medicine and policy in colonial New Zealand, this framework has been largely adopted by New Zealand historians whose focus on professional medicine and omission of domestic or _alternative' medical practices supports this delineation.24 Challenging this framework are medical historians Roy Porter and Roger Cooter, who reveal the inconsistencies and discrepancies that confuse the notion of a strictly divided eighteenth- and nineteenth-century medical system.25 They argue 21 Belgrave, 1985; Dow, 1995; Wright- St Clair, 1987. 22 Belgrave, 1985, p. 12. 23 Peter Freund and Meredith McGuire, Health, Illness and the Social Body (New Jersey: Prentice hall, 1999); G. Foster and B. Anderson, Medical Anthropology (New York: Joghn Wiley and Sons, 1978); Kevin Dew, Borderland Practices: Regulating Alternative Therapies in New Zealand (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2003). 24 For example; Belgrave, 1985; Dow, 1995; Wright- St Clair, 1987. 25 Roy Porter, 'Before the Fringe 'Quackery' and the Eighteenth-Century Medical market', in Studies in the History of Alternative Medicine, ed. by Roger Cooter (Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 1998), pp. 1-27; Roger Cooter, (ed. ), Studies in the History of Alternative Medicine, (New York: St. Martin's Press, 1988). 20 that a simple dichotomy is both irrelevant and inappropriate to medical historical enquiry. This thesis follows Porter and Cooter's lead. Through a focus on medicinal plants and the philosophies and cultural practices associated with them, it argues that the process of medical differentiation was far more complex, contingent and far more place-specific in its scope and timing than previously portrayed. The study of colonial medical history has received significant attention over the past two decades, with specialised and localised research by numerous scholars.26 More recently, medical historians such as Anne Digby, Waltraud Ernst and Projit Mukhaji have appealed to scholars to consider the _diversity of colonial experiences and indigenous actions'.27 Different approaches to distinct colonial medical histories, they argue, have led to independent studies that tend to overlook overlaps between different regions and systems.