50 terminology a favourable balance of trade'.102 Medicinal plants were valuable commodities, largely supplied by herb gatherers or root diggers who protected their trade by constructing elaborate instructions for harvesting and cultivating.103 Scholars such as Theophrastus ridiculed their directives and the first field guide to medicinal plants, De Materia Medica, written by physician Pedanius Dioscorides, included over four hundred colour illustrations for the sake of identification and omitted the superstitions of the gatherers.104 De Materia Medica included plants from around the Greek and Roman world as well as Chinese plants that entered Europe through the Silk Road - an extensive network of trade routes established during the Han Dynasty (BC 206 -220 AD) used by Arab, Indian, Persian and Roman traders.105 By 1200 AD, after nearly a thousand years of translation and with the addition of previously omitted medicinal plants by Arab, Latin and Greek scholars, De Materia Medica, and other Greek texts, entered Western Europe, assisted by the Caliphate conquests of Northern Africa, Spain and Italy.106 By this time, Britain's exotic flora had grown considerably in number and diversity. Hundreds of plants entered Britain during the course of the Roman occupation (43-410 AD). These 102 Glacken, p. 124. 103 Agnes Arber, Herbals: Their Origin and Evolution 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1938), p. 7. The directions for mandrake, for example, involved drawing three circles around the plant with a sword before cutting it while facing west and dancing around the plant. 104 Dioscorides was born in Anazarbus (southeast Turkey) and was medically trained in Alexandria and Tarsus. He travelled extensively with the Roman Army and his work remained an authority on medicinal plants up until the seventeenth century. See Maggie Campbell-Culver, The Origin of P ants: The Peop e and P ants That a e Shaped Britain's Garden istory (London: Transworld Publishers, 2004), p. 8; Bowler, p. 55; Vivian Nutton, Lawrence Conrad, Michael Neve, Roy Porter and Andrew Wear, The Western Medical Tradition, 800BC to AD1800 (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 57. 105 Jane Kilpatrick, Gifts from the Gardens of China (London: Frances Lincoln, 2007), pp. 15-16; British Pharmacopeia published under direction of General Council of Medical Education and Registration of the United Kingdom pursuant to the Medical Act 1858. (London: Spotiswood, 1885), p. 126; Dioscorides included Chinese Day lilies, Hemerocallis lilioasphodelus in De Materia Medica and the Chinese medicinal rhubarb, Rheum palmatum, became and remained a popular medicine in western countries up until the late nineteenth century. See Campbell-Culver, pp. 18-33. 106 Richard Drayton: atures Go ernment: S ien e, Imperia Britain and the 'Impro ement' of the World (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2000); Bowler, p. 54; G. Foster and B. Anderson, Medical Anthropology (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978), p. 58. 51 included medicinal species described in De Materia Medica; for example, the opium poppy, garlic, dill, common mallow and hemlock.107 Following the fall of the Western Roman Empire, Christian scholarship dominated intellectual thought in Britain, encouraging a relationship between theology and the study of the natural world that persisted for centuries. Many scholars embraced the Greeks' rationality, which complemented such Christian pursuits as restoring natural balance by _gathering together all the creations scattered at the fall of man'.108 This approach supported the belief that God had provided everything required to heal humans in the form of plants.109 Chinese plants were added to western pharmacopoeia as they moved through trade routes and intrigued western scholars. In China, during the Ming Dynasty (1368-1644), significant advances in printmaking, an established gardening tradition and a sophisticated system of medicine that relied heavily on medicinal plants, encouraged the production of important medico-botanical works.110 Bencao gangmu (1596) written by Li Shizhen is an early Chinese pharmaceutical natural history that is considered the precursor to modern science in China.111 Li's research, reflected late Ming concerns with the commodification of objects, the increasing availability of print media, and efforts to naturalise parts of what had been the divine realm.112 The Bencao gangmu combined observation, experimentation, analysis and comparisons of previous scholarship, to produce a substantial compendium that contained fifty-two chapters and around 1,892 organic and inorganic drugs. As 107 Campbell-Culver, pp. 4, 18-33. 108 Drayton, p. 4. 109 Glacken, pp. 227-229; Bowler, p. 61. 110 In China, from the relative peace of the Tang Period (618-907AD) through to the Song Dynasty (912-1279AD), botanists and horticulturists, blessed by a vast and diverse native flora, cultivated plants and developed elaborate gardens that incorporated symbolism and denoted social status. See, Jane Kilpatrick, Gifts From The Gardens of China (London: Frances Lincoln, 2007), p. 16. 111 Carla Nappi, The Monkey and the Inkpot: atura istory and It's Transformations in Ear y Modern China (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2009), p. 5. In 1578 Li Shih-chen completed Pen-ts'ao Kan -mu (The Great Pharmacopeia) which included over one thousand plants. See Eugenia Herbert, F ora's Empire: British Gardens in India (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011), p. 60. 112 Nappi, p. 7. 52 with comparable tomes published much later in Europe, the Bencao gangmu, served as an important guide that protected buyers of drugs from unscrupulous peddlers of medicinal plants.113 By the sixteenth century, many European scholars independently developed a similar empirical approach to Chinese scholars. The fall of Constantinople (1453) released further botanical treatises and translations to Renaissance scholars. New --scientists|| such as Francis Bacon and Rene Descartes applied mechanistic frameworks to nature, as classical Greek methodologies gradually gave way to empirical research.114 The Reformation (1517-1648) encouraged a polarisation of intellectual and spiritual thought, and many Protestants, rejecting the seemingly _false doctrines and ordinances of the Byshop of Rome', became dedicated students of experimental botany.115 Newly-established universities in Western Europe such as Bologna (1534) and Montpellier (1538) replaced monasteries as centres of learning, while translations of Greek texts, including De Materia Medica, became blueprints for western herbals, including William Turner's A New Herball (1564) and John Gerard's Herball (1597).116 The publication of such texts was an important development for the study of medicinal plants which became increasingly academic during this period. As the pages from Gerard's herbal shown below demonstrate, the layouts of herbals were organised and systematic and far more refined than those presented earlier by men such as Dioscorides. 113 Nappi, p. 41. 114 Keith Thomas, Man and the Natural World: Changing Attitudes in England, 1500-1800 (London: Allen Lane Penguin Books, 1983), pp. 73-81. 115 Thomas, pp. 91-98; Drayton, p. 8; Bowler, p. 144. 116 Andrew Wear, 'Early Modern Europe, 1500-1700', in The Western Medical Tradition 800BC to AD1800, ed. by Vivian Nutton, Lawrence Conrad, Michael Neve, Roy Porter and Andrew Wear, (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995), pp. 215-363. 53 Figure 1:1: John Gerard, The Herball or Generall Historie of Plantes Gathered by Iohn Gerarde of London Master in Chirurgerie Very Much Enlarged and Amended by Thomas Iohnson Citizen and Apothecarye of London (London: Adam Islip, 1633), pp. 708-9 Source: http://www.otago.ac.nz/library/exhibitions/authorship/cabinet7-1.html, [accessed May 28 2014] According to historian Richard Grove, the study of plants also acquired political significance during this period. European Governments and monarchies provided official patronage to botanical investigation and English botanists, in particular, maintained that botany and the study of plants was an attribute of a wise government.117 Religious and secular literature of the west supported these ideas and many botanists, including Turner and Gerard, sought royal and aristocratic support.118 Under the patronage of William Cecil (English statesman, Chief Advisor of Queen Elizabeth I and High Treasurer from 1572- 1598), Gerard worked as curator of the Royal College of Physicians' physic garden in London. 117 Richard Grove, Green Imperialism: Colonial Expansion, Tropical Island Edens, and the Origins of Environmentalism, 1600-1860 (Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 1995), p. 76. 118 Drayton, pp. 26-49. 54 In this capacity he received plants from around Europe, including France, Crete, Spain, Italy and Poland.119 The establishment of physic gardens - gardens designed to cultivate and investigate the properties and uses of medicinal plants, such as that run by Turner - resurrected the intellectual relationship between medicine and botany that was initiated by the Greeks.120 Designed initially to recreate and reflect God's grand design, by the sixteenth century, physic gardens became sites of experimentation and cultivation and supplied plants to doctors who were struggling to contain the plague and control the spread of syphilis. Medical practice in Europe suffered greatly from the dissolution of the monasteries during the Reformation and the consequent closure of medieval hospitals. As a consequence, sixteenth-century physicians, dismayed at the limited range and largely ineffective medicines available, became focused on retrieving the lost drugs of antiquity.121 An overseas network of physicians, scholars, travellers and explorers soon formed and individuals and associations _co-operated informally with each other, sending plants and information'.122 At the same time, the creation of new trade routes to Africa, Asia and America revealed a plethora of exotic species. Imperial powers including the Dutch, Portuguese, Spanish and British became collectors and authorities on plants of the New World.123 By the seventeenth century, botanical enquiry and discovery became intrinsically linked to imperialism, a development that later supported the introduction of 119 Parvord, pp. 332-346. See Forbes Robertson, Early Scottish Gardeners and their Plants, 1650-1750 (Scotland: Tuckwell Press, 2000), pp. 129-140; Marcus Woodward, Gerard's erba : The Essence thereof distilled by Marcus Woodward from the Edition of TH. Johnson, 1636 (London: Spring Books, 1964), p. xv-xvii. 120 Kilpatrick, p. 24; Wear, p. 300. Christian Neoplatonists (scholars who resurrected Plato's' teachings and philosophies) had created gardens in the fifteenth century to reassemble 'God's original creative intentions' and to reveal the potential in plants to control and modify human health. See Drayton, p. 6. 121 Roy Porter, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present (London: Harper Collins Publisher, 1999), p. 199. 122 Wear, p. 303. 123 The European search for medicines prompted efforts to make European countries pharmaceutically self-sufficient and therefore able to reduce expenditure on overseas drugs and create a positive trade surplus. Catherine Herbert Howell, Flora Mirabilis: How Plants Have Shaped Word, Knowledge, Health, Wealth and Beauty (Washington D.C: National geographic, 2009); Londa Schiebinger, Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic World (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007), p. 73. 55 British botanical practices and knowledge to New Zealand. The transfer and cultivation of plants became _a mark of European colonialism [and] both cause and effect of European expansion'.124 British imperialism relied largely on manufacturing and selling products made from colonial natural resources. The supposed idea that indigenous people did not make efficient use of their land provided justification for colonial science and scientists, who were argued to be best able to efficiently use and distribute colonial plants.125 This notion reflected disparate ideas and translations of land and productivity. During this period, the English and Dutch created chartered trading companies, the English East India Company (EIC) and the Dutch East India Company (VOC) respectively, and gained, often through armed conquest, regional trade monopolies - for example, the British in India and the Dutch in Java. The creation of plantations and mass agricultural production severely disrupted local markets and labour forces, and left regions such as India and South America open for further exploitation.126 Between the seventeenth and nineteenth centuries, Europeans created entire plant monopolies that formed, dissolved or changed hands as colonies were conquered, abandoned or changed political allegiance.127 Medicinal plants provided both the impetus for invasion - through the desire to secure new cures and economic gain - and the means for colonisation, affording a degree of medical comfort and relief to both colonisers and the colonised. The imperial web grew increasingly complex as links between places and people were constantly negotiated and intensified along with the exchange of flora and fauna. The following diagram reveals the factors I identify as the most significant in the development of botany as it was practiced in colonial New Zealand. The institutions I identify, and discuss further in this section, are all British. However, it is important to note that within these institutions, plants and theories from other parts of the world, including New Zealand, were cultivated, investigated and assessed. The outer circle represents broader trends and processes, while the inner ring presents some 124 Quote from Drayton, p. 92; Lucile Brockway, Science and Colonial Expansion: The Role of the British Royal Botanical Gardens (New Haven: Yale University Press, 2002), pp. 20-31, 103-167. 125 Brockway, pp. 20-31. 126 Grove, pp. 101-125; Brockway, pp. 103-167. 127 Brockway, pp. 20-31, 103-167. 56 of the institutions that both directed and received colonial botanical information during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. Figure 1:2: Factors that directed, influenced and stimulated colonial botanical enquiry and their interconnectedness. Exploring the development of European science and botany in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries provides some understanding of how these institutions arose in colonial New Zealand. During the eighteenth century, European scholars and botanists such as the founder of modern biological taxonomy, Carl von Linne (Carolus Linnaeus) (1707-1778), supported imperial motivations and actions. In Europe, newly-formed classificatory systems, reflecting changing and disparate views of nature, sought to bring order to the growing number of plants revealed through colonisation, exploration and trade.128 Linnaeus, a Swedish naturalist and later professor of medicine, encouraged his students to travel widely and thereby facilitated the movement of _useful' plants. He gave economic reasons for 128 Thomas, p. 84; Campbell-Culver, pp. 9-11. Older systems of classification included the Doctrine of Signatures, which named and classified plants according to their morphology and medicinal use. 57 botanical enquiry and believed that indigenous knowledge of plants was inferior, had no scientific value, and did not reflect the role God played in their design.129 In an increasingly industrial nineteenth century, Linnaean scholarship appealed to a newly-emerging European middle class.130 His classificatory system was based on the number and position of pistils (female parts) and stamens (male parts) and although the system shocked some with its sexual imagery, it had widespread appeal.131 Classificatory systems encouraged the study of natural history, a discipline that, by the late eighteenth century, also played a significant role in the education of Britain's working class.132 As discussed in Chapter Six, classificatory systems also provided another avenue of enquiry into medicinal plants. These investigations relied on the translation of plants into botanical specimens and the assumption that plants from the same family possessed similar medicinal properties. By the nineteenth century, Britain boasted as many botanists as the whole of the rest of Europe, and as plants from the Indian sub-continent, Japan and China flowed into Britain and Europe, a burgeoning culture of professional and amateur botanists provided a rapt and captivated audience.133 Botanical knowledge filtered down from the elite through botanical literature such as William Curtis's The Botanical Magazine. Published in London from 1787, this magazine targeted _such Ladies, Gentlemen and Gardeners... [who] wish to become scientifically 129 Paul Lawrence Farber, Finding Order in Nature: The Naturalist Tradition from Linnaeus to E. O. Wilson (London: Johns Hopkins University Press, 2000) p. 12. Linnaeus also supported the Hippocratic theory that remedies for specific diseases could be found in areas where the disease was endemic. See Drayton, p. 73 130 Bowler, p. 144. 131 Patricia Fara, Sex, Botany and Empire: The Story of Carl Linnaeus and Joseph Banks (New York: Columbia University Press, c2003). 132 Farber, p.30. 133 Ray Desmond, The History of the Royal Botanic Gardens Kew (London: The Harvill Press, 1995), p. ix. The introduction of plants to Britain was made known to the public through botanical journals such as Curtis's Botani a Ma azine, edited by William Hooker and monthly editions of Paxton's Ma azine of Botany and Re ister of F o erin P ants and The Ladies Flower Garden of Ornamental Annuals. See, John Claudius Loudon, The Garden Magazine and Register of Rural and Domestic Improvement: Comprising Treatises on Landscape Gardening, Arboriculture, Floriculture, Horticulture, Agriculture, Garden Structure, Plans of Gardens and Country Residences, Suburban Villas etc - Also Lists of New and Rare Plants, Fruits and Vegetables (London: J.C. Loudon FLS HS, 1840). 58 acquainted with the Plants they cultivate'.134 Around the same time, Romantic philosophers and artists, whose drawings and paintings of plants reflected their view of nature as inspiring and sacred, were starting to add another dimension to botanical discovery and appreciation in Britain.