As a consequence, untrained midwives lost favour in the eyes of some public health officials, and those employed in public health institutions were replaced by women trained in hospitals and medical schools.94 From their advent, New Zealand's hospitals employed masters, matrons, housekeepers or house stewards - untrained men and women who often provided medical assistance. By the 1880s, a concerted effort was made to replace the untrained care givers with _probationers, drawn from a higher order of society'.95 Throughout the 1890s, Mrs Elizabeth Grace Neill (1846-1926), a nurse and advocate for nurses' training and registration in New Zealand, lamented the number of untrained women who 93 Six private collections of medical receipts are referred to in this chapter and all are written prior to the 1880s. 260 manuscripts make up a substantive collection of remedy books held at the Wellcome Library for the History and Understanding of Medicine, London. Out of these, ninety-seven (37%) are dated in the nineteenth century. Seventeen (17%) of the ninety-seven are dated in the mid to late nineteenth century, indicating either a decline in the number of collections compiled during this period or a decline in the preservation of collections from this period. Pennel, 2004. 94 Members of the New Zealand Medical Association, who were by this stage agitating for increased medical professionalism met in April 1886 to discuss their concerns relating to midwifery and the 'total lack of qualifications amongst some of the women practising as midwifes'. In 1904, the New Zealand Government passed the Midwives Registration Act which provided for the better training and the registration of midwives. The Act allowed all women of 'good character' with a minimum of three years experience practicing as 'bona fide' midwifes as well as those with a certificate in midwifery from any recognised training school, to register on payment of a prescribed fee. In 1906, 662 women registered under this provision; only sixty three of these acknowledged an actual qualification. The Act also decreed that of January 1, 1907, only those registered as midwives were lawfully able to practice and assume the name of midwife. See Alison Bashford, 'Medicine, Gender and Empire', in Gender and Empire, ed. by Phillipa Levine (Oxford: Oxford University Press), p 126; Rex Wright-St. Clair, A History of the New Zealand Medical Association: The First Hundred Years (Wellington: Butterworths of New Zealand, 1987), p. 26; Duncan MacGregor, 'Hospitals and Charitable Institutions of the Colony', AJHR (1901), H-22, pp. 1-49. 95 Wellington Hospital provided the first official training school for nurses in 1883. Auckland followed suit in 1891, as did Christchurch in 1891 and Dunedin in 1893. Christchurch Hospital which opened in 1865 employed its first trained nurse in 1885 although she had only 6 months experience in a London Hospital. From 1886, New Plymouth Hospital employed trained nurses, the first being Miss Blackley who was trained in Manchester Royal Infirmary. By 1887, a nurses training scheme was initiated and by the following year, nurse were taught at Otago Medical School. This scheme, ironically was run by a Miss Burton, herself an untrained nurse. See F. S. Maclean, Challenge for Health: A History of Public Health in New Zealand (Wellington: Government Printer, 1964), p. 45. 153 adopted the title of nurse in public and private settings.96 In many ways, this strengthened the divide between domestic health and public health. Domestic remedies and care came to be classified as _traditional' or old-fashioned compared to the seemingly more modern and progressive care provided in hospitals and other public health institutions. Campaigns to standardise nursing training paralleled concerted efforts by members of the New Zealand British Medical Association to regulate the practices of _irregular' and untrained practitioners. Practitioners became increasingly specialised, no longer combining different approaches and techniques, but forced instead to choose sides in the _irregular medicine' versus _regular medicine' debate. Consequently, certain medicines became associated with different medical approaches. While many rejected what they considered to be _old time' remedies - such as tincture of digitalis - others, such as James Neil (quoted below), continued to use plants considered outdated, basing their loyalty on experience: This preparation [Tincture of digitalis]...was at one time held in high estimation, but has since fallen into disuse ... The tinctures, concentrated medicines, and most valuable pharmaceutical preparations, are generally not kept in stock by wholesale pharmaceutists ... We import mainly from America.97 In 1879, American drug manufacturers Parke, Davis and Co. developed a process for the standardisation of plant-based medicines by chemical assay, and before long _scientifically proven' medicines flooded the market.98 The scientific translation of medicinal plants is explored further in Chapter Six. Chemists performed stringent tests dictated by British formularies and pharmacopeia designed to standardise the drugs they sold. Domestic medical manuals made distinctions between those plants favoured or rejected by physicians. The Australasian Practical Home Physician recommends the use of buckthorn but 96 Maclean, p. 24. 97 James Neil, The New Zealand Family Herb Doctor: A Guide to Recipes and Herbal Remedies (First published in 1891) (Twickenham: Tiger Books International, 1998), p. 192. 98 Milton L Hoefle and Warner Lambert-Parke Davis, 'The Early History of Parke-Davis and Company', Bulletin of Historical Chemistry, 25, 1 (2000), pp. 28-34. 154 notes _it is not ordinarily used by physicians'.99 Contrarily, Cascara sagrada, informs the author, is _recognised by the medical profession as the best known laxative ... best attained by using the cascara cordial manufactured by Parke, Davis and Co'.100 As herbalists and others continued to use the same plants vetoed by physicians, the plants themselves became increasingly defined as _traditional' remedies. Contrary to the popular perception that domestic remedies were unscientific, _antiquated formulae', domestic healers also adopted a scientific approach to their practice.101 This trend was supported by the popularity of domestic science. Although _few historians of science have considered daily domestic duties, particularly domestic medicine, as science', by the late nineteenth century, domestic duties and household management became increasingly standardised and scientific, with the aid of organised education.102 A female curriculum that included subjects such as literacy, economics and health was created for girls in schools and training institutions.103 Teaching was a popular profession for women and many women found _satisfying niches schooling genteel and respectable girls'.104 The advent of this domestic curriculum and the increasing influence of science affected the advice given to, and the approach taken by, domestic healers. By the 1890s, most domestic manuals, such as Kellogg's Ladies Guide pictured in Figure 3:3, included substantial sections on anatomy and physiology, and instructions on how to prepare plants became increasingly refined. Additionally, they emphasised diagnosis and the application of specific treatments and regimes. 99 Henry Lyman, Christian Fenger, H. Webster Jones and W.T. Belfield, The Practical Home Physician and Encyclopaedia of Medicine: A Management of Disease; Giving the History, Cause, Means of Prevention and Symptoms of all Diseases of Men, Women and Children and most Approved methods of Treatment with P ain Instru tions for the Care of the Si k...Australasian Edition (Canada: The World Publishing Co, c. 1880s), p. 1076. 100 Lyman et al, p. 1085. 101 'Sale of Food and Drugs Act, The British Medical Journal (BMJ), June 1 (1895), p. 1219. 102 Allen, p. 3. 103 North Otago Times (NOT), 13 September 1886, p. 2; Star, 26 November 1892, p. 4. 104 James Belich, Makin Peop es, istory of e Zea ander's From Po ynesian Sett ement to the End of the Nineteenth Century (Auckland: The Penguin Press, 1996), p. 388. 155 Figure 3:3: The contents from Kellogg's 'The Ladies Guide' showing sections on anotomy and physiology Source: Kellogg, p. v Patient observation was the first and foremost diagnostic technique and domestic manuals included comprehensive descriptions of diseases to assist with diagnosis. Many incorporated detailed diagnostic instructions, such as that described below from The Practical Home Physician and Encyclopaedia of Medicine (c.1880): A point which should never be forgotten in household practice is to inspect the throat wherever an individual is suffering from any indefinite ailment; if this were a more general practice, mothers would often be spared the surprise and chagrin which occurs when, upon the first visit of the physician, he discovers in the throat of the child, who may have been ill for several days, a thick, white coating of diphtheritic membrane.105 During this period, the scope of domestic care remained broad. Domestic manuals prepared and instructed healers to treat both simple everyday ailments, such as headaches and colds, and severe disorders including spinal meningitis, apoplexy 105 Lyman et al, p. 52. 156 and cancer of the stomach.106 As demonstrated in Chapter Six through a case study on the highly poisonous plant, Aconitum napellus, few controls surrounded the use and sale of drugs in New Zealand in the nineteenth century. As a consequence, domestic healers, like educated physicians, used plants that had potentially fatal side effects.107 In Brett's Colonist's Guide (1897) medicines for internal use include Aconitum napellus, a plant described in another manual as _one of the most powerful drugs employed'.108 Other plants recommended to, and used by, domestic healers include Atropa belladonna, otherwise known as deadly nightshade and described as a violent poison; Hyoscyamus niger, used similarly to belladonna and equally toxic; and Conium maculatum, reportedly used to poison prisoners in Ancient Greece.109 As the information available to domestic healers became increasingly broad, so too did the sphere in which they practiced. During New Zealand's early period of European settlement, New Zealand women, in their role as _moral guardians', established welfare organisations that replicated British initiatives. Benevolent Societies, the Women's Christian Temperance Movement (WCTU), the Young Women's Christian Association (YMCA), homes for the elderly and refuges for _fallen women' were _morally charged' institutions, designed to instil British ideals of morality and civility.110 These organisations maintained a strong focus on health and wellbeing and by the 1880s, they provided a forum for trained and untrained women to provide care and medical advice. These actions extended the 106 Lyman et al, pp. 338, 207, 296, 293. 107 Acts such as the Adulteration of Food and Drugs Act (1877) were designed largely to prevent the contamination of existing consumer products and did little to regulate or monitor the sale of potential harmful drugs. Early legislation (for example the 1866 Food and Drug Act) regulated the sale of specific poisons including arsenic corrosive sublimate prussic acid, essential oil of bitter almonds and strychnine, but exempted medicines that contained these products. Statutes of New Zealand, 1866, No. 55, An Act to Prevent the Adulteration of Articles of Food or Drink; Statutes of New Zealand, 1877, No. 48, An Act for Preventing the Adulteration of Food or Drugs, and the Selling or Exhibiting for Sale Adulterated or Unwholesome Food or Drugs of any Kind. 108 Lyman et al, p. 1080. 109 Leys, pp. 468-479; Grieve, pp. 391-2. 110 The first Ladies Benevolent Societies formed in Auckland and Onehunga in 1857 and 1863 respectively. See Margaret Tennant, 'Welfare Organisations', in Women Together: A History of Women's r anisations in e Zea and, a R p Wahine o te Motu, ed. by Anne Else (Wellington: Historical Branch, Department of Internal Affairs, Daphne Brasell Associates Press, 1993), p. 109-119; Sandra Coney, 'Health Organisations', in Women Together: A History of Women's r anisations in e Zea and, a R p Wahine o te Motu, ed. by Anne Else (Wellington: Historical Branch, Department of Internal Affairs, Daphne Brasell Associates Press, 1993), pp. 241-253. 157 realm in which women provided care, complicating simple binary definitions of public and private health.111 Most women involved with health and welfare organisations were urban-based and from the middle-to-upper-classes; in other words, in a social position to engage with modern medical discourse. The form of assistance provided varied according to need, and in accordance with America's middle-class, many New Zealand women advocated the progressive ideals of the American Popular Health Movement.112 By the 1890s, health movements in America, led by charismatic doctors such as John Harvey Kellogg and supported by institutions like the American School of Medicine (Eclectic), became increasingly popular, particularly appealing to a burgeoning middle-class. Advocates and disciples rejected the increasing number of inorganic medicines available and sought to _live in a manner consistent with natural law'.113 They highlighted the dangers of opium and chloral, popular and powerful addictive sedatives, recommending instead regime and lifestyle to combat drug addiction and the associated ills of decadence. Drugs like opium, writes Kellogg, lead to _complete mental, physical, and moral demoralization'.114 Many of Kellogg's contemporaries, such as fellow American Dr Edward Foote, recommended instead a return to traditional cures and the use of plants in their natural unadulterated state. Nearly all kinds of vegetable medicines, such as sarsaparilla, yellow dock, elder flowers, uva ursi, rhubarb, Iceland moss, and other useful roots and herbs which are thrown into the medicine market, are either adulterated in such a way as to elude the detection of those acquainted with the botanical description, fragrance, and flavour of the pure articles, or have been rendered inefficient by being gathered at the wrong season of the year.115 111 Additionally, district nursing developed in response to increasing numbers of sick poor in New Zealand to whom the state displayed a degree of ambivalence. This also challenged 'spatial, social and public-private boundaries'. Pamela Wood and Kerri Arcus, 'Poverty, Philanthropy and Professionalization: The Establishment of a District Nursing Service in Wellington, New Zealand, 1903', Health and History, 13, 1 (20111), pp. 44-64. 112 Coney, pp. 242-3. 113 Sylivia Tesh, Hidden Arguments: Political Ideology and Disease Prevention Policy (New Brunswick: Rutgers University Press, 1988), p.21. 114 Kellogg, p. 223. 115 Edward Foote, Plain Home talk: Embracing Medical Common Sense, About the Human System, the Habits of Men and Women, the Causes and Prevention of Disease, Our Sexual Relations and Social Natures, Embracing Medical Common Sense, Applied to Causes, Prevention, and Cure of 158 Supported by the American influence, herbalism underwent a period of resurgence in the 1890s, further encouraging and perpetuating the use of medicinal plants by domestic healers as opposed to inorganic medicines. Thomsonianism, a popular American system of herbalism, became popular in New Zealand immediately following its introduction, thanks largely to the prominent herbalist James Neil.116 Newspaper columns and medical manuals reflected this trend, publishing articles that encouraged the preparation of medicines from simple ingredients. The Te Aroha News, for example, printed an excerpt from an English paper that described simple and easily prepared _green ointments' for common ailments, based on readily available medicinal plants such as chickweed, groundsell, solomon's seal, violets, chamomile and hyssop.117 These articles created a link between herbalists and domestic healers and supported the role of herbalists in New Zealand society. Articles presented medical discourse from America that informed and influenced domestic healers and their choice of remedies.118 During an era of _grassroots discontent' and mass literacy in America, various religious dissenting sects and socio-political groups also created healing movements that appealed particularly to the middle- and upper-classes.119 Although disparate in their practices and philosophies, many groups denounced modern lifestyles, and instead looked to nature for cures and advocated the use of medicinal plants. The influence of these groups and their philosophies was felt in the colonies. It appealed to members of the public who resented campaigns run by medical organisations such the New Zealand British Medical Association to Chronic Diseases, the Natural Relations of Men and Women to Each Other, Society, Love, Marriage, Parentage... (New York: Murray Hill Publishers, 1873), pp. 193-194. 116 The number of herbalists in New Zealand increased significantly during this period, making up the majority of 'irregular practitioners' included in New Zealand censuses between 1886 and 1916. Belgrave, p. 307. 117 Bush Advocate (BA), 10 April, 1905, p. 2. 118 For example the following articles discuss the benefits of American health resorts and reports from the American Health Association twenty-nine annual convention.' An American Health Resort', Evening Post (EP), 19 November 1898, p. 3; 'Oppose Dr Koch's Theory', Bruce Herald (BH), 3 March 1903, p. 7. 119 Porter, p. 390. 159 restrict the practices of other healers and control the provision and direction of medicine.120 In New Zealand in 1885, for example, Mrs Emma Bono gave evidence at a coroner's inquest relating to the care she had given to a young Maori girl, Mehema Ratima, brought to her by the girl's aunt and uncle, Hokimate and Te Raumahiwa Te Rango. Mrs Bono stated her affiliation with an order known as the Children of Truth. This organisation followed the teachings of several American Orders, including Christian Science - a popular metaphysical movement developed by Mary Baker Eddy in 1879. Christian Science advocates prayer over medicine, and Mrs Bono determined her diagnosis, as the paper reported, while in a _semi-trance or clairvoyant state'.