87 O'Carroll's original article appeared in the Taranaki Almanac, 1884. 241 In 1886, Auckland civil engineer and surveyor J. Baber produced a report on medicinal plants specifically for a scientific audience. This research was purportedly well-received by members of the New Zealand Institute, and subsequently published in the Transactions and Proceedings of the New Zealand Institute and the Chemist and Druggist of Australasia.88 The information combined anecdotes gathered from old settlers and Maori, as well as Baber's personal observations. Baber did not believe _that a drug of specific value will be obtained from our plants', but felt there was material for some useful preparations. Nonetheless, Baber's work was intended to stimulate further experimentation that may _provide results that are more reliable'.89 Accordingly, his paper was structured to appeal particularly to pharmacists. Plants are listed in chemical categories, for example, as cathartics (flax), astringents (hebe, rata, rimu), tonics (kohe-kohe) and stimulants (kawakawa).90 This _translation' of Maori medical knowledge into western scientific terms demonstrates Scheibinger's notion of _stripping' - the process of removing the indigenous narrative or understanding from the plant.91 Omitting Maori and Maori understandings from research into native New Zealand medicinal plants was an important part of the translation process. In most colonial reports on native New Zealand plants, Maori hardly feature, and their roles as investigators and practitioners are typically downplayed.92 Indeed, some authors - including ethnologists Elsdon Best and William Herbert Goldie - mistakenly believed that Maori had no use for medicinal plants and only began applying these after following the European example.93 As Best notes: 88 J. Baber, 'The Medicinal Properties of some New Zealand Plants', TPNZI, 19 (1886), pp. 319-322; Chemist and Druggist of Australasia (CDA), I, 12 (1886), pp. 321-322. 89 Baber, 'The Medicinal Properties ', pp. 321-322. 90 Baber, 'The Medicinal Properties', pp. 321-322. 91 Schiebinger, p. 194-225; See, Jodi Frawley, Making Mangoes Move in Transforming Cultures eJournal, 3, 1 (2008). 92 In traditional Maori society, tohunga were the men people consulted when they fell ill. According to belief, the knowledge tohunga acquired and applied came from three baskets of knowledge which Tane-i-te-wananga-a-rangi had brought down from the tenth or twelfth uppermost heaven. This knowledge was taught to certain young men at whare wananga (houses of learning) and by chief tohunga or tohunga pu taua. Medical practices included karakia (prayer), and rongoa (plant based remedies). Riley, pp. 7-14; Clarke, pp. 257- 265. 93 W. H. Goldie, 'Maori Medical Lore: Notes on the Causes of Disease and Treatment of the Sick among the Maori People of New Zealand, as believed and practised in Former Times, together with some Account of Various Ancient Rites connected with the Same', TPNZI, I, 37 (1904), 242 In regard to the following account of the various simple remedies used by the natives, I am by no means prepared to state that all such here given were used in olden times -- i.e., before the arrival of Europeans. In fact, I believe most of them to be modern, being based on the European methods of treatment of the sick. The use of simples was not encouraged in the days of old, for that would have lessened the power of the priests, who relied principally upon their absurd rites and incantations. For no Hippocrates had appeared to separate medicine (!) [sic] from theology, and shamanism was rampant.94 This translation allowed plants to be placed in seemingly appropriate forums such as official pharmacopeia, and created the standardisation necessary as the production of medicine became increasingly global. By the turn of the twentieth century, the validation of many indigenous medicines was established through their inclusion in the BP. In 1900, for example, in response to increasing numbers of indigenous medicines used by British doctors in British colonies, the BP affixed an Indian and Colonial Addendum.95 The aim of the addendum was to assist doctors, promote further investigations into the properties of certain plants, and provide others with possible new and novel compounds. Many believed the addendum would pave the way for the _Utopian dream of a Universal Pharmacopeia'.96 The addendum lists fifty-four drugs and sixty-five preparations acknowledged and accepted by the Therapeutic Committee, complete with English and Latin names, recognised preparations and doses, and places within the British Empire _in which they are intended to be used'. They include acacia bark used in India and Australia; arnica flowers from North American colonies, betel leaves and black catechu from India and Northern American colonies; datura seeds from Indian colonies; http://rsnz.natlib.govt.nz/volume/rsnz_19/rsnz_19_00_005710.html, [accessed April 19 2012]; Elsdon Best, The Maori s e Was: Brief ount of Maori Life as it as in Pre-European Days (Wellington: Dominion Museum, 1936), p. 126. 94 Elsdon Best, 'Maori Medical Lore', The Journal of the Polynesian Society, 14, 1 (1905), p. 9. 95 In the 1885 BP, out of 175 plants, 40 per cent originated in Europe, 25 per cent came from America, 25 per cent from Asia, 9 per cent from Africa and 1 per cent from Australia. Stuart Anderson, Pharmacy, Books and Empire: Spreading the Imperial Word 1864 to 1932, www.histpharm.org/40ishpBerlin/L02P.pdf, [accessed January 25 2013]. 96 From 1867, additions from medical and pharmaceutical bodies in India and the colonies formed appendices and by 1898, this had grown enough to substantiate a complete addendum. Author Unknown, 'Indian and Colonial Addendum to the British Pharmacopeia', BMJ, 2, 2084 (1900), pp. 1677-1678. 243 eucalyptus from Australia; and Indian valerian from Indian and Eastern colonies.97 No New Zealand plants appeared in the Colonial Addendum, and experiments in New Zealand continued largely unacknowledged by the British medical faculty. This is possibly due to the lack of any substantial and organised industry in the cultivation and processing of medicinal plants, despite the efforts of scientists such as Kirk discussed in Chapter One. The translation of indigenous Maori medical knowledge remained important and became increasingly so by the early twentieth century in New Zealand, as governing bodies such as New Zealand's Department of Health amplified campaigns aimed at suppressing practices and medicines judged fraudulent. The translation of Maori knowledge was a process that arguably legitimised investigations into indigenous medicine during a period when traditional Maori healers were increasingly criticised and chastised through legislation and debate.98 By 1900, crusades against quackery and quack medicines were justified by concerns for the seemingly unsuspecting public. Quackery, as discussed in the Introduction to this thesis, was a flexible term, used by a variety of practitioners, each claiming their practice as being more legitimate than the other.99 Indeed, as middle-class doctors erected barriers around their profession through codes of ethics, educational standards, membership to organisations, and of course a scientific translation of plants, a socially constructed form of medical orthodoxy slowly emerged. This orthodox practice was as fluid a construct as the quackery against which it was compared. Typically, therefore, accusations of quackery expressed by medical associations such the British New Zealand Medical Association were based on false advertising and fraudulent claims.100 New Zealand's Tohunga Supression Act (1907) sought to suppress traditional Maori healers, or tohunga, who supposedly made false claims and preyed on the 97Author Unknown, 'Indian and Colonial Addendum', pp. 1677-1678. 98 Raeburn Lange, May the Peop e Li e: istory of Maori ea th De e opment 1900-1920 (Auckland: Auckland University Press, 1999); Derek Dow, Maori ea th and Go ernment Po i y, 1840-1940 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1999). 99 See my discussion on quackery and its definition in the Introduction to this thesis, pp. 32-33. 100 The New Zealand Medical Association amalgamated with the British Medical association in 1896 to become the British New Zealand Medical Association, Wright-St Clair, pp. 39-43. 244 superstition or credulity of others. The Quackery Prevention Act (1908) was designed to restrict the sale of medicines that failed to meet advertised claims. Both Acts attempted to define and condemn quacks and unscientific medical practices, and both were largely ineffective. Many colonists and some Maori contemporaries judged tohunga as primitive, ineffective and at worst harmful - their followers, ignorant and naive.101 From the 1890s, tohunga could be charged under ordinances and Acts, including the Indictable Offences Summary Jurisdiction Act (1894), and the Criminal Code Act (1893), although few were. By 1900, The Maori Council Act aimed to suppress seemingly injurious Maori customs, through a clause used to challenge tohunga and traditional healing. Advocates of the Acts voiced their concern for Maori health, suggesting that traditional beliefs and practices were detrimental to Maori health and wellness. Maui Pomare, the first American-trained Maori medical gradate, maintained tohungaism was a barrier to modern medical science. He maintained the provision of properly qualified medical people would evoke a necessary change in Maori attitudes to health.102 Pomare, who was appointed Maori Health Officer in 1901, and Te Rangi Hiroa/Peter Buck, the first New Zealand-trained Maori medical graduate, described a _modern' tohunga as resembling typical descriptions of white quack doctors.103 They condemned white quacks, who they stated, preyed equally on Maori, by visiting pa and peddling their ineffective medicines. James Pope, in his influential booklet Health For Maori: A Manual for Use in Native Schools (1884), claimed that Maori who 101 Many historians including Raeburn Lange and Judith Binney maintain the suppression of tohunga was in part a reaction to the Maori prophet and tohunga Rua Kenana Hepetipa. Hepetipa claimed to be a descendant of nineteenth-century military leader and founder of Ringatu Church, Te Kooti Rikirangi, and established a religious community and gained a considerable following deemed potentially problematic by certain colonial officials. Derek Dow, 'Pruned of its Dangers: The Tohunga Supression Act 1907', Health and History, 3, 1 (2001), pp. 41-64. 102 Dow, 'Pruned of its Dangers', pp. 41-64. 103 Dr Pomare, trained by American born Dr Kellogg had worked as Maori Health Officer since 1896 and was supported by the first Maori New Zealand-trained medical graduate, Dr Peter Buck. In 1904, Pomare published a blueprint for Maori health reminiscent of James Pope's Health for the Maori: Manua for Use in ati e S hoo s (the first of its kind published in 1882 in both English and Maori) that included such aims as training for Maori nurses, the appointment of non-Maori women to provide health care and education to Maori, better use of native officers, separate Maori tuberculosis hospitals and the prohibition of the practices of quacks and tohunga. Derek Dow, Maori ea th and Go ernment Po i y, 1840-1940 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1999). 245 adhered to tohunga were no better than Europeans who clung to quackery.104 Meanwhile, opponents to the Tohunga Suppression Act raised concerns that suppressing tohunga would cause neglect in areas where Maori continued to rely on their care, and alternative medical assistance was limited. The Quackery Prevention Act (1908) dealt mainly with controls on the sale of patent and propriety medicines. The Act stated that it was an offence to publish false information relating to the ingredients, composition and efficacy of any medicine or medical practice. It fed into rhetoric expressed in such publications as Secret Remedies: What they Cost and What they Contain (1909), issued by the British Medical Association, that advocated scientific analysis as a measure of efficacy. In response, manufacturers of patent and propriety medicines advertised their drugs as _scientific', despite the absence of either standardised tests or controls. The adverts for Gatenby's Blue Flag Liver Cure, (Figure 5:3) for example, describes it as scientific. However, proof of its reliability and efficacy appears to stem solely from _the experience of hundreds of men, women and children'.105 The Quackery Prevention Act (1908) gained vehement support from advocates who claimed that quacks, and all others of the same class, do infinite harm. In contrast, opponents of the Act believed that it would give the medical profession an undue monopoly by limiting competition from practitioners whose practices failed to meet specified criteria. A primary objection to the Act concerned the disclosure of ingredients and formula. The matter of disclosure and the listing of ingredients on all medicines prepared, imported and sold in the colony was an on-going debate in New Zealand, prompted three years earlier by the Chief Health Officer, James Mason.106 104 Dow, 'Pruned of its Dangers', p. 50. 105 WH, 7 February 1903, p. 4. 106 Marlborough Express (ME), 1 April 1909, p. 5. The Quackery Prevention Bill Committee interviewed Richard Ayres, a well-known Wellington herbalist, who voiced his objections relating to the Bill. Ayres objected only to the clause that insisted all formulae and samples of formulae be submitted to a Board. 'It hardly seems fair', stated Ayres, 'after a man has spent a number of years in perfecting a formula, that he should have to part with it, even it be only to a Board. Quackery Prevention Bill Committee, AJHR (1907), I -14, p. 5. 246 In 1904, under the direction of Mason, the newly created New Zealand Department of Health proposed that all formulae for medicines prescribed and sold in the colony should be disclosed and registered with a governing body. Figure 5:3: Advertisement for Gatenby's Blue Flag Liver Cure Source: Wanganui Herald, 7 February 1903, p. 4 This divided the opinions of politicians, chemists, manufacturers and practitioners and alienated some British patent manufacturers who, rather than disclose their secrets, chose instead to cut their ties with the colony. The release of formulae, they argued, would destroy their business, as any chemist would be able to make up and market an equivalent compound. New Zealand opponents to the idea 247 believed that the effects on the patent medicine trade would endanger colonists in isolated districts who relied heavily on patent and propriety medicines.107 While many of New Zealand's doctors supported the BMA in their stance against patent and propriety medicines, when the Quackery Prevention Bill Committee proposed disclosure, New Zealand chemists petitioned against the Bill, claiming it would interfere with their _legitimate practice'.108 Due to mounting pressure and objections, revealing or registering formula was not made compulsory in the Act that followed. Despite this, New Zealand and British doctors continued to push for disclosure, believing that the popularity of patent medicines stemmed from mystery surrounding their properties and actions. Keeping formulae secret, they maintained, also allowed manufacturers to use outdated and useless ingredients.109 In the absence of legislative action, in 1909, the BMA analysed and published the formulae for many popular patent medicines in Secret Remedies: What they Cost and What They Contain. This pamphlet was readily available in New Zealand, where similar analyses were made and published in Australasian journals, such as the Australasian Chemist and Druggist.110 With the assistance of a _skilled analytical chemist', the BMA determined the ingredients and proportions in particular remedies and compared the actions of these with the claims made in associated advertisements or testimonials. The book focused largely on the associated claims of patent and propriety medicines. As expressed in the quotation below, it emphasises the gullibility of consumers and the fraudulent nature of manufacturers. The quack takes advantage of this common foible [interest in mystery] of human nature to impress his customers. But secrecy has other uses in his trade; it enables him to make use of cheap new or old fashioned drugs and to proclaim that his product possess virtues beyond the ken of the mere doctors; his herbs have been culled in some remote prairie in America or among 107 WH, 15 November 1904, p. 5. 108 New Zealand chemists wrote to newspapers expressing their concerns. For example; ME, 24 August 1907, p. 2; Oamaru Mail (OM), 30 November 1917, p. 2; Poverty Bay Herald (PBH) 31 July 1908, p. 5; Dominion, 3 May 1912, p. 5. 109 British Medical Association, Secret Remedies What They Cost and What they Contain: Based on an Analysis Made for the British Medical Association (London: British Medical Association, 1909), p. 11. 110 CDA, Author Unknown, 'Patent and Proprietary Medicines', edn unknown (1881), p. 84-93. 248 the mountains of central Africa; the secret of their virtues having been confided to him by some venerable chief.111 In the section on medicines for coughs and catarrh, the authors stated that customers familiar with commonly-used drugs for this condition - quinine, camphor, cascara and ipecacuanha - would willingly purchase a medicine that claims to include these. Under analysis, however, some of the leading cough and cold medicines included only minute amounts of the drug, making the claims redundant and at worst, misleading. Many contained large amounts of inert inorganic ingredients such as salt, giving physicians fuel to disparage them and promote their own expertise. The book and its conclusions reflected on-going concerns among British and colonial doctors about the patent medicine industry and also reveal greater understandings of drug dosage, design and action, as well as awareness of inconsistencies in the way drugs acted in the body.