37 British Pharmacopeia Published Under the Direction of the General Council of Medical Registration and Education of the United Kingdom Pursuant to the Medical Act, 1864 (BP, 1864) (London: Spottiswoode and Co, 1864), p. xiii. 226 vessel, agitating occasionally, then transfer to a percolator, and when the fluid ceases to pass, pour into the percolator the remaining five ounces of spirit - As soon as the percolation is completed subject the contents of the percolator to pressure, filter the product, mix the two liquids and add sufficient proof spirit to make one pint.38 Achieving uniformity was a major aim of the BP, realised in part by using botanical and pharmaceutical nomenclature and precise measurements. As increasing numbers of pharmaceutical companies produced more and more drugs, creating standards also became an imperative. Chemical tests to assess the strength and purity of medicines, through measures including solubility, volatilisation, colour, turbidity and specific gravity, are included in the BP so as to protect doctors from buying and prescribing adulterated drugs. Aconitium, the alkaloid in Aconitum napellus (monkshood), for example, was susceptible to adulteration as it fetched a high price on the international drug market.39 Dosage remained a relatively ill-defined part of doctors' practices in the 1860s, but at their request, an average dose for each preparation is included in the second edition of the BP published in 1867. Intended as a guide only, the Committee appealed to physicians to use their discretion and skill to adjust doses according to the patient's age.40 Better understandings of drug design and action encouraged the use of compound medicines, and the 1867 BP has over one hundred new preparations, many of which are novel uses for plants included in the earlier edition.41 Although it is difficult to determine the popularity of specific drugs without trade reports or receipts, we can assume that the versatility of some medicinal plant species made them an important part of the pharmacopeia. The following table lists plants that appear in in the 1867 BP in four or more forms - in preparations such as tinctures, infusions, syrups, vinegars and wines. 38 BP, 1864, pp. 365-6. 39 'Dr Garrod's Lectures on the British Pharmacopeia', BMJ, 1, 162 (1864), pp. 154-157. 40 British Pharmacopeia Published Under the Direction of the General Council of Medical Registration and Education of the United Kingdom Pursuant to the Medical Act, 1867 (BP, 1867) (London: Spottiswoode and Co, 1867), p. ix, http://archive.org/stream/britishpharmacop00gene#page/n5/mode/2up, [accessed September 5 2013]. 41 BP, 1867, pp. xvii-xviii. 227 Table 5:1: The frequency of medicinal plants in the British Pharmacopeia (BP, 1867) Medicinal Plants Number of preparations in which they appear in the 1867 British Pharmacopeia. Papaver somniferum (opium, laudanum) 14 Aloes barbadoes, socotrine 12 Cinchona 11 Colchium, Orange, Senega, Rhubarb. 8 Hemlock, Poppies (Red), Belladonna 7 Quinine, Gentian, Digitalis, Catechu, Aconite, Ipecacuanha, Sassafras, Scamonium, Cinnamon 6 Valerian, Camphor, Quinia, Senna, Lemon, Ginger, Asafoetida 5 Quassia, Colocynth, Calumba, Sarsaparilla, Nutmeg, Stramonium, Bearberry, Dandelion, Jalap, Hysycomus, Hop 4 Source: BP, 1867 (London: Spottiswoode and Co, 1867) The country from which each plant is cultivated or gathered is listed in the 1867 BP, and presented in Table 5:2, demonstrating the scope of the pharmaceutical industry by his time. The expansion of the market for medicine increased considerably as a consequence of long-term increases in incomes that began in the eighteenth century. By the 1870s, however, wholesale drug prices began to fall, reflecting an increase in competition.42 While chemists and druggists extended their trade into increasingly exotic patent and proprietary medicines, doctors, many of whom rejected patent medicines, also sought novel compounds. The 1867 BP includes a wide and diverse range of plants gathered or collected from around the world. The global nature of the pharmaceutical industry encouraged international collaboration, as plants and associated medico-botanical knowledge circulated the globe.43 Table 5:2, and the range of countries included, is an indication of the networks required to gather, convert and export medicines around the world. 42 Roy Church, 'The British Market for Medicine in the Late Nineteenth-Century: The Innovative Impact of S M Burroughs & Co', in Medical History, 49 (2005), pp. 281-298. 43 International collaboration in the field of pharmaceutical research continued to grow as evidenced by international conferences such as the International Congress on Pharmacopoeial Unification in Brussels in 1902. Author Unknown, Untitled Article, BMJ, 2, 2384 (1906), p. 553. 228 Table 5:2: The source of a selection of medicinal plants included in the British Pharmacopeia, 1867 Medicinal Plants included in the 1867 British Pharmacopeia. Country in which the plant is gathered (g) or cultivated (c). Aloes barbadoes Mogadore/Morroco (c) Bitter almond Malaga (c) Dill Central England, South Europe Orange flower/root France (c) Arnica Middle - Southern Europe (g) Asafoetida Afghanistan, Punjab (c) (g) Balsam of Peru Salvador Belladonna Central Britain (c), Germany (c) Buchu Cape of Good Hope Camphor China, Japan Capsicum Zanzibar Cloves Penang, Bencoolen, Amboyna Cassia West Indies Pale catechu Singapore Cinchona Bolivia Cinnamon Ceylon Hemlock, Digitalis, Hyosycamus, Dandelion Britain (g) Ipecacuanha Brazil Jalap Mexica Lobelia North America Matico leaves Peru Calabar bean West Africa Quassia bark Jamaica Santonica Russia Source: BP, 1867. As demonstrated by historian Markku Hokkanen, the commercial production and sale of medicinal plants during the nineteenth century relied on networks that 229 linked botanical, medical and pharmaceutical research with consumers.44 In this way, in the late 1850s, Scottish-trained doctor John Kirk employed his Scottish medical and botanical training, combining this with observations of indigenous African healers to _discover' a medicinal plant native to Malawi, Strophanthus Kombe. Following his discovery, a short-term of employment at Kew Gardens in the 1860s, collaboration with Scottish chemist Thomas Fraser and a fortuitous meeting with American businessman, Henry Wellcome, the commercial production of Strophanthus began. The plant, once used to poison arrows in Africa, was translated into a botanical specimen at Kew, converted into a western medicine in Scottish laboratories and, by the 1870s, gathered from Africa and then sent to America, before being exported around the world.45 In New Zealand, reliance on the BP was a consequence of doctors' educations, the legislative framework in which they operated, the introduction of familiar medicinal plants and British medical policy, and the availability of manufactured drugs. The British Medical Association held considerable sway in New Zealand throughout the nineteenth century and advocated legislation that promoted the authority of the BP. Coroners' inquests used the pharmacopeia as a reference guide to poisoning cases and medical negligence. By the 1870s, the BP became the standard for recognising and determining the adulteration of food and drugs as set out in New Zealand's Food and Drug Adulteration Act (1877).46 New Zealand's chemists and grocers referred to the BP to validate their wares.47 Conversely, for some medical men and traders, advocating strict adherence to the BP limited experimentation with plants and remedies excluded from the text. _Medicus', a correspondent who wrote regularly to the New Zealand Herald, voiced his concern over this matter and challenged the authority of the BP, lamenting the fact that it discouraged the use of alternative plants and overlooked 44 Markku Hokkanen, 'Imperial Networks, Colonial Bioprospecting and Burroughs Wellcome & Co.: The Case of Strophanthus Kombe from Malawi (1859-1915)', Social History of Medicine, 25, 3 (2012), pp. 589-607, http://shm.oxfordjournals.org/, [accessed April 17 2014]. 45 Hokkanen, pp. 589-607. 46 Press, 17 October 1883, p. 3. 47 For examples see: Lyttelton Times (LT), 4 September 1852, p. 3; Wanganui Herald (WH), 7 January 1904, p. 4; New Zealand Herald (NZH), 20 December 1869, p. 3; Otago Daily Times (ODT), 11 February 1868; Daily Southern Cross (DSC), 27 June 1864, p. 3; New Zealand Herald (NZH) 11 March 1881, p. 6; Colonist, 20 October 1877, p. 5. 230 the medicinal potential of many New Zealand native plants.48 Resistance to blanket legislation that enforced strict adherence to the BP permitted experiments on alternative plants and medicines. These experiments began soon after Europeans arrived in New Zealand and many relied on observations of traditional Maori medical practices. The advantages of procuring indigenous medical knowledge during the course of exploration and colonisation were two-fold. According to Londa Schiebinger, as Europeans turned their focus away from ancient medical knowledge, they placed faith in the _authority of native peoples encountered during global expansion'.49 While colonists maintained their own health in unfamiliar environments, they also determined the economic potential of plant-based drugs.50 Dr George Bennett of Sydney purportedly wrote the first account of native New Zealand plants in contemporary medical literature, publishing an article on tutu (Coriaria arborea) in the London Medical Gazette in 1831. The poisonous nature of this plant also attracted attention from Edinburgh physician William Lauder Lindsay while the Frenchman, M. Vincent, was the first to make a chemical analysis of Phormium tenax, New Zealand flax in 1848.51 Apart from these early analyses, medicinal 48 NZH, 16 December 1868, p. 7. 49 Londa Schiebinger, Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic World (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 2007), p. 76; Pratik Chakrabarti, Materials and Medicines: Trade, Conquest and Therapeutics in the Eighteenth Century (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2010), pp. 171-205. 50 Schiebinger, p. 75. Most case-studies on colonial medicine focus on the introduction and role western medicine played in British colonisation, and the disruption to indigenous medical systems. Historian David Arnold, for example, adeptly explains how colonialism employed medicine and the body to express colonial authority, legitimacy and control. In line with Michel Foucault, Arnold maintains that during the nineteenth century, medicine was more than merely a scientific practice. Bodies were counted, categorized and dissected by ideological and administrative mechanisms employed to exert growing influence and monopolistic rights over the body. In India, this process was complex and dynamic as scientific medicine was not simply transferred from its metropolitan roots. See, David Arnold, Colonizing the Body: State Medicine and Epidemic Disease in Nineteenth-Century India (California: University of California Press), p. 9-11. 51 Additionally, by the 1860s, as New Zealand's scientific community grew increasingly organised, analyses of several native plants were made by resident chemist William Skey - a member of James Hector's Geological Survey team and colonial analyst from 1865 to 1900. Skey investigated the chemical characteristics of native plants, including rangiora, towai, karamu and flax endeavouring to uncover potentially profitable constituents. S. Brooker, R. Cambie and R. Cooper, New Zealand Medicinal Plants: A Handbook for the Auckland War Memorial Museum (Auckland: Unity Press, 1962), p. 5; James Beattie, 'W.L. Lindsay, Scottish Environmentalism, and the 'Improvement' of Nineteenth-Century New Zealand', in Tony Ballantyne and Judith A. 231 plants received relatively little attention from New Zealand's scientific community over the nineteenth century - their potential and properties examined more closely by doctors and missionaries, many of whom worked closely with Maori, observing, translating and sometimes adopting elements of traditional herbal knowledge. Among the first to publish an account of traditional Maori healing practices was colonist and writer James Polack. Polack maintained that the _materia medica of the nation [New Zealand] is very simple, but efficacious'.52 He notes the use of fern root in particular used in conjunction with European medicaments - presumably Epsom salts - for the treatment of dysentery. Reverend Richard Taylor and William Colenso also made notes on traditional Maori healing. Both men were fluent speakers of Maori and interested in the collection of ethnographical detail. Stationed in the Bay of Islands in the 1830s, Taylor formed close relationships with local Maori Chiefs. In 1848, he produced A Leaf from the Natural History of New Zealand - essentially a dictionary of Maori terms with aspects of Maori culture. In sections entitled _Native Diseases' and _Natural Pharmacopeia' he identifies over thirty plants used by Maori and the ailments they are indicated for.53 Guided and encouraged by these early accounts were doctors like Francis Alexander Monckton whose use of flax was described at the beginning of this chapter, and who also advocated experimentation with and the use of native medicinal plants. Doctors, I argue, used the process of translation to distinguish their practices from other practitioners such as herbalists, who placed less emphasis on scientific analysis. Furthermore, translating New Zealand's native medicinal plants into scientific and pharmaceutical nomenclature, made doctors' use and investigations into these plants appear distinctly different from their use by traditional Maori healers/tohunga. Tohunga were characterised in the nineteenth century in Bennett, eds., Landscape/Community: Perspectives from New Zealand History, (Dunedin: University of Otago Press, 2005), pp. 43-56. 52 James Polack, New Zealand Being a Narrative of Travels and Adventures During a Residence in that Country Between the Years 1831 and 1837, Vol. II [Capper reprint, 1974], p. 277. 53 Richard Taylor, A Leaf from the Natural History of New Zealand (Auckland: W. Atkin Printer, 1870). 232 European literature as the main providers of traditional Maori medicine.54 These men were specialists in Maori lore, traditions, religion and ritual.55 Most were taught by older tohunga in centres of learning called whare-wananga where they moved through various degrees of education. The fifth, according to Kai Tahu tohunga Samuel Timoti Robinson, was the tohunga-rongoa, or _healing priest'.56 Intrinsically linked to Maori religious beliefs, traditional Maori medicine worked to heal the spirit as well as the physical body and involves prayer, divination and ritual.57 The cause of illness is often attributed to a malign spirit or breach of protocol. Herbal medicines were also employed, particularly cathartics, emetics and ointments believed to have the power to repel the spirit causing the affliction.58 In stark contrast to nineteenth-century European plant-based medicines, Maori used plants for both their physical and metaphysical properties. A flax leaf and bracken root, for example, was placed on the skin of a sufferer as an avenue of escape for the demon causing sickness.59 By ignoring the supernatural element of traditional Maori healing and describing plants in western scientific and pharmaceutical terms, European doctors effectively separated the plants they investigated from their indigenous frameworks while they applied to them to same ailments and injuries that tohunga used them for. Combining his own understandings of chemistry and pharmacology with observations of traditional Maori healing, Monckton experimented at length with native medicinal plants. Monckton was the first resident physician in Invercargill and the first Superintendant at Riverton Hospital, Southland. After practicing for twenty years in Southland, Monckton moved to the West Coast, where he gained 54 Simon Timoti Robinson, Tohunga: The Revival Ancient Knowledge for the Modern Era (Auckland: Reed Publishing, 2005). Tohunga were in fact much more than healers. They were experts in the spiritual, cultural and physical world of Maori. 55 Robinson, p. 10. 56 Simon Timoti Robinson is a modern day tohunga from the South Island tribe, Kai Tahu. He is the author of The Revival Ancient Knowledge for the Modern Era. Robinson, p. 214- 232. 57 Tohunga-rongoa viewed the body as a universe in itself, divided into four distinct divisions working in harmony. Elsden Best records these four parts as hamano (soul), Manawa (breath), ata (shadow) and kiko (body). Healing required attention to all elements while diagnosis was often determined through divination. Elsdon Best, 'Maori Magic: Notes upon Witchcraft, Magic Rites, and various Superstitions as practised or believed in by the Old-time Maori', TPNZI, 34 (1901), pp. 69-98; Robinson, pp. 214-232. 58 Clarke, p. 266. 59 Clarke, p. 277. 233 a reputation as an outstanding surgeon before moving to Fielding in the Manawatu.60 In Fielding, he worked as Consulting Surgeon at the Palmerston North Hospital and served as District Coroner for several years. In addition, Monckton was a Justice of the Peace, and earlier, a member of the Southland Provincial Council.