In many ways, the use of native plants by domestic healers supported more formal lines of enquiry, providing an apparently legitimate impetus for investigation during a period when indigenous medicine was disparaged and discouraged by public health authorities.65 When perceived as boundary objects, as advocated by Susan Leigh Star, the use of native medicinal plants by domestic healers contributed to the translation of traditional Maori herbal knowledge into European medicaments.66 As discussed in Chapters Four 61 Mercury successfully treated syphilis and ringworm, digitalis strengthened the heart, amyl nitrate dilated arteries while quinine cured malaria and colchicum eased gout. Iron was a popular tonic and plant-based emetics and purgatives including ipecacuanha and senna were routinely prescribed. Porter, p. 674. 62 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-08, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 63 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-04, 1739-40, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 64 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-07, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 65 Reactions from the New Zealand Government and Department of Health towards indigenous medical practices is discussed further in Chapter Five. 66 Susan Leigh Star, 'This is not a Boundary Object: Reflections on the Origin of the Concept', Science, Technology and Human Values, 35, 5 (2010), pp. 601-617; See also, Susan Leigh Star and James R. Griesemer, 'Institutional Ecology, 'Translations and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and professionals in Berkley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39', Social Studies of Science, 19 (1989), pp. 387-420. 146 and Five, herbalists and doctors assisted this process, constructing their own translations and inadvertently co-operating despite diverse opinions and political agendas. The process of translation is discussed in more detail in Chapter Six. As historians Peter Holland, Jim Williams and Vaughan Wood state, in Maori culture certain knowledge was privy to the observer, immediate family or tribe.67 Protocols surrounded the disclosure of such information and some indigenous knowledge, particularly that related to food gathering and the use of native plants, was considered tapu (sacred) and too revered to share. Early traders, explorers and missionaries often lived in close proximity with Maori and were often the first to adopt aspects of Maori life and culture to assist with cross-cultural exchange.68 As evidenced in her book, Our Maoris, Lady Mary Ann Martin combined European remedies with traditional Maori herbal practices. Wife of first Chief Justice William Martin, Lady Mary established a hospital in Tauranga in the Bay of Plenty where she treated mainly Maori with traditionally British remedies, including mustard poultices, rosemary tea, elder shoots and wild marshmallow. For coughs we made rosemary tea with treacle and a soups'on of ipecacuanha; for dropsy, the tops of elder shoots and Spanish broom. For swelled joints we applied poultices of sea-weed, and the wild marsh-mallow for sores. Mustard plasters were in constant request.69 However, Martin also observed and recorded Maori medical practices, integrating some of these into her own provision of care, for example, in her use of seaweed dressings for skin conditions.70 This practice also took place elsewhere in New Zealand. In an isolated mining town in the Hokitika region, Catharine Wallace used traditional Maori remedies - koromiko leaves and flax root brew - to treat 67 Peter Holland, Jim Williams and Vaughn Wood, 'Learning about the Environment in Early Colonial New Zealand', in Seeds of Empire: The Environmental Transformation of New Zealand, ed. by Tom Brooking and Eric Pawson (London: I. B. Taurus, 2011), pp. 34-51. 68 Indeed some embraced aspects of Maori culture and lives, married Maori women, had children and were termed by historian Michael King as Pakeha-Maori. Pakeha is the Maori term for European and according to Michael King was in general use in New Zealand from the 1830s. Michael King, The Penguin History of New Zealand (Auckland: Penguin, 2003), p. 117, 168. 69 Lady Mary Ann Martin, ur Maoris (London: The Committee of General Literature and Education appointed for the Society for promoting Christian Knowledge, 1884), p. 74. 70 Martin, p. 74. 147 her children for dysentery and constipation.71 Agnes Harrold, on Rakiura/Stewart Island, also recommended koromiko leaves, and by the late 1880s a Napier chemist made the plant a stock standard in his dispensary.72 Arguably, no European was more commercially successful in the collection of traditional Maori medical knowledge and the popularisation of native medicinal plants than the missionary Marie Henriette Suzanne Aubert, better known as Mother Mary Joseph Aubert (1825-1926).73 By the time Aubert signed a contract with leading pharmaceutical company Kempthorn and Prosser in 1891, she had already worked closely with Maori for over thirty years. In that time she observed protocol, gathered and shared information, and established relationships that ultimately allowed her to commercialise aspects of Maori culture inaccessible to others. Drawn to the New Zealand mission by the charismatic Bishop Pompallier, Aubert arrived in the colony in 1860s. Landing in Auckland, she joined The Sisters of Mercy who trained for _religious life and the work of education of the young people of their sex'.74 Following Pompallier's advice and example, Aubert quickly learnt Te Reo (Maori language) and became well acquainted with Maori culture. In Auckland, she worked closely with Maori women and befriended Peata, a woman of high mana (status/respect), who Pomapallier purportedly converted to the Catholic faith. 71 Harper, p. 227. 72 Harper, p. 237; Thomas Wilson Leys (ed. ), Brett's Co onists' Guide and Cy opedia of Usefu Kno ed e: Bein a Compendium of Information by Pra ti a Co onists upon... (Auckland: H. Brett, 1897), p. 480. 73 Born in a small village not far from Lyon, France, Aubert like countless other bourgeois women following the French Revolution devoted herself to a religious way of life. Against her parents' wishes and desperate to join a congregation, she sought guidance from the Benedictine nuns and worked with laywomen in Lyon and Tarare on numerous charitable endeavours. In France, Aubert volunteered and nursed for the Sisters of Charity, looking after Crimean veterans and cholera victims. During this period, she learnt the medical and pharmaceutical skills that eventually made her one of New Zealand's most well-known medicine manufacturers and healers. Jessie Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert (Auckland: Auckland University Press with Bridget Williams Books, 1996); Jessie Munro (ed. ), Letters on the Go: The Correspondence of Suzanne Aubert (Wellington: Bridget Williams, 2009); Pat Rafter, Never Let Go! ; The Remarkable Story of Mother Aubert (Wellington: A. H. & A. W. Reed, 1972); Barbara Harper, Unto These Least: The Story of Mother Aubert and Her Great Work (Wellington: Home of Compassion, 1992). 74 Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert, p. 69. 148 While Pompallier's mission and reputation began to unravel in the 1860s, Aubert remained devoted to the Maori mission, struggling to preserve the institutions and schools they had established. When the Auckland mission disbanded, Aubert settled into life at the Marist Mission at Meanee, not far from the growing township of Taradale in New Zealand's Hawke's Bay.75 At Meanee, Aubert taught catechism, trained the local choir, prepared the church for feast days and widened her circles of association, forming relationships with local chiefs and _discovering a more effective channel of Maori mission...'.76 By 1872, Aubert was identifying herself as a sicknurse, and was regularly welcomed at six or seven pa (villages). As disease raged through pa in the aftermath of the Waikato Wars, Aubert was on hand to provide medicine and care. She became a recognised figure, often seen gathering herbs from the hills and fields and accompanied by Maori women, who were presumably guiding and teaching the nun.77 Aubert's ability to collect and collate information gathered from a number of sources and informants aided her success as a healer and entrepreneur. As well as collecting oral traditions from Maori, she also referred to contemporary medical literature and communicated with other missionaries and healers who provided care to Maori, including Lady Mary Martin. Martin wrote a small book on Maori medicine which she lent to a grateful Aubert.78 While Aubert undoubtedly used these familiar plants, she also experimented with various combinations and alternatives, reading contemporary literature and following medical trends such as experimenting with blue gum.79 As she notes; 75 Pompallier was driven during the late 1860s by the thought that Maori would turn to Catholicism as they increasingly rejected Protestant ideals in the wake of the Waikato Wars. Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert, p. 111; Munro, 'Letters on the Go', pp. 60-99. 76 Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert, p. 115. 77 Rafter, p. 39. 78 Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert, p. 116; 'Story: Martin, Mary' http://www.teara.govt.nz/en/biographies/1m19/martin-mary-ann, [accessed January 13 2014]. 79 Blue gum, Eucalyptus globula, was a poplar medicinal plant that many believed also purified the air, mitigating miasma. Sarah Amelia Courage, author of Lights and Shadows of Colonial Life: Twenty-Six Years in Canterbury New Zealand (1896) writes of her frequent use of eucalyptus that was introduced to New Zealand from Australia, propagated in early botanic gardens, and investigated for its medicinal application. Courage, p. 20; See also, James Beattie, Empire and Environmental Anxiety: Health, Science, Art and Conservation in South Asia and Australasia, 1800-1920 (Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2011), pp. 51-55. 149 I've discovered a herb [blue gum] which I've been using in an ointment to cure in three months a cancerous sore which has been defeating every remedy. It was an Irish woman sixty years old. She's been cured for four months now and she's not feeling any fatigue. I'm trying it out now on other people.80 By this time, Aubert was concocting medicines that appealed to Maori and European alike. In 1873, for example, Aubert treated 1,353 people with medicines that she provided for free. Through her faith in prayer and God, Aubert effectively translated not only the physical side of Maori healing - using native ingredients and indigenous knowledge to create Europeans remedies - but also the spiritual. Her faith and strong religious convictions, combined with her interest in pharmacy, produced an approach to medicine that appealed to Maori, who regarded her as a skilled doctor and faithful friend.81 In 1894, Aubert dissolved her contract with Kempthorn and Prosser and for a few years following, the pharmaceutical manufacturer, Sharland, took responsibility for the marketing and advertising of her medicines.82 Biographer Jessie Munro argues that in their campaign, Sharland emphasised the safety and naturalness of the medicines, while the _Maoriness' of the remedies was largely ignored. Although Maori were involved from the beginning - local hapu, Ngati Hau and Ngati Ruaka gathered the plants and assisted in their preparation - Aubert was credited with the _discovery' of the medicines and likened to the Jesuit missionaries, who introduced cinchona to its colonies from South America.83 Despite this, Aubert did not entirely strip the indigenous element from her medicines. She gave all her remedies Maori names acknowledging both the origins of the plants included and the source of her information and continued to work closely with Maori. In her letters and memoirs, she notes that most of her knowledge of medicinal plants came from Maori sources. While the combination of scientific and indigenous, or indeed _folk' translations of plants was typical of 80 Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert 1996, p. 118. 81 Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert 1996, pp. 196-207; Rafter, p. 39-47. 82 Munro, 'Letters on the Go', pp. 172-174; Rafter, pp. 63-64. 83 Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert, p. 200. 150 domestic healers, Aubert's commercial endeavours and the need to market her medicines undoubtedly encouraged this combination. Although members of the scientific community debated the medicinal value of native plants on the basis of non-existent scientific enquiry and methodology, domestic healers retained a broad view of legitimacy.84 Prior to the 1880s, experiences, anecdotes and observations provided an impetus for experimentation and for many domestic healers, this evidence was as valid, and in many ways more applicable, than scientific analysis. Evaluation of a medicine or medicinal plant depended largely on an individual's experience or the testimonial of a respected source. By the 1890s, however, broader changes to the lives of New Zealand women encouraged greater organisation of health care, while popular medical discourse provided new frameworks for understanding the properties and applicability of plants. A Combination of 'Traditional' and 'Modern' Influences, 1880s -1920s Between 1880 and 1920, white New Zealand became predominantly urban dwelling. State bureaucracy began to grow, as did organisation in the private sector.85 As discussed in Chapter One, colonial scientific institutions became more organised and collaborative while practical scientific research, including experimentation on medicinal plants, was encouraged and supported by the New Zealand Government.86 An increasing array of patent and proprietary medicines, medical theories and political agendas emerged, and New Zealand became a _curious mix of traditional and modernising influences' - influences that can be 84 Brett's Co onists' Guide includes the following disclaimer: ' It must be observed, however, that, though the Maori usage is accurately given, their observation cannot be relied upon as scientifically settling the properties of these plants, and persons who are disposed to try them must proceed with caution, lest they aggravate instead of relieving their ailments'. Leys, p. 480. 85 Erik Olssen, 'Women, Work and Family 1880-1926', in Women in New Zealand Society, ed. by Philida Bunkle and Beryl Hughes (Auckland: George Allen and Unwin, 1980), pp. 159-184. 86 Ross Galbreath, DSIR, Making Science Work for New Zealand: Themes from the History of the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, 1926-1992 (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1998), pp. 11-34. 151 detected in the nature and breadth of domestic medical practices.87 Up until the 1920s, domestic healers continued to play a vital role in maintaining the health of New Zealand's population, despite increased state intervention into health and welfare.88 Broad changes to the lives of New Zealand women affected their use of medicinal plants and extended the sphere in which they provided care. By the 1880s, the number of women in New Zealand had risen through organised emigration targeting single women, and men no longer statistically dominated the population.89 Women moved to urban centres from farms in search of work as greater employment opportunities arose in towns. Many considered a few years' employment as a valuable interlude between school and marriage.90 Domestic service remained the most popular form of employment for New Zealand women while the advent of manufacturing enabled thousands of women, particularly from the main centres - Dunedin, Wellington and Auckland - to enter factory employment, especially in textiles and clothing.91 Greater demands on women's time encouraged consumerism of convenient domestic products, including patent and proprietary medicines. Chemists prepared appropriate forms of plant-based medicines such as powders - individually wrapped packets of powdered plants, often mixed with inorganic compounds - pills, capsules and cachets.92 The publication of domestic medical manuals flourished, while the practice of 87 Rollo Arnold, e Zea and's Burnin : The Sett ers Wor d in the Mid 1800s (Wellington: Victoria University Press, 1994), p. 123. 88 Between 1907 and 1908, for example a number of health-related Acts were passed including an amended Public Health Act, Sale of Food and Drug Act, Medical Act, Quackery Prevention Act, Poisons Act, Dentists Act, Lunatics Act, Opium Act and the consolidation of the Contagious Diseases Act as well as the Tohunga Suppression Act. See, Department of Health, New Zealand, 'Chrono o i a List of Some ote orthy E ents in the istory of e Zea and ea th Ser i es', (Wellington: Information Centre, Ministry of Health, 1971), pp. 11-12, www.moh.govt.nz/...nsf/0/.../Chronological%20List%201769-1970.pdf, [accessed July 4 2013]. 89 By 1901, in the four main towns there were more women than men and in the provinces Auckland, Wellington, Hawkes Bay, Otago and Canterbury there was an excess of women aged 21 to 40. Olssen, 'Women, Work and Family', p. 160. 90 In 1874 only 11.1 % of women were actively engaged in the work force, by 1921 the figure rose to 20.7%. Olssen, 'Women, Work and Family', p. 161. 91 By 1881, fifty-five per cent of all women employed in the colony worked as domestic servants. Macdonald, 'The Eclipse of Domestic Service', p. 52. 92 Cachets were ravioli-like preparations that masked the bitter taste of popular medicines such as charcoal, used to treat flatulence. 152 recording and compiling medical receipts appears to have declined, indicating a greater reliance on shop-bought remedies.93 The growing popularity of germ theory, coupled with the introduction of public health policies and the advent of nurses training in New Zealand, encouraged a perceived divide between _folk' or domestic medicine and public health.