108 ODT, 26 March 1890, p. 2; Neil, pp. 128-148. 202 In his herbal, Neil includes a list of medicines used by regular practitioners, not _so much to recommend their use', but to instruct and guide readers as to their properties and application.109 In doing so, Neil supported Thomson's doctrine that every man and woman should understand physiological and medical processes and maintain their own health. Some substances, stated Neil, do work in harmony and are also used by medical herbalists. Others he considered to be poison. Neil rated these drugs by placing the words, _safe', _use carefully' or _dangerous' next to each. He also explains the signs and abbreviations used by regular physicians, _as many have been poisoned by dog Latin'.110 As well as several varieties of acid and inorganic compounds such as potassium and sulphur, a number of plants - including aloes, aconite, arnica, belladonna, cannabis, cinchona, hemlock, foxglove, ginger, henbane, ipecacuahna jalap, nux vomica and black cohosh -appear in the list. Although some herbalists used these plants, Neil emphasises the fact they are potentially dangerous and associated more with regular practice and physicians. These lists contribute to the classification of certain plants as _folk' or _traditional' remedies. In further support of self-care and domestic health, Neil advocated gaining knowledge of anatomy and physiology, explaining and describing the body in scientific, but easily understood, terms.111 Indeed, as regular practitioners increasingly employed scientific terminology, effectively limiting the knowledge accessible to domestic healers, herbalists extended the definition of science, describing it in comprehensible terms. Scientific medicine and terminology, as defined by regular practitioners, supported the medical gaze and made patients compliant, uninformed vehicles of disease.112 In 1895, for example, a Harley Street physician wrote to the British Medical Journal lamenting the simplification of medical terminology.113 There are a number of times, writes the anonymous physician, when he wished to dispense undecipherable drugs to his patients who 109 Neil, p. 151. ` 110 Neil, p. 153. 111 Neil, pp. 245-253. 112 Michel Foucault, The Birth of the Clinic: An Archaeology of Medical Perception translated by Alan Sheridan (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, 1963), pp. 112-120;Freund and McGuire, p. 213; Deborah Lupton, Medicine as Culture (London: Sage Publications, 1994), pp. 23-24. Belgrave, p. 313. 113 Julius Althaus, 'The Nomenclature of the British Pharmacopeia', British Medical Journal (BMJ) 2, 1817 (1895), pp. 1064. 203 grow alarmed when they read such ingredients as nux vomica, strychnine, arsenic and chloroform in their prescriptions. Like the French physician Laennec, who spoke in Latin to his students across his patients so they remained unaware of their treatment, this Harley Street doctor preferred his treatments to be as anonymous as his opinion.114 Conversely, Thomson's system, as practiced by Broadbent and Neil, relied on a regime of remedies, contained explicit religious sentiment and encouraged patients to be active in their pursuit of health. Broadbent describes science as knowledge, and the science of medicine, as the art of preventing and curing disease.115 While Broadbent ridicules the science taught in medical universities, describing this as archaic and old-dated, he promotes Thomson's _science of life' as progressive: It is now the wonder of the more enlightened of the present generation how the belief in witchcraft could have been obtained amongst the most learned of the 16th century. So it will be the wonder of future generations, that their forefathers of the 19th century should be so hoodwinked as to swallow down deadly poisons, be bled, blistered and physicked ... 116 In an approach typical of both herbalists and domestic healers, Neil combines elements of his varied education with his experience and response to the colonial environment. Neil was encouraged in this approach at the appropriately named Eclectic College of America. The Eclectic Practice of Medicine was first devised by New York physician and herbalist Wooster Beach, who, like many others, believed the best way to compete with regular physicians was to gain a medical qualification.117 In 1830, Beach, with several other physicians, established a school in Worthington, Ohio, to provide students with a scientific knowledge of botanical medicine. Beach coined the term _eclectic' to distinguish his system from Thomson's. In 1842, after anti-dissection riots forced the closure of the Worthington school, the college moved to Cincinnati, where its popularity grew 114 Charles Newman, The Evolution of Medical Education in the Nineteenth Century (London: Oxford University Press, 1957), p. 27. 115 Broadbent, p. 1. 116 Broadbent, pp. 13-4. 117 Rothstein, pp. 47-50; Rolla L. Thomas, The Eclectic Practice of Medicine (Cincinnati: The Scudder Brothers, 1907), http://www.swsbm.com, [accessed September 3 2013]. 204 and the college became known as the only medical botanical institute to award degrees.118 Throughout the nineteenth century, eclectic medicine experienced fluctuating periods of acclaim and disdain. As early as the 1840s, Professor John King of the Eclectic Medical Institute began concentrating the resinous material of plants, creating convenient and popular medicines used by regular and irregular physicians. By the late 1850s, however, these compounds were in general dispute, being considered ineffective and too easily adulterated, a blow that damaged the reputation of the eclectics and their practice. Many considered the medicines prescribed by eclectics as simply the botanical equivalents of heroic medicine - medicines the patient had to be more heroic than the physician to stand.119 By the 1880s, however, John Scudder, a pharmacologist and manufacturer of pharmaceuticals, reinvigorated the Institute, making policy the use of gentle drugs, both palatable and effective.120 The influence of eclecticism can be detected in Neil's advice and recommendations. His famous dandelion pills are largely effective, writes Neil, because they contain podophyllin and leptandrin - concentrated resins like those discovered by John King. Certain heroic treatments are also recommended by Neil, who suggests the following rather harrowing directions for the removal of birth marks or _mothers' marks. If parents wish to do it themselves, the simplest way to do it is to thread a darning needle with a white cotton crochet thread, pass it through the base of the tumour or elevation, tie it on top, cut off the ends...now put on a slippery elm poultice between muslin cloths, renew every six hours till the part festers and comes off; then dress with healing ointment.121 While doctors sought feedback and were concerned primarily with the judgement of their peers, herbalists encouraged and collected testimonials from the lay public. 118 Rothstein, p. 47. 119 Dary, p. 30; Harvey Wickes Felter, Historical Sketch of the Eclectic Medical Institute, Cincinnati (Cincinnati: The Lloyd Library, c. 1911), http://www.swsbm.com, [accessed September 3 2013]. 120 Rothstein, pp. 47-50. 121 Neil, p. 272. 205 Indeed, Neil speaks directly to domestic healers in his book and assumes a degree of knowledge on their part. Some doses he describes simply as _ordinary' and he omits the virtues of some plants such as wormwood, which, in his words is _so well known a description is not needed'.122 Ironically, despite their advocacy of domestic health and _free health', herbalists charged for their services and their medicines and competed for customers in a capitalistic medical market. Thomson sold the _rights' to his system to other herbalists who then received a copy of his book, New Guide to Health; or, Botanic Family Physician, Containing a Complete System of Practice (1822) and membership to one of Thomson's Friendly Societies.123 Broadbent included an extensive list of herbs and prices at the end of his manual, and Neil actively marketed and promoted his own formulae through advertising such as that shown in Figure 4:7.124 Like domestic medical manuals, Neil includes numerous references to the source of information, referring repeatedly to Thomsonian herbalists, Drs. Beach, Coffin and Skelton, as well as academics, eclectic practitioners and lay healers. Neil asserts medicine is an intuitive art and despite his explicit praise of Thomson, he stresses regularly that people should use their own sense and judgement when it comes to health and healing. An entire section of Neil's book is contributed by a _woman who has had much experience with domestic medicine'.125 Including local lay information made herbalism a dynamic system and further increased the number of plants relied on by herbal practitioners. Like domestic healers, Neil also experimented with native plants.126 122 Neil, p. 25. 123 Rothstein, p. 43; Thomson, ' e Guide to ea th', pp. 10-12. 124 Broadbent, pp. 173-188; Southland Times (ST), 9 May 1903, p. 3; Timaru Herald (TH), 3 July 1889, p. 4. 125 Neil, p. 468. 126 Neil, pp. 492-495. 206 Figure 4:7: Advertisements for Neil's medicines Source: Southland Times, 9 May 1903, p. 3; Timaru Herald, 3 July 1889, p. 4 Thomson had established a tradition of incorporating and adapting local lay and indigenous knowledge, basing many of his treatments on Native American plants and treatments.127 Neil's use of indigenous medical knowledge befits Thomson's system by adhering to notions of tradition and rejecting the need for scientific analysis. Yet, as noted, Thomson effectively stripped any cultural context from the plants by claiming their discovery for himself. Thomson claimed to have 127 Neil includes one hundred and thirty-four plants in his manual. Thirty-one are described as either native to or growing abundantly in America. 207 _discovered' lobelia, the most important drug in his armorial, despite Native Americans using the plant for centuries. Steam treatments, and around fifty other plants used by American shamans, were also claimed by Thomson and his advocates.128 American plants - that is, those described by Neil as native to, or growing abundantly in various parts of America - remained important within the Thomsonian system. Indeed, of the one hundred and thirty-four plants in Neil's book, thirty-one are associated with America geographically or culturally. An American-trained herbalist based in Napier in the 1880s, Professor James relied heavily on American plants and maintained that New Zealand's climate was most suitable to their cultivation.129 Unlike Neil, he ignored the presence or potential of native New Zealand medicinal plants. Most significantly, Neil dabbled in traditional Maori medicine and described medicinal and commercial uses for nineteen native New Zealand plants. Table 4:2, is a summary of his section on New Zealand flora. Like Thomson, or contemporary botanists and doctors, Neil gives little acknowledgement to Maori, praising instead Mr King, Neil's manager in Auckland, for gathering and collating the information. By doing so, Neil contributed to the translation of indigenous medical knowledge into western frameworks and understandings, a process described in more detail in Chapter Six. 128 Indeed, there was little of Thomson's system that was novel or new - the plants he recommended were well known and his regime of purging and then strengthening the body was a common practice that adhered to a humoral theory of disease. Rothstein, p. 43; Vivian Nutton, 'Humoralism', in Companion Encyclopedia of the History of Medicine, Vol. I, ed. By W. F. Bynum and Roy Porter (London: Routlege, 1993), pp. 281-292. 129 Daily Telegraph (DT), November 30, 1881. 208 Table 4:2: A list of native New Zealand plants as described in Neil's herbal Botanical Name Common Name (as written by Neil) Medicinal Uses Phormuim tenax Flax, harakeke Anthelmintic, haemostatic, demulcent, carminative, poultice for burns, scalds, abscesses or inflammation Rhipogonum parviflorum Kare-Ao, supple jack Decoction of the roots good for rheumatism, bowel complaints, fever, general debility and skin complaints Macropiper excelsum Kawakawa, pepper tree Aromatic, diuretic. The leaves are chewed for toothache or facial swelling. An infusion of the leaves is good for pains in the stomach Veronica Koro-Miko Astringent, good for dysentery, ulcers and venereal disease Dysoxylum spectabile Kohe-kohe Stops the secretion of milk Passiflora tetrandra Ko-Hia An oil made from the seeds of the fruit used for sore breasts and old wounds Plantain Kopa-Kopa Boiled leaves applied to ulcers Leptospernum scoparium Manuka Allays fever, given to costive infants and coughs in adults Metrosiderus robusta Rata bark Anthelmintic and use to treat venereal disease Atherosperma N. Zealandiae Puka-Tea Applied to obstinate sores and scrofula, venereal diseases Drimys axillaris Horopito Stimulating tonic with anti-scorbutic and alterative qualities Metrosiderus tomentosa Pohutu Kawa Used to treat dysentery, high in tannins Phyllocladus trichomanoides Tarekaha Used to treat dysentery, high in tannins. Also used in tanneries Coriaria ruscifolia Tu Pakihi Tutu, toot Extremely poisonous but the juice of the berry used as a laxative Source: Neil, pp. 492-495 By the turn of the twentieth century, herbalists in New Zealand were becoming increasingly concerned with the status of their profession. Exclusion from medical registration meant herbalists had no legal right to claim compensation.130 Their practice and trade relied solely on the good faith of their patients, while their 130 Statutes of New Zealand, 1867, No. 30, Medical Practitioners' Act. http://www.nzlii.org/nz/legis/hist_act/mpa186731v1867n30335/, [accessed June 8 2014]. 209 reputations suffered considerably during campaigns against unregistered practitioners.131 As governing medical bodies such as the New Zealand British Medical Association sought to control and supress unregistered practices, herbalists rallied and presented an alternative form of registration that would provide the same assurances and safeguards as the national medical register. In 1906, Neil formed a New Zealand Association of Medical Herbalists, establishing main branches in Wellington and Christchurch.132 The Association was registered under the Unclassified Societies Act and by 1907 had twenty to thirty members, some of whom were also members of the British Association of Medical Herbalists. A major aim of the Association was to form an organised appeal for inclusion on the national medical register and raise the status of herbal practice. It adopted similar rules and regulations as the national register, including an expectation that members would to pass an exam set by their president, Neil, and co-president, John Hepworth. Members had to have at least four years' practicing experience and were banned from advertising anything in relation to sexual remedies or diseases of the urinary organs.133 Despite their desire to be included in the national register, Association members rallied for autonomy and the right to control its own practitioners. During an enquiry related to the Quackery Prevention Bill, herbalist Richard Ayres approved of the Bill's proposal to register herbalists who had sat an exam or had been in practice for an appropriate period of time. Yet Ayres was determined that the _examination [be] on the lines which the rules of our Association provide'.134 Fellow herbalist Benjamin Gardiner was also questioned and voiced his concern over the ambiguity of what constituted a registered herbalist. A registered 131 Porter, 'Before the Fringe', pp. 1- 27; Bivins, 'Histories of Heterodoxy', pp. 578-97. Articles in New Zealand newspapers warned the public not to consult unregistered medical practitioners, mimicking the debate against quackery taking place in America and Britain. For example, 'The Campaign Against Quacks: Twentieth Thousand in New York', Evening Post (EP), 13 October 1904, p. 5; 'Too Many Quacks', EP, 27 November 1931, p. 9. 132 EP, 3 April 1907, p. 8. 133 Quackery Prevention Bill Committee, 'Quackery Prevention Bill Committee', AJHR (1907), I -14, p. 5. 134 Quackery Prevention Bill Committee, AJHR, (1907), I -14, pp. 5-6. 210 herbalist, stated Gardiner, should be one registered and affiliated with the New Zealand Association of Medical Herbalists.135 Chief Health Officer from the Department of Health (established 1900), James Mason, rejected this idea, determined that no man who is unqualified in accordance with the national register, should practice medicine or give medical advice.136 This opinion persisted and New Zealand herbalists were consistently denied entry to the national medical register throughout the twentieth century.137 Despite this, herbalists held positions on health boards, including the New Zealand Pharmacy Board, in local politics and on Hospital and Charitable Aid Boards.138 Mr Peter Mitchell Mackay, for example, who was proprietor of Neil's Herbal Dispensary in Auckland, was elected onto the New Zealand Pharmacy Board in 1917. He was also Justice of the Peace and resided over the oral and practical pharmacy subjects at the Boards' examination. Mackay was also a member of the Auckland City Council, local fire board, Auckland Hospital and Charitable Aid Board, and trustee of the Auckland Savings Bank.139 The positions Mackay and other herbalists held suggest that they received public support despite men such as Mason denigrating their authority. The numbers of herbalists in New Zealand peaked at the turn of the century, but according to the national census, declined dramatically during the 1920s.140 Popular historical scholarship blames members of the regular medical faculty for this decline, suggesting that campaigns against quackery and the exclusion of herbalists from registers and associations damaged the reputation of herbalists beyond repair.141 However, this alone does not account for the decline in numbers and popularity of New Zealand herbalists.