These books and the information they contained moved with colonists - the popularity and adaptation of their information changing in accordance to different environments and contexts. For example, British manuals such as Culpeper's English Physician and William Buchan's Domestic Medicine initially guided American pilgrims but became less popular following the 35 Riley, pp. 317-8; Maida Barlow. ''Harrold, Agnes', from the Dictionary of New Zealand Biography. Te Ara - the Encyclopedia of New Zealand', URL: http://www.TeAra.govt.nz/en/biographies/1h10/harrold-agnes, [accessed May 11 2014]; Barbara Harper, Petticoat Pioneers: South Island Women of the Colonial Era, Vol. 3 (Wellington: A. H. & A. W. Reed, 1980), pp. 94-7. 36 'Squaw tea' is a generic term for a popular remedy prescribed by domestic healers in various cultures. In traditional Chinese medicine, squaw tea or Ma Huang is made from the plant Ephedra sinica - the same plant native Americans used and later taught Mormon pioneers in America to prepare. Harrold's use of this remedy reflects her North American background and the introduction of practices familiar to her. Harper, pp. 94-7; Maude Grieve, A Modern Herbal: The Medicinal, Culinary, Cosmetic and Economic Properties, Cultivation and Folklore of Herbs, Grasses, Fungi, Shrubs and Trees with all their Modern Scientific Uses, 3rd edn (First Published 1931) (London: Tiger Books, 1992), p. 286; Anton Sohn, The Healers of Nineteenth Century Nevada (Nevada: University of Nevad, 1997), pp. 59-67. 37 Royal Pharmaceutical Society, 'Information Sheet: 16, Domestic Medicine Chests', http://www.rpharms.com/museum-pdfs/16-medicine-chests.pdf, [accessed March 14 2013]. 139 American Revolution.38 Subsequently, American writers were encouraged to be original in their literary productions during a period when America was overwhelmingly rural and the need for domestic medical guides was self-evident.39 Many authors _nationalised' manuals, and the number of medical manuals published in American flourished. Sent to Britain for sale, these books encouraged the integration of American medicinal plants such as senega and capsicum into British and European herbals. Domestic healers in New Zealand readily incorporated American plants and were particularly influenced by the American popular health movement, as discussed in the following section. As the extent of colonisation increased and as discourse on the influence of climate upon health assumed prominence, writers produced manuals intended specifically for New Zealand and Australian emigrants. The Australian-published Tegg's Handbook for Emigrants (1839) includes a _Domestic Pharmacopeia'. This explains how to prepare syrups, tinctures, infusions, liniments and poultices from a list of ingredients that include both processed drugs, such as Dover's Powder, and raw plant ingredients such as rhubarb, ginger and jalap.40 For Tegg, like many of his contemporaries, _domestic medicine' consisted largely of combining commercially processed plants and applying these in a domestic setting.41 Figure 3:2 shows Tegg's recommended layout of an emigrant's medical chest.42 The plants prescribed by Tegg are those cultivated by European, American and British drug manufacturers and evidence suggests that New Zealand colonists relied heavily on commercially-prepared medicines imported by chemists or grocers. This reliance reflects an initial dependence on familiar remedies and treatments based on well-known ingredients and medicines. 38 Norman Gevitz, 'But all Those Authors are Foreigners': American Literary Nationalism and Domestic Medical Guides', in The Popularization of Medicine, 1650-1850, ed. by Roy Porter (London: Routledge, 1992), pp. 232-252. 39 The first American published medical guide, Every Man His Doctor was written by John Tennant in 1730 and America's first medical journal appeared in 1797. Gevitz, pp. 232-252. 40 Thomas Tegg, Te 's andbook for Emi rants: Containin Usefu Information and Pra ti a Directions on Domestic, Mechanical, Surgical, Medical and other Subjects Calculated to Increase the Comforts and add to the Conveniences of the Colonist (London: Thomas Tegg, 1873). 41 Tegg's list of medicaments includes a price list - indicating an assumption that all ingredients will be available and bought in the colonies. Tegg, pp. 96-98. 42 Tegg, p. 96. 140 Figure 3:2: Standard emigrant's medical chest Source: Figure One: Thomas Tegg, Tegg's Handbook for Emigrants: Containing Useful Information and Practical Directions on Domestic, Mechanical, Surgical, Medical and other Subjects Calculated to Increase the Comforts and add to the Conveniences of the Colonist (London: Thomas Tegg, 1873), p. 96 The reliance on familiar remedies was supported by the introduction of personal collections of medical receipts or recipes. According to historian Katharine Allen, there are parallels between the structure and recording of both seventeenth- and eighteenth-century medical receipts and the structure and recording of scientific reports. These similarities, she argues, indicate an _appreciation and public awareness of natural philosophy and a growing recognition of the household as an epicentre of experimental activities'.43 In Europe, this trend diminished by the late eighteenth century, due largely to the depreciation of women's knowledge. Medical receipt writing became increasingly a leisure activity. An analysis of late-nineteenth and early-twentieth-century medical receipts and domestic medical knowledge referred to by colonists in New Zealand's suggests that the home once 43 Allen, p. 5. 141 again became a site of legitimate experimentation and one that also reflected an appreciation of nineteenth-century science and standardisation. Elizabeth Jane (1849-1942) and her husband Frederick Joseph Locke (1847-1914) arrived from Guernsey, England to Port Chalmers (Otago) on 16 February 1873. They brought five books they presumably referred to in New Zealand that contained medicinal receipts collected by Jane, who worked as a cook at Castle Eden in Durham prior to their departure.44 The earliest, dated 1739-40, includes plants used routinely by British practitioners, such as liquorice, opium and tansy. For jaundice, instructions for the preparation of barberry bark are included, while alkany root is recommended for the treatment of chilblains. Most recipes involve a degree of preparation - for example steeping plant material in oil, alcohol or water - and conjure images of the kitchen dispensary. Others are _simples' - remedies made from one plant.45 The following remedy for _fits' (seizures) is most likely reproduced from seventeenth and eighteenth-century herbals, when animal products were common components of European materia medicas: Take earth moles just as they are taken out of the earth, then dry them in an oven with the hair, blood, guts and everything till they powder very fine, let the person or the child take as much as will lie upon a sixpence three times a day before they expect to fit or any symptoms of fitting are coming and to repeat until the changing moon, but be sure never to take it if the fits are upon them. When the moles are taken out of the oven they should be hung in a paper bag and so powdered when you want them.46 Dated c. 1820, the second book in this series includes remedies for rheumatism, biliousness, headaches, jaundice, coughs, colds, weak stomachs and toothaches -examples of the ailments and illnesses treated regularly during this period.47 Directions in this collection are more complicated than earlier receipts and reflect developments in the pharmaceutical industry. Instructions on how to prepare pills, 44 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-04, 1739-40, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts; Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-06, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts; Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-07, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts; Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-08, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 45 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-04, 1739-40, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts 46 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-04, 1739-40, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts 47 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-06, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 142 lozenges, boluses, plasters and poultices showcase the repertoire of domestic medical care. Household ingredients such as soap, eggs, sugar and syrup help bind and provide a medium for medicinal plants, and unlike the previous collection, the only animal product recommended is hartshorn, powdered red deer horn.48 Spanish liquorice is recommended for colds, indigestion and biliousness; the herb's name is indicative of the country in which it is cultivated and processed. Ever since domestic medicine was described as a distinct system by early authors such as William Buchan, it has been proclaimed safer than that prescribed by a physician.49 The reasons for this include the relatively high use of plant-based medicines as opposed to the inorganic compounds such as arsenic and mercury which were becoming increasingly popular within the medical fraternity. Spanish liquorice, wrote Elizabeth Jane, _is an excellent medicine to cleanse and strengthen the stomach and purify the blood, relieves headaches and sickness and is so purportedly safe that it may be taken without danger at any time'.50 As discussed in Chapter One, the extensive cultivation of medicinal plants collected from around the world occurred at specific sites throughout the British Empire, such as botanic gardens. Many of these plants feature strongly in personal collections of receipts - their presence being as _symbols of Empire in Briton's daily routines'.51 Opium - native to India - was included in several remedies from Jane's collection, both in powdered and tincture form (laudanum) while camphor, also native to China, is recommended for toothache, colic and fever. Nutmeg and ginger, originally from South East Asia, appear in remedies for jaundice and stomach upsets. Aloes from the Middle East are also included and sassafras, the North American herb popularised and introduced to Britain by Sir Walter Raleigh in 1602, is described by Jane as cure for a rheumatism, one that purportedly sold for one hundred guineas. Senna, another American herb, is described as a most 48 Made from the horns of the male red deer, this product was attributed with sudorific qualities (promotes sweating) and was used to treat fever and dysentery. Dr Phelps Brown, The Complete Herbalist, or the People their own Physicians by the use of Nature's Remedies Describing the Great Curative Properties found in the Herbal Kingdom (New Jersey: Dr O. Phelps Brown, 1897), pp. 303, 344; Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-06, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 49 William Buchan, The Special Edition of Domestic Medicine or the Family Physician (Edinburgh: R. Aitken, 1774), pp. ix-xvii. 50Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-07, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 51 Allen, p. 71. 143 effective aperient.52 Rhubarb, a stalwart of Chinese medicine, was cultivated initially for export by China (and later Russia) and was not introduced to Europe until the late eighteenth century.53 Despite this, it was a common and popular ingredient used by European healers such as Jane, who notes its use as a remedy for biliousness and indigestion. Remedies collected or created in the colony show the tendency to combine commercially-prepared medicines with home-made formulations. In 1868, Agnes Emma Hall, a Canterbury colonist, turned to popular painkillers - including laudanum and chloroform - for her toothaches, before finding relief from a home-made fomentation of poppy heads and chamomile flowers.54 Frances Caverhill, who occupied a Canterbury sheep station, Hawkeswood, between 1850 and 1896, relied on ingredients including castor oil (as an emetic), mustard (in a poultice), marshmallow and arrowroot (infusions for inflammation) as well as patent medicines such as Gregory's mixture, made from rhubarb, magnesium and ginger and commonly prescribed for stomach pain.55 Domestic healers typically referenced the source of the information they recorded. Elizabeth Jane settled with her husband in Dunedin, where large numbers of doctors practiced, drawn to the area during the 1860s gold rushes.56 In her collections, she notes several doctors as the sources of receipts, for example, Dr Reece, who provided a recipe for bilious pills; Dr Thornton, who recommends coffee for the treatment of fever; and Dr Boarhearease, who also prescribed a remedy for fever. Jane also acknowledged Mrs Fox for her comprehensive instructions for the production of bilious pills, Mrs Clarkes, whose pills appeared to be a general cure-all, and Mrs Hayes, who contributed a recipe for a _spewing' medicine. M. Pradiar, writes Jane, is a gentleman who has found a remedy for 52 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-07, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 53 Deni Brown, The Royal Horticultural Society Encyclopaedia of Herbs and their Uses: The Definitive A-Z guide to Herbs (London: Dorling Kindersley Limited, 2002), p. 19. 54 Jean Garner and Kate Foster (eds), Letters to Grace: Writing Home From Colonial New Zealand (Christchurch: Canterbury University Press, 2011), p. 98. 55 Frances Caverhill, A Year at Hawkswood: The Diary of Frances Caverhill for 1865, Vols I and II (Christchurch: Nag's Head Press, 1981), pp. 47, 60, 69. 56 Twenty percent of New Zealand's doctors registered in Otago in 1871. Twenty-one per cent in 1891. Michael Belgrave, "Medical Men" and "Lady Doctors" The Making of a New Zealand Profession, 1867-1941, PhD Thesis, Victoria University of Wellington, 1985, p. 265. 144 gout that consists of a thin linseed poultice applied with a yellow liquid, presumed to be saffron-infused spirits.57 To the reader, these names reveal little. But to Jane, the source arguably denotes the worth of the information. Given their capricious social status in the colony, recipes from physicians may have been considered either valid or dubious. The _presence of receipts --authorised|| by women of superior social standing might indicate a blurring of deferential formalities in matters domestic.58 Furthermore, the exchange of medical receipts between middle-to-upper class women suggests that in nineteenth-century New Zealand, domestic medicine was not considered a lower class of medicine than that provided by educated doctors. Difficulties in employing and retaining servants in New Zealand meant that many middle-class women undertook duties usually appointed in Britain to the labouring class, including the provision of domestic health care.59 Additionally, many middle-class colonial women, encouraged by evangelical ideals, concerned themselves with the health and welfare of others. This often led to the informal exchange of information and ideas between women of different classes and backgrounds. For example, Jane, a young woman who worked for Sarah Amelia Courage (c1845 -1901), author of Lights and Shadows Of Colonial Life: Twenty Six Years In Canterbury, New Zealand, obviously learnt a great deal from her mother and offered her employer the benefit of her advice, as the following excerpt shows: mother she took and dragged him backwards through a gorse hedge; but he got no better. So last of all she was told to catch nine mice and fry 'em and give him to 'em each morning, then wait three mornings and give him three more - waiting another three - then give him the rest; and sure enough after he had all of them there was a change, and after a bit he got quite well.60 57 Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-07, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts; Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-08, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts. 58 Sara Pennell (ed. ), Women and Medicine: Remedy Books, 1533-1865, From the Wellcome Library for the History and Understanding of Medicine, London, (London: Primary Source Microfilm Library for the Wellcome Library for the History and Understanding of Medicine, 2004), p. 17. 59 Macdonald, 'The Eclipse of Domestic Service', p. 44. 60 Sarah Amelia Courage, Lights and Shadows Of Colonial Life: Twenty Six Years In Canterbury, New Zealand (Christchurch: Whitcoulls, 1976), p. 82. 145 Collections of receipts often contain several recipes for the same ailment, actions indicative of a practicable approach to treatment. According to Roy Porter, only a handful of medicines - such as mercury, digitalis, amyl nitrate, quinine and plant-based emetics - were effective during this period.61 Experimentation and an approach that combined remedies, therefore, increased a patient's chances of recovery. Jane collected several recipes for rheumatism, including one from Mrs Bouyer, Mrs Cooper, Major Cartwright and Mrs Hayes.62 Accompanying some recipes are testimonials to their worth. For example, Mr Sutton's plaister [sic], which is _not to be shown to a medical man - the material to be bought at different druggists', proved particularly efficacious:63 Virtues of this plaister [sic], applied to the stomach it relieves pain and takes away aches and pains, swelling bruises, draws out humours, particularly good for rheumatism. The lady who gave me this receipt said one of her servants had a lump under her throat the size of a nutmeg which went off without breaking the skin.64 In New Zealand, the adaptation of medical receipts included the incorporation of native medicinal plants, a practice that relied on observations and knowledge taught by Maori.