The eclectic nature of this knowledge and the acceptance by domestic healers of a wide range of medical theories and practices, distinguished their care from herbalists and 17 G. B Earp, Handbook for Intending Emigrants to the South Settlements of New Zealand, facsimile ed., (Christchurch: Kiwi Publishers, 1998); John Hill Burton, The Emigrants Manual, New Zealand, Cape of Good Hope and Port Natal, (1851); Author Unknown, All About New Zealand: Being a Complete Record of Colonial Life, Facsimile ed., (Christchurch: Kiwi Publishers, 1996). 18 Hopeful, Taken In (Reprint ed. ), (Christchurch: Capper Press, 1974), p. ix. 288 doctors, who were comparably more restrained in their approach to medicine and medical care. While domestic healers used plants based on a wide range of both local experience and international research, New Zealand herbalists remained relatively loyal to one primary source and mentor. Evidence suggests that Thomsoniansm was the most popular system of herbal medicine in nineteenth-century New Zealand. The influence of Samuel Thomson is arguably best explained as a reaction to the increased organisation and specialisation of medicine. In New Zealand, herbalism was at its height of popularity in the 1880s, a period described by James Belich as one in which a set of social and moral standards were enforced through so-called _moral evangelising'.19 The acceptance of herbalism is indicative of a medical culture still diverse in practice and organisation, and a society that was establishing new standards of class and status and in the process challenging the role of doctors. Chapter Four explored the process with which herbal medicine was defined a distinct body of knowledge and medical practice. From the sixteenth century, a number of western physicians defined themselves as herbalists as opposed to doctors or physicians, choosing to focus on one aspect of medical care - the use of medicinal plants. This practice become increasingly popular due to the commodification of medicine, the cost of which put it beyond the pockets of most. Prominent herbalists such as Nicholas Culpeper rejected the growing elitism of Britain's medical faculty, ultimately placing herbalism in opposition to medical guilds and organisations.20 Centuries later, American herbalist Samuel Thomson promoted and presented a seemingly novel system of herbalism, in the process resurrecting the political bandwagon advocated by Culpeper.21 Assisting 19 James Belich, Paradise Reforged, A History of the New Zealanders from the 1880s to the Year 2000 (Auckland: The Penguin Press, 2001), pp. 121-146. 20 Benjamin Woolley, The Herbalist: Nicholas Culpeper and the Fight for Medical Freedom (London: Harper Collins Publishers, 2004); Benjamin Woolley, Heal Thyself: Nicholas Culpeper and the Seventeenth-Century Struggle to Bring Medicine to the People (London: Harper Collins, 2004). 21 Samuel Thomson, 'New Guide to Health; Or Botanic Family Physician. Containing a Complete System of Practice on a Plan Entirely New: With a Description of the Vegetables Made Use of and Directions for Preparing and Administering them to Cure Diseases to Which is Prefixed, A Narrative of the Life and Medical Discoveries of the Author', originally published by J. Q. Adams Printer, Boston, 1835', Bulletin of the Lloyd Library of Botany, Pharmacy and Materia Medica, 11, 289 Thomson's ambitions and the spread of his system were well established trade routes, newly developed colonies such New Zealand where demand for his approach existed, and a sense of social and political unrest in both America and Britain. Thomsonians also successfully used networks established by radical activists from the British labouring class to move plants, practices and associated propaganda. Meanwhile, New Zealand doctors relied on comparatively more organised networks to transfer and exchange medico-botanical knowledge. By the nineteenth century, various western pharmacopeia provided the accepted standards for doctors and chemists on the species, preparation and application of medicinal plants.22 The development of pharmacopeia relied on co-operation among scientists, pharmacists, doctors, botanists and governing bodies, such as the British Medical Council, and reflected a common goal to define and promote science as the epitome of authority. As such, an emphasis was placed on the translation of seemingly non-scientific work into scientific work. Doctors relied predominantly on sanctioned texts such as pharmacopeia and authorised medical journals, which became the dominant forums for the publication of their research. This effectively guarded their work and helped to create a boundary around their profession, one also supported by codes of ethics and memberships to associations. While New Zealand doctors performed their own sorts of _colonial clinical trails' with plants, much of this research was presented to the medical faculty only, through formal publications such as the London Medical Gazette.23 7 (1909), pp. 3-64; The Thomsonian Botanical Watchman, 1, 1 (1834), p. 1, http://archive.org/stream/thomsonianbotani00alba#page/4/mode/2up, [accessed October 8 2013]. 22 British Pharmacopeia Published Under the Direction of the General Council of Medical Registration and Education of the United Kingdom Pursuant to the Medical Act, 1858 (London: Spottiswoode and Co, 1864); British Pharmacopeia Published Under the Direction of the General Council of Medical Registration and Education of the United Kingdom Pursuant to the Medical Act, 1858 (London: Spottiswoode and Co, 1867); British Pharmacopeia Published Under the Direction of the General Council of Medical Registration and Education of the United Kingdom Pursuant to the Medical Act, 1858 (London: Spottiswoode and Co, 1885). 23 For example Dr George Bennett of Sydney purportedly wrote the first account of native New Zealand plants in contemporary medical literature, publishing an article on tutu (Coriaria arborea) in the London Medical Gazette in 1831. In 1885, the Australasian Medical Gazette published an article submitted by Monckton on the virtues and properties of Phormium tenax. S. Brooker, R. Cambie and R. Cooper, New Zealand Medicinal Plants: A Handbook of the Auckland War Memorial Museum (Auckland: Unity Press, 1962), p.5; Evening Post, 7 February, 1885, p. 2. 290 As well as investigating the routes and networks through which plants and information were exchanged, this thesis has explored the notion of translation.24 Exploring translation does not dispute the fact that nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century domestic healers, herbalists and doctors used similar plants in similar ways. Rather, it suggests that each group interpreted plants through different lenses, assigning greater or lesser importance to the broader developments and trends that directed the cultivation, access, processing and application of medicinal plants. These different interpretations or translations contributed to the notion of a clearly demarcated medical culture. However, as this thesis reveals, diffrent translations co-existed and often supported and legitimised the other. Domestic healers, doctors, herbalists and botanists recognised familiar introduced medicinal species in the colonial environment and each interpreted the presence of such plants differently. Domestic healers ascertained their usefulness and chose their species according to need. For example, the frequency of skin complaints made plantain and marshmallow popular species.25 Used to maintain and promote health, rhubarb remained a stock standard in domestic medical chests, as livelihoods and indeed life depended on keeping well.26 Domestic healers appreciated naturalised medicinal species, using them to supplement imported or unavailable medicines, while herbalists such as James Neil viewed wild medicinal 24 Exploring the notion of translation does not dispute the fact that nineteenth and early twentieth century domestic healers, herbalists and doctors used plants in much the same way. Rather it suggests each group interpreted their relationship with medicinal plants in different ways. This interpretation or translation, I argue, contributed to the notion of an atomised and clearly demarcated medical culture often portrayed by medical and social historians. 25 Frances Caverhill, A Year at Hawkswood: The Diary of Frances Caverhill for 1865, Volumes I and II (Christchurch: Nag's Head Press, 1981), pp. 47, 60, 69; Hocken Library, Dunedin, AG-561-04, 1739-40; AG-561-06; AG-561-07, AG-561-08, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts; Maude Grieve, A Modern Herbal: The Medicinal, Culinary, Cosmetic and Economic Properties, Cultivation and Folklore of Herbs, Grasses, Fungi, Shrubs and Trees with all their Modern Scientific Uses, 3rd ed. (First Published 1931) (London: Tiger Books, 1992). 26 Thomas Tegg, Te 's andbook for Emi rants: Containin Usefu Information and Practical Directions on Domestic, Mechanical, Surgical, Medical and other Subjects Calculated to Increase the Comforts and add to the Conveniences of the Colonist (London: Thomas Tegg, 1873). 291 plants as virtuous gifts from God.27 Botanists recognised the economic potential of the plants and noted their easy growing habits and viability.28 Each interpretation or translation affected the way each group related to, and assessed, medicinal plants. Domestic healers viewed plants as multipurpose medicines, accessible, safe and effective. They often used the same plant for various complaints. For example, mustard plasters were used to alleviate and mitigate colds and flus, to bring on perspiration and to treat pulmonary conditions.29 Women were undeniably assigned to the domestic sphere during the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, as evidenced by domestic manuals and popular notions of etiquette, such as that prescribed by Isabella Beeton.30 However, the use of plants by domestic healers during this period was not perceived as a gendered occupation. William Buchan's Domestic Medicine (1790) was written to educate and inform men. Indeed, Buchan, writes historian Roy Porter, _deplored old wives' tales and folk myth'.31 For Buchan, domestic medicine was not a feminine practice. Rather, he acknowledges class distinctions that govern the use of plants, stating that many peasants know the use of plants better than some physicians.32 From the point at which domestic medicine was defined, domestic healers interpreted plants as safe alternatives to the inorganic and often painful administrations of doctors. John Wesley's Primitive Physic (1747), a popular domestic medical manual during the eighteenth century, advocates the use of cheap, safe and easy-to-find medicinal plants, many of which appeared in early Greek texts and later European herbals. Groundsell, yarrow and chamomile are 27 James Neil, The New Zealand Family Herb Doctor: A Guide to Recipes and Herbal Remedies (First published in 1891) (Twickenham: Tiger Books International, 1998). 28 Colonial Industries Commission, 'Evidence of Mr Thomas Kirk: Economic Plants', Appendices to the Journals of House of Representatives (AJHR) (1880), H-22, p. 32. 29 Hocken Library, Dunedin, Dorothy Harvey Book of Receipts, AG-561-04, 1739-40; AG-561-06; AG-561-07, AG-561-08; Laurie Gluckman, Tangiwai: Medical History of New Zealand Prior to 1860 (Auckland: Dr L.K. Gluckman, 1976), p. 118. 30 Isabella Beeton, Beetons's Book of ouseho d Mana ement: first Edition Fa simi e (First Published 1861) (London: Lowe and Brydone, 1968), p. 1015. 31 Roy Porter, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present (London: Harper Collins Publisher, 1999), p. 283. 32 William Buchan, The Special Edition of Domestic Medicine or the Family Physician (Edinburgh: R. Aitken, 1774), p. xiv. 292 recommended for ague. Nettles and plantain are suggested cures for spitting blood. _Herculean medicines', writes Wesley, including opium, steel, various preparation of quicksilver and _the bark' (presumably quinine), are unsafe and _far too strong for men to grapple with'.33 Domestic healers in colonial New Zealand, encouraged by this belief, experimented freely with native medicinal plants. Domestic healers retained broad criteria for the assessment of medicinal plants and associated information. Not restricted by a governing body enforcing and defining a medical protocol, or limited by the possibility of rejection from an association, they accepted indigenous and so-called _alternative' knowledge, while many also embraced a scientific translation provided by the medical faculty. Sister Mother Mary Aubert, for example, combined scientific analysis with an explicitly indigenous translation of the plants with which she worked. Through her affiliation with the pharmaceutical company, Kempthorn and Prosser, she adopted and employed the scientific testing necessary to market her medicines as safe and natural to a public who were growing increasingly suspicious of inorganic medicines and potentially addictive substances.34 During the late nineteenth century, as domestic healers became increasingly enamoured of scientific technique, patent and proprietary medicines made plants appropriately _scientific'. By the turn of the twentieth century, the popularity of the American Health Movement was encouraging a return to simple unadulterated medicines.35 Manufacturers of patent medicines also appealed to this market by resurrecting the perception of safety. The combined approach and various translations adopted by domestic healers reflect the wide range of reference material available to them during this period and their relative freedom from 33 John Benjamin Wesley, Primitive Physick or an Easy and Natural Method of Curing Most Diseases, 9th Ed. (London: W. Strahan, date unknown), pp. 30, 41, xxvi. 34 Jessie Munro, The Story of Suzanne Aubert (Auckland: Auckland University Press with Bridget Williams Books, 1996); Jessie Munro (ed. ), Letters on the Go: The Correspondence of Suzanne Aubert (Wellington: Bridget Williams, 2009). 35 For example Lydia Pinkham's Pills. Lydia E. Pinkham Medicine Company Records, Home Nursing, Summer (1931), Series II, Advertising records, 1873-1968; Pinkham pamphlets, Schlesinger Library, Radcliffe Institute, Harvard University, MC 181, http://pds.lib.harvard.edu/pds/view/4089243?n=569&imagesize=1200&jp2Res=.25&printThumbnails=no, [accessed July 31 2013]. 293 governing bodies, who recommended relatively limited views or perceptions of medicine. Herbalists focused on the use of medicinal plants, placing far more emphasis on their value and worth than other practitioners. When Nicholas Culpeper translated the London Dispensary in 1649, he was one of the first herbalists to make a literal translation of medico-botanical knowledge from that prescribed by doctors into that applied by lay healers and herbalists.36 His most influential work, Culpeper's Herbal, formed strong associations between herbal medicine and domestic practices by providing instruction for domestic healers and supporting and advocating their use of medicinal plants.37 Culpeper's political actions and his rejection of medical institutions and organisation was rhetoric adopted by later herbalists to define and distinguish their use of medicinal plants and herbal medicine. Nineteenth-century herbalists emphasised arbitrary differences in the way they and doctors viewed medicinal plants, a translation underlined by a political subtext employed to place them in opposition to a regular medical faculty. Samuel Thomson's system, in particular, was politically charged. Indeed, his guide to herbal practitioners contained more political conjecture than it did medical advice.38 Many of the plants herbalists used were the same as those prescribed by regular physicians, but while Thomson considered doctors' use of them as unsafe and irresponsible, his translation deemed them safe and divine. In reality, one of Thomson's main herbs, Lobelia inflata, was a powerful emetic, as strong as any equivalent prescribed by the medical fraternity yet the rhetoric around it did not indicate as such.39 In New Zealand, James Neil's interpretation of medicinal plants encapsulated his belief that plants were simple gifts from a 36 Nicholas Culpeper, translator, Pharmacopeia Londinensis or the London Dispensatory, Further Adorned by the Studies and Collections of the Fellows now Living of the Said College, https://archive.org/stream/2548018R.nlm.nih.gov/2548018R#page/n3/mode/2up, [accessed May 11 2014]. 37 Nicholas Culpeper, Cu peper's Comp ete erba : Consistin of a Comprehensi e Des ription of Nearly all herbs with their Medicinal properties and Directions for Compounding the Medicines Extracted from Them (London: W. Foulsham, 1970 reprint). 38 Thomson, pp. 3-64; The Thomsonian Botanical Watchman, 1, 1 (1834), http://archive.org/stream/thomsonianbotani00alba#page/24/mode/2up, [accessed October 7 2013]. 39 The Thomsonian Botanic Watchman, 1, 1 (1834), p. 10. 294 divine benefactor, a view that supported his perception of plants as accessible and safe. His business was a success in New Zealand arguably because his translation mirrored those made by domestic healers and appealed to self-prescribers and certain religious members of society. While the constant rejection of herbalists from medical associations and registration in New Zealand created tension between doctors and their perceived rivals, intellectual communication between the two occurred and was maintained. As suggested by Susan Star and James Griesemer, communication, negotiation and debate are required for various translations of objects to be reconciled and legitimised.40 Herbalists translated plants into a scientific framework, one that few doctors could dispute and one that inadvertently supported doctors and their use of plants.41 However, few herbalists reduced the plants to their isolated constituents, a trend most definitely associated with regular doctors. Instead, herbalists choose to advocate the synergistic effects of the whole plant, maintaining and preserving the concept of the plant as a botanical specimen, once alive and part of nature. This stance supported a distinction between herbalists and doctors, marking a boundary between the two. Doctors' translations of plants relied predominantly on scientific analysis and evaluation, particularly by the late nineteenth century. This translation supported doctors' claims to be progressive and modern. It encouraged the establishment of clear boundaries around the medical profession, through the use of language and terminology that must be learned. The creation of pharmacopeia assisted this translation, as did developments in the field of pharmacology and chemistry.