The concept of an informal _domestic medical curriculum' acknowledges the wide range of sources that constitute the body of knowledge constructed, exchanged and relied upon by domestic healers. This curriculum includes domestic medical manuals, unpublished personal collections of medical receipts, the oral exchange of 143 Alice Silverso (ed. ), The Last Thirty Years: The History of the Canterbury Area Health Board, 1963-1993 (Christchurch: Bookhouse Publishing, 1995), pp. 382-383. 169 information in informal and formal institutions, and the often extensive personal experience of health and wellness. Between 1850 and 1880, domestic healers were relatively autonomous in their practice despite the wide net they cast to gather information. Many relied on collections of medical receipts and drugs brought to the Colony, using mainly introduced and familiar medicinal plant species. Chemists and grocers provided the raw ingredients for nostrums (family remedies) and healers combined these with plants gathered from the wild. Compilers of medical receipts collected several remedies for the same complaint, noting the sources and presumably the worth of the information. Domestic healers were quick to incorporate and adopt pharmaceutical developments, such as the advent of pills, while they remained adept at creating tinctures, poultices and decoctions. Unrestrained by medical exams or a university curriculum, they experimented with native plants, extending their own curriculum and, to a degree, legitimising the use of native plants. Broad social and cultural changes in the 1880s changed the lives of many New Zealand women and in turn influenced their use of medicinal plants. Greater opportunities for employment and education meant less time spent in the domestic environment and greater reliance on patent and proprietary medicines. Increased state intervention in the organisation of health and welfare supported organisations previously established by middle to upper class women. These organisations provided another forum for domestic health practices, extending the sphere from which women provided care and disseminated medical information. The increasing specialisation and standardisation of medicine, science and education created arbitrary definitions and distinctions between different forms of healing. As a consequence, the elements of care, including medicinal plants, were similarly classified. Several popular medicinal plants were recast as _folk' remedies, and were perceived by some as inferior to scientifically tested plants and constituents. Others advocated the use of these seemingly _traditional' medicines, supporting campaigns against the increased use of inorganic drugs and fighting against efforts to suppress various types of healing such as herbalism and homeopathy. 170 Women involved in formal and informal health and welfare organisations in New Zealand advocated the ideals of the American popular health movement, which encouraged the use of unadulterated drugs and so-called traditional medicines. At the same time, domestic medical manuals and patent and proprietary medicines, which sold in New Zealand at an unprecedented rate, contained increasing amounts of inorganic ingredients and adopted scientific techniques. Many medical herbalists - the subject of the following chapter - supported domestic health practices. They encouraged the view of medicinal plants and domestic medicine as safe, and despite campaigns run by both doctors and herbalists to discredit one another, herbalists sought validation from doctors and encouraged the commercialisation of medicine. 171 Chapter Four Nineteenth-Century Herbalists and their use of Medicinal Plants, 1850s-1920s The use of medicinal plants has been an integral part of often complex and dynamic historical medical systems and regimes. Chapter Two discussed how medical herbalism became defined as a distinct subject with the advent of a western medical curriculum, a division that reflected increased medical specialization and the organization of medicine. This chapter expands on that discussion and describes the events and processes that led to the definition of nineteenth-century herbalism. It creates a space for nineteenth-century New Zealand herbalists in medical historiography; a space situated between domestic medicine and the _regular' medical faculty. It argues that various elements of herbalism linked domestic health practices with more organised forms of medicine. In doing so, this chapter identifies the plants used and advocated by herbalists, and central to this thesis, shows how herbalists interpreted or translated these plants in order to define and distinguish their practices from others. Section One of this chapter reviews the origins of colonial herbalism and explores the influence of lay medical knowledge and practices. It reflects briefly on the organization of medicine in Britain from the sixteenth century onwards and considers the events and processes that led to the initial definition of medical herbalism as practiced in colonial New Zealand. This section recognizes contributions made by sixteenth-century herbalist Nicholas Culpeper, whose text continued to guide western herbalists and was available to New Zealand colonists throughout the nineteenth century. Section Two of this chapter discusses the most influential nineteenth-century western herbalist, Samuel Thomson, introduced in Chapter Two. Born in America in 1769, Thomson revived herbal medicine as a discrete and novel 172 system of medicine that differed in practice and philosophy to regular medical practice. This section explores the social and political contexts that bolstered Thomson's system and examines its appeal and popularity in America, Britain, Australia and New Zealand. Specifically, it explores the plants and practices of Thomson's chief advocate in New Zealand, James Neil, and identifies differences and similarities among nineteenth-century herbalism, domestic health care and regular medical practice. This comparison reveals the external and local influences that supported the popularity of herbalism in New Zealand, and explains the notion and process of translation. James Neil was New Zealand's first, self-proclaimed herbalist and is the focus of Section Three of this chapter. A relative lack of source material makes it difficult to explore medical herbal practices in colonial New Zealand, and as a consequence medical herbalism in New Zealand is often overlooked by historians. This chapter's major contribution to medical historiography is its description of the organisation and practice of commercial herbalism in nineteenth-century New Zealand, as revealed through a case study of Neil, including an analysis of his book, The New Zealand Family Herb Doctor (1891). It discusses the adaptation of Thomson's system by Neil and the inclusion of native New Zealand plants, and describes how the exclusion of herbalists from New Zealand's national medical register influenced their practices and role in New Zealand society. The Separation and Construction of Medical Herbalism The origins and development of western herbal medicine created a corpus of knowledge that supported the separation of herbalism as a distinct medical practice in the sixteenth century. Propelling and encouraging this separation were reactions to the increased organisation of medicine and attempts to control the medical market by governing bodies such as the Royal College of Physicians. By the nineteenth century, a similar resistance to medical control and professionalization was expressed by some medical men, supporting the so-called resurrection and reinvention of herbalism. Samuel Thompson and James Neil were instrumental in asserting herbalism as a distinct and legitimate medical 173 practice. They based their practices on medico-botanical knowledge that had developed over centuries, and on sentiments expressed by sixteenth-century herbalists. As noted in the Introduction, in early Egyptian, Indian and Chinese medical practice, medicinal plants played an important and dominant role. On the contrary, the Greek philosophers, considered the founders of western medical practice, initially focused more on regime than therapeutics. Hippocrates emphasised the influence of nature, rejected supernatural associations and initiated a humoral theory of disease that persisted for centuries.1 Not until Greek medicine spread through the Mediterranean did the medical colossus of the Roman era, Galen unite medical theory with practical therapeutics, including medicinal plants. As discussed in Chapter One, a materia medica that later dictated and directed western medical practice was systematised during this period by Theophrastus and Dioscorides and as Greek texts moved into Islamic states, Arab scholars and physicians added Persian, Indian and Arabian plants. By the second century AD, Latin translations of Greek teachings were moving to the West via Sicily and Spain.2 These early _herbals' were manuscripts that contained descriptions of medicinal plants and their uses. They guided British monks who were important providers of medical care between the fifth and tenth centuries.3 Monasteries were centres of learning and healing during this period and their gardens were precursors to physic gardens established by the great universities of Italy, Spain, France and 1 Many people during this period believed good health relied on maintaining a balance of four bodily constituents or humors; blood, phlem, black bile and yellow bile. These humors were thought to exist in equilibrium and in relation to external elements such as climate, seasons, celestial bodies as well as internal processes such as age and emotion. Ill health of body or mind reflected an imbalance of humors and could be consequently restored by addressing the imbalance. Roberta Bivins, Alternative Medicine: A History? (Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007), p. 9; G Foster and B. Anderson, Medical Anthropology (New York: John Wiley and Sons, 1978), pp. 51-66; Vivian Nutton, 'Humoralism', in Companion Encyclopedia of the History of Medicine, Vol. I, ed. by W. F. Bynum and Roy Porter (London: Routlege, 1993), pp. 281-292. 2 These include Abu Ali al Husayn b. 'Abd Allah b. Sina (980-1037) - the first Islamic physician to advocate experimentation and observation of medical applications and author of The Canon of Medicine. Anna Parvord, The Naming of Names: The Search for Order in the World of Plants (London: Bloomsbury Publishing, 2005), p. 100. 3 Agnes Arber, Herbals: Their Origin and Evolution, 2nd edn (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1938), pp. 1-13. 174 England as they first offered medical degrees.4 Although the advent of medical education created a form of medical hierarchy, with educated physicians at the top and lay healers at the bottom, this chapter argues that the use of medicinal plants did not vary greatly between the educated and uneducated. Indeed, western herbal knowledge arose not only from the foundations described above, but also from the historic use of medicinal plants by lay healers around the world.5 The link between herbalism and lay medical practices supported its popularity and appealed to colonists used to a system of self-care. Despite the production of herbals and later pharmacopeia, medico-botanical knowledge was not easily concealed or controlled by any particular group. Before the advent of biochemical analysis, information that guided the use of medicinal plants was produced largely through experimentation and experience. Access to plants was the only criterion governing their use, and as educated physicians pursued alternative forms of treatment, lay healers were arguably the leaders in medico-botanical experiments and applications. Many doctors secured a living by subscribing to popular beliefs and practices, theories that inadvertently influenced the direction of medicine. Physicians such as Theophrastus Philippus Aureolus Bombastus von Hohenheim, otherwise known as Paracelsus, incorporated lay ideas of health and wellness into their practices and produced literature that was a combination of folk and paid practice.6 Herbal manuals, in particular, epitomised this approach. 4 Peter J. Bowler, The Norton History of the Environmental Sciences (New York: W. W. Norton, 1993), p. 56. 5 Other aspects of medical care, apart from the use of medicinal plants, differed considerably between educated physicians and lay healers. Theophratus Phillipus Aureolus Bombastus von Hohenheim (c. 1493-1542), commonly known as Paracelsus, popularised chemical theories of disease championing inorganic remedies such as mercury and salt and incorporating these with esoteric doctrines. He also promoted lay ideas of health and wellness, 'lapping up the lore he heard from peasants'. Roy Porter, The Greatest Benefit to Mankind: A Medical History of Humanity from Antiquity to the Present (London: Harper Collins Publisher, 1999), pp. 201-202; See also, Frans'oise Loux, 'Folk Medicine', in Companion Encyclopedia of the History of Medicine, Vol. I, ed. by W. F. Bynum and Roy Porter (London: Routlege, 1993), pp. 661-676. 6 Porter, pp. 201-202. 175 Hundreds of herbals were produced during the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries.7 Many were reproductions of earlier texts with the introduction of new _discoveries' or novel plants uncovered during the course of colonisation and exploration.8 These books proved to be popular guides for practitioners as well as apothecaries and herb sellers.9 They inadvertently united lay healers with educated practitioners, combining so-called folk lore with aspects of western medical education and imperial investigations.10 Herbal remedies and indeed herbalism has shared an association with domestic and lay healers ever since, an association perpetuated and encouraged by commercial herbalists. An era of European botanical exploration and investigation, explored in Chapter One, further encouraged and supported a focus on medico-botanical enquiry. As the commodification of medicine encouraged enterprise and competition, medical men such as John Gerard focused their attention on the study of medicinal plants, perpetuating the use and importance of plants as medicine.11 An elected and active member of the Court of Assistants of the Barber-Surgeons' Company, and _herbarist' in gardens belonging to Lord Burleigh, Gerard gathered and received medicinal plants from all around the world, making use of an already extensive network of plant exchange. In 1597, he produced The Herball or Generall History of Plantes, a comprehensive and extensively illustrated volume of medicinal plants.12 7 Parvord, 2005; Arber, 1938; Wilfrid Blunt and Sandra Raphael, The Illustrated Herbal (London: Francis Lincoln Publishers, 1979). 8 For example, an American herbal for Spanish Roman Catholic Cardinal Francisco de Mendoza, (1508-1566) by Aztec scholar Martin de la Cruz, and Coloquios dos Simples, e Drogas he Cousas Medicinais da India (Dialogues about Simples and Drugs and Medical Matters from India) by Garcia D'Orta from the Portuguese State of India. 9 Blunt and Raphael, pp. 12-32. 10 Agnes Arbor, in her analysis of the origin and evolution western herbals, illustrates clearly how herbal manuscripts from the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries combined aspects of so-called folk lore with the learning's and teachings of educated physicians and practicing herbalists. See Arbor, pp. 138-163. 11 Although Gerard's authority and reputation is disparaged by historian Agnes Arbor, his book indisputably remained an important and influential herbal for centuries with editions still being produced in the 1960s. Arbor, pp. 129-135. 12 Marcus Woodward, Gerard's Herball: The Essence Thereof Distilled by Marcus Woodward from the Edition of T. H. Johnson, 1636 (London: Spring Books, 1964), p. xv. 176 In Gerard's herbal, plants are described as virtuous gifts of God, more accessible and safer than the inorganic medicines popular during this time. As the excerpt below illustrates, Gerard regarded plants as infinitely safer and more effective than those prescribed by physicians. This view persisted for centuries and became a point of difference for herbalists such as New Zealand's James Neil, and their trade. and yet this dusty mettall, or excrement of the earth (which was first deeply buried least it should be an eie-sore to grieve the corrupt heart of man) by forcible entry made into the bowels of earth, is rather snatched at of man to his owne destruction, than directly sent of God to the comfort of this life....Contrariwise, in the expert knowledge of herbes, what pleasure still renewed with variety? What small expense? What security? And yet what an apt and ordinary manes to conduct man to that most desired benefit of health? 13 During the sixteenth century, medical knowledge became increasingly organised and specialised. Herbalism slowly emerged as a distinct medical practice driven largely by people's resistance to medical authority and by the continued need for an alternative to educated physicians. Herbalists became increasingly associated with a political perspective that resisted the authority of medical institutes and supported the use of lay knowledge and _folk lore'. As Section Two of this chapter reveals, this resistance was reconfigured during the nineteenth century by American, British and colonial herbalists in response to similar attempts to control and regulate medical practice organisations such as British and American medical associations. The formation of medical guilds and associations in Britain and Europe afforded privileges to some practitioners and created controls and standards that affected the use of medicinal plants. In 1512 in London, Henry VIII passed an Act requiring all who practiced medicine - _a great multitude of ignorant persons' - to sit an exam set by the Bishop of London or Dean of St. Paul's Cathedral.14 Definite divisions were drawn between surgeons, physicians, apothecaries and barbers as the jostle for medical control ensued. London's College of Physicians 13 Woodward, p. 4. 14 Benjamin Woolley, The Herbalist: Nicholas Culpeper and the Fight for Medical Freedom (London: Harper Collins Publishers, 2005), p. 35. 177 accused the Company of Barbers and Guild of Surgeons of _small cunning' and deemed their practice dubious through the Quacks' Charter of 1543.15 Physicians who held elite positions and could afford a medical education chastised those who could not. Those who practiced without qualifications criticized the growing elitism of the medical faculty.16 Educated physicians were accused of concealing medical knowledge and medico-botanical knowledge became a currency in the fight for medical control, used by the uneducated or subjugated to resist the growing authority of doctors. Nicholas Culpeper was among those who resented medical institutions such as the College of Physicians, claiming that their organisation and controls made medical care unavailable to London's poor.17 His life and works contributed to the definition of herbalism, not as a component of British medicine, but as a separate medical practice. The resistance and antagonism that motivated Culpeper became a distinct feature of the practice adopted by nineteenth-century herbalists including colonists, John Broadbent in Australia and James Neil in New Zealand.18 As a child, Culpeper spent much of his time in the scullery surrounded by the company of women where he learned to use medicinal plants.19 These beginnings presumably encouraged Culpeper's respect for domestic medical practices. The acceptance and support of these became another defining feature of herbalism, one that persisted into the nineteenth century and appealed in colonial societies such as New Zealand. Sent to Cambridge for an education at age sixteen, Culpeper eventually landed in London apprenticed to an apothecary, Simon White. There, Culpeper extended his knowledge of herbs as he fought against the College of Physicians and their attempts to control apothecaries and their trade. 15 Woolley, p. 38. 16 Porter, pp. 209-215. 17 Benjamin Woolley, Heal Thyself: Nicholas Culpeper and the Seventeenth-Century Struggle to Bring Medicine to the People (London: Harper Collins, 2004); Graham Tobyn, Culpeper's Medicine: A Practice of Western Holistic Medicine New Edition (London: Singing Dragon, 2013).