Ewudzie, Assistant Regional Officer O.A. Denton, Contact Person Nigeria A.B. Karim, Contact Person Sierra Leone Regional Office (francophone) West Africa, Burkina Faso A. Traore, Regional Officer C. Kouame, Contact Person Cote d'Ivoire F. Assogba-Komlan, Contact Person Benin H. Sanou, Contact Person Mali L. Mahamane, Contact Person Niger Country Office France M. Chauvet, Technical Editor French C. Dorthe, Country Officer Country Office United Kingdom O. Grace, Country Officer Network Office Africa, Kenya E.A. Omino, Head D.J. Borus, Dissemination Officer J. Chege, Database Officer B. Owuor, Secretary D. Laur, Office Assistant Network Office Europe, Netherlands J.S. Siemonsma, Head R.H.M.J. Lemmens, General Editor L.P.A. Oyen, General Editor E.J. Bertrums, Databank Manager C.H. Bosch, Editor/Dissemination Officer M. Brink, Editor G.H. Schmelzer, Editor/Dissemination Officer 15 Introduction Choice of species PROTA 11(1): 'Medicinal plants 1' is the first volume of 4 describing the wild, and sometimes cultivated, plant species of tropical Africa traditionally used in local medicine. Some of these plants are not only used for human health care, but are also applied as veterinary medicine or as poisonous plants used as pesticide, fish poison or dart poison, and narcotic plants. Most species have several other, secondary, uses. PROTA normally assigns one primary use and if relevant, one or more secon- dary uses to all plant species used in Africa. For instance, the primary use of Voacanga africana Stapf is as a medicinal plant, and thus it is treated in PROTA 11, but it has several secondary uses, e.g. the branches are used in construction and to make musical instruments, the wood is used for firewood, good fibre for rope and yarn can be obtained from the bark and the fruits are considered edible. In Tanza- nia Voacanga africana is planted for ornamental purposes because of its sweet- scented white flowers. Pharmaceutical companies in Europe extract tabersonine from the seeds, which is readily converted into vincamine, a compound widely used in medicines for geriatric patients. Seed extracts are also used in medicines to t reat heart diseases, to lower blood pressure and to treat cancer. Also Carissa spinarum L. (synonym: Carissa edulis (Forssk.) Vahl) is quite important as a medicinal plant, but its primary use is as a fruit, and consequently it is described in PROTA 6: 'Fruits'. The remaining 'primary use' medicinal plants will be included in tomes 11(2) to 11(4). In the final tome 11(4), the 'secondary use' medicinal plants will be listed as 'Medicinal plants with other primary use' and referred to other Handbook volumes. In PROTA 11(1), one species is treated which, in addition to the primary use as me- dicinal plant, also has another primary use and consequently will be described in 2 commodity groups. This species is Jatropha curcas L. (also in PROTA 14: 'Vegetable oils'). In this volume the medicinal plant species of several important medicinal plant- containing families are treated, the largest families being Apocynaceae, Aspho- delaceae, Caesalpiniaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Loganiaceae, Menispermaceae and So- lanaceae as well as 19 other families with few but important medicinal plants. In PROTA 11(1): 'Medicinal plants 1' comprehensive descriptions are given of 134 important medicinal plant species. These major medicinal plants comprise most wild species, but also several cultivated or partly domesticated species. The accounts are presented in a detailed format and illustrated with a line drawing and a distri- bution map. In addition, accounts of 272 medicinal plants of minor importance are given. Because information on these species is often scanty, these accounts are in a simplified format and usually do not include a drawing or map. For another 488 spe- cies the medicinal information was too scarce to justify an individual treatment and they have only been mentioned in the accounts of related species. Each account will highlight traditional and modern uses, phytochemical and pharmacological proper- ties, will make identification of useful species easier and more reliable, will describe 16 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 most convenient collection (harvest), cultivation and application methods, and will indicate the research and conservation status of the plants. About two third of the plant species used in tropical Africa have some documented medicinal use, but the actual number is probably higher. For PROTA 11, however, only species have been chosen for which proof was found in the literature on African useful plants that they actually are or have been used as a medicinal plant. Such literature, however, is scarce, often old and usually poor in details about the use. Only species for which at least a practical application is known have been consid- ered for treatment. This means that species mentioned in the literature but only with remarks such as 'the plant is medicinally used' or 'the roots are medicinally used' have not been included. In Sub-Saharan Africa, traditional medicine has been for centuries and still is the most affordable and accessible health care system. Medicinal plants contribute sig- nificantly to rural livelihoods of the people and social equilibrium in Africa. The de- mand of local and international markets is continuously growing, as well as bio- prospecting activities searching for sources of news drugs. As a result of their widely and unsustainable use, increasing economic importance, and environmental factors, medicinal plant resources are diminishing at an alarm- ing rate. Besides, the loss of indigenous knowledge on medicinal plants and tradi- tional medicine is increasing, especially in Africa, as a result of death of the older people who have traditionally been the custodians of this knowledge, and the socio- cultural transformation of societies. This situation calls for policies and research programmes, both at national and international levels, for conservation and sus- tainable use of medicinal plants, as well as for the protection of indigenous commu- nities' rights over the use of their traditional knowledge. Plant names Family: Apart from the classic family name, the family name in accordance with the Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification is also given where it differs from the classic name. Synonyms: Only the most commonly used synonyms and those that may cause con- fusion are mentioned. Vernacular names: Only names in official languages of regional importance in Africa are included: English, French, Portuguese and Swahili. It is beyond the scope of PROTA to give an extensive account of the names of a species in all languages spo- ken in its area of distribution. Checking names would require extensive fieldwork by specialists. Although regional forms of Arabic are spoken in several countries in Af- rica, the number of African plant species that have a name in written, classical Ara- bic is limited. Arabic names are therefore omitted. Names of plant products are mentioned under the heading 'Uses'. Origin and geographic distribution To avoid long lists of countries in the text, a distribution map is added for major species. The map indicates in which countries a species has been recorded, either wild or planted. For many species, however, these maps are incomplete because they are prepared on the basis of published information, the quantity and quality of INTRODUCTION 17 which varies greatly from species to species. This is especially the case for wild spe- cies which are not or incompletely covered by the regional African floras, and for cultivated species which are only planted on a small scale (e.g. in home gardens). For some countries (e.g. Central African Republic, Chad, Sudan, Angola) there is comparatively little information in the literature. Sometimes they are not covered by recent regional or national floras and although species may be present there, this cannot be demonstrated or confirmed. Propert ies The phytochemistry of the different plant parts is given, with emphasis on the bio- active compounds. Where possible, a link is made between the traditional uses of a plant part, the active compounds isolated from it and pharmacological tests confirm- ing or not confirming the activity of these active compounds, or of the plant extracts containing active compounds. Descript ion A morphological characterization of the species is given. The description is in 'tele- gram' style and uses botanical terms. Providing a description for the general public is difficult as more generally understood terms often lack the accuracy required in a botanical description. A line drawing is added for all major and some lesser-known species to complement and visualize the description. Management Descriptions of husbandry methods including fertilizer application, irrigation, and pest and disease control measures are given under 'Management' and under 'Dis- eases and pests'. These reflect actual practices or generalized recommendations, opt- ing for a broad overview but without detailed recommendations adapted to the widely varying local conditions encountered by farmers. Recommendations on chemical control of pests and diseases are merely indicative and local regulations should be given precedence. PROTA will participate in the preparation of derived materials for extension and education, for which the texts in this volume provide a basis, but to which specific local information will be added. Genetic resources The genetic diversity of many plant species in Africa is being eroded, sometimes at an alarming rate, as a consequence of habitat destruction and overexploitation. The replacement of landraces of cultivated species by modern cultivars marketed by seed companies is another cause of genetic erosion. Reviews are given of possible threats for plant species and of the diversity within species and reference is made to the IUCN red list of threatened species where relevant. Information on ex-situ germ- plasm collections is mostly extracted from publications of Bioversity International (formerly the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute - IPGRI). 18 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1