Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersEdited by:Valentina Echeverria Moran,Bay Pines VA Healthcare System,United StatesReviewed by:Helen Skaltsa,National and Kapodistrian University ofAthens, GreeceFrancois Chassagne,Emory University, United States*Correspondence:Damaris Silveiradamaris@unb.brJose Maria Prieto-GarciaJ.M.PrietoGarcia@ljmu.ac.ukMichael Heinrichm.heinrich@ucl.ac.uk+These authors have contributedequally to this workSpecialty section:This article was submitted toEthnopharmacology,a section of the journalFrontiers in PharmacologyReceived: 09 July 2020Accepted: 28 August 2020Published: 23 September 2020Citation:Silveira D, Prieto-Garcia JM, Boylan F,Estrada O, Fonseca-Bazzo YM,Jamal CM, Magalhaes PO, Pereira EO,Tomczyk M and Heinrich M (2020)COVID-19: Is There Evidence forthe Use of Herbal Medicines asAdjuvant Symptomatic Therapy?.Front. Pharmacol. 11:581840.doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.581840REVIEWpublished: 23 September 2020doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.581840COVID-19: Is There Evidence for theUse of Herbal Medicines as AdjuvantSymptomatic Therapy?Damaris Silveira1*+, Jose Maria Prieto-Garcia2*+, Fabio Boylan3, Omar Estrada4,Yris Maria Fonseca-Bazzo1, Claudia Masrouah Jamal5, Perola Oliveira Magalhaes1,Edson Oliveira Pereira1, Michal Tomczyk6 and Michael Heinrich7*+1 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, Brazil, 2 School of Pharmacy andBiomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 3 School of Pharmacy andPharmaceutical Sciences and Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 4 Biophysics andBiochemistry Center, Venezuelan Institute of Scientific Research, Caracas, Venezuela, 5 Center of Health Sciences, FederalUniversity of Espirito Santo, Vitoria, Brazil, 6 Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,7 Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy, School of Pharmacy, University College of London, London, United KingdomBackground: Current recommendations for the self-management of SARS-Cov-2disease (COVID-19) include self-isolation, rest, hydration, and the use of NSAID in caseof high fever only. It is expected that many patients will add other symptomatic/adjuvanttreatments, such as herbal medicines.Aims: To provide a benefits/risks assessment of selected herbal medicines traditionallyindicated for "respiratory diseases"within the current frame of the COVID-19 pandemic asan adjuvant treatment.Method: The plant selection was primarily based on species listed by the WHO and EMA,but some other herbal remedies were considered due to their widespread use in respiratoryconditions. Preclinical and clinical data on their efficacy and safety were collected fromauthoritative sources. The target population were adults with early and mild flu symptomswithout underlying conditions. These were evaluated according to a modified PrOACT-URLmethod with paracetamol, ibuprofen, and codeine as reference drugs. The benefits/risksbalance of the treatments was classified as positive, promising, negative, and unknown.Results: A total of 39 herbal medicines were identified as very likely to appeal to theCOVID-19 patient. According to our method, the benefits/risks assessment of the herbalmedicines was found to be positive in 5 cases (Althaea officinalis, Commiphora molmol,Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hedera helix, and Sambucus nigra), promising in 12 cases (Alliumsativum, Andrographis paniculata, Echinacea angustifolia, Echinacea purpurea,Eucalyptus globulus essential oil, Justicia pectoralis, Magnolia officinalis, Mikaniaglomerata, Pelargonium sidoides, Pimpinella anisum, Salix sp, Zingiber officinale), andunknown for the rest. On the same grounds, only ibuprofen resulted promising, but wecould not find compelling evidence to endorse the use of paracetamol and/or codeine.Conclusions: Our work suggests that several herbal medicines have safety marginssuperior to those of reference drugs and enough levels of evidence to start a clinicalin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5818401Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersdiscussion about their potential use as adjuvants in the treatment of early/mild common fluin otherwise healthy adults within the context of COVID-19. While these herbal medicineswill not cure or prevent the flu, they may both improve general patient well-being and offerthem an opportunity to personalize the therapeutic approaches.Keywords: herbal medicine, coronavirus (2019-nCoV), COVID-19, benefit/risk assessment, respiratory diseasesINTRODUCTIONThe outbreak of Coronavirus SARS-Cov-2 disease (COVID-19)in Wuhan (China) in late 2019 and its Worldwide spread hascaused hundreds of thousands of deaths so far. As of July 2020,the disease seems to be mostly affecting Europe and theAmericas. Most people infected with the COVID-19 virus willexperience mild to moderate respiratory illness and recoverwithout requiring special treatment. Older people and thosewith underlying medical problems such as cardiovasculardisease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer aremore likely to develop serious illness (WHO, 2020a). Teensand adults without underlying medical conditions are asked toself-manage their symptoms in isolation with a minimum ofdrugs (paracetamol, if fever is high) and lifestyle adjustments(increased rest and hydration). However, most of the currentguidelines do not specifically advise on how to treat cough, one ofthe main symptoms, which, apart from being very debilitating,contributes to the spread of the virus.There is not yet any evidence-based specific therapy forCOVID-19, and the real efficacy and safety of current therapeuticapproaches will need further scrutiny when enough multi-siteclinical data become available. The examples of ibuprofen andhydroxychloroquine illustrate how clinical protocols may includeand/or exclude drugs in their therapeutic approaches based onlimited evidence (Kim et al., 2020; Sodhi and Etminan, 2020;Taccone et al., 2020; Torjesen, 2020). Predictably, patients willlargely try to increase their well-being at least by self-administeringcough suppressing medication (natural or not) plus naturalmedication or supplements to combat cold/flu symptoms. Theseare readily accessible both in retail commerce and communitypharmacies. InEurope, there are severalherbalmedicines registeredunder the European Directive 24/2004 for self-prescription (EU,2004). Their labeling establishes that these medicines are indicatedfor the treatment of common cold and flu symptoms based ontraditional use only.Weagree in thatCOVID-19 isnot the commonflu, but theWHO definition is clear in that it is a mild, self-limitingcondition and, therefore, fitting the boundaries of self-prescription,moreover if the patients have not been tested for the virus (WHO,2020a). In that sense, there is a need to clarify the real potential andsafety profile of herbalmedicines to scientifically substantiate futurerecommendations on their benefits and risks of use them.Therefore, the impetus of this work is twofold. First, it intendsto highlight which species may provide a more rationalphytotherapeutic choice to the disease and second to showcasewhich plants can be a clinically compatible option as adjuvanttherapy for the self-management of common cold/flu symptoms byin.org 2otherwise healthy adults within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.Clinical BackgroundEarly COVID-19 symptoms include fever, dry cough, anddyspnea, among other similar ones to other viral respiratorydiseases such as common flu (Rothan and Byrareddy, 2020).Therefore, the diagnosis of COVID-19 based on anamnesisremains problematic. In general, the incubation period isaround 15 days, but the reported range is 0 to 24 days (Baiet al., 2020). SARS-Cov-2 presents a strong transmission capacity(Zheng et al., 2020). To complicate matters further, there is asignificant number of asymptomatic patients (up to 60%) whounknowingly contribute to the spread of the disease (Gao et al.,2020; Kronbichler et al., 2020).The clinical spectrum of the infection goes from mild upperrespiratory tract illness to the so-called 'severe acute respiratorysyndrome': respiratory failure, shock, and multiple organ failure(Bai et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020); and may be accompanied byfatigue, headache, diarrhea, and lymphopenia (Rothan andByrareddy, 2020), and high incidence of cardiovascularsymptoms (Zheng et al., 2020). Older people and those withunderlying medical problems such as cardiovascular disease,diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer are morelikely to develop severe illness (WHO, 2020a).The precise pathology of the disease is not yet clear, but seemsto include a systemic pro-inflammatory response, inducinghemodynamic changes and, consequently, a predisposition toischemia and thrombosis (Tang et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020;Zhou et al., 2020). A hallmark of the disease is the "cytokinestorm", a massive cytokine and chemokine release due to anuncontrolled dysregulation of the host immune defense thatcauses loss of function of multiple organs (Catanzaro et al., 2020).Preventative and Therapeutic ApproachesDue to the emergence of the propagation of the disease, HealthSystems have become overloaded, even having sufficient diagnosticcapacity and hospital facilities to handle such an outbreak. In themost vulnerable regions, the COVID-19 epidemic effectivelyparalyzes health systems at the expense of primary health care(Velavan and Meyer, 2020). Some measures, such as lock-down ofcommunities, social distancing, and quarantine-type for thosesuspected to be infected can, at least in part, slow the COVID-19spread (Heymann and Shindo, 2020) and, so, enable the healthsystems to cope. However, these measures are palliative, and peopletend to ignore them after a few days of isolation, mainly those indisadvantaged and vulnerable communities.September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyImportantly, at this stage, we are starting to build up anevidence-base for the best strategy to treat, mitigate, andprevent the diseases. Currently, none of the approaches used isevidence-based.In the worldwide search for a response to the COVID-19pandemic, news about "alternative remedies against COVID"have been disseminated (ANSES, 2020; Nordling, 2020). As ofJuly 2020, the evidence-base for such treatments is often limitedif not non-existent. However, often strong, unsubstantiatedclaims are made about the pros and cons of herbal medicines,which will also result both in false hopes or strong fears of thoseat risk or ill with COVID-19 (Brennen et al., 2020;Guastalegname and Vallone, 2020; Thorp, 2020).While some preparations have been claimed to be specificallyactive, some commonly used medicinal plants are assessed here,especially those on the WHO list of selected medicinal plants, asadjuvant treatments. For example, Hensel et al. (2020), in theirrecent work, state that extracts prepared with Echinacea species(Asteraceae) have an important role with the immune systemdue to their alkylamide interacting with the cannabinoidreceptors (Hensel et al., 2020). Additionally, curcumin, themain constituent in Curcuma longa L. (Zingiberaceae), issuggested as a potential clinical option for the treatment ofSARS-CoV-2 infection, due to its action in several steps of aviral infection such as protease inhibition, cellular signallingpathways modulation, among others (Zahedipour et al., 2020)In another paper (Panyod et al., 2020), 11 medicinal plantswere discussed concerning their in vitro antiviral activity usingdifferent models. Two species (Allium sativum L. and Zingiberofficinale Roscoe) mentioned in this study that had their in vitropotential and immune capacity assessed, were also included inour study. Moreover, in an elegant evidence-based analysis,eighteen phytotherapeutic preparations were mentioned ashaving some role in the clinical management of viralrespiratory diseases, showing different levels of immunologicalresponse (Portella et al., 2020). Four plants mentioned in thatreport [Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench, Glycyrrhiza glabra L.,Sambucus nigra L., and Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi] were alsoincluded in our study.The rationale used in our study was to include, mostly, speciesknown in the Americas and Europe and those already morewidely available for the management of respiratory conditions(Blumenthal, 2003; Edwards et al., 2015; Anheyer et al., 2018;Langeder et al., 2020), mainly regarding the symptoms (cough,pain, fever). We recognize that patients suffering from COVID-19 are likely to seek such herbal medications. Complementingother papers published on medicinal plants and their potential tobe used for COVID-19, we focused on the therapeutic potentialof 39 species, the limitations for their use, and their possible risks.It must be strongly emphasized that this is not an assessment ofany mainline treatment for COVID-19 with such herbalmedicines. The focus is on assessing their potential as adjuvanttherapies to COVID-19. Although the listed herbal drugsincluded herein have been used for a long time, the evidencelevel of their action in the relief of mild respiratory symptomsvaries, and they are pointed out here.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 3The Frame of the Problem* Apart from a handful of antiviral drugs with limited efficacy,there is only symptomatic therapy for influenza. * There is no specific therapy for COVID-19. * There are several herbal medicines recognized by variousHealth Authorities for the treatment of flu, its symptoms, andother respiratory disorders. * Health authorities in Europe and the Americas have warnedthe population against taking any natural/herbal medicines/supplements. They sustain this advice on theoretical potentialeffects on the immune system due to unspecific anti-inflammatory effects in early stages, facilitating the infectionas well as potential immunostimulation, contributing to theaggravation of the "cytokines storm". As of today, there is noclinical backup for such strong recommendations other thantrying to prevent unspecific herb-drug interactions should thepatient need emergency care. * There is a significant OTC use for these herbal medicines,and a realistic prospect is that patients will self-administerthem to increase their well-being.AimsTo apply a decision-making framework to provide a benefits/risks assessment for selected herbal medicines traditionallyindicated for "respiratory diseases" within the current frame ofthe COVID-19 pandemic.METHODSFor a treatment to be recommended as adjuvant therapy forrespiratory diseases in the context of COVID-19, we heredetermine that the treatment is effective and that its expectedbenefits outweigh its potential risks to patients. Briefly, thisassessment is informed by the body of evidence about eachtreatment's safety and efficacy retrieved in a literature search. Thisassessment is also informed by a number of other factors, includingthe severity of the underlying condition and how well patients'medical needs are addressed by currently available therapies("reference drugs"). The decision also reflects current applicablelaws, regulations, and healthcare recommendations, taking intoconsideration the uncertainty associated with COVID-19.Selection of Herbal MedicinesA search was conducted, considering herbal medicines traditionallyused to relieve cold and flu symptoms. The criterion used to limitthe investigation, and to grant minimal evidence of efficacy was thatthe species, linked to the chosen indications, must be listed at least inone of the following organizations: World Health OrganizationMonographs (WHO); European Medicines Agency (EMA);European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy; ANVISA(Brazilian Pharmacopoea, Brazilian Pharmacopoea HerbalMedicines Formulary, Brazilian Pharmacopoea Herbal MedicinesMementum), Ministry of Health of Chile, Ministry of Health ofSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyCuba, Ministry of Health of Colombia, and Government of Canada.Several South American Countries use the Brazilian Pharmacopeiadocuments as a reference, so they are also covered within thissearch. Based on these documents, a list of target species wasprepared to establish a search of clinical evidence for the givenindication. We refer to these as "herbal medicines" as they areendorsed by Scientific and/or Regulatory committees.We also included some species which are not listed inmonographs based on their significant widespread use in theself-management of respiratory diseases. Some of them are alsolinked to food uses. We refer to these as "herbal remedies".We did not consider species that have given rise to majorsafety concerns (such as Ephedra sp.) and species which are onlyindicated for relieving mucous phlegm. Furthermore, we do notassess multi-herbal preparations.Decision-Making FrameworkTo assist our decision-making and/or the benefits/risksassessment of herbal medicines, we adopted some of theprocedures described in many qualitative or semi-quantitativeguidelines to conduct a benefit-risk assessment (PROTECT,2020). They consist of a step-by-step approach to follow forgood decision-making practice and to increase transparency.Descriptive frameworks are usually general, and most of theFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 4time, reiterate common sense.