Iridoid and secoiridoid glucosides andester derivatives (Rastrelli et al., 1998); essential oil (thymol,Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 23limonene, carvacrol, as the major components) (Compadre et al.,1987; Uribe-Hernandez et al., 1992); lipids (esterols) andflavonoids (e.g., pinocembrin, luteolin, apigenin, quercetin andderivatives) (Lin et al., 2007; Arias et al., 2020); rosmarinic acid(Compadre et al., 1987).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1-2 g of dried leaves orstem in 150 ml of water (Dominguez et al., 1989).Preclinical evidence. This species has not been experimentallyproven for respiratory disease. Flavonoid and terpenoid fractionsfrom Lippia genus have demonstrated a significant inhibitoryeffect on ROS and NO production and mitochondrial activity inLPS-induced inflammation in RAW 264.7 macrophage cells.Additionally, these fractions exhibited non-selective inhibitionsagainst the activity of the cyclooxygenases COX-1 and COX-2(Leyva-Lopez et al., 2016).Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. In the United States, the regulatory status "generallyrecognized as safe" has been accorded to Mexican oregano(GRAS 2827). Therefore, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None.Overall assessment. Lippia graveolens profile and chemistry fitas an anti-inflammatory therapy in the context of upperrespiratory affections. Therefore, this herbal medicine could beuseful in the relief of respiratory symptoms through exerting ananti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidence is Low. Thisherbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Nigella sativa L. - Ranunculaceae (Seeds)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Black seedsare globally known as a spice and as such as a food item. InArabic medicine, they have very high status as an herbalmedicine used for a wide range of diseases. In the context ofCOVID-19, the relevant uses are for asthma and in the moregeneral management of inflammatory conditions. In manyArabic countries, black seed is used for asthma and cough,among many other uses, especially for gastrointestinal diseases(like abdominal pain, stomach ache, colic), rheumatism, skindiseases (Lebling and Pepperdine, 2006).Chemical composition. Relevant secondary metabolites in theseed include large quantities of fixed oil (30%-45%; especiallylinoleic and oleic acids), various triterpenoids, includingsaponins; essential oil, with a relatively high concentration ofthymoquinone (2-isopropyl-5-methyl-1,4-benzoquinone),which is also a key therapeutically relevant of the fixed oil,where it can be found in concentrations varying from 3.5 to 8.7mg/g of fixed oil (Lutterodt et al., 2010). Thymoquinone is notfound in relevant concentrations in aqueous preparations.Posology. Capsules containing fatty oil with a defined amountof thymoquinone are likely to be the best option. Herbal teas andother hydrophilic preparations seem less likely to have benefits,and potentially the essential oil may offer some relief.Preclinical evidence. In rats, a chemically not wellcharacterized 50% ethanol extract (1:4) of chopped N. sativaseeds (extraction at room temperature for 72 h) showedameliorating effects on lung inflammation and oxidative stressinduced by lipopolysaccharide. In general, many study focus onSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapythe effects of N. sativa preparations (Yimer et al., 2019), butmostly these are of highly inadequate scientific quality.Clinical evidence. Some small studies demonstrate clinicalbenefits in asthma patients. In a randomized, double-blind,placebo-controlled trial supplementation of standard therapy withsoft gel capsules of cold-pressed N. sativa oil (0.7% thymoquinone)improved asthma control with a trend in pulmonary functionimprovement. Two of the five subscores (impact of asthma onwork, school, or at home and shortness of breath and the overallscore) showed a significant improvement. The other three were notsignificantly improved.At the sametime, a remarkablenormalizationof blood eosinophilia count was observed (Koshak et al., 2017). Therelease of IL-2, IL-6, and PGE2 in T-lymphocytes, as well as IL-6 andPGE2 inmonocytes,were suppressed.Overall, the clinical evidence isMedium for asthma.Safety. As a commonly used food item, it can be considered tobe intrinsically safe. However, this does not apply to thelipophilic extracts discussed above. Here further evidence isessential. Insufficient evidence is available in the context ofuses as an adjuvant medication (Nguyen et al., 2019). Overall,safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Again, there is noevidence for specific therapeutic benefits, and it is important tocommunicate this to potential users. There is insufficientevidence for use during pregnancy and while breastfeeding.Overall assessment. Black seed may be useful in the relief ofrespiratory symptoms mainly associated with the severe coughexperienced, and it may reduce inflammatory parameters. Theclinical evidence is very limited, focusing on asthma. A particularconcern, in this case, are themanywell-intendedbut very low-qualitystudies and the broad range of claims they try to support,making anyassessmentproblematic.Theclinical evidence isMedium.Thisherbalmedicine is considered presenting High safety.Plectranthus amboinicus Lour. - Lamiaceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Plectranthusamboinicus has been used in asthma and to relieve cold,headache, and fever (Menendez Castillo and Pavon Gonzalez,1999; Duke et al., 2002).Chemical composition. Essential oil (thymol and carvacrol asthe major components) (Pino et al., 1990; Arumugam et al.,2016); phenolic compounds (e.g., rosmarinic, caffeic, gallic andp-coumaric acids; quercetin derivatives; luteolin) (Brieskorn andRiedel, 1977b; Arumugam et al., 2016), terpenoids and steroids(e.g., b-sitosterol, a-amyrin, stigmasterol) (Brieskorn and Riedel,1977a; Risch et al., 2012).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3-5 g of fresh leaves in150 ml, as an infusion, up to three times daily (Albornoz, 1993;Matos et al., 2001).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease. Aqueous andethanolic extracts of P. amboinicus present in vitro anti-inflammatory activity (Devi and Periyanayagam, 2009;Ravikumar et al., 2009; Janakiraman and Somasundaram, 2014).The active constituents of P. amboinicus present inhibitory effectson pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b(Yashaswini and Vasundhara, 2011).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 24Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. No toxicity reported at the indicated dose (Albornoz,1993; Matos et al., 2001). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The use iscontraindicated for hypersensitivity to the active substance.Children, under 30 months of age, should not use this plant dueto thymol containing preparations, can induce laryngospasm (seeThymus vulgaris).Overall assessment. Plectranthus amboinicus profile andchemistry fit as an anti-inflammatory therapy in the context ofupper respiratory affections and could be useful in the relief ofrespiratory disease through exerting an anti-inflammatory effecton the respiratory tract and in the treatment of fever. The clinicalevidence is Low, but this herbal medicine is consideredpresenting High safety.DiscussionGeneral Discussion About the Position of InternationalHealth Organizations, National Authorities, andProfessional Bodies on the Use of Herbal MedicinesWithin the Context of COVID-19 DiseaseThe use of herbal medicines/food supplements to prevent, treat,mitigate, diagnose, or cure coronavirus disease 2019 has not beenconsistently addressed at a global level. China has been activelyexploring how to integrate traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)into western therapy since the SARS outbreak in 2003. Based onclinical results, the General Office of the National Health, and theOffice of the State Administration of Traditional ChineseMedicineencouraged the integration of herbal TCM and Western medicinein the treatment of respiratory complications in Coronavirusinfections with different prescriptions recommended in differentstages of disease (Leung, 2007). After SARS-CoV-2 diseaseoutbreak, a number of clinical trials with Traditional HerbalMedicines (THM) have been added to the body of evidence withsome favorable findings when compared to standard antiviraltherapy (Langeder et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2020;Rastogi et al., 2020).Therefore, it is not surprising that thousands of TCMpractitioners across China have been working along withregular medical doctors to control the COVID-19 disease. Theclinical data generated from tens of thousands of confirmed casesare being subjected to meta-analyses to ascertain their actualeffectiveness (Li et al., 2020). In the meantime, the Diagnosis andTreatment Protocol of COVID-19 by the National HealthCommission has already advised to integrate TCM in thetreatment of COVID-19 patients to effectively relievesymptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, myalgia, andfatigue, shorten the course of the disease, reduce theprobability of life-threatening complications (Xu et al., 2020).In India, the Ayurveda Practitioners are following suit byworking on setting clear protocols with a rationale consistent withtheir millenary system. The first line of defense recommended toearly-stage patients consists of the following herbal medicines:Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Myers (Menispermaceae), Zingiberofficinale Roscoe (Zingiberaceae), Curcuma longa L.(Zingiberaceae), Ocimum sanctum L. (Lamiaceae), GlycyrrhizaSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyglabra L. (Fabaceae), Adhatoda vasica Ness (Acanthaceae),(Acanthaceae), Andrographis paniculata (Burm.f.) (Acanthaceae),Swertia chirata Buch.-Ham. ex Wall. (Gentianaceae), Moringaoleifera Lam (Moringaceae), Triphala [a mixture of the driedfruits of Emblica officinalis Gaertn. (Phyllanthaceae), Terminaliabellirica (Gaertn.) Roxb. (Combretaceae), and Terminalia chebulaRetz. (Combretaceae)] and Trikatu [a complementary formula toTriphala, including Piper nigrum L. (Piperaceae), Piper longum L.(Piperaceae), andZ.officinale Roscoe] (Rastogi et al., 2020). Clinicalsettings and regulations of research on COVID-19 throughAyurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy systems have alreadybeen published by the Indian Ministry of Ayush (INDIA, 2020).However, in Western medicine, we are witnessing quite theopposite. Not only integration of herbal medicine is "out of thequestion" from an emergency clinical point of view, but authoritiesare also reluctant - if not discouraging - the self-prescription of anyproducts other than paracetamol in early stages of the disease. Themedia trying to get answers about the benefits of herbal medicinesturn tomedical expertswhousually cautionagainst theuse ofherbalmedicines in order to avoid any liabilities. Oftentimes, dismissingthe potential of herbal medicines to relieve early COVID-19symptoms is just an uncritical and legalist approach. Aninternational initiative from Brazilian Academic Consortium forIntegrative Health - CABSIn, TCIM Americas Network, and theLatin-American and Caribbean Center on Health SciencesInformation (BIREME/PAHO/WHO) is systematizing theavailable evidence about Traditional, Complementary andIntegrative Medicine (including herbal medicines) potentiallyuseful in the COVID-19 pandemic (Portella et al., 2020).Traditional herbal medicines are poorly or not regulated aslicensed/registered medicines in quite a few countries, includingthe USA, and therefore are considered "food," precluding anyhigh-level discussion on their potential contributions to humanhealth. Consequently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration(FDA) considers fraudulent to sell any herbal products withattached claims and has sent warning letters to companiesoffering herbal products such as teas, essential oils, andtinctures claiming to prevent, treat or cure the symptoms ofCOVID-19. It is also encouraging the public to report theunlawful sales of medicinal products on the Internet (FDA,2020). The North American public is receiving advice on theuse of herbal products from dedicated academic groups. One ofthem is the Andrew Weil Center for Integrative Medicine whichrecommends polyphenol-rich plants (chamomille, Chineseskullcap, licorice, onions, apples, tomatoes, oranges, nuts,berries, parsley, celery, turmeric root, and green tea) to reducethe risk of infection (Alschuler et al., 2020), but no detailedassessment is available.In Europe, Traditional Herbal Medicine Products (THMP)are regulated by the EMA as OTC medicinal products for therelief of mild, self-limiting conditions, including flu symptomsand cough. Surprisingly, there is not any overarching officialguidance with respect to the use of THMP in the context of thepandemic. In principle, THMP would not qualify as therapy forCOVID-19 symptoms as it is considered a severe life-threateningcondition. However, this disease is self-limiting in most of theFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 25patients and - in the absence of a positive result in a test -COVID-19 patients are just 'flu' patients and, as such, could self-medicate with THMP. Several herbal drugs here reviewed havebeen registered as THMP. EMA stresses in its guidelines tohealthcare professionals to report all "suspected side effects yourpatients experience while infected, regardless of the medicinesintended to treat the disease or pre-existing conditions. Suspectedside effects should be reported even if the medicine is notauthorized for use in COVID-19. When reporting a suspectedside effect in a patient, you should tell us of any other medicinesbeing taken around the same time, including non-prescriptionmedicines, herbal remedies, or contraceptives" (EMA, 2020).We have witnessed how, in different countries, the authoritieshave developed an array of tools both to inform and enforceguidelines: Italian police are acting at retail commerce level byseizing on the spot any products sold under fraudulent claims; theBrazilian Ministry of Health is fighting back any misleading claimswith a dedicated channel inWhatsApp (BRASIL, 2020). The case ofFrance is unique in that its health authorities have provided anextensive and detailed analysis of the potential interactions ofnatural products with either the disease or its clinical treatment(ANSES, 2020). Finally, many other countries lack the resources toeither reach out to the public in this specific matter or enforce anysignificant actions regarding to the sale of such products.The WHO regional office for Africa has issued a statementsupporting scientifically-driven traditional medicine as "a validapproach towards the treatment of the virus, as long as theirefficacy and safety are proven through rigorous clinical trials"(WHO, 2020b), in reaction to a self-proclaimed "COVID-19 herbalcure"promoted at highgovernmental levels inMadagascar under thename COVID Organics (CVO) (BBC, 2020; WHO, 2020b).The potential risks and public impact associated with anyadvice on this disease are huge, and understandably; so,Herbalists associations are more cautious than usual inpromoting herbal medicines in this context. In the UK, theNMHI just encourages its members to "integrate the herbaladvice they provide with any conventional treatment ormanagement strategies that are appropriate for their patients,and to observe the current infection control and managementguidelines formulated by the Department of Health" (NMHI,2020); and the College of Medicine actively recommends dietaryinterventions such as boosting immunity against coronavirus by'turning' to antioxidants and polyphenol-rich food (Dixon, 2020).General Discussion About the Efficacy ofReference Drugs and Herbal Medicines inthe Relief of Flu Symptoms in the Contextof COVID-19Despite the massive use of codeine, paracetamol, and ibuprofenfor the relief of respiratory diseases, the clinical body of evidencesupporting their use in flu is very low. These drugs are mostlyused based on medical experience and clinicians are familiar withtheir benefits/risks profiles. These drugs have very commontoxicities and their adverse effects are potentially dangerous inthe context of COVID-19 (Jozwiak-Bebenista and Nowak, 2014;Drugs.com, 2020a; Drugs.com, 2020b).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyIt is surprising the lack of clinical trials to substantiate the useof both paracetamol and ibuprofen in the treatment of cold/flusymptoms.