Overall, the clinical evidence is High for asthma.Safety. Patients affected by hypertension, kidney diseases,liver or cardiovascular disorders, or hypokalemia, should avoidG. glabra (Nazari et al., 2017). On the other hand, licorice iswidely used in food preparation and, therefore, short term usesseem of little concern in otherwise patients with no history ofmajor diseases. Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. In an in vitroexperiment, licorice ethanol extract inhibits CYP3A4 andCYP2D6 (Budzinski et al., 2000; Pandit et al., 2011).Overall assessment. Glycyrrhiza glabra is used for a long timeand can be useful in the relief of respiratory symptoms bySeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyexerting a soothing effect on the respiratory tract. The clinicalevidence can be considered as High. This herbal medicine safetycan be rated as High, although it should be avoided for somerisk groups.Hedera helix L. - Araliaceae (Leaves)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Hedera helixis indicated for some symptoms of respiratory disease, namelyexpectorant (a medicine that helps to bring up phlegm) forproductive (chesty) coughs (EMA, 2015a). Other relatedindications include its actions as antispasmodic and in thetreatment of flu and fever (Bisset, 1994; Blumenthal et al.,1998; Hong et al., 2015; Kruttschnitt et al., 2019).Chemical composition. Flavonoids and other phenolics(Urban, 1958; Trute and Nahrstedt, 1997; Al-Snafi, 2018);polyacetylenes (falcarinol, dehydrofalcarinol) (Bohlmann et al.,1961; Gafner et al., 1989); saponins (Elias et al., 1991; Crespinet al., 1995; Yakovishin and Grishkovets, 2018); and essential oils(b-caryophyllene, germacrene D, limonene, a- and b-pinene,and sabinene as the main components) (Tucker andMaciarello, 1994).Posology. Pharmaceutical preparation with a definedchemical profile and an adequate dose need to be used(EMA, 2015a).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely productive cough (Hong et al., 2015; Pizzorno et al.,2016). Other related experimental effects include acute andchronic bronchitis, asthma, and pneumonia (Hong et al., 2015;Pizzorno et al., 2016). The H. helix extract and isolatedcompounds exerted a spasmolytic effect in isolated guinea-pigileum (Trute et al., 1997).Clinical evidence. Hedera helix preparations have been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases such as bronchial asthma, andimprovement of airway resistance, intrathoracic gas volume, andforced expiratory volume were evaluated (Hofmann et al., 2003;Guo et al., 2006; Holzinger and Chenot, 2011). However, despiteits established traditional use, very few controlled clinical studieshave been published. A randomized, double-blind trial wascarried was conducted with an H. helix standardized extract. Atotal of 181 patients presenting acute cough was treated with 35mg of the extract, three times daily, for 7 days. The group treatedwith ivy extract showed a clinically relevant reduction in coughscore, the severity of symptoms associated with cough, andbronchitis, in comparison with the control group. Thereduction of symptoms occurred in the first 48 h. of treatment.The observed adverse effects were non-serious, mild, or moderateseverity and not related to the treatment (Schaefer et al., 2016). Astudy involving 139 patients having acute bronchitis andproductive cough for at least three days, compared thetreatment using a standardized extract of H. helix andacetylcysteine. No statistically differences were observedbetween the treatments. Moreover, both treatments showed tobe safe and effective in children and adults (Kruttschnitt et al.,2019; Kruttschnitt et al., 2020). Moreover, a review of thetreatment of upper respiratory tract infections identified 10clinical trials, including three controlled trials (one of whichFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 12was placebo-controlled) and 7 non-randomized observationalstudies (Holzinger and Chenot, 2011). Overall, the clinicalevidence is High for bronchitis and the common cold.Safety. Although gastrointestinal reactions (EMA, 2015a) andnausea, vomiting, and diarrhea have been listed among thesymptoms of overdose (Bisset, 1994), and although there mightbe allergic reactions to the saponins, H. helix preparations aregenerally considered to be safe. There was a minimal report ofadverse effects in 10 clinical trials, including three controlledtrials (one of which was placebo-controlled) and 7 non-randomized observational studies (Holzinger and Chenot,2011). Overall, the safety is High, and there are no reports toinfer that the preparations from the plant may interferenegatively with the disease or NSAIDs.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Hedera helixpreparations are contraindicated if the patient presentsdyspnea, fever, or purulent sputum. They should be used withcare in patients suffering from gastritis or gastric ulcers(EMA, 2015a).Overall assessment. Hedera helix preparations could be usefulin the symptomatic relief of respiratory diseases by exerting anexpectorant and anti-inflammatory effect on the respiratorytract. In many countries, licensed preparations are regulatedfor use in children. There is a robust body of clinical evidencethat can be considered as High. This herbal medicine safety canbe rated as High, due to the side effects that had been related onlyin an overdose situation.Justicia pectoralis Jacq. [syn. Dianthera pectoralis(Jacq.) J.F.Gmel.] - Acanthaceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Justiciapectoralis (chamba) is indicated for symptoms of respiratorydisease, as expectorant (BRASIL, 2011) and immunostimulant(CUBA, 2014).Chemical composition. Coumarins (mainly coumarin andumbelliferone); flavonoids (e.g., quercetin, kaempferol,swertisin, and derivatives) (Lino et al., 1997; Oliveira et al.,2000); lignans (e.g., justicidin B) (Joseph et al., 1988).Posology (based on traditional uses). 5 g in 150 ml of water asan infusion (BRASIL, 2011).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely asthma. A standardized hydroalcoholic extract of J.pectoralis presented inhibitory effects on the tracheal smoothmuscle of rats subjected to challenge with ovalbumin (OVA) inan allergen model that reproduces many features of clinicalasthma such as bronchial hyper-reactivity. Administered bygavage to sensitized rats after challenge with saline or OVA, theextract of J. pectoralis decreased the exacerbated responsiveness ofrat trachea caused by the challengewith the sensitizing antigen. Theoral administration of the standardized extract reduced thehyperresponsiveness in OVA-challenged trachea in preparationsstimulated with KCl (potassium chloride) or ACh (acetylcholine).These effects on rat airways are possibly related to its anti-inflammatory activity, as observed by its ability to significantlyinhibit the increase of the levels of TNF-a and IL-1b, pro-inflammatory cytokines, in bronchoalveolar lavage of OVA-September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapychallenged rats. These work findings reinforce the notion that theextract of J. pectoralis possesses potential anti-asthmatic properties(Moura et al., 2017). In another study, the aqueous extract of J.pectoralis was evaluated in sensitized guinea-pig. The crude extractreduced the formation of histamine-inducedwheals.Moreover, theextract was tested on guinea-pig tracheal contraction caused by thecumulative dosing of histamine. Justicia pectoralis reducedhistamine-induced tracheal smooth muscle contractions(Cameron et al., 2015).Clinical evidence. Justicia pectoralis preparations have beentrialed clinically for cough in children only. The efficacy ofchamba syrup at 5% was evaluated in a randomized, double-blindclinical trial, in 114 children presenting cough andother respiratorysymptoms. Chamba syrup was effective in relieving symptoms ofcough, nasal congestion, and rhinorrhea, as well as improving thesleeping capacity of children when compared to placebo(Nascimento, 2018).Overall, the clinical evidence isHigh for cough.Safety. In traditional doses, there is no report about thetoxicity of J. pectoralis, including children.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Due to the presenceof coumarin and derivatives, J. pectoralis use should be avoidedtogether non-steroidal anti-inflammatory or anti-coagulantdrugs (Wittkowsky, 2003). Overall, safety is High.Overall assessment. Justicia pectoralis preparations might beuseful in the symptomatic relief of respiratory disease throughexerting an anti-inflammatory effect on the respiratory tract. Theclinical evidence may be considered High. Even though chambais known to have potential antiplatelet effects, overall, it can beconsidered presenting Medium safety.Magnolia officinalis Rehder & E.H. Wilson -Magnoliaceae (Bark)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Magnoliaofficinalis is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely cough, fever, and shortness of breath (WHO, 2009).Chemical composition. Biphenyl neolignan derivatives:magnolol (5,5'-diallyl-2,2'-dihydroxy biphenyl) and honokiol(5,3'-diallyl-2,4'-dihydroxy biphenyl); isoquinoline-type alkaloids,the majority of which are aporphine (N-methylcoxylonine, (S)-magnoflorine, magnofficine, (R)-asimilobine, corytuberine,anonaine, liriodenine) and benzylisoquinoline derivatives(magnocurarine, (S)-tembetarine, lotusine, (R)-oblongine,reticuline); essential oil (the major constituents are a-, b-, and g-eudesmol) (Yan et al., 2013; Poivre and Duez, 2017).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3-9 g of crude drug(decoction) daily in divided doses (WHO, 2009).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for asthma. Studies in animals and invitromodels have demonstrated multiple biological properties ofhonokiol, including anti-asthma (through IL4 and IFN-NF-kB)(Hong et al., 2018). Other related symptom studies are anti-histamine (Shin et al. , 2001) and anti-HIV (humanimmunodeficiency viruses) activities (Amblard et al., 2006).Clinical evidence. Magnolia preparations have been trialedclinically for asthma. Preliminary clinical studies showed thebenefits of magnolia for oral health (Campus et al., 2011). In non-Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 13comparative research, as add-on therapy in 148 patients with mildto moderate asthma using inhaled corticosteroids, an extract ofMagnoliae flos had a beneficial effect on asthma control (Park et al.,2012). Overall, the clinical evidence is Medium for asthma.Safety. Magnolol and honokiol are the main ingredients ofmagnolia bark and, therefore, were considered directly relevantto evaluate the safety of the product. Full clinical monitoring,including biochemical and hematological analysis, showed noevidence of toxicity reported in subjects consuming magnoliabark containing supplements at a dose of 750 mg/person/day(approximately 15 and 60 mg/person per day of honokiol andmagnolol respectively) for 42 days (Garrison and Chambliss,2006). According to other studies, safety and toxicity of magnoliabark do not differ notably but may reflect insufficiencies of thesetoxicity studies. Therefore, currently, studies of the mechanismsof toxicity of magnolia bark are insufficient (Luo et al., 2019).However, in the context of COVID-19, magnolol has beenidentified as a potential enhancer of ACE2 expression (ANSES,2020). Overall, the safety of M. oficinalis is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None known.Overall assessment. Magnolia bark has been used in Chineseand Japanese traditional medicines for the treatment of asthma,allergic disease, as well as for the alleviation of headaches,muscular pain, and fever (Forrest, 1995; Lee et al., 2011). AsM. officinalis preparations are not clinically proven to providesymptomatic relief of flu symptoms and its active principle(magnolol) may enhance the entry SARS-CoV-2 virus into thecell, the clinical evidence may be considered Medium and thesafety, in the COVID-19 context, Medium.Malva sylvestris L. - Malvaceae (Leaves)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Malvasylvestris is indicated for respiratory disease, namely oral orpharyngeal irritations and dry cough (BRASIL, 2011;EMA, 2018d).Chemical composition. Mucilages (mainly glucuronic andgalacturonic acids, rhamnose, galactose, fructose, glucose,trehalose); flavonoids (e.g., malvidin, delphinidin, myricetin,apigenin, kaempferol, genistein, and derivatives); tannins(Farina et al., 1995; Paul, 2016); hydroxycinnamic acid andderivatives; benzoic acid and derivatives; monoterpenes(Cutillo et al., 2006).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1.8 g in 150 ml asinfusion or decoction three times daily (EMA, 2018d).Preclinical evidence. Malva sylvestris preparations have beenexperimentally studied for cough. The anti-tussive activity of itsmucilage and isolated rhamnogalacturonan was evaluated in cats.Both substances suppressed the cough reflex and decreased thefrequency of cough, especially in the laryngopharynx area, althoughthe polysaccharide was more active than mucilage (Nosalova et al.,2005). Another study showed anti-inflammatory and analgesicaction through traditional pharmacological in vivo models(Seddighfar et al., 2020). Mucilage seems to be responsible forthe cough suppressive activity of this species (Capek et al., 1999).Another experimental related activity is anti-inflammatory. Malvasylvestris ethanolic extract presented anti-inflammatory activity inSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapymice through the ear edema model. The extract reduced the levelsof IL-1b in tissue challenged by TPA. Also, the extract and isolatedcompounds inhibited myeloperoxidase activity. Malvidin-3-glucoside presented inhibitory activity similar to dexamethasone(Prudente et al., 2013). The aqueous extract can suppress theexpression of several pro-cytokine genes such as TNF-a, IL-1b,COX-2, iNOS (Mirghiasi et al., 2015).Clinical evidence.Malva sylvestris has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. In traditional doses, there isnoreport about the toxicityofM. sylvestris.However, high dosesmay cause nausea, vomiting anddiarrhea, nervous excitement, and insomnia (BRASIL, 2015a;BRASIL, 2019b). Overall, safety is High.Specific Warnings and precautions of use. In general, mucilagecan alter the absorption of some drugs (BRASIL, 2015a).Overall assessment. Malva sylvestris has been traditionallyused as cough therapy and may be useful in the relief of COVID-19 symptoms through exerting a soothing effect on therespiratory tract. The clinical evidence may be considered Low,but this herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Mikania glomerata Spreng. and M. laevigataSch.Bip. ex Baker Asteraceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Mikaniaglomerata is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely cough, and as expectorant (BRASIL, 2011; BRASIL,2017; BRASIL, 2018).Chemical composition.