Taraxacum officinalis Contraindicated in biliary obstruction empyema of gallbladder (dandelion root) and ileus; can produce poisoning especially in children (nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and arrhythmias) Vaccinium myrtillus Doses> Ig may result in nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, (huckleberry) fibrillation, dyspnea, cyanosis, delirium and collapse; hemolytic anemia, cachexia, hepatic steatosis, and hair depigmentation have been reported; fetal doses range from 2 |to 12 g. 158 10.4 Conclusion Diabetes is a chronic incurable disease, for which modem treatments remain somewhat unsatisfactory. It is therefore perhaps not surprising that some patients seek alternative treatments with more attractive claims. However, the lack of such trials has been characterized as a major deficiency in the assessment of alternative therapies. It is important to remember that these adverse events are extremely unusual. Chinese herbal medicine is generally both safe and effective, and there are many patients who have experienced dramatic benefits to their health from treatment. All medicines are assessed in terms of their risk-benefit ratio and it should not be surprising that Chinese herbal medicines may also have occasion rare but significant adverse events. Patients should be taught the importance of using proven effective treatment regimens. Diabetes health professionals need to be aware of the potential dangers associated with some of these treatments. Patients should not stop using drug treatments abruptly as there is a risk of hyperglycemia or diabetic ketoacidosis. Any patient who decides to use a natural product should be foilowed closely to make sure that no toxic effects occur and that treatment objectives are achieved. According to the risk that concurrent use of drugs and herbal treatment may have synergistic effects on lowering the blood glucose levels. During the transition period when the patients take both drugs and herbs, they should under the instruction of family doctor and their blood glucose levels should be monitored at least twice daily to assess the effectiveness of the treatment and to avoid hypoglycemia. Dosage must be adjusted as needed to keep blood glucose within the normal range. Herbal treatment may reduce the dosage and frequency of insulin injections needed; however, it can never replace insulin, especially in insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) patients. 159 'V Chapter 11 - Herbal Hepatotoxicity 11,1 Introduction Treatment options for common liver diseases such as cirrhosis, fatty liver, and chronic hepatitis are problematic. (Luper S, 1998) The effectiveness of treatments such as interferon, colchicine, penicillamine, and corticosteroids are inconsistent at best and the incidence of side effects profound. All too often the treatment is worse than the disease. Conservative physicians often counsel watchful waiting for many of their patients, waiting in fact for the time when the disease has progressed to the point that warrants the use of heroic measures. Physicians and patients are in need of effective therapeutic agents with a low incidence of side effects. Herbs have been used traditionally by herbalists and indigenous healers worldwide for the prevention and treatment of liver disease. Clinical research in the past had already confirmed the efficacy of the herbal medicine in the treatment of liver disease. Basic scientific research has uncovered the mechanisms by which some plants afford their therapeutic effects. The effectiveness of treatments such as interferon, colchicine, penicillamine, and corticosteroids are inconsistent at best and the incidence of side effects profound. In most cases, research has confirmed traditional experience and wisdom by discovering the mechanisms and modes of action of these plants as well as reaffirming the therapeutic effectiveness of certain plants or plant extracts in clinical studies. Hepatotoxicity of Chinese herbs has been recognized, e.g. during treatment of patients with atopic eczema. However, the mechanism of herbal-induced liver injury is unknown, and the pathologic findings are nonspecific, with steatosis,acute and chronic 160 hepatitis, hepatic fibrosis, zonal or difilxse hepatic necrosis, bile duct injury, veno-occlusive disease, acute liver failure requiring liver transplantation and carcinogenesis. Recently, reports have mounted about hepatotoxicity of herbal remedies,which ranges from mild liver enzyme alterations to chronic liver disease and liver failure. Unfortunately, there are no formal data on the incidence even of acute severe side effects, such as liver failure after certain herbal medications, and knowledge of longer-term sequelae such as mutagenicity and carcinogenicity is even more scanty. 11.2 Drug-induced hepatic injury Drugs and other chemical toxins account for less than 5% of cases of jaundice or acute hepatitis and fewer cases of chronic liver disease, but they are an important cause of more severe types of hepatic injury. (Farrell GC, 1997) Drug reactions produce an array of hepatic lesions that mimic all known hepatobiliary diseases; this poses a diagnostic challenge for physicians and pathologists. Diagnosis of drug-induced hepatic injury is circumstantial, with positive rechallenge being the only fector that unequivocally implicates a particular agent. Nonetheless, other aspects of the temporal relationship between drug ingestion and adverse reaction, exclusion of other diseases, the presence of extrahepatic features of drug hypersensitivity and some findings on liver biopsy can lend support to the diagnosis. In western medicine, factors that predispose to dose-dependent hepatic injury will be considered in relation to acetaminophen, an example of acute hepatotoxicity, and methotrexate, an agent that can produce hepatic fibrosis. Flucloxacillin will be discussed as an example of drug-induced cholestatic hepatitis often associated with prolonged cholestasis and the vanishing bile duct syndrome. Minocycline and diclofenac will be mentioned as two drugs for which drug hepatitis is an exceedingly rare complication. 161 Many drugs and chemicals are idiosyncratic hepatotoxins: isoniazid, amiodarone, tetracycline, methyldopa, bromobenzene, valproic acid, and halothane. (Haller CA, Dyer JE et al, 2002) Hepatotoxins may have intrinsic, idiosyncratic, or immune-mediated mechanisms of liver injury. Intrinsic hepatotoxins, such as acetaminophen, amanitin (found in Amanita phalloides mushrooms), or carbon tetrachloride, produce liver damage in a predictable, dose-dependent manner. Toxic hepatitis may also occur sporadically due to differences in individual susceptibility related to factors such as age, sex, underlying disease, concomitant medications, and genetic iiifluences. (Haller CA, Dyer JE et al, 2002) Hypersensitivity or immune-mediated hepatitis may develop after repeated exposure to a causative agent. Immune-mediated hepatitis may manifest with systemic findings such as fever, rash, eosinophilia, or atypical lymphocytosis and recur with reexposure. Liver injury due to drugs such as sulfonamides, chlorpromazine, erythromycin, and phenytoin is thought to be immune-mediated. Treatment includes removing exposure to the toxic agent and supportive patient care. (Haller CA, Dyer JE et al, 2002) Often, herbal-related acute hepatitis will resolve spontaneously once ingestion of the offending product is discontinued. Rarely, acute liver injury progresses to fulminant failure, necessitating transfer to a tertiary care facility with a liver transplantation service. Clinical deterioration may develop rapidly in toxin-induced hepatic failure, so the decision to transfer the patient should be made quickly. Some hepatotoxic herbs cause chronic pathologic liver changes. Herbs such as coltsfoot (Roulet M, Laurini R et al, 1988), comfrey (Ridker PM and McDermott WV, 1989), bush tea, and senecio contain pyrrolizidine alkaloids,(Smith LW and Culvenor CCJ, 1981) direct hepatotoxins that can cause centrilobular necrosis, veno-occlusive disease, portal hypertension, and an increased risk of hepatocellular carcmoma. (Stillman 162 AS, Huxtable R et al,1977; Fox DW, Hart MC et al, 1978) 11.3 TVpes of Liver In j u ry In the cases of herbal hepatotoxicity, several kinds of pathological changes could see in the liver during liver biopsy. These include zonal necrosis, necrotic lesions with steatosis or bile duct injury and vascular injury, especially veno-occlusive disease, which is commonly caused by pyrrolizidine alkaloids. (Chittiiri S and Farrell GC, 2000) Some herbs are thought to be intrinsic hepatotoxins and show dose-related liver toxicity, either through direct hepatocellular damage, such as with Atractylis gummifera, or through the generation of a reactive metabolite, as is the case with pennyroyal oil {Mentha pulegium). {Andtrson IB, Mullen WH et al, 1996) Recently, greater celandine, which is widely used for biliary disorders and dyspepsia, was identified as a cause of cholestatic hepatitis. Hepatotoxic reactions have also been observed after the ingestion of Atractylis gummifera, Callilepsis laureola, Senna, Kavapyrone and Pulegium. 11.4 Hepatotoxicity Herbs In Chinese literature, the following herbs are taken orally and have been associated with incidents of hepatitis: Dioscorea bulhifera (bulbil), Livistona chinensis (fruit), Lycoris radiata (blub), Melia toosendan (fruit), Pine I Ha ternata (tuber), Ricinus communis (seed), Taxillus chinensis (leafy twig), Tripterygium wilfordii (root), Typha species (pollen), Viscum coloratum (leafy twig),and Xanthium sibihcum (fruit). (But PPH, Tomlinson B et al, 1996) (see Table 11 d) 11.4.1 Tripterygium wilfordii Tripterygium wilfordii Hook f . (TWH) is a plant of the genus Tripterygium of the family celastraceae. (Ming J, 1996) Many preparations,mainly from its root, have been used in the clinic, among which the polyglycoside (TP) has shown better effects with 163 relatively mild side effects. Its pharmacological effect is mainly inhibitory on all stages of cell cycle TP and acts much like cytotoxic drugs. Traditionally it is used as an antirheumatic and to clear out channels and collaterals for the treatment of rheumatic arthritis. Although much of the clinical experience with this herb comes from uncontrolled studies and anecdotal reports, recent clinical trials have confirmed the efficacy of TWH in the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis and other autoimmune diseases. In patient with lupus nephritis unresponsive to prednisone and other immunosuppressive drugs, combined administration of prednisone and TP resulted in reduction or even complete disappearance of protein in urine in 40% to 50% of cases. Many side effects, however, have been reported. About 45% of patients who received poly glycoside complained of such adverse effects as skin rashes, skin pigmentation, stomatis and softening of finger nails. Intoxication of Tripterygium wilfordii showed gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and vomiting, abdominal pain with diarrhea, hepatomegaly with tenderness, etc. Fatty infiltration and necrosis of the liver with appearance of liver direct intoxication. Intrahepatic cholestasis with inflammation was seen in pathologic appearance. Besides this, leukopenia and irregular menstruation in women also. In male patients, the number and motility of sperms were reduced and the sperms disappeared completely after one month of this herb intake. In general, the longer the duration of administration and the older the patients, the smaller the probability of their menses or sperms returning to normal. 11.4.2 Rhizonta Discoreae Bulbiferae This drug consists of the dried rhizome of Discoreae bulbiferae /..(family Discoreaceae). It is used as hemostatic and to eliminate evil heat from blood and as a detoxicant for the treatment of various kinds of bleeding, boils and carbuncles, but 164 nowadays mainly used for the treatment of tumors and goiters. The main toxic ingredient was Dioscorein and Dioscoretoxin. Fatty infiltration and lobar necrosis could see in animal models. In China, several cases of intoxication of rhizoma Discoreae bulbiferae were reported and patient had jaundice, lethargy, poor appetite and hepatomegaly with mal liver ftinction. 11.5 Consumption of Insect Herbs A 67-year-old man was admitted to hospital because of jaundice and general weakness after taking herbal medicine for few days. This patient consulted a traditional Chinese practitioner because of lumbago for one month and the practitioner prescribed several dosage of anticonvulsive medication which include fresh centipede {Scolopendra subspinipes mutilans L. Koch) 12 g and fresh scorpion {Buthus martensii Karsch) 15g. The patient felt weakness and jaundice could see in the sclera and whole body after taken the medication for few days. No itching sensation but has tea colour urine. Laboratory examination and liver echography confirmed diagnosis of acute hepatitis, which was caused by consumption of toxic herbs (insect). After symptomatic treatment, the jaundice disappear and the liver function return to normal. (Yeung PH, 2000) Toxic insects were always used in subduing the hyperactivity of the liver and the endogenous wind. It used for anti-convulsion as for the treatment of various kinds of tic, convulsions and tetanus. Only a minor dosage was recommend because of its renal and liver toxicity. If prolong usage or mixed with other toxic herbs, accumulation with toxicity will result. So, regular checking for the liver function is necessary. 11.6 Hepatotoxicity Cause by Chinese Proprietary Medicine 165 'V Hepatic impairment resulting from the use of conventional drugs is widely acknowledged, but there is less awareness of the potential hepatotoxicity of herbal preparations and Chinese proprietary medicine, many of which are believed to be harmless and are commonly used for self-medication without supervision. Injections prepared from Crotalaria sessiliflora (whole plant), Trichosanthes kirilowii (root), and several combinations of herbs have also led to hepatotoxicity. (Zhou OH,1988; Zhao JY, 1991; But PPH, Tomlinson B et al. 1996) 11.6.1 Jin Bu Huan "Jin Bu Huan Anodyne Tablets" {Lycopodium serratum), a traditional Chinese h e r b a l r e m e d y , h a s b e e n u s e d f o r m o r e t h a n 1 0 0 0 y e a r s a s a s e d a t i v e a n d a n a l g e s i c b u t has only been available in the United States for 10 years. (Dharmananda S, 1993) The name "Jin Bu Huan" literally means 'not to exchange (even) for gold',implying that the herb is invaluable in certain treatments. In the Encyclopedia of Chinese Materia Medica^(Anonymous,1977) the name "Jin Bu Huan" applies to eleven herbs: Aneciochilus taizwanensis (Orchidaceae), Aristolochia yunnanensis (Aristolochiaceae), Asystasiella neesiana (Acanthaceae), Lycopodium serratum (Lycopodiaceae), Panax pseudoginseng var. notoginseng (Araliaceae), Polygalo chinensis (Polygalaceae), Rumex madaio (Polygonaceae), R. patientia (Polygonaceae), Selaginella involvens (Selaginellaceae), Stephania delavayi (Menispermaceae) and S. sinica (Menispermaceae). Many of these herbs are used as an analgesic. The alkaloid levo-tetrahydropalmatine is responsible for the morphine-like properties of "Jin Bu Huan" but the hepatotoxic mechanism was unknown. A recent study described three children who had taken unintentional overdoses of Jin Bu Huan tablets and who developed central nervous system and respiratory 166 depression with bradycardia. (Horowitz RS, 1993) Seven cases of hepatitis have been reported in adults who used Jin Bu Huan and had no history of hepatic disease, obesity, diabetes mellitus, or atopy. (Woolf WGM, 1993) All denied a history of excessive alcohol or hepatotoxic drug intake. Liver disease occurred after a mean duration of use of 20 weeks (range, 7-52 weeks). Six of the 7 patients showed complete resolution of symptoms within 8 weeks. Two patients had a recrudescence of symptoms with re-exposure to the herb. The duration of use before manifestations of clinical hepatitis was the same for "Jin Bu Huan,,as for another hepatotoxic herb, germander. The package insert for "Jin Bu Huan" recommended a dosage of 2 to 4 tablets 1 to 3 times a day for pain relief or 1 to 3 tablets at night for insomnia. Thus, all patients were taking appropriate doses. The insert also indicated that tablets contained 70% starch and 30% levo-alkaloid from the plant Polygala chinensis. Although the insert of "Jin Bu Huan Anodyne Tablets" indicates in the English description that the ingredient is ,Polygala Chinensis L Alkaloid', results of the analysis show that the alkaloid is L-THP which is not found in P. chinensis. (Jiimiucao GSL, 1988) Among the other ten herbs also known as "Jin Bu Huan",only those derived from species of the genus Stephania are known to contain L-THF. Therefore, the description on the insert that the ingredient is Tolygala Chinensis L Alkaloid' is definitely an error and a mislabeling. (But PPH, 1994) Although L-THP can be obtained from plant sources, it is used as a fine pharmaceutical in mainland China and is registered as such under Rotundinum (rotundine) in Part 2 of the Pharmacopeia of the People's Republic of China; the recommended single and daily oral doses of rotundine are 60 to 120 and 60 to 480 mg respectively.