(Haller CA and Benowitz NL, 2000) Ephedrine in combination with caffeine, aspirin, or both, has been found in controlled trials to produce greater weight losses than placebo for periods of up to one year, although most studies have been short-term. (Astrup A, Breum L, Toubro S, Hein P, Quaade F, 1992; Breum L, Pedersen JK, Ahlstrom F, Frimodt-Moller J, 1994) Ephedra (ma huang) is commonly found in herbal weight-loss products referred to as "herbal fen-phen." Marketed uses of ephedrine-containing products such as "herbal ecstasy" include induction of a euphoric state and heightening of awareness and sexual sensations. Dietary supplements containing ephedra alkaloids frequently contain a dosage that differs substantially from that indicated on the product label. Case reports concerning ephedra alkaloids (often in combination with caffeine) have noted serious cardiovascular and central nervous system events, including hypertension, cardiac 148 arrhythmia, stroke,seizure, myocardial infarction, and sudden death. Concomitant use of ephedra and monoamine oxidase inhibitors can result in life-threatening hyperpyrexia, hypertension, and coma. Finally, heavy use of ephedra has been documented as a very rare cause of radiolucent kidney stones. (Powell T, Hsu FF et al, 1998) Subarachnoid hemorrhage is thought to be a result of the hypertensive action of ephedrine, which can be short lived, or of cerebral vasculitis, which has been described in association with a variety of sympathomimetic drugs. (Wooten MR, Khangure MS et al, 1983; Fallis RJ and Fisher M, 1985) Because of potential adverse health effects among persons with diabetes, hypertension, heart disease, and other conditions, the FDA has recommended a labeling statement that instructs ephedra users to seek the advice of a health care provider before use. Since obesity is a chronic disease, it is possible that individuals may use nonprescription products to maintain weight loss; however, use of these products by normal-weight individuals could expose them to risks for which there are no counterbalancing benefits. 9.4 Conclusion Losing weight is difficult for most obese persons, yet long-term maintenance of a reduced weight is even more challenging. Even several kinds of prescription were currently approved for control body weight, and can help carefully selected obese patients lose weight and can reduce the rate of regain, behavioral interventions to improve diet and increase physical activity are considered the primary means to promote and maintain weight loss. Weight-loss medications should be considered as an adjunct only for patients who are at substantial medical risk because of their obesity and in whom nonpharmacologic treatments have not resulted in sufficient weight loss to 149 improve health or to prevent regain. Providing appropriate science-based advice will be a challenge for health care professionals because of the increasing variety of nonprescription products on the market and the lack of methodologically sound efficacy studies. With such understanding, we can hope not only to develop safe and effective ways to help obese persons to achieve and maintain a healthy weight but also to understand how to prevent the development of obesity in those who are at risk. 150 Chapter 10 - Adverse effects of CHM used for Diabetes. 10.1 Introduction Type 2 diabetes is a global health problem of enormous magnitude, especially in newly industrialized nations. (Paul Z,1999) Projections recently published by the World Health Organization (WHO) suggest that there will be well over 150 million people with diabetes in the year 2000 and expect the number to reach 300 million by the year 2025. (Gojka R et al, 1999) The majority of the new cases will be those with Type 2 diabetes and the majority of these will be in China, the Indian subcontinent and Africa. Although insulin is a life-saving drug it is not a "cure-all,'. A growing public interest in herbal medications for this metabolic disorder has developed around the world. Insulin-resistance and the poor response of neuropathic complications in diabetic patients receiving insulin treatment have encouraged the development of alternative medication. (Cheng JTYRS, 1983) The known use of plant treatments for diabetes dates from the Ebers papyrus of about 1550 BC. (John C et al, 1998) Many traditional plant treatments for diabetes are used throughout the world. 10.2 Traditional Chinese medicine used in Diabetes Traditional Chinese herbs are used for protecting from and treating diseases under the guidance of therapy of TCM and they have properties of natural herb, but it has the special connotation and unique theory system and application method. Many herbs used in Chinese traditional medicine and natural products have been attributed with hypoglycemic effects, (see Table 10 a) 151 Table 10 a. Herbs used in Chinese traditional medicine that may be attributed with hypoglycemic effects. Chinese Herb Botanical Name , Active . Main Chemical Constituents Name-  . [Part * ; ; Baizhu Atractylodes Rhizome Volatile oils - mainly atractylol macrocephala and atractyione Cangrzi Xanthium sibiricum Fruit Glycosides etc Cangzhu Atractylodes lancea Rhizome Volatile oils mainly p-eudesmol and hinesol Changchunhua Catharanthus roseus Plant Alkaloids including vinblastine and vincristine Danshen Salvia miltiorrhiza Root Tanshinones and derivatives Digupi Lycium chinense Root bark Betaine, p-sitosterol etc Dihiiang Rehmannia glutinosa Rhizome p-sitosterol, mannitol etc Gouqizi Lycium barharum Fruit Betaine etc Huang)ing Polygonatum spp. Rhizome Mucilage etc Jiegeng Platycodon grandiflorum Root Platycodin etc Maiya Hordeum vulgare L Sprouts a-amylase, P-amylase, maltose germinating ^ Sangye Morus alba L Leaf Ecdysterone etc Xianhecao Agrimonia pilosa Plant Agrimonin etc Xuanshen Scrophularia Root Scrophularin etc ningpoensis Yinyanghuo Epimedium spp. Plant Icariin, flavones etc Yumixu Zea mays Style and Potassium nitrate, vitamin K etc stigma Yuzhu Polygonatum odoratum Rhizome Convallamarin and various glycosides Zexie Alisma orientalis Tuber Triterpenes etc Zhimu Anemarrhena Rhizome Saponins etc asphodeloides 10.3 Adverse Reactions to Alternative Diabetic Treatments Many natural products are promoted to improve the health status of patients with diabetes by people making a profit on these products. (Gori M and Campbell RK, 1998) Few of these claims have any scientific basis. Certain natural products are potentially 152 damaging to patients with chronic diseases, especially if the products are used instead of proven scientific treatment regimens. Diabetic patients who are treated with insulin and/or hypoglycemic drugs are at a greater risk of suffering hypoglycemic episodes than diabetic patients treated by diet only, a fact that has been supported by the widespread systemic monitoring of blood glucose during the last decade. (Unger RH, 1982; Bolli G, De Feo P et al, 1983) Several mechanisms for the development of hypoglycemia during renal insufficiency have been found, including reduced renal gluconeogenesis and decreased energy intake. 45% of new glucose supply from renal gluconeogenesis in normal patients could be found during prolonged starvation. (Rutsky E,McDaniel HG et al, 1978) Therefore, elderly diabetic patient with impaired renal function should be aware from episode of drug-induced hypoglycemia, (see Table 10 b) An investigative survey in 1997 showed that nearly thirty percent of Americans aged 65 and older using alternative medicine. (Foster DF, Phillips RS et al, 2000) Almost three million people aged 65 and older took herbal therapies, with two million taking both herbal therapies and prescription medications. Those who use both prescription medications and herbal therapies are at potential risk for unintended adverse interactions. Especially for some Chinese proprietary medicines contain western drugs either legitimately, with a declaration on the package or package insert, or as a hidden adulterant which may increase the short-term efficacy of the preparation. Hypoglycemia due to the consumption of "Xiao Kee Wan" has been described in the Chinese literature. Hue reported a case of a 67 year old diabetic male who died from severe hypoglycemia after taking "Xiao Kee Wan,, 8 pills tad for 1 month. (Hui X, Li J et al, 1992) Due also reported 2 cases of hypoglycemia with the use of "Xiao Ke WarC'.Qiut D and Xue LX, 153 1992) Both patients were female diabetics, aged 73 and 67 years, with normal renal function and they had taken 5 pills bid for 5 days and 4 pills bid for 14 days respectively Both recovered after intravenous glucose. Tomlinson B. reported another case of severe hypoglycemia caused by "Xiao Ke Wan,, and "Liu Wei Di Huang Wan'\(Iowi\mson B, But PPH et al) A 5 3-year-old Chinese male was brought to Emergency department due to lost of conscious. He was found to be hypoglycemic with plasma glucose of 2.0 mmol/L. Physical examination revealed a mild left hemiparesis, bilateral symmetrical glove-and-stock sensory neuropathy, bilateral retinopathy with previous laser scars and bilateral ankle edema. Investigations revealed that the patient had severe renal impairment with plasma urea 24.9 mmol/L, creatinine 549 fimol/L and 24-hour urine protein 4.8 g/d. There was a normochromic normocytic anaemia and phosphate retention as well as metabolic acidosis. The patient was suffered 4 years of diabetes mellitus with bilateral proliferative retinopathy. He had a cerebrovascular accident whilst in China three months later and he was treated with Chinese herbal medicines. When he come back to Hong Kong, he started to treat his diabetes by himself with three over-the-counter Chinese patent medicines "Xiao Ke WarC\ "Xin Nao Shu Tong" and "Liu Wei Di Huang Wan,, which were purchased from a pharmacy in China. The patient adjusted the dosage by himself without any consultation with herbal practitioner. Two weeks before this admission, he had increased the dosage of "Xiao Ke Wari" from 5 pills to 10 pills daily because of bilateral ankle swelling, polyuria and nocturia over the previous montL After analyzed, the dosage that the patient took was approximately 1.25 mg glibenclamide daily that may have produced adequate diabetic control, but after doubling the dose to increase the diuretic effect he developed toxicity. The action of glibenclamide may be enhanced by various other drugs such as "Liu Wei Di Huang 154 -V JVan" in this case which may act by displacing it from protein binding, interfering with its metabolism or by having hypoglycemic effects through other mechanisms. Patients often consider such treatments as purely herbal and may not volunteer that they are taking them so physicians should take a careful history about this type of medication. These preparations are readily available in China and could be brought into Hong Kong and many other countries although they would come under the same licensing regulations as standard drugs and would not usually be marketed. FDA also gave warning to the public, especially diabetics, on February last year not to use five brands of Chinese herbal products. It was because the herbs were found illegally contain prescription drugs that could cause dangerous drops in blood sugar. The products claim to contain only natural Chinese herbal ingredients. However, an investigation by the California Department of Health Services' Food and Drug Branch determined they contain the prescription drugs glyburide and phenformin, which can be used to treat diabetes. (The product brand name were Diabetes Hypoglucose Capsules, Pearl Hypoglycemic Capsules, Tongyitang Diabetes Angel Pearl Hypoglycemic Capsules, Tongyitang Diabetes Angel Hypoglycemic Capsules and Zhen Qi Capsules) Both of them were available from mail order and can be purchased by telephone or via the Internet. The investigation was launched after a diabetic patient in Northern California suffered from several episodes of low blood sugar after consuming one of the products. Diabetes Hypoglucose Capsules. The FDA has stopped imports of the products and is investigating how the drugs were added to the herbs and whether any other herbal products are contaminated. Patient suffered from chronic disease such as diabetes should pay attention during using traditional Chinese medicine or other dietary supplement. Vautier report a case of 155 fulminant hepatic failure happened after taken a locally dispensed Chinese herbal remedy called " eternal life" as treatment for simple lipomas for 4 weeks. (Vautier G and Spiller RC, 1995) One week later he was deeply jaundiced and became encephelopathic. Despite urgent liver transplantation he died and no viral, immunological, or metabolic cause for his liver failure was identified. Analysis of the herbal remedy that this man had taken confirmed the presence of Dictamnus dasycarpus; this herb was found to have hepatotoxicity. Another similar adverse reaction was a 27-year-old insulin-dependent diabetic man presented with a two-week history of progressive jaundice after consuming "eternal life." (Sanders D, Kennedy N et al, 1995) After analyzed, there was a high possibility of relation between the herbal tea and this patient's hepatitis. Liver biopsy showed inflammation around the portal tract and piecemeal necrosis. The patient's clinical condition improved over the next four weeks. A 72-year-old Portuguese woman experienced sudden onset of nausea, vomiting, and diaphoresis after she drank a glass of extract made from lupine beans. (Tsiodras S, Shin RK et al, 1998) She also complained of blurred vision and generalized weakness. She took the preparation with the belief it represented a cure for her recently diagnosed diabetes. Analysis of the patient's lupine bean extract identified a significant amount of the preponderant compound as oxo-sparteine by gas chromatography / mass spectrometry. Lupine beans are commonly eaten as an appetizer in Southern Europe and the Middle East. People in Portugal and Southern Europe believe that the extract from boiled lupines has hypoglycemic effects even no scientific supports such a belief that lupine extract could lower blood sugar levels. It should be noted that nearly 100 different species are found in the United States but not all species are poisonous. Toxicity actually depends on the amount of toxic alkaloids contained. Sparteine like 156 other quinolizidine alkaloids (such as anagyrine and lupanine, as well as piperidine) have been implicated in producing dyspnea, restlessness, spasms, coma, and even death as a result of respiratory paralysis in cases of acute intoxication in animals, as well as classic anticholinergic effects. Lupine beans in a natural state are very bitter and toxic and need debittering process continues for several days. In this case, the patient drank a glassful of the bitter water in which the beans had been initially boiled in the belief that it could lower her blood sugar level. The patient was discharged home less than 24 hours after her initial admission. Another herb need to pay caution was ephedra (Ma Huang). It is an herbal stimulant that acts similarly to amphetamine. Approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in some asthma medications, but it was also widely used in combination with caffeine in unregulated supplements for losing weight, building muscle, or giving energy. These alkaloids were implicated in over 800 reports of adverse effects including nervousness, insomnia, irritability, psychosis, headache, dizziness, seizures, stroke, premature ventricular contraction, hypertension, myocardial infarction, and death. (Boullata J and Nace AM, 2000) As a result the FDA proposed limits on the use of ephedrine-containing products: a maximum of 8 mg/dose and 24 mg/day for no more than a week, and combined with no products that contain caffeine Studies show the actual doses of ephedra found in supplements vary dramatically from much less to much more than the stated content on the label For people with diabetes, the risks are even greater because ephedra can raise blood sugars dramatically and make control extremely difficult. Gill GV (Gill G, Redmond S et al, 1994) reported that four patients with insulin-dependent diabetes reduced or stopped their insulin in favor of therapeutic approaches 157 *v including prayer, faith healing, unusual diets, and supplements of vitamins and trace elements. This resulted in ketoacidosis in three, in one case life threatening; and weight loss and hyperglycemia in the other. One patient developed serious retinopathy. A case of acute hepatic and renal toxicity associated with drinking sheep bile for diabetic treatment was report in Saudi Arabia. (Anonymous, 1996) A traditional healer in Al-Wadein village had advised patients with diabetes to drink raw sheep bile as a treatment for their diabetes. After drinking sheep bile,the patient was found to have gastrointestinal, hepatic, and renal toxicity. Table 10 b. Herbs Affecting Blood Glucose and Associated Adverse Effects. Herbs Associated Adverse Effects Aconitum carmichaelie Subject to poison control in some Australian states Arctium lappa Commission E state the root is not permitted for therapeutic (burdock root) use; usefulness not documented adequately; no risks was known Artemisia ahbysinica Essential oil should not be used; listed as unsafe in FDA (1975) Catharanthus roseus Subject to poison control in some Australian states Echinacea spp. Contraindicated in progressive systemic diseases (eg. (coneflower) Tuberculosis, MS) according to Commission E; associated with metabolic worsening in some diabetic patients; should not be used more than three weeks. Eleutherococcus Should not be given to patients whose blood pressure exceed senticosus 180/90 mmHg; palpitations, pressure headaches, and arrhythmias have been reported in the Russian literature. Lupinus tennis Lupinus extracts cause " crooked calf disease ",a congential abnormality in bovine stock Momordica charantia Hepatic necrosis has been associated with excessive intake; (karela, bitter melon) testicular lesions have occurred in dogs.