5.4.3 Overdose of Chansu Chansu refers to toad venum from Bufo hufo gargarizan and B. melanostictus (Bufonidae). It contains the cardiotonic bufotoxins and used its anti-inflammatory analgesic and anaesthetic properties. (Tomlinson B and But PPH, 8-11 November 1994) The recommended dosage is 0.015-0.03 g. In Hong Kong, a herbal practitioner reported a fetal case due to over-prescription of 5 g of this herb, and the patient was finally died. It is also found in the proprietary Chinese medicine 'Lushenwan,, which is a famous and popular remedy for upper respiratory symptoms or used as a topical preparation for skin infections. Overdosage of these tiny pills can cause cardiac glycoside toxicity in children and topical applications may cause local skin inflammation. 5.5 Misusing -- Personal abuse 5.5.1 Banmao The risk that a poisonous plant is used instead of the required medicinal herb might become particularly high when people without botanical expertise start to collect their own plant material. Every now and then, a case report in the literature makes it abundantly clear that the erroneous identification of self-selected plant material can result in serious or even lethal poisoning. In Hong Kong, a 23-year-old unmarried pregnant woman tried to induce abortion by consuming a decoction prepared by boiling in water over 200 pieces of Banmao. (But PPH and Kan WK, 1995) The dose of the herb amounted to over 50 g. A few hours after consuming the decoction, she presented to hospital with pain in the mouth and throat, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and abdominal pain. Physical examination showed swelling and multiple erosions of the mucous 80 membranes of the mouth, the tongue and the pharynx. Blisters were found in the lower limbs. Gastric lavage and intensive treatment were not useful, and her conditions continued to deteriorate. Sixteen hours after admission, the fetal heart sounds became undetectable and spontaneous abortion occurred nine hours later. She later went into shock with acute renal failure, hematuria and bleeding. She remained in deep coma and died two days after admission. Autopsy of the body found congested and bleeding patches in visceral organs. The amounts of cantharidin found in ante-mortem blood, ante-mortem urine, postmortem blood,and liver were 0.27 p-g/ml, 4.45 |ag/ml, 0.11 jig/ml, and 1.24 )ig/g,respectively. Banmao refers to the beetles Mylabris phalerata and M. cichoni (Meloidae). It has antivirulent, antulcerative, anticoagulant, and discutient actions. It is mainly used to treat malignant sores, abdominal mass, lymph node tuberculosis, thyroid tumor and rabies. It has also been used to induce abortion. The Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China (1990 edition) (Pharmacopoeia C, 1990) noted that Banmao is very toxic and should be used with care for oral consumption and avoided during pregnancy. The recommended dosage of this herb is 0.03-0.06 g and the major bioactive component is cantharidin. Cantharidin was formerly used as a counter irritant and vesicant, in hair lotions for their rubefacient action, and in flexible collodion for the removal of warts. The lethal dose of cantharidin has been reported to be in the range of 10-60 mg, which is equivalent to about 4-24 pieces of the dried beetles. 5.6 Discussion A botanist of appropriate training and experience should examine herbs. A qualified botanist to identify herbs may be difficult to find and other professionals 81 should be consulted. Schools for pharmacognosists, acupuncturists, naturopathic practitioners, and herbalists can serve as invaluable sources. Other experts in herbs include trade professionals like importers and herbal product manufacturers. Traditional identification methods may include organoleptic as well as visual. Two independent qualified experts should be utilized to confirm the identity of the herbs. Consistent terminology (Latin or scientific names) should be used in the identification process since familiar toxic agents may be hidden behind unfamiliar names. After the suspected herbs have been visually identified, it is essential to confirm the identity of the herbs by laboratory analysis since misidentification, substitution, improper preparation, and contamination are all possible causes of adverse reactions. Confirmation can be done by pharmacognostical study of the morphology and anatomy of the herbs, chemical analysis, or bioassay. If an adverse reaction does not correspond to the known pharmacological actions of the identified herb,improper preparation and contamination should be considered and detailed chemical analysis should be pursued to determine possible adulterant(s). Chemically defined constituents of medicinal plants can play an important role in the quality control of herbal products. Some constituents may serve a qualitative purpose; their presence in a herbal product assures that the product has been prepared from the correct botanical ingredient. If possible, one should monitor the constituents which are held responsible for the pharmacological activity of a herbal drug. When the active constituents are uncertain or unknown, however, quality control may be based on so-called chemical markers, Le., constituents which are considered characteristic for the herbal ingredient. The Committee for Proprietary Medicinal Products of the EC has explicitly recognized the usefulness of markers in the quality assurance of herbal 82 remedies. This Committee specifies in its recent "Note for Guidance on the Quality of Herbal Remedies" that a marker may serve to calculate the quantity of vegetable drug or preparation in a finished product if that marker has been quantitatively determined in the vegetable drug or preparation when the starting materials were tested. (De Smet PAGM, Hansel R et al, 1997) Traditional methods for analyzing natural products include thin-layer chromatography (TLC) and gas and liquid chromatography (GC and LC) linked to mass spectrometry. For example, a TLC check on the presence of menthoflirane in a peppermint drug may verify that it comes from Menthapiperila and not from M. arvensis var. piperascens. Other constituents are used in a more quantitative way, that is to say,a certain level in a herbal remedy is taken as a measure of the amount of the herbal ingredient in that product. All three methods offer the advantage of screening for a wide range of polar and nonpolar compounds especially when the ingredients are unknown. However, the extraction process can be complicated and time consuming. In recent years,researchers have shown that supercritical fluid extraction is an alternative for many of these matrices and analyte. For instance, in an evaluation of commercial ginseng products on the US market, ginsenosides (- panaxosides) were determined to assess the amount of Panax root in each product. Capsules containing powdered root or slurries of ground root showed a total ginsenoside level comparable to dried roct samples, but teas for infusion yielded only low concentrations, and tablets did not contain detectable ginseno sides. (De Smet PAGM, Hansel Reta l , 1997) Beside this, restrictive using and import of poisoning herbal medicine is important. Such kind of procedure can decrease the morbidity caused by toxic herbs. In China, 8 3 Taiwan and Hong Kong already setup laws and some toxic herbal name list for regulates the manufacture, sale and use of Chinese herbal medicines. In Hong Kong, the regulatory measures for Chinese herbal medicines include a licensing system for Chinese medicines traders and a registration system for proprietary Chinese medicines. For the former, retailers and wholesale dealers of Chinese herbal medicines and wholesale dealers and manufacturers of proprietary Chinese medicines are required to obtain the appropriate licenses from the Chinese Medicines Board of the Chinese Medicine Council for their businesses. 5.7 Conclusion In the long term, the government should provide screening services to the public for traditional medicine. This monitoring program provides a mechanism to identify adulterated traditional medicines. As for the countries that have not established adequate regulations covering the distribution of traditional Chinese medicines, the appropriate health authorities should be made aware of the potential hazards in such illegal adulterations to the health of their public. Public education on health hazards of such adulteration should be advocated. In addition, legislative requirements on adequate labeling of dispensed medicines, showing particularly the name of the product or its ingredients, is essential in enforcing prohibition of such hazardous practices. 84 Chapter 6 - Chinese proprietary medicines- General Aspects 6.1 Chinese proprietary medicines 6.1.1 Introduction In recent years, as more extensive studies have been carried out on herbal medicines, the knowledge of the chemistry and pharmacology of their active principals has increased remarkably. (Ko RJ, 1999) With freeze-drying technology and advances in extraction methods, many traditional Chinese medicinal prescriptions are now being formulated into tablets, pills, and liquids. These new formulations are known as Chinese proprietary medicines (CPM). Owing to the extensive modifications of drug formulations and chemical extraction from an expanding range of natural products, more cases of adverse reactions have been reported in recent years. (Li X and Yu QH, 2000) Misuse, mislabeled and inappropriate preparations may lead to serious health consequences. CPMs have gained wide acceptance by the Asian community in the past 20 years and have increased in popularity among non-Asian consumers who seek alternative therapy. They are sold as over-the-counter medicines labeled with indications and instructions, and patients no longer rely on the technical knowledge of a traditional Chinese medical doctor. More than this, the main or unapproved active ingredients that may or may not be declared on the label. (Li X and Yu QH, 2000) The true incidence of side effects to herbal products is not known because the systems for reporting adverse reactions are limited. 85 CPM-related adverse reactions can be caused by natural toxins, heavy metal poisoning, drug interaction, and drug overdoses. (Horowitz S, 2000) In traditional Chinese theories, CPMs often contain cinnabar (mercuric sulfide), realgar (arsenic sulfide), or litharge (lead oxide) as part of the traditional formula. Other common toxic herbal ingredients found in the imported patent medicines include bomeol (similar to camphor), aconite, Bufo secreta (toad secretion), mylabris, scorpion, borax, acorus, and Strychnos nux vomica (strychnine). Since certain herbs are highly potent, both Taiwan and China have required control of their sales. In Hong Kong, nearly 3,300 kinds of Chinese proprietary medicines were available on the market with about 500 being locally manufectured. (Medicine WPOC,1991) Although western medicine has already become the mainstream of Chinese modem medicine, it would stride forward significantly as the renovation of modem science and technology as well as the Anther development of life science, but it still is confined by the unconquerable limitation of ideological mechanical materialism. (Zhou JH, 1999) Chinese proprietary medicines are quite popular now in worldwide because of its convenient and therapeutic effect. There is a widespread belief in the therapeutic values of Chinese proprietary medicines, even among highly educated elite groups. A proportionate stratified random sample of 109 full-time faculty members of Chinese origin in The Chinese University of Hong Kong revealed that, in terms of over-the-counter proprietary medicines kept at home for self-medication, 13% reported that they had more Chinese than Western medicines, 52% kept as many Chinese as Western medicines, and 35% had more Western than Chinese medicines. (Lee RP, 1980) The Pharmacy and Poisons Ordinance (Cap. 135), which specifies the regulations for pharmacists, pharmacies and pharmaceuticals, simply waived such requirements for 86 Chinese medicines. The last paragraph in that Ordinance states that "Nothing in this Ordinance shall apply to the sale, manufacturing, dispensing or compounding of traditional Chinese medicines as listed in the Chinese Herbal Materia Medica (Ben Cao Gang  Mu ),or which are made from herbs customarily used by the Chinese people". In this context, the Government did very little on Chinese medicines except occasionally taking random samples to check if they contain Western pharmaceutical and excessive heavy metals. This laisser-faire practice has sometimes left rooms for discrepancies or even abuse. Because physician's dispensing of western and traditional Chinese medicines has been in existence for nearly half a century, policy makers in the Department of Health have been quite passive in pursuing the release of prescriptions from medical practitioners to community pharmacies. The missing requirement of adequate labeling on packages of dispensed medicine is an intentional omission: It represents a denial of the public's right to safe and effective medications. Without an affirmed policy on the right to adequate product information and labeling, all governmental efforts in monitoring and persecuting such misconduct as adulteration of medicines by practitioners of traditional Chinese medicine will meet with only limited success. (Huang WF, Wen K C e t a l 1997) 6.1.2 Herbal Injection and Infusion In western pharmaceutical medicine, drugs are given in a >iire' form with a single active ingredient and have different kind of administrations. In China, herbal medicine is well developed and is marketed as pills, capsules, or tinctures and injection form also and was a kind of popular treating method in the hospital The transformation of herbal 87 medicine from crude material to a modem injection form illustrates principles of modem pharmacology that have helped make herbal medicine safer and more effective. However the percentage of herbal adverse reaction from the injection form were still greater than form of medicines. In China, a retrospective analysis was reported in 2000 stated that nearly 42 % of herbal adverse reaction in 1096 cases was caused by injection. (Di SL, 2000) (Table 6a) It may relate to the following reason, 6.1.2.1 Variety & Processing Controlled, high quality, manufacturing conditions, including authentication of ingredients, are essential to the production of safe, high quality herbal medicines. Improper processing and manufacturing can influence the pharmaceutical effects. Nonspecific labeling statements such as these both confuse consumers and promote skepticism among healthcare professionals. Basically, manufacturers can allude to a therapeutic use of an herb, whether it is effective or not. Theoretically, manufacturers should be able to substantiate their "structure and function" claims,but they are not required to share this information with the government's pharmecutical laboratory or make it publicly available. Poor quality-control personnel or lack of standard procedures to evaluate their products for its purity and reliability. Therefore, batch-to-batch variability is a serious problem with herbal preparations. (Gazella JG. Pinto JT et al, 1987) Factors predisposing to pharmacological adverse reactions may related to the impurities and unknown chemical substance. It was because herbal preparations are usually not evaluated for purity and consistency of active components, they often contain accidental contaminants. 6.1.2.2 Stabilization Clearly, plants have ingredients with therapeutic activity, but their preparations 88 must be standardized to yield consistent products, which therefore can be given in doses that are maximally safe and effective. The uncertain composition of many herbal materials raises questions about their safety and stability. More than this, with the limitation of technical support, it was difficult to maintain the pH value and the stability for the mixed herbal solution, especially when mixing with glucose or normal saline solution for dilution. In addition, some unvisible or unknown chemical reaction may occur and caused adverse reaction after mixing the injection material for clinical usuage. 6.1.2.3 The Molecular Size The molecular size of the herbal material was large and insoluble in in water, especially when mixed with other chemical molecule or distubed by acid-base inequilibrium. Insoluble molecule was form with different solubility and the molecule will obstructed the capillaries. In addition, the molecule may irritate the autoimmune system to start defence mechanism and cause anaphylactic reaction. Table 6a. Adverse Reactions Caused by Herbal Injection in Tientsin, China during 1997-2000. (Di SL, 2000) Name of Herbai Injection No. of cases % Yi  Xie Sai Tong ZhusheYe (Xie Sai Tong Zhu She Ye ) 7 18.92 Sheng Mai ZhusheYe (Sheng Mo Zhu She Ye ) 6 16.22 Fufang Danshen ZhusheYe (Fu Fang Dan Can Zhu She Ye ) 5 13.51 ^ u a n g Huanglian ZhusheYe (Shuang Huang Lian Zhu She Ye , Fen Zhen ) 5 13.51 i i n g Kai Ling ZhusheYe (Qing Kai Ling Zhu She Ye ) 4 10.81 Huang Ji ZhusheYe (Huang Qi Zhu She Ye ) ^ 8.1 Deng Zhan Hua ZhusheYe (Deng --Hua Zhu She Ye ) 3 SA Can Mai ZhusheYe (Can Mo Zhu Xian ) 2 5.40 Shi e Gen Su ZhusheYe (Ge Gen Su Zhu She Ye ) 2 5.40 Total 37 cases 100 89 The allergic reaction always happened in venous injection and the patient may have fever,allergic rash and even shock after injection. The duration of episode between several minutes to several days and not related to the dosage. In order to decrease the episode of adverse reaction, some standard protocol and instructions w e recommended to all hospitals in China to assess herbal injection. (Di SL, 2000) For instance, the period of using herbal injection therapy was suggested within the period of treatment and should under the guideline to practice. More than this, pharmaceutical manufacturer should keep quality control in the major position and the production should under GMP standard to decrease the possibilities of accidental contamination. In China, all proprietary Chinese medicines will be assessed and registered by State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (SATCM). 6.1.3 Adverse Reactions Caused by Chinese Proprietary medicines 6.1.3.1 Aconitine poisoning In China, poisoning may occur after taking CPM containing aconite roots. (Chan TY and Critchiey JA, 1996) So far, there have not been any reports of CPM^induced aconitine poisoning from outside China but it is conceivable that Western-trained physicians would miss such aetiology. 6,13.2 'Nan Lien Chui Fong Toukuwan^ The great majority of reports of poisoning by CPM in Western countries were due to T^an Lien Chui Fong Toukuwan', which was sold as tablets/capsules for the treatment of various muscu loske l e t a l d i s o r d e r s .