(Rowin J and Lewis SL, others) 1996; Rosenblatt M and Mindel J, 1997; Vale S, 1998) In vitro evidence of antiplatelet activity but no confirmatory evidence in human trials. (Jung F, Mrowietz C et al, 1990; Braquet P, Esanu A et al, 1991; Braquet P, 1993; SkoghM, 1998) Kava In vitro evidence of platelet antagonism. (Gleitz J, Beile Aeta l , 1997) Clonidine Yohimbine Competitive a2-aiitagonist. (Hoffinan BB,Lefkowitz | r J et al, 1996) 130 Drug Herb Evidence for Interaction Digitalis Hawthorn Claims of interaction but no case reports and no pharmacologic data. (Miller LG and Murray WJ, 1998) Herbal laxatives Herbal laxatives such as buckthorn, cascara sagrada and senna can cause loss of potassium leading to digitalis toxicity. (Tyler VE, 1994) Oleander Contains active cardiac glycosides. (Eddleston M, Rajapakse S et al, 2000) Digitalis St. John's wort Reduces serum digoxin levels. (Johne A, Brockmoller J et al, 1999) Siberian ginseng May interfere with assay, does not cause elevated digoxin levels (Awang DVC, 1996; McRae S,1996) Tricyclic Yohimbine Antidepressants potentiate pressor effects. (De Smet P. antidepressants and Smeets 0,1994) Methysergide, Feverfew Antagonizes serotonin release, may potentiate the pizotifen, other effect of other serotonin antagonists. (Wong HCG, serotonin 1999) antagonists J CNS -- central nervous system NSAID _ nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug INR _ international normalized ratio PT -- prothrombin time. 8.8.1 Herbal Medicine Used in Cardiovascular System 8.8 Shang  1 Ginseng Ginseng is regarded as the king of herbs and throughout the world it is treasured as a supreme health-tonic for its purported anti-stress, anti-fatigue and anti-aging properties. (Chong SK and Oberholzer VG, 1988) In China it is utilized for angina pectoris, MI and CHF. It has been evaluated for many other indications, most notably for use as an antihyperglycemic. The active compounds are heterogeneous triterpene saponin glycosides, collectively termed ginsenosides. The exact ginsenosides vary by Panax species,(Attele AS, Wu JA et al, 1999) root age (Gillis CN, 1997) and preparation 131 method (i.e., red or white). The Commission E monograph recommends a dosage of 1 to 2 g of root daily. (Blumenthal M,Busse WR et al, 1998) Clinical trials in China and Korea have investigated ginseng for cardiac function, although there is no known mechanism and little data from placebo-controlled or blinded studies. An open trial evaluating CHF contrasted, 1) red ginseng, 2) digoxin, and 3) digoxin plus red ginseng, and found that hemodynamic improvement was most marked with combined therapy. (Dmg DZ, Shen TK et al, 1995) In a double blind, placebo-controlled trial of coronary heart disease, a mixture of Chinese herbs,including ginseng, found that stroke volume index and cardiac index improved. (Fang J, Jian J et al, 1987) Ginseng has been shown to have both hypertensive and hypotensive effects in animal studies trials. (Gillis CN, 1997) Hypotensive effects are attributed to enhanced synthesis of nitric oxide. An open trial of 4.5 g red ginseng daily found systolic blood pressure decreased after eight weeks. (Han KH, Choe SC et al, 1998) In contrast, a ginseng-abuse syndrome has been described wherein hypertension, behavioral changes and diarrhea occur. (Siegel RK, 1979; Siegel RK, 1980) In an observational study of 133 chronic ginseng users, 22 developed elevated blood pressure. (Siegel RK, 1979) Such effects might be due to ginseng dammarenetriol glycosides, which have strong central nervous system excitatory actions. Animal studies suggest that ginseng scavenges free radicals. (Gillis CN, 1997) In a placebo-controlled trial of 30 patients undergoing mitral valve surgery, ginseng and ginsenoside Rb were evaluated for protective effects in ischemia and reperfiision injiiry. (Zhan Y, Xu XH et al, 1994) Both improved postoperative cardiac function; however, ginseng provided greater benefit than the isolate ginsenoside Rb. An 132 interaction of ginseng with warfarin, in which the INR was reduced to subtherapeutic levels, has been reported. (Janetzky K and Morreale AP, 1997) However, no mechanistic evidence for the interaction has been provided. (Vaes LP and Chyka PA, 2000) Interaction with digoxin, or with the digoxin assay and Siberian ginseng, has been observed' though this may have been due to a contaminant. (Awang DVC, 1996) Of note, many products that claim ginseng content have no ginsenosides. (Liberti LE and Der Marderosian A, 1978; Cui J, Garle M e t a l , 1994) Some ginseng preparations have been contaminated with germanium, which has led to an account of ginseng related diuretic resistance and renal failure. (Becker BN, Greene J et al, 1996) 8.8.1.2 Ma huang {Ephedra sinica) Ma huang is a natural source of ephedrine and has potent sympathomimetic activity. Herbal remedies and soft drinks used for energy or weight loss often contain ma huang. Its pharmacokinetics and bioavailability are similar to standard doses of ephedrine,(White LM, Gardner SF et al, 1997) but the effects are delayed in onse tThis is one of the most commonly taken supplements and is called by a variety of names including ma huang, ephedra extract, ephedra sinica, ephedra equisetina, ephedra intermedia, ephedra geradiana, ephedra herb powder, epitonin, or ephedrine. (Mansoor GA,2001) Between 1997 and 1999, a total of 140 reports of adverse events were related to ma huang; (Hailer CA and Benowitz NL, 2000) 13 caused permanent impairment and 10 resulted in death. Ephedrine and related alkaloids have been associated with adverse cardiovascular events, including acute myocardial infarction, severe hypertension, myocarditis, and lethal cardiac arrhythmias. (To LB, Sangster JF et al, 1980; Wiener I,Tilkian AG et al, 1990) Constriction of coronary arteries and, in some cases, vasospasm is believed to be the mechanisms of myocarditis and myocardial 133 infarction. The adrenergic effects of ephedrine shorten cardiac refractory periods, permitting the development of reentrant cardiac arrhythmias. Ephedrine can predispose patients to both hemorrhagic and ischemic stroke. (Bruno A, Nolte KB et al, 1993) Many reports concern healthy young people without known cardiac disease. The majority had new-onset hypertension, and other findings included cerebrovascular accidents, arrhythmias and ML Several reports link the adverse response of ma huang to concurrent use of caffeine, guarana (a source of caffeine and theophylline)(Carlson M. and Thompson RD, 1998) or exercise. In a 2-year period in Texas, some 5000 reports of adverse effects of dietary supplements containing ephedra were reported. (CDC, 1996) It makes good sense to specifically instruct patients with hypertension, diabetes mellitus, thyroid disease, cardiac rhythm disorders, and seizures not to take herbals with ephedra. Subarachnoid hemorrhage is thought to be a result of the hypertensive action of ephedrine, which can be short lived, or of cerebral vasculitis, which has been described in association with a variety of sympathomimetic drugs. (Wooten MR, Khangure MS et 1, 1983; Fallis RJ and Fisher M, 1985) Thrombotic stroke is presumably related to vasoconstrictionof large cerebral arteries,which leads to local thrombosis as a result of stasis and sympathomimetic-induced platelet activation. An additional cause of concern for clinicians treating hypertension is the reported association of kidney stones with ephedra mgestion. (Powell T,Hsu FF et al, 1998) Chemical analysis has revealed these concretions to contain ephedrine and its metabolites. Renal calculi containing ephedrine have also been found in patients consuming large amounts of guaifenesin and ephedrine in over-the-counter preparations. (Assimos DG, Leinbach RF et al, 1999) It should be noted that ephedra has 134 also been linked to cases of psychoses, (Jacobs KM and Hirsch KA, 2000) mood disorders, and myocarditis. (Zaacks SM, Klein L et al, 1999) Many of the cases we reviewed involved side effects such as anxiety, tremulousness, insomnia, palpitations, and personality changes that are well known to occur with the use of stimulant drugs. When ephedrine is used for medical purposes, these types of reactions are considered side effects and must be included in the assessment of risks and benefits. (Haller CA and Benowitz NL, 2000) In fact, ephedrine is rarely prescribed today for medical purposes, because newer drugs have more specific actions and fewer side effects. The risks of taking ephedra alkaloids as a dietary supplement, however, are difficult to justify because the alkaloids have no demonstrated benefit. Caffeine is present in many products that contain ephedra alkaloids, and those who take these products might also be consuming considerable quantities of caffeine in coffee, tea, and soft drinks. Caffeine is likely to enhance the cardiovascular and central nervous system effects of ephedrine. Caffeine acts by competitively antagonizing the receptors for adenosine, a hormone released by endothelial cells that dilates blood vessels. (Benowitz NL, 1990) By inhibiting adenosine-mediated dilatation of blood vessels, caffeine constricts blood vessels and may increase blood pressure in persons prone to hypertension. Caffeine also augments the release of catecholamines, an effect that, when combined with that of ephedrine, could lead to increased stimulation of the central nervous system and cardiovascular system. (Robertson D, Frolich JC et al, 1978) Phenylpropanolamine, another ephedrine alkaloid, was marketed with caffeine in various weight-reducing aids until 1983, when the combination was banned by the FDA after numerous reports of adverse effects. Several studies have shown that caffeine and phenylpropanolamine have an additive effect on blood pressure. (Brown NJ, Ryder D et 135 al, 1991) These interactions between phenylpropanolamine and caffeine support the idea that the combination of ephedrine and caffeine in a dietary supplement could increase the risk of adverse effects. 8.8.1.3 Yellow oleander (Thevetia neriifolia) Yellow oleander {Thevetia neriifolia) is a commonly grown tree found widely in Eastern India. (Bose TK, Basu RK et al, 1999) The seeds of yellow oleander are highly poisonous and contain three glycosides--thevetin, thevetoxin and peruvoside. Yellow oleander seed ingestion is usually with suicidal intent in Eastern India. In the case of oleander, all plant tissues, including the seeds, roots, stems, leaves, berries, and blossoms, are considered extremely toxic. (Safadi R, Levy I, et al, 1995) In fact, death in humans has been reported following ingestion of as little as 1 oleander leaf. (Szabumewicz M, McGrady JD et al, 1971) The clinical manifestations of oleander intoxication, as well as other natural glycosides, are virtually identical to digoxin overdose. Morbidity and mortality are mainly related to cardiotoxic adverse effects that usually include life-threatening ventricular tachyarrhythmias, bradycardia, and heart block. The diagnosis should rely on the clinical presentation of unexplained hyperkalemia, and cardiac, neurologic, and gastrointestinal symptoms. (Safadi R, Levy I et al, 1995) Poisoning symptoms indicated serious cardiac, neuromotor and mental malfunctioning, and manifested as tachycardia, arrhythmia, paralysis, ataxia and disorientation. (Oji O and Okafor QE, 2000) Serious yellow oleander induced arrhythmias were associated with higher serum cardiac glycoside concentrations and hypokalemia but not with disturbances of magnesium. (Eddleston M,Ariaratnam CA et al, 2000) Anti-digoxin Fab fragments are a safe and effective treatment for serious 136 cardiac arrhythmias induced by yellow oleander. The diagnosis can be further supported by the detection of the substance digoxin in a radioimmunoassay for digoxin. 8.8.1.4 Stephania tetrandra Stephania tetrandra is an herb sometimes used in traditional Chinese medicine to treat hypertension. Tetrandrine, an alkaloid extract oiS. tetrandra, has been shown to be a calcium ion channel antagonist, paralleling the effects of verapamil. Tetrandrine blocks T and L calcium channels, interferes with the binding of diltiazem and methoxyverapamil at calcium-channel binding sites, and suppresses aldosterone production. (Rossier MF, Python CP et al, 1993; Sutter MC and Wang YX, 1993) A parenteral dose (15 mg/kg) of tetrandrine in conscious rats decreases mean, systolic, and diastolic blood pressures for more than 30 minutes; however, an intravenous 40-mg/kg dose killed the rats by myocardial depression. In stroke-prone hypertensive rats, an oral dose of 25 or 50 mg/kg produced a gradual and sustained hypotensive effect after 48 hours without affecting plasma renin activity. (Kawashima K, Hayakawa T et al, 1990) In addition to its cardiovascular actions, tetrandrine has reported antineoplastic, immunosuppressive, and mutagenic effects. (Sutter MC and Wang YX, 1993) Tetrandrine is 90% protein-bound with an elimination half-life of 88 minutes, according to dog studies; however, rat studies have shown a sustained hypotensive effect for more than 48 hours after a 25- or 50-mg oral dose. Tetrandrine causes liver necrosis in dogs orally administered 40 mg/kg of tetrandrine 3 times weekly for 2 months, reversible swelling of liver cells with a 20-mg/kg dose, and no observable changes with a 10-mg/kg dose. (Sutter MC and Wang YX, 1993) Given the evidence of hepatotoxicity, many more studies are necessary to establish a safe dosage of tetrandrine in humans. More recently, tetrandrine has been implicated in an outbreak of rapidly progressive 137 renal failure, termed Chinese herb nephropathy. Numerous individuals developed the condition after using a combination of several Chinese herbs as part of a dieting regimen. It has been hypothesized that the cause may be attributed to misidentification of S tetrandra; nonetheless, questions still remain as to the role of tetrandra in the development of this serious toxic effect. (Vanherweghem JL, 1994; Schmeiser HH, Bieler CA et al, 1996; Violin C' 1997) 8.8.1.5 Danshen (Salvia miltiorrhiza) Salvia miltiorrhiza (Danshen), a relative of the Western sage Salvia officinalis, is native to China. (Mashour NH, Lin GI et al,1998) Danshen is used in TCM to promote blood flow and treat cardiovascular diseases. Besides function of circulatory stimulant, sedative, and cooling are also available. It is sold in over-the-counter herbal preparations, prescribed by TCM doctors and administered in Chinese hospitals for angina pectoris, acute myocardial infarction (MI) and ischemic and thrombotic disorders. Salvia miltiorrhiza may be useful as an antianginal drug because it has been shown to dilate coronary arteries in all concentrations, similar to P. notoginseng, Futhermore, S. miltiorrhiza also shown to have protecting function of myocardial mitochondrial membranes from ischemia-reperfusion injury and lipid peroxidation because of its free radical-scavenging effects. (Zhao BL, Jiang W et al, 1996) In vitro and animal studies suggest it may be vasoactive, scavenge free radicals and inhibit platelet aggregatiorL(Wang Z, Roberts JM et al, 1982) The active compounds in danshen are tanshinones and phenolic compounds. (Lei XL and Chiou G.C, 1986) 8.8.1.6 Ginkgo biloba Ginkgo biloba, is derived from the leaves of the maidenhair tree. (Valli G and Giardina EGV, 2002) Although the root and kernels of G. biloba have long been used in 138 traditional Chinese medicine, the tree gained attention in the West during the 20th century for its medicinal value after a concentrated extract of G. biloba leaves was developed in the 1960s.