Chelating therapy was not given because of the deranged liver function. Her liver function normalised in 3 weeks after stopped taking the herbal pills. Another victum was a 35-year-old housewife, who had been suffering from anxiety neurosis for eight years, was receiving follow up treatment in Psychiatry Clinic regularly. She consulted the same TCM practitioner as in the first patient and was taking "Boa Nina Dan" in the belief that it could "'help excrete the toxin of the psychiatric medication from the body and stop the left groin pain',. She had been taking four pills daily for 6 months. She received screening for blood lead level after learning that "Boa jSjins Dan,, contained excess lead and her first blood lead level was 5.6 ^imol/L (< 1.5 umol/L). Furthermore, a 48-year-old housewife who had suffered from common cold symptoms consulted the same TCM practitioner. She took four "Boa Nm Dan" pills 233 daily (or three days. Her blood lead level was 6.7 Jiao nol/L (< 1.5 ^mol/L). She was referred to received further management. The highest blood lead level in the third patient could be caused by acute lead intake and the lead needs time to distribute to the body tissues. At this stage, the body tissues could still be free from lead deposition. This explains why she had no dinical features of poisoning despite having the highest blood lead level. The second and third patient, although relatively asymptomatic, were treated with chelating therapy. In douhtful clinical situations, a Calcium Disodium EDTA mobilization test can be done to decide whether chelating therapy should be given. The Department of Health has already banned the distribution of the pills and confiscated the patient list from this practitioner for further investigation. The department appealed to people who have taken the pills to come forward for free lead screening and appropriate treatment. Nearly eighty people have to take blood lead screening test by the Department of Health after learning that the pills contained excess lead. The herbal pili was analyzed chemically by the laboratory of the Department of Health and showed that each pills contained 200 times more lead than the daily allowable intake. Based on the practitioner statement showed that no heavy metal was used in this formula and the presence of heavy metals might be the result of contamination during manufacture. According to the fact that in China there was no formal regulation for traditional medical practice and qualified medical pactitioners in the past. Some TCM practitioners are trained specifically as Chinese herbal medicine practitioners and have little or no knowledge of medicine. They only get training from the senior practitioner and lack of 234 western medical concept also. Some of them even made the herbal drug by themselves at home and the constituents of the herbal pills cannot be standardized or regulated. 15.2.3 L e a d P o i s o n i n g W o r l d w i d e Beside "Bao Ning Dan",several cases of lead poisoning reported in recent years. Lead poisoning cases may happen in diffisrent countries. (Fisher A & Couteur D, 2000) A 4-month-old boy presented at a Hong Kong hospital with a history of fever, cough, anorexia, vomiting, and a grand mal seizure. (Chan TY, 1997) On physical examination he was comatose with repealed tonic-cGun onic convulsions. His whole blood lead level was 137 {_ig/100g and the 24-h urinary lead excretion was 52 ^g. Since birth the boy had been treated with several Chinese herbal medicines (16 unit dose packages of "Po Ying Tan", 5 packages of ' 'Chun Chu MiT. and one package each of "Po Lung Yuen" and ''Siu Fun San"). In Chinese communities, these medicines are used very frequently, without prescription, Ibr many minor ailments. All these medicines were found to contain lead. The analyses of 11 brands of Chinese herbal medicines by flameless atomic absorption spectrophotometry revealed that one of the medicines, "Po Ying Tan,, had a mean lead content of 7.5 mg per unit dose; the other 10 brands had lower but still significant lead contents. Samples of six other "Po Ying Tan" brands showed lead levels from 0.012 to 0.07 mg/dose. (Chan TY, 1997) A survey done by the Hong Kong Medical and Health Department showed that 2 of 44 patent herbal medications contained > 30 fag/pill of lead and would provide > 3 mg/week when taken in recommended doses (i.e. more than the provisional weekly tolerable intake for lead established by FAO/WHO). (Yu ECL & Yeung CY,1987) 235 A semiconscious 2-nionth-()id boy was admitted with repeated convulsions to a Hong Kong hospital. (Yu ECL & Yeung CY, 1987) Subsequent investigations showed a blood lead level of 195 |.ig/dl and a 24-h urinary lead excretion of 20.7 mg. Sincc the 4th day olhis life he had been treated with a herbal powder mixture with a tota] and leachable lead content of 23.3% and 15.6%, respectively. At least 0.2 g of this powder had been painted onto his buccal mucosa twice a week, resulting in a lead intake of 62.4 mg/week. Heavv metal intoxication of newborn infants fed with "Ba-Pao-Neu-Hwang-San" has been reported every year by many hospitals in Taiwan. Nearly ten years ago, the National Laboratories of Foods and Drugs of the Department of Health, Executive Yuan, have a case report for a five-month-old female infant who died as a result of long term feeding with "Ba-Pao-Neu-Hwang-San". The drug was found to have contained lead 44,000 ppm. (Chi YW. Chen SL et a l 1993) A 59.year-old woman in the United Stales developed anemia, diffuse pain, insomnia, imtability. and paranoia as well as dirnculty using her hands. (Lightfoote J, Blair liJ el a l 1977) Her 24-h urinary lead excrction was 1044 [xg. Four months before, she had been instructed by a herbalist.acupuncturist to take 30 Chinese herbal pills per day. Since the pills showed a lead content of 0.5 mg per bill, this advice amounted to a lead intake of 15 mg/day. (Lightfoote J, Blair HJ et al, 1977) "Chuifong tokuwan pills" (Nan Ling Pharmaceutical Company. Hong Kong) illegally sold in Texas contained not only synthetic Western drugs (diazepam, indomethacin. Hydrochlorothiazide, mefenamic acid, dexamethasone) but also lead and cadmium. (Anonymous, 1989) When 93 persons who had ingested these pills were 236 tested for exposure to these hca\'y mclals. none showed elevated levels of lead, hut 22 (24%) had abnormally high urinary cadmium levels over 2.5 f.ig/1 ml. and 39 (42%) showed elevated urine values for retinolbinding protein, a low molecular weight protein indicative of renal tubular dysfunction.(Anonymous. 1989) A s m e s of five cases of lead poisoning due to traditional remedies in the West Midlands. (Bayly GR. Braithwaite RA et a l 1995) All developed typical clinical features. Blood lead and zinc protoporphyrin (ZPP) concentrations were elevated 2-10 times the upper limit of normal. The remedies contained up to 60% lead t) 11 ] of the medicines as the cause of the poisoning was made in one patient by measurement of lead isotopic ratios, (see Table 15 a) Moreover two cases of lead poisoning from the Chinese herbal medicine Cordyceps were reported by the Department of Health in a laboratory-based blood lead surveillance program in Taiwan. (Wii TN. Yang KC et aL 1996) This was caused by. These two patients took Cordyceps herbal medicine for treatment of underlying diseases. Loss of appetite and anemic signs of lead poisoning were manifested in one patient with a blood lead level of 130 microg/dl. while the other patient was asymptomatic with a blood lead level of 46 microg/di. After cessation of intake in the asymptomatic patient, and cessation of intake and treatment with chelating agents in the symptomatic patient, the blood lead levels returned to normal range. A 33-year-old Korean woman was diagnosed to have combination of chronic lead and arsenic poisoning following consumption of a Korean herbal medicine prescribed for haeiTiorrhoids. (Heggs M' Conway M et aL 1990) The patient had malaise, severe difficulty walking, arthralgia, oedema and abdominal pain w showed anaemia with basophilic stippling, fragmentation and a raised reticulocyte count. Laboratory examination showed that the blood and urine lead levels and urine arsenic 237 levels were aiscd. Analysis of the herbal medicine revealed a high lead and arsenic content. Ti-eatment with the newer chelating agent 2,3-dimercaplosuccinic acid was successful, with no detectable side-effects. Another South Korean case report describes lead poisoning (abdominal pain, anemia, and a urinary lead level of 739.4 )Lig/l) due to a herbal medicine containing a high concentration of lead. (Chung JG, Yoon YB et al, 1980) In western European, a patient was suffered from severe anaemia after ingestion of several kinds of ayurvedic drugs during travel to India. (Spriewald BM, Rascu A et aL 1999) This 37 year old man was admitted to the hospital because of weakness, dizziness, nausea, and diffuse muscle pain that had developed over the past few weeks. The patient stated that two months before he had travelled to India and took some herbal medicine when he make visited a traditional ayurvedic medical centre. He took nearly all the medication before admission. The metallic appearance of the paste and the detection of basophilic stippling in the red blood cells raised the suspicion of heavy metal poisoning. The diagnosis of lead intoxication was confirmed by high blood lead concentrations' an increased urinary lead concentration, and an increased urinary excretion of delta-aminolaevulinic acid. Also, slightly increased urinary concentrations of arsenic and silver were found. After chelation treatment with D-penicillamine threatment. the patient recovered. 15.3 M E R C U R Y 15.3.1 Overv iew Mercury has been used in medicine and industry for over 2000 years, e.g. ; by medieval alchemists in gold extraction. (Campbell BG, 1999) A large variety of inorganic and organic compounds containing mercury have been used as cathartics. 238 antiseptics, vermicides and diuretics. Mercury is a ubiquitous substance in our environmenl. Mercury vapor in the atmosphere makes its way into fresh and salt water by falling in precipitation. Methyl mercury compounds are created by bacterial conversion of inorganic mercury in water and soil' which subsequently concentrates in seafood and fish. Beside this, mecury is also used as medicinal purpose and spiritual practice in some other countries such as Caribbean islands. (Luis ZH & Philip 0 0 , 1996) 15.3.2 C i n n a b a r Mercury compounds were also used in traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) for thousand years. Cinnabar, a crude form of mercury sulphide (HgS), has been widely used in the traditional Chinese mcdicines. (Tseng HH) It consisted of a mineral composed of red mercuric sulphide. It is used as sedative and transquilizer for the treatment of palpitation, insomnia, infantile convlusion due to fever, epilepsy. In traditional Chinese medicine, mercury is part of some preparations under the terminology of "cinnabaris" (mercury sulfide), "calomer'(mercury chloride) or "hydrarsyri oxvdiim rubrum: (mercury oxide). Such products are used for a variety of indications including, for example, as a tranquilliser, an anti-epileptic, for ulcers or to treat insomnia. (Koh HL & Woo S, 2000) In traditional Chinese theory, the usuage may depend on its pharmaceutical function and the dosage of the heavy metal used may laraer than the safety level. However, in western attitude, this kind of heavy metal contamination was unacceptable and dangereous. The approximate minimum lethal dosa(Te for a 150-lb man is 500 mg (mercuric chloride); other inorganic and organic mercury compounds vary widely in toxicity. Cinnabar is insoluble in water but the free partical of mercury compounds and some compounds are soluble in water. Different kind of processing may affect the percentage 239 of the soluble and free mercury compounds. Base on the result from the research of the soluble mercury and free mercury compounds showed that only traditional griding method can not remove those impurities. Adding water into it to elutriate could allow the turbid fluid to settle in tanks and then collecting the deposit. After elutriate, the percentage of soluble part of mercury and the free particle of mercury compounds will decrease and have low toxicities. In the animal experiment of Cinnabar showed that there was a clear dose-response effects could see in the clinincal and pathological slituation with the appearance of nodulation and edema of liver, kidney and spleen with serious gastrienteriiies and necrosis. (Tseng HH) 15.3.3 P r e s e n t a t i o n The manifestations of mercury toxicity vary, depending on the chemical form of the mercury compound and patient sensitivity. (Li AM, Chan MHM et ai, 2000) In the acute phase, symptoms are produced within minutes of exposure. These include a burning sensation in the mouth and throat, abdominal pain, vomiting, eschars on the lips, loss of fluids and electrol>4es, tachycardia followed by shock and peripheral vascular collapse. Delayed actions are evident after about 12 hr to several days. These include ulcerative colitis, excessive salivation, foul breath and metallic taste. Initially the urine volume increases, later there is oliguria, anuria, uremia, acidosis and renal tubular necrosis. Exposure may be by all portals of entry. In chronic exposure to mercury compounds, the kidney is a major target organ. In chronic intoxication, inflammation of the mouth, swollen salivary glands, soft spongy gums, loose teeth, blue-black gum line, excessive salivation, metallic taste, foul breath, muscular tremors and behavioral changes are symptoms which should be confirmed by mercury determinations in the urine. In organic mercury intoxication, gastrointestina] 240 symptoms are rare, mental and nervous symptoms, such as ataxia, visual disturbances, paresis and delerium, predominate. 15.3.4 P o i s o n i n g Cases ' A 5 year old Chinese boy presented with recurrent ora] ulceration followed by motor and vocal tics. (Li AM, Chan MHM et a l 2000) The oral ulceration, which mainly affected the left lateral aspect of his tongue, appeared approximately five weeks prior to the onset of tics. Herpetic ulceration was diagnosed and confirmed by the isolation of herpes simplex virus (HSV) type 1 from his tongue swab. Symptom was improved after medication but relapse several days later. His lamiiy then consulted a local pharmacist and then started to used a Chinese patent medicine named "Watermelon Frost" It is an oral spray for healing mucosal ulcer. After using this medication for several weeks, the symptom improved. However, the patient family found that the patient developed a sudden onset of motor tics that consisted of eye blinking, head turning, and shoulder shrugging. There was no preceding history of flu like symptoms, head injury, or consumption of other drugs or herbs. There was no family history of any psychiatric or neuroioeical problems. He was taken to hospital to received follow up investigation and no abnormalities were revealed after examination. The patient admitted that he had been using the this herbal oral spray up to 20 times a day for the preceding four weeks, when the recommended dose was only one spray twice a day. As the use of herbal medication always arouses the suspicion of heavy metal exposure in the locality, screening for heavy metals was performed. After analyzed, the mercury content of the spray was 878 ppm (2% methylmercury and 98% inorganic mercury) and the patient's blood mercury level was 83 nmol/1 (normal for adults <50 nmol/1). His tics completely resolved at 241 follow up four weeks later and the blood mercury level also returned to normal after stopped taking the herbal spray. "Watermelon Frost" is an old famous patent medicine in Southeast China. This patent medicine was widely used and easily obtainable over the counter in China and Asian population also because of its low price and pharmecutical value. The medicine that the patient look was contained 878 ppm of mercury and mainly in the inorganic form. Although methylmercury constituted only 2% of total mercury in this preparation, the content was 18 times the action level of mercury in food as proposed by the Food and Drug Administration. (FDA, 1998) This high mercury intake, together with the temporal association between symptom onset and increased blood mercury level and the subsequent resolution of symptoms with normalisation of mercury concentration, make chronic mercury poisoning the most likely culprit. Recently, a lawsuit in New York City netted two million dollars for a child who suffered from permanent neurological symptoms related to the use of the product 'Tse Koo Choy"., which contains calomel (mercurous chloride). (Elaine KY, 1994) A Chinese store and two hospitals were cited in the case for the sale of the product and the failure to diagnose the symptoms of toxicity. 15.4 A R S E N I C 15.4.1 Overv iew Arsenic intoxication is known for centuries as a result of suicidal and homicidal intentions. Arsenic has been in use as a therapeutic agent and as a poison for more than 2,400 years. Its use as a general remedy and tonic was common in Europe last century (eg; in Fowler, s solution which contained 1% potassium arsenite) In the early 1970s, it was introduced to treat acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) and chronic myeloid 242 leukemia (CML) in China and showed surprising clinical efficacy.