Cerebral angiograms demonstrated multiple areas of alternating focal constriction and dilatation ("beading" appearance) in the anterior and posterior cerebral 120 a r t e r i e s a n d t h e s u p e r i o r c e r e b e l l a r a r t e r y , w h i c h i s c o n s i s t e n t w i t h a r t e r i t i s . T h e h o s p i t a l course was uneventful, and her headache gradually disappeared over the next 10 days. The temporal association between the ingestion of ethanolic ginseng extract and the onset of severe headache in this case strongly suggests a causal relationship. The angiographic appearance of cerebral arteritis may be associated with use of sympathomimetics or cocaine, various CNS inflammatory processes, or aneurysmal subarachnoid hemorrhage. However, detailed medical history excluded use of cocaine or any sympathomimetic drugs, and there was no CNS infection or aneurysm. The syndrome seen in our patient was most likely related to ingestion of a large amount of ginseng extract. Although the acute oral toxicity (LD50) for ethanolic extract of ginseng has been determined in mice, its toxic dose in humans is not known. Patients who take ginseng risk paying a high price without proven benefit. In Asian cultures, ginseng is commonly consumed by pregnant women and is given to newborns in hopes of bolstering energy. (OUara M,Kiefer D et al, 1998) A case-control study of 88 pairs of women (matched only for age and parity) found a significantly lower rate of pregnancy-induced hypertension, but a 3-fold higher incidence of gestational diabetes among ginseng consumers. (Chin RK, 1991) Ginseng was not recommending for pregnant or lactating women or for children until safety and efficacy are proven in randomized controlled trials. 7.5 Drug - herb Interaction Both Asian and American ginseng have been shown to reduce blood glucose levels and hemoglobin Ale levels in people with type 2 Diabetes mellitus. (Sotaniemi E, Haapakoski E et al, 1995; Vuksan V,Sievenpiper JL et al, 2000; Vuksan V,Sievenpiper JL et al, 2001] Given concurrently with insulin or oral antidiabetic agents, ginseng may, 121  without careful blood glucose monitoring, result in hypoglycemia. There has been one case report of ginseng decreasing the effect of warfarin in a previously stable patient with a mechanical heart valve. Within two weeks of adding ginseng, the INR dropped to 1.5 from the targeted 3.0-4.0 and returned to 3.3 after ginseng was discontinued. (Janetzky K and Morreale AP, 1997) However, some current animal experimental showed no significant impact of ginseng on the pharmacokinetics / pharmacodynamics of warfcin when they are concomitantly administered. (Zhu M, ChanKWet al, 1999) A 74-year-old asymptomatic man taking a constant dose of digoxin for many years to control atrial fibrillation and was found to have an elevated serum digoxin level. (McRae S, 1996) No signs of digoxin poisoning such as mental disturbance, nausea, vomiting or abnormal vision. The patient then revealed that he was taking Siberian ginseng, a popular herbal remedy. After stopping ginseng intake, the serum digoxin level soon returned to an acceptable level However, the patient resumed taking ginseng several months later and the serum digoxin level again rose. After regional forensic laboratory analyzed the samples of the Siberian ginseng capsules; no digoxin or digitoxin contamination was found. Siberian ginseng contains eleutherosides, which are chemically related to cardiac glycosides such as digoxin. In this patient, some component of the Siberian ginseng capsules may have been converted in vivo to digoxin. The case reported here should remind physicians to ask patients about nonprescribed medications, "natural" or otherwise, and to consider those remedies as possible factors when unexpected symptoms or complications arise. 122 *V 7.6 Conclusion Based on the accumulation of experience over many thousands of years, some principles have been developed to guide the use of Chinese medicines. According to the lack of standardization of ginseng products and the common practice of adulteration with cheaper substitutes, it is often difficult to be certain of the extent to which true ginseng was involved in some previous reports of its alleged adverse effects. (D'Arcy PF, 1991) Both medical professionals and the general public should be alerted to the potential toxicity of herbal remedies. Furthermore, in order to gain better understanding of the toxicity of ginseng and its individual allergic reactions, research should be encouraged. 123 Chapter 8 - Herbal Medicines With Cardiovascular Adverse Reactions 8.1 Overview The use of alternative therapies, herbs, and supplements occurs at a very high rate among patients attending a variety of health care settings. Such therapy may cause significant interactions or effects on hypertension and other cardiovascular disorders and needs to be considered by clinicians. Plants that contain cardiac glycosides are used throughout the world for the treatment of heart failure and some arrhythmias. Current conventional pharmacological treatment includes at least five classes of drugs: Antiadrenergic, vasodilators, Calcium channel blockers, diuretics, and ACE inhibitors. It is rare to use single drug therapy. Non-drug conventional therapy limits itself to diet counseling, exercises, and the cessation of smoking and drinking. Herbals including ma huang, S t John's wort, yohimbine, garlic,and licorice all may cause important consequences in the hypertensive patient. Added care is needed in monitoring the use and effects of herbal and alternative therapies in the hypertensive population. 8.2 Hypertension Hypertension is very prevalent with some 50 million Americans diagnosed with hypertension and the majority taking antihypertensive drugs. Based on the fact that tighter goal for the treatment of hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and hyperglycemia has been recommended, multidrug therapy is routine for these disorders. 8.3 Atherosclerosis Atherosclerosis is a multifactorial disease, and other factors besides lipid peroxidation can accelerate atherogenesis independently or in association with lipid 124 peroxidation. Increased retention and aggregation of LDL in the arterial wall and LDL oxidation are key events in the acceleration of atherogenesis. Because LDL and macrophages are retained in the atherosclerotic lesion on the arterial wall and macrophages release proteoglycans to their surroundings under atherogenic conditions, the macrophage-mediated aggregation of LDL may play a physiologic role in LDL modification in vivo. 8.4 Arrhythmias There is increasing awareness of the problem of drug-induced cardiac arrhythmias. (Lean MF and Lee A, 1999) A cardiac arrhythmia is defined as any abnormal cardiac rhythm, whether the abnormality is one of rate, regularity or origin of the impulse initiating each heart beat. Drug-induced arrhythmias may be an adverse effect of a non-cardiac drug, a pro-arrhythmic complication of an anti-arrhythmic drug, or may arise from a drug overdose. Predisposing factors include underlying rhythm disturbances (especially ventricular tachycardia or fibrillation), impaired left ventricular function, pre-existing heart disease, high plasma levels of antiarrhythmic drugs and electrolyte abnormalities, especially hypokalemia and hypomagnesaemia. Effects on the QT interval The QT interval on the electrocardiogram (ECG) are an indirect measure of the duration of the ventricular action potential and ventricular repolarisation. Prolongation of ventricular repolarisation can cause arrhythmias, the most characteristic of which is torsades de pointes (twisting of the points), a specific form of ventricular tachycardia, which causes dizziness or syncope, it may lead to ventricular fibrillation and sudden death. Causes include bradycardia, certain inherited disorders, biochemical disturbances such as hypokalaemia, and acquired heart disease. Some patients with 125 torsade de pointes may be asymptomatic while others experience dizziness, light-headedness, syncope, collapse, irregular heartbeat and palpitations. 8.5 Cardie Failure A number of herbs contain potent cardioactive glycosides, which have positive inotropic actions on the heart. (Nick HM, George IL et al, 1998) The drugs digitoxin, derived from either D purpurea (foxglove) or Digitalis lanata, and digoxin, derived from D. lanata alone, have been used in the treatment of congestive heart failure for many decades. The only way to control dosage is to use standardized powdered digitalis, digitoxin, or digoxin. As is evident, treating congestive heart feilure with nonstandardized herbal drugs would be dangerous and foolhardy. 8.6 Angina Pectoris Crataegus of hawthorn is an important tonic for the cardiovascular system that is particularly useful for angina in TCM. Crataegus leaves, flowers, and fruits contain a number of biologically active substances, such as oligomeric procyanins, flavonoids, and catechins. Crataegus extract antagonizes the increases in cholesterol, triglyceride, and phospholipid levels in low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and very low-density lipoprotein in rats fed a hyperlipidemic diet; thus, it may inhibit the progression of atherosclerosis. (Shanthi S, Parasakthy K et al, 1994) Crataegus also prevents cholesterol accumulation in the liver by enhancing cholesterol degradation to bile acids, as well as suppressing cholesterol bio synthesis. (Rajendran S, Deepalakshmi PD et al, 1996) 8.7 Thromboembolic Disorders Thromboembolic disorders result from the sudden occlusion of a blood vessel by a blood clot (thrombus) in the arterial or venous circulation. (Lean MF and Lee A, 1999) 126 Venous thromboembolism is common and is associated with a mortality of 1-2 per cent. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT) usually arises in the veins of the lower limbs or pelvis. Clinical features include pain involving the calf or thigh associated with swelling, redness and warmth. Management involves restoring normal circulation and anticoagulation. If part of a venous thrombus breaks off it can lodge in the pulmonary circulation, causing pulmonary embolism (PE). This can present with breathlessness, chest pain and collapse. In the arterial circulation, a thrombus may result in peripheral arterial occlusion, either in the lower limbs or in the cerebral circulation, where it may result in stroke. 8.8 Discussion Several herbs offer potential for treating cardiovascular conditions including venous insufficiency, intermittent claudication, hyperlipidemia, hypertension and congestive heart failure (CHF). (Vam G and Giardina EGV, 2002) (See Table 8 a & b) Varied mechanisms, including antioxidant, antiplatelet, fibrinolytic, antiatherosclerotic, antihyperlipidemic, antiarrhythmic and vasodilatory actions, are ascribed to h e r b s  I n addition, the growing demand for soft drinks and foods with herbal additives greatly expands public exposure. More than this, Chinese herbs were also reported to have the possibilities to cause heart disease in Belgium. (Vanherweghem JL, 1997) Vanherweghem J.L. stated that nearly 30% patients with drug induced renal failure (they were taken as appetite suppressants: fenfluramine, dexfenfluramine, or phentermine, alone or in combination) were found to have aortic insufficiency. The valvular heart disease in Chinese-herb nephropathy seen in Belgium seems most likely to be due to the combined use of (dex)fenfluramine and Chinese herbs. It is also obvious that the nephropathy recorded both in Belgium and in Japan is not caused by (dex)fenfluramine, 127 *V and that tubulointerstitial disorders are induced by the prolonged use of Chinese herbs that contain aristolochic acid. The adverse effects, efficacy and interactions for herbal therapies that impact on the cardiovascular system are as follow. Table 8 a. Herbs With Adverse Cardiovascular Effects. (Valli G. and Giardina EGV, 2002) Yi  Herb Adverse Effect Comments -- Belladonna Tachycardia Herbal source of atropine (Blumenthal M, Busse WR et al, 1998) Danshen Platelet dysfunction In vitro evidence of platelet antagonism (Wang Z, Roberts JMetal , 1982) Dong quai Increased bleeding Presence of natural coumarins and in vitro evidence  tendency of platelet antagonism (Zhu DP, 1987; Page RL, 2nd and Lawrence JD, 1999) Feverfew Platelet dysfunction In vitro evidence of platelet antagonism (Heptinstall S, White Aet al, 1985) not supported in clinical trials (Groenewegen WA, Knight DW et al, 1992; Vogler BK and Ernst E,1999) Garlic Increased bleeding Case reports of hemorrhage. (Rose KD, Croissant PD tendency et al, 1990; Bumham BE, 1995) In vitro evidence of platelet dysfunction (Ali M, 1995; Bordia T, Mohammed N et al, 1996; Ali M, Thomson M et al, 2000) but conflicting platelet and fibrinolytic evidence from clinical trials (Harenberg J, Giese C et al, 1988; Kieswetter H, Jung F et al, 1991; Bordia A, Verma SK et al, 1998) Ginger Platelet dysfunction Conflicting results in studies of platelet antagonism in human trials (Lumb AB, 1994; Janssen P, Meyboom S et al, 1996; Bordia A, Verma SK et al, 19971 Hypertension Animal studies of specific purified ginger compounds demonstrate pressor effects (Suekawa M, Aburada M et al, 1986; Kobayashi M, Ishida Y et al, 11988) 128 -V Herb Adverse Effect~ Comments Ginkgo Increased bleeding Case reports of central nervous system hemorrhage. tendency, platelet Pharmacologic evidence of platelet antagonism; dysfunction however, active compounds not present in sufficient amounts in most extracts (Braquet P, 1993; Skogh M, 1998) : Ginseng Hypertension An abuse syndrome involving hypertension is described in chronic iisers. (Siegel RK, 1979 However, evidence from clinical trials also supports hypotensive effects (Han KH, Choe SC et al, 1998) Hellebore Hypotension, Accidental ingestion occurs when plant is mistaken bradycardia for another, especially gentian (Jaffe AM, Gephardt D et al, 1990; Quatrehomme G, Bertrand F et al, 1993) Kava Platelet dysfunction Limited in vitro evidence (Gleitz J, Beile A. et al, 1997) Licorice Hypertension, Occur as a result of decreased inactivation of Cortisol pulmonary edema, causing symptoms of mineralocorticoid excess cardiomyopathy (Walker B and Edwards CRW, 1994) (rarely) Mahuang Stroke, myocardial Numerous case reports of serious adverse events in infarction, healthy young people. (Haller CA and Benowitz NL, arrhythmia, 2000) hypertension Myocarditis Rare case report (Zaacks SM, Klein L et al,1999) Oleander Arrhythmia Cardiac glycosides cause symptoms similar to digoxin toxicity. Responds to digoxin antibody treatment. (Safadi R, Levy I et al, 1995) Yohimbine Hypertension, Increases norepinephrine levels and central arrhythmia sympathetic outflow via a2 antagonism (Grossman E, Rosenthal T et al, 1993; Hof&nan BB, Lefikowitz | r J et al,1996) 129 Table 8 b . Important Cardiovascular Drug Interactions. Drug Herb Evidence for Interaction Warfarin Dong quai Case reports of elevation of PT and INR in patient stable on warfarin. (Page RL,2nd and Lawrence JD, 1999) Demonstration of pharmacological interaction in rabbits. (Lo ACT, Chan K et al, 1995) Danshen Decreases warferin clearance and increases bioavailability. Case reports of hemorrhage in subjects on warfarin. (Yu CM, Chan JCN et al, 1997; Chan TY, 1998) Garlic Rare reports of elevation in INR in subjects previously stable on warfarin. (Sunter W, 1991) Ginkgo Case report of CNS hemorrhage in patient previously stable ofwarfarin. (Matthews MK, Jr, 1998) Ginseng Case report of decreased INR in patient stable on warfarin. (Janetzky K and Morreale AP, 1997) Antiplatelet Dong quai In vitro evidence of platelet antagonism. (Page RL, drugs 2nd and Lawrence JD, 1999) (NSAIDs, Feverfew Potential antiplatelet effects. (Heptinstall S, White A ticlopidine, et al, 1985) No case reports of hemorrhage. others) Garlic Case reports of platelet dysfunction with increased bleeding time (Rose KD, Croissant PD et al, 1990; Bumham BE, 1995) Conflicting evidence from clinical trials of antiplatelet effects. (Harenberg J, Giese C et al, 1988; Kieswetter H, Jung F et al, 1991; Legnani C, Frascaro M et al, 1993; Bordia A, Verma SK et al, 1998) Antiplatelet Ginger In vitro evidence of antiplatelet activity, but no effects (inigs seen in clinical trials and no case reports of adverse (NSAIDs, events. ticlopidine, Ginkgo Case reports of hemorrhage.