12.3 MuTong {Aristolochia manshuriensis) MuTong is the name of the Chinese plant derived either from Aristolochia manshuriensis or various species of akebia or clematis. (Goshi T, 1992) Mutong is the stem of Akebia quinata (Thunb.) Decne (Lardizabalaceae). (Chang H. and But PPH, 1987) There is, however, much confusion regarding the products which are used as the Chinese herb Mutong. This lack of verification can result in the inadvertent use of Aristolochia manshuriensis and subsequent adverse health effects. Pharmacognostic study, however, revealed that most of the so-called "Mutong products" being sold in the market are actually <Guanmutong> derived from the dried vines of Aristolochia manshuriensis Kom(Aristolochiaceae), which have a bitter taste and "cold" property The herb is credited with latent-heat-clearing antipyretic, sthenic "heaf'-purgative, diuretic and lactagogue actions. The acute toxicity of excessive doses of MuTong has been previously reported in Chinese publications. One woman wanting to promote milk production ate soup containing 70 g MuTong and red beans; she and her father-in-law who also ate the beans developed acute renal failure. (Wu SH, 1964) Another woman who took a decoction made with 175 g of MuTong also had acute renal failure and none of them died. Less fortunate were the other two men and two women who took decoctions prepared with 50 g, 70 g, 60 g, and 120 g MuTong respectively and they died of renal failiire. (Wu SH, 187 'V 1964; Lord GM, Tagore R et al, 1999) There is no report on the long-term adverse effects of MuTong, except a case of renal-function impairment in a man who took ten doses of a decoction containing 25 g of MuTong. (Liu JY and Ceng HJ, 1994) All these cases were probably caused by GuanMuTong, which is derived from Aristolochia manshuriensis. 12.4 Ma-dou-ling {Fructus Aristolochiae) Members of the genus of Aristolochia have been used as medicines in the Orient and the West. A Chinese herb, Ma-dou-ling {Fructus Aristolochiae), is derived from the fruits of contorta Bunge. or A. debilis Sieb. et Zucc. In traditional Chinese medicine, the pharmaceutical function of Ma-dou-ling is to remove heat from the lung and relieve cough and asthma, and to remove heat from the large intestine (rectum) for the treatment of hemorrhoid. Short-term prescription of Ma-dou-ling was used for treatment of cough and asthma at doses ranging from 3-9 g without any side effects. However,two cases of adverse reaction were reported due to overdose. In one case, a woman vomited severely after having taking a decoction prepared with 15 g of Ma-dou-ling(Xiao P, 1989) Another case showed symptoms of nausea, dizziness and severe vomiting resulted from the intake of a decoction prepared with 30 g of Ma-dou-lingOverdose and long-term usage of Ma-dou-ling should be avoided. (Yin R, 1983) 12.5 Tripterygium wilfordii Tripterygium wilfordii Hook f . (TWH) is a plant of the genus Tripterygium of the family celastraceae. (Ming J, 1996) In China Tripterygium wilfordii was used to treated renal disease because the polyglycoside (TP) have pharmacological effect in autoimmune system. However, a case of herb-induce renal failure was reported in China. (Chai SR and Qu J, 1987) A patient suffer with Psoriasis consulted a practitioner 188 and was prescribed 8 g of Tripterygium wilfordii for one time daily and boiled with water for a month. However, the patient presumes using 12 g of Tripterygium wilfordii for the first time and only boiled for 20 minutes. Nausea and vomiting happened 2 hours later but he didn't seek medical help. He took 8 g of Tripterygium wilfordii on the nest day and started to have frequent vomiting and only have 100 ml of urine for that day. He was taken to hospital and found electrolyte imbalance with acidosis and symptoms of acute renal failure. The cause of ARF may relate to overdosage of Tripterygium wilfordii and the patient recover 2 months later. The mechanism of the intoxication may be related to the damage caused by direct toxin and ischaemia. (Bi KB, 2000) This was because the circulation of the renal system will decrease due to hypovolumic condition caused by diarrhea and vomiting after intoxication. Damage of the renal tubular cell from toxin directly may happen and changed into degenerating necrosis. 2 cases of biopsies confirmed the main cause of ARF from Tripterygium wilfordii intoxication was came from the toxin by the herb directly. (Bi KB, 2000) 12.6 Gastrodia Elata The drug consisted of the dried tuber of Gastrodia elata BL In traditional Chinese theory, it used as antihypertensive and anticonvulsive agent for the treatment of headache, vertigo and numbness of limbs, induced by hypertension and the premonitory symptoms of apoplexy. An anaphylaxic reaction for Gastrodia elata was reported in China that a 50 years old lady was found vertigo, nausea and vomiting after taken 10 g of for 6 hours. (Liu ZB, 1991) Purpura and skin itching was found for the whole body. Persistent abdominal pain and oliguria happened on the 2-day and she was diagnosed to have herb-induced ARF. She was recovering after one week of symptomatic treatment but the mechanism of the anaphylaxic reaction was still unknown. 189 12.7 Licorice (Glycyrrhiza glabra) An early report documented acute renal failure due to rhabdomyo lysis, which was a consequence of chronic licorice mgestion and, possibly, due to the administration of furosemide for the two days prior to presenting. Withdrawal of the licorice and renal dialysis brought about complete recovery. (Mourad G, Gallay P et al, 1979) In a subsequent case, myoglobinemia led to glomerulopathy and tubulopathy, but there was no clinical evidence of acute renal failure (ARF). (Heidemann HT and Kreuzfelder B, 1983) It was proposed that the mineralocorticoid-like actions of glycyrrhizin cause sodium retention and volume expansion, and thereby prevent the decrease in the glomerular filtration rate and the development of ARF, in spite of evidence of tubular dysfunction. (Mourad G, Gallay P et al, 1979; Heidemann HT and Kreuzfelder B, 1983) Moreover, another case reported the development of reversible tubulopathy. (Delcroix C, Poncin E et al, 1985) Besides this, a 72-year-old man that developed acute renal failure following severe hypokalemic rhabdomyo lysis, subsequent to chronic use of a glycyrrhizin-containing antacid. (Chubachi A, Wakui H et al, 1992) This patient presented with several predisposing factors, complicating the implication of glycyrrhizin, but was stabilized via plasma exchange, hemodialysis, potassium supplementation, and modest use of a glycyrrhizin-containing preparation. These authors conclude that the mineralocorticoid-like actions explained above may be inadequate to protect all persons, especially elderly people with decreased renal function and severely dehydrated patients. (Chubachi A, Wakui H et al,1992) More than this licorice root containing glycyrrhizin has been reported in association with Fanconi syndrome. (Izumotani T, Ishimura E et al, 1993) The authors hypothesized 190 that glycyrrhizin inhibits the Na K-ATP ase activity of proximal tubular cells, possibly leading to irreversible Fanconi syndrome. 12.8 Hippocampus (Sea Horse) Hippocampus is the dried body of Hippocampus kellogi Jordan et Snyder. It is used to replenish the vital function of the kidney especially that of sexual organs for the treatment of impotence, swelling in the abdomen and is also used externally for the treatment of carbuncles and furuncles. In traditional Chinese theory, Hippocampus were given to the newborn babies for strengthen the body within 3 days after delivery. 6 cases of newborn babies were found to have oliguria, fever, cyanosis, alert and abdominal distention after taken 1-2 pieces of Hippocampus and one of the babies was dead. (Yuan HN, 1992) Another cases of renal intoxication was reported that a patient who took a herbal decoction including Hippocampus due to mal-renal function. 12.9 Milabris Phanalerata The dried body of Milabris Phanalerata Pall or Milabris cichorii L is used externally as a rubefacient, irritant and caustic to promote local blood circulation, remove dead tissue and accelerate the healing of wounds for the treatment of psoriasis, neurodermatitis, chronic ulcers and scrofula. If used internally, it was used for treating of the swelling of the lymph nodes and rabies. Cantharidin included was a severe toxin and caused adverse reaction in China occasionally. 2 cases of a 10 years old girl and a 46 years old man was taken herbal decoction that included 0.15g and 0.25 g of Milabris Phanalerata respectively due to prevention of rabies. (Liao LJ, 1987) Both of them started to have symptoms of ARF (oliguria, purpura and BUN increased rapidly) 3nd y^ere treated in the hospital According to the severe toxin from Milabris Phanalerata, it betters to have caution for this when using in the elderly and children. 191 The clinical manifestations of intoxication are: Skin: Dehydration and vesicle formation, erosion of the buccal cavity with patchy hemorrhage. Gastrointestinal: nausea and vomiting, abdominal tenderness with diarrhea. In severe case, hemoptysis and melena will occur; Urologic: lumbar pain, frequent urination, dysuria, proteinuria, hematuria, anuria or oliguria; Neurologic: blurred vision, headache and dizziness with paralysis of extremities; Circulation: increase blood pressure first and change to hypovolumic with circulation failure with arrhythmia. No special antidote and symptomatica! and supportive treatment are suitable. 12.10 Chinese Proprietary Medicine A case of reversible acute renal failure associated with the ingestion of a Chinese herbal medicine adulterated with a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agent and diazepam was reported. (Arthur AB, John OY et al,1995) Such kind of adulteration with synthetic therapeutic substances is a main problem of herbal adverse reaction. A 51-year-old woman prepare to receive cholecystectomy in the hospital but needed to delay because she was found creatinine level around 300 micro mo 1/L and rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis was rendered. The patient had taken eight herbal pills daily for 4 weeks and her medications included estrogen, a herbal tea, and a Chinese herbal medicine (Tung Shueh pills). Chemical analysis of the Tung Shueh pills confirmed the presence of mefenamic acid (not quantitated) and diazepam (0.43 mg per pill) accompanied with the herbal tea contained caffeine. Excessive dosage or contamination of heavy metal in some Chinese proprietary medicine is sometimes present. Cinnabar (mercuric sulfide), realgar (arsenic sulfide), or litharge (lead oxide) may be present as part of the traditional formula and used in China for thousand of years. Other common renal-toxic herbal ingredients found in these 192 imported patent medicines include bomeol (similar to camphor), aconite, bufo secreta (toad secretion or bufotoxin), mylabris, scorpion, borax, and Strychnos nux vomica (strychnine). In the case of aristolochic poisoning, But PPH (But PPH and Ma SC, 1999) suggested that in the People's Republic of China Pharmacopoeia, there are seven kinds of Chinese proprietary medicines that contain GuanMuTong. For example, are registered, ''Anyang Jingzhi plaster", "Dahuang Qingwei Pills", "Daochi pills", "Fenqing Wulin pills,,, "Fuke Fenqing pills,,, "Longdan Xiegan pills", and "Xiao'er Jindan tablets". According to the toxicity of aristolochic acid, priority should be given to review of the long-term safety of these products, and GuanMuTong should be excluded from ftirther use. Other sources of MuTong, for example ChuanMuTong from Clematis armata and C. montana, which do not contain aristolochic acids, could be used instead. 12.11 Conclusion Many cases of CHN developed because of failure to verify the identity of the prescribed herbs. Some of the confusion arose from name similarity (Fangchi vs Fangji) and from lack of precision about the type of MuTong Chinese plant used. MuTong can be derived either from Aristolochia manshuriensis or from various species of Akebia or Clematis. Some patented Chinese medicines contain GuanMuTong, which is derived from Aristolochia manshuriensis. Others contain ChuanMuTong from Clematis armata and Clematis montana and do not contain aristolochic acids. Patients and practitioners should try to avoid using Mu-Tong containing aristolochic acid and pay attention to monitoring the renal function if the medication has to be given. Incidents of this kind highlight the importance of developing and enforcing appropriate quality assurance 193 procedures for herbal medicines. Table 12 a. The Renal-toxicity of Traditional Chinese Medicine & Chinese Proprietary Medicine. Ti^ditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) [Chinese Proprietary Medicine (CPM) 1. Lu Hui ) 1. AngongNiuhuang Wan (An Gong Niu Huang Jiu ) 2. Caulis Aristolochiae Manshuriensis (Guan  2. NiuHuang Jiedu Wan/Pian (Niu Huang Jie Du  Mu Tong ) Pian ) Yi  3. (Zhu Sha ) 3. SanXiandan (San Xian Dan ) 4. Cortex MagnoUae Officinalis (Hou Po ) 4 . Suxiao Sangfeng Jiaonang (Su Xiao Shang Feng  5. Flos Rhododendri Mollis (Nao Yang Hua ) Jiao Nang ) 6. Folium SennaeFan He Xie  5. TianWang Buxin Dan (Tian Wang Bu Xin Dan ) 7. Fructus Aristolochiae (Ma Jiu Qian ) 6. Yunnan Baiyao (Yun Nan Bai Yao ) 8. Fructus Bruceae (Teng Dan Zi ) 7. Zhusha Anshen Wan (Zhu Sha An Shen Jiu ) 9. Fructus Crotonis ( E S ) 10. Fructus Quisqualis 11. Fructus Xanthii (Cang Er Zi ) 12. Gastrodia Elata ( ^ i f i ) 13. Herba Leomiri[Yi Mu Bei ) 14. Hippocampus (Hai Ma ) 15. Me/(Feng Mi ) 16. Afy/"Z7r/>y (Ban Mi ) 17. Radix Trichosanthis (Tian Hua Fen ) 18. Radix Tripterygii JVUfordii (MGong Teng ) 19.Realgar (Xiong Huang ) 20. Radix Angelicae Pubescentis (Du Huo ) 21. Rhizoma Alismatis (Ze Dang ) 22.Ricinus Communis (MfS"?) 23. Semen Arecae (^f ffiP) 24.Semen Strychni (MWF) 25. Scolopendra 26. Quan Luo ) 27. Trichosanthes Kirilowii (Tian Hua Fen ) 28. Tripterygium hypoglacum (Kun Ming Shan Hai  Tang ) 194 'V Chapter 13 * Adverse Reaction of Herbal Medicine in Dermatology. 13.1 Overview Herbal therapy is becoming increasingly popular among patients and physicians. Many herbal preparations are marketed to the public for various ailments including those of the skin. It emphasizes the importance of using many herbs that are combined in different formulations for each individual patient. Among some segments of the patient population it has become increasingly popular as a mode for treating dermatologic diseases. As a result, it is now worthwhile for dermatologists throughout the West to gain some femiliarity with this method. Yet, dermatologists are largely unfamiliar with TCM and may possess some misconceptions. Herbal treatments are increasingly popular. A recent survey implied that, between 1990 and 1997, the general population usage of unconventional treatments had risen from 33% to 42%. It also suggested that 8.6% of people who use unconventional drugs did so to treat dermatological problems, and showed that the usage of herbal remedies has increased by 380% in this time span. This level of popularity clearly begs the question as to how safe herbal treatments are Thus dermatologists should know about their potential to cause adverse events. Some agents, particularly Chinese herbal creams, have been shown repeatedly to be adulterated with corticosteroids. Virtually all herbal remedies can cause allergic reactions and several can be responsible for photosensitization. Some herbal medicines, in particular Ayurvedic remedies, contain arsenic or mercury that can produce typical skin lesions.