(Huang WF, Wen KC et al, 1997) Such kinds of commercial packages were produced in China and indicate that the prohibition of registering traditional medicines from China is not an effective mechanism for controlling such product distribution to Taiwan. 6.2.4 Discussion The undeclared occurrence of thyroid hormones induced by botanical remedy was recently discovered when several United States residents developed thyrotoxicosis following the use of purportedly herbal slimming capsule adulterated with thyroid, diethylpropion, and hydrochlorothiazide. The product had been imported into the United States from Peru. Herbal products are claimed to cure numerous disorders ranging from diabetes to obesity, but these claims are often not supported by well-controlled clinical trials. In addition, herbal products are rarely packaged in childproof containers. (Anderson LA, 1996) In England, a 44 years old woman was admitted to the hospital because of taking some herbal remedies for weight lost and got new onset hypertension, palpitation, anxiety, with a body mass index of 19 kg/ml (Metcalfe K, Corns C et al, 2002) Initially, researchers suspected Ephedra or Ma Huang, herbs that widely used in the United States 102 and elsewhere in the world for weight loss but also linked to adverse side effects. However, after chemical analysis revealed there was a high concentration of fenfluramine in two of the products (sold as 'Qian Er, and 'Ma zin dol,) and also in the patients' urine. The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) pulled Fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine from the market in 1997 after numerous reports the off-label cocktail combo increased the risk of heart valve damage in the United States and in the United Kingdom. This finding was published as a letter in the March 15 issue of British Medical Journal Another preparations that found to contain western drugs include "Tong Shap Yee's Shuenchih Wan" (pill for easy breathing) (theophylline) and "Leung Pui Kee cough pills" (bromhexine). (Tay SAB and Johnston MA, 1989) This old brand name of Chinese proprietary medicine was sold in Hong Kong and South East Asia for more than 30 years. This drug has anti-asthmatic effects and contains powdered licorice 50 mg, aminophylline 20 mg, ephedrine HCl 1.3 mg, and starch 68.7 mg. The label instructs the user to take 10 pills 3 times a day when "short of breath" or five pills 3 times a day when asymptomatic. (Wong HCG, 2001) Nowaday it is readily available in Chinese herbal shops across Canada and probably elsewhere as well. The prescription drug aminophylline is clearly identified as one of the ingredients in the preparation, and not as an contaminant. The dosage of ephedrine used during the symptomatic period exceeds the maximal daily dose (24 mg) recommended by the US Food and Drug Administration's 1997 proposal, which was raised because of its adverse reactions. (Wong HCG, 2001) In addition, awareness of herbal medicine has also been facilitated by the proliferation of home computers and the explosive growth of the Internet,which have 103 'V provided ready access to information about herbs. Ordering supplies of botanical products from around the world is usually an easy process but such kind of botanical products are without any quality assurance. Health authorities have enforced inspections, and screening services have been made available through different channels to the general public with minimal cost. Although the health authorities usually have a list of CPM containing western drugs, such information may not be readily available. CPM may be adulterated with undeclared and, often more toxic, drugs. (Chan TY, Lee KK et al, 1995) Table 6b. Adulteration of Asian herbal medicines with synthetic drug substances: chemical and clinical reports. (From Adverse Effects of Herbal Drugs. Volume 1. Heidelberg,Germany: Springer-Verlag; 1992: 48-50) preparation(s) I Chemical and clinical Details ' Ref 1 ' Chuifong Toukuwan Nan Lien (Qiao ^ CA 2. Long Life Brand Ginseng Hui Sheng Tsaitsaowan ^ ^ 3. Sanlungpai Ginseng Hui Sheng Tsaitsaowan MA^ 1 9 /  4. Fonsuning Tongwan 5. Lilongpai Fonsuning 6. Hippo Brand secret (Formula Chui Fung Eng (Nan Lien Pharm. Co.,Taiwan and Hong Kong) * All 6 brands contained amino phenazone and phenylbutazone. * Three of the brands (with 23-43 mg and 17-34 mg, respectively) produced life-threatening agranulocytosis in 4 patients, when taken in doses of 8-12 pills/day. One patient died. 104 'V Breparatioa(s) . Chemical and c l i n i c a l DQing  s . | _ Chuifong Toukuwan - One patient developed agranulocytosis after (Brooks (Hong Kong) starting treat. PM and -Analysis of different batches showed varying Lowentha amounts of amino phenazone, 1 RM, phenylbutazone, and phenacetin.^ 1977) _ Chuifong-Toukuwan - One patient developed Cushing's syndrome (Uitdehaa (Hong Kong) from 12 pills/day. g CMJ' - T h e pills contained dexamethasone (0.112 mg), Hekster indomethacin (7.5 mg), Hydrochlorthiazide, YA et al, and diazepam (see next entry). 1979) L Chuifong Toukuwan - Dexamethasone 0.112 mg (Anoniem (Nan Lien Phann.Co.. - Indomethacin 7.3-8.3 mg ,1979) Hong Kong) - Hydrochlorthiazide 4.1 mg -Diazepam 0.45 mg (Dose: 12 pills/day) L Chuei-Fong-Tou-Geu-- One patient developed a low plasma Cortisol (Forster wan concentration and a cushingoid look. PJG, Calverley M et al, 1979) -Chuifong Toukuwan - Prednisolone 0.4 mg (Anoniem (Nan Lien Pharm. - Hydrochlorthiazide 4.0 mg ,1979) Co.,Singapore) - Chlordiazepoxide 0.5 mg -- Chlorpheniramine 1.3 mg - Thiaminedisuiphide 5.0 mg (Dose: 12 pills/day) L Chuifong Toukuwan - Aminophenazone 8 mg (Anoniem (Shou Sing Pharm. Co. - Phenylbutazone 0.6-6.0 mg , 1979) Taiwan) - Thiamine (Dose: 12 pills/day) Yi  Dumeap capsules - Prednisolone 4mg (Morice (Duzcap Pharmacy,- Betamethasone A., 1986) Pakistan) - (Dose: 3 capsules/day) L Chihshiton (Yi Chung - Paracetamol 8,1 mg Tai MedManuf . Co., - Ethaverine 0.26 mg Taiwan) - Chlorzoxazone 2.0 mg - D i a z e p a m 0.55 mg - C a f f e i n e 1.9 mg - Thiamine (Dose: 18 pills/day) L Deecap capsules - Prednisolone (Monce (Shaham Romeo A, 1987) 1 Pharmacy, Pakistan) -Ambonim special-F|- Dexamethasone 0.02-0.2 mg/ml ' (Stemigen syrupe M, 1987) I - (Sri Lai, United States) 105 W ^ P r e ^ r a t o ^ and clmical^etalb * - Cow's Head Brand - One patient developed a low plasma Cortisol (De Smet iTimg Shueh concentration. Each pill contained 0.09 mg PAGM, (Ta Ang Pharm. Co., dexamethasone (dose: 12 pills/day). Elferink F --T--) ^ Chuifong Toukuwan- Dexamethasone (P^ Smet (Nan Lien) - Indomethacin PAGM - M e f e n a m i c acid Ji d -Hydrochlor thiazide & Diazepam ' Elferink F, 1988) Unmarked green- Phenylbutazone " Si  ^ capsules (Chinese - One patient gained weight and became RW, herbalist, Kuala moonfaced Fulhnfaw Lumpur) - Powder #3 contained prednisolone (0.5 mg/g) RO et al, #3 Colds and Flu and paracetamol (63 mg/g). 1987) #6 Arthritis - Powder #6 contained similar amounts of both (Medical practitioner, Sri drugs as well as phenylbutazone (42 mg/g). D r ^ i g Shap Yee's - Theophyllin 12 mg per pill Bromhexine 0.7 (Tay SAB asthma ills mg er p U " Johnston M A , 1989) Nan Lien Chui Fong Diaz pam 0.6 ,y Toukuwa - Theophylline 12 mg =Dr. Tong Shap ec's B m ex 0.7 mg J st asth a i ls '. L e u n g Pui Kee Cough ^Reng ) (Hong Kong) tt a S F O N tural H rbs - t ethasone 0.1- 5 /ml (Ru Tea^ (Sri Lai, Sri ous 1988) La ) -- j r _ Chu fong Tokuwanh D xamethasone (Na Lie P rm. Co., _ Ind methacin lyFang ) on ong) M f n acid Hydr c orthiazid D iaze a ^- T h Ye Ob t China P ed is,, . b  " 1 V  s, ) (Li Y k Kong) -- c .Un pecif d hine e - h n zo , propy henaz ne, and ( Y u e n  . erb l reparat ons m t te tosteron have a so been identifie and Lau-s adul ts of Chinese rbal products. C m CA,1985) 106 Table 6 c. Undeclared pharmaceuticals that have been found in traditional Chinese remedies. 1 Acetaminophen (paracetamol) 11. Fluocinolone acetonide 2. Aminopyrine 12. Glibenclamide 3 Caffeine 13. Hydrochlorthiazide 4] Carbamazepine 14. Hydrocortisone 5. Chlorzoxazone 15. Indomethacin 6 Clobetasol propionate 16. Mefenamic acid 7 Dexamethasone 17. Methylsalicylate 8 Diazepam 18. Phenacetm 9 Diclofenac 19. Phenylbutazone 10 Ethoxybenzamide 20. Phenytom 21. Valproate 107 Chapter 6.3 - Oil of Wintergreen (methyl salicylate) 6.3.1 Overview In Hong Kong, there are at present more than 160 adult and pediatric preparations containing salicylates registered with the Government. This figure does not include the wide range of medicated oils containing methyl salicylate (wintergreen oil) that are commonly used in the self-treatment of conditions such as musculoskeletal pains and common cold. In Hong Kong, medicated oils containing methyl salicylate account for 48% of acute salicylate poisoning cases treated in the general medical ward of the Prince of Wales Hospital. (Chan TY and Critchley JA, 1996) Oil of Wintergreen (methyl salicylate) is a common ingredient for liniments, ointments and essential oils used in self-treatment of musculoskeletal pain. Its pleasant smell also encourages its use to flavor confectionery. (Botma M,Colquhoun-Flannery W et al, 2001) The toxic potential of this preparation is not always fully appreciated by the general public and physicians. To appreciate the danger of this oil it can be compared to aspirin tablets (325 mg dose): one teaspoon (5 ml) of Oil of Wintergreen is equivalent to approximately 7000 mg of salicylate or 2L7 adult aspirin tablets. Ingestion of as little as 4 ml in a child can be fatal. Methyl salicylate in topical analgesic preparations may cause irritant or allergic contact dermatitis. (Chan TY and Critchley JA, 1996) Excessive usage of these preparations in patients receiving war&in may result in adverse interaction and bleeding complications. (Joss JD and LeBlond RF,2000) A 22-year-old white woman presented with an INR of 12.2 after applying a topical pain-relieving gel to her knees daily for eight days. The potentiation of the warfarin anticoagulation was attributed to the low-108 dose methyl salicylate contained in the product. Methyl salicylate may increase warfarin action by affecting vitamin K metabolism or by displacing warfarin from protein-binding sites. In view of the toxic potential of medicated oils containing methyl salicylate, Chan performed studies to the existing packaging of 7 commonly used preparations from Hong Kong and Singapore. (Chan TY, Lee KK et al, 1995; Chan TY, 1996) (See Table 6 d) The medicated oils were all packed in translucent bottles without child-resistant closures. The result showed that the methyl salicylate content ranged from 15 to 67%. Many preparations also contained other potentially toxic ingredients in significant amounts, such as turpentine oil and camphor. Koong Yick Hung Far Oil had the highest methyl salicylate content (67%) and was available only in 60-ml bottles. If the entire bottle of this product were ingested, the equivalent of 184 adult 300-mg aspirin tablets would have been swallowed. Accidental ingestions of as little as 6 ml of Koong Yick Hung Far Oil by a child can be fatal. The other six products contained 15-40% methyl salicylate and their biggest bottle sizes were range from 28-57 ml. (Chan TY, 1996) Furthermore, the contents of the larger bottles could generally be emptied more easily because of the greater size of their openings. The product with the highest methyl salicylate content also had the biggest opening of all "Koong Yick Hung FA Oil" (KYHFO) (67% wintergreen oil {>70% methyl salicylate}, 22% turpentine oil, 5% ciimamic aldehyde, 4% ciimamon leaf oil,2% citroneUa oil), made in Singapore, is readily available in any Asian grocery store. (Maryann H, Jose ED et al, 1998) "KYHFO" claims to be useful in the self-treatment of respiratory obstruction, cardiac pain, hemiplegia, paresthesia, sciatica, rheumatism, beriberi, abdominal pain, headaches, fatigue, bums, scalds, and bruises. As 109 per its product label, it is primarily indicated for external use, but can be taken orally for enhanced efficacy. Maryann H, et al reported that a 70-year-old Asian woman with a history of hypertension and arthritis ingested 60 mL of topical "KYHFO,,(~ 1.2 g/kg salicylate equivalents) for relieve chronic knee pam. (Maryann H, Jose ED et al, 1998) One hour after ingestion abdominal pain, restlessness, and diaphoresis developed. On arrival in the emergency department, she was afebrile, euglycemic, and the ECG monitor showed a narrow complex tachycardia. Abdomen was soft, nondistended, and without active bowel sounds. However, A voluminous brown liquid bowel movement was noted. The neurologic exam revealed a confused and agitated patient with impaired attention and limited awareness to the surroundings. After analysis, the "KYHFO" bottle (60 mL) contains 56.2 g saUcylic acid and equivalent to 186 regular-strength adult aspirin tablets Ingestions of as little as 4 to 6 mL of wintergreen oil can result in fetalities; a lethal adult dose is usually estimated as 30 mL. A significant central nervous system (CNS) deterioration (without seizures) developed after three hours of ingestion and required orotracheal intubation; marked metabolic acidosis with some respiratory compensation and a salicylate (SA) level of 108.6 mg/dL also were noted. After treating with lavage and activated charcoal, the patient received three times of hemodialysis. Rhabdomyolysis (creatine phosphokinase 19,570 U/L {20-149 U/L}), hepatitis (aspartate aminotransferase 4,190 U/L; alanine aminotransferase 2,808 U/L), coagulopathy (prothrombin time 17.1; partial thromboplastin time 89), and nephrotoxicity (blood urea nitrogen 29 mg/dL; creatine 2.7 mg/dL) were found after 48 hours. The hemoglobin level steadily decreased (14.8 to 7.9 g/dL) requiring transfusion. No site of active bleeding was identified. By the sixth 110 'V hospital day, all laboratory values had returned to normal. Unluckily, she was died on the 13th hospital day because of anoxic encephelopathy. (Maryaim H, Jose ED et al, 1998) 6.3.2 Prevention It was much more difficult to collect toxicity information on CPM than on therapeutic drugs,for several reasons. (Chan TY, Lee KK et al, 1995) Many patients knew the nature but not the brand name of the product they had taken. Even if patients knew the group name of the CPM, for example, Medicated Oil, there is a multitude of products collectively known as Medicated Oil which are locally manufactured or imported.