Article 138 of the Basic Law provides that "the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region shall, on its own, formulate policies to develop western and traditional Chinese medicme and to improve medical and health services. Community organizations and individuals may provide various medical and health services in accordance with law." The Chief Executive, in his 1998 Policy Address, declared the vision to establish Hong Kong as a world center for the development of health foods and pharmaceuticals based on Chinese medicines. Hong Kong is aiming to establish itself as the global center for the scientific study and commercial exploitation of traditional Chinese medicines. (Cyranoski D,2001) Before 2002,The Hong KongGun s Innovation and Technology Commission, the main applied research funding body in the territory, has already spent more than HKSlOO million over the past few years on research into traditional medicine, involving many of Hong Kong's leading biomedical researchers. Given its historical and business connections to the West and its close cultural connections to China, Hong Kong could very well become the center for internationalization of Chinese medicine. The Government has also recently launched a new initiative on the development of regulatory standards for Chinese medicinal herbs. Alongside the regulatory and infrastmctural development, the Government, with the pledged donation of HK$500 rnimon (or US$64 million) from the Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust Limited, has set up the Hong Kong Jockey Club Institute of Chinese Medicme Limited 6 (HKJCICM) to steer, co-ordinate and strengthen the modernisation and further development of Chinese medicines in Hong Kong. Although adverse reactions caused by traditional Chinese medicine are infrequent and low, it is important for the government to be aware of these. In a prospective study of hospital admissions during an 8-month period in Hong Kong, adverse events due to CHM accounted for 0.2% of admissions (3 patients in 1701 admissions), and those due to Western pharmaceuticals accounted for 4.4%. (Chan TY, Chan JC et al, 1993) This study only measured severe adverse event, and the lack of data on the relative use of CHM and Western medicine makes this comparison difficult to interpret. 2.3 The Preparatory Committee on Chinese Medicine (PCCM) In August 1989, the Secretary for Health and Welfare of the Hong Kong Government set up the Working Party on Chinese medicine to review the use and practice of Chinese medicine in Hong Kong and to advise on measures that should be taken to promote the proper use and good practice of Chinese medicine. The working party has made recommendations on: (I) Registration of Chinese medicine practitioners; (II) Restricted use of proprietary Chinese medicines; (III) Processing, manufacturing and trading of Chinese medicine; (IV) Training and research in traditional Chinese Medicine; (V) Training of dispensers and public education. Following the Working Party's recommendation, the Preparatory Committee on Chinese Medicine (PCCM) was appointed in 1995. The Preparatory Committee on Chinese medicine and its two sub-committees, consisting mainly of members of the traditional Chinese medicine profession and supported by health officials and academics, were formed in April 1995 to manage the implementation of these recommendations. During its four years of appointment, the Preparatory Committee conducted a census on Chinese medicine 7 practitioners in Hong Kong. Based on the submission of PCCM's first report in 1997, which recommended the creation of a regulatory framework and a statutory body for regulation and control, and based on second report in 1999 recommending further regulation and development, the Chinese Medicine Ordinance was passed by the Legislative Council in 14 July 1999. The government policy included the following main topics: development of a statutory framework, development of education, and scientific research in TCM. (WHO, 1999) 2.4 The Chinese Medicine Council of Hong Kong The Chinese Medicine Ordinance provides for the setting up of the Chinese Medicine Council of Hong Kong ("The Council"). This statutory regulatory body con^rises practicing Chinese medicine practitioners, members of the trade of Chinese medicines, academics, laypersons and government officials. The contents of the Chinese Medicine Ordinance include the composition and functions of the Chinese Medicine Council, Chinese Medicine Practitioners Board, Chinese Medicines Board and the six committees established under the Chinese Medicine Council; the regulatory system for Chinese medicine practitioners, which includes registration, examination and discipline of Chinese medicine practitioners; and the regulatory system for Chinese medicines, which includes licensing and regulation of Chinese medicines traders and registration of proprietary Chinese medicines. In addition, the Ordinance contains Schedule 1 of 31 types of potent/toxic Chinese herbal medicines and Schedule 2 of 574 types of Chinese herbal medicines. Proprietary preparations containing a combination of herbal ingredients and conventional drugs are regulated in the same manner as other conventional drugs. 8 The Council was established in September 1999 and is responsible for implementing the regulatory measures for Chinese medicine. A licensing system and a registration system to regulate manu&cture and trade were established in the year 2000. Under the new licensing system for Chinese medicine practitioners, Chinese medicine doctors in Hong Kong must prove they have practiced continuously for at least 15 years, as of January 3 2000, to avoid taking licensing examination and registration assessment. (Chak M, 2001) Totally 8,000 applications were collected by the Chinese Medicine Council of Hong Kong but twenty-eight Chinese medicine practitioners were investigated by the police because of allegedly faking documentation. (Chak M, 2001) Totally 7,707 eligible applicants were placed on the List of Listed Chinese Medicine Practitioners and were listed in the Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Gazette, which was published on 21 December 2001. Only these Listed Chinese Medicine Practitioners (CMPs) wm be allowed to practice Chinese medicine in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region on March 1 (2002) when the relevant legislation comes into effect. Their practice could continue when the Listed CMPs become Registered CMPs or until the end of the transitional period on such date as specified by the Secretary for Health and Welfare. For Chinese medicines, upon completion of relevant subsidiary legislations, the Council will implement the licensing system of Chinese medicine traders and the registration system of proprietary Chinese medicines by phases. Products already in the market on 1 March 1999 when a new legislation was set into force are "grand fathered', and will be reviewed particularly on quality aspects. New products require assessment of safety, quality and efficacy by the Chinese Medicine Board. The dispensation, storage and labeling of Chinese herbal medicines will also be regulated. A government survey 9 of patent Chinese medicines on the market revealed over 3,000 patent Chinese medicines. The majority of these patent Chinese medicines are imported from Mainland China. In order to safeguard public health, besides regulating the practice of Chinese medicine, the Chinese Medicine Council regulates the manufacture, sale and use of Chinese medicines. The regulatory measures for Chinese medicines include a licensing system for Chinese medicine traders and a registration system for proprietary Chinese medicines. For the former, retailers and wholesale dealers of Chinese herbal medicines and wholesale dealers and manufacturers of proprietary Chinese medicines are required to obtain the appropriate licenses from the Chinese Medicines Board of the Chinese Medicine Council for their businesses. In addition, all proprietary Chinese medicines will be assessed and registered by the Chinese Medicines Board before they are allowed to be sold or roanufacturecL As with conventional synthetic drugs, safety and toxicity data that are collected on herbal medicines should be distributed to health professionals, both in Hong Kong and abroadMoreover, the Chinese Medicine Council also set up a toxic herbs name list for herbalists to use as in China and Taiwan. (See Table 2a and 2b) 2 5 Development of Standards The establishment of a statutory framework laid the solid foundation for the future development of Chinese medicine in Hong Kong. (Leiing TH and Fung YK, 2001) Other strategies include the development of health-related and industry-related standards. Lo-cally, the Chinese medicine Council of Hong Kong sets standards for the regulation and registration of Chinese medicine. To fecilitate the development of international standards relevant to Chinese medicine concerted efforts from the World Health Organization (WHO) and experts worldwide are required. A WHO meeting on Methodologies for 10 Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine was held in April 2000 in Hong Kong. An internationally accepted guideline was published and disseminated to member states for reference in early 2001. 2.6 Development of Centers of Good Clinical Practice It is proposed in the "Consultation Document on Health Care Reform,,(Health and Welfare Bureau. Government Secretariat. Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative RegioiL The People's Republic of C, 2000) released at the end of 2000 that the provision of Chinese medicine in the public health care system would be introduced. As the first step, the mode of delivery of outpatient Chinese medicine services will be examined. Primary care is one of the strengths of Chinese medicine. This proposal will enable this strength to be maximized for the benefits of the patients. It is also proposed to pilot the practice of Chinese medicine in selected public hospitals supporting clinical research for the evaluation of health benefits derived from Chinese medicine-based products and facilitating the development of standards and models of interface between western and Chinese medicine. In the long term, Chinese medicine will be integrated into the public health care system providing treatments to patients in collaboration with western medicine. 2J Establishment of a Good System of Education and Training Before 1998, there were no full time training courses in Chinese medicine. (Leung TH and Fung YK,2001) At present, fUU-time degree courses on Chinese medicine are provided by three universities. In the long run, an adequate pool of high calibre professionals can be produced locally to support Hong Kong's development to become an international center for Chinese medicine. Furthermore, it is important to create a network of research institutions of high standing to support new 11 'V drug development and enhance competitiveness of industry. Locally an institute of Chinese medicine ha been set up with donations from the Hong Kong Jockey Club to support research on Chinese medicine. Moreover, it is planned to introduce Chinese medicine into the public healthcare system. This includes providing out-patient Chinese medicine services in the public sector,piloting the practice of Chinese medicine in selected public hospitals, supporting clinical research, and facilitating the development of standards and models of interface between western and Chinese medicines. 2.8 Investigation of Suspected Herbal Toxicity Cases In order to investigate the particular situation of Chinese medicine in Hong Kong, several surveys were performed. A survey done in 1980 showed that (I) the majority (over one half) of respondents resorted to western doctors and 10% consulted traditional Chinese medicine practitioners, mostly herbalists, (n) In addition, Chinese medicine was generally perceived to be better than or as good as Western, scientific medicine in some ways, such as for tonic care, for fewer side effects,for curing the cause (not symptoms) of diseases, and for treating certain diseases. Therefore, to ordinary Chinese people, Chinese and Western medicine may perform either equivalent or complementaiy functions. (EI) As regards the process of seeking medical care, most people seem to follow the pattern of moving from self-medication, using Chinese and/or western home remedies, to western-style doctors, to Chinese-style practitioners, and finally to a western medical hospital Another two surveys done in 1993 and 1995 regarding the role of traditional Chinese medicine in health care produced similar results. (Wai WT, LanWSeta l , 1995; Lau J and Yu A, 2000) In contrast to the situation for conventional drugs, there was no government scheme for monitoring or reporting adverse reactions to herbal medicines before 1999. The 12 Chinese Medicinal Material Research Center (CMMRC) (Now changed into The Institute of Chinese Medicine) of the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Drug and Poisons Information Bureau (DPIB) within the Clinical Pharmacology Department (Now changed into Department of Medicine & Therapeutics) at the Prince of Wales Hospital were established in 1979 and 1988 respectively to collect adverse reaction data on herbal medicine and perform multidisciplinary research on various aspects of Chinese medicine. These two units also provide consultation and assistance in response to both local and overseas requests. 2.8.1 Herbal Safety Surveillance This two-year project is partially supported by the University and Polytechnic Grants Committee (UPGC). The principal investigators in this project are Professor Paul But from the Chinese Medicinal Material Research Center (now changed to the Institute of Chinese Medicine) at the Chinese University of Hong Kong and Professor Brian Tomlinson from Department of Clinical Pharmology, Prince of Wales Hospital, the Chinese University of Hong Kong. The aim of the project is to actively collect cases of suspected herbal poisoning and try to determine the actual or potential causes of the adverse reactions. The information generated through this project is expected to facilitate future management of such cases, to offer concrete data for policy-making in the control of herbal medicines, and to upgrade the scientific contents of Chinese and other herbal medicines by defining their safety limits. Both prospective and retrospective cases are the concerns in this project. Totally 96 cases of suspected herbal poisoning were collected within 2 year. Several case were reported and published by the pharmaceutical journal However, most of the cases are lack of enough information or evidences to follow. When a case of adverse 13 reaction to Chinese herbal medicine is suspected, the difficulty in establishing the diagnosis is well recognized. Each preparation (herbs or compound medicines) typically is made up of a number of ingredients that in turn consist of many different chemicals. Very often, the chemical nature and pharmacological actions of these ingredients and their constituents are largely unknown. If the actual prescription cannot be traced, chemical analysis of each ingredient is not possible. On the other hand, the success in making the diagnosis to some extent will also depend on the clinician's suspicion and an awareness of particular patterns of clinical features which may suggest CHM toxicity rather than being features of the underlying disease or being related to toxic effects of pharmaceutical drugs. In the absence of the residues of the preparations taken on, comments can only be made based on the remaining sample of preparations and the prescriptions given by the patient's familier and the TCM practitioner are reluctant to cooperate to disclose the prescription because of economic consideration. Furthermore, they would like to use an alias or secret signal to replace the common name of some herbal medicine and make confusion. So investigation is very difficult. Methods for grading herb toxicity (in therapeutic use or overdose) were developed based on a combination of the quality of reports, severity of adverse reaction, supporting animal studies, extrapolation from pharmacology and empirical evidence. 2.9 Conclusion In the 21st Century, there remain other issues that need to be addressed to realize the fiill role and function of Chinese medicine in the health care systenL These,among others,include the use of modem scientific knowledge to explain Chine medicine so that Chinese medicine can be understood and accepted by the international community and 14 the determination of the strategic positioning Chinese medicine in the health care systenL The development of models of interface of Chinese medicine practitioners and practitioners of western medicine and the promotion of the integration Chinese and western medicine. 15 Chapter 3 -Herbal medicines used in other countries 3.1 Overview It is difficult to use traditional medicme effectively to support primary health care without the commitment of governments. In turn the government's involvement needs a national policy that provides a clear statement on the role of traditional medicine and the government's position with regard to the relationship between traditional medicme and the official health service systenx The adoption of such a policy will be particularly helpful in establishing appropriate standards for traditional medicine. The WHO is supporting Member States to improve the quality of herbal medicines. Since 1992, several workshops and training courses on the quality of herbal medicines and control of heavy metals in herbal medicme have been conducted in China. A collaborative research project on pesticide residue in medicinal plants was also conducted in China. The WHO has worked with interested countries to apply good manufacturing practices (GMP) to the manufacture of herbal medicine products. 3.2 China China has a vast amount of land, with a population of 1.2 billion people. Over thousands of years, traditional Chinese medicme has developed a theoretical and practical approach to the treatment and prevention of disease. The first documented source of Chinese medical theory, the Huangdi Nei Jing ("Inner Classic of the Yellow Emperor") was written between 300 BC and 100 BC. It describes the diagnosis and treatment of a huge range of disorders and gives advice about healthy lifestyles, exercise, and diet which conforms remarkably well to current recommendations for the prevention of chronic disease. (Hesketh T and Zhu WX, 1997) 16 China is the only country in the world where Western medicine and the traditional medicine work alongside each other at every level of the healthcare system. Every city has a hospital practicing traditional Chinese medicine, and there is a plan for every county to have one. Based on State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (SATCM) information, in 1998, there were 2,629 hospitals for TCM in China, including hospitals for TCM integrated with Western medicine (WM) and hospitals of national minority medicine with 260,000 beds in these hospitals. In addition, there were 288 clinics for TCM. TCM has made great contributions to the medical care. According to statistics, in 1998, 150 million outpatients and 2.87 million inpatients had treatment in hospitals for TCM. All the general or special hospitals of Western medicine (WM) in China have departments of TCM with outpatients amounting to 22% of the total in hospitals of WM and beds at the departments of TCM accounting for 5-10% of the total beds in hospitals of WM. TCM serves one third of outpatients and a quarter of inpatients in rural areas of China. (see Table 3a) More than 170,000 TCM workers are employed in over 50,000 clinics. The majority of the 970,000 rural physicians use both TCM and WM in treatment and prevention of diseases. At present, TCM has greatly expanded its coverage and it is playing an important and irreplaceable role in the medical and healthcare systems in China. In general, although hospitals of TCM are generally smaller than those of WM in scale, each physician in hospitals of TCM treats more outpatients than those in hospitals of WM at the same level. If the two systems are to be truly complementary, more research in this area is essential to Militate a more rational approach. Traditional Chinese rr^dicine has become a source of great interest to the international research community. It is acknowledged that many of the treatments have 17 enormous potential and could be utilized more widely. In China, the licensing and official regulation of traditional Chinese medicine and the Chinese Proprietary medicine was by the State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine (SATCM). It has its own medical schools, hospitals, and research institutes. The licensing of drugs and official regulation of their sale is equally stringent for Western and Chinese medicines. At each different level of administration particular administrative institutions were formedThus, an administrative system exists from top to bottom.