(WHO, 1999) There are five different levels of legislation on traditional TCM from the state constitution (where the legal status of TCM is stipulated) to local laws in provinces and municipalities. New drugs have to be examined and approved according to the Drug Administration Law. New drug approvals require documentation of identification, cultivation, physical and chemical characteristics, pharmacology, standards of clinical use, stability, and preparation methods along with three reference samples. After approval, a New Drug certificate is granted an approval number. The factory is then permitted to put the product on the market. To date over 1000 new drug applications have been approved. (WHO, 2000) Further development of TCM in the fiitiire would include creation of new laws and revision of the existing ones, and enlargement of international exchange and cooperation programmes. In China, the use of TCM is supported by central government, and it is practiced alongside 'Western, medicine at every level of healthcare, so that treatments with western and herbal medicine are often prescribed simultaneously. However, the largest expansion of traditional and herbal medicines is occurring in the industrialized cities, as patients look for alternative and less invasive approaches to healthcare. Furthermore, 18 patients often use herbal and traditional medicines without informing their 'Western' medicine healthcare practitioner. Training in traditional Chinese medicine varies from family apprenticeships to three to five year university training at a college of traditional Chinese medicine, though the educational standard of these undergraduates is generally lower than their counterparts at the Western medical schools. All Western medical schools devote around 10-15% of curriculum time to traditional Chinese medicine, so all doctors have some traditional training. (Hesketh T and Zhu WX, 1997) The introduction of a market based economy into the health care system in China since the early 1980s have meant that health professionals and hospitals have to generate most of their income, including the salaries of staff in many cases. Drugs can be charged at a mark up of 15%. . Furthermore, staff in pharmacies is often untrained and unregulated medicines are widely sold and many products are available over the counter. It is estimated that only 20% of China's hospitals buy medicines from licensed state wholesalers, because the black market products are much cheaper. This complicated situation contributes to the numbers of adverse reaction to TCM reported in the Chinese literature every year. In China alone, there were over 600 reported cases in the past 30 years. (Wu YB, 1988) 19 -V Table 3a: Numbers of Hospitals of TCM,Beds and Physicians in China. Hospitals of TCM ... Hospitals of & Yan   f ~ O t h e r Total T o S a b o v e a  'a t e d 0 TCM hospitals of _ t y Gun  e v eGun ?S f s o f TCM Hospitals """1980 678 647 - _ 31 1986 2050 -- 1576 31 12 39 1995 2522 2371 41 ^ 70 Yi 1998 2629 2444 | 43 | 53 | 89 Beds Yi 1980 49977 49151 - - 826 1 9 ^ 1 2 8 7 8 4 1 1 3 0 0 8 10931 Yi  3627 """ 1218 --~1995 236060 206812 17603 8875 2770 """1998 260386 229000 17695 10863 2828 " Physicians 1980 73458 72097 Gun  _ | _ 1361 1986 198158 ~ 169591 21263 ^ 1433 ^ 3 7 3 309401 27503 13556 2913 Yi 1998 397235 349261 27908 17054 3012 " (Information from State Administration of Traditional Chinese Medicine, People's Republic of China) Note: 1. According to statistics issued by the Health Ministry in 1996 (every 5 years), there were 71838 beds at the departments of TCM in hospital of WM (general, special and affiliated hospitals) in China in 1996. 2. in the table indicates no available data. 20 'V Table 3b. Toxic Herbs Controlled in China and Taiwan. (Richard KJ, 1999) Toxic Herbs Controlled in China- 1. Unprocessed main root of Aconitum carmichaeli 2. Unprocessed tuber of Aconitum kusnezoffii 3. Unprocessed lateral root of Aconitum carmichaeli 4. Unprocessed tuber of Typhonium giganteum 5. Unprocessed tuber ofPinellia temata 6. Unprocessed root of Euphorbia ebracteolata and E. fischeriana 7. Unprocessed tuber of Euphorbia kansui 8. Tuber of Arisaema erubescens, A. heterophyllum and A. amurense 9. Root-tuber of Aconitum brachypodum 10. Unprocessed resin of Garcinia morella 11. Flower of Datura metel 12. Fbwer of Rhododendron mo lie 13. Unprocessed seed of Strychnos pierriana and S. mix-vomica 14. Unprocessed seed of Euphorbia lathyris 15. Unprocessed seed of Hyoscyamus niger 16. Unprocessed fruit of Croton tiglium 17. Body of Lytta caraganae 18. Body ofHuechys sanguinea and H. philaemata 19. Body ofMylabris phalerata and M. cichorii 20. Secretion ofBufo bufo gargarizans and B. melano-stictus Arsenolite 21. Arsenic 22. Mercury 23. Calomel 24. Mercuric oxide Realgar 25. Processed mixture of mercury, niter, and alunite 26. Crystals formed with mercurous chloride and mercuric chloride Toxic Herbs Controlled in Taiwan. 1. Root of Euphorbia fischeriana and E. ebracteolata 2. Root of Knoxia valerianoides 3. Seed of Hyoscyamus niger 4. Seed of Strychnos mix-vomica 5. Body ofMylabris phalerata and M. cichorii 6. Body ofButhus martensii 7. Calomel 8. Chalcanthite 9. Realgar 10. Arsenolite 11 ' Root of Aconitum carmichaeli 12. Tuber of Arisaema erubescens, A. heterophyllum and A. amurense 13. Root of Euphorbia kansui 14. Root of Aconitum coreanum 21 15. Tuber of Aconitum kusnezoffii 16. Root ofPhtolacca acinosa and P. americana 17. Stem bark and root bark ofMelia azedarach and M' toosendan 18. Resin of Rhus vemiciflua 19. Flower bud of Daphne genkwa 20. Flower of Datura metel 21. Seeds ofPharbitis nil and P. purpurea 22. Seed of Impatiens balsamina 23. Seed of Ricinus communis 24. Fruit of Croton tiglium 25. Seed of Euphorbia lathyris 26. Body ofHimdo nipponica, Whitmania pigra, and W. acranulata 27. Body of Tabanus bivittatus 28. Skin slough ofElaphe carinata, E. taeniura, and Zaocys dhumnades 29. Secretion ofBufo bufo gargarizans and B. melano- stictus 30. Body ofScolopendra subspinipes mutilans 31. Sal-ammoniac 3.3 Macau Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) is a popular form of health care in Macau. Many of the people still consult doctors and practitioners of TCM. In addition, a very high percentage of the population regularly uses TCM in preparing soups, herbal teas or herbal tonics as supplementary food. In view of this situation, the Health Authority realized several years ago that it was crucial to establish laws and other regulations to improve the quality, efficacy and safety of these medicines, and to define the professional backgrounds and technical skills for trading in and dispensing pharmaceutical products, the most important aspects. The first Chinese traditional pharmacy was registered in the Health Department in 1936, and by 1990, there were already 102 licensed traditional Chinese pharmacies. Since the law regulating licensing was very old, it could not deal with updated technological requirements developed in the last two decades. The new law, Decreta-Lei n 53/94/M, was enacted in November 1994 and aimed at better public health through adequate licensing of 22 medicines, import, export and wholesalers companies, dispensing pharmacies, and pharmacists and other technicians of traditional pharmacies. Based on this law, a list that includes 456 types of traditional medicinal material, which may only be sold in Chinese pharmacies of Macau, was prepared. The list consists of two sub-lists: Part 1. - toxic traditional Chinese materials; and Part 2. Yi  common therapeutic traditional Chinese materials. Under this law, a simple but effective registration system for imported traditional medicines, the so-called "alternative registration system" started to be implemented. Only traditional medicines that have been registered in a country can be imported into the Macau market; but for those from Hong Kong, Singapore and other countries without a registration system at the moment, the importer must provide analytical certificates issued by the manufacturer or recognized laboratories. Throughout Macau, there are two hospitals but the government hospital is not providing TCM therapy but one of the health centers provides outpatient TCM clinic services. 3.4 Taiwan Healthcare delivery in Taiwan has inherited the culture of TCM practices since early immigration in the late seventeenth century. (Huang WF, Wen KC et al, 1997) Taiwan's health care system has also been much affected by Japanese colonization (1895-1947) before the Nationalist Government fled to Taiwan from China in 1949. Contrary to western medical professionals who are educated through established medical school programs, TCM practitioners in Taiwan are produced from diversified backgrounds, mainly through apprenticeship, and a small percentage through an institutional education process. The two medical practice systems have been in coexistence for more than half a century. In Taiwan, 60% of the public uses multiple healing systems, including modem Western medicine, Chinese medicine, and religious 23 healing. (Bodeker G, 2001) The medicines used in each type of medical practice generally remain within individual domains of modem medicines and TCM, respectively. In Taiwan, the government has put great efforts into promoting the modernization of Chinese medicine. As a result, there are now people trained in both traditional Chinese and modem Western medicine who have made commendable contributions to the treatment of hepatitis, high blood pressure, cancer, and other diseases that are so far difficult to treat. In the area of pharmacology, researchers have evaluated effectiveness, analyzed, tested, and formulated concentrated dosages of Chinese pharmaceutical products for commercial sale. The prescriptions for these drugs are easier to fill, and are much more convenient for the patient than the old boiling method. In the area of basic science, modem research is being conducted in the field of pulse diagnosis. The three fingers used in the past to determine illness through the feeling of the pulse are now being replaced by pressure reactors. The pressure reactor converts variances in pulse pressure into electromagnetic waves, and registers them on a screen. These data are then analyzed by a computer. Many important new discoveries have been made through unique combinations of traditional and modem science. Contrary to western medical professionals who are educated through established medical school programs, traditional Chinese medicine practitioners in Taiwan are produced from diversified backgrounds, mainly through apprentice-ship, and a small percentage through an institutional education process. The two medical practice systems have been in coexistence for more than half a century. The medicines used in each type of medical practice generally remain within individual domains of modem medicines and traditional Chinese medicines, respectively. The current practice of traditional 24 medicine is prevalent among the licensed traditional medicine doctors, herb shops, street vendors, snake shops, temples, etc. Pharmaceutical products, both in western and in traditional Chinese medicine dose forms are required to have premarketing approvals by the Department of Health in accordance with Taiwan's Pharmaceutical Affairs Law. Addition of unlabeled therapeutic substances other than the approved formula is strictly prohibited by law. The National Laboratories of Foods and Drugs (NLFD) functions as the technical gatekeeper for the Department of Health in food and drug analysis in Taiwan. It has been regularly monitoring the commercial packages of traditional Chinese medicines since the 1970s, as such prohibited adulterations of traditional medicines from Asian sources were reported occasionally in other countries. Samples are collected from Chinese medicine practitioners and drugstores periodically for inspection and to establish systematic analytical methods. Since 1975, the Food and Drug laboratory Bureau (FDB) of the Department of Health, Executive Yuan, has had an ongoing program of Traditional Medicine Analysis SurveyThe purpose of this program is to identify unlicensed traditional medicine and the possible mixtures with western medicine. Between 1975 and 1981, among the 249 cases of unlicensed traditional medicine tested, 214 (86%) were found to contain "western medicines". (Deng JF, 1994) Traditional Chinese medicines produced in China, however, usually receive no premarket approval by the Department of Health according to current regulatory practices in Taiwan, and the commercial distribution of these products is not legal. The existing channels to pursue drug safety control of traditional medicine in Taiwan include: (1) Consumer Protection Service Center at County Health Departments; (2) Consumer 25 Protection Association (CPA); (3) Medical Centers; (4) Department of Justice; (5) the Food and Drug Laboratory Bureau (FDB). (Deng JP, 1994) The distribution of prescribed medicines or bulk materials has not been effectively controlled in accordance with the existing medical and pharmaceutical laws, mainly because the dispensing practices of physicians, inherited from the Japanese colonization, continue to prevail and because of a lack of commitment by the health authorities to a policy to change such practices. Therefore, the National Laboratories of Foods and Drugs initiated the program to monitor traditional Chinese medicines in 1992. This was the first time an island-wide approach was adopted to monitor, through hospital pharmacies, the prohibited adulteration of traditional Chinese medicines. The objective of this program was to screen samples of traditional Chinese medicines, suspected of adulteration that were used by the patients in several major hospitals. It was purported to serve as a basic model of incorporating hospitals into a safety-monitoring system for traditional Chinese medicines. In Taiwan, herbs can be obtained from temples, night markets, street venders,herb stores, traditional medicine doctors, and neighborhoods or relatives. People like to recommend the medicine they used to their relatives and friends without safety considerations. The general public and many of the traditional medicine practitioners also believe that the herbs are non-toxic and can be used in managing many health problems. Younger people appeared to consider the value of TCM and were more likely to favor its use. Those with higher education levels were more likely to be familiar with TCM, but were also more likely to present a negative attitude towards its effectiveness. 26 3.5 Japan Traditional medicines have been used effectively in Japanese society for more than a thousand years. Japanese traditional medicine may be divided into folk medicine and Chinese medicine from ancient China, the so-called Kampo medicine. Kampo Medicine is extremely popular in Japan, where the per capita consumption of herbal medicine seems to be the highest in the world. The drugs used are known as Kampo drugs. Each Kampo drug is a formula usually consisting of 5-10 different herbs. New features have been introduced into the practice of Kampo. Most of the modem ready-to-use forms of the original formulae are produced in industrialized granular, powdered or other forms based on the classical decoction. Introduced in 1957, it is now estimated that more than 95% of Kampo drugs used in Japan are taken in such a ready-to-use form as ethical drugs. Since 1961, the National Health Insurance (NHI) has covered almost 100% of the Japanese population. 43 Kampo drugs for ethical use were included in the NHI Drug Price Tariff in 1976, joining a few predecessors. More Kampo drugs were included later, and now 147 Kampo drugs (as formulae) are available as ethical drugs. As the Ministry of Health and Welfare (MHW) already registered these as drugs, their inclusion might be assumed to have been a matter of course. Their acceptance took place without clinical validation studies. In Japan, 80% of practicing physicians have experience using herbal formulas. Japan now produces 210 Kampo herbal formulas according to strict quality controls, 147 of which are covered by health insurance. (Yamada Y, 1991) Along with the expanding consumption of the Kampo medicines in the clinical treatments, several side effects of the Kampo medicines has recently been reported by the collection of adverse reaction data of MHW, these side effects are important signals for believing the safety of natural drugs. (Satake M, 1998) Safety and efficacy have been 27 estimated based on general methods employed by modem medical science. In 1972, the MHW designated 210 formulas as over-the-counter drugs. This selection was based mainly on the experience of doctors actually practicing Chinese galenical medicine. In 1976, the Ministry specified 146 prescriptions as Nlfl applicable prescription drugs. In the case of an application for approval of a prescription other than those mentioned, specified data on safety, stability, comparison with other drugs, clinical test results, etc. are required to be submitted. Plant materials have been characterized and classified into five categories, by the Ministry of Health and Welfare (MHW), Japanese Government, in 1971, which include three medicine divisions and two food divisions. (Satake M, 1998) New Kampo drugs are regulated in essentially the same way as Western drugs in Japan. They are regarded as a form of combined drug, and the same data required for new Western drugs are required for new Kampo drugs in the NBA. The time-consuming and expensive chronic toxicity tests and special toxicity tests such as for mutagenicity, carcinogenicity and teratogenicity depend on the possible length of treatment and indications that apply to them. Data for three-phase clinical trials are also required.