For generic Kampo drugs, bioequivalence data are required, which may discourage development, because pharmacokinetic studies of Kampo drugs are difficult to conduct and bioassay methods are quite limited. There was an improvement in the quality control of Kampo drugs in the mid-1980s. (Yamada Y, 1991) After a report on the situation of quality control, the Advisory Committee for Kampo Drugs was established in 1982 in close association with the Pharmaceutical Affairs Bureau of the MHW. The Pharmaceutical Affairs Bureau setting standards for the manufacture of Kampo drugs and quality control of Kampo drugs established a Working Group on the Quality of Kampo Drugs. This ensures that the 28 quality of herbs used in each original formula meets precise standards. The regulations also call for quality monitoring of specific ingredients, using at least two different chemical or physical methods to test them. Since October 1986, Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP), a standard required of pharmaceutical drugs issued by MHW in 1976, applies also to Kampo drugs. In addition, in 1988, the Japan Kampo Medicine Manufacturers' Association drew up self-imposed guidelines that take into consideration the unique nature of Kampo drugs. (Yamada Y,1991) In 1985, guidelines for ethical extract products in oriental medicine formulations were developed, according to which the data from a comparative study of the extract and a standard decoction have to be provided by the manufacturer of an ethical extract product. Besides data on the crude drug and on the standard decoction prepared in accordance with the Chinese traditional medicine prescription, a comparative study has to describe the content of an indicator ingredient in the finished product, which is required to be more than 70% of the content of the indicator ingredient in the standard decoction The Ministry of Health and Welfare (MHW) has three major systems for the collection of domestic adverse reaction data. The first is the Adverse Drug Reaction Monitoring System under which 2,915 monitoring hospitals have been designated and requested to report cases of adverse reactions to the MHW, (Yamada Y, 1991) This is a "voluntary" monitoring system, and 1,158 cases of adverse reaction were reported in 1990, of which 15 cases pertained to Kampo drugs. The second data collection system is the Pharmacy Monitoring System formed by 2,733 pharmacies. This system mainly collects data on cases of adverse reactions to over-the-counter drugs. In recent years, about 400 cases have been reported annually. Among these, reactions caused by Kampo drugs are the most common, though most of these 29 adverse reactions are minor, involving symptoms such as gastric discomfort and skin problems. Fifty cases were reported in 1989. (Yamada Y, 1991) The third system is Adverse Reaction Reporting from Manufacturers. Several severe cases caused by "Shosikoto", including drug-induced hepatitis and pneumonitis, were documented at medical conferences and in journals and were reported to the MHW by the responsible company in 1990. In addition, since 1988, the newly drafted Good Post-Marketing Surveillance Practice (GPMSP) has been used on a pilot scale for Western drugs dispensed in Japan. When new Kampo drugs are approved and appear on the market, this guideline will also apply to thenx 3.6 Singapore Singapore's healthcare services are based on Western medical science. There is a role for TCM to play as a con^lementary form of medical care in S i n g a p o r e  I n Singapore about 45% of the population has consulted traditional Chinese medical practitioners. (Singapore MOH, 1995) Only those properly trained in TCM should be allowed to practice TCM. The local TCM training schools have made valuable contributions to the training of TCM practitioners in the past. However, the training they provide and the quality of trainees are not up to the standard of the TCM colleges in some other countries. Government and community efforts to upgrade the training of TCM practitioners and the standard of TCM practice in Singapore should be supported. Apart from the control of poisons, the Ministry of Health has in the past not been actively involved in TCM practices in Singapore. This is largely due to the lack of expertise in this area and the relatively low usage of TCM by the population. However, with the development of TCM particularly in China over the past 2 to 3 decades, and increasing interest in complementary medicine the world over, public interest in TCM 30 'V has also risen. It is therefore timely to review the standards of training and practice of TCM in Singapore. In July 1994, the Minister of Health appointed a Committee to review the practice of TCM and recommend measures to safeguard patient interest and safety, and to enhance the standard of training of TCM practitioners. The Committee recommends that the two main local schools upgrade their part-time courses to a 3-year full-time diploma course or a 6-year part-time equivalent. Moreover, as the dispensers play an important role in the delivery of traditional Chinese medicines to customers and patients, the local TCM organizations are planning to provide refresher-training courses for existing dispensers. In future, dispensers may also be required to receive formal training and be registered. (Singapore MOH, 1995) At present, the Government imposes minimal control on Chinese Proprietary M e d i c i n e  T h e nforcement activities currently carried out are targeted more towards safeguarding the public from toxic substances, prevention of adulteration and exaggerated claims. As most raw herbs have low toxicity and herbs containing toxic substances are already controlled under the Poisons Act, the control of raw CMM (in terms of the import, export, sale and distribution) can be maintained at the present level. The Singapore Trade Development Board has reported that Singapore imported US$ 79 million worth of herbs and ginseng in 1993 and re-exported $ 13 million worth of these products during the same year. (WHO, 2000) 3.7 Australia Traditional Chinese medicine, best known for the practices of acupuncture and Chinese herbal medicine (CHM), has been practiced in Australia for many years and is being used now more than ever before. (Bensoussan A, Myers SP et al, 2000) In order to elevate the usage of TCM in Australia, the Victorian Department of Human Services 31 (DHS) (formerly known as Health & Community Services) sought tenders for research into the practice of Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) in that State at 1995. The first stage involved a major research project to collect information on the risks and benefits of TCM and the nature of the TCM work force; and to consider the need, if any, for registration of TCM practitioners and regulation of Chinese herbal medicines. The outcome was that the researchers recommended to the Australian Health Ministers Advisory Council (AHMAC) and to all State governments that occupational regulation of the profession of TCM proceed as a matter of urgency. In Australia in 1996-97, the Commonwealth Health Insurance Commission paid over $17.7 million in Medicare rebates for 960,000 acupuncture treatments by registered medical practitionersThere has been a similar increase in the practice of other aspects of Traditional Chinese medicine, including herbal medicine, therapeutic massage, manipulation, dietary therapy and exercise therapy. (Bensoussan A, Myers SP et al, 2000) Moreover, complementary medicine services in Australia have grown to the extent that consumers now spend approximately twice as much on complementary medicines as their out-of-pocket contributions to pharmaceuticals. The resulting research report. Towards a Safer Choice: The Practice of Traditional Chinese Medicine in Australia, was launched in November 1996. The researchers found that the risks in the practice of TCM relate primarily to the practice of acupuncture and Chinese herbal medicine, which have resulted in at least five documented deaths in Australia, With the growing use of TCM, regulatory authorities, health professionals, and the public need to understand the risks involved in TCM.Consumercomplaints are dealt with by the Department's Therapeutic Goods Unit concerning herbal preparations, some of which had been adulterated with potent western medicines, along with the difficulties 32 experienced by the Commonwealth Therapeutic Goods Administration in controlling this area. In Australia, products for human medicinal use must be placed on the Register of Therapeutic Goods [Therapeutic Goods Act 1989 (Cwlth)] in one of two categories -"listed" or registered. Formulations can be listed for a small fee if they contain substances regarded by the Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) as being of low public health concern and comply with the Therapeutic Goods Advertising Code. (Drew AK and Myers SP, 1997) This restricts wording of claims to "assist" rather than "treat" and limits indications to minor self-limiting conditions. The products have to be manufactured by a TGA-licensed manufacturer following a recognized code of Good Manufecturing Practice. Labeling requirements are the same as those for registered products. Efficacy data have to be held by the manufacturer/distributor of such products and can be called on at any time by the TGA or the Australian. Competition and Consumer (formerly, the Trade Practices) Commission. About 4500 plant-based products are listed; these are given an "AUST L" number, indicating their listing on the register and that they can be sold legally in Australia. Registered products, which bear an "AUST R" number, contain herbs that are either restricted by the federal Standards for the Uniform Scheduling of Drugs and Poisons, those for which efficacy claims are more substantial, or those which are specified by the TGA as being of some health concern. For registration, which is more costly, appropriate documentation outlining clinical trial work must be submitted to the Traditional Medicines Evaluation Committee (established in 1991 - soon to be replaced by the Complementary Medicines Evaluation Committee) which advises the TGA. Fewer than five CAM products have been evaluated in this way. Although Australia has 3 3 more regulatory controls than many other countries for CAM preparations, including herbals, most of these preparations are not exposed to the premarketing evaluation process that prescription and scheduled proprietary medicines undergo. Few CAM preparations can be patented, so they are not subject to the financial incentive that drives the pharmaceutical market. (Drew AK and Myers SP, 1997) There is significant black market activity in the importation of unlisted and/or unregistered patent medicines. Deficiencies exist in the ability of the Federal Therapeutic Goods Administration to address both this problem and that of the importation of raw herbs. In order to control such a situation, a tighter regulation of importation of raw herbs and patent medicines are needed to protect the public adequately. In Australia, reporting of adverse effects of any medication, whether alternative or conventional, is usually undertaken by a medical practitioner, pharmacist or dentist, who completes and forwards a "blue card" to ADRAC. Although the person reporting needs not assess the association between the medication and the adverse effect, this process enables trends to be spotted. ADRAC has received 154 reports relating to complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) in 25 years. (Drew AK and Myers SP, 1997) A study performed in Australia in 1996 collected data on adverse events that occurred in clinical practice and have been self-reported by practitioners of TCM, including those who practiced only TCM and those whose primary specialty was not TCM. Totally four hundred fifty-eight (30%) of 1517 medical practitioners responded and the adverse reaction rate caused by TCM was 0.16%. (Bensoussan A, Myers SP et al, 2000) 34 3.8 Others Asian countries In the Philippines, eight public hospitals provide acupuncture clinics and treatment. Several doctors at these hospitals have been trained in acupuncture with WHO support. (WHO, 2000) In Vietnam, 45 traditional medicine hospitals at national and provincial levels and 265 general hospitals provide traditional medicine services. In the Republic of Korea, a national medical law was passed in 1952 and traditional medicine was introduced into the health service as a parallel system alongside modern medical science. In the Republic of Korea, there are 11 colleges providing formal education on traditional medicine and there are about 9210 licensed traditional medicine doctors. In Malaysia the market for traditional medicine is estimated at about RM 1 billion annually and more than 16,000 traditional medicine products have been submitted to the National Pharmaceutical Control Bureau, Ministry of Health, for registration. (WHO, 1998) 3.9 USA The commercialized herbal industry is now blossoming in the United States, More than 500 different herbs are currently marketed in the United States, and Americans spent more than US$12 billion on natural supplements in 1997, nearly double the amount spent in 1994, while sales still continue to grow by more than 10% a year. Increasingly, alternative therapies such as herbal products are being used in the United States. Approximately 25 % of Americans who consult their physician about a serious health problem are employing unconventional therapy, but only 70 % of these patients inform their physician of such use. (Eisenberg DM, Kessler RC et al, 1993) Another national survey of alternative medicine performed in 1997 demonstrated that 42% of Americans used alternative medicine in the past year. (Eisenberg DM, Davis RB 3 5 et al,1998) The result of the studies showed that female gender, age 35-49 years, college education, annual income greater than $50,000 and residence in the western quarter of the United States best characterizes users of alternative medicine. More than this, an investigative survey in 1997 showed that nearly 30% of Americans aged 65 and older were using alternative medicine. (Forster PJG, Calverley M et al, 1979) Almost three million people aged 65 and older took herbal therapies, with two million taking both herbal therapies and prescription medications. Those who use both prescription medications and herbal therapies are at potential risk for unintended adverse interactions. In 1962, thalidomide was found teratogenic and Congress passed an amendment to the Food and Drug Act to increase assurance of drug safety and efficacy. While successful in general, the amendment initiated a regulatory dilemma regarding herbal therapies in the United States. (OTIara M, Kiefer D et al, 1998) Before 1994, dietary supplements were regulated under the Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act as either foods or drugs, depending on the intended application. (Rotblatt MD, 1999) For new foods or food additives, safety had to be demonstrated before marketing. A product was considered a drug if the manufacturer, including structure or function claims, made any therapeutic claims or if other evidence existed that the intended use was as a drug. In 1994 the Dietary Supplement Health and Education Act (DSHEA) was passed by Congress and created a new category for dietary supplements. Under the act, supplements can claim to affect structure and function, but they cannot be intended to treat, prevent, mitigate, cure, or diagnose disease. Under DSHEA, herbs can be labeled and advertised as having certain healthful or nutritional properties as long as no therapeutic claims are made. Labeling can include suggested doses, despite the fact that few dose-response studies of herbal medicines have been conducted. Nonspecific 36 labeling statements such as these both confuse consumers and promote skepticism among healthcare professionals. Basically, manufacturers can allude to a therapeutic use of an herb, whether it is effective or not. Herbal medicines and other dietary supplements were not subject to approval by the FDA before marketing.(U.S. Public Law S, 1994) Theoretically, manufacturers should be able to substantiate their "structure and function" claims, but they are not required to share this information with the FDA or make it publicly available. In fact, manufacturers are not required to notify the FDA of label claims until 30 days after their products are marketed. The FDA can take action only once a supplement is on the market and found to be a significant or unreasonable risk to consumers. New dietary supplement labeling regulations, implemented in March 1999, ensure that labels should include complete ingredient listings in a format that is easy to understand, but manufacturers are not required to furnish information such as side effects, contraindications, or warnings. According to DSHEA, dietary supplements must include the following statements in the product labeling: "This statement has not been evaluated by the FDA. This product is not intended to diagnose, treat, cure, or prevent any disease" (Klepser TB and Klepser ME, 1999) Quality control and manufacturing standardization are not required of herbal medicines in the United States. (Rotblatt MD, 1999) With guidance from the Commission on Dietary Supplement Labels (appointed by President Clinton and established by the Congress in the DSHEA), the FDA is considering other regulations, such as working to improve post market surveillance of dietary supplements, requiring pertinent warning statements in product information, and taking action to protect consumers and withdraw unsafe products from the market or take other protective 37 action. (FDA, 1998) Partly due to the lack of GMPs, some dietary supplements contain impurities and adulterants. Unlike pharmaceutical companies, supplement manufacturers often lack personnel to obtain information on overdoses or adverse events. Although the FDA regulates labeling,advertising of dietary supplements fall under the purview of the Federal Trade Commission. The FDA has suggested that manufacturers not make any claims with respect to their products and use in pregnancy. (O'Neil C and Fetrow C, 2001) Numerous big pharmaceutical companies in United States and Europe were doing research on Chinese medicine. (Cyranoski D, 2001) The Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition of the FDA recently published a document entitled, "Dietary Supplement Strategy: Ten Year Plan. "(FDA US,2000) It outlines the strategy to reach its goal to have a "science-based regulatory program" that provides consumers with a "high level of confidence in the safety, composition, and labeling" of the products. The FDA developed six strategy teams that are organized into categories of safety, labeling, boundaries, enforcement, research, and outreach. The plan is to fully implement the DSHEA. The FDA's 10-year plan is an ambitious undertaking and will help solve many of the unresolved issues. Furthermore, western medical professionals have also changed their perspective. The American Medical Association (AMA) resolved in 1995 that alternative / complimentary / herbal medicine should be included in the medical curriculum. Now, over 50% of the medical schools in the U.S. have a course on this subject. Base on the fact that herbal remedies are considered food products under the DSHEA and hence they are not subject to rigorous clinical testing, as are pharmaceutical products. No manufacturing standards regulate the quality and production of herbal 38 remedies. All these factors have led to increase adverse reactions in patients choosing alternative therapies. Adverse reactions associated with dietary supplements in USA, especially herbal remedies, can be caused by inherently toxic herbs, by herb overdoses, or by drug-herb interactions, especially with pharmaceuticals that have a narrow therapeutic index.