Other popular remedies that can cause dermatological side effects include 195 *V St Johns Wort, kava, aloe vera, eucalyptus, camphor, henna and yohimbine. Finally, there are some herbal treatments used specifically for dermatological conditions, e.g. Chinese oral herbal remedies for atopic eczema, which have the potential to cause systemic adverse effects. 13.2 Chinese Herbal Medicine Used in Psoriasis According to TCM,psoriasis is subtyped into 3 main categories: "blood-heat" type, "blood deficiency-dryness" type, and "blood stasis" type. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) According to the subtype of psoriasis the patient has, a different mixture of herbs is suggested. For example, when inflicted with blood stasis psoriasis the lesions are indurated and have little tendency to resolve spontaneously. There is also a purplish or dark red coloring of the tongue with occasional petechia. The pulse is often small and loose. The principle of treatment of this type of psoriasis is to activate the blood and eliminate the stasis. The most often used prescriptions include Herba Hedyotis diffusae, Flos carthami, Semen persicae, Ramulus euonymi, Rhizoma sparganii, Rhizoma curoumae' Pericarpium Citri reticulatae, and Caul is spatholob. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) These are only the core ingredients that are recommended. They are ingested as decoctions. According to the needs of each patient, this list would be altered. To treat blood deficiency-dryness a different set of herbs is considered more suitable. Among the physical manifestations of this type is the appearance of the tongue characterized by pinkish color with a thin coating. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) Western dermatologists do not routinely inspect the tongues or pulses of their patients with psoriasis. Thus, it is difficult to make a comparison between this two treatment. 196 13.2.1 Tripterygium wilfordii Tripterygium wilfordii Hook and Triptergium hypoglaucum Hutch are 2 popular TCMs. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) Tripterygium wilfordii Hook has yielded positive therapeutic effects when used to treat various types of psoriasis. Although Tripterygium wilfordii Hook's possible mechanism of action has been investigated to be both anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive, there have been several negative consequences. The clinical efficacy is similar for Triptergium hypoglaucum Hutch and Tripterygium wilfordii Hook. Chinese medical literature concludes that with the current results Tripterygium wilfordii Hook and Triptergium hypoglaucum Hutch have shown modest efficacy with an acceptable adverse effects profile. (Long YI, Zhou GP et al, 1983; Zheng FZ, 1984; Gao JC, 1990) Some toxic effects have been observed in both animals and human subjects. Among these are gastrointestinal reaction, cutaneous/mucotaneous reactions, and abnormal menstruation. Some abnormalities in the hematopoietic system were also noted. In addition, exacerbation of latent chronic hepatitis and abnormal liver function was observed in several cases, 13.2.2 Radix Angelicae pubescentis and Radix Angelicae dahuricae Although TCM has been used to treat a variety of skin diseases, of particular interest to us is psoriasis>> Both topical and systemic use of herbs has been administered to treat psoriasis, as well as a combination of herbal medications with UV-A. This method is similar to psoralen-UV-A phototherapy. Radix Angelicae pubescentis and Radix Angelicae dahuricae were the Chinese herbal medicine that were administered in combination with UV-A irradiation. Radix Angelicae dahuricae UV-A therapy was reported to have an obvious result with 46.8% in 204 psoriasis patients and inducing 197 *v marked improvement in 121 patients (42.6%) in whom psoriasis was not completely cleared. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) 13.2.3 Radix macrotomiae sen Lithospermi Injection Although TCMs are commonly found in topical, oral, and photochemotherapeutic modalities, some of them are also injectable. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) Sometimes the injectable agent yields better results than when used in the other forms. For instance. Radix macrotomiae sen Lithospermi when injected resulted in a more significant therapeutic effect in treating psoriasis than in an oral formulation. 13.3 Chinese Herbal Decoction For Atopic Dermatitis Traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) for the treatment of atopic dermatitis and psoriasis has recently received much attention. In traditional Chinese theory, the body is treated as a whole and the aim of therapy is to restore harmony to the functions of the body. (Atherton DJ, Sheehan MP et al, 1992) This requires a mixture of various herbs individually formulated for the patient, making randomized controlled trials difficult to undertake. (Sheehan MP, Rustin MH et al, 1992) Recently, 2 randomized placebo-controlled crossover trials were performed in England to study the effects of orally administered CHM in the treatment of atopic dermatitis in which traditional Western therapy had failed. (Sheehan MP and Atherton DJ, 1992; Sheehan MP,Rustin MH et al, 1992; Armstrong N and Ernst E, 1999) The investigators were aided by a Chinese physician who was able to create a standardized mixture of 10 herbs useful in treating atopic dermatitis characterized by erythema, lichenification, and plaques of dermatitis in the absence of active exudation or clinical infection. The standard TCM practice emphasizes the importance of using many herbs combined in different compositions for each individual patient. The formulation is based on the diagnosis and individual 198 condition of the patient. Whereas Western medicme emphasizes monotherapy, standard TCM promotes herbal mixtures sometimes involving more than 10 different herbs and other agents. The 10 herbs used were Potentilla chinensis, Tribulus terrestris, Rehmannia glutinosa, Lophatherum gracile, Clematis armandii, Ledehouriella saseloides, Dictamnus dasycarpus' Paeonia lactiflora, Schizonepeta tenuifolia, and G glabra. (Sheehan MP and Atherton DJ, 1992) These herbs were placed in sachets and boiled to make a decoction that was orally administered daily as a tea. The placebo arm consisted of a decoction made from several herbs with similar smells and tastes that have no known efficacy in the treatment of atopic dermatitis. The first study focused on 37 children and showed a median decrease in erythema score of 51.0% in the treatment group compared with only a 6.1% improvement in the placebo group. The percentage siirfece involvement also decreased by 63.1% and 6.2% for the treatment and placebo groups, respectively. In this initial study, no serious adverse effects were found. These 37 children were offered continued treatment with the CHM and then followed up for 1 year. (Sheehan MP, Rustin MH et al, 1992) Eighteen children completed the year of treatment and showed 90% reduction in eczema activity scores' The children who withdrew from the study did so because of lack of further response to treatment, unpalatability of the tea, or difficulty in preparation of the treatment. By the end of 1 year, 7 patients were able to discontinue therapy without relapse. Asymptomatic elevation of aspartate aminotransferase level was noted in 2 patients, which returned to normal with discontinuing treatment. No other serious sequelae were observed. In the other study, the design was similar; however, the investigators studied 31 adult patients with atopic dermatitis. (Sheehan MP, Rustin MH et al, 1992) Again, the decrease in erythema and surface damage was statistically superior in the treatment group compared 199 with the placebo group. There was also subjective improvement in itching and sleep. These patients were also followed up for a year, with continued improvement and no serious adverse effects, whereas the patients who discontinued treatment noted a decline in their condition. (Sheehan MP, Rust in MH et al, 1992) Although the sample sizes were limited during the course of the study, initial results were promising for patients in whom standard therapy failed. The main limitation appeared to be the taste and the preparation of the decoction. It should be emphasized, however, that, although no serious adverse effects were noted in this study, careful monitoring of complete blood cell count and liver function is recommended, as reports of liver failure and even death have been reported when baseline laboratory values were not followed up. (Brown G, 1992; Kara M, Pauwels A et al, 1992; Koo J and Arain S, 1998) 13.3.1 Tea Extracts Ultraviolet solar radiation may induce a variety of adverse effects in humans, including melanoma,(Koh H, Kligler B et al, 1990) photoaging of the skin (Wenk J, Brenneisen P et al, 2001); (Krutmann J, 2000), sunburn (Biesalski H and Obermueller-Jevic U, 2001), and immunosuppression. (Gil E and Kim T, 2000; Hart P, Grimbaldeston M et al, 2001] Protection against UV-induced skin damage includes avoidance of sun exposure, application of sunscreens, low-fat diets,(Black H, 1998; Hakim I, Harris R et al, 2000) and pharmacologic intervention with retinoids. (DiGiovanna J, 2001) More recently, green tea extracts have been reported to be beneficial in treating UV-induced p h o t o d a m a g e . (Levin CBA and Maibach HMD, 2002) The (-)-epigallocatechin-3-gallate and (-)-epicatechin-3-gallate polphenolic fractions were most effective in a dose-dependent reduction of UV-induced erythema as measured by chromatometry and visual evaluation. Histological examination showed a decrease in sunburn cells in green tea 200 polyphenolic (GTP)-treated skin. Epidermal Langerhans cells, the antigen-presenting cells involved in the skin immune response, were significantly protected against UV damage. Furthermore, oral and topical standardized black tea extracts also decreased photochemical damage to the skin. 13.4 Potential Adverse Effect with Herbal Medicine Many patients have the misconception that,because herbs are "natural," there are no adverse effects. Physicians often do not question patients about herbal supplements, and patients are often reluctant to divulge the use of these agents for fear of criticism from their physician. It is important that dermatologists become aware of the most common, as well as the more serious, effects. (see Table 13 a & 13 b) This will aid in better education of patients, as well as better diagnosis of possible fatal sequelae. 13.4.1 Allergic skin reactions Many cutaneous reactions to herbal preparations have been reported. The most common cutaneous adverse effect of herbal preparations is allergic contact dermatitis. However, more serious cutaneous reactions have been reported. Allergies are a potential adverse effect with virtually any herbal (or indeed synthetic) medication. (Mantyranta T and Haahtela T,1993) The risk obviously increases with topical administration and long-term usage. A notable case describes an aromatherapist with allergic eczema and positive patch tests to 18 different essential oils. (Selvaag E, Holm J et al, 1995) The number of cases related to allergic reactions to herbal remedies reported in the medical literature is too large to be comprehensively reviewed here. Table 13 a provides examples only. Emphasis is put on more recent case reports with clinical relevance. Two patients developed erythroderma after using topical herbal treatments for psoriasis and atopic dermatitis, and 1 patient developed Stevens-Johnson syndrome after taking 201 'V . "Golden Health Blood Purifying Tablets," which contained multiple herbs, including red clover, burdock, queen's delight, poke root,prickly ash, sassafras bark, and Passiflora. (Monk B, 1986) There have been reports of bullous and nodular lichen planus induced by ingestion of native African medicines. (Soyinka F, 1973) A young woman has also been described with leukemia-related Sweet syndrome elicited by pathergy to topical arnica creairL(Delmonte S,Bmsati C et al, 1998) 13.4.2 Stevens-Johnson syndrome Following the consumption of a health drink containing ophiopogonis tuber, a 66-year-old woman noted erythema and swelling of her face, neck and chest (Table 13 a). (Mochitomi Y, Inoue A et al, 1998) Subsequently, she developed bullous and eroded lesions on the skin of her entire body as well as of the mucous membranes of her mouth, conjunctiva and cornea. She also had a fever and liver dysfunction. Difilise necrosis of the epidermis was confirmed by biopsy. She tested positive in drug lymphocyte stimulation and patch tests as well as on a rechallenge with 1/1000 of the original dose. The patient made a full recovery on steroid therapy. 13.4.3 Photosensitization Essential oils used topically for aromatherapy and herbal creams have repeatedly been implicated as the cause for photosensitization. A particularly dramatic case was reported recently; a 3 3-year-old woman was admitted to a U.K. bums unit with 70% superficial partial thickness biirns. (Cocks H and Wilson D, 1998) She had self-administered an aromatherapy bath 3 days previously using six drops of bergamot and six drops of geranium oil After the bath she had spent about half an hour on a sunbed. During the ensuing 48 h she noted increasing erythema and blistering on the exposed areas. The authors conclude that bergamot oil (which contains 5-methoxypsoralen and is 202 "V a known photo sensitizer) was the cause of this event. Numerous other herbal remedies contain psoralens (Rutaceae, Umbelliferae, Moraceae, Leguminosae) and can therefore cV cause photosensitivity. (Koo J and Arain S, 1999) Based on animal data, photosensitivity has always been considered a possible adverse effect of St Johns Wort, a best-selling herbal antidepressant. (Stevinson C and Ernst E, 1999) German dermatologists reported a case of a 61-year-old patient who presented with an itching erythema of the light-exposed areas. She was on St Johns Wort extract for depression. Using a systemic oral photoprovocation test, these authors were able to demonstrate a decreased minimal erythema dose for ultraviolet radiation B that was reversible after withdrawal of the herbal remedy. (GoIsch S, Vocks E et al, 1997) Recently a further case report of photosensitivity after oral administration of St Johns Wort was published. (Bove GM, 1998) A 35-year-old women took 500 mg/day of ground whole St Johns Wort leaf for about 1 month when she began to feel a stinging pain on the skin of her face and dorsum of her hand. The pain was exacerbated through exposure to the sun. The problem spread to all areas of the skin exposed to the sun. When she discontinued self-medicating with St Johns Wort the pain ceased promptly. A forther case of acute photosensitivity following treatment with an herbal remedy relates to Psorolea corylifolia (Babchi). The patient had taken the herbal treatment in the form of a cream that he had used to treat his long-standing vitiligo and subsequently experienced erythema in exposed areas,(Maurice PDL and Cream JJ, 1989) By excluding other causes, a diagnosis of photosensitivity due to P. corylifolia was made This diagnosis was subsequently confirmed through inadvertent rechallenge. The herb, which is frequently used for vitiligo in Indian populations, contains psoralen, isopsoralen 203 and psoralidin. Its extracts have been demonstrated to have potent sensitizing activity on guinea-pig skin. (Pathak MA, Daniels F et al, 1962) CV 13.4.4 Pellagra A 25-year-old woman presented with a 6-week history of photosensitive dermatitis with painful erythema of the feet and progressive involvement of sun-exposed areas. (Wood B and Wishart J, 1997) Dermato logical examination revealed erythematous plaques with well-demarcated, peeling hyperpigmented borders, which were distributed symmetrically over the dorsal aspect of the limbs. She also showed the classic Casals necklace. A clinical diagnosis of pellagra was made and she recovered quickly on oral nicotinamide. Even though no satisfactory mechanism of action could be identified, the authors considered the patients self-medication with Kombucha tea the most likely cause for the pellagra. 13.4.5 Hepatotoxic Effects Serious systemic adverse effects have been reported with the use of TCM for the treatment of dermato logic disorders. (Monica BK and Philip SD, 2002) The most common are hepatotoxic effects. Although most patients recover without serious consequences as long as the medication is stopped, there have been reports of patients with acute liver failure and death. In Great Britain, a 29-year-old woman was prescribed Chinese herbal treatment for eczema. (Walton P and Murray V, 1992) She consequently developed 2 episodes of hepatitis that led to hospitalization. She had acute liver failure after the second hospitalization. This later led to her death, despite an emergency liver transplantation. The British governmental agency has recorded 11 cases of liver damage following the use of TCM for skin conditions from January 1991 to December 1993. In many of the 204 *V cases, recovery occurred after discontinuation of the herbal medicines. Later when rechallenged with the same herbal medicine, there was a recurrence of hepatitis. Although it is difficult to establish absolute etiologic association for all 11 cases, there is an obvious circumstantial link between TCM and the consequent liver damage.