As a general rule, concomitant use of herbs and drugs thai produce like effects is best avoided to avert "synergistic overload. "(Horowitz S, 2000) Approximately 25-30 percent of all conventional drugs are derived from plants, and cautions that such double-dosing becomes more likely. It was because herbs, as they move incrementally further from their plant origins in becoming more standardized, arc transformed into herbal drugs thai are capable of producing similar side effects to potent bioinedicine. Natural products that have been reported to interact with drugs in humans include coenzyme QIO, dong quai, ephedra, Ginko biloba' ginseng, glucosamine sulfate, ipriflavone. melatonin, and St. John's wort. (Scott GN, 2002) In many cases, more research is needed to confirm these interactions and to determine whether other natural products may also interact with drugs. To effectively counsel patients about interactions involving natural products, pharmacists should be familiar with the most commonly used products and have access to information on more obscure products. Interactions between natural products and drugs are based on the same pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic principles as drug-drug interactions. Natural products may affect the absorption of drugs and other natural products. Two studies reported in the February 12, 2000,issue of The Lancet journal implicated the use of St. John's wort {Hypericum perforatum), one of the most popular herbals used primarily to treat depression, as potentially detrimental in two very specific medical circumstances. St. John's wort was found to compromise the efficacy of both the HIV protease inhibitor indinavir,(Piscitelli SC. Burstein AH et a l 2000) and the anti-253 rejcclion transplant drug cyclosporin (Chitzka RF & el al, 2000) that is used to suppress the immune system of heart transplant patients. While such situations may represent atypical cases, given that phytochemicals tend to be in less potent form than pharmaceuticals and thai most have been used safely throughout history, these cases do focus attention on the fact that botanicals are medicines that deserve as much respect and professional supervision as synthetically produced allopathic prescription drugs. Another example is using laxative or bulk-forming agents. Both agents will speed intestinal transit, and thus may interfere with the absorption of almost any intestinally absorbed drug. The most popular stimulant laxative herbs are the anthranoid-containing senna {Cassia senna and C angustifolia) and cascara sagrada {Rhamnus purshiana). Dried exudate from the aloe vera {Aloe harhadensis) leaf (not gel) also contains anthranoids and is used as a laxative. Aloe vera ge l found within the leaves, is used topically for burns and cuts, and is sometimes recommended by herbalists for internal ingestion to treat ulcers and other disorders. The gel (or juice made from the gel) does not contain anthranoids, but some oral preparations are contaminated by the laxative leaf. Less commonly used anthranoid-containing plants are frangula {Rhammis frangula), yellow dock {Rumex crispus), and Chinese rhubarb {Rheum officinale). While many drug interactions can be serious, the consequences of some involving such as St. John's wort are potentially life-threatening. (Berman F & Ernst E, 2001) Significant decreases in antiretroviral drug concentrations can lead to treatment failure and viral rebound in HIV-seropositive patients; drops in cyclosporine levels have been shown to cause organ rejection in kidney and heart transplant patients. Pharmacists in these two areas of practice must be especially vigilant to protect their patients from such interactions. 254 16.2 E f f ec t s of Herb-dru<^ i n t e r ac t i ons 16.2.1 G a s t r o - i n t e s t i n a l sys tem The majority of all absorption occurs in the intestines, where herbs or drugs must pass through the intestinal wall to enter the blood. Several mechanisms may interfere with the absorption of drugs through the intestines. The efficacy of antacids or antiulcer drugs used in therapy may be affected in individuals taking herbs such as horse chestnut which is irritant to the gastro-intestinal tract. (Newall CA & Phillipson D) Drugs such as Questran (cholestyramine), Co lest id (colestipol) and Carafate (sucralfate) may bind to certain herbs, forming an insoluble complex, and decrease absorption of both substances because the size of the insoluble complex is too big to pass through the intestinal wail. It is possible that the activity of a laxative may be potentiated or its side effects increased by concomitant use of a herbal laxative such as senna. The absorption of herbs may be adversely affected when the herbs are given together with some drugs that change the pH of the stomach. Drugs such as antacids, Tagamet (cimetidine). Pepcid (famotidine),Axid (nizatidine). Zantac (ranitidine) and Prilosec (omeprazole) may neutralize, decrease or inhibit the secretion of the stomach acid. With the subsequent decrease of stomach acid, herbs may not be broken down properly, leading to poor absorption in the intestines. To minimize the risk of interaction, it is best if the drugs and the herbs are taken separately by approximately two hours. Lastly, drugs that affect the G.I. motility may affect the absorption of herbs. G.I. motility is the rate at which the intestines contract to push the content from the stomach to the rectum. Slower G.I. Motility means the herbs stay in the intestines for a longer period of time and there will be an increase in absorption. Conversely, faster G.I. Motility means the herbs stay in the intestines for a shorter period of time and there may 255 be an decrease in absorption. Drugs such as Reglan (metoclopramide) and Propulsid (cisapride) increase G.I. Motility and possibly decrease absorption of herbs; and drugs such as Haldol (haloperidol) decrease G.I. Motility and may increase absorption of herbs. Therefore, it may be necessary to decrease the dosage of herbs when the patient takes a drug that decreases the G.I. Motility and increases overall absorption; and increase the dosage of herbs when the patient takes a drug thai increases the G.I. Motility and decreases overall absorption. 16.2.2 C a r d i o v a s c u l a r sys tem A number of pharmaceutical drugs with different modes of action may be prescribed for cardiovascular abnormalilies. (NewalI CA &Phillipson D) Diuretics are commonly prescribed for the management of hypertension and their activity may be potentiated by co-administration of herbal diuretics such as dandelion. Elderly patients, in particular, are susceptible to the side effects of diuretics. Herbs which either lower blood pressure (e.g. ginseng) or raise it (e.g. broom), or have mineralocorticoid activity (e.o. liquorice) or are diuretic (e.g. dandelion) may adversely affect the beneficial clinical effects of antihypertensive therapy. Blood lipid levels, already lowered by treatment with lipid-lowering drugs, may be further reduced by the use of hypolipidaemic herbs such as alfalfa. Herbs, such as angelica, which contain coumarins have anticoagulant activity whereas other herbs, such as agrimony, are reported to have coagulant activity. Aspirin increases the risk of bleeding in warfarin therapy and it is possible that herbs such as willow, which contains salicylates may have similar effects. Therapeutic doses of garlic should not be given to patients with slow blood clotting time and caution is recommended for those on anticoagulant therapy. 256 16.2.3 C e n t r a 1 n e r v o u s system Hypnotics and anxiolytics may react with sedative herbs, e.g. passiflora, valerian, or with slimulanl herbs, e.g. ginseng. (Newall CA &Phillipson D) Evening primrose oil may have the potential to manifest undiagnosed temporal lobe epilepsy and caution should be exercised in patients taking epileptogenic drugs such as phenolhiazines. Herbal sedatives, e.g. hypericum. may affect the activity of antidepressant drugs and it is possible that any sedative herb may interfere with the activity of analgesic and antiepileptic drugs. 16.2.4 E n d o c r i n e system Drugs acting on the endocrine system including antidiabetics, corticosteroids and oral contraceptives may interact with herbal remedies. (NewaI] CA & Phillipson D) Alfalfa has hypoglycaemic activity whereas deviFs claw is reportedly hyperglycaemic and therefore it is possible that co-administration of these herbs with conventional diabetic therapy may result in adverse effects. 16.3 Reasons c o n t r i b u t i n g to h e r b - d r u g interact ions . 16.3.1 Lack of Knowledge Abou t H e r b s In USA, nearly 300,000 higher plant species and only approximately 10 percent have been carefully assessed for their medicinal and toxic properties. In China, nearly 12,807 species of herbal medicine could use, 11,146 are plants species and 1,581 are animal species and 50 kinds of mineral herbs. Nearly 200 species are always used in medical treatment. Even an experienced herbalist might not be familiar with more than ]000-2000 of these species. Doctors who rely on standard Western medicine are apt to be even less knowledgeable in this area. 257 16.3.2 Misiabel i inj^ o r A d u l t e r a t i o n Such mislabelling or adulteration may account for some of the problems noted with in the reactions with prescription medicines, thus complicating the scientific assessment of herbal-drug interact ions. (Horowitz S, 2000) 1 6 3 . 3 L a c k of P a t i e n t C o m m u n i c a t i o n A b o u t Use of Botan ica l s Despite the steadily increasing popularity of medicinai herbs, surveys indicate that only a small percentage of patients disclose such usage to their mainstream physicians and pharmacists. Patients may neither report or be asked about their diets and use of nutritional supplements. Furthermore, such surveys reveal that a majority of patients do not inform their allopathic physicians of herbal use because of fear of the practitioners' disapproval of alternative medical treatments and the conventional top-down information flow from physician to patient. 16.3.4 L a c k of P r a c t i t i o n e r K n o w l e d g e A b o u t Po ten t i a l I n t e r ac t ions While the trend toward more integrative or complementary medical practice and education continues, information regarding potential harmful interactions between herbal and pharmaceutical drugs is still largely lacking in mainstream medical school curricula and professional literature. (Horowitz S, 2000) 16.4 Me tabo l i sm and H e r b - D r u g I n t e r a c t i o n s Many herbs and drugs are metabolized by the liver into inactive derivatives. The rate at which the liver metabolizes these herbs and drugs determines the length of time these herbs or drugs stay active in the body. If the liver were induced to speed up its metabolism, herbs and drugs would be inactivated at a faster pace and the overall effectiveness of ingested substances would be lower. On the other hand, if the liver 258 were induced to slow down its metabolism, herbs and drugs would be inactivated at a slower pace and the overall elTecliveness of the substances would be higher. In general, drugs thai induce liver metabolism do not exert an immediate effect. The rate of liver metabolism changes slowly over several weeks. Therefore, the effect of increased liver metabolism is not seen until weeks a f k r the initiation of drug therapy. Some examples include Dilantin (phenytoin). Tegretol (carbamazepine), phenobarbital and rifampin. These drugs speed up liver metabolism. Therefore, the herbs may be inactivated faster and their overall effectiveness may be lower. Under such circumstances, the patient may need a higher dose of herbs to achieve the desired effectiveness. On the other hand, drugs that inhibit liver metabolism have an immediate onset of action. The rate of liver metabolism may be greatly impaired within a few days. Therefore, there is a higher risk of herbs accumulating inside the body as the function of the liver to inactivate them is compromised. Examples of drugs that slow down or inhibit liver metabolism include, but are not limited to. Tagamet (cimetidine), erythromycin, ethanoL Diflucan (fluconazole). Sporonox (itraconazole) and Nizoral (ketoconazole). Therefore, the herbs may be inactivated more slowly and the overall effectiveness may be prolonged, in this case, one may need to lower the dosage of herbs to avoid unwanted side-effects' 16.5 P h a r m a c o l o g i c In t e r ac t i ons It should be noted that there is more theorizing to date about herbal-drug interactions than experimental data; patients tend to underreport such crossreactions to allopathic physicians and pharmacists. (Horowitz S, 2000) In addition, much clinical experience of such metabolic interaction problems is typically based on a small number 259 of patients and a re specific product-related and dose-relalcd. In clinical practice, polypharmacy is common, and to the mixture physicians prescribe, patients add various over-the-counter medications, vitamins, herbs, and foods. All ingested substances have the potential to interact. (Berman AF, 2000) 16.5.1 In t e r ac t i on with Ant ibiot ics Tetracycline hydrochloride and St. John's wort act synergistically to increase the photosensitivity side-effect of each medicine. (Horowitz S, 2000) Besides herbs: mineral supplements, such as calcium, iron, magnesium, and zinc, can prevent the absorption of tetracycline, ciprofloxacin (Cipro) and other antibiotics, if taken together with such pharmaceuticals. Even grapefruit juice was recently found to inactivate medications used to treat allergies, cancer, heart failure, and high blood pressure, as well as for immunosuppression in patients who receive organ transplants. The juice also was found to increase the potency of some antihistamines and calcium-channei blockers. (Herbst D, 1999) 16.5.2 i n t e r ac t i on with Nonsteroidal A n t i - i n f l a m m a t o r y Drugs The NSAIDS should not be used with herbal medicinals that are known to cause gastrointestinal damage. (Miller LGPB, 1999) Gossypol has been associated with tissue congestion, mucosal sloughing, mucosal necrosis, and ileus and intestinal wall .iiemorrhage. (Wailer OP, Zaveveld UD et ai' 1985) Other gastric irritants include Arctostaphylos uva-ursi, Rula graveolens, Cetraria islandica, Sanguinaria canadensis, Chamaelirium lutewn,Schinus terebinthifolia, Cqffea arabica, Schimis molle, Cola acuminata, Symplocarpusfoetidus, Cola nilida, Trillium erectum, and Quill aj a saponcirGun a. (Smet PAAD, Hansel R et al, 1993; Smet PAAD, Hansel R et al. 1996) Hence, a patient complaining of unexpected gastrointestinal upset should be questioned 260 regarding herbal nicdicinal use and concomitant use with known gaslroinleslinal irritants, such as NSAIDs, should be avoided. 16.5.3 I n t e r a c t i o n wi th Seda t ives In general, concomitant use of herbs and drugs that produce similar effects is best avoided. (Horowitz S. 2000) This rule applies to herbs utilized as anti-anxiety drugs and sleep aids such as kava and valerian (Valeriana officinalis), which are liable to enhance the sedating or tranquilizing cfleets of psychopharinacologic drugs such as Valium (diazepam),other benzodiazepines, and night time pain formulas containing diphenhydramine. Kava is used as a sedative to enhance sleep. (MiHer LGPB, 1999) Long-term use is not advised because tolerance has been shown to develop rapidly in animals. (Duffield PH & Jamieson D, 1991) Additionally, long-term use has led to kawaism, which is characterized by dry. flaking, discolored skin and reddened eyes. (Ruzo P, 1990; Norton SA & Ruze P. I 994) The toxicity o f kava is increased if taken with alcohoL a-Pyrone. the active component of kava, has been found to have weak effects on y-aminobutyric acid and benzodiazepine receptors in vitro, although this has been disputed. (Davies LP. Drew CA et al, 1992; Davies LP, Drew CA et al, 1992; Jussofie A, Schmiz A et a l 1994) Synergism between a-pyrones and other active sedatives with y-aminobutyric acid was verified in 1994 by a German study group. (Almeida JC & Grimsley EW' 1996) However, concomitant use with benzodiazepene is ill advised based on a case of coma following concomitant use. A 54-year-old man was hospitalized in a lethargic and disoriented state. (Stimpel M, Proksch A et a l 1984) His medications included alprazolam, cimetidine. and terazosin 261 hydrochloride; his alcohol levels were negative and his drug screen was positive for benzodiazepine.