FORUM 
Plant Resources of Tropical Africa 11(1) 
Medicinal plants 1 
PROTA is an international Foundation involving the following participating institu-
tions: 
- Wageningen University (WU), Plant Sciences Group (PSG), Haarweg 333, P.O. 
Box 341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands 
- Agropolis International (AGROPOLIS), Avenue Agropolis, F-34394 Montpellier 
Cedex 5, France 
- Royal Botanic Gardens Kew (RBGKEW), Centre for Economic Botany, Rich-
mond, Surrey TW9 3AB, United Kingdom 
- Centre National de Semences Forestières (CNSF), 01 B.P. 2682, Ouagadougou 
01, Burkina Faso 
- Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique et Technologique (CENAREST), 
B.P. 842, Libreville, Gabon 
- Forestry Research Institute of Ghana (FORIG), KNUST, University P.O. Box 
63, Kumasi, Ghana 
- Parc Botanique et Zoologique de Tsimbazaza (PBZT), B.P. 4096, Tsimbazaza, 
Antananarivo 101, Madagascar 
- National Herbarium and Botanic Gardens of Malawi (NHBGM), P.O. Box 528, 
Zomba, Malawi 
- Makerere University (MU), Department of Botany, P.O. Box 7062, Kampala, 
Uganda 
- World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), P.O. Box 30677, Nairobi, Kenya 
- Prosea Foundation (PROSEA), P.O. Box 332, Bogor 16122, Indonesia 
This publication has been made possible through the financial support by: 
- Netherlands Ministry of Agriculture, Nature and Food Quality 
- Netherlands Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Directorate-General for International 
Cooperation (DGIS) 
- Netherlands Ministry of Spatial Planning, Housing and the Environment 
- Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO) 
- Wageningen University, Netherlands 
Plant Resources of Tropical Africa 11(1) 
Medicinal plants 1 
Editors: G.H. Schmelzer 
A. Gurib-Fakim 
Associate editors: R. Arroo 
C.H. Bosch 
A. de Ruijter 
M.S.J. Simmonds 
General editors: R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
L.P.A. Oyen 
PROTA Foundation / Backhuys Publishers / CTA 
Wageningen, Netherlands, 2008 
^ 
• \ 
0 
I S~~. f" 
;, L A ^ v. 
vj > ' ; • U 
Correct citation of this publication: 
Schmelzer, G.H. & Gurib-Fakim, A. (Editors), 2008. Plant Resources of Tropical Af-
rica 11(1)- Medicinal plants 1. PROTA Foundation, Wageningen, Netherlands / 
Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands / CTA, Wageningen, Netherlands. 791 pp. 
Correct citation of articles from this publication: 
[Author name, initials, 2008. Title of article]. In: Schmelzer, G.H. & Gurib-Fakim, 
A. (Editors). Plant Resources of Tropical Africa 11(1). Medicinal plants 1. PROTA 
Foundation, Wageningen, Netherlands / Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands 
/ CTA, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. ........ 
ISBN 978-90-5782-204-9 / 978-3-8236-1531-6 (book only) 
ISBN 978-90-5782-205-6 / 978-3-8236-1532-3 (book + CD-Rom) 
© PROTA Foundation, Wageningen, Netherlands, 2008. 
No part of this publication, apart from bibliographic data and brief quotations em-
bodied in critical reviews, may be reproduced, re-recorded or published in any form 
including print, photocopy, microfilm, electric or electromagnetic record without 
written permission from the copyright holder: PROTA Foundation, P.O. Box 341, 
6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands. 
Printed in the Netherlands by Ponsen & Looijen bv, Wageningen. 
Distributed for the PROTA Foundation by Backhuys Publishers, P.O. Box 321, 2300 
AH Leiden, Netherlands (worldwide), and CTA, P.O. Box 380, 6700 AJ Wageningen, 
Netherlands (ACP countries). 
Contents 
Contributors 6 
PROTA Board of Trustees and Personnel 13 
Introduction 15 
Alphabetical t reatment of medicinal plants 19 
Literature 635 
Index of scientific plant names 769 
Index of vernacular plant names 782 
PROTA in short 789 
CTA in short 790 
Map of Tropical Africa for PROTA 791 
6 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Contributors 
A.A. Adebisi, Centre for Environment, Renewable Natural Resources Manage-
ment, Research and Development (CENRAD), P.M.B. 5052, Jericho Hills, 
Ibadan, Nigeria (Bridelia atroviridis, Okoubaka aubrevillei, Spondianthus 
preussii) 
P.O. Adebola, Department of Botany, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, 
South Africa (Aloe vera) 
A.J. Afolayan, Department of Botany, University of Fort Hare, Alice 5700, 
South Africa (Aloe vera) 
J.C. Alegre, Grimaldo del Solar 450, Departamento 501 Miraflores, Lima 18, 
Peru (Petiveria alliacea) 
N.S. Alvarez Cruz, Unidad de Medio Ambiente, Delegation del CITMA, Cor. 
Legon 268 / Henry Reeve y Carlos Roloff, Sancti Spiritus 60100, Cuba (Hyo-
scyamus muticus, Microdesmis keayana, Phyllanthus casticum, Phyllanthus ni-
ruroides, Strychnos usambarensis) 
R. Arroo, Leicester School of Pharmacy, Natural Products Research, De Mont-
fort University, The Gateway, Leicester LEI 9BH, United Kingdom (associate 
editor) 
G. Aweke, P.O. Box 4278, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia (Costus afer, Costus lucanu-
sianus, Phytolacca americana) 
L.N. Banak, Institut de Recherches en Ecologie Tropicale (IRET), Centre Na-
tional de la Recherche Scientifique et Technologique (CENAREST), B.P. 842, 
Libreville, Gabon (wood anatomy) 
H. Beeckman, Laboratory for Wood Biology and Xylarium, Royal Museum for 
Central Africa, Leuvense steenweg 13, B-3080 Tervuren, Belgium (wood anat-
omy) 
H.J. Beentje, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3AB, 
United Kingdom (Strophanthus eminii, Strophanthus gratus, Strophanthus 
hispidus, Strophanthus kombe, Strophanthus preussii, Strophanthus sarmento-
sus, Strophanthus thollonii) 
K.D. Ben-Bala, RINATED, Centre Evangélique Béthanie, Quartier Saïdou, B.P. 
982, Bangui, République Centrafricaine (Phyllanthus muellerianus) 
O.O. Bethwell, Department of Natural Sciences, Catholic University of Eastern 
Africa, P.O. Box 62157, 00200 Nairobi, Kenya (Acokanthera oppositifolia, Aco-
kanthera schimperi, Excoecaria madagascariensis) 
M.J. Boone, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 
341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (Hunteria congolana, Hunteria umbel-
lata, Hunteria zeylanica, Motandra guineensis, Oncinotis glabrata, Petchia 
madagascariensis, Schizozygia coffaeoides) 
C.H. Bosch, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 
341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (Aloe arborescens, Aloe buettneri, Aloe 
divaricata, Aloe ferox, Aloe flexilifolia, Aloe lomatophylloides, Aloe nuttii, Aloe 
turkanensis, Aloe volkensii, Aloe wollastonii, Argemone mexicana, Bauhinia 
kalantha, Bersama abyssinica, Bulbine abyssinica, Bulbine capitata, Caesal-
CONTRIBUTORS 7 
pinia benthamiana, Caesalpinia volkensii, Cassia angolensis, Cassia fistula, 
Chamaecrista biensis, Chamaecrista falcinella, Coldenia procumbens, Cynoglos-
sum coeruleum, Echium stenosiphon, Ehretia obtusifolia, Erythrophleum cou-
minga, Erythrophleum ivorense, Griffonia simplicifolia, Heliotropium aegyptia-
cum, Heliotropium ramosissimum, Heliotropium steudneri, Heliotropium zeyla-
nicum, Hilsenbergia petiolaris, Kirkia tenuifolia, Kniphofia foliosa, Loesenera 
kalantha, Lycium shawii, Lycopodium clavatum, Okoubaka aubrevillei, Osyri-
dicarpos schimperianus, Pachyelasma tessmannii, Peltophorum africanum, 
Perriera madagascariensis, Phyllanthus engleri, Physalis lagascae, Pierreoden-
dron africanum, Platycladus orientalis, Pycnocoma macrophylla, Schwenckia 
americana, Senna alata, Senna alexandrina, Senna italica, Senna petersiana, 
Senna podocarpa, Senna singueana, Senna sophera, Solanum catombelense, So-
lanum coagulans, Solanum erythracanthum, Solanum terminale, Solanum tet-
tense, Stillingia lineata, Suregada zanzibariensis, Suriana maritima, Thecaco-
ris spathulifolia, Thesium viride, Tournefortia acuminata, Tragia breuipes, Tri-
chodesma africanum, Trichodesma ambacense, Trichodesma zeylanicum, asso-
ciate editor) 
H.P. Bourobou Bourobou, CENAREST, B.P. 842, Libreville, Gabon (Tabernan-
the iboga) 
M. Clavo, Grimaldo del Solar 450, Departamento 501 Miraflores, Lima 18, Peru 
(Petiveria alliacea) 
A. de Ruijter, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, P.O. 
Box 341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (Adenia digitata, Adenia globosa, 
Adenia racemosa, Alafia barteri, Alafia landolphioides, Alafia lucida, Albertisia 
cordifolia, Albertisia delagoensis, Albertisia uillosa, Androsiphonia adenostegia, 
Anthocleista amplexicaulis, Anthocleista djalonensis, Anthocleista liebrechtsia-
na, Anthocleista madagascariensis, Anthocleista procera, Anthocleista schwein-
furthii, Anthocleista vogelii, Barteria fistulosa, Basananthe sandersonii, Com-
micarpus plumbagineus, Craspidospermum uerticillatum, Diplorhynchus con-
dylocarpon, Efulensia clematoides, Mostuea batesii, Mostuea brunonis, Mostuea 
hirsuta, Paropsia brazzeana, Paropsia grewioides, Passiflora suberosa, Pisonia 
lanceolata, Pleioceras barteri, Plumbago aphylla, Plumbago auriculata, Pycno-
botrya nitida, Schlechterina mitostemmatoides, Smeathmannia pubescens, 
Strophanthus amboensis, Strophanthus boivinii, Strophanthus courmontii, 
Strophanthus petersianus, Strophanthus speciosus, Strophanthus welwitschii, 
Strychnos aculeata, Strychnos afzelii, Strychnos angolensis, Strychnos barteri, 
Strychnos camptoneura, Strychnos dinklagei, Strychnos floribunda, Strychnos 
henningsii, Strychnos longicaudata, Strychnos mostueoides, Strychnos myrtoi-
des, Strychnos phaeotricha, Strychnos potatorum, Strychnos samba, listeria 
guineensis, associate editor) 
P. Détienne, CIRAD, Département Persyst, UPR Bois tropicaux, 73 rue Jean-
François Breton, TA B-40 / 1 6 (Bât. 16, Bur. 106), 34398 Montpellier Cedex 5, 
France (wood anatomy) 
T. Dimo, Faculty of Science, Laboratory of Animal Physiology, University of 
Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 3201 Messa, Yaoundé, Cameroon (Alafia multiflora) 
A.P. Dold, Selmar Schonland Herbarium, Albany Museum, P.O. Box 101, Gra-
hamstown 6139, South Africa (Azima tetracantha) 
8 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
M. Domis, Tobias Asserlaan 104, 5056VD Berkel-Enschot, Netherlands {Piper 
umbellatum) 
E. Dounias, Centre d'Ecologie Fonctionnelle et Evolutive, Center for Evolutio-
nary and Functional Ecology (CEFE-CNRS), 1919, route de Mende, 34293 
Montpellier cedex 5, France (Gloriosa superba, Microdesmis puberuia, Pentadi-
plandra brazzeana, Sacoglottis gabonensis) 
J. Elia, National Herbarium of Tanzania (TPRI), P.O. Box 3024, Arusha, Tan-
zania (Tabernaemontana pachy siphon) 
V.E. Emongor, Department of Crop Science and Production, Botswana College 
of Agriculture, Private Bag 0027, Gaborone, Botswana (Euphorbia hypericifolia, 
Harrisonia abyssinica) 
D.G. Fowler, Flat 4 Abbotsrood, 1 Milnethorpe Road, Eastbourne BN20 7NR, 
Sussex, United Kingdom (Adenia cissampeloides, Brucea antidysenterica, Eu-
phorbia grantii, Stephania abyssinica) 
H.S. Foyet, Faculty of Science, Laboratory of Animal Physiology, University of 
Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 812, Yaoundé, Cameroon (Synclisia scabrida) 
P.E. Gasson, Jodrell Laboratory, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Sur-
rey TW9 3DS, United Kingdom (wood anatomy) 
O.M. Grace, PROTA Country Office United Kingdom, Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3AB, United Kingdom {Adenia cissampeloides, 
Andrachne ovalis, Brucea antidysenterica, Euphorbia convolvuloides, Euphor-
bia grantii, Euphorbia tirucalli, Stephania abyssinica, Stephania dinklagei) 
A. Gurib-Fakim, Faculty of Science, University of Mauritius, Reduit, Mauritius 
(Heliotropium indicum, Heliotropium ovalifolium, Ochrosia borbonica, Plan-
tago lanceolata, Plantago major, Withania somnifera, editor) 
R.K. Henning, Rothkreuz 11, D-88138 Weissensberg, Germany (Jatropha cur-
cas) 
P.CM. Jansen, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, P.O. 
Box 341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands {Cannabis sativa, Solanum ni-
grum) 
R.B. Jiofack Tafokou, Ecologie Museum of Cameroon, P.O. Box 8038, Yaoundé, 
Cameroon (Erythrococca anomala) 
V. Kawanga, Zambian Branch, Commonwealth Forestry Association, Private 
Bag RW 359X, Ridgeway, 15102 Lusaka, Zambia (Cassia abbreviata, Erythro-
phleum africanum, Jatropha gossypiifolia, Senna singueana) 
M.M. Kitambala, Département de Chimie de la Faculté des Sciences, Universi-
té de Lubumbashi, Lubumbashi, DR Congo (Uapaca guineensis) 
A.M. Kouyaté, Institut d'Economie Rurale, B.P. 16, Sikasso, Mali (Detarium 
microcarpum) 
D.O. Ladipo, Centre for Environment, Renewable Natural Resources Manage-
ment, Research and Development (CENRAD), 5 Akinola Maja Avenue, P.M.B. 
5052, Jericho Hills, Ibadan, Nigeria (Bridelia atroviridis, Okoubaka aubreuillei) 
J. Lejoly, Laboratoire de Botanique systématique et de Phytosociologie, Univer-
sité Libre de Bruxelles, Avenue F. Roosevelt 50, C.P. 169, B-1050 Bruxelles, 
Belgium (Alchornea cordifolia) 
R.H.M.J. Lemmens, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, 
P.O. Box 341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (Cerbera manghas, Fumaria 
CONTRIBUTORS 9 
muralis, Lepidium africanum, Lepidium didymum, Lycopodiella cernua, Pla-
giostyles africana, Symphytum officinale, general editor) 
D. Louppe, CIRAD, Département Environnements et Sociétés, Cirad es-dir, 
Campus international de Baillarguet, TA C-DIR / B (Bât. C, Bur. 113), 34398 
Montpellier Cedex 5, France (wood anatomy) 
F.S. Mairura, Kenya Tropical Soil Biology and Fertility, CIAT, P.O. Box 30677, 
Nairobi, Kenya (Croton macrostachyus, Datura stramonium, Physalis angula-
ta, Sambucus nigra, Tabernaemontana crassa) 
A. Maroyi, Department of Biological Sciences, Bindura University of Science 
Education, P.O. Bag 1020, Bindura, Zimbabwe (Holarrhena pubescens, Ma-
prounea africana, Phyllanthus maderaspatensis, Phyllanthus reticulatus, Voa-
canga africana) 
E.N. Matu, CTMDR/KEMRI, P.O. Box 54840-00200, Nairobi, Kenya (Clutia 
abyssinica, Solanum incanum) 
H. Mavar-Manga, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie, Unité CHAM 72.30, Ecole 
de Pharmacie, Université Catholique de Louvain, Av. E. Mounier 72, B-1200 
Bruxelles, Belgium (Alchornea cordifolià) 
D.M. Modise, University of South Africa, P.O. Box 392, Pretoria 0003, South 
Africa (Adenia volkensii, Solanum erianthum) 
K.K. Mogotsi, Botswana College of Agriculture, Private Bag 0027, Gaborone, 
Botswana (Solanum erianthum) 
N.P. Mollel, Tropical Pesticides Research Institute, National Herbarium of Tan-
zania, P.O. Box 3024, Arusha, Tanzania (Rauuolfia caffra, wood anatomy) 
D.M. Mosango, c/o Laboratory of Natural Sciences, Lycée Français Jean Mon-
net de Bruxelles (LFB), Avenue du Lycée Français 9, 1180 Brussels, Belgium 
(Alchornea floribunda, Anthocleista nobilis, Chasmanthera dependens, Cissam-
pelos owariensis, Euphorbia heterophylla, Euphorbia prostrata, Euphorbia 
thymifolia, Mallotus oppositifolius, Penianthus longifolius, Peperomia pellu-
cida, Phyllanthus urinaria, Sphenocentrum jollyanum, Strychnos icaja, Tri-
clisia patens) 
Y. Mungwini, National Herbarium and Botanic Garden, Box A889, Avondale, 
Harare, Zimbabwe (Plumbago zeylanica) 
M. Muzila, Herbarium (UCBG), Department of Biological Sciences, University 
of Botswana, Private Bag UB00704, Gaborone, Botswana (Boerhavia diffusa, 
Boerhavia repens, Cissampelos mucronata) 
P. Nana, ICIPE, P.O. Box 30772, 00100 Nairobi, Kenya (Synclisia scabrida) 
L.E. Newton, Department of Biological Sciences, Kenyatta University, P.O. Box 
43844, Nairobi 00100, Kenya (Aloe lateritia, Aloe rabaiensis, Aloe secundiflora, 
Elaeophorbia grandifolia, Euphorbia paganorum, Euphorbia pereskiifolia, Eu-
phorbia unispina) 
P. Ng'andwe, Department of Wood Science and Technology, School of Natural 
Resources, The Copperbelt University, P.O. Box 21692, Kitwe, Zambia (wood 
anatomy) 
M.J. Nicholson, Plants for Life, P.O. Box 617, Limuru, Kenya (Euphorbia pseu-
dograntii, Solanum aculeatissimum) 
N. Njifutié, Faculty of Science, University of Yaoundé 1, P.O. Box 812, 
Yaoundé, Cameroon (Picralima nitida) 
10 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
0 . 0 . Nuga, Department of Forestry and Wildlife, Faculty of Agriculture, Uni-
versity of Port Harcourt, P.M.B. 5323, Port Harcourt, Nigeria (Datura metel) 
Achmad Satiri Nurhaman, Southeast Asian Regional Centre for Tropical Biol-
ogy (SEAMEO BIOTROP), P.O. Box 17, Bogor, Indonesia (illustrations) 
N. Nyunaï, Center for Medical Research, Institute of Medical Research and 
Medicinal Plants Studies, P.O. Box 3805, Yaoundé, Cameroon (Picralima 
nitida, Pleiocarpa muticd) 
J.M. Okeyo, TSBF-CIAT, World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), P.O. Box 30677, 
Gigiri, Nairobi, Kenya {Plumbago indica, Erythrophleum suaueolens, Senna 
italica) 
P. Oudhia, SOPAM, 28-A, Geeta Nagar, Raipur, 492001, CG., India {Agave 
americana, Caesalpinia bonduc, Cocculus pendulus, Cordia myxa, Phyllanthus 
amarus, Phyllanthus fraternus, Strychnos nux-vomica) 
L.P.A. Oyen, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 
341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (Adenium boehmianum, Adenium mul-
tiflorum, Adenium obesum, Adenium oleifolium, Anisocycla cymosa, Antizoma 
angustifolia, Burasaia madagascariensis, Chasmanthera welwitschii, Cissam-
pelos capensis, Cissampelos pareira, Cocculus hirsutus, Erythrococca bongensis, 
Jateorhiza macrantha, Jateorhiza palmata, Kolobopetalum auriculatum, Lima-
ciopsis loangensis, Penianthus patulinervis, Perichasma laetificata, Phyllanthus 
nummulariifolius, Piper umbellatum, Spirospermum penduli flor urn, Strych-
nopsis thouarsii, Syrrheonema fasciculatum, Tiliacora leonensis, Tinospora 
bakis, Tinospora caffra, general editor) 
B.J. Pollard, Herbarium, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 
3AB, United Kingdom (Triclisia dictyophylla) 
J. Quetin-Leclercq, Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie, Unité CHAM 72.30, Ecole 
de Pharmacie, Université Catholique de Louvain, Av. E. Mounier 72, B-1200 
Bruxelles, Belgium (Alchornea cordifolia) 
G.H. Schmelzer, PROTA Network Office Europe, Wageningen University, P.O. 
Box 341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (Acalypha ciliata, Acalypha fruti-
cosa, Acalypha indica, Acalypha integrifolia, Acalypha ornata, Acalypha psilo-
stachya, Acalypha villicaulis, Acokanthera oblongifolia, Alchornea cordifolia, 
Alchornea hirtella, Alchornea laxiflora, Andrachne aspera, Anthostema senega-
lense, Antidesma laciniatum, Antidesma membranaceum, Argomuellera macro-
phylla, Baissea axillaris, Baissea multiflora, Boerhavia erecta, Callichilia bar-
teri, Catharanthus lanceus, Catharanthus roseus, Catharanthus trichophyllus, 
Cavacoa aurea, Centroplacus glaucinus, Cephalocroton mollis, Chrozophora 
brocchiana, Chrozophora plicata, Chrozophora senegalensis, Cleistanthus bi-
pindensis, Cordemoya integrifolia, Croton antanosiensis, Croton aubreuillei, 
Croton barorum, Croton decaryi, Croton geayi, Croton haumanianus, Croton ja-
trophoides, Croton lobatus, Croton mauritianus, Croton membranaceus, Croton 
menyharthii, Croton mubango, Croton myriaster, Croton nitidulus, Croton pen-
duliflorus, Croton sakamaliensis, Croton sylvaticus, Croton tiglium, Crotono-
gyne preussii, Dalechampia ipomoeifolia, Dichostemma glaucescens, Disco-
claoxylon hexandrum, Discoglypremna caloneura, Drypetes cheualieri, Drypetes 
molunduana, Elaeophorbia drupifera, Euphorbia antso, Euphorbia calyptrata, 
Euphorbia candelabrum, Euphorbia chamaesyce, Euphorbia cooperi, Euphorbia 
crotonoides, Euphorbia didiereoides, Euphorbia granulata, Euphorbia ingens, 
CONTRIBUTORS i l 
Euphorbia lugardiae, Euphorbia mainty, Euphorbia matabelensis, Euphorbia 
quinquecostata, Euphorbia schimperiana, Euphorbia subsalsa, Excoecaria gra-
hamii, Grossera macrantha, Hilleria latifolia, Holarrhena floribunda, Hymeno-
cardia acida, Jatropha chevalieri, Jatropha dichtar, Jatropha glauca, Jatropha 
zeyheri, Macaranga heterophylla, Macaranga monandra, Macaranga spinosa, 
Maesobotrya floribunda, Mallotus subulatus, Maprounea membranacea, Ma-
reya micrantha, Margaritaria anomala, Meineckia paxii, Microstachys chamae-
lea, Ochrosia oppositifolia, Plagiostyles africana, Plantago palmata, Plesiatro-
pha carpinifolia, Pseudolachnostylis maprouneifolia, Rauvolfia mannii, Rauvol-
fia media, Rauvolfia vomitoria, Sclerocroton cornutus, Securinega capuronii, 
Shirakiopsis elliptica, Tabernaemontana coffeoides, Tabernaemontana crassa, 
Tabernaemontana elegans, Tabernaemontana persicariifolia, Tabernaemontana 
uentricosa, Thevetia peruviana, Uapaca paludosa, Voacanga thouarsii, Wrightia 
demartiniana, editor) 
M.P. Setshogo, Department of Biological Sciences, University of Botswana Her-
barium, Private Bag UB00704, Gaborone, Botswana {Datura metel, Datura 
stramonium) 
M.S.J. Simmonds, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, Surrey TW9 3AB, 
United Kingdom (associate editor) 
V.S.T. Sob, Département de Chimie Organique, Université de Yaoundé I, B.P. 
812, Yaoundé, Cameroun (Drypetes gossweilerï) 
M.O. Soladoye, P.O. Box 2029, Dugbe, Ibadan, Oyo State, Nigeria (Spondian-
thus preussii) 
M.M. Spitteler, Het Hoge Stuk 19, 8431 KL Oosterwolde, Netherlands (illustra-
tions) 
Iskak Syamsudin, Herbarium Bogoriense, Research Centre for Biology - LIPI, 
Ja lan Ir. H. Juanda 22, Bogor 16122, Indonesia (illustrations) 
J.R.S. Tabuti, Department of Botany, Makerere University, P.O. Box 7062, 
Kampala, Uganda (Euphorbia hirta, Flueggea virosa, Senna didymobotrya) 
A.T. Tchinda, Institut de Recherches Médicales et d'Etudes des Plantes Médici-
nales (IMPM), Ministère de la Recherche Scientifique et de l'Innovation, B.P. 
6163, Yaoundé, Cameroun (Drypetes gossweileri, Euphorbia peplus, Euphorbia 
poissonii, Penianthus zenkeri) 
M. Thiam, Unité de Formation et de Recherches, Sciences Agronomiques et Dé-
veloppement Rural, Université de Thiès, B.P. A296, Thiès, Sénégal (wood ana-
tomy) 
E. Thompson, c/o PROTA Network Office Europe, P.O. Box 341, 6700 AH 
Wageningen, Netherlands (Rhigiocarya racemifera) 
B. Toirambe, Laboratoire de Biologie du bois et Xylarium, Musée Royal pour 
l'Afrique Centrale, Leuvensesteenweg 13, 30870 Tervuren, Belgium (Tetror-
chidium didymostemon) 
D.E. Tsala, Faculty of Science, Laboratory of Animal Physiology, University of 
Yaoundé I, P.O. Box 3201 Messa, Yaoundé, Cameroon (Alafia multiflord) 
P. van Damme, Laboratory of Tropical and Subtropical Agronomy and Ethno-
botany, University of Gent, Faculty of Agriculture and Applied Biological Sci-
ences, Coupure Links 653, 9000 Gent, Belgium (Detarium microcarpum) 
12 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
L.J.G. van der Maesen, Biosystematics Group, Wageningen University, Gen. 
Foulkesweg 37, 6703 BL Wageningen, Netherlands (Cassia sieberiana, 
Chamaecrista absus, Chamaecrista nigricans, Spigelia anthelmia) 
E. Uetimane, Departamento de Engenharia Florestal, Faculdade de Agronomia 
e Engenharia Florestal, Universidade Eduardi Mondlane (UEM), Maputo, Mo-
zambique (wood anatomy) 
I. Vandebroek, Institute of Economic Botany, The New York Botanical Garden, 
Kazimiroff Boulevard and 200 Street, Bronx, New York 10458, United States 
(Capsella bursa-pastoris) 
E.A. Wheeler, Department of Wood and Paper Science, College of Forest Re-
sources, North Carolina State University, P.O. Box 8005, Raleigh, NC 27695-
8005, United States (wood anatomy) 
C. Zimudzi, Department of Biology, National University of Lesotho, P.O. Roma 
180, Lesotho (Adenia lobata, Lycopodium clauatum, Phytolacca dodecandra, 
Piper capense) 
Acknowledgments 
— PROSEA Foundation, Jalan H. Juanda 22, P.O. Box 332, Bogor 16122, Indonesia 
(use of text parts and illustrations of species overlapping between South-East 
Asia and tropical Africa) 
— S. van Otterloo-Butler, Bowlespark 21, 6701 DR Wageningen, Netherlands 
(English language correction) 
— N. Wulijarni-Soetjipto, Jl. Pahlawan 113, Bogor 16131, Indonesia (coordination 
illustrators) 
13 
PROTA Board of Trustees and Personnel 
Board of Trustees 
M. J. Kropff (WU, Netherlands), chair 
Z.L.K. Magombo (NHBGM, Malawi), vice-chair 
V. Agyeman (FORIG, Ghana) 
H. Andriamialison (PBZT, Madagascar) 
H.G.B. Carsalade (AGROPOLIS, France) 
D. Garrity (ICRAF, Kenya) 
M. Honadia (CNSF, Burkina Faso) 
S.D. Hopper (RBGKEW, United Kingdom) 
D-.F. Idiata (CENAREST, Gabon) 
L.S. Luboobi (MU, Uganda) 
E. Sukara (PROSEA, Indonesia) 
Personnel 
Regional Office Central Africa, Gabon 
J.A. Bourobou Bourobou, Regional Officer 
E.D. Eyone Edoh, Assistant Regional Officer 
D.N. Omokolo, Contact Person Cameroon 
M.K.D. Ben-Bala, Contact Person Central African Republic 
Regional Office East Africa, Uganda 
G. Nakabonge, Regional Officer 
C. Bulafu, Assistant Regional Officer 
A. Tsegaye, Contact Person Ethiopia 
J. Elia, Contact Person Tanzania 
Regional Office Indian Ocean Islands, Madagascar 
M.E. Rahelivololona, Regional Officer 
A. Gurib-Fakim, Contact Person Mauritius 
S. Brillant, Contact Person Réunion 
Regional Office Southern Africa, Malawi 
J. Kamwendo, Regional Officer 
V.K. Kawanga, Contact Person Zambia 
0 . Oagile, Contact Person Botswana 
S. Kativu, Contact Person Zimbabwe 
Regional Office (anglophone) West Africa, Ghana 
J.R. Cobbinah, General Editor 
14 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
S. Britwum-Acquah, Regional Officer 
E.E. Ewudzie, Assistant Regional Officer 
O.A. Denton, Contact Person Nigeria 
A.B. Karim, Contact Person Sierra Leone 
Regional Office (francophone) West Africa, Burkina Faso 
A. Traoré, Regional Officer 
C. Kouamé, Contact Person Côte d'Ivoire 
F. Assogba-Komlan, Contact Person Benin 
H. Sanou, Contact Person Mali 
L. Mahamane, Contact Person Niger 
Country Office France 
M. Chauvet, Technical Editor French 
C. Dorthe, Country Officer 
Country Office United Kingdom 
O. Grace, Country Officer 
Network Office Africa, Kenya 
E.A. Omino, Head 
D.J. Borus, Dissemination Officer 
J. Chege, Database Officer 
B. Owuor, Secretary 
D. Laur, Office Assistant 
Network Office Europe, Netherlands 
J.S. Siemonsma, Head 
R.H.M.J. Lemmens, General Editor 
L.P.A. Oyen, General Editor 
E.J. Bertrums, Databank Manager 
C.H. Bosch, Editor/Dissemination Officer 
M. Brink, Editor 
G.H. Schmelzer, Editor/Dissemination Officer 
15 
Introduction 
Choice of species 
PROTA 11(1): 'Medicinal plants 1' is the first volume of 4 describing the wild, and 
sometimes cultivated, plant species of tropical Africa traditionally used in local 
medicine. Some of these plants are not only used for human health care, but are also 
applied as veterinary medicine or as poisonous plants used as pesticide, fish poison 
or dart poison, and narcotic plants. Most species have several other, secondary, 
uses. PROTA normally assigns one primary use and if relevant, one or more secon-
dary uses to all plant species used in Africa. For instance, the primary use of 
Voacanga africana Stapf is as a medicinal plant, and thus it is treated in PROTA 
11, but it has several secondary uses, e.g. the branches are used in construction and 
to make musical instruments, the wood is used for firewood, good fibre for rope and 
yarn can be obtained from the bark and the fruits are considered edible. In Tanza-
nia Voacanga africana is planted for ornamental purposes because of its sweet-
scented white flowers. Pharmaceutical companies in Europe extract tabersonine 
from the seeds, which is readily converted into vincamine, a compound widely used 
in medicines for geriatric patients. Seed extracts are also used in medicines to t reat 
heart diseases, to lower blood pressure and to treat cancer. Also Carissa spinarum 
L. (synonym: Carissa edulis (Forssk.) Vahl) is quite important as a medicinal plant, 
but its primary use is as a fruit, and consequently it is described in PROTA 6: 
'Fruits'. 
The remaining 'primary use' medicinal plants will be included in tomes 11(2) to 
11(4). In the final tome 11(4), the 'secondary use' medicinal plants will be listed as 
'Medicinal plants with other primary use' and referred to other Handbook volumes. 
In PROTA 11(1), one species is treated which, in addition to the primary use as me-
dicinal plant, also has another primary use and consequently will be described in 2 
commodity groups. This species is Jatropha curcas L. (also in PROTA 14: 'Vegetable 
oils'). 
In this volume the medicinal plant species of several important medicinal plant-
containing families are treated, the largest families being Apocynaceae, Aspho-
delaceae, Caesalpiniaceae, Euphorbiaceae, Loganiaceae, Menispermaceae and So-
lanaceae as well as 19 other families with few but important medicinal plants. 
In PROTA 11(1): 'Medicinal plants 1' comprehensive descriptions are given of 134 
important medicinal plant species. These major medicinal plants comprise most 
wild species, but also several cultivated or partly domesticated species. The accounts 
are presented in a detailed format and illustrated with a line drawing and a distri-
bution map. In addition, accounts of 272 medicinal plants of minor importance are 
given. Because information on these species is often scanty, these accounts are in a 
simplified format and usually do not include a drawing or map. For another 488 spe-
cies the medicinal information was too scarce to justify an individual treatment and 
they have only been mentioned in the accounts of related species. Each account will 
highlight traditional and modern uses, phytochemical and pharmacological proper-
ties, will make identification of useful species easier and more reliable, will describe 
16 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
most convenient collection (harvest), cultivation and application methods, and will 
indicate the research and conservation status of the plants. 
About two third of the plant species used in tropical Africa have some documented 
medicinal use, but the actual number is probably higher. For PROTA 11, however, 
only species have been chosen for which proof was found in the literature on African 
useful plants that they actually are or have been used as a medicinal plant. Such 
literature, however, is scarce, often old and usually poor in details about the use. 
Only species for which at least a practical application is known have been consid-
ered for treatment. This means that species mentioned in the literature but only 
with remarks such as 'the plant is medicinally used' or 'the roots are medicinally 
used' have not been included. 
In Sub-Saharan Africa, traditional medicine has been for centuries and still is the 
most affordable and accessible health care system. Medicinal plants contribute sig-
nificantly to rural livelihoods of the people and social equilibrium in Africa. The de-
mand of local and international markets is continuously growing, as well as bio-
prospecting activities searching for sources of news drugs. 
As a result of their widely and unsustainable use, increasing economic importance, 
and environmental factors, medicinal plant resources are diminishing at an alarm-
ing rate. Besides, the loss of indigenous knowledge on medicinal plants and tradi-
tional medicine is increasing, especially in Africa, as a result of death of the older 
people who have traditionally been the custodians of this knowledge, and the socio-
cultural transformation of societies. This situation calls for policies and research 
programmes, both at national and international levels, for conservation and sus-
tainable use of medicinal plants, as well as for the protection of indigenous commu-
nities' rights over the use of their traditional knowledge. 
Plant names 
Family: Apart from the classic family name, the family name in accordance with the 
Angiosperm Phylogeny Group (APG) classification is also given where it differs from 
the classic name. 
Synonyms: Only the most commonly used synonyms and those that may cause con-
fusion are mentioned. 
Vernacular names: Only names in official languages of regional importance in Africa 
are included: English, French, Portuguese and Swahili. It is beyond the scope of 
PROTA to give an extensive account of the names of a species in all languages spo-
ken in its area of distribution. Checking names would require extensive fieldwork by 
specialists. Although regional forms of Arabic are spoken in several countries in Af-
rica, the number of African plant species that have a name in written, classical Ara-
bic is limited. Arabic names are therefore omitted. Names of plant products are 
mentioned under the heading 'Uses'. 
Origin and geographic distribution 
To avoid long lists of countries in the text, a distribution map is added for major 
species. The map indicates in which countries a species has been recorded, either 
wild or planted. For many species, however, these maps are incomplete because they 
are prepared on the basis of published information, the quantity and quality of 
INTRODUCTION 17 
which varies greatly from species to species. This is especially the case for wild spe-
cies which are not or incompletely covered by the regional African floras, and for 
cultivated species which are only planted on a small scale (e.g. in home gardens). 
For some countries (e.g. Central African Republic, Chad, Sudan, Angola) there is 
comparatively little information in the literature. Sometimes they are not covered 
by recent regional or national floras and although species may be present there, this 
cannot be demonstrated or confirmed. 
Propert ies 
The phytochemistry of the different plant parts is given, with emphasis on the bio-
active compounds. Where possible, a link is made between the traditional uses of a 
plant part, the active compounds isolated from it and pharmacological tests confirm-
ing or not confirming the activity of these active compounds, or of the plant extracts 
containing active compounds. 
Descript ion 
A morphological characterization of the species is given. The description is in 'tele-
gram' style and uses botanical terms. Providing a description for the general public 
is difficult as more generally understood terms often lack the accuracy required in a 
botanical description. A line drawing is added for all major and some lesser-known 
species to complement and visualize the description. 
Management 
Descriptions of husbandry methods including fertilizer application, irrigation, and 
pest and disease control measures are given under 'Management' and under 'Dis-
eases and pests'. These reflect actual practices or generalized recommendations, opt-
ing for a broad overview but without detailed recommendations adapted to the 
widely varying local conditions encountered by farmers. Recommendations on 
chemical control of pests and diseases are merely indicative and local regulations 
should be given precedence. PROTA will participate in the preparation of derived 
materials for extension and education, for which the texts in this volume provide a 
basis, but to which specific local information will be added. 
Genetic resources 
The genetic diversity of many plant species in Africa is being eroded, sometimes at 
an alarming rate, as a consequence of habitat destruction and overexploitation. The 
replacement of landraces of cultivated species by modern cultivars marketed by seed 
companies is another cause of genetic erosion. Reviews are given of possible threats 
for plant species and of the diversity within species and reference is made to the 
IUCN red list of threatened species where relevant. Information on ex-situ germ-
plasm collections is mostly extracted from publications of Bioversity International 
(formerly the International Plant Genetic Resources Institute - IPGRI). 
18 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
References 
The main objective of the list of references given is to guide readers to additional 
information; it is not intended to be complete or exhaustive. Authors and editors 
have selected major and other references; major references are limited to 10 refer-
ences (5 for minor species), the number of other references is limited to 20 (10 for mi-
nor species). The references listed include those used in writing the account. Where 
data available on the internet have been used, the website and date are also cited. 
19 
Alphabetical treatment of medicinal plants 
20 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ACALYPHA 21 
ACALYPHA CILIATA Forssk . 
P r o t o l o g u e Fl. aegypt.-arab.: 162 (1775). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r n = 10 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha dilata occurs from Senegal eas t to Ethio-
pia and south to Namibia and South Africa. It 
also occurs in Yemen, Pakis tan , India and Sri 
Lanka , and probably elsewhere as a weed. 
U s e s In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf decoction is 
d runk to t r ea t female sterility. In Ghana 
mashed leaves are applied as a dressing to 
sores. In Eas t Africa a root infusion is t aken to 
t r ea t schistosomiasis. In Senegal, Benin and 
Nigeria the leaves are ea ten as a vegetable. In 
Senegal the plant is widely browsed by cattle, 
sheep and goats, bu t not by horses. 
P r o p e r t i e s In an in-vitro exper iment an 
aqueous leaf extract reduced the growth of 
Fusarium moniliforme (Gibberella fujikuroi) on 
maize grain. In field t r ia ls t he leaf extract 
showed moderate activity against brown blotch 
disease (Colletotrichum capsici) and insect 
pests (Ootheca mutabilis, Nezara viridula, 
Clavigralla tomentosicollis and Maruca testula-
lis) of cowpea. 
B o t a n y Monoecious, annua l herb up to 1 m 
tall; s tems shortly hairy. Leaves a r ranged spi-
rally, simple; s t ipules l inear, c. 2 mm long; 
petiole up to 7.5 cm long; blade ovate to ellipti-
cal-ovate, 4-10 cm x 1.5—5 cm, base cuneate to 
rounded, apex acuminate , marg ins coarsely 
toothed, membranous , sparingly and shortly 
hai ry on both surfaces, la ter almost glabrous, 
3-5-veined a t base and with 4 - 5 pai rs of lat-
eral veins. Inflorescence an axillary, solitary or 
paired spike up to 5 cm long, densely flowered, 
lower 35-70% with female flowers, upper pa r t 
with male flowers, sometimes t e rmina ted by a 
female flower; bracts in female flowers t rans-
versely ovate, becoming c. 6 mm x 12 mm, with 
many filiform segments 1.5-3 mm long. Flow-
ers unisexual , sessile, peta ls absent ; male flow-
ers with 4-lobed, minute , g ranu la r dotted, 
greenish calyx, s t amens 8, an the r s yellow; fe-
male flowers with 3 ovate-lanceolate, c. 1 mm 
long, ciliate sepals, ovary superior, c. 0.5 mm in 
diameter , 3-celled, slightly 3-lobed, styles 3, 
free, c. 2 m m long, fringed, whi te . F ru i t a 3-
lobed capsule c. 1.5 m m x 2.5 mm, smooth, 
almost glabrous, spl i t t ing into 3 cocci, each 2-
valved and 1-seeded. Seeds ovoid-globose, c. 1 
mm in diameter , smooth, brown, caruncle ellip-
tical. 
Acalypha comprises about 460 species and oc-
curs throughout the tropics, subtropics and 
warm tempera te regions, excluding Europe. In 
tropical Africa about 65 species occur and in 
Madagascar and other Indian Ocean is lands 
about 35 species. 
E c o l o g y Acalypha ciliata occurs on open and 
wooded grassland, in deciduous and coastal 
bushland, often in rocky or damp localities, 
nea r lakes and on flood plains, from sea-level 
up to 1650 m al t i tude. It is also a weed in 
fields. It avoids high rainfall a reas . 
M a n a g e m e n t As a weed, Acalypha ciliata 
can be controlled well by handweeding and 
several herbicides. In India Acalypha ciliata is 
a host of powdery mildew (Erysiphe cichoracea-
rum); in G h a n a it was found to be a host of 
root-knot nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.). 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Acaly-
pha ciliata is widespread and weedy and not 
th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Acalypha ciliata is not commonly 
used as a medicinal plant , and its use will 
probably remain limited. With respect to crop 
protection, i ts insecticidal and fungicidal prop-
ert ies mer i t fur ther research. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1994; Ha lvanka r 
et al., 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; Owolade, Amusa 
& Osikanlu, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Owolade et al., 2004. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
A C A L Y P H A F R U T I C O S A Fors sk . 
P r o t o l o g u e Fl. aegypt.-arab.: 161 (1775). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r In - 20 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Gonasokola, mchacha, 
mnukovunda (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha fruticosa occurs from Sudan east to Soma-
lia and south th rough Eas t Africa and DR 
Congo to southern Africa, avoiding the humid 
Congo Basin. It is also found in Yemen, south-
ern India, Sri Lanka and Myanmar . 
U s e s The Suiei hun te r -ga the re r s of nor the rn 
Kenya boil the root in goat bone soup and dr ink 
the soup to t r e a t liver problems, and stomach-
ache caused by eat ing too much honey. A root 
decoction is d runk to t r ea t convulsions, fever, 
colds and swellings of the scrotum. A root infu-
sion is t aken to t r ea t whooping cough. The fil-
t r a t e of the macera ted leaves in wate r or milk 
is t aken to t r ea t constipation. The s tem and 
root are chewed to t r ea t toothache. In southern 
Africa a root decoction is t a k e n to t r ea t snake-
22 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
bites, fever and ulcers of venereal origin. In 
Tanzania a leaf decoction is drunk to treat epi-
lepsy. A leaf infusion is taken to treat stomach 
problems and swellings of the body. A leaf 
maceration is used as eye-drops to treat eye 
infections. Leaf sap is swallowed or used as 
nose drops to treat cough and chest problems. 
Ground leaves are applied as a paste to scabies 
and sores. Ground fresh leaves mixed with 
water are rubbed in and inhaled as a sedative. 
Stems ground in water are applied to wounds 
of animals. 
The Suiei people of northern Kenya use the 
stem to make arrow shafts, and beehive lids. In 
Tanzania the leafy shoots of Acalypha fruticosa 
are eaten as a vegetable. In East Africa Acaly-
pha fruticosa is an important browse plant of 
sheep. In Ethiopia the dried leaves are used as 
a substitute for tea. 
Properties An aqueous leaf extract showed 
significant antibacterial activity against 
Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus fae-
calis in vitro. The root extract did not show any 
antifungal activity. The methanol leaf extract 
showed antioxidant activity in vitro and anti-
inflammatory activity in rats. In laboratory 
experiments larvae of several species of live-
stock ticks were particularly attracted to Aca-
lypha fruticosa because of the odour of the 
plant. In the wild, larvae of especially 
Rhipicephalus appendiculatus are commonly 
found on Acalypha fruticosa. 
Botany Monoecious, much-branched, aro-
matic shrub up to 4 m tall; stems hairy and 
green at first, later almost glabrous and red-
dish brown. Leaves arranged spirally, simple; 
stipules narrowly lanceolate, 3-4 mm long, 
brown; petiole 0.5-4.5(-7) cm long; blade 
broadly ovate to rhombic-ovate, (1—)3—7(—9) cm 
x 1-5 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex acu-
minate, margins toothed, sparingly to evenly 
shortly hairy on both surfaces, sparingly to 
evenly yellowish gland-dotted beneath, mem-
branous, 5(-7)-veined at base and with (2-)4-5 
pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary, 
solitary spike up to 5 cm long, the lower part 
interrupted, with l-4(-7) female flowers, the 
upper part with densely congested male flow-
ers, terminated by a female flower; peduncle 
hairy; bracts in female flowers broadly ovate to 
kidney-shaped, c. 1 cm x 1-1.5 cm, toothed, 
sparingly yellow gland-dotted, prominently 
ribbed. Flowers unisexual, sessile, petals ab-
sent; male flowers with 4-lobed, minute, 
densely white hairy calyx, stamens 8; female 
flowers with 3 ovate-lanceolate, c. 1 mm long, 
ciliate sepals, ovary superior, c. 0.5 mm in di-
ameter, 3-celled, 3-lobed to almost globose, 
densely shortly hairy, styles 3, free, c. 4 mm 
long, fringed, pink or red. Fruit a 3-lobed cap-
sule c. 2 mm x 3 mm, yellow gland-dotted, 
densely shortly hairy, splitting into 3 cocci, 
each 2-valved and 1-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid-
ovoid, 1.5-2 mm x 1-1.5 mm, smooth, brown, 
caruncle elliptical. 
The ratio of male to female flowers per inflo-
rescence increases from bottom to top inflores-
cences and also increases with altitude. 
Acalypha comprises about 460 species and oc-
curs throughout the tropics, subtropics and 
warm temperate regions, excluding Europe. In 
tropical Africa about 65 species occur and in 
Madagascar and other Indian Ocean islands 
about 35 species. Several other perennial Aca-
lypha species with male and female flowers on 
the same inflorescence have medicinal uses. A 
root decoction of Acalypha engleri Pax & 
K.Hoffm. from south-eastern Kenya and Tan-
zania is taken to treat back-ache. The head is 
rubbed with a leaf extract to treat headache. In 
East Africa a root decoction of Acalypha nep-
tunica Müll.Arg., occurring from Ghana to East 
Africa, is taken as a diuretic. The twigs are 
used as arrow shafts. A root decoction of Acaly-
pha volkensii Pax from East Africa is taken in 
milk to treat gonorrhoea. The ground whole 
plant is applied to scabies, and the root juice to 
sores. Ground leaves are inhaled to treat se-
vere cough. A root infusion is taken as a purga-
tive. The branches are used to make arrows. 
Ecology Acalypha fruticosa occurs in coastal 
and deciduous bushland and thickets, wooded 
grassland, riverine grassland, on rocky shores 
or outcrops, and in humid localities, from sea-
level up to 1400 m altitude. It is common in 
overgrazed areas. 
Genetic resources and breeding Acaly-
pha fruticosa is relatively common in its distri-
bution area and not threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Acalypha fruticosa has several 
interesting medicinal uses, but information 
concerning the chemical compounds responsi-
ble for these activities is lacking. Information 
concerning the antibacterial activities is in-
complete; more research is therefore war-
ranted. 
Major references Alasbahi, Safiyeva & 
Craker, 1999; Gupta et al., 2003b; Neuwinger, 
2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other references le Floc'h et al., 1985; Has-
san, Dipeolu & Malonza, 1994; Ichikawa, 1987; 
ACALYPHA 23 
Khan, 2001; Kokwaro, 1993; Terashima & 
Ichikawa, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ACALYPHA INDICA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2; 1003 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In - 20, 28 
Vernacular names Indian acalypha, Indian 
nettle, three-seeded mercury (En). Ricinelle des 
Indes, oreille de chatte, herbe chatte (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha indica occurs in Nigeria and from Sudan 
east to Somalia and south through DR Congo 
and East Africa to southern Africa including 
South Africa. It is also widespread in the In-
dian Ocean islands and occurs furthermore in 
India, South-East Asia and Oceania. It was 
introduced into the warmer parts of the New 
World. 
Uses In East Africa the leaf sap is used as 
eye drops to treat eye infections. In Namibia 
ground leaves in water are used for this pur-
pose. Leaf powder is applied to maggot-infested 
wounds. In Comoros a leaf decoction is used as 
a massage cream to treat pain of the joints. In 
the Seychelles and Réunion a root infusion or 
decoction is taken to treat asthma, and also to 
clean the liver and kidneys. In the Seychelles a 
root decoction is also taken to treat intestinal 
worms and stomach-ache. A leaf infusion to-
gether with a tuber infusion of Jumellea fra-
grans (Thouars) Schltr. and sweetened with 
honey is taken to treat bronchitis. The leaves 
are emetic and an infusion together with the 
roots of Tylophora indica (Burm.f.) Merr. is 
Acalypha indica - wild 
taken in Réunion in case of poisoning. A leaf 
infusion is also taken as a purgative. In Mada-
gascar the crushed aerial parts are applied to 
skin parasites and an infusion is taken as a 
purgative and vermifuge. In Mauritius the 
juice of the crushed leaves mixed with salt or a 
decoction of the aerial parts is applied to sca-
bies and other skin problems. A poultice made 
from the whole plant is applied to treat head-
ache. The leaf sap is taken as an emetic and 
the root decoction as a laxative. Acalypha in-
dica was formerly listed in the British Phar-
macopoeia. It has numerous medicinal uses in 
India and is listed in the Pharmacopoeia of 
India as an expectorant to treat asthma and 
pneumonia. 
In north-eastern Africa Acalypha indica is 
browsed by sheep and goats. In India and In-
donesia the plant is cultivated for its edible 
shoots and leaves, which are cooked as a vege-
table. 
Properties The dried aerial parts contain a 
cyanogenic glycoside, acalyphin (0.3%) which is 
a 3-cyanopyridone derivative. Flavonoids, no-
tably the kaempferol glycosides mauritianin, 
clitorin, nicotiflorin and biorobin, have been 
isolated from the flowers and leaves. The plant 
also contains tannins, ß-sitosterol (0.1%), aca-
lyphamide, aurantiamide, succinimide and the 
pyranoquinolinone alkaloid flindersin. Some of 
the compounds of Acalypha indica cause in-
tense, dark chocolate-brown discolouration of 
blood, and gastro-intestinal irritation in rab-
bits. Furthermore, ingestion of herbal medicine 
containing Acalypha indica may lead to hae-
molysis in patients suffering from glucose-6-
phosphatase dehydrogenase deficiency. 
Ethanol extracts of Acalypha indica show sig-
nificant selective activity against vesicular 
stomatitis viruses. Cytotoxic activity was ob-
served against HeLa cell lines. 
An ethanol leaf extract showed significant in-
hibition to Viper russelli venom-induced lethal-
ity, haemorrhage, necrotizing and mast cell 
degranulation in rats and the cardiotoxic and 
neurotoxic effects in isolated frog tissue. Ad-
ministration of an ethanol extract also signifi-
cantly inhibited venom-induced lipid peroxida-
tion and catalase levels of rat kidney tissue. 
Petroleum ether and ethanol extracts of the 
whole plant showed significant post-coital anti-
fertility activity in female rats, and this anti-
implantation activity was reversible on with-
drawal of the extracts. Both extracts showed 
estrogenic activity at 600 mg/kg body weight. 
An ethanol extract of the aerial parts showed 
24 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
modera te wound-heal ing activity when topi-
cally applied to r a t s . 
Crude extracts as well as hexane, chloroform, 
acetone and methanol fractions of shoots, 
leaves and roots showed ant ibacter ia l and anti-
fungal activity; the chloroform extract of shoots 
and leaves demons t ra ted the highest activity. 
It also showed larvicidal activity agains t the 
larvae of Aedes aegypti and Tribolium cas-
teneum. A leaf pas te showed significant in vitro 
(48 hr) and in vivo (14 days) acaricidal activity 
agains t Psoroptes cuniculi infesting rabbi ts . 
Acalyphin is used as a subs t i tu te for ipeca-
cuanha from Psychotria ipecacuanha (Brot.) 
Stokes, as a vermifuge, expectorant and emetic. 
Analysis of the shoots yielded per 100 g edible 
portion: wate r 80 g, energy 269 k J (64 kcal), 
protein 6.7 g, fat 1.4 g, carbohydrate 6 g, fibre 
2.3 g, Ca 667 mg, P 99 mg, Fe 17 mg and 
ascorbic acid 147 mg. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Monoecious, annua l to some-
t imes short-lived perennia l herb up to 1.5(-2.5) 
m tall; s tems sparingly to densely hairy. 
Leaves a r ranged spirally, simple; st ipules lin-
ear, c. 2 m m long; petiole up to 12 cm long; 
blade broadly ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 2—9 cm 
x 1-5 cm, base cuneate , apex acute, marg ins 
toothed, membranous , sparingly shortly hai ry 
to almost glabrous on both surfaces, more hai ry 
along t h e midrib, 5-veined a t base and wi th 4(— 
5) pairs of la tera l veins. Inflorescence an axil-
lary, solitary or paired spike up to 6(-10) cm 
long, lower 75% with laxly a r ranged female 
flowers, upper pa r t with densely congested 
male flowers, usual ly t e rmina ted by a female 
flower; bracts in female flowers t ransversely 
ovate to almost orbicular, 0 .5-1 cm x 1-1.5 cm, 
toothed, each subtending l - 2 ( - 5 ) flowers. 
Flowers unisexual , sessile, peta ls absent; male 
flowers with 4-lobed, minute , g ranu la r dotted, 
greenish calyx, s t amens 8; female flowers with 
3 t r iangular-ovate , c. 1 mm long, ciliate sepals, 
ovary superior, c. 0.5 mm in diameter , 3-celled, 
slightly 3-lobed, styles 3, fused a t base, c. 2 mm 
long, fringed, whi te . Fru i t a 3-lobed capsule c. 
1.5 mm x 2 mm, g ranu la r dotted, shortly hairy, 
spl i t t ing into 3 cocci, each 2-valved and 1-
seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 1.5 mm x 1 mm, smooth, 
grey, caruncle linear, appressed; t e rmina l 
flower producing 1 seed. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Acalypha 
comprises about 460 species and occurs 
throughout the tropics, subtropics and w a r m 
tempera te regions, excluding Europe. In tropi-
cal Africa about 65 species occur and in Mada-
gascar and other Indian Ocean is lands about 
Acalypha indica - 1, flowering twig; 2, female 
flowers with bract; 3, apex of inflorescence. 
Source: PROSEA 
35 species. Several o ther a n n u a l Acalypha spe-
cies with male and female flowers in the same 
inflorescence have medicinal uses. The leaf sap 
of Acalypha supera Forssk. (synonym: Acaly-
pha brachystachya Hörnern.), from Centra l and 
Eas t Africa and other pa r t s of the Old World 
tropics, is used as eye drops in Gabon to t r ea t 
headache . The leaf powder of Acalypha lanceo-
lata Willd. from Cent ra l and southern Africa 
and other pa r t s of t he Old World tropics, mixed 
with castor oil (Ricinus communis L.) is applied 
to scabies. In South-Eas t Asia the uses of Aca-
lypha lanceolata a re s imilar to those of Acaly-
pha indica; in India the p lan t is cult ivated for 
i ts edible shoots, which are ea ten as a cooked 
vegetable. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Acalypha indica 
flowers throughout the year in regions without 
a pronounced dry season. 
E c o l o g y Acalypha indica occurs on sandy 
margins of r ivers and seasonal wate r courses, 
usual ly in the shade of thickets , also on rocky 
hillsides, often in dis turbed localities and as a 
weed of fields, from sea-level up to 1350 m alti-
tude . 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Acalypha in-
dica is only propagated by seed. 
ACALYPHA 25 
Management Although Acalypha indica is 
cultivated in India for its edible shoots, not 
much information is available on its manage-
ment. The plants need fair amounts of water 
and nutrients to grow quickly and stay tender. 
Acalypha indica is often considered a noxious 
weed. 
Diseases and pests The leaves of Acalypha 
indica may suffer from Alternaria leaf spot; in 
India the plant is sometimes severely affected 
by Pseudocercospora acalyphae. It is also a host 
of several plant viruses, e.g. pumpkin yellow 
vein mosaic virus, okra yellow vein mosaic vi-
rus, leaf curl virus and Nicotiana virus 10, of-
ten resulting in very severe and recurrent out-
breaks in crops. Roots may suffer from nema-
tode infestation (e.g. Meloidogyne spp.). In In-
dia Acalypha indica is a host of the spiralling 
whitefly (Aleurodicus dispersus). 
Harvesting Leaves, roots or whole plants of 
Acalypha indica are harvested when in full 
bloom. 
Handling after harvest After harvesting, 
the plants are used fresh or simply dried for 
future use. 
Genetic resources Acalypha indica is a 
common plant with a weedy nature and is 
therefore not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Acalypha indica is an important 
medicinal plant in the Indian Ocean islands as 
well as in India for its expectorant properties. 
It also has significant antibacterial and anti-
fungal activities, both against human and 
plant pathogens, and it would be worthwhile 
continuing research to isolate the active com-
pounds. Care needs to be taken when using the 
species as a vegetable as it contains several 
alkaloids as well as hydrocyanic acid. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Gopala-
krishnan et al., 2000; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & 
Bissoondoyal, 1996; Hiremath et al., 1999; 
Lavergne & Véra, 1989; Masih & Singh, 2005; 
Nahrstedt, Hungeling & Petereit, 2006; Neu-
winger, 2000; Shirwaikar et al., 2004; Siregar, 
2001. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1983a; 
Adjanohoun et al. (Editors), 1982; Ali et al., 
1996; Andriamanga, 1995; Gurib-Fakim et al., 
1993; Hiremath et al., 1993; Lamabadusuriya 
& Jayantha, 1994; Prema, 2004; Reddy, Rao &, 
2002; Samy, Ignacimuthu & Raja, 1999; Singh 
et al., 2004; Solomon, Kallidass & Vimalan, 
2005; Talapatra, Goswami & Talapatra, 1981. 
Sources of illustration Siregar, 2001. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ACALYPHA INTEGRIFOLIA Willd. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 4(1): 530 (1805). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Bois queue de rat, bois 
de crève cœur, bois de Charles (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha integrifolia occurs in Madagascar, Réunion 
and Mauritius. 
Uses In Réunion and Mauritius a leaf decoc-
tion is taken as an astringent and purgative, 
used to eliminate intestinal worms. A bath in 
the leaf decoction is taken to treat skin infec-
tions. 
Properties The leaves, stems and roots con-
tain saponins, tannins, sterols, terpenes and 
traces of alkaloids. 
Botany Monoecious shrub up to 2 m tall; 
branches erect and branchlets spreading, gla-
brous. Leaves arranged spirally, simple; stip-
ules narrowly triangular, 1—9 mm long; petiole 
2-20 mm long; blade elliptical-ovate, obovate-
elliptical to oblong, 4-13(-18) cm x l-4.5(-6.5) 
cm, base rounded, truncate or cordate, apex 
acute to obtuse, margins toothed, membranous, 
glabrous, pinnately veined, green, sometimes 
with red margins, or green above and purple to 
red below. Male inflorescence an axillary, soli-
tary spike up to 20 cm long, many-flowered, 
flowers in groups, peduncle short, shortly 
hairy; female inflorescence an axillary cluster, 
1-5-flowered, bracts broad, obovate, 2-5 mm 
long. Flowers unisexual, sessile, petals absent; 
male flowers with 4-lobed, minute, almost gla-
brous calyx, green to reddish, stamens 8, free, 
anthers curled; female flowers with 3 minute 
sepals, ovary superior, covered with fleshy 
spines, 3-celled, styles 3, fused at base, deeply 
fringed, red. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 3-4 mm 
long, spiny. Seeds ovoid, 2.5-3 mm long, pale 
brown. 
Acalypha comprises about 460 species and oc-
curs throughout the tropics, subtropics and 
warm temperate regions, excluding Europe. In 
tropical Africa about 65 species occur and in 
Madagascar and other Indian Ocean islands 
about 35 species. Acalypha integrifolia is a 
variable species and 3 subspecies and 7 varie-
ties have been distinguished. Several other 
Acalypha species with medicinal uses are en-
demic to the Indian Ocean islands. A leaf de-
coction of Acalypha lyallii Baker, from Mada-
gascar and the Comoros, is used to massage 
parts of the body to treat rheumatism. A decoc-
tion of the aerial parts or stem bark of Acaly-
pha andringitrensis Leandri and Acalypha 
26 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
radula Baill., both from Madagascar , is t aken 
or inhaled to t r ea t fever and syphilis. The 
crushed leaves are topically applied to t r ea t 
scabies. A leaf infusion of Acalypha decaryana 
Leandri from Madagascar is t a k e n as a purga-
tive to t r ea t dysentery. A decoction of the leafy 
s tems of Acalypha spachiana Baill. from 
Madagascar is t aken to t rea t venereal diseases. 
The flexible s tems a re used to make baskets . 
The s tems also yield a black dye. 
E c o l o g y Acalypha integrifolia occurs in 
shrub land from sea-level up to 1000 m alti-
tude . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Acaly-
pha integrifolia is relatively common and not 
th rea t ened by genetic erosion, a l though several 
of the subspecies and variet ies a re restr icted to 
small a reas and/or known from few collections. 
P r o s p e c t s Acalypha integrifolia is only oc-
casionally used as a medicinal p lan t and is 
likely to remain of local importance, unless 
new pharmacological research reveals interest-
ing pharmacological activities. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Coode, 1982; Gurib-Fakim 
& Brendler, 2004; Lavergne, 2001. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1982; Neuwinger , 2000; Pe rne t & Meyer, 
1957; Said & Peti t jean, 1995. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
A C A L Y P H A O R N A T A Höchs t , ex A.Rich. 
P r o t o l o g u e Tent . fl. abyss. 2: 247 (1851). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Mchakat i , mjiakhat i , 
mckakar i , mchacha (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha ornata occurs from Nigeria eas t to Er i t rea 
and south to Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe 
and Mozambique. 
U s e s In southern Nigeria the leaves a re 
pounded together with those of other p lan ts in 
water , and the liquid is given to children wi th 
rabies . In the Cent ra l African Republic cooked 
leaves are ea ten to relieve pos t -par tum pain 
and a root decoction is t aken as a laxative. In 
Tanzan ia wate r in which leaves have been 
soaked is used to wash children wi th scabies. A 
leaf decoction is used as a b a t h to t r ea t haem-
orrhoids, and a root decoction is also d runk for 
the same purpose. An infusion of the aerial 
pa r t s is applied to an infected navel in new-
born babies. A fresh root decoction is d runk 
and used as a wash to t r e a t leprosy and men-
s t ruat ion pain. P lan t ash is rubbed on the 
chest to t rea t pain. Powdered leaves together 
with powdered flowers of Psorospermum febri-
fugum Spach are sprinkled on circumcision 
wounds. 
In Tanzania the s tems are woven into baskets 
and fish t raps . The leaves are chopped and 
cooked and ea ten wi th rice or pounded maize; 
sometimes groundnut , coconut milk, onion or 
tomato are added to improve the tas te . In Eas t 
Africa the foliage is browsed by livestock. The 
leaves are used for bedding mater ia l . In DR 
Congo the s tems are used to make arrow 
shafts. The wood is sometimes used as fire-
wood. Acalypha ornata is sometimes p lanted as 
an o rnamenta l . 
P r o p e r t i e s Leaf and root extracts show 
slight molluscicidal activity agains t the fresh 
wa te r snail Bulinus globulus. 
B o t a n y Monoecious, much-branched, peren-
nial herb or lax shrub up to 2.5(-5) m tall; 
s tems almost glabrous to hairy. Leaves ar-
ranged spirally, simple; st ipules linear-
lanceolate, 4 -10 mm long, soon falling; petiole 
(2-)3-10(-15) cm long; blade ovate to elliptical-
ovate, 5-16 cm x 3-10 cm, base cuneate , 
rounded, t runca te or shallowly cordate, apex 
acuminate , marg ins coarsely toothed, mem-
branous , sparingly short ly hai ry to almost gla-
brous on both surfaces, more hai ry along the 
midrib, 5-veined a t base and with 4—7 pairs of 
la tera l veins. Male inflorescence an axillary, 
solitary raceme up to 15 cm long, many-
flowered, peduncle short; female inflorescence 
a terminal , solitary spike up to 17 cm long, 
peduncle short, bracts ovate-rhomboid, c. 1.5 
cm x 2.5 cm, toothed, enlarging in fruit. Flow-
ers unisexual , petals absent; male flowers with 
pedicel c. 1.5 mm long, calyx 4-lobed, minute , 
almost glabrous, green to reddish, s t amens 8, 
free, an the r s curled, yellowish white; female 
flowers sessile, sepals 3, t r iangular , c. 1 mm 
long, ciliate, ovary superior, c. 1 mm in diame-
ter, 3-lobed and 3-celled, styles 3, free, c. 3 mm 
long, fringed, red. Frui t a 3-lobed capsule c. 3 
mm x 4 mm, apex sparingly hairy, spli t t ing 
into 3 cocci, each 2-valved and 1-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid-globose, c. 2 m m x 1.5 mm, smooth, pur-
plish grey, caruncle elliptical, brownish yellow. 
Acalypha comprises about 460 species and oc-
curs throughout the tropics, subtropics and 
w a r m tempera te regions, excluding Europe. In 
tropical Africa about 65 species occur and in 
Madagascar and other Indian Ocean is lands 
about 35 species. Several other shrubby Acaly-
pha species with male and female flowers on 
ACALYPHA 27 
separate inflorescences have medicinal uses. 
The leaf sap of Acalypha chirindica S.Moore, 
known from DR Congo, Tanzania and southern 
Africa, is taken in Tanzania to treat dizziness; 
a root decoction is drunk to treat kidney pain. 
A leafy stem decoction of Acalypha manniana 
Müll.Arg., occurring from Ghana east to 
Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi, is taken by the 
Abayanda people of Uganda to treat diarrhoea. 
Acalypha racemosa Baill. occurs in tropical 
Africa, India, Sri Lanka and some islands of 
Indonesia. In East Africa a leaf poultice is ap-
plied to the back to treat kidney pain and her-
nia. Leaf ash is rubbed into cuts to relieve body 
pain. Root and leaf decoctions are taken as an 
emetic and antidote. In India Acalypha ra-
cemosa is grown as a vegetable. 
Ecology Acalypha ornata occurs in forest 
undergrowth and forest margins, wooded 
grassland, deciduous woodland and thickets, 
often in riverine or rocky localities, or in secon-
dary vegetation, from sea-level up to 2000 m 
altitude. 
Management The leaves and roots of Aca-
lypha ornata are mainly collected from the wild 
during the rainy season. Plants can be propa-
gated by seed and cuttings. In Central Africa 
Acalypha ornata is a host of the cotton 
helopeltis (Helopeltis schoutedeni), one of the 
most important pests of cotton and Eucalyptus 
spp. 
Genetic resources and breeding Acaly-
pha ornata is common throughout its large 
distribution area and therefore not threatened 
by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Acalypha ornata has several me-
dicinal uses, but nothing is known on the 
chemistry and pharmacology of the plant. 
Unless more research is done, the species will 
remain of local importance only. Its uses as a 
vegetable, fibre plant and ornamental deserve 
further research. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Neuwin-
ger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Ruffo, Birnie 
& Tengnäs, 2002. 
Other references Haerdi, 1964; Hamill et 
al., 2000; Ichikawa, 1987; Kokwaro, 1993; 
Mtengeti & Mhelela, 2006; Terashima & Ichi-
kawa, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ACALYPHA PSILOSTACHYA Höchst, ex A.Rich. 
Protologue Tent. fl. abyss. 2: 246 (1850). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha psilostachya occurs from Sudan and 
Ethiopia south to Malawi, Zambia, Angola and 
Mozambique. 
Uses In Burundi a leaf decoction is taken to 
treat headache, to expel a retained placenta 
and as a tonic for pregnant women. The leaf 
sap is taken to stop bleeding during pregnancy 
and to treat amenorrhoea. A decoction of leafy 
twigs is used as an eye bath and the leaf sap is 
used as eye drops to treat conjunctivitis. A leaf 
decoction is drunk or the ash of leafy twigs is 
sniffed to treat pain in the side. An infusion of 
the leafy twigs is drunk and the steam is in-
haled to treat dizziness. A leaf decoction is 
used as an enema to treat diarrhoea, and the 
decoction is drunk to treat intestinal parasites. 
Botany Monoecious, erect, perennial herb or 
shrub up to 3 m tall; stems sparsely to densely 
hairy, with or without glandular hairs. Leaves 
arranged spirally, simple; stipules linear-
lanceolate, 2—4 mm long; petiole up to 11 cm 
long, slender; blade ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 
2—15 cm x 1-9 cm, base rounded to cordate, 
apex acuminate, margins toothed, membra-
nous, shortly hairy to almost glabrous on both 
surfaces, more hairy along the midrib, (5-)7-9-
veined at base and with 4-6 pairs of lateral 
veins. Inflorescence an axillary, solitary or 
paired spike up to 9(-12) cm long, with mainly 
male flowers and (l-)3-4(-8) female flowers at 
the base; peduncle hairy; bracts of female flow-
ers deeply 5-7-lobed, lobes linear-lanceolate to 
ovate-lanceolate, the median lobe up to 8 mm x 
12 mm. Flowers unisexual, sessile, petals ab-
sent; male flowers with 4-lobed, minute, 
shortly hairy, reddish calyx, stamens 8, free, 
anthers yellowish; female flowers with 3 ovate, 
c. 0.5 mm long, ciliate sepals, ovary superior, c. 
0.5 mm in diameter, slightly 3-lobed, densely 
shortly hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, free, 2-3 mm 
long, fringed, white. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 
1.5 mm x 2.5 mm, densely shortly hairy. Seeds 
ovoid-globose, c. 1 mm x 1 mm, smooth, brown, 
caruncle small. 
Acalypha comprises about 460 species and oc-
curs throughout the tropics, subtropics and 
warm temperate regions, excluding Europe. In 
tropical Africa about 65 species occur and in 
Madagascar and other Indian Ocean islands 
about 35 species. Acalypha psilostachya com-
prises 2 varieties with mainly overlapping dis-
28 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tribution areas; var. psilostachya, with densely 
hairy stem and inflorescence, and var. glandu-
losa Hutch., which is variably hairy, but also 
has glandular hairs. 
Ecology Acalypha psilostachya grows in 
moist submontane forest undergrowth, in val-
leys, also in submontane grassland and swamp 
forest, persisting in disturbed localities, at 
500-3000 m altitude. 
Management The leaves and leafy stems of 
Acalypha psilostachya are mainly collected 
from the wild during the rainy season. 
Genetic resources and breeding Acaly-
pha psilostachya is relatively widespread in the 
mountainous regions of its distribution area 
and there are no signs that it is genetically 
threatened. 
Prospects The only known uses of Acalypha 
psilostachya are from Burundi, where it has 
numerous medicinal applications. Research 
into the chemical composition and pharmacol-
ogical activities of the compounds is warranted. 
Major references Neuwinger, 2000; Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ACALYPHA viLLiCAULis Höchst. 
Protologue Sched. Schimperi Iter. Abyss., 
Sectio secunda, coll. no.: 737 (1842). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Acalypha brachiata Krauss 
(1845), Acalypha petiolaris Höchst. ex 
C.Krauss (1845), Acalypha senensis Klotzsch 
(1861), Ricinocarpus petiolaris (Höchst, ex 
C.Krauss) Kuntze (1891). 
Origin and geographic distribution Acaly-
pha villicaulis occurs from Senegal east to 
Ethiopia and south to South Africa and Swazi-
land. 
Uses The Tenda people of Senegal place the 
chopped leaves on wounds to improve healing. 
The steam of a leaf decoction is inhaled to treat 
fever. Leaf ash in water is taken to treat ele-
phantiasis. In Rwanda the pounded leaves, 
twigs and flowers are applied to snakebites. 
The fresh or dried aerial parts are crushed and 
the decoction drunk to treat liver diseases. In 
East and southern Africa a leaf infusion is ap-
plied to wounds and sores. In Uganda a leaf 
maceration is taken to treat epilepsy. A root 
infusion is given to children who suffer from 
burning urine. A root decoction is widely taken 
to treat diarrhoea, and also to treat cough, as 
an aphrodisiac, and to prevent premature 
ejaculation. In southern Africa a root decoction 
is drunk as an abortifacient and contraceptive. 
The root powder or paste with fat is applied to 
treat itch. In Namibia a root decoction is taken 
to treat cough. The pounded and heated leaves 
are applied to wasp stings. In Zimbabwe a root 
decoction is taken to treat bloody diarrhoea, 
asthma and male sterility. In Senegal and 
Zimbabwe the water in which roots are soaked 
is used to bathe constipated babies; the water 
may also be drunk. 
Botany Monoecious perennial herb or small 
shrub up to 2 m tall, with woody rootstock; 
stems erect, ascending or decumbent, hairy. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple; stipules 
subulate-filiform, 1.5-4(-6) mm long, glandular 
at base; petiole l-3(-5) cm long, hairy, with 2 
glands at base; blade ovate-lanceolate to 
lanceolate, (2-)5-12.5(-14) x 1-4 cm, base cor-
date, apex acuminate, margins coarsely 
toothed, membranous, shortly hairy on both 
surfaces, more hairy along the midrib, 7-veined 
at base and with 5-8 pairs of lateral veins. 
Male inflorescence an axillary, solitary raceme 
up to 12 cm long, many-flowered; female inflo-
rescence a terminal, solitary, head-shaped 
spike up to 3 cm long, peduncle short, bracts 
transversely ovate, c. 0.5 cm x 1 cm, toothed, 
with glandular hairs, enlarging in fruit. Flow-
ers unisexual, petals absent; male flowers with 
pedicel c. 1 mm long, calyx 4-lobed, minute, 
almost glabrous, yellowish green, stamens 8, 
free, anthers curled, yellow; female flowers 
sessile, sepals 3, ovate-lanceolate, c. 1 mm 
long, ciliate, ovary superior, c. 1 mm in diame-
ter, 3-lobed to globular, 3-celled, styles 3, free, 
c. 1.5 mm long, fringed, red. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule c. 4 mm x 5 mm, sparingly hairy, split-
ting into 3 cocci, each 2-valved and 1-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid-globose, c. 2.5 mm x 2 mm, smooth, 
dark grey, caruncle depressed-hemispherical. 
Acalypha comprises about 460 species and oc-
curs throughout the tropics, subtropics and 
warm temperate regions, excluding Europe. In 
tropical Africa about 65 species occur and in 
Madagascar and other Indian Ocean islands 
about 35 species. Several other small perennial 
Acalypha species with male and female flowers 
in separate inflorescences have medicinal uses. 
In Burundi a root decoction of Acalypha am-
bigua Pax, occurring from Burundi south to 
Namibia and Zimbabwe, is drunk or used as an 
enema or in a vapour bath to treat insanity 
and possession. The plant is widely browsed by 
livestock. Acalypha allenii Hutch, occurs in 
ACOKANTHERA 29 
south-eastern Africa; in Zimbabwe an infusion 
of the pounded roots mixed with bone meal is 
taken to treat oedema. Root paste is used as an 
enema to treat diarrhoea of children. A root 
infusion is drunk as an aphrodisiac. 
Ecology Acalypha villicaulis is widespread 
in open woodland and grassland, and also in 
coastal and lakeshore grassland, sometimes in 
riverine and submontane forest, from sea-level 
up to 2200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Acaly-
pha villicaulis has a large distribution area 
and is common. It is therefore not threatened 
by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Acalypha villicaulis has many 
medicinal uses, especially in eastern and 
southern Africa to treat diarrhoea and cough, 
and externally to treat wounds. The species 
will remain of local importance only though, 
unless research into the chemical composition 
and pharmacology gives interesting results. 
Major references Gelfand et al., 1985; Neu-
winger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Burkill, 1994; Ramathal 
& Ngassapa, 2001; Stäuble, 1986; Tabuti, Lye 
& Dhillion, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ACOKANTHERA OBLONGIFOLIA (Höchst .) 
Codd 
Protologue Bothalia 7: 449 (1961). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number In = 22 
Synonyms Acokanthera spectabilis (Sond.) 
Hook.f. (1878), Carissa spectabilis (Sond.) 
Pichon (1948). 
Vernacular names Dune poison bush, win-
tersweet (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aco-
kanthera oblongifolia occurs in southern Mo-
zambique and eastern South Africa. 
Uses Acokanthera oblongifolia is used med-
icinally to treat snakebites and as an emetic. 
To treat snakebites, a small amount of the 
leaves is eaten, a leaf decoction is drunk and 
the leaf pulp is rubbed into the wound, root 
powder is sniffed and roots or leaves are put on 
the swollen part as a dressing. Root scrapings 
are rubbed into the skin against itch. A wood 
or leaf decoction is drunk or administered as 
an enema as a cure for internal worms, and to 
combat evil spirits. The fruit is highly toxic, 
especially when unripe, but the ripe fruits have 
also caused fatalities in children. The stem 
bark and root bark are used as a potent arrow 
poison, for homicide, suicide and to kill stray 
dogs. 
Properties Numerous cardenolides were 
detected in the wood, leaves, seeds and fruit, 
the most important being acovenosides A and 
B, which both have cardio-vascular properties. 
Other cardenolides that were isolated are 
acovenoside C, spectabiline and acopieroside II. 
The last compound shows a higher activity 
than digitalin and digoxin as a cardiotonic. The 
seeds yielded acobioside A and 14-O-acetyl-
acovenoside C; the latter showed marked car-
diotonic activity in dogs. 
Botany Evergreen shrub or small tree up to 
6 m tall; young branches glabrous, conspicu-
ously angled and ribbed. Leaves decussately 
opposite, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 4-12 mm long; blade elliptical, 6-12 cm 
x 1.5—5 cm, base cuneate or rounded, apex 
acute to obtuse, mucronate, leathery, glossy, 
glabrous, pinnately veined, lateral veins incon-
spicuous, with looping connections. Inflores-
cence a dense axillary cyme, many-flowered. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; 
sepals free, ovate to lanceolate, 2.5-3 mm long, 
apex acuminate to acute, shortly hairy or gla-
brous outside, ciliate; corolla tube cylindrical, 
14-20 mm long, glabrous or shortly hairy out-
side, inside sparsely hairy in the upper half 
and wrinkled below, white tinged pink, lobes 
broadly ovate, 3-7 mm long, apex rounded, 
glabrous to shortly hairy on both sides, ciliate 
or not, white; stamens inserted near the top of 
the corolla tube, included; ovary superior, ellip-
soid, faintly ribbed, 2-celled, style slender, 
stigma minutely bifid. Fruit an ellipsoid to 
globose berry 2—2.5 cm long, purple when ripe, 
1-2-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, plano-convex, c. 1.5 
cm long, smooth, glabrous. 
Acokanthera comprises 5 species and is re-
stricted to Africa, with one species also found 
in Yemen. It is related to Carissa. Acokanthera 
oblongifolia fruits from February to April. 
Ecology Acokanthera oblongifolia occurs in 
dry forest and thickets on coastal dunes. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no indications that Acokanthera oblongifo-
lia is at risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects The cardenolides isolated from 
Acokanthera oblongifolia are highly poisonous. 
Most of them have not been pharmacologically 
investigated, and more research is needed to 
evaluate the possible prospects of the various 
compounds. Acokanthera oblongifolia is easy to 
propagate, like the other Acokanthera species, 
30 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and it would be a beautiful ornamental in gar-
dens. However, this is not recommended be-
cause of its toxicity. 
Major references Hanna et al., 1998; Kupi-
cha, 1982; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Karawya, Abdel-Wahab & Niazi, 1974; van 
Wyk, van Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 2002. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ACOKANTHERA OPPOSITIFOLIA (Lam.) Codd 
Protologue Bothalia 7: 448 (1961). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Acokanthera longiflora Stapf 
(1922). 
Vernacular names Bushman poison, win-
tersweet, common poison bush (En). Msunguti 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aco-
kanthera oppositifolia occurs from Kenya south 
to South Africa, and to southern DR Congo in 
the west. 
Uses Bark, root, wood and leaves are used in 
the preparation of arrow poison, and also for 
hunting, suicide and homicide. The only treat-
ment against the poison is immediate excision 
of the flesh around the wound. The poison is 
also used for killing wild animals (hyenas, ele-
phants, buffaloes, leopards, lions) and stray 
dogs. Fatal accidents have been caused by eat-
ing meat grilled over a fire of sticks from this 
tree. To treat snakebites and spider bites, a 
small amount of the leaves is eaten, a leaf or 
root decoction is drunk and the leaf or root 
pulp is rubbed into the wound. Alternatively, 
root powder is sniffed and a dressing made of 
Acokanthera oppositifolia - wild 
roots or leaves is put on the swollen part. A 
root infusion is taken to treat syphilis. In 
South Africa root powder or leaf powder is 
sniffed to cure headache, while a leaf infusion 
is used as a nasal spray for this purpose. Small 
pieces of the stem are chewed against tooth-
ache. A leaf infusion is taken to treat abdomi-
nal pain, colds, measles and blood poisoning. A 
root infusion is taken to expel tapeworm and to 
treat excessive and irregular menstruation. 
Poisoning of livestock is rare, but the risk in-
creases during droughts. 
The pulp of the ripe fruit is edible and has a 
sweetish bitter taste. It is relished by birds and 
animals and has also been used in making 
jams and preserves. The unripe fruits and 
seeds are highly poisonous, and accidental poi-
soning of children has been recorded. Children 
use the latex of the fruit as chewing gum. Aco-
kanthera oppositifolia has beautiful flowers 
and is grown as an ornamental although it is 
poisonous. It is sometimes marketed as a con-
tainer plant in South Africa and in subtropical 
and temperate regions. 
Production and international trade The 
poison made from the wood, leaves and roots of 
Acokanthera oppositifolia is traded in small 
amounts among tribes. Arrow tips are also 
smeared with the poison in exchange for 
money. There are no data on traded volumes or 
value. 
Properties All parts of Acokanthera opposi-
tifolia, except for the pulp of the ripe fruit, con-
tain large amounts of cardiac glycosides 
(cardenolides), of which about 15 have been 
identified. The glycosides are responsible for 
the activity as arrow poison, but also act as 
cardiac stimulant. The main compound is 
acovenoside A (1.2—2.4%), with acovenosigenin 
as aglycone, followed by acolongifloroside K 
(acolongifloriside K) (0.3-0.4%), with oua-
bagenin as aglycone. Acokanthera oppositifolia 
plants from South Africa contain twice as much 
acovenoside A as plants from Kenya, but less 
acolongifloroside K. Minor components include 
acovenoside C, opposide, acofrioside L, acolongi-
floroside H and and traces of ouabain. The con-
stitution is location dependent. 
Patent applications have been submitted for 
the use of acovenoside A for treating muscle 
pain. Acolongifloroside K, opposide and oua-
bain are the most cardioactive compounds; they 
are highly toxic and can cause death even in 
minute doses. The other compounds are 
slightly less toxic. Cardiac glycosides are given 
in low doses to treat patients suffering from 
ACOKANTHERA 31 
congestive heart failure. In higher doses, car-
diac glycosides have a direct inhibiting action 
on the atrioventricular conduction and cause a 
decrease of the heart rate. Injection of the ar-
row poison into an animal causes death almost 
immediately, while humans inflicted with an 
arrow wound die in 30 minutes to 2 hours. 
Animals that eat the leaves or immature fruit 
show dullness, followed by violent spasms, pa-
ralysis and finally death. 
Adulterations and substitutes Another 
arrow poison plant, Strophanthus gratus (Wall. 
& Hook.) Baill., contains mainly ouabain, and 
to a lesser extent acolongifloroside K. 
Description Evergreen shrub or small tree 
up to 6(—7) m tall; bark brown, deeply fissured; 
young branches reddish, glabrous, conspicu-
ously angled and ribbed. Leaves decussately 
opposite, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 2—6 mm long; blade obovate to elliptical, 
4-13.5 cm x 1.5-8 cm, base cuneate or 
rounded, apex acute, obtuse or rounded, with 
hard mucro, leathery, glossy, usually glabrous, 
pinnately veined, lateral veins prominent, 
without looping connections. Inflorescence a 
dense axillary cyme, many-flowered. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; sepals 
Acokanthera oppositifolia - 1, flowering shoot; 
2, flower; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
free, ovate to lanceolate, (1.5-)2—3.5 mm long, 
apex acuminate to acute, shortly hairy or gla-
brous outside, ciliate; corolla tube cylindrical, 
6.5-20 mm long, shortly hairy outside, inside 
sparsely hairy in the upper half and wrinkled 
below, pink or red, lobes broadly elliptical, 2-5 
mm long, apex acute, shortly hairy on both 
sides, ciliate, white; stamens inserted at 12.5-
15 mm from the base of the corolla tube, 
slightly exserted; ovary superior, ellipsoid, 2-
celled, style slender, 11-16 mm long, stigma 
minutely bifid. Fruit an ellipsoid berry 1.5—3(— 
4) cm long, purple when ripe, pulp green to 
deep red, 1-2-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, plano-
convex, 6-10 mm long, smooth, glabrous. 
Other botanical information Acokanthera 
comprises 5 species and is restricted to Africa, 
with one species also found in Yemen. It is re-
lated to Carissa. 
Growth and development Acokanthera 
oppositifolia is a moderately fast growing tree, 
which is drought and shade tolerant, and frost 
resistant. It flowers from late January to 
March, and fruits from April to July in South 
Africa and Tanzania; in Kenya it fruits from 
February to March. Insects are the major pol-
linators and animals the major seed dispersers. 
Ecology Acokanthera oppositifolia occurs at 
1000-2400 m altitude in areas with an annual 
rainfall of 600-1000 mm. It thrives in rocky, 
red clay and clay-loam soils, often on termite 
mounds. It is usually found on rocky hillsides, 
in riparian forest edges, coastal bush, or open 
woodland. 
Propagation and planting Acokanthera 
oppositifolia can be propagated by seed or 
semi-hardwood cuttings. Seeds require no pre-
treatment and should be sown fresh owing to 
their poor storage nature. They have a high 
water content and lose their viability easily on 
storage. Wildlings can also be used for propa-
gation. 
Management Acokanthera oppositifolia is 
commonly left standing in pasture fields and 
farm land as a shade plant. Pruning and pol-
larding can be used in managing the tree. 
Harvesting The fruits are handpicked or 
harvested with the aid of a pole. 
Yield To prepare 100 g of Acokanthera op-
positifolia poison, 1 kg of wood, together with 
250 g roots and 100 g leaves are needed. 
Handling after harvest The wood or roots 
of Acokanthera oppositifolia are boiled in water 
for a long time until a tar-like substance is 
obtained. The latter is filtered and stored in an 
airtight container away from children. Addition 
32 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
of plant and animal parts to the arrow poison 
is common in southern Africa. Fresh latex of 
Euphorbia spp. and bulbs of Boophone disticha 
(L.f.) Herb, are commonly used additives for 
poison production. Numerous animal additives, 
e.g. poisonous spiders, insects, dried and pow-
dered cobra and viper glands may also be 
added to increase poison toxicity. 
Genetic resources Acokanthera oppositifo-
lia is a relatively common species, and there 
are no indications that it is at risk of genetic 
erosion. In southern Africa it is an invasive 
colonizer with weedy tendencies. 
Prospects The cardenolides isolated from 
Acokanthera oppositifolia are highly poisonous. 
Most of them have not been pharmacologically 
investigated, and more research is needed to 
evaluate the possible prospects of the various 
compounds. Acokanthera oppositifolia has at-
tractive leathery, dark green leaves, beautiful, 
fragrant inflorescences and is drought and 
frost tolerant; these characteristics make it 
interesting as an ornamental, although its poi-
sonous properties make it dangerous. 
Major references Coates Palgrave, 1983. 
Hauschild-Rogat, Weiss & Reichstein, 1967 
Kupicha, 1982; Maundu & Tengnäs, 2005 
Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; Omino, 
2002. 
Other references Dharani, 2002; Hanna et 
a l , 1998; Karawya, Abdel Wahab & Niazi, 
1974; Kokwaro, 1993; Laudadio & Davis, 2003; 
Maundu et al., 2001; Maundu, Ngugi & Ka-
buye, 1999; Pieri, Arnould Guerin & Sefraoui, 
1992; Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 2002; Tyiso & 
Bhat, 1998; van Wyk, van Heerden & van 
Oudtshoorn, 2002; van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn 
& Gericke, 1997; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Sources of illustration Kupicha, 1982. 
Authors O.O. Bethwell 
ACOKANTHERA SCHIMPERI (A.DC.) Schweinf. 
Protologue Bol. Soc. Afr. Italia 10(11-12): 
12(1891). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Carissa schimperi A.DC. (1844), 
Acokanthera ouabaio Poisson (1888). 
Vernacular names Common poison bush, 
arrow-poison tree (En). Msunguti, msungu 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aco-
kanthera schimperi occurs from Eritrea south 
to Tanzania and west to Uganda, Rwanda and 
Acokanthera schimperi - wild 
eastern DR Congo. It is also found in southern 
Yemen. 
Uses Acokanthera species are among the 
most commonly used plant species for the 
preparation of poison in East Africa. It is either 
used on its own or mixed with other plant or 
animal parts. The bark, wood and roots are the 
usual ingredients for arrow poison, and they 
are also used for suicide and homicide. The 
only treatment against the poison is immediate 
excision of the flesh around the wound, or suck-
ing the blood from the wound. The poison is 
also used in killing wild animals and stray 
dogs from fields and homes. 
In Ethiopia the leaves and bark are applied to 
the skin to treat skin disorders, and an infu-
sion of the leaves is gargled to treat tonsillitis. 
Dried pulverized leaves with honey are taken 
as an antifertility medicine. In Kenya Samburu 
women drink a bark decoction when their men-
struation does not stop. In Kenya and Tanza-
nia a hot infusion of the pounded root is drunk 
in small quantities to treat sexually transmit-
ted diseases, and also as an aphrodisiac. In 
Uganda a leaf decoction is given to cattle that 
have a cold. A mixture made from the leaves, 
bark and butter is used for gall-bladder prob-
lems. The smoke of dried roots and twigs is 
insect repellent; too much smoke is harmful for 
humans as well. 
The fruits are edible and an important famine 
food. They are sweet and slightly bitter when 
fully ripe. They are also used to make jams. 
The unripe fruits and seeds are highly poison-
ous, and several cases of accidental poisoning 
of children have been recorded. The latex in the 
fruits is used as chewing gum by children. The 
ACOKANTHERA 33 
wood is very hard and compact and branches 
are used in making spear shafts. In Uganda, it 
is used as firewood and to make charcoal. Aco-
kanthera schimperi serves as an ornamental, 
shade or live fence tree in parks or around 
houses. 
Production and international trade The 
stem bark and roots of Acokanthera schimperi 
are locally traded for poison production. The 
ready-made poison is also sold in East Africa. 
There are no data on traded volumes and 
value. 
Properties All plant parts of Acokanthera 
schimperi, except the pulp of the ripe fruit, 
contain large amounts of cardiac glycosides 
(cardenolides), of which nearly 20 have been 
identified. The glycosides are responsible for 
the activity as arrow poison, but also act as 
cardiac stimulant. The main compounds are 
acovenoside A (0.3-1.8%), with acovenosigenin 
as aglycone, followed by ouabain (0.1-5%) with 
ouabagenin as aglycone, and traces of 
acolongifloroside K. Acokanthera schimperi 
plants from the Nairobi region in Kenya con-
tain the highest amounts of acovenoside A, and 
lowest amounts of ouabain. Plants from the 
coastal region of Kenya contain mainly oua-
bain, while plants from Eritrea contain only 
half as much acovenoside A as those from Nai-
robi, but much more ouabain. Minor compo-
nents also vary with origin and may include 
acoschimperosides N, P, Q and V. The main 
differences with Acokanthera oppositifolia 
(Lam.) Codd are the higher amounts of ouabain 
and the lower amounts of acolongifloroside K, 
but both species are equally poisonous. Oua-
bain and acolongifloroside K are the most car-
dioactive compounds; they are highly toxic and 
can cause death even in minute doses. The 
other compounds are slightly less toxic. Car-
diac glycosides are given in low doses to pa-
tients suffering from congestive heart failure. 
In higher doses, they have a direct inhibiting 
action on the atrioventricular conduction to-
gether with a decrease of the heart rate. Injec-
tion of the arrow poison into an animal causes 
death almost immediately, while humans in-
flicted with an arrow wound die in 30 minutes 
to 2 hours. In medicine, ouabain is used as a 
remedy for congestive heart failure, like gly-
cosides from Digitalis. 
A methanol extract from the leaves showed 
significant antiviral activity against influenza 
virus A, coxsackievirus B3 and HSV-1 by inhib-
iting their replication. The extract also exhib-
ited significant antibacterial activity against 
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, and significant antifungal activity 
against Trichophyton mentagrophytes. 
Adulterations and substitutes Poison 
from Acokanthera oppositifolia (Lam.) Codd 
may be used as a substitute for that of Acokan-
thera schimperi, although the latter species is 
more widely used for poison production. Dis-
honest dealers sometimes adulterate the poi-
son with black earth. 
Description Much-branched, evergreen 
tree, sometimes a shrub, up to 9(-10) m tall, 
with short trunk; bark brown, soft; crown 
dense, rounded; young branches glabrous or 
hairy, conspicuously angled and ribbed. Leaves 
decussately opposite, simple and entire; stip-
ules absent; petiole 1—6(—9) mm long; blade 
elliptical to ovate or broadly ovate, 2-10 cm x 
1.5—6.5 cm, base cuneate or rounded, apex 
acute, obtuse or rounded, with hard mucro, 
leathery, glossy, glabrous or shortly hairy, pin-
nately veined, lateral veins obscure, with loop-
ing connections. Inflorescence a dense axillary 
cyme, many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, fragrant; sepals free, ovate to 
lanceolate, (l-)1.5-2.5 mm long, apex acumi-
nate to acute, shortly hairy or glabrous outside, 
ciliate; corolla tube cylindrical, 8-12.5 mm 
long, glabrous or shortly hairy outside, inside 
sparsely hairy in the upper half and wrinkled 
below, pink or red, lobes ovate, 2.5-5 mm long, 
apex acute, glabrous above, glabrous to shortly 
hairy below, ciliate, white; stamens inserted at 
7-10 mm from the base of the corolla tube, 
slightly exserted; ovary superior, ellipsoid, 2-
celled, style slender, 7—10 mm long, stigma 
minutely bifid. Fruit an ellipsoid berry 1-2.5 
cm long, purple when ripe, pulp green to deep 
red, 1-2-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, plano-convex, 
6-13 mm long, smooth, glabrous. 
Other botanical information Acokanthera 
comprises 5 species and is restricted to Africa, 
although Acokanthera schimperi is also found 
in Yemen. The genus is related to Carissa. 
There are two types of Acokanthera schimperi: 
a large-leaved (up to 11 cm) and a small-leaved 
one. A third type that is climbing and has 
shortly and sharply recurved leaf margins has 
been reported in Kenya. Acokanthera schimperi 
has been domesticated in coastal Kenya by the 
Giriama people. The domestication process has 
increased the genetic variability of the species; 
the large-leaved, possibly domesticated types 
have very high amounts of ouabain. 
The stem bark of Acokanthera laevigata 
Kupicha from Tanzania and Malawi, also 
34 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
called 'msunguti' in Swahili, is widely used to 
make arrow poison. It contains similar alka-
loids as the other Acokanthera species. The 
tough stems are suitable for building poles, tool 
handles and firewood. 
Growth and development Acokanthera 
schimperi has a moderate growth rate. In 
Kenya fruiting occurs from February to March 
and in Tanzania from April to July. The flow-
ers are pollinated chiefly by bees and seeds 
dispersed by animals. 
Ecology Acokanthera schimperi occurs at 
the margins of dry forest, in relict forest, thick-
ets, grasslands and bushland, at 1100-2400 m 
altitude and with 600-1000 mm annual rain-
fall. It is drought resistant. It prefers well-
drained, red or black rocky soils, but also grows 
on black cotton soil and poor soil of dry sites. 
Lowland distribution appears to be associated 
with human introduction. 
Propagation and planting Acokanthera 
schimperi regenerates naturally by seed. In 
Kenya and Ethiopia Wildlings are transplanted 
to home gardens. The seeds have high moisture 
content and lose viability easily under ambient 
conditions and on storage. There are 400-450 
seeds per kg. Seed germination is low. 
Management Acokanthera schimperi can be 
pruned and pollarded in intercropping systems. 
Harvesting Acokanthera schimperi is not 
equally poisonous throughout the year. The 
toxic potential of trees is sometimes estab-
lished by observation of dead insects or dead 
birds under the tree. The fruits are handpicked 
or harvested with aid of a pole. 
Yield One kg of wood of Acokanthera schim-
peri, together with 250 g of roots and 100 g of 
leaves yields 100 g of poison. The wood of twigs 
and roots yields 0.2% of ouabain. 
Handling after harvest Stem wood is 
chopped into 15 cm long pieces. Chopped 
stems, roots, leaves and less commonly seeds of 
Acokanthera schimperi, together with animal 
and other plant additives, are put in a large 
clay container filled with water, and boiled 
with occasional stirring for up to 10 hours over 
a fire in a secluded place. Additional water is 
added in case the water evaporates before the 
poison is ready. In some communities, the 
making of the poison is complex, and ritual 
aspects, such as chanting, are observed to im-
prove the efficacy of the poison. Once all the 
water has evaporated, a thick sticky black sub-
stance is left in the container. Used plant parts 
are discarded and the substance is then cut 
into pieces, put into containers or wrapped. 
Before use, the sticky extract is made into balls 
and spread in small amounts on arrow tips. 
Plant and animal parts are frequently added to 
increase poison potency and for magical rea-
sons. In Kenya many different plant additives 
are used together with poison from Acokan-
thera schimperi, whereas in Tanzania mainly 
Strophanthus spp. are used, and to a lesser 
amount Euphorbia candelabrum Kotschy and 
Urginea spp. In Rwanda mainly Strychnos 
usambarensis Gilg is mixed with the poison. 
The poison is traded the same way as 150 
years ago, in the form of a characteristic 'poi-
son cigar', where the poison is packed securely 
in maize leaves. It is sometimes sold wrapped 
in paper, leaves, cloths, or foil or in open cans. 
The poison needs to be stored in a cool, dark 
place, and will keep its potency for decades. 
Genetic resources Acokanthera schimperi 
is not at risk but considered rare in southern 
Ethiopia. 
Prospects Acokanthera schimperi plants 
from the coastal zone of Kenya contain a high 
percentage of ouabain, and could thus have 
medical and commercial potential in congestive 
heart failure treatment. 
Major references Kupicha, 1982; Maundu 
& Tengnäs, 2005; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwin-
ger, 2000; Tadeg et al., 2005. 
Other references Abebe et al., 2001; Cas-
sels, 1985; Dharani, 2002; Gebre-Mariam et al., 
2006; Giday et al., 2003; Jansen, 1981; Katen-
de, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Lovett et al., 2006; 
Maundu et al., 2001; Maundu, Ngugi & Ka-
buye, 1999; Omino, 2002; Ruffo, Birnie & 
Tengnäs, 2002; van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn & 
Gericke, 1997; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Authors O.O. Bethwell 
ADENIA CISSAMPELOIDES (Planch, ex Hook.) 
Harms 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. Nachtr. 1: 255 (1897). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Synonyms Adenia gracilis Harms (1897), 
Adenia gummifera (Harv.) Harms (1897), Ade-
nia guineensis W.J.de Wilde (1971). 
Vernacular names Monkey rope, snake 
climber, wild granadilla (En). Mandali, mken-
geti (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Adenia 
cissampeloides occurs from Senegal east to 
Somalia, and south throughout Central and 
ADENIA 35 
Adenia cissampeloides - wild 
East Africa to southern Africa including South 
Africa. It is also found in the Seychelles. 
Uses Adenia cissampeloides has many uses 
in traditional medicine throughout tropical 
Africa. Most frequently recorded are the uses of 
an infusion or decoction of the root, stem or 
leaves for the treatment of gastro-intestinal 
complaints, such as stomach-ache, constipa-
tion, diarrhoea and dysentery. Such infusions 
or decoctions are also taken to treat various 
inflammatory ailments, commonly oedema and 
rheumatism, and for pain relief, particularly 
against headache and back pain. 
A decoction of the leaves or root is taken to 
treat fever and malaria, and as a diuretic. 
Pounded roots, and sometimes other plant 
parts, are widely used to dress wounds and 
sores. For leprosy, a decoction of the leaves is 
applied to the sores, and a root decoction taken 
orally together with a vapour bath prepared 
from the leaves. In Kenya and Tanzania ashes 
of the bark or root are mixed with castor oil to 
treat scabies. In eastern Africa a root decoction 
is drunk to treat cholera and, taken with milk, 
to treat anaemia. An extract of the root and 
stems is administered orally to treat intestinal 
worms. A leaf decoction is drunk to treat liver 
ailments. In Tanzania a paste of the leaves is 
applied to broken bones and fractures. In DR 
Congo, eastern and southern Africa the pow-
dered leaf and stem are macerated and taken 
to treat complaints of the gall bladder. Bron-
chitis and other lung ailments are treated with 
the leaves, eaten raw with salt and palm oil or 
cooked as a vegetable with meat or fish. Infu-
sions of the root or aerial parts are taken to 
treat venereal diseases and sterility. In the 
Central African Republic root shavings are 
introduced into the vagina, or the uterus rinsed 
with root decoction, as an abortifacient. A root 
decoction may also be taken to treat excessive 
menstruation. In Zimbabwe an infusion of the 
root and leaves is drunk, and the powdered 
root and leaves eaten in porridge, to prevent 
threatened abortion. In Nigeria leaves are 
rubbed on women's breasts to stimulate milk 
flow. A decoction of the peeled root is drunk to 
treat swollen testicles. An infusion of the leaf is 
used as a stimulant to treat depression, and, in 
Zimbabwe, insanity. The Mano people of Libe-
ria use the inner bark to induce amnesia. Roots 
are chewed to treat snakebites and are used as 
antidote for Acokanthera arrow poison. In West 
Africa, the Central African Republic and 
Ethiopia crushed stems are thrown in water as 
a fish poison. Leaves, branches, bark, wood and 
roots may also be used in fish or arrow poisons. 
In Central, eastern and southern Africa the 
leaves are cooked and eaten as a vegetable, 
alone or with other ingredients. The reddish 
sap is used as a facial cosmetic. In Gabon the 
stems are made into rope. In Sierra Leone the 
juice of the stems is used to give a smooth sur-
face to mud floors. Placing crushed twigs near 
the entrance of a bee hive pacifies the bees for 
a short time. In Botswana the smoke of burn-
ing roots is also used to calm bees before har-
vesting the honey. 
Production and international trade A 
1980s survey in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa, 
showed that some herbal traders purchased 
more than 450 sacks of fresh wild-harvested 
Adenia cissampeloides from gatherers in a 
year. 
Properties The stem, leaves, fruit and roots 
of Adenia cissampeloides contain the cyano-
genic glycosides tetraphyllin B (barterin) and 
epitetraphyllin B (volkenin). The leaves also 
contain gummiferol, a cytotoxic polyacetylenic 
di-epoxide, which has shown in vitro anti-
cancer activity. Excessive use of Adenia cis-
sampeloides among the Zulu people in South 
Africa has been associated with liver com-
plaints, and in-vivo tests have confirmed the 
presence of compounds causing liver damage. 
Leaves and root bark are rich in iron; the aver-
age iron content of the leaves per 100 g dry 
matter is 32.5 mg, of stem bark 9.9 mg and of 
root bark 32.1 mg. In a laboratory test aqueous 
extracts of the plant had a dose dependant 
depressing effect on the blood pressure of cats. 
The effect was neutralized by small doses of 
atropine. A second active principle might be 
36 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
sympathomimet ic and have vasoconstrictive 
action. The effect of the p lan t agains t Plasmo-
dium falciparum in vitro is negligable. A di-
ethyl-ether extract from the bark, formulated 
as an emulsifiable concentrate, is an effective 
anaes the t ic for the African honeybee (Apis mel-
lifera adansonii). S tem pulp showed a signifi-
cant larvicidal effect on the beet a rmyworm 
Spodoptera exigua. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Robust l iana up to 30 m long, 
usual ly dioecious; s tem up to 10 cm in diame-
ter, s tr iped bluish-green, older s tems often 
with whit ish powder; s tems with simple or 3-
fid tendr i ls 10-20 cm long. Leaves a l te rna te , 
simple; st ipules 0 .5( - l ) mm long, broadly 
rounded to t r iangular , i r regular ly cleft; petiole 
(1-)1 .5-11 cm long; blade ent i re or more or less 
deeply 3(-5)-lobed, orbicular to ovate or rhom-
boid in outline, (1—)3—14 cm long, base cordate 
to t runca te or cuneate , apex obtuse or re tuse , 
rare ly acute, with a single gland a t base, up to 
4 glands on lower leaf surface and 3-7 glands 
on the margins . Inflorescence an axillary cyme, 
often with up to 2(-4) cm long tendri ls between 
the branches , up to 35-flowered in male, 2-6-
flowered in female inflorescence; peduncle 
(0 .5- ) l -12( -16) cm long; bracts and bracteoles 
narrowly t r iangular , 0 .5-1 mm long, acute, 
Adenia cissampeloides - 1, branch with male 
inflorescence and leaves; 2, dehisced fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
minutely toothed. Flowers unisexual , regular, 
5-merous, pale greenish; pedicel 2—10(—15) mm 
long in male flowers, slightly shor ter in female 
ones; sepals and peta ls free: male flowers with 
sepals up to 8 mm long and petals 8-11 mm 
long, f i laments of s t amens fused a t base, ovary 
rud imentary ; female flowers with sepals up to 
6.5 mm long and peta ls up to 4.5 mm long, 
ovary superior, ovoid, 3-6 mm long, 3(-6)-
ribbed, s t igmas almost sessile, kidney-shaped, 
s t amens rud imenta ry . Frui t an ovoid capsule 
2.5-4.5 cm x 1.5-3 cm, lea thery to woody, pale 
green, 30-50-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 3.5-5.5 mm 
x 3-4 m m x 2 mm, pit ted. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Adenia com-
prises about 95 species, with about 60 species 
on the African continent, 20 in Madagascar 
and 15 in Asia. The genus is subdivided in 6 
sections. Adenia cissampeloides belongs to sec-
tion Ophiocaulon. Several other species belong-
ing to this section have medicinal propert ies. 
Adenia dinklagei Hutch. & Dalziel occurs from 
Senegal to Ghana; in Côte d'Ivoire the leaves 
a re ground with sal t and water and the liquid 
is t aken to t r ea t palpi ta t ions . An infusion of 
the leaves of Adenia tricostata W.J.de Wilde, 
occurring in Centra l Africa and Uganda, is 
used to t r ea t fever. Adenia bequaertii Robyns & 
Lawalrée occurs in DR Congo, Rwanda, Bu-
rundi , Kenya and Uganda ; in DR Congo i ts leaf 
sap or a leaf decoction is d runk to t r ea t head-
ache, whereas a leaf decoction and macerat ion 
is d runk or used as a ba th to t rea t insani ty and 
possession. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Adenia cissam-
peloides can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year. 
E c o l o g y Adenia cissampeloides occurs in 
p r imary and secondary rainforest, forest mar-
gins and in gallery, s avanna and swamp forest, 
from sea-level up to 2200 m al t i tude. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Adenia cissam-
peloides is re ta ined or cultivated in Chagga 
homegardens on Mount Kilimanjaro, Tanzania . 
It can be grown from seed and cut t ings. Stem 
cut t ings with 2—3 nodes are t rea ted with 
growth hormone before being planted in poly-
thene bags, and are watered regular ly unt i l 
sprouting. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Adenia cissampeloides 
is a host p lan t of passion fruit r ing spot virus 
(PFRSV), to which Passiflora edulis Sims is 
very susceptible. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t Adenia cissam-
peloides roots, s tems and leaves a re usual ly 
used fresh, after collection. 
A D E N I A 37 
Genetic resources Adenia cissampeloides 
is widespread in a range of habitats, very 
common in its area of distribution, and not in 
danger of genetic erosion. Germplasm of plants 
used as vegetables has been collected in Ma-
lawi. 
Prospects Adenia cissampeloides has many 
interesting medicinal uses. More research into 
the chemical composition and pharmacological 
activities of the compounds of Adenia cissam-
peloides and related species is warranted. Ade-
nia cissampeloides could be grown as an attrac-
tive ornamental climber. 
Major references Bouquet, 1969; Burkill, 
1997; de Wilde, 1971; de Wilde, 1975; Morah, 
1988; Neuwinger, 2000; Neuwinger, 2004; 
Nyarko & Addy, 1990; Omolo, Chhabra & Nya-
gah, 1997; Robyns, 1995. 
Other references Adewunmi et al., 2001; Aké 
Assi et al., 1985; Cunningham, 1997; de Wijs, 
1975; Fullas et al., 1995; Getahun, 1976; Kraft 
et al., 2003; Kwapata & Maliro, 1997; Maite, 
1994; Morris, 1996; Noumi & Tchakonang, 
2001; Olafsdottir, Andersen & Jaroszewski, 
1989; Oliver-Bever, 1982; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961; Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 2002; 
Sandberg & Cronlund, 1982; Senoo, 1992; 
Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003; Yeboah-Gyan & 
Oppong-Boachie, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Keay, 1954a. 
Authors O.M. Grace & D.G. Fowler 
ADENIA DIGITATA (Harv.) Engl. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 14: 375 (1891). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Vernacular names Wild granadilla (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Adenia 
digitata occurs from Tanzania south to South 
Africa and west to Angola. 
Uses Adenia digitata is deadly poisonous. 
The Tswana people of Botswana have used the 
fruit for homicide. The fruit is also eaten or a 
root extract is drunk as a suicide poison. Acci-
dental poisoning mainly occurs when the root 
of Adenia digitata is mistaken for edible tu-
bers, particularly those of Coccinia species. 
Children are often poisoned as a result of eat-
ing the attractive fruit. In Botswana the root is 
rubbed into swellings or applied warm to treat 
knee swellings. To treat skin ailment, leprosy 
or ulcers, the Nyanja people of Malawi and 
Zambia rub the skin with boiled roots or a root 
decoction. The Venda people of South Africa 
apply a root decoction externally and also drink 
it to treat swollen legs. 
Because of its impressive tuber, which can be 
partly above ground, Adenia digitata is culti-
vated as an ornamental worldwide. 
Production and international trade Adenia 
digitata is collected, traded and grown as an 
ornamental by plant amateurs. 
Properties The tuber of Adenia digitata 
contains cyanogenic glycosides, mainly tetra-
phyllin B (barterioside), and the very potent 
toxin modeccin, a toxalbumin, which inhibits 
protein synthesis in vitro. 
Botany Perennial climbing herb, usually 
dioecious, with a tuber up to 60 cm in diame-
ter; stems annual, up to 3 m long. Leaves al-
ternate, deeply (3-)5-cleft or -foliolate, orbicu-
lar in outline; stipules narrowly triangular, 1-3 
mm long, withering; petiole 1-9 cm long; lobes 
or leaflets ovate to obovate or linear, some-
times deeply lobed, 1.5-15 cm x l-4(-7) cm, 
rounded to acute at apex, with glands at base. 
Inflorescence an axillary cyme, with a 2-10 cm 
long tendril between the branches, 1—20(—60)-
flowered; peduncle up to 7 cm long. Flowers 
usually unisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 
up to 3 cm long, jointed about halfway; calyx 
tube about as long as lobes; petals free, in-
cluded in calyx, usually toothed; male flowers 
up to 2.5 cm long, filaments of stamens fused 
in lower half and anthers curved inward and 
clinging together, ovary rudimentary; female 
flowers up to 2 cm long, ovary superior, ovoid 
to oblong, styles 3, fused at base, stigmas kid-
ney-shaped, stamens rudimentary. Fruit a 
stalked ovoid to ellipsoid capsule 3-5.5(-7.5) 
cm x 2-4 cm, smooth, orange to yellow when 
ripe, many-seeded. Seeds ovoid to ellipsoid, 
flattened, 6-8 mm x 4.5-6.5 mm x 3 mm, 
brown, pitted. 
Adenia comprises about 95 species, with about 
60 species on the African continent, 20 in 
Madagascar and 15 in Asia. The genus is sub-
divided in 6 sections. Adenia digitata is classi-
fied in section Blepharanthes. Adenia repanda 
(Burch.) Engl, from section Paschanthus also 
occurs in southern Africa, from Angola east to 
Zimbabwe and south to South Africa, and is 
reported to be deadly poisonous to man. How-
ever, Adenia repanda is also reported to be 
greedily eaten by livestock. 
Ecology Adenia digitata occurs in savanna, 
bushland, dry rocky or grassy localities, on 
termite mounds and along forest fringes, on 
stony, sandy, or clayish soils from sea-level up 
to 1850 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Adenia 
38 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
digitata is widely distributed and hence not 
threatened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that medicinal 
use of Adenia digitata will remain limited in 
Africa, because of the high toxicity. The chemo-
therapeutic properties of lectins such as 
modeccin in cancer treatment and in chemo-
prevention warrant further research on me-
dicinal applications. The prospects for Adenia 
digitata as an ornamental seem promising be-
cause of the growing interest in unusual plants 
by specialized amateurs. 
Major references Arnold & Gulumian, 
1984; de Wilde, 1971; Neuwinger, 2000; van 
Wyk, van Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 2002; 
Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Bokan, 2004; de Wilde, 
1975; Gasperi-Campani et al., 1978; Gonzalez 
de Mejia & Prisecaru, 2005; Muhammad Man-
sur, 2003; Pelosi et al., 2005. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ADENIA GLOBOSA Engl. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 14: 382, f. 8 
(1891). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Vernacular names Mpaga (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Adenia 
globosa occurs in East Africa from Somalia 
south to northern Tanzania. 
Uses In Tanzania a cold water extract of the 
stem is drunk to treat abdominal pain. An ex-
tract is used as a bath to treat itches. In Kenya 
the Maasai people use the tuberous stem as 
cattle medicine. Adenia globosa is grown for 
ornamental purposes in South Africa and in 
greenhouses in the temperate regions. 
Production and international trade Adenia 
globosa is collected, grown and traded as an 
ornamental by plant amateurs. 
Properties The aerial parts of Adenia glo-
bosa contain the cyanogenic glycosides deida-
clin and its stereoisomer tetraphyllin A. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or climber up to 8 m 
tall, with a swollen, warty globular trunk up to 
2.5 m in diameter; stems erect or scandent, 
more or less succulent, with axillary, up to 8 
cm long thorns. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire to 3-lobed, soon falling; petiole 1-1.5 mm 
long; stipules narrowly triangular, c. 0.5 mm 
long, acute; blade triangular, 3-7 mm x 1.5—9 
mm, base rounded, apex acute, with 1 kidney-
shaped gland at base. Inflorescence an axillary 
cyme, 1-5-flowered; peduncle up to 1.5 mm 
long; bracts and bracteoles triangular. Flowers 
unisexual, regular, 5-merous, greenish white; 
pedicel up to 1(—1.5) cm long, jointed near base; 
calyx tube about as long as lobes; petals free, 
exserted, toothed; male flowers up to 2 cm long, 
filaments of stamens fused at base, anthers 
free, ovary rudimentary; female flowers up to 1 
cm long, ovary superior, ovoid to ellipsoid, 3-
ribbed, styles 3, fused at base, stigmas kidney-
shaped, stamens rudimentary. Fruit a stalked 
globular to ovate-ellipsoid capsule 1-3 cm x 1-
2 cm, leathery, smooth, green, many-seeded. 
Seeds broadly ovoid, flattened, 6-7 mm x 3-5.5 
mm x 3 mm, pitted. 
Adenia comprises about 95 species, with about 
60 species on the African continent, 20 in 
Madagascar and 15 in Asia. The genus is sub-
divided in 6 sections. Adenia globosa, and sev-
eral other species with medicinal uses belong 
to section Adenia. Adenia venenata Forssk. 
occurs from Nigeria east to Eritrea and south 
to Tanzania. In DR Congo Adenia venenata is 
cultivated near villages and is used to treat 
intestinal worms. In Kenya Turkana people 
use the leaves to treat cattle suffering from 
mange. In Madagascar the pounded stems of 
Adenia subsessilifolia Perr. are applied to 
wounds. The tubers are bitter and inedible. 
Ecology Adenia globosa occurs in scrub sa-
vanna at 100-1800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Adenia 
globosa is widely distributed and hence not 
threatened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects Adenia globosa is only locally 
used, and will remain of little importance 
unless pharmacological research shows new 
possibilities. The prospects of Adenia globosa 
as an ornamental seem promising because of 
the growing interest in unusual plants by spe-
cialized amateurs. 
Major references de Wilde, 1971; Hedberg 
et al., 1983b; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references de Wilde, 1975; Jaros-
zewski & Jensen, 1985; Ohto, 1984; Olafsdot-
tir, Andersen & Jaroszewski, 1989; Sinei & 
Mwangi, 1995; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ADENIA LOBATA (Jacq.) Engl. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 14: 375 (1891). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24, 48 
Synonyms Adenia mannii (Mast.) Engl. 
ADENIA 39 
(1871), Adenia schweinfurthii Engl. (1891), 
Adenia rumicifolia Engl. & Harms (1921). 
Vernacular names Ngole (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Adenia 
lobata occurs from Senegal east to Ethiopia 
and south to Angola and Mozambique. 
Uses Adenia lobata is widely used in tradi-
tional medicine. Young, lightly roasted leaves 
are applied and then covered with leaves to 
treat abscesses. In Senegal leafy stems are dry-
heated and applied to Guinea worm sores to 
extract the worms. The Tenda people of Sene-
ga] prepare a soup from the leaves to treat fe-
ver in children and they also wash the patients 
with the leaf decoction. In Côte d'Ivoire and 
Congo the leaves are eaten with palm oil and 
salt to treat palpitations. The leaf sap is ap-
plied topically or as an enema against rheu-
matic, rib and abdominal pains and a macerate 
of leafy twigs in water is taken to treat cough, 
bronchitis and fever. Sap of leaves and stems is 
used to treat trypanosomiasis and is applied to 
insect bites. Pulped twigs administered as an 
enema are used as a diuretic and to treat jaun-
dice and fainting. To facilitate childbirth, a root 
maceration or the stem sap is drunk. The stem 
sap is also taken to treat gastrointestinal prob-
lems; it is rubbed in to treat headache, a stiff 
neck and dropped in the ear to treat inflamma-
tion of the ear. A leaf extract as enema is used 
as a strong purgative. The Ebrié people of Côte 
d'Ivoire use a maceration of crushed leaves in 
water as an enema to treat fever attacks. In 
Ghana the leaves are locally applied to treat 
haemorrhoids. In Togo a twig decoction is 
drunk and used in a bath to treat malaria. In 
Nigeria and Côte d'Ivoire the stem pulp is used 
as an enema and taken orally as an aphrodi-
Adenia lobata - wild 
siac and to treat gonorrhoea. A leaf decoction is 
taken to treat cough, bronchitis and fever. 
In Gabon root powder, together with powdered 
Capsicum annuum L. and seeds of Aframo-
mum melegueta K.Schum., is sniffed to treat 
nasal tumours. In DR Congo a leaf decoction is 
drunk to treat insanity and a twig extract is 
drunk or applied as an enema to treat gonor-
rhoea and abdominal pain. Bark scrapings are 
ground in water and massaged into the head to 
treat head lice, and root scrapings are applied 
to wounds. In Sierra Leone, Côte d'Ivoire and 
Gabon the sap of the stem is used as an arrow 
poison and to kill rats and street dogs. The 
stem, stem bark, fruit or sap are used for fish 
poisoning in West and Central Africa, and in 
Tanzania and Angola. 
In DR Congo the finely cut and cooked leaves of 
Adenia lobata are eaten as a vegetable. The 
liquid from the stem can be drunk. In Principe 
Island a fibre is produced from the stem, and in 
DR Congo the stem serves as rope. In Camer-
oon sections of the stem are used as sponges. 
Properties The stem and leaves of Adenia 
lobata contain cyanogenic glycosides. Gynocar-
din or a closely related substance was detected 
in Adenia lobata. Dried leaves from Cameroon 
contained the flavonoids 2"-xylosylvitexin, 
vitexin, violanthin, vicenin-2 and schaftoside. 
Description Large liana, usually dioecious, 
with stem up to 45 m long and up to 12 cm in 
diameter, smooth or with tubercles; bark green 
to red-brown; sap clear, turning red; stems 
with simple or 3(-7)-fid tendrils up to 25 cm 
long. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules trian-
gular, 0.5-1 mm long, soon falling; petiole up to 
15 cm long; blade entire or sinuate to pal-
mately 3-5(-7)-lobed, elliptical to ovate or or-
bicular in outline, 4-25 cm x 2-20 cm, base 
deeply cordate, apex acuminate, with 2 glands 
at base of blade and up to 16 glands on lower 
leaf surface. Inflorescence an axillary cyme, 
usually with 1-3 tendrils up to 20 cm long, up 
to 30-flowered in male, up to 10-flowered in 
female inflorescence; peduncle up to 12 cm 
long; bracts and bracteoles triangular to ob-
long, 1-2 mm long. Flowers unisexual, regular, 
5-merous, yellowish; pedicel 5-40 mm long; 
calyx with tube (5-) 7-15 mm long and triangu-
lar, 7-15 mm long lobes; petals free; corona 
consisting of a fringe of hairs; male flowers 
with spoon-shaped to elliptical-oblong petals, 
4-13 mm long, margins fringed, filaments of 
stamens fused at base, included, ovary rudi-
mentary; female flowers with linear to spoon-
shaped petals, 5-9 mm long, acute, margins 
40 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Adenia lobata - 1, part of older stem; 2, part of 
male flowering stem; 3, part of female flowering 
stem; 4, male flower in longitudinal section; 5, 
female flower in longitudinal section; 6, fruit; 7, 
seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
fringed or entire, ovary superior, ovoid to ellip-
soid, 4-8 mm long, styles 3, fused at base, arms 
up to 5 mm long, stigmas kidney-shaped, 
densely woolly papillate, stamens rudimentary. 
Fruit an obovoid to globular or ellipsoid cap-
sule 3-8 cm long, leathery or fleshy, yellow, 
smooth or lumpy, 20-150-seeded. Seeds 
broadly ellipsoid to orbicular, c. 5 mm long, 
pitted. 
Other botanical information Adenia com-
prises about 95 species, with about 60 species 
on the African continent, 20 in Madagascar 
and 15 in Asia. The genus is subdivided in 6 
sections. Adenia lobata belongs to section Ble-
pharanthes. A more robust type of Adenia lo-
bata has been described as Adenia miegei Aké 
Assi, but this is now considered to be the 
tetraploid form. 
Growth and development In West Africa 
Adenia lobata flowers throughout the year but 
fruits are mainly present from Jul}' to Novem-
ber. It regenerates rapidly after bush fires. 
Ecology Adenia lobata occurs in rainforest, 
secondary forest, forest edges, gallery forest, 
periodically inundated and marshy forest and 
on rocky outcrops from sea-level up to 1800 m 
altitude. 
Propagation and planting Adenia lobata 
can be grown from seeds or cuttings. The plant 
grows rapidly and can be trained to grow over 
a pergola in a similar fashion to passion fruit. 
Management Because the plant is not 
common in the Mount Nimba area of Liberia, 
Mano people protect it for its fish-poisoning 
property. 
Diseases and pests Adenia lobata is a host 
plant of passion fruit ring spot virus (PFRSV), 
to which Passiflora edulis Sims is very suscep-
tible. 
Handling after harvest The harvested 
parts are usually used fresh for medicinal pur-
poses after collection from the wild. 
Genetic resources Adenia lobata is wide-
spread in a range of habitats, very common in 
its area of distribution and is not in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Adenia lobata is widely used in 
local medicine. Surprisingly little is known 
about the properties, and more research into 
the chemical composition and pharmacological 
activities of the compounds seems warranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; de Wilde, 
1971; Neuwinger, 2000; Neuwinger, 2004; Ok-
pekon et al., 2004; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 
1961; Robyns, 1995; Ulubelen et a l , 1982. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1986; 
Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 1979; Aké Assi et a l , 
1985; Atindehou et a l , 2002; Bouquet, 1969; 
Bouquet & Debray, 1974; de Wijs & Mobach, 
1975; de Wilde, 1975; Fernandes & Fernandes, 
1978; Gassita et al. (Editors), 1982; Getahun, 
1976; Hulstaert, 1966; Kerharo & Bouquet, 
1950; Kerharo, Guichard & Bouquet, 1961; 
Konda et a l , 1992; Latham, 2004; Neuwinger, 
1998. 
Sources of illustration de Wilde, 1975. 
Authors C. Zimudzi 
ADENIA RACEMOSA W.J.de Wilde 
Protologue Meded. Landbouwhogeschool. 
71(18): 64 (1971). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Adenia 
racemosa is endemic to Tanzania. 
Uses In Tanzania a bark decoction is drunk 
to treat menorrhagia. A leaf decoction is drunk 
to treat mental illness. The tubers are used to 
treat chickenpox. The flexible stems are used 
ADENIA 41 
as string. Adenia racemosa is also used for fod-
der and is grown for ornamental purposes in 
greenhouses in temperate regions. 
Production and international trade Adenia 
racemosa is collected, traded and grown as an 
ornamental by plant amateurs. 
Properties Few phytochemical analyses 
have been done on Adenia racemosa. The stem 
bark contains flavonoids, saponins and tan-
nins, but no cyanoglycosides have been re-
ported. Recently, ribosome-inactivating pro-
teins have been isolated. 
Botany Monoecious climber up to 8 m tall, 
with a swollen, globular trunk; stems with 
simple tendrils 8-12 cm long. Leaves alternate, 
deeply (3-)5(-7)-lobed; petiole 1.5-5.5 cm long; 
stipules broadly triangular, c. 1 mm long, 
acute; blade orbicular to broadly ovate in out-
line, 3—10 cm x 3-10 cm, base cordate to trun-
cate, lobes triangular to elliptical, up to 5 cm 
long, acute to rounded. Inflorescence in the 
axils of much reduced leaves on short shoots, 
up to 7-flowered; peduncle 0.5-4 mm long; 
bracts and bracteoles triangular to oblong, c. 1 
mm long. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-
merous, greenish to yellowish; pedicel up to 1 
cm long, jointed near base; calyx tube much 
shorter than lobes; petals free, exserted, entire, 
corona consisting of lobes or a lobed rim pre-
sent; male flowers c. 1 cm long, filaments of 
stamens fused at base, anthers free, ovary ru-
dimentary; female flowers c. 0.5 cm long, ovary 
superior, ovoid, styles 3, free, stigmas globular 
to kidney-shaped, papillate, stamens rudimen-
tary. Fruit a stalked ovoid-ellipsoid capsule 2-3 
cm x 1.5-2 cm, woody to leathery, red, many-
seeded. Seeds broadly ovoid, flattened, c. 6.5 
mm x 5.5 mm x 3 mm, coarsely banded or pit-
ted. 
Adenia comprises about 95 species, with about 
60 species on the African continent, 20 in 
Madagascar and 15 in Asia. The genus is sub-
divided in 6 sections. Adenia racemosa and 
some other species with medicinal uses belong 
to section Microblepharis. Adenia aculeata 
(Oliv.) Engl, occurs in Ethiopia, Somalia and 
north-eastern Kenya. In Somalia the fresh root 
of Adenia aculeata is boiled in water, the decoc-
tion is filtered and drunk to treat gastritis. 
Like Adenia racemosa, Adenia aculeata is col-
lected, traded and grown as an ornamental. 
Ecology Adenia racemosa occurs in regen-
erating bush at c. 1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Adenia 
racemosa is a rare species and because of its 
limited area of distribution, it is liable to ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Because of its rarity it seems 
likely that Adenia racemosa will remain of 
limited use only. The wild population needs to 
be protected and care should be taken with 
uprooting plants for trade as ornamentals. 
Major references Chhabra, Mahunnah & 
Mshiu, 1991; de Wilde, 1971; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 2002. 
Other references Pelosi et al., 2005; 
Samuelsson et al., 1993. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ADENIA VOLKENSII Harms 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenw. Ost-Afrikas 
C; 281 (1895). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Vernacular names Kilyambiti plant (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Adenia 
volkensii occurs in eastern Africa from Somalia 
south to Malawi. 
Uses In East Africa a leaf decoction is taken 
orally to treat bronchitis, coughs and fever, or 
is used as a purgative enema. Pounded seeds 
are given in enema form as a diuretic. A few 
drops of sap are sucked from a piece of twig or 
stem to treat gonorrhoea; larger amounts are 
very poisonous. Powder of the roasted rootstock 
is taken in Kenya to treat coughs, colds and 
pneumonia and with milk to treat stomach-
ache and internal swellings. The rootstock is 
also used to cure trypanosomiasis and venereal 
diseases in livestock. The fruit and roots are 
used to poison hyenas. 
Adenia volkensii is collected, grown and traded 
as an ornamental by enthusiasts. 
Adenia volkensii - wild 
42 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Production and international trade Leaves, 
rootstock and bark are sold for medicinal pur-
poses in local markets, but Adenia volkensii is 
also commercially important because pharma-
ceutical products are produced industrially 
from the same plant parts. 
Properties The most important active in-
gredient of Adenia volkensii is volkensin, a 
galactose-specific lectin (glycoprotein) consist-
ing of an A and a B subunit, linked by disulfide 
and noncovalent bonds. Volkensin is a potent 
inhibitor of eukaryotic protein synthesis in 
whole cells as well as in cell-free systems. The 
inhibitory activity is a function of the A sub-
unit; the B subunit has a lectin function and 
allows the protein to pass the intact cell mem-
brane. Volkensin is one of the most lethal dou-
ble-chain ribosome-inactivating and ricin-like 
toxins; in rats the LD50 is 50-60 |tg/kg. Chemi-
cally, it resembles most closely modeccin, the 
toxin of Adenia digitata (Harv.) Engl. In a rat 
model volkensin could be used effectively to 
produce anatomically selective lesions in the 
brain. It causes neuron death not only at the 
injection site, but it is also transported be-
tween neurons. Possibilities have also been 
studied of selectively killing mononuclear 
macrophages, the cells in which the HIV virus 
survives and which transfer it to T-cells in 
which the virus is rapidly multiplied resulting 
in the development of Aids. 
All parts of Adenia volkensii, even the flowers, 
contain cyanogenic glycosides, with the root-
stock accounting for about 90% of the amount 
of these compounds. The cyanogenic glycosides 
isolated are tetraphyllin B (barterin) and its 
epimer epi-tetraphyllin B (volkenin). 
Description Usually monoecious shrub or 
herb up to 1.5 m tall, with annual shoots of 20— 
50 cm long growing from a rootstock or caudici-
form, succulent stem up to 100 cm long; ten-
drils absent. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules 
0.5-1.5 mm long, triangular, acute; petiole 1.5-
10 cm long; blade entire or more or less deeply 
3-7-lobed, orbicular to ovate or rhomboid in 
outline, 3-16 cm long, base cordate to truncate, 
apex acute, mucronate, margin toothed or dis-
sected, with 2 glands at base, 2-6 glands on 
lower leaf surface, and blackish glands on the 
teeth. Inflorescence an axillary cyme, 1—6-
flowered in male, l-2(-3)-flowered in bisexual 
and female inflorescences; peduncle up to 0.5 
cm long; bracts and bracteoles lanceolate, 2.5-
10 mm long, acute, toothed and gland-dotted. 
Flowers usually unisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
glabrous, pale greenish or cream; pedicel 5-25 
Adenia volkensii - 1, branch with male inflo-
rescences; 2, male flower in longitudinal sec-
tion; 3, female flower in longitudinal section; 4, 
fruits; 5, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
mm long; calyx with long tube and shorter 
lobes, woolly hairy at margins; petals free, co-
rona consisting of branched hairs 1.5-3 mm 
long; male flowers with calyx tube 12-20 mm 
long, lobes ovate-triangular, 3-9 mm long, ob-
tuse, petals lanceolate-linear, 10-14 mm long, 
acute, with many branched hairs 3—5 mm long 
at margins, stamens free, ovary rudimentary; 
female flowers with calyx tube 7-10 mm long, 
lobes oblong, 5—8 mm long, obtuse, petals lin-
ear, 8-12 mm long, with few branched hairs, 
ovary superior, ellipsoid, 4-8 mm long, styles 
connate for 2-4 mm, the arms c. 1 mm long, 
stigmas c. 4 mm in diameter, much-branched, 
woolly-papillate, stamens rudimentary. Fruit a 
globose to ellipsoid capsule 3.5-5.5 cm x 3-4.5 
cm, leathery, 15-30-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 8-9 
mm x 7-7.5 mm x 3-4 mm, pitted. 
Other botanical information Adenia com-
prises about 95 species, with about 60 species 
on the African continent, 20 in Madagascar 
and 15 in Asia. The genus is subdivided in 6 
sections. Adenia volkensii belongs to section 
ADENIUM 43 
Blepharanthes. Several other species belonging 
to this section have medicinal properties. Ade-
nia ellenbeckii Harms occurs in Ethiopia, So-
malia, Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. A decoc-
tion of its fruit is taken to treat wounds and 
fruit powder is applied to the wounds. The 
juice of the fruit added to meat is used to poi-
son hyenas. In Ethiopia the leaves are eaten as 
a vegetable. Adenia keramanthus Harms oc-
curs in Kenya and Tanzania. A stem extract is 
taken to treat syphilis and the leaves and roots 
are chewed to treat snakebites. Adenia lanceo-
lata Engl, occurs from southern Sudan to Ma-
lawi and is poisonous. Adenia ellenbeckii, Ade-
nia keramanthus and Adenia lanceolata con-
tain cytotoxic lectins. The effect of the lectin 
from Adenia lanceolata is similar to the effect 
of volkensin on cell-free protein synthesis, but 
the former is more effective on whole cells, and 
is one of the most potent toxins of plant origin. 
Growth and development Adenia volken-
sii is fast growing and flowers more profusely if 
growing in direct sunlight. It has the ability to 
store water in the rootstock. 
Ecology Adenia volkensii occurs in scrubby 
vegetation in rocky localities on red soil or 
lava-dust at 1000-2000 m altitude. It regener-
ates quickly after damage by cutting and from 
light fires. 
Propagation and planting Adenia volken-
sii can be propagated by seed and by stem cut-
tings. Cuttings taken from mature plants seem 
to flower more easily. The cuttings do not nec-
essarily result in formation of a rootstock. 
Harvesting The stem, rootstock and leaves 
of Adenia volkensii are collected from the wild 
whenever needed and can be used fresh or 
dried. 
Genetic resources Adenia volkensii is 
fairly widespread in its distribution area and 
therefore not likely to be threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Adenia volkensii will remain im-
portant in East Africa both in human and in 
veterinary traditional medicine. The active 
ingredients of Adenia volkensii and related 
species, especially the ribosome-inactivating 
proteins, warrant further study. Large-scale 
cultivation for pharmaceutical products seems 
possible since other Adenia species are quite 
easily propagated for ornamental purposes. 
Major references Chambery et al., 2004; de 
Wilde, 1971; de Wilde, 1975; Fernandes & Fer-
nandes, 1978; Gondwe, Seigler & Dunn, 1978; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Barbiera, Falasca & 
Stirpe, 1984; Clausen et al., 2001; ITDG & 
IIRR, 1996; Kokwaro, 1993; Kraft et al., 2003; 
LaGrone, 1999; Morgan, 1981; Pangalos et al., 
1991; Pelosi et al., 2005; Stirpe et al., 1985; 
Szalai et al., 2005. 
Sources of illustration de Wilde, 1971. 
Authors D.M. Modise 
ADENIUM BOEHMIANUM Schinz 
Protologue Verh. Bot. Vereins Prov. Bran-
denburg 30: 259 (1888). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Adenium obesum (Forssk.) 
Roem. & Schult, subsp. boehmianum (Schinz) 
G.D.Rowley (1983). 
Vernacular names Bushman poison (En). 
Unguiu (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ade-
nium boehmianum occurs naturally in Angola 
and Namibia. 
Uses The extremely bitter root sap and latex 
are boiled to prepare arrow poison in Namibia 
and neighbouring parts of Angola. The arrow 
poison is used for hunting large game such as 
zebra and wildebeest. Plants are occasionally 
grown as ornamentals. 
Production and international trade There 
is some international trade in seeds and plants 
of Adenium boehmianum for ornamental pur-
poses. 
Properties The arrow poison prepared from 
Adenium boehmianum has strong cardiotoxic 
effects. When an animal is hit it usually dies 
within a few hours and within a few hundred 
metres from where it was shot. The poisonous 
Adenium boehmianum - wild 
44 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Compounds in the root and stem latex have 
been identified as cardiac glycosides. The most 
important ones are: echujine (composed of the 
aglycone digitoxigenin, the sugars D-cymarose 
and 2 molecules of D-glucose), digitalinum 
verum (composed of gitoxigenin, D-digitalose 
and D-glucose), somaline (composed of digitoxi-
genin and D-cymarose) and abobioside (com-
posed of abogenin and D-cymarose). 
Description Succulent shrub up to 2.5(-3.5) 
m tall, with rootstock and white latex in all 
parts; stem swollen at base, up to 40(-60) cm in 
diameter; branches erect, sparingly hairy when 
young becoming scabrid, greyish white. Leaves 
arranged spirally, clustered at the end of 
branches, simple; stipules minute or absent; 
petiole l-3(-7) mm long; blade obovate, 8-15 
cm x 4.5-8 cm, often folded upwards along the 
midrib, base cuneate, apex usually emarginate, 
entire, glaucous or pale green, leathery, hairy 
at least when young, pinnately veined with 
distinct lateral veins. Inflorescence a dense 
terminal cyme; bracts narrowly oblong to nar-
rowly ovate, 5-11 mm x 1-3 mm, acuminate, 
pubescent. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, showy, appearing before or with the 
leaves; pedicel 5-10 mm long; sepals lanceo-
late, 6-12 mm long, fused at base, acuminate, 
Adenium boehmianum - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
follicle; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
densely hairy; corolla with tube 0.7-1 cm long 
and obovate lobes, spreading, 2.5-3.5(-4.5) cm 
x 1-1.5 cm, slightly undulate, pink to mauve, 
darker in the throat, hairy outside; stamens 
inserted near base of corolla tube, included, 
anthers forming a cone covering the pistil, base 
sagittate, 5-7 mm long, with long apical ap-
pendices; ovary superior, composed of 2 free 
carpels, glabrous, styles fused, slender with 
well-developed clavuncula. Fruit consisting of 2 
linear-oblong follicles, coherent at base, 10-18 
cm long, tapering at both ends, spreading or 
recurved when mature, opening by a longitudi-
nal slit, many-seeded. Seeds linear-oblong, 7-9 
mm long, brown, striate, with tufts of long 
dirty white to pale brown hairs at both ends. 
Other botanical information Adenium 
comprises 5 species, which are sometimes 
merged into a single one, Adenium obesum 
(Forssk.) Roem. & Schult, with 6 subspecies. 
Adenium swazicum Stapf may resemble 
Adenium boehmianum, but differs in its nar-
rower leaves. It has a limited distribution in 
Swaziland and neighbouring parts of South 
Africa and southern Mozambique and is 
planted as an ornamental. Some selections are 
'Boyce Thompson' with deep purplish pink 
flowers, and 'Perpetual Pink', which is robust, 
upright and with large pink flowers. 
Growth and development Plants bear 
leaves for about 3 months only. This period 
cannot be extended by cultural practices in 
cultivation. They flower for a few weeks only. 
Ecology In its natural range Adenium 
boehmianum is widespread in granitic rocky 
localities and occasionally at edges of swamps. 
The largest plants are found along the escarp-
ment of the Mary river in Kaokoland in Na-
mibia. 
Propagation and planting As an orna-
mental Adenium boehmianum can probably be 
propagated like Adenium obesum, by seed, 
grafting or cuttings. 
Management Plants used for making arrow 
poison are always collected from the wild. As a 
container plant Adenium boehmianum is han-
dled in the same way as other large succulents. 
Genetic resources Although the natural 
distribution of Adenium boehmianum is re-
stricted, it seems not to be in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects More research into the chemical 
composition and pharmacological activities of 
the compounds of Adenium boehmianum seems 
warranted. Its prospects as an ornamental 
seem limited because of the short flowering 
ADENIUM 45 
period. 
Major references Codd, 1963; Dimmitt & 
Hanson, 1992; Neuwinger, 1996; Plaizier, 1980; 
Rowley, 1983; Stapf, 1902-1904. 
Other references von Koenen, 2001; van 
Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Plaizier, 1980. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
ADENIUM MULTIFLORUM Klotzsch 
Protologue Naturw. Reise Mossambique 
6(1): 279, t. 44 (1861). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Adenium obesum (Forssk.) 
Roem. & Schult, var. multiflorum (Klotzsch) 
L.E.Codd (1961), Adenium obesum (Forssk.) 
Roem. & Schult, subsp. multiflorum, (Klotzsch) 
G.D.Rowley (1974). 
Vernacular names Sabi star, impala lily 
(En). Megoza (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ade-
nium multiflorum is widespread in Malawi, 
southeastern Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, 
Swaziland and north-eastern South Africa. 
Uses The stem latex of Adenium multiflo-
rum has long been used in Zimbabwe and 
Zambia to prepare arrow poison and fish poi-
son. Usually, the poison is combined with that 
of other plants. In Zimbabwe the root and stem 
latex are used in veterinary medicine; an ex-
tract is given against diarrhoea and eye dis-
eases in domestic birds. 
Like other Adenium spp., Adenium multiflo-
rum is grown as an ornamental for its curious 
habit and striking flowers. In Zimbabwe 
Adenium multiflorum is relished by cattle and 
also wild animals, which browse the plants 
down to ground level, indicating that plants 
with low toxicity exist. 
Production and international trade There 
is some international trade of seeds and plants 
of Adenium multiflorum for ornamental pur-
poses. 
Properties Adenium multiflorum contains 
cardenolide glycosides similar to those found in 
Adenium obesum (Forssk.) Roem. & Schult. 
The glycosides identified include: 16-desacetyl-
16-anhydrohongheloside A (composed of 16-an-
hydrogitoxigenin and D-cymarose), 16-anhydro-
strospeside (composed of 16-anhydrogitoxigenin 
and D-digitalose) and strospeside (composed of 
gitoxigenin and D-digitalose). 
There may be chemical differences between 
Adenium multiflorum from different prove-
nances, as the plant is relished by animals in 
Zimbabwe, but in other countries it is consid-
ered highly poisonous. 
Botany Succulent shrub or small tree up to 
3.5 m tall, with watery latex and with large 
thickened root, up to 1 m in diameter at stem 
base; bark shiny grey. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, clustered at end of branchlets, simple; 
stipules minute or absent; petiole 3-7 mm long; 
blade obovate to oblong, 7.5-12.5 cm x 2-7.5 
cm, base cuneate, apex acute to rounded or 
emarginate, apiculate or mucronate, entire, 
leathery, glabrous, pinnately veined with dis-
tinct lateral veins. Inflorescence a dense ter-
minal cyme; bracts narrowly obovate, 4-6 mm 
x 1-3 mm. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, showy, usually appearing before the 
leaves; pedicel 2-4 mm long, densely hairy; 
sepals narrowly ovate, 6—10 mm x 2.5—3 mm, 
fused at base, hairy; corolla with funnel-shaped 
tube 2.2-4 cm x 1-1.3 cm and narrowly ovate 
to narrowly obovate, spreading lobes 1.3-3 cm 
x 1-2 cm, red, pink to white with deep pink to 
scarlet margins and red stripes inside the 
throat, hairy outside; stamens inserted near 
base of corolla tube, distinctly exserted, an-
thers forming a cone covering the pistil, base 
sagittate, 5-7 mm long, with long apical ap-
pendices; ovary superior, composed of 2 free 
carpels, glabrous, styles fused, slender, with 
well-developed clavuncula. Fruit consisting of 2 
oblong follicles 10-18 cm long, eventually 
spreading at 180°, pale grey to pale grey-
brown, opening by a longitudinal slit, many-
seeded. Seeds linear, 10-15 mm long, very pale 
brown, with tufts of long dirty white to light 
brown hairs at both ends 2—3 cm long. 
Adenium comprises 5 species, which are some-
times merged into a single one, Adenium obe-
sum (Forssk.) Roem. & Schult. Adenium multi-
florum crosses readily with Adenium obesum 
and with other Adenium spp. 
Adenium multiflorum has long dormancy; re-
gardless of growing conditions, leaves fall at 
the start of the cool season and growth will not 
resume for at least 4 months. It flowers pro-
fusely during the cool season. Leaves appear 
only after flowering. Plants rarely flower before 
they are 4-5 years old. 
Ecology The natural habitat of Adenium 
multiflorum is savanna and occasionally open 
forest on sandy soil along marshes and rivers 
and also in much drier sandy and rocky locali-
ties; it occurs up to 700(-1200) m altitude. 
Management In cultivation Adenium multi-
46 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
florum is propagated by seed, cuttings or graft-
ing. Tip-cuttings dipped in a rooting hormone, 
planted in a coarse rooting medium and well-
watered are most successful. Seeds germinate 
readily in about a week at 30°C, and seedlings 
grow through the first cool and dry period be-
fore obligate dormancy appears. After the first 
year, the plants should be kept dry during 
dormancy, to prevent the brittle root from rot-
ting. 
Genetic resources and breeding Adenium 
multiflorum is considered vulnerable in Zam-
bia, Zimbabwe and Swaziland. It is threatened 
by collection for horticulture, medicinal uses 
and by heavy browsing by livestock. 
Prospects Adenium multiflorum is an in-
teresting ornamental, although its flowering 
period is shorter and growth rate is lower than 
that of Adenium obesum. It is unlikely that it 
will become important in medicine, while its 
importance as arrow poison has dwindled. 
Major references Bester, 2004; Leeuwen-
berg et al., 1985; Neuwinger, 1996; Plaizier, 
1980; Rowley, 1983. 
Other references Dimmitt & Hanson, 1991; 
Hargreaves, 2002; van Wyk, van Heerden & 
van Oudtshoorn, 2002. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
ADENIUM OBESUM (Forssk.) Roem. & Schult. 
Protologue Syst. veg. 4: 411 (1819). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Adenium somalense Balf.f. 
(1888), Adenium socotranum Vierh. (1904). 
Vernacular names Desert rose, impala lily 
(En). Rose du désert, baobab chacal, faux bao-
bab, lis des impalas, pied d'éléphant (Fr). Rosa 
do deserto, baobâ exotica, djindje pété (Po). 
Mdagu, mdaguwande, mwanja (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ade-
nium obesum occurs from Senegal to Ethiopia 
and from Somalia to Tanzania. It also occurs in 
Egypt, Saudi Arabia, Oman and Yemen, in-
cluding Socotra; it is uncertain whether it oc-
curs naturally in West Africa or has been in-
troduced and become naturalized. Adenium 
obesum is naturalized in Sri Lanka and parts 
of south-eastern Asia, e.g. Thailand. As an or-
namental it is cultivated worldwide. 
Uses In a wide area of Africa the root sap or 
sometimes the wood or stem latex of Adenium 
obesum is used to prepare arrow poison. The 
poison is popular for hunting large game as it 
Adenium obesum - wild 
kills quickly and the hunted animal dies within 
2 km from the place where it was shot. The 
Hadza people of Tanzania use the sap by itself 
or sometimes in combination with poison from 
Strophanthus eminii Asch. & Pax, while the 
Duruma people of Kenya use the stem latex, 
sometimes in combination with the roots and 
wood of Acokanthera schimperi (A.DC.) 
Schweinf. or the latex of Synadenium pereski-
ifolium (Baill.) Guillaumin. The use of 
Adenium obesum arrow poison is also reported 
from Senegal, Nigeria and Cameroon. A decoc-
tion of the bark and leaves is widely used as 
fish poison. This use is reported from Nigeria, 
Cameroon and East Africa. In Mauritania and 
Senegal preparations from Adenium obesum 
are used as ordeal poison and for criminal pur-
poses. 
Adenium obesum is important in traditional 
medicine. In the Sahel a decoction from the 
roots, alone or in combination with other 
plants, is used to treat venereal diseases; a root 
or bark extract is used as a bath or lotion to 
treat skin diseases and to kill lice, while latex 
is applied to decaying teeth and septic wounds. 
In Somalia a root decoction as nose drops is 
prescribed for rhinitis. In northern Kenya latex 
is rubbed on the head against lice and pow-
dered stems are applied to kill skin parasites of 
camels and cattle. The bark is chewed as an 
abortifacient. 
Adenium obesum is planted fairly frequently 
for its curious form and attractive flowers. 
Sometimes it is planted as a live fence. In Tan-
zania it is planted to mark the position of 
graves. The wood is sometimes used as fuel. 
Production and international trade Seed 
ADENIUM 47 
and plants of Adenium obesum are traded in-
ternationally for ornamental purposes. 
Properties In Adenium obesum the pres-
ence of some 30 cardiotoxic glycosides has been 
demonstrated, which act in a similar way as 
digitalis from Digitalis. Digitalis acts upon the 
Na+K+-ATPase enzyme that regulates the con-
centrations of Na+ and K+ ions in body cells and 
so also modifies the Ca++ concentration. In low 
doses it is used to treat congestive heart failure 
(CHF) and heart rhythm problems (atrial ar-
rhythmias), but in high doses it leads to sys-
tolic heart failure and death. 
Several of the cardiac glycosides from Adenium 
obesum have oleandrigenin as aglycone moiety, 
e.g. hongheloside A (with D-cymarose), hong-
heloside C (with D-cymarose and D-glucose) 
and 16-acetylstrospeside (with D-digitalose). 
Other glycosides include: hongheline (com-
posed of digitoxigenin with D-thevetose), soma-
line (composed of digitoxigenin with D-
cymarose) and digitalinum verum (composed of 
gitoxigenin with D-digitalose and D-glucose). 
The roots and stems contain the same gly-
cosides and in similar amounts. Oleandrigenin 
and some of the glycosides derived from it have 
cytotoxic effects and are being studied as po-
tential components of anticancer drugs. 
The ethanol extract of the roots slows down the 
growth of Bacillus subtilis, but has not shown 
activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, 
Staphylococcus aureus or Candida albida. Ex-
tracts from the root have shown a cytotoxic 
effect against several carcinoma cell lines. The 
aqueous stem bark extract is a potential acari-
cide as it shows high toxicity on all stadia of 
development of the ticks Amblyomma spp. and 
Boophilus spp. 
Description Succulent shrub or small tree, 
up to 4(-6) m tall, sometimes with a fleshy 
taproot; stem swollen at base up to l(-2) m in 
diameter; bark pale greyish-green, grey or 
brown, smooth, with sticky, clear or white la-
tex; branchlets glabrescent, pubescent at apex. 
Leaves arranged spirally, clustered at the end 
of branchlets, simple; stipules minute or ab-
sent; petiole up to 4 mm long; blade linear to 
obovate, 3-12(-17) cm x 0.2-6 cm, base 
cuneate, apex acute to rounded or emarginate, 
entire, slightly glaucous, dull green or pale 
green, leathery, pinnately veined with distinct 
or indistinct lateral veins. Inflorescence a more 
or less dense terminal cyme; bracts linear to 
narrowly oblong, 3—8 mm long, acuminate, 
pubescent. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, showy, usually appearing before the 
Adenium obesum - 1, leafy branch; 2, inflores-
cence; 3, follicle; 4, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
leaves; pedicel 5-9 mm long; sepals narrowly 
oblong to narrowly ovate, 6-12 mm long, hairy; 
corolla with funnel-shaped tube 2-4.5 cm x 
0.9-1.7 cm, reddish-pink to white suffused with 
pink, sometimes red-striped inside the throat, 
hairy to glabrous outside, glandular hairy on 
main veins inside, lobes 1-3 cm x 0.5-2.5 cm, 
spreading, pale pink to red with darker mar-
gins; stamens inserted near base of corolla 
tube, included or exserted, anthers forming a 
cone covering the pistil, base sagittate, 5-7 mm 
long, with long apical appendices; ovary supe-
rior, composed of 2 free carpels, glabrous, 
styles fused, slender, with well-developed cla-
vuncula. Fruit consisting of 2 linear-oblong 
follicles, coherent at the base, 11-22 cm long, 
tapering at both ends, recurved, grey to pale 
grey-brown, opening by a longitudinal slit, 
many-seeded. Seeds linear-oblong, 10-14 mm 
long, pale brown, slightly rough, with tufts of 
long dirty white hairs at both ends. 
Other botanical information Adenium 
comprises 5 species, which are sometimes 
merged into a single one, Adenium obesum 
with 6 subspecies. Adenium obesum is the most 
widespread species in the wild and in cultiva-
48 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tion. It crosses readily with Adenium multiflo-
rum Klotzsch in cultivation, bu t the areas of 
na tu r a l distr ibution do not overlap. Adenium is 
closely related to Pachypodium and Nerium. 
G r o w t h and d e v e l o p m e n t The s tem base 
of Adenium obesum becomes strongly thick-
ened with age and sometimes spreads over 
rocks. In the wild the plant flowers dur ing the 
first pa r t of the dry season while leafless. Pol-
l ination is by insects with a long slender pro-
boscis. The proboscis is inser ted through one of 
the slits in the cone formed by the an the r s and 
the pollen is placed on the st igma. When the 
proboscis is wi thdrawn, it is gummed by con-
tact with the knob of the style and picks up 
fresh pollen from the an thers . Fru i t s m a t u r e 
2 - 3 months after pollination. In cultivation in 
w a r m climates the p lan t can be semi-evergreen 
if kept wa rm and well-watered. Under such 
conditions p lants undergo a short period of 
leaf-drop and dormancy in spr ing or early 
summer . They can also endure a drought or 
cold-induced dormancy of several months as 
occurs in the na tu r a l habi ta t . Under favourable 
conditions some clones flower for 2 -4 months 
or even nearly year-round. Flowering stops 
when t empera tu res exceed 38°C. P lan t s grown 
from seed may flower within 1 year. P lan t s 
grown from cut t ings also develop a thickened 
s tem base and become indis t inguishable from 
seed-grown plants . 
E c o l o g y Adenium obesum occurs in sa-
vanna , dry bush land or woodland, and wooded 
grass land up to 2100 m al t i tude, on rocky or 
sandy soil. In cultivation it requires full 
sunl ight and warm t empera tu res with maxi-
m u m tempera tu res preferably above 30°C. 
Although it originates from dry areas , it toler-
a tes high air humidi ty well, which explains its 
popular i ty e.g. in Thai land and the Phil ippines. 
Branch t ips are damaged a t t empera tu res be-
low 5°C and Adenium obesum cannot be grown 
in the open when t empera tu re s a re regularly 
close to 0°C. Waterlogging is not tolerated. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g As an orna-
menta l Adenium obesum is propagated by seed, 
grafting or cut t ings. Viability of seed from cul-
t ivated p lants is sometimes poor because of 
pollination problems. Viable seed should be 
p lanted in a sandy free-draining medium after 
removal of the hai ry tufts and t r e a t m e n t with a 
fungicide. It germina tes within a week a t tem-
pe ra tu res of about 30°C. Seedlings are ready 
for t r ansp lan t ing within 1 month when they 
have developed 6 leaves. Tip-cutt ings dipped in 
a rooting hormone, p lanted in a coarse rooting 
medium and well watered are most successful. 
Selected p lan ts and valuable hybrids are often 
propagated by cleft grafting as this process is 
more reliable than propagation by cutt ings, 
a l though it requires more skill. Grafting onto 
oleander (Nerium oleander L.) is possible and 
leads to rich flowering. 
M a n a g e m e n t Adenium obesum thr ives un-
der conditions of ample rainfall or irr igation 
with t empera tu res above 27°C and in a per-
fectly dra in ing soil. Dur ing cool wea ther it is 
prone to root rot and then requires drier soil. 
For fast growth fertilizer should be applied 
regularly. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Bacterial and fungal 
root and s tem rot are the most common dis-
eases in cultivation. Avoiding wet cool condi-
tions is the best control s trategy. Spider mites, 
scale insects and mealy bugs occasionally cause 
damage. Caution is needed when us ing pesti-
cides as Adenium obesum is sensitive to many 
formulations containing oil. Diseases and pests 
seem ra re in the wild. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Adenium obesum occurs 
in a large a rea and does not seem to be in dan-
ger of genetic erosion. 
B r e e d i n g Many o rnamenta l cult ivars of 
Adenium obesum have been developed as well 
as hybrids with other species. Well known se-
lections are 'Singapore ' which is deep pink and 
probably originally from Yemen, 'Red Ever-
bloomer', 'Mombasa' which is a much-branched 
dwarf, 'Fri tz Dederer ' forming thick corky 
white bark, and 'Tom Grumbleys ' with purely 
white flowers. Hybrids between Adenium obe-
sum and Adenium swazicum Stapf include 
'Asha', 'Endless Sunset ' , 'Perpetual Pink' and 
'Volcanic Sunset ' . 
P r o s p e c t s The chemical and pharmacologi-
cal propert ies of Adenium obesum deserve 
more research a t ten t ion al though there are no 
immedia te prospects for the development of 
h e a r t or cancer medicines. In teres t in Adenium 
obesum as an o rnamenta l is likely to remain 
strong because of the s t r iking habi t and flow-
ers. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Dimmitt & Hanson, 1991; 
Leeuwenberg, 2003; Leeuwenberg et al., 1985; 
McLaughl in & Garofalo, 2002; Neuwinger, 
1996; Omino, 2002; Plaizier, 1980; Rowley, 
1983; Yamauchi & Abe, 1990. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Arbonnier, 2000; Ce-
pleanu et al., 1994; Eggli, 2002; Forster , 1998; 
Goyder, 2001; Hargreaves , 2002; Melero, Me-
darde & San Feliciano, 2000; Mgbojikwe & 
Okoye, 2000; Neuwinger, 2000; Singh, 2004; 
AGAVE 49 
Vethaviyasar & John, 1982. 
Sources of illustration Plaizier, 1980. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
ADENIUM OLEIFOLIUM Stapf 
Protologue Kew Bull. 1907: 53 (1907). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number In - 22 
Synonyms Adenium obesum (Forssk.) 
Roem. & Schult, subsp. oleifolium (Stapf) 
G.D.Rowley (1980). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ade-
nium oleifolium occurs naturally in south-
eastern Namibia, Botswana and South Africa. 
Uses An arrow poison is prepared from the 
latex, or from a decoction of the extremely bit-
ter tuber. People living in the south-western 
Kalahari Desert prepare a salve from the 
plant, which is applied to snakebites and scor-
pion stings. Root sap is used to treat fever and 
colic. In larger doses it is purgative and toxic. 
Adenium oleifolium is occasionally grown as an 
ornamental. 
Properties Several cardiac glycosides have 
been isolated from Adenium oleifolium: hong-
heloside A (composed of oleandrigenin and D-
cymarose), echujine (composed of the digitoxi-
genin, D-cymarose and 2 molecules of D-
glucose), somaline (composed of digitoxigenin 
and D-cymarose) and odorotrioside G (com-
posed of digitoxigenin, D-digitalose and 2 mole-
cules of D-glucose). Tests with guinea pigs, cats 
and rats, which were injected with an alcoholic 
extract of the tuber or given the extract orally, 
all resulted in restlessness, generalized tremor, 
rapid breathing, convulsions and death. 
Botany Succulent, small shrub up to 40 cm 
tall, with thickened rootstock (tuber) 50-80 cm 
x 15-30 cm and white latex in all parts, soft 
pubescent on all parts; stem swollen at base. 
Leaves arranged spirally, clustered at the end 
of branchlets, simple, sessile; stipules minute 
or absent; blade linear, 4.5-14.5 cm x 0.3-1.4 
cm, base cuneate, apex acute, entire, glaucous 
or pale green, leathery, hairy to glabrous. In-
florescence a terminal cyme; bracts narrowly 
oblong to narrowly ovate, 3-4 mm x 1-2 mm, 
acuminate, pubescent. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, showy, appearing with the 
leaves; pedicel 5-8 mm long, hairy; sepals 
lanceolate, 5-7 mm long, fused at base, white 
outside, hairy; corolla with tube 2.2-3.4 cm 
long, narrowly cylindrical at the base for 4-7 
mm then campanulate to funnel-shaped, throat 
scales forming pockets between the lobes, lobes 
obovate, spreading, 1—1.3 cm long, acute, pale 
pink to red, more intense towards the margin, 
hairy outside, glabrous inside; stamens in-
serted at base of widened part of corolla tube, 
slightly exserted, anthers forming a cone cover-
ing the pistil, base sagittate, 5-7 mm long, 
with long apical appendices; ovary superior, 
composed of 2 free carpels, glabrous, styles 
fused, slender, with well-developed clavuncula. 
Fruit consisting of 2 cylindrical follicles, coher-
ent at base, 8-11 cm long, long tapering at 
apex, spreading or recurved when mature, 
opening by a longitudinal slit, many-seeded. 
Seeds linear-oblong, 12-15 mm long, brown, 
striate, with tufts of long brownish hairs at 
both ends. 
Adenium comprises 5 species, which are some-
times merged into a single one, Adenium obe-
sum (Forssk.) Roem. & Schult, with 6 subspe-
cies. Adenium oleifolium is characterized by its 
narrow leaves. The fruits take more than a 
year to mature. Seeds germinate readily, but 
the growth of the plants is slow. 
Ecology Adenium oleifolium grows in grass-
land with bushes, on stony ridges and lime-
stone rock outcrops or in loose sand. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though the natural distribution of Adenium 
oleifolium is restricted, it seems not to be in 
immediate danger of genetic erosion. However, 
in Botswana it is rare and considered vulner-
able. 
Prospects More research into the chemical 
composition and pharmacological activities of 
the compounds of Adenium oleifolium seems 
warranted. Possibilities to develop Adenium 
oleifolium as an ornamental seem limited be-
cause of its slow growth. 
Major references Dimmitt & Hanson, 1992; 
Neuwinger, 1996; Plaizier, 1980; Rowley, 1983; 
von Koenen, 2001. 
Other references Codd, 1963. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
AGAVE AMERICANA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 323 (1753). 
Family Agavaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 60 
Vernacular names Century plant, Ameri-
can agave, American aloe (En). Agave 
d'Amérique (Fr). Piteira de boi, piteira brava 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Agave 
50 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
americana is a native of Mexico and the south-
ern United States. It has been distributed 
throughout the world for its ornamental value. 
Its distribution in Africa is not reflected by 
collections in herbaria as it is introduced and 
not easy to collect. However, it is probably 
found throughout tropical Africa. 
Uses In DR Congo and Mauritius the leaf 
sap of Agave americana is drunk for its laxa-
tive and diuretic properties and as an emme-
nagogue. It is applied to wounds and cuts to 
promote healing. A decoction of the roots is 
taken, mixed with honey, to cure syphilis and 
it also has diuretic properties. In South Africa 
the leaves are used to treat cardiac problems, 
high blood pressure and gastro-intestinal prob-
lems. The leaves are split, heated and applied 
externally to relieve rheumatic pain. The leaf 
sap is used as an insecticide, e.g. against ter-
mites in Tanzania. 
As an ornamental, Agave americana is planted 
in private and public gardens and on roadsides. 
It is used as a hedge plant and planted along 
contours for erosion control and for reclamation 
of denuded and overgrazed land. The leaf fibres 
are used locally to make textiles. 
Properties Two different derivatives of tri-
acontanol, isolated from the leaves, were 
shown to have antibacterial activity against 
Staphylococcus spp., Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
and Escherichia coli. Leaf extracts showed mol-
luscicidal and insecticidal properties. The 
leaves contain angiotensin-converting enzymes 
that are a potent medicine to treat hyperten-
sion. The leaves also contains several sapogen-
ins, e.g. hecogenin, which can be used in the 
manufacture of semisynthetic corticosteroids, 
but only if they do not contain too much ti-
gogenin, because this results in losses in prod-
uct quality and yield. In Nigerian plants ti-
gogenin was only found in trace amounts in the 
leaves. Tigogenin itself is a base material for 
the production of other steroids. 
The leaves contain needle-like calcium oxalate 
crystals, called raphides, which can cause con-
tact dermatitis and conjunctivitis. 
Botany Robust, perennial herb up to 9 m 
tall when flowering, producing suckers; stem 
short and thick, up to 20 cm in diameter, with 
a dense rosette of leaves at apex. Leaves ar-
ranged spirally, succulent, sessile, lanceolate, 
1—2 m x 15-25 cm, base fleshy, triangular in 
cross section, apex with sharp, dark brown 
spine up to 5 cm long, margin wavy to toothed 
with teeth up to 10 mm long, pale blue-grey to 
green, sometimes variegated. Inflorescence a 
very large, terminal, rather open panicle; pe-
duncle 2-8 m long. Flowers bisexual, regular; 
perianth tubular, 8-20 mm long, 6-lobed, pale 
yellow; stamens 6, attached above the middle 
of the perianth tube, 6-9 cm long; ovary infe-
rior, 3-celled, style 1, longer than the stamens, 
stigma 3-lobed. Fruit an oblong capsule 4-5 cm 
long, shortly beaked, many-seeded. Seeds flat, 
disk-shaped, 7-8 mm x 5-6 mm, curved, shiny 
black. Seedling with epigeal germination. 
Agave americana follows the Crassulacean 
Acid Metabolism (CAM) pathway. CAM plants 
are able to fix CO2 at night and photosynthe-
size with closed stomata during the day, thus 
minimizing water loss. Agave comprises 100-
200 species, all native to Central America and 
Mexico. 
Ecology Agave americana is adapted to a 
wide range of conditions. In East Africa it is 
found from sea-level to 2500 m altitude. It is 
found in both low and high rainfall areas. In 
many countries in southern Africa, including 
South Africa, it is considered a noxious inva-
sive weed. 
Management Multiplication of Agave 
americana is done by suckers or seeds. The 
hecogenin content of the leaves increases with 
age of the plant and is highest during dry peri-
ods. 
Genetic resources and breeding As 
Agave americana is widely distributed and 
cultivated no threats are envisaged. Many or-
namental cultivars have been developed, in-
cluding a cultivar with pale yellow leaf mar-
gins, known as 'Marginata', which is widely 
planted. Breeding and selection for ornamental 
properties is ongoing. 
Prospects As a source of medicine for hy-
pertension, Agave americana is promising. 
Hypertension, often regarded as a disease of 
well-to-do populations, is on the increase in 
urban populations in Africa. 
Major references Duncan, Jäger & van 
Staden, 1999; Edwards & Tesfaye, 1997; Gel-
fand et al., 1985; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bis-
soondoyal, 1995. 
Other references Dahal, Utomo & Brink, 
2003; Dharmshaktu, Prabhakaran & Menon, 
1987; Gbolade et al., 1992; Lorenza-Salinas, 
Ogura & Soffchi, 2001; McDaniel, 1985; Nel et 
al., 2004; Parmar et al., 1992; Sukumaran, 
Parashar & Rao, 1994; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962; Yang et al., 2006b. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
ALAFIA 51 
ALAFIA BARTERI Oliv. 
Protologue Hook.f., Icon. pi. 20: t. 1992 
(1890). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Alafia 
barteri occurs in the forests of West and Cen-
tral Africa, from Guinea Bissau east to Camer-
oon and south to Congo. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf infusion is used 
to treat malaria. In Nigeria a decoction is 
taken to treat rheumatic pains. The roots are 
used as chew sticks. 
The fibre of the stems is used as binding mate-
rial for roofs. The latex has been used to adul-
terate better latex. 
Properties Ethanol and water extracts of 
the leaves of Alafia barteri showed antifungal 
activity against Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus 
fumigatus, Aspergillus niger, Candida albi-
cans, Microsporum audoninii, Trichoderma 
viride and Trichophyton mentagrophytes. The 
ethanol extracts were more effective than the 
water extracts. 
Botany Liana up to 35 m long, with clear 
sap or sometimes with white latex; stem up to 
Alafia barteri - 1, flowering twig; 2, flower; 3, 
fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
3 cm in diameter; bark pale grey-brown with 
many lenticels. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules in axil of petiole; petiole 2-5(-8) 
mm long; blade elliptical to narrowly elliptical, 
4-16.5 cm x 2—6.5 cm, base obtuse to cordate, 
apex rounded to shortly acuminate, leathery, 
glabrous. Inflorescence a rather lax terminal 
dichasial cyme, many-flowered; peduncle 5-20 
mm long; bracts sepal-like. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 2-6 mm 
long; sepals free, ovate, 1.5-2 mm long, 
rounded or obtuse; corolla white, often with 
greenish tube, tube 5-8 mm long, 1-2 mm wide 
above the base, widening near the insertion of 
the stamens and narrowed towards the throat, 
glabrous or slightly hairy outside, inside with 
hairy belt below insertion of stamens, lobes 
obliquely orbicular to elliptical or obovate, 4.5-
8 mm long, at apex rounded and often wavy, 
spreading, glabrous outside, hairy with curled 
to rather straight hairs at the part of the lobes 
covered in the bud and hairy inside at the base 
and in the upper part of the throat; stamens 
inserted halfway the corolla tube, just included 
or exserted, anthers sessile, arrow-shaped; 
ovary superior, ovoid, consisting of 2 separate 
carpels, style narrowly obconical, 2.5—3 mm 
long, pistil head consisting of basal ring, cylin-
drical part and 2-lobed stigmoid apex. Fruit 
consisting of 2 separate, cylindrical, linear fol-
licles 15-50 cm x 0.5-1 cm, dehiscent, dark 
brown, many-seeded. Seeds narrowly ellipsoid, 
c. 20 mm long, at the top with a tuft of hairs c. 
2.5 cm long. 
Alafia comprises 23 species, 15 of which occur 
in continental Africa and 8 in Madagascar. 
Alafia benthamii (Baill.) Stapf is another spe-
cies from West and Central Africa, usually 
found in periodically inundated riverine forest. 
In Sierra Leone a leaf infusion is used to treat 
fever. 
Ecology Alafia barteri occurs in lowland 
forest up to 200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Alafia 
barteri is widespread and there are no indica-
tions that it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Alafia barteri is a useful medici-
nal plant in rural communities. More informa-
tion is needed to assess the pharmacological 
possibilities. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Dalziel, 
1937; Irvine, 1961; Leeuwenberg, 1997b. 
Other references Adekunle & Okoli, 2002; 
Osemeobo & Ujor, 1999; Tra Bi, Kouamé & 
Traoré, 2005. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
52 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ALAFIA LANDOLPHIOIDES (A.DC.) Benth. & 
Hook.f. ex K.Schum. 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. 4, 2: 165 (1895). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Alafia scandens (Thonn.) De 
Wild. (1903). 
Origin and geographic distribution Alafia 
landolphioid.es occurs from Senegal east to the 
Central African Republic and northern DR 
Congo. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana a leaf de-
coction of Alafia landolphioides is taken to 
treat rheumatism, while scraps of the residue 
are rubbed in to treat rheumatic spots. In 
Ghana the latex is used as an adhesive ingre-
dient in arrow poison; in the Central African 
Republic it is also used as an ingredient of ar-
row poison. 
Botany Liana up to 20 m long, with white 
latex; stem up to 2.5 cm in diameter; bark dark 
brown, with pale brown lenticels. Leaves oppo-
site, simple and entire; stipules in axil of peti-
ole; petiole 3-7 mm long; blade elliptical to 
narrowly elliptical, 4-13 cm x 1.5-6.5 cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex acuminate, leathery, 
glabrous or hairy. Inflorescence a rather lax 
terminal dichasial cyme, many flowered; pe-
duncle 3-40 mm long; bracts sepal-like. Flow-
ers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedi-
cel 1-5 mm long; sepals free, ovate to broadly 
ovate, 1.5-2 mm long, obtuse or rounded; co-
rolla white, dark red at the throat, tube 6-7 
mm long, 1.5-2 mm wide above the base, 
slightly widening near the insertion of the 
stamens and narrowed towards the throat, 
glabrous outside, inside with hairy belt below 
insertion of stamens, lobes obliquely elliptical 
to oblong or obovate, 5.5-9 mm long, rounded, 
spreading, hairy near margin with long curled 
hairs at the part of the lobes covered in the 
bud; stamens inserted 1.5-3.5 mm from the 
base of the corolla tube, included, anthers ses-
sile, arrowhead-shaped; ovary superior, glo-
bose, consisting of 2 separate carpels, style 
narrowly obconical, 2.5-3 mm long, pistil head 
consisting of a basal ring, cylindrical part and 
2-lobed stigmoid apex. Fruit consisting of 2 
separate, cylindrical, linear follicles 18-45 cm 
x 0.5-1.5 cm, dehiscent, dark brown, striate, 
glabrous, many-seeded. Seeds narrowly ellip-
soid, 16-19 mm x 2-3 mm x 0.5-1 mm, with 
several longitudinal lines, with an acute wing 2 
mm long at base, at the top with a tuft of hairs 
3-5 cm long. 
Alafia comprises 23 species, 15 of which occur 
in continental Africa and 8 in Madagascar. The 
seeds and roots of Alafia erythrophthalma 
(K.Schum.) Leeuwenb., occurring partly in the 
same region as Alafia landolphioides, i.e. from 
Nigeria east to Uganda and south to DR Congo, 
are used as an arrow poison ingredient in the 
Central African Republic and DR Congo. 
Ecology Alafia landolphioides occurs in 
forest and savanna, up to 1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though Alafia landolphioides is fairly wide-
spread, it is locally under much pressure be-
cause of habitat destruction, e.g. in Côte 
d'Ivoire. 
Prospects Research is needed to assess the 
potential of Alafia landolphioides in the treat-
ment of rheumatic pains. Alafia landolphioides 
produces large amounts of fragrant flowers, 
and may be a potential ornamental plant. 
Major references Abbiw, 1990; Burkill, 
1985; Irvine, 1961; Kerharo & Bouquet, 1950; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Avit, Pedia & Sankaré, 
1999; Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ALAFIA LUCIDA Stapf 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1894: 
122 (1894). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Alafia 
lucida occurs from Guinea east to Uganda and 
Tanzania, and south to northern Angola. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire an extract of the aerial 
parts is taken to treat jaundice and swollen 
glands, whereas in Gabon it is dripped into the 
eye to cure eye problems. A leaf decoction is 
used in Congo to wash sores and is taken orally 
to treat stomach complaints. To promote the 
healing of wounds, a paste made from bark and 
plant sap is applied as a dressing. The latex, 
coagulated with sap from Costus sp., is used as 
arrow poison. 
Properties The chemical constituents of 
Alafia lucida are not known, apart from the 
information that the seeds tested positive for 
alkaloids. 
Botany Large liana up to 45(-70) m long, 
with white latex; stem up to 18 cm in diameter; 
ALAFIA 53 
branches dark brown or pale grey, rough, 
deeply longitudinally fissured, glabrous. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules in 
axil of petiole; petiole 2-6 mm long; blade ellip-
tical to obovate, 4.5-15 cm x 2-7 cm, base 
cuneate, apex rounded or shortly acuminate, 
leathery, glabrous. Inflorescence a rather lax 
terminal, occasionally axillary dichasial cyme, 
many-flowered; peduncle 5-25 mm long; bracts 
sepal-like, persistent. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 4-7 mm 
long; sepals free, ovate to broadly ovate, 1-2 
mm long, obtuse or rounded; corolla yellow or 
cream with a dark red throat, tube 4-7 mm 
long, 1-2 mm wide at base, slightly widening 
at or just below the middle, glabrous or hairy 
in longitudinal stripes outside, inside with 
hairy belt below insertion of stamens, lobes 
elliptical, 6-10 mm long, apex bluntly truncate, 
slightly toothed, hairy on the part covered in 
the bud; stamens inserted 1.5-5.5 mm from the 
base of the corolla tube, just included or ex-
serted, anthers sessile, arrowhead-shaped; 
ovary superior, ovoid to globose, consisting of 2 
separate carpels, style narrowly obconical, c. 2 
mm long, pistil head consisting of a basal ring, 
cylindrical part and 2-lobed stigmoid apex. 
Fruit consisting of 2 separate, cylindrical, lin-
ear follicles 24-75 cm x 0.5-1.5 cm, dehiscent, 
dark brown, striate, glabrous, many-seeded. 
Seeds narrowly ellipsoid, c. 23 mm x 2 mm x 1 
mm, with longitudinal ridges, at the top with a 
tuft of hairs c. 3 cm long. 
Alafia comprises 23 species, 15 of which occur 
in continental Africa and 8 in Madagascar. 
Alafia caudata Stapf is also medicinally used 
in Gabon. It occurs from Gabon east to Kenya 
and south to Mozambique and Angola. In Ga-
bon bark scrapings along with the fruit of Cap-
sicum annuum L. are rubbed on the skin to 
treat kidney pain. Alafia perrieri Jum. is en-
demic to Madagascar and has similar uses as 
Alafia lucida. A decoction of the bark is taken 
to treat jaundice, measles and fever attacks. 
The latex of Alafia perrieri and three other 
endemic species in Madagascar, Alafia fuscata 
Pichon, Alafia pauciflora Radlk. and Alafia 
thouarsii Roem. & Schult., contain saponins 
and are used as a substitute for soap. The fibre 
of the stems of these last three species is used 
as binding material for roofs. 
Ecology Alafia lucida occurs in primary and 
secondary rainforest up to 2000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Alafia 
lucida is widespread and there are no indica-
tions that it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects As there are no published data on 
the chemical compounds or pharmacological 
effects of Alafia lucida it will probably remain 
of local importance only. 
Major references Bouquet, 1969; Bouquet 
& Debray, 1974; Burkill, 1985; Neuwinger, 
2000. 
Other references Abisch & Reichstein, 
1960; Boiteau, Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 
1999; Dalziel, 1937; Markgraf, 1976; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ALAFIA MULTIFLORA (Stapf) Stapf & Pichon 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1908: 
303 (1908). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Alafia 
multiflora occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
southern Sudan and south to northern DR 
Congo. 
Uses Alafia multiflora is widely used in its 
area of distribution to treat wounds. Latex 
mixed with bark scrapings is applied to 
wounds and ulcers, and also to ulcers caused 
by syphilis. In Ghana the latex diluted with 
water is taken to cure stubborn wounds. In 
Cameroon fresh latex, either alone or mixed 
with Oncinotis glabrata (Baill.) Stapf ex Hiern, 
is also applied to treat yaws. Stem bark or 
fruits in decoction are taken to relieve abdomi-
nal pain. The seeds are an ingredient of arrow 
poison in DR Congo. 
Properties The pyrrolizidine alkaloid ala-
fine has been extracted from Alafia multiflora 
seeds. Vanillic acid isolated from an ether ex-
tract of the latex was found to be responsible 
for the antibacterial properties. 
Botany Large liana up to 40(-80) m long, 
with clear sap or sometimes white latex; stem 
up to 18 cm in diameter; bark dark brown, 
rough, with or without scattered pale brown 
lenticels. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules in axil of petiole; petiole 5-10 mm 
long; blade elliptical, 5-21 cm x 2.5-11.5 cm, 
base rounded to slightly cordate, apex shortly 
acuminate, leathery, glabrous on both sides. 
Inflorescence a dense terminal dichasial cyme, 
many-flowered; peduncle 3-27 mm long; bracts 
sepal-like. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
slightly fragrant; pedicel 5—15 mm long; sepals 
free, ovate to broadly ovate, 3—6 mm long, 
rounded or obtuse; corolla white, often greenish 
outside, tube 11—18 mm long, 1.5-3 mm wide 
54 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
at base, widening near the insertion of the 
stamens and narrowed towards the throat, 
glabrous outside, inside with hairy belt below 
insertion of stamens, lobes broadly rounded, 
10-20 mm long, at apex often wavy, spreading, 
hairy with long curled hairs at the part of the 
lobes covered in the bud and hairy inside in the 
upper part of the throat; stamens inserted 
halfway the corolla tube, included, anthers 
sessile, arrowhead-shaped; ovary superior, 
broadly ovoid, 2-celled, style cylindrical, 4.5-10 
mm long, pistil head cylindrical with 2-lobed 
stigmoid apex. Fruit a cylindrical, linear cap-
sule 70-110 cm x 2-2.5 cm, dehiscent, gla-
brous, many-seeded. Seeds narrowly ellipsoid, 
20-26 mm x 4 mm x 2 mm, with a longitudinal 
raised line, at the base with an obtuse wing 
0.5-1 mm long, at the top with a beak c. 5 mm 
long and tuft of hairs 4-7 cm long. 
Alafia comprises 23 species, 15 of which occur 
in continental Africa and 8 in Madagascar. 
Alafia multiflora differs from the other species 
of the genus by the syncarpous fruit and the 
beak on the seed. The fruits of Alafia multi-
flora and those of Alafia schumannii Stapf are 
the longest in the entire family, measuring up 
to 1.1 m. 
Alafia schumannii occurs in tropical forest 
from Sierra Leone east to Uganda and south to 
northern Angola. The latex is an effective 
medicine for treating wounds: it is dropped 
directly into the wound to improve healing. 
Ecology Alafia multiflora occurs in periodi-
cally inundated riverine forest, up to 750 m 
altitude. 
Management Alafia multiflora can be har-
vested at any time in the year. Harvesting is 
done by wounding a leafy stem, collecting the 
latex on a leaf or in a bottle and put it directly 
on and around the wound or ulcers. Bark is 
harvested by scratching it as powder from the 
stem; it is then mixed with the sap. 
Genetic resources and breeding Alafia 
multiflora is widespread and there are no indi-
cations of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Alafia multiflora is a widely used 
medicinal plant in rural communities. As there 
are few published data on the pharmacological 
effects of this plant, more information is 
needed to assess its qualities. 
Major references Abbiw, 1990; Balansard 
et al., 1980; Leeuwenberg, 1997b; Neuwinger, 
2000; Pais et al., 1971. 
Other references Brisson, 1988; Mshana et 
a l , 2000; N'goran et al., 1995. 
Authors D.E. Tsala & T. Dimo 
ALBERTISIA CORDIFOLIA (Mangenot & 
J.Miège) Forman 
Protologue Kew Bull. 30(1): 83 (1975). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Epinetrum cordifolium Mange-
not & J.Miège (1951). 
Origin and geographic distribution Alber-
tisia cordifolia is endemic to the south-eastern 
coastal region of Côte d'Ivoire, where it occurs 
in a small area near Abidjan. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire the root of Albertisia 
cordifolia is used to treat anaemia and oedema 
of the legs. Root pulp with some water is used 
as nose drops and administered as a sedative 
to agitated people, complementing treatment 
with the root of Rauvolfia vomitoria Afzel. Root 
pulp is inserted into the vagina to treat uterus 
complaints and applied externally as a haemo-
static. Men suffering from gonorrhoea take an 
enema of root pulp. A root maceration is taken 
as an enema or in draught as aphrodisiac and 
stimulant. 
Properties The roots of Albertisia cordifolia 
contain the bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids 
cycleanine, isochondrodendrine and norcy-
cleanine. Cycleanine is a neuromuscular stimu-
lant in small doses and paralyses at high doses. 
Albertisia cordifolia is considered poisonous to 
sheep. 
Botany Dioecious scandent shrub or liana 
up to 15 m long; young branches yellowish 
hairy, old branches with greyish or brownish 
glabrous bark. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 3—12 cm long, 
thickened at both ends, white-hairy; blade 
ovate to elliptical, 8-25 cm x 5-17 cm, base 
cordate, apex acute or shortly acuminate, pa-
pery to thinly leathery, glabrous except for the 
veins, pinnately veined but with 5-7 basal 
veins. Inflorescence an axillary few-flowered 
cyme; male inflorescence 2-5-flowered, with 
peduncle up to 1.5 cm long, female inflores-
cence 1-2-flowered with peduncle up to 2 mm 
long. Flowers unisexual, regular, pedicel 2-4 
mm long; sepals 9 in 3 whorls, greyish hairy 
outside, glabrous and blackish inside, 3 outer 
sepals triangular, c. 1 mm long, next 3 sepals 
triangular-ovate, 2-4 mm long, 3 inner ones 
elliptical-oblong, 6-9 mm long, yellowish; pet-
als 6, kidney-shaped, c. 0.5 mm long; male 
flowers with c. 20 stamens fused into a stami-
nal column 2-2.5 mm long, anthers fused into 
a conical head c. 2 mm long; female flowers 
with superior ovary consisting of 6 silky hairy 
carpels. Fruit composed of 4-6 sessile drupes, 
ALBERTISIA 55 
each drupe ovoid to nearly globose, 2-3.5 cm x 
2-2.5 cm, short-hairy, orange, 1-seeded. Seed 
ovoid to broadly ellipsoid, 2-3 cm x 2-2.5 cm. 
Seedling with hypogeal germination; epicotyl 
4-7 cm long; cotyledons remaining within the 
fruit-stone. 
Albertisia cordifolia flowers from April to June 
and fruits ripen about 2 months later. The 
seeds are probably dispersed by animals that 
feed on the fruit. 
Albertisia comprises 18 species, 13 in Africa 
and 5 in tropical Asia. Other species occurring 
in Côte d'Ivoire are Albertisia mangenotii 
(Guillaumet & Debray) Forman in the south-
western part of the country and Albertisia 
scandens (Mangenot & J.Miège) Forman in 
southern Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana. Leaf sap of 
both species is applied to treat toothache, and 
leaf sap of Albertisia scandens is also applied to 
skin affections. 
Ecology Albertisia cordifolia occurs in sec-
ondary formations inside dense humid forest at 
low altitude. 
Management Albertisia cordifolia roots are 
only collected from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding The area 
of distribution of Albertisia cordifolia is small 
with an estimated width of 13 km and its habi-
tat is shrinking which may bring it in danger of 
extinction. 
Prospects Albertisia cordifolia will probably 
remain locally important as a medicinal plant. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; de Koning, 
1983; Holmgren et a l , 2004; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Bouquet & Debray, 1974. 
Debray, 1966; Debray, Plat & Le Men, 1966: 
Forman, 1975; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006: 
Oliver-Bever, 1986. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ALBERTISIA DELAGOENSIS (N.E.Br.) Forman 
Protologue Kew Bull. 30(1): 83 (1975). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Epinetrum delagoense (N.E.Br.) 
Diels (1910). 
Origin and geographic distribution Alber-
tisia delagoensis occurs in Mozambique and 
eastern South Africa. 
Uses In Mozambique the root of Albertisia 
delagoensis is used to treat fever. In South 
Africa a root extract is taken to treat diar-
rhoea, vomiting, menstrual pain, chest prob-
lems, body pain caused by influenza, back pain 
and antenatal problems, and it is used as an 
anthelmintic, appetite stimulant and to im-
prove sexual performance in men. A root and 
leaf extract is given orally to babies for clean-
sing the stomach. The ash of burnt roots is 
applied to heal sores. 
Properties The stems and roots of Alber-
tisia delagoensis contain as major compounds 
the bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids O-
methylcocsoline and cissacapine, and small 
amounts of cocsoline, cocsuline, cycleanine and 
2 unidentified alkaloids. The aporphine alka-
loid dicentrine was also isolated as minor com-
ponent. The leaves contain O-methylcocsoline 
and cycleanine and small amounts of the other 
alkaloids. The alkaloid yield of the roots is 1— 
2.2 mg/g dry weight, of the stems 0.3-0.8 mg/g 
and of the leaves 1.1-2.7 mg/g. The alkaloid 
composition varies between plants. The large 
amounts of alkaloids make the plant bitter, 
which explains its use as an appetite stimu-
lant. Tested on chloroquine-resistant Plasmo-
dium falciparum, methanol extracts of the 
leaves and roots exhibited antiplasmodial ac-
tivities of ICso 4.1 (ig/ml and 1.6 Hg/ml, respec-
tively. Cocsoline showed strong antiplasmodial 
activity (ICBO = 1 (J.M) in vitro; cycleanine 
showed selective antiplasmodial and antiproto-
zoal activities as well as spasmolytic activity in 
vitro, and also antimicrobial, anti-
inflammatory and analgesic activities. Dicen-
trine exhibited antibacterial and antifungal 
activities in vitro. In-vitro tests showed a low 
cytotoxicity against the Graham cell line for 
leaf extracts. 
Botany Dioecious small shrub or liana; 
branches greyish hairy. Leaves alternate, sim-
ple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1—1.5 
cm long; blade oblong-elliptical to broadly ellip-
tical, 4-9 cm x 2-5 cm, base cuneate, apex 
acute, mucronate, leathery, glabrous except on 
the veins above, short-hairy below, pinnately 
veined with 2-3 pairs of lateral veins, but also 
with 3-5 basal veins. Male inflorescence an 
axillary, 1—3-flowered cyme with short pedun-
cle, female flowers solitary. Flowers unisexual, 
regular; pedicel 2-3.5 mm long; sepals 6 in 2 
whorls, 3 outer sepals narrowly lanceolate or 
ovate, 1.5-2.5 mm x c. 1 mm, 3 inner sepals 
4.5-6 mm x 2.5-3.5 mm; petals 6, kidney-
shaped, 0.5-1 mm x 0.5—1 mm; male flowers 
with c. 20 stamens fused into a staminal col-
umn 3-4.5 mm long, anthers fused into a coni-
cal head c. 2 mm long; female flowers with su-
perior ovary consisting of 6 silky hairy carpels. 
Fruit composed of 2-6 sessile drupes, each 
56 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
drupe ellipsoid, c. 2.5 cm x 1.5 cm, short-hairy, 
orange, 1-seeded. Seed ovoid, curved, c. 1.5 cm 
x 1 cm. 
Albertisia comprises 18 species, 13 in Africa 
and 5 in tropical Asia. 
E c o l o g y Albertisia delagoensis occurs on 
well dra ined l i t toral sand, in open grassy fields 
or in open spaces between t rees . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Al-
though the na tu r a l distr ibution of Albertisia 
delagoensis is restricted, it does not seem to be 
in danger of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s The low cytotoxicity of the leaf 
extract coupled to the significant ant iplasmo-
dial activity indicates t h a t Albertisia delagoen-
sis has potential as an an t imalar ia l p lant . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s de Wet, 2005; de Wet et 
al., 2007; Troupin, 1962. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s J a n s e n & Mendes, 1983; 
Marsha l l et al., 1994; Rondanelli et a l , 1986a; 
Rondanell i et a l , 1986b; Schiff, 1987; Schiff, 
1991. 
A u t h o r s A. de Ruijter 
A L B E R T I S I A V I L L O S A (Exell) F o r m a n 
P r o t o l o g u e Kew Buil. 30(1): 84 (1975). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
S y n o n y m s Epinetrum villosum (Exell) 
Troupin (1962). 
Origin and geographic distribution Alber-
tisia villosa occurs in Gabon, Congo, DR Congo 
and Cabinda (Angola). 
U s e s In DR Congo a root bark decoction is 
t aken to t rea t malar ia and a root decoction to 
t r ea t diarrhoea and dysentery. The crushed 
leaves a re applied to burned skin and ground 
leaves as a haemosta t ic to wounds. Albertisia 
villosa is considered to have abortive activity. 
Product ion and international trade In DR 
Congo Albertisia villosa is commonly sold in 
local marke t s as a medicine. 
P r o p e r t i e s The root ba rk of Albertisia vil-
losa contains t he bisbenzylisoquinoline alka-
loids cycleanine, cocsoline and norcycleanine, of 
which cycleanine is the most a b u n d a n t (85%). 
Aqueous and methanol extracts of the root 
have shown strong ant ibacter ia l propert ies in 
in-vitro screening tes ts . The methanol extract 
was also effective agains t castor-oil-induced 
diarrhoea in mice. In-vitro tes ts of cycleanine 
and the alkaloidal extract of the root ba rk re-
vealed potent ant ibacter ial , antifungal, an-
tiplasmodial , and cytotoxic activities. Cy-
cleanine was found to cause inhibition of 12-0-
tetradecanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate-induced ear 
tumours in ra t . These resul ts may par t ly ex-
plain and support the use of Albertisia villosa 
root bark for the t r e a t m e n t of malar ia and 
other infectious diseases in t radi t ional medi-
cine in DR Congo. 
B o t a n y Dioecious l iana; branches red-hairy. 
Leaves a l te rna te , simple and entire; st ipules 
absent; petiole 3-10 cm long, hairy; blade 
ovate, 9-20 cm x 6-18 cm, base cordate, apex 
long-acuminate, hairy a t both sides, pinnately 
veined wi th 4 - 5 pairs of la te ra l veins bu t also 
with 5-7 basal veins. Male inflorescence an 
axillary 2—5-flowered cyme with short pedun-
cle, female flowers solitary. Flowers unisexual , 
regular , nearly sessile; male flowers wi th 9 
sepals, 6 outer sepals lanceolate, up to 10 mm 
long, very hairy, 3 inner sepals lanceolate to 
ovate, 6-10 mm x 2 -4 mm, leathery, hairy, 
petals absent or 6 and very small, s t amens up 
to 30, fused into a s t amina l column up to 1 mm 
long, an the r s fused into a conical head 1.5-4 
mm long; female flowers with 9-12 sepals, the 
outer 6-9 lanceolate, up to 10 m m long, very 
hairy, the 3 inner ones c. 7 mm long, peta ls 6, 
1-2.5 mm x 1.5-3 mm, deeply cordate, with a 
tuft of red ha i r s at apex, ovary superior, con-
sist ing of 8—12 carpels 3-5 mm long, densely 
reddish hairy. Fru i t composed of 2 -6 ellipsoid 
drupes , each 3-4.5 cm x 2 .5-3 cm, densely 
hairy, 1-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 2-2 .5 cm x 1 -
1.5 cm. 
Albertisia comprises 18 species, 13 in Africa 
and 5 in tropical Asia. Another species tha t 
occurs in Congo, DR Congo and Angola (and 
maybe also in Côte d'Ivoire and Tanzania) is 
Albertisia undulata (Hiern) Forman, which is 
also used as an abortifacient in DR Congo. 
Crushed leaves in pa lm oil a re applied to t rea t 
wounds. 
E c o l o g y Albertisia villosa occurs in dense 
humid forest, also in secondary forest and in 
gallery forest a t low to medium al t i tudes . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Al-
though t he hab i t a t of Albertisia villosa is 
shr inking, there are no indications t h a t it is 
th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Because of the potent ant iplas-
modial, bactericidal, cytotoxic and fungicidal 
activities of i ts main active ingredient cy-
cleanine, fur ther research on medicinal appli-
cations of Albertisia villosa is war ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Lohombo-Ekomba et al., 
2004; Longanga-Otshudi , Vercruysse & Fori-
ers, 2000; Neuwinger, 2000; Troupin, 1951; 
Troupin, 1962. 
ALCHORNEA 57 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Burkill, 1997; Longanga-
Otshudi et al., 2005; Longanga-Otshudi et al., 
2000; Wome, 1985. 
A u t h o r s A. de Ruijter 
A L C H O R N E A C O R D I F O L I A ( S c h u m a c h . & 
Thonn . ) Mül l .Arg. 
P r o t o l o g u e Linnaea 34: 170 (1865). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r In = 36 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Chr i s tmas bush, dove-
wood (En). Arbre de djeman (Fr). Bugi-bugi, 
bunce, pô d'arco (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Al-
chornea cordifolia occurs from Senegal east to 
Kenya and Tanzania and south throughout 
Centra l Africa to Angola. It is cult ivated in DR 
Congo for i ts medicinal use. 
U s e s Alchornea cordifolia is commonly used 
as a medicinal p lan t throughout i ts a rea of 
distr ibution. The leaves are mostly used, bu t 
also the s tem bark, s tem pith, leafy s tems, root 
bark, roots and fruits en ter in local medicine. 
The leaves or leafy s tems, as an infusion or 
chewed fresh, are t aken for the i r sedative and 
ant ispasmodic activities to t rea t a var ie ty of 
respira tory problems including sore throat , 
cough and bronchit is , geni ta l -ur inary problems 
including venereal diseases and female steril-
ity, and in tes t inal problems including gastric 
ulcers, diarrhoea, amoebic dysentery and 
worms. As a purgat ive, they are also t aken as 
an enema; high doses t aken orally are emetic. 
They are also t aken as a blood purifier, as a 
tonic and to t rea t anaemia and epilepsy. In 
Senegal a leaf decoction is t aken to t r ea t tachy-
Alchornea cordifolia - wild 
cardia. Young s tem pith is b i t ter and astr in-
gent and is chewed for the same use. The pi th 
may also be rubbed on the chest to t rea t respi-
ratory problems. The leaves are ea ten in West 
Africa and Congo as an emmenagogue and to 
facilitate delivery, and in Gabon as an abortifa-
cient. A cold infusion of the dried and crushed 
leaves acts as a diuretic. Leaf and root decoc-
tions are widely used as mouth wash to t r ea t 
ulcers of the mouth , toothache and caries, and 
twigs are chewed for the same purposes. 
Crushed fresh leaves or powdered dry leaves 
are applied external ly as a cicatr isant to 
wounds, to relieve pain, e.g. backache and 
headache, to fractures to improve heal ing and 
to t r ea t eye infections and numerous skin af-
flictions including venereal diseases, sores, 
abscesses, yaws and filariasis. A decoction or 
pas te of leafy twigs is applied as a wash to 
t r ea t fever, malar ia , rheumat ic pains, enlarged 
spleen and as a lotion or poultice to sore feet; 
vapour ba ths can also be taken . In Côte 
d'Ivoire and Ghana the leaves are applied as a 
haemosta t ic to stop prolonged mens t rua t ion 
and a decoction of roots or leaves is applied in 
the vagina to stop pos t -par tum haemorrhage 
and to t r ea t vaginitis . In Sierra Leone and 
Congo young leaves or pounded bark are made 
into a suppository to t r ea t haemorrhoids . In 
DR Congo bruised leaves are applied as an 
enema to t r ea t impotency. In West Africa 
pulped root is widely t aken to t r ea t venereal 
diseases. Dried leaves or roots, alone or wi th 
tobacco, are smoked to cure cough. The leaves 
and root ba rk a re external ly applied to t r ea t 
leprosy and as an ant idote to snake venom. In 
Gabon and Congo a root decoction or macera-
tion is t aken to t r ea t amoebic dysentery and 
diarrhoea and used as eye drops to cure con-
junctivit is . In Nigeria a decoction of bruised 
fruit is t aken to prevent miscarr iage. The sap 
of the fruit is applied to cure eye problems and 
skin diseases. In ve ter inary medicine a leaf or 
root infusion is given to livestock to t r ea t try-
panosomiasis . In Nigeria the s tem ba rk is 
thrown in dammed s t r eams as a fish poison. 
Alchornea cordifolia is used for alley cropping 
for in-situ mulch production in b a n a n a or 
maize p lanta t ions in West and Eas t Africa. In 
Burkina Faso the plant is used as a windbreak 
around crops. In West Africa the leaves are 
used as forage for small r u m i n a n t s and poul-
try. Chicken produce egg yolks with a deeper 
yellow colour when fed regularly with the 
leaves. In West Africa the leaves are used for 
packing cola nu t s and 'okpeye', a Nigerian con-
58 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
diment produced by fermenting seeds of Pro-
sopis africana (Guill. & Perr.) Taub. Pipe stems 
are made from the branches with the pith re-
moved. The Iwo people of Nigeria chew the 
leaves as an appetizer. Dried leaves are a tea 
substitute. 
In West Africa mats and cloth are cooked with 
the fruits and natron to colour them black; the 
fruits are often combined with fermented Par-
kia pods or the bark of Bridelia ferruginea 
Benth. This dye is also used on pottery, cala-
bashes and leather. The leaves are often added 
to indigo to darken its colour. In Nigeria fish-
ermen use leaves and fruits for dyeing and 
preserving fishing nets; dried leaves give a 
darker colour than fresh ones. In Gabon bark 
and leaves are used to blacken cloth and pot-
tery. The wood ash serves as a mordant. The 
wood is light, soft and perishable and is used 
for house construction, stakes and kitchen 
utensils, and also benches when large stems 
are available. The wood is also used as fuel. In 
DR Congo the split stems are used to line bas-
kets. In Cameroon and Gabon the acidulous 
fruits are considered edible and are also used 
as bait to trap birds. The infructescences are 
used in decorations. 
Alchornea cordifolia extract has been patented 
for various other applications: antifouling ad-
juvant in paints, coatings and polymers, and 
alchorneic acid was proposed as a raw material 
for hemi-synthesis of plastic. 
Production and international trade In 
Ghana and Burkina Faso the leaves, root bark 
and fruits of Alchornea cordifolia are sold in 
local markets from November to January. The 
Centre National de Semences Forestières of 
Burkina Faso sells seeds at a price of US$ 10 
per kg in the region and US$ 14 outside the 
region. 
Properties The leaves, roots and stem bark 
contain terpenoids, steroid glycosides, flavon-
oids (2-3%), tannins (about 10%), saponins, 
carbohydrates and the imidazopyrimidine alka-
loids alchorneine, alchornidine and several 
guanidine alkaloids. The leaves also contain a 
range of hydroxybenzoic acids: gallic acid and 
its ethyl ester, gentisic acid, anthranilic acid 
(vitamin LI) and protocatechuic acid, and also 
ellagic acid (alizarine yellow). A C20 homologue 
of vernolic acid, named alchornoic acid, was 
found in the seed oil. 
Different leaf, stem bark and root extracts 
(macerations or decoctions and methanolic, 
ethanolic or acetonic extracts) have shown sig-
nificant activities against a range of bacterial 
and fungal pathogens of humans. The root bark 
showed the strongest activity. The results of 
tests on anti-HIV activities of the seed extract 
are contradictory; in African tests, HIV-1 
strains were sensitive to the seed extract, 
whereas American tests seemed inconclusive. 
Methanol or ethanol extracts of leaf and root at 
a concentration of 100 ug/ml did not show cyto-
toxic activity against 60 different tumour cell 
lines from 8 organs. The ethanol extracts of the 
leaf and fruit showed significant trypanocidal, 
anthelminthic and amoebicidal activities. The 
amoebicidal activity of the root bark was even 
much higher. The ethanol extract of the leaf 
exhibited mild in-vitro activity against Plas-
modium falciparum, whereas chloroform and 
ether extracts were inactive. Ellagic acid was 
found to be the active constituent of the ex-
tract. Crude ethanol extracts of the leaves 
showed moderate in-vitro anthelmintic activity 
against Haemonchus contortus, a nematode 
pathogenic to small ruminants. 
Different leaf extracts showed a significant 
anti-anaemic activity by increasing the level of 
haemoglobin and iron in the blood after oral 
administration to anaemic rats. Crude extracts 
of the leaves coagulated blood plasma in vitro. 
The high tannin content was thought to be 
responsible for this activity. 
The ethanol extract of the leaf showed signifi-
cant activity against castor oil-induced diar-
rhoea in mice. The presence of tannins and 
flavonoids may account for the increased colo-
nic water and electrolyte reabsorption. The 
crude methanol extract of the leaf has a mod-
erate relaxing effect on smooth muscles in vi-
tro, which is attributed to the flavonoid 
quercetin and its derivatives. The ethanol ex-
tract of the root significantly delayed the effect 
of histamine-induced broncho-constriction 
characterized by shortness of breath in guinea 
pig. The crude methanol extract of the leaves 
and several fractions of it have shown anti-
inflammatory activity in the croton oil-induced 
ear oedema test in mice and in the egg albu-
men-induced hind paw oedema test in rats. 
The cytotoxicity of the crude extract was very 
low. Alcohol extracts from root bark, stem 
bark, leaves, fruits and seeds disrupted mitotic 
cell division in onion (Allium cepa L.). A 
methanol extract of the seed has shown inhibi-
tion of vascularization in chicken embryos. 
The approximate nutrient composition of leaf 
meal for use in chicken feed was per 100 g dry 
matter: energy 1930 k j , crude protein 18.7 g 
and crude fibre 16.4 g. While the production of 
ALCHORNEA 59 
leaves is high, their palatability to cattle, goats 
and sheep is rather low. 
Description Straggling, laxly branched, 
evergreen dioecious shrub or small tree up to 8 
m tall; young shoots erect, later becoming hori-
zontal, hollow, glabrous. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules triangular, c. 1.5 mm long, 
acute, soon falling; petiole (3-)5-15 cm long; 
blade ovate to elliptical-ovate, (5-)10-25 cm x 
(3—)7—15 cm, base cordate, with basal lobes 
slightly auriculate and overlapping, apex acute 
to acuminate, margins toothed, shortly hairy 
when young, later almost glabrous, 3-5-veined 
at the base with 4 glandular patches in the 
angles of the veins. Male inflorescence an axil-
lary panicle up to 30(-45) cm long, sparingly 
hairy, bracts minute; female inflorescence an 
axillary spike or lax panicle up to 30(-45) cm 
long, 1-several together, bracts broadly trian-
gular-ovate, c. 1 mm long, acuminate. Flowers 
unisexual, sessile; male flowers with 2 cup-
shaped sepals, petals absent, stamens 8, the 
united filaments forming a basal plate; female 
flowers with 2-4-lobed calyx, lobes obtuse, 
hairy, petals absent, ovary superior, conical, c. 
Alchornea cordifolia - 1, leafy branch; 2, part of 
young male inflorescence; 3, tip of female inflo-
rescence; 4, fruit; 5, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
2 mm x 2 mm, smooth, densely silky hairy, 
styles 2-3, 1-2 cm long, free or fused at base, 
dark red. Fruit a 2-lobed capsule c. 1.5 cm x 1.5 
cm, lobes somewhat compressed, smooth, 
shortly hairy, green to red, 2-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid-ellipsoid, c. 6 mm long, smooth, bright 
red. 
Other botanical information Alchornea is 
pantropical and comprises about 60 species of 
which 6 occur in tropical Africa. 
Growth and development In West Africa 
Alchornea cordifolia flowers at the start of the 
dry season, in October-November; in DR Congo 
flowering is from June to August. The nectar 
glands at the leaf base attract ants, which pro-
tect the plant from attacks from other insects. 
Ecology Alchornea cordifolia is widespread 
in secondary forest and riverine forest, espe-
cially in marshy areas but sometimes in drier 
sites, from sea-level up to 1500 m altitude. It 
often forms thickets in disturbed, unburned 
localities. It is well adapted to acid soils. In DR 
Congo the tree is reported to improve soil fertil-
ity and is known to be effective in restoring 
calcium levels in acid soils. It is one of the first 
trees to appear in vegetation dominated by 
Chromolaena odorata (L.) R.M.King & H.Rob. 
Propagation and planting Alchornea 
cordifolia is propagated by seed or stem cut-
tings. The weight of 1000 seeds is about 77 g. 
Plants are most easily propagated from stem 
cuttings, which root in 9 weeks. When grown 
from seed, germination takes 3-12 weeks when 
directly planted in moist soil. 
Management Coppice regrowth of Alchor-
nea cordifolia is vigorous. In Nigeria field tests 
with Alchornea cordifolia showed that it is a 
promising alley crop. As a mulch crop it has 
good potential for restoration of soil fertility 
considering its standing biomass, root distribu-
tion, nutrient content in the biomass, decompo-
sition and nutrient release patterns, and asso-
ciation with mycorrhiza. 
Diseases and pests Alchornea cordifolia is 
a preferred feed plant of the desert locust Zo-
nocerus variegatus. 
Harvesting For medicinal purposes Alchor-
nea cordifolia is mainly harvested from the 
wild. 
Yield The yearly biomass production of Al-
chornea cordifolia is 2000-3000 kg/ha. 
Handling after harvest In traditional 
medicine, the leaves and root bark are used 
fresh or dried in the shade for later use. 
Genetic resources Alchornea cordifolia is 
widespread and common in secondary forest 
60 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and produces much seed; it is therefore not 
threatened. 
Prospects Alchornea cordifolia is an impor-
tant medicinal plant in traditional medicine 
and much pharmacological research has been 
effected including its antibacterial, antifungal 
and antiprotozoal properties, as well as its 
anti-inflammatory activities, with significant 
positive results. However, the link between 
activity and particular compounds is often not 
clear, although the flavonoids and tannins 
seem to play a major role. More research is 
needed to elucidate these relations. It is prob-
able that Alchornea cordifolia will remain a 
major medicinal plant. Its use as an alley-
cropping component is promising, especially as 
a mulch crop for restoration of soil fertility, but 
other, especially leguminous, species are pre-
ferred in most situations. 
Major references Agbor, Leopold & 
Jeanne, 2004; Aké-Assi, Guinko & Aya-Lazare, 
1991; Burkill, 1994; Kapnang Jepang, 1997; 
Koné et a l , 2005; Mavar-Manga et a l , 2004; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Nia et al., 2005; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1987; Stäuble, 1986. 
Other references Adewunmi et al., 2001; 
Adjanohoun et al., 1989; Ayisi & Nyadedzor, 
2003; Banzouzi et al., 2002; Boampong, 1992; 
Ebi, 2001; Iwu, 1993; Kamara et a l , 2000; 
Kang et al., 1999; Kanmegne et al., 1999; 
Lamikanra, Ogundaini & Ogunbamila, 1990; 
Latham, 2004; Muanza et al., 1995; Nkum, 
1997; Obadoni & Ochuko, 2002; Ogungbamila 
& Samuelsson, 1990; Okeke et al., 1999; 
Osadebe & Okoye, 2003; Ruhigwa et al., 1994; 
Tona et al., 2000. 
Sources of illustration Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Authors H. Mavar-Manga, J. Lejoly, J. 
Quetin-Leclercq & G.H. Schmelzer 
ALCHORNEA FLORIBUNDA Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Flora 47: 435 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18 
Vernacular names Niando (En). Alchornée 
fleurie, niando (Fr). Hondo (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Al-
chornea floribunda occurs from Guinea east 
through the forest zone of West and Central 
Africa to Sudan and Uganda. In DR Congo it is 
cultivated in home gardens for its medicinal 
use. 
Uses In West and Central Africa, especially 
in Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon and DR Congo, the root 
of Alchornea floribunda has a great reputation 
as a stimulating intoxicant and aphrodisiac. 
The powdered dried roots or root bark scrap-
ings are either mixed with food or macerated 
for several days in palm wine, banana beer or 
other local beers and consumed as a tonic to 
provide energy during festivals and, formerly, 
for warfare. It provides a state of intense ex-
citement followed by a deep, sometimes fatal, 
depression depending on dosage, individual 
temperament and habit. Similar effects have 
been observed in gorillas and chimpanzees that 
had eaten the root. In Gabon the roots are 
sometimes mixed with or used as a substitute 
for those of Tabernanthe iboga Baill. and taken 
in water as an aphrodisiac and stimulant in 
initiation ceremonies. 
In Côte d'Ivoire, Congo and DR Congo leaf or 
root sap is rubbed over the affected area to 
treat wounds, circumcision wounds, ringworm 
and eczema. A leaf decoction is drunk or the 
leaves are eaten as a vegetable to treat ovarian 
problems, stomach problems and intestinal 
disorders. In Nigeria and Gabon the root sap is 
used as eye drops to treat ophthalmia and con-
junctivitis. In Cameroon the ash of burnt roots 
mixed with palm oil is applied to scarifications 
to treat chest pain and headache. One teaspoon 
of root bark powder is eaten daily to cure impo-
tence. In Equatorial Guinea the leaf pulp is 
applied to wounds. In Congo the leaves are 
eaten as a vegetable with meat or fish as an 
antidote to poison. The roots and fruits are 
taken for urinary, respiratory and intestinal 
problems. In DR Congo a leaf maceration is 
taken against pains in the heart. A decoction of 
the young leaves is taken to treat diarrhoea. 
In DR Congo the thin branches are used to 
make the framework of round huts. The root 
scrapings or dried leaves are smoked as a sub-
stitute of tobacco. 
Production and international trade Dried 
root bark of Alchornea floribunda is traded on 
the internet for its stimulating (and supposedly 
hallucinogenic) properties at c. US$ 15 per 100 
g, but its trade name 'niando' is confused with 
that of the South American Alchornea castanei-
folia (Humb. & Bonpl. ex Willd.) A.Juss., 
mainly known as 'iporuru', which has similar 
properties. 
Properties The stem bark contains 0.1 mg/g 
crude alkaloids, the root bark 1.9 mg/g and the 
leaves 4.8 mg/g. The imidazopyrimidine alka-
loid alchorneine is the major alkaloid present 
in the stem bark and root bark. The root bark 
ALCHORNEA 61 
and leaves also contain isoalchorneine, and the 
leaves also alchorneinone. Some reports have 
mentioned the presence of yohimbine, an in-
dole alkaloid present in Tabernanthe iboga. 
However, more recent evaluations did not con-
firm the presence of this compound in Alchor-
nea floribunda. The leaves and bark contain 
about 10% tannins. 
The root extract has sympatholytic action and 
increases significantly the sensitivity of the 
nervous system to adrenalin. In dogs, small 
doses produced slight hypotension followed by 
hypertension; larger doses produced an in-
crease of blood pressure followed by a strong 
decrease with only slow recovery. A patent has 
been obtained for the use of the leaf alkaloid as 
a spasmolytic. Positive results have been re-
ported in clinical experiments with root and 
leafy stem extracts in the treatment of hepati-
tis. 
Botany Laxly branched monoecious shrub or 
small tree up to 4.5(-7) m tall; young shoots 
shortly hairy. Leaves alternate, simple, 
crowded at the end of shoots; stipules 3-9 mm 
long, shortly hairy; petiole 0.5-2.5 cm long; 
blade oblanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, 14-37 
cm x 6-13.5 cm, base cuneate, apex shortly 
acuminate to obtuse, margins remotely and 
shallowly glandular-toothed, glandular at base, 
glabrous above, minutely hairy beneath, pin-
nately veined. Male inflorescence an axillary 
panicle up to 20 cm long, bracts minute; female 
inflorescence a terminal spike or lax panicle, 
up to 25 cm long; bracts 2-3 mm long, acumi-
nate, with 2 sessile glands at the base. Flowers 
unisexual, sessile; male flowers with 3 almost 
orbicular sepals, petals absent, stamens 8; fe-
male flowers with 5 triangular-ovate sepals, c. 
1.5 mm long, acute, glandular-toothed, shortly 
hairy, petals absent, ovary superior, 3-lobed, 1— 
1.5 mm x 1.5—2 mm, smooth, densely silky 
hairy, styles 3, 1-2.5 cm long, free, dark red. 
Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 6 mm x 10 mm, 
smooth, shortly hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds almost 
globose, c. 4 mm long, smooth, shiny, pale 
brown. 
Alchornea is pantropical and comprises about 
50 species, of which 6 occur in tropical Africa. 
Ecology Alchornea floribunda grows in the 
understorey and clearings of rainforest and 
swamp forest, from sea-level up to 1200 m alti-
tude. 
Management The roots and leaves are har-
vested from the wild or home gardens, and can 
be used fresh or dried and powdered for future 
Genetic resources and breeding Alchor-
nea floribunda is widespread and common in 
the forest understorey and therefore not in 
danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Alchornea floribunda has quite a 
reputation as a stimulating intoxicant and 
aphrodisiac. The presence of the alkaloid al-
chorneine seems partly responsible for these 
activities, but more research is needed to cor-
roborate the findings. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Neuwin-
ger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Raymond-
Hamet, 1952; Raymond-Hamet, 1954. 
Other references Betti, 2004; Bouquet, 
1969; Bouquet & Debray, 1974; Cousins & 
Huffman, 2002; De Smet, 1996; Kawukpa & 
Angoyo, 1994; Nyakabwa & Dibaluka, 1990; 
Oliver-Bever, 1986; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 
1961; Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
ALCHORNEA HIRTELLA Benth. 
Protologue Hook., Niger fl.: 507 (1849). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 9 
Origin and geographic distribution Al-
chornea hirtella is widespread in tropical Af-
rica and occurs from Senegal east to Kenya and 
Tanzania and south to South Africa. 
Uses In Senegal and Congo the leaf sap is 
inhaled through the nose or applied to scarifi-
cations on the temples to treat headache. A 
decoction of the aerial parts is taken to treat 
ovarian trouble and gastro-intestinal afflic-
tions. In Guinea an infusion of the leaves and 
stem pith is taken as an anti-cough agent and 
is locally applied as an antiseptic. In Sierra 
Leone the leaves are chewed to treat toothache, 
and the leaf sap is swallowed to treat diar-
rhoea. Bark scrapings ground with white lime 
are applied to treat river blindness. In Côte 
d'Ivoire a root decoction is taken as a sedative 
to treat pain; the sap is also topically applied. 
A root decoction is taken to treat stomach-ache 
and as a purgative. In DR Congo root scrapings 
are chewed to treat tiredness after intoxication. 
Dried and powdered leaves soaked in water are 
applied as a poultice to broken limbs. In south-
ern Uganda an infusion of the inflorescences is 
taken to expel worms. 
In Uganda Alchornea hirtella is one of the most 
favoured sources of bean stakes and branches 
are used in house construction. A branch split 
in 2 or 3 is used as a rim in basketry. Some-
62 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
times the wood is used as firewood. 
Properties The dried root bark of Alchornea 
hirtella yields 1.5 mg/g crude alkaloids and the 
dried stem bark 0.15 mg/g, both with the imi-
dazopyrimidine alkaloid alchorneine as major 
component. Alchorneine causes parasympathic 
paralysis of autonomous ganglions because of 
its strong inhibition of both the vagus nerve 
and intestinal peristalsis in anaesthetized 
dogs. 
Botany Spindly, scandent to straggling 
shrub or small tree up to 9(-12) m tall, usually 
dioecious; bark smooth, pale grey; young shoots 
long hairy to shortly appressed hairy. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules 2-5 mm long, bristly 
hairy; petiole 0.5-2(-3.5) cm long, thickened at 
base, bent at top; blade elliptical to oblanceo-
late, 5-20(-25) cm x 2-8.5 cm, base cuneate, 
apex shortly acuminate, margins remotely and 
shallowly glandular-toothed, glandular at base, 
glabrous to roughly hairy, pinnately veined. 
Male inflorescence a usual terminal panicle up 
to 30 cm long, bracts minute; female inflores-
cence a terminal, lax spike up to 10 cm long, 
few-flowered, bracts c. 2 mm long, glandular at 
base. Flowers unisexual, sessile; male flowers 
with 2 cup-shaped, reflexed, reddish sepals, 
petals absent, stamens 8, filaments united into 
a basal plate; female flowers with 5 lanceolate, 
c. 1.5 mm long, acute, slightly toothed sepals, 
petals absent, ovary superior, 3-lobed, c. 1 mm 
x 1.5 mm, smooth, shortly hairy, styles 3, up to 
2 cm long, united at base, red. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule 5-9 mm x 7-8 mm, smooth, dark 
green, slightly shortly hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid to almost globose, c. 4.5 mm x 4 mm, 
smooth, shiny, pale brown and mottled. 
Alchornea is pantropical and comprises about 
50 species, of which 6 occur in tropical Africa. 
Another Alchornea species with medicinal uses 
in DR Congo is Alchornea yambuyaensis De 
Wild. A leaf decoction, together with leaves of 
Psidium guajava L., is taken as an enema to 
treat fever. 
Ecology Alchornea hirtella occurs often gre-
gariously in the understorey of evergreen for-
est, also in secondary forest and riverine forest, 
sometimes also in associated bushland, at 400-
2500 m altitude. 
Management Alchornea hirtella is fast 
growing, and sticks used for bean support root 
quickly. 
Genetic resources and breeding Alchor-
nea hirtella is common throughout its very 
wide distribution area and therefore not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Alchornea hirtella has several 
interesting medicinal uses, e.g. for pain relief 
and as a purgative. Very little is known about 
its phytochemistry and pharmacology, besides 
the presence of the alkaloid alchorneine, and 
more research is warranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Neu-
winger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Berhaut, 1975a; Chifun-
dera, 2001; De Smet, 1996; Hamill et al., 2000; 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Wome, 1985; Yamada, 
1999. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ALCHORNEA LAXIFLORA (Benth.) Pax & 
K.Hoffm. 
Protologue Engl, Pflanzenr. IV, 147, 7: 245 
(1914). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18 
Origin and geographic distribution Al-
chornea laxiflora occurs from Nigeria east to 
Ethiopia and south to DR Congo and through 
East Africa to Zimbabwe, Mozambique, north-
eastern South Africa and Swaziland. 
Uses In Nigeria a decoction of the leaves is 
taken to treat inflammatory and infectious 
diseases. It is also a common ingredient in 
herbal antimalarial preparations. In Tanzania 
the ground leaves are taken in water to treat 
hernia. The leaf sap and root decoction are 
drunk to treat pain in neck and shoulders. The 
ash of the stem pith is applied to a stiff neck. 
In Nigeria the leaves are used as packing and 
preservation material for kola nuts. Small 
branches are used as chew sticks. Straight 
stems are used as fence poles. 
Properties Preliminary phytochemical 
screening revealed the presence of alkaloids, 
cardiac glycosides, saponins and phenolic com-
pounds in the roots, and in lower amounts, in 
the leaves. From the ethyl acetate soluble frac-
tion of the crude methanolic leaf extract the 
flavonoids quercetin and the quercetin-related 
compounds rutin and quercitrin were isolated. 
These compounds showed significant antim-
icrobial activity against several gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria and fungi. The 
anti-oxidant activity of the root and leaf ex-
tracts have been compared with that of the 
standard anti-oxidant butylated hydroxyani-
sole. The crude hexane and methanol extracts 
of Alchornea laxiflora showed 65—75% activity 
for root extracts, and ca. 40% activity for leaf 
ALOE 63 
extracts in comparison to the standard anti-
oxidant compound. 
Botany Deciduous, erect to straggling shrub 
or small tree up to 7(-10) m tall, monoecious 
with male and female inflorescences on sepa-
rate branches; bark smooth, pale grey, flaking; 
young shoots shortly hairy to almost glabrous. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules linear, 2-8 
mm long; petiole 1—7(—9) cm long, thickened at 
both ends with 2 filiform, 1-3 mm long stipels 
at top; blade elliptical-lanceolate to oblong-
oblanceolate, 5-18 cm x 3—8 cm, base rounded 
or cuneate, apex acuminate, margins shallowly 
toothed, glandular at base, sparingly shortly 
hairy on the veins, base 3-veined, reddish when 
young. Male inflorescence an axillary spike or 
raceme up to 12 cm long, developing on older 
twigs just before new leaf flush, bracts ovate, 
1.5-5 mm long; female inflorescence a termi-
nal, lax spike up to 10 cm long, few-flowered, 
bracts ovate-lanceolate, 2-3 mm long, glandu-
lar at base. Flowers unisexual, sessile; male 
flowers with 2—4(—5), almost round to ovate, 
reflexed, yellowish green or white sepals, pet-
als absent, stamens 8-9, filaments united into 
a basal plate; female flowers with 5-6, almost 
round to ovate, acute, unequal, slightly toothed 
sepals, petals absent, ovary superior, almost 
globose, c. 1 mm x 1.5 mm, scarcely 3-lobed, 
smooth, shortly hairy, styles (2-)3, up to 1.5 cm 
long, united at base, red. Fruit a 3-lobed cap-
sule 5-7 mm x 7-8 mm, smooth, dark green, 
brown or black, slightly shortly hairy, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid to almost globose, c. 4 mm x 3 mm, 
smooth or slightly rough, slightly shiny, pale 
brown or greyish. 
Alchornea is pantropical and comprises about 
50 species, of which 6 occur in tropical Africa. 
Ecology Alchornea laxiflora occurs in ever-
green forest and associated bushland, in river-
ine thickets, from sea-level up to 1600 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Alchor-
nea laxiflora is locally common throughout its 
wide distribution area, and is probably not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Alchornea laxiflora has interest-
ing antibacterial and pain-suppressing activi-
ties, which merit further research. The anti-
oxidant activities of the leaves are interesting 
as well, and more research is needed to eluci-
date the effectiveness under different condi-
tions. 
Major references Farombi et al., 2003; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Ogundipe et al., 2001; Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Burkill, 1994; Kokwaro, 
1993; Ogundipe et al., 2001; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ALOE ARBORESCENS Mill. 
Protologue Gard. diet. ed. 8: Aloe n.3 (1768). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2ra = 14 
Vernacular names Krantz aloe, Kidachi 
aloe, mountain bush aloe, candelabra aloe, 
octopus plant, torch plant (En). Aloes arbores-
cent (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
arborescens is native to southern Africa and 
occurs in Malawi, Botswana, Zimbabwe and 
Mozambique as well as South Africa. It has 
been imported in many countries in the tropics 
and subtropics as an ornamental and medicinal 
plant. In Italy it is commercially grown for its 
medicinal and cosmetic uses and in Japan for 
both medicine and food. In Japan, where it was 
first introduced in the 17th century, it has be-
come naturalized. Commercial growing of Aloe 
arborescens has started recently in Israel and 
China. 
Uses The split or crushed fresh leaves of 
Aloe arborescens are widely used to treat burns 
and wounds. In South Africa a leaf decoction is 
given to women to ease childbirth. In Japan 
the leaves are used as a vegetable and as a 
health food because they are thought to over-
come constipation. Parts of the stem with a 
number of leaves attached are marketed as a 
vegetable. Preparations are sold as over-the-
counter drugs for acceleration of gastric secre-
Aloe arborescens - wild 
64 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tion, as a purgative and for dermatological use. 
Aloe arborescens is an important ingredient of 
'Kidachi aloe candies' popular in Japan for 
their tangy yoghurt flavour. Worldwide atten-
tion was drawn to the possible value of gel pre-
pared from Aloe arborescens after the second 
World War, when skin burns of victims of the 
nuclear bombs on Japan were successfully 
treated with this gel. In southern Africa Aloe 
arborescens is planted as a living fence. Home-
steads that have been abandoned for over a 
century can still be traced thanks to surviving 
fences. Aloe arborescens is grown widely as an 
ornamental in the subtropics and is especially 
popular in the Mediterranean region. 
Production and international trade There 
are no statistics available on the production of 
Aloe arborescens. Japan is probably the largest 
producer, but for the national market only. 
Properties As in most Aloe species, the leaf 
exudate of Aloe arborescens contains anthrone 
10-C-glucosides (anthraquinone derivatives) 
such as aloin and hydroxyaloins. Aloin is a 
mixture of the stereoisomers aloin A (barba-
loin) and aloin B (isobarbaloin). Furthermore, 
the exudate contains the pyrone derivative 
aloenin and free and glucosylated 2-acetonyl-7-
hydroxy-5-methylchromones (e.g. aloesone, 
furoaloesone, aloeresin A, aloeresin B (aloesin) 
and aloeresin C). The compound responsible for 
the laxative properties is aloin, which itself is 
inactive as a laxative, but is activated by 
Eubacterium sp. to aloe-emodin anthrone. Al-
though some observations indicate that in di-
arrhoea induced by aloin, increased water con-
tent might be more important than stimulated 
peristalsis, the side effects of prolonged use 
point to a griping effect on the colon. An-
thraquinone laxatives should not be used for 
longer than 8—10 days, or by children younger 
than 12 years. Contra-indications include 
pregnancy, breastfeeding, intestinal inflamma-
tions and haemorrhoids. It has been claimed 
that aloin is responsible for antihistamine and 
anti-inflammatory activity. Aloin should be 
administered preferably in combination with 
an antispasmodic to moderate its griping ac-
tion. Possible side effects of aloin include con-
gestion and irritation of the pelvic organs. An-
thraquinone laxatives may play a role in devel-
opment of colorectal cancer as they have 
genotoxic potential and also tumorigenic poten-
tial in rodents. Both aloin and aloeresin B have 
skin-whitening activity. In 2002 the United 
States Food and Drug Administration with-
drew the 'generally recognized as safe and ef-
fective (GRASE)' status for over-the-counter 
drugs based on aloe exudates. 
The gel contains polysaccharides and glycopro-
teins. Apart from mannan and glucomannan, 
arboran A and arboran B have been identified, 
which have hypoglycaemic effects. The struc-
ture-function relationship of polysaccharides 
from gel from different Aloe species is still sub-
ject to research. Biological activity is thought 
to be, at least partly, due to immunomodulat-
ing effects of these polysaccharides. 
The leaf epidermis contains lectins (aloctin A 
and aloctin B) that inhibit the growth of fi-
brosarcoma in animals. Aloe arborescens leaf 
powder showed protective effects on mouse 
skin injury induced by soft X-irradiation. It 
also showed protective effects against human 
carcinogenesis. Aloe arborescens gel works as a 
synergist of neomycin sulfate in eye drops; they 
are useful in the treatment of inflammation 
and infections of the eye. 
Freeze-dried leaves have shown a 70% growth 
inhibition of Trichophyton mentagrophytes (one 
of the fungi causing athlete's foot in humans), 
induced in guinea-pigs feet in vivo. 
Adulterations and substitutes Psyllium 
(Plantago spp.), which is a natural bulk laxa-
tive, is one of the substitutes for an-
thraquinone-containing laxative drugs such as 
aloe that may cause dependency and/or cathar-
tic colon. Anthraquinone-containing prepara-
tions from Senna alata (L.) Roxb. and other 
Senna and Cassia species are sometimes rec-
ommended as substitutes for Aloe products. 
Centella asiatica (L.) Urb. is recommended as a 
substitute for Aloe vera gels in wound treat-
ments; its tri terpenes have exhibited both 
wound healing and antibacterial activities. 
Description Succulent shrub up to 5 m tall; 
stems solitary, branching at or near the base, 
with persistent dead leaves. Leaves in a dense 
rosette, spreading, becoming recurved; stipules 
absent; petiole absent; blade lanceolate, up to 
60 cm x 7 cm, apex long-acuminate, margin 
with firm, deltoid, forward-pointing, yellow 
teeth, c. 4 mm long, 1-1.5 cm apart, blade grey-
ish green, reddish tinged in dry conditions. 
Inflorescence a terminal raceme, 20-40 cm 
long, 1-4 per rosette, erect, cylindrical-
acuminate, very densely flowered; peduncle up 
to 60 cm long, simple or rarely with 1 short 
branch; bracts broadly ovate, 2-5 mm long. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel 1— 
1.5 cm long; perianth tubular, 3.5-4 cm long, c. 
7 mm in diameter, lobes 6, free to the base, 
bright orange to scarlet; stamens 6, exserted; 
ALOE 65 
Mßl-
Aloe arborescens - 1, plant habit; 2, part of 
inflorescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
ovary superior, 3-celled, style filiform, stigma 
head-shaped, exserted. Fruit an oblong-ovoid 
capsule up to 18 mm x 7 mm, yellowish brown, 
dehiscing loculicidally, many-seeded. Seeds c. 
3.5 mm long, with very narrow wings. 
Other botanical information Aloe com-
prises about 450 species in Africa and Arabia, 
of which c. 315 occur in mainland Africa, c. 100 
are endemic to Madagascar or the Indian 
Ocean islands (including the former Lomato-
phyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. The taxon-
omy is complicated by the occurrence of inter-
specific hybrids both in the wild and in cultiva-
tion. Aloe arborescens is a morphologically very 
variable species. 
Growth and development In southern 
Africa Aloe arborescens flowers in June-July. 
Ecology Aloe arborescens occurs in montane 
grassland among rocks, in open evergreen for-
est and in coastal forests from sea-level to 
2100(-2800) m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Aloe arbores-
cens can be propagated by seed and by stem 
cuttings of 3-10 cm long. It can also be multi-
plied by tissue culture methods. 
Yield The contents of aloin, aloeresin and 
aloenin are highest in the leaves that grow 
high on the branch. Repeated pruning in-
creases the content of these compounds in the 
dry exudate of the regrown parts from 10% to 
85%. 
Genetic resources In Zimbabwe Aloe ar-
borescens has a protected status. As it is widely 
cultivated for ornamental purposes there are 
no major threats. All Aloe species, except Aloe 
vera (L.) Burm.f., are listed by CITES and all 
international trade of plants and products 
should be regulated. 
Breeding In the wild, hybrids of Aloe arbor-
escens with a number of other species occur. 
Hybrids with Aloe ferox Mill, are common and 
are of interest as garden ornamentals. There 
are no indications that breeding is actively 
undertaken, although there is discussion in the 
literature of Japanese cultivars. Once gel pro-
duction becomes important, selection for larger 
leaf size and low anthraquinone content would 
be indicated. 
Prospects Aloe arborescens is, surprisingly, 
little used as a medicinal in its native range 
and surprisingly highly esteemed in Asia and 
the Mediterranean. The chemistry is subject of 
intensive study but husbandry aspects have 
not yet been published in an accessible form. 
Future developments will depend on competi-
tive advantages of Aloe arborescens over Aloe 
vera. 
Major references Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Kuzuya, Shimpo & Beppu, 2004; Newton, 2001; 
Yagi, 2004. 
Other references Beppu et al., 2004; Carter, 
2001; Chauser-Volfson & Gutterman, 2004; 
Furukawa et al., 2002; Gutterman & Volfson, 
2000; Kawai et al., 1998; Kodym et al., 2002; 
van Wyk & Gericke, 2000; Umano et al., 1999. 
Sources of illustration Coates Palgrave, 
1983. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE BUETTNERI A.Berger 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 36: 60 (1905). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14 
Synonyms Aloe barteri Baker (1860) p.p. 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
buettneri is restricted to West Africa, where it 
occurs from Senegal to Nigeria. In this region it 
is locally cultivated. 
Uses Aloe buettneri is widely used as a me-
dicinal plant. The leaves are applied externally 
for all kinds of skin trouble: burns, wounds, 
66 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
insect bites, Guinea worm sores and vitiligo. 
Internal ly, the leaf sap is t aken to t rea t intes-
t inal and uro-genital problems. In Burkina 
Faso the dried powdered leaves are t aken to 
t rea t malar ia , while in Côte d'Ivoire and Togo 
the roots are used for th is purpose. Throughout 
West Africa, decoctions of bulbs and roots are 
t aken to cure liver problems, especially jaun-
dice. Decoctions of leaves, roots and whole 
p lants are t aken as a laxative, to t r ea t stom-
ach-ache and to get rid of in terna l paras i tes . 
Rheumat i sm is t rea ted with leaf ash. A leaf 
decoction is d runk to cure cough. A decoction of 
the chopped whole p lan t is t aken to t r ea t vene-
real diseases and infertility in women. A leaf 
decoction is applied for t r ea t ing cancer. In 
Senegal a leaf decoction is added to the drink-
ing wate r of poultry to prevent avian cholera. 
In Nigeria leaf sap is given to catt le as an 
anthelmint ic . 
P r o p e r t i e s The methanol extract of the 
dried leaf exudate of Aloe buettneri or the re-
lated Aloe schweinfurthii Baker showed signifi-
cant in-vivo activity agains t helminthias is 
caused by Nippostrongylus sp. in ra t s . 
B o t a n y Succulent perennia l herb up to 80 
cm tall, without stem, usual ly solitary, rarely 
suckering, with a bulb. Leaves about 16 in a 
rosette, erect to spreading; st ipules absent; 
petiole absent; blade t r iangular , 30-50 cm x 10 
cm, apex acuminate , margin ha rd and tough, 
with firm white to pale pink sharp tee th 3-4 
mm long, 1—1.5 cm apar t , blade with scat tered 
whit ish spots. Inflorescence consisting of cylin-
drical-conical to almost head-like racemes 15 
cm x 7 cm, peduncle 70—90 cm long, with 3—5 
branches ; bracts deltoid-acute or lanceolate-
acuminate , 10-15 m m x 6-8 mm. Flowers bi-
sexual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel 2-2.5 cm 
long; per ian th tubular , up to 4 cm x 1 cm, in-
flated around the ovary, lobes 6, c. 12 mm long, 
greenish yellow to dull red; s t amens 6, slightly 
exserted; ovary superior, 3-celled, style fili-
form, s t igma head-shaped, exserted. Frui t an 
ovoid capsule up to 4 cm long, dehiscing loculi-
cidally, many-seeded. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean is lands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. 
In West Africa 3 indigenous Aloe species a re 
dist inguished: Aloe buettneri, Aloe schwein-
furthii Baker and Aloe macrocarpa Tod. The 
n a m e Aloe barteri Baker has long been used as 
a n a m e for all West African Aloe, bu t the n a m e 
was based on a mixture of p lant pa r t s of Aloe 
buettneri and Aloe schweinfurthii. In West Af-
rica, the distr ibution of Aloe schweinfurthii 
largely overlaps with t h a t of Aloe buettneri, but 
the former species also occurs in DR Congo, 
Sudan and Uganda . Aloe schweinfurthii differs 
from Aloe buettneri in lacking a bulb, its 
smaller fruits and the presence of suckers. Aloe 
schweinfurthii is cult ivated locally for i ts me-
dicinal uses. It has the same uses as Aloe 
buettneri. Aloe macrocarpa is widely distrib-
uted in West Africa and extends east to Er i t rea 
and Djibouti. In Er i t rea the leaf exudate is 
used medicinally and the plant is p lanted on 
contours for soil conservation. In West Africa 
t he flowers a re ea ten as a vegetable. In west-
ern DR Congo the leaf sap of Aloe congolensis 
De Wild. & T.Durand is t radi t ional ly used to 
cure sores, wounds, burns , pain in the joints, 
inf lammation of the breas t and as a laxative, 
whereas dried and powdered leaves are said to 
prevent cancer of the colon and rec tum. Aloe 
congolensis appears closely related to Aloe 
buettneri and is possibly synonymous. 
E c o l o g y Aloe buettneri occurs in grass land 
and woodland a t 250-900 m al t i tude. 
M a n a g e m e n t Although Aloe buettneri is 
sometimes cultivated, no details of i ts hus-
bandry have been published. Most harves t ing 
is done from wild p lants . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Like all 
Aloe species except Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f., Aloe 
buettneri is listed by CITES and t r ade in p lan ts 
and p lan t pa r t s is restricted, a l though there 
mus t be numerous p lan ts in botanical gardens 
and pr ivate succulent collections and the re are 
no indications t h a t the species is th rea tened in 
the wild. 
P r o s p e c t s Aloe buettneri will probably re-
main locally impor tan t as a medicinal plant . 
Pharmacological work on West African Aloe 
species has been limited so far and further 
work is war ran ted . Related Aloe species of 
Centra l Africa are in need of taxonomie study. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Baerts & Lehmann, 2005a; 
Burkill, 1995; Newton, 2001; von Koenen, 
2001. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Berhaut , 1967; Carter , 
2001; Hammond, Fielding & Bishop, 1997; 
Kibungo Kembelo, 2004; La tham, 2004; New-
ton, 2004. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
ALOE 67 
ALOE DIVARICATA A.Berger 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 36: 64 (1905). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n — 14 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
divaricata is an endemic of Madagascar and is 
widespread in the western and southern parts 
of the island. 
Uses A leaf decoction of Aloe divaricata is 
used as a purgative. A decoction of the leaves 
or the leaf sap is applied internally and exter-
nally to improve healing of bone fractures. The 
dehydrated exudate, known as 'Madagascar 
Aloes', has been an important article in local 
and international trade. 
Production and international trade Export 
of 'Madagascar Aloes' by the East India Com-
pany dates back to 1630, and prices then were 
higher than those for 'Socotrine aloe', from Aloe 
perryi Baker. The present production is unclear 
and there are no export figures. 
Properties The internationally traded 
product 'Madagascar Aloes' contains 15-40% 
anthrone 10-C-glucosides (anthraquinone de-
rivatives) such as aloin, hydroxyaloins and 
sometimes aloinoside. Aloin and aloinoside are 
both mixtures of stereoisomers. Aloin is re-
sponsible for the laxative properties. On a dry 
weight basis the exudate of Aloe divaricata 
contains 18.5% aloin, and the leaf 3%. Aloe 
divaricata is reported to induce labour by 
stimulating contractions of the uterine mus-
cles. 
Botany Succulent shrub, stem 2—3(—6) m 
tall, usually sparsely branching from the base 
or low down, dead leaves persistent over 50-
100 cm. Leaves about 30 in a rosette, erect-
spreading; stipules absent; petiole absent; 
blade lanceolate, up to 65 cm x 7 cm, apex ob-
tuse, margin cartilaginous, with deltoid teeth, 
5-6 mm long, reddish brown, 15-20 mm apart, 
blade dull grey-green tinged reddish, exudate 
drying yellow. Inflorescence heavily branched, 
consisting of 60-80 terminal, erect racemes, 
15-20 cm long, lax, apex acuminate; peduncle 
up to 1 m long; bracts deltoid, 4 mm long. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel 6 
mm long; perianth tubular, 2.5-3 cm long, up 
to 7 mm in diameter, lobes 6, free to base, scar-
let or pale pink; stamens 6, exserted; ovary 
superior, 3-celled, style filiform, stigma head-
like, exserted. Fruit an oblong capsule, 25-30 
mm x 12 mm long, dehiscing loculicidally, 
many-seeded. Seeds c. 1.5 cm long, wings 4 mm 
wide. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. The 
taxonomy is complicated by the occurrence of 
interspecific hybrids both in the wild and in 
cultivation. Based on genome size, most species 
from Madagascar are considered closely related 
(with the exception of those formerly placed in 
Lomatophyllum) although the many different 
growth forms would suggest otherwise. The 
species from Madagascar were obviously iso-
lated long ago from the mainland African spe-
cies. 
Apart from Aloe divaricata, a number of other 
Madagascan Aloe species have recorded me-
dicinal uses. A number of unspecified species 
are used for sun creams and dandruff lotions. 
Aloe vaombe Decorse & Poiss. (orthographic 
variant 'vahombe) is a small tree with an un-
branched trunk up to 5 m tall. Skin lesions are 
treated with leaf juice, and the leaves are 
boiled in water and drunk to cure yellow fever. 
Extracts of Aloe vaombe leaves have shown 
anti-infectious activity when mice were in-
jected with them but no bactericidal activity 
was detected. In another test with mice, ad-
ministration of a gel extract called 'Alva' re-
duced the growth rate of fibrosarcoma and 
melanoma tumours. Aloe macroclada Baker, 
locally called 'vahona', is a solitary plant with-
out stem. The leaves are used to cure ascites, 
while the leaf pulp is rubbed on the head to 
treat dandruff. It has a reputation as a tradi-
tional anti-carcinogenic. On internet 'vahona' 
gel products are offered for sale with similar 
properties as for Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. The leaf 
sap of Aloe capitata Baker is used as a cathar-
tic and purgative; the whole plant is used to 
cure dropsy. 
Ecology Aloe divaricata is mostly found in 
arid bush vegetation on sandy soils and in 
coastal thickets, up to 800 m altitude. In dense 
bush it can grow with a simple stem up to 6 m 
long. 
Management All Madagascan Aloe species 
used as medicine are collected from the wild. 
Aloe divaricata is considered the Madagascan 
species with the highest exudate production. 
Genetic resources and breeding All Aloe 
species except Aloe vera are listed by CITES, 
and quite a number of Madagascan species 
appear in Appendix 1. Harvesting from the 
wild for medicinal and ornamental uses and 
habitat destruction are major threats to Aloe 
68 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
diuaricata. 
Prospects The Aloe species from Madagas-
car have not been the subject of systematic 
ethnobotanical research. It is therefore difficult 
to determine their potential. Species such as 
Aloe divaricata, Aloe macroclada and Aloe 
vaombe could possibly play a role in the world-
wide trade of medicinal and cosmetic products 
and could compete with Aloe vera if they can be 
cultivated and produced on a large scale. 
Major references CITES, 2003; Debray, 
Jacquemin & Razafindrambao, 1971; Groom & 
Reynolds, 1987; Newton, 2001; Perrier de la 
Bâthie, 1938; Rasolondraibe, 2003. 
Other references Radjabi-Nassab et al., 
1984; Ralamboranto et al., 1982; Rasoanaivo, 
1990; Ravohitraniaina, 2003; Reynolds, 1966; 
Stiles, 1998; Tizard & Ramamoorthy, 2004; 
Strickland & Pelley, 2004; Zonneveld, 2002. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE FEROX Mill. 
Protologue Gard. diet. ed. 8: Aloe n. 22 
(1768). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14 
Synonyms Aloe candelabrum A.Berger 
(1906). 
Vernacular names Cape aloe, bitter aloe, 
red aloe (En). Aloès du Cap (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
ferox is indigenous in South Africa. From the 
Dutch East India Company's garden in the 
Cape it was distributed throughout the tropics 
and subtropics, where it is grown as an orna-
mental and medicinal plant. Although not 
treated or mentioned in regional floras, its oc-
currence in several countries of tropical Africa 
is probable. 
Uses In southern Africa the thickened, red 
leaf exudate, called 'Cape aloe', is used as a 
purgative in human and veterinary medicine 
and fresh exudate is applied in cases of oph-
thalmia and syphilis. The gel from the core of 
the leaves has a similar use as the gel from the 
leaves of Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. and is used to 
treat skin afflictions (burns, wounds, abra-
sions, irritations), and is applied as a poultice 
on contusions or as a general refrigerant. It is 
furthermore used as a hair wash to promote 
hair growth and against dandruff and as a 
cosmetic to improve the complexion and to 
smooth the skin. Aloe gel is also widely used as 
a hydrating and skin-protecting agent in 
creams and liquids such as sun lotion, shaving 
cream, lip balm and healing ointments. An 
infusion of crushed leaves in water is given to 
cattle to treat jaundice and redwater and to 
expel worms. The gel has been used in South 
Africa to make a jam that tastes like water-
melon jam; it is also gaining importance as a 
refreshing and nutritive ingredient in food and 
drinks. The gel, leaf powder and drinks are 
produced in South Africa for both domestic and 
international markets. Dry leaves are har-
vested and crushed, after which a decoction is 
used to make a herbal tea. The leaf ash is used 
as an insect repellent. In South Africa Aloe 
ferox is planted as a live fence. It is readily 
browsed by goats. 
Production and international trade Though 
considerable quantities of 'Cape aloe' are mar-
keted and used locally, most of the exudate 
produced in South Africa is exported. Total 
legal harvest is approximately 400 t/year, al-
though an additional 300 t is presumed to go 
undocumented. Exports are destined for 
Europe, Asia and North America, with the 
main importing countries being the United 
States, Japan and Germany. Production of Aloe 
ferox gel has been hampered by lack of process-
ing facilities in South Africa. Most gel is 
bought by the cosmetic industry, which de-
mands high quality. 
Properties The exudate of Aloe ferox con-
tains 15—40% anthrone 10-C-glucosides (an-
thraquinone derivatives) such as aloin and 
hydroxyaloins. Aloin is a mixture of the stereo-
isomers aloin A (barbaloin) and aloin B (iso-
barbaloin). Furthermore, the exudate contains 
the pyrone derivative aloenin and free and glu-
cosylated 2-acetonyl-7-hydroxy-5-methylchromones 
(e.g. aloesone, furoaloesone, aloeresin A, alo-
eresin B (aloesin) and aloeresin C). Aloe ferox 
also contains free or glycosylated feroxidin (a 
tetralin) and feralolide (a dihydroisocoumarin). 
'Cape aloe' drugs should contain at least 18% 
hydroxy-anthraquinone derivatives, not more 
than 12% moisture and 2% ash, and a water-
soluble fraction of at least 45%. The compound 
responsible for the laxative properties is aloin, 
which itself is inactive as a laxative, but is ac-
tivated to aloe-emodin anthrone, by Eubacte-
rium sp. Although some observations indicate 
that in diarrhoea induced by aloin, increased 
water content might be more important than 
stimulated peristalsis, the side effects of pro-
longed use point to a griping effect on the co-
lon. Anthraquinone laxatives should not be 
used for longer than 8—10 days, or by children 
ALOE 69 
younger than 12 years. Contra-indications in-
clude pregnancy, breastfeeding, intestinal in-
flammations and haemorrhoids. In 2002 the 
United States Food and Drug Administration 
withdrew the 'generally recognized as safe and 
effective (GRASE)' status for over-the-counter 
drugs based on aloe exudates. Aloin should be 
administered preferably in combination with 
an antispasmodic to moderate its griping ac-
tion. Possible side effects of aloin include con-
gestion and irritation of the pelvic organs. An-
thraquinone containing laxatives such as aloe 
may play a role in colorectal cancer as they 
have genotoxic potential, and tumorigenic po-
tential in rodents. Aloe-emodin, chrysophanol 
and aloin A, all isolated from Aloe ferox leaf 
extract, have significant antibacterial activity 
in vitro. Aloeresin A and B both reduce the 
oedematous response induced by croton oil in 
the mouse ear by 40%. Aloeresin B also modu-
lates melanogenesis via competitive inhibition 
of tyrosinase, thus showing promise as a pig-
mentation-altering agent for cosmetic or thera-
peutic applications. 
Adulterations and substitutes Psyllium 
(Plantago spp.), which is a natural bulk laxa-
tive, is one of the substitutes for an-
thraquinone-containing laxative drugs such as 
Aloe, and has the advantage that it does not 
cause dependency and/or cathartic colon. An-
thraquinone-containing preparations from 
Senna alata (L.) Roxb. and other Senna and 
Cassia species are also sometimes recom-
mended as substitutes for aloe. Centella asia-
tica (L.) Urb. is recommended as a substitute 
for aloe gels in wound treatments; its triter-
penes have exhibited both wound healing and 
antibacterial activities. 
Description Succulent shrub up to 3(-5 m) 
tall; stem solitary, up to 30 cm in diameter, 
rarely branching from above the base, with 
persistent dead leaves. Leaves 50-60 in a 
dense rosette, spreading or recurved; stipules 
absent; petiole absent; blade lanceolate-oblong, 
up to 100 cm x 15 cm, apex long-acuminate, 
margin with sharp, reddish(-brown) teeth c. 6 
mm long, 1-2 cm apart, blade dull green, some-
times reddish tinged; exudate yellow, drying 
red. Inflorescence consisting of large, dense, 
elongated racemes 50-80 cm long; peduncle 
with 5-8 spreading branches; bracts broadly 
ovate, 2-5 mm x 2—4 mm. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 3-merous; pedicel 1—1.5 cm long; peri-
anth tubular, 2.5-3.5 cm long, lobes 6, 12-17 
mm long, red or deep orange, sometimes white 
or yellow; stamens 6, exserted; ovary superior, 
Aloe ferox - 1, plant habit; 2, leaf margin; 3, top 
of inflorescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
3-celled, style filiform, stigma head-shaped, 
exserted. Fruit an ovoid capsule up to 3 cm 
long, dehiscing loculicidally, many-seeded. 
Seeds c. 9 mm long, broadly winged. 
Other botanical information Aloe com-
prises about 450 species in Africa and Arabia, 
of which c. 315 occur in mainland Africa, c. 100 
are endemic to Madagascar or the Indian 
Ocean islands (including the former Lomato-
phyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. 
Another South African species with medicinal 
uses is Aloe maculata All. (synonym: Aloe 
saponaria (Aiton) Haw.). It has been planted in 
the drier parts of Mauritius, Rodrigues and 
Comoros as an ornamental, but is also used 
medicinally. An infusion of the leaves is used 
as eye drops to treat conjunctivitis, and rubbed 
on boils, sores, bruises and rheumatic joints. It 
is also taken to treat stomach-ache and head-
ache. In South Africa a leaf infusion is taken to 
treat cardiac problems and as an anthelmintic. 
The pulverized flower infusion is drunk or 
given as an enema to treat colds with fever in 
children. The leaves contain anthraquinones, 
as well as aloesaponarin I and II, and aloin. 
The leaves yield a yellow dye. The plant is 
70 M E D I C I N A L P L A N T S l 
readily browsed by goats. 
Growth and development Aloe species 
follow the Crassulacean acid metabolism 
(CAM). CAM plants are able to fix CO2 at night 
and to photosynthesize with closed stomata 
during the day, thus minimizing water loss. 
This, plus their succulent leaves and stems and 
the presence of a thick cuticle, makes them 
well adapted to dry conditions. Severe drought, 
though, stops exudate production. Aloe ferox 
has a stem surrounded with a persistent layer 
of dead leaves that insulate the stem in the 
case of bush fires. Harvesting of Aloe ferox 
leaves for medicinal purposes could thus result 
in significant mortality due to fires. The flower 
morphology of Aloe ferox suggests pollination 
by birds. However, honey bees also play a role 
in the pollination. Aloe ferox is self-
incompatible and only a few flowers per raceme 
flower simultaneously. The stamens produce 
pollen in the morning and wither in the after-
noon, whereas the style is exserted on the sec-
ond day of anthesis. 
Ecology Aloe ferox is one of the dominant 
species in the 'succulent bushland' vegetation 
in South Africa. It grows in a wide range of 
climatic conditions. It is especially abundant on 
arid rocky hillsides up to 1000 m altitude, 
where mean temperatures range from 27-
31°C. Annual rainfall ranges from 50-300 mm. 
Though the root system is shallow, the plant 
can grow under such dry conditions. Waterlog-
ging should be avoided and Aloe ferox thrives 
on well-drained, rich soils. It withstands light 
frost, although the flowers may be damaged. 
Propagation and planting Aloe ferox does 
not produce suckers but can be propagated by 
seed and planting of the tops of old plants. 
Plant regeneration from root and embryo tis-
sue is successful as well. 
Management Commercial cultivation be-
comes a profitable option now that not only the 
exudate but also the gel has become interest-
ing. Details on cultivation have not been pub-
lished. 
Diseases and pests A leaf-mining insect 
affects yields of natural populations of Aloe 
ferox. 
Harvesting Harvesting of leaves from wild 
plants of Aloe ferox is thought to be sustain-
able. Rural populations have been harvesting 
for generations and a fee is paid to the land-
owner. Aloe ferox exudate is often collected by 
cutting off the leaves transversely close to the 
stem and positioning them in such a way that 
the exudate drains into pots, tubs, vessels or 
even a simple canvas placed over a depression 
in the ground. The exudate may also be ob-
tained by squeezing the leaves or by warm or 
cold water retting. In South Africa Aloe ferox is 
preferably tapped during the rainy season, 
because then the exudate is more abundant, 
but tapping is also carried out in other periods 
of the year, except for the driest months. The 
leaves are usually cut in the morning and it 
takes 4-5 hours for the exudate to drain from a 
pile of leaves. Only older leaves are cut; 
younger ones and growing tips are spared. 
Yield Two tonnes of Aloe ferox leaves yield 
about 1 kg of gel powder, which is a higher 
ratio than for Aloe vera. 
Handling after harvest Collected exudate 
is usually concentrated by boiling and then 
cooling. On cooling, a solid, amorphous extract 
is formed and this constitutes the drug. Its 
appearance varies with the concentration proc-
ess used. If the exudate has been concentrated 
slowly, in the sun or over a low fire, the cooled 
extract is opaque, waxy and liver-coloured ('he-
patic aloe') and aloin crystals are visible under 
the microscope. If, on the other hand, the juice 
has been concentrated rapidly, for instance 
over a fierce fire, the cooled extract is semi-
transparent ('glassy aloe') and no aloin crystals 
are visible under the microscope. 
An option for adding value is to produce dried 
and ground leaf powder. After the leaf exudate 
is extracted, the leaves are pulped and 
squeezed dry under high pressure. The liquid 
is settled and treated with chemicals to floccu-
late the jelly fraction. 
The gel can be obtained by removing the outer 
tissues of the leaf. In Aruba, gel is obtained by 
cutting open the leaves lengthwise and scrap-
ing the gel from the leaf blade. The youngest 
leaves (< 25 cm) are not suitable because of the 
small amount of gel, but the leaves should not 
be too old, because gel quantity and quality 
may decline. 
Genetic resources Because of their popu-
larity as a garden and greenhouse plant, vari-
ous Aloe species are potentially at risk of ex-
tinction as a result of plant collection from the 
wild. Aloe ferox is cultivated widely as an or-
namental. Harvesting from the wild is still 
considered sustainable but warrants monitor-
ing. An export permit is compulsory because 
apart from Aloe vera, all Aloe species are listed 
in the Convention on International Trade in 
Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora 
(CITES) Appendices. 
Breeding No breeding programmes are 
ALOE 71 
known to exist for Aloe ferox. High-yielding 
plants may be selected and propagated for 
commercial cultivation. In Aloe ferox in South 
Africa, the aloin content of the leaf exudate 
was found to differ markedly between prove-
nances. Many Aloe species hybridize in the 
wild if their area of distribution and period of 
flowering overlap, and it is easy to produce 
hybrids in cultivation. The scope for breeding 
and selection is therefore enormous. 
Prospects Aloe ferox is a potential crop in 
arid regions. It will remain beneficial as a 
household remedy: fresh gel can easily be pre-
pared and applied to wounds. In its use as a 
laxative, however, there is a tendency for the 
drug to be replaced by other laxatives such as 
those from Plantago spp. The gel industry has 
a bright future. Other Aloe species producing 
suckers, such as Aloe turkanensis Christian 
and Aloe flexilifolia Christian from East Africa, 
may prove better candidates for commercial 
cultivation. 
Major references Aguilar & Brink, 1999; 
CITES, 2003; Coates Palgrave, 1983; Glen & 
Hardy, 2000; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoon-
doyal, 1996; Kambizi, Sultana & Afolayan, 
2004; Newton, 2001; Newton & Vaughan, 1996; 
van Zyl, Mander & Antrobus, 2001. 
Other references Baerts & Lehmann, 2005b; 
Bayne, 2002; Bond, 1983; Grierson & Afolayan, 
1999; Jones et a l , 2002; Kleinschmidt, 2004; 
Latham, 2004; Mascolo et al., 2004; Neu-
winger, 2000; Newton, 2004; Speranza et al., 
1993; Speranza et al., 2005; van Wyk & 
Gericke, 2000; van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn & 
Gericke, 1997; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Sources of illustration Hobson et al., 1975; 
Jeppe, 1969. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE FLEXILIFOLIA Christian 
Protologue Journ. S. African Bot. 8(2): 167 
(1942). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
flexilifolia is endemic to the Usambara Moun-
tains of north-east Tanzania. 
Uses Sap from crushed roots and leaves of 
Aloe flexilifolia is applied by the Shambaa peo-
ple of Tanzania to reduce swelling of the testi-
cles and scrotum. 
Properties The distinctive constituents in 
Aloe are phenolic compounds, notably chro-
mone, anthraquinone or anthrone derivatives. 
The exudate of Aloe flexilifolia is known to be 
caustic, and is rich in aloin. Aloin is the active 
ingredient and has purgative properties. Other 
compounds of interest for their medicinal activ-
ity in this and other Aloe species are the poly-
saccharides contained in the gel from the core 
of the leaves, and lectins found in several plant 
parts. 
Botany Succulent perennial shrub; stem 
stout, erect and up to 1 m tall or slender, pen-
dulous and up to 2 m long, much branched 
from the base forming large clumps. Leaves 
laxly crowded at top of branches, hanging 
down; stipules absent; petiole absent; blade 
narrowly lanceolate, up to 50 cm x 7 cm, apex 
long-acuminate, margin hard and tough, with 
pale brown sharp teeth 1-2 mm long, 1-2 cm 
apart, blade pale bluish green with a few white 
spots when young; exudate drying brown. In-
florescence consisting of erect, cylindrical ra-
cemes, 10-15(-30) cm x 8 cm, densely flowered; 
peduncle horizontal to down-curved, 50—65 cm 
long, with 6-8 branches, lowest branches occa-
sionally rebranched; bracts ovate-lanceolate, 5— 
6 mm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 3-
merous; pedicel 12-18 mm long; perianth tubu-
lar, up to 3.5 cm long x c. 8 mm, lobes 6, 10-12 
mm long, bright red or brownish red, some-
times yellow; stamens 6, exserted; ovary supe-
rior, 3-celled, style filiform, stigma head-
shaped, exserted. Fruit unknown. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. Aloe 
flexilifolia belongs to a group of species with 
decumbent, sprawling or pendulous stems. 
Several other East African species in this 
group have medicinal uses. The leaf sap of Aloe 
carolineae L.E.Newton is used in Kenya to cure 
eye disorders. Aloe pulcherrima M.G.Gilbert & 
Sebsebe, which is endemic to central Ethiopia, 
is used medicinally and has become scarce in 
the wild due to harvesting, but is increasingly 
cultivated in gardens. According to CITES, 
Aloe scabrifolia L.E.Newton & Lavranos from 
Kenya is threatened as a result of overexploita-
tion for medicinal use and exudate extraction; 
the leaf exudate is brown and contains much 
aloin A. The So people of Uganda use the exu-
date of Aloe wilsonii Reynolds from north-
western Kenya and north-eastern Uganda ex-
ternally to cure eye infections, headache and 
body pains, while an infusion of the whole 
72 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
plant is taken as an emetic; pounded roots and 
leaves are applied to aching teeth. The leaf 
exudate is yellow and turns brownish when 
drying. 
Ecology Aloe flexilifolia occurs on rocky 
slopes and cliff-faces at 1000-1250 m altitude. 
Management Aloe flexilifolia can easily be 
propagated by suckers and stem cuttings. 
Genetic resources and breeding Harvest-
ing from the wild for medicinal and ornamental 
uses and habitat destruction are major threats 
to many Aloe species. All Aloe species, except 
Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. are listed by CITES. The 
status of Aloe flexilifolia is classified as 'Unde-
termined'. However, in view of its restricted 
range and a general decline in Tanzania of 
populations of medicinally used Aloe species, 
'Vulnerable' would probably be a more appro-
priate classification. 
Prospects Research into the chemical com-
position and affinities of Aloe species is well 
underway. However, the ethnobotanical as-
pects of less important species such as Aloe 
flexilifolia are poorly documented. The high 
aloin content makes Aloe flexilifolia a potential 
crop plant. Growing Aloe as a commercial crop 
might take the pressure off wild populations 
but more research is needed to identify the 
species best suited for domestication and their 
requirements in cultivation. 
Major references Carter, 1994; CITES, 
2003; Morgan, 1981; Newton, 2001; Reynolds, 
1996. 
Other references Demissew Sebsebe & Gil-
bert, 1997; Groom & Reynolds, 1987; Heine & 
König, 1988; Kokwaro, 1993; Newton & 
Lavranos, 1990; Reynolds, 1997. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE LATERITIA Engl. 
Protologue Pflanzenw. Ost-Afrikas: 140 
(1895). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n — 14 
Vernacular names Mlalangao (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
lateritia is restricted to East Africa, and occurs 
naturally in southern Ethiopia, Kenya and 
Tanzania. It has not been domesticated, and is 
only occasionally cultivated as an ornamental. 
Records of Aloe lateritia for DR Congo, 
Rwanda, Burundi and Uganda refer to Aloe 
wollastonii Rendle. 
Uses In Kenya the leaf exudate of Aloe la-
Aloe lateritia - wild 
teritia is used locally for treating colds and 
malaria. A decoction of the leaves is taken to 
treat hepatitis. In some areas leaves are ap-
plied to wounds and are used to treat chicken 
diseases. A liquid obtained by pounding the 
leaves is drunk to relieve stomach-ache. A de-
coction of the roots together with Solanum 
incanum L. roots is taken to treat anaemia. 
The roots are pounded, boiled and added to 
beer, reputedly to increase fermentation. 
Two products from leaves of Aloe spp. can be 
used commercially in the manufacture of me-
dicinal and cosmetic preparations. One is the 
gel from the centre of the leaf, the other the 
exudate (usually yellow) from the longitudinal 
vessels situated at the outer poles of the vascu-
lar bundles of the leaves. In Kenya only the 
exudate is harvested, as it can be processed 
easily into a solid material suitable for trading, 
and known as 'bitters'. 
The roots have been used as a dye in Kenya, 
giving yellow to pink-brown colours. Aloe la-
teritia is sometimes grown as a garden orna-
mental in the tropics and subtropics. 
Production and international trade In 
1986 the President of Kenya announced that 
all Aloe species were to be protected in Kenya, 
and that commercial exploitation must be from 
plantations and not from wild plants. Although 
this was not formalised into law, the CITES 
Licensing Office in Kenya has refused since 
then to give export permits for Aloe plants and 
Aloe products. Therefore, all international 
trade from Kenya is illegal and no official trade 
figures are available. The Kenya Aloes Work-
ing Group, inaugurated in 2004, has initiated 
arrangements for registration of plantations 
ALOE 73 
developed with propagated material, and legal 
trading in Aloe products. 
Aloe lateritia is one of the Aloe species in 
Kenya harvested illegally from the wild. It 
appears that there is substantial international 
trade in processed exudate, but the exported 
product is probably a mixture of exudate from 
several species. Informal figures for 2003 sug-
gest that up to 85,000 kg of solid 'bitters' with a 
market value of about US$ 840,000 are ex-
ported from Kenya per year. Main importers 
are China and Saudi Arabia. 
Properties Distinctive constituents in Aloe 
leaves are phenolic compounds, notably chro-
mone, anthraquinone or anthrone derivatives, 
but the chemistry varies considerably among 
species. Some of the compounds are found in 
many species, while others occur in only a few. 
From the exudate of Aloe lateritia the an-
throne-C-glucosides homonataloin and aloin 
were isolated, both as 2 stereoisomers. Aloin is 
the active ingredient in the exudate and has 
purgative properties. Chrysophanol, aspho-
delin, chrysophanol-8-methyl ether, aloesapo-
nol I, II and III and aloesaponarin I and II 
have been isolated from the roots. No informa-
tion is available on the polysaccharides in the 
gel. 
Adulterations and substitutes As har-
vesting from the wild is uncontrolled, exudates 
are collected indiscriminately from many Aloe 
species in Kenya. Dealers buying from the col-
lectors have not developed any method of qual-
ity control, and rely on visual assessment only. 
Description Succulent, perennial herb, 
without stem or with stem up to 50 cm long, 
usually solitary or suckering to form small 
groups. Leaves 16-20 in a dense rosette; stip-
ules absent; petiole absent; blade lanceolate, 
25-50 cm x 5-10 cm, apex long-acuminate, 
margin with firm, brown, sharp teeth 3-4 mm 
long, 1—1.5 cm apart, blade fleshy, surface 
smooth, bright green, usually with elongated 
white spots in irregular transverse bands; exu-
date yellow. Inflorescence consisting of termi-
nal head-like racemes 4-12 cm x 8 cm, densely 
flowered, sometimes to 20 cm long and more 
laxly flowered; peduncle up to 125 cm long, 
with 3-8 branches, lowest branches occasion-
ally rebranched; bracts linear-lanceolate, 10— 
20(-25) mm x 4 mm. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
3-merous; pedicel 2-3 cm long; perianth tubu-
lar, 3-4 cm long, inflated around the ovary, c. 5 
mm diameter at the mouth, lobes 6, 10—13 mm 
long, orange-red, sometimes yellow, usually 
glossy; stamens 6, exserted; ovary superior, 3-
Aloe lateritia - 1, plant habit; 2, part of inflo-
rescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
celled, style filiform, stigma head-shaped, ex-
serted. Fruit an ovoid capsule up to 28 mm 
long, pale brown, dehiscing loculicidally, many-
seeded. Seeds c. 5 mm long, blackish brown, 
with speckled wings. 
Other botanical information Aloe com-
prises about 450 species in Africa and Arabia, 
of which c. 315 occur in mainland Africa, c. 100 
are endemic to Madagascar or the Indian 
Ocean islands (including the former Lomato-
phyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. The taxon-
omy is complicated by the occurrence of inter-
specific hybrids both in the wild and in cultiva-
tion. Two varieties of Aloe lateritia are recog-
nized: var. lateritia and var. graminicola (Rey-
nolds) S.Carter. Var. graminicola differs from 
the poorly suckering and strictly acaulescent 
var. lateritia by often having a decumbent stem 
up to 50 cm long, usually suckering to form 
dense clumps. Var. graminicola also has 
sharper teeth and always head-like racemes. 
The cuticular wax of the two taxa are indistin-
guishable in their chemistry and there is men-
tion of intergrades. Var. graminicola is the 
more abundant of the 2 in Kenya. 
Several other species that resemble Aloe la-
74 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
teritia in forming groups by suckering and hav-
ing branched inflorescence stalks also have 
medicinal uses. The Topnaar people in Na-
mibia drink an infusion of the leaves of Aloe 
asperifolia A.Berger to treat arteriosclerosis, 
kidney problems, asthma, colds and epilepsy. A 
decoction is taken by humans and livestock to 
expel the placenta, and given to donkeys when 
they have eaten poisonous plants. The leaves 
are chewed or the decoction is drunk to treat 
stomach-ache and chest pains. The leaf exu-
date is added to drinking water of chickens to 
treat various diseases. An infusion of the 
leaves of Aloe chabaudii Schönland, native of 
DR Congo, Tanzania and southern Africa, is 
taken as an abortifacient. Fatal casualties have 
been reported, although the abortifacient activ-
ity of the infusion could not be demonstrated in 
tests with rats. A decoction of the leaves is 
taken orally as a purgative. An infusion of the 
roots is taken to overcome nausea. A root de-
coction is drunk to treat blood in the urine. 
Leaf sap is rubbed into scarifications on the 
ankle to reduce swelling. Poultry are dipped in 
an infusion of the leaves to kill external para-
sites and the leaf juice is mixed with drinking 
water as a cure for poultry with blood in their 
faeces. Cattle are drenched with the leaf infu-
sion to cure diarrhoea. Aloe duckeri Christian 
from southern Tanzania, Malawi and Zambia 
has been confused with Aloe lateritia but has 
unspotted or lightly spotted leaves and dull 
orange-red flowers. The leaf sap is used in 
southern Tanzania to help childbirth. Aloe es-
culenta L.C.Leach is a native of the western 
part of southern Africa. The leaf sap is applied 
to burns and cuts. The pulverized, dried root is 
made into a paste by adding water and is mas-
saged into painful and swollen body parts. Aloe 
globuligemma Pole-Evans from Botswana, 
Zimbabwe and South Africa is known to have 
caused fatal poisoning. Plants differ in toxicity. 
Toxic plants smell of rats which indicate the 
presence of the hemlock alkaloid 7-coniceine. A 
leaf infusion is taken traditionally in Zim-
babwe to relieve stomach-ache, as a cure for 
venereal diseases and as an abortifacient, al-
though abortifacient activity of the infusion 
could not be demonstrated in tests with rats. 
Aloe hendrickxii Reynolds, an endemic of DR 
Congo, is used externally for healing wounds of 
cattle and the diluted leaf sap is applied orally 
to calves to cure ear problems. 
Growth and development All Aloe spp. 
can survive dry periods well, thus making 
them a useful crop for semi-arid areas; they 
need water though in order to develop new 
leaves. Seedlings take a few years before they 
are large enough for harvesting. 
Ecology Aloe lateritia is found in grassland 
and open bushland, often on rocky slopes, at 
250-2100 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Aloe lateritia 
can be propagated by seed or by suckers. Tis-
sue culture techniques can be used to produce 
large numbers of plants for establishing plan-
tations. 
Management Harvesting of wild Aloe la-
teritia is generally destructive. Development of 
properly managed plantations will lead to con-
servation of the wild populations and to sub-
stantial production. As the establishment of 
plantations of Aloe lateritia is just starting, 
there are no data on optimum spacing and 
general management of plantations. 
Diseases and pests Aloe spp. grown in gar-
dens in Kenya for decorative purposes are sus-
ceptible to fungal attack, as well as scale in-
sects and mealy bug infestation. Newly estab-
lished plantations will need to be closely moni-
tored to watch for signs of diseases and pests. 
Harvesting In order to harvest the exudate 
from Aloe lateritia leaves, a hole is dug in the 
ground and lined with a container, which may 
be a skin bag, polythene bag or plastic bowl. 
Leaves are cut and immediately arranged 
around the edge of the hole at an angle allow-
ing the exudate to drain into the container. 
When no more sap is seen to be dripping from 
the leaves, the exudate is transferred to bottles 
or jerry cans for sale to a dealer. 
Yield Harvesting of exudate of Aloe lateritia 
takes place throughout the year, though it has 
been observed that the yield is higher during 
rainy seasons. On average one mature plant 
can produce 80-100 ml of exudate. In some 
areas of Kenya dealers obtain up to 1700 1/day 
from collectors. 
Handling after harvest Dealers only visu-
ally inspect the quality of the exudate. The 
usual reason for rejection of the exudates is 
that the liquid is too thin or 'watery', as seen 
from the ease with which a small sample will 
soak into the ground. The dealer will store the 
exudate until at least 200 1 has accumulated 
before further processing. The liquid is placed 
in a large drum and boiled over a controlled 
fire for a period of 5—11 hours, depending on 
the quality. Eventually the exudate becomes 
black and very viscous. It is then removed from 
the fire and transferred from the drum to 
sacks, in which it is left to cool and harden. 
ALOE 75 
After a day the material is solid and black, 
called 'bitters', and is ready for sale to a mid-
dleman, who will sell it on to an exporter. Be-
cause of the illegality in Kenya, the whole 
marketing chain is shrouded in secrecy. 
Genetic resources Aloe lateritia is collected 
indiscriminately from the wild, with no selec-
tion factors involved. The few plantations now 
being established are stocked with plants 
(probably from various species) collected in the 
wild. All Aloe, except Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f., are 
protected by CITES and all international trade 
of plants and products should be regulated. 
Breeding So far there has been no attempt 
to improve the stock of Aloe lateritia by breed-
ing but there is ample scope for selection in 
this highly variable species. 
Prospects The yield of exudate of Aloe la-
teritia is not as high as in other species cur-
rently being harvested, and it is possible that 
other species will be preferred when planta-
tions are developed. 
Major references Carter, 1994; Gelfand et 
al., 1985; Kihara et al., 2003; Newton, 2001; 
Reynolds (Editor), 2004. 
Other references Baerts & Lehmann, 2005c; 
Byavu et al., 2000; Cribb & Leedal, 1982; 
Dagne et al., 2000; Demissew Sebsebe & Gil-
bert, 1997; Ermias Dagne et al., 1994; 
Gachathi, 1989; Herbin & Robins, 1968; Hind-
marsh, 1982; Kokwaro, 1993; Lukwa et al., 
2001; Neuwinger, 1996; Newton, 1995; Parry & 
Matambo, 1992; Rauwald & Niyonzima, 1991; 
Reynolds, 1966; Reynolds, 1985; Van Damme & 
Van den Eynden, 2000; von Koenen, 2001. 
Sources of illustration Carter, 1994. 
Authors L.E. Newton 
ALOE LOMATOPHYLLOIDES Balf.f. 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc. Bot. 16: 22 
(1877). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Synonyms Lomatophyllum lomatophyl-
loides (Balf.f.) Marais (1975). 
Vernacular names Ananas marron (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
lomatophylloides is endemic to Rodrigues (Re-
public of Mauritius), where it is restricted to 
the Grande Montagne Reserve, but was for-
merly widespread. 
Uses The crushed leaves of Aloe lomatophyl-
loides are applied as a poultice to relieve mus-
cle pain. A decoction of the leaves is taken to 
increase the menstrual flow. The plant is 
widely grown as an ornamental. 
Properties All Aloe spp. in the section Lo-
matophyllum, to which Aloe lomatophylloides 
belongs, have a common phytochemical profile 
and contain flavones, anthrones and chro-
mones. In Aloe lomatophylloides the flavone 
isovitexin (apigenin 6-C-glucoside) occurs to-
gether with the anthrone aloin. 
Botany Succulent herb up to 40 cm tall; 
stem short, decumbent, unbranched. Leaves in 
a lax rosette, erect to spreading; stipules ab-
sent; petiole absent; blade lanceolate, up to 75 
cm x 8 cm, apex attenuate, margin with short 
deltoid teeth, 5—15 mm apart. Inflorescence 
consisting of few cylindrical racemes, 15-20 cm 
long, lax, with acuminate apex; peduncle up to 
12 cm long, with 2-3 branches; bracts lanceo-
late, up to 4 mm long. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 3-merous; pedicel c. 2 cm long; perianth 
tubular, 1.5-2 cm long, lobes 6, free to base, 
pale reddish orange; stamens 6, exserted; ovary 
superior, 3-celled, style filiform, stigma head-
shaped, exserted. Fruit a berry 15-20 mm long, 
many-seeded. Seeds c. 3 mm long. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. 
Based on genome size, the species of Aloe in the 
section Lomatophyllum are not closely related 
to the other Aloe species of the Indian Ocean 
Islands. Therefore, and because of the differ-
ence in fruits (berries versus capsules) some 
authors maintain 2 separate genera. 
Another Aloe species endemic to Mauritius and 
with medicinal uses is Aloe purpurea Lam. 
(synonym: Lomatophyllum purpureum (Lam.) 
T.Durand & Schinz). Its leaf sap is applied to 
the nipples to wean children. The leaves con-
tain the flavone isovitexin and its aglucon api-
genin, the anthrone homonataloin, and the 
chromone aloeresin A. The leaf sap of Aloe 
mayottensis A.Berger, endemic to Mayotte, is 
applied as eye drops to cure conjunctivitis, and 
to nipples to wean children. A poultice of the 
leaves is used to treat wounds and burns. 
Ecology There is no information on the eco-
logical requirements of Aloe lomatophylloides, 
but probably it occurs on open, dry localities. 
Management All Aloe species used as medi-
cine in Mauritius are collected from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Harvest-
ing from the wild for medicinal and ornamental 
uses and habitat destruction have devastated 
the population of Aloe lomatophylloides. 
76 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Whereas it was common in the 19th century, its 
natural range is now restricted to a single re-
serve on Rodrigues where just 30 plants re-
main. It is however widely planted in botanical 
gardens and is grown widely as an ornamental 
and is therefore not immediately threatened 
with extinction. All Aloe species with the ex-
ception of Aloe vera are listed by CITES. 
Prospects The Aloe species from Mauritius 
have not been the subject of systematic ethno-
botanical research, and little has been pub-
lished. Proper protection of the remaining 
plants seems in place and cultivation will take 
the pressure off wild populations. 
Major references Groom & Reynolds, 1987; 
Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Gurib-Fakim 
et a l , 1994; Marais & Coode, 1978; Newton, 
2001. 
Other references Baker, 1877; Dagne et 
a l , 2000; Gurib-Fakim, 2004; Pascal, 2002; 
Rowley, 1997; Viljoen, van Wyk & van Heer-
den, 1998; Zonneveld, 2002. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE NUTTII Baker 
Protologue Dyer, Hooker's Icon. pi. 26: t. 
2513 (1897). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Vernacular names Kisimamleo, mshubili, 
msubili (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
nuttii occurs from DR Congo and Tanzania 
south to Malawi, Zambia, Angola and Mozam-
bique. 
Uses Aloe nuttii is medicinally used in Tan-
zania. The leaf sap is rubbed on the skin to 
treat ringworm. A decoction of the roots is 
drunk to cure kidney problems and as an aph-
rodisiac. A decoction of the leaves is drunk to 
cure diarrhoea. In Malawi Aloe nuttii is used in 
veterinary medicine to prevent Newcastle dis-
ease in chickens, for deworming and to ease 
parturition. Mature flowers are boiled and 
eaten as a vegetable in Tanzania. Aloe nuttii is 
grown as a garden ornamental in the tropics 
and subtropics, and as a pot plant. 
Botany Succulent perennial herb up to 1 m 
tall; stem 5 cm in diameter, solitary or sucker-
ing to produce a cluster of up to 12 plants. 
Leaves 16-20 in a rosette, erect; stipules ab-
sent; petiole absent; blade linear, 40-50 cm x 
1.5-2(-4) cm, grass-like, apex acute, margin 
white, hard and tough, with soft teeth, c. 1 mm 
long, crowded at base, almost absent towards 
tip, blade with scattered whitish spots towards 
the base on lower surface. Inflorescence a ter-
minal cylindrical-acuminate raceme 15-25 cm 
x 8-9 cm, dense; peduncle erect, unbranched, 
60-80 cm long; bracts ovate, 15-20 mm long, 
apex acute, imbricate in bud. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 3-merous; pedicel 3-3.5 cm long; peri-
anth tubular, c. 4 cm x 1 cm, lobes 6, up to 30 
mm long, coral-pink to orange-red, green-
tipped; stamens 6, slightly exserted; ovary su-
perior, 3-celled, style filiform, stigma head-
shaped, slightly exserted. Fruit an ovoid cap-
sule up to 4 cm long, dehiscing loculicidally, 
pale brown, many-seeded. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. 
Several other Aloe species have medicinal uses 
in southern Africa. A flower decoction of Aloe 
cooperi Baker from Mozambique and South 
Africa is taken by the Zulu people to ease 
childbirth. In Swaziland the young shoots and 
flowers are cooked and eaten as a vegetable. 
Aloe cooperi is planted as an ornamental in 
South Africa. In Zimbabwe leaf sap of Aloe 
greatheadii Schönland is used as eye drops to 
cure chronic conjunctivitis. An infusion or de-
coction of the leaves is drunk to treat gonor-
rhoea. An infusion of the leaves is used as a 
malaria prophylactic and is taken as a purga-
tive and put in drinking water of poultry to 
cure diseases. In South Africa the leaf sap is 
applied externally to bruises, burns and skin 
irritations. Leaf pulp is used to treat snake-
bites. Flower buds are considered a delicacy. 
Large concentrated populations of Aloe great-
headii are an indication of overgrazing. Seed-
lings are planted in land reclamation trials; 
they need partial shade for survival. Probably 
Aloe ortholopha Christian & Milne-Redh., 
which is endemic to Zimbabwe and resembles 
Aloe greatheadii, has similar medicinal uses. In 
Namibia a leaf infusion of Aloe hereroensis 
Engl, is taken to treat digestive problems, 
chest and heart pains, urinary incontinence 
and venereal diseases. Both leaf sap and roots 
are used to treat gonorrhoea. The leaf sap is 
used to cure eye problems. Aloe swynnertonii 
Rendle is used in Malawi as fish poison, and in 
South Africa, it is used in a mixture with other 
plants to kill pests in vegetable crops. In Na-
mibia the Topnaar people drink a decoction of 
the roots of Aloe dichotoma Masson to treat 
asthma and tuberculosis. In the past, the hoi-
ALOE 77 
low branches were used as quivers for arrows. 
The Nama people use the porous inner fibre of 
the trunk as cooling material. Sheep eat the 
dry leaves. Aloe dichotoma is planted as an 
ornamental in South Africa. 
Ecology Aloe nuttii occurs in moist grass-
land ('dambos') and often on rocky slopes, at 
1600-2650 m altitude. 
Management Aloe nuttii is collected from 
the wild and leaves can be harvested through-
out the year. Flowers can be collected at the 
end of the rainy season. 
Genetic resources and breeding Aloe 
nuttii is not uncommon and probably not in 
danger of genetic erosion. However, all Aloe 
species except Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. are listed 
by CITES, and trade in plants and plant parts 
is restricted. 
Prospects Aloe nuttii is not suitable for 
large scale exploitation or domestication be-
cause of the small plant size and narrow 
leaves; it will therefore remain of local impor-
tance only. 
Major references Carter, 2001; Gelfand et 
a l , 1985; Newton, 2001; Ruffo, Birnie & 
Tengnäs, 2002; van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn & 
Gericke, 1997. 
Other references Dlamini, 1981; Glen & 
Hardy, 2000; Kambewa et al., 1999; Lukwa et 
a l , 2001; Neuwinger, 2000; SEPASAL, 2005; 
Smith & de Correia, 1992; Tredgold, 1986; Van 
Damme & Van den Eynden, 2000; von Koenen, 
2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE RABAIENSIS Rendle 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc. Bot. 30: 410 
(1895). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 14 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
rabaiensis occurs in Somalia, Kenya and Tan-
zania. 
Uses In Kenya and Tanzania a leaf decoction 
of Aloe rabaiensis is taken to cure an enlarged 
spleen. It causes vomiting and diarrhoea. To-
gether with Acokanthera schimperi (A.DC.) 
Schweinf., the exudate is part of an arrow poi-
son made by the Giriama people of the coast of 
Kenya. The Digo people of Tanzania apply the 
heated and pounded leaves to swellings. Small 
portions of the root are taken as a purgative. 
The exudate is harvested as it can be concen-
trated easily into a solid material suitable for 
trading, called 'bitters'. 
Production and international trade Aloe 
rabaiensis is one of the Aloe species in Kenya 
harvested illegally from the wild. It appears 
that there is a substantial international trade 
in concentrated exudate, but the exported 
product is probably a mixture of exudate from 
several Aloe species. 
Properties The distinctive constituents in 
Aloe leaves are phenolic compounds, including 
chromone, anthraquinone or anthrone deriva-
tives. Some of the compounds are found in 
many species, whereas others occur in only a 
few. The widespread anthrone glucoside aloin 
A (barbaloin) is present in the exudate of Aloe 
rabaiensis. The exudate also contains aloere-
sin-D. Aloin is the active ingredient in the 'bit-
ters' and has purgative properties. Other com-
pounds of interest for their medicinal activity 
in this and other Aloe species are the lectins 
and the polysaccharides contained in the gel. 
Botany Succulent perennial shrub up to 2 m 
tall; stem branching from base, erect or sprawl-
ing, often supported by surrounding shrubs. 
Leaves in a lax rosette, persistent; stipules 
absent; petiole absent; blade lanceolate, 30-45 
cm x 3-8 cm, apex long-acuminate, margin 
with firm, brown-tipped teeth 2-3 mm long, 1— 
1.5 cm apart, blade fleshy, greyish green often 
tinged reddish with few scattered whitish spots 
on leaves of young shoots; exudate yellow. In-
florescence consisting of head-like racemes up 
to 8 cm x 8 cm, densely flowered; peduncle up 
to 60 cm long, with 5-9 branches, lower branch 
sometimes rebranched; bracts lanceolate, 10— 
12 mm x 3 mm. Flowers bisexual, regular, 3-
merous; pedicel 1-1.5(—2) cm long; perianth 
tubular, 2-2.5 cm long, slightly inflated around 
the ovary, lobes 6, 1-1.5 cm long, orange-red, 
yellow at the mouth, sometimes entirely yel-
low; stamens 6, exserted; ovary superior, 3-
celled, style filiform, stigma head-shaped, ex-
serted. Fruit unknown. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. The 
taxonomy is complicated by the occurrence of 
interspecific hybrids both in the wild and in 
cultivation. Aloe rabaiensis belongs to a group 
of species with obvious stems that grow into 
shrubs of over 2 m tall. Several other species in 
this group have medicinal uses. In Rwanda the 
leaf extract of Aloe dawei A.Berger is drunk to 
cure malaria and leaf sap is used as drops to 
78 MEDICINA!, PLANTS 1 
treat inflammation of the ear. In the highlands 
of Kenya the leaves of Aloe kedongensis Rey-
nolds are used to treat colds, fever, diarrhoea 
and malaria. Veterinary use comprises treat-
ment of poultry diseases and East Coast fever 
in cattle. Aloe kedongensis is planted to form 
live fences and is used as a dye. The roots are 
added to honey beer to promote fermentation. 
Aloe ngongensis Christian occurs in the high-
lands of Kenya and Tanzania and has long 
been considered as conspecific with Aloe ra-
baiensis. It has the same medicinal uses as 
Aloe rabaiensis, and is also harvested from the 
wild for exudate extraction. The leaf sap of Aloe 
nyeriensis Christian from the Central Province 
of Kenya is locally used by women to clear up 
pimples and blemishes on the face. The leaf 
exudate contains aloin A (barbaloin) and 
homonataloin. Natural hybrids of Aloe rabaien-
sis with some other species have been reported. 
Ecology Aloe rabaiensis grows in sandy soil 
in open bushland up to 500 m altitude. 
Management Aloe rabaiensis can be propa-
gated by cuttings or by seed. It is possible to 
use tissue culture techniques to produce large 
numbers of plants for establishing plantations. 
Although harvesting from wild plants is illegal, 
exudate is collected from many Aloe species in 
Kenya. In order to harvest the exudate from 
Aloe rabaiensis, a hole is dug in the ground and 
lined with a container. Cut leaves are arranged 
around the edge of the hole at an angle allow-
ing the exudate to drain into the container. The 
exudate is transferred to bottles or jerry cans 
for sale to a dealer. The exudate is placed in a 
large drum and boiled down so that it becomes 
reddish black and very viscous. It is then 
transferred from the drum to sacks, in which it 
is left to cool and harden. After a day of cooling 
the material is solid and black, called 'bitters', 
and is ready for sale to a middle man, who will 
sell it on to an exporter. Because of the illegal-
ity in Kenya the whole marketing chain is 
shrouded in secrecy. Harvesting from wild 
plants is generally destructive. Development of 
properly managed Aloe plantations will lead to 
conservation of the wild plants and substantial 
yields from the plantations. 
Aloe species grown in Kenyan gardens for deco-
rative purposes are susceptible to fungal at-
tack, scale insect and mealy bug infestation. 
Newly established plantations will need to be 
closely monitored to watch for signs of diseases 
and pests. 
Genetic resources and breeding Aloe 
rabaiensis is collected indiscriminately from 
the wild, with no selection factors involved. 
The few plantations now being established are 
stocked using plants collected from the wild 
and probably from several species. 
Prospects Once the legislation is in place 
and enforced, and once plantations are estab-
lished, Aloe rabaiensis should be a valuable 
crop for marginal areas where low rainfall 
makes it difficult to gain good yields from con-
ventional crops. Borrowing technology from 
better-studied Aloe species such as Aloe vera 
(L.) Burm.f. will make progress in management 
fast and could lead to the production of leaf gel 
in addition to 'bitters'. The Kenya Aloes Work-
ing Group intends to look for ways of improv-
ing the processing and quality control of the 
Aloe products. 
Major references Carter, 1994; Kihara et 
al., 2003; Maundu et a l , 2001; Newton, 2001; 
Reynolds (Editor), 2004. 
Other references CITES, 2003; Conner et 
a l , 1989; Cutler, 1980; Gachathi, 1989; 
Lavranos, 1995; Newton, 1994; Newton, 1995; 
Pakia & Cooke, 2003b; Reynolds, 1966; Rey-
nolds, 1986. 
Authors L.E. Newton 
ALOE SECUNDIFLORA Engl. 
Protologue Pflanzenw. Ost-Afrikas: 140 
(1895). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
secundiflora occurs in Rwanda, southern 
Ethiopia, Kenya and Tanzania. 
Uses The leaves of Aloe secundiflora are 
Aloe secundiflora - wild 
ALOE 79 
applied to wounds to assist healing. The leaf 
sap is drunk as an appetizer and anti-emetic. 
Diluted leaf sap is drunk as a cure for malaria, 
typhoid fever, diarrhoea, oedema, swollen dia-
phragm, nosebleed, headache, pneumonia, 
chest pain and as a disinfectant. The exudate is 
applied into the eyes, to cure conjunctivitis. 
The bitter exudate is applied to nipples to 
wean children. The basal parts of the leaves 
are used in the fermentation of local beer by 
several tribes in East Africa. The leaves are 
pounded and added to drinking water for pre-
venting or treating coccidiosis and Newcastle 
disease in poultry. The plant is sometimes 
added as an ingredient to Acokanthera schim-
peri (A.DC.) Schweinf. or Adenium obesum 
(Forssk.) Roem. & Schult, for arrow poison in 
Kenya. 
Two products from Aloe secundiflora can be 
used commercially in the manufacture of me-
dicinal and cosmetic preparations. One is the 
gel from the centre of the leaf, and the other is 
the exudate from longitudinal vessels situated 
at the outer sides of the vascular bundles of the 
leaves. In Kenya only the exudate is harvested, 
as it can be processed easily into a solid mate-
rial suitable for trading, known as 'bitters'. 
Most of the material harvested in Kenya is 
exported. One small factory in Kenya uses Aloe 
in the manufacture of bathing soap and a crude 
medicine for abdominal pain. Large-scale Ken-
yan producers of cosmetic products import gel 
of Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. Aloe secundiflora is 
planted as a garden ornamental in tropics and 
subtropics. In East Africa farmers sometimes 
plant Aloe secundiflora as a live fence. 
Production and international trade In 
1986 the President of Kenya announced that 
all Aloe species were to be protected in Kenya, 
and that commercial exploitation must be from 
plantations and not from wild plants. Although 
this was not formalised into law, the CITES 
Licensing Office in Kenya has refused since 
then to give export permits for Aloe plants and 
Aloe products. Therefore, all international 
trade from Kenya is illegal and no official trade 
figures are available. The Kenya Aloes Work-
ing Group, inaugurated in 2004, has initiated 
arrangements for registration of plantations 
developed with propagated material, and legal 
trading in Aloe products. 
Aloe secundiflora is one of the Aloe species in 
Kenya harvested illegally from the wild. It 
appears that there is a substantial interna-
tional trade in dried exudate, but the exported 
product is probably a mixture of exudate from 
several species. Informal figures for 2003 sug-
gest that up to 85,000 kg of solid 'bitters' with a 
market value of about US$ 840.000 are ex-
ported from Kenya per year. Main importers 
are China and Saudi Arabia. 
Properties Distinctive constituents in Aloe 
leaves are phenolic compounds, notably chro-
mone, anthraquinone or anthrone derivatives, 
but the chemistry varies considerably among 
species. Some of the compounds are found in 
many species, whereas others occur in only a 
few. The major components of the leaf exudate 
of Aloe secundiflora are the anthrones aloenin, 
aloenin B, aloin A (barbaloin) and other aloin-
derivatives. The exudate also contains chro-
mones and phenylpyrones, and the phenyl-
ethylamine alkaloid N-methyltyramine. No 
information is available on the polysaccharides 
in the gel. In a field experiment, the leaf ex-
tract was found to be significantly active 
against fowl typhoid caused by Salmonella 
gallinarum and against Newcastle disease 
virus (NDV) in chickens. 
Adulterations and substitutes As har-
vesting from the wild is uncontrolled, exudates 
are collected indiscriminately from many Aloe 
spp. now in Kenya. Only the 3 species known to 
Aloe secundiflora - 1, plant habit; 2, part of 
inflorescence; 3, leaf margin. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
80 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
be poisonous a re avoided. Dealers buying from 
the collectors have not developed any method 
of quali ty control and rely on visual assessment 
only. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Succulent, perennial herb, 
wi thout stem or with s tem up to 30 cm long, 
usual ly solitary, sometimes suckering to form 
small groups. Leaves about 20 in a dense ro-
sette; stipules absent; petiole absent; blade 
ovate-lanceolate, 30-75 cm x 8-30 cm, apex 
long-acuminate, margin with dark brown, 
sharp teeth, 3-6 m m long, 1-2 cm apar t , sur-
face smooth, dull green, often wi th horny mar-
gin; exudate yellow. Inflorescence consisting of 
racemes, 15-20 cm long, lax, flowers a r ranged 
at one side; peduncle 1—1.5 m long, with up to 
12 branches , the lower branches rebranched; 
bracts ovate-acute, 3-7 mm long, pale brown, 
papery. Flowers bisexual, regular , 3-merous; 
pedicel 5-10 m m long; per ian th tubular , 2 . 5 -
3.5 cm long, inflated around the ovary, lobes 6, 
12-17 m m long, rose-pink to dull scarlet, paler 
a t mouth; s t amens 6, exserted; ovary superior, 
3-celled, style filiform, s t igma head-shaped, 
exserted. Frui t an oblong-ovoid capsule up to 
25 m m x 14 mm, pale brown, dehiscing loculi-
cidally, many-seeded. Seeds c. 8.5 mm long, 
blackish brown, with speckled wings. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Aloe com-
prises about 450 species in Africa and Arabia, 
of which c. 315 occur in main land Africa, c. 100 
are endemic to Madagascar or the Indian 
Ocean is lands (including the former Lomato-
phyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia . The taxon-
omy is complicated by the occurrence of inter-
specific hybrids both in the wild and in cultiva-
tion. Two variet ies of Aloe secundiflora a re 
recognized: var. secundiflora and the suckering 
var. sobolifera S.Carter; the la t te r is only 
known from Tanzania . Na tu ra l hybrids with 
several other species have been reported. Apar t 
from Aloe secundiflora, there are several other 
Eas t African species with similar growth habi t 
and with medicinal use or use as poison. Aloe 
macrosiphon Baker is used medicinally and 
has very similar chemical propert ies to Aloe 
vera. Aloe ruspoliana Baker is poisonous to 
sheep and camels and is used in Somalia and 
Kenya to poison hyenas . 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Seedlings take 
a couple of years before they a re large enough 
for harvest ing. Although Aloe secundiflora is 
drought to lerant it needs wate r to develop new 
leaves. 
E c o l o g y Like all Aloe species, Aloe secundi-
flora is well adap ted to dry semi-arid condi-
tions. It occurs in grass land and open woodland 
on sandy soil a t 600-2000 m al t i tude. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g With the excep-
tion of the relatively ra re var. sobolifera, Aloe 
secundiflora p lan t s have solitary or few (up to 
3) roset tes . Therefore they are usual ly propa-
gated from seed. There are p lans to use t issue 
cul ture techniques to produce large number s of 
p lants for establ ishing planta t ions . 
M a n a g e m e n t To protect wild populat ions 
and increase production, p lan ta t ions of Aloe 
secundiflora a re being established. As estab-
l i shment is jus t s tar t ing, the re are no da ta yet 
on managemen t techniques. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Aloe species grown in 
gardens in Kenya for decorative purposes are 
susceptible to fungal a t tack, scale insects and 
mealy bug infestation. Newly established plan-
ta t ions will need to be closely monitored for 
signs of diseases and pests . 
H a r v e s t i n g In some areas , wild p lan ts of 
Aloe secundiflora a re harves ted on a sustain-
able basis and the same plants can be used for 
many years . In a reas where the re is no estab-
lished t radi t ion of harves t ing, wild p lan ts are 
frequently destroyed while collecting the exu-
date . To harves t the exudate from Aloe secun-
diflora, a hole is dug in the ground and lined 
with a container. Cut leaves are a r ranged 
around the edge of the hole a t an angle allow-
ing the exudate to dra in into the container. The 
exudate is t ransferred to bott les or jer ry cans 
for sale to a dealer. 
Yield Harves t ing of exudate takes place 
throughout the year, though it has been ob-
served t h a t the yield is h igher dur ing rainy 
seasons. On average one m a t u r e plant can pro-
duce 80-100 ml of exudate . In some areas of 
Kenya the dealers obtain up to 1700 1/day from 
collectors. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t Dealers only visu-
ally inspect the quali ty of the exudate . The 
usua l reason for rejection of the exudates is 
t h a t the liquid is too thin, or 'watery', as seen 
from the ease with which a small sample will 
soak into the ground. To concentrate the exu-
date it is placed in a large d rum and boiled so 
t h a t it becomes reddish black and very viscous. 
It is t hen t ransferred from the d rum to sacks, 
in which it is left to cool and harden . After a 
day of cooling the mater ia l is solid and black, 
called 'bitters ' , and is ready for sale to a mid-
dleman, who will sell on to an exporter. Be-
cause of the illegality in Kenya the whole mar-
ket ing chain is shrouded in secrecy. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Aloe secundiflora is col-
ALOE 81 
lected indiscriminately from the wild, with no 
selection factors involved. The few plantations 
now being established are stocked with plants 
(probably from various species) collected in the 
wild. All Aloe species, except Aloe vera, are 
protected by CITES and all international trade 
of plants and products should be regulated. 
Breeding So far, there has been no attempt 
to improve the stock of Aloe secundiflora by 
breeding. 
Prospects Once legislation is in place and 
plantations are established, Aloe secundiflora 
will be a valuable crop for marginal areas 
where low rainfall makes it difficult to obtain 
good yields from conventional crops. The Kenya 
Aloes Working Group intends to look for ways 
of improving the processing and quality control 
of the product. 
Major references Carter, 1994; Kihara et 
al., 2003; Mascolo et al., 2004; Newton, 2001; 
Newton, 2004. 
Other references Atiti, 2004; Baerts & 
Lehmann, 2005d; CITES, 2003; Ermias Dagne 
et al., 1994; Demissew Sebsebe & Gilbert, 
1997; Gachathi, 1989; Kokwaro, 1993; Musila, 
Kisangau & Muema, 2004; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Newton, 1994; Newton, 1995; Oketch-Rabah, 
1996; Oketch-Rabah, Dossaji & Mberu, 1999; 
Waihenya, Mtambo & Nkwengulila, 2002; 
Waihenya, 2002; Waihenya et al., 2003. 
Sources of illustration Agnew & Agnew, 
1994; Carter, 1994. 
Authors L.E. Newton 
ALOE TURKANENSIS Christian 
Protologue Journ. S. African Bot. 8(2): 173 
(1942). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
turkanensis occurs in north-western Kenya and 
in the Karamoja District of Uganda. 
Uses The Turkana people of Kenya apply the 
leaf sap of Aloe turkanensis to wounds and as a 
cure for eye diseases. The juice from boiled 
roots is added to a drink to induce vomiting, 
which is said to relieve persistent headaches. 
The roots are used to flavour beer. 
Production and international trade The 
trade of Aloe extract from East Africa is illegal. 
The dried exudate, marketed under the name 
'Kenya aloes' or 'bitters', is usually a mixture of 
the exudate of several species. In Kenya Aloe 
turkanensis is harvested from the wild at a 
large scale. 
Properties The main components of leaf 
exudate of Aloe turkanensis are aloin A, aloin B 
and aloesone. From about 70 Aloe species 
checked, Aloe turkanensis had the highest aloin 
content, both in the exudate and in the leaf 
(31% and 6.6% of dry weight, respectively). 
Aloin is a mixture of the stereoisomers aloin A 
(barbaloin) and aloin B (isobarbaloin), and is 
responsible for the laxative properties. 
Botany Succulent sprawling shrub; stem 
ascending, becoming decumbent, up to 70 cm 
long, branching from the base and forming 
large clumps. Leaves 14-18 in a dense rosette, 
erect to spreading; stipules absent; petiole ab-
sent; blade lanceolate, up to 70 cm x 9 cm, apex 
long-acuminate, margin with sharp deltoid 
teeth, 2 mm long, whitish, brown-tipped, 12-18 
mm apart, blade pale bluish green with elon-
gated white spots on both surfaces; exudate 
drying yellow. Inflorescence consisting of cylin-
drical racemes 15—26 cm long; peduncle up to 1 
m long, with up to 8 branches; bracts ovate, 5 -
7 mm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 3-
merous; pedicel 8-10 mm long; perianth tubu-
lar, c. 2.5 cm long, lobes 6, c. 12 mm long, 
bright coral-pink, paler at mouth; stamens 6, 
exserted; ovary superior, 3-celled, style fili-
form, stigma head-shaped, exserted. Fruit an 
oblong-ovoid capsule c. 2 cm x 1 cm, dehiscing 
loculicidally, yellowish brown, many-seeded. 
Seeds blackish with whitish, sparsely black-
speckled wings. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. Aloe 
turkanensis belongs to a group of East African 
species forming large clumps, with leaves 
wider than 2 cm. Several other species in this 
group have medicinal uses and are considered 
by CITES to be under threat because of the 
risk of overexploitation. Aloe calidophila Rey-
nolds from Ethiopia and Kenya has become 
rare due to harvesting for medicinal purposes. 
Aloe camperi Schweinf. (synonym: Aloe eru 
A. Berger) is one of the most important medici-
nal plants in Eritrea. In Egypt it is widely cul-
tivated for its exudate. The main components 
of the exudate are emodin and aloenin. The 
exudate has significant antifungal properties. 
Aloe elgonica Bullock, from Kenya, has become 
vulnerable due to harvesting. The leaf exudate 
contains aloe-emodin, aloenin, aloesin, aloere-
sin B and homonataloin. In Somalia the exu-
82 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
da te of Aloe microdonta Chiov. is dissolved in 
wate r and d runk to t rea t jaundice. The leaf 
juice is applied topically to cure skin diseases. 
The leaf exudate contains aloin A and B, and 
microdontin A and B. 
E c o l o g y Aloe turkanensis grows on stony, 
sandy soil or lava, usually in the shade of 
shrubs in arid a reas at 600-1250 m al t i tude. 
M a n a g e m e n t To harves t the exudate from 
Aloe turkanensis and other Aloe species, a hole 
is dug in the ground and lined with a con-
ta iner . Cut leaves are a r ranged around the 
edge of the hole a t an angle allowing the exu-
date to dra in into the container. The exudate is 
t ransferred to bottles or jerry cans for sale to a 
dealer. It is placed in a large d rum and boiled 
down unt i l it becomes reddish black and very 
viscous. It is t hen t ransferred from the d rum to 
sacks, in which it is left to cool and harden . 
After a day of cooling the mater ia l is solid and 
black, called 'bitters ' , and is ready for sale to a 
middle man, who will sell it to an exporter. 
Harves t ing from wild p lants is generally de-
structive. Development of properly managed 
planta t ions will lead to conservation of the wild 
p lants and subs tan t ia l yields from the planta-
t ions. Aloe turkanensis can easily be propa-
gated by suckers. It is being cult ivated on a 
small scale in Kenya for exudate production, 
bu t no details a re available on its manage-
ment . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Harvest-
ing from the wild for medicinal and ornamenta l 
uses and hab i ta t destruction are major t h rea t s 
to many Aloe species. All Aloe species are listed 
by CITES, except Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. As Aloe 
turkanensis is still being harves ted on a large 
scale from the wild, it is certainly threa tened . 
P r o s p e c t s Research into the chemical com-
position and affinities of Aloe species is well 
underway. However, the ethnobotanical as-
pects of less impor tan t Aloe species are poorly 
documented. Growing Aloe species as a com-
mercial crop might t ake the pressure off wild 
populations, but more research is needed to 
identify the species best suited for domestica-
tion and their requ i rements in cultivation. Aloe 
turkanensis and other species tha t develop 
many suckers seem good candidates for domes-
tication. The high aloin content of Aloe tur-
kanensis makes it even more in teres t ing as a 
potent ial crop plant . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Carter , 1994; CITES, 
2003; Morgan, 1981; Newton, 2001; Newton & 
Lavranos, 1990. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Ali et al., 1999a; Conner 
et al., 1990, 1990; Ermias Dagne et al., 1994; 
Demissew Sebsebe & Gilbert, 1997; Farah , 
Andersson & Samuelsson, 1992; Groom & Rey-
nolds, 1987; Neuwinger, 2000; Reynolds, 1996; 
Reynolds & Nicholls, 1986; Tawfik, Sheteawi & 
El-Gawad, 2001. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
ALOE VERA (L.) Burm.f. 
P r o t o l o g u e Fl. ind.: 83 (1768). 
F a m i l y Asphodelaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r In - 14 
S y n o n y m s Aloe barbadensis Mill. (1768). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Aloe vera, Barbados 
aloe, coastal aloe, Curaçao aloe, Ind ian aloe, 
medicinal aloe, Medi t e r ranean aloe, t rue aloe, 
West Indian aloe (En). Aloès, aloès vulgaire, 
aloe vera (Fr). Aloés, aloé vera, aloés de Barba-
dos, caraguatâ , erva-babosa, azebre vegetal 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
vera is only known as a cultivated or na tura l -
ized plant . It is generally presumed t h a t the 
origin is Arabia, Somalia or Sudan and a re-
cently discovered s tand of Aloe vera in Oman 
could well prove to be the only wild population 
in the world. A Medi te r ranean origin is often 
quoted bu t probably wrong. At present Aloe 
vera is widely dis t r ibuted throughout the trop-
ics and subtropics. It is widely grown as a cash 
crop in dry regions in the Americas, Asia and 
Austra l ia . Aloe vera was already used as a drug 
by the Greeks as early as 400 B.C. and la ter by 
Arabian physicians. It is probably present as a 
cult ivated plant in all countries of tropical Af-
rica, a l though its presence is largely undocu-
Aloe vera - planted and naturalized 
ALOE 83 
merited. 
Uses Aloe vera is a well-known medicinal 
plant widely used in modern herbal practice 
and often available in proprietary herbal 
preparations. The exudate, called 'aloe', 'aloes' 
or 'bitter aloes', is contained in the pericycle 
cells of the vascular bundles in the leaf, and is 
used either fresh or dried. The dried exudate is 
used as a laxative, purgative and vermifuge. 
The fresh leaf exudate is also taken as a laxa-
tive or purgative, and is externally applied as a 
refrigerant, to treat acne or cuts. Mixed with 
other ingredients to mask its bitter taste, it is 
taken against asthma and to treat coughs. 
Similar mixtures are taken to cure dysentery, 
kidney problems or against dyspepsia. The 
exudate is used as a bittering agent for food 
and beer. 
Aloe gel, the mucilage from the central part of 
the leaf, has a multitude of medicinal applica-
tions. The gel or peeled leaves are generally 
applied to treat skin afflictions (burns, wounds, 
abrasions, skin diseases, irritations), as a poul-
tice on contusions or as a general refrigerant. 
The gel is also applied externally to cure 
haemorrhoids. It is furthermore used as a hair 
wash to promote hair growth and against dan-
druff, and as a general cosmetic to improve the 
complexion and to smooth the skin. The peeled 
leaves are eaten to relieve sore throat and 
coughs and as a mild laxative. As a food sup-
plement, Aloe vera gel is said to facilitate di-
gestion, and to improve blood and lymphatic 
circulation, as well as kidney, liver and gall 
bladder functions. There are claims of benefi-
cial activity of Aloe vera products in cases of 
AIDS, arthritis, or other chronic and debilitat-
ing conditions. However, these claims have not 
been substantiated by scientific studies. There 
is also no evidence that topical Aloe vera gel is 
effective in preventing or minimizing radiation-
induced skin reactions in cancer patients. In 
large amounts, the gel has anti-irritant proper-
ties. 
For tropical Africa there are reports from coun-
tries including Nigeria, DR Congo and Uganda 
of medicinal use of Aloe vera, in particular to 
treat skin problems. Identification of the spe-
cies however is doubtful as many Aloe species 
have identical uses. In Mauritius Aloe vera gel 
is used for treating sprains, muscle pain and 
callosities of the feet. Leaves and seeds are 
cooked and eaten as a vegetable. The gel is 
used in the manufacture of commercial jellies, 
drinks and ice-cream. A novel application of gel 
powder is as a 1% addition to concrete, which 
gives the reinforcing steel better resistance 
against corrosion. Aloe vera gel used in a coat-
ing on grapes lengthens the shelf life consid-
erably and this patented method could also be 
applicable in other high-value fruits and vege-
tables. Aloe vera is often grown as an ornamen-
tal in gardens or pots. 
Production and international trade The 
global annual turnover of fresh Aloe vera gel 
products amounted to approximately US$ 125 
million in 2004 and was expected to grow at a 
rate of 35% over the next five years. The 
American continent supplies about 60% of the 
gel to the world market, with Mexico, the Do-
minican Republic and Venezuela as the main 
producers. Asia and Australia produce the re-
mainder of the internationally traded product, 
with China and Thailand as the most impor-
tant producers. In Nigeria Aloe vera is com-
mercially grown for the local market. 
Properties Dried exudate contains 15-40% 
anthrone 10-C-glucosides (anthraquinone de-
rivatives) such as aloin and hydroxyaloins. 
Aloin is a mixture of the stereoisomers aloin A 
(barbaloin) and aloin B (isobarbaloin). Fur-
thermore, the exudate contains the pyrone 
derivative aloenin and free and glucosylated 2-
acetonyl-7-hydroxy-5-methylchromones (e.g. 
aloesone, furoaloesone, aloeresin A, aloeresin B 
(aloesin) and aloeresin C). 'Curaçao aloe' 
should contain at least 28% hydroxy-
anthraquinone derivatives; it is almost entirely 
soluble in 60% alcohol and for more than 70% 
in water. It should not contain more than 12% 
moisture and 3% ash. The compound responsi-
ble for the laxative properties is aloin, which 
itself is inactive as a laxative, but is activated 
to aloe-emodin anthrone, by Eubacterium sp. 
Although some observations indicate that in 
diarrhoea induced by aloin increased water 
content might be more important than stimu-
lated peristalsis, the side effects of prolonged 
use point to a griping effect on the colon. An-
thraquinone laxatives should not be used 
longer than 8-10 days, or by children younger 
than 12 years. Contra-indications include preg-
nancy, breastfeeding, intestinal inflammations 
and haemorrhoids. It has been claimed that 
aloin is responsible for antihistamine and anti-
inflammatory activity. Aloin should be admin-
istered preferably in combination with an anti-
spasmodic to moderate its griping action. Pos-
sible side effects of aloin include congestion 
and irritation of the pelvic organs. An-
thraquinone laxatives may play a role in devel-
opment of colorectal cancer as they have 
84 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
genotoxic potential, and tumorigenic potential 
in rodents. Both aloin and aloeresin B have 
skin-whitening activity. Large variations in 
aloin content have been found in Aloe vera, 
with the highest concentration in exudates 
from younger mature leaves. In 2002 the 
United States Food and Drug Administration 
withdrew the 'generally recognized as safe and 
effective (GRASE)' status for over-the-counter 
drugs based on aloe exudates. 
Aloe vera gel has earned a reputation as a 
miracle drug. It is effective in burn treatment, 
because of its anti-inflammatory and wound-
healing properties. Its healing properties may 
be due to rehydrating, insulating and protec-
tive activities resulting from the high water 
content. The major constituents are polysac-
charides (mainly acemannan), lectins, sterols 
and enzymes, and the effect is assumed to be a 
synergy between the polysaccharide base and 
various components. In addition, acemannan 
has shown immune stimulating, anticancer 
and antiviral effects. The use of the gel has 
been approved in the United States for treat-
ment of leukaemia in cats, of fibrosarcoma in 
dogs, for wound healing in humans and to pre-
vent dry socket ('alveolar osteitis') in humans. 
In several experiments with rats (including 
diabetic rats) both topical and oral treatments 
with Aloe vera gel had a positive influence on 
the synthesis of glycosamino glycans, thereby 
facilitating wound healing. A placebo-
controlled, double-blind study showed that a 
topically applied Aloe vera gel of 0.5% in a hy-
drophylic cream is beneficial for patients suf-
fering from psoriasis. It did not show toxic or 
other side-effects. A clinical test with patients 
with advanced solid tumours, for whom no 
standard effective therapy was available, sug-
gested that Aloe vera gel in combination with 
the immunomodulating neurohormone mela-
tonin may produce some therapeutic benefits, 
at least in terms of stabilization of disease and 
survival. 
Contradicting results of clinical tests with Aloe 
vera products are common. A problem is that 
the identity of the tested plants is not always 
certain. A second problem is that the products 
are not of standard composition, but depend on 
cultivar, growing conditions and handling after 
harvest. Therefore, commercial products may 
vary enormously in composition. Also, con-
tamination of the gel with exudate can turn a 
harmless product into a purgative. It is there-
fore imperative that products of well-defined 
composition are used for clinical trials, that the 
identity of the plant is confirmed by a taxono-
mist and that a specimen is deposited in a her-
barium for future reference. 
Adulterations and substitutes The enor-
mous increase in demand in the 1990s and the 
lack of regulation has led to cases of deliberate 
manipulation of the quality of Aloe vera gel. 
Samples of Aloe vera gel powder have been 
found that contained up to 90% maltodextrin, a 
polysaccharide made from cornstarch. In the 
United States certification of Aloe vera prod-
ucts is in place. The commercial drug 'Cape 
aloe' is produced from Aloe ferox Miller and 
'Socotrine aloe', from Aloe perryi Baker. Their 
exudates are used as substitutes for 'bitter 
aloes'. 
Psyllium (Plantago spp.), which is a natural 
bulk laxative, is one of the substitutes for an-
thraquinone-containing laxative drugs such as 
Aloe and has the advantage that it does not 
cause dependency and/or cathartic colon. An-
thraquinone-containing preparations from 
Senna alata (L.) Roxb. and other Senna and 
Cassia species are sometimes recommended as 
substitutes for Aloe products. Centella asiatica 
(L.) Urb. is recommended as a substitute for 
Aloe vera gels in wound treatments; its triter-
penes have exhibited both wound healing and 
Aloe vera - 1, plant habit; 2, part of inflorescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
ALOE 85 
antibacterial activities. 
Description Succulent perennial herb up to 
160 cm tall, without stem or with a short stem 
up to 30 cm long, freely suckering and forming 
dense groups. Leaves 16-20 in a dense rosette, 
erect to slightly spreading; stipules absent; 
petiole absent; blade linear-lanceolate, 40-50 
cm x 6-7 cm, apex acuminate, margins slightly 
pinkish, with deltoid, firm teeth 2 mm long, 
pale, 1-2 cm apart, fleshy, upper surface rather 
flat, grey-green to pale green, lower surface 
convex; leaf sap yellowish. Inflorescence a ter-
minal dense raceme 30-40 cm x 5-6 cm; pe-
duncle simple or sometimes 1—2-branched 
above the middle, 60-90 cm tall; bracts ovate-
acute, deflexed, up to 1 cm long. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel c. 5 mm long; 
perianth tubular, up to 3 cm long, inflated 
around the ovary, lobes 6, 3 outer lobes acute, 3 
inner lobes obtuse, yellow, orange or red; sta-
mens 6, exserted; ovary superior, 3-celled, 6-
grooved, style filiform, stigma head-shaped, 
exserted. Fruit a capsule, dehiscing loculi-
cidally, many-seeded. Seeds c. 7 mm long, dark 
brown, winged. 
Other botanical information Aloe com-
prises about 450 species in Africa and Arabia, 
of which c. 315 occur in mainland Africa, c. 100 
are endemic to Madagascar or the Indian 
Ocean islands (including the former Lomato-
phyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. The taxon-
omy is complicated by the occurrence of inter-
specific hybrids both in the wild and in cultiva-
tion. The long history of cultivation has led to 
various selections that are sometimes given 
formal botanical ranking. The names Aloe vera 
and Aloe barbadensis have long been conten-
tious among specialists. While taxonomists 
now agree that Aloe vera is the correct name, 
both pharmacologists and medical researchers 
still use both names, probably also due to pat-
ent-related problems. To confuse matters fur-
ther many pharmacologists apply the name 
'aloe vera' to products derived from other Aloe 
species. 
The group of Aloe species to which Aloe vera 
belongs is characterized by the production of 
suckers and a simple or sparsely branched in-
florescence. Aloe officinalis Forssk. has the 
same growth habit and is cultivated for me-
dicinal use of the leaves in Somalia. It is native 
to Yemen and it is often incorrectly considered 
conspecific with Aloe vera. 
Growth and development Aloe species 
follow the Crassulacean acid metabolism 
(CAM). CAM plants can fix C02 at night and 
photosynthesize with closed stomata during 
the day, thus minimizing water loss. This, plus 
their succulent leaves and stems, and the pres-
ence of a thick cuticle, makes them well 
adapted to dry conditions. Birds are the most 
important pollinators of Aloe but in Africa hon-
eybees also play a role. In Africa Aloe vera 
flowers and fruits normally, but elsewhere fruit 
formation is rare. Failure to set fruit is pre-
sumed to be caused by pollen sterility and self-
incompatibility. 
Ecology Aloe vera grows in a wide range of 
climatic conditions. It prefers sandy or loamy, 
well-drained soils and can grow in nutritionally 
poor soil, but thrives on rich soils. It is tolerant 
of salinity. Established plants will survive 
drought quite well even though the root system 
is relatively shallow. Aloe vera is not very frost-
hardy, but will survive a temperature of 
-3°C with only slight injury. It should be 
planted in full sun or light shade. During the 
winter months in the subtropics, the plant be-
comes dormant and utilizes very little mois-
ture. 
Propagation and planting In Aloe vera 
cultivation, vegetative propagation is usually 
preferred above propagation by seed, because 
of poor seedling emergence and faster initial 
growth of suckers. Water deficiency may lead 
to decreased sucker formation. Suckers can be 
cut from the mother plant when they are 15-20 
cm long. They may be grown in a nursery dur-
ing the first year. Micropropagation through 
in-vitro culture of vegetative meristems, as 
well as in-vitro regeneration of leaf base ex-
plants is possible. 
Management Management practices for 
Aloe vera vary widely. Where grown exten-
sively, for example in the Dominican Republic, 
goats are used for weeding. Greenhouse culti-
vation is practised in Ohio, United States. Use 
of chemical fertilizers is not common, probably 
because it would spoil the reputation of this 
organic health product. Nitrogen is the most 
important nutrient. Plant densities used are 
variable. Densities of 60,000 plants/ha have 
given the highest yields of gel and exudate, but 
in large-scale plantations the distances be-
tween and within rows are usually at least 50 
cm. Densities of about 15,000 plants/ha are 
considered optimal for intensive cultivation 
with drip irrigation and polythene ground 
cover. Lower densities will give larger leaves 
but lower gel yields per ha. 
Diseases and pests In Africa no serious 
diseases affect Aloe vera. In India Altemaria 
86 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
alternata and Fusarium solani are causes of 
leaf spot disease. In Aruba leaf rot caused by 
Erwinia chrysanthemi occurs occasionally. Aloe 
vera has few pests as the tough outer skin pro-
vides excellent resistance. It is likely that the 
bitter anthraquinones contained in the outer 
layer of the leaf make the plant unattractive. 
Harvesting Aloe vera plants take about 3 
years to attain harvestable size, and then 
leaves can be harvested for about seven years. 
The exudate is collected by cutting off the 
leaves transversely close to the stem and posi-
tioning them in such a way that the juice 
drains into pots, tubs, vessels or even a simple 
canvas placed over a depression in the ground. 
The exudate may also be obtained by squeezing 
the leaves or by warm or cold water retting. 
The leaves are usually cut in the morning and 
it takes 4-5 hours for the juice to drain from a 
pile of leaves. Only older leaves are cut; 
younger ones and growing tips are spared. 
For gel production, the leaves are cut at inter-
vals of about 3 months. The youngest leaves (< 
25 cm) are not suitable because of their low gel 
content, but the leaves should not be too old 
because gel quantity and quality may decline. 
Individual Aloe vera leaves in Aruba reach 
their maximum fresh weight after about 40 
weeks of growth. Leaves with tip necrosis or 
that are otherwise damaged, should be dis-
carded to avoid contamination of the gel with 
bacteria. In a system where only selected 
leaves are cut, the possibilities for mechanical 
harvesting are limited. 
Yield In Aruba Aloe vera plants can produce 
16-20 leaves per year under optimal moisture 
supply and sufficient nitrogen fertilization. 
With a plant density of 50,000 plants/ha and 
an average fresh leaf weight of 0.2 kg, this im-
plies a gel yield of about 180 t/ha. Leaves of the 
cultivar 'Rio Grande Valley' can weigh up to 1.3 
kg when grown under optimal conditions. 
Handling after harvest The exudate col-
lected is concentrated by boiling and subse-
quent cooling or by vacuum evaporation. The 
resulting amorphous extract constitutes the 
drug 'Curaçao aloe'. The extract is opaque, 
waxy and often liver-coloured ('hepatic') and 
aloin crystals are visible under the microscope. 
Other compounds found in dried exudate may 
well be artefacts of boiling the exudate. 
For gel production the cut leaves are trans-
ferred to water baths where debris is washed 
off. The leaves are then taken into the factory 
for filleting. To separate the gel-containing 
parts, each leaf is topped and tailed and the 
sides are cut off using a very sharp knife. Then 
the outer tissues of the leaf are removed the 
same way. The remaining gel must be proc-
essed as quickly as possible to avoid degrada-
tion of the polysaccharides. In an alternative 
method used e.g. in Aruba, gel is obtained by 
cutting the leaves lengthwise and scraping the 
gel from the leaf blade. The gel is further cut 
into small pieces to produce a free flowing liq-
uid, followed by refining and filtration. Purifi-
cation is done by centrifugal removal of cell 
wall material, and the liquid pure gel is stabi-
lized chemically. Subsequently the gel may be 
concentrated and dehydrated. So-called 'whole 
leaf aloe vera' products are produced in the 
same way as the gel products but the outer 
tissues are extracted separately, the aloins are 
removed by mixing with fine charcoal, and the 
extract is subsequently sieved and added to the 
gel. In Asia the whole dried fillet is marketed, 
and in several West African markets and in 
supermarkets in the United States whole fresh 
leaves are sold. 
Genetic resources Aloe vera is widely cul-
tivated because of its commercial value. It is 
also present in many botanical gardens, and is 
therefore not endangered. Aloe vera is the only 
Aloe species not listed by the Convention on 
International Trade in Endangered Species of 
Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES) Appendices and 
is therefore the only species that can be traded 
legally. 
As a result of the continuous vegetative propa-
gation, the genetic variation within Aloe vera 
in cultivation seems to be rather small but this 
variation has never been studied. Populations 
in India and China for example have been iso-
lated for centuries and may harbour character-
istics that could be useful elsewhere. 
Breeding High-yielding plants may be se-
lected and propagated for commercial cultiva-
tion. For gel production cultivars with low 
aloin content would be preferred and seem to 
exist. Many Aloe species hybridize in the wild if 
their area of distribution and period of flower-
ing overlap, and it is easy to produce hybrids in 
cultivation. The scope for breeding and selec-
tion is therefore enormous. 
Prospects Aloe vera is of particular interest 
for the use of its gel in burn and wound care. It 
will remain beneficial as a household remedy: 
fresh gel can easily be prepared and applied to 
wounds. In its use as a laxative, however, the 
drug tends to be replaced by other laxatives 
such as those from Plantago spp. Even so, 
there is still considerable demand, also for vet-
ALOE 87 
erinary use, worldwide. For gel production Aloe 
vera has potential as a commercial crop in arid 
regions as the demand is enormous and in-
creasing; in Kenya plantations of Aloe vera 
have started on a small scale. Growing Aloe 
vera for gel requires however considerable in-
vestment in processing equipment. 
In the Western World the medicinal use of Aloe 
vera extracts will be gradually replaced by that 
of purified drugs. The number of scientific and 
pseudo-scientific publications on medicinal and 
pharmacological aspects is overwhelming and 
new insights are likely to contribute to the 
démystification of now contentious claims 
about the beneficial effects of Aloe vera. The 
identification of active ingredients and mecha-
nisms of action are critical for production of 
effective and safe drugs based on Aloe vera and 
other Aloe species. 
Major references Abe & Talmadge (Edi-
tors), 2004; Aguilar & Brink, 1999; Dagne et 
al., 2000; Das & Chattopadhay, 2004; Eshun & 
He, 2004; Grindlay & Reynolds, 1986; Newton, 
2001; Reynolds, 2004; Reynolds & Dweck, 
1999; Strickland & Pelley, 2004. 
Other references Cerqueira et al., 1999; 
Chow et al., 2005; Diehl & Teichmuller, 1998; 
Duke & duCellier, 1993; Dweck, undated; Ek-
pendu, 2004; Facciola, 1990; Gurib-Fakim, 
Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1996; Liao et al., 2004; 
Richardson et al., 2005; Ross, 2003; Tanaka,, 
1976; Torres-Acosta et al., 2005; Valverde et 
al., 2005; Usher, 1974; Yeh et a l , 2003; WHO, 
1999. 
Sources of illustration Bâillon, 1886. 
Authors A.J. Afolayan & P.O. Adebola 
ALOE VOLKENSII Engl. 
Protologue Pflanzenw. Ost-Afrikas: 141 
(1895). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
volkensii occurs in Rwanda, southern and 
coastal Kenya, southern Uganda, and northern 
and coastal Tanzania, including Zanzibar. 
Uses In eastern Africa the leaf sap of Aloe 
volkensii is applied to burns, wounds and sores 
and as a lotion to eyes. The bitter exudate is 
applied to nipples to wean children and is 
rubbed on the forehead to treat headache. In 
Rwanda it is taken as a purgative. The leaf sap 
is taken to expel a retained placenta. The 
leaves are used to deworm livestock. Small 
amounts of leaf sap are added to butter to in-
crease its shelf life. Aloe volkensii is planted as 
a live fence. Roots are used to accelerate the 
fermentation of honey beer and to impart a 
slightly bitter taste. 
Properties Exudate of Aloe volkensii con-
tains a mixture of the stereoisomers aloin A 
(barbaloin) and aloin B (isobarbaloin), which 
are responsible for the laxative properties. 
Botany Succulent shrub or small tree up to 
3(-9) m tall; stem solitary or clustered, up to 30 
cm in diameter, simple or branching from 
above the base, with persistent dead leaves. 
Leaves in a rosette, erect, later spreading and 
recurved; stipules absent; petiole absent; blade 
narrowly lanceolate, up to 1 m x 10 cm, margin 
with forward pointing, brown-tipped teeth 2-4 
mm long, 1-2.5 cm mm apart, blade dull olive-
green; exudate yellow, drying red. Inflores-
cence consisting of head-like racemes c. 8 cm 
long, becoming cylindrical-conical; peduncle 
50-60(-85) cm long, with 8 or more spreading 
branches, lowest with secondary branches; 
bracts broadly ovate, 2-5 mm long. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel 1-1.5 cm 
long; perianth tubular, 2.5-3.5 cm long, 6-8 
mm in diameter, lobes 6, 12-17 mm long, red 
with yellow tips; stamens 6, exserted; ovary 
superior, 3-celled, style filiform, stigma head-
shaped, exserted. Fruit an ovoid capsule c. 3 
cm x 1.5 cm, dehiscing loculicidally, many-
seeded. Seeds c. 9 mm long, broadly winged. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. Aloe 
volkensii belongs to a group of species, which 
are often small trees with usually unbranched 
trunks (sometimes branching at base) or suck-
ering shrubs. Several other species in this 
group have medicinal uses. Aloe ballyi Rey-
nolds is a rare species from Kenya and Tanza-
nia. Leaf sap is taken as a purgative but this is 
dangerous as it contains poisonous alkaloids. It 
is planted as an ornamental in the streets of 
Nairobi, Kenya. Aloe christianii Reynolds oc-
curs in DR Congo, Tanzania and a large part of 
southern Africa. A leaf infusion is taken to 
induce abortion, but is considered too poison-
ous in Zimbabwe. Aloe excelsa A.Berger occurs 
in a large part of southern Africa. An infusion 
made of the leaves is taken as a malaria pro-
phylactic and to cure stomach-ache, asthma 
and jaundice and is put in drinking water of 
chickens to prevent diseases. The leaves con-
88 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tain aloesin, anthraquinones and a C-
glucoside. In Namibia the leaf sap of Aloe lit-
toralis Baker is applied to cure eye problems 
and to arrest progress of venereal disease. 
Powdered leaves are an effective anti-
inflammatory. Daily use of leaf extract is said 
to be effective as a malaria prophylaxis. 
Chopped leaves, boiled in water are purgative 
both for humans and livestock. Chopped leaves 
added to drinking water protect cattle against 
ticks and ear lice and chickens against lice. 
Aloe marlothii A.Berger occurs in Botswana, 
Mozambique, Swaziland and northern South 
Africa. A leaf decoction is taken with porridge 
to treat stomach-ache and intestinal worms. 
The leaf pulp is rubbed on nipples to wean 
children. The burned dried leaves are mixed 
with snuff. Aloe marlothii is planted as a live 
fence. The leaves show strong in-vitro 
anthelminthic activity. Ash from the leaves, 
mixed with maize, effectively protects the lat-
ter from storage pests. The dried exudate was 
formerly traded under the name 'Natal aloe'. 
Aloe marlothii is an important bee plant. 
Ecology Aloe volkensii occurs in dry, riverine 
forest and bush on rocky localities from sea-
level to 2100 m altitude. 
Management Cuttings are used to establish 
live fences of Aloe volkensii. For medicinal use 
leaves are primarily harvested from wild 
plants in a non-destructive way. 
Genetic resources and breeding There is 
no indication of over-utilisation of Aloe volken-
sii in its natural range. 
Prospects Aloe volkensii has not drawn 
much interest so far. It is likely to remain im-
portant only for local use. Its habit does not 
make it a likely candidate for domestication. 
Major references Carter, 1994; Gelfand et 
al., 1985; Kokwaro, 1993; Maundu et al., 2001; 
van Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
Other references Abegaz et al, 1999; Baerts 
& Lehmann, 2005e; Carter, 2001; CITES, 2003; 
Clarkson et al., 2004; Lukwa et al., 2001; Neu-
winger, 2000; Newton, 2004; Pakia & Cooke, 
2003b; von Koenen, 2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ALOE WOLLASTONII Rendle 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc. Bot. 38; 238 
(1908). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Vernacular names Mlalangao (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Aloe 
wollastonii is distributed from north-eastern 
DR Congo to western Kenya and Tanzania. 
Uses In DR Congo and Burundi exudate, 
crushed leaves and dried leaves are applied 
topically to cure haemorrhoids. In Uganda 
itchy skin rash is treated by bathing in an in-
fusion of Aloe wollastonii leaves or by using the 
crushed leaves as a sponge. Uterine inflamma-
tion is treated by drinking an infusion of the 
leaves. A decoction of roots and leaves is drunk 
to cure jaundice. Veterinary applications of the 
leaves are multiple in DR Congo, Rwanda and 
Burundi. Anthrax, piles, burns, parasites and 
retention of the afterbirth are ailments that 
are treated with fresh leaves or dried leaf pow-
der, as is East Coast fever in cattle. 
Properties Aloe species contain a variety of 
phenolic compounds, including chromone, an-
thraquinone or anthrone derivatives. The leaf 
exudate of Aloe wollastonii contains about 15% 
aloin. 
Botany Succulent perennial herb up to 1.5 
m tall, without stem, usually solitary. Leaves 
12-15 in a dense rosette, erect to spreading; 
stipules absent; petiole absent; blade lanceo-
late, up to 50 cm x 10 cm, apex long-acuminate, 
margin with sharp white-horny to red-brown 
teeth 4-6 mm long, 1-2 cm apart, blade dull 
green with elongated white blotches in trans-
verse bands; exudate drying yellow. Inflores-
cence consisting of cylindrical-conical racemes 
10-25(-30) cm long, laxly flowered; peduncle 
up to 1.2 m long, with 4-6 branches, lower 
branches sometimes rebranched; bracts linear-
lanceolate, (10-)15-20 mm long. Flowers bi-
sexual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel 1.5-2 cm 
long; perianth tubular, 3-3.5 cm long, c. 9 mm 
in diameter at base, lobes 6, c. 11 mm long, 
pinkish to orange-red, rarely yellow; stamens 
6, exserted; ovary superior, 3-celled, style fili-
form, stigma head-shaped, exserted. Fruit an 
ovoid capsule c. 20 mm x 12 mm, dehiscing 
loculicidally, many-seeded. Seeds c. 3 mm x 5 
mm, blackish brown with broad, speckled 
wings. 
Aloe comprises about 450 species in Africa and 
Arabia, of which c. 315 occur in mainland Af-
rica, c. 100 are endemic to Madagascar or the 
Indian Ocean islands (including the former 
Lomatophyllum) and c. 50 occur in Arabia. Aloe 
wollastonii has been confused in the literature 
with Aloe lateritia Engl., a species with a more 
eastern distribution and more densely flowered 
racemes. Aloe wollastonii belongs to a group of 
Aloe species with solitary rosettes or forming 
small groups, with leaves wider than 2 cm and 
ANDRACHNE 89 
inflorescences with at least 2 branches. Several 
other species in this group have medicinal 
uses. The exudate of Aloe citrina S.Carter & 
Brandham is used in Somalia to cure ophthal-
mia. The leaf juice of Aloe cryptopoda Baker is 
used in Zimbabwe to treat constipation, vene-
real diseases and as abortifacient, although the 
abortifacient activity of the infusion could not 
be demonstrated in tests with rats. The sap 
from roasted leaves of Aloe kilifiensis Christian 
from coastal Kenya is applied to the skin to 
reduce swelling. A decoction of the leaves is 
taken to cure an enlarged spleen. The exudate 
is used externally to treat headache. Aloe rivae 
Baker from Ethiopia and Kenya is threatened 
because of overexploitation for undocumented 
medicinal uses. In Sudan both the leaves and 
leaf exudate of Aloe sinkatana Reynolds are 
valued for treating a variety of ailments, in-
cluding skin diseases, constipation, fever, ton-
sillitis, haemorrhoids and inflamed colon. Aloe 
sinkatana is valued as an ornamental. It is 
depleted in the wild and propagation and con-
servation measures are urgently needed. 
Ecology Aloe wollastonii is found in grass-
land and woodland at 1100-2300 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Aloe 
wollastonii is widespread and probably not 
under direct threat of genetic erosion or extinc-
tion, although it is included in CITES lists like 
all Aloe spp. except Aloe vera (L.) Burm.f. 
Prospects As Aloe wollastonii produces few 
or no suckers it is not an obvious choice for 
commercial cultivation. Confusion with Aloe 
lateritia warrants review of the literature on 
chemistry and ethnobotany of both species. 
Major references Carter, 1994; Kokwaro, 
1993; Marshall, 1998; Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 
2003. 
Other references Baerts & Lehmann, 2005c; 
Champluvier & Maquet, 1988; CITES, 2003; 
Newton, 2001; Pakia & Cooke, 2003b; Parry & 
Matambo, 1992. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ANDRACHNE ASPERA Spreng. 
Protologue Syst. veg. 3: 884 (1826). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllanthaceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution An-
drachne aspera occurs throughout northern 
Africa east through the Arabian peninsula to 
Turkey, Pakistan and India. In tropical Africa 
it occurs in Cape Verde and from Cameroon 
east to Somalia and Kenya. 
Uses In Ethiopia the roots are eaten as an 
anti-emetic. An extract of the aerial parts is 
drunk as a poison antidote, and to treat head-
ache and stomach-ache. In Pakistan and India 
a decoction of the bitter root is used as eye 
drops to treat eye infections and improve eye-
sight. 
Properties From the aerial parts a number 
of piperidine alkaloids were isolated: aspertine 
A-D, andrachcinine, andrachcinidine, andrach-
amine, andrachcine, as well as the alkaloids 
(+)-allosedridine, (-)-8-epi-8-ethylnorlobelol I 
and (-)-8-epihalosaline. Terpenes isolated from 
the aerial parts are lupeol acetate, a-amyrin, ß-
amyrin, cc-taraxerol, stigmasterol, ß-stig-
masterol, lupeol, oleanolic acid and germanicol. 
In preliminary laboratory tests, an alcoholic 
extract of the aerial parts showed stimulatory 
activity on respiration and blood pressure of 
dogs and cats. It also showed spasmolytic activ-
ity on isolated guinea-pig ileum and rat ileum, 
as well as antihistaminic activity on guinea-pig 
ileum. Root extracts showed significant anti-
bacterial activity against several human 
pathogens, but methanol extracts of the aerial 
parts were inactive. Toxicity studies with rats 
showed low toxicity. 
Botany Monoecious, prostrate or decumbent 
perennial herb up to 35 cm tall; stems hairy. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
oblong to lanceolate, c. 1 mm long; petiole 1— 
10(-15) mm long; blade broadly ovate to almost 
kidney-shaped, 0.5-1.5(-2.5) cm in diameter, 
base rounded to shallowly cordate, apex 
rounded to notched, glabrous to sparingly 
short-hairy above, short-hairy beneath. Inflo-
rescence axillary; male inflorescence a few-
flowered fascicle, female flowers solitary. Flow-
ers unisexual, regular, 5(—6)-merous; male 
flowers with pedicel 1.5-2 mm long, sepals 
oblanceolate-oblong, c. 1.5 mm long, slightly 
toothed at apex, yellowish green with membra-
naceous margins, petals rhombic-elliptical, c. 1 
mm long, acute, white, disk glands kidney-
shaped, flattened, stamens c. 1 mm long, free 
or fused in the lower third; female flowers with 
pedicel c. 2 mm long, extending to 4—8 mm in 
fruit, sepals lanceolate, c. 2 mm long, almost 
acute, green with narrow membranaceous 
margins, petals subulate, c. 1 mm long, acute, 
whitish, disk glands free, fleshy, ovary supe-
rior, c. 1 mm in diameter, shallowly 6-lobed, 
densely short-hairy, styles 3, c. 0.5 mm long, 
apex 2-fid. Fruit a deeply 3-lobed capsule 2-2.5 
mm x c. 3.5 mm, sparingly short-hairy, dull 
green or purplish tinged, 6-seeded. Seeds ir-
90 MEDICINAL PLANTS l 
regularly compressed-trigonous, c. 2 mm x 1.5 
mm, greyish brown, minutely whitish warty. 
Andrachne comprises about 45 species and 
occurs throughout the tropics and subtropics; 2 
species occur in Madagascar and 6 in continen-
tal Africa, 2 of which extend their distribution 
area to Pakistan. 
Ecology Andrachne aspera occurs in open 
dry woodland or bushland and in dry, sandy or 
stony river beds, from sea-level up to 2000(-
2400) m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Andrachne 
aspera is extremely widespread and there are 
no signs that it is threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Although the roots of Andrachne 
aspera are used medicinally, nothing is known 
about their chemistry and pharmacology. The 
aerial parts were active in preliminary phar-
macological tests, but it is not known whether 
the alkaloids and terpenes in the aerial parts 
are associated with these activities. Further 
research is justified on both the roots and ae-
rial parts of the species. 
Major references Geyid et al., 2005; Jansen, 
1981; Mill & Hootelé, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Other references Ikram & Haq, 1980; Ka-
mal, 2001. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ANDRACHNE OVALIS (E.Mey. ex Sond.) 
Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Linnaea 32: 78 (1863). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Vernacular names False lightning bush 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution An-
drachne ovalis occurs in Zimbabwe, South Af-
rica and Swaziland. 
Uses The strong-smelling roots of Andrachne 
ovalis are used in medicine. A decoction of the 
root is given orally to humans and animals as 
an anthelmintic by the Swazi people, whilst an 
infusion of the root is externally applied as a 
wash by the Zulu people to treat head lice and 
fleas. Burned roots are sniffed to treat head-
ache or taken as an emetic to treat chest com-
plaints. Snakebites are treated with an emetic 
prepared from burned roots, or with powdered 
root bark applied to incisions in the skin. Pow-
dered stem bark is reported to be effective 
against epilepsy. The roots are inserted in 
holes to repel snakes. Powdered root bark in 
milk is used to trap flies, which are said to die 
soon after eating the mixture. 
Properties Methanol extracts of the bark 
and leaves showed strong molluscicidal activity 
against the snail Bulinus africanus, and some 
antibacterial activity against the bacterial wilt 
disease Ralstonia solanacearum (synonym: 
Pseudonomas solanacearum). Bioactivity has 
been attributed to anthraquinones and their 
glycosides, saponins, flavonoids and steroids. 
Botany Monoecious or dioecious, rather lax, 
slender, almost glabrous shrub or small tree up 
to 3(—6) m tall; bark grey, smooth; young twigs 
terete, greenish. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules triangular-ovate, c. 1 mm long; 
petiole 2-5(-7) mm long, slender, sparingly 
pubescent when young; blade ovate to ellipti-
cal-ovate, l-4(-6) cm x 0.5-2(-3) cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex obtuse to almost 
acute, deep glossy green above, paler beneath, 
smelling of cyanide when crushed. Inflores-
cence axillary; male inflorescence a few-
flowered fascicle, female flowers solitary. Flow-
ers unisexual, regular, 5(-6)-merous; male 
flowers with pedicel 2-3(-5) mm long, sepals 
almost orbicular to obovate, c. 1.5 mm x 1.5 
mm, fused at base, obtuse, greenish yellow, 
petals almost orbicular, c. 1 mm long, white, 
disk cup-shaped, c. 1.5 mm in diameter, with 
10 triangular teeth, stamens c. 1.5 mm long, 
fused in the lower third; female flowers with 
pedicel 4-8 mm long, extending up to 1.5 cm in 
fruit, apically enlarged, sepals ovate, c. 2 mm 
long, greenish, becoming hardened and persis-
tent in fruit, petals almost orbicular to obovate, 
c. 1 mm long, disk cup-shaped, 1-2 mm in di-
ameter, margin irregularly lobed or toothed, 
orange, ovary superior, c. 1 mm in diameter, 
globose, sparingly hairy, styles 3, c. 0.5 mm 
long, apex 2-fid. Fruit a rounded, 3-lobed cap-
sule, 5-6 mm x 8-10 mm, reticulately veined, 
short-hairy at apex, green, 6-seeded. Seeds 
irregularly compressed-trigonous, c. 3.5 mm x 
3 mm x 1.5 mm, dorsally irregularly ridged, 
dark greyish brown. 
Andrachne comprises about 45 species and 
occurs throughout the tropics and subtropics; 2 
species occur in Madagascar and 6 in continen-
tal Africa, 2 of which extend their distribution 
area to Pakistan. Clutia pulchella L. is found 
in a similar habitat and may be confused with 
Andrachne ovalis. 
Ecology Andrachne ovalis occurs in ever-
green forest, forest margins, grassy and stony 
slopes and ravines, at 650-1700 m altitude. 
ANISOCYCLA 91 
Andrachne ovalis flowers from November-
January and fruits from January-March. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Andrachne ovalis is threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The roots and stem bark of 
Andrachne ovalis have several medicinal uses, 
but their chemistry or pharmacology are not 
well documented. Additional research is there-
fore warranted. 
Major references Amusan, Msonthi & 
Makhubu, 1995; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Watt 
& Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Amusan et al., 1994; 
Coates Palgrave, 1983; Govaerts, Frodin & 
Radcliffe-Smith, 2000; Hoffmann, 2000; 
Hutchings et al., 1996. 
Authors O.M. Grace 
ANDROSIPHONIA ADENOSTEGIA Stapf 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc, Bot. 37: 101 
(1905). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Origin and geographic distribution An-
drosiphonia adenostegia occurs in West Africa 
from Sierra Leone east to Ghana. 
Uses In Liberia and Ghana the leaves are 
mixed with palm oil and applied to the head to 
kill lice. The leaves are mixed with lime juice 
(Citrus aurantifolia (Christm. & Panzer) 
Swingle) and used to treat crab louse. In Libe-
ria twigs are used as chew sticks. 
Properties Androsiphonia adenostegia con-
tains the cyanogenic glycosides tetraphyllin B, 
volkenin and their possible biosynthetic pre-
cursor the nonprotein amino acid L-
cyclopentenylglycine, a potent inhibitor of 
valine and isoleucine utilization in bacteria. 
Androsiphonia adenostegia also contains 
saponin dérivâtes. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 6 m tall. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules absent; peti-
ole 8-25 mm long; blade oblong to elliptical, 
12-25 cm x 4-7 cm, base with two large black 
glands, one at each side of the midrib, apex 
acuminate to acute, margin toothed, papery, 
slightly hairy when young, later glabrous. In-
florescence a terminal panicle, sometimes also 
axillary, few- to many-flowered; bracts leafy, 
glandular. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
c. 2.5 cm in diameter; sepals fused at base, 
ovate to elliptical, hairy; petals inserted at the 
base of the sepals, similar to the sepals, grey-
ish green; corona emerging from the base of the 
calyx, deeply divided, segments broadly linear; 
stamens inserted at the base of the ovary, 
forming an ovoid tube up to 3 mm long, fila-
ments c. 5 mm long, anthers oblong; ovary su-
perior, ellipsoid, c. 1 mm long, 1-celled, styles 
3, slender, c. 6 mm long, stigmas head-shaped. 
Fruit a leathery, globose berry 2-3 cm long, 
apex acuminate, yellow to orange when ripe, 
several-seeded. Seeds with pitted wall, sur-
rounded by pulpy aril. 
Androsiphonia comprises a single species. 
Ecology Androsiphonia adenostegia occurs 
in dense evergreen humid forest. 
Genetic resources and breeding As An-
drosiphonia adenostegia only occurs in ever-
green forest, it might be threatened by genetic 
erosion because of habitat loss, although it does 
not seem to be endangered yet. 
Prospects In view of the biological impor-
tance of the active substances found in An-
drosiphonia adenostegia, further research into 
the properties may prove worthwhile, although 
these substances also occur in several better-
known Passiflora spp. 
Major references Abbiw, 1990; Andersen, 
Nielsen & Jaroszewski, 2000; Bernhard, 1999; 
Burkill, 1997; Clausen et a l , 2001. 
Other references Hedberg, 1979; Keay, 
1954a; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANISOCYCLA CYMOSA Troupin 
Protologue Bull. Jard. Bot. Etat 19: 416 
(1949). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Aniso-
cycla cymosa is endemic to DR Congo. 
Uses An aqueous extract of the leaves and 
roots is used in DR Congo as a tonic and anal-
gesic, e.g. against rheumatic pains and stom-
ach-ache. 
Properties From the roots the bisbenzyliso-
quinoline alkaloids 2'-norcocsoline, cocsoline-N-
oxide and 12-O-methylcocsoline-N-oxide have 
been isolated, as well as a number of alkaloids 
of various structures, including anisocycline, 
palmatine, liriodenine, remrefidine, 1,2-
dehydroapateline, 1,2-dehydrotelobine and 
trilobine. The bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids 
2-norobaberine-2'-ß-N-oxide, 2-norobaberine, 
daphnandrine, coclobine, anisocycline, pal-
matine, and remrefidine have been isolated 
from seeds. Their role in neurochemistry is 
being studied. The leaves contain N-O-
92 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
dimethyl thaicanine, N-methyl thaicanine, N-
methyl te t rahydropalmat ine , anisocycline, pal-
mat ine , and s t ephenan th r ine . 
B o t a n y Dioecious liana; s tem up to 5 cm in 
diameter; ba rk with circular leaf scars. Leaves 
a r ranged spirally, simple and entire; petiole up 
to 6 cm long, thin, grooved; blade broadly ovate 
to elliptical, 6-10 cm x 3-6.5 cm, base rounded 
to slightly cordate, apex acuminate , glabrous, 
pinnately veined with 3-5 pai rs of la tera l 
veins. Inflorescence an axillary, many-flowered 
cyme, single or paired, 2 -8 cm long, reddish 
hairy. Flowers unisexual , small; pedicel short; 
sepals 9 in 3 whorls, yellowish hairy, sepals of 
outer and middle whorls 0.5-1.5 mm long, 3 
inner sepals 2 -3 mm x 1-1.5 mm; peta ls 
broadly ovate, c. 1.5 mm long, nar rowing to the 
base, glabrous; male flowers wi th 9-18 sta-
mens c. 3 m m long, fi laments fused; female 
flowers with superior ovary composed of 3 free 
carpels 2 -4 m m long, styles cylindrical, gla-
brous. Fru i t composed of 1-3 drupes; s tone 
bony. 
Anisocycla comprises 6 species, 4 in cont inental 
Africa and 2 in Madagascar . 
Anisocycla grandidieri Baill. is endemic to 
nor thern Madagascar , where it occurs below 
500 m al t i tude. A very bi t ter decoction of i ts 
yellow roots is used to cure diseases of the kid-
neys and the bladder. Sap from the roots is 
used as a coagulant. The roots contain t he bis-
benzylisoquinoline alkaloids epis tephanine, 
stebisimine, tri lobine and 12'-0-demethyltr i -
lobine. Epis tephanine and stebisimine have 
shown spasmolytic activity in isolated guinea-
pig ileum. Anisocycla jollyana (Pierre) Diels is 
a climbing shrub occurring in fringing forest 
from Equator ia l Guinea to wes tern DR Congo. 
It does not have recorded medicinal uses, bu t 
i ts chemistry was researched because its close 
relat ive Anisocycla cymosa contains many in-
teres t ing alkaloids. The roots of Anisocycla 
jollyana contain a great var ie ty of bisbenzyli-
soquinoline alkaloids and dioxine alkaloids, 
including cycleanine, l imacusine, apatel ine and 
isochondrodendrine and its derivatives fastrine 
and jollyanine. From the leaves the secodiben-
zylisoquinolines secojollyanine and secoho-
moaromaline have been isolated, as have sev-
eral bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids. 
E c o l o g y Anisocycla cymosa occurs on sandy 
riversides and in fringing forest a round open 
vegetat ion in the humid forest belt. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Too little 
is known about Anisocycla cymosa to assess its 
genetic vulnerabil i ty. 
P r o s p e c t s Additional research on the phyto-
chemistry and pharmacology of Anisocycla cy-
mosa and the other Anisocycla species seems 
war ran t ed in view of the uses and the numer-
ous bioactive const i tuents . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Kanyinda et al., 1989; 
Kanyinda, Vanhae len-Fas t re & Vanhaelen, 
1993; Kanyinda et al., 1992; Kanyinda, 1993; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Boissier et al., 1975; 
Boiteau, Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; 
Kanyinda, Vanhae len-Fas t re & Vanhaelen, , 
1995; Kanyinda et al., 1996; Kanyinda et al., 
1997; Schüt t ler & Weber, 1972a; Thanikai-
moni, 1986; Vauquelin et al., 1989. 
A u t h o r s L.P.A. Oyen 
ANTHOCLEISTA AMPLEXICAULIS Baker 
P r o t o l o g u e Journ . Linn. Soc , Bot. 22: 506 
(1887). 
F a m i l y Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista amplexicaulis is endemic to eas te rn and 
central Madagascar . 
U s e s In Madagascar a decoction of the aer ial 
pa r t s or s tem bark is t aken to t r e a t malar ia . 
Anthocleista amplexicaulis is also used to t r ea t 
constipation and nervousness . 
P r o p e r t i e s Anthocleista amplexicaulis con-
ta ins the secoiridoid glycosides swer t iamar in , 
grandifloroside, methylgrandifloroside, am-
plexine and amplexine-1-glucoside. The leaves 
contain the cyclitol (+)-bornesitol. 
B o t a n y Small t ree up to 15 m tall; bole up to 
20 cm in diameter . Leaves opposite, simple and 
ent ire , sessile; blade obovate to oblanceolate, 
7.5-90 cm x 3.5-35 cm, base usual ly auricled, 
apex rounded, papery to leathery, bri t t le , con-
spicuously pinnate ly veined. Inflorescence an 
erect t e rmina l dichasial cyme 15-30 cm long, 
many-flowered; peduncle and branches green-
ish white . Flowers bisexual, regular ; sepals 4, 
free, orbicular, the outer ones orbicular or 
broadly ovate, 4-10 mm long, the inner ones 
emargina te , whi t ish green; corolla with cylin-
drical tube 5—9 mm long, lobes 8—12, orbicular, 
broadly ovate or elliptical, 5—10 mm long, apex 
obtuse or rounded, spreading, violet or mauve; 
s t amens as many as corolla lobes and al ternat-
ing wi th them, exserted, f i laments fused, an-
the r s with a sterile acute apex; ovary superior, 
ovoid or oblong-ovoid, 5-6 mm x 2.5—3 mm, 4-
celled, style short, s t igma globose or obovoid, 
apically slightly notched. Frui t a globose to 
ANTHOCLEISTA 93 
ovoid berry 2—3 cm x 1-2 cm, smooth and shin-
ing, acuminate, thick-walled, green, many-
seeded. Seeds obliquely ovoid-globose, 2-2.5 
mm x 1.5-3 mm, brown. 
Anthocleista comprises 14 species and occurs in 
tropical Africa, including Comoros and Mada-
gascar. 
Ecology Anthocleista amplexicaulis occurs 
in swamp forest, from sea-level up to 1200 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antho-
cleista amplexicaulis is fairly widespread in 
Madagascar, but there is insufficient informa-
tion available to make any pertinent conclu-
sions or recommendations concerning its ge-
netic erosion and possible conservation meas-
ures. 
Prospects The use of Anthocleista amplexi-
caulis appears to be limited and only occasional 
in Madagascar. In view of the limited chemical 
and pharmacological data available and the 
many uses of other Anthocleista species in Af-
rica, research into the pharmacological proper-
ties of Anthocleista amplexicaulis may prove 
worthwhile. 
Major references Debray, Jacquemin & 
Razafindrambao, 1971; Jensen & Schripsema, 
2002; Leeuwenberg, 1961b; Leeuwenberg, 1980. 
Other references Leeuwenberg, 1984; Neu-
winger, 2000; Rasoanaivo et al., 1994a; Weber, 
1974. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOCLEISTA DJALONENSIS A.Chev. 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Bot. France 54: 47 
(1908). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 60 
Synonyms Anthocleista kerstingii Gilg ex 
Volkens (1909). 
Vernacular names Cabbage tree (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista djalonensis occurs from Guinea Bissau 
east to Cameroon. 
Uses Anthocleista djalonensis is widely used 
throughout its distribution area as a strong 
purgative and diuretic. A root decoction is 
commonly taken to treat constipation, to regu-
late menstruation and as an abortifacient. It is 
used as a wash or bath or as a vapour bath to 
treat leprosy, venereal diseases, oedema and 
scrotal elephantiasis. A root infusion is taken 
to treat intestinal problems, acute inflamma-
tions and boils on the skin. In Mali a root mac-
Anthocleista djalonensis - wild 
eration is taken alone or with honey to treat 
malaria and a root decoction or root powder in 
porridge is taken to treat abdominal pain. A 
root decoction is also taken to treat hernia of 
the groin. In southern Nigeria a decoction of 
the roots with potash is taken to treat fungal 
skin infections and filarial worm infections, 
including loa loa filariasis. A tea made from the 
chopped soft root bark soaked in water is taken 
to treat thrush. An alcoholic leaf extract is 
taken to treat diarrhoea and dysentery. In Si-
erra Leone a decoction of dry fallen leaves is 
drunk to treat jaundice. In Guinea Bissau a 
bark infusion is used to treat broken bones in 
women. In Côte d'Ivoire the Attié people use an 
extract of twig bark as eye drops to treat diar-
rhoea in babies. Powdered stem bark mixed 
with the roots of Aloe buettneri A.Berger is 
taken to treat hepatitis, jaundice and cirrhosis. 
Properties The bark of Anthocleista dja-
lonensis contains the quinoline alkaloid 
brucine and the monoterpene glycoside lo-
ganoside (loganine). Brucine is a strychnine 
derivative. In chemistry, brucine and strych-
nine are commonly used as agents for chiral 
resolution. Loganoside plays an important role 
in the partial synthesis of alkaloids such as 
quinine, reserpine and strychnine. The root 
bark contains irlbacholine, which tested posi-
tive for antifungal activity against the patho-
gens Candida albicans, Cryptococcus neofor-
mans, Aspergillus fumigatus and Trichophyton 
rubrum. Irlbacholine has been synthesized 
chemically. The plant also contains triterpenes, 
the monoterpene-diol djalonenol, the dibenzo-
pyrone djalonensone, the iridoid glycosides 
sweroside (djalonenoside) and amplexine and 
94 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
the xanthone lichexanthone. The stem bark 
contains the phthalide djalonensin. The cold 
water and ethanol extracts of the roots have 
antibacterial activities against Staphylococcus 
aureus and Escherichia coli. An aqueous ex-
tract of Anthocleista djalonensis showed a hy-
pertensive effect in cats and increases the tone 
and amplitude of rabbit duodenal movement. 
An alcoholic leaf extract showed in-vitro anti-
spasmodic and smooth muscle relaxant activi-
ties. 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
Anthocleista species are used for similar me-
dicinal purposes and may be used as a substi-
tute for Anthocleista djalonensis. When sold on 
the market it is very difficult to differentiate 
between the dried bark of the different species. 
Description Small tree up to 15 m tall; bole 
up to 40 cm in diameter; twigs sometimes with 
2 erect spines or small cushions above the leaf 
axils. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; peti-
ole 1-9 cm long, auricled; blade oblong-
elliptical to obovate-elliptical, 9-35 cm x 5-17 
cm, in young plants up to 115 cm x 50 cm, base 
cordate, rounded or cuneate, apex rounded. 
Anthocleista djalonensis - 1, portion of branch; 
2, part of flowering branch; 3, flower; 4, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
Inflorescence an erect terminal dichasial cyme, 
15-50 cm long, many-flowered; peduncle and 
branches greenish white or pale green and 
with darker green dots, thickened at the nodes. 
Flowers bisexual, regular; sepals 4, free, or-
bicular, 6-10 mm long; corolla with cylindrical 
tube 20-32 mm long, lobes 11-14, oblong-
lanceolate, 10-18 mm long, spreading, white or 
creamy; stamens as many as corolla lobes and 
alternating with them, exserted, filaments 
fused into a ring, anthers creamy or pale yel-
low; ovary superior, obovoid, 6-7 mm x 3-4 
mm, 4-celled, stigma obovoid-cylindrical, api-
cally 2-lobed. Fruit an ellipsoid berry 3.5-5 cm 
x 2-3.5 cm, rounded at the apex, thick-walled, 
dark green, many-seeded. Seeds obliquely 
ovoid, 2.5 mm x 1.5-2 mm x 1 mm, brown. 
Other botanical information Anthocleista 
comprises 14 species and occurs in tropical 
Africa, including Comoros and Madagascar. 
The 4 West African species have the same ver-
nacular names and are used by local practitio-
ners for the same medicinal purposes. 
Growth and development In Ghana An-
thocleista djalonensis flowers in April and May, 
in Nigeria from March to May. Fruits occur in 
Nigeria in October and November. 
Ecology Anthocleista djalonensis occurs in 
rather dry localities, in savanna or thickets, 
from sea-level up to 500 m altitude. 
Harvesting The leaves are collected from 
young trees or by climbing older ones. The bark 
is obtained by slashing or peeling with a cut-
lass. The roots are dug up when the soil is 
workable. 
Handling after harvest The collected ma-
terial is dried in the sun and kept in wrappers 
or is pounded and made into balls. Sometimes, 
the plant material is powdered when dry. 
Genetic resources Anthocleista djalonensis 
grows sparsely in savanna areas and care 
should be taken to protect it from overexploita-
tion. In Mali and Burkina Faso Anthocleista 
djalonensis is threatened because of uncon-
trolled harvesting for use in local medicine and 
a concerted effort is being undertaken to con-
serve the species. It is rare in Cameroon where 
its niche is occupied by Anthocleista schwein-
furthii Gilg. 
Prospects In view of the medicinal uses on 
record, more research into the chemical compo-
sition and pharmacological activities of the 
compounds of Anthocleista djalonensis seems 
warranted. In areas where Anthocleista dja-
lonensis is rare, measures should be taken to 
propagate and protect the species. 
ANTHOCLEISTA 95 
Major references Adjanohoun et a l , 1979; 
Akubue, Mittal & Aguwa, 1983; Bierer et al., 
1995; Jensen & Schripsema, 2002; Leeuwen-
berg, 1961b; Neuwinger, 2000; Okoli & 
Iroegbu, 2004; Okorie, 1976; Onocha et a l , 
2003a; Togola et al., 2005. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2002; Ber-
haut, 1979; Bouquet, 1969; Irvine, 1961; Keay, 
1989; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Onocha et al., 1995. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1961b. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOCLEISTA LIEBRECHTSIANA De Wild. & 
T.Durand 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Roy. Bot. Belg. 38(2): 
96 (1899). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 60 
Vernacular names Lesser forest fever tree 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista liebrechtsiana occurs from Ghana east 
to the Central African Republic and south to 
Zambia and Namibia. 
Uses In Congo a stem bark decoction of An-
thocleista liebrechtsiana is taken to treat her-
nia and a root decoction is taken to treat stom-
ach-ache in women, ovarian problems, venereal 
diseases, hernia, bronchitis and fever and also 
to induce labour and as a purgative. Sap of 
young leaves, root powder and bark pulp are 
used to treat sores, abscesses, as a haemostatic 
and for cicatrization. Sap is applied topically to 
treat otitis or ophthalmia. 
Properties Anthocleista liebrechtsiana con-
tains the secoiridoid glycoside swertiamarin 
(swertiamaroside), a compound used in Asian 
medicine. Patent applications have been sub-
mitted for its use in hair-growth products and 
hepatitis medicines. 
Botany Few-stemmed shrub or small tree 
up to 12 m tall; bole up to 30 cm in diameter; 
twigs without spines. Leaves opposite, simple 
and entire; petiole 1-9 cm long, auricled; blade 
very narrowly obovate to linear, 15-40 cm x 3 -
8 cm, in young plants up to 75 cm x 15 cm, 
base long-decurrent into the petiole, apex 
rounded. Inflorescence an erect terminal dicha-
sial cyme 10-35 cm long, many-flowered. Flow-
ers bisexual, regular; sepals 4, free, broadly 
ovate or orbicular, 4-8 mm long; corolla with 
narrowly cylindrical tube 22-34 mm long, con-
tracted at base, greenish white, lobes 10-12, 
oblong-lanceolate, 10—18 mm long, apex obtuse, 
spreading, white; stamens as many as corolla 
lobes and alternating with them, exserted, 
filaments fused; ovary superior, obovoid, 5-7 
mm x 3-4 mm, stigma obovoid-cylindrical, 
notched at apex. Fruit a globose to ovoid berry 
1.5-2.5 cm x 1-2 cm, rounded at apex, thin-
walled, green or pale yellow, many-seeded. 
Seeds obliquely ovoid, 1.5-2.5 mm x 1-1.5 mm, 
brown. 
Anthocleista comprises 14 species and occurs in 
tropical Africa, including Comoros and Mada-
gascar. 
Ecology Anthocleista liebrechtsiana occurs 
in open localities in swamps and periodically 
inundated forests from sea-level up to 400 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antho-
cleista liebrechtsiana is widespread and not 
under pressure from genetic erosion, although 
it is uncommon in West Africa. 
Prospects In view of the medicinal uses on 
record, the limited chemical and pharmacologi-
cal data available and the many medicinal uses 
of other Anthocleista species, research into the 
properties of Anthocleista liebrechtsiana is rec-
ommended. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Jensen & 
Schripsema, 2002; Leeuwenberg, 1961b; Leeu-
wenberg, 1983; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Kanemu-
ra, 2006; Keay, 1989; Leeuwenberg, 1980; 
Tchouto, 2004; Zhang, 2005. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOCLEISTA MADAGASCARIENSIS Baker 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 20: 173 (1882). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Synonyms Anthocleista rhizophoroides 
Baker (1887), Anthocleista hildebrandtii Gilg 
(1893). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista madagascariensis is endemic to Mada-
gascar, where it is widespread. 
Uses In Madagascar a decoction of the 
leaves and roots is taken to treat cough, ma-
laria, fever, dysentery and as an emetic, tonic 
and bitter. A bark decoction is taken to treat 
gonorrhoea, as a diuretic and antiseptic of the 
urinary tract. A decoction of the plant is used 
as a steam bath to treat common cold. A leaf 
decoction is taken to induce labour. Antho-
cleista madagascariensis is also used to treat 
constipation and nervousness. The wood is 
used locally for construction work. 
96 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Properties Anthocleista madagascariensis 
contains the monoterpene alkaloid gentianine. 
In Anthocleista procera Lepr. ex Bureau this 
compound arises as an artifact in the isolation 
of swertiamarin, but the presence of swertia-
marin in Anthocleista madagascariensis has 
not been established. Different extracts were 
shown to have a strong effect on the nervous 
system and on the heart, lowering the rhythm 
and diminishing the amplitude of the contrac-
tions. 
Botany Small tree up to 15 m tall; bole up to 
30 cm in diameter; twigs without spines. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; petiole 1— 
2.5(-4) cm long, slightly auricled; blade oblong-
obovate or oblanceolate, 5-17 cm x 2-9 cm, in 
young plants up to 24 cm x 11 cm, base decur-
rent into the petiole, apex rounded, margin 
revolute when dry. Inflorescence an erect ter-
minal dichasial cyme, 5-20 cm long, many-
flowered; peduncle and branches creamy or 
pale green. Flowers bisexual, regular; sepals 4, 
free, orbicular or broadly ovate, 5-9 mm long; 
corolla with cylindrical tube 8—12 mm long, 
lobes 10, orbicular or elliptical, 7-10 mm long, 
apex obtuse or rounded, spreading, violet; sta-
mens as many as corolla lobes and alternating 
with them, exserted, filaments fused, anthers 
brownish white with an often large petal-like 
sterile acute apex; ovary superior, obovoid, 5-6 
mm x 2.5—3 mm, 4-celled, stigma obovoid, api-
cally slightly notched. Fruit a globose to ovoid 
berry 2.5-4 cm x 1.5-2.5 cm, smooth and shin-
ing, apiculate, thick-walled, many-seeded. 
Seeds obliquely ovoid to ellipsoid, 2-2.5 mm x 
1.5-2.5 mm, medium brown, usually sur-
rounded by a narrow ridge. 
Birds often visit the nectar-rich flowers. The 
seeds of Anthocleista madagascariensis are 
probably dispersed by bats, which eat the 
fruits. 
Anthocleista comprises 14 species and occurs in 
tropical Africa, including Comoros and Mada-
gascar. 
Ecology Anthocleista madagascariensis 
occurs in open moist localities, mostly in rain-
forest, at 450-1700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antho-
cleista madagascariensis is widespread in 
Madagascar, but there is insufficient informa-
tion to draw pertinent conclusions or make 
recommendations concerning its genetic ero-
sion and possible conservation measures. 
Prospects The use of Anthocleista mada-
gascariensis appears to be limited and only 
occasional in Madagascar. In view of the lim-
ited chemical and pharmacological data avail-
able and the many uses of other Anthocleista 
species in Africa, research into the pharmacol-
ogical properties of Anthocleista madagas-
cariensis may prove worthwhile. 
Major references Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Debray, Jacquemin & Razafin-
drambao, 1971; Leeuwenberg, 1961b; Leeu-
wenberg, 1984; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bollen, Van Elsacker & 
Ganzhorn, 2004; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Randri-
amantsoa, 1996; Rasoanaivo & Ratsimamanga-
Urverg, 1992; Razafindramanana, 1996. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOCLEISTA NOBILIS G.Don 
Protologue Gen. hist. 4: 68 (1838). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Vernacular names Cabbage tree, cabbage 
palm (En). Anthocleista majestueux, arbre 
chou (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista nobilis occurs from Senegal east to the 
Central African Republic. It possibly also oc-
curs in Benin, Gabon and Congo. 
Uses Anthocleista nobilis is widely used 
throughout its distribution area as a strong 
purgative and diuretic. A root decoction is 
commonly taken to treat constipation, to regu-
late menstruation and as an abortifacient. It is 
used as a wash, bath or vapour bath to treat 
leprosy, venereal diseases, oedema and scrotal 
elephantiasis. In Sierra Leone a decoction of 
the roots with lemon is taken to treat hepatitis. 
Bark pulp is used as an enema to treat intesti-
nal parasites. A bark decoction is taken or used 
Anthocleista nobilis - wild 
ANTHOCLEISTA 97 
as vapour bath to treat fever, stomach-ache, 
leprosy, gonorrhoea and dysmenorrhoea. In 
Senegal, Liberia and Ghana stem bark or pow-
dered young green twigs are applied fresh or as 
a paste on wounds, abscesses or ulcerous 
wounds. In Côte d'Ivoire the Oubi people use a 
decoction of twig bark and leaves together with 
those of Thaumatococcus daniellii (Bennet) 
Benth. as nose drops to treat headache. Twig 
bark of Anthocleista nobilis and Zanthoxylum 
gilletii (De Wild.) P.G.Waterman made into a 
paste is applied locally to treat rheumatism. In 
Liberia a bark infusion is given to dogs with 
diarrhoea. 
A poultice obtained by grinding young leaves 
with soil from a fireplace and water is believed 
to promote closure of the fontanelle in babies. 
A decoction of the leaves is taken to treat ab-
dominal pain of uterine origin. 
The wood is used for general carpentry, small 
implements and plywood. The spiny logs are 
used in Liberia to make falling traps for ani-
mals. In Ghana potash from the wood is used 
to make soap. 
In the northern region of Côte d'Ivoire Antho-
cleista nobilis is planted to protect the soil 
against erosion. 
Production and international trade Dried 
bark and roots are sold in local markets. The 
timber is of some economic value. The seed and 
bark are exported from Ghana to industrial 
countries. 
Properties Anthocleista nobilis contains 
xanthones and secoiridoids such as anthocleis-
tol. The bark contains the quinoline alkaloid 
brucine and the monoterpene glycoside lo-
ganoside (loganine). Brucine is a strychnine 
derivative. In chemistry, brucine and strych-
nine are commonly used as agents for chiral 
resolution. Loganoside plays an important role 
in the partial synthesis of alkaloids such as 
quinine, reserpine and strychnine. An alcoholic 
extract from the root bark has shown a hypo-
glycaemic effect. Hypotensive and hypoglycae-
mic activities in the treatment of obese adult 
diabetics with hypertension have been re-
ported. The bark has antimicrobial and anti-
inflammatory properties. The ethanol extract 
of the bark showed a relaxant effect on isolated 
guinea-pig ileum and antihepatotoxic activity 
in mice. Accidental poisoning has occurred with 
the following symptoms: colic, obstinate consti-
pation, weakening of the stomach or spasm of 
the pylorus, fibrillary trembling, pronounced 
paleness of the skin and heart weakness. 
The wood is creamy or yellowish white, some-
what lustrous, light weight and soft but firm, 
easy to cut and finishing smoothly; it is not 
resistant to decay. The grain is straight or ir-
regular, texture moderately coarse. 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
Anthocleista species are used for similar me-
dicinal purposes and other West African An-
thocleista species may be used as substitutes 
for Anthocleista nobilis. The dried bark of the 
different species is very difficult to differentiate 
when sold in the market. 
Description Small to medium-sized tree up 
to 18(-30) m tall; bole branchless for up to 15 
m long, up to 45(-90) cm in diameter; bark 
smooth, pale grey, inner bark cream-yellow 
and granular; twigs with 2 spines above the 
leaf axils. Leaves opposite, crowded at the end 
of branchlets, simple; petiole 1-6 cm long, auri-
cled; blade oblong-elliptical, obovate-elliptical 
to oblanceolate, 7-35 cm x 4-12 cm, in young 
plants up to 150 cm x 25 cm, base long-
decurrent, apex rounded, margin wavy and 
recurved. Inflorescence an erect terminal di-
chasial cyme 12-60 cm long, many-flowered; 
Anthocleista nobilis - 1, portion of bole; 2, por-
tion of branch; 3, part of flowering branch; 4, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
98 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
peduncle and branches creamy or green, thick-
ened a t the nodes. Flowers bisexual, regular; 
sepals 4, free, orbicular to ovate-elliptical, 7-10 
m m long; corolla with cylindrical tube 30-45 
mm long, fleshy, lobes 11-14, oblong-
lanceolate, 9-12 m m long, obtuse to rounded, 
spreading, white; s t amens as many as corolla 
lobes and a l te rna t ing with them, exserted, 
f i laments fused; ovary superior, obovoid, 6-7 
mm x 3—4 mm, 4-celled. Frui t an ellipsoid 
berry 3-4 cm x 2-2.5 cm, thick-walled, green, 
many-seeded. Seeds obliquely ovoid-globose, 2— 
2.5 mm x 1.5-2 mm, dark brown. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Anthocleista 
comprises 14 species and occurs in tropical 
Africa, including Comoros and Madagascar . 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Anthocleista 
nobilis flowers throughout the year. 
E c o l o g y Anthocleista nobilis is a lower can-
opy t ree of tropical rainforest and semi-
deciduous forest. It is common in forest clear-
ings, up to 1200 m al t i tude. It grows on well-
drained soils wi th 1100—2000 mm annua l rain-
fall, in regions where t empera tu re s do not ex-
ceed 35°C. 
M a n a g e m e n t Anthocleista nobilis is only 
rare ly cultivated. However, in West Africa it is 
often left s tanding near houses for medicinal 
purposes. 
H a r v e s t i n g The leaves are collected from 
young t rees or by climbing older ones. The ba rk 
is obtained by s lashing or peeling with a cut-
lass . The roots a re dug up when the soil is 
workable. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The collected ma-
ter ia l is dried in the sun and kept in wrappers , 
or is pounded and made into balls . Sometimes, 
the p lan t mater ia l is powdered when dry. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Anthocleista nobilis is a 
common const i tuent of dis turbed forest in large 
pa r t s of West Africa and is not th rea tened by 
genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s So far, no a t t empt h a s been made 
to cult ivate Anthocleista nobilis for medicinal 
purposes. Improvement of the productivity of 
the p lan t and the development of managemen t 
sys tems for i ts sus ta inable use a re desirable. 
More research into t he chemical composition 
and pharmacological activities of the com-
pounds of Anthocleista nobilis seems war-
ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Abbiw, 1990; FAO, 1986; 
Jensen , 1992; J e n s e n & Schripsema, 2002; 
Leeuwenberg, 1961b; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neu-
winger, 2000; Madubunyi & Asuzu, 1995. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Berhaut , 1979; Bouquet 
& Debray, 1974; Dalziel, 1937; Kerharo , 1971; 
Oliver-Bever, 1986. 
S o u r c e s of i l lustrat ion Leeuwenberg, 1961b. 
A u t h o r s D.M. Mosango 
A N T H O C L E I S T A P R O C E R A Lepr . ex B u r e a u 
P r o t o l o g u e Fam. Logan.: 74-77, f. 60-62 
(1856). 
F a m i l y Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Cabbage tree, candela-
b ru m t ree (En). Arbre chou (Fr). Papae u m eve 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista procera occurs from Senegal east to Ni-
geria. 
U s e s Anthocleista procera is widely used 
throughout i ts distr ibution area as a s trong 
purgat ive and diuretic. A root decoction is 
commonly t a k e n to t r ea t constipation, to regu-
late mens t rua t ion and as an abortifacient. It is 
used as a wash or ba th , or as a vapour ba th to 
t r ea t leprosy, venereal diseases, oedema and 
scrotal e lephant ias is . A decoction of t he ba rk is 
used agains t fever and as a stomachic. A seed 
or ba rk decoction is a s trong purgat ive and 
should be used with caution and only if a 
s t rong effect is desired. Pulp of sun-dried bark 
mixed with palm oil is t a k e n to t r ea t constipa-
tion. In Senegal leaf sap is applied to the nos-
tr i ls to provoke sneezing as a t r e a t m e n t of 
common cold. A leaf decoction is used as a face 
wash to t r ea t dizziness. 
The leaves a re used as wrapping mater ia l . 
P r o p e r t i e s Anthocleista procera contains 
the secoiridoid glycoside swer t iamar in . Swer-
t i amar in is used in t radi t ional Asian medicine, 
e.g. in hepat i t i s medicines. The fruits of Antho-
cleista procera contain c. 4.7% of the t r i te rpene 
acid anthocleist in. Bark extracts have been 
tes ted for activity on avian malar ia , bu t only 
the chloroform extract gave a slight response. 
B o t a n y Small to medium-sized t ree up to 20 
m tall; bole up to 50 cm in diameter ; twigs 
without spines. Leaves opposite, simple, ses-
sile; blade oblong-obovate to oblanceolate, 4 0 -
45 cm x c. 20 cm, in young p lan ts up to 145 cm 
x 45 cm, base cuneate , auricled, apex rounded, 
marg in ent i re or minute ly crenate , bri t t le, 
l ea thery or papery. Inflorescence an erect ter-
minal dichasial cyme 30-60 cm long, many-
flowered; peduncle and branches pale green, 
thickened a t the nodes. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar; sepals 4, free, orbicular or broadly ovate, 
9—10 mm x 7-8 mm; corolla wi th cylindrical 
ANTHOCLEISTA 99 
tube 35-55 mm long, lobes c. 9, oblong, 10-15 
mm long, obtuse, white; stamens as many as 
corolla lobes and alternating with them, ex-
serted, filaments fused; ovary superior, obovoid 
to cylindrical, c. 7 mm x 3.5 mm, 4-celled, 
stigma obovoid-cylindrical, apically slightly 
notched. Fruit an ellipsoid berry c. 3 cm x 2 
cm, pale green, shining, rounded at the apex, 
thick-walled, many-seeded. Seeds obliquely 
ovoid-globular, 1.5-2 mm x 1—1.5 mm, dark 
brown. 
Anthocleista comprises 14 species and occurs in 
tropical Africa, including Comoros and Mada-
gascar. The 4 West African species have the 
same vernacular names and are used by local 
practitioners for the same medicinal purposes. 
Ecology Anthocleista procera occurs in open, 
usually swampy localities at low elevations. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antho-
cleista procera occurs in a large area of West 
Africa and there are no signs that the species is 
in danger, except for some areas where the 
population pressure is high. In Senegal Antho-
cleista procera has almost disappeared from 
the Dakar area but for 1 relic population. In 
Mali Anthocleista procera has been listed as a 
species in need of special attention. Care 
should be taken to protect the species from 
overexploitation. 
Prospects In view of the medicinal uses on 
record, more research into the chemical compo-
sition and pharmacological activities of the 
compounds of Anthocleista procera seems war-
ranted. 
Major references Berhaut, 1979; Burkill, 
1995; Claude & Claude, 1947; Dalziel, 1937; 
Jensen & Schripsema, 2002; Leeuwenberg, 
1961b; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Carrière, 1994; Keay, 
1989; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Plat et al., 1963. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOCLEISTA SCHWEINFURTHII Gilg 
Protologue Engl., Bot. Jahrb. 17: 579 
(1893). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Vernacular names Mkungu maji, mtam-
buu mwitu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista schweinfurthii occurs from Nigeria east 
to Ethiopia and south to Tanzania, Zambia and 
Angola. 
Uses In Gabon the Bapunu people use An-
thocleista schweinfurthii as a galactogenic. In 
Congo a stem bark decoction of Anthocleista 
schweinfurthii is taken to treat hernia and 
female sterility. A root decoction is taken to 
treat stomach-ache in women, ovarian prob-
lems, venereal diseases, hernia, bronchitis and 
fever, and also as a purgative and to induce 
labour. In Tanzania a root decoction is taken to 
treat malaria, hard abscesses and as an 
anthelminthic. 
Sap of young leaves, root powder or bark pulp 
is used to treat sores, abscesses, as a haemo-
static and for cicatrization. Sap is applied topi-
cally to treat otitis and ophthalmia. In Central 
Africa a decoction of leaves and roots is used as 
an enema to treat pain in the side. A bath is 
taken in a leaf decoction to treat vaginal 
prolapse. A decoction of twig bark and leaves or 
the sap is taken to treat fever, or used as an 
enema. 
In the Central African Republic Anthocleista 
schweinfurthii is used to prepare arrow poison. 
The wood is very soft and is used in Tanzania 
for firewood. The tree is planted for amenity 
purposes and shade in Tanzania. In Cameroon 
pole-cuttings are used to establish hedges or 
living fences. 
Properties Anthocleista schweinfurthii con-
tains the secoiridoid glycoside swertiamarin. 
The bark contains traces of alkaloids and the 
roots contain up to 3% alkaloids. The leaves, 
bark and roots contain steroids and terpenes. 
Botany Medium-sized tree up to 30 m tall; 
bole up to 70 cm in diameter; twigs often with 
small broadly conical cushions. Leaves oppo-
site, simple and entire; petiole up to 10 cm 
long, auricled; blade oblong-obovate to 
oblanceolate, 7-45 cm x 3.5—18 cm, in young 
plants up to 100 cm x 30 cm, base cuneate, 
apex rounded, sometimes acute, margin revo-
lute, papery to leathery. Inflorescence an erect 
terminal dichasial cyme 12—30 cm long, many-
flowered; peduncle and branches thickened at 
the nodes. Flowers bisexual, regular; sepals 4, 
free, orbicular, 8-13 mm long; corolla with cy-
lindrical tube 25-37 mm long, contracted at 
base when young, lobes 10—11, lanceolate, 2 1 -
28 mm long, reflexed, obtuse, greenish white to 
creamy; stamens as many as corolla lobes and 
alternating with them, exserted, filaments 
fused; ovary superior, ovoid, 5-7 mm x 3-4 
mm, 4-celled, stigma obovoid-cylindrical, 
notched at apex. Fruit a globose to ellipsoid 
berry 2.5-4.5 cm x 2-3 cm, rounded or apicu-
late at apex, smooth, thick-walled, green or 
yellow, many-seeded. Seeds obliquely ovoid-
globose, c. 2 mm x 1.5 mm, brown. 
100 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Anthocleista comprises 14 species and occurs in 
tropical Africa, including Comoros and Mada-
gascar. 
Ecology Anthocleista schweinfurthii occurs 
in secondary forest, gallery forest, in thickets 
and sometimes in savanna or rainforest, usu-
ally not in moist localities, at 400-1800 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antho-
cleista schweinfurthii is widespread and not 
under pressure from genetic erosion. It is 
common in Central and southern Africa, but 
rare in Nigeria. 
Prospects In view of the medicinal uses on 
record, the limited chemical and pharmacologi-
cal data available and the many uses of other 
Anthocleista species, research into the proper-
ties of Anthocleista schweinfurthii may prove 
worthwhile. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1961b; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Leeuwenberg, 
1983; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Bouquet, 
1972; Bourobou Bourobou et al., 1996; Gautier, 
1995; Haerdi, 1964; Keay, 1989; Latham, 2004; 
Moundipa et al., 2005; Nkounkou-Loumpangou 
et al., 2005; Tchouto, 2004. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOCLEISTA VOGELII Planch. 
Protologue Hook., Icon. pi. 8: t. 793 (1848). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gentianaceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 60 
Vernacular names Cabbage tree (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Antho-
cleista vogelii occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
Anthocleista vogelii - wild 
Kenya, and south to Zambia and Angola. 
Uses Anthocleista vogelii is widely used in 
West Africa as a strong purgative and diuretic. 
A root decoction is commonly taken to treat 
constipation, to regulate menstruation and as 
an abortifacient. It is used as a wash, bath or 
vapour bath to treat leprosy, venereal diseases, 
oedema and scrotal elephantiasis. In Sierra 
Leone a decoction of the roots with lemon is 
taken to treat hepatitis, while a decoction of 
dry fallen leaves is taken to treat jaundice. In 
Ghana a root decoction of Anthocleista vogelii 
and Combretum mucronatum Schumach. & 
Thonn. with pepper and ashes is taken to treat 
chest pain. In Nigeria the bark and seed are 
used as an antipyretic and tonic. The seed is 
also used as a purgative. In Congo fresh twig 
bark with manioc is eaten raw to treat asper-
mia. A stem bark decoction is taken to treat 
hernia and a root decoction is taken to treat 
stomach-ache in women, ovarian problems, 
venereal diseases, hernia, bronchitis and fever, 
and also as purgative and to induce labour. Sap 
of young leaves, root powder or bark pulp is 
used to treat sores, abscesses, as a haemostatic 
and for cicatrization. Sap is applied topically to 
treat otitis or ophthalmia. A plaster of pulp of 
terminal buds is used to draw out thorns or 
splinters and is applied to snakebites. 
In Ghana the wood-ash is used as a mordant to 
fix colours. The wood is used to make crates. In 
Nigeria stems are hollowed out to make quiv-
ers. In Zambia trunks are cut for dugout ca-
noes. In Ghana potash of the wood is used in 
making soap. In Congo the leaves are placed 
between tobacco leaves during drying to make 
the tobacco stronger. 
Properties Anthocleista vogelii contains the 
closely related secoiridoid glycosides secolo-
ganic acid, vogeloside, and sweroside. The stem 
bark contains the alkaloid fagaramide, the 
stem bark and wood several xanthones. The 
major xanthone of Anthocleista vogelii is de-
cussatin and it contains the minor compounds 
l,7-dihydroxy-3,8-dimethoxy-xanthone and 1,8-
dihydroxy-3,7-dimethoxy-xanthone. The latter 
compound showed antimalarial activity in vivo 
against Plasmodium berghei. Tests with aque-
ous, hexane, acetone and methanol extracts of 
the stem bark in rats showed potent anti-ulcer 
properties, which could explain the traditional 
use in the treatment of stomach-ache. 
The wood is whitish, soft and perishable. 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
Anthocleista species are used for similar me-
dicinal purposes and may be used as substi-
ANTHOSTEMA 101 
tu tes for each other. When sold on the marke t 
it; is difficult to differentiate the dried ba rk of 
the different species. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Small to medium-sized t ree up 
to 20 m tall; bole up to 55 cm in diameter , 
sometimes with stilt roots; twigs with 2(-4) 
divergent spines confluent a t base. Leaves op-
posite, simple and entire, almost sessile; blade 
oblong-ovate to ob lanceolate, 15-45 cm x 6-24 
cm, in young p lants up to 150 cm x 45 cm, base 
cuneate , auricled, apex rounded, margin re-
curved, papery or leathery. Inflorescence an 
erect t e rmina l dichasial cyme 30-50 cm long, 
many-flowered; peduncle and branches yellow-
ish green or orange, thickened a t the nodes. 
Flowers bisexual, regular ; sepals 4, free, or-
bicular or broader t h a n long, outer ones 4-12 
m m long, inner ones about twice as long; co-
rolla wi th cylindrical tube, 12-18 mm long, 
lobes 13—16, oblong-lanceolate, 12-19 m m long, 
spreading, creamy to pale yellow; s t amens as 
many as corolla lobes and a l te rna t ing with 
them, exserted, fi laments par t ly or entirely 
fused, an the r s whit ish green; ovary superior, 
ovoid-cylindrical to ovoid-conical, 5-7 mm x 3-6 
mm, 4-celled, s t igma obovoid-cylindrical, api-
cally 2-lobed. Frui t an ellipsoid berry 2.5-4.5 
cm x 2-3.5 cm, rounded a t apex, thick-walled, 
green or yellowish, many-seeded. Seeds obliquely 
ovoid-globose, 2-2.5 mm x 1.5-2 mm, dark 
brown. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Anthocleista 
comprises 14 species and occurs in tropical 
Africa, including Comoros and Madagascar . 
The 4 species occurring in West Africa have the 
same vernacular names and a re used by local 
pract i t ioners for the same medicinal purposes. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t In Nigeria An-
thocleista vogelii flowers from October to Feb-
rua ry and from March to May; it fruits from 
November to March. 
E c o l o g y Anthocleista vogelii occurs in moist 
localities, in swamps, in Raphia groves, on 
river banks , in p r imary rainforest or secondary 
forest, from sea-level up to 1500 m al t i tude. 
H a r v e s t i n g The leaves are collected from 
young trees or by climbing older ones. The ba rk 
is obtained by s lashing or peeling with a cut-
lass. The roots are dug up when the soil is 
workable. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The collected ma-
terial is dried in the sun and kept in wrappers 
or it is pounded and made into balls. Some-
t imes, the p lan t mater ia l is powdered when 
dry. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Anthocleista vogelii oc-
curs r a t h e r sparsely, bu t it is widely distrib-
uted. It is not in danger of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s In view of the recorded medicinal 
uses, more research into t he chemical composi-
tion and pharmacological activities of Antho-
cleista vogelii is war ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Abbiw, 1990; Adjanohoun 
et al. (Editors), 1988; Ateufack et al., 2006; 
J ensen & Schripsema, 2002; Leeuwenberg, 
1961b; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Okorie, 1976; Olukoya, Idika & Odugbemi, 
1993. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Abuh et al., 1990; Bou-
quet, 1969; Chapelle, 1976; Ka ran et al., 2005; 
Keay, 1989; Rai, Wambebe & Abuh, 1989. 
Sources of i l lustrat ion Leeuwenberg, 1961b. 
A u t h o r s A. de Ruijter 
ANTHOSTEMA SENEGALENSE A. J u s s . 
Anthocleista vogelii - 1, part of branch; 2, leaf; 
3, flower; 4, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
P r o t o l o g u e Euphorb . gen.: 117 (1824). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution An-
thostema senegalense occurs from Senegal eas t 
102 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
to Bénin. 
Uses The latex is toxic, acrid and vesicant, 
and can cause blindness. In spite of its toxicity, 
it is used, with suitable precautions, as a 
strong purgative. It is used to treat leprosy, 
menstrual problems and help with the expul-
sion of the afterbirth. For these purposes, small 
amounts of latex or pulped roots are added to 
food. The latex is also used as an antidote for 
poison, the latex diluted in water being drunk 
till vomiting occurs. A bark maceration is 
drunk to treat intestinal parasites, kidney 
problems, oedema, impotence and mental ill-
ness. In Sierra Leone young leaves are ground 
with flour and the dried paste is taken as a 
laxative. In Senegal the chopped up whole 
plant is thrown in pools as fish poison to catch 
small fish. 
The wood is white and lightweight and is easy 
to work. It is used for local building purposes, 
poles for temporary fences, light carpentry 
work and boxes. In Sierra Leone the sticky 
latex is used as bird lime. 
Properties The crude water extract of the 
stem bark of Anthostema senegalense showed 
strong anthelmintic activity against the larvae 
of Haemonchus contortus in vitro. A crude stem 
bark extract exhibited significant activity 
against Leishmania donovani with IC50 of 9.1 
|lg/ml, as well as moderate antibacterial and 
antifungal activities. Another Anthostema spe-
cies, Anthostema aubryanum Baill., contains 
phorbol esters, and the presence of these com-
pounds is consistent with the uses and proper-
ties as described above. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small to me-
dium-sized tree up to 25 m tall; bole straight, 
up to 65 cm in diameter; twigs glabrous, with 
abundant latex. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 7-10 mm long; 
blade elliptical-oblong to lanceolate, 7-13 cm x 
3-4.5 cm, base cuneate, apex acuminate, gla-
brous, pinnately veined with numerous pairs of 
lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary, dense, 
much-branched sessile cyme with at apex of 
each cyme-branch a common involucre com-
posed of 4 small partly fused bracts with glan-
dular margins, enclosing 4 involucres each 
containing c. 8 male flowers and sometimes 1 
female flower in the centre. Flowers unisexual; 
male flowers with short pedicel, 3-4-toothed 
perianth and a single stamen; female flowers 
with short pedicel, 3-4-lobed perianth with 
lobes c. 1.5 mm long, ovary superior, 3-celled, 
glabrous, styles stout, short, spreading. Fruit a 
deeply 3-lobed capsule c. 2.5 cm in diameter, 3-
seeded. Seeds ellipsoid to almost globose, 
smooth. 
Anthostema comprises 3 species, 2 in mainland 
Africa and 1 in Madagascar. It seems related to 
Dichostemma, which has a similar structure 
composed of cyathia (involucral bracts enclos-
ing male flowers reduced to a single stamen 
and a female flower), but differs in the termi-
nal position of the inflorescence and 4-lobed 
fruits. 
Ecology Anthostema senegalense occurs in 
evergreen forest, wooded savanna and coastal 
savanna, usually in damp, swampy or flooded 
localities. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antho-
stema senegalense is fairly widespread in its 
distribution area and does not seem to be 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Anthostema senegalense shows 
anthelmintic and antileishmanial activities in 
vitro, but virtually nothing is known concern-
ing its active compounds, although phorbol 
esters with phytochemical activity have been 
identified in Anthostema aubryanum. There-
fore more chemical and pharmacological analy-
ses are needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Abreu et al., 1999; Brown, 
Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; Burkill, 1994; 
Koné et al., 2005; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Beutler, Alvarado Lind-
ner & McCloud, 1996; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 
2006; Keay, 1958a. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ANTIDESMA LACINIATUM Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Flora 47: 520 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2re = 26 
Origin and geographic distribution Anti-
desma laciniatum occurs from Sierra Leone 
east to southern Sudan and south to DR Congo 
and Uganda. 
Uses In Liberia a leaf decoction is taken as a 
bath to prevent miscarriage. In Côte d'Ivoire 
powdered bark is taken in water or palm wine 
as an aphrodisiac. In Congo a bark decoction is 
taken orally or as an enema to treat intestinal 
complaints. In Central Africa meat is served on 
the aromatic leaves. 
The wood is yellowish white to pinkish and 
hard and does not work well. It is used to make 
poles for house construction and tool handles, 
as firewood and for charcoal production. The 
ANTIDESMA 103 
fruits are not palatable, unlike those of several 
other Antidesma spp. 
Properties Leaves from Cameroon yield an 
essential oil (1.8% on a dry weight basis), 
which contains mainly terpenoids (72%) with a 
relatively high amount of esters (41%). The two 
major constituents are the esters benzyl benzo-
ate (19%), responsible for the sweet balsamic 
odour of the oil, and geranyl acetate (15%). 
Other constituents isolated from the essential 
oil are the terpenoid squalene, used in cosmet-
ics as an oil-free moisturizer, and the biflavon-
oid amentoflavone, which has shown antiviral 
and anticancer activity and is a potent antioxi-
dant. The essential oil showed significant activ-
ity against Plasmodium falciparum in vitro, 
but no important radical scavenging activity. 
Botany Dioecious, small tree up to 8(-15) m 
tall; branches spreading, young parts densely 
short-hairy. Leaves alternate, simple and en-
tire; stipules with 3-9 lanceolate, linear or 
branched segments, 1-1.5 cm long, fairly per-
sistent; petiole up to 5(-8) mm long; blade el-
liptical-oblanceolate to elliptical-oblong, 7.5-20 
cm x 3-7 cm, base rounded to shallowly cor-
date, apex acuminate, variably hairy on veins. 
Inflorescence an axillary or terminal spike, 
sometimes with 1-2 lateral spikes at base, up 
to 10 cm long, in fruit up to 20 cm long. Flow-
ers unisexual, regular, sessile or almost sessile, 
petals absent, disk annular; male flowers with 
cup-shaped calyx up to 1 mm long, 3-toothed, 
ciliate, reddish pink to reddish purple, stamens 
3, 1.5-2 mm long; female flowers with cup-
shaped calyx up to 1.5 mm long, 3-toothed, 
brownish, ovary superior, ellipsoid, c. 3 mm 
long, glabrous or hairy, l(-2)-celled, styles 3, 2-
fid or 2, 3-fid. Fruit a compressed ellipsoid to 
ovoid drupe up to 1 cm long, glabrous or hairy, 
brownish or yellowish to orange-red, 1-seeded. 
Seed ellipsoid. 
Antidesma comprises about 155 species and 
occurs in the Old World tropics from tropical 
Africa and the Indian Ocean islands through 
Asia to Australia and the Pacific islands. In 
continental Africa 7 species occur and in the 
Indian Ocean islands 1 species. Antidesma 
laciniatum is rather variable and 2 varieties or 
subspecies are distinguished. 
Ecology Antidesma laciniatum occurs in the 
understorey of dense forest, including secon-
dary forest, and at forest edges, from sea-level 
up to 1200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antides-
ma laciniatum is widespread and not likely to 
be threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The essential oil from the leaves 
contains several compounds with interesting 
activities. The bark is also used medicinally, 
but nothing is known about its chemistry or 
pharmacology. More research is therefore 
needed to assess the potential of Antidesma 
laciniatum as a medicinal plant. 
Major references Boyom et al., 2003a; 
Boyom et al., 2003b; Burkill, 1994; Léonard, 
1988; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Akoègninou, van der 
Burg & van der Maesen, 2006; Carter & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1988; Tchinda et al., 2006; Wur-
dack et al., 2004; Yamada, 1999. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
ANTIDESMA MEMBRANACEUM Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Linnaea 34: 68 (1865). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Synonyms Antidesma venosum E.Mey. ex 
Tul. subsp. membranaceum (Müll.Arg) Lye 
(1998). 
Vernacular names Pink tassle-berry (En). 
Mziwaziwa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Anti-
desma membranaceum occurs from Senegal 
east to Sudan and south to northern South 
Africa. 
Uses In Liberia a leaf decoction is used as a 
bath to prevent miscarriage. In Côte d'Ivoire a 
bark extract is widely taken as an aphrodisiac. 
In DR Congo a root decoction is taken to treat 
stomach-ache, colic, cough and snakebites. In 
Tanzania the Digo people drink a decoction of 
the roots to treat kwashiorkor and pneumonia. 
Scrapings of the roots are chewed to treat 
mouth ulcers in children. The powdered stem 
bark is sprinkled on wounds. The powdered 
seeds are eaten to expel roundworms. In Zim-
babwe an infusion of leaves and roots is drunk 
to treat cough and chest problems. 
The wood is white and hard and used in con-
struction, and for making tool handles, knife 
sheaths and spoons. It is also used as firewood. 
The tree is planted for shade in home gardens. 
Edible caterpillars (Imbrasia petiveri) feed on 
the leaves. 
Properties From different extracts of the 
root, leaves and stem bark several 2-alkylated 
benzopyranones, several amide derivatives of 
ferulic acid (4-hydroxy-3-methoxy-benzoic 
acid), a diferuloyate and syringaresinol were 
isolated. Antidesmone, an unusual hydroqui-
104 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
nolone or glycine-derived alkaloid was isolated 
from the leaves and bark. A butanol extract of 
the leaves and ba rk also yielded several alka-
loidal, megas t igmane and l ignan glucosides. 
Ant idesmone h a s potent and highly selective 
ant i t rypanosomal activity agains t Trypano-
soma cruzi, the pathogenic agent of Chagas ' 
disease. 
B o t a n y Dioecious shrub or small t ree up to 
8(-20) m tall; crown dense, b ranches drooping; 
ba rk smooth, pale yellowish brown to dark 
grey; young pa r t s densely short-hairy. Leaves 
a l te rna te , simple and entire; st ipules lanceo-
late, 2-8(—15) m m long, fairly persistent; peti-
ole up to 1 cm long; blade elliptical-oblong, 2— 
12(-20) cm x 1-7 cm, base rounded to cuneate , 
apex acuminate , glossy and da rk green above, 
sparsely hairy and yellowish beneath . Inflores-
cence a te rmina l spike on a short la tera l shoot, 
4-10(—25) cm long, with 1-4 la tera l spikes a t 
base . Flowers unisexual , regular , sessile, peta ls 
absent , with unp leasan t smell; male flowers 
with 4-lobed calyx, lobes c. 1 mm long, unequal , 
rounded, short-hairy, yellowish green, disk 
i rregular , s t amens mostly 4, c. 2.5 mm long; 
female flowers wi th cup-shaped calyx, 3-4-
lobed, lobes c. 1 m m long, unequal , rounded, 
short-hairy, yellowish green, disk cup-shaped, 
ovary superior, compressed-ellipsoid, c. 1 mm 
long, glabrous, l(-2)-celled, styles 2-4 , short, 2-
fid, strongly recurved. Fru i t a lateral ly com-
pressed ellipsoid to ovoid drupe up to 8 m m 
long, green becoming pink, purple or black, 1-
seeded. Seed ellipsoid. 
Antidesma comprises about 155 species and 
occurs in the Old World tropics, from tropical 
Africa and the Indian Ocean is lands through 
Asia to Aust ra l ia and the Pacific is lands. In 
continental Africa 7 species occur and in the 
Indian Ocean is lands 1 species. Antidesma 
membranaceum is often confused with 
Antidesma venosum E.Mey. ex Tul., which is 
used medicinally as well, bu t is be t te r known 
for i ts edible fruits, which tas te of mulberr ies . 
Compared to Antidesma venosum, the leaves of 
Antidesma membranaceum a re more narrowly 
elliptical-oblong and more acutely acuminate , 
the female inflorescence never galled. In Na-
mibia an extract of the crushed fruit, leaves 
and twigs of Antidesma rufescens Tul. is t aken 
to t r ea t abdominal pain. A root extract is added 
to a ba th as an analgesic in case of body pain. 
In southern Nigeria a root decoction of 
Antidesma vogeliana Müll.Arg. wi th or wi thout 
the seeds of Aframomum melegueta K.Schum. 
is t aken as an aphrodisiac. In DR Congo a root 
decoction is d runk to t rea t worm infections and 
other in tes t inal problems, and it is gargled as a 
mouthwash to t rea t toothache. The crushed 
s tem is used as fuel in lamps. 
E c o l o g y Antidesma membranaceum occurs 
in mixed woodland, humid woodland and ever-
green forest, also in riverine vegetat ion and 
ravines, along lakeshores and in coastal forest, 
from sea-level up to 1850 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Antides-
ma membranaceum is common in its large dis-
t r ibut ion area and therefore not th rea tened by 
genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Antidesma membranaceum is 
locally used agains t a range of bacter ia l dis-
eases. Chemical analyses have yielded several 
complex chemical const i tuents of the roots, 
leaves and bark, the unusua l alkaloid antides-
mone being the most impor tan t compound. It 
exhibits potent ant i t rypanosomal activity and 
deserves further test ing. More research is 
needed to elucidate the pharmacology of t he 
other isolated compounds to evaluate the po-
tent ia l of the plant . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Br ingmann et al., 2000a; 
Br ingmann et al., 2001; Burkill , 1994; Léonard, 
1988; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Br ingmann et al., 2000b; 
Buske et al., 1999.; Buske et al., 1997; Buske et 
al., 2001; Chhabra , M a h u n n a h & Mshiu, 1993; 
La tham, 2004; Lovett et a l , 2006; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1996a; von Koenen, 2001; Wurdack et 
al., 2004. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
A N T I Z O M A ANGUSTIFOLIA (Burch.) M i e r s ex 
H a r v . 
P r o t o l o g u e Fl. cap. 1: 11 (1860). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
S y n o n y m s Cissampelos angustifolius Burch. 
(1822). 
Origin and geographic distribution An-
tizoma angustifolia occurs in Zimbabwe, Na-
mibia, Botswana and nor thern South Africa. 
U s e s A root infusion is d runk as an emetic 
and purgat ive, to purify the blood in the treat-
ment of boils, and also to t rea t stomach-ache, 
s tomach ulcers, colic, d iarrhoea and dysentery, 
kidney stones, liver, gallbladder and bladder 
complaints, general pain and cough. Women 
drink a root decoction dur ing pregnancy to 
keep the foetus mobile and to facilitate child-
bir th as well as the expulsion of t he afterbirth. 
A decoction from the leaves or roots is d runk or 
ARGEMONE 105 
leaves and roots are chewed to treat digestive 
problems, against general malaise and AIDS. 
Properties Antizoma angustifolia contains 
large amounts of alkaloids, in the leaves 4.7— 
10.5 mg/g dry weight. The diversity of alkaloids 
present is remarkable. The leaves contain the 
proaporphines crotsparine, pronuciferine and 
traces of glaziovine and the bisbenzyl-
isoquinoline dioxines cissacapine and insu-
larine. The stem contains crotsparine and 
glaziovine. The root contains crotsparine, 
glaziovine, pronuciferine, the aporphine bulbo-
capnine and the morphinane salutaridine. 
Traces of other alkaloids were also found, but 
could not be identified. Crotsparine seems to be 
the main alkaloid in the leaves, accounting for 
72% of the total alkaloids. Populations from 
different provenances vary considerably in 
their alkaloid content; salutaridine was found 
in only one sample plant from Pretoria (South 
Africa). 
Botany Dioecious evergreen shrub up to 3 m 
tall, sometimes with long, rambling branches; 
young stems longitudinally striped, glabrous to 
densely hairy. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire, grey-green; stipules absent; petiole up 
to 5 mm long, glabrous or hairy, with a dorsal 
spine on the stem just below the insertion; 
blade oblong to obovate, up to 8 cm x 2 cm, 
base obtuse to truncate, apex rounded to 
slightly notched, with mucro, leathery, hairy, 
palmately veined in broader leaves, pinnately 
in narrow leaves. Male inflorescence a con-
densed axillary fascicle, sometimes strongly 
branched; female inflorescence a few-flowered 
axillary fascicle on short side-branches or flow-
ers solitary. Flowers small; pedicel up to 2.5 
mm long, with joint at base; male flowers with 
(3—)4(—5) fused sepals, broadly obovate to 
spatulate, 1-2.5 mm x 0.5-2 mm, pale green or 
pale brown, glabrous or slightly short-hairy 
outside, petals 4, fused into a cup or saucer 
0.5-2 mm in diameter, stamens (2—)4—5(—7), 
fused into a column 0.5—1 mm long; female 
flowers with 2(—4) sepals, rhomboid to obovate, 
1-2 mm x 1-1.5 mm, slightly hairy outside, 
petals 2(—4), broadly oblanceolate to broadly 
obovate, 0.5-1.5 mm long, staminodes some-
times present, ovary superior, c. 1 mm long, 
glabrous or hairy, transversely grooved, style 
short, stigma lobed. Fruit an ovoid drupe; stone 
horseshoe-shaped, 1-seeded. Seed horseshoe-
shaped, cotyledons appressed. 
Antizoma angustifolia flowers from October to 
April. It is frost tender. 
Antizoma is closely related to Cissampelos and 
comprises 3 species, which all occur in south-
ern Africa. Antizoma angolensis Exell & Men-
donça is endemic to Angola. Antizoma miersi-
ana Harv. is endemic to southern Namibia and 
western South Africa; a root decoction is drunk 
to treat stomach ulcers. Antizoma miersiana is 
similar to Antizoma angustifolia in its rich 
diversity of isoquinoline alkaloids. 
Ecology Antizoma angustifolia occurs in dry 
bushland, usually associated with Acacia spe-
cies, at 750-1700 m altitude. 
Management Antizoma angustifolia is only 
collected from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Antizo-
ma angustifolia is fairly widely distributed and 
does not seem to be in danger of genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects The diversity of traditional uses 
and of the alkaloids present in Antizoma an-
gustifolia warrants further pharmacological 
research. 
Major references de Wet, 2005; de Wet, 
van Heerden & van Wyk, 2004; de Wet & van 
Wyk, 2008; von Koenen, 2001; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Dekker et al., 1988; de 
Wet, van Heerden & van Wyk, 2005; Leistner, 
2000; Neuwinger, 2000; SEPASAL, 2008a. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
ARGEMONE MEXICANA L. 
Protologue Sp. pl. 1: 508 (1753). 
Family Papaveraceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 28, 42, 56 
Synonyms Argemone ochroleuca Sweet 
(1828). 
Vernacular names Mexican poppy, prickly 
poppy, yellow thistle, Mexican thistle (En). 
Argémone, pavot épineux, pavot du Mexique, 
tache de l'œil, chardon du pays (Fr). Papoila 
mexicana, papoula do Mexico, cardo santo (Po). 
Mtunguja bonde (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Arge-
mone mexicana is native in Mexico and the 
West Indies, but has become pantropical after 
accidental introduction or introduction as an 
ornamental. It is naturalized in most African 
countries, from Cape Verde east to Somalia, 
and south to South Africa. 
Uses Throughout the tropics Argemone mex-
icana is widely used as a medicinal plant. It is 
considered a painkiller, diuretic, cholagogue 
and anti-inflammatory. The seed oil is used as 
a purgative and as a pomade. Both the seed oil 
106 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Argemone mexicana - naturalized 
and leaf infusions are drunk to relieve cough. 
Root and leaf decoctions are applied to the skin 
to cure oedema, inflammation, muscle pain, 
ulcers, yaws, to remove warts, to kill Guinea 
worm and to promote wound healing. A root 
decoction is used as a mouthwash and eye bath 
to treat infections. Leaf sap is used as eardrops 
to cure ear inflammation. Flowers, leaves and 
seeds are used in alcoholic and non-alcoholic 
drinks for their psycho-active properties. 
In Nigeria the seed oil is applied to protect 
wood from termite attack, whereas in India, 
Mexico and the West Indies the seed oil is 
sometimes used to make soap, for greasing and 
for illumination. The seed oil of Argemone 
mexicana, called 'argemone oil' or 'katkar oil', 
is sometimes added to mustard oil in India to 
increase the pungency. Larger amounts are 
sometimes used to adulterate mustard oil or 
sesame oil, which may lead to oedema and 
glaucoma in people who consume the oil. 
Cattle do not graze the plant as it is spiny, but 
they can be poisoned if they consume it in hay 
or the chaff. Sheep and goats eat it when other 
vegetation is in short supply, while ostriches 
relish it. The value of wool decreases when it is 
contaminated by the prickly fruits. 
Argemone mexicana is sometimes cultivated as 
an ornamental. 
Production and international trade Arge-
mone mexicana is only used locally and is not 
traded internationally. In Africa cultivation for 
its oil for the domestic market has been re-
ported from Mali and Eritrea. 
Properties Argemone mexicana contains 
numerous isoquinoline alkaloids of the proto-
berberine type and related types, including 
sanguinarine. The total alkaloid fraction in the 
dried roots and stems is 0.25%, mainly consist-
ing of protopine and berberine. The alkaloid 6-
acetonyldihydrochelerythrine has recently been 
isolated from whole plant extracts and was 
found to have significant anti-HIV activity. The 
alkaloids berberine, protopine, protopine hy-
drochloride, sanguinarine and dihydrosangui-
narine have been isolated from the seeds. Pro-
topine is considered a narcotic and it reduces 
morphine-withdrawal effects significantly. Pro-
topine and sanguinarine showed molluscicidal 
properties against Lymnaea acuminata and 
Biomphalaria glabrata. Berberine has improv-
ing effects on the circulation in small doses and 
also has hallucinogenic properties. An over-
dose, however, produces death by paralysis of 
the central nervous system. Other pharmacol-
ogical effects of berberine include spasmolytic, 
antibacterial and to some degree antifungal 
and antiprotozoal activities. Most berberine is 
formed in the flowers. The alkaloid fraction 
from the roots showed anti-inflammatory activ-
ity in rabbits and rats. Leaf extracts showed in-
vitro anti-plasmodial activity. 
The seeds of Argemone mexicana contain 35— 
40% of an orange-yellow oil which consists 
mainly of linoleic acid (54-61%) and oleic acid 
(21-33%). It also contains poisonous sangui-
narine in concentrations as high as 10 g/1. Ac-
cidental mixing of Argemone mexicana seed 
with grain and oil seeds has caused deaths in 
several countries, including South Africa. The 
seed oil has a significant nematicidal effect on 
larvae of the genus Meloidogyne. An aqueous 
mixture of the oil (0.2%) applied to the soil of 
okra (Abelmoschus esculentus (L.) Moench) 
significantly reduced nematode infection and 
nematode concentrations in roots and soil, 
thereby increasing okra growth. When sprayed 
on the leaves the effect was even more striking, 
showing the systemic effect of the spray. 
Leaf extracts show antifeedant activity against 
insects, including the large cabbage-heart cat-
erpillar (Crocidolomia binotalis), the cluster 
caterpillar (Spodoptera litura), the cotton 
aphid (Aphis gossypii) and also larvae of the 
southern house mosquito (Culex quinquefascia-
tus). Dried plant extracts significantly reduced 
nematode damage on seedlings of tomato and 
eggplant. Tomatoes treated with a leaf extract 
showed significantly less fruit rot caused by 
Aspergillus niger. A flower extract induced a 
high level of resistance to tomato virus x in 
Chenopodium album L. Extracts also showed 
antibacterial activity in vitro against Bacillus 
ARGEMONE 107 
subtilis, Escherichia coli and Streptococcus 
faecalis. 
Aqueous leaf and flower extracts inhibit the 
germination and growth of many cultivated 
crops, such as tomato, cucumber, mustard, 
radish and pearl millet. Allelopathic effects of 
the residues on Bambara groundnut and sor-
ghum have been observed in the field. 
Description Erect, branched, annual herb 
up to 50(-100) cm tall, glabrous, containing 
yellow latex; taproot firm; stem with scattered 
prickles. Lower leaves in a rosette and with 
short petiole, stem leaves alternate, sessile, 
auricled, obovate in outline, 5-22 cm x 3-7 cm, 
margin wavy to more or less deeply lobed, 
sharply toothed, lobes curled upwards, white 
variegated along the main veins, bluish green 
elsewhere, prickles scattered along the margin 
and on the veins below. Flowers solitary, regu-
lar, 3-merous; bracts 3, leafy; sepals vaulted, 
terete, with few prickles, horn just below apex, 
caducous; petals 6, obovate, 1.5-3 cm long, pale 
to bright yellow; stamens many, 7-12 mm long, 
free; ovary superior, ovoid, 8-10 mm long, with 
long soft bristles, style very short, stigma 3-6-
lobed, dark red. Fruit an ellipsoid, 3-6-lobed 
capsule 2.5-4 cm long, valves 3-6, dehiscing 
from the apex to about 1/3, covered with sharp 
Argemone mexicana - 1, flowering and fruiting 
stem; 2, flower bud; 3, seed; 4, dehisced fruit. 
Source: PROSEA 
prickles, many-seeded. Seeds globular, 1.5—2 
mm in diameter, finely net-veined, black-
brown, hilum prominent, pale. Seedling with 
epigeal germination; cotyledons linear, up to 2 
cm long. 
Other botanical information Argemone 
comprises 6-9 species all from tropical Amer-
ica. Some authors consider Argemone ochro-
leuca Sweet a distinct species that can be dis-
tinguished by paler petals, thicker leaves and 
narrower fruits. However, it is widely accepted 
that it is the tetraploid form (or sometimes 
triploid form) of Argemone mexicana. 
Growth and development In the tropics, 
Argemone mexicana flowers and fruits 
throughout the year. The flowers open early in 
the morning, and last for 2-3 days. Small stin-
gless bees are the main pollinators, but 
Argemone mexicana is predominantly self-
pollinated. Most seeds fall around the base of 
the parent plant where they may form a carpet 
of seedlings. The seed is light, has a waxy coat 
and is pitted, and may be dispersed by wind 
and water and is known to spread quickly in 
irrigation schemes. Dispersal also occurs by 
soil adhering to farm machinery and by man 
and livestock. Seeds can remain dormant for 
many years. 
Ecology Argemone mexicana occurs mainly 
in regions with a pronounced dry season, on 
open waste ground, along roadsides and rail-
ways, in fields as a weed, mostly at sea-level, 
but sometimes up to 3000 m altitude. It is lo-
cally abundant, but on the whole scattered. It 
tends to grow well in soils of low fertility. 
Propagation and planting Argemone mexi-
cana is propagated by seed. Seed production 
can be 18,000-36,000 seeds per plant. Seeds 
germinate best in moist soil with a tempera-
ture of up to 25°C. In some regions they germi-
nate throughout the year if enough moisture is 
available. 
Management Argemone mexicana is hardly 
cultivated and generally considered a weed. As 
a weed in cultivated land it is generally not an 
aggressive competitor. It is reported as a weed 
in pulses, cereals, tobacco, tea, sugarcane, to-
matoes, cotton and Irish potato. Hand harvest-
ing of field crops can be painful in the presence 
of Argemone mexicana. In areas were it was 
introduced fairly recently its potential impact 
as a weed is often underestimated. A biological 
control programme has been initiated in Aus-
tralia. In Mexico several predatory insects 
were identified including an extremely damag-
ing species of root-breeding and leaf-feeding 
108 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
weevü. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s In some areas Argemo-
ne mexicana is a t tacked by leafspot caused by 
Xanthomonas campestris pv. papavericola. Ar-
gemone mexicana is a host of collar rot (Asper-
gillus niger), the reniform nematode (Rotylen-
chulus reniformis) and the tobacco budworm 
(Helicoverpa assulta). 
H a r v e s t i n g The desired plant pa r t s of 
Argemone mexicana a re harves ted whenever 
the need arises. 
Yie ld Under favourable conditions, Argemo-
ne mexicana can produce a fresh weight of 6-9 
t/ha. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t Harvested mate-
rial of Argemone mexicana is used fresh or is 
dried for la ter use. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Argemone mexicana is 
not a t r isk of genetic erosion as it is a widely 
dis t r ibuted weed. 
P r o s p e c t s Several compounds of Argemone 
mexicana display in teres t ing pharmacological 
effects as purified compounds, mak ing further 
research desirable. Argemone mexicana might 
be of in teres t as a na tu r a l source of berberine. 
The toxic effects of seed oil, flowers and to a 
lesser extent leaf sap make the i r use for me-
dicinal purposes hazardous , bu t they will 
probably continue to be used extensively. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Abebe & Hagos, 1991; 
Burkill , 1997; CAB Internat ional , 2007; Hyde 
& Wurs ten , 2002; Neuwinger, 2000; Seegeler, 
1983; T ran Cong Khanh , 2001a. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Capasso et a l , 2006; Carrillo-
Rosario & Diaz de Ramirez, 2005; Chang et al., 
2003; Chaturvedi , Da t ta & Pal, 1999; Das & 
Khanna , 1997; Diallo et al., 2005; 
Fre iburghaus et al., 1996a; Gupta , Dixit & 
Dobhal, 1990; Gurib-Fakim et al., 1993; 
S h a r m a & Na thawa t , 1987; Upret i , Das & 
Khanna , 1991; van Wyk, van Heerden & van 
Oudtshoorn, 2002. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion T ran Cong Khanh , 
2001a. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(2): Medicinal and poi-
sonous p lants 2. 
ARGOMUELLERA MACROPHYLLA Pax 
P r o t o l o g u e Bot. J a h r b . Syst. 19: 90 (1894). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Argo-
muellera macrophylla occurs from Guinea east 
to Ethiopia and south throughout Centra l Af-
rica to Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. 
U s e s In Côte d'Ivoire the leaf sap is t aken as 
a purgat ive and emetic in the t r e a t m e n t of 
poisoning and ascites. Powdered dried leaves 
are sometimes t aken as an aphrodisiac. In 
Kenya the honey from the flowers is considered 
to be poisonous, causing joint problems. 
B o t a n y Monoecious, unbranched shrub or 
small t ree up to 4(-9) m tall; young twigs 
densely short-hairy. Leaves a l te rna te , crowded 
at twig ends, simple; s t ipules l inear to lanceo-
late, 3—4(—15) mm long, rough hairy; petiole up 
to 1.5 cm long, densely hairy; blade elliptical-
oblanceolate to oblong-elliptical, (10-)25-40 cm 
x 5-12 cm, base cuneate , apex acuminate , 
marg ins toothed, leathery, sparingly short-
hai ry above, densely hai ry beneath , la ter often 
glabrescent, p innately veined with 20-25(-30) 
pairs of la tera l veins. Inflorescence an axillary 
raceme up to 25 cm long, with flowers in inter-
rupted clusters, usual ly each cluster consisting 
of 1 female and several male flowers; axis 
densely hairy; bracts t r iangular-ovate , c. 2 mm 
long, short-hairy. Flowers unisexual , s w e e t -
scented; pedicel (3- )5-6 mm long; peta ls ab-
sent; male flowers with 2-4 , ovate to lanceolate 
sepals, 4 - 5 mm long, hairy outside, greenish to 
white, disk glands numerous , br ight orange, 
s t amens 30-120, free, 5-7 mm long; female 
flowers with 5-9, t r iangular-ovate sepals 3-4 
mm long, ha i ry outside, disk annula r , ovary 
superior, c. 2 mm in diameter , slightly 3-lobed, 
3-celled, densely hairy, styles 3, c. 3 mm long, 
recurved, stout, fused a t base, yellow. Frui t a 
3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm x 13 mm, smooth, 
evenly short-hairy, green, 3-seeded. Seeds 
nearly globose, c. 5 mm x 4 mm, smooth, 
brown-marbled. 
Argomuellera comprises 11 species, 5 of which 
occur in continental tropical Africa and 6 in 
Madagascar and the Comoros. Argomuellera 
macrophylla is the only species with a wide 
distr ibution area. 
E c o l o g y Argomuellera macrophylla occurs 
in the forest undergrowth, in West Africa often 
in drier types of forest, in Eas t Africa often in 
riverine forest and dry evergreen lakeshore 
forest up to 1300(-1850) m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Argo-
muellera macrophylla has a very wide distribu-
tion in tropical Africa, and does not seem to be 
th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Argomuellera macrophylla has 
only few medicinal uses and nothing is known 
on its phytochemistry and pharmacology; it is 
AZIMA 109 
therefore likely to remain of local importance 
only. 
M a j o r r e f e r e n c e s Burkill, 1994; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1996a. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Ichikawa, 1987; Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1987. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
AZIMA TETRACANTHA L a m . 
P r o t o l o g u e Encycl. 1(1): 343 (1783). 
F a m i l y Salvadoraceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n — 22 
S y n o n y m s Azima spinosissima Engl. (1894). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Bee st ing bush, fire 
thorn, needle bush (En). Mdunga ndewe, 
mswaki ndume, mpilipili t awa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Azima 
tetracantha occurs na tura l ly in central , eas te rn 
and southern Africa as well as in the Indian 
Ocean islands, and extends through Arabia to 
tropical Asia. 
U s e s In Eas t Africa the pounded roots of 
Azima tetracantha a re applied directly to 
snakebi tes and an infusion is t aken orally as a 
t r ea tmen t for them, while in Zimbabwe a mix-
tu re of roots and leaves is used similarly. The 
Bajun people of the Kenyan coast use a root 
decoction to t r ea t s tomach disorders. In Mada-
gascar an infusion of the leaves is used to t rea t 
venereal diseases. In the Cape Province of 
South Africa the juice of the berr ies is applied 
directly into the ear to t r ea t earache and the 
dried root is ground, put in cold wate r and 
given to cows to facilitate difficult par tur i t ion . 
The Zulu people of South Africa apply the sap 
of the plant directly to t rea t toothache and 
Azima tetracantha - wild 
bleeding gums after tooth extraction and also 
as a disinfectant. In India and Sri Lanka the 
root, root bark and leaves are added to food as 
a remedy for rheumat i sm. The plant is consid-
ered diuretic and is also used to t rea t dropsy, 
dyspepsia, chronic d iarrhoea and as a st imu-
lant tonic. In western India juice of the leaves 
is applied as eardrops agains t earache and 
crushed leaves are placed on painful teeth. 
The fruit is edible. Azima tetracantha is 
browsed by livestock. It is p lanted as live fence 
in Bangalore (India). In Malaysia pickled 
leaves are used as an appetizer and agains t 
colds. The plant is promoted as an o rnamen ta l 
in the United Sta tes . 
P r o p e r t i e s The dimeric piperidine alkaloids 
azimine, azcarpine and carpaine have been 
isolated from all p lant pa r t s . Terpenoids are 
present in the roots and the leaves, while the 
seeds contain a complex mixture of about 25 
flavonoids, predominant ly as glycosides and 
acyl-glycosides, the most impor tan t being 
quercetin, i sorhamnet in , rhamne t in and 
rhamnaz in . All pa r t s contain glucosinolates. 
These are hydrolyzed into thiocyanates and 
isothiocyanates, and the resul t ing compounds 
have anti-oxidant and sometimes anticarcino-
genic activities. The seed and roots of Azima 
tetracantha contain high concentrat ions of N-
methoxy-3-indolylmethyl-glucosinolate, 
whereas the s tem and young leaves contain 
lower concentrations. Seed oil contains the 
fatty acids myristic acid 0.2%, palmitic acid 
5%, stearic acid 15%, arachidic acid 7%, be-
henic acid 2%, oleic acid 32%, linoleic acid 18% 
and eicosenoic acid 21%, indicating t h a t the oil 
could be suitable as an edible oil. Despite the 
t radi t ional uses , the leaves of Azima tetracan-
tha have tes ted negat ive in ant ibacter ia l and 
antifungal tests . The ant i- inf lammatory activ-
ity of leaf powder has been confirmed in tes ts 
on oedema in ra t s , and the wound-heal ing ac-
tivity of a methanol extract was confirmed both 
as o in tment and when injected in ra t s . 
When Azima tetracantha is ea ten by domestic 
stock, it impar t s a very pronounced flavour to 
milk and but te r . Pricks from thorns produce 
unp leasan t bu rn ing sensat ions comparable to 
bee stings. The wood is avoided as fuel wood 
because t he smoke is considered poisonous. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Dioecious, erect shrub up to 90 
cm tall with ( l - ) 2 spines 0.5-5 cm long in each 
leaf axil, sometimes scandent wi th s tems up to 
8 m long; branchle ts tere te or quadrangular , 
glabrous to densely hairy. Leaves decussately 
opposite, simple and entire; st ipules absent or 
110 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Azima tetracantha - 1, male flowering branch; 
2, female inflorescence; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
rudimentary; petiole short; blade elliptical-
oblong to ovate-oblong or orbicular, 1.5-5.5 cm 
x 0.5—4.5 cm, base rounded or somewhat nar-
rowed, apex mucronate, pinnately veined with 
one pair of lateral veins from near the base. 
Inflorescence an axillary, sometimes terminal 
spike or cyme up to 3 cm long or flowers soli-
tary; bracts ovate, often with long and spinous 
mucro. Flowers unisexual, regular, 4-merous, 
usually sessile; calyx campanulate, 2-4 mm 
long, with triangular lobes; petals linear-oblong 
to oblong, greenish to yellowish, the upper part 
reflexed over the calyx, 2—5 mm long; male 
flowers with stamens inserted at the base of 
the rudimentary ovary, exserted; female flow-
ers with staminodes and superior ovary, up to 
4.5 mm long with a broad sessile stigma. Fruit 
a globose berry, 0.5-1 cm in diameter, 1—2-
seeded, green turning white, with persistent 
stigma. Seeds disk-like, brown to black. 
Other botanical information Azima com-
prises about 4 species in mainland Africa, 
Madagascar and Asia and is characterized by 
long axillary spines. Over the range of its dis-
tribution Azima tetracantha varies considera-
bly, yet it is an easily recognizable and distinct 
species. In southern Africa the male plants 
lack spines, or have poorly developed ones, 
while female specimens have long spines. 
Growth and development The scandent, 
straggling growth habit and its spines make 
Azima tetracantha a useful species for hedges. 
The hedge tends to open up underneath but 
pruning will keep it in shape. It coppices read-
ily and spreads through underground runners. 
Ecology Azima tetracantha is found in bush, 
scrub and forest, along rivers and at the coast, 
up to 1100 m altitude. In East Africa it is 
common along banks of seasonal rivers where 
the soil is saline, notably in the edges of man-
grove. In South Africa Azima tetracantha oc-
curs on hillsides, in shrub savanna, often on 
termitaria, and at the coast. 
Propagation and planting A few specialist 
nurseries in the United States offer seeds of 
Azima tetracantha for sale for ornamental pur-
poses. Multiplication through cuttings is possi-
ble. 
Management The South African Depart-
ment of Agriculture considers Azima tetracan-
tha an indicator of bush encroachment. Land 
users in certain areas are required to control 
the species to prevent deterioration and main-
tain the productivity of pastoral land. Over-
grazing is the main reason for encroachment. 
When used as a hedge or barrier plant, it needs 
to be pruned regularly to keep a compact shape. 
Genetic resources Azima tetracantha is a 
common, widespread pioneer and thus there is 
no immediate risk of overharvesting for human 
use. 
Prospects The use of Azima tetracantha 
appears to be limited and only occasional in 
Africa. As all parts contain glucosinolates, fur-
ther research on medicinal applications is war-
ranted. 
Major references Dold & Cocks, 2000; Dold 
& Cocks, 2001; Fox & Norwood Young, 1988; 
Hutchings et al., 1996; Ismail et al., 1997; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Verdoorn, 1963; Vickery, 1983b; 
Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Bennett, 
Mellon & Kroon, 2004; Bennett et al., 2004; 
Brown et al., 2003; Carlquist, 2002; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Dahir, 1999; Dale & Greenway, 
1961; den Outer & van Veenendaal, 1981; 
Friis, 1992; Guerra dos Santos, 1989; Hebbar 
et a l , 2004; Henderson, 1987; Jaswanth et a l , 
2001; Perrier de la Bâthie, 1946; Ramaswamy 
& Razi, 1973; Rodman et al., 1996; Schatz, 
2001; Vonshak et a l , 2003. 
Sources of illustration Vickery, 1983b. 
Authors A.P. Dold 
BAISSEA 111 
BAISSEA AXILLARIS (Benth.) Hua 
Protologue Compt. Rend. Hebd. Séances 
Acad. Sei. 134: 857 (1902). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number In - 22 
Origin and geographic distribution Baissea 
axillaris occurs from Senegal east to the Cen-
tral African Republic, and south to northern 
Angola. There is one collection from eastern 
Tanzania. 
Uses In Congo a decoction of the leafy twigs 
is taken to treat kidney problems. In DR Congo 
a maceration of the root is used as eye drops to 
treat psychosis. A decoction of the roots and 
stem bark is taken to treat colic; it causes no 
diarrhoea. A decoction of the leafy twigs is 
taken as a diuretic. The Yoruba people in Nige-
ria add the latex to palm wine to increase the 
intoxicating effect. The bark in decoction is 
applied to the skin of dogs to cure mange. The 
bark is used to make a powerful hunting poi-
son. In DR Congo the root sap is dripped into 
the nostrils of hunting dogs to improve their 
ability to scent. 
Properties No chemical analyses have been 
carried out on Baissea axillaris. It belongs to 
the subfamily Echitoideae, whose representa-
tives often contain cardiac glycosides, espe-
cially in the seeds and roots. 
Botany Liana up to 15 m long, with white 
latex; stem up to 12 cm in diameter; bark 
rough or smooth, greyish; branchlets densely 
hairy. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stip-
ules absent; petiole 1-8 mm long, densely 
hairy; blade ovate to oblong, often violin-
shaped, sometimes deltoid, 1-8 cm x 0.5-3 cm, 
base rounded to cordate, apex obtuse to acute, 
glabrous to hairy on both sides, pinnately 
veined with 3-10 pairs of lateral veins. Inflo-
rescence an axillary cyme, sometimes terminal, 
lax or congested, 1-20-flowered; peduncle 1-15 
mm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel 1.5-5 mm long; sepals connate at base, 
broadly ovate, 1-2 mm long, apex rounded to 
obtuse, brown hairy outside; corolla tube fun-
nel-shaped, (2-)3-5 mm long, variably hairy 
outside, with tufts of hairs and small scales 
inside, yellow, orange or white, sometimes with 
red spots or stripes inside, lobes elliptical, 1.5-
6 mm x 1-2 mm, apex obtuse, variably hairy 
outside, glabrous inside; stamens inserted near 
the base of the corolla tube, anthers almost 
sessile, forming a cone over the pistil head; 
ovary half-inferior, globose to cylindrical, con-
sisting of 2 carpels connate at the very base, 
Baissea axillaris - 1, flowering twig; 2, flower; 
3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
style 0.5-1 mm long, pistil head c. 1 mm long. 
Fruit consisting of 2 almost free, narrowly cy-
lindrical follicles 11-39 cm x 0.5-3 cm, apex 
rounded, pendulous, densely hairy, many-
seeded. Seeds narrowly ellipsoid, laterally 
compressed, 17-27 mm long, apex truncate, 
with a tuft of hairs 15-45 mm long. 
Baissea is confined to continental Africa and 
comprises 18 species. Baissea axillaris flowers 
and fruits throughout the year. Baissea leonen-
sis Benth. has about the same distribution area 
as Baissea axillaris, occurring from Senegal to 
western Uganda, and south to DR Congo. In 
Senegal the latex is applied to mumps, and the 
latex together with the powdered bark of 
Zanthoxylum leprieurii Guill. & Perr. is ap-
plied to tumours. In Côte d'Ivoire the latex is 
dropped in water to stupefy fish. The strong 
stems are used as ropes. The leaves contain the 
coumarin glycoside baisseoside. 
Ecology Baissea axillaris occurs in riverine 
forest, coastal forest and secondary forest, up 
to 1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Baissea 
axillaris is relatively common throughout its 
112 MÉDICINAL PLANTS l 
distribution area and grows well in disturbed 
forest. It is therefore not threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Baissea axillaris will remain of 
local importance only, unless chemical and 
pharmacological research reveals possibilities 
for modern medicine. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Neuwinger, 
1996; Neuwinger, 2000; van Dilst, 1995. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Oliver-
Bever, 1986; Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003; Tra 
Bi, Kouamé & Traoré, 2005. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
BAISSEA MULTIFLORA A.DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 8: 424 (1844). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Baissea laxiflora Stapf (1894). 
Vernacular names Liane étoilée (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Baissea 
multiflora occurs from Senegal east to the Cen-
tral African Republic and DR Congo, and south 
to northern Angola. 
Uses In Senegal roots and bark decoctions 
are widely used to treat colic and stomach-ache 
without causing diarrhoea, and to treat steril-
ity in women. A decoction of the leafy twigs or 
bark is considered diuretic and taken to treat 
rheumatism, arthritis, kidney problems, haem-
orrhoids, lumbago, oedema caused by deficien-
cies and as a stimulant to treat general fatigue. 
The decoction is also externally used in friction 
or bathing. Root powder in water is dripped 
into the eye to treat conjunctivitis or cataract 
Baissea multiflora - wild 
and mixed with food or drink to treat appendi-
citis. It is also applied to snakebites. The 
Tenda people of Senegal give a few drops of the 
sap to children with fever. Ash of the plant is 
rubbed on the back to treat backache. Tenda 
hunters consider the plant a charm. In Gambia 
a decoction of the leafy twigs is taken to treat 
diarrhoea. In northern Côte d'Ivoire the roots 
in decoction are taken to treat dry cough, and 
are used as a wash to treat gonorrhoea. 
The strong stems are used in Sierra Leone to 
tie roofs of houses. In Gambia the bark is made 
into rope. The plants contain white latex, 
which has been collected in the past in Ghana 
to produce a good quality rubber. Cattle in 
Senegal browse on the leaves and stems are 
pulled to the ground to make the leaves avail-
able. Baissea multiflora produces masses of 
small flowers, which are sweet-scented, and 
have ornamental value. It is listed as a rare 
ornamental plant on a gardener's website. 
Properties No chemical analyses have been 
carried out on Baissea multiflora. It belongs to 
the subfamily Echitoideae, whose representa-
tives often contain cardiac glycosides, espe-
cially in the seeds and roots. A leaf extract 
showed significant molluscicidal activity 
against Biomphalaria glabrata. An ethanol 
extract of the root or bark did not show any 
antibacterial, antitrypanosomal or antiplasmo-
dial activities. 
Description Shrub up to 6 m tall or liana 
up to 30 m long, with white latex; stem up to 
12 cm in diameter; bark with small grooves, 
dark grey or brown; branches smooth, grey- or 
red-brown, branchlets hairy. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-5 
mm long, hairy; blade obovate to oblong, 1.5— 
9.5 cm x 1-4.5 cm, base cuneate to rounded, 
apex acute to acuminate, glabrous on both 
sides, pinnately veined with 5-10 pairs of lat-
eral veins. Inflorescence an axillary or terminal 
cyme, lax or congested, few- to many-flowered; 
peduncle 0.5-4.5 cm long, hairy. Flowers bi-
sexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 
2.5-30 mm long; sepals free or nearly so, 
broadly ovate to oblong, 1-4 mm long, apex 
obtuse to acute, red-brown or greenish, mi-
nutely hairy; corolla tube cylindrical to cup-
shaped, 3-5.5 mm long, minutely hairy, with 
tufts of hairs and distinct scales inside, white, 
pink or orange, lobes narrowly ovate or strap-
shaped, 5-21 mm x 1-2 mm, apex acuminate, 
white or yellow, sometimes red striped, varia-
bly hairy outside, glabrous inside; stamens 
inserted near the base of the corolla tube, in-
BARTERIA 113 
V V '•** 
Baissea multiflora - 1, flowering twig; 2, flower; 
3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
eluded, anthers almost sessile, forming a cone 
over the pistil head; ovary half-inferior, globose 
to cylindrical, consisting of 2 carpels connate at 
the very base, style 0.5-1.5 mm long, pistil 
head c. 1 mm long. Fruit consisting of 2 almost 
free, narrowly cylindrical follicles 30-45 cm x 
0.5-1 cm, pendulous, hairy, many-seeded. 
Seeds narrowly ellipsoid, laterally compressed, 
14-19 mm long, black, with a tuft of hairs 35-
50 mm long at apex. 
Other botanical information Baissea is 
confined to continental Africa and comprises 18 
species. The hairiness of the flowers in most 
species is extremely variable, as is the size of 
the corolla lobes. 
Baissea myrtifolia (Benth.) Pichon from Kenya 
and Tanzania has similar uses as Baissea mul-
tiflora. In Kenya a root decoction is taken to 
treat stomach and kidney problems, colic and 
dysentery. 
Growth and development In West Africa 
Baissea multiflora flowers from July to May, 
and fruits from September to June. In Central 
Africa it can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year. 
Ecology Baissea multiflora occurs in pri-
mary as well as secondary forest, and in river-
ine forest, at 150-1400 m altitude. 
Harvest ing The bark, roots and leaves of 
Baissea multiflora are harvested from the wild 
whenever the need arises. 
Handling after harves t The plant parts 
harvested are usually used fresh. 
Genetic resources As Baissea multiflora is 
only used at a local scale, it is not likely to be-
come threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Despite the multiple uses in local 
medicine, very little is known about the chem-
istry and pharmacological activities of Baissea 
multiflora. Several antibacterial tests had 
negative results, although it showed significant 
molluscicidal activity. More research is neces-
sary to determine the value of Baissea multi-
flora as a medicinal plant. The profusion of 
small and fragrant flowers makes it an orna-
mental worth cultivating. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2002; Burkill, 
1985; Neuwinger, 2000; van Dilst, 1995. 
Other references Atindehou et al., 2004; 
Burkill, 2000; Duret & Paris, 1972; Kerharo & 
Adam, 1974; Koné et al., 2004. 
Sources of illustration van Dilst, 1995. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
B A R T E R I A F I S T U L O S A M a s t . 
Protologue Oliv., Fl. trop. Afr. 2: 511 
(1871). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Synonyms Barteria nigritana Hook.f. subsp. 
fistulosa (Mast.) Sleumer (1974). 
Vernacular names Arbre à fourmis (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Barte-
ria fistulosa occurs from western Nigeria east 
to the Central African Republic and south to 
DR Congo. 
Uses The stem bark, roots and leaves of Bar-
teria fistulosa are widely used in baths and 
embrocation to treat pain, e.g. fever pains, 
headache, intestinal and lumbar pains and 
rheumatism. In Gabon a bark decoction is gar-
gled to treat toothache, and in the Central Af-
rican Republic a decoction is used as nose 
drops to treat headache. Young shoots are 
eaten as an aphrodisiac, and the powdered root 
is widely taken as an invigorator for men. A 
bark decoction is taken to treat venereal dis-
eases and madness. In Congo Barteria fistulosa 
is used in many formulations to treat epilepsy 
and snakebites. A bark decoction makes a 
wash to treat smallpox and ulcerous sores. A 
114 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mixture of dried ground twig bark, rock salt 
and maize meal is eaten as a purgative. Pow-
dered bark is used to stop the coughing of blood 
and uterine haemorrhage, while the leaf pow-
der is rubbed into scarifications. In DR Congo 
the bark sap is used to treat wounds. 
Properties The stem bark of Barteria fistu-
losa contains large amounts of flavones, while 
the leaves and roots contain traces. The bark 
furthermore contains a trace of saponins, the 
bark and root contain tannins and the leaves, 
bark and root contain traces of hydrocyanic 
acid. The cyanogenic glycoside barterioside has 
been isolated from the root bark. 
Botany Small tree up to 13 m tall with deep 
taproot; branches horizontal, hollow over their 
full length, smooth or with lenticels, greyish. 
Leaves distichously alternate, simple, almost 
entire; stipules absent; petiole short, thickened; 
blade oblong to obovate-oblong, 20-42 cm x 6-
19 cm, base decurrent into the petiole, forming 
a raised line on both sides of the stem, apex 
apiculate, leathery, glabrous. Inflorescence an 
axillary fascicle, often horseshoe-shaped, (2-
)6-9-flowered; bracts numerous, oblong, apex 
rounded to obtuse, overlapping, shiny, chest-
nut-coloured, increasing in size from below 
upwards. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
sessile; sepals fused at base, oblong to lanceo-
late, c. 3 cm x 1 cm, overlapping, wavy at the 
margins, silky and downy outside, white; pet-
als similar to the sepals, but slightly larger and 
glabrous; corona double, the outer membra-
nous, about half the length of the petals, jagged 
at the edge, inner much smaller, consisting of a 
ring of thick, fleshy tubercles; stamens numer-
ous, c. 3 cm long, filaments fused at base, an-
thers linear-oblong; ovary superior, globose, 1-
celled, style thick, stigma large, mushroom-
shaped. Fruit a leathery, ellipsoid indéhiscent 
berry 3-3.5 cm x 2-2.5 cm, many-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, compressed, coarsely pitted, with pulpy 
aril. 
Barteria comprises 4 species, which all occur in 
tropical Africa. Barteria fistulosa houses large, 
aggressive ants (Tetraponera spp.). Barteria 
nigritana Hook.f. and Barteria dewevrei De 
Wild. & T.Durand house small ants in their 
hollow branches, while Barteria solida Breteler 
does not house any ants. In Nigeria Barteria 
fistulosa fruits in March on trees more than 8 
m tall (more than 10 years old). The seeds are 
dispersed by birds and small mammals. Seed-
lings occur in heavy shade and produce the 
first hollow, horizontal branches when 1-1.5 m 
tall; these are colonized by ants. The growth 
rate is 50-100 cm per year, and the tree dies 
after 15-30 reproductive seasons, at which 
time the crown is high enough to be exposed to 
broken sunlight. 
In Cameroon the Baka people use Barteria 
nigritiana to treat anaemia and toothache and 
in Congo the Kouilou and Mayombe people use 
the bark to treat wounds, scabies and itch. 
After a wash with the decoction, the affected 
area is dusted with powdered bark. 
Ecology Barteria fistulosa occurs in lowland 
rainforest and gallery forest, also in secondary 
forest, often in clearings or along rivers. 
Genetic resources and breeding Barteria 
fistulosa is widespread and hence not threat-
ened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of the many medicinal 
uses and the limited chemical and pharmacol-
ogical data, research into the properties of Bar-
teria fistulosa may prove worthwhile. 
Major references Breteler, 1999; Burkill, 
1997; Janzen, 1972; Keay, 1954a; Neuwinger, 
2000; Waterman, Ross & McKey, 1984. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Akendengué & Louis, 1994; Betti, 
2004; Bouquet, 1969; Gassita et al. (Editors), 
1982; Hulstaert, 1966; Paris, Bouquet & Paris, 
1969; Raponda-Walker, 1952; Sandberg & 
Cronlund, 1982; Tanno, 1981. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
BASANANTHE SANDERSONII (Harv.) W.J.de 
Wilde 
Protologue Blumea 21(2): 339 (1973). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Synonyms Tryphostemma longifolium Harms 
(1891). 
Origin and geographic distribution Basan-
anthe sandersonii occurs from Tanzania south 
to Zimbabwe, Mozambique, South Africa and 
Swaziland. 
Uses In Tanzania the roots are chewed and 
the juice taken internally to treat snakebites. 
Botany Perennial herb up to 60 cm tall, 
with woody rootstock; stems erect or prostrate 
at base. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules lin-
ear, 1.5-5 mm long; petiole 0-5 mm long; blade 
orbicular, broadly ovate, obovate or elliptical, 
2-16 cm x 1-4 cm, base rounded or cuneate, 
apex rounded or obtuse, margins toothed, glau-
cous beneath. Inflorescence an axillary cyme, 
1-3-flowered, often with a tendril 0.5-2(—5) cm 
long; peduncle up to 4.5 cm long; bracts 1-4 
mm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, campanu-
BAUHINIA 115 
late; pedicel 3-17 mm long, pale yellow; hypan-
thium 2-4 mm wide; sepals 5(-7), 4.5-8.5 mm 
long, apex obtuse; petals absent or rarely 2; 
outer corona blue, with tube 1-2 mm high and 
threads 0.5-1.5 mm long, inner corona 1-1.5 
mm high, cup-shaped; stamens 5, inserted at 
the inner corona, filaments 1.5-4 mm long; 
ovary superior, obovoid, 1—1.5 mm long, 1-
celled, styles 3(—4), free, 3-4 mm long, stigma 
head-shaped. Fruit an obovoid capsule 1.5-2 
cm long, pendulous, 1-4-seeded. Seeds 6-10 
mm long. 
Basananthe comprises about 25 species in con-
tinental Africa. Basananthe heterophylla 
Schinz is an annual or occasionally short-lived 
perennial herb up to 50 cm tall, occurring in 
Namibia and Botswana at 900-1500 m alti-
tude. A root decoction from it is used in Na-
mibia to treat coughs. 
Ecology Basananthe sandersonii occurs in 
grassland, open scrub vegetation and forest 
edges on sandy and rocky soils, up to 1700 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Basa-
nanthe sandersonii is a widespread pioneer 
plant and thus not at risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of the medicinal use on 
record and the complete lack of chemical and 
pharmacological data, research into the proper-
ties of Basananthe sandersonii may prove 
worthwhile. 
Major references de Wilde, 1973; Kokwaro, 
1993; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bernhard, 1999; von 
Koenen, 2001. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
BAUHINIA KALANTHA Harms 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 28: 398 (1900). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Vernacular names Mchekwa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Bau-
hinia kalantha is endemic to Tanzania where it 
is restricted to the Dodoma, Morogoro and Ir-
inga Regions. 
Uses In the area around Dodoma (Tanza-
nia), the sliced roots of Bauhinia kalantha are 
boiled together with chicken and eaten as a 
treatment for schistosomiasis. Young, tender 
leaves are cooked alone or with other leaves as 
a vegetable. Bauhinia kalantha produces good 
firewood and a dye used in basketry. Ropes are 
made from the bark fibre. 
Proper t ies Active compounds have not been 
reported for Bauhinia kalantha, but other 
Bauhinia species are known to contain gluco-
sides of flavones and flavonols. 
Botany Shrub up to 3 m tall, glabrous ex-
cept stamens and ovary. Leaves alternate, 
simple; blade 1-4.5 cm x 1.5-4 cm, deeply 2-
lobed to one-fifth from base, lobes rounded at 
the apex. Flowers solitary, bisexual, almost 
regular, 5-merous; hypanthium 3-4 mm long; 
sepals narrowly ovate to lanceolate, 13-17 mm 
long; petals obovate, 2.5-3.5 cm x 1—2 cm, yel-
low; stamens 10, all fertile, hairy; ovary supe-
rior, hairy, stigma c. 3 mm in diameter. Fruit 
an oblong pod c. 1.5 cm wide, woody, dehiscent, 
few-seeded. Seeds 7-8 mm x 6—7 mm, deep 
brown. 
Bauhinia is a widespread tropical genus with 
about 250 species. Bauhinia urbaniana Schinz 
is also used in traditional medicine. It is re-
stricted to Zambia, Angola, Namibia and Bot-
swana on Kalahari sands in woodland at 
around 1000 m altitude. In Namibia the cut 
fresh roots are cooked in water and the decoc-
tion is taken as a strengthening tonic for adults 
in case of any serious sickness. The dried, pow-
dered roots are mixed with vaseline and babies 
are rubbed with the mixture as a protection 
against sickness. 
Ecology Bauhinia kalantha occurs in de-
ciduous woodland and thickets, often on stony 
soils, at 600-1000 m altitude. 
Management For all uses, plant material is 
only collected from the wild. The edible leaves 
are collected from November till April. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though it has a limited distribution, Bauhinia 
kalantha apparently is common in its range. 
Prospects The chemical and pharmacologi-
cal properties of Bauhinia kalantha have not 
been analysed and it is therefore impossible to 
judge its value as a medicinal plant and vege-
table. 
Major references Brenan, 1967; Kokwaro, 
1993; Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 2002. 
Other references Blomley & Mbogo, 1992; 
Brummitt et al., 2007; Dale & Greenway, 1961; 
Leger, 1997; Vihan, Kumar & Arora, 2007. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
116 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
B E R S A M A A B Y S S I N I C A F r e s e n . 
P r o t o l o g u e Mus. Senckenberg. 2: 281 (1837). 
F a m i l y Mel ianthaceae 
S y n o n y m s Bersama engleriana Gurke 
(1892). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Winged bersama, bi t ter 
ba rk (En). Mwangwakwao, m t a t a (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ber-
sama abyssinica is dis t r ibuted from Guinea 
Bissau through the coastal countries of West 
Africa except Benin, east to Er i t rea and Ethio-
pia and south to Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
and Mozambique. 
U s e s All pa r t s of Bersama abyssinica a re 
poisonous and have been implicated in killing 
h u m a n s and livestock. For in te rna l use the 
dosage is therefore critical. Bark, leaf and root 
decoctions are widely t aken as a purgat ive to 
t r ea t a range of s tomach disorders, such as 
abdominal pain, colic, diarrhoea, cholera, intes-
t inal worms, amoebiasis and dysentery. Rabies, 
syphilis, gonorrhoea and malar ia are also 
t rea ted with these decoctions. A stem bark 
decoction is d runk to cure cancer and rheuma-
t ism. As an aphrodisiac, powdered ba rk is 
added to beer or leaves are chewed. A bark 
poultice is applied to the back, a leaf decoction 
is d runk or a root decoction is used as a wash 
to cure lumbago. Stem bark and leaves are 
used to t r ea t diabetes mell i tus. Leaf decoctions 
are also t aken to t r ea t feverish pains, loss of 
appet i te , debility, jaundice and leprosy. Ex-
t rac ts of growing shoots are used for external 
t r e a t m e n t of burns , ulcers and to clean 
wounds. To t r ea t convulsions and snakebites , 
leaves are pounded and mixed with water , and 
the mixture is d runk and applied the body. A 
root ba rk infusion is drunk, s tem ba rk powder 
is sniffed, leaf sap is applied as eye drops or 
leaf powder is sniffed to t rea t migraine, head-
ache and colds. A root decoction is used to t r ea t 
haemorrhoids and epilepsy. Shoots and leaves 
are pounded and used to control s ta lk borers in 
maize. 
The wood is used for poles in house building, as 
firewood and for making charcoal. Branches 
are used in living fences. Bersama abyssinica is 
fur ther valued as an o rnamenta l shade tree, 
for bee forage and in agroforestry. Seeds are 
used as a subst i tu te for soap. 
P r o p e r t i e s The s tem bark of Bersama abys-
sinica collected in Kenya and Uganda con-
ta ined 2 bufadienolides, which a re cardiac gly-
cosides with an t i - tumour activity, as well as 
sterols and the xanthone mangiferin. Differ-
ences between provenances were detected in 
the glycoside fractions. Two hellebrigenin de-
rivatives identified in an ethanol extract of the 
bark have shown inhibitory activity against 
h u m a n carcinoma of the nasopharynx in cell 
cul tures . Cardiac glycosides and u n s a t u r a t e d 
sterols were identified in tes ts in Ethiopia on 
s tem bark and root bark . Leaf extracts have 
cardiogenic, spasmolytic and hypoglycaemic 
activities. Crude ba rk extracts slow down 
growth of Bacillus cereus, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Shigella flexineri and Shigella dysente-
ria, a root ba rk extract slows down t h a t of Ba-
cillus subtilis. An aqueous s tem bark extract 
showed ant ispasmodic effects on isolated 
guinea-pig ileum. A methanolic leaf extract 
had an inhibitory effect on HIV-1 replication. 
From the roots the bufadienolide abyssinin (an 
insect ant ifeedant agains t Helicoverpa zea), 3 
other bufadienolides, bersenogenin, berscil-
logenin, and 3-epiberscillogenin, all with in-
vitro cytotoxicity, and glucuronide t r i terpene 
saponins have been isolated. 
Methanol fractions of the leaves of Bersama 
abyssinica showed significant free radical scav-
enging capacity. Phytochemical investigation 
resul ted in the isolation of five flavonol gly-
cosides and the xan thone mangiferin. The last 
compound also has cytoprotective propert ies . 
The wood is white to brownish grey without 
differentiation between sapwood and hear t -
wood; the tex ture is moderately coarse. The 
wood is ha rd and works easily. The densi ty is 
about 800 kg/m3 a t 12% mois ture content. 
B o t a n y Evergreen shrub to small t ree up to 
12(-25) m tall; bark grey, brown or mottled, 
scaly. Leaves a l te rna te , impar ip innate ly com-
pound with up to 12 opposite pairs of leaflets, 
up to 1 m long; st ipules 0.5-5 cm long; rachis 
usual ly with wide wings; leaflets near ly sessile, 
lanceolate to oblong or ovate-oblong, 3.5-22 cm 
x 1—8 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex acu-
mina te , marg in ent i re to sharply and conspicu-
ously toothed, glabrous to hairy, with 10-12 
pai rs of la tera l veins. Inflorescence an upright , 
dense, axillary raceme up to 35 cm long. Flow-
ers bisexual or often functionally unisexual , 
zygomorphic, 4-5(-6)-merous, scented; sepals 
4 -5 , c. 6 mm long, 2 anter ior ones fused; petals 
5, free, narrowly oblong, 10-20 mm long, white, 
yellowish or purple-pink, s t amens 4 -6 , free or 
fused a t base; ovary superior, densely hairy, 4— 
5-celled, style simple. Fru i t a woody capsule 1— 
3 cm in diameter , 4-5-lobed, yellowish to red-
dish, 4-5-seeded. Seed up to 11 m m x 8 mm, 
bright red wi th cup-shaped yellow or orange 
BOERHAVIA 117 
aril. 
Bersama comprises about 8 species, all occur-
ring in Africa. The large variat ion in Bersama 
abyssinica has led to the naming of numerous 
species, subspecies and variet ies. Bersama 
lucens (Höchst.) Szyszyl. occurs in Mozambique 
and South Africa, and in South Africa powder 
from its s tem bark is sniffed to cure headache 
and a s tem bark macerat ion is d runk to t rea t 
mens t rua l pain, nervousness , venereal diseases 
and impotence. The s tem bark extract is also 
used to kill lice. An aqueous s tem bark extract 
showed significant antifungal activity against 
Candida albicans. A s tem bark extract of Ber-
sama tysoniana Oliv., a South African endemic, 
is d runk to t rea t fever and hyster ia; the ba rk is 
probably overharvested. 
E c o l o g y Bersama abyssinica grows in low-
land bush savanna , gallery forests and mon-
tane forests, from sea-level up to 2700 m alti-
tude. It behaves as a pioneer species and is 
considered a weed in forest p lanta t ions . 
M a n a g e m e n t Bersama abyssinica can be 
propagated by seed, cutt ings, Wildlings or root 
suckers. There are about 1200 seeds in a kg. 
Seeds can be stored after removal of the aril 
and re ta in viability for 2 months a t room tem-
pera tu re . They are sensitive to freezing. Man-
agement practices may include coppicing, lop-
ping and pollarding. Bersama abyssinica pro-
duces root suckers. 
The only impor tan t disease recorded is t a r 
spot, caused by the fungus Phyllachora ber-
samae; it affects the leaves. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Bersama 
abyssinica is widespread, bu t nowhere abun-
dant . Increased use especially of roots and 
s tem bark could pose a t h rea t in the future. 
P r o s p e c t s The taxonomy of Bersama is still 
far from clear. The large morphological varia-
tion in Bersama abyssinica is fairly well de-
scribed, but variat ion in chemical propert ies is 
poorly understood. The medicinal propert ies 
w a r r a n t further research. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill, 1997; M a u n d u & 
Tengnäs, 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; Tapondjou, 
Miyamoto & Lacaille-Dubois, 2006; Verdcourt, 
1989. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Asres et al., 2001; Asres, 
Gibbons & Bucar, 2006; Buwa & Van Staden, 
2006; Dharan i , 2002; Geyid et al., 2005; Kitula, 
2007; La tham, 2007; Makonnen & Hagos, 
1993; Mikkelsen & Seberg, 2001; Njike et al., 
2005. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
BOERHAVIA DIFFUSA L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pi. 1: 3 (1753). 
F a m i l y Nyctaginaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 26, 52, 54, 116 
S y n o n y m s Boerhavia africana Lour. (1790). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Spreading hogweed, red 
hogweed, t a r vine, red spiderling (En). Agarra 
pinto, t angara , bredo de porco, erva tostâo (Po). 
Mkwakwara , mkwayakwaya (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Boerha-
via diffusa has a pantropical distr ibution, and 
possibly originates from the Old World tropics. 
It occurs throughout tropical Africa. 
U s e s In India Boerhavia diffusa is a very 
popular medicinal plant , called 'Punarnava ' ; 
especially the roots, leaves and seeds are used 
and the root is listed in the Indian Pharmaco-
poeia. P lan t pa r t s are applied as a stomachic, 
cardiotonic, hepatoprotective, laxative, diu-
retic, anthelmint ic , febrifuge, expectorant and, 
in higher doses, as an emetic and purgat ive. As 
a diuretic it is useful in s t rangury, jaundice, 
enlarged spleen, gonorrhoea and other in te rna l 
inf lammations. In moderate doses it is success-
ful in a s thma . A decoction of the roots is also 
applied to corneal ulcers and to t r ea t night 
bl indness. Similar uses have been reported for 
Central America and South-Eas t Asia. 
In tropical Africa the boiled roots are applied to 
ulcers, abscesses and to assist in the extraction 
of Guinea worm. The boiled roots and leaves 
are considered expectorant and febrifuge, and 
in large doses emetic. A decoction of t he aer ial 
pa r t s is also t aken to t r ea t gastro- intest inal 
pains , convulsions, in tes t inal worms and to 
regula te mens t rua t ion . In Maur i t an ia the 
seeds are ground and made into cakes which 
Boerhavia diffusa - wild 
118 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
are cooked and eaten as a remedy for dysen-
tery. In Côte d'Ivoire the powdered leaves are 
made into a paste and are applied to the chest 
to relieve asthma. The leaves are applied to the 
forehead to treat violent headache and around 
the ears against earache. Root sap as a lotion 
for friction is used to treat kidney troubles, 
rheumatism, generalised pain and sprains. In 
Ghana the root decoction is also taken to treat 
anaemia and applied externally to yaws, while 
the powdered root can be mixed with butter or 
oil to treat abdominal tumours. A decoction of 
the root is also taken to treat heart troubles, 
palpitations and jaundice. In Congo root sap is 
rubbed on the neck and throat to treat mumps, 
laryngitis and burns. In water or palm oil, or in 
a decoction, it is taken to treat spleen troubles, 
diarrhoea, dysentery, haematuria and gonor-
rhoea. The root is also considered abortifacient 
and used to hasten parturition. The roots are 
also applied as a snakebite antidote, and as an 
aphrodisiac. A decoction of the leaves is used in 
DR Congo to treat gonorrhoea and to calm 
pain. A decoction of the root is taken in Angola 
to treat jaundice. In Namibia the Bergdamara 
people chew or boil the root to treat gastro-
enteritic problems, while the Damara people 
take a tea made from the root to treat a pro-
lapsed uterus. 
In West and East Africa the leaves are some-
times prepared in a sauce as a vegetable, while 
the seeds are added to cereals in Senegal and 
Mali. The leaves are cooked as a vegetable in 
curries and soups in India as well, and the 
roots and seeds are added to curries and bread. 
The leafy stems are widely eaten by sheep and 
cattle, and may also be cut as a fodder. 
Production and international trade Boer-
havia diffusa is mainly used at a local scale, 
except in India where especially the roots enter 
in popular medicinal formulations. Indian 
products are traded worldwide. 
Properties The chemistry of the bioactive 
compounds of Boerhavia diffusa and their 
pharmacological properties are poorly studied. 
Most research has focused on extracts. 
Compounds isolated from the roots of Boerha-
via diffusa include the alkaloid punarnavine, 
punarnavoside (a glucopyranoside), ursolic 
acid, and the rotenoids boeravinones Al, Bl, 
C2, D, E and F, as well as several minor com-
ponents. 
In India Boerhavia diffusa is included in the 
Pharmacopoeia as a diuretic, and this action 
has since been confirmed. The diuretic activity 
is probably due to depression of tubular excre-
tion, inhibiting kidney succinic dehydrogenase 
and stimulating D-amino oxidase. An aqueous 
extract of the dry or fresh plant is useful in 
cases of oedema and ascites. In India an intra-
venous injection of punarnavine in cats pro-
duced a distinct and persistent rise of blood 
pressure and a marked diuresis. The high 
amounts of potassium salts present in the 
whole plant increase the action of punarnavine. 
In a clinical trial for treatment of nephrotic 
syndrome, the extract was found to improve 
diuresis, to relieve oedema, and to cause an 
overall improvement of the patient, including a 
decrease in albuminuria, rise in serum protein 
and fall in serum cholesterol level. 
A decoction of the leaves and the fresh juice 
both produced a significant analgesic effect in 
tests with rats, but the fresh juice raised the 
pain threshold for much longer than the leaf 
decoction. The alcoholic extract showed anti-
inflammatory effects against carrageenan-
induced paw oedema and also increased uri-
nary output in rats. 
In tests with mice, the alkaloidal fraction of the 
roots inhibited hypersensitivity reactions. Ex-
tracts of the whole plant exhibited various 
pharmacological effects including hepatopro-
tective, anticonvulsant, hypotensive, myocar-
dial depressant, and skeleton and smooth mus-
cle stimulant activities in rats. No teratogenic 
effects have been detected in pregnant rats. 
The root extract showed noticeable reduction of 
the duration of menstrual flow and iron loss in 
monkeys. The results of tests with rats suggest 
that a leaf extract has significant antidiabetic 
activity. The ethanolic extract of the aerial 
parts showed protection of guinea pigs with 
histamine-induced asthma. An ethanolic ex-
tract of the roots showed in-vitro and in-vivo 
antitumour activity. Additionally, extracts 
showed antiviral, antifungal and allelopathic 
activities. 
In-vitro root cultures were established from 
leaf segments of Boerhavia diffusa. Roots 
formed with 0.5 uM IAA contained 15% punar-
navine on dry weight basis, while roots formed 
with higher concentrations of IAA contained 
less of the compound. In the presence of 2,4-D, 
leaf segments produced callus with regener-
ated roots, containing traces of punarnavine. 
The nutritional composition of the leaves per 
100 g edible portion is: water 82 g, energy 217 
kJ (52 kcal), protein 4.5 g, fat 0.5 g, carbohy-
drate 10.3 g, fibre 2.2 g. 
Adulterations and substitutes Other spe-
cies of Boerhavia, and also Trianthema portu-
BOERHAVIA 119 
lacastrum L. (Aizoaceae) are sometimes used as 
a diuretic in the same way as Boerhavia dif-
fusa. 
Description Annual to perennial herb up to 
1 m tall, sometimes with thick taproot; stem 
branching mainly from the base, prostrate 
when young, ascending to erect when flower-
ing, fleshy, green, often flushed with red, gla-
brescent to short or long hairy with multicellu-
lar hairs, often glandular, especially around 
the swollen nodes. Leaves opposite, simple, 
unequal; stipules absent; petiole l-2.5(-3.5) cm 
long; blade broadly ovate to elliptical, 1.5-6 cm 
x 0.5-5 cm, base obtuse, cordate or truncate, 
apex acute to obtuse, margins sinuate, pale 
green to whitish beneath, sometimes with red 
marginal glands. Inflorescence an axillary, 
small, often congested irregular umbel, (1—)3-
5(-7)-flowered, aggregated in a large diffuse 
panicle up to 40(-60) cm long, by reduction of 
leaves appearing terminal, elongating greatly 
after start of flowering; bracts and bracteoles 
small, fimbriate, caducous. Flowers bisexual, 
regular; pedicel up to 1 mm long; perianth tu-
bular-campanulate, distinctly constricted half-
way, lower part obconical, surrounding the 
ovary, 5-ribbed, green, upper part 5-lobed, 0.5— 
Boerhavia diffusa - 1, flowering and fruiting 
stem; 2, root. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
1.5 mm x 2 mm, red or purple, soon falling; 
stamens l(-3), slightly exserted; ovary supe-
rior, seemingly inferior, 1-celled, style slightly 
exserted, stigma head-shaped. Fruit an achene 
enclosed by the thickened lower part of peri-
anth (collectively called anthocarp); anthocarp 
obconical or club-shaped, (2.5-)3-3.5 mm x 1-
1.5 mm, apex rounded, 5-ribbed, with rounded 
ribs, with glandular hairs, 1-seeded. Seed obo-
void, pale brown. Seedling with epigeal germi-
nation; hypocotyl well developed; cotyledons 
rounded, with distinct midvein; first leaves 
alternate, shortly hairy, purplish beneath. 
Other botanical information Boerhavia 
comprises 5-20 species, depending on the spe-
cies concept, and includes several variable pan-
tropical weeds with complex nomenclatural 
histories. Two views have been taken on the 
application of the name Boerhavia diffusa: a 
broad view regarding several Boerhavia taxa 
(including Boerhavia repens L. and Boerhavia 
coccinea Mill.) as a single very variable species, 
and a restricted concept in which Boerhavia 
diffusa is applied to the taxon with an appar-
ently terminal panicle. This last view is fol-
lowed here, but this implies that some of the 
literature in which the name Boerhavia diffusa 
is used may refer to other species. 
Growth and development Boerhavia dif-
fusa can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year, when sufficient water is 
available. The first flowers may appear 4 
weeks after germination of the seeds. 
Ecology Boerhavia diffusa occurs in ruderal 
localities and along roadsides, preferring sunny 
sites and a slightly seasonal climate, from sea-
level up to 1200 m altitude. It is often a weed 
in cultivated land, usually on sandy soils, and 
is also found in lawns and grazing pasture. 
Propagation and planting Boerhavia dif-
fusa is propagated by seed, which germinates 
with the start of the first rains and continues 
to germinate throughout the rainy season. 
When the soil of arable fields is turned, pieces 
of root can sprout as well. Well-drained soils 
and sunny conditions are required. The mucous 
coat of the anthocarp shows a distinct sticky 
swelling when ripe, with which it clings to 
mammals and birds. Boerhavia diffusa has 
been successfully propagated by in-vitro induc-
tion of adventitious roots on stem expiants, leaf 
or shoot tip cultures. 
Management Boerhavia diffusa is a weed of 
cultivated land and wasteland, often in lawns 
in drier areas. Although common, it is not a 
weed of importance. After mechanical cultiva-
120 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tion the plant resprouts from its roots but rela-
tively few cult ivations are needed to exhaus t it. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s In India several host-
specific diseases have been identified on Boer-
havia diffusa, i.e. Cercospora diffusa causing 
chlorotic leaf spots, and Colletotrichum boerha-
viae causing brown necrotic spots. Also in India 
Boerhavia diffusa is recorded as a host for the 
virus causing aubergine mosaic disease (EMV), 
and in Costa Rica as a host of zucchini yellow 
mosaic potyvirus (ZYMV). In Cameroon Boer-
havia diffusa is an a l ternat ive host for the cot-
ton aphid (Aphis gossypii), and in Nigeria cat-
erpil lars of Aegocera rectilinea and Hippotion 
celerio were found feeding almost solely on 
Boerhavia diffusa. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The harves ted 
pa r t s of Boerhavia diffusa a re often used fresh, 
except for the roots, which may be dried in the 
sun for la ter use. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Boerhavia diffusa has a 
large a rea of distribution, often as a weed, and 
is not a t r isk of genetic erosion. There seems to 
be a geographical variat ion in the composition 
of pharmacological compounds, and more re-
search is needed in order to evaluate the most 
promising populat ions. There are no known 
breeding programmes of Boerhavia diffusa. 
P r o s p e c t s Various extracts and purified 
compounds from Boerhavia diffusa show a 
range of pharmacological effects (in vitro and 
in vivo), e.g. diuretic, ant i - inf lammatory and 
hepatoprotective activities. Few clinical data , 
however, are available and th is mer i ts further 
research in order to fully eva lua te its potent ial 
for future medicinal use. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1997; Chandan, 
S h a r m a & Anand, 2004; Gilbert, 2000a; Hi-
ruma-Lima et al., 2000; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Noba & Ba, 1992; Rawat et al., 1997; Sa theesh 
& Pari , 2004; Slamet Su tan t i Budi Rahayu, 
2001a; Whitehouse, 1996. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Abo & Ashidi, 1999; 
Agrawal et al., 2004; Amoako, 1991; Berhaut , 
1979; Edeoga & Ikem, 2002; Gupta & Ali, 1998; 
Kibungo Kembelo, 2004; Lami, Kadota & Kiku-
chi, 1991; La tham, 2004; Leung, Busson & 
Ja rd in , 1968; Mehro t ra et a l , 2002a; Mehro t ra 
et a l , 2002b; Mungan t iwar et a l , 1999; Par i & 
Amarna th , 2004a; Par i & Amarna th , 2004b; 
Shr ivas tava & Padhya , 1995; Singh et al., 
1991; Smith et a l , 1996; Thulin, 1993c; von 
Koenen, 2001. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Adjanohoun et al. 
(Editors), 1982. 
A u t h o r s M. Muzila 
BOERHAVIA ERECTA L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pi. 1: 3 (1753). 
F a m i l y Nyctaginaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 52 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Tar vine, erect spider-
ling (En). Mkwakwara (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Boer-
havia erecta originates from the New World 
but now has a pantropical distr ibution. It oc-
curs throughout the regions of tropical Africa 
with a distinct dry season, from West Africa 
east to Somalia and south to South Africa. It is 
a recent introduction in Réunion. 
U s e s Boerhavia erecta h a s similar propert ies 
to Boerhavia diffusa L., and the root is applied 
in India especially as a diuretic, bu t also as a 
stomachic, cardiotonic, hepatoprotective, laxa-
tive, anthelmint ic , febrifuge, expectorant and, 
in higher doses, as an emetic and purgat ive. As 
a diuretic it is useful in cases of s t rangury, 
jaundice, enlarged spleen, gonorrhoea and 
other in terna l inf lammations. In moderate 
doses it is successful in t r ea tmen t of a s thma . 
In Mali a decoction of the whole plant is t aken 
to t r ea t gastro-intest inal , liver and infertility 
problems, while a pas te of the roots is rubbed 
on abscesses and ulcers to r ipen them. In Niger 
ash of the whole p lan t is rubbed on the skin of 
the head against fungal infections. In Benin a 
decoction of the whole p lan t is t aken to t rea t 
convulsions in children. In southern Sudan the 
roots are used in a prepara t ion for t r ea t ing the 
s tump of a newly severed umbilical cord. Neo-
na ta l t e t a n u s is relatively prevalent in t h a t 
a rea and th is p lan t is suspected of being a ve-
hicle for the infection. In Kenya the leaves are 
crushed in wate r and the extract t aken to t r ea t 
diarrhoea. In Tanzan ia the ash of the ent i re 
p lan t is mixed with oil and rubbed on to t rea t 
r h e u m a t i s m and scabies. The dried root is 
powdered and added to local beer as an aphro-
disiac. Sap from the leaves is squeezed into the 
eye to t r ea t conjunctivitis. 
In West and Eas t Africa t he leaves a re some-
t imes ea ten as a vegetable or used for the 
prepara t ion of sauces. Catt le in the Sahel graze 
the p lan t before the inflorescences have devel-
oped. At th is stage it can be made into silage as 
well. In Benin Boerhavia erecta was found to be 
very pala table for rabbi ts . 
Product ion and international trade Boer-
havia erecta is used a t a local scale, except in 
India where especially the roots en ter in popu-
lar medicinal formulations. 
P r o p e r t i e s Despite the common medicinal 
BOERHAVIA 121 
uses of Boerhavia erecta throughout its distri-
bution area, information on its properties is 
scarce. As it is credited with similar medicinal 
uses to Boerhavia diffusa, it is likely to contain 
similar compounds such as the alkaloid punar-
navine. The ethanol extract of the aerial parts 
showed strong larvicidal effect on the tick 
Boophilus microplus. 
Botany Annual to short-lived perennial herb 
up 1 m tall, sometimes with a thick taproot; 
stem branching mainly from the base, ascend-
ing to erect, fleshy, green, often flushed with 
red, lower parts thinly hairy, upper parts gla-
brous, nodes swollen. Leaves opposite, simple, 
about equal; stipules absent; petiole 1—3.5(-4) 
cm long; blade broadly lanceolate to ovate, 2.5-
4.5(-8) cm x 1.5-2.5(-6.5) cm, base rounded to 
truncate, apex rounded to acute, margins sinu-
ate, pale green to whitish beneath, sometimes 
with red marginal glands. Inflorescence an 
axillary, small, often congested umbel, ( l - )4-
5(-6)-flowered, aggregated in a diffuse panicle 
up to 30 cm x 20 cm, by reduction of leaves 
appearing terminal, elongating after start of 
flowering; bracts and bracteoles small, cadu-
cous. Flowers bisexual, regular; pedicel 1-3 
mm long; perianth tubular-campanulate, dis-
tinctly constricted halfway, lower part obconi-
cal, surrounding the ovary, 5-ribbed, green, 
upper part 5-lobed, 1-1.5 mm x 2 mm, lobes 
emarginate, white to pale pink or dotted with 
red, soon falling; stamens 2(-3), slightly ex-
serted; ovary superior, seemingly inferior, 1-
celled, style slightly exserted, stigma head-
shaped. Fruit an achene enclosed by the thick-
ened lower part of perianth (collectively called 
anthocarp); anthocarp obconical or club-
shaped, 3-4 mm x 1.5-2 mm apex truncate, 
sharply 5-ribbed, with glabrous ribs, 1-seeded. 
Seed obovoid, pale brown. Seedling with 
epigeal germination; hypocotyl well developed, 
shortly hairy; cotyledons rounded, with distinct 
midvein; first leaves alternate, shortly hairy, 
purplish beneath. 
Boerhavia comprises 5-20 species depending 
on the species concept, and includes several 
variable pantropical weeds with complex no-
menclatural histories. Boerhavia erecta is 
propagated by seed. The mucous coat of the 
anthocarp shows a distinct sticky swelling 
when ripe, with which it clings to mammals 
and birds for wide dispersal. Boerhavia erecta 
can be found flowering and fruiting throughout 
the year, when sufficient water is available. 
Under favourable conditions, flowering starts 2 
weeks after germination and the first seeds 
ripen 2 weeks later. A well-developed Boerha-
via erecta plant can form 20,000-30,000 seeds 
per year. 
Ecology Boerhavia erecta occurs in open 
bushland, on waste ground, in agricultural 
land and along roadsides, up to 1500(-2500) m 
altitude, usually on sandy or rocky soils. It 
prefers sunny localities and a seasonal climate 
with a pronounced dry season. 
Management Boerhavia erecta grows well 
in irrigated arable land. It is a common weed in 
several annual and perennial crops, but causes 
little damage. It is easily controlled by various 
chemical herbicides and repeated mechanical 
cultivation. The harvested parts of Boerhavia 
erecta are often used fresh, except for the roots, 
which may be dried in the sun for later use. 
Genetic resources and breeding Boerha-
via erecta has a large area of distribution and 
occurs in disturbed habitats, and is therefore 
not at risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Boerhavia erecta has a wide 
range of medicinal uses similar to those of its 
better-known relative Boerhavia diffusa, but 
research is needed to elucidate its pharmacol-
ogical properties and its compounds responsi-
ble for the activities. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1979; 
Berhaut, 1979; Burkill, 1997; Gilbert, 2000a; 
Slamet Sutanti Budi Rahayu, 2001a. 
Other references Adehan et al., 1994; Ad-
janohoun et al., 1989; Adjanohoun et al., 1985; 
Edeoga & Ikem, 2002; Geissler et al., 2002; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Noba & Ba, 1992; Stintzing 
et al., 2004; Thulin, 1993c; Whitehouse, 1996. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
BOERHAVIA REPENS L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 3 (1753). 
Family Nyctaginaceae 
Chromosome number n = 52 
Vernacular names Creeping spiderling 
(En). Trevinha (Po). Mkwayakwaya (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Boer-
havia repens has a pantropical distribution, 
and possibly originates from the Old World. It 
occurs throughout Africa, including the Medi-
terranean countries and South Africa, and is 
especially common in regions with a distinct 
dry season. 
Uses Boerhavia repens is considered to have 
similar properties to Boerhavia diffusa L., and 
the root is applied in India especially as a diu-
retic, but also as a stomachic, cardiotonic, 
122 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
hepatoprotective, laxative, anthelmintic, febri-
fuge, expectorant and, in higher doses, as an 
emetic and purgative. In West Africa decoc-
tions of the roots and leaves of Boerhavia re-
pens are taken in moderate doses to cure 
asthma, and in larger doses as an emetic, diu-
retic and laxative and to cure leprosy and 
syphilis. The roots are boiled and applied as a 
poultice to cure ulcers, including those result-
ing from guinea-worm infections, while ground 
roots are applied to yaws. The ground roots 
mixed with ground seeds of Blighia sapida 
K.D.Koenig are applied to the body to cure 
chicken pox. An infusion of the whole plant is 
taken to cure convulsions and amenorrhoea. 
The Yoruba people of Nigeria give an infusion 
as a mild laxative and febrifuge to children. 
The pounded plant is applied externally 
against dropsy. An infusion of the leaves is 
taken as an abortifacient, ecbolic and to cure 
jaundice, and the whole plant is pulped for 
poulticing sprains. In Central Africa a root 
decoction is taken as an aphrodisiac or to cure 
stomach-ache, while root sap is used as eye 
drops to treat filaria infection. In Nigeria 
Boerhavia repens is preferred over Boerhavia 
diffusa and Boerhavia erecta L. because it is 
considered the most effective. 
In West Africa the leaves are sometimes pre-
pared in a sauce as a vegetable, and the seeds 
are added to cereals or other food in Senegal 
and Mali. In Nigeria the root is added to cake 
and the Hausa people eat the plant as a cure 
for faintness due to hunger. The leafy stems 
are widely eaten by sheep and cattle, and may 
also be cut as a fodder. 
Production and international trade Boer-
havia repens is used at a local scale, except in 
India where the plant enters into popular me-
dicinal formulations, in the same way as Boer-
havia diffusa and Boerhavia erecta. 
Properties All plant parts of Boerhavia 
repens contain flavonoid glycosides and the 
alkaloid punarnavine. A methanol extract of 
the entire plant inhibited bone resorption in-
duced by parathyroid hormone in mouse bone 
tissue culture; some flavonoid glycosides were 
isolated as active compounds. 
Botany Annual to perennial, prostrate or 
straggling herb, with stems up to 60 cm long, 
with a slender taproot; stem few- to much-
branched, fleshy, green, often flushed with red, 
finely hairy or glabrescent, nodes swollen. 
Leaves opposite, simple, unequal; stipules ab-
sent; petiole 0.5-1.5 cm long; blade broadly 
ovate to elliptical, 1—2.5 cm x 0.5—1.5 cm, base 
cuneate, rounded or truncate, apex rounded to 
acute, margins sinuate, pale green to whitish 
beneath, finely hairy, glandular hairy or gla-
brescent. Inflorescence an axillary, congested, 
irregular umbel or cyme, (3—)5—7(—13)-
flowered; peduncle (2—)4—7 cm long; bracts and 
bracteoles small, fimbriate, caducous. Flowers 
bisexual, regular; pedicel (0—)1—1.5 mm long; 
perianth tubular-campanulate, distinctly con-
stricted halfway, lower part ellipsoid, sur-
rounding the ovary, 5-ribbed, green, upper part 
5-lobed, up to 3.5 mm x 3 mm, lobes emargi-
nate, white, pink or mauve, soon falling; sta-
mens (1—)2(—3), slightly exserted; ovary supe-
rior, seemingly inferior, 1-celled, styie slightly 
exserted, stigma head-shaped. Fruit an achene 
enclosed by the thickened lower part of peri-
anth (collectively called anthocarp); anthocarp 
obovoid to ellipsoid, 3-3.5 mm x 1.5-2 mm, 
apex rounded, 5-ribbed, with rounded ribs, 
with glandular hairs all over, 1-seeded. Seed 
ovoid, pale brown. Seedling with epigeal ger-
mination. 
Boerhavia comprises 5-20 species, depending 
on the species concept, and includes several 
variable pantropical weeds with complex no-
menclatural histories. 
In West Africa the leaf pulp of Boerhavia coc-
cinea Mill., which is related to Boerhavia re-
pens, mixed with peanut oil is burnt and the 
smoke inhaled to calm toothache. An infusion 
of the root is taken to treat liver problems. In 
Nigeria the roots are ground with other herbs 
and taken in water as a vermifuge. The leaves 
are sometimes cooked and eaten as a potherb. 
The nomads of the Sahara cook the protein-
rich seeds in a soup. 
Boerhavia repens can be found flowering and 
fruiting throughout the year, when sufficient 
water is available. 
Ecology Boerhavia repens occurs in dis-
turbed sandy and rocky localities, often in oc-
casionally inundated areas, such as ditches 
along roadsides, dry river beds, flood plains 
and irrigated fields, up to 1600(-1900) m alti-
tude. Boerhavia repens prefers sunny sites and 
a seasonal climate with a pronounced dry sea-
son. 
Management The harvested parts of Boer-
havia repens are often used fresh, except for 
the roots, which may be dried in the sun for 
later use. 
Genetic resources and breeding Boerha-
via repens has a large area of distribution and 
occurs in disturbed habitats, and is therefore 
not at risk of genetic erosion. 
BRIDELIA 123 
Prospects Boerhavia repens has similar 
medicinal uses to its better-known relative 
Boerhavia diffusa, but more research is needed 
to elucidate its chemistry and pharmacological 
activities. 
Major references Abbiw, 1990; Ayensu, 
1978; Gilbert, 2000a; Li et al., 1996; Neu-
winger, 2000. 
Other references Berhaut, 1979; Burkill, 
1997; Codd, 1966; Le Bourgeois & Merlier, 
1995; Noba & Ba, 1992; Philcox & Coode, 1994; 
Thulin, 1993c; Whitehouse, 1996. 
Authors M. Muzila 
BRIDELIA ATROVIRIDIS Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 2: 327 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number n = 13 
Vernacular names West African hardwood, 
Yoruba ironwood, fever leaf (En). Mkarati (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Bride-
lia atroviridis occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
Ethiopia and south to Angola and Mozam-
bique. 
Uses Throughout West Africa a bark infu-
sion or maceration is drunk as a purgative and 
diuretic, to treat urethral discharges, fever, 
abdominal pain, dysentery, diarrhoea and 
rheumatic pain. The bark infusion is also used 
as a mouth wash to treat thrush in children 
and as an aphrodisiac. The leaves are also pur-
gative and sudorific, and are taken in decoction 
to treat diarrhoea and fever. The leaf infusion 
is also used for bathing and as vapour baths. In 
DR Congo a bark macerate or decoction of bark 
Bridelia atroviridis - wild 
scrapings is taken to treat cough, asthma and 
venereal diseases. The mouth is rinsed with a 
twig or root bark maceration to treat caries. 
In Nigeria, DR Congo and Uganda the leaves 
are used as food for African silkworm larvae 
(Anaphe spp.). The wood is used in house build-
ing, for tool handles and wooden spoons, and as 
fuelwood. In southern Nigeria the seeds are 
reported to be eaten. The roots are used as 
chew sticks. In Togo the bark is used to pro-
duce dyes of different colours, using various 
mordants to achieve the desired colour. 
Production and international trade In Ni-
geria the bark of Bridelia atroviridis is sold in 
markets in the form of pale soft pieces with 
weak prickles. The bark from all Bridelia spp. 
has similar medicinal uses in West Africa. In 
Nigeria 1 kg of bark is sold for US$ 1.30-1.50, 
and between 1999 and 2003 the estimated 
value of marketed Bridelia bark was c. US$ 
146,000. Regional trade values are not known, 
but considerable amounts of bark are trans-
ported. 
Properties Bridelia atroviridis contains 
triterpenes, flavonoids and tannins, but the 
exact chemical composition has not been de-
termined. The total tannin content of the bark 
is about 31%. 
The methanol extract of the root showed toxic-
ity to the freshwater snail Bulinus globosus 
and also reduced the number of eggs laid. The 
extract showed moderate toxicity to the fresh-
water snails Biomphalaria glabrata and Ar-
chachatina marginata. The alcohol extract of 
different plant parts showed depressive effects 
on mitotic division in onion (Allium cepa L.). A 
lyophilized leaf decoction caused a decrease of 
arterial pressure and a decrease of heart rate 
in rats. The extract did not appear to interact 
with adrenergic receptors or with cholinergic 
receptors and might act through potential-
dependent calcium channels. 
The aqueous leaf extract induced contractions 
of the isolated rat uterus in a dose-dependent 
manner. 
The heartwood is dark brown, very hard and 
durable. 
Adulterations and substitutes In West 
Africa the bark of all Bridelia spp. is used and 
traded in a similar way as that of Bridelia 
atroviridis. 
Description Deciduous, much-branched, 
monoecious shrub or tree up to 12(-20) m tall; 
bole up to 45 cm in diameter; bark pale grey, 
smooth or rough; branches spiny, twigs brown 
to dark purplish brown, young shoots shortly 
124 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
v ^ 
Bridelia atroviridis - 1, part of male flowering 
branch; 2, male flower; 3, female flower; 4, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
hairy to glabrous. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules narrowly lanceolate, 3-8 mm 
long, acuminate, soon falling; petiole 2-8 mm 
long, shortly hairy; blade elliptical to oblanceo-
late, (2-)6-12(-22) cm x (l-)3-10 cm, base 
rounded to cuneate or almost truncate, apex 
acuminate, membranous, sparingly shortly 
hairy along the midvein, pinnately veined, with 
10-22 pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an 
axillary fascicle; bracts ovate, acute, keeled, 
shortly hairy. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-
merous; pedicel 1-2 mm long; sepals ovate to 
triangular, c. 2 mm long, acuminate, greenish 
or pink to reddish; male flowers with obtrian-
gular, spoon-shaped petals, c. 0.5 mm long, 
irregularly toothed in upper half, disk annular, 
entire, glabrous, staminal column c. 1 mm long, 
anthers c. 1 mm long, rudimentary pistil flask-
shaped, c. 1 mm long, apex 2-fid; female flower 
with elliptical to rhombic petals c. 1 mm long, 
almost entire, shortly hairy, disk 3-lobed, lobes 
triangular, c. 1 mm long, toothed at apex, ovary 
superior, ovoid, 2-celled, styles 2, c. 1 mm long, 
stigma 2-fid. Fruit a small, ovoid drupe 6-8 
mm x 5-6 mm, 1-celled by abortion, indéhis-
cent, greenish, ripening blackish, smooth be-
coming rough when dry; pyrene c. 4 mm long, 
smooth, shiny, chestnut-brown, 1-seeded. 
Other botanical information Bridelia is 
paleotropical and comprises about 50 species, 
of which about 15 species occur in tropical Af-
rica and 3 in Madagascar. Most Bridelia spp. 
in Africa have medicinal uses, but they are 
more important for their fruit, timber or fuel. 
Bridelia brideliifolia (Pax) Fedde occurs at 
higher altitudes in DR Congo, Rwanda, Bu-
rundi, Uganda, Tanzania and Malawi and is 
only used for medicinal purposes. In DR Congo 
the crushed stem bark or root bark in water is 
given as an enema or taken orally as a purga-
tive to treat intestinal worms. To stimulate 
digestion the root and twig powder is sniffed. 
The sap of leafy twigs is drunk to treat ele-
phantiasis. A leaf decoction is used as an en-
ema to hasten childbirth. An infusion of the 
twig bark or a leaf and root maceration is 
taken to treat insanity. In DR Congo and Tan-
zania leaf powder or cooked roots with chicken 
is eaten or leaf sap is used as an enema to treat 
female infertility. In Rwanda a leaf extract is 
drunk to treat gastro-intestinal problems, gas-
tric ulcers and migraine. A leaf or bark decoc-
tion of Bridelia ripicola J.Léonard, endemic to 
DR Congo, is taken as a purgative to treat 
stomach-ache, diarrhoea, liver problems and 
also to treat female sterility. The crushed bark 
is used to colour pottery red. A leafy stem de-
coction of Bridelia pervilleana Baill., endemic 
to Madagascar, is taken to treat syphilis. 
Growth and development In Benin Bride-
lia atroviridis fruits from August to November. 
Ecology Bridelia atroviridis occurs in sec-
ondary forest, forest edges, associated bush-
land and thickets, also near lakes and rivers, 
from sea-level up to 1700 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Bridelia atro-
viridis is propagated by seed. Mature seeds are 
dried and stored in air-tight containers at room 
temperature. Two to three weeks after planting 
the germination rate is 50-60%. Propagation 
by stem cuttings is possible. 
Management Bridelia atroviridis stands 
occur only in the wild; it has not been domesti-
cated or planted on a large scale. Some wild 
populations are protected from destruction by 
annual bush fires through weeding, but further 
information on cultivation and management is 
lacking. 
Harvesting Bark and fresh leaves are regu-
larly harvested for medicinal preparations and 
roots for use as chew stick. Bark pieces are 
peeled off the bole and bark strips are removed 
BRUCEA 125 
from branches throughout the year. Roots are 
harves ted especially dur ing the ra iny season 
when the ground is soft for digging. Harves t ing 
activities are locally done in a sus ta inable way, 
ensur ing t h a t the t rees are not killed. The 
fruits or seeds a re rare ly collected. 
H a n d l i n g a f t e r h a r v e s t The harves ted 
bark and roots are thoroughly sun dried for 3-4 
days. After drying, the mater ia ls a re packed in 
ju te bags and stored unt i l they can be t aken to 
the marke t s . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s In West Africa Bridelia 
atroviridis is widely harvested for i ts bark and 
for firewood production. Although some wild 
populat ions are more or less protected from 
bush fires, the n u m b e r s are diminishing and 
the genetic diversity could become th rea tened 
in the future. 
P r o s p e c t s The ba rk of Bridelia atroviridis is 
widely used for medicinal purposes and is sold 
in local marke t s . Although some pharmacologi-
cal tes ts have been done, vir tually nothing is 
known on the chemical composition. More phy-
tochemical and pharmacological research is 
needed to evaluate the potent ial of the species. 
Silvicultural s tudies are needed to promote its 
domestication and develop managemen t tech-
niques. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Adebisi & Ladipo, 2000; 
Adebisi, Ladipo & Oyeleke, 2003; Adewunmi, 
Segun & Ashaolu, 1983; Burkill , 1994; Corallo 
et al., 1997; Corallo et al., 1991; Neuwinger, 
2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Chifundera, 2001; Ene Obong, Nwofia & 
Okunji, 2001; Léonard, 1962. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Car ter & Radcliffe-
Smith, 1988. 
A u t h o r s A.A. Adebisi & D.O. Ladipo 
BRUCEA ANTIDYSENTERICA J .F .Mll l . 
P r o t o l o g u e Icon. anim. plant . 5: t. 25 
(1779). 
F a m i l y Simaroubaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Brucea 
antidysenterica occurs widely in tropical Africa, 
from Guinea and Nigeria east to Ethiopia and 
south to Angola, Malawi and Zambia. 
U s e s As its n a m e suggests, Brucea anti-
dysenterica is of value in t radi t ional medicine 
for the t r ea tmen t of dysentery. The bark, fruit 
and roots are widely used agains t dysentery, as 
an anthelmint ic and to t r e a t fever. The bark, 
fruit, seeds, leaves and roots (sometimes 
Brucea antidy senterica - wild 
boiled) are used as a remedy for diarrhoea, 
indigestion and stomach-ache. The leaves and 
roots are cooked with meat , or infused with 
milk (for children) to relieve a s thma . 
Wounds and skin complaints, such as those 
caused by leprosy and scrofula, are t rea ted 
wi th o in tments made from the leaves and twigs 
mixed with ghee or but te r , or from the ripe 
fruits mixed with honey. Prepara t ions of the 
roots are used on sores caused by sexually 
t r ansmi t t ed diseases, while t he leaves and 
seeds are used to t r ea t cancerous skin tumours . 
The fruits, leaves and twigs are also used in 
e thnoveter inary medicine on skin galls and 
sores, and the powdered leaves to relieve bloat-
ing and colic in catt le. The roots are used to 
t r ea t rabies. 
In Er i t rea the wood is used as firewood and for 
roof construction. 
P r o p e r t i e s The potent ant icancer propert ies 
shown by extracts of Brucea antidy senterica 
have a t t rac ted much research a t tent ion in re-
cent decades. I ts bioactivity is a t t r ibuted to the 
presence of quassinoid and canth in alkaloids. 
Quassinoid compounds known as bruceolides, 
notably bruceant in and bruceanic acids, have 
been isolated from the leaves and s tem bark . 
Bruceant in h a s shown ant icancer activity 
agains t B16 melanoma, colon 38, and L1210 
and P388 leukaemia in mice. However, in sub-
sequent clinical t r ia ls no objective tumour re-
gressions were observed and clinical develop-
ment was te rmina ted . Recently, the activity of 
bruceant in was s tudied with a number of leu-
kaemia, lymphoma and myeloma cell lines. 
T rea tmen t of HL-60 and RPMI 8226 cell l ines 
induced apoptosis involving the caspase and 
126 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mitochondrial pathways. An in-vivo study us-
ing RPMI 8226 human-SCID xenografts dem-
onstrated bruceantin-induced regression in 
early as well as advanced tumours; these re-
sponses were facilitated in the absence of overt 
toxicity. In addition to their antineoplastic ac-
tivity, many bruceolides present in Brucea 
antidysenterica are highly effective against 
Entamoeba histolytica (ICso of bruceantin = 
0.018 ug/ml), and the malaria parasite Plas-
modium falciparum (ICso of bruceantin -
0.0008 ug/ml). Root extracts are reportedly 
active against Plasmodium gallinaceum in 
birds. Quassinoids from Brucea antidy senterica 
have exhibited weak anti-tuberculosis activity 
in vitro, whilst their anti-HIV potential is 
marred by high cytotoxicity. 
Quassinoids are characteristic of the Simarou-
baceae; they give the bark of Brucea anti-
dysenterica a distinctive bitter taste 
Canthin alkaloids, present in the root bark of 
Brucea antidy senterica, have anticancer and 
antimicrobial properties. Some of them have 
been produced by cell suspension cultures of 
Brucea antidy senterica. 
The fruit is bitter and reportedly toxic to live-
stock, especially sheep. It contains about 22% 
oil. A yellow dye in the fruit endocarp is non-
soluble in water. Crystals of calcium oxalate 
are present in the bark, leaves and roots. 
Description Monoecious shrub or small tree 
up to (7—)10(—15) m tall, sometimes branching 
from the base; bark grey to grey-brown with 
heart-shaped leaf-scars; young stems terete, 
with red-brown hairs. Leaves alternate, usu-
ally crowded at the end of younger twigs, 10-65 
cm long, imparipinnately compound with 2—6 
pairs of leaflets; stipules absent; petiole up to 
15 cm long, with red-brown hairs; petiolules 1— 
9 mm long, up to 35 mm on terminal leaflet; 
leaflets narrowly oblong to narrowly ovate, 3 -
18 cm x 1.5—8 cm, base asymmetric and 
rounded, apex pointed, glossy dark to pale 
green, with red-brown hairs. Inflorescence an 
axillary, erect, red-brown hairy panicle 5-35 
cm long, male and female flowers in separate 
inflorescences in compact clusters. Flowers 
unisexual, regular, (3-)4(-5)-merous; pedicel 
1—8 mm long; sepals almost free, oblong to 
ovate, 2-3 mm x c. 1.5 mm, acute, pale green, 
red-brown hairy; petals oblong to ovate, 1.5—3 
mm x 1—1.5 mm, pale green, red-brown hairy 
outside; male flowers with white to pale yellow 
stamens; female flowers with 4-5 carpels free 
or joined at base, c. 1-2.5 mm x 1—3 mm, some-
times hairy, stigmas c. 1 mm long, free, bent 
Brucea antidy senterica - flowering branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
outwards in a cruciform arrangement. Fruit 
composed of 1-4 drupe-like ellipsoid mericarps, 
9-14 mm x 6-8 mm, apex pointed, shiny pale 
green, ripening yellow-orange to dark red, each 
mericarp 1-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 8—9 mm x 5-6 
mm, apex pointed, pale brown, with a large red 
to dark-brown spot. 
Other botanical information Brucea com-
prises 6 species in the Old World tropics, of 
which 5 occur naturally in tropical Africa. 
Brucea javanica (L.) Merr. has been introduced 
in DR Congo for its medicinal properties, which 
are similar to those of Brucea antidy senterica. 
It is found near villages and has become natu-
ralized. The West African lowland species 
Brucea guineensis G.Don is reported to be 
threatened as a result of medicinal use. No 
details on its use are documented, but brucean-
tin and several other quassinoids have been 
isolated from the stem bark. 
Growth and development Vegetative 
growth, flowering and fruiting of Brucea anti-
dysenterica continue throughout the year, even 
in the dry season. 
Ecology Brucea antidy senterica occurs in 
montane forests, in forest margins and com-
monly in secondary vegetation. It is found at 
altitudes of 1000-3700 m, but most frequently 
at 1750-2500 m altitude. 
BULBINE 127 
Propagation and planting Brucea anti-
dysenterica can be readily propagated from 
seed and is sown on site. An alternative 
method of propagation is transplanting wild-
lings. Seed can be stored at room temperature 
for over a year. 
Diseases and pests Brucea antidysenterica 
has been recorded as a host plant of the Medi-
terranean fruit fly, a major pest of the fruit 
industry. 
Genetic resources Brucea antidy senterica 
is widely distributed and no threats to its ge-
netic variability are envisaged. If demand for 
the bark increases, it will be worthwhile closely 
monitoring its status and taking protective 
measures against non-sustainable use, includ-
ing domestication. 
Prospects Bruceantin and related com-
pounds have shown very promising anti-cancer 
effects. Their potency warrants further investi-
gation as promising candidates for drug devel-
opment. Bruceantin has yet to be produced 
synthetically. Protocols have been established 
for the in-vitro production of bioactive alkaloids 
and quassinoids from cell suspension cultures 
of Brucea javanica and there is potential for 
similar protocols using Brucea antidy senterica. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Dale & 
Greenway, 1961; Gillin, Reiner & Suffness, 
1982; Jansen, 1981; Kokwaro, 1993; Kupchan 
et a l , 1975; Rahman et al., 1997; Roberts, 
1994; Stannard, 2000; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Abebe & Hagos, 1991; 
Arbayah H. Siregar, 1999; Arisawa et al., 1983; 
Aubréville, 1959a; Chiu, Govindan & Fuchs, 
1994; Cuendet & Pezzuto, 2004; Fernando, 
Gadek & Quinn, 1995; Fong et a l , 1980; Fu-
kamiya et al., 1987; Guru et al., 1983; Harris et 
al., 1985; Kupchan et al., 1973; Lemordant, 
1971; Misawa, Hayashi & Takayama, 1985; 
Murakami et al., 2004; Odojo et al., 1981; 
Okano et al., 1996; O'Neill et a l , 1986; Simâo 
et a l , 1991; Thomas et al., 2005. 
Sources of illustration Wild & Phipps, 
1963. 
Authors O.M. Grace & D.G. Fowler 
BULBINE ABYSSINICA A.Rich. 
Protologue Tent. fl. abyss. 2: 334 (1851). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Bulbine 
abyssinica occurs from Congo to Ethiopia and 
southwards to South Africa. 
Uses In Botswana, South Africa and Lesotho 
fresh leaf sap of Bulbine abyssinica is applied 
to the skin to cure ringworm and rash. The sap 
is applied to wounds as a disinfectant and to 
promote healing. In Lesotho crushed leaves are 
used as a dressing for burns and leaf sap is 
applied to cracked lips. 
Properties Anthraquinones, phenylanthra-
quinones and isofuranonaphthoquinones have 
been isolated from the roots, leaves and fruits 
of Bulbine abyssinica. The phenylanthraqui-
none bulbine-knipholone has been isolated 
from the roots. This compound showed in-vitro 
antiplasmodial activity, and no cytotoxic effects 
on mammalian cells. 
Botany Tufted, perennial herb up to 70 cm 
tall, with short rhizome up to 1.5 cm x 1.5 cm. 
Leaves in a rosette, simple, erect to spreading, 
without stipules and petiole, terete or slightly 
flattened, up to 55 cm x 4 mm, fleshy, at base 
extending into a tubular sheath, old leaf bases 
persistent. Inflorescence a terminal raceme 3— 
18 cm long; peduncle up to 65 cm long; bracts 
5-20 mm long, with a sharp point, persistent. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel c. 
3 mm long at apex of inflorescence, c. 20 mm at 
basis of inflorescence; tepals 6, oblong, c. 6 mm 
x 2 mm, 1-veined, yellow; stamens 6, 3—4 mm 
long, densely bearded in upper third; ovary 
superior, 3-celled, style terete, stigma head-
shaped. Fruit a globose to obovoid capsule c. 5 
mm long, dehiscing loculicidally, brown to 
black, many-seeded. Seeds pyramidal, c. 3 mm 
in diameter, grey-black. 
Bulbine comprises about 60 species, most of 
them restricted to southern Africa. Bulbine 
asphodeloides (L.) Willd., native of Mozam-
bique, South Africa and Swaziland, has often 
been confused with Bulbine abyssinica and as 
their ranges overlap it is not always clear to 
which of the 2 species a medicinal use should 
be attributed. Leaf sap of Bulbine aspho-
deloides is applied to promote wound healing. 
A decoction of the rhizomes is drunk to cure 
scrophula, venereal diseases and diarrhoea. In 
southern Africa Bulbine abyssinica flowers in 
early summer. 
Ecology Bulbine abyssinica occurs in small 
colonies in dry bushland or grassland, often on 
shallow soil over rock at 600—2750 m altitude. 
Management Bulbine abyssinica is only 
harvested from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Bulbine 
abyssinica is widespread and therefore not 
seriously threatened by genetic erosion. In 
southern Africa, were the rhizomes are har-
128 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
vested and traded locally, measures should be 
considered to prevent overharvesting. 
Prospects The ethnobotanical information 
on Bulbine abyssinica is scarce and not specific 
and the identification of the species is often 
doubtful. The presence of pharmacologically 
interesting compounds in Bulbine abyssinica 
and many other Bulbine species warrants more 
research. 
Major references Bringmann et al., 1999; 
Bringmann et a l , 2002; Kativu, 2001; Majinda 
et al., 2001; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references van Jaarsveld & Forster, 
2001; Wanjohi et al., 2005; Whitehouse, 2002. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
BULBINE CAPITATA Poelln. 
Protologue Feddes Repert. 53: 37 (1944). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Bulbine 
capitata is native to Namibia, Botswana, Zim-
babwe, Swaziland, Lesotho and South Africa. 
Uses In Botswana a root decoction of Bul-
bine capitata is applied to the skin to cure 
rashes and sexually transmitted diseases. In 
Lesotho it is taken orally as a mild purgative 
and to cure gonorrhoea. 
Production and international trade In local 
markets in Botswana both roots and leaves of 
Bulbine capitata are sold for medicinal use. 
Properties Anthraquinones, phenylanthra-
quinones and isofuranonaphthoquinones have 
been isolated from the roots and leaves of Bul-
bine capitata. Several isofuranonaphthoqui-
nones from the roots showed antioxidant activ-
ity in a human lipoprotein oxidation assay, 
some of them with activity comparable to that 
of quercetin, a flavonoid with established anti-
oxidant activity. These compounds also demon-
strated weak antiplasmodial activities in vitro. 
Bulbine capitata is said to have antibiotic and 
antipyretic properties, but these remain un-
substantiated. 
Botany Tufted, perennial herb up to 45 cm 
tall, with rhizome up to 5 cm x 1 cm. Leaves in 
a basal rosette, simple, erect to arching, with-
out stipules and petiole, up to 25 cm x 2 mm, 
fleshy, at base extending into a tubular sheath, 
old leaf bases persistent. Inflorescence a termi-
nal, densely flowered raceme 2-15 cm long; 
peduncle up to 25 cm long; bracts ovate, 2-10 
mm long, auricled, persistent. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 3-merous; pedicel up to 20 mm 
long at flowering, 35 mm in fruit; tepals 6, ob-
long-ovate, c. 7 mm x 3 mm, 1-veined, yellow; 
stamens 6, c. 6 mm long, densely bearded in 
upper third; ovary superior, 3-celled, style 
terete, stigma head-shaped. Fruit an ovoid 
capsule c. 7 mm long, dehiscing loculicidally, 
brown to black, many-seeded. Seeds pyramidal, 
2-3 mm long, brownish black. 
Bulbine comprises about 60 species, most of 
them restricted to southern Africa. Bulbine 
narcissifolia Salm-Dyck, a native of Botswana, 
South Africa and Lesotho, has several medici-
nal uses in South Africa. The fresh leaf sap is 
applied to wounds to promote healing, as a 
wart and corn remedy, and to cure ringworm 
and rash. A cold infusion of the leaves is used 
as a purgative. A decoction of the roots is taken 
to relieve rheumatic pain and to induce preg-
nancy. In southern Africa Bulbine capitata 
flowers in spring. 
Ecology Bulbine capitata grows in scattered 
clumps in open grassland and thorn scrub on 
sandy soil and on rocky hillsides at about 1000 
m altitude. 
Management Bulbine capitata is only har-
vested from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no reports on threats to Bulbine capitata 
and harvesting of rhizomes is probably sus-
tainable. Once demand for rhizomes increases 
the wild populations may need protection. 
Prospects The chemistry of Bulbine capi-
tata has been the subject of in-depth studies. 
The potential of the isolated isofuranonaphtho-
quinones in the development of antimalarial 
drugs, as well as in the development of coro-
nary artery disease, in which the oxidation of 
lipoproteins is thought to play a critical role, 
deserves more research attention. 
Major references Abegaz et al., 1999; Bez-
abih et al., 2001; Bezabih, Motlhagodi & 
Abegaz, 1997; Kativu, 2001; Majinda et al., 
2001. 
Other references Bezabih & Abegaz, 1998; 
Bringmann et al., 1999; Qhotsokoane-Lusunzi 
& Karuso, 2001; van Jaarsveld & Forster, 
2001; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
BURASAIA MADAGASCARIENSIS DC. 
Protologue Syst. nat. 1; 514 (1818). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Bura-
saia madagascariensis occurs throughout east-
ern Madagascar, from Antsiranana in the 
CAESALPINIA 129 
north to Toliara in the south. It also occurs on 
the Comoros, Réunion and Mauritius. 
Uses A tea prepared from the roots of Bura-
saia madagascariensis is one of the oldest 
medicines against malaria in Madagascar, and 
is also used to treat enlarged spleen and he-
patic affections. A decoction of the root bark is 
taken as a cholagogue against nausea and 
retching. A leaf decoction is drunk against fe-
ver and gonorrhoea. 
The bitter leaves and stem bark are added to 
alcoholic beverages drunk during circumcision 
ceremonies. The fruit is edible. The root yields 
a bright yellow dye. 
Properties From an alcohol extract of the 
stem N-acetylnornuciferine was isolated as 
were the clerodane-type diterpenes epicorda-
tine and penianthic acid-methylester. From an 
alcohol extract of the wood the quaternary pro-
toberberine alkaloids palmatine (burasaine), 
columbamine and jatrorrhizine were isolated. 
Palmatine was isolated also from the root. The 
root decoction has a slow-action antimalarial 
effect in humans. It causes a contraction of the 
spleen and is believed to force the Plasmodium 
parasites to stay in the bloodstream, where 
they can be controlled by smaller doses of 
chloroquine or quinine. Palmatine has mild 
DNA-binding properties. At high concentra-
tions it has a very modest effect on the pro-
gression of the cell cycle, but does not promote 
DNA cleavage by topoisomerases. 
The sap from the wood is irritant to the skin. 
Botany Dioecious shrub up to 4 m tall. 
Leaves alternate, 3-foliolate but usually simple 
at stem apex; petiole 7-14 cm long, swollen and 
bent at the apex; petiolule up to 1 cm long; 
leaflets elliptical, up to 10 cm long, base 
cuneate, apex acuminate, pinnately veined. 
Inflorescence a panicle in the leaf axils or on 
older stems. Flowers unisexual, small, pedicel-
late; sepals usually 9 in 3 whorls, pale green, 
fleshy; male flowers c. 4 mm long, stamens 6, 
filaments enlarged, triangular below, fleshy; 
female flowers with rudimentary stamens, 
ovary superior, composed of 3 free carpels c. 2.5 
mm long. Fruit generally a single, ovoid, fleshy 
drupe c. 2 cm long, 1-seeded, pale yellow to 
pink or orange; stone hard and brittle. Seedling 
with epigeal germination; cotyledons leafy and 
spreading. 
Burasaia comprises about 5 species, all en-
demic to Madagascar and neighbouring is-
lands. Revision of the genus may lead to the 
distinction of additional species. Burasaia 
madagascariensis is a variable species and 
easily confused with the other Burasaia spp. 
Burasaia congesta Decne. occurs in eastern 
Madagascar up to 1000 m altitude, Burasaia 
gracilis Decne. is endemic to northern Mada-
gascar up to 1200 m altitude, and Burasaia 
australis Scott-Elliot is endemic to south-
eastern Madagascar up to 700 m altitude. Bu-
rasaia nigrescens Capuron is also endemic to 
Madagascar. The roots of these Burasaia spp. 
are used for similar medicinal purposes as 
those of Burasaia madagascariensis. They 
yield a bright yellow dye. From the stem bark 
the protoberberine quaternary alkaloids pal-
matine, jatrorrhizine and columbamine were 
isolated, as well as clerodane diterpenes. 
Ecology Burasaia madagascariensis is an 
adaptable species occurring in humid, interme-
diate and dry forest, from coastal sand dunes 
up to 1600 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Bura-
saia madagascariensis is common and wide-
spread. There are no indications that it is in 
danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects The antimalarial properties of 
Burasaia species were studied and active com-
pounds have been identified. Subsequently, 
research was discontinued probably because 
alternative sources of these compounds were 
available. However, the interaction of the Bu-
rasaia alkaloids and quinine or chloroquine 
deserves further study. 
Major references Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
2004; Kluza et al., 2003; Mambu et al., 2002; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Rasoanaivo et al., 1991b. 
Other references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; de Wet, 2005; Grycova, 
Dostal & Marek, 2007; Ortiz, Kellogg & Van 
Der Werff, 2007; Rasoanaivo et a l , 1999; 
Resplandy, 1958; Schatz, 2001. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
CAESALPINIA BENTHAMIANA (Baill.) Herend. 
& Zarucchi 
Protologue Ann. Missouri Bot. Gard. 77(4): 
854 (1990). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
Synonyms Mezoneuron benthamianum 
Baill. (1866). 
Origin and geographic distribution Caes-
alpinia benthamiana is widespread in West 
and Central Africa, where it occurs from Sene-
gal to Gabon. 
Uses In Senegal an infusion of the dried 
130 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
roots is drunk or used as a bath against gen-
eral malaise. In Senegal, Guinea and Nigeria a 
decoction of roots, bark and leaves is used to 
cure urethral discharge. In Guinea the young 
leaves are chewed as a depurative and masti-
catory. In Côte d'Ivoire Caesalpinia bentha-
miana stem liquid is dropped in the eye to cure 
inflammation and cataract. In Côte d'Ivoire 
and Nigeria stems and roots are used for den-
tal hygiene, to sooth toothache and as an aph-
rodisiac. Leaves are applied as a paste to treat 
snakebites. In Senegal, Sierra Leone and 
Ghana wounds, skin infections, piles and ul-
cers are treated with a watery macerate of 
leafy twigs, mashed-up leaves or leaf ash. The 
leaves are mildly laxative and used to cure 
colic. Patients suffering from hookworm or 
guinea-worm eat the young leaves as a treat-
ment. Patients suffering from impotence re-
lated to venereal diseases are prescribed a 
macerate of leafy twigs. A root decoction is 
drunk to cure dysentery. The roots are added 
to palm wine to increase the strength or its 
aphrodisiac properties. 
In Gambia Caesalpinia benthamiana is grown 
in garden fences to make them impenetrable. 
When cut the stems yield drinking water. 
Properties Gallic acid and gallate deriva-
tives have been isolated from the leaves of 
Caesalpinia benthamiana. Gallic acid and its 
methyl ester (methylgallate) inhibit the growth 
of both Gram-negative and Gram-positive bac-
teria, but the other gallate derivatives only 
suppress Gram-positive bacteria. Petroleum 
spirit, chloroform and ethanol extracts of the 
roots of Caesalpinia benthamiana showed an-
timicrobial activity on a range of organisms. 
Also, a 4-fold and 2-fold potentiation of the 
activity of norfloxacin, a standard antibiotic 
against Staphylococcus aureus, was observed 
for the ethanol and petroleum spirit extracts, 
respectively. The petroleum spirit and chloro-
form extracts display strong free radical scav-
enging activity. 
Botany Climbing or straggling shrub with 
stems up to 20 m long and up to 8 cm in diame-
ter, armed with recurved spines. Leaves alter-
nate, bipinnately compound, with 5—6 pairs of 
pinnae; stipules small, inconspicuous; petiole 
5-10 cm long, swollen at base, rachis 15-20 cm 
long with recurved spines, especially at base of 
pinnae; leaflets alternate, c. 5 pairs per pinna, 
elliptical, 3-4 cm x 1.5-2.5 cm, base and apex 
rounded, glabrous. Inflorescence a branched or 
unbranched terminal raceme up to 20 cm long, 
hairy, densely flowered. Flowers bisexual, zy-
gomorphic, 5-merous; pedicel 5-10 mm long; 
sepals free, unequal, the lower one hood-
shaped and embracing the others; petals free, 
unequal, 2-2.5 cm wide, yellow, the upper one 
larger; stamens 10, free, c. 11 mm long, hairy; 
ovary superior, style slender. Fruit a linear-
oblong, flattened pod c. 10 cm x 2-2.5 cm, thin, 
reflexed, indéhiscent, winged along upper su-
ture, wing 3-5 mm wide, bright red to pink, 4— 
6-seeded. 
Caesalpinia is pantropical and comprises about 
200 species, the majority of them native to 
tropical America. In tropical Africa about 25 
species are indigenous, naturalized or culti-
vated. The generic delimitations of Caesalpinia 
have long been disputed. The former genus 
Mezoneuron, distinguished by the thin, winged 
pods, is now included as subgenus Mezoneuron 
within Caesalpinia. Caesalpinia hildebrandtii 
(Vatke) Baill. is endemic to Madagascar, and is 
used to counteract poison. Caesalpinia cucul-
lata Roxb., a medicinal plant from Asia, has 
been introduced in Tanzania where it is used to 
cure convulsion and cramps. Piceatannol, 
trans-resveratrol, apigenin and scirpusin A 
have been isolated from it. The hydroxystil-
benes piceatannol and trans-resveratrol have 
been shown to act as chemopreventive agents 
of cancer. 
Ecology Caesalpinia benthamiana is found 
in humid and ruderal localities in dry decidu-
ous woodland and savanna, but is especially 
common in gallery forest and on roadsides. 
Genetic resources and breeding Caesal-
pinia benthamiana is widespread in disturbed 
habitats and is apparently not threatened by 
overexploitation. As the main interest is in the 
leaves, sustainable exploitation is feasible. 
Prospects The traditional medicinal uses of 
Caesalpinia benthamiana were linked to its 
pharmacological properties only recently. 
Caesalpinia benthamiana and its closest rela-
tives are potential sources of compounds that 
can overcome bacterial multidrug resistance, 
and so are likely to become or remain of inter-
est for pharmacologists. 
Major references Berhaut, 1975b; Binutu 
& Cordell, 2000; Burkill, 1995; Dickson et al., 
2006; Keay, Hoyle & Duvigneaud, 1958. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Adjanohoun 
& Aké Assi, 1979; Herendeen & Zarucchi, 
1990; du Puy et al., 2002; Jain, 1991; Nihei et 
a l , 2005b; Neuwinger, 2000; Tra Bi, Kouamé & 
Traoré, 2005; Wilczek et al., 1952. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
CAESALPINIA 131 
CAESALPINIA BONDUC (L.) Roxb. 
Protologue Fl. ind. ed. 1832, 2: 362 (1832). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 24 
Synonyms Caesalpinia bonducella (L.) 
Fleming (1810), nom. ill. 
Vernacular names Bonduc nut, fever nut, 
guilandina seed, nicker nut (En). Bonduc, ca-
duque, cadoc, cassie (Fr). Inimbo, inimboja, 
nogueira de bonduque, olho de gato, silva da 
praia (Po). Mkomwe, mnamu, mburuga (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Caesal-
pinia bonduc is pantropical. It is commonly 
found in coastal areas of tropical Africa. 
Uses Throughout the distribution area of 
Caesalpinia bonduc in Africa its leaves, bark 
and roots are used to cure fever, headache and 
chest pain and as an anthelminthic. In West 
Africa it is used as a rubefacient and as a tonic 
in the treatment of jaundice, diarrhoea and 
skin eruptions. At the Kenyan coast the seed 
and decoctions of the leaves and roots are 
taken to treat asthma and complications dur-
ing menstruation, to avoid miscarriage, and as 
eye-drops to treat internal blood clots in the 
eye. In Tanzania the powdered kernel of the 
seed is taken with water to treat diabetes mel-
litus. In Somalia the oil from the seeds is used 
to treat rheumatism. A bitter extract from the 
seeds is known as 'poor man's quinine' and is 
used against malaria e.g. in India, but its use 
in Africa as a malaria cure has not been docu-
mented. 
In tropical Asia and the Pacific Ocean islands 
Caesalpinia bonduc is an important medicinal 
plant as well, with largely similar uses as in 
Caesalpinia bonduc - wild and planted 
Africa. In large doses it is believed to be poi-
sonous. 
In Sierra Leone and Ethiopia Caesalpinia bon-
duc is planted as a live fence. In Equatorial 
Guinea the oil from the seeds is used for cook-
ing. The seeds are widely used as beads, as 
weights and as counters in board games. 
Production and international trade Local 
trade of Caesalpinia bonduc seeds for medici-
nal use is common in tropical Africa. 
Properties The seeds of Caesalpinia bonduc 
contain the isoflavonoid bonducellin and sev-
eral cassane diterpenes, including caesal-
dekarin A, caesalpinin B, bonducellpins A-D, 
a-, ß-, y-, and 8-caesalpins, and a bondenolide. 
Compounds isolated from the roots include 
caesaldekarin C and caesalpin F. 
The phytochemical content of other plant parts 
has not yet been documented. 
Several of the compounds found in the seeds, 
notably bonducellin and ß-caesalpin, have con-
firmed antiplasmodial activity. Contradicting 
results of tests on the antiplasmodial activity 
may be due to faulty identification of the 
specimens tested. Bondenolide and seed ex-
tracts have confirmed antifungal and antibac-
terial activity. The effects of a leaf extract on 
calcium metabolism and cholinergic receptors 
of preparations of the isolated outer muscular 
layer of the uterus of pregnant rat were compa-
rable to those obtained with acetylcholine. In 
normal rats, aqueous and 50% ethanolic ex-
tracts of Caesalpinia bonduc seeds exhibited 
hypoglycaemic activity and in diabetic rats, 
they produced a significant antihyperglycaemic 
effect. The aqueous extract also exhibited anti-
hypercholesterolemic and antihypertriglyc-
eridemic effects in streptozotocin diabetic rats. 
An aqueous extract of the roots, stems and 
leaves was found to have antiviral and anti-
cancer activity. 
The seed contains about 20% oil that is espe-
cially rich in linoleic acid (68%) and has vesi-
cant properties. 
Description Liana with stems up to 15 m 
long, usually armed with robust prickles. 
Leaves alternate, bipinnately compound, with 
6-11 pairs of pinnae; stipules pinnate or 3-5-
lobed, up to 20 mm long; petiole and rachis 15— 
80 cm long; leaflets opposite, 6-9(-12) pairs per 
pinna, oblong, 2—4 cm x 1—2 cm, base rounded, 
apex rounded to acute, shortly hairy at least on 
midrib and margins. Inflorescence a supra-
axillary or terminal raceme or panicle 30-60 
cm long, densely flowered. Flowers bisexual or 
functionally unisexual, zygomorphic, 5-merous; 
132 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
AAf%# 
Caesalpinia bonduc - 1, flowering twig; 2, node 
with stipules; 3, flowers; 4, fruits. 
Source: PROSEA 
sepals free, unequal, c. 5 mm x 2.5 mm, the 
lowest one hood-shaped; petals free, unequal, 
6-7 mm x 2-3 mm, clawed, yellow, the upper 
one different in shape and size; stamens 10, 
free, c. 5 mm long, filaments hairy towards 
base; ovary superior, style short. Fruit an ob-
long, inflated pod 5-8 cm x 3-4.5 cm, dehis-
cent, covered with stiff, long hairy prickles, 1-2 
seeded. Seeds ovoid, 1.5-2 cm in diameter, 
smooth, hard, pale grey. Seedling with epigeal 
germination; cotyledons rounded, thick. 
Other botanical information Caesalpinia 
comprises about 200 species and is pantropical, 
most of the species occurring in tropical Amer-
ica. In tropical Africa about 25 species are in-
digenous, naturalized or cultivated. Caesal-
pinia crista L. mentioned in literature on Af-
rica is a misapplied name and can refer to ei-
ther the indigenous Caesalpinia bonduc or the 
introduced Caesalpinia decapetala (Roth) 
Alston. In tropical Africa Caesalpinia crista 
has only been recorded in the Seychelles and 
Mauritius and is otherwise found in the Ameri-
cas, Asia, Australia and the Pacific Ocean is-
lands. 'Brazilwood' or 'Pernambuco wood' is 
often associated with Caesalpinia bonduc, 
however the wood derives from an endemic of 
Brazil, Caesalpinia echinata Lam. which also 
yields a dye. The dyes brasilin and brasilein 
have only been isolated from the latter and not 
from Caesalpinia bonduc. 
Growth and development Caesalpinia 
bonduc can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year. Seeds of Caesalpinia bon-
duc float and retain their viability in water for 
extended periods. This explains its presence in 
coastal areas throughout the tropics. 
Ecology Caesalpinia bonduc occurs espe-
cially in disturbed sites. In tropical Africa it 
has become naturalized around inland villages 
probably as a result of seeds being transported 
for medicinal use and for use in popular board 
games. 
Propagation and planting Caesalpinia 
bonduc is only propagated by seed. 
Management In Equatorial Guinea Caesal-
pinia bonduc has been cultivated for its seed 
oil. 
Harvesting Mature pods of Caesalpinia 
bonduc can be collected from the plant or 
picked up after they have dropped. Other plant 
parts are harvested whenever the need arises. 
Handling after harvest Seeds of Caesal-
pinia bonduc may be simply dried and stored 
for later use. Other plant parts are probably 
used fresh. 
Genetic resources Caesalpinia bonduc is 
very widespread, not in danger of extinction or 
genetic erosion and is rare in germplasm col-
lections. 
Prospects Extracts of Caesalpinia bonduc 
show interesting pharmacological effects, e.g. 
modulation of cholinergic receptors and anti-
hyperglycaemic activity, which merit further 
research. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Francis, 
2003; Datte et al., 1998; du Puy et a l , 2002; 
Ibnu Utomo, 2001; Oliver-Bever, 1986; Pakia & 
Cooke, 2003b; Sharma, Dwivedi & Swarup, 
1997. 
Other references Ali, 1973; Kinoshita, 
2000; Lyder et al., 1998; Moshi & Nagpa, 2000; 
Peter et al., 1997; Peter et al., 1998; Simin, 
Khaliq-uz-Zaman & Ahmad, 2001; Stiles, 1998. 
Sources of illustration Ibnu Utomo, 2001. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
CALLICHILIA 133 
CAESALPINIA VOLKENSII Harms 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 45: 304 (1910). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
Vernacular names Msoro, mkomwe (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Caesal-
pinia volkensii is native to Ethiopia, Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania. 
Uses Caesalpinia volkensii is used in Kenya 
and Tanzania mostly to treat malaria. In the 
area around Nairobi (Kenya) over 60% of the 
herbalists prescribe a decoction of the leaves of 
Caesalpinia volkensii to cure malaria, some-
times alone, but more often mixed with other 
plants. The leaf decoction is also taken to fight 
pains during pregnancy. Pregnant women take 
powdered pods dissolved in water to relieve 
stomach-ache. Roots are eaten cooked, raw or 
as an addition to palm wine for their aphrodi-
siac properties. They are also used to treat 
gonorrhoea and bilharzia. Seeds are used to 
cure stomach ulcers. Flower buds are crushed 
and applied to the eye to treat eye problems. 
Unspecified plant parts are used in Kenya to 
treat retinoblastoma. The roots are used in 
Tanzania as a source of red dye. 
Production and international trade Caesal-
pinia volkensii used to be traded on a local 
scale only. Nowadays Caesalpinia volkensii is 
exported from Uganda to Kenya but quantities 
are unknown. 
Properties In-vitro tests of leaf extracts of 
Caesalpinia volkensii showed antiplasmodial 
activity against chloroquine-sensitive and 
chloroquine-resistant strains of Plasmodium 
falciparum. Active compounds have not been 
reported for Caesalpinia volkensii. 
Botany Shrub with climbing or straggling 
stems armed with recurved and straight prick-
les 2-4 mm long. Leaves alternate, bipinnately 
compound, with 3-6 pairs of pinnae; stipules 
small, c. 3 mm long, 2-3-pointed; rachis 15-50 
cm long with recurved prickles, especially at 
base of pinnae; leaflets opposite, 3—7 pairs per 
pinna, ovate to ovate-elliptical, 3-8 cm x 1.5-
4.5 cm, apex acuminate, glabrous. Inflores-
cence an unbranched or few-branched, hairy, 
axillary raceme, up to 20 cm long, densely 
flowered. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-
merous; pedicel 4-14 mm long; sepals free, 
unequal, the lower one hood-shaped and em-
bracing the others; petals free, unequal, 1-1.5 
cm x c. 4 mm, yellow, the upper different in 
shape and size; stamens 10, free; ovary supe-
rior, style slender. Fruit a broadly oblong or 
obovoid-ellipsoid, flattened pod up to 13 cm x 
6.5 cm, covered with prickles. Seeds globose, c. 
2 cm in diameter, hard. 
Caesalpinia is pantropical and comprises about 
200 species, the majority of them native to 
tropical America. In tropical Africa about 25 
species are indigenous, naturalized or culti-
vated. Several other Caesalpinia spp. in tropi-
cal Africa have medicinal uses. Caesalpinia 
welwitschiana (Oliv.) Brenan is native to hu-
mid forests in Central, East and southern Af-
rica. In DR Congo leaf sap is instilled in the 
nostrils to treat madness. Caesalpinia trothae 
Harms is indigenous to Ethiopia, Somalia, 
Kenya and Tanzania. The fruits are poisonous, 
but the leaves are considered a good browse for 
camels. 
Ecology Caesalpinia volkensii occurs in 
forest and at forest margins up to 2100 m alti-
tude. 
Management Caesalpinia volkensii is occa-
sionally planted near homesteads. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though widespread Caesalpinia volkensii is 
apparently nowhere common. Habitat destruc-
tion and over-exploitation are potential 
threats. No germplasm collections are known 
to exist. 
Prospects In view of its medicinal use 
Caesalpinia volkensii is an obvious candidate 
for pharmacological research. Germplasm col-
lection and ex-situ conservation are recom-
mended. Cultivation should be encouraged, 
especially in Kenya. 
Major references Brenan, 1967; Graham et 
a l , 2000; Kokwaro, 1993; Kuria et a l , 2001; 
Thulin, 1989. 
Other references Aubréville, 1970; Beentje, 
1994; Chifundera, 2001; Gachathi, 1989; 
Greenway, 1941; Marshall, 1998; Njoroge & 
Bussmann, 2006; Thulin, 1993a. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
CALLICHILIA BARTERI (Hook.f.) Stapf 
Protologue Dyer, FI. trop. Afr. 4(1): 133 
(1902). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n — 22 
Synonyms Hedranthera barteri (Hook.f.) 
Pichon (1948). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cal-
lichilia barteri occurs in Ghana, Benin, Nigeria 
and Cameroon; possibly also in Congo. 
Uses In Nigeria the Yoruba people use an 
134 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
infusion of the leaves as a laxative for children 
and to treat dizziness. The leaves are applied 
against tumours. An extract of the fruit is 
taken as a vermifuge and as a treatment 
against gonorrhoea. The Ijo people give the 
fruit to teething children to bite in. 
Properties The indole alkaloid lonicerine 
and the bisindole alkaloids vobtusine (a rare 
plumeran-plumeran class dimer), callichiline, 
beninine and amataine were isolated from the 
roots. Bisindole alkaloids are rare compounds 
in Apocynaceae species, and Callichilia barteri 
is an exception. Vobtusine causes hypotension 
as a result of peripheral vasodilatation and a 
direct depressant action on the heart. In mod-
erate doses initial agitation is followed by a 
sedative effect; high doses may bring about 
convulsions and death. Vobtusine is not of 
clinical interest. 
The methanol extract of the powdered leaves 
showed some antioxidant activity. 
Botany Erect shrub up to 3 m tall, white 
latex in all parts; branches pale brown. Leaves 
opposite, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 2—10(—15) mm long; blade elliptical to 
narrowly ovate, 3.5—21 cm x 1-9 cm, base 
cuneate or decurrent into the petiole, apex 
acuminate, sometimes acute, papery, paler 
beneath. Inflorescence a cyme in the axil of 
deciduous scale-like bracts at the apex of a 
branch just below its bifurcate ramification, 
pendulous, 1-several-flowered; peduncle 5 -
35(-43) mm long; bracts few near the apex, 2-8 
mm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
fragrant at night; sepals fused at base, broadly 
to narrowly obovate, 2-17 mm long, papery, 
with many glands at base; corolla tube cylin-
drical, 24-52 mm long, abruptly widening at 
the insertion of the stamens to a cylindrical 
upper part, glabrous except for 5 short hairy 
ridges inside extending downwards from the 
base of the filaments, lobes obtriangular, 11-40 
mm long, with 2 apices, one acute and one 
rounded, white; stamens inserted up to half-
way the corolla tube, included; ovary superior, 
consisting of 2 carpels connate at base only, 
surrounded by a ring-shaped disk, style slen-
der, 9-15 mm long, consisting of 2 connate 
strands, pistil head 1-1.5 mm long, 5-winged, 
each wing touching an anther. Fruit consisting 
of 2, separate, ellipsoid, berry-like parts up to 5 
cm long, with beak 4-10 mm long, smooth, 
with 2 lateral ridges, yellow to orange, dehis-
cent by a ventral slit, wall thin, pulp juicy, 
fleshy, aril very thin, 12-44-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, c. 6 mm long, deeply pitted, dark brown. 
Callichilia barteri - 1, flowering twig; 2, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
Callichilia comprises 7 species in tropical Afri-
ca. Some of the uses of Callichilia barteri 
probably also apply to the closely related Cal-
lichilia subsessilis (Benth.) Stapf, which has a 
wide distribution in the forest area of West 
Africa. 
Ecology Callichilia barteri occurs in rain-
forest, also secondary forest and in open locali-
ties, probably in humid conditions. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Cal-
lichilia barteri is rather common in secondary 
forest, it is probably not in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects The traditional uses of Cal-
lichilia barteri are varied and interesting, but 
pharmacological studies have mainly been 
done on the roots, which are not used. As they 
contain several rare bisindolic alkaloids, it 
might be worth analysing the aerial parts as 
well. The showy and fragrant flowers could 
make Callichilia barteri an interesting orna-
mental. 
Major references Beentje, 1978; Burkill, 
1985. 
Other references Agwada et al., 1967; Ag-
wada et al., 1977; Irvine, 1961; Naranjo, Hesse 
& Schmid, 1970; Oke & Hamburger, 2002. 
CANNABIS 135 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CANNABIS SATIVA L. 
Protologue Sp. pl. 2: 1027 (1753). 
Family Cannabaceae (Cannabinaceae) 
Chromosome number In - 20, 40, 80 
Synonyms Cannabis indica Lam. (1785). 
Vernacular names Cannabis, hemp, mari-
huana, hashish (En). Chanvre, chanvre indien, 
cannabis (Fr). Cânhamo (Po). Mbangi (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Canna-
bis is a native of the temperate parts of Asia: 
near the Caspian Sea, in Iran, the Kirghiz 
steppe, southern Siberia and probably also the 
Himalayas and northern India. It escapes cul-
tivation and naturalizes easily. Cannabis is one 
of the oldest non-food crops. It was already 
valued by the Chinese 8500 years ago. It was 
introduced into western Asia and Africa, and 
subsequently Europe in 2000-1000 BC, and 
cultivation in Europe became widespread from 
about 500 AD onwards. From Central Asia it 
spread eastward to China and South-East 
Asia. It was introduced into the Americas in 
the 16th century. At present it is cultivated all 
over the world, although in most countries, 
including those in Africa, cultivation as a psy-
chotropic drug is prohibited by law. 
Uses Cannabis provides several useful prod-
ucts: therapeutics and narcotics (flowers and 
leaves), fibre (stems), oil (fruit, colloquially 
often called seed) and food for humans and 
animals (fruit). It was probably first used as a 
source of fibre: the oldest remains of cloth 
Cannabis sativa -planted and naturalized 
made from cannabis date back 6000 years. Its 
cultivation for oil is more recent, but began at 
least 3000 years ago, and the earliest reference 
to narcotic use dates from 5000 years ago in 
China. The earliest recorded medicinal use of 
cannabis is found in a Chinese pharmacopoeia 
of 4700 years old. All parts of the plant are 
used in Chinese medicine and in traditional 
medicine in Africa. The fruits are considered 
useful as a tonic, alterative, emmenagogue, 
laxative, demulcent, diuretic, anthelmintic, 
narcotic and anodyne. They are prescribed for 
dysentery, post-partum difficulties, obstinate 
vomiting, and used externally on eruptions, 
ulcers, wounds and favus. The specially pre-
pared fruits are prescribed for uterine 
prolapse, to aid parturition, and as a febrifuge. 
Cannabis products are used as sedative of the 
stomach, to treat dyspepsia with painful symp-
toms, cancers and ulcers. They are also used to 
treat migraine, neuralgia, tetanus and rheu-
matism. 
In western medicine, preparations rich in can-
nabinoids were extensively used between the 
middle of the 19th century and the Second 
World War as an anticonvulsant, analgesic, 
sedative and soporific, and also to treat teta-
nus, neuralgia, uterine haemorrhage, rheuma-
tism, epilepsy, migraine, convulsions, spasms 
and pain. It was considered a milder and less 
dangerous analgesic than opium. 
The inconsistency of its therapeutic activity, 
the poor shelf-life of its preparations, the diffi-
culty in deciding optimal doses and the emer-
gence of synthetic analgesics and hypnotics led 
to the use of cannabis being gradually aban-
doned in the first half of the 20th century, and 
authorized medicinal use is very limited today. 
In recent years, cannabis drugs have been ad-
vocated as useful for treating spasms in pa-
tients suffering from multiple sclerosis, lower 
intra-ocular pressure in developing glaucoma, 
as an analgesic in patients with rheumatism 
and for treating loss of appetite in AIDS pa-
tients. The best known application, however, is 
its use in cancer patients as a sedative and for 
treating side-effects of chemotherapy e.g. nau-
sea, vomiting and convulsions, for which it is 
licensed in e.g. the United States and the 
United Kingdom. The main active compound of 
cannabis, A9-tetrahydrocannabinol (= A9-THC, 
dronabinol), is marketed as a medicine for 
these puposes. 
The narcotic use varies between cultures. In 
Africa cannabis resin (locally known as 'dagga') 
has extensive ritual uses in many countries. In 
136 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
India 3 types of prepara t ions exist: 'bhang' 
(dried, powdered plant , made into a dr ink with 
milk or water) , 'ganja' (dried flowering tips of 
female plants , usual ly smoked, sometimes 
eaten or drunk) and 'hashish ' (crude resin 
scraped from the plant , which is smoked, some-
t imes eaten). In the western world, 'marihu-
ana ' usually refers to a prepara t ion comprising 
crumbled leaves, small twigs and flowering 
pa r t s of female plants , whereas 'hashish ' is a 
s t ronger preparat ion, wi th more resin and lit-
t le recognizable plant mater ia l . All these drugs 
contain resin from the g landular ha i r s on 
leaves, s tems and inflorescences. 
The bas t fibres of cannabis (hemp) are t radi-
tionally used to make yarn, twine, rope, ne ts 
and paper, while the wooden core of the s tems 
is used as animal bedding or fuel. Hemp yarn 
is mainly made by wet spinning of the long 
fibres. Improved ya rn quali ty can be obtained 
by 'cottonization' of hemp, involving the chemi-
cal or mechanical r ea r r angemen t of bas t fibres. 
This makes it possible to process the fibres on 
cotton spinning machines. However, hemp fi-
bres and yarns current ly on the marke t rarely 
meet the requ i rements of the textile indus t ry 
with respect to fibre fineness, homogeneity, 
flexibility and length distr ibution. In Africa 
cannabis is not impor tan t as a fibre crop. 
Cardboard can be made from hemp fibre. In 
the building industry, fibre and particle boards 
containing hemp fibre are used indoors for in-
sulation. Hemp fibres are also used in inor-
ganic matr ix composite (IMC) technology to 
s t rengthen plas ter boards, tiles, concrete, mor-
t a r s and plas ters . The oil in the fruits is used 
in cosmetics and as surfactants in detergents 
and can be used as a subs t i tu te for linseed oil 
in pa in ts and soap. Cannabis fruits are edible, 
and used on a l imited scale as h u m a n food, as 
bird and poultry feed, and as fish-bait. The 
press cake remain ing after oil extraction is 
used to feed livestock. 
Product ion and international trade Few 
stat is t ics on production of cannabis for narcotic 
purposes exist as the cultivation, possession, 
preservation, t ranspor ta t ion and t r ade a re 
illegal in most countries. Cannabis drugs 
(herbal and resin) are by far the most com-
monly consumed illegal drug in the world and 
worldwide an es t imated 161 million people 
used cannabis in 2003, of which 37 million in 
Africa. Average annua l consumption is esti-
ma ted a t 200 g of t he herba l drug or 150 g 
resin per user. In 2003 worldwide cannabis 
herb production was es t imated to be more t h a n 
40,000 t, of which 30,000 t reached end users , 
valued a t retai l level a t about US$ 113,000 
million. Africa was a large producer (28%) with 
as major exporters Nigeria, South Africa, Ma-
lawi, Lesotho, Swaziland and Tanzania . The 
major importer is Europe, bu t the largest mar-
ket is Nor th America. Worldwide cannabis 
resin production is es t imated a t 7400 t, of 
which 6000 t reached end users , valued a t re-
tail level at about US$ 28,000 million, with 
nor the rn Africa (Morocco 40%), Turkey and the 
Middle Eas t (30%) as major suppliers. Major 
importers are Europe (78%), followed by Africa 
(9%) and Asia (8%). In India cannabis is culti-
vated for 'ganja' by a few licensed growers, and 
the drug is a monopoly of the Indian Govern-
ment . 
In 2004 world production of hemp fibre and tow 
was 66,000 t from 50,000 ha, of which 40,000 t 
was produced in Asia, mainly in China and 
Korea. World production of cannabis fruits in 
2004 was about 30,000 t, of which 24,000 t in 
China. 
P r o p e r t i e s Cannabis is classified as a nar-
cotic belonging to the psychotropic d is rupters . 
It a l ters perceptions and emotions. More t h a n 
460 chemical const i tuents have been isolated 
from cannabis , and the amount of l i t e ra ture on 
their chemistry and biological activity is over-
whelming. The most in teres t ing compounds for 
medicinal purposes are the cannabinoids, 
which a re mainly present in the leaves and 
flowering tops of female plants , and accumu-
late in the brac ts and resin, bu t a re absent in 
the fruits and s tems. Cannabinoids are terpe-
nophenolics, classified into several groups. At 
present , about 60 of these compounds are 
known, and the main representa t ives of each of 
these groups are: cannabigerol (CBG), can-
nabidiol (CBD), cannabichromene (CBC), can-
nabicyclol (CBL), cannabielsoin (CBE), can-
nabinol (CBN), cannabinodiol (CBDL), can-
nabitr iol (CBTL), A 8- t rans- tetrahydrocannabi-
nol (A8-THC) and A9- t rans-tetrahydrocannabi-
nol (A9-THC, sometimes also called Ai-THC in a 
different number ing system). In each group, 
the cannabinoids can be present e i ther as neu-
t ra l phenylmethyle thers or as acidic analogues, 
differing only by the presence of a carboxyl 
group. AH-THC has two acidic analogues: A9-
te t rahydrocannabinol ic acids A and B. Acidic 
cannabinoids are regarded as the genuine 
compounds; the carboxylic group, however, is 
very uns table and decarboxylation readily oc-
curs. A9-THC itself is not stable either: on pro-
longed storage it is converted into CBN. CBD 
CANNABIS 137 
and cannabidiolic acid are the main compo-
nents of the glandular hairs (up to 15%); the 
remaining cannabinoids occur in smaller 
amounts. 
In addition to cannabinoids, Cannabis sativa 
contains various other compounds: flavonoids, 
phenolic spiroindanes, dihydrostilbenes, dihy-
drophenanthrenes and spermidine alkaloids. It 
also contains an essential oil whose main com-
ponents are ß-caryophyllene, humulene, a-
pinene, ß-pinene, limonene, myrcene and cis-ß-
ocimene. 
The pharmacological activity of cannabis is 
mainly based on A9-THC; other cannabinoids 
seem to have less, if any, biological activity, 
although many of them have never been stud-
ied well. Of the two major cannabis drug-
products, good quality marihuana in the 1960-
1970s contained 0.1-2.7% A9-THC and hashish 
4-10%. In the 2000s cannabis can be much 
higher in THC, ranging 5-12(-31)%, but the 
average user seems to prefer the lower concen-
trations. The predominant effects of A9-THC on 
the central nervous system in humans include 
analgesia and anti-emesis, as well as a 'psycho-
logical high' state with alterations in cognition 
and memory, and a decrease in psychomotor 
performance. The acute toxicity of A9-THC is 
very low; there are no documented cases of 
human death caused by this component or 
cannabis. The initial effects caused by a com-
mon dose of inhaling one cigarette with 2% A9-
THC, or by oral intake of 20 mg of the purified 
compound e.g. in biscuits, cakes or herbal teas, 
are described as a feeling of well-being, eupho-
ria and relaxation, and effects on the sensor-
ium, sense of time, short-term memory and 
motivation. A9-THC levels in the blood plasma 
are highest within 15 minutes after inhalation 
and maximum effects are felt 30-40 minutes 
later, gradually diminishing until at most 3 
hours after inhalation. Bio-availability of A9-
THC is slower and weaker when the drug is 
ingested orally, but then the effects last longer. 
Higher doses may induce anxiety, even panic, 
dysphoria and hallucinations. Prolonged use in 
humans and in test animals leads to rapid de-
velopment of tolerance. Chronic use of canna-
bis leads to a weak physical dependence, but 
psychological dependence is substantial and 
dependent on the user's history and personal-
ity. Chronic use may also lead to paranoid psy-
chosis. An overdose is mainly marked by a psy-
chotic state (anxiety, suicidal tendencies, deep 
mental confusion), which may last for a week. 
Interruption of drug intake in chronic users 
may cause withdrawal syndrome, which sub-
sides in 3-4 days. Since the 1970s, many stud-
ies have been carried out to determine the im-
pact of the use of cannabis on health, but the 
long-term effects are still not well known. 
Cannabinoids act on the body through their 
action on the endogenous cannabinoid system, 
consisting of neurochemical substances (en-
dogenous ligands) and specific receptors. In 
humans two types of endogenous cannabinoid 
receptors are known: CB1 and CB2. CB1 is 
mainly expressed in the central and peripheral 
nervous system, CB2 is expressed essentially 
in the cells of the immune system. So, CB1 is 
mainly involved in psychotropic effects, CB2 in 
immunomodulatory effects. Besides the psycho-
logical effects, cannabinoids have a vast array 
of other effects on, e.g. the hormonal system, 
cell growth and cell structures. 
Although current studies suggest that can-
nabinoids may be useful in treating a number 
of human inflammatory disorders, a thorough 
evaluation of their immunomodulatory effects 
still needs to be done. Cannabinoid administra-
tion in animal models demonstrated acute al-
teration of multiple hormonal systems, includ-
ing the suppression of sex hormones, growth 
hormone, prolactin hormone and thyroid hor-
mone. The effects in humans have been incon-
sistent though, which can possibly partly be 
ascribed to the development of tolerance. 
Cannabinoids have been found to affect the 
proliferation and growth of a variety of cell 
types. Reduction of cell growth and division 
has been observed in protozoans. Cell prolifera-
tion and growth were also reduced in HeLa 
cervical carcinoma cells, Lewis lung carcinoma 
cells and B103 neuroblastoma cells. The effects 
of cannabis on the gastro-intestinal propulsion 
and motility have been studied in detail in 
mice and rats. An intravenous injection of A9-
THC slowed the rate of gastric emptying and 
small intestine transit, but the effect on large 
bowel transit was less. A decrease in frequency 
of both gastric and intestinal contractions 
without altering the intraluminal pressure was 
also found. In humans, the anti-emetic effects 
of cannabinoids are equal to those of commonly 
used phenothiazines. Side-effects are common. 
In some studies a third of patients experienced 
dysphoria, and up to 80% had somnolence. 
Cannabis products have been reported to re-
duce muscle spasm and tremors in patients 
suffering from cerebral palsy or multiple scle-
rosis (MS). On the other hand, it has also been 
found to impair posture and balance in pa-
138 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tients with spastic MS. Preliminary clinical 
trials have shown that marihuana and A9-THC 
may help to increase food intake and slow 
down weight loss in cancer and AIDS patients. 
Cannabis has been reported to cause bron-
chodilation, and cannabis derivatives have 
been tested as anti-asthma drugs. There has 
been preliminary research on A9-THC in the 
form of an aerosol spray, but other cannabi-
noids may also be of interest. Cannabinoids 
may affect the bronchi by a mechanism differ-
ent from that of other anti-asthma drugs. 
Cannabinoids can be used to slow down the 
development of wide-angle glaucoma, which is 
a major cause of blindness and is associated 
with high intra-ocular pressure. In a number of 
patients, cannabis significantly decreased this 
pressure for several hours. Aqueous extracts of 
cannabis fruits have shown strong nematicidal 
activity on the eggs, larvae and cysts of the 
nematode Heterodera schachtii. 
The bast of the plant cultivated for fibre con-
tains primary and secondary bast fibres rich in 
cellulose but low in hemicellulose and lignin. 
Cultivars are available containing 67% cellu-
lose, 13% hemicellulose and 4% lignin. Primary 
bast fibres are 5-40 mm long and heteroge-
nous, secondary bast fibres are smaller and 
more uniform with an average length of 2 mm. 
The woody core contains parenchyma, vessels 
and thick-walled short fibres with an average 
length of 0.55 mm. The core fibres consist of 
40% cellulose, 20% hemicellulose and 20% lig-
nin. 
The fruit of cannabis contains 29-35% oil, 20-
24% protein and 20—30% carbohydrates. Com-
pounds with narcotic potential do not accumu-
late in the fruit but contamination may occur 
due to contact with the glands of flower bracts 
and leaves. Washing is sufficient to remove 
contamination. The fatty acid composition of 
cannabis oil is: palmitic acid 6-7%, stearic acid 
3%, arachidic acid 1%, oleic acid 10-15%, li-
noleic acid 54-57%, omega-3-linolenic acid 15— 
21%, omega-6-linolenic acid 2-4% and eico-
sadienoic acid 0-1%. 
Adulterations and substitutes Because 
cannabinoids have not been found in other 
plant species, there are no natural adulterants 
and substitutes. Synthetic analogues of A9-THC 
have been developed, notably nabilone and 
levonantradol. They have undergone successful 
clinical trials, but have considerable side-
effects. In 2006 the synthetic cannabinoid ri-
monabant was released as a medicine for a 
number of complaints, including obesity and 
drug dependency. 
Description Annual erect herb up to 3(-4.5) 
m tall, usually branched, dioecious or some-
times monoecious, rather densely appressed-
hairy when young. Leaves opposite near base 
of stem, arranged spirally higher up, palmately 
compound; stipules free, filiform or narrowly 
subulate, c. 5 mm long; petiole long; leaflets (3-
)5—7(-ll), upper leaves often with only 1 leaf-
let, sessile, lanceolate, 6-14 cm x 0.5-1.5 cm, 
base narrowed, apex long-acuminate, coarsely 
toothed, on the upper surface rough with short 
stiff hairs, on the lower surface appressed 
hairy, and with many sessile glands. Flowers 
unisexual, 5-merous, regular; male flowers in 
short, dense cymes, united into leafy terminal 
panicles, almost sessile; tepals oblong, free, c. 5 
mm long, greenish white, stamens with erect 
linear filaments and comparatively large an-
thers 3-4 mm long; female flowers in spike-like 
fascicles, enveloped by bracts, sessile, perianth 
absent or present and then undivided, ovary 
superior, 1-celled, style up to 7.5 mm long, fili-
form, caducous, with 2 stigmas. Fruit a broadly 
ovoid, compressed achene 4-5 mm long, faintly 
Cannabis sativa - 1, branch of female plant; 2, 
part of branch with female inflorescence; 3, part 
of branch of male plant; 4, part of female inflo-
rescence; 5, male flower; 6, fruit. 
Source: PROSEA 
CANNABIS 139 
keeled on the lateral margins, smooth, shiny, 
yellowish or brown, closely enveloped by 
bracts, splitting into 2 halves, 1-seeded. Seed-
ling with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Cannabis 
sativa is the only species in Cannabis, although 
Cannabis indica L. is sometimes recognized as 
separate species representing the morphologi-
cally and chemically distinct drug types from 
Afghanistan and Pakistan. Great variation 
exists in Cannabis as a result of selection for 
fibre, oilseed or resin. This variation is further 
enhanced by the ease of crossing between these 
plant types making all subspecific classifica-
tions inexact. A geographical classification is in 
use for cultivated cannabis, in which North 
European, Central Russian, Mediterranean 
and Asiatic types are distinguished. The North 
European cannabis is characterized by a short 
stem (< 1.5 m) and early flowering. Fibre and 
fruit yields are generally low. Central Russian 
cannabis is cultivated in Europe and Asia be-
tween 50-60° latitude. Total growth duration 
is 90-110 days, with stems reaching 1.3-3 m in 
height. Fibre yields of these types are average, 
but high fruit yields may be obtained. Mediter-
ranean cannabis is mainly cultivated south of 
50° latitude in Europe. The total growth dura-
tion is 130-150 days, with stems reaching 2.5-
4.5 m in height. Fibre production can be high 
and the fibre of good quality. Fruit yields are 
average. Asiatic type cannabis plants form 
branched stems of 2.5-3 m with short inter-
nodes. Growth duration is 150-170 days. For 
practical purposes, three types can be distin-
guished, based on the concentrations of A9-THC 
and cannabidiol: the drug (resin) type, with 
high A9-THC concentration (> 1%) and low 
cannabidiol content; the hemp (fibre) and seed 
types with very low A9-THC content (< 0.3%) 
and high cannabidiol concentration; and the 
intermediate type, with moderately high con-
centrations of both compounds. However, con-
centrations may change during the growing 
season. 
Growth and development Cannabis is 
normally dioecious, but monoecious cultivars 
have been bred; the two sexes are normally 
indistinguishable before flowering. In a dio-
ecious crop, male and female plants tend to be 
present in similar numbers, but, depending on 
cultivar and growing conditions, there may be 
up to 50% more female than male plants. Male 
plants die soon after anthesis, whereas female 
plants live 3-5 weeks longer, until the seed is 
ripe. Flowers are wind-pollinated. The duration 
of vegetative growth of cannabis strongly de-
pends on photoperiod and temperature. Can-
nabis is a quantitative short-day plant. The 
sensitivity to photoperiod starts after forma-
tion of a few pairs of leaves and after a certain 
amount of heat has been received. As a result, 
optimal production of fibre hemp is limited to 
regions with relatively long days, in which the 
vegetative growth phase is sufficiently long to 
produce long stems. The length of the flowering 
phase of cannabis also depends on photoperiod 
and temperature. At shorter daylengths and 
higher temperatures flowering is earlier and 
also more synchronized between plants and in 
individual plants. The degree of branching 
depends on propagation methods and condi-
tions of cultivation. Cannabis has horizontal 
leaves, resulting in a high degree of light inter-
ception by the top of the canopy. This leads to 
intense shading. Although this has the advan-
tage that weeds are suppressed, it reduces 
overall photosynthesis of the crop. 
Ecology Cannabis requires humid tropical 
conditions to produce narcotic resin. For the 
production of fibre, temperate climates with 
temperatures of 15-27°C during the growing 
season are optimal. Cannabis thrives on mod-
erately to very fertile soils provided there is 
enough water. It is suitable for alluvial soils 
along streams and for loamy soils. 
Propagation and planting Cannabis is 
usually raised from seed. Seeds weigh 1.5-2.5 
g/100 seeds. The seed germinates at low tem-
peratures, but not below 1°C. It germinates 
after 3-7 days and early vegetative growth is 
often slow. Soil temperatures of 10-12°C are 
required for optimal crop establishment. 
Emergence is seriously hampered by soil com-
paction and water logging. Healthy seed should 
give 90% germination, and if properly stored it 
will remain viable for up to 2 years. Most mod-
ern indoor growers produce vegetatively propa-
gated crops. Rooted cuttings from female 
plants develop into a uniform crop of nearly 
identical seedless females. As long as the ma-
terial remains free of pathogens, vegetative 
propagation can be continued. Vegetative 
clones tend to have higher concentrations of A9-
THC than plants raised from seed, and better 
developed lateral branches. 
Seed rate and spacing depend on the product 
desired. For 'ganja' production in India, seed is 
sown in rows 1.2 m apart at a rate of 3—5 
kg/ha, followed by a thinning when the plants 
are 20 cm tall. For fibre production, seed is 
sown densely at a rate of 30—40 kg/ha, either 
140 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
broadcast or in drills. For fruit production row 
distances of more t h a n 1 m and in ter-plant 
dis tances of 15-50 cm are used. In China seed 
p lan ts are sometimes sown in clusters . 
M a n a g e m e n t Weeding is rarely necessary 
because the dense canopy shades out most 
weeds. However, weeds may be a problem in 
the establ ishing crop and in gaps. Practical 
experience with fibre hemp on optimal soils 
has shown t h a t for the production of 1000 kg 
s tem mater ia l a fertilizer application of 15-20 
kg N, 4 -5 kg P2O5 and 15-20 kg K2O is re-
quired. The need for ni trogen is highest dur ing 
the vegetative growth phase; requ i rements for 
P and K increase gradual ly dur ing vegetative 
growth, peaking a round flowering before slowly 
declining again. Fibre quality is improved by 
increasing N, P and K contents of the p lan t 
(within certain limts), the effect being strong-
est for K, then P, and finally N. Cannabis is a 
sui table crop for rotat ion with almost any crop, 
though some problems may occur in rotat ions 
with beets , because of nematode infestations. 
Cannabis suppresses weeds and loosens the 
soil for the following crops. Moreover, root and 
leaf mater ia l may be left in the field to serve as 
organic mater ia l for the next crop. Male p lants 
produce the best fibre and are sometimes har-
vested first; female p lan ts are sometimes al-
lowed to s tand to set seed for oil production. 
The Asian practice of removing male p lan ts is 
not because of the i r lower content of A9-THC, 
bu t to prevent seed production in female 
plants , which would reduce resin production. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Many diseases and 
pests have been described in cannabis , bu t few 
of t hem cause economic damage. Damping-off 
fungi a re impor tan t because they kill germi-
na t ing seeds and young seedlings. The most 
common leaf disease is yellow leaf spot, caused 
by Septoria cannabis and Sclerotinia scle-
rotiorum, both a t tacking the s tems and upper 
leaves. Botryotinia fuckeliana (Botrytis cinerea) 
causes damage in high humidi ty conditions. In 
dense s tands of fibre crops it a t t acks the s talks , 
whereas in hemp seed and drug crops the fun-
gus tends to a t tack the female flowers because 
they re ta in moisture. Nectria haematococca 
(anamorph Fusarium solani) and Thanatepho-
rus cucumeris (anamorph Rhizoctonia solani) 
cause root rot and may lead to losses in France 
and India, respectively. Cannabis may also 
suffer from nematodes such as Meloidogyne 
hapla in nor thern Europe and the s tem nema-
tode Ditylenchus dipsaci in southern Africa, 
nor thern America, Aust ra l ia and Asia. Canna-
bis may be infected by the parasi t ic Orobanche 
ramosa L. 
In cannabis crops, the most serious pests are 
the lepidopterous s tem borers Ostrinia nubila-
lis and Grapholitha delineana, and several 
beetle larvae boring into s tems and roots, e.g. 
Psylliodes attenuata, Ceutorhynchus rapae, 
Rhinocus pericarpius, Thyestes gebleri and 
several Mordellistena spp. The most impor tan t 
leaf-eating pests a re larvae of Autographa 
gamma, Melanchra persicariae, Spodoptera 
exigua and Mamestra configurata. Flowering 
tops are commonly infested by budworms, such 
as Helicoverpa armigera, Helicoverpa zea and 
Heliothis viriplaca. Various aphids also infest 
cannabis and may act as a vector for viruses. 
The role played by terpenoid subs tances and 
exudates of cannabinoids in repell ing insects 
has been neglected and deserves investigation. 
Another na tu r a l defence mechanism of canna-
bis, i.e. its cover of non-glandular tr ichomes, 
may serve as a mechanical defence against 
p reda tors . 
H a r v e s t i n g How cannabis is harves ted de-
pends on the product. For 'ganja' production, 
male p lan ts are pulled out as soon as they are 
recognized and before they shed pollen. Unfer-
tilized female p lants are left, and harves ted 
when flower s talks begin to t u r n yellow, about 
5 months after sowing. For the production of 
'hashish ' , the resin is collected by men who r u n 
through the p lanta t ion in lea ther ga rments . 
The resin sticks to the ga rmen t s and is then 
scraped off. Another method is to collect the 
resin by squeezing p lan t tops between the 
palms of the hand . P lan t s are harves ted for 
fibre or seed by cut t ing the s tems manua l ly or 
by machinery. In China branched p lan ts on the 
edges of the field a re left for seed production. 
Yie ld The average yield of 'ganja' in India is 
about 280 kg/ha. Elsewhere, average yields of 
750 kg/ha on rain-fed land and 1270 kg/ha on 
irr igated land are mentioned. The extraction 
r a t e for resin is about 2.8%, averaging 10-45 
kg/ha. Stem yields (yielding approximately 2 5 -
35% fibre) a re usual ly between 3-8 t/ha, with a 
potent ial of 20 t /ha. When cannabis is grown 
solely for seed, yields of 1300-1700 kg/ha may 
be obtained. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t For the production 
of 'ganja', harvested inflorescences a re t rodden 
and pressed into flat cakes. For fibre produc-
tion the cut s tems are graded by pull ing out 
the longest and medium stems, respectively. 
Short and twisted s tems a re not used for fibre 
production. Leaves are s tr ipped off wi th a 
CANNABIS 141 
knife. The stems are then dried in the field for 
2-4 days. About 200 stems are bundled and 
immersed in water for a 3-day retting. The 
retted stems are dried and, if necessary, retted 
and dried a second time. Fibre bundles are 
subsequently stripped off by hand from the 
partly wet stems and dried on drying-lines 
before marketing. Another method to obtain 
the fibres is to dry the stems completely before 
breaking and combing them. The yield of fibre 
with the dry method is slightly higher than 
with the wet method; 10% versus 6% of the dry 
stem mass. In Europe hemp is harvested me-
chanically by cutting, drying in swathes on the 
field for a few weeks, and subsequently press-
ing and baling in one operation. The yield of 
fibre is on average 15%. The fineness of the 
fibre and cleanness or degree of retting are 
decisive for processing to ropes and textiles. 
Sometimes, male and female plants are there-
fore separated and processed differently. On 
modern spinning machines, in which produc-
tion speeds are the determining factor, fibre 
length may be a limitation to the use of bast 
fibre. Parallel processing of the fibrous raw 
material is required, to prevent entanglement; 
this adds substantially to the costs of the fab-
rics. Hemp fibres may be used for paper pro-
duction in which the chemical content of the 
fibres mainly determines the quality of the 
pulp. The drainability and bleachability of the 
pulp and sheet forming are among the many 
factors that determine the applicability of the 
pulp. For the application of fibre in composite 
materials the following properties are of inter-
est: high tensile strength, rigidity, impact re-
sistance, small volume shrinkage during cur-
ing, resistance to corrosion, low density, non-
toxicity, recyclability, ease of disposal and eco-
nomic price. 
Genetic resources Although the N.I. 
Vavilov All-Russian Scientific Research Insti-
tute of Plant Industry, St. Petersburg, Russian 
Federation holds 450 accessions and the Insti-
tute of Crop Science (CAAS), Beijing, China 
200 accessions, there has been limited preser-
vation of germplasm of Cannabis sativa in gene 
banks because of its bad image as a narcotic. 
Together with the declining interest in breed-
ing and maintaining cultivars, this has led to 
an impoverishment of germplasm resources. 
However, a large reservoir of natural variation 
is maintained by wild types. 
Breeding Genetic variability is large. Pro-
duction of large amounts of pollen and wind 
pollination tend to lead to extensive genetic 
exchange between different domesticated types 
and between domesticated and wild plants. 
Breeding has mostly focused on the creation of 
monoecious cultivars. In Europe breeding and 
selection work is directed at obtaining hemp 
types with a bast fibre content higher than 
30% and A^-THC levels below 0.3%. 
Prospects Although the resin present in 
cannabis has been recognized to have thera-
peutic value, the use of cannabis as a medicinal 
plant is limited, mainly because it is prohibited 
in most countries. However, research is in-
creasing on cannabis drugs for relieving pa-
tients suffering from diseases such as multiple 
sclerosis, cancer and AIDS and for the preven-
tion of glaucoma. Since many young people 
smoke 'ganja' or 'marihuana', illegal cultivation 
of cannabis in remote areas is common and 
increasing. If cannabis were to become an ac-
cepted legal medicine worldwide, prospects for 
large-scale cultivation in tropical Africa would 
be good. 
Hemp grown for fibre has a long history and 
still has good prospects, but not yet for tropical 
Africa where ecologically adapted cultivars are 
lacking. The plant fibre products have major 
advantages in various branches of industry. 
They are biocompatible and biodegradable, 
thereby reducing the environmental burden of 
waste materials. The excellent nutritional 
qualities of seed oil and seed protein and the 
ease with which it can be fitted into crop rota-
tions may lead to an expansion of cannabis 
production in western countries. The research 
priorities include: developing ecologically 
adapted cultivars, determining optimal produc-
tion techniques, developing field fibre extrac-
tion techniques, quantifying the relationships 
between production conditions, processing and 
fibre quality, and optimizing the management 
of production chains to the best use of all com-
ponents of cannabis. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Grinspoon, 
1995; Grotenhermen & Russo, 2002; Neu-
winger, 2000; Turner, Elsohly & Boeren, 1980; 
UNODC, 1997; UNODC, 2005; van der Werf, 
1994; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962; Wuli-
jarni-Soetjipto et al., 1999. 
Other references Ameri, 1999; Brown & 
Dobs, 2002; Bruneton, 1995; Colasanti, Craig, 
& Allara, 1984; Croxford & Yamamura, 2005; 
Hillig, 2005; FAO, 2005; Gray, 1995; Guy, 
Whittle & Robson, 2004; Hall, Christie & Cur-
row, 2005; Hansel et a l , 1993; McPartland, 
1996a; McPartland, 1996b; Purseglove, 1968; 
Samuelsson, 1992; Shook & Burks, 1989; 
142 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Small, 1995; Tahir & Zimmerman, 1991; van 
Soest, Mastebroek & de Meijer, 1993; Wills, 
1995. 
Sources of i l lustrat ion Wulijarni-Soetjipto 
et al., 1999. 
Authors P.C.M. Jansen 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
CAPSELLA BURSA-PASTORIS (L.) Medik. 
Protologue Pfl.-Gatt. 1: 85 (1792). 
Family Brassicaceae (Cruciferae) 
Chromosome number In - 16, 32 
Vernacular names Shepherd's purse, shep-
herd's heart, pepper and salt, lady's purse, 
mother's heart, rattle pouches (En). Bourse à 
pasteur, bourse à berger, boursette (Fr). Boisa 
de pastor (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Capsel-
la bursa-pastoris probably originated in the 
eastern Mediterranean area. It is more com-
mon in temperate zones than in the tropics. It 
currently has a worldwide distribution avoid-
ing only the tropical lowlands. In tropical Af-
rica it occurs at higher altitudes. 
Uses Capsella bursa-pastoris is a prominent 
medicinal plant in Europe and the Mediterra-
nean region, as well as in Latin America and 
Asia. The aerial parts have been used since 
antiquity as a haemostatic to treat internal 
and external haemorrhages, while a hot and 
bitter infusion is taken as an emmenagogue, 
diaphoretic, tonic, antiscorbutic, astringent, 
antidiarrhoeal and diuretic. It is also used in 
gynaecology to regulate menstruation as it 
constricts the blood vessels. In Ethiopia the 
Capsella bursa-pastoris - wild 
plant is known as an abortifacient. In Rwanda 
ground leaves are applied as a dressing for 
dislocations and sprains, while the fumes of a 
leaf infusion in hot water are inhaled to treat 
colds. Mashed seeds, slightly grilled, are mixed 
with beer and taken to treat impotence. Indica-
tions and uses approved by Commission E are 
those for nosebleed, premenstrual syndrome, 
and wounds and burns. The species is not to be 
used during pregnancy. No health hazards are 
known with proper therapeutic dosage. 
The young leaves are sometimes cooked and 
eaten as a vegetable; they are used fresh in 
salads in Rwanda and Madagascar and also in 
Europe and the Americas. It is even a salad 
crop in China. The seeds, containing 35% fatty 
oil, are edible as well, raw in salads, or cooked 
in soup. The fruits can be used as a peppery 
seasoning for soups and stews. One of the 
chemical constituents of the plant, luteolin, is a 
natural colouring agent (yellow or yellowish 
green). Capsella bursa-pastoris is grazed by 
livestock. Cows produce yellowish milk and 
chicken produce yellowish green egg yolks 
when they have eaten large amounts of the 
plant. It is also said to influence the taste of 
milk and eggs. 
Production and international trade Al-
though extracts of Capsella bursa-pastoris are 
widely used and traded as phytopharmaceuti-
cals, no information is available on the 
amounts involved or the centres of production. 
Properties Capsella bursa-pastoris contains 
flavonoids (including rutin, luteolin, luteolin-7-
galactoside and luteolin-7-rutinoside), acids 
(e.g. bursic acid, fumaric acid and citric acid) 
and amines (e.g. acetylcholine, histamine and 
tyramine). The presence of tyramine and 
histamine might be due to fungal infection. The 
leaves of Capsella bursa-pastoris are rich in 
iron, calcium, nitrate and vitamin A, thiamin, 
riboflavin, phylloquinone and ascorbic acid. 
Cardioactive steroids are present presumably 
only in the seeds. 
In pharmacological studies, Capsella bursa-
pastoris has shown anti-inflammatory and 
diuretic actions. Intraperitoneal administra-
tion of a plant extract to rats blocked the for-
mation of stress-induced ulcers and reduced 
recovery time. Antineoplastic, central nervous 
system depressant, and hypotensive effects 
have also been observed, and in-vitro tests 
have shown smooth-muscle stimulant effects. 
An extract of the whole plant produced a fall in 
blood pressure in dogs and rabbits, accompa-
nied by cardiac acceleration, and caused dilata-
CAPSELLA 143 
tion of the blood vessels in rabbits. This effect 
has been ascribed to acetylcholine. The toxic 
symptoms in mice with Ehrlich tumour that 
had been given mitomycin C were reduced by 
the administration of fumaric acid from 
Capsella bursa-pastoris. 
A glucosyl flavone close to luteolin extracted 
from Capsella bursa-pastoris showed excellent 
antioxidative activity. Two glycine- and 
histidine-rich peptides, shepherin I and II, 
exhibited antimicrobial action against gram-
negative bacteria and fungi. 
A case of nitrite poisoning in pigs in South 
Africa has been attributed to ingestion of 
Capsella bursa-pastoris. 
Description Slender, erect, annual or short-
lived perennial herb up to 70 cm tall, with a 
taproot; stem simple or branched, angled and 
striate, almost glabrous to hairy. Leaves 
alternate, basal ones in a rosette; stipules 
absent; petiole short; blade very variable, from 
undivided and coarsely toothed to 
pinnatipartite, oblanceolate in outline, 3-15 cm 
long, base attenuate, apex rounded to acute; 
stem leaves few, sessile, amplexicaul, blade 
smaller than basal leaves, usually undivided, 
oblong. Inflorescence a terminal raceme up to 
20 cm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 4-
Capsella bursa-pastoris - 1, plant habit; 2, 
flower; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
merous; pedicel c. 6 mm long, elongating in 
fruit, up to 20 mm long; sepals c. 1.5 mm long, 
green, mostly pubescent; petals spatulate, 2-3 
mm long, clawed, white; stamens 6, 4 longer 
and 2 shorter; ovary superior, dorsiventrally 
flattened, style c. 0.5 mm long. Fruit a heart-
shaped silique, 5—10 mm x 2.5—8 mm, 
dehiscing by 2 net-veined valves, many-seeded. 
Seeds oblong, 0.5-1 x 0.5 mm, reddish to 
yellowish brown, with 2 longitudinal grooves, 
mucilaginous when wet. Seedling with epigeal 
germination. 
Other botanical information Capsella 
comprises about 5 species, most of them from 
Europe. Capsella bursa-pastoris is extremely 
variable. The oldest record of Capsella bursa-
pastoris in East Africa is from 1932 at 2600 m 
altitude. 
Growth and development Capsella bursa-
pastoris is a pioneer of disturbed localities and 
hence an opportunist species. In open localities 
it has a high growth rate and spreads easily, 
but when perennial grasses appear in the 
succession, it declines in abundance and 
disappears. It can withstand a high degree of 
trampling by animals. Heavy trampling may 
lead to rosettes with more leaves, but also to 
smaller plants that flower later and produce 
fewer seeds. Flowers are usually self-
pollinated. Capsella bursa-pastoris is easily 
dispersed by wind and rain. It flowers and 
fruits all year round, unless the temperature 
drops below 5°C. 
Ecology Capsella bursa-pastoris occurs in 
both urban and rural wasteland, in cultivated 
land and roadsides. The reported altitudinal 
range in Africa is 1600-2500(-3000) m. 
Capsella bursa-pastoris is found on soils 
ranging from clay to sandy loam with pH 5-8. 
It is especially frequent on fertile soils in areas 
of intense arable agriculture. It is more 
common in drier habitats than in wet ones. Its 
reproductive and vegetative potential is quite 
low in waterlogged soil, and it does not survive 
in extremely wet conditions. It can survive 
frost. 
Propagation and planting The number of 
seeds per fruit and fruits per plant is very 
variable and depends on the position of the 
fruit on the infructescence and on habitat. 
Seeds remain viable for many years in the soil. 
They germinate at 5-30°C. Freshly matured 
seeds are dormant. Dormancy is easily broken 
by temperatures below 15°C, followed by 
exposure to light. Temperatures of 25—30°C 
and alternating temperatures accelerate 
144 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
germinat ion of non-dormant seeds. Seed stored 
at ambient t empera tu res and humidi ty s t a r t s 
to lose viability after 6 months . 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Capsella bursa-pastoris 
is an a l ternat ive host of several fungal diseases 
and insect pests of other Brassicaceae species. 
Since it often acts as a host to fungi like Albugo 
Candida and Peronospora parasitica the 
presence of mycotoxins (health hazard 
chemicals secreted by the toxic mold) is 
possible. It is also host to a wide variety of 
p lan t viruses, especially seed-borne viruses. 
H a r v e s t i n g Capsella bursa-pastoris is 
collected from the wild, a l though bringing it 
into cultivation h a s been recommended to 
obtain higher yields. The p lan ts can be dried 
rapidly in the shade at t empera tu re s not 
h igher t h a n 45°C. They can be used fresh or 
dried, a l though the dried p lan ts quickly lose 
the i r effectiveness and should not be stored for 
more t h a n a year. The pungent t as te is also 
lost by drying. Dur ing storage, Capsella bursa-
pastoris should be protected from light and 
moisture. 
Yield Seed production of Capsella bursa-
pastoris unde r greenhouse conditions was es-
t imated a t 11,300-58,500 seeds/plant, bu t can 
be as high as 90,000 seeds/plant. 
P r o s p e c t s The m a n y uses of Capsella bursa-
pastoris in t radi t ional medicine w a r r a n t more 
research at tent ion. I ts restr ict ion in Africa to 
higher a l t i tudes is a l imiting factor for wide-
spread use, both as a medicinal p lan t and as a 
vegetable. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Aksoy, Dixon & Hale, 
1998; Burkill , 1985; Duke, 1992; Fleming (Edi-
tor), 1998; Holm et al., 1977; Neuffer & Linde, 
1999; P lan t s for a future, 1996-2002; Wat t & 
Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Decary, 1946; Hong et 
al., 1995; Jansen , 1981; Jonseil, 1982a; Kuroda 
& Akao, 1977; Kuroda & Akao, 1980; Kuroda & 
Kaku, 1969; Mara is , 1980a; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Pieroni et al., 2002; Wiese & Jouber t , 2001. 
S o u r c e s o f i l lu s t ra t ion Holm et al., 1977. 
A u t h o r s I. Vandebroek 
CASSIA ABBREVIATA Oliv. 
P r o t o l o g u e FI. t rop. Afr. 2: 271 (1871). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Longtail cassia, long-
pod cassia, sjambok pod (En). Mbaraka , 
m k a k a t i k a (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cassia 
abbreviata is indigenous from Gabon east to 
Somalia and throughout southern Africa to 
South Africa. It has been introduced into Mau-
ri t ius. 
U s e s Cassia abbreviata h a s been used for 
many a i lments . The leaves are smoked as a 
t r ea tmen t for haema tu r i a , whereas the smoke 
of smouldering twigs is inhaled to cure head-
ache. A root infusion is kept in the mouth, or 
roots a re chewed and swallowed to relieve 
toothache. A root decoction or the dried pow-
dered roots in wate r are d runk to t r ea t gastro-
intest inal disorders, stomach-ache, bilharzia, 
venereal diseases, pneumonia , u t e rus com-
plaints , heavy mens t rua t ion , snakebites , and 
as a purgat ive, stomachic, aphrodisiac, aborti-
facient and vermifuge. Malar ia (including 
blackwater fever) is also t rea ted with extracts 
from the roots. A wate r extract of t he roots is 
used as an eyewash to cure ophthalmia . The 
powdered s tem bark is applied to abscesses and 
added to food to cure diarrhoea. A decoction of 
the s tem bark is used as a purgat ive and to 
cure malar ia and diarrhoea. The seed is used 
as a tonic. 
The wood is used to make furniture, pestles 
and joinery. It is t e rmi te res i s tan t and there-
fore t he poles a re preferred for house construc-
tion. The wood is also a useful source of char-
coal and firewood Cassia abbreviata is impor-
t a n t in soil conservation and as a shade tree. 
The flowers a re highly appreciated as bee for-
age. The s tem bark is used for t ann ing and 
dyeing. 
Product ion and international trade A de-
coction of Cassia abbreviata roots was formerly 
produced commercially and sold in southern 
Cassia abbreviata - wild 
CASSIA 145 
Africa as a cure for blackwater fever and schis-
tosomiasis. Trade of roots and bark for local 
use is still important in East and south-eastern 
Africa. Traditional healers nowadays rely on 
commercial traders for their supply, whereas in 
the past they harvested the required material 
themselves. High demand and destructive har-
vesting have led to steep price increases, at 
least in Malawi. 
Properties From the root bark, stem bark, 
leaves and flowers, a number of an-
thraquinones, triterpenoids, flavanol deriva-
tives and organic acids have been isolated. Ex-
tracts of both roots and leaves showed high 
antiplasmodial activity in vitro. Injection of 
crude extract of the stem bark in rats caused a 
drop in blood pressure which was dose-
dependent. Tests on pregnant mice and rats 
showed no abortifacient activity of stem bark 
extract at doses which are not toxic to the ani-
mals. Methanol, acetone and water extracts of 
the stem bark showed significant inhibition 
against a number of gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria. Tests of a root extract 
showed only modest levels of cytotoxicity. 
The wood is heavy and dark brown. The heart-
wood has a coarse texture and shows pale 
blotches. 
Cassia abbreviata - 1, leafy branch; 2, inflore-
scence; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
Adulterations and substitutes As a pur-
gative Cassia abbreviata is often replaced by 
other Cassia, Senna and Aloe species. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 10(— 
15) m tall, deciduous; young twigs glabrous or 
hairy. Leaves arranged spirally, paripinnately 
compound with 5-12 pairs of leaflets; stipules 
linear, c. 1.5 mm long, caducous; leaflets ovate-
elliptical to oblong-elliptical, 3-6 cm x 1-3 cm, 
base rounded to obtuse, apex obtuse to 
subacute. Inflorescence a terminal, lax raceme, 
0.5-9 cm long, many-flowered; bracts persis-
tent during flowering. Flowers bisexual, 
slightly zygomorphic, 5-merous, fragrant; se-
pals obtuse; petals oblanceolate to obovate, 15-
35 mm x 7-18 mm, yellow; stamens 10, 3 with 
filaments c. 3 cm long, 4 shorter, 3 rudimen-
tary; ovary superior, stipitate, style very short, 
stigma small. Fruit a pendulous cylindrical pod 
30-90 cm x 1.5-2.5 cm, transversely parti-
tioned, dehiscent by 2 valves, woody, black, 
many-seeded with seeds embedded in pulp. 
Seeds ellipsoid, 9-12 mm long, brown to black. 
Seedling with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Until the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, but was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
Chamaecrista and Senna. In Cassia abbreviata 
3 subspecies are distinguished: subsp. abbre-
viata, subsp. beareana (Holmes) Brenan and 
subsp. kassneri (Baker f.) Brenan. They differ 
morphologically and in ecological require-
ments. Cassia abbreviata hybridizes with Cas-
sia burttii Baker f., which is found in Tanzania 
and Mozambique. Cassia afrofistula Brenan 
has been erroneously considered synonymous 
with Cassia abbreviata; it is native to Kenya, 
Tanzania, Mozambique and Madagascar. Both 
Cassia burttii and Cassia afrofistula have simi-
lar medicinal uses in East Africa as Cassia 
abbreviata. It is probable that these 3 species 
have been confused. 
Growth and development Cassia abbre-
viata is moderately fast growing. It has poten-
tial for intercropping as it roots deeply and 
probably causes only limited competition with 
crops for nutrients and water. Flowering occurs 
on the bare tree at the end of the dry season 
and fruits are ripe about 7 months later. Cas-
sia abbreviata does not form root nodules but 
has a high N-content in its leaves. It has been 
suggested that it may fix atmospheric nitrogen 
in sym-biosis with ectomycorrhizas. 
Ecology Cassia abbreviata commonly occurs 
in Acacia-Commiphora bushland and also in 
146 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
woodland and wooded grassland. It is usually 
found on termite mounds and clayey soils. Ma-
ture t rees are fire res is tant , bu t seedlings are 
vulnerable . It is drought to lerant and it can 
wi ths tand moderate frost. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Cassia abbre-
viata is propagated by seed or Wildlings. Soak-
ing in hot water improves seed germinat ion. 
Seeds germinate 4-10 days after sowing. They 
are sown in a sand-compost mixture (1:1) and 
should be kept wa rm and moist. It is bet ter not 
to use seeding t rays , bu t to sow seed directly 
into polythene bags or into the ground. Before 
t ransp lan t ing , 1-2 weeks after sowing, root 
t r imming is necessary because the p lants de-
velop a long taproot early. 
M a n a g e m e n t Pollarding, coppicing, t r im-
ming and pruning are recommended manage-
men t s t ra tegies for Cassia abbreviata. Over-
water ing resul ts in poor flowering. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s The leaves of Cassia 
abbreviata a re a t tacked by powdery mildew 
caused by Phyllactinia cassiae. 
H a r v e s t i n g Removal of the ba rk of Cassia 
abbreviata should be done in small pieces and 
not by r ing barking, as is commonly done. Har-
vest ing the roots is even more destructive. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The harves ted 
ba rk is dried in the shade for future use. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s In Malawi and Zambia 
excessive cut t ing of the ba rk of Cassia abbre-
viata for medicinal use has killed many t rees 
nea r homesteads . Populat ions in Kenya and 
Tanzania are also under severe pressure . 
Measures to protect na tu r a l s t ands are long 
overdue. 
P r o s p e c t s In view of the many and wide-
spread medicinal uses of Cassia abbreviata, the 
amoun t of scientific research on the species is 
disappointing. The enormous demand for roots 
and ba rk mean t h a t the wild populat ions are 
being depleted a t a high ra te . Protection meas-
u r e s a n d domestication a re required urgently. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Brenan, 1967; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Er iksen et al., 2005; Kayam-
baz in thu et al., 2006; Kokwaro, 1993; Neu-
winger, 2000; Otsyina & Dery, 2001; Storrs, 
1979; World Agroforestry Centre, undated . 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s August ino & Gillah, 
2005; Beentje, 1994; Chhabra , M a h u n n a h & 
Mshiu, 1987; Connelly et al., 1996; Gelfand et 
al., 1985; Gessler et al., 1995; Gorter & Eicker, 
1987; Hogberg & Alexander, 1995; Kambizi & 
Afolayan, 2001; Kamuhabwa , Nshimo & de 
Witte, 2000; Malan et al., 1996; Molgaard et 
a l , 2001; Muta sa & Kahn, 1995; Ndubani & 
Höjer, 1999; Ndubani et a l , 1998; Pa r ry & 
Matambo, 1992; Parry, M u t a n g a d u r a & Duri , 
1992; S teenkamp, 2003; van Wyk & Gericke, 
2000; von Koenen, 2001. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Ross, 1977; Serra to 
Valenti , 1971. 
A u t h o r s V. Kawanga 
C A S S I A A N G O L E N S I S Welw. ex H i e r n 
P r o t o l o g u e Cat. afr. pi. 1: 291 (1896). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae - Cae-
salpinioideae) 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Mkundekunde (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cassia 
angolensis occurs na tura l ly in DR Congo, Tan-
zania, Malawi, Zambia, Angola and Mozam-
bique. In South Africa it is planted as an or-
namen ta l . 
U s e s In Tanzania a root decoction of Cassia 
angolensis is d runk as a remedy for venereal 
diseases, and the fresh leaves are ea ten as a 
cough remedy. The wood is used as firewood, as 
a source of charcoal and to make tool handles 
and spoons. The tree is planted for shade and 
as an ornamenta l . 
P r o p e r t i e s The s tem ba rk of Cassia ango-
lensis contains the an thraqu inones chrysopha-
nol, emodin and physcion. 
B o t a n y Medium-sized t ree up to 25 m tall, 
deciduous, with s t ra ight bole; ba rk brown, 
smooth, scaling; young branches almost gla-
brous to shortly hairy. Leaves a r ranged spi-
rally, par ip innate ly compound with 10-13 
pairs of leaflets; s t ipules linear, 1.5 mm long, 
caducous; petiole and rachis 11-30 cm long; 
leaflets oblong-elliptical, 3.5-4 cm x 1.5-2 cm, 
apex emargina te , short ly hairy. Inflorescence 
an axillary raceme up to 12 cm long, c. 20-
flowered; bracts soon falling. Flowers bisexual, 
zygomorphic, 5-merous; sepals rounded a t 
apex; pe ta ls unequal , 2 - 3 cm long, golden-
yellow; s t amens (9—)10, the 3 lower ones larg-
est, curved and sterile, 4 middle ones fertile, 3 
upper ones rudimentary ; ovary superior, lin-
ear, curved, glabrous, up to 2 cm long. Frui t a 
cylindrical pod up to 70 cm long, t ransversely 
part i t ioned, indéhiscent, up to 60-seeded. 
Seeds compressed obovoid-cylindrical, 8-10 
mm x 5-9 mm, brown. Seedling with epigeal 
germinat ion. 
Unt i l the early 1980s, Cassia was considered a 
very large genus of about 550 species, bu t was 
then split into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. wi th about 
30 species, Chamaecrista and Senna. Cassia 
CASSIA 147 
mannii Oliv, is very similar to Cassia angolen-
sis but has white or pink petals, the leaflets are 
not distinctly emarginate and the margin of 
the leaflets is pubescent. Cassia mannii occurs 
from Côte d'Ivoire southwards to Gabon and 
eastwards to Sudan and Uganda. In Congo an 
infusion of the bark is taken to cure bronchial 
problems and the crushed seeds are applied to 
skin scarifications to treat neuralgia. The bark 
is used for tanning and the heartwood is hand-
some, hard, heavy and tough and is suitable for 
turning and polishing. Two other Cassia spe-
cies occurring in the Guineo-Congolian rainfor-
est zone, Cassia fikifiki Aubrév. & Pellegr. and 
Cassia aubrevillei Pellegr., are both reported to 
have medicinal uses. However, all uses on re-
cord are from western Côte d'Ivoire and from 
Liberia where Cassia aubrevillei does not occur 
and hence, the uses should probably be attrib-
uted to Cassia fikifiki. Water or palm-wine 
extracts of the stem bark and roots of Cassia 
fikifiki are drunk to treat river blindness (on-
chocerciasis). A decoction of the bark is used 
for washing leprosy patients and dry powdered 
bark is sprinkled on wounds to promote heal-
ing. The dried bark dissolved in palm wine is 
taken to cure stomach-ache. To treat dizziness 
ash of burned pods is mixed with water and 
applied to the eyelids. The bark contains 
chrysophanol, aloe-emodin, physcion and rhein. 
The alcoholic extract of the bark showed sig-
nificant microfilaricidal activity in vitro. Cassia 
aubrevillei and Cassia fikifiki are included in 
the IUCN Red List of endangered species as 
vulnerable and endangered, respectively. 
Ecology Cassia angolensis occurs in lowland 
rainforest at 800-1100 m altitude. 
Management Cassia angolensis is only cul-
tivated for its ornamental value. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Cas-
sia angolensis is fairly widespread there is no 
threat of genetic erosion or extinction. 
Prospects Cassia angolensis will probably 
remain of local importance only as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Brenan, 1967; Kokwaro, 1993; Lovett et 
al., 2006; Southon et al., 1994. 
Other references Aubréville, 1959b; Jahn, 
Kilian & Kraus, 1990; Kilian et a l , 1990; Lock, 
1990; Ross, 1977; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962; Wilczek et al., 1952. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
CASSIA FISTULA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 377 (1753). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 24, 28 
Vernacular names Golden shower, Indian 
laburnum, golden pipetree, purging cassia, 
purging fistula, pudding-pipe tree (En). Canéfi-
cier, bâton casse, casse doux, casse espagnole, 
douche d'or (Fr). Cassia officinal, cana fistula, 
cassia fistula, meduro (Po). Mkundekunde 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cassia 
fistula probably originates from India and Sri 
Lanka, but is now pantropical. The medicinal 
use of Cassia fistula dates from ancient times 
and has been the main factor in its spread. It is 
now widespread in East Africa and several of 
the Indian Ocean islands. 
Uses The ripe pods and seeds of Cassia fis-
tula are widely used as a laxative. The root-
bark, leaves and flowers also have laxative 
properties, but to a lesser extent. In Tanzania, 
Zimbabwe and Mozambique Cassia fistula pods 
are used as a remedy for malaria, blood poison-
ing, anthrax and dysentery. In Mauritius a 
decoction of the pulp of the fruit is taken as a 
cure for kidney stones, as a vermifuge and as a 
laxative. In Papua New Guinea broken bones 
and tropical ulcers are bandaged with bark 
scrapings and leaf sap. In Thailand the heart-
wood is traditionally applied as an anthelmin-
thic, and a decoction of the roots is applied to 
purify wounds and ulcers. The bark or leaves 
are widely applied to skin problems. In India 
the roots are used to treat fever. In tropical 
America the pods are used to treat diabetes. 
Cassia fistula - planted 
148 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
In m o d e m medicine, the fruit pulp of Cassia 
fistula is sometimes used as a mild laxative in 
paediatr ics . 
Apar t from its medicinal propert ies, Cassia 
fistula is widely planted as an ornamenta l , 
often along roads, and it provides a ha rd mul-
t ipurpose t imber. Twigs are commonly cut for 
forage. 
The ba rk is used for t ann ing and as an ingre-
dient in betel pas te . 
Product ion and international trade Al-
though Cassia fistula pods have been t raded 
internat ional ly, e.g. to Europe, for centuries, no 
recent t r ade information is available. 
P r o p e r t i e s The fruit pulp and leaves of 
Cassia fistula a re rich in an th raqu inone de-
rivatives (c. 2%), e.g. rhein, sennidin and re-
lated d ianthrones , and sennoside (the corre-
sponding glycoside) and related dianthrone-
glycosides, which a re responsible for the laxa-
tive propert ies. In a s tudy in Mexico, sennoside 
contents were found to be up to 1.5% in the 
leaves, and up to 1.9% in the fruits. The sugar 
moiety in the glycosides increases water solu-
bility of the molecule, and t hus facilitates 
t r anspor t to the site of action: the colon. In the 
colon, bacteria hydrolyze the glycosides and 
d ianthrones to an thraquinones , a reaction 
which is immediately followed by the local re-
duction of the an th raqu inones to the i r corre-
sponding an thrones . The la t te r compounds act 
directly on the colon and s t imula te peristalsis . 
In-vitro and in-vivo tes ts showed t h a t seed 
powder of Cassia fistula h a s amoebicidal and 
cysticidal propert ies agains t Entamoeba histo-
lytica and tha t it could cure in tes t ina l and he-
patic amoebiasis of laboratory an imals and 
in tes t inal amoebiasis of h u m a n s . In an ex-
per iment with r a t s with induced hypercholes-
terolaemia, adminis t ra t ion of a Cassia fistula 
pod extract caused a marked correction of the 
lipid metabolism and a r e tu rn to normal serum 
levels of the t r ansaminases GOT and GPT, and 
of phosphatases . The aqueous fraction of Cas-
sia fistula pods produced a significant decrease 
in glycaemia in mice. Aqueous and methanolic 
ba rk extracts showed significant anti-oxidant 
activities in different in-vitro assay methods, 
and significant ant i - inf lammatory activities in 
both acute and chronic models us ing ra t s . An 
alcohol extract of Cassia fistula leaves showed 
ant ibacter ial activity in vivo agains t Staphylo-
coccus aureus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa in 
wounded r a t s and accelerated wound healing. 
A wate r extract of Cassia fistula leaves showed 
antifungal activity in vitro agains t t he h u m a n 
skin pa thogens Trichophyton spp., Epider-
matophyton floccosum and Microsporum fer-
ruginum. 
In an Indian study, the fatty acids in Cassia 
fistula seeds were: linoleic acid (52.5%), oleic 
acid (18.1%), palmitic acid (16%), vernolic acid 
(6.1%), stearic acid (3.4%), sterculic acid (2%), 
malvalic acid (1.5%) and myristic acid (0.4%). 
The fruit pulp is rich in pectins and mucilages. 
The wate r soluble gum isolated from the seeds 
h a s been evaluated for its binding propert ies 
for formulations of tablets . The gum showed 
overall superiori ty in viscosity and binding 
propert ies as compared to other binders . 
The nutr i t ive value of the forage is per 100 g 
dry mat te r : crude protein 18 g, crude fibre 30 g, 
ash 8 g, crude fat 8 g, N-free extract 37 g, Ca 
3.3 g, P 0.3 g. The wood of Cassia fistula h a s a 
density of about 790 kg/m3, with more or less 
s t ra ight grain and moderately coarse texture . 
The wood has an oven-dry energy value of 
18,400 kJ/kg. 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s Anthraqui -
none glycosides and sennosides are also found 
in other Cassia, Senna and Aloe species, which 
are also used for their laxative and purgat ive 
propert ies . 
D e s c r i p t i o n Small t ree up to 15 m tall, de-
ciduous or semi-deciduous; branches spreading, 
young twigs glabrous. Leaves a r ranged spi-
rally, par ip innate ly compound with 3-7 pairs 
of leaflets; st ipules deltoid, 1-2 mm long; leaf-
lets ovate-oblong, 7-12 cm x 4 - 8 cm, base 
broadly cuneate, apex acute, leathery, with 
shiny upper surface, glabrous when ma tu re . 
Inflorescence an axillary, pendulous, lax ra-
ceme, 20-40(-60) cm long, 1-3 together, many-
flowered; bracts soon falling. Flowers bisexual, 
slightly zygomorphic, 5-merous, fragrant; se-
pals 7-10 mm long, densely shortly hai ry out-
side; petals broadly ovate, 30-35 m m x 10-15 
mm, short ly clawed, golden-yellow; s t amens 
10, 3 wi th fi laments 3-4 cm long, 4 shorter 
with f i laments 6-10 mm long, 3 rud imen ta ry 
and 3-4 mm long; ovary superior, s t ipi tate , 
style long, s t igma small . Frui t a pendulous 
cylindrical pod 20-60 cm x 1.5-2 cm, t rans-
versely part i t ioned, indéhiscent, black, gla-
brous, many-seeded with seeds embedded in 
black, glutinous pulp. Seeds ellipsoid, 8-9 mm 
long, glossy brown. Seedling with epigeal ger-
minat ion. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Unt i l the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, bu t was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
CASSIA 149 
Cassia fistula - 1, branch with inflorescence; 2, 
flower; 3, mature fruit; 4, section of fruit show-
ing seeds. 
Source: PROSEA 
Chamaecrista and Senna. 
Growth and development Cassia fistula is 
a slow growing tree. In Singapore, Cassia fis-
tula sheds its leaves at 9-10 month intervals 
and the inflorescences develop with the new 
leaves. It generally takes 8-10 years from sow-
ing to flowering. This period can be reduced by 
vegetative propagation. At the beginning of 
flowering, the whole crown is covered with 
flowers; sporadic flowering continues for up to 
3 months. The roots of Cassia fistula lack 
nodulating ability. 
Ecology In its natural area of distribution 
Cassia fistula occurs in dry deciduous forest at 
lower altitudes. It is grown in areas with an 
annual rainfall of 500—2700 mm and average 
annual temperatures of 18-29°C. It tolerates 
some shading, is fairly drought resistant but 
vulnerable to frost. It seems to favour calcare-
ous and red, volcanic soils, but is also found on 
sandy and loamy soils with a pH of 5.5—8.7. 
Propagation and planting Cassia fistula 
can be propagated by seed and vegetatively 
through cuttings and layering. The seeds have 
a hard seed coat and germination is improved 
by mechanical scarification or treatment with 
concentrated sulphuric acid for at least 45 
minutes. Seed can be stored for prolonged peri-
ods without loss of viability. Cassia fistula seed 
should be sown in full light, and adequate wa-
ter supply is required for optimal germination. 
The seed can increase three times in weight by 
absorbing water. Direct sowing is practised in 
Asia. 
Management Cassia fistula coppices well 
and produces root suckers freely. It does not 
compete well with weeds. 
Diseases and pests In tropical Africa no 
diseases and pests of Cassia fistula have been 
recorded. Colletotrichum gloeosporioides causes 
brown pinhead spot disease in Malaysia. In the 
Philippines Cassia fistula is attacked by the 
psyllid Heteropsylla cubana. 
Harvesting Pods of Cassia fistula are har-
vested when mature, and in general simply 
collected from the ground. 
Yield The concentration of sennoside in the 
leaves of Cassia fistula is highest soon after the 
onset of the rainy season, when new leaves 
have appeared and flowering started. The sen-
noside content of the pods is highest at the 
mid-stage of fruit maturation, when the pods 
are pale brown. 
Handling after harvest For domestic use 
of Cassia fistula, the pulp is scraped from the 
fresh pods. Pods intended for trade are dried. 
Prolonged boiling of the pulp leads to loss of 
the purgative properties. 
Genetic resources In view of its wide dis-
tribution and cultivation, Cassia fistula is not 
endangered. The International Institute for 
Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, Nigeria main-
tains a germplasm collection. 
Prospects Cassia fistula is an interesting 
multipurpose tree for African farmers, and has 
a high ornamental value. With regard to fre-
quent use of Cassia as laxative, caution seems 
to be needed. The hypocholesterolaemic, anti-
fungal and anti-amoebic properties warrant 
further research. The seeds of Cassia fistula 
are a potential commercial source of seed gum, 
a potential binder for the pharmaceutical in-
dustry. 
Major references Asseleih, Hernandez & 
Sanchez, 1990; Babeley & Kandya, 1988; Bru-
neton, 1999; El-Saadany et al., 1991; Gurib-
Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1995; Phong-
paichit et al., 2004; Shukla & Das, 1988; To-
ruan-Purba, 1999a; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962; World Agroforestry Centre, undated. 
Other references Burkill, 1995; Göhl, 1981; 
150 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Ilavarasan, Mallika & Venkataraman, 2005; 
Khanna & Arora, 1984; Masih & Singh, 2005; 
Monif, Malhotra & Kapoor, 1992; Senthil 
Kumar et a l , 2006; SEPASAL, 2006a; Thulin, 
1989. 
Sources of illustration Toruan-Purba, 1999a. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
C A S S I A S I E B E R I A N A D C . 
Protologue Prodr. 2: 489 (1825). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 26, 28 
Vernacular names West African laburnum, 
African laburnum, drumstick tree (En). Casse 
du Senegal, casse de Sieber, casse à grappes, 
casse-flûte (Fr). Mossué, cana fistula, cacafistu-
la (Po). Mzangaya, mzangaye (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cassia 
sieberiana is distributed from Senegal and 
Gambia east to DR Congo and Uganda. 
Uses Leaves, roots and pods of Cassia siebe-
riana are widely used in traditional medicine. 
The entire plant is purgative and diuretic. In 
Senegal an infusion of the entire plant is given 
against all children's diseases. In Uganda pow-
der of different plant parts is applied to teeth 
to cure toothache; when mixed with butter it is 
used to treat skin diseases. In Senegal and 
Burkina Faso a steam bath of leafy twigs 
boiled in water is prescribed to help against 
malaria attacks and fever; the liquid should 
also be drunk. An infusion of the leaves sweet-
ened with honey is taken against stomach-
Cassia sieberiana - wild 
ache, ulcers and diarrhoea. Boiled and 
squeezed fresh leaves are applied as poultice in 
pleurisy or burns. Gonorrhoea in women is 
treated by taking leaf powder with food. In 
Benin the twigs are used to treat sleeping 
sickness. 
The roots, boiled in water, are used to treat 
haemorrhoids, bilharzia, leprosy, dropsy and 
bloody dysentery. In Côte d'Ivoire the decoction 
is taken in large doses to treat intestinal 
worms including tapeworms, although this is 
risky. An infusion of the root bark is employed 
against venereal diseases, sterility and dys-
menorrhoea. After soaking the roots in water, 
the liquid is used for a bath against tiredness 
and for body massage. A decoction of the roots 
is considered an aphrodisiac. In Burkina Faso 
a pinch of powdered dried decorticated roots 
taken at the end of each meal is said to prevent 
malaria. Crushed roots are rubbed on the tem-
ples to treat headache. Debarked roots are 
boiled with bark of Terminalia macroptera 
Guill. & Perr. to combat eczema. In Burkina 
Faso capsules made from the root bark are 
prescribed against Aids. The yellow pulp 
around the seeds and an infusion of the pods is 
taken as a laxative. In Uganda diarrhoea, dys-
entery and vomiting are treated by a decoction 
of bark, leaves or roots. The roots and seeds are 
used as fish poison in Côte d'Ivoire and Nige-
ria. 
The wood is suitable for making furniture, 
tools, construction and railway sleepers. It is 
used as firewood, but it is considered inferior 
because it produces a lot of smoke. The root 
wood is used in Sierra Leone and Burkina Faso 
as chewsticks. The tree is planted as an orna-
mental and as an avenue tree. 
Production and international trade Bark 
and roots of Cassia sieberiana are commonly 
sold in local markets. The pods are locally 
traded, especially as vermifuge. The Centre 
National de Semences Forestières in Ouaga-
dougou, Burkina Faso sells the seeds at US$ 
45-55/kg. 
Properties Cassia sieberiana contains cal-
cium oxalate in abundance. The leaves contain 
flavones (quercitrin, isoquercitrin), an an-
thraquinone (rhein) and tannins (11%). The 
roots contain tannins (up to 17%), an-
thraquinones and sterols. The purgative action 
can be ascribed to the anthraquinones. The 
flavones cause diuresis and have antibacterial 
and anti-inflammatory activity. An assay for 
antiviral activity against Herpes simplex virus 
type 1 (HSV-1) showed that Cassia sieberiana 
CASSIA 151 
extracts had a significant activity against this 
virus. In-vitro tests only showed a low activity 
of the extracts against trypanosomes. Leaf ex-
tracts were found to be active against Staphy-
lococcus lutea, Mycobacterium phlei, Bacillus 
subtilis and Proteus sp., but not against 
Staphylococcus albus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa 
or Escherichia coli. 
The termite-resistant wood changes from white 
or yellowish-pinkish to dark red upon expo-
sure. It is finely textured, heavy, hard and dif-
ficult to work. 
Adulterations and substitutes As a laxa-
tive Cassia sieberiana is often substituted by 
Cassia fistula L., Senna podocarpa (Guill. & 
Perr.) Lock and Senna alexandrina Mill. pods. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 15(— 
20) m tall; bole short, twisted; bark fissured, 
grey to brown, with blackish stripes; young 
branches densely shortly hairy. Leaves ar-
ranged spirally, paripinnately compound with 
5-14 pairs of leaflets; stipules narrowly trian-
gular, c. 2 mm long, caducous; leaflets elliptical 
Cassia sieberiana - 1, leaf; 2, inflorescence; 3, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
to ovate, 3.5—10 cm x 2—5 cm, apex rounded to 
acute, shortly hairy. Inflorescence an axillary 
pendulous raceme up to 35(-45) cm long; bracts 
soon falling. Flowers bisexual, slightly zygo-
morphic, 5-merous; sepals elliptical, 5-8 mm 
long, slightly hairy; petals oblong to almost 
circular, 2-3.5 cm long, bright yellow; stamens 
10, free, 3 lower ones fertile, hooked at base, 
much longer than the petals, 4 middle ones 
fertile, short, 3 upper ones rudimentary; ovary 
superior, sessile, style slender, much longer 
than the petals. Fruit a, cylindrical pod 40-
60(-90) cm x c. 1.5 cm, transversely parti-
tioned, dehiscent by 2 valves, black, many-
seeded with seeds embedded in yellow pulp. 
Seeds ellipsoid, 8-9 mm long, rusty to dark 
brown, glabrous. Seedling with epigeal germi-
nation. 
Other botanical information Until the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, but was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
Chamaecrista and Senna. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth ring boundaries indis-
tinct or absent. Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
13: simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel 
pits alternate; 23: shape of alternate pits po-
lygonal; 26: intervessel pits medium (7-10 um); 
(27: intervessel pits large (> 10 u.m)); 29: ves-
tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pits with distinct bor-
ders; similar to intervessel pits in size and 
shape throughout the ray cell; 42: mean tan-
gential diameter of vessel lumina 100-200 um; 
43: mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
> 200 u.m; 46: < 5 vessels per square millimetre; 
47: 5-20 vessels per square millimetre; (58: 
gums and other deposits in heartwood vessels). 
Tracheids and fibres: 61: fibres with simple to 
minutely bordered pits; (65: septate fibres pre-
sent); 66: non-septate fibres present; 69: fibres 
thin- to thick-walled. Axial parenchyma: 80: 
axial parenchyma aliform; 81: axial paren-
chyma lozenge-aliform; 82: axial parenchyma 
winged-aliform; 83: axial parenchyma conflu-
ent; 85: axial parenchyma bands more than 
three cells wide; 91: two cells per parenchyma 
strand; (92: four (3-4) cells per parenchyma 
strand). Rays: (96: rays exclusively uniseriate); 
(97: ray width 1-3 cells); 104: all ray cells pro-
cumbent; 116: > 12 rays per mm. Mineral in-
clusions: 136: prismatic crystals present; 142: 
prismatic crystals in chambered axial paren-
chyma cells. 
(N.P. Mollel, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
152 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Growth and development In West Africa 
Cassia sieberiana flowers in March—April, just 
before the rainy season when the trees are leaf-
less. In Uganda flowering is in June-August, 
during the rainy season, when new leaves have 
formed. The fruits ripen in August-October in 
West Africa and in September—February in 
Uganda. Cassia sieberiana does not form root 
nodules. 
Ecology Cassia sieberiana occurs in tree or 
shrub savanna with less than 800 mm annual 
rainfall. Acid sandy soil is preferred. 
Propagation and planting Cassia sieberi-
ana is mainly propagated by seed. Ripe, fresh 
seeds have nearly 100% viability. One kg con-
tains 7,000-16,500 seeds. Treatment with sul-
phuric acid is recommended before sowing 
older seeds. Passage of seeds through cattle 
intestines also hastens germination, and en-
hances the distribution of seeds in grazed ar-
eas. Marcotting and side-grafting are feasible 
for vegetative multiplication. 
Management Cassia sieberiana is one of the 
constituents of the vegetation of fallow fields in 
the Sahel, but unlike Parkia biglobosa (Jacq.) 
R.Br, ex G.Don (African locust bean) and Vitel-
laria paradoxa C.F.Gaertn. (shea butter tree) it 
is eradicated during clearing. When planted for 
the wood it can be left after cutting to produce 
at least one more ratoon. 
Diseases and pests Cassia sieberiana is a 
host of the groundnut bruchid (Caryedon serra-
tus), a major storage pest of groundnut, and of 
the bean flower thrips (Megalurothrips sjos-
tedti), a pest of several pulse crops. 
Harvesting Pods of Cassia sieberiana are 
harvested by hand and the seeds are extracted 
manually as well. For harvesting the roots, the 
plant has to be dug up. 
Handling after harvest The seeds need to 
be stored in a dry place. Storage in the pods is 
also feasible, but in that case extra care must 
be taken to prevent insect damage. 
Genetic resources Cassia sieberiana is 
rather common and does not seem to be endan-
gered. However, uprooting is detrimental for 
the population and is reason for concern in 
Burkina Faso. 
Prospects In view of the numerous local 
uses of Cassia sieberiana more clinical tests 
seem warranted. Quality control and measures 
for sustainable utilization are needed. Interest 
in the species as an ornamental is growing. 
Use as a pot plant in temperate zones seems to 
be possible. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2004; Atinde-
hou et al., 2002; Aubréville, 1970; Brenan, 
1967; Burkill, 1995; Hoët et al., 2004b; Inngjer-
dongen et al., 2004; Neuwinger, 2000; Silva et 
al., 1997a; von Maydell, 1983. 
Other references Adam, Echard & Lescot, 
1972; Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 1979; Adjano-
houn et al., 1979; Adjanohoun et al., 1985; 
Berhaut, 1975b; Boussim et a l , 2004; Elojuba, 
Abere & Adelusi, 1999; Hegnauer & Hegnauer, 
1996; InsideWood, undated; Keay, 1989; Kok-
waro, 1993; Nacoulma-Ouédraogo & Millogo-
Rasolodimby, 2002; Nacro & Millogo-
Rasolodimbi, 1993; Neuwinger, 1998; Nikiéma 
et al., 2004; Paris & Etchepare, 1967; Sembène 
& Delobel, 1998; SEPASAL, 2006b; Taïta, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Keay, 1989. 
Authors L.J.G. van der Maesen 
CATHARANTHUS LANCEUS (Bojer ex A.DC.) 
Pichon 
Protologue Mém. Mus. natl. Hist, nat., Pa-
ris n.s. 27: 237 (1949). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 16 
Vernacular names Lance-leaf periwinkle 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Catha-
ranthus lanceus is endemic to Madagascar, 
where it occurs mainly in the central part. 
Uses A root decoction of Catharanthus 
lanceus is taken against toothache or fever, 
and as a purgative, contracting agent and ver-
mifuge. The leaves are bitter, astringent and 
emetic. A decoction of the aerial parts is taken 
to stimulate the flow of breast milk. It is also 
taken as an anodyne, diuretic and general 
tonic. Externally, the decoction is applied 
against several skin problems and as a haemo-
static. 
Production and international trade Catha-
ranthus lanceus is used locally, but is also ex-
ported as a medicinal plant, although no de-
tails of destination or amounts traded are 
known. 
Properties Several pharmacologically active 
alkaloids have been isolated from the aerial 
parts of Catharanthus lanceus, e.g. leurosine, 
perivine, yohimbine, cathanneine, tetrahydro-
alstonine, leurocristine, periformyline, vincris-
tine and vindolinine. 
The alkaloid fractions of Catharanthus lanceus 
have shown hypotensive activity. The main 
active compound is yohimbine, a potent oc-
adrenergic blocker, but several other com-
CATHARANTHUS 153 
pounds play a role as well. A lyophilized aque-
ous extract was found to show anti-tumour 
activity, with leurosine as the most potent 
compound. Some alkaloids have a hypoglycae-
mic effect. Leurocristine, perivine, perifor-
myline and vincristine show antiviral activity 
in vitro against some human pathogens. 
Botany Perennial decumbent herb up to 1 m 
tall, with white latex; taproot carrot-shaped, up 
to 70 cm long; stems and branches reddish, 
almost quadrangular, internodes much longer 
than the leaves. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules 1-3 at each side of the leaf 
base; petiole 1-3 mm long; blade oblong to nar-
rowly ovate, 1-4.5 cm x 3-13 mm, base 
cuneate, apex acuminate to rounded, herba-
ceous to thinly leathery, shiny on both sides, 
glabrous. Flowers in leaf axils, bisexual, 5-
merous, regular, fragrant; pedicel 5-25(-32) 
mm long; sepals slightly fused at base, 5-10 
mm long; corolla tube cylindrical, 15-22 mm 
long, widening near the insertion of the sta-
mens, throat constricted, inside with a ring of 
hairs just below the throat and a ring of hairs 
below the insertion of the stamens, green, 
pinkish at base, lobes ovate to obovate, 11-22 
mm long, densely shortly hairy inside, spread-
ing, pink, reddish violet or pale pink-magenta, 
white to cream at the base; stamens inserted 
just below the corolla throat, included, fila-
ments very short; ovary superior, consisting of 
2 very narrowly oblong carpels, style slender, 
10-16 mm long, pistil head cylindrical with a 
reflexed transparent frill and with rings of 
woolly hairs at base and apex, stigma minute. 
Fruit composed of 2 free cylindrical follicles 
1.5-5 cm long, striate, glabrous, green, dehis-
cent, 10—20-seeded. Seeds oblong, 1-3 mm 
long, grooved at one side, black. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Catharanthus comprises 8 species, all originat-
ing from Madagascar except for Catharanthus 
pusillus (Murr.) G.Don, which is restricted to 
India and Sri Lanka. Catharanthus lanceus 
flowers and fruits from September to May. 
Ecology Catharanthus lanceus occurs on 
volcanic soil, laterite covering quartzite and 
granitic rock, in periodically burned areas, in 
open woodland on ridges, among rocks on hill-
sides, in ruderal grassland and along road-
sides, at 750-2000 m altitude. It prefers sunny 
localities. 
Genetic resources and breeding Catha-
ranthus lanceus is probably not threatened by 
genetic erosion, although it is not common in 
its distribution area. 
Prospects Catharanthus lanceus contains 
several pharmacological active alkaloids, with 
similar importance as those found in Catha-
ranthus roseus (L.) G.Don. More research is 
needed to identify all alkaloids and their 
pharmacological activities, as the information 
which is available is rather outdated and very 
incomplete. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Neuwinger, 2000; van 
Bergen, 1996; van der Heijden et al., 2004. 
Other references Blomster, Farnsworth & 
Abraham, 1967; Debray, Jacquemin & Ra-
zafindrambao, 1971; Farnsworth, Blomster & 
Buckley, 1967; Farnsworth, Loub & Blomster, 
1963; Farnsworth, Svoboda & Blomster, 1986; 
Pernet & Meyer, 1957; Plaizier, 1981; Rama-
nankierana, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CATHARANTHUS ROSEUS (L.) G.Don 
Protologue Gen. hist. 4(1): 95 (1837). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 16 
Synonyms Vinca rosea L. (1759), Lochnera 
rosea (L.) Rchb. ex Endl. (1838). 
Vernacular names Madagascar periwinkle, 
rosy periwinkle (En). Pervenche de Madaga-
scar, rose arrière (Fr). Sempre noiva, flor de 
anjinho, pervinca de Madagascar (Po). Mtunda 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Catha-
ranthus roseus originates from Madagascar, 
but for centuries it has been cultivated as an 
ornamental throughout the tropics and occa-
sionally in the subtropics; it has become natu-
Catharanthus roseus -planted and naturalized 
154 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ralized in many regions. It was brought under 
cultivation in the first half of the 18th century 
in Paris, from seeds collected in Madagascar, 
and was later distributed from European bo-
tanical gardens to the tropics. The antimitotic 
properties of some of its alkaloids were discov-
ered accidentally in the late 1950s during 
searches for antidiabetic substances. 
Uses In Africa, especially in the Indian 
Ocean islands, medicinal uses of Catharanthus 
roseus are manifold and are similar to those in 
Asia. A decoction of all parts of Catharanthus 
roseus is well known as an oral hypoglycaemic 
agent. The decoction is also taken to treat ma-
laria, dengue fever, diarrhoea, diabetes, cancer 
and skin diseases. Extracts prepared from the 
leaves have been applied as antiseptic agents 
for the healing of wounds, against haemor-
rhage and skin rash and as a mouthwash to 
treat toothache. The aerial parts are also con-
sidered diaphoretic and diuretic, and decoc-
tions are taken to relieve indigestion, dyspep-
sia, dysentery, toothache and the effects of 
wasp stings, and as an emetic, purgative, ver-
mifuge and depurative. In Uganda an infusion 
of the leaves is taken to treat stomach ulcers. 
In Botswana the leaves ground in milk are 
applied to mature abscesses. In Togo a root 
decoction is taken to treat dysmenorrhoea. 
The aerial parts of the plant are used for the 
extraction of the medicinal alkaloids vincris-
tine and vinblastine. The alkaloids are pre-
scribed in anticancer therapy, usually as part 
of complex chemotherapy protocols. The dried 
root is an industrial source of ajmalicine, which 
increases the blood flow in the brain and pe-
ripheral parts of the body. Preparations of 
ajmalicine are used to treat the psychological 
and behavioural problems of senility, sensory 
problems (dizziness, tinnitus), cranial traumas 
and their neurological complications. 
Alkaloids extracted from the aerial parts of 
Catharanthus roseus are marketed as lyo-
phylisates (solutions of salts) designed for in-
travenous application. Vindesine and vinorel-
bine, which are semisynthetic derivatives of 
vinblastine, are marketed as a sulphate and a 
bitartrate, respectively. These are prescription 
drugs in Western countries. 
Catharanthus roseus is a popular garden or-
namental, grown as a perennial in the tropics 
and as an annual in temperate regions, al-
though it can overwinter as a pot plant in a 
conservatory. It is valued for its bushy habit 
and many large flowers carried above dark 
green foliage. Catharanthus roseus can also be 
kept as a cut flower; the branches will last for 
weeks or even months, producing new, but 
smaller, flowers all the time. 
Production and international trade The 
world market consumed 5-10 kg of vincristine 
and vinblastine in the early 1990s, with a total 
value of US$ 25-50 million. In 2005 the market 
was estimated at US$ 150-300 million. In 1991 
the world market consumed 3-5 t of ajmalicine, 
with a total value of US$ 4.5-7.5 million. Two 
anticancer medicines, Oncovin® and Velban®, 
derived from Catharanthus roseus, are sold for 
a total of US$ 100 million per year. 
Catharanthus roseus is widely cultivated in 
Spain, United States and China for its phar-
maceutical compounds. 
Properties Catharanthus roseus has been 
found to contain as many as 130 constituents 
with an indole or dihydroindole structure. The 
principal component is vindoline (up to 0.5%); 
other compounds are serpentine, catharan-
thine, ajmalicine (raubasine), akuammine, 
lochnerine, lochnericine and tetrahydroal-
stonine. Ajmalicine and serpentine are essen-
tially present in the roots, whereas catharan-
thine and vindoline accumulate in aerial parts. 
The aerial parts contain 0.2-1% alkaloids. 
The substances of pharmacological interest are 
the bisindole alkaloids, most of them contain-
ing a plumeran (vindoline) or an ibogan (catha-
ranthine) moiety. Several of these alkaloids 
have cytostatic properties, but occur in very 
small amounts: vincristine (leurocristine) in up 
to 3 g/t of dried plant material and vinblastine 
(vincaleucoblastine) in a slightly larger 
amount. Other active compounds are leu-
rosidine (vinrosidine) and leurosine. 
Vincristine and vinblastine are highly toxic 
antimitotics, blocking mitosis in the meta-
phase. They both also have neurotoxic activity 
(especially vincristine), affecting neurotrans-
mission. Their peripheral neurotoxic effects are 
neuralgia, myalgia, paresthesia, loss of the 
tendon reflexes, depression and headache; 
their central neurotoxic effects are convulsive 
episodes and respiratory difficulties. Other side 
effects are many and include alopecia, gastro-
intestinal distress including constipation, ul-
cerations of the mouth, amenorrhoea and azoo-
spermia. As vinblastine decreases the total 
number of white blood cells in the blood, its 
dosage must be carefully controlled. The alka-
loids are very irritating; when extravasation 
accidentally occurs there is a risk of tissue ne-
crosis. It is possible to limit the side effects by 
careful dosage and administration, and inten-
CATHARANTHUS 155 
sively monitoring the treatment. Vindesine, a 
semisynthetic derivative of vinblastine, is also 
a potent antimitotic. Its side effects include a 
transient decrease of the number of granulo-
cytes in the blood and effects comparable to 
those caused by vincristine and vinblastine, 
although the neurological symptoms are less 
obvious. Vinorelbine (noranhydrovinblastine) is 
synthesized from anhydrovinblastine. It acts 
preferentially on mitosis and its neurological 
toxicity is limited. However, its haematotoxic 
activity is substantial, so its dosage must be 
carefully controlled. Vincristine (Oncovin®) is 
indicated in the treatment of acute leukaemia, 
Hodgkin's disease, small-cell lung cancer, cer-
vical and breast cancer and various sarcomas. 
The indications for vinblastine (Velban®) are 
mainly Hodgkin's disease, non-Hodgkin's lym-
phoma, Kaposi's sarcoma, and renal, testicular, 
head and neck cancer. Vindesine (Eldisine®) is 
indicated in the treatment of acute lymphatic 
leukaemia (especially in children) and refrac-
tory lymphomas and melanomas. Vinorelbine 
(Navelbine®) has breast cancer and bronchial 
cancer as current indications. It is now part of 
several phase II clinical trials. 
Roots to be used in pharmacy must contain at 
least 0.4% ajmalicine and the closely related 
serpentine. Ajmalicine (Hydroserpan®, Lamu-
ran®) is an oc-adrenergic blocking spasmolytic, 
which at high doses reverses the effects of 
adrenaline and moderates the activity of the 
vasomotor centres, especially in the brain 
stem. It temporarily increases the blood flow to 
the brain. 
Some of the alkaloids (e.g. catharanthine, leu-
rosine and vindoline) exhibit a moderate hypo-
glycaemic action. The fresh leaf juice though 
shows considerable hypoglycaemic activity. 
Vinblastine markedly inhibits the in-vitro re-
production of Trypanosoma cruzi, the organism 
causing Chagas' disease. Antiviral activity has 
been reported in vitro for some Catharanthus 
alkaloids, e.g. leurocristine, perivine and vin-
cristine. Extracts of the plants have shown 
fungicidal activity (e.g. against Fusarium so-
lani that causes wilt e.g. in aubergine and 
Sclerotium rolfsii that causes diseases such as 
southern blight in tomato) and nematicidal 
activity (e.g. against Meloidogyne incognita 
and Meloidogyne javanica). Extracts of the 
dried flowers, dried leaves or fresh roots have 
shown antibacterial activity against some hu-
man pathogens. 
Callus tissue of Catharanthus roseus can be 
cultured on various media, and can produce a 
variety of monomeric alkaloids. The alkaloid 
spectra of root and shoot cultures are similar to 
those of roots and aerial parts, respectively. In 
root cultures, ajmalicine and serpentine are 
usually the major constituents and catharan-
thine in shoot cultures. Much higher yields of 
serpentine and ajmalicine can be produced in 
cell cultures than in whole plants: up to 2% on 
dry weight basis versus 0.3% in whole plants. 
The dimeric anticancer alkaloids vinblastine 
and vincristine are almost undetectable in cul-
tured cells, so attention has turned to the pro-
duction of catharanthine and vindoline, which 
can be used as precursors for the synthesis of 
the dimers. Multiple shoot cultures induced 
from seedlings produce vindoline and catha-
ranthine in rather higher levels. Another pos-
sible method of vindoline production is by cul-
tures of selected hairy roots. These hairy roots 
can be produced by infecting seedlings with 
Agrobacterium rhizogenes. Some clones not 
only produce levels of ajmalicine, serpentine 
and catharanthine comparable to those of cell 
suspension cultures, but also about 3 times 
more vindoline than usually found in cell cul-
tures. Another approach is to produce the alka-
loids (or their precursors) in other organisms 
such as yeast via gene transfer. 
Adulterations and substitutes Vincris-
tine, vinblastine and related compounds pre-
vent mitosis in a different way from colchicine 
(from Colchicum autumnale L.), another potent 
antitumour agent. Ajmalicine and derivatives 
are also found in other Apocynaceae, such as 
Rauvolfia spp. 
Description Erect or decumbent, deciduous 
undershrub up to 1 m tall, usually with white 
latex and an unpleasant smell; roots up to 70 
cm long; stems narrowly winged, green or red, 
shortly hairy to glabrous, often woody at base. 
Leaves decussately opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules 2-4 at each side of the leaf base; peti-
ole 3-11 mm long, green or red; blade elliptical 
to obovate or narrowly obovate, 2.5-8.5 cm x 1-
4 cm, base cuneate, apex obtuse or acute with a 
mucronate tip, herbaceous to thinly leathery, 
glossy green above and pale green below, 
sparsely shortly hairy to glabrous on both 
sides. Inflorescence terminal, but apparently 
lateral, 1—2-flowered. Flowers bisexual, 5-
merous, regular, almost sessile; sepals slightly 
fused at base, (2-)3-5 mm long, erect, green; 
corolla tube cylindrical, 2-3 cm long, widening 
near the top at the insertion of the stamens, 
laxly shortly hairy to glabrous outside, with a 
ring of hairs in the throat and another lower 
156 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Catharanthus roseus - 1, flowering twig; 2, 
flower; 3, base and top of corolla tube in longi-
tudinal section; 4, fruit; 5, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
down the tube, greenish, lobes broadly obovate, 
1—2(—3) cm long, apex mucronate, glabrous, 
spreading, pink, rose-purple or white with a 
purple, red, pink, pale yellow or white centre; 
stamens inserted just below the corolla throat, 
included, filaments very short; ovary superior, 
consisting of 2 very narrowly oblong carpels, 
style slender, 15-23 mm long, with a cylindri-
cal pistil head provided at base with a reflexed 
transparent frill and with rings of woolly hairs 
at base and apex, stigma glabrous. Fruit com-
posed of 2 free cylindrical follicles 2-4.5 cm 
long, striate, laxly shortly hairy to glabrous, 
green, dehiscent, 10-20-seeded. Seeds oblong, 
2-3 mm long, grooved at one side, black. Seed-
ling with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Catharan-
thus comprises 8 species, all originating from 
Madagascar except for Catharanthus pusillus 
(Murr.) G.Don, which is restricted to India and 
Sri Lanka. Catharanthus is very closely related 
to Vinca. No consistent qualitative differences 
have been found in alkaloid composition in 
relation to the different colours of the corolla of 
Catharanthus roseus. 
Catharanthus coriaceus Markgr. is a rare spe-
cies of central Madagascar. A leaf decoction is 
used to treat bilious fevers and dysentery. The 
bitter flowers are given to people with diabetes, 
who chew them to lessen their appetite. A de-
coction of the aerial parts was formerly drunk 
as an ordeal poison. Catharanthus longifolius 
(Pichon) Pichon and Catharanthus ovalis 
Markgr. occur in southern-central Madagascar. 
An extract of the aerial parts of either species 
is given to humans or calves to expel worms. A 
concentrated extract was formerly drunk as an 
ordeal poison. They are both rich in indole al-
kaloids, including several bisindole alkaloids. 
Catharanthus ovalis contains the pharmaco-
logically active leurosine, vindoline, vindolin-
ine, coronaridine, catharanthine and vin-
blastine (vincaleucoblastine), whereas from 
Catharanthus longifolius e.g. vindolicine was 
isolated. Natural hybrids exist between Catha-
ranthus longifolius and Catharanthus roseus, 
and artificial hybrids have been made between 
Catharanthus ovalis and Catharanthus longi-
folius. 
Growth and development Catharanthus 
roseus is usually self-compatible, and intra-
flower self-pollination is common, because the 
stigma may come into contact with the anthers, 
even after anthesis. The degree of outcrossing 
may vary with environmental conditions and 
the presence of seasonal pollinating butterflies. 
Self-incompatible strains of Catharanthus 
roseus exist and can be locally common. In 
warmer climates, Catharanthus roseus will 
flower and fruit the whole year round. The 
seeds usually fall close to the mother plant, but 
are sometimes transported by ants. Within 6-8 
weeks after germination the first flowers will 
appear. At temperatures below 5°C some 
branches or even the whole plant will die. 
When the temperature rises, the plant will 
regrow from basal axillary buds, especially 
after hard pruning of shoots and roots. Without 
pruning, the plant regrows mainly from the 
tops. 
Tetraploid plants, induced with colchicine, 
have been found to have much higher alkaloid 
content than diploid plants, but the doubling of 
chromosomes was found to result in reduced 
pollen fertility and poor seed set. 
Ecology Catharanthus roseus often occurs 
in sandy locations along the coast, but also 
inland on river banks, in savanna vegetation 
and in dry waste places and roadsides, some-
times in open forest or scrub, usually on sandy 
soils, but sometimes also on rocky soils. It is 
CATHARANTHUS 157 
very salt-tolerant, and is mostly found near 
sea-level, but occasionally up to 1500 m alti-
tude. It can stand drought well, but not severe 
heat. Under severe water stress the alkaloid 
content of mature leaves was found to double, 
but it did not change in stems and immature 
leaves and it decreased in roots. 
Propagation and planting Catharanthus 
roseus is usually propagated by seed. Seed may 
remain dormant for several weeks after matur-
ity. The optimum temperature for germination 
is 20-25°C, and the germination rate is in gen-
eral over 95%. The seeds remain viable for 3-5 
years. If the germination rate is low, this might 
be due to storage under too dry conditions. 
Seedlings can be potted after 3 weeks. Catha-
ranthus roseus can also be propagated vegeta-
tively by greenwood or semi-ripe cuttings 
rooted in a closed container with bottom heat. 
When rooting powder is used, the cuttings will 
start to root after 4-5 weeks. Putting cuttings 
in water will also induce rooting but it will 
take longer than in the soil. 
Management Catharanthus roseus is usu-
ally cultivated as an ornamental. It is a fast-
growing plant that is easy to cultivate. When 
the plants become too tall, pruning is neces-
sary. To encourage branching, the top of the 
seedling can be cut off, resulting in side 
branches that are always opposite. When the 
main stem is not topped, it will usually start 
branching at a height of 20-30 cm, but only one 
side branch will then develop with subsequent 
branching. Catharanthus roseus responds well 
to N fertilizers, but can also grow and persist 
on poor soils. 
Catharanthus roseus is also cultivated for me-
dicinal purposes, in Africa mainly in Madagas-
car. In India it is mainly cultivated as a 200-
day crop for its leaves (for the extraction of 
vinblastine and vincristine) and its roots (for 
the extraction of ajmalicine). The crop needs 
little irrigation or fertilizer. Too excessive wa-
tering causes yellowing of the leaves. Plant 
spacing is 30-40 cm between plants. 
Diseases and pests In Africa no diseases or 
pests are known, but in Malaysia Catharan-
thus roseus has been reported to be infected 
with 'Malaysian periwinkle yellow'. Symptoms 
include excessive yellowing of foliage, bunchy 
top and stunted flowers and leaves, suggesting 
infection by a mycoplasm-like organism. Simi-
lar diseases have been reported from China, 
Taiwan, North America and Europe. My-
coplasm-like organisms can be transferred to 
Catharanthus roseus by parasitic plants of the 
genus Cuscuta, and perhaps also by leafhop-
pers. Container-grown plants in the United 
States cultivated as ornamentals have been 
reported susceptible to Phytophthora parasitica 
that causes root and stem rot. In glasshouses 
red spider mite (Tetranychus urticae) is very 
common. 
Harvesting Catharanthus roseus plants are 
harvested by uprooting the whole plant after 
which the roots are separated from the rest of 
the plant and both parts are separately proc-
essed. If only the leaves are harvested, the 
plants are left in the field for a ratoon crop. 
Harvesting leaves is done manually or by ma-
chine. The alkaloid content of the plants is 
highest at flowering. 
Handling after harvest The aerial parts 
and the roots of Catharanthus roseus are 
cleaned, after which they are dried at low tem-
peratures, then packed for shipment. Potted 
plants for use as ornamentals are usually 
traded in sealed packages. They are market-
able in this condition for 18 days, and do not 
require watering during this period. 
Genetic resources Although Catharanthus 
roseus probably originated from a limited area 
in south-eastern Madagascar, it is now widely 
planted and naturalized in all tropical areas, 
and is certainly not endangered. However, pro-
tection of the wild populations in Madagascar 
is desirable to ensure the conservation of the 
genetic diversity, which might be of interest for 
breeding purposes in the future. 
Breeding Catharanthus roseus has been 
successfully crossed with Catharanthus tricho-
phyllus (Baker) Pichon, with the Fi having a 
high seed set and good viability when Catha-
ranthus trichophyllus was the female parent. 
The alkaloid profiles of the two species are 
different, and alkaloid production seems to be 
higher in hybrids than in the parent species. 
In breeding, the following characteristics seem 
to be dominant: purple corolla colour, dark eye 
of the flower and tall and open habit. Breeding 
aims at plants of which the corollas drop, be-
cause the old corolla will otherwise stick to the 
young fruit and to the new bud, which cannot 
develop well. Two large groups of cultivars 
exist, those with a distinct eye and those with a 
green to white eye. Subsequent grouping is 
done by corolla colour, and about 50 cultivars 
have so far been developed. Although hybrids 
are only occasionally found in nature, in culti-
vation many usually fertile hybrids can be 
made between the different Catharanthus spe-
cies, which have the same chromosome num-
158 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
bers. 
Prospects The possibility of accessing active 
dimeric alkaloids by biomimetic synthesis has 
recently attracted much attention. It is now 
conceivable that vinblastine could be obtained 
from starting materials such as catharanthine 
and vindoline, which are neither rare nor too 
expensive. These latter two compounds can be 
produced in sufficient amounts in in-vitro cul-
tures of Catharanthus roseus. Studies on ana-
logues of the well-known alkaloids suggest 
good prospects for new developments vis-à-vis 
Catharanthus alkaloids. Horticultural produc-
tion of Catharanthus roseus for alkaloid pro-
duction is little studied and deserves more at-
tention. Catharanthus roseus may have good 
prospects as an ornamental in temperate re-
gions. 
Major references Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
2004; Lavergne & Vera, 1989; Mukherjee et al., 
2001; Neuwinger, 2000; Plaizier, 1981; Ross, 
2003; Snoeijer, 1996; Sutarno & Rudjiman, 
1999; van Bergen, 1996; van der Heijden et al., 
2004. 
Other references Bhadra, Vani & Shanks, 
1993; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 
1995; Johns et al., 1995; Kulkarni, 2001; Mar-
fori & Alejar, 1993; Nammi et al., 2003; Oje-
wole & Adewunmi, 2000; Reda, 1978; Sevestre-
Rigouzzo et al., 1993; Singh et al., 2001; 
Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003; van Wyk, van 
Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 2002; Verpoorte, 
Contin & Memelink, 2002; Yuan, Hu & Yang, 
1994. 
Sources of illustration Sutarno & Rudji-
man, 1999. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
CATHARANTHUS TRICHOPHYLLUS (Baker) 
Pichon 
Protologue Mém. Mus. natl. Hist, nat., 
Paris n.s. 27: 237 (1949). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number In = 16 
Origin and geographic distribution Catha-
ranthus trichophyllus is endemic to Madagas-
car, where it occurs mainly in the northern 
part. 
Uses The bitter root decoction of Catharan-
thus trichophyllus is reputed for its stimulant 
properties, and is applied especially against 
venereal diseases, impotency and back-ache. It 
is also taken against toothache. A leaf decoc-
tion is taken to treat bilious fevers and dysen-
tery and as an aphrodisiac. Externally, a decoc-
tion of the aerial parts is applied as a haemo-
static. An infusion of all parts is taken to treat 
liver diseases and to stabilize the blood compo-
sition. The bitter flowers are given to people 
with diabetes, who chew them to lessen their 
appetite. 
Properties The aerial parts of Catharan-
thus trichophyllus contain mainly monomeric 
indole alkaloids, of which vindoline is the most 
important; tetrahydroalstonine, catharanthine, 
serpentine and vindolinine occur as minor 
components. The roots contain mainly serpen-
tine, and minor components are the dimeric 
vincristine, but also the monomeric ajmalicine, 
catharanthine, lochnericine, hörhammericine, 
tetrahydroalstonine and cathaphylline. All 
alkaloids in the roots and leaves occur in lower 
amounts than in Catharanthus roseus (L.) 
G.Don. Lochnericine and hörhammericine are 
responsible for part of the cytotoxic activity. 
Botany Undershrub up to 1 m tall, with 
white latex and a rather unpleasant smell; 
stems and branches reddish to purple, quad-
rangular, winged. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire, almost sessile; stipules 2-5 at each side 
of the leaf base; blade oblong to narrowly ovate, 
2.5-8.5 cm x 1-4 cm, base rounded to cuneate, 
apex acuminate, herbaceous, margin ciliate, 
more or less hairy on both sides. Inflorescence 
axillary, 1-2-flowered. Flowers bisexual, 5-
merous, regular; pedicel 4—11 mm long, quad-
rangular; sepals slightly fused at base, 6-10 
mm long, apex long-acuminate; corolla tube 
cylindrical, 22-26 mm long, widening near the 
insertion of the stamens, throat constricted, 
with a ring of hairs just below the throat and 
another below the insertion of the stamens, 
glabrous or laxly hairy, green, pinkish at base, 
lobes narrowly obovate, 8-18 mm long, densely 
shortly hairy at base, spreading, white, pink, 
red, purple, yellowish at the base; stamens 
inserted just below the corolla throat, included, 
filaments very short; ovary superior, consisting 
of 2 very narrowly oblong carpels, style slen-
der, 14-19 mm long, pistil head cylindrical 
with a ring of woolly hairs, stigma minute. 
Fruit composed of 2 free cylindrical follicles 3— 
7 cm long, striate, glabrous to laxly hairy, 
green to purplish green, dehiscent, 10—20-
seeded. Seeds oblong, 2.5—3 mm long, grooved 
at one side, dark brown. Seedling with epigeal 
germination. 
Catharanthus comprises 8 species, all originat-
CAVACOA 159 
ing from Madagascar except for Catharanthus 
pusillus (Murr.) G.Don, which is restr icted to 
India and Sri Lanka . Catharanthus trichophyl-
lus flowers and fruits from July to May. 
E c o l o g y Catharanthus trichophyllus occurs 
on r iver banks , in open localities in forest, 
along forest edges and roadsides, on sand, 
gneiss-derived soil and lateri te , from sea-level 
up to 1400 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Catha-
ranthus trichophyllus does not seem to be en-
dangered by genetic erosion because it has a 
wide ecological adapta t ion. Catharanthus 
trichophyllus has been successfully crossed 
with Catharanthus roseus, with the Fi having 
a high seed set and good viability only when 
Catharanthus trichophyllus was the female 
parent . The alkaloid profiles of the two species 
are different, and alkaloid production is h igher 
in hybr ids t h a n in the pa ren t species. Artificial 
hybridization was also successful between Ca-
tharanthus trichophyllus and Catharanthus 
ovalis Markgr . or Catharanthus coriaceus 
Markgr . All Catharanthus spp. are self-
compatible; only for Catharanthus roseus do 
self-compatible and self-incompatible s t ra ins 
occur. 
P r o s p e c t s Catharanthus trichophyllus con-
ta ins modera te amounts of mainly monomeric 
alkaloids, bu t hybrids formed through crossing 
with Catharanthus roseus have much higher 
alkaloid content, indicating the potent ial of 
breeding hybrids for improved alkaloid produc-
tion. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Boiteau, Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1999; Kulkarni , 2001; van Bergen, 
1996; van der Heijden et al., 2004. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Hammer , 1994; Neu-
winger, 2000; Novy, 1997; Perne t & Meyer, 
1957; Plaizier, 1981; Segelman & Farnswor th , 
1974; Sevestre-Rigouzzo et al., 1993. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
CAVACOA AUREA (Cavaco) J . L é o n a r d 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. J a rd . Bot. E t a t 25: 323 
(1955). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Na ta l hickory, South 
African hickory (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cava-
coa aurea occurs from Kenya south to Malawi, 
southern Mozambique and nor th-eas te rn South 
Africa. 
U s e s In southern Africa a root infusion is 
taken to ease pain and to t rea t fever, and a 
s t eam b a t h is t a k e n to clear s inuses. 
Cavacoa aurea yields good sticks for var ious 
uses. 
B o t a n y A dioecious evergreen shrub or 
small t ree up to 15 m tall; t r unk i r regular ly 
fluted near base; ba rk thin, scaly, brown; 
branches long, greyish, glabrous. Leaves alter-
nate , simple and entire; s t ipules oblong, c. 5 
mm long, soon falling, leaving conspicuous 
annu la r scars; petiole 1-5 cm long; blade ellip-
tical to elliptical-obovate or elliptical-
oblanceolate, 3.5-18 cm x 1.5-8 cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex obtuse to acuminate , 
leathery, minute ly gland-dotted, p innate ly 
veined with 9—12 pairs of la te ra l veins. Inflo-
rescence a t e rmina l raceme up to 10 cm long, 
up to 10-flowered; bracts 4 -6 m m long. Flowers 
unisexual , fragrant, cream-coloured, br ight 
yellow or greenish yellow; pedicel 1-2.5 cm 
long, jointed; male flowers with 2(-4), lanceo-
la te to broadly ovate sepals, 3.5-6 m m long, 
peta ls 4 - 5 , free, elliptical-ovate, 7-9 mm long, 
disk glands 4 - 5 , free, fleshy, s t amens 15-35, 
5—6 m m long; female flowers with (4-)5, ob-
long-lanceolate sepals 6—8 mm long, peta ls 5, 
elliptical-oblong, c. 10 m m long, disk cup-
shaped, ovary superior, 2 - 3 m m in diameter , 
3—5-celled, styles 3, fused a t base, 3 -5 mm 
long, s t igmas 2-fid. Fru i t a 3—5-lobed capsule 
12-15 mm x 23-30 mm, smooth, hard, green 
tu rn ing black, 3—5-seeded. Seeds ovoid to 
near ly globose, c. 10 mm x 8-9 mm, smooth, 
pale brown, s t reaked and mott led dark brown. 
Cavacoa comprises 3 species, all in tropical 
Africa. Cavacoa aurea h a s long been confused 
with Heywoodia lucens Sim in South Africa. 
E c o l o g y Cavacoa aurea occurs in mixed 
evergreen forest and coastal forest, often near 
s t reams , usual ly on sandy soil, a t low al t i tudes . 
It grows equally well in shade or sun. 
M a n a g e m e n t Cavacoa aurea is cult ivated in 
South Africa. There, fruiting is from December 
to February . Fresh seed germinates well. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Cavacoa 
aurea is uncommon in most pa r t s of its distri-
bution area . It is protected in South Africa. 
P r o s p e c t s Cavacoa aurea will probably re-
main of local importance only. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Govaerts , Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 2000; 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Duthie , 1978; Neuwinger, 
2000; Pa lmer & P i tman , 1972-1974. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
160 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
CENTROPLACUS GLAUCINUS Pierre 
Protologue Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris, 
ser. 2, 1: 115 (1899). 
Family Pandaceae 
Synonyms Microdesmis paniculata Pax 
(1899). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cen-
troplacus glaucinus occurs in Cameroon, Equa-
torial Guinea and Gabon. 
Uses In Gabon a leaf decoction is taken to 
treat schizophrenia. 
Botany Dioecious small to medium-sized 
tree up to 20 m tall; bark surface dark brown, 
inner bark red; twigs slender, terete, glabrous. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules triangular, 
tiny; petiole up to 4 mm long, blackish when 
dry; blade oblong to elliptical-oblong, 7.5-17.5 
cm x 2.5-6.5 cm, base obtuse, apex acuminate, 
distantly and shallowly toothed, glabrous, 
shiny above, pinnately veined with 10-14 pairs 
of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary pani-
cle up to 7.5 cm long, on young shoots, short-
hairy; bracts spoon-shaped, c. 1 mm long. 
Flowers unisexual, 5-merous; pedicel c. 1 mm 
long; sepals ovate, c. 1 mm long, obtuse, yellow-
ish short-hairy; male flowers with petals 
broadly obovate or obovate-elliptical, c. 3 mm 
long, white, short-hairy, disk cup-shaped, sta-
mens with short filaments; female flowers 
without petals, disk saucer-shaped, fleshy, 5-
lobed, ovary superior, ovoid, c. 1 mm in diame-
ter, 3-celled, densely short-hairy, styles 3, 
short. Fruit an oblong-ellipsoid, slightly 3-lobed 
capsule c. 7 mm in diameter, densely short-
hairy, green turning pinkish orange, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ellipsoid, c. 3 mm long, usually smooth, 
black, shiny, aril orange-red. 
Centroplacus consists of one species only. It 
has formerly been placed in Flacourtiaceae and 
Euphorbiaceae, but is now considered to belong 
to Pandaceae, although recent molecular stud-
ies indicate that it may be better placed in a 
separate family Centroplacaceae. 
Ecology Centroplacus glaucinus occurs as 
an understorey tree in primary and secondary 
forest, usually at low altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Centroplacus glaucinus is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Centroplacus glaucinus will re-
main of local importance only as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Akendengué & Louis, 
1994; Govaerts, Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 
2000. 
Other references Brown, Hutchinson 
Prain, 1909-1913. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CEPHALOCROTON MOLLIS Klotzsch 
Protologue Peters, Naturw. Reise Mossam-
bique, Vol. 6, Botanik 1: 99, t. 17 (1861). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Cepha-
locroton mollis occurs from Tanzania south 
throughout southern Africa, including eastern 
South Africa. 
Uses In Namibia the Heikum Bushmen use 
the dried powdered root in food as criminal 
poison, causing bloody diarrhoea. The aerial 
parts are browsed by cattle. 
Botany Monoecious, rarely dioecious, per-
ennial herb or shrub up to 2(-3.5) m tall; root-
stock woody; bark pale grey; all parts covered 
with stellate hairs, with or without long glan-
dular hairs, later almost glabrous. Leaves al-
ternate, simple; stipules subulate-filiform, 1-4 
mm long; petiole 1-7 mm long; blade ovate-
oblong to oblong-lanceolate, 1-10.5 cm x 0.5-5 
cm, base rounded or truncate, apex obtuse to 
acute, margins entire to sinuate, leathery. In-
florescence a terminal raceme, with male flow-
ers in a dense terminal globose cluster and 1-4 
female flowers at base of peduncle; peduncle 1— 
10 cm long; bracts minute. Flowers unisexual, 
sweetly scented; pedicel 3-4(-7) mm long; pet-
als absent; male flowers with 4 glabrous, ovate 
to elliptical-ovate sepals c. 2 mm long, pale 
yellowish green, stamens 6-8, free, 5-6 mm 
long; female flowers with 6 sepals, pinnately 
lobed, c. 4 mm x 2 mm, enlarging in fruit, lobes 
linear, with side lobes, stellately hairy, green, 
disk annular, ovary superior, c. 1.5 mm in di-
ameter, densely hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, fused 
at base, 4-8 mm long, stigma multifid, orange-
yellow. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 1 cm x 1.5 cm, 
hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 6-8 mm long, 
smooth, pale to pinkish brown, slightly mot-
tled, dull. 
Cephalocroton comprises 3-4 species in tropical 
and southern Africa. It is closely related to 
Adenochlaena (1 species from Madagascar and 
the Comoros and 1 from Sri Lanka) and Cepha-
locrotonopsis (1 species from Socotra), both 
formerly included in Cephalocroton. 
Ecology Cephalocroton mollis occurs on 
clayey soils (including black cotton soil) but 
usually on sandy soils in dried-out depressions 
and seasonal swamps, in open grassland and 
CERBERA 161 
mixed open bushland, at 500—1500 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Cepha-
locroton mollis is relatively common in south-
ern Africa and therefore not likely to be threa t -
ened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Research on the phytochemistry 
of Cephalocroton mollis is war ran ted in the 
light of the uses as a p lant poison and of 
browse for catt le. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1973; von 
Koenen, 2001. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
CERBERA MANGHAS L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pi. 1: 208 (1753). 
F a m i l y Apocynaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r In = 40 
S y n o n y m s Cerbera venenifera (Poir.) Steud. 
(1840). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Sea-mango, tanghin , 
ordeal p lan t (En). Tanghin (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cerbera 
manghas is widely dis t r ibuted from the is lands 
of the Indian Ocean to tropical Asia, tropical 
Aust ra l ia and the is lands of the Pacific Ocean. 
In tropical Africa it h a s been found on Pemba 
Island (Tanzania), Madagascar , the Seychelles 
and Maur i t ius . 
U s e s The seeds of Cerbera manghas a re used 
in t radi t ional medicine in Madagascar to t r ea t 
cardiac disorders. However they a re very poi-
sonous and were used unt i l the middle of the 
19 th century as ordeal poison. In tropical Asia 
the seeds are used to t r ea t scabies and itch, to 
p repare a hai r tonic and as fish poison, the 
ba rk is used as a laxative and ant ipyret ic and 
in the t r ea tmen t of dysur ia and r ingworm, the 
flowers to t rea t haemorrhoids , and roots, ba rk 
and leaves to p repare a purgat ive . The wood is 
occasionally used in tropical Asia for mould-
ings, inter ior t r im, fruit cases, core veneer, 
matches , shut ter ing , clogs, plain furni ture and 
carving, and also for charcoal. Cerbera mang-
has is p lanted as an o rnamenta l and the fi-
brous fruits, of which the skin and soft pa r t s 
have decayed, are used in flower arrange-
ments . 
Product ion and international trade Me-
dicinal products of Cerbera manghas a re not 
t raded on the in te rna t ional marke t , bu t can be 
found on local marke t s in Madagascar . Small 
amounts of t imber are exported from Papua 
New Guinea and the Solomon Is lands to J a p a n . 
P r o p e r t i e s The seeds contain glycosides 
derived from the cardenolides tanghinigenin 
and digitoxigenin, such as cerberin, neriifolin, 
thevet in B and 2 '-0-acetyl-thevetin B. The 
principal cardenolides contained in the bark 
and roots are gentiobiosyl-thevetoside and glu-
cosyl-thevetoside along wi th other thevetosides 
derived from tanghinigenin. The amount of 
cardenolides in the leaves varies according to 
the season. Some of the cardenolides showed 
antiproliferative activity agains t h u m a n colon 
cancer, b reas t cancer, lung cancer and epider-
moid carcinoma cell lines, as well as anti-
oestrogenic activity. Cerberin acts on plain 
muscle prepara t ions as a definite s t imulan t 
both with regard to tone and peristal t ic move-
ments . As such it behaves as a parasympato-
mimetic poison. It acts on both t he rhy thm and 
ampl i tude of the hear t . In moderate doses cer-
ber in has positive inotropic propert ies, bu t in 
high, toxic doses it produces a negative ino-
tropic and chronotropic effect. Phytochemical 
invest igations also revealed the presence of a 
series of l ignans derived from olivil (cerber-
alignans) and monoterpenoids such as cerberi-
dol. Ethanolic extracts of Cerbera manghas 
have shown selective activity aga ins t vesicular 
s tomatis virus (VSV). Olivil, carinol and 
cycloolivil showed ant ioxidant activities. 
The wood is l ightweight to medium-weight , 
with the whi te to pale yellow-brown hear twood 
not demarcated from the sapwood; grain is 
s t ra ight to slightly interlocked, tex ture fine 
and uneven. The shr inkage upon seasoning is 
moderate , and the wood works easily. It is not 
durable, highly susceptible to blue-staining 
fungi, and res i s tan t to preservat ive t r ea tmen t 
unde r pressure . 
B o t a n y Shrub or small to medium-sized t ree 
up to 20(-25) m tall, with white latex in all 
par t s , glabrous; bole up to 70 cm in diameter ; 
ba rk thick, rough, peeling off, wi th large lenti-
cels, grey to dark brown; branches thick and 
succulent, with many conspicuous leaf scars . 
Leaves a r ranged spirally, clustered at the ends 
of branches , simple and entire; s t ipules absent; 
petiole 1-4.5 cm long; blade narrowly obovate, 
5-30 cm x 1—8 cm, cuneate a t base, shortly 
acumina te a t apex, leathery, pinnately veined 
wi th 15-40 pa i r s of la te ra l veins. Inflorescence 
a te rmina l cyme up to 25 cm x 15 cm, many-
flowered; peduncle 1.5-12 cm long; bracts 
about as long as sepals, deciduous. Flowers 
bisexual, regular , 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 
162 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
0.5-3 cm long; sepals ovate or obovate, (0.5—)1— 
3.5 cm x c. 0.5 cm, spreading to recurved; co-
rolla tube funnel-shaped, 1.5-5.5 cm long, wid-
ened at apex, pale green with white or pale 
yellow scales in the throat, hairy inside, lobes 
obliquely elliptical or obovate, 1.5-3 cm x 1-2 
cm, spreading to recurved, white but pink at 
base; stamens inserted just below the top of 
corolla tube, included, covered by scales of co-
rolla tube, anthers sessile; ovary superior, glo-
bose, consisting of 2 separate carpels, style long 
and slender, pistil head consisting of a 5-ridged 
basal part, a veil and a cone-shaped apex. Fruit 
consisting of 1 or 2 separate or basally fused, 
drupe-like, ellipsoid follicles 5-12 cm x 3-7 cm, 
rounded at both ends, dark red when mature, 
indéhiscent, usually 1-seeded. Seed flattened 
orbicular, c. 2.5 cm in diameter, with small 
wing at apex. Seedling with hypogeal germina-
tion. 
Cerbera comprises 6 species occurring in tropi-
cal Asia, tropical Australia and islands of the 
Pacific Ocean; Cerbera manghas is most wide-
spread. In tropical Asia Cerbera manghas has 
been much confused with Cerbera odollam 
Gaertn. 
The flowers of Cerbera manghas are pollinated 
by insects. The fruits, which are fibrous inside, 
float in water and can be distributed by sea 
currents; they are quite commonly washed up 
on shores. 
Ecology In Madagascar Cerbera manghas is 
widespread, occurring in humid evergreen for-
est along the coast as well as in dry deciduous 
forest inland up to 150 m altitude. 
Management Cerbera manghas should 
preferably be grown in full light in a fertile, 
moist but well-drained loam with additional 
leaf mould. The pulp of ripe fruits is removed 
to obtain the seeds, or the fruits are dried first, 
and then cracked to liberate the seeds. 
Genetic resources and breeding Cerbera 
manghas is widespread and not under threat of 
genetic erosion. This is also the case in Mada-
gascar, where it is still widespread. 
Prospects It is unlikely that Cerbera mang-
has will play an important role in future medi-
cine because its cardenolides are very toxic and 
better alternatives are available, e.g. digoxin 
from Digitalis or ouabain from Strophanthus. 
The trees seldom grow to timber size, but the 
wood is useful for the production of veneer. 
Cerbera manghas has good prospects as an 
ornamental with beautiful flowers and fruit 
mesocarps. 
Major references Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Chang et al., 2000; Leeuwen-
berg, 1999; Tran Dinh Ly, 1998; Tran Cong 
Khanh, 2001b. 
Other references Abe & Yamauchi, 1977; 
Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Lee et al., 
1998; Markgraf, 1976; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Tomlinson, 1986. 
Authors R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
CHAMAECRISTA ABSUS (L.) H.S.Irwin & 
Barneby 
Protologue Mem. New York Bot. Gard. 35: 
664 (1982). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number In — 28 
Synonyms Cassia absus L. (1753). 
Vernacular names Four-leaved senna, 
black grain, pig's senna, tropical sensitive-pea 
(En). Casse absus (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cha-
maecrista absus occurs naturally throughout 
the Old World tropics, and has been introduced 
and naturalized in tropical America. 
Uses Dried and powdered leaves, a leaf ex-
tract or occasionally pounded ripe fruits of 
Chamaecrista absus are widely applied to ec-
zema, ringworm, wounds, sores, abscesses, 
ulcers and venereal inflammations. A tea of the 
leaves is considered depurative. In many parts 
of Africa and Asia the powdered seeds or seed 
extracts are sprinkled on the eye to treat eye 
diseases, e.g. conjunctivitis and cataract. In 
Senegal the powdered seeds are also taken to 
treat diabetes and chlorosis, and the fresh 
plant is pounded and mixed with butter for use 
Chamaecrista absus - wild 
CHAMAECRISTA 163 
as a suppository against haemorrhoids. In 
Ghana a decoction of the roots, combined with 
palm wine and chillies, is used as a purgative 
to expel worms. In Congo the leaves mixed 
with Heterotis rotundifolia (Sm.) Jacq.-Fél. are 
pulped and diluted with palm wine to promote 
conception in women. In part the mix is in-
gested, and in part it is rubbed on the under-
belly. Different plant parts are also taken in 
infusion as an aphrodisiac. In Kenya and Tan-
zania an infusion of the roots is taken to treat 
stomach-ache. 
Reports on the value of Chamaecrista absus as 
a pasture plant are contradictory. In the Sahel 
it is well liked by livestock and is used to make 
silage. Leaves are retained well into the dry 
season, which makes it valuable grazing. In 
Nigeria it is appreciated as it is thought to 
favour growth of cattle and it has veterinary 
value, e.g. to cure diarrhoea. Elsewhere in Af-
rica, young plants are eaten by cattle, but older 
plants are sticky and appear unpalatable. In 
Malawi Chamaecrista absus is applied as a 
green manure in maize. The leaves yield a 
weak yellow dye. 
Production and international trade Seed of 
Chamaecrista absus is traded in India; no in-
formation is available on trade in Africa. 
Properties All plant parts of Chamaecrista 
absus contain the monoterpenoid imidazole 
alkaloids chaksine and isochaksine. Chaksine 
suppresses the respiratory, vasomotor and 
heat-regulating centres and inhibits muscle 
activity and the sense of balance. It also has 
hypotensive and antibacterial activity. In a test 
for antifungal activity, chaksine iodide at 0.5% 
inhibited all fungi tested. Isochaksine has simi-
lar activities to chaksine but in general at 
higher doses. Aqueous extracts of the aerial 
parts have an allelopathic effect on root nodule 
growth of groundnut and mung bean. 
The anthraquinones chrysophanol and emodin 
were isolated from the roots, and the flavonoids 
quercetin and rutin were isolated from the 
leaves. Chrysophanol and emodin have laxa-
tive activities. 
The seeds of Chamaecrista absus contain about 
4.5% oil, 52% of which is 9-ketooctadec-cis-15-
enoic acid. The oil also contains 25% linoleic 
acid, 12% palmitic acid, 7% oleic acid, 2.5% 
stearic acid and 1.5% arachidic acid. Other 
analyses have shown the presence of gentisic 
acid, 5-O-D-glucopyranosyl gentisic acid, ethyl-
a-D-galactopyranoside, and the flavonoids api-
genin, luteolin, hydnocarpin and iso-
hydnocarpin. These flavonoids showed anti-
tumour activities in vitro, and some also in 
vivo. Sugars in the seed include galactoman-
nan, which induces the mucilaginous proper-
ties of the endosperm. 
Description Annual herb up to 60(-100) cm 
tall, branched towards the top, with long rigid 
glandular hairs on all parts, lemon-scented. 
Leaves alternate, paripinnate, 3-7 cm long, 
with 2 pairs of leaflets; stipules linear, up to 8 
mm long; petiole without large gland, rachis 
with gland between each of the leaflet pairs; 
leaflets almost sessile, elliptical, up to 4.5 cm x 
3 cm, largest in the upper pair, apex obtuse. 
Inflorescence a terminal or axillary raceme, up 
to 13 cm long, 4-6-flowered. Flowers bisexual, 
nearly regular, 5-merous; pedicel 3-5 cm long; 
sepals obtuse, c. 4 mm long, pubescent; petals 
obovate, up to 8 mm long, cream to orange-
yellow, sometimes red outside; stamens 5, 
filaments straight; ovary superior, 1-celled, 
style curved. Fruit a flat pod c. 5 cm x 0.5 cm, 
splitting into 2 thin, slightly spiralling valves, 
containing 5-7 seeds. Seeds obovate to slightly 
rhombic, c. 5 mm long, dark brown to black, 
glossy. 
Other botanical information Chamae-
crista (formerly in Cassia) occurs throughout 
Chamaecrista absus - 1, plant habit; 2, flower; 
3, opened pod. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
164 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
the tropics and subtropics and comprises about 
250 species. It h a s its largest diversity in tropi-
cal Africa and tropical America. In continental 
Africa about 40 species occur, in Madagascar 
10, 6 of them endemic. Chamaecrista h a s a 
large morphological variability, render ing a 
comprehensive taxonomie t r e a t m e n t extremely 
difficult. Chamaecrista absus is variable in its 
morphology, which is not surpr is ing consider-
ing its wide distr ibution. 
E c o l o g y Chamaecrista absus occurs in rud-
eral localities, old farmland, along roadsides, in 
grassy savanna, in open localities in deciduous 
bushland, on grani te outcrops and on sand 
dunes , from sea-level up to 1700 m al t i tude. In 
Senegal it is abundan t nea r the seashore. It is 
well adapted to the semi-arid tropics. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g To increase 
germination, nicking or abrasion of Chamae-
crista absus seeds is recommended. A tempera-
tu re of 24°C is opt imum for germinat ion. 
M a n a g e m e n t In Africa Chamaecrista absus 
is collected from the wild. In Pak i s t an it is cul-
t ivated for i ts leaves and seeds. 
H a r v e s t i n g Chamaecrista absus is har-
vested by pulling up the p lants when the pods 
are ma tu re . 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t As the pods of 
Chamaecrista absus a re dehiscent, drying 
should be done on a firm clean th resh ing floor. 
Dry storage is preferable. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s As a weedy species, 
Chamaecrista absus faces no risk of genetic 
erosion. No samples are available in seed 
banks . 
P r o s p e c t s Some of the t radi t ional uses of 
Chamaecrista absus have been val idated by 
research, bu t more research is needed on an-
timicrobial and an t i tumour activities. Chak-
sine and iso-chaksine seem to be the most in-
teres t ing chemical compounds for commerciali-
zation. A bet ter unders t and ing of the cultiva-
tion and its economics could be the basis for 
further work. The risk of the species becoming 
a weed should be t aken into account in a reas 
where it does not occur natura l ly . 
Major re ferences Baerts & Lehmann, 2005f; 
Brenan, 1967; Burkill, 1995; Harborne , Boulter 
& Turner , 1971; Kapoor & Mukherjee, 1969; 
Lock, 1990; Mahajan, 1983; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Rao et al., 1979; Silva et a l , 1996. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Bar tha , 1970; Berhaut , 
1975b; du Puy et a l , 2002; Figuière et al., 
1998; Ghisalbert i , Pennacchio & Alexander, 
1998; Hegnauer & Hegnauer , 1996; Hosamani , 
1994a; Jansen , 1981; Kapoor & Mukherjee, 
1969; Khonje, 1998; Nwude & Ibrahim, 1980; 
Wat t & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Brenan, 1967. 
A u t h o r s L.J.G. van der Maesen 
C H A M A E C R I S T A B I E N S I S (S teyaer t ) Lock 
P r o t o l o g u e Kew Bull. 43: 335 (1990). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
S y n o n y m s Cassia biensis (Steyaert) Men-
donça & Torre (1955). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cha-
maecrista biensis is widely distributed through-
out southern Africa from Angola, Botswana 
and Mozambique to South Africa. 
U s e s In Namibia the raw or boiled root of 
Chamaecrista biensis is ea ten to cure stomach 
disorders. It is also ea ten as a staple food. It is 
further used to bring luck; when a piece of root 
is chewed, under t ak ings such as hun t ing and 
hi tchhiking are believed to become successful. 
The foliage is browsed by livestock. 
P r o p e r t i e s The foliage of Chamaecrista 
biensis h a s been tes ted for palatabil i ty, toxicity 
and feeding value in tes ts with r a t s . The re-
sults showed no differences from lucerne 
(Medicago sativa L.). The seeds showed a low 
palatabil i ty and feeding value, bu t no toxicity. 
B o t a n y Perennia l herb up to 45 cm tall with 
woody rootstock and pros t ra te or decumbent 
s tems, occasionally more or less erect; branches 
hairy. Leaves a l te rna te , par ip innate ly com-
pound with usual ly 13-24 pairs of leaflets; 
st ipules lanceolate; petiole with a s ta lked or 
almost sessile gland, rachis channelled; leaflets 
sessile, obliquely linear, asymmetr ical , up to 10 
mm x 2 mm, apex rounded, apiculate. Inflores-
cence an extra-axil lary raceme, usual ly 1-
flowered. Flowers bisexual, near ly regular , 5-
merous; pedicel up to 20 mm long; sepals acute, 
slightly shor ter then petals ; petals obovate, 4 -7 
mm long, yellow; s t amens 10; ovary superior, 
1-celled. Frui t an erect compressed pod 3-4.5 
cm x c. 4 mm, glabrous to shortly hairy. Seeds 
rhombic-ellipsoid, c. 3 mm long, pale brown 
with da rk brown spots. 
Chamaecrista occurs throughout the tropics 
and subtropics and comprises about 250 spe-
cies. It has its largest diversity in tropical Af-
rica and tropical America. In cont inental Africa 
about 40 species occur, in Madagascar 10, 6 of 
t hem endemic. 
Chamaecrista biensis forms N-fixing root nod-
ules. 
CHAMAECRISTA 165 
Ecology Chamaecrista biensis is widely dis-
tributed in savanna on deep sandy and loamy 
soils. It is most common in disturbed areas 
such as ploughed land and grazed areas. It is 
tolerant of low rainfall. 
Genetic resources and breeding Chamae-
crista biensis is considered not threatened. 
Germplasm collections are preserved at the 
Institute of Crops and Pastures and the Grass-
land Research Centre in Pretoria, South Africa, 
at the Australian Tropical Crops & Forages 
Genetic Resources Centre, Biloela, Australia 
and at ICRAF, Nairobi, Kenya. 
Prospects The potential of Chamaecrista 
biensis as a pasture plant is high as far as nu-
tritive properties are concerned, but few re-
sults seem to have been published on its pro-
ductivity. Its tolerance of low rainfall and its 
nitrogen fixing ability have raised interest for 
use in intercropping and as a green manure. 
The medicinal properties have not been inves-
tigated. 
Major references Leger, 1997; Lock, 1990; 
von Koenen, 2001. 
Other references Corby, 1974; Laden & 
Wrangham, 2005; Mphinyane, 2001; Naisbitt, 
James & Sprent, 1992; Ross, 1977; Strickland, 
Lambourne & Ratcliff, 1987; Torre & Hillcoat, 
1956. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
CHAMAECRISTA FALCINELLA (Oliv.) Lock 
Protologue Kew Bull. 43(2): 336 (1990). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Synonyms Cassia falcinella Oliv. (1871). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cha-
maecrista falcinella occurs in DR Congo, 
Rwanda, Kenya, Uganda,Tanzania, Zambia, 
Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozam-
bique. 
Uses In Kenya a decoction of the pounded 
leaves of Chamaecrista falcinella is drunk as a 
remedy for rheumatism. Pounded leaves mixed 
with ghee are rubbed on the skin to promote 
healing of broken bones. In Tanzania pounded 
roots are mixed with water and drunk to treat 
diarrhoea. 
Properties No data have been published on 
the properties of Chamaecrista falcinella. Sev-
eral interesting compounds with pharmacologi-
cal activities have been isolated from other 
Chamaecrista spp. 
Botany Annual or perennial herb up to 60 
cm tall. Leaves alternate, paripinnate with 5 -
17 pairs of leaflets; stipules falcate, slightly 
cordate at base; petiole with sessile gland, ra-
chis without gland; leaflets sessile, elliptical, 
up to 17 mm x 3 mm, midrib asymmetrical, 
apex acute with prickle-like point bent side-
ways. Inflorescence a 1-3-flowered raceme. 
Flowers bisexual, nearly regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel 1-2.5 cm long, hairy; sepals acute, pu-
bescent; petals obovate, up to 10 mm long, yel-
low; stamens 8—10; ovary superior, 1-celled, 
style curved. Fruit a pod up to 4.5 cm x 0.5 cm. 
Seeds rhombic, c. 3 mm long. 
Chamaecrista comprises about 250 species 
with about 40 species in continental Africa, 
and 10 in Madagascar, 6 of them endemic. 
Chamaecrista falcinella is variable, and several 
varieties are distinguished. 
Chamaecrista zambesica (Oliv.) Lock (syno-
nym: Chamaecrista hildebrandtii (Vatke) Lock) 
is also used in traditional medicine. In Kenya 
the leaves and roots are used as a cathartic 
against the intestinal protozoal parasite 
Giardia lamblia. Laboratory tests confirmed 
the lethal effect on the parasite. Chamaecrista 
lateriticola (R.Vig.) Du Puy is endemic to 
Madagascar, where a leaf infusion is taken 
against stomach-ache. 
Ecology Chamaecrista falcinella is found 
mainly in grassland at 1000-1800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Chamae-
crista falcinella is widely distributed and hence 
not threatened with genetic erosion. It is not 
present in major germplasm collections. 
Prospects In view of its medicinal uses, the 
complete lack of chemical and pharmacological 
data and the medicinal properties of other 
Chamaecrista species, research on the proper-
ties of Chamaecrista falcinella may prove 
worthwhile. 
Major references Brenan, 1967; Johns et 
a l , 1995; Kokwaro, 1993. 
Other references Gereau & Walters, 2003; 
Lock, 1990; Ross, 1977. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
CHAMAECRISTA NIGRICANS (Vahl) Greene 
Protologue Pittonia 4: 30 (1899). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 16 
Synonyms Cassia nigricans Vahl (1790). 
Vernacular names Black grain (En). Casse 
noircissante (Fr). Tintêro, macarra bubel (Po). 
166 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Origin and geographic distribution Cha-
maecrista nigricans is widely distributed in 
tropical Africa, and also occurs in western Asia 
and India. As a spontaneous weed it occurs 
throughout the tropics and subtropics and is 
sometimes found even in Australia. 
Uses Chamaecrista nigricans has many uses 
in both human and veterinary medicine. 
Throughout West and East Africa, an infusion 
of the leaves or aerial parts is taken against 
fever and malaria, and to treat stomach-ache, 
diarrhoea and worms. Externally, an infusion 
or decoction of the leaves is applied to wounds 
and abscesses as an antiseptic. The root is 
pounded with water and taken against diar-
rhoea, while in decoction it is taken as an 
anthelmintic. A decoction of the leaves is also 
taken as cough medicine, and is externally 
applied for itching. The pounded leaves in wa-
ter are applied to ticks on humans and horses, 
while pounded leaves in palm oil are rubbed on 
the head to kill lice. In Guinea an infusion of 
the aerial parts is taken as an anti-
menstruation agent. In Mali an infusion of the 
aerial parts is added to a bath to treat haemor-
rhoids. In Burkina Faso the leaves are rubbed 
on insect stings. In Niger an infusion of the 
leaves is taken to treat venereal diseases. In 
Nigeria a leaf infusion is used to treat peptic 
ulcers. In Uganda, an infusion of the roots is 
taken against retained placenta and to promote 
labour. In Niger and Uganda, an infusion of 
the root is used for cattle as a vermifuge, as a 
purgative and to treat diarrhoea. Dried leaves, 
leaf powder, ash and extracts are used as pro-
tective in the storage of pulses and cereals. 
The foliage is occasionally grazed by livestock 
in Senegal. In Sudan it is eaten by camels 
Chamaecrista nigricans - wild 
only in the rainy season. In Guinea, the bitter 
mature leaves are added to food as an appe-
tizer. 
Properties The leaves of Chamaecrista ni-
gricans contain the anthraquinone emodin and 
its anthrone. Methanolic extracts have shown 
analgesic and anti-inflammatory effects and 
protected rats against ulcers. The anti-ulcer 
activity may be via histaminergic receptor in-
hibition. The extract also has a dose-dependent 
antidiarrhoeal activity, which may be partly 
due to a-adrenoceptor stimulation. In mice and 
rats the extract showed contraceptive activity 
through oestrogenic and anti-implantation 
activities. Tests with plant extracts have 
shown significant action against Herpes sim-
plex virus type 1 in vitro. Leaves caused a sig-
nificant reduction in growth rate in rats when 
incorporated at 5% in the diet, induced cell 
hyperplasia in the liver, and reduced the mean 
weight of the liver and kidneys. Powdered 
leaves are effective as a storage protectant for 
pulses, as they inhibit hatching of insect lar-
vae. They are not a health threat if removed 
before consumption. Ethanolic plant extracts 
have shown antibacterial activity against Shi-
gella dysenteriae, Staphylococcus aureus, Sta-
phylococcus faecalis, and Vibrio cholerae. 
Description Annual, erect herb or under-
shrub, up to 1.5 m tall, hairy, pale green. 
Leaves distichously alternate, paripinnate with 
10-18 pairs of leaflets; stipules 5-8 mm long; 
petiole with a sessile gland 2-4 mm long, ra-
chis channelled; leaflets sessile, narrowly ob-
long, symmetrical, up to 25 mm x 6 mm, apex 
rounded, mucronate. Inflorescence a raceme, 
inserted slightly above the leaf axil, 3—8-
flowered. Flowers bisexual, nearly regular, 5-
merous; pedicel 1—3 mm long; sepals acute, 
slightly longer then petals; petals obovate, up 
to 4.5 mm long, yellow; stamens 8-10; ovary 
superior, 1-celled. Fruit an erect compressed 
pod 2—4 cm x 0.5 cm, slightly raised over the 
seeds, brown to black when ripe, splitting into 
2 thin, spiralling valves, finely pubescent, with 
up to 10 seeds. Seeds obovate or rhombic, up to 
4 mm long, smooth. 
Other botanical information Chamae-
crista (formerly in Cassia) occurs throughout 
the tropics and subtropics and comprises about 
250 species. It has its largest diversity in tropi-
cal Africa and tropical America. In continental 
Africa about 40 species occur, in Madagascar 
10, 6 of them endemic. Chamaecrista has a 
large morphological variability, rendering a 
comprehensive taxonomie treatment quite dif-
CHASMANTHERA 167 
.Nil/ V> .~' 
Chamaecrista nigricans - 1, flowering branch; 
2, branch with pods. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
flcult. 
Ecology Chamaecrista nigricans favours 
waste places, agricultural fields, roadsides and 
disturbed soil, and also occurs in grassland and 
wooded savanna, from sea-level up to 1200 m 
altitude. It is especially common on heavy lat-
eritic soils. Rainfall of 950-1400 mm in 5-6 
months as in the Sudano-Guinean zone of West 
Africa is suitable. 
Propagation and planting Seed of Cha-
maecrista nigricans germinates easily. 
Harvesting Chamaecrista nigricans is col-
lected from the wild. The whole plant is up-
rooted by hand and may be subsequently dried. 
Genetic resources Chamaecrista nigricans 
is not threatened by genetic erosion, because of 
its wide range of habitats and wide distribu-
tion. 
Prospects Chamaecrista nigricans shows 
very interesting pharmacological actions: the 
anti-ulcer, anticonceptive and antibacteriologi-
cal activities are especially promising. Further 
research on the medicinal actions of leaves and 
roots of Chamaecrista nigricans is warranted. 
Formulations for using the leaves against stor-
age pests need to be developed. 
Major references Akah et al., 1998; Baerts 
& Lehmann, 2002a; Beimain et al., 2001; 
Brenan, 1967; Chidume et al., 2001; Diallo et 
a l , 2002; Lock, 1990; Neuwinger, 2000; Nwafor 
& Okwuasaba, 2001a; Nwafor & Okwuasaba, 
2001b. 
Other references Adam, Echard & Lescot, 
1972; Berhaut, 1975b; Burkill, 1995; Benz, 2001; 
Figuière et a l , 1998; Geissler et al., 2002; 
Golob et al., 1999; Harborne, Boulter & Turner, 
1971; Hegnauer & Hegnauer, 1996; Mahmoud 
et a l , 1995; Silva et al., 1996; Tabuti, Lye & 
Dhillion, 2003; Velayaudham et a l , 2000; Vidi-
gal, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Thulin, 1983. 
Authors L.J.G. van der Maesen 
CHASMANTHERA DEPENDENS Höchs t . 
Protologue Flora 27: 21 (1844). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Chas-
manthera dependens is widely distributed from 
Sierra Leone east to Eritrea and Somalia and 
south through eastern DR Congo and Tanzania 
to Angola, Zambia and Zimbabwe. It is com-
monly planted in home gardens, e.g. in Ghana. 
Uses In West Africa leaf and stem sap are 
locally applied to cure sprains and bruises, as a 
dressing for fractures or mixed with shea but-
ter as an embrocation to treat pain and stiff-
ness. The bark is chewed as a remedy for vene-
real discharges or as a general tonic for physi-
cal or nervous weakness in inflammatory and 
exhausting diseases. In Nigeria a stem macera-
tion together with stems and roots of several 
other plants is drunk against convulsions. In 
Chasmanthera dependens - wild 
168 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Kenya the stem is roasted and eaten to treat 
convulsions in infants. In Uganda the plant is 
used against dementia, snakebites and epi-
lepsy. A decoction of freshly pounded roots 
mixed with roots of Vernonia sp. is drunk to 
cure malaria. A decoction of pounded roots 
mixed with leaves of Tagetes sp. is drunk by 
children to treat cough. In DR Congo the leaf 
sap is applied as first aid to stop bleeding of 
wounds. 
In Nigeria the fibrous stem is beaten and used 
as a sponge. In Ethiopia Borana pastoralists 
eat the roots and leaves. 
Production and international t rade Several 
plant parts are commonly sold in local markets 
as a medicine. 
Proper t ies The stem bark of Chasmanthera 
dependens is rich in alkaloids and contains the 
quaternary protoberberine alkaloids jateorrhiz-
ine, palmatine (berbericinine), columbamine, 
pseudicolumbamine, magnoflorine, and the 
non-phenolic quaternary alkaloids tetrahydro-
palmatine, liriodenine, lysicamine (oxonuce-
ferine), 0,0-dimethylcorytuberine, anonaine, 
glaucine, norglaucine, oxoglaucine and nor-
nuceferine. It also contains the tetrahydropro-
toberberine type alkaloids govanine and 
coreximine, the pavine type alkaloid bis-
norargemonine and the morphinandienone 
type alkaloid pallidine, as well as the furanoid 
diterpene 8-hydroxycolumbine. Several of these 
alkaloids were also extracted from other spe-
cies and were found to have interesting phar-
macological effects. The roots contain berber-
ine, which is reported to control leishmaniasis. 
Methanol extracts of the dried leaves have 
shown significant analgesic and anti-
inflammatory effects. 
Ethanol extracts and crude water extracts of 
the roots showed significant antifungal activity 
against Aspergillus flavus, Aspergillus fumiga-
tus, Aspergillus niger, Candida albicans, Mi-
crosporum audonii, Trichoderma viride and 
Trichophyton mentagrophytes. The ethanol 
extracts of the plants were more active than 
the water extracts. 
Descript ion Dioecious liana; mature 
branches with papery exfoliating bark; young 
branchlets densely short-hairy. Leaves alter-
nate, simple; stipules absent; petiole 7-14 cm 
long; blade almost round to 3-angled, 7-20 cm 
x 7-20 cm, base cordate, apex obtuse to acumi-
nate, margin entire or shallowly lobed, densely 
hairy, palmately 5-7-veined. Inflorescence a 
pendulous, axillary raceme or false raceme; 
male inflorescence a false raceme 10-30 cm 
long, composed of 3-5-flowered clusters; female 
inflorescence a raceme 10-18 cm long; bracts 
filiform, persistent. Flowers unisexual, regular; 
pedicel 3-6 mm long; sepals 6-9, 3 outer sepals 
lanceolate, up to 2 mm long, bract-like, hairy, 
inner sepals obovate, 2.5-3.5 mm long, with a 
tuft of hairs at apex; petals 6, obovate, 2-2.5 
mm x 1.5-2 mm, fleshy, glabrous, greenish 
yellow; male flowers with 6 stamens 2.5-3 mm 
long, filaments largely fused; female flowers, 
with superior ovary, consisting of 3 ovoid car-
pels c. 2 mm long, united at apex by the re-
curved stigmas, staminodes 6, c. 1 mm long. 
Fruit composed of 3 ellipsoid and unequal-
sided drupelets 1-2 cm x c. 1 cm, each drupelet 
1-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 1-2 cm long, curved. 
Other botanical information Chasman-
thera is closely related to Tinospora and Jateo-
rhiza; these genera have been combined in the 
past. Chasmanthera is an African genus which 
comprises two species: Chasmanthera de-
pendens and Chasmanthera welwitschii 
Troupin. The species appear to be ecologically 
different, although their areas of distribution 
overlap in the Central African Republic and 
intermediates have been found there. Further 
Chasmanthera dependens - 1, part of male 
flowering branch; 2, male flower; 3, drupelet. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
CHASMANTHERA 169 
research is needed to decide if the 2 species 
should be combined into a single species. 
Ecology Chasmanthera dependens occurs 
commonly in forest margins, savanna and sec-
ondary forest, often near rocks, but sometimes 
also in dense and moist evergreen forest, semi-
deciduous forest and riverine forest, up to 1500 
m altitude. It prefers well-drained soils with 
ample water and sun. 
Propagation and planting Chasmanthera 
dependens is propagated by seed and Wildlings. 
The seeds remain dormant for 6 months. 
Management In West Africa Chasmanthera 
dependens is sometimes cultivated as a medici-
nal plant, mainly in home gardens. It is found 
growing in cocoa plantations and is sometimes 
believed to reduce yields. It also hosts a medfly 
(Ceratitis sp.), which feeds on fruits. 
Harvesting Chasmanthera dependens is 
collected from the wild or home gardens. 
Handling after harvest The fresh leaves 
are ground and the leaf juice is used immedi-
ately or kept for further use on sprains or 
bruises. The stem bark may be used fresh or 
roasted. It may also be dried and kept for later 
use. 
Genetic resources Chasmanthera dependens 
is widespread and common and is not in dan-
ger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Chasmanthera dependens is 
widely used in traditional medicine, but very 
few pharmacological tests have been done. 
Pharmacological tests on the alkaloids present 
in Chasmanthera dependens, but obtained from 
other species, indicate that additional research 
is warranted. 
Major references Adekunle & Okoli, 2002; 
Almeida, Navarro & Barbosa-Filho, 2001; Bou-
quet & Debray, 1974; Burkill, 1997; Irvine, 
1961; Morebise et a l , 2001; Okoli, Akah & 
Nwafor, 2003; Oliver-Bever, 1986; Onabanjo et 
a l , 1990; Troupin, 1960. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1991; 
de Wet, 2005; Dormon et a l , 2004; Gemedo-
Dalle, Maass & Isselstein, 2005; Hamill et al., 
2000; Hamill et a l , 2003; Ichikawa, 1987; Iwu, 
1993; Iwu, Duncan & Okunji, 1999; Ohiri, Ver-
poorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1982; Ohiri, 
Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983b; 
Thorold, 1975; Troupin, 1962. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
CHASMANTHERA WELWITSCHII Troupin 
Protologue Fl. Congo Beige 2: 241 (1951). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Vernacular names Njinde (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Chas-
manthera welwitschii occurs in the humid zone 
from Cameroon and the Central African Re-
public south to DR Congo and northern Angola. 
Uses Bark preparations are taken as a tonic 
against bodily and nervous exhaustion. Leaf 
sap mixed with shea butter is rubbed on the 
body against pain and stiffness of limbs. A wet 
dressing made from the leaves is applied to 
furuncles and abscesses. A fishing poison is 
prepared from the leaves mixed with leaves of 
Tephrosia vogelii Hook.f. The roots are used as 
an ordeal-poison, judgement resting on 
whether the roots caused constipation or diar-
rhoea, indicating innocence or guilt, respec-
tively. The roots are used in the preparation of 
palm wine to give it extra strength. 
Fruits and roots are eaten by the Turumbu 
people in DR Congo. The Balumba people in 
Gabon use the stem for rope in house construc-
tion and to make fishing nets and frames. 
Properties The medicinal or chemical prop-
erties have not been studied, but the presence 
of berberine-like quaternary alkaloids, as in 
Chasmanthera dependens Höchst., is likely. 
Botany Dioecious liana up to 30 m long; 
branches pendulous, finely grooved, hairy. 
Leaves alternate, simple, densely hairy; stip-
ules absent; petiole 12-14 cm long; blade 
nearly round to broadly 5-angular, 10—16 cm x 
10-22 cm, base cordate, apex acuminate or 
obtuse, margins recurved, thinly leathery, 
palmately 6-7-veined. Inflorescence a pendu-
lous, axillary raceme or false raceme; male 
inflorescence a false raceme 30-60 cm long, 
composed of 3-5-flowered clusters; female in-
florescence a raceme 15-22 cm long; bracts 
filiform, persistent. Flowers unisexual, regular; 
pedicel c. 2.5 mm long; sepals 6, 3 outer ones 
linear-lanceolate, up to 2 mm long, 3 inner 
ones obovate, c. 2.5 mm long, with a tuft of 
hairs at apex; petals 6, obovate, c. 1.5 mm x 1 
mm, fleshy, glabrous, greenish yellow; male 
flowers with 6 stamens c. 1.5 mm long, fila-
ments largely fused; female flowers with supe-
rior ovary consisting of 3, ovoid carpels united 
at apex by the recurved stigmas, staminodes 6, 
c. 1.2 mm long. Fruit composed of 3 ellipsoid 
and unequal-sided drupelets c. 1.2 cm x 1 cm, 
each drupelet 1-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 1 cm 
long, curved. 
170 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Chasmanthera is closely related to Tinospora 
and Jateorhiza; these genera have been com-
bined in the past. Chasmanthera is an African 
genus which comprises two species: Chasman-
thera welwitschii and Chasmanthera de-
pendens. The species appear to be ecologically 
different, although their areas of distribution 
overlap in the Central African Republic and 
intermediates have been found there. Further 
study is needed to decide if the 2 species should 
be combined into a single species. 
Ecology Chasmanthera welwitschii occurs 
in dense evergreen and semi-deciduous humid 
forest, in gallery forest, humid secondary forest 
and bush fallow at low to medium altitudes. 
Management Chasmanthera welwitschii is 
only collected from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though the habitat of Chasmanthera 
welwitschii is shrinking, there are no indica-
tions that it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The pharmacological properties 
of Chasmanthera welwitschii are unknown and 
deserve exploratory research. 
Major references Liengola, 2001; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Troupin, 1951; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Burkill, 
1997; Lubini, 1986. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
CHROZOPHORA BROCCHIANA (Vis.) Schweinf. 
Protologue PL quaed. nilot.: 9 (1862). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Chro-
zophora brocchiana occurs from Cape Verde 
and Mauritania throughout the Sahel region 
east to Sudan, and is also found in Algeria and 
Egypt. 
Uses In the Hoggar region of Mali and Ni-
ger, the plant ash is applied to sores of humans 
and camels. In Niger the Hausa people rub 
crushed leaves on the affected sites to treat 
stitch in the side. The aerial parts are taken in 
decoction to strengthen lactating mothers and 
their children, and to treat fever and dysen-
tery. In Benin powdered dried leaves in water 
are taken to treat diarrhoea. Root sap in water 
is used as ear drops to treat otitis. 
In Senegal the plant is not browsed by most 
stock, except occasionally by sheep and goats, 
as it causes vomiting and diarrhoea. In Niger 
though, it is sought after by goats and at cer-
tain times of the year also by cattle. It is not 
suitable for making hay or silage. In central 
Sudan a sweet, non-drying oil is pressed from 
the seeds. 
Properties Analysis of the chemical content 
of the aerial parts revealed an unusually high 
silica content. The aqueous methanol extract of 
the aerial parts contains brocchiana carboxylic 
acid, an analogue of brevifolin carboxylic acid, 
as well as gallic acid, methyl gallate, ethyl 
gallate, ellagic acid, mono- and di-methoxy 
ellagic acid, apigenin and luteolin 7-0-
glucoside. 
The analysis of the fatty acid composition of 
the seed oil showed linoleic acid as the major 
component, followed by palmitic, oleic and 
stearic acids. 
Botany Monoecious, shrubby herb up to 
60(-150) cm tall; taproot stout and very long; 
stem ascending, knotty, much-branched from 
the base, white-velvety hairy with stellate 
hairs. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules small; 
petiole long; blade angular-ovate to triangular-
ovate, 2.5-4 cm x 1.5—3 cm, base deeply cor-
date with 2 glands, apex rounded, margins 
undulate, upper surface sparsely hairy, lower 
surface velvety hairy, 3-veined at base. Inflo-
rescence a condensed axillary raceme, with 
male flowers at the top and female flowers at 
the base; bracts small. Flowers unisexual, 
regular, 5-merous; calyx velvety hairy, petals 
deep red; male flowers with short pedicel, sta-
mens up to 10, filaments fused into a column; 
female flowers with pedicel elongating in fruit 
to 6 mm long, petals smaller than in male 
flowers, ovary superior, 3-celled, styles 3, fused 
at base, 2-fid at apex. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 
1 cm long, densely covered with white or violet-
tinged, shiny stalked scales, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, smooth, yellowish brown, covered by a 
thin, pale, shiny aril. 
Chrozophora comprises 7-8 species and is dis-
tributed in Africa, southern Europe and Asia. 
Ecology Chrozophora brocchiana grows on 
sandy soils in dry regions. It resprouts 
throughout the dry season. 
Genetic resources and breeding Chrozo-
phora brocchiana is common in its distribution 
area and not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Chrozophora brocchiana has sev-
eral interesting medicinal uses, e.g. against 
diarrhoea, but no pharmacological studies have 
been effected to elucidate effects of the isolated 
compounds. The plant is important as a fodder 
of cattle in some times of the year although 
there is contradiction concerning the toxicity of 
the aerial parts. It would therefore be interest-
CHROZOPHORA 171 
ing to investigate Chrozophora brocchiana phy-
tochemically. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Hawas, 
2006; Keay, 1958a; Mirghani et a l , 1996; Neu-
winger, 1996. 
Other references Adam, Echard & Lescot, 
1972; Adjanohoun et al., 1985; Bartha, 1970; 
Prain, 1918. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CHROZOPHORA PLICATA (Vahl) A.Juss. ex 
Spreng. 
Protologue Syst. veg. 3: 850 (1826). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In = 22 
Synonyms Chrozophora rottleri (Geiseler) 
A.Juss. ex Spreng. (1826). 
Origin and geographic distribution Chro-
zophora plicata occurs from Senegal east to 
Somalia and south throughout East Africa to 
northern South Africa. It also occurs from 
Egypt and Saudi Arabia east to tropical Asia. 
Uses In Sudan pounded stems or whole 
plants are applied to wounds to improve heal-
ing. In Ethiopia an infusion of the seeds and 
leaves is taken as a laxative. The plant is also 
used medicinally in Saudi Arabia, Pakistan 
and India, e.g. against jaundice and to purify 
blood. 
In Senegal the plant is not browsed by most 
stock, except occasionally by sheep and goats, 
as it causes vomiting and diarrhoea. In Kenya 
camels graze it. The fruits yield a purplish blue 
dye, which is used in East Africa to dye mats. 
Properties The fresh shoots of Chrozophora 
plicata force-fed to Nubian goats and desert 
sheep caused all animals to die, and the main 
signs of poisoning were salivation, dyspnoea, 
bloat, loss of appetite, dullness, diarrhoea, pa-
ralysis of the hind limbs and lateral deviation 
of the head and neck. The main lesions were 
haemorrhage in the lungs, heart and kidneys, 
pulmonary cyanosis and oedema, and serious 
atrophy of the cardiac fat and renal pelvis. 
Hematological changes indicated the develop-
ment of anaemia. 
The seed oil resembles cotton-seed oil in its 
proportions of linoleic, oleic and saturated ac-
ids. The total linolenic and linoleic acid content 
varied from 60-75%. No chemical analyses 
have been effected on the aerial parts of Chro-
zophora plicata, but from the aerial parts of 
the related Chrozophora tinctoria (L.) Raf. 
(synonym: Chrozophora obliqua (Vahl) A.Juss. 
ex Spreng.) occurring from north-western India 
to the Mediterranean, several toxic dolabellane 
diterpene glucosides, dolabellane diterpenoids 
and phenylpropanoid glucosides have been 
isolated. Although rats fed 10% leaves in their 
diet had a low growth rate, bouts of soft faeces, 
lesions of internal organs and alterations in 
blood and urea, no death occurred among the 
rats. 
Botany Monoecious, annual to perennial 
herb up to 50 cm tall; stem angular, much-
branched from the base, densely hairy with 
stellate hairs, yellowish or pinkish. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules small; petiole l-4(— 
7) cm long; blade broadly ovate to rhombic-
ovate, 1.5-7 cm x 1-5.5 cm, base cuneate to 
shallowly cordate with 2 purple glands, apex 
rounded to obtuse, margins entire or shallowly 
toothed, densely hairy with stellate hairs, 3-5-
veined at base. Inflorescence a condensed axil-
lary raceme 1.5-4 cm long, with male flowers 
at the top and female flowers at base; bracts 
small. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
calyx with stellate hairs; male flowers with 
short pedicel, calyx with lanceolate lobes c. 3 
mm long, petals elliptical-oblong, c. 3 mm long, 
yellowish orange or pinkish, stamens 15, fila-
ments fused into a column; female flowers with 
long pedicel, extending up to 2(-3) cm in fruit, 
sepals linear-lanceolate, 1.5-2 mm long, petals 
minute or absent, ovary superior, 3-celled, 
densely short-hairy, styles 3, 1.5—2 mm long, 
fused at base, deeply 2-fid, red. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule 4-5 mm x 7-9 mm, densely stellate-
hairy, reddish or bluish purple when ripe, 3-
seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 3.5 mm long, smooth or 
minutely dotted, pale or dark brown to black-
ish. 
Chrozophora comprises 7—8 species and is dis-
tributed in Africa, southern Europe and Asia. 
Another Chrozophora species with medicinal 
use in Africa is Chrozophora oblongifolia (De-
lile) A.Juss. ex Spreng., occurring in north-
eastern Africa, the Arabian Peninsula and 
Pakistan. In Sudan a stem or leaf extract is 
taken to treat gonorrhoea. The chloroform and 
methanol extracts show considerable antibac-
terial activities. 
Ecology Chrozophora plicata occurs on flood 
plains of rivers, along drainage channels, usu-
ally in damp or desiccating black clay soils and 
alluvial soils, on mudflats and sandbanks, up 
to 1200 m altitude. It is also a weed of arable 
land. 
Genetic resources and breeding Chrozo-
phora plicata has a wide distribution and is 
172 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
relatively common. The species is therefore not 
th rea tened hy genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Chrozophora plicata has few me-
dicinal uses, and is poisonous to livestock. It 
will therefore remain of local importance only. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1994; Farouk, 
Bashir & Salih, 1983; Galal & Adam, 1988; 
Jansen , 1981; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adam, Al-Redhaiman & 
Al-Qarawi, 1999; Barker , Dunn & Hilditch, 
1950 
2000 
1995: 
Govaerts, Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 
Hasan et al., 1980; Mahmoud et al., 
Mohamed, 2001; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
CHROZOPHORA SENEGALENSIS (Lam.) 
A . J u s s . ex S p r e n g . 
P r o t o l o g u e Syst. veg. 3: 850 (1826). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Chro-
zophora senegalensis occurs from Maur i t an ia 
east to Nigeria. 
U s e s Throughout West Africa a leaf macer-
ate is t aken to t rea t tapeworm and roundworm. 
In Senegal a root decoction is given to suckling 
babies to t r ea t diarrhoea. A fruit macerat ion is 
t aken to t r ea t ophthalmia , conjunctivitis and 
night bl indness. The fruit juice is used as eye 
drops to t r ea t more severe cases. A macerat ion 
of leaves and roots is d runk to t r ea t loss of ha i r 
and diabetes. In Mali a macerat ion of the ae-
r ia l pa r t s is applied to wounds to improve heal-
ing. In Côte d'Ivoire an enema m a d e from the 
aer ial pa r t s is given to children with r ickets. 
An infusion of the aer ial pa r t s is t aken to t r ea t 
s tomach-ache and venereal diseases. An infu-
sion of the whole p lan t is as t r ingent and t aken 
in nor thern Nigeria with cereals to t r ea t diar-
rhoea. The infusion is also topically applied to 
t r ea t rheumat i sm. The aerial pa r t s also enter 
in a complex medicine to t r e a t venereal dis-
eases and menta l disorders. 
In Senegal the plant is not browsed by most 
stock, except occasionally by camels, sheep and 
goats, as it causes vomiting and diarrhoea. The 
aerial pa r t s yield a black dye, which is used to 
colour mats . 
P r o p e r t i e s A wa te r ext ract of t he aer ia l 
pa r t s caused an in-vivo hypoglycaemic re-
sponse in r a t s . 
B o t a n y Monoecious, shrubby herb up to 60 
cm tall; taproot s tout and very long; s tem as-
cending, knotty, much-branched from the base, 
densely short-hairy. Leaves a l te rna te , simple; 
st ipules small; petiole short; blade angular-
ovate to t r iangular-ovate , 2.5-4 cm x 1.5-3 cm, 
base deeply cordate with 2 basal glands, apex 
rounded, margins undula te , upper surface 
sparsely hairy, lower surface densely short-
hairy, 3-veined at base. Inflorescence a con-
densed axillary raceme, with male flowers a t 
the top and female flowers at the base; bracts 
small . Flowers unisexual , regular, 5-merous; 
calyx short-hairy, petals deep red; male flowers 
with short pedicel, s t amens up to 10, fi laments 
fused into a column; female flowers with long 
pedicel, petals smaller t h a n in male flowers, 
ovary superior, 3-celled, styles 3, fused a t base, 
2-fid at apex. Frui t a 3-lobed capsule c. 1 cm 
long, densely covered with white, shiny stalked 
scales, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, smooth, yellow-
ish brown, covered by a thin, pale, shiny aril . 
Chrozophora comprises 7-8 species and is dis-
t r ibuted in Africa, southern Europe and Asia. 
Chrozophora senegalensis closely resembles 
Chrozophora brocchiana (Vis.) Schweinf., but 
the former species h a s shorter ha i r s , shorter 
petioles and non-elongating sepals in fruit. 
E c o l o g y Chrozophora senegalensis occurs on 
sandy soils, in seasonally flooded a reas and on 
r iverbanks in savanna regions with a pro-
nounced dry season. It is also a weed of culti-
vated land. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Chrozo-
phora senegalensis is relatively common in its 
distr ibution area and not th rea tened by genetic 
erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Chrozophora senegalensis h a s a 
wide range of local medicinal uses , bu t virtu-
ally nothing concerning its chemist ry and 
pharmacology is known. Research is therefore 
war ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill, 1994; Keay, 1958a; 
Massing-Bias, 1991; Neuwinger, 1996. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Diallo et al., 2002; Go-
vaer ts , Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 2000. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
ClSSAMPELOS CAPENSIS L.f. 
P r o t o l o g u e Suppl. pi.: 432 (1782). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution The 
distr ibution of Cissampelos capensis is limited 
to Namibia and the Cape Provinces of South 
Africa. 
U s e s In South Africa, where the plant is 
called 'dawidjie', a t inc ture of t he rhizome in 
alcohol or b randy or a decoction of the rhizome 
ClSSAMPELOS 173 
is taken as a blood purifier to treat boils and 
glandular swellings, syphilis, cholera, colic, 
diarrhoea, diabetes and several cancers. It is 
given against bladder ailments, bilious prob-
lems and gallstones and is applied externally 
and internally against erysipelas. The extract 
is also used to prevent miscarriage and difficult 
labour, and to expel retained placenta. A paste 
made of the leaves is applied to sores and boils. 
Stems are burnt as incense against evil spirits, 
while a stem infusion is used as a ritual wash 
for the same purpose. 
Production and international trade Bun-
dles of fresh or dried leaves and rhizomes are 
sold in local markets in South Africa. 
Properties All plant parts are rich in alka-
loids. Major components of the leaves are the 
morphinane alkaloid salutaridine and the 
aporphine alkaloids dicentrine and bulbo-
capnine, and as minor components the apor-
phine alkaloid lauroscholtzine, the proapor-
phine alkaloids crotsparine and glaziovine and 
the bisbenzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid 
cycleanine. The alkaloid yield varies from 4.7-
19 mg/g dry weight. In the stems the major 
alkaloids are the aporphine alkaloids bulbo-
capnine and dicentrine and the bisbenzyltetra-
hydroisoquinoline alkaloids cissacapine, cy-
cleanine and insularine. Minor alkaloids are 
the bisbenzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloids 
12-O-methylcurine and insulanoline and the 
benzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid re-
ticuline. Main components of the rhizomes are 
the bisbenzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloids 
12-O-methylcurine, cycleanine and cissa-
carpine, and as minor components the apor-
phine alkaloids bulbocapnine and dicentrine, 
the proaporphine alkaloids glaziovine and pro-
nuciferine and the bisbenzyltetrahydroisoqui-
noline alkaloid insularine. The alkaloid yield of 
both stem and rhizome samples varies from 
0.5-2.3 mg/g dry weight. The alkaloid composi-
tion also varies among plants, the difference 
being largest between plants from inland lo-
calities and plants from coastal localities. 
In pharmacological tests dicentrine, cycleanine 
and salutaridine showed significant anticancer 
activities against several cancer cell lines, but 
this was coupled with a high cytotoxicity. Cy-
cleanine has shown selective antiplasmodial 
and antiprotozoal activities as well as spasmo-
lytic activity in vitro. Cycleanine furthermore 
showed antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory and 
analgesic activities, and dicentrine antibacte-
rial and antifungal activities in vitro. A 
methanol extract of the leaves, as well as iso-
lated dicentrine and another isolated alkaloid, 
neolitsine, showed significant anthelmintic 
activity against larvae of the stomach parasite 
Haemonchus contortus. In an in-vivo essay, 
oral administration of dicentrine resulted in 
67% reduction of worm counts in mice at a dose 
of 25 mg/kg. 
Botany Dioecious shrub up to 1 m tall, with 
rhizome; stems glabrous or short-hairy, with 
longitudinal ridges. Leaves arranged spirally, 
simple; stipules absent; petiole up to 2.5 cm 
long, glabrous; blade ovate to deltoid, up to 4 
cm x 3.5 cm, base cuneate to truncate, apex 
obtuse to refuse, often with mucro, margin 
entire to slightly undulate, leathery, glabrous 
to hairy, greyish to bright green, palmately 3 -
5-veined. Inflorescence an axillary, umbel-like 
cyme, solitary or clustered; male inflorescence 
solitary or paired, female inflorescence ar-
ranged in a short false raceme; bracts linear, 
tiny. Flowers unisexual; male flowers with 
pedicel up to 2.5 mm long, sepals 4, elliptical to 
obovate, 0.5-1.5 mm x 0.5-1 mm, fleshy, outer 
two thicker than inner two, short-hairy out-
side, corolla cup-shaped, 4-lobed, 0.5-1 mm in 
diameter, greenish, stamens 4, filaments fused; 
female flower with pedicel up to 3 mm long, 
sepals 2, orbicular to rhomboid, c. 1 mm x 1.5 
mm, short-hairy outside, petals 2, elliptical to 
ovate, 0.5-1 mm x 0.5-1 mm, glabrous, ovary 
superior, striped, glabrous, 1-celled, style 
short, stigma u-shaped, 3-lobed. Fruit a com-
pressed obovoid drupe up to 7 mm long, orange 
when mature, stone bony, horseshoe-shaped, 1-
seeded. Seed with sparse endosperm and 
curved embryo. 
Cissampelos capensis can be found flowering 
throughout the year. 
Cissampelos comprises about 20 species, 7 in 
tropical America and 13 in tropical Africa. Cis-
sampelos pareira L. is the only species with a 
pantropical distribution. Cissampelos capensis 
should not be confused with Zehneria scabra 
(L.f.) Sond. (Cucurbitaceae), known as 'dawid-
jies' in South Africa and also used medicinally. 
Ecology Cissampelos capensis occurs in 
open localities on well-drained sandy or gran-
ite-derived soils, up to 1900 m altitude. 
Management Leaves and rhizomes are only 
collected from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Cissam-
pelos capensis occurs in a fairly large area; 
there are no indications that it is threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Cissampelos capensis contains 
some alkaloids with interesting pharmacologi-
174 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cal properties, some of which act against sev-
eral cancer cell lines. Therefore more research 
is warranted. 
Major references Ayers et al., 2007; Cocks 
& Dold, 2006; de Wet, 2005; de Wet & van 
Wyk, 2008; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Cocks, 1995; Dold & 
Cocks, 2002; Friedrich-Holzhammer, 1968; SA 
Health Info, 2007; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
ClSSAMPELOS MUCEONATA A.Rich. 
Protologue Fl. Seneg. tent. 1: 11 (1831). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Cissampelos pareira L. var. 
mucronata (A.Rich.) Engl. (1899). 
Vernacular names Orelha de rato (Po). 
Kishiki cha buga (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cis-
sampelos mucronata is distributed throughout 
tropical Africa, except the most humid areas, 
from Senegal east to Ethiopia and south to 
South Africa. 
Uses Cissampelos mucronata, Cissampelos 
owariensis P.Beauv. ex DC. and Cissampelos 
pareira L. have often been confused; as they 
are also similarly used, it is often impossible to 
correlate uses unambiguously with a particular 
species. Cissampelos mucronata has many 
medicinal uses, and throughout Africa people 
take an infusion of the bitter rhizome, and 
sometimes of leaves and stems, or fruit juice, to 
cure gastro-intestinal complaints such as 
diarrhoea, dysentery, colic, intestinal worms 
and digestive complaints, and also urogenital 
Cissampelos mucronata - wild 
problems such as menstrual problems, 
venereal diseases, infertility, azoospermia, to 
induce contraction of the uterus to start labour 
or abortion and to expel the placenta. In 
eastern DR Congo a leaf decoction is taken as a 
vermifuge against tapeworm. 
In Senegal the rhizome enters into 
preparations to treat catarrh, whereas in Togo 
the rhizome is chewed to treat sore throat, 
cough and lung problems. In decoction the 
rhizome is given against oedema. In Tanzania 
and Madagascar a rhizome decoction is taken 
to diminish fever caused by malaria or 
jaundice. Rhizome sap is used as ear drops to 
treat earache. Bushmen of the Kalahari take a 
warm rhizome decoction to treat coughs and for 
general wellness. In the Okavango delta in 
Botswana, Namibia and Zimbabwe a rhizome 
decoction is drunk to treat headache, neck pain 
and back pain. In Namibia the Damara people 
apply the powdered rhizome to open wounds 
for quick healing. In Zimbabwe rhizomes are 
used to treat bilharzia. 
Throughout West Africa and in Uganda, fresh 
leaves, heated leaves or pulped leaves are 
applied to wounds, ulcers, conjunctivitis and 
syphilis sores, and a poultice of leaves mixed 
with natron is applied to swellings, ulcers and 
Guinea worm sores. In Ghana leaf pulp is 
taken internally or applied to the affected area 
as an antidote for snake venom. In Côte 
d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso fresh leaf pulp is 
applied to relieve severe headache and is eaten 
mixed with clay to stop stomatitis. The vapour 
of a leaf decoction is inhaled to induce 
vomiting. 
In southern Senegal an infusion of leafy stems 
is used as emmenagogue. In Togo the whole 
plant is used in preparations to treat 
intercostal pain. In Nigeria ash from the plant 
enters into a medicine against arthritis, which 
is rubbed into scarifications. In DR Congo and 
eastern Tanzania the pounded plant is applied 
to snakebites. In Rwanda the plant is used to 
treat diseases affecting the spine. In Benin, 
Uganda and other parts of Africa the roots are 
used in medical rituals to treat mental 
problems such as psychoses. 
In Nigeria the rhizome is sometimes used in 
the preparation of arrow poison. In Kenya 
crushed rhizomes are applied to the skin of 
goats to remove insect parasites. 
The stems of Cissampelos mucronata are 
commonly used for tying and binding and in 
wickerwork; in DR Congo stems are used to 
make fishing lines. 
ClSSAMPELOS 175 
Production and international trade Cis-
sampelos mucronata is mainly traded in local 
markets. It may enter wider markets by the 
name 'pareira brava'. True 'pareira brava' 
however is made from the South American 
Chondrodendron tomentosum Ruiz & Pav.; in 
some African countries it is permitted to sell 
Cissampelos pareira under this name, and 
confusion with Cissampelos mucronata may 
occur. 
Properties All plant parts are rich in 
alkaloids, although the rhizomes contain most. 
The aporphine alkaloid dicentrine is the main 
alkaloid isolated from all plant parts. The 
rhizome also contains a high concentration of 
the bisbenzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloids 
cissacapine, cycleanine and d-isochondroden-
drine; the first 2 alkaloids occur in small 
amounts in the stem, as well as the aporphine 
alkaloid lauroscholtzine. The leaves contain 
the proaporphine alkaloid pronuciferine, the 
benzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloid reticu-
line and the morphinane alkaloid salutaridine. 
A methanolic rhizome extract contained 
several bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids, inclu-
ding tubocurine, 12-O-methylcurine, isoliensi-
nine and cissampentine. 
Methanolic extracts from the dried rhizome 
have shown significant antiprotozoal activity 
against chloroquine sensitive and chloroquine 
resistant Plasmodium falciparum. The 
dichloromethane extract showed less activity. 
The methanolic extract also inhibited the 
enzyme tyrosine kinase. Alkaloids isolated 
from the ethanolic extracts of the rhizome have 
shown sedative effects in tests with mice. The 
ethanol extract has also shown uterine 
relaxant activities in pregnant and non-
pregnant rats. Methanolic leaf extracts of the 
plant had a positive effect against indometha-
cin-induced stomach ulcers in rats. 
Description Dioecious liana, with rhizome; 
older stems with longitudinal ridges, dark 
brown, branchlets short-hairy. Leaves 
arranged spirally, simple; stipules absent; 
petiole (l-)2-4.5(-8) cm long, inserted 0-3 mm 
above the base of the blade; blade ovate to 
heart-shaped, 4-12(-15) cm x 4-13(-14.5) cm, 
base cordate, apex rounded to acute, with 
mucro, margin entire or wavy, papery, short-
hairy on both sides, later glabrescent, 
palmately veined with 5-7 main veins. 
Inflorescence an axillary, umbel-like cyme, 
solitary or clustered; male inflorescence either 
in clusters or arranged in a false raceme up to 
15(—30) cm long, female inflorescence arranged 
Cissampelos mucronata - 1, part of stem with 
male inflorescence; 2, part of stem with female 
inflorescence and infructescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
in a false raceme 5—16(-18) cm long; peduncle 
up to 1 cm long; bracts 10—12 mm long, 
mucronate. Flowers unisexual, with reddish 
brown or black spots; pedicel up to 2 mm long; 
male flowers with 4-5(-7) ovate to elliptical 
sepals, free or fused at base, 1-1.5 mm x 0.5-1 
mm, hairy outside, petals 4-5, fused at base, 1— 
1.5 mm long, spreading after flowering, 
stamens 2—5, filaments fused, up to 1.5 mm 
long; female flowers with l(-2) obovate sepals 
up to 1.5(—2) mm long, short-hairy, petals 1(— 
2), broadly ovate, c. 1 mm x 1.5 mm, glabrous, 
ovary superior, c. 1 mm long, almost glabrous, 
1-celled, stigma 3-5-lobed. Fruit a compressed 
obovoid drupe 4-7 mm x 3-5(-8) mm, curved, 
orange-red or yellow when ripe, short-hairy, 
stone woody with a dorsal ridge, sides with 
warty ribs, 1-seeded. Seed with sparse 
endosperm. 
Other botanical information Cissampelos 
comprises about 20 species, 7 in tropical Amer-
ica and 13 in tropical Africa. Cissampelos pa-
reira is the only species with a pantropical dis-
tribution. 
Growth and development In South Africa 
176 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Cissampelos mucronata can be found flowering 
almost throughout the year. 
Ecology Cissampelos mucronata occurs in 
deciduous bushland, often on termite hills and 
rock outcrops, in riverine forests and swamps, 
up to 1800 m altitude. It often persists in 
cultivated land. 
Propagation and planting Cissampelos 
mucronata is only propagated by seed. 
Management Cissampelos mucronata is 
commonly planted in home gardens as a 
medicinal plant but details of management and 
yield are not known. 
Genetic resources Because Cissampelos 
mucronata is very widespread in Africa and 
occurs in a variety of habitats, it seems not to 
be in danger of genetic erosion. In view of its 
medicinal importance and wide distribution, 
the establishment of a representative germ-
plasm collection is recommended. 
Prospects Cissampelos mucronata is an 
important and well-documented medicinal 
plant throughout Africa, but with little 
chemical and pharmacological data available to 
support its medicinal uses. Further study of 
the pharmacological properties of the various 
plant parts and of their chemical components is 
urgently needed. 
Major references Baerts & Lehmann, 2006a; 
de Wet & van Wyk, 2008; Keay & Troupin, 
1954; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Nwafor & Akah, 2003; Nwafor et al., 2002; 
Rhodes, 1975; Troupin, 1956; Tshibangu, 
Wright & König, 2003. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1991; 
Akah et al., 2002; Bost, 1961; de Wet, Tilney & 
van Wyk, 2001; Gessier et al., 1994; Hamill et 
al., 2000; Ie Grand & Wondergem, 1987; Minja, 
1994b; Tshibangu et al., 2002; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962. 
Sources of illustration Berhaut, 1979. 
Authors M. Muzila 
CISSAMPELOS OWARIENSIS P.Beauv. ex DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 1: 100 (1824). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Cissampelos pareira L. var. owa-
riensis (P.Beauv. ex DC.) Oliv. (1868). 
Vernacular names Liane amère, liane 
corde, liane serpent (Fr). Kishiki cha buga, 
mkasisi cha mkiwa, mlagalaga (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cis-
sampelos owariensis occurs from Sierra Leone 
east to Uganda and south to Angola, Zambia 
Cissampelos owariensis - wild 
and Mozambique. 
Uses Cissampelos owariensis, Cissampelos 
mucronata A.Rich. and Cissampelos pareira L. 
have often been confused; as they are also 
similarly used, it is often impossible to 
correlate uses unambiguously with a particular 
species. 
Throughout the distribution area of Cissampe-
los owariensis people take an infusion of the 
bitter rhizome, leaves or stems to cure gastro-
intestinal complaints such as diarrhoea, 
dysentery, colic, intestinal worms and digestive 
complaints, and also urogenital problems such 
as menstrual problems, venereal diseases, 
infertility, to induce contraction of the uterus 
to start labour or abortion and to expel the 
placenta. Women of the Bini people in Nigeria 
use the leaves to promote foetal growth. 
Leaves and rhizomes or their ash are widely 
used in various forms to treat abscesses, ulcers 
and scabies, and also as a haemostatic. In Ni-
geria leaf sap is used as nose or eye drops to 
cure headache. In Congo a decoction of stems 
mixed with leaves of other plants is used as a 
wash to treat wounds. In DR Congo leaf sap is 
applied to swellings, and is taken as a stom-
achic. A maceration of the plant is applied to 
snake bites. A decoction of the rhizome macer-
ated in palm oil is taken against piles. In 
south-eastern Tanzania grated rhizome is ap-
plied to snakebites. The aerial parts enter in 
preparations to treat amnesia and psychoses 
and in the preparation of health tonics. A de-
coction of crushed leaves is used in veterinary 
medicine to treat diarrhoea. In Nigeria the 
rhizome is sometimes used in the preparation 
of arrow poison. 
ClSSAMPELOS 177 
The stems are used as binding material for 
basket-work. The plant is occasionally culti-
vated as an ornamental. 
Production and international trade The 
plant is commonly sold in local markets. It may 
enter wider markets by the name 'pareira 
brava'. True 'pareira brava' however is made 
from the South American Chondrodendron 
tomentosum Ruiz & Pav.; in some African 
countries it is permitted to sell Cissampelos 
pareira under this name, and confusion with 
Cissampelos owariensis may occur. 
Properties Although the chemical and 
pharmaceutical properties of several Cissampe-
los spp. have been studied extensively and 
promising activities have been demonstrated, 
these aspects of Cissampelos owariensis have 
hardly been studied. Given the wide use of the 
plant in traditional medicine, it seems likely 
that it contains similar compounds, such as 
bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids. 
Crude ethanol extracts of leaves and rhizomes 
of Cissampelos owariensis applied topically to 
adult Acanthoscelides obtectus (pest of beans), 
Sitophilus oryzae (pest of stored rice grain) and 
Prostephanus truncatus (pest of maize and 
cassava) caused significant mortality in these 
beetles. Seed and leaf powders and slurries 
were also very effective against the last 2 pests 
when mixed with grains at a rate of 1% w/w. 
Description Dioecious liana, with rhizome; 
stem and branchlets with spreading hairs. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple, peltate; stip-
ules absent; petiole 4-16 cm long, inserted 1-2 
cm from the base of the blade; blade broadly 
ovate to circular, sometimes broadly triangu-
lar, 6-12 cm in diameter, base rounded to al-
most cordate, apex obtuse and mucronate, pa-
pery, variably hairy, palmately 5-7-veined. 
Inflorescence an axillary, umbel-like cyme, 
solitary or clustered; male inflorescence 
arranged in a false raceme up to 40 cm long, 
female inflorescence arranged in a false raceme 
up to 35 cm long; peduncle 0.5-3 cm long, 
hairy; bracts rounded or kidney-shaped, up to 4 
cm in diameter, enlarging in fruit, whitish, 
hairy. Flowers unisexual; pedicel c. 1 mm long; 
male flowers with 4(-5) obovate, spreading 
sepals 1—1.5 mm x 0.5-1 mm, hairy outside, 
corolla cup-shaped, c. 1 mm long, stamens 2-5, 
filaments fused; female flowers with 1 sepal, 1-
2 mm x 0.5-1 mm, petals l(-3), kidney-shaped, 
c. 1 mm long, ovary superior, 1-1.5 mm long, 
hairy, 1-celled. Fruit an obovoid drupe 4-6 mm 
x 4—5 mm, hairy, red when ripe, stone woody 
with warty ribs, 1-seeded. 
Cissampelos owariensis - 1, part of stem with 
male inflorescence; 2, part of stem with female 
inflorescence. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
Other botanical information Cissampelos 
comprises about 20 species, 7 in tropical Amer-
ica and 13 in tropical Africa. Cissampelos pa-
reira is the only species with a pantropical dis-
tribution. 
Growth and development Cissampelos 
owariensis is very variable in leaf form, hairi-
ness and inflorescence size. Flowering occurs 
towards the end of the dry season and the be-
ginning of the rainy season, in Benin from 
January to May. Fruits mature in the dry sea-
son. 
Ecology Cissampelos owariensis occurs in 
lowland and riverine forest, also in secondary 
forest, and it is often also common in clearings, 
orchards, fields and hedges, especially on moist 
soils up to 900 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Cissampelos 
owariensis is only propagated by seed 
Management It is sometimes found as a 
medicinal plant in home gardens, mainly in 
coastal regions. 
Harvesting Plant material is collected from 
the wild throughout the year, whenever re-
178 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
quired. 
Handling after harvest Collected plant 
material may be dried for later use. 
Genetic resources and breeding Cissam-
pelos owariensis has a wide distribution and is 
not in danger of genetic erosion. In view of its 
medicinal importance and wide distribution, 
the establishment of a representative germ-
plasm collection is recommended. 
Prospects Cissampelos owariensis has 
many medicinal uses, which are similar to sev-
eral other Cissampelos spp. However, few 
chemical and pharmacological investigations 
on Cissampelos owariensis have been made 
and additional research is warranted. If the 
biological activities are confirmed, biological 
and ecological studies are needed for domesti-
cation to ensure sustainable use. 
Major references Baerts & Lehmann, 2006b; 
Burkill, 1994; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 
2000; Niber, 1994; Troupin, 1960. 
Other references Chifundera, 1987; Igoli et 
al., 2005; Keay & Troupin, 1954; Maas, 1991; 
Niber, Helenius & Varis, 1992; Troupin, 1951; 
Troupin, 1962; Wome, 1985. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
CISSAMPELOS PAREIRA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 1031 (1753). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Chromosome number n = 12 
Synonyms Cissampelos madagascariensis 
Miers (1871). 
Vernacular names Velvetleaf, false parei-
ra, abuta (En). Liane patte cheval (Fr). Pareira 
brava, butua (Po). Kishiki cha buga, mkasisi 
mkiwa, mlagalaga (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cis-
sampelos pareira was first described from 
Latin America, but actually occurs throughout 
the tropics; in some countries it has been in-
troduced for its ornamental value. In Africa it 
has been recorded from Sierra Leone east to 
eastern DR Congo, Rwanda and Tanzania and 
south to northern Angola and Zambia. It also 
occurs in the Comoros, Madagascar and Mauri-
tius, and formerly on Assumption Island (Sey-
chelles). Its presence in Benin is uncertain. 
Uses Cissampelos pareira, Cissampelos 
mucronata A.Rich, and Cissampelos owariensis 
P.Beauv. ex DC. have often been confused; as 
they are also similarly used, it is often 
Cissampelos pareira - wild and naturalized 
impossible to correlate uses unambiguously 
with a particular species. 
Throughout the tropics preparations of Cis-
sampelos pareira are applied against a variety 
of complaints. People take an infusion of the 
bitter rhizome, and sometimes of leaves and 
stems, to cure gastro-intestinal complaints 
such as diarrhoea, dysentery, ulcers, colic, 
intestinal worms and digestive complaints, and 
also urogenital problems such as menstrual 
problems, venereal diseases, infertility, uterine 
bleeding and threatening miscarriage. A rhi-
zome decoction or pounded leaves are also 
widely taken or externally applied as a febri-
fuge and stomachic, and against cough, heart 
trouble, rheumatism, jaundice, snake bites and 
skin infections such as sores, boils, scabies and 
childhood eczema. More specifically, the rhi-
zome is used as a diuretic and against acute 
and chronic bladder inflammation, to dissolve 
urinary calcifications and as an emmenagogue. 
In Tanzania a rhizome extract mixed with a 
hot water extract of roots and leaves of 
Launaea cornuta (Höchst, ex Oliv. & Hiern) 
C.Jeffrey is given orally to treat epilepsy. 
Tribal people in India use the plant to prevent 
pregnancy. The Pokot people in Kenya apply 
crushed rhizomes to treat skin diseases of 
goats. In Madagascar a rhizome extract is 
given to poultry against avian malaria. In the 
Philippines the fibres of the bark are used as a 
fish poison. In Madagascar rhizomes were for-
merly used in the preparation of alcoholic liq-
uors as a bitter. The Pokot people make thin 
rope from the rhizomes. Cissampelos pareira is 
commonly planted in orchards, parks and gar-
dens for its ornamental value. In Asia the 
ClSSAMPELOS 179 
leaves are occasionally eaten. The leaves, 
crushed in water, give a jelly which is used as a 
refreshment. 
Production and international trade Cis-
sampelos pareira is mainly used in local medi-
cine and is only occasionally traded interna-
tionally. In some countries it is a permitted 
substitute for Chondrodendron tomentosum 
Ruiz & Pav. from South America in the drug 
'pareira brava'. 
Properties Cissampelos pareira contains a 
number of alkaloids, especially bisbenzyliso-
quinoline alkaloids. The rhizome contains ha-
yatine, hayatidine, hayatinine, d-4"-0-
methylbebeerine, 1-bebeerine, isochondroden-
drine, dicentrine, dehydrodicentrine, insu-
larine; the rhizome and leaves contain cy-
cleanine, while cissampareine has been iso-
lated from the whole plant and the chalcone-
flavone dimer cissampeloflavone from the ae-
rial parts. 
The rhizomes have also been found to be a rich 
source of tropoloisoquinoline alkaloids. 
Pareirubrine A, pareirubrine B, grandirubrine, 
isoimerubrine and pareitropone have been iso-
lated, all of which showed potent antileukae-
mic activity. Furthermore, two cytotoxic 
azafluoranthene alkaloids, structurally strongly 
related to tropoloisoquinoline alkaloids, have 
been isolated from the same extract, as has 
cissamine chloride. 
Several experiments on rhizome extracts of 
Cissampelos pareira have been done in recent 
years. A water-ethanol extract of the rhizomes 
reduced the growth and multiplication rate of 
benzo(a)pyrene-induced forestomach tumours 
in mice in a dose-dependent manner. In an-
other series of tests with rat models for acute, 
subacute and chronic inflammation, a similar 
extract showed significant anti-inflammatory 
activity without carcinogenic effects or causing 
gastric lesions. Mice administered the extract 
also showed reduced reactions against several 
pain stimuli. Ethanolic rhizome extracts have 
shown antihistaminic, hypotensive, antispas-
modic and anticonvulsant properties. In a test 
to confirm the antifertility use of the plant, a 
methanol extract of the leaves administered to 
rats caused a significant increase in the dura-
tion of the dioestrus and a reduction in the 
number of litters. Altered gonadotropine and 
oestradiol secretion were involved. 
Cissampelos pareira exhibits curare-like activ-
ity, depressing the central nervous system and 
relaxing smooth muscles, and has hypotensive 
and hypoglycaemic actions. The compound 
hayatinine is structurally similar to tubocu-
rarine from Chondrodendron tomentosum, the 
active compound in curare. It shows compara-
ble neuro-muscular blocking activities. Cy-
cleanine has shown significant inhibition of 
nitric oxide production in macrophages. Cy-
cleanine and bebeerine suppressed hepatic 
injury and reduced the level of tumour necrosis 
factor in mice treated with lipopolysaccharide 
and BCG, a model for the study of fulminant 
hepatitis. 
Description Dioecious liana or scandent 
shrub, with rhizome; leafy stems slender, gla-
brous to densely hairy. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, simple; stipules absent; petiole 4-7 cm 
long, short-hairy; blade broadly ovate, 2—12 cm 
x 4.5-12 cm, base rounded or truncate to 
deeply cordate, apex obtuse or notched, with 
mucro, entire or slightly wavy, membranous to 
papery, hairy below, sparsely hairy above, 
palmately 3-7-veined. Inflorescence an 
axillary, umbel-like cyme, solitary or clustered; 
male inflorescence up to 4 cm long, 1-3 to-
gether, female inflorescence arranged in a false 
raceme 5-10 cm long; bracts up to 1.5 cm in 
Cissampelos pareira - 1, flowering parts of stems 
with male inforescences; 2, part of stem with 
female inflorescence; 3, male flower; 4, sectioned 
male flower; 5, part of female inflorescence; 6, 
stone. 
Source: PROSEA 
180 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
diameter , almost round to kidney-shaped, 
hairy. Flowers unisexual ; pedicel up to 2 mm 
long; male flowers with 4(—5) sepals, ovate to 
ohovate, c. 1.5 mm x c. 0.5 mm, keeled, ha i ry 
outside, greenish or yellowish, corolla cup-
shaped, c. 1 m m long, fi laments of s t amens 
completely fused; female flowers with 1 sepal c. 
1.5 m m long, 1 obtr iangular to kidney-shaped 
petal c. 1.5 mm x 2 mm, ovary superior, hairy, 
1-celled, style thick with spreading, 3-lobed 
st igma. Frui t a short-hairy, orange to red 
drupe c. 5 mm long, curved with style-scar nea r 
base; s tone with 2 rows of very prominent 
t ransverse ridges, 1-seeded. Seed horseshoe-
shaped; embryo elongate, narrow, embedded in 
endosperm, cotyledons flattened. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Cissampelos 
comprises about 20 species, 7 in tropical Amer-
ica and 13 in tropical Africa. Cissampelos pa-
reira is the only species with a pantropical dis-
t r ibut ion. In tropical Africa 4 variet ies of Cis-
sampelos pareira a re recognized. Several other 
Cissampelos spp. are used in t radi t ional medi-
cine in tropical Africa. 
Cissampelos hirta Klotzsch (synonym: Cissam-
pelos pareira L. var. klotzschii T .Durand & 
Schinz) occurs in Mozambique and nor thern 
South Africa. I ts rhizome is used to t r ea t stom-
ach-ache, the leaves a re applied agains t ring-
worm and itching skin. The leaves contain re-
ticuline, the rhizome 12-O-methylcurine and 
dicentr ine. Cissampelos truncata Engl, occurs 
in Uganda and Tanzania . Its rhizome pulp is 
applied to snakebi tes , while the rhizome is 
chewed and the sap is swallowed as an emetic. 
Cissampelos torulosa E.Mey. ex Harv. occurs in 
Malawi, eas te rn Zimbabwe, Mozambique and 
eas te rn and southern South Africa. In South 
Africa its leaves a re t aken to t r ea t d iarrhoea 
and dysentery, hal lucinat ions, vomiting and 
pain, and the rhizome is t aken to t rea t syphilis, 
kidney pain and toothache. The leaves contain 
the alkaloids bulbocapnine, dicentrine, lauro-
scholtzine, pronuciferine, cissacapine, cycleanine, 
insulanoline, reticuline and salutar idine; the 
s tem bulbocapnine, dicentrine, reticuline, cis-
sacapine, cycleanine and sa lu tar id ine . 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t The flowers of 
Cissampelos pareira a re probably pollinated by 
small insects. 
E c o l o g y Cissampelos pareira occurs in rain-
forest, coastal evergreen bush land and decidu-
ous bushland, up to 2300 m al t i tude. It often 
pers is ts on cleared ground and in p lanta t ions , 
and can also be found in secondary vegetat ion 
and near rock outcrops. 
M a n a g e m e n t Cissampelos pareira is mostly 
collected from the wild. Although it is occa-
sionally cultivated, no information on its man-
agement is available. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Cissampelos pareira is 
very widespread and locally common. There is 
no reason to assume any danger of genetic ero-
sion, ei ther in Africa or in other pa r t s of the 
tropics. The quant i ty and composition of the 
alkaloids found in t he leaves and roots seem to 
differ between p lan ts from different regions. 
This may be a resul t of i ts great genetic diver-
sity. 
P r o s p e c t s The alkaloids present in Cissam-
pelos pareira have in teres t ing propert ies, e.g. 
ant i leukaemic and neuromuscular blocking 
activity. The rhizomes are used in t radi t ional 
medicine in different pa r t s of the world for 
similar purposes, which seems to confirm their 
effectiveness. Research to confirm and further 
invest igate these activities is war ran ted . The 
great diversity of the species also w a r r a n t s 
further s tudy and collection of germplasm. 
Major references Amresh, Rao & Singh, 2007; 
Baer ts & Lehmann , 2006c; Dwuma-Badu et al., 
1975a; Ganguly et al., 2007; Ge tahun , 1976; 
Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Hedberg et al., 
1983a; Hors ten & Lemmens , 1999; Keay & 
Troupin, 1954; Troupin, 1960. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Amresh et al., 2004; Am-
resh et al., 2007; Amresh , Singh & Rao, 2007; 
Chevalier & Laffitte, 1937; Kondo, Takano & 
Hojo, 1993; Mori ta et al., 1993a; Mori ta et a l , 
1993b; Mori ta et al., 1993c; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Samie et al., 2005; Singthong et al., 2005. 
S o u r c e s o f i l l u s t r a t i o n Hors ten & Lem-
mens, 1999. 
A u t h o r s L.P.A. Oyen 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous p lants 1. 
CLEISTANTHUS BIPINDENSIS Pax 
P r o t o l o g u e Bot. J a h r b . Syst. 33: 282 (1903). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyl lantha-
ceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution Cleis-
tanthus bipindensis occurs in Cameroon, the 
Cent ra l African Republic, Gabon and DR 
Congo. 
U s e s In DR Congo the s tem bark is chewed 
for i ts tonic propert ies . The wood is used for 
temporary construction and household uten-
sils. 
B o t a n y Monoecious shrub or small t ree up 
CLUTIA 181 
to 15 m tall; bole up to 50 cm in diameter; 
twigs short-hairy, later almost glabrous. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
small, soon falling; petiole 5—9 mm long; blade 
elliptical-oblong to elliptical-lanceolate, 8-22 
cm x 3-10 cm, base cuneate, apex acute, upper 
surface glabrous, lower surface short-hairy, 
pinnately veined, with 4-9 pairs of lateral 
veins. Inflorescence an axillary few-flowered 
fascicle or pseudo-raceme 0.5-3.5 cm long, 
densely hairy; bracts ovate-lanceolate, up to 8 
mm long, densely hairy, soon falling. Flowers 
unisexual, regular, 5-merous, sepals triangu-
lar-lanceolate, 5—7(—8) mm long, reddish and 
densely hairy outside; petals spatulate to lin-
ear; male flowers with pedicel 5—6 mm long, 
petals c. 1 mm long, filaments of stamens fused 
at base, 3-4 mm long, pistillode present; fe-
male flowers with pedicel 3-4 mm long, petals 
1.5—2.5 mm long, disk annular, ovary superior, 
reddish, densely hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, fused 
at base, 2-3 times 2-fid. Fruit an almost round 
capsule 10-12 mm long, densely hairy at first, 
later almost glabrous, 6-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 8— 
9 mm long, smooth, brown. 
Cleistanthus occurs throughout the Old World 
tropics and comprises about 150 species. About 
20 species occur in continental tropical Africa, 
mainly in Central Africa, and about 6 in Mada-
gascar. Many Cleistanthus spp. have galls on 
the leaves. The highly toxic Cleistanthus col-
linus (Roxb.) Benth. from India is frequently 
used for homicidal and suicidal purposes. The 
aerial parts contain cleistanthin A, a diphyllin 
glycoside with promising cytotoxic and tumour-
suppressing properties. 
Ecology Cleistanthus bipindensis occurs in 
marshy dense forest and along small streams. 
Genetic resources and breeding Cleistan-
thus bipindensis has a relatively large distribu-
tion area in Central Africa and there are no 
signs that it is genetically threatened. 
Prospects Cleistanthus bipindensis will 
remain of local importance as a tonic. 
Major references Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Léonard, 1962. 
Other references Léonard, 1960; Neuwin-
ger, 2000; Nguyen Nghia Thin, 1998. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CLUTIA ABYSSINICA Jaub. & Spach 
Protologue 111. pi. orient. 5: 77, t. 468 (1855). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Lightning bush, smooth-
fruited clutia (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Clutia 
abyssinica occurs from Congo east to Eritrea 
and Somalia and through eastern Africa south 
to Zambia, Angola, Mozambique and South 
Africa. 
Uses Roots and leaves are commonly used 
for medicinal purposes. In DR Congo a root 
decoction is taken to treat fever and cough and 
is taken by pregnant women as a tonic. Ground 
roots are applied as an enema to treat gonor-
rhoea. To treat headache either a root extract 
is rubbed on the head or a leaf extract is drunk. 
The sap of leafy twigs is drunk to treat chest 
pain, side pain and shortness of breath. An 
infusion of leafy twigs or leaves is drunk or the 
ash eaten to treat skin problems, elephantiasis, 
diarrhoea and tachycardia. This infusion is 
also used as a wash to treat these ailments. 
Leaf ash in water is also taken to treat cough. 
Leaf powder in palm oil is applied to burns to 
heal them. A maceration of the crushed leaves 
is used as nose drops to treat pneumonia. Leaf 
sap diluted in water is applied as an enema to 
treat diarrhoea in children. In Rwanda and 
Kenya a root decoction is drunk, sometimes in 
milk, against liver problems. In eastern Africa 
the boiled roots are made into a soup which is 
taken as a remedy for enlarged spleen and kid-
ney problems, and to treat headache, stomach-
ache and malaria. A root extract is drunk to 
cure intestinal worms, influenza, colds and 
fever, and as a remedy for indigestion. To treat 
Clutia abyssinica - wild 
182 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
malaria, leaves are boiled to prepare a vapour 
bath. In Rwanda a leaf extract is drunk to in-
duce the process of childbirth and as an aborti-
facient, and also to treat sciatic pain. In South 
Africa leaves are rubbed on the gums to treat 
toothache. In Uganda powdered leaves in wa-
ter are taken to treat whooping cough and a 
leaf decoction is taken to treat shock. In Tan-
zania fresh leaves are rubbed on fungal skin 
problems. The wood is smoked by women to 
treat menstrual pains. In South Africa a mac-
eration of root bark is drunk to treat abdominal 
problems, as a laxative and to expel intestinal 
worms. 
In Kenya and Tanzania the roots are boiled 
with food to add flavour to it. 
Production and international trade The 
roots, leafy stems and leaves are used at a local 
level only. 
Properties The roots contain a phytosterol 
glucoside, cluytyl alcohol, and several bicyclic 
diterpenoids with a 6,7-secolabdane skeleton, 
clutiolide, dihydroclutiolide and isodihydroclu-
tiolide. A chloroform extract of powdered roots 
yielded a complex mixture of 5-methylcouma-
rins. y-Cadinene was the major constituent of 
the essential oil from the root, while ß-ionone, 
a-farnesene and farnesylacetone were the ma-
jor volatile constituents of the leaf. The leaves 
yielded the flavonoids ent-16ß,17-dihydroxy-
kaurane, spinosin and the diterpene 2"-0-
glycosylisovitexin. 
Ethanolic leaf, stem and root extracts showed 
moderate antiviral activity in vitro against 
polio virus and Coxsackie virus, moderate anti-
fungal activity against Aspergillus fumigatus 
and Fusarium culmorum, but little antibacte-
rial activity. An ethanol extract of the dry 
leaves showed antifungal activity against 
Trichophyton mentagrophytes. 
There are reports that several Clutia spp. are 
highly toxic to livestock. 
Description Dioecious, erect, lax shrub up 
to 6 m tall, with brittle branches, glabrous to 
evenly hairy. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-3.5 cm long; 
blade ovate to elliptical-lanceolate, 2-16(-20) 
cm x 1-7 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
obtuse to acute, pinnately veined with 5—12 
pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary 
fascicle; male inflorescence dense, many-
flowered, female inflorescence 1-many-
flowered; bracts triangular, up to 1 mm long. 
Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 
up to 1 cm long, extending in fruit up to 2.5 cm; 
male flowers with sepals elliptical-ovate, c. 2.5 
Clutia abyssinica - 1, part of male flowering 
branch; 2, part of female flowering and fruiting 
branch; 3, fruit; 4, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
mm x 1 mm, each with 3-4 glands at base, pale 
green, petals triangular, clawed, c. 2 mm x 1.5 
mm, each with gland at base, white, stamens 
fused into a column c. 1 mm long, ovary rudi-
mentary; female flowers with sepals oblong-
lanceolate, c. 2 mm long, obtuse, each with 
yellowish gland at base, petals spoon-shaped, c. 
2 mm long, white, ovary superior, nearly glo-
bose, c. 1 mm in diameter, 3-celled, smooth, 
styles 3, c. 1 mm long, fused at base, 2-fid and 
reflexed at apex, persistent. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule c. 5 mm x 4.5 mm, pale green, covered 
with small whitish warts, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, c. 3 mm x 2 mm x 1.5 mm, minutely 
pitted, black, shining, caruncle conical, c. 1 mm 
long, whitish. 
Other botanical information Clutia com-
prises about 60 species, of which about 20 occur 
in tropical Africa and about 40 in South Africa. 
Three varieties have been described in Clutia 
abyssinica, which are mainly distinguished by 
the hairiness of the plant, the shape of the 
leaves and the length of the pedicel. 
Other Clutia spp. from eastern and southern 
Africa are also used medicinally. Clutia angus-
COCCULUS 183 
tifolia Knauf occurs from Burundi south to 
Zambia and Mozambique, and in DR Congo a 
leaf extract is used as a mouth wash, while 
leaves are rubbed in to treat toothache. A leaf 
decoction of Clutia hirsuta (Sond.) Müll.Arg. 
from Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South Af-
rica, is taken to treat fever. A leaf maceration 
combined with other plants is taken to treat 
anthrax, and also gall bladder problems in 
livestock. Crude leaf and root extracts show 
moderate antimalarial activities. Clutia lanceo-
lata Forrsk. (synonyms: Clutia kilimand-
scharica Engl., Clutia robusta Pax) occurs from 
Eritrea and Somalia south to Tanzania and 
Zimbabwe. In Ethiopia a maceration of young 
twigs and leaves is drunk to treat diarrhoea. 
The leafy twigs are also used in fumigations to 
treat ophthalmia. In East Africa a root decoc-
tion in milk is taken to treat colds and rheuma-
tism. Maasai people use pieces of wood as ear 
plugs. Clutia paxii Knauf occurs from southern 
DR Congo south to Zimbabwe and Mozam-
bique; a leaf infusion is drunk in DR Congo to 
treat angina. A hot leaf infusion of Clutia pul-
chella L. (from Zimbabwe, southern Mozam-
bique and northern South Africa) is drunk to 
treat stomach-ache, diarrhoea and dysentery. 
Root ash is rubbed into scarifications to heal 
fractures and sprains. An infusion of leaves, 
stems and roots in milk is applied as an enema 
to treat stomach-ache in children. 
Ecology Clutia abyssinica is common in dry 
forest, forest remnants, secondary forest and 
wooded grassland on rocky hillsides, and river-
ine, evergreen thickets, at 700-3700 m alti-
tude. 
Propagation and planting Clutia abyssi-
nica is only propagated by seed. 
Harvesting All plant parts of Clutia abys-
sinica can be harvested whenever the need 
arises. 
Handling after harvest Leaves, leafy stems 
and roots are used fresh or are dried for later 
use. 
Genetic resources Clutia abyssinica is 
widespread and common and hence not threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Clutia abyssinica has many me-
dicinal uses against a range of diseases. Sev-
eral tests with root, stem and leaf extracts 
showed antifungal and antiviral activities, 
while the antibacterial activities showed diver-
gent results. It would be worthwhile to evalu-
ate the activities of the isolated compounds. 
Major references Beentje, 1994; Cos et al., 
2002; de Boer et al., 2005; Kokwaro, 1993; 
Latham, 2007; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1987; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Vlietinck 
et al., 1995; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Chifundera, 2001; Gil-
bert, 1992; Ichikawa, 1987; Kraft et a l , 2003; 
Mahunnah & Mtotmwema, 1985; Waigh, Zeri-
hun & Euerby, 1990; Waigh, Zerihun & Mait-
land, 1991; Zerihun, Lockwood & Waigh, 1987a; 
Zerihun, Lockwood & Waigh, 1987b; Zilimwa-
bagabo & Kanayire, 1990. 
Sources of illustration Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Authors E.N. Matu 
COCCULUS HIRSUTUS (L.) Theob. 
Protologue Mason, Burmah ed. 4, 2: 657 
(1883). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Chromosome number n = 13 
Vernacular names Broom creeper, ink-
berry, monkey rope (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Coccu-
lus hirsutus occurs from East and southern 
Africa eastward to India, Myanmar, Thailand 
and southern China. In Africa it is distributed 
from Sudan, Eritrea and Ethiopia south 
throughout East and southern Africa (includ-
ing Angola) to Kwazulu-Natal (South Africa) 
and Swaziland. 
Uses In Turkana (Kenya) a leaf infusion is 
taken to treat stomach-ache. In Tanzania a leaf 
decoction is drunk against female sterility and 
leaf sap is taken to treat nervous illnesses. 
Cocculus hirsutus is a popular medicine in 
Asia, especially Pakistan and India. The leaves 
are used to treat skin infections and itchy skin 
including eczema, rheumatism and gonorrhoea, 
the roots are taken as a tonic and alterative 
and as a diuretic and laxative. A root decoction 
is applied against fever, rheumatism and se-
vere weight loss. In Rajasthan (India) the 
cooked leaves are eaten to treat night blind-
ness and a jelly prepared by soaking leaves in 
cold water is taken to check spermatogenesis. 
The stems are used in basketry in South Africa 
and the fruits to colour baskets blue. The 
leaves are occasionally eaten as a vegetable, 
e.g. in India. 
Properties From the above-ground parts of 
the plant the isoquinoline alkaloids hirsutine, 
cohirsine, cohirsinine, cohristine, cohirsitinine, 
haiderine, jamtinine, jamtine-N-oxide and 
shaheenine have been isolated, and also sev-
eral bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids, including 
184 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
coclaurine, cocsuline-N-2-oxide, magnoflorine, 
trilobine and isotrilobine. The plant also con-
tains the triterpenoids sitosterol and hirsudiol. 
An aqueous extract of the leaves has shown 
diuretic and laxative properties in rats at doses 
more than 15 times lower than the acute toxic 
dose. Extracts from the fruit pulp can be used 
as a dye in a histological assay to test for pollen 
viability. 
Cocculus shows one of the greatest diversities 
in alkaloid types in the family Menisper-
maceae. Some 135 alkaloids of 13 different 
classes have been isolated. Bisbenzyltetrahy-
droisoquinoline alkaloids represent the main 
type of alkaloids isolated from Cocculus, with 
erythrina alkaloids the second most common 
type. 
Botany Dioecious scandent shrub or liana 
up to 15 m long; branchlets densely yellowish 
short-hairy. Leaves arranged spirally, simple; 
stipules absent; petiole 0.5-3 cm long, densely 
short-hairy; blade ovate, ovate-oblong to 
obovate, 4-8(- l l ) cm x (2.5-)6-10 cm, on lower 
main branches 3-5-lobed, base cuneate, 
rounded or slightly cordate, apex obtuse to 
rounded, with small mucro, yellowish hairy, 
later glabrous, basal veins 5; leaves much re-
duced at the end of lateral branches and on 
flowering branches. Inflorescence a small axil-
lary cyme, solitary or 2-3 together, few- to 
many-flowered, 1-2.5 cm long; peduncle up to 
1.5 cm long. Flowers unisexual, small; pedicel 
0.5-2 mm long; sepals 6, long-hairy, 3 outer 
ones broadly ovate or obovate, 1.5-2.5 mm x 
1.5-2 mm, 3 inner ones oblong to lanceolate, 
1.5-2 mm x 0.5-1 mm; petals 6, ovate-oblong, 
0.5-1.5 mm x c. 0.5 mm, sparsely short-hairy, 
with auricles surrounding the stamens; male 
flower with 6-9 stamens c. 1 mm long; female 
flower with 6 staminodes c. 0.5 mm long, ovary 
superior, composed of 3 free, compressed-ovoid 
carpels, style short, cylindrical, stigma re-
curved. Fruit composed of up to 3 obovoid or 
rounded drupes, each drupe 4-8 mm x 4-5 
mm, dark blue; stone ribbed on lateral faces, 1-
seeded. Seed horse-shoe shaped, laterally flat-
tened. 
In Sudan flowering occurs in June-October, 
fruits ripen in November-April. 
Cocculus comprises about 11 species, and oc-
curs in Central and North America, Africa, the 
Middle East, Asia and Polynesia. In tropical 
Africa 3 species occur. 
Ecology Cocculus hirsutus occurs in bush-
land and semi-desert scrub vegetation, up to 
1200 m altitude. It grows on sandy and grav-
elly soil, and can form a dense cover on top of 
other plants. 
Management Cocculus hirsutus is only col-
lected from wild stands. 
Genetic resources and breeding Because 
Cocculus hirsutus is widely distributed and 
locally common, there is no risk of genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Cocculus hirsutus will continue 
to play a role in traditional African and in Chi-
nese and Indian systems of medicine; in Africa 
it will probably remain of minor importance. It 
is unlikely that it will become a source of 
chemicals for the Western pharmaceutical in-
dustry. Its use as a vegetable is unlikely to 
become important in Africa; moreover, re-
search on possible health risks would then be 
needed. 
Major references de Wet, 2005; Ganapathy 
et a l , 2002; Shaista Iqbal, 1993; Troupin, 1956; 
Troupin, 1960. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Chhabra, 
Mahunnah & Mshiu, 1990; Gupta et al., 2005; 
Jain et al., 2004; Neuwinger, 2000; Parrotta, 
2001; Thulin, 1993b; Uddin Ahmad, Moham-
mad & Rasheed, 1987; Uddin Ahmad et al., 
1987; van Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
COCCULUS PENDULUS (J.R.Forst. & G.Forst.) 
Diels 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenr. IV, 94: 237 
(1910). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Chromosome number n = 13 
Synonyms Cocculus leaeba (Delile) DC. 
(1817). 
Origin and geographic distribution Coccu-
lus pendulus occurs in northern Africa, the 
Middle East and eastward to India. In tropical 
Africa it is distributed throughout the Sahara 
desert and its semi-desert edges, from Cape 
Verde east to Somalia and north-eastern 
Kenya. 
Uses People in the Sahel, as well as in Paki-
stan and Afghanistan, use various parts of the 
plant, especially the root, to cure fevers includ-
ing intermittent fever. In Nigeria the leaves 
and root are used for this purpose, in Senegal 
the Toucouleur and Peul people use the stem 
bark and root bark. In West Africa a decoction 
of the roots, together with those of Tinospora 
bakis (A.Rich.) Miers, is used to prepare a 
stimulating tonic. In Senegal the Toucouleur 
COCCULUS 185 
Cocculus pendulus - wild 
and Peul people use stem bark and root bark 
decoctions against intestinal parasites and 
gonorrhoea. The root has a great reputation in 
Senegal against biliousness and menstrual 
problems and as a diuretic. It is also part of 
medicines against jaundice, yellow fever, lep-
rosy, syphilis, and of an aphrodisiac. An infu-
sion of the plant is used to assist in removing 
thorns from the feet. In Kenya a wood infusion 
is taken as an emetic. 
In the drier parts of West Africa the plant is 
browsed by all livestock, especially camels and 
goats, but where more browse is available, few 
animals eat it. The flowers are added to food. 
The fruits are edible and Arabs make an in-
toxicating drink from the fruits. 
Properties The stems and leaves contain a 
great variety of bisbenzylisoquinoline dioxine 
alkaloids, including cocsuline, cocsoline, cocsu-
linin, siddiquine, penduline, tetradine, isotrilo-
bine, siddiquamine, kohatine, telobine, pate-
line, kurramine, isotrilobine and tricordatine, 
and many derivatives of these. Little investiga-
tion has been made of the chemical components 
of the root. 
Cocsulinin is the main alkaloid with anticancer 
properties of Cocculus pendulus. Kurramine 
derivatives have shown anticholesterinase ac-
tivity in vitro. The alkaloids cocsoline, pendu-
line, tetradine and isotrilobine have shown 
high antiplasmodial activity in vitro. In a com-
parison of 20 plant species from India, how-
ever, Cocculus pendulus was not selected as 
one of the promising species with antimalarial 
properties for further research. Newcastle dis-
ease, a fowl pest, provides a test-model for an-
tiviral activity, and positive anti-Newcastle 
virus action has been noted in Cocculus pen-
dulus. 
High alkaloid-producing cell lines have been 
established, which produce actineoplastic 
agents. 
Description Dioecious, much-branched li-
ana or scandent shrub; stem up to 15 cm in 
diameter at base, striped, dark grey, 
branchlets long, slender, terete, hairy. Leaves 
arranged spirally, simple; stipules absent; peti-
ole 2-10 mm long; blade oblong-lanceolate, in 
lower leaves sometimes ovate, 1.5-5 cm x 0.5-2 
cm, base cuneate, rounded or sometimes spear-
shaped, apex obtuse, with mucro, sometimes 
notched, leathery, glabrous, basal veins 3, con-
spicuous. Inflorescence a small axillary cyme, 
solitary or clustered; male inflorescence few- to 
many-flowered, up to 2 cm long; female inflo-
rescence 1-2-flowered, up to 1.5 cm long. Flow-
ers unisexual, small; sepals 6, ovate-elliptical, 
fleshy to membranous, 3 outer ones 1-1.5 mm 
long, slightly hairy, 3 inner ones larger, finely 
hairy to glabrous; petals 6, ovate-obovate, 0.5-
2 mm x 0.5-1 mm, apex notched; male flowers 
sessile or with short pedicel, stamens 6-9, up 
to 1.5 mm long, free; female flowers with pedi-
Cocculus pendulus - 1, part of stem with male 
inflorescences; 2, part of stem with fruits. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
186 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cel up to 1 cm long, staminodes 6, c. 1 mm long, 
ovary superior, consisting of 3(-6) free, ovoid, 
laterally compressed carpels c. 1 mm long, 
stigma c. 0.5 mm long. Fruit composed of 1-3 
obovoid, flattened drupes, each drupe 4—7 mm 
x 4-5 mm, dark red, stone ribbed on lateral 
faces, 1-seeded. Seed horse-shoe shaped, later-
ally flattened. 
Other botanical information Cocculus 
comprises about 11 species, and occurs in Cen-
tral and North America, Africa, the Middle 
East, Asia and Polynesia. In tropical Africa 3 
species occur. 
Cocculus orbiculatus (L.) DC. is an Asian spe-
cies that also occurs on Réunion and Mauritius. 
In Asia the stem is used as a diuretic against 
oedema, and the root is used to treat fever and 
epilepsy. In China the stem and leaves are 
prescribed against flatulence, stomach-ache 
and oedema. In Réunion the branches are used 
as rope in construction. 
Growth and development In Sudan flow-
ering occurs in June—September, fruits ripen in 
November-April. 
Ecology Cocculus pendulus grows in semi-
desert scrub vegetation or deciduous bushland, 
sometimes in shady localities along streams, 
climbing on e.g. Acacia and Balanites spp., up 
to 1900 m altitude. It grows on sandy and 
gravelly soils, and sometimes colonizes dry 
fallow land. 
Propagation and planting Protocols for 
in-vitro multiplication have been developed in 
India. 
Genetic resources Cocculus pendulus 
grows in a variety of habitats and has a very 
wide distribution, and therefore it does not 
seem to be in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects As folk medicine Cocculus pen-
dulus has many uses. It is rich in bisbenzyliso-
quinoline alkaloids, many of which have shown 
pharmacological potential. There is a need for 
further scientific evaluation of these uses and 
compounds. Because of their wide utilization, 
the composition of the roots deserves special 
research attention. 
Major references Atta-ur-Rahman et al., 
2004; Jahan, 1988; Ozenda, 1977; Setyowati, 
2003; Troupin, 1956; Verma & Lall, 2000. 
Other references Al Khalil et a l , 1993; 
Atta-ur-Rahman, 1986; Beentje, 1994; Bha-
kuni, Jain & Singh, 1978; Bhakuni & Joshi, 
1975; Duarte, 1995; El Amin, 1990; Gaur et al., 
1995; Guinaudeau et al., 1987; Ikram, Shati & 
Zarga, 1982; Kerharo & Adam, 1974; Oliver-
Bever, 1983b; Simonsen et a l , 2001; Thulin, 
1993b. 
Sources of illustration Berhaut, 1979. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
COLDENIA PROCUMBENS L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 125 (1753). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Colde-
nia procumbens is found throughout Africa 
including Cape Verde and Madagascar. It is 
also widespread in tropical Asia and Australia. 
Uses In Sudan fresh leaves of Coldenia pro-
cumbens are pulped and applied to rheumatic 
swellings. Similar use is reported from India. 
The dried plant, mixed with an equal amount 
of fenugreek seed (Trigonella foenum-graecum 
L.), is powdered and applied to mature ab-
scesses in Sudan. Fresh leaves are put as a 
poultice on mature abscesses in the Philip-
pines. 
Production and international trade Colde-
nia procumbens is offered for sale on the inter-
national market from India but quantities in-
volved are unknown and are probably modest. 
Properties Pharmacological screening of an 
ethanolic extract of whole Coldenia procum-
bens plants showed depression of the central 
nervous system in mice and prolongation of the 
pentobarbital-induced sleeping time in rats. 
Extracts exhibited some analgesic effects but 
had no anticonvulsant effects, did not alter the 
body temperature and did not abolish condi-
tioned avoidance responses. The mechanism of 
the analgesic activity may possibly involve 
opioid receptors and enhancement of the pain 
threshold. Acetone, ethanol and water extracts 
of dried aerial parts have shown weak angio-
tensin-converting enzyme inhibition in vitro. 
Botany Annual, prostrate herb with com-
pressed, ascendingly branched stems up to 50 
cm long, greyish hairy. Leaves alternate, sim-
ple; stipules absent; petiole up to 0.5 cm long; 
blade asymmetric, oblong or obovate, 0.5-3 cm 
x 0.5-1.5 cm, margin crenate, veins in 4-6 
pairs, impressed above, prominent below. 
Flowers solitary, extra-axillary, bisexual, 4-
merous, almost sessile, small; calyx c. 1.5 mm 
long, slightly accrescent in fruit; corolla up to 2 
mm long, with cylindrical tube and small lobes, 
white; stamens inserted at about the middle of 
the corolla tube, included; ovary superior, style 
bifid nearly to the base. Fruit initially splitting 
into 2 halves, later each half into 2 one-seeded 
nutlets with a distinct beak. 
COMMICARPUS 187 
Coldenia procumbens - 1, plant habit; 2, leaf 
upper surface; 3, leaf lower surface; 4, corolla 
showing stamens; 5, pistil; 6, fruit; 7, nutlet 
dorsal surface; 8, nutlet ventral surface. 
Source: PROSEA 
Coldenia comprises a single species. Several 
American species previously included have 
been transferred to the genus Tiquilia. 
Ecology Coldenia procumbens is found in 
seasonally wet or flooded locations such as 
muddy river banks and lake shores, black cot-
ton soil, rice fields and depressions. In tropical 
Africa it is found at altitudes up to 750 m. The 
wall of the nutlet is partly thick and corky, 
which enables dispersal by water. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Col-
denia procumbens is common, widespread and 
adapted to anthropogenic habitats, it is locally 
considered a weed and not subject to genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Although information on the 
pharmacological properties of Coldenia pro-
cumbens is limited, the obvious analgesic ef-
fects justify further research. 
Major references Aguilar, 2003a; Burkill, 
1985; Naga Rani, Vijayasekarani & Kames-
waran, 1991; Verdcourt, 1991. 
Other references Broun & Massey, 1929; 
Martins & Brummitt, 1990; Senthamarai et al., 
2001; Somanadhan et a l , 1999. 
Sources of illustration Aguilar, 2003a. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(3): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 3. 
COMMICARPUS PLUMBAGINEUS (Cav.) 
Standi. 
Protologue Contr. U.S. Natl. Herb. 18(3): 
101 (1916). 
Family Nyctaginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 40 
Synonyms Boerhavia plumbaginea Cav. 
(1793). 
Origin and geographic distribution Com-
micarpus plumbagineus is widespread from 
southern Spain throughout Africa to South 
Africa and Madagascar, extending in the east 
to Palestine, Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia. 
Uses The roots and leaves of Commicarpus 
plumbagineus are expectorant and in large 
doses emetic, and are widely used to treat 
asthma. In West Africa the leaves are boiled 
and made into poultices for application to ul-
cers and guinea-worm sores. In Ghana the 
crushed roots are applied to treat yaws, 
whereas in Nigeria a poultice from the roots is 
used by Hausa people to treat leprosy. In 
Ethiopia a decoction of the leaves is taken to 
treat jaundice. A leaf decoction and the ash of 
burned stems are applied to wounds. In Ethio-
pia and Kenya ground leaves are applied to 
burns. In Kenya crushed leaves are rubbed on 
swollen glands. In Madagascar a decoction of 
the whole plant is used as laxative. In Ethiopia 
Commicarpus plumbagineus is used in veteri-
nary medicine to treat skin diseases of cattle. 
In Kenya an infusion of the whole plant is used 
as an insecticide, e.g. against lice in humans 
and against other insects on camels. In DR 
Congo a decoction of the leaves is given as a 
laxative to cattle. 
In northern Nigeria Commicarpus plumbagi-
neus is sometimes grazed by livestock. In 
Kenya the plant is used as forage for all live-
stock, but is said to make the milk taste bitter. 
Botany Shrub, with stem base and roots 
woody; stem procumbent or scandent up to 4(-
10) m long, much branched, glabrous or hairy. 
Leaves opposite, simple; stipules absent; peti-
ole up to 4 cm long; blade ovate, 1.5—12 cm x 
0.5-8 cm, base cordate, truncate or rounded, 
apex acute, apiculate, margins entire or wavy, 
slightly fleshy. Inflorescence an axillary or 
terminal irregular umbel, laxly flowered; 
188 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
bracts 1.5-4 mm long, linear-lanceolate, hairy. 
Flowers bisexual, regular; pedicel 1-5 mm 
long; perianth trumpet-shaped, 8—15 mm long, 
distinctly constricted above ovary, lower part 
surrounding the ovarj? with viscid glands, es-
pecially around the apex, glabrous to shortly 
hairy, upper part 7—12 mm long, 5-9 mm wide, 
lobes spreading, white, densely shortly hairy to 
glabrescent; stamens 3-5, long-exserted, joined 
at base into a short tube around the ovary; 
ovary superior but seemingly inferior, ellipsoid, 
stipitate, glabrous, 1-celled, style 15-18 mm 
long, long-exserted, slightly curled. Fruit an 
achene enclosed by the thickened lower part of 
the perianth (anthocarp), anthocarp cylindri-
cal, fusiform to club-shaped, 7-11 mm x 1-2 
mm, glabrous to hairy with numerous viscid 
glands concentrated towards apex, 1-seeded. 
Commicarpus comprises about 25 species and 
occurs throughout the tropics, but mainly in 
Africa. In Namibia a root decoction of Commi-
carpus pentandrus (Burch.) Heimerl mixed 
with Thesium lineatum L.f. is taken orally to 
treat gonorrhoea. Also in Namibia, a hot water 
extract of leaves and roots of Commicarpus 
fallacissimus (Heimerl) Pohnert is taken orally 
or as an enema to treat pain moving from the 
back to the legs. 
Ecology Commicarpus plumbagineus occurs 
in forest and grassland, often along water 
courses on a variety of soils up to 1800 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Commi-
carpus plumbagineus is widespread and hence 
not threatened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of the many medicinal 
uses and the complete lack of chemical and 
pharmacological data, research into the proper-
ties of Commicarpus plumbagineus may prove 
worthwhile. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Gilbert, 
2000a; Kokwaro, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; Stan-
nard, 1988a. 
Other references Dalziel, 1937; Getahun, 
1976; Giday et al., 2003; Heine & Heine, 1988a; 
Heine & Heine, 1988b; Irvine, 1961; Morgan, 
1981; Raimondo, Rossitto & Sartoni, 1981; von 
Koenen, 2001. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
CORDEMOYA INTEGRIFOLIA (Willd.) Baill. 
Protologue Adansonia 1: 255 (1861). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Bois de perroquet, Jac-
ques marron, bois pigeon (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Corde-
moya integrifolia is endemic to Réunion and 
Mauritius. 
Uses In Réunion a stem bark infusion is 
taken to treat high blood pressure and to im-
prove blood circulation. The stem bark macer-
ated in rum is taken as a tonic, often prior to 
strenuous physical efforts. 
Properties Preliminary phytochemical 
screening of the leaves yielded alkaloids, fla-
vonoids, coumarins, saponins and terpenes. 
The stem bark contains alkaloids, tannins and 
terpenes. The acetone, ethanol and water ex-
tracts of the stem bark showed moderate anti-
hypertensive activity in vitro. A methanol ex-
tract of the aerial parts did show low activity 
against several pathogenic human viruses in 
vitro. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 15 m tall; bark reddish brown; young 
branches with deep grooves and groups of stel-
late hairs, older branches rounded and gla-
brous. Leaves arranged spirally at the end of 
branches, simple and entire; stipules tiny, soon 
falling; petiole 2-20 cm long, reddish, thick-
ened at base; blade ovate, 5—18(—38) cm x 3.5-
8(—16) cm, base rounded, apex acute. Female 
inflorescence an axillary, few-flowered raceme, 
male one a 15-30-flowered panicle 5-10 cm 
long. Flowers unisexual; petals and disk ab-
sent; pedicel 1—3(—5) mm long; male flowers 
with 3 ovate sepals 3-4 mm long, concave, 
stamens numerous, c. 2 mm long; female flow-
ers with 4 lanceolate-triangular sepals c. 3 mm 
long, ovary superior, 3-lobed, 3-celled, styles 3, 
8-14 mm long, fused at base. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule 12-14 mm in diameter, each lobe with 
2 curved horns 3-6 mm long, 3-seeded. Seeds 
rounded, 7-9 mm long, dark brown, shiny. 
Cordemoya comprises a single species, and is 
close to Mallotus. 
Ecology Cordemoya integrifolia occurs in 
rainforest, at 800-1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Corde-
moya integrifolia is possibly threatened by 
genetic erosion, although the remaining rain-
forests on Réunion and Mauritius are pro-
tected. 
Prospects Cordemoya integrifolia has sev-
eral interesting medicinal applications, which 
are partly confirmed by pharmaceutical tests. 
It would be worthwhile investigating the active 
compounds. 
Major references Adsersen & Adsersen, 
1997; Coode, 1982; Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
C O R D IA 189 
2004; Lavergne, 2001. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Forgacs et al., 1981; 
Fort in et a l , 2002; Govaerts , Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
CORDIA MYXA L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pi. 1: 190 (1753). 
F a m i l y Boraginaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 48 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Sebesten plum, sapis-
tan , c lammy cherry, Indian cherry, Assyrian 
plum (En). Sébestier, bois savon (Fr). Se-
besteira, sebesteiro do Sudao (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cordia 
myxa originates from the a rea s t retching from 
the eas te rn Medi te r ranean region to eas te rn 
India, and was introduced long ago in tropical 
Africa, tropical Asia and Austral ia , and more 
recently also in the Americas. 
U s e s The fruit of Cordia myxa h a s long been 
valued throughout i ts distr ibution area for its 
sticky mucilaginous pulp, which is ea ten to 
suppress cough and chest complaints, and to 
t r ea t a sore throat , as it has demulcent proper-
ties. The pulp is also applied as an emollient to 
m a t u r e abscesses, to calm rheumat ic pain and 
as an anthe lminth ic . In Tanzania the fruit pulp 
is applied on r ingworm. In Mali and Côte 
d'Ivoire the leaves are applied to wounds and 
ulcers. A macera te of the leaves is t aken to 
t r ea t t rypanosomiasis , a n d is external ly ap-
plied as a lotion to tse-tse fly bites. In the Co-
moros the powdered ba rk is applied to the skin 
in cases of broken bones before a p las ter is 
applied, to improve healing. Bark powder is 
Cordia myxa -planted and naturalized 
used external ly in the t r ea tmen t of skin dis-
eases. Bark juice together with coconut oil is 
t aken to t r ea t colic. 
In semi-arid regions Cordia myxa is p lanted in 
shelter belts to prevent soil erosion. In Yemen 
it is used as a shade t ree for coffee. The wood is 
sui table for furni ture making, cabinetry, well 
curbs, boats and agricul tural implements . It is 
marke ted under the same t rade name as Cor-
dia africana Lam.: 'Khar toum teak' or 'Sudan 
teak' . The bark is fibrous and yields cordage. 
The sticky pulp, especially from the unr ipe 
fruits, has widespread use as bird lime. Ripe 
fruits are ea ten raw, while tender young fruits 
are ea ten fresh or pickled as a vegetable. 
Mashed fruits en ter in the prepara t ion of sor-
ghum beer. The kernel is also edible. In India 
the leaves are prepared as a vegetable. In 
Burkina Faso the ash of the young branches is 
used to make soap. In South-East Asia the 
leaves are used as catt le fodder. 
P r o p e r t i e s Chemical screening of both the 
leaves and the fruits showed the presence of 
pyrrolizidine alkaloids, coumarins , flavonoids, 
saponins, te rpenes and sterols. The fruit con-
ta ins about 70% pulp; the pulp contains per 
100 g: water 6 g, protein 35 g, fat 37 g and car-
bohydrate 18 g. The seed contains per 100 g: 
wate r 32 g, fat 46 g; the principal fatty acids 
are: palmitic acid, stearic acid, arachidic acid, 
behenic acid, oleic acid and linoleic acid. 
The petroleum ether and alcoholic extracts 
showed significant analgesic, anti- inflamma-
tory and ant i -ar thr i t ic activities in tes ts with 
r a t s . Four flavonoid glycosides (robinin, ru t in 
(rutoside), datiscoside and hesperidin), a fla-
vonoid aglycone (dihydrorobinetin), and 2 phe-
nolic derivatives (chlorogenic acid and caffeic 
acid) were isolated. The ethanol extract of the 
leaves reduced acetylcholine-induced contrac-
t ions of guinea-pig ileum. Ethanol extracts 
from fruits and leaves showed significant anti-
oxidant activities due to the carotenoids bu t no 
antimicrobial activity agains t gram-positive or 
gram-negat ive bacteria . The addition of 
chopped leaves to nematode infested soil re-
duced the populat ions of the nematodes Meloi-
dogyne incognita and Rotylenchulus reniformis. 
The nutr i t ive value of the forage is per 100 g 
dry mat te r : crude protein 15 g, crude fibre 20 g, 
a sh 14 g, crude fat 6 g, N-free extract 47 g, Ca 
2.5 g, P 0.3 g. The wood of Cordia myxa is yel-
lowish brown and soft but strong; it polishes 
well and is durable in water . 
D e s c r i p t i o n Dioecious shrub or small t ree 
up to 12 m tall; bole tor tuous or s t raight ; ba rk 
190 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Cordia myxa - 1, flowering branch; 2, infructes-
cence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
grey, cracked; branches spreading, forming a 
dense crown; branchlets hairy, later glabrous, 
with very prominent leaf scars. Leaves alter-
nate, simple; stipules absent; petiole 0.5-4.5 
cm long; blade broadly ovate to orbicular, 
sometimes obovate, 3-18 cm x 3-20 cm, base 
rounded to cordate or cuneate, apex rounded to 
obtusely acuminate, margins entire to toothed, 
glabrous above, glabrous to velvety hairy be-
low. Inflorescence a lax terminal or short lat-
eral panicle, 3-8.5 cm long, many-flowered; 
bracts absent. Flowers unisexual, regular, 
white to creamy; pedicel 1-2 mm long; male 
flowers with campanulate calyx 4.5-5.5 mm 
long, 3-lobed, shortly hairy inside, glabrous 
outside, corolla tube 3.5-4.5 mm long, lobes 5, 
elliptical, c. 5 mm x 2 mm, reflexed, stamens 
inserted at corolla throat, exserted, filaments 
1.5—3.5 mm long, ovary rudimentary; female 
flower with tubular-campanula te calyx 6-8.5 
mm long, irregularly 3-4-toothed, densely 
hairy inside, glabrous outside, corolla tube 4.5— 
6.5 mm long, lobes 4—6, elliptical to obovate, 5— 
7 mm long, reflexed and rolled up, staminodes 
with sterile anthers, ovary superior, ellipsoid to 
obovoid, 4-celled, style 8-9 mm long, with 4 
stigmatic branches 4-5 mm long. Fruit a globu-
lar to ovoid drupe 2-3.5 cm long, apiculate, 
enclosed at base by the accrescent calyx, yel-
low, apricot or blackish when ripe, pulp almost 
transparent, mucilaginous, sweet-tasting. 
Pyrene broadly ellipsoid to globose, c. 12 mm 
long, deeply wrinkled, 1-2-seeded. 
Other botanical information Cordia is a 
large pantropical genus of about 250 species, 
with the majority of the species occurring in 
the New World. Cordia myxa is morphologi-
cally close to Cordia dichotoma G.Forst, from 
Asia and Australia, and the species are often 
confused there. 
Several other Cordia species are medicinally 
used in tropical Africa. In eastern Africa leaf 
sap and root decoctions of Cordia goetzei Gurke 
are taken to treat leprosy, while the bark and 
leaf ash is rubbed into scarifications. A root 
decoction is taken to treat malaria. The leaf 
sap and a root decoction are taken to cure 
hardened abscesses. From the stem bark the 
polyphenols cordigone, cordigol and 2 benzofu-
rans were isolated. The benzofurans are re-
sponsible for the orange colour of the stem 
bark. All 4 compounds are fungicidal against 
Cladosporium cucumerinum. In DR Congo a 
leaf infusion of Cordia dewevrei De Wild. & 
T.Durand is given to children as a tonic. 
Drums are made from the trunk. The Mende 
people of Sierra Leone take a leaf decoction of 
Cordia vignei Hutch. & Dalziel as a purgative. 
A paste of powdered leaves is applied to the 
body to treat rheumatism. A bark decoction is 
used to wash sores, and the ground young 
leaves are used as a wound dressing. 
Growth and development Cordia myxa 
grows fairly fast and starts flowering when 3-5 
years old. Pollination is done by insects. Fruits 
ripen in 30-45 days, and are dispersed by 
birds. 
Ecology Cordia myxa occurs in dry decidu-
ous woodland, mainly on alluvial soil up to 
1500 m altitude. It occurs naturalized around 
villages and abandoned habitations. It toler-
ates moderate shade, and is drought and frost 
hardy. 
Propagation and planting Cordia myxa is 
propagated by seed or stem cuttings. As plants 
grown from seeds show large variation, vegeta-
tive propagation of plants producing large 
fruits is preferred. Seeds are soaked in cold 
water for 6 hours before planting and germi-
nate within 40-60 days. The germination rate 
is 50-80%. There are about 18.000 seeds/kg. 
Seedlings require 4-6 months in a nursery 
before planting out. 
Management Cordia myxa trees can be 
COSTUS 191 
pollarded and coppiced. 
Diseases and pests In Egypt several spot 
and blight diseases caused by Alternaria 
tenuissima and Alternaria alternata have be-
come common on fruits of Cordia myxa and 
other fruit-yielding Cordia species. 
Harvesting The fruits are mostly harvested 
when ripe, but are picked green for use in pick-
les. 
Yield In arid regions in India, a plantation 
of 8-year-old Cordia myxa trees yielded on av-
erage 32.4 kg fruits per tree per year. Fruit 
weight is about 5 g. 
Genetic resources As Cordia myxa is fairly 
commonly planted, there are no indications 
that it is at risk of genetic erosion. Large 
germplasm collections do not exist. 
Prospects Cordia myxa fruit pulp is com-
monly used in folk medicine to treat cough and 
chest complaints, as well as for the treatment 
of wounds and ulcers. Several studies have 
confirmed its anti-inflammatory and analgesic 
activities, but more research is needed to 
evaluate the active compounds. As the variabil-
ity in fruit size is large, selection and vegeta-
tive propagation of high-yielding trees deserve 
attention. 
Major references Al Awadi et al., 2001; 
Berhaut, 1974; Burkill, 1985; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Warfa, 1988. 
Other references Abou Shaaban et al., 
1989; Adjanohoun et al. (Editors), 1982; Afzal 
et a l , 2004; Agharkar, 1991; Aguilar, 2001; 
Ficarra et al., 1995; Göhl, 1981; Marston, 
Zagorski & Hostettmann, 1988; Occhiuto, Cir-
costa & Costa De Pasquale, 1989; Rapisarda et 
al., 1992; Rastogi & Mehrotra, 1991; Taïta, 
2000; Taton, 1971; Tiwari et al., 1967. 
Sources of illustration Berhaut, 1974. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
COSTUS AFER Ker Gawl. 
Protologue Bot. Reg. 8: tab. 683 (1823). 
Family Costaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 18, 36 
Vernacular names Bush cane, ginger lily, 
spiral ginger (En). Costus, gingembre spirale 
(Fr). Fia ipqueté (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Costus 
afer is found in the forest belt from Senegal 
east to Ethiopia and south to Tanzania, Ma-
lawi and Angola. It is often planted in home 
gardens for medicinal purposes. 
Uses Costus afer is commonly used as a me-
Costus afer - wild and planted 
dicinal plant throughout tropical Africa. An 
infusion of the inflorescence is taken to treat 
tachycardia. The same infusion or a rhizome 
infusion is taken to treat stomach complaints. 
A stem decoction, the mashed or chewed stem 
or the pounded fruit, sometimes mixed with 
sugar cane juice, are taken to treat cough, res-
piratory problems and a sore throat. The 
smoke of the dried stem is also inhaled to treat 
cough. Leaf sap is used as eye drops to treat 
eye troubles and as nose drops to treat head-
ache with vertigo, and in frictions to treat oe-
dema and fever. Leaf sap or a rhizome decoc-
tion is taken to treat malaria. Stem sap is ap-
plied to treat urethral discharges, venereal 
diseases, jaundice and to prevent miscarriage. 
Stem sap is acid and rubefacient and burns on 
open wounds, but it is also anodyne and heal-
ing, and is applied to different skin ailments. A 
stem decoction is widely taken to treat rheu-
matoid arthritis. An infusion of the dried aerial 
parts is taken to treat hypertension. The pow-
dered stems are used as an enema to treat 
worms and haemorrhoids. The pulped stems 
taken in water are strongly diuretic. In Nigeria 
the debarked stem is chewed to treat nausea 
and to quench thirst. A cold water extract of 
the stem is taken to treat small epileptic at-
tacks. Rhizome pulp is applied to abscesses and 
ulcers to mature them, applied to teeth to cure 
toothache, and mixed with water it is taken to 
treat diarrhoea and amoebic dysentery. A rhi-
zome decoction or the raw rhizome is taken to 
treat leprosy and venereal diseases. In Gabon 
the stem sap is rubbed on the body to treat 
colic. 
In Togo Costus afer is sometimes cultivated for 
192 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
the stem bark which is used to make table 
mats and baskets. Experiments in Uganda to 
use it for making paper were successful. In DR 
Congo the stems are used in house construc-
tion. The sap can be used to coagulate latex 
and is also used in skin nourishing creams. In 
West Africa Costus afer is used as a fodder for 
small ruminants and poultry and the leaves 
serve as a feed for snails. Costus afer is widely 
used for ceremonial and religious purposes. 
Properties The stem, seeds and rhizome of 
Costus afer contain several steroidal sapogen-
ins, of which diosgenin is the most important 
one. The rhizome yields 0.5% diosgenin. Dios-
genin is a very important raw material used as 
a precursor in the synthesis of a number of 
steroidal drugs, including corticosteroids, sex 
hormones, oral contraceptives and anabolic 
agents. The rhizomes also contain the saponins 
aferosides A—C, as well as dioscin and pary-
phyllin C and the flavonoid glycoside 
kaempferol 3-O-a-L-rhamnopyranoside. The 
last compound showed an ability to potentiate 
in vitro cisplatin cytotoxicity in a human colon 
cancer cell line. 
Sesquiterpenoids were the most abundant 
group of volatile compounds in the essential oil 
of Costus afer leaves from western Nigeria, 
with sesquilavandulyl acetate (17.0%) as the 
principal component, followed by ß-
caryophyllene (12.3%) and Z,E-farnesol (9.9%). 
The essential oil did not show any antimicro-
bial activity. A papaverine-like alkaloid is 
found in the rhizome which causes relaxation 
of smooth muscle and is anti-spasmodic, diu-
retic and central nervous system depressant in 
tests in animals. The saponin fraction from the 
rhizomes and the methanolic leaf extract 
showed significant abortifacient activity in 
rats. The chloroform and methanol extracts 
from the aerial parts showed a significant re-
duction of carrageenin-induced rat paw oe-
dema. The methanol extract of the rhizome 
showed significant topical anti-inflammatory 
activity in croton aldehyde-induced mouse ear 
oedema. The chloroform extract ameliorated all 
signs associated with adjuvant-induced pol-
yarthritis in rats. The extracts delayed arachi-
donic acid and castor oil-induced diarrhoea in 
rats. 
The aqueous extract of the leaves and stems 
showed significant antibacterial and amoebi-
cidal activity in vitro. The methanolic leaf ex-
tract showed significant cytotoxicity in the 
brine shrimp test. The same extract showed 
moderate local anaesthetic activity in guinea 
pig skin test, and contracted the guinea pig 
ileum in a concentration-dependent manner. 
The extract exhibited antihyperglycaemic ac-
tivity, and decreased the blood glucose level by 
50% in streptozotocin (STZ)-induced hypergly-
caemia in male rats; high doses, however, in-
creased blood glucose level. 
Adulterations and substitutes Diosgenin 
is mainly obtained from Dioscorea spp., but it 
is also present in most Costus spp., and espe-
cially obtained from the ornamental Costus 
speciosus (Fenzl) K.Schum. Another species of 
which the seed contains high concentrations of 
diosgenin is fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-
graecum L.). 
Description Perennial, rhizomatous herb 
up to 4 m tall. Leaves arranged spirally, simple 
and entire; sheath tubular, closed, green with 
purple blotches; ligule 4-8 mm long, leathery, 
glabrous; petiole 4-12 mm long; blade elliptical 
to obovate, 15-35 cm x 3.5-9.5 cm, base 
rounded to subcordate, apex acuminate, mar-
gin sparsely hairy, usually glabrous above, 
sometimes shortly hairy beneath. Inflorescence 
a very compact, terminal, conical spike 2.5-7.5 
cm long, sessile; bracts oblong, convex, c. 3.5 
Costus afer - 1, flowering shoot; 2, base of leaf 
with ligule; 3, bract with 2 flowers. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
COSTUS 193 
cm long, densely imbricate, upper ones often 
smaller, apex truncate to rounded, green with 
purple markings, each subtending 2 flowers; 
bracteoles boat-shaped, c. 2.5 cm x c. 1 cm, keel 
thick and ridged, pale green with pink mark-
ings and thin pink papery margin. Flowers 
bisexual, zygomorphic, 3-merous; calyx tube 
1.5-2 cm long, teeth c. 5 mm long, triangular, 
margin pink; corolla tube c. 2 cm long, hairy 
inside, enclosed by bract, lobes oblong to ovate, 
3-4 cm long, hooded at apex, transparent to 
white, labellum (lip) broadly triangular, fun-
nel-shaped, c. 2.5 cm x 2.5 cm, opposite the 
stamen, white or tinged pink towards the mar-
gin with an orange-yellow central line to the 
base of the corolla tube; stamen 1, free, peta-
loid, ovate, c. 3 cm x 1 cm, entire, white, anther 
c. 7 mm long, attached at the middle to the 
filament; ovary inferior, 3-celled, style 1, fili-
form. Fruit an ellipsoid capsule c. 1 cm long, 
dehiscing loculicidally, many-seeded. Seeds 
black, with aril. 
Other botanical information Costus is 
pantropical and comprises about 70 species, of 
which about 40 species in tropical America, 
about 25 in tropical Africa and about 5 in 
South-East Asia. The African Costus spp. are 
much in need of revision, especially the large 
forest species which are difficult to collect for 
herbarium collections. Costus afer and Costus 
lucanusianus J.Braun & K.Schum. are closely 
related species, mainly differing in the form of 
the inflorescence, the number of flowers en-
closed by the bracts and the colour of the flow-
ers. In Costus afer the inflorescence is cone-
like, each bract covers 2 flowers and the corolla 
is white with a yellow throat, whereas in Cos-
tus lucanusianus the inflorescence is globose, 
each bract covers 1 flower and the corolla is 
white with a red lip and yellow throat. In 
southern Nigeria Costus afer and Costus lu-
canusianus produce hybrids. 
Other Costus spp. with medicinal uses in West 
Africa are Costus deistelii K.Schum., Costus 
dubius (Afzel.) K.Schum., Costus englerianus 
K.Schum., Costus schlechten Winkler and the 
ornamental Costus spectabilis (Fenzl) K.Schum. 
An extract of the inflorescences and stems of 
all species is taken to treat cough and stomach 
complaints. Leaf and stem sap is used as eye 
drops to treat eye infections and as nose drops 
to cure headache, in frictions or a vapour bath 
to treat oedema and fever, or applied to treat 
urethral discharges, venereal diseases, jaun-
dice and to prevent miscarriage. Rhizome pulp 
is applied to abscesses, ulcers and Guinea 
worm to mature them. The rhizome decoction 
of Costus dubius is taken to treat epilepsy; it is 
also a diuretic and febrifuge. The boiled leaves 
of Costus schlechten are also applied to small-
pox and are taken to treat diabetes. The rhi-
zomes of Costus deistelii yield 0.25% total ster-
oidal sapogenins, with 0.15% diosgenin. 
Growth and development Costus afer is a 
very vigorous grower. It flowers and fruits 
throughout the year, depending on the humid-
ity of the soil. 
Ecology Costus afer occurs in moist locali-
ties in forest and forest edges, up to 1400 m 
altitude. In southern Nigeria Costus afer is a 
weed in rice fields. In cultivation it requires a 
rich well-drained, moist soil (2 parts peat moss 
to 1 part loam to 1 part sharp sand). It does 
well in partial shade to full sun. 
Propagation and planting Costus afer can 
be propagated by seed, and also by stem cut-
tings or rhizome cuttings. The stems and rhi-
zomes are cut into pieces 2.5 cm long and 
planted in a mixture of sand and peat moss. In-
vitro storage of multiple shoot cultures of Cos-
tus afer was successful; after 1 year of storage 
under liquid paraffin, high survival rates (70— 
100%) were found, and even after 2 years, 75% 
of the cultures of Costus afer remained viable. 
Diseases and pests In Cameroon Costus 
afer is a host of the African root and tuber scale 
Stictococcus veyssierei. 
Harvesting The stems and rhizomes of Cos-
tus afer are harvested from the wild or from 
plants grown in home gardens whenever the 
need arises. 
Genetic resources In Ethiopia Costus afer 
is harvested on a large scale from the wild for 
medicinal purposes, resulting in diminishing 
numbers. As demand for medicinal plants 
rises, harvest rates also increase. The situation 
is further aggravated by habitat destruction 
caused by slash-and-burn, commercial logging 
and firewood collection. In West and Central 
Africa, Costus afer remains a common species 
in forest undergrowth, and is not liable to ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Costus afer is widely used as a 
medicinal plant in tropical Africa and several 
uses have been confirmed by pharmacological 
tests, although no systematic evaluation of the 
active compounds of the different plant parts 
has been effected. The diosgenin content needs 
further study as well, especially because the 
content is higher than commercially grown 
diosgenin-producing Costus spp. Costus afer 
has some value as an ornamental plant. 
194 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Major references Aguiyi, Olorunfemi & 
Igweh, 1998; Anaga et al., 2004; Aweke, 1997; 
Burkill, 1985; Iwu, 1993; Iwu & Anyanwu, 
1982; Lin, Hanquet & Lacaille Dubois, 1996; 
Lin et al., 1997; Lock, 1985; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Akendengué & Louis, 
1994; Burkill, 2000; Chhabra, Mahunnah & 
Mshiu, 1993; Dekkers, Rao & Goh, 1991; Do-
kosi, 1998; Ebenso & Okafor, 2002; Edeoga & 
Okoli, 1996; Hepper, 1968; Kambu et a l , 1989; 
Moody & Okwagbe, 2003; Moundipa et al., 
2005; Okoli et a l , 2003; Specht & Stevenson, 
2006; Taiwo & Bolanle, 2003; Terashima & 
Ichikawa, 2003. 
Sources of illustration Koechlin, 1965. 
Authors G. Aweke 
COSTUS LUCANUSIANUS J.Braun & 
K.Schum. 
Protologue Mitt. Deutsch. Schutzgeb. 2: 
151 (1889). 
Family Costaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18, 27 
Vernacular names Spiral ginger (En). 
Canne d'eau (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Costus 
lucanusianus is found in the forest belt from 
Guinea east to western Ethiopia and south to 
DR Congo. It has been introduced as an orna-
mental, mainly in the United States and South 
America. In Central Africa it is often planted in 
home gardens for medicinal purposes. 
Uses Costus lucanusianus is commonly used 
as a medicinal plant in tropical Africa. An infu-
sion of the inflorescence is used to treat tachy-
cardia and stomach complaints. A stem decoc-
Costus lucanusianus - wild and planted 
tion, warmed stem sap or the pounded fruit are 
taken to treat cough, bronchitis and a sore 
throat; the stem is also mashed or chewed to 
treat cough. Leaf sap is acid and is used as eye 
drops to treat eye troubles and headache with 
vertigo, and in frictions to treat oedema and 
fever. Leaf sap is used as nose drops and leaf 
pulp is rubbed on the head to calm insanity. 
Stem sap is applied to treat urethral dis-
charges, venereal diseases and jaundice, and to 
prevent miscarriage. Stem sap is rubefacient 
and burns on open wounds, but it is also ano-
dyne and healing, and is applied to mumps and 
measles. Rhizome pulp is applied to abscesses 
and ulcers to mature them, and mixed with 
water it is taken to treat diarrhoea. A stem 
decoction is widely taken to treat rheumatism. 
The pulped stems taken in water are strongly 
diuretic. In Gabon stem sap is used as eye 
drops to control filariasis. 
In Gabon young shoots are cooked and eaten as 
a substitute for those of Hibiscus sabdariffa L.; 
they have a slightly acid taste. Stem sap is 
used to coagulate latex. Costus lucanusianus is 
commonly used for ceremonial and religious 
purposes. It is sold in Western countries as an 
ornamental container plant. 
Properties The rhizomes of Costus lucanu-
sianus yield 0.7% total steroidal sapogenins 
and 0.6% diosgenin. The juice from fresh stems 
of Costus lucanusianus showed a significant 
dose-related relaxation of rat duodenum and 
uterus in vitro. 
Different extracts from the leaves did not show 
any antibacterial or antifungal activity, and 
different extracts from the rhizome tested 
negative for antitrypanosomal and antiplas-
modial activity. 
Adulterations and substitutes The rhi-
zomes of Costus lucanusianus contain a higher 
percentage diosgenin than those of Costus spe-
ciosus (Fenzl) K.Schum., from which diosgenin 
is isolated for the pharmaceutical industry. 
Description Perennial, rhizomatous herb 
up to 3 m tall. Leaves arranged spirally, simple 
and entire; sheath tubular, closed, green with 
purple blotches; ligule 1.5-3 mm long, leathery, 
with a raised ridge, long-hairy; petiole 5-9 mm 
long; blade elliptical, 21-24 cm x 4.5-6 cm, 
base rounded to subcordate, apex acuminate, 
margin sparsely hairy, glabrous above, shortly 
hairy beneath. Inflorescence a very compact, 
terminal, globose spike 3.5-7.5 cm long, sessile; 
bracts oblong, convex, c. 2.5 cm long, densely 
imbricate, upper ones often smaller, apex trun-
cate to rounded, green with purple markings, 
COSTUS 195 
Costus lucanusianus - flowering shoot. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
each subtending 1 flower; bracteoles boat-
shaped, up to 2 cm long, keel thick and ridged, 
pale green with pink markings and thin pink 
papery margin. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 
3-merous; calyx tube 2-3 cm long, teeth 5-6 
mm long, triangular, recurved, margin shortly 
hairy; corolla tube c. 2 cm long, hairy inside, 
enclosed by bract, lobes oblong, c. 2.5 cm long, 
hooded at apex, acute, semi-transparent to 
white, labellum (lip) broadly triangular, fun-
nel-shaped, c. 3 cm x 3 cm, opposite the sta-
men, dark red towards the margin, with a cen-
tral yellow line not extending into the corolla 
tube; stamen 1, free, petaloid, narrowly trian-
gular, c. 2.5 cm x 1 cm, entire, white, tinged 
red at apex, anther 8-10 mm long, attached at 
the middle to the filament; ovary inferior, 3-
celled, style 1, filiform. Fruit an ellipsoid cap-
sule 1-1.5 cm long, dehiscing loculicidally, 
many-seeded. Seeds black, with white aril. 
Other botanical information Costus is 
pantropical and comprises about 70 species, of 
which about 40 species in tropical America, 
about 25 in tropical Africa and about 5 in 
South-East Asia. The African Costus spp. are 
much in need of revision, especially the large 
forest species which are difficult to collect for 
herbarium collections. Costus lucanusianus 
and Costus afer Ker Gawl. are closely related 
species, mainly differing in the form of the in-
florescence, the number of flowers enclosed by 
the bracts and the colour of the flowers. In Cos-
tus lucanusianus the inflorescence is globose, 
each bract covers 1 flower and the corolla is 
white with a red lip and yellow throat, whereas 
in Costus afer the inflorescence is cone-like, 
each bract covers 2 flowers and the corolla is 
white with a yellow throat. In southern Nigeria 
Costus afer and Costus lucanusianus produce 
hybrids. 
Several other Costus species have medicinal 
uses in the forest zone of Central Africa. In DR 
Congo the sap of the crushed stems of Costus 
dewevrei De Wild. & T.Durand is used as an 
enema or drunk to treat abdominal pain. The 
sap, fresh or as an infusion, is also taken or 
externally applied to treat cough, fever, vene-
real diseases and rheumatism. The Masango 
people in Gabon drink the filtrate of the ground 
stems and leaves of Costus ligularis Baker to 
treat cough. Costus phyllocephalus K.Schum. is 
important as a vegetable because of its edible 
shoots, but the leaf sap is also medicinally used 
in DR Congo to treat eye diseases, wounds and 
ulcers and it is applied as an enema to treat 
post-partum haemorrhoids. A root decoction is 
taken to treat epilepsy and mental disorders. 
Growth and development Costus lucanu-
sianus is a vigorous grower. It flowers and 
fruits throughout the year, depending on the 
humidity of the soil. 
Ecology Costus lucanusianus occurs in sea-
sonally or permanently humid localities in for-
est, up to 1200 m altitude. In cultivation it 
prefers a humus-rich soil and partial shade. 
Propagation and planting Costus lucanu-
sianus can be propagated by seed, and also by 
stem cuttings or rhizome cuttings. The stems 
and rhizomes are cut into pieces 2.5 cm long 
and planted in a mixture of sand and peat 
moss. Seeds lose their viability rapidly, and 
need to be sown fresh in a rich, moist soil un-
der dense shade. Costus lucanusianus also 
reproduces asexually through plantlet forma-
tion on the inflorescence (vivipary), a charac-
teristic absent in Costus afer. In-vitro storage 
of multiple shoot cultures of Costus lucanu-
sianus was successful; after 1 year of storage 
under liquid paraffin, high survival rates (70— 
100%) were found. 
Management When grown in a container, 
Costus lucanusianus requires frequent repot-
ting to control its size. 
Harvesting The stems and rhizomes of Cos-
tus lucanusianus are harvested from the wild 
196 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
or from home gardens whenever the need 
arises. 
Genetic resources Costus lucanusianus is 
a common species in the forest zone of tropical 
Africa and not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Costus lucanusianus is widely 
used as a medicinal plant in tropical Africa but 
little is known about the constituents and their 
pharmacological activities. This merits further 
research. The diosgenin content of the rhizome 
is very high, and seems to be economically 
competitive, compared to commercial dios-
genin-producing plant species. 
Major references Aweke, 1997; Burkill, 
1985; Edeoga & Okoli, 1996; Edeoga & Okoli, 
1997; Foungbe et al., 1991; Lock, 1985. 
Other references Atindehou et al., 2002; 
Atindehou et al., 2004; Burkill, 2000; Foungbe, 
Sawadogo & Declume, 1987; Gassita et al. 
(Editors), 1982; Hepper, 1968; Lambert, Baccou 
& Sauvaire, 1988; Neuwinger, 2000; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961. 
Sources of illustration Lock, 1985. 
Authors G. Aweke 
CRASPIDOSPERMUM VERTICILLATUM Bojer 
ex A.DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 8: 323 (1844). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Cras-
pidospermum verticillatum is endemic to 
Madagascar. 
Uses The leaves and bark of Craspi-
dospermum verticillatum are often used in 
traditional medicine to treat pulmonary dis-
eases as a tonic, antitussive and expectorant. 
After-effects of syphilis are treated with a de-
coction of the aerial parts. The wood is used as 
timber and is highly esteemed for construction. 
Craspidospermum verticillatum is therefore 
often cultivated around villages. 
Properties The leaves and bark contain the 
indole alkaloids methoxy-11-tabersonine, hy-
droxy-11-tabersonine, venalstonine, A14-vincine 
and craspidospermine. These alkaloids show 
cerebro-vascular activity. The leaves also con-
tain the alkaloid condylocarpine, which causes 
irritation in workers handling the leaves. An-
dranginine has also been isolated. The wood is 
moderately heavy, with an oven-dry density of 
about 780 kg/m3. It is recommended to kiln dry 
the wood at 41°C. 
Botany Tree up to 25 m tall, glabrous, with 
white latex in the branchlets, not in the bark; 
bole up to 50 cm in diameter; bark pale grey-
brown, rather smooth, branches lenticellate. 
Leaves in whorls of 3-4, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole (0-)5-25 mm long; 
blade narrowly elliptical to obovate, 4-14 cm x 
2-6.5 cm, base cuneate, apex rounded or some-
times acute, leathery, pinnately veined with 
10-20 pairs of conspicuous lateral veins. Inflo-
rescence a very dense compound dichasium, 4— 
12 cm long, terminal and in the axils of the 
upper leaves, 1-4 together; peduncle 1-8.5 cm 
long; lower bracts leafy, others sepal-like. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 
0.5—3 mm long; sepals connate at base, ovate, 
apex obtuse or rounded; corolla with cylindrical 
tube 6-10 mm x 1—2 mm, widened around the 
anthers, lobes narrowly elliptical, 3-9 mm x 2 -
4 mm, apex rounded, erect to spreading, over-
lapping to the left, hairy inside with straight 
hairs directed downwards, white or pale pink, 
throat pink or dark red; stamens inserted 2-4 
mm from the base of the corolla tube, deeply 
included; ovary superior, almost globose, 2-
celled; pistil head with basal ellipsoid stigmatic 
part and oblong apex. Fruit an oblong woody 
capsule 3-6 cm x 1—2 cm, base and apex 
rounded, 2-valved, septicidal, wall c. 2 mm 
thick, many-seeded. Seeds flat, obliquely ellip-
tical, c. 12 mm long, dark brown, ciliate with 
irregularly coherent, fin-like hairs 1-2 mm 
long, minutely papillose. 
Craspidospermum comprises only a single spe-
cies. It is characterized by its whorled leaves 
and capsular fruits. 
Ecology Craspidospermum verticillatum 
occurs in rain forest up to 1800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Craspi-
dospermum verticillatum has been harvested 
on a large scale for its timber, and to avoid 
genetic erosion it should be planted on a much 
larger scale for timber purposes. 
Prospects Craspidospermum verticillatum 
will remain a medicinal plant of only local im-
portance. Its value and potential as cultivated 
timber tree need further research. 
Major references Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; 
Kan Fan et al., 1974; Leeuwenberg, 1997a; 
Markgraf, 1976. 
Other references Debray, Jacquemin & 
Razafindrambao, 1971; Kan Fan et al., 1968; 
Kan Fan et al., 1971; Kan Fan, Husson & Po-
tier, 1976; Riche & Pascard Billy, 1979; Schatz, 
2001; Simpson, 1996. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
CROTON 197 
CROTONANTANOSIENSIS Leandri 
Protologue Ann. Inst. Bot.-Géol. Colon. 
Marseille sér. 5, 7(1): 45 (1939). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
antanosiensis is endemic to Madagascar. 
Uses The stem bark is used to make a bitter 
alcoholic beverage, which is used in circumci-
sion ceremonies to induce virility. A strong 
stem bark decoction was taken as an ordeal 
poison in former times. Leafy branches are 
used as mattress filling, especially as lice repel-
lent. The leafy branches are used to fumigate 
houses in case of epidemic diseases. 
Proper t ies More than 20 compounds have 
been found in the essential oil of the dried ae-
rial parts of Croton antanosiensis, of which 
more than 70% are monoterpenes, followed by 
sesquiterpenes. Major components are a-
pinene (33%), ß-pinene (16%), limonene (6%) 
and trans-nerolidol (6%). 
Botany Monoecious shrub up to 4 m tall. 
Leaves opposite or in whorls of 3, simple, 
strongly scented; stipules tiny; petiole 5—8 mm 
long; blade lanceolate, 3-4 cm x c. 1 cm, base 
cordate, with 2 small, sessile glands, apex 
acute, margins variously toothed, glabrous 
above, beneath with silvery whitish peltate 
scales. Inflorescence a terminal raceme, with 
numerous male flowers at end and 3-4 female 
flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, 
regular, white; male flowers with pedicel up to 
1.5 mm long, sepals triangular, yellowish 
brown, petals obovate to spoon-shaped, sta-
mens 10-11, free, white; female flowers with 
robust pedicel c. 2 mm long, sepals triangular, 
petals absent, ovary superior, rounded, 3-lobed, 
silky hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, several times 2-
fid. Fruit not known. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Almost 40 spe-
cies from Madagascar are used in medicine, 
and several of them resemble morphologically 
Croton antanosiensis. An infusion of the aro-
matic leafy branches of Croton anisatus Baill. 
or Croton ambanivoulensis Baill. is taken to 
treat dysentery and to calm colic. An infusion 
or a steam bath of the aerial parts of Croton 
boinensis Leandri is often taken to treat rheu-
matism including rheumatoid arthritis. A leaf 
infusion of Croton catati Baill. is taken to treat 
stomach-ache, cough and shortness of breath. 
Stem and root bark are used in fumigations to 
treat malaria. A bitter alcoholic beverage is 
made from the bark of Croton catati or Croton 
noronhae Baill., causing euphoria. The bever-
age can cause severe poisoning even at rela-
tively low intake. The aromatic leafy branches 
of Croton greveanus Baill. are used as mattress 
filling to repel insects, especially lice. A bark 
decoction is taken to treat cough. A decoction of 
the aerial parts is taken to treat lumbar pain 
caused by chronic gonorrhoea. Leafy branches 
of Croton humbertii Leandri are hung in 
houses to repel insects and small pouches of 
dried leaves are carried on the body against 
lice. A leaf infusion of Croton kimosorum 
Leandri is an important medicine against 
coughs and an antispasmodic. 
Ecology Croton antanosiensis occurs in hilly 
shrubland and in forest on laterite, sometimes 
near streams, from sea-level up to 1500 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
antanosiensis is probably not threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton antanosiensis is interest-
ing for use as an insect repellent and as an 
antibacterial agent, but more information is 
needed, especially on the composition of the 
essential oil, to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Leandri, 1939; Radulovic et 
a l , 2006. 
Other references Coode, 1982; Missouri 
Botanical Garden, undated; Ralaivao, 1993; 
Rasoanaivo, Petitjean & Conan, 1993. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON AUBREVILLEI J.Léonard 
Protologue Bull. Jard. Bot. Etat 28: 113 
(1958). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
aubrevillei occurs in Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, 
Cameroon and the Central African Republic. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire an infusion of the 
leaves and bark is taken to treat constipation, 
stomach-ache and female infertility; the bark is 
also rubbed on the body to treat pain and 
guinea-worm infection. In Cameroon the dried 
bark is eaten to treat stomach-ache or high 
blood pressure; an infusion of the roots, leaves 
or stem bark is used similarly. Chewed bark is 
rubbed on babies when they do not sleep well. 
198 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
In Cameroon the stem bark is sometimes used 
as a toothbrush. 
Properties The main constituents identified 
in the essential oil from the stem bark are the 
common terpenoids linalool (35%) and ß-
caryophyllene (12%). 
Botany Monoecious, small tree up to 6 m 
tall, stellate hairy and scaly. Leaves alternate 
to whorled, simple and entire; stipules small, 
linear, 4-7 mm long, persistent; petiole 1-7.5 
cm long; blade elliptical to ovate-elliptical, 3.5-
10 cm x 2-5.5 cm, base rounded to cordate, 
with 2 small glands, apex acute to acuminate, 
sparsely to densely brown hairy above, with 
silvery white scales beneath. Inflorescence a 
terminal raceme 4-7 cm long, with many male 
flowers at end and 1—2 female flowers at base. 
Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, regular, white; 
pedicel 3-5 mm long, enlarging to 8-11 mm in 
fruit; sepals elliptical to triangular, fused at 
base, 3-4.5 mm long; male flowers with ellipti-
cal petals 3.5-4 mm long, stamens 17-24, free; 
female flowers with lanceolate petals 2.5-5 mm 
long, ovary superior, rounded, 3-lobed, hairy, 3-
celled, styles 3, 2-fid to the base. Fruit a globu-
lar, slightly 3-lobed capsule c. 9 mm in diame-
ter, green, hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 6-7 
mm x 5-6 mm, brown. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. 
Ecology Croton aubrevillei occurs in ever-
green and deciduous forest at low altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
aubrevillei is not common in its area of distri-
bution and is threatened by habitat destruc-
tion. It is assessed as vulnerable in the IUCN 
Red List of threatened species, and future re-
evaluation is likely to rate this species as en-
dangered. 
Prospects Croton aubrevillei has several 
interesting medicinal uses, but little is known 
about its chemistry or pharmacology; more 
research is therefore needed. 
Major references Cheek, 2004a; Léonard, 
1958; Menut et al., 1995; Tshiamala-Tshibangu 
et a l , 1999. 
Other references Burkill, 1994; Missouri 
Botanical Garden, undated. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON BARORUM Leandri 
Protologue Ann. Inst. Bot.-Géol. Colon. 
Marseille sér. 5, 7(1): 66 (1939). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
barorum is endemic to south-western Madagascar. 
Uses A decoction of the stem and root bark is 
drunk to treat diarrhoea, malarial fever, cough, 
breast cancer and leukaemia. The aromatic 
leafy branches are used as an insect repellent 
in mattress fillings, especially against lice. A 
leaf extract is also used to perfume soap. 
Properties Crude extracts from the leaves, 
stems and stem bark have shown significant 
activity against several human bacterial 
pathogens. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 5 m tall, much-branched; young twigs with 
short stellate hairs. Leaves alternate, simple, 
aromatic; stipules small, persistent; petiole c. 3 
cm long; blade ovate-lanceolate, 8-15 cm x 2.5-
5.5 cm, base cordate, with 2 tiny, sessile 
glands, apex acuminate, margins toothed, 
short-hairy, lower surface whitish. Inflores-
cence a terminal raceme, with male flowers 
crowded at apex and 2-3 female flowers at 
base. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, white; male 
flowers with short pedicel, sepals fused at base, 
with sparse stellate hairs, petals obovate, 
rounded, stamens 15-16, free; female flowers 
with pedicel enlarging in fruit to c. 2 cm long, 
sepals fused at base, petals absent, ovary supe-
rior, 3-lobed, short-hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, 
several times 2-fid at apex. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule c. 1 cm in diameter, 3-seeded. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
in continental Africa about 65 species occur 
and in Madagascar about 125. 
Ecology Croton barorum occurs in dry for-
est. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no reports that Croton barorum is threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton barorum shows interest-
ing antibacterial activity, and more research is 
warranted to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Leandri, 1939; Rakoton-
iraini, 2004. 
Other references Coode, 1982; Rasoanaivo, 
Petitjean & Conan, 1993. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CEOTON 199 
CROTON DECARYI Leandri 
Protologue Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Pa-
ris, sér. 2, 3: 370 (1931). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
decaryi is endemic to south-western Madagas-
car. 
Uses The aromatic leafy branches are used 
as a mattress filler to repel insects, especially 
lice. A decoction of the aerial parts is taken to 
calm patients with paranoid psychosis. 
Properties Dry leaves of Croton decaryi 
contain about 0.3% essential oil, dry stems 
0.2%. The essential oil of the leaves is rich in 
monoterpene and sesquiterpene hydrocarbons. 
Major components are ß-caryophyllene (27%), 
cc-pinene (21%), a-humulene (19%), ß-pinene 
(7%) and caryophyllene oxide (5%). The essen-
tial oil of the dried stem contains mainly 
monoterpenes and oxygenated monoterpenes, 
and the major components are a-pinene (26%), 
borneol (13%), camphene (11%), ß-pinene (7%), 
ß-caryophyllene (9%) and caryophyllene oxide 
(6%). 
Botany Monoecious shrub up to 2 m tall; 
young twigs with short, reddish stellate hairs. 
Leaves opposite to whorled, simple, strongly 
scented; stipules small, persistent; petiole c. 1.5 
cm long; blade ovate, c. 3 cm x 2 cm, base cor-
date, with 2 small, sessile glands, apex 
rounded, margins toothed, with small, cup-
shaped glands in forks of veins, softly hairy on 
both sides, whitish beneath. Inflorescence a 
terminal raceme with male flowers at apex and 
2-3 female flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, 
5-merous, regular, white; sepals small, petals 
rudimentary; male flowers with short pedicel, 
stamens c. 15, free; female flowers with pedicel 
c. 2 cm long, ovary superior, rounded, 3-lobed, 
yellowish hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, several times 
2-fid. Fruit an ovoid 3-lobed capsule, softly 
stellate hairy, 3-seeded. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Almost 40 of the 
species from Madagascar are used in medicine, 
and several of them resemble morphologically 
Croton decaryi. The crushed stems of Croton 
bathianus Leandri are added to a fermented 
beverage and taken as a bitter tonic. An infu-
sion of the bitter bark of Croton crocodilorum 
Leandri is taken as a stimulant and aphrodi-
siac. An infusion of the grated bark of Croton 
perrieri Leandri is taken to treat infectious 
diseases. 
Ecology Croton decaryi occurs in open forest 
and on stream banks, at low altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Croton decaryi is threatened 
by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Probably due to its essential oil, 
Croton decaryi is interesting for use as an in-
sect repellent, but is likely to remain of minor, 
local importance only. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Leandri, 1939; Radulovic et 
al., 2006. 
Other references Coode, 1982; Missouri 
Botanical Garden, undated; Ralaivao, 1993. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON GEAYI Leandri 
Protologue Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Pa-
ris, sér. 2, 3: 368 (1931). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
geayi is endemic to south-western Madagascar. 
Uses An infusion of the aromatic leafy twigs 
is taken to treat fever, cough, asthma and con-
stipation in newborn babies. 
Properties The dry aerial parts of Croton 
geayi contain about 0.3% essential oil. The es-
sential oil contains mainly oxygenated 
monoterpenes, sesquiterpenes and oxygenated 
sesquiterpenes. Major components are 1,8-
cineol (16%), ß-carophyllene (15%), a-terpineol 
(14%), T-muurolol (7%), y-cadinene (5%) and 4-
terpineol (5%). Some diterpenes have been iso-
lated from the wood: geanine, geaninine and 
derivatives. 
Botany Monoecious, aromatic shrub up to 
1.5 m tall; young twigs glabrous. Leaves 
whorled, simple and entire; stipules small; 
petiole 3-5 mm long; blade elliptical, c. 2 cm x 
0.5 cm, base rounded, with 2 small, yellow 
glands, apex acute, short-hairy above, with 
silvery brown, shiny scales beneath. Inflores-
cence a terminal raceme, with many male flow-
ers at apex and 1—2 female flowers at base. 
Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, regular; pedicel 
white to yellowish green; male flowers with 
small sepals and small petals, stamens c. 15, 
free; female flowers with small sepals, petals 
absent, ovary superior, globose, 3-lobed, silky 
hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, several times 2-fid. 
Fruit an ovoid 3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm long, 
200 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
covered with brown scales, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Almost 40 of the 
species from Madagascar are used in medicine, 
and several of them resemble morphologically 
Croton geayi. An infusion of the leafy twigs of 
Croton adabolavensis Leandri is taken to treat 
dysentery. The aromatic leafy branches of Cro-
ton androiensis (Leandri) Leandri and Croton 
elaeagni Baill. are used as a mattress filler to 
repel insects, especially lice. A root bark decoc-
tion of Croton androiensis is externally applied 
for its cicatrizing effect and to treat caries. A 
bark decoction of Croton elaeagni is taken to 
treat a cough. A decoction of the aerial parts of 
Croton jennyanus Gris, ex Baill. is taken to 
calm patients with delirium, paralysis or Park-
inson's disease. The seeds are taken as a strong 
purgative, but are considered dangerous. 
Ecology Croton geayi occurs in rocky locali-
ties, on calcareous or sandy soil, at 100-1400 m 
altitude. It prefers sunny localities. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Croton geayi is threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton geayi has some interest-
ing local medicinal uses, but more information 
is needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; CNRE & ONE, 2001; 
Govaerts, Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 2000; 
Leandri, 1939; Radulovic et al., 2006. 
Other references Coode, 1982; Missouri 
Botanical Garden, undated; Palazzino et al., 
1997; Ralantonirina, 1993; Rasoanaivo et al., 
1999; Razafiarison, 1993. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON HAUMANIANUS J.Léonard 
Protologue Bull. Agric. Congo Beige 48: 79 
(1957). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
haumanianus has been recorded in southern 
Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Congo and DR 
Congo. 
Uses In Congo an infusion of the grated, 
bitter, fresh bark is commonly taken as a pur-
gative and diuretic. The grated bark is mixed 
with palm oil and is applied to the body to treat 
rheumatism, headache, pain in the side, oe-
dema of the legs and abscesses. Sometimes 
mashed leaves are mixed with the grated bark. 
A leaf or bark decoction is taken to treat gonor-
rhoea, urinary infections, worms, headache, 
constipation, starting hernia, heartburn, oe-
dema, rheumatism and painful urination. A 
decoction or infusion is also applied as an en-
ema as a purgative. A bark infusion is taken to 
treat hypertension and epilepsy. Pregnant 
women with a history of repeated spontaneous 
abortions take a spoonful of the liquid obtained 
from crushed seeds in water to prevent abor-
tion. In DR Congo small amounts of bark de-
coction, alone or in combination with other 
plants, are drunk to treat gonorrhoea and 
rheumatism. A preparation of stem bark, 
leaves or fruits is eaten as an aphrodisiac. 
Mashed stem bark and fruits are used to kill 
rats and in the preparation of arrow poison. 
The plant is used in ceremonies to chase away 
bad spirits, and to restore health when taboos 
have been broken. 
The wood is used in carpentry. Croton hauma-
nianus is frequently planted as a shade plant 
in coffee and cacao plantations. 
Properties The stem bark contains several 
diterpenes including crotocorylifuran, a clero-
dane-type diterpenoid, and crotohaumanoxide, 
a crotofolane-type diterpenoid. 
Botany Monoecious small to medium-sized 
tree up to 15(-35) m tall, densely scaly and 
stellate hairy; bole cylindrical, up to 40(-100) 
cm in diameter; outer bark longitudinally fis-
sured, brownish green, inner bark yellowish 
orange and whitish, scented, exudate brown 
and sticky; crown light. Leaves alternate, sim-
ple and entire; stipules filiform, 1-15 mm long, 
usually with basal, filiform appendages, persis-
tent; petiole 1.5-12 cm long; blade elliptical to 
ovate-elliptical, 4-19.5 cm x 2-9.5 cm, base 
rounded to cordate, basal glands 2(-4), apex 
acute to acuminate, whitish beneath. Inflores-
cence a terminal raceme 3-21 cm long, with 
many male flowers at apex and few female 
flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, 
regular, white; pedicel 1—5 mm long; sepals 
elliptical, 3.5-4.5 mm long; male flowers with 
elliptical petals 2.5-4 mm long, hairy on both 
sides, stamens 23—34, free; female flowers with 
linear petals 3-3.5 mm long, hairy on both 
sides, ovary superior, rounded, densely hairy, 
3-celled, styles 3, 3-4 times deeply 2-fid. Fruit 
an almost globular, thick-walled drupe, 2-2.5 
cm in diameter, indéhiscent, upper part 
slightly 3-lobed, 3-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, c. 7 
CROTON 201 
mm x 5 mm, whitish. Seedling with epigeal 
germination. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Several other 
medicinally used Croton species occur in Cen-
tral Africa. In Congo an infusion of the fruits of 
Croton draconopsis Müll.Arg. is taken as a 
purgative and vermifuge; the leaves and root 
bark are sometimes used similarly. In Congo 
Croton mayumbensis J.Léonard is often used 
instead of Croton haumanianus. A bark decoc-
tion is used as nose drops to treat sinusitis and 
colds. In Gabon a bark decoction of Croton ma-
yumbensis or Croton oligandrus Pierre ex 
Hutch, is drunk to treat colic. Bark powder is 
sniffed to treat nasal tumours and it is exter-
nally applied to treat scabies. The wood of Cro-
ton oligandrus is used in carpentry. In Gabon 
the stem bark of Croton tchibangensis Pellegr. 
is commonly used as a fish poison. 
Ecology Croton haumanianus occurs in sec-
ondary forest and regrowth of lowland rainfor-
est, up to 1000C-1200) m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
haumanianus is very common in its distribu-
tion area and not likely to be threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton haumanianus has many 
local medicinal uses. It is poisonous and should 
be used with caution. Despite the many uses, 
not much pharmacological research has been 
undertaken on this species. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Bouquet, 1969; Léonard, 1962; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Raponda-Walker & Sil-
lans, 1961; Tchissambou et al., 1990; Terashima 
& Ichikawa, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON JATROPHOIDES Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 43: 79 (1909). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Msinduzi (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
jatrophoides occurs in the Central African Re-
public, south-eastern Kenya and Tanzania. 
Uses In Tanzania a strongly scented root 
extract is taken to treat colds and stomach-
ache. The Washambaa people take a fruit ex-
tract to treat intestinal worms. 
The wood is used for firewood, and to make 
beehives, water containers and knife sheaths. 
The leaves are used as fodder. Croton jatro-
phoides is also used as a shade tree. 
Properties Nine limonoids (tetranortriter-
penoids) were isolated from a methanol extract 
of the root bark: dumsin, zumsin, dumnin, 
dumsenin, zumketol, zumsenin, zumsenol, 
musidunin and musiduol. Most of these com-
pounds, extracted from plants collected near 
Mombasa, Kenya, showed potent antifeedant 
activity against the larvae of pink bollworm 
(Pectinophora gossypiella) and fall armyworm 
(Spodoptera frugiperda). Zumsenin and zum-
senol were not tested as they occur in very 
small quantities. 
Botany Monoecious or dioecious small to 
medium-sized tree up to 18 m tall; young twigs 
stellate hairy, older twigs pinkish to greyish 
brown, almost glabrous. Leaves alternate, sim-
ple, turning orange before falling; stipules lin-
ear, up to 10 mm long, soon falling; petiole 3-7 
cm long; blade broadly triangular-ovate, 5-15 
cm x 3.5-12 cm, base cuneate to cordate, with 
2 small subsessile basal glands beneath, apex 
acuminate, margins coarsely toothed to almost 
5-lobed, densely stellate hairy on both sides, 
greyish green beneath, later almost glabrous. 
Inflorescence a slender, terminal raceme 8-19 
cm long, either with only male flowers or with 
3-4 female flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, 
5-merous, regular, white; male flowers with 
pedicel 3-4 mm long, sepals elliptical-ovate, c. 
2.5 mm long, stellate hairy, petals elliptical-
lanceolate, 2.5-3 mm long, acute, stamens 14-
15, free; female flowers with pedicel c. 2 mm 
long, fleshy, sepals lanceolate, c. 3 mm long, 
stellate hairy, petals absent, ovary superior, 2-
lobed, densely stellate hairy, 2-celled, styles 2, 
2-fid to base, c. 5 mm long, spreading-recurved. 
Fruit an ovoid, 2-lobed drupe c. 2.5 cm x 2 cm, 
indéhiscent, stellate hairy, 2-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, c. 2 cm x 1.5 cm, greyish brown mottled, 
slightly shiny. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. 
Ecology Croton jatrophoides occurs in dry 
coastal forest, riverine forest, forest borders 
and clearings, up to 250 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
jatrophoides is relatively rare and is included 
in the IUCN Red List of threatened species. 
Confirmation of the occurrence of the species 
202 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
outside Tanzania is needed in order to assess 
its genetic diversity. 
Prospects The roots of Croton jatrophoides 
are used against colds and stomach-ache. Sev-
eral limonoids were isolated from the root bark, 
which exhibit significant antifeedant activity 
against larvae of insects, but no information is 
available concerning their pharmacological 
activity. As many limonoids are biologically 
active, more research on Croton jatrophoides is 
recommended. 
Major references Kokwaro, 1993; Lovett et 
al., 2006; Nihei et a l , 2006; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Other references Lovett & Clarke, 1998a; 
Nihei et a l , 2004; Nihei et a l , 2005a. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON LOBATUS L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 1005 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 9 
Vernacular names Lobed croton (En). Ve-
lame pó de galinha (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
lobatus occurs in the Caribbean and South 
America, tropical Africa and the Arabian Pen-
insula. In Africa it is found from Senegal east 
to Eritrea and Ethiopia. 
Uses Throughout West Africa a leaf decoc-
tion is drunk as a strong purgative. A leaf 
paste mixed with palm oil is applied to treat 
guinea worm sores, ulcers, skin diseases and 
headache. In Côte d'Ivoire and Togo leaf decoc-
tions are used as an enema to treat gynaeco-
logical affections. Heated leaves are rubbed on 
to the skin to treat rheumatic and costal pain. 
An enema made from a root bark decoction is 
used as a purgative. A strong arrow poison is 
made by crushing the plant into a paste with a 
little water. In Togo leaf sap is used as eye 
drops to treat eye problems and unconscious-
ness. In Benin a decoction of the flowers or 
roots is taken as an antispasmodic in case of 
risk of abortion and of hiccup. The penis is 
washed with a maceration of the leafy twigs as 
an aphrodisiac. A leaf decoction with honey 
and palm oil is taken to treat stiff limbs. A leaf 
decoction is also taken to treat fever. In Nige-
ria the leaf sap is applied to lessen the pain of 
scorpion stings. 
Properties From the stems and leaves of 
Croton lobatus the monocyclic terpene alcohol 
vomifoliol, the diterpene geranylgeraniol, the 
triglyceride lobaceride (characterized by un-
usual poly-unsaturated fatty acids), steroids 
(e.g. ergosterol), the triterpene betulinic acid 
and several other compounds were isolated. 
Betulinic acid is a potent HIV-1 antiviral com-
pound, and inhibits the growth of Plasmodium 
falciparum, whereas geranylgeraniol induces 
apoptosis in leukaemia cell lines. 
A methanolic root extract showed significant 
antiplasmodial activity, against strains that 
are sensitive to chloroquine as well as resistant 
ones. 
Botany Monoecious branched, annual herb 
up to 1 m tall; taproot long; branches densely 
stellate hairy. Leaves alternate, lobed; stipules 
small, filiform; petiole up to 10 cm long; blade 
deeply 3-5-lobed, in outline 2.5-10 cm in di-
ameter, lobes oblanceolate to obovate, basal 
glands absent, apex acuminate, margins 
toothed, stellate hairy to almost glabrous on 
both sides. Inflorescence a slender, axillary or 
terminal raceme up to 12.5 cm long, with small 
male flowers in upper half and female flowers 
in lower half. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, 
regular, yellowish green; pedicel short; male 
flowers with elliptical sepals c. 2 mm long, pet-
als oblanceolate, c. 2 mm long, stamens 10-13, 
free; female flowers with linear-lanceolate se-
Croton lobatus - flowering branch. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
CROTON 203 
pals c. 5 mm long, petals represented by a hair 
c. 1.5 mm long, ovary superior, rounded, 
densely hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, deeply 2-fid, 
lobes linear. Fruit an almost globular capsule 
c. 7 mm in diameter, stellate hairy, green, 3-
seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, c. 6 mm x 3 mm, cov-
ered with wart-like protuberances. Seedling 
with epigeal germination. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Croton lobatus 
is a host of nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.), of 
fungi causing powdery mildew, and of cucum-
ber mosaic virus (CMV). 
Ecology Croton lobatus occurs in open 
sandy localities, often on river banks, along 
road sides and on waste land. It is a weed of 
cultivation. 
Management As a weed, Croton lobatus is 
often invasive and difficult to eradicate from 
arable land because of its strong taproot and 
lateral roots. However, effective control with 
herbicides is possible. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Cro-
ton lobatus is common and often even weedy 
throughout its distribution area, there is no 
risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton lobatus has several inter-
esting local medicinal applications. It is very 
poisonous, so due care should be taken when 
using it. Several potentially active compounds 
have been identified, but information concern-
ing the pharmacology is lacking, except for an 
encouraging result concerning its antimalarial 
activity. More research is therefore needed. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Chabert, 
Attioua & Brouillard, 2006; Lagnika, 2005; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Weniger et al., 2004. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Brown, Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; Keay, 
1958a; Neuwinger, 1996; Stäuble, 1986. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON MACROSTACHYUS Höchst, ex Delile 
Protologue Voy. Abyssinie 3: 158 (1847). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Woodland croton, forest 
fever tree, broad-leaved croton (En). Croton à 
feuilles larges (Fr). Mtumbatu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
Croton macrostachyus - wild 
macrostachyus occurs throughout tropical Af-
rica, including Madagascar. 
Uses Throughout its distribution area a de-
coction, infusion or maceration of leaves, stem 
bark or root bark are taken as a purgative and 
vermifuge. Leaf sap is used similarly. The seed 
oil is a very powerful purgative. 
In West Africa different plant parts in decoc-
tion are taken to treat constipation, stomach-
ache and female infertility, and are used exter-
nally to treat stitch-like pain in the side and 
guinea-worm sores. In Ethiopia Croton macro-
stachyus has many uses. A leaf extract is ap-
plied against itchy scalp. A decoction of the 
leafy twigs mixed with Justicia schimperiana 
(Höchst, ex Nees) T.Anderson is taken to treat 
jaundice and smallpox. The preparation is 
taken with pepper, butter and milk. An infu-
sion of the leafy branches and roots is used as a 
mouthwash to treat toothache. The leaves or 
young shoots are eaten to treat fever and oe-
dema and mashed leaves are applied to haem-
orrhoids. A preparation of the seed is instilled 
into the ear to treat ear problems. The seeds 
are poisonous and are used to make fish poi-
son, while crushed seed and leaves in water are 
taken to treat tapeworm infection; the seed is 
eaten to induce abortion and a fruit, bark or 
root decoction or raw fruit is taken to treat 
venereal diseases. A bark maceration is drunk 
as an abortifacient and uterotonic, to expel a 
retained placenta. These treatments are all 
considered dangerous. The root or stem bark is 
chewed to treat toothache, but also rabies. Ripe 
crushed fruits mixed with butter or honey and 
ground leaves are applied to skin diseases. In 
Kenya the Luhya people lick the ash of burnt 
204 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
leaves as a cough remedy. A leaf decoction is 
also taken to treat cough and stomach prob-
lems. A root decoction is taken to treat indiges-
tion. The Kikuyu people take a root decoction 
to treat malaria; leaf juice is put on wounds to 
improve blood clotting, and also to treat sores, 
warts and ringworm. In Kenya and Tanzania a 
root infusion is taken to treat intestinal para-
sites. A decoction of the stem and root bark is 
used for bathing babies with skin rash. A bark 
infusion is taken to treat chest problems and 
rheumatism. Leaves made into a poultice are 
externally applied to treat pleurisy. A powder 
of leaves and twig bark is eaten to calm insan-
ity and possession. 
In Kenya Croton macrostachyus is commonly 
planted as a shade tree in villages and in coffee 
plantations. The wood is used in eastern and 
southern Africa to make tool handles, small 
stools, boxes, crates and plywood, as flooring 
and building material and in carpentry. The 
wood is used as fuel that burns even when 
green, but with a rather unpleasant spicy 
odour and much smoke; it is also used to make 
charcoal. Due to its drought hardiness and fast 
growth, Croton macrostachyus is considered 
useful for afforestation of shifting sand dunes, 
degraded waste land, hill slopes, ravines and 
lateritic soils. It is also grown as a hedge plant 
and is suitable for intercropping. In India it 
has been grown successfully with Azadirachta 
indica A.Juss. in shelter belts. In Uganda 
sheep and goats do not browse young leaves, 
but old leaves are readily eaten. In Sudan the 
leaves are burnt to make vegetable salt. In 
Ethiopia the leaves are used as green manure 
and fodder. The fruits are very popular with 
birds and could be used as poultry feed. The 
flowers are heavily scented and give a dark-
amber coloured honey with strong flavour. Cro-
ton macrostachyus is widely used in rituals. 
Properties The seeds contain about 19% oil, 
which is a slightly viscous, yellow-orange fluid 
and slightly vesicant. The seeds also contain 
several saponins and a resin, which is said to 
be more toxic to insects than rotenone. The 
plant also contains the chalcone crotin. The 
stem bark and twigs contain lupeol, betulin 
and several fatty acids. The fruits contain cro-
tepoxide, a cyclohexane diepoxide, which inhib-
its certain tumours in animal models. Cro-
tepoxide also shows moderate trypanocidal 
activity against Trypanosoma brucei and Try-
panosoma evansii. Protein fractions from the 
leaves induced mitogenesis both in human and 
mouse isolated T cells. 
Aqueous and alcoholic stem bark extracts are 
toxic when injected intraperitoneally in mice. 
However, after autopsy no marked pathological 
changes were recorded. The extracts showed 
taenicidal activity in volunteers with tapeworm 
infection. A hexane extract of the leaves 
showed antibacterial activity against Bacillus 
subtilis, Micrococcus luteus and Staphylococcus 
aureus in vitro. Root and stem bark extracts 
showed low antibacterial activities. An aqueous 
root extract showed toxicity in the brine 
shrimp lethality test. The crude ground seeds 
showed high molluscicidal activity in vitro. 
In a field experiment in Ethiopia the decompo-
sition rate of the leaves of Croton macro-
stachyus was found to be 3 times higher than 
those of Millettia ferruginea (Höchst.) Baker. 
The decomposition rate of naturally shed 
leaves was only marginally slower than the 
rate of leaves harvested green. In another field 
trial in Ethiopia on the effect of combined in-
puts of green manure and urea (both at a rate 
of 100 kg N/ha) on maize productivity, no con-
sistent short-term advantage of a combination 
of Croton macrostachyus green manure and 
urea over pure urea was found. 
The wood density is about 540 kg/m3 at 12% 
moisture content. The wood is moderately soft, 
perishable and susceptible to attack by wood 
borers. The wood is difficult to saw. In tests, 
sulphate pulping gave a pulp of moderate 
strength; the wood can be used to make writing 
paper or newsprint paper after bleaching, but 
it is unsuitable for the production of wrapping 
paper. 
Description Monoecious or dioecious, de-
ciduous, medium-sized tree up to 25(-30) m 
tall; bole cylindrical, up to 100 cm in diameter; 
bark grey to grey-brown, finely fissured and 
cracked, inner bark pale brown to reddish 
brown, smell peppery; crown rounded and open 
with large, spreading branches; young 
branches densely stellate hairy. Leaves alter-
nate, simple, turning orange before falling; 
stipules linear, up to 15 mm long, soon falling; 
petiole up to 12(^20) cm long, with 2 stalked 
glands at top; blade ovate-elliptical to almost 
circular, up to 17(-25) cm x 14(-20) cm, base 
cordate, apex acuminate, margins irregularly 
toothed, densely stellate hairy on both sides, 
whitish green beneath. Inflorescence a slender, 
terminal raceme up to 35 cm long, either with 
only male or female flowers or male and female 
flowers variably mixed. Flowers unisexual, 5-
merous, regular, yellowish to white, fragrant; 
male flowers with pedicel 3—10 mm long, calyx 
CROTON 205 
Croton macrostachyus - 1, leafy twig; 2, inflo-
rescence; 3, infructescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
campanulate, lobes ovate to triangular, 2.5-3.5 
mm long, margins densely white hairy, petals 
oblong to oblanceolate, 3-4.5 mm long, stamens 
15-17, free; female flowers with pedicel 2-4 
mm long, fleshy, calyx as in male flowers but 
lobes more triangular, persistent in fruit, pet-
als linear or absent, up to 1.5 mm long, ovary 
superior, rounded, densely stellate hairy, 3-
celled, styles 3, 2-fid to base, 3—6 mm long, 
twisted and curved. Fruit an almost globular 
capsule 8—12 mm in diameter, slightly 3-lobed, 
stellate hairy, apex centrally depressed, whit-
ish to pale greyish brown, 3-seeded. Seeds el-
lipsoid, 6-8 mm x 4-5.5 mm, flattened, carun-
cle lobed, cream-coloured. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Croton com-
prises about 1200 species and occurs through-
out the warmer regions of the world. It is best 
represented in the Americas; about 65 species 
occur in continental Africa and about 125 in 
Madagascar. Mature fruits of Croton macro-
stachyus split open with a sharp noise. 
Growth and development In dry regions 
of West Africa flowering starts at the beginning 
of the rainy season. In Nigeria flowering occurs 
in March-May. In Kenya flowering occurs al-
most throughout the year with peaks in 
March^Iune in western Kenya and May-June 
in central Kenya. Fruit development takes 4-5 
months. Pollination is done by insects. The 
maximum growth rate is about 1.5 m/year. 
Ecology Croton macrostachyus commonly 
grows in secondary forests, especially on forest 
edges and along rivers or lakes, in moist or dry 
evergreen upland forest, woodland, wooded 
grassland, bushland and along roadsides, often 
on soils of volcanic origin, at 200-2500(-3400) 
m altitude. The mean annual rainfall varies 
from 150 to 1200 mm. 
Propagation and planting Croton macro-
stachyus is propagated by seed or Wildlings. 
Direct seeding is preferred, and pre-sowing 
treatment is not necessary. The number of 
seeds per kg is 16,000—27,000. The seeds are 
sown in a mixture of sand and compost (1:2), 
covered lightly with fine compost and kept 
moist. They take 3-8 weeks to germinate. Un-
der ideal conditions, 40-70% of the seeds ger-
minate in 4 weeks. If planted in a nursery, 
transplanting should be done at the 2-leaf 
stage. The seeds retain their viability for sev-
eral months if kept dry and free from insects at 
a maximum of 20°C, and for at least 2 years 
when dried below 8% humidity. 
Management Croton macrostachyus can be 
lopped, pollarded or coppiced. It grows well 
both in shade and bright sunlight; it is vulner-
able though to cold wind and frost, especially 
young plants, which should be protected during 
the first two years. Croton macrostachyus has a 
long taproot and numerous side-roots, which 
makes it adapted to dry climates. 
Diseases and pests In Ethiopia the leaves 
of Croton macrostachyus are attacked by a leaf 
spot caused by the fungus Cylindrosporium sp. 
The seeds are often damaged by insects while 
still on the tree. 
Handling after harvest Fruits are sun-
dried to release the seeds. 
Genetic resources Although Croton macro-
stachyus occurs scattered and localized 
throughout its large distribution area, it is not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton macrostachyus is an im-
portant medicinal plant especially in East Af-
rica. It is widely used as a purgative and ver-
mifuge, but also to treat venereal diseases and 
to induce abortion. All parts, but especially the 
seeds, are considered toxic, and any medicine 
206 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
made from them should be used with caution. 
Despite the many medicinal uses, not much 
research has been done concerning the chemi-
cal composition and pharmacology of the dif-
ferent plant parts and more research is war-
ranted. Croton macrostachyus has several 
other important uses, e.g. to control soil ero-
sion, as a shade tree and for its green manure 
and fodder, which deserve additional tests in 
the field. 
Major references Adda-Mensah et al., 1992; 
Bekele-Tesemma, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1993; 
Burkill, 1994; Desta, 1995; Gindaba, Rozanov 
& Negash, 2005a; Matu & van Staden, 2003; 
Maundu & Tengnäs, 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; 
World Agroforestry Centre, undated. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2002; Beentje, 
1994; Berhan, Asfaw & Kelbessa, 2006; Giday 
et a l , 2003; Giday et al., 2007; Gindaba, Olsson 
& Itanna, 2004; Gindaba, Rozanov & Negash, 
2005b; Jansen, 1981; Kokwaro, 1993; Moshi et 
al., 2004; Njoroge & Bussman, 2007; Oliver-
Bever, 1986; Tachibana et a l , 1993; Teklay, 
Nyberg & Maimer, 2006; Venter & Venter, 
1996. 
Sources of illustration Maundu & Ten-
gnäs, 2005. 
Authors F.S. Mairura 
CROTON MAURITIANUS Lam. 
Protologue Encycl. 2: 205 (1786). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Ti bois de senteur (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
mauritianus is endemic to Réunion, and possi-
bly also occurs on Mauritius. 
Uses A decoction of the chopped leaves is 
taken to treat fever and to improve the mem-
ory. 
Properties The aerial parts tested positive 
for alkaloids. A methanol extract of the leaves 
and of the stem had considerable free radical 
scavenging activity. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 5 m tall; stem up to 20 cm in diameter; 
young twigs with short stellate hairs. Leaves in 
whorls, simple, strongly scented; stipules 
small; petiole 2-5 cm long; blade ovate, 6-15 
cm x 3-9 cm, base cordate, with 2 small, sessile 
glands, apex acute, margins variously toothed, 
soft-hairy on both sides. Inflorescence a termi-
nal raceme 3-12 cm long, with up to 25 male 
flowers at end and 2-3 female flowers at base. 
Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-merous, white; 
male flowers with pedicel up to 15 mm long, 
sepals triangular, 2-3 mm long, with stellate 
hairs, petals oblong-obovate, c. 5 mm long, 
stamens 45-60, free, 4-5 mm long; female 
flowers with pedicel 18-20 mm long, sepals 
fused to half their length, c. 5 mm long, petals 
oblong-obovate, 3-6 mm x 1-2 mm, recurved 
between the sepals, with long hairs on mar-
gins, staminodes c. 3 mm long if present, ovary 
superior, rounded, 3-lobed, silky hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, several times 2-fid. Fruit an oblong to 
ovoid, 3-lobed capsule 6—8 mm long, with stel-
late hairs, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, pale brown to 
black. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
in continental Africa about 65 species occur 
and in Madagascar about 125. Réunion has 1 
endemic species and Mauritius about 4. 
Ecology Croton mauritianus occurs in semi-
dry forest and steep hill sides at low altitudes. 
Management Croton mauritianus can be 
propagated by stem cuttings. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
mauritianus is commonly used as an ingredi-
ent of medicinal preparations, and is therefore 
becoming rare in the wild. It has a protected 
status in Réunion. 
Prospects Croton mauritianus has several 
interesting medicinal uses, which are partly 
confirmed by pharmacological tests. More re-
search is warranted to evaluate the real poten-
tial of the species. More efforts are needed to 
domesticate Croton mauritianus and protect it 
from extinction. 
Major references Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Lavergne, 2001; Poullain, 
2004; Poullain, Girard-Valenciennes & Smadja, 
2004. 
Other references Coode, 1982; Maure-
mootoo, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON MEMBRANACEUS Miill.Arg. 
Protologue Flora 47: 534 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
membranaceus occurs in Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana 
and Nigeria. 
Uses In Ghana a root extract is taken to 
treat urinary retention caused by an enlarged 
prostate. It is also taken to treat measles. 
Properties The root bark contains sco-
CROTON 207 
poletin and julocrotine, a glutarimide alkaloid. 
It also contains calcium oxalate crystals. 
Botany Monoecious herb or undershrub up 
to l(-2) m tall; branches slender, densely stel-
late hairy. Leaves opposite or alternate, when 
opposite the two very unequal in size, simple 
and entire; stipules tiny; petiole 2-6 mm long; 
blade ovate, 3-7.5 cm x 2-5 cm, base rounded, 
basal glands absent, apex acuminate, sparsely 
stellate hairy above, densely stellate hairy be-
neath. Inflorescence an axillary or terminal 
raceme c. 5 cm long, few-flowered, with male 
flowers at end and female flowers at base. 
Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, regular, white; 
pedicel short; male flowers with elliptical se-
pals and obovate petals c. 2 mm long, margin 
woolly hairy, stamens 10, free; female flowers 
with narrowly lanceolate sepals c. 4 mm long, 
petals rudimentary or absent, ovary superior, 
rounded, densely hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, apex 
2-fid. Fruit an ellipsoid, slightly 3-lobed cap-
sule c. 5 mm in diameter, 3-seeded. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Another medici-
nally used Croton with a restricted distribution 
in West Africa is Croton eluteria (L.) W.Wright 
('cascarilla'), which originates from the Carib-
bean and northern South America. It was in-
troduced into Nigeria in the 19th century for its 
use as a tonic and aromatic bitter, which im-
proves digestion. The essential oil of the bark is 
used in aromatherapy to treat cough, fever, 
flatulence, nausea and diarrhoea. In the Ba-
hamas the leaves are used to aromatize to-
bacco. The active compounds of the bark are 
neoclerodane diterpenoids, such as cascarillins 
A-I and cascallin. 
Ecology Croton membranaceus occurs in 
moist bush vegetation and savanna, at low 
altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
membranaceus has a limited area of distribu-
tion and it is apparently uncommon. It is 
grown in Aburi Botanic Gardens, Ghana. 
Prospects Some preliminary tests on the 
activity of Croton membranaceus root extract 
have been undertaken, but more chemical and 
pharmacological research needs to be done to 
evaluate its potential. Measures should be 
taken to monitor the presence of this appar-
ently uncommon species. 
Major references Antwi, 1994; Atakora, 
2004; Brown, Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; 
Keay, 1958a. 
Other references Aboagye et al., 2000; 
Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006; Lambert et al., 
2005; Vigor et al., 2002. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON MENYHARTHII Pax 
Protologue Bull. Herb. Boiss. 6: 733 (1898). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
menyharthii occurs from southern Ethiopia 
and Somalia south throughout East and south-
ern Africa south to Natal (South Africa). 
Uses In Somalia a decoction of fresh or dried 
roots is taken to treat dysmenorrhoea. Fresh or 
dried crushed leaves in water are drunk to 
treat hepatitis and tapeworm. Crushed root 
bark in water is taken to treat intestinal ob-
struction. In East Africa a root decoction is 
taken to treat influenza and malaria. In Kenya 
the Pokomo people inhale the smoke of burnt 
leaves to ease pregnancy and menstruation 
pains. 
Properties A methanol extract of the leaves 
or twigs showed significant antiplasmodial 
activity in vitro, while a water extract was in-
active. 
Botany Monoecious, much-branched shrub 
up to 5 m tall; young twigs densely covered 
with yellowish scales, older twigs pale greyish 
brown. Leaves alternate, simple and entire; 
stipules tiny, soon falling; petiole 2—5(—9) mm 
long; blade elliptical-ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 
2.5-7(-ll) cm x l-3(-4.5) cm, base rounded to 
shallowly cordate, with 2 minute basal glands, 
apex obtuse to notched, thinly stellate hairy 
and yellowish above, covered with shiny silvery 
to cream-coloured scales below. Inflorescence a 
slender terminal raceme up to 3(—5) cm long at 
the end of side-shoots, covered with yellowish 
scales, mostly with male flowers in upper part 
and 1-4 female flowers at base. Flowers uni-
sexual, 5-merous, regular, pale yellow-green; 
male flowers with pedicel 2-5 mm long, sepals 
ovate, c. 2 mm long, petals linear-oblong to 
linear-oblanceolate, c. 2 mm long, margin cili-
ate, stamens 12-15, free; female flowers with 
pedicel 2-3 mm long, extending to 4 mm in 
fruit, calyx lobes ovate, c. 2 mm long, petals 
absent, ovary superior, rounded, densely scaly 
and stellate hairy, yellowish brown, brown or 
black, 3-celled, styles 3-4, deeply 2-fid, c. 2.5 
mm long, spreading or incurved. Fruit a 3-
lobed capsule 6-7 mm x 7-9 mm, covered with 
208 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
yellowish scales, black-spotted, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ellipsoid to ovoid, c. 6 mm x 4 mm, brown or 
greyish, shiny. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Several other 
medicinally used species of Croton occur in 
East Africa. Croton polytrichus Pax is a lax 
shrub or small tree occurring from Sudan 
south to Zambia. In East Africa an extract of 
its roots is taken to treat headache and labour 
pain. Root powder, alone or mixed with that of 
Croton dichogamus Pax, is mixed with porridge 
or tea to treat impotence and colds. A root de-
coction is taken to treat irregular menstrua-
tion. Croton scheffleri Pax is a shrub or small 
tree occurring from Kenya to Zambia. In north-
ern Kenya its roots are soaked in water and 
the water is taken to treat malaria and fever. 
Croton somalensis Pax occurs in Ethiopia, So-
malia and northern Kenya. In Kenya the 
Maasai people drink a decoction of its roots to 
treat fever and malaria. The wood is used in 
house construction. Croton steenkampianus 
Gerstner (Tonga croton) occurs in Tanzania, 
southern Mozambique and South Africa. The 
Zulu people inhale the vapour of a decoction of 
its fresh leaves to treat general body pain. Ex-
tracts have shown antimalarial activity. Croton 
talaeporos Radcl.-Sm. occurs in southern So-
malia and Kenya. In southern Kenya a root 
infusion is taken as a remedy for colds and 
stomach complaints. 
Ecology Croton menyharthii occurs in de-
ciduous bushland, dune bushland and thickets, 
from sea-level up to 1300 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Croton menyharthii is threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton menyharthii has several 
local medicinal uses, e.g. against menstrual 
pain, malaria and tapeworm, but nothing is 
known about the compounds that might be 
responsible for these actions. The leaves and 
twigs show significant antiplasmodial activity. 
More research is warranted to evaluate the 
potential of the species. 
Major references Beentje, 1994; Clarkson 
et al., 2004; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Samuelsson 
et al., 1992. 
Other references Hedberg et al., 1983a; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON MUBANGO Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 2: 338 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Mubango (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
mubango is known from the Central African 
Republic, Gabon, DR Congo and Angola. 
Uses In DR Congo the bark pulp is rubbed 
onto the gums and teeth to treat toothache, 
and is also applied to haemorrhoids, hernia, 
skin eruptions and pain in the joints. The body 
is rubbed with a bark maceration as a tonic. A 
bark decoction is taken to treat gastritis and 
painful periods. The bark, together with the 
seeds of Monodora myristica (Gaertn.) Dunal, 
is eaten to treat abdominal pain and expel in-
testinal worms. Powdered root or a root mac-
eration is taken to treat diarrhoea and dysen-
tery. The leaves are eaten to ease pain, and a 
leaf infusion is used as a body wash to treat 
fever. A stem bark decoction is also taken to 
treat abdominal pain and fever. In the Equator 
province of DR Congo a decoction of crushed 
stem bark is taken to treat an enlarged spleen 
and tuberculosis. Powdered bark in palm wine 
is taken to treat oedema. Young fruits soaked 
in palm wine are taken as a laxative. 
The bark of young twigs is used as a condi-
ment. In DR Congo Croton mubango is planted 
as a shade tree in villages. The scented flowers 
are very attractive to bees. Edible caterpillars 
(Lobobunaea phaedusa) feed on the leaves. The 
resin from the trunk is used to trap birds. 
Properties Preliminary screening showed 
the presence of flavonoids, sterols, triterpenes, 
saponins and reducing sugars. Stem bark ex-
tracts showed weak antibacterial and anti-
amoebic activities in vitro. 
Methanolie, dichloromethane and aqueous 
stem bark extracts showed antiplasmodial ac-
tivity against Plasmodium falciparum in vitro. 
At a daily oral dose of 200 mg/kg, the di-
chloromethane extract, the petroleum-ether, 
chloroform, ethyl-acetate and residual water-
soluble fractions showed antiplasmodial activ-
ity against Plasmodium berghei in mice. The 
aqueous extract of the stem bark showed rela-
tively low toxicity in mice. It significantly in-
creased the serum concentrations of glutamate-
oxaloacetate transaminase and glutamate-
pyruvate transaminase in mice. In-vitro anti-
bacterial screening of the stem bark extract 
showed no activity against enteropathogens. 
The wood is hard and white. 
Botany Monoecious shrub to medium-sized 
CROTON 209 
tree up to 17 m tall; bole up to 30 cm in diame-
ter; branches spreading, twigs drooping, 
densely covered with scaly and stellate hairs. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 4— 
5-partite, segments linear, 4-12 mm long, per-
sistent; petiole 2-10 cm long; blade elliptical to 
ovate, 4-16.5 cm x 2-9 cm, base cordate to 
rounded, with 2 large basal glands, apex acu-
minate, thinly stellate hairy above, scaly and 
grey below. Inflorescence a slender, terminal 
raceme 7.5—20 cm long, covered with scales, 
mostly with male flowers in upper part and 1—4 
female flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, 5-
merous, regular, white; pedicel (2—)5-12 mm 
long; sepals triangular, 4-5 mm long; petals 
ovate-elliptical, 3.5-5 mm long, hairy on both 
sides; male flowers with 22-37 stamens, free; 
female flowers with superior, depressed-
globose ovary, densely scaly hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, 3—4 times 2-fid, spreading. Fruit a 
rounded capsule 18-23 mm in diameter, cov-
ered with scales, 3-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 13— 
15 mm x 9-12 mm, brownish. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Croton mubango flowers from July to Septem-
ber. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. 
Ecology Croton mubango occurs in margins 
of dense forest, secondary forest and tree sa-
vanna. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
mubango occurs in disturbed forest and sa-
vanna and is probably not uncommon. Cur-
rently it is not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton mubango is used to treat 
a wide variety of diseases, especially in DR 
Congo. Although the antiplasmodial activities 
of the stem bark are promising, not much is 
known about the compounds responsible for 
this action. Additional research is warranted. 
Major references Latham, 2005; Léonard, 
1962; Longanga-Otshudi, Vercruysse & Fori-
ers, 2000; Mesia et al., 2005; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Brown, Hutchinson & 
Prain, 1909-1913; Kasuku et al., 1999. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON MYRIASTER Baker 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 20: 268 (1882). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
myriaster is endemic to central Madagascar. 
Uses A decoction of the aerial parts is ad-
ministered to children with epileptic attacks, 
and used as an inhalation to treat headache. 
The wood is used as firewood. 
Properties The bark contains traces of alka-
loids, but none have been detected in the 
leaves. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 10 m tall; stem up to 20 cm in diameter; 
young twigs with short stellate hairs. Leaves 
alternate, simple, strongly scented; stipules 
small; petiole 1.5-2.5 cm long; blade ovate-
lanceolate, 8-15 cm x 2.5—5.5 cm, base 
rounded, with 2 small, brown, sessile glands, 
apex acuminate, margins toothed, short-hairy, 
lower surface whitish. Inflorescence a terminal 
or axillary raceme, with male flowers at end 
and 2-3 female flowers at base. Flowers uni-
sexual, regular, 5-merous, white to pale green 
or pale yellow; sepals small, brownish hairy, 
petals tiny; male flowers with short pedicel, 
stamens 12-16, free; female flower with pedicel 
enlarging in fruit to c. 2 cm long, ovary supe-
rior, 3-lobed, with pale brown hairs, 3-celled, 
styles 3, several times 2-fid at apex. Fruit a 3-
lobed capsule c. 12 mm x 10 mm, hard, with 
glandular hairs, reddish brown, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, c. 7 mm long, grooved. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
in continental Africa about 65 species occur 
and in Madagascar about 125. Almost 40 spe-
cies from Madagascar are used in medicine, 
and several of them are morphologically close 
to Croton myriaster. Mattresses are filled with 
the strong smelling branches of Croton meri-
dionalis Leandri, Croton salviformis Baill. and 
Croton tranomarensis Leandri to act as an in-
sect repellent. The powder of the aerial parts of 
Croton meridionalis is added to bait as rat poi-
son. A leaf infusion of Croton bemaranus Lean-
dri is taken as a digestive. A leaf decoction of 
Croton goudotii Baill. is inhaled to treat ma-
laria; a bark decoction is taken to treat chronic 
gonorrhoea. The latter is also used as a vapour 
bath and wash, and is taken orally to calm 
pain. 
Ecology Croton myriaster occurs along hu-
mid forest margins, at 900-2200 m altitude. 
210 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no reports that Croton myriaster is threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Unless additional research re-
veals otherwise, Croton myriaster will remain 
of local importance only as a medicinal plant. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Leandri, 1939. 
Other references Missouri Botanical Gar-
den, undated; Rasoanaivo, Petitjean & Conan, 
1993; Rasoanaivo et al., 1992. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON NITIDULUS Baker 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc, Bot. 20: 253 
(1883). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
nitidulus is endemic to central and eastern 
Madagascar. 
Uses The bitter stem bark is taken to treat 
malaria and cough. The aromatic leafy 
branches are used as an insect repellent in 
mattress fillings, especially against lice. The 
leafy branches are also used to make a steam 
bath to clear the nose. The wood is used as 
firewood. 
Properties The aerial parts contain alka-
loids. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 9 m tall, dichotomously branched; all parts 
with brown stellate hairs. Leaves almost oppo-
site to alternate, simple, aromatic; stipules 
absent; petiole 1.5—2.5 cm long; blade lanceo-
late, 7-8 cm x 3-3.5 cm, base rounded, with 2 
small, sessile glands, apex acute to acuminate, 
margins toothed, almost glabrous above, whit-
ish hairy below. Inflorescence a terminal fasci-
cle, with male flowers at end and 2-3 female 
flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-
merous, white to pale yellow; male flowers with 
short pedicel, sepals whitish green, stamens 
13-16, free; female flowers with pedicel enlarg-
ing in fruit to c. 2 cm long, sepals enlarging in 
fruit, petals tiny, linear, ovary superior, 3-
lobed, with reddish scales, 3-celled, styles 3, 
several times 2-fid at apex, orange. Fruit a 3-
lobed capsule, brown hairy, 3-seeded. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
in continental Africa about 65 species occur 
and in Madagascar about 125. Almost 40 spe-
cies from Madagascar are used in medicine, 
and several of them are morphologically close 
to Croton nitidulus. The aerial parts of Croton 
hovarum Leandri, cooked with chicken bones, 
are used to treat colic and acute weakness of 
the body. The leaves are toxic, and infusions of 
this plant are known to cause coronary vaso-
constriction. A methanol extract of the leaves 
contained several clerodane-type furano-
diterpenes. A decoction of the bitter stem bark 
of Croton mocquerysii A.DC. is taken to treat 
malaria. A leafy twig infusion of Croton macro-
buxus Baill. (synonym: Croton sambiranensis 
Leandri) is taken to treat asthma attacks. The 
aerial parts contain several steroids and triter-
penes, but few alkaloids. 
Ecology Croton nitidulus occurs near small 
streams and along forest edges, at (20-)300-
2200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
nitidulus is relatively common in its distribu-
tion area and there are no signs that it is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton nitidulus will probably 
remain of local importance as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Leandri, 1939. 
Other references Coode, 1982; Krebs & 
Ramiarantsoa, 1997; Missouri Botanical Gar-
den, undated; Rasoanaivo et al., 1999; Ratom-
pomalala, 1983. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON PENDULIFLORUS Hutch. 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 
1914(9): 337 (1914). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
penduliflorus occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
Nigeria and also in the Central African Repub-
lic and Gabon. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf infusion is taken 
to treat menstrual disorders. In Ghana a leaf 
infusion is externally applied to treat fever. In 
Nigeria a seed extract is taken to treat stomach 
complaints and uterine tumours and as an 
abortifacient. The seeds, mashed with cassava, 
are eaten as a purgative. 
The yellow wood is used to make rafters. 
Production and international trade In Ni-
geria the seeds are sold in the local markets. 
Also in Nigeria, a herbal laxative is made from 
CROTON 211 
the seeds of Croton penduliformis together 
with the leaves of Senna alata (L.) Roxh. In 
2006, this product was sold at US$ 30 on the 
internet, packaged in 30-capsule plastic con-
tainers. 
Properties The seed oil is purgative. It con-
tains crystals composed of equal amounts of 
palmitic, stearic and arachidic acids. Pen-
duliflaworosin, a furanoid diterpene, was iso-
lated from the roots. 
A petroleum ether extract of the seeds given 
orally to mice induced purgation and showed 
increased gastric emptying in rats. It also pro-
duced oedema in the stomach and mild in-
flammatory reactions in the intestines. In addi-
tion to its irritant effect, it produced pathologi-
cal lesions in several organs after chronic oral 
administration. Mice showed convulsions, pa-
ralysis and death after a dose of the crude seed 
oil. A petroleum ether seed extract showed 
significant dose-dependent contractions in iso-
lated guinea-pig ileum and rat uterus primar-
ily through a cholinergic mechanism. It also 
caused 100% foetal mortality by abortion in 
mice and rabbits during late pregnancy as well 
as foetal resorption during early pregnancy. 
Seed oil crystals administered orally to rats 
offered significant protection against gastric 
ulcers and duodenal ulcers at moderate doses. 
The crystals also significantly reduced pento-
barbitone-induced sleeping time in mice, thus 
stimulating their central nervous system, and 
reduced the intensity of the analgesic action of 
several opioids while prolonging their duration. 
Crude seed oil caused a reduction of the blood 
pressure in dogs. 
Botany Monoecious medium-sized tree up to 
25 m tall; branches almost glabrous. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules tiny; petiole 2-5.5 
cm long, glabrous; blade elliptical to ovate-
elliptical, 6-14 cm x 3.5-8 cm, base rounded to 
cuneate, with 2 glands on 2-3 mm long stalk, 
apex shortly and abruptly acuminate, margins 
toothed, glabrous to sparsely short-hairy. Inflo-
rescence an elongated terminal raceme 28-42 
cm long, pendulous, with many male flowers 
interspersed with few female flowers. Flowers 
unisexual, 5-merous, regular, white; pedicel c. 
4 mm long; male flowers with ovate sepals c. 
1.5 mm long, stellate hairy, petals obovate, c. 2 
mm long, upper margin woolly hairy, stamens 
12, free; female flowers with oblong to lanceo-
late sepals c. 2 mm long, petals absent, ovary 
superior, rounded, densely hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, apex 2-fid. Fruit an ellipsoid, slightly 
3-lobed capsule, pale green, hairy, 3-seeded. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Another medici-
nally used West African Croton is Croton nigri-
tanus Scott-Elliot; in Sierra Leone the crushed 
leaves are applied to sores. 
Ecology Croton penduliflorus occurs in low-
land forest, mostly in rocky or dry localities. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
penduliflorus is rather widespread but in many 
areas uncommon. However, there are no signs 
that it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton penduliflorus has several 
medicinal uses in West Africa, some of which 
have been confirmed by pharmacological re-
search. When used as a purgative, the seed oil 
should be taken with caution because it has 
toxic side-effects. Further research on the seed 
oil is warranted. 
Major references Asuzu, 2005; Asuzu & 
Chineme, 2006a; Asuzu & Chineme, 2006b; 
Keay, 1958a; Onunkwo, 2006. 
Other references Asuzu & Chineme, 1989; 
Asuzu, Gray & Waterman, 1988; Asuzu, Shetty 
& Anika, 1989; Asuzu, Shetty & Anika, 1990; 
Burkill, 1994; Kayode, 1981; Tra Bi, Kouamé & 
Traoré, 2005. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON SAKAMALIENSIS Leandri 
Protologue Ann. Inst. Bot.-Géol. Colon. 
Marseille sér. 5, 7(1): 54 (1939). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
sakamaliensis occurs in central and southern 
Madagascar. 
Uses An infusion of the stem bark of Croton 
sakamaliensis is taken to treat diarrhoea, 
cough and fever, and in larger amounts as a 
purgative to expel intestinal worms. 
Properties The plants contain essential oil, 
which shows significant antibacterial activity 
against a range of human intestinal pathogens. 
Botany Monoecious small shrub up to 1 m 
tall; stems covered with whitish scales. Leaves 
in whorls, simple, strongly scented; stipules 
small, soon falling; petiole c. 2 mm long; blade 
ovate to lanceolate, 1-1.5 cm x 0.5-1 cm, base 
rounded, with 2 small, yellow, sessile glands, 
apex rounded, stellate hairy above, beneath 
with whitish scales and small red glands. Inflo-
rescence a compact, terminal raceme c. 1 cm 
212 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
long with 4-5 male flowers at end and 2-3 fe-
male flowers at base. Flowers unisexual, 5-
merous; male flowers with short pedicel, sepals 
ovate, acute, petals thin, ciliate, stamens 15, 
free; female flowers with short pedicel c. 2 mm 
long, sepals small, margin membranaceous, 
petals rudimentary, ovary superior, rounded, 
3-lobed, yellowish hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, each 
deeply 2-fid. Fruit an ovoid 3-lobed capsule c. 4 
mm long, scaly hairy, 3-seeded. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. Almost 40 spe-
cies from Madagascar are used in medicine, 
and several of them resemble morphologically 
Croton sakamaliensis. A stem bark infusion of 
Croton bernierus Baill. and Croton isomonensis 
Leandri is taken to treat coughs. The aromatic 
leafy branches are used as mattress fillers to 
repel insects. A bark decoction of Croton stan-
neum Baill. is taken to treat venereal diseases. 
Croton stanneum is easy to propagate and 
sometimes planted in villages. The aromatic 
leafy branches of Croton trichotomus Geiseler 
are used in fumigation to chase insects in 
houses. 
Ecology Croton sakamaliensis occurs on 
rocky soils in valleys at 500—800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Croton sakamaliensis is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Croton sakamaliensis shows an-
tibacterial activities, but more information is 
needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Leandri, 1939; Rasoanaivo, 
Petitjean & Conan, 1993. 
Other references Missouri Botanical Gar-
den, undated; Rakotoniraini, 2004. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON SYLVATICUS Höchst, ex C.Krauss 
Protologue Flora 28: 82 (1845). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Croton oxypetalus Müll.Arg. 
(1864). 
Vernacular names Forest croton, fever 
tree, forest fever berry (En). Msinduzi (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
sylvaticus occurs from Guinea east to Ethiopia 
and south to Zimbabwe, Mozambique and 
Croton sylvaticus - wild 
South Africa (Natal). 
Uses In Central and East Africa a leaf infu-
sion is taken as a purgative, while in Gabon 
the seed and seed oil are taken as a strong 
purgative. A bark or root decoction is taken to 
treat tuberculosis, fever, digestive problems 
and abdominal pain. Charred, powdered bark 
is rubbed onto bleeding gums. In Kenya a stem 
bark extract is taken to treat malaria. In 
southern Africa a bark decoction is taken to 
treat rheumatism; bark powder is rubbed on 
cuts and inflammations. In South Africa the 
bark is used to treat abdominal disorders, 
dropsy, fever and uterus problems. The bark is 
also used as a fish poison. In cattle the pow-
dered bark is used as a remedy for gall bladder 
problems. In DR Congo wood scrapings are 
rubbed on the feet to treat elephantiasis. The 
pounded roots are used as poultice on swell-
ings. In East Africa a leaf decoction is used as a 
wash to treat oedema caused by kwashiorkor 
and tuberculosis. In South Africa the juice of 
young leaves is used to treat ear infections. A 
leaf poultice is externally applied to treat tu-
berculosis. 
In Zimbabwe Croton sylvaticus is sometimes 
cultivated as a garden ornamental. In Central 
and East Africa it is used as shade tree in cof-
fee plantations and other crops. Edible cater-
pillars feed on the leaves and the flowers are 
attractive to bees. It is a useful timber tree 
with soft, easily workable wood, which is used 
to make furniture, shelves, beehives, drums, 
tool handles, poles and fruit boxes. The wood 
burns even when green, and is also used to 
make charcoal. 
Production and international trade The 
CEOTON 213 
bark is one of the most commonly stocked 
products in Witwatersrand (South Africa). No 
information is available on amounts traded or 
prices. In 2006, 5 seeds were sold for about 
US$ 11 on the internet. 
Properties The seed contains an oil com-
posed of palmitic acid, stearic acid and linoleic 
acid; it also contains the rare tiglic acid (2-
methyl,2-butenoic acid or 2,3-dimethylacrylic 
acid). A glutarimide alkaloid isolated from the 
stem bark showed moderate toxicity in the 
brine shrimp test. The bark is strongly aro-
matic, and yields 2.7% tannins. Dichloro-
methane and methanol extracts of different 
parts of Croton sylvaticus show mutagenicity or 
DNA damage in in-vitro tests. Aqueous and 
methanol extracts of the stem bark showed 
anti-inflammatory and anti-oxidant activities 
in vitro. 
Description Monoecious, semi-deciduous 
shrub or small to medium-sized tree up to 25(-
40) m tall; bole cylindrical, up to 100 cm in 
diameter; bark smelling of black pepper, grey 
to greenish brown, smooth; inner bark pale 
brown with brown streaks; crown open; young 
twigs sparingly to densely stellate hairy, later 
almost glabrous and dark grey-brown. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules linear, up to 10 mm 
long, soon falling; petiole up to 7 cm long, 
thickened at both ends; blade ovate, elliptical-
ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 3-21 cm x 2-14 cm, 
base cuneate to rounded, with 2 stalked or ses-
sile glands, apex acuminate, margins glandu-
lar-toothed, young leaves stellate hairy, later 
almost glabrous on both sides. Inflorescence an 
upright, terminal raceme 6-21 cm long, with 
either only male or female flowers or mixed 
and then with male flowers in upper part and 
1-several female flowers at base. Flowers uni-
sexual, 5-merous; male flowers with pedicel 2 -
6 mm long, sepals elliptical-ovate to ovate-
lanceolate, 2-3 mm long, pale yellowish green, 
petals elliptical-lanceolate to oblong-lanceolate, 
2-3 mm long, whitish yellow to greenish 
cream, stamens 14-17, free; female flowers 
with pedicel 1-2 mm long, stout, sepals linear-
lanceolate, c. 3 mm long, whitish, petals absent 
or 5, linear, c. 2 mm long, greenish, ovary su-
perior, rounded, densely stellate hairy, 3-
celled, styles 3, 2-fid to base, 4-5 mm long, 
twisted and curved. Fruit a rounded to ellip-
soid drupe 9-11 mm x 7-10 mm, slightly 3-
lobed, partly or not dehiscent, stellate hairy, 
apex centrally depressed, salmon-pink, orange 
or yellow, 3-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, c. 6 mm x 
4-5 mm, flattened, whitish, aril white. Seed-
Croton sylvaticus - 1, flowering twig; 2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
ling with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Croton com-
prises about 1200 species and occurs through-
out the warmer regions of the world. It is best 
represented in the Americas; about 65 species 
occur in continental Africa and about 125 in 
Madagascar. 
Growth and development In Central Af-
rica Croton sylvaticus flowers from October-
December and fruits from January-May. The 
seeds are dispersed by birds, which feed on the 
fruits. 
Ecology Croton sylvaticus occurs in semi-
deciduous savanna, secondary forest and mixed 
evergreen forest, often on rocky slopes, in river 
gully forest and on rocky outcrops, from sea-
level up to 1700 m altitude. In Uganda it often 
occurs in old Eucalyptus plantations. It prefers 
light to deep shade, but survives in full sun. 
Propagation and planting Croton sylvati-
cus is propagated by seed or Wildlings. The 
fruits are collected before they open and placed 
in the sun to dry and open, after which the 
seeds are collected. The seeds need to be stored 
cool and dry. They are sown in containers in a 
mixture of river sand and compost (1:2), lightly 
214 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
covered with compost and kept moist. Germi-
nation occurs after 2-3 weeks. The seedlings 
are transplanted at the 2-leaf stage, either in 
the field or in plastic bags filled with river sand 
and compost (1:1). 
Management Croton sylvaticus is fast grow-
ing, and does not need particular care. 
Harvesting The bark, leaves and roots can 
be harvested whenever the need arises. Fruits 
can be harvested during 5-6 months per year. 
Handling after harvest The plant parts 
harvested are used fresh or dried and stored in 
a dry, cool place for later use. 
Genetic resources Croton sylvaticus is 
relatively common in many parts of tropical 
Africa, except in West Africa, where it is quite 
rare. It grows in several types of vegetation 
and is therefore not likely to be threatened by 
genetic erosion, except in localities where it has 
been overharvested. 
Prospects Croton sylvaticus has a wide 
range of local medicinal uses, especially its 
bark. Several laboratory tests showed toxicity 
but also pharmacological activity, and more 
research is needed to identify the active com-
pounds in order to evaluate its effective and 
safe use. 
Major references Baerts & Lehmann, 2006d: 
Elgorashi et al., 2002; Frum & Viljoen, 2006: 
Grace et al., 2002; Kapingu et al., 2005: 
Katende, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Kokwaro, 
1993; Latham, 2004; Moshi et al., 2004; Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Burkill, 
1994; Coates Palgrave, 1983; Grace et al., 2003; 
Léonard, 1962; Lovett et al., 2006; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Vieux & Kabele 
Ngiefu, 1970. 
Sources of illustration Léonard, 1962. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTON TIGLIUM L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 1004 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 10 
Vernacular names Purging croton, croton 
oil plant, croton (En). Croton cathartique (Fr). 
Crotone, crotone tiglio (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Croton 
tiglium originates from tropical Asia and China 
and has been introduced into many parts of the 
world, including several countries of tropical 
Africa, e.g. Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon and 
Sudan, but an exact distribution in Africa is 
not known. 
Uses The seed and seed oil have long been 
used in tropical Asia as a strong purgative, 
cathartic and poison. In Malaysia one seed is 
eaten as a purgative by adults and coconut 
milk is drunk to stop the effect. The lethal dose 
for an adult is about 4 seeds and for a horse 
about 15 seeds. The seed oil was formerly in-
cluded in several pharmacopoeias as a purga-
tive, but because the oil is not stable, it has 
proved unreliable and has therefore been ex-
cluded. The seed oil and bark were widely used 
in folk medicine as a remedy for cancerous 
sores and tumours, carbuncles, colds, dysen-
tery, fever, paralysis, scabies, schistosomiasis, 
snakebite, sore throat and toothache. The oil is 
a strong vesicant but diluted it can be em-
ployed as a counterirritant for various skin 
affections. Caution should be taken with all 
applications in view of its toxicity. 
In Ghana the seeds are known to be very poi-
sonous, and are used as fish poison or for 
criminal purposes. In Sudan the powdered 
seeds mixed with dates are eaten as a purga-
tive. In South-East Asia the root is used as an 
abortifacient and purgative. The leaves are 
mentioned as an ingredient of arrow poison 
and as a poultice to treat snakebites. 
An extract of the seed can be used as an insec-
ticide for field application and in stored cereals 
and pulses. The seed oil may also be used in 
the production of soap and candles. However, 
for illumination it can only be used outdoors as 
the smoke is toxic. Croton tiglium is grown in 
southern California as an ornamental. 
Production and international trade Roots, 
seeds and seed oil of Croton tiglium are locally 
traded in India and South-East Asia. Trade 
from Asia to Europe started in the 16th century 
and continued to be important until the begin-
ning of the 20th century. Recent trade statis-
tics, however, are lacking. Market value of 
seeds fluctuates considerably depending on 
demand. 
Properties All plant parts are toxic, but 
only the seeds have been chemically analysed 
in detail. The seed contains 30-45% of a fixed 
oil named croton oil and about 20% protein. 
The composition of the oil varies with the 
method of extraction. The oil comprises the 
fatty acids oleic acid 37%, linoleic acid 19%, 
myristic acid 7.5%, arachidic acid 1.5%, 
palmitic acid 1%, formic acid 1%, acetic acid 
0.5%, stearic acid 0.5% and smaller amounts of 
butyric acid, lauric acid, tiglic acid and valeric 
acid. The oil also contains a group of proteins 
CROTON 215 
called 'crotin', about 3.5% croton resin ('cro-
tonol'), a glucoside called crotonoside (isogua-
nosine), and a non-volatile unsaturated fatty 
acid responsible for the purgative properties. 
Croton oil causes severe inflammation on the 
skin; it is commonly used in laboratory tests to 
induce oedema in test animals. The names 
crotonol and crotin are also used for other 
chemical compounds. 
Crotin is a mixture of the toxic proteins croton 
globulin and croton albumin. It has haemolytic 
and blood coagulant properties with a delayed 
poisonous effect. In humans erythrocytes are 
merely deformed and rapid antibody formation 
is induced. The vesicant and irritant properties 
of the seed oil are mainly due to croton resin, 
which contains esters of long-chain fatty acids 
and the diterpene phorbol. Such phorbol esters 
also show paradoxical biological activity, some 
being strongly co-carcinogenic, others having 
anti-cancer activity. 12-O-tetradecanoylphor-
bol-13-acetate is a standard tumour-promoting 
agent; several others are well-established 
causal agents of nasopharyngeal cancer as they 
can activate Epstein-Barr viruses. On the other 
hand, phorbol 12-tiglate-13-decanoate exhibits 
inhibitory activity against P-388 lymphocytic 
leukaemia in mice; 12-0-acetylphorbol-13-deca-
noate and 12-0-decanoylphorbol-13-2-methyl-
butyrate potently inhibit the HIV-1-induced 
cytopathic effect on MT-4 cells without activat-
ing protein kinase C. Crotonoside shows cyto-
toxic effect against several tumour cell lines in 
vitro and in vivo in mice as well. 
Aqueous extracts of latex and stem bark 
showed molluscicidal activity against the 
freshwater snails Lymnaea acuminata and 
Indoplanorbis exustus; at high doses these ex-
tracts were also lethal to the freshwater fish 
Channa punctatus. 
The seed cake retains its toxicity and is thus 
not suitable for cattle feed. 
Botany Monoecious, evergreen shrub or 
small tree up to 6(-12) m tall; young branches 
sparsely stellate hairy, soon glabrous. Leaves 
alternate, almost opposite at the end of shoots, 
simple; stipules up to 3.5 mm long; petiole up 
to 2.5(-6.5) cm long; blade ovate to ovate-
lanceolate, 5-17 cm x 2.5-9.5 cm, base cuneate 
to broadly rounded with 2 stalked or sessile 
glands, apex obtuse to acuminate, margins 
shallowly toothed to almost entire, glabrous, 
metallic green to bronze or orange, sparsely 
hairy beneath. Inflorescence an axillary or 
terminal raceme 5—7 cm long, with male flow-
ers in upper half and female flowers in lower 
Croton tiglium - 1, flowering and fruiting twig; 
2, female flower in longitudinal section; 3, male 
flower in longitudinal section. 
Source: PROSEA 
half. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous; pedicel 2—4 
mm long; sepals triangular to ovate, c. 2 mm 
long, hairy; male flowers with elliptical-
lanceolate petals c. 2 mm long, whitish, sta-
mens 15-20, free; female flowers with petals 
lacking, ovary superior, rounded, c. 2 mm long, 
densely stellate hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, deeply 
2-fid, c. 4 mm long. Fruit an oblong-obovoid to 
slightly 3-lobed capsule 2-2.5 cm long, dull 
yellow, roughly stellate hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ellipsoid-trigonous, c. 9 mm x 6 mm, greyish 
brown. 
Croton comprises about 1200 species and oc-
curs throughout the warmer regions of the 
world. It is best represented in the Americas; 
about 65 species occur in continental Africa 
and about 125 in Madagascar. 
Ecology Croton tiglium occurs in a wide 
range of vegetation and soil types, up to 1500 
m altitude. In tropical Africa it is usually 
planted around villages. It tolerates an annual 
rainfall of 600-1200 mm, an annual tempera-
ture of 21-27.5°C and a soil pH of 4.5-7.5. 
Management Croton tiglium is propagated 
from stem cuttings or seed. There are about 
216 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
4150 seeds/kg. It may be grown as a pure crop 
or as an intercrop with cacao or coffee, provid-
ing some shade. Plants start flowering after 1.5 
years, and seed yield in the 3rd year may be 
200-750 kg seed/ha, and in the 6th year 750-
1000C-2000) kg/ha, when the plant is full-
bearing. Seeds ripen in November and Decem-
ber in South-East Asia, and should be collected 
before the fruits open. Croton tiglium is at-
tacked by several fungi, and also by root-knot 
nematodes. 
Genetic resources and breeding Croton 
tiglium has a wide distribution from India to 
Papua New Guinea, and is also cultivated. It is 
therefore not threatened by genetic erosion. As 
virtually nothing is known about the distribu-
tion of Croton tiglium in tropical Africa, it is 
not known whether it is genetically diverse 
there. 
Prospects The seed oil of Croton tiglium is 
commonly used in laboratories throughout the 
world for its vesicant properties. The phorbol 
esters isolated from the oil also have interest-
ing tumour-promoting or tumour-inhibiting 
properties, and although much research has 
been done, more is needed to elucidate their 
future potential. As the other parts of the plant 
are poisonous as well, it might be worthwhile 
investigating their chemistry and pharmacol-
ogy. A large number of pharmaceutical applica-
tions of Croton tiglium are being patented in 
China. The extensive ongoing research may 
lead to new developments elsewhere too. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; El Mek-
kawy et al., 1999; Neuwinger, 2000; Philcox, 
1997; van Weizen & Esser, 2001. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Duke, 1983; 
El Amin, 1989; El Mekkawy et al., 2000; 
Hecker & Schmidt, 1974; Kim et al., 1994; Na-
kamura, 2004; van Duuren & Sivak, 1968; 
Yadav et al., 2006. 
Sources of illustration van Weizen & 
Esser, 2001. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CROTONOGYNE PREUSSII Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 23: 524 (1897). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Cro-
tonogyne preussii occurs in southern Nigeria, 
Cameroon and the Central African Republic. 
Uses In eastern Cameroon an infusion of the 
aerial parts is taken to treat diarrhoea. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 8 
m tall; young branches with stellate and scaly 
hairs. Leaves alternate, crowded at apex of 
branches, simple and entire; stipules small, 
persistent; petiole up to 2 cm long; blade linear 
to oblanceolate, up to 55 cm x 13 cm, base cor-
date-auricled, with 2 large glands, apex acumi-
nate, pinnately veined. Male inflorescence a 
sessile, erect, axillary raceme up to 60 cm long, 
many-flowered; female inflorescence a few-
flowered fascicle. Flowers unisexual, greenish 
yellow or white; male flowers with pedicel 
longer than calyx, calyx split irregularly into 
2-3 lobes, covered with scaly hairs, petals c. 5, 
free, stamens 7-19, free; female flowers larger 
than male ones, pedicel stout, sepals 5, petals 
5, ovary superior, 3-celled, styles 3, free, each 
divided into 3-8 filiform threads. Fruit a 3-
lobed capsule c. 1 cm in diameter, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, c. 8 mm long, brown. 
Crotonogyne comprises 16 species and occurs in 
the forest zone from Liberia to DR Congo. Ac-
cording to the Ebrié people of Côte d'Ivoire, all 
parts of Crotonogyne strigosa Prain are very 
poisonous, and there is no antidote against it. 
Ecology Crotonogyne preussii occurs in rain-
forest at low altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding Crotono-
gyne preussii is relatively common in its distri-
bution area and there are no signs that it is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Crotonogyne preussii will proba-
bly remain a medicinal plant of local impor-
tance only. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Govaerts, 
Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 2000. 
Other references Keay, 1958a; Léonard, 
1962; Stäuble, 1986. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
CYNOGLOSSUM COERULEUM DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 10: 148 (1846). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number 2rt = 24 
Synonyms Cynoglossum geometricum Baker 
& C.H.Wright (1905). 
Origin and geographic distribution Cy-
noglossum coeruleum is fairly widespread in 
Central, East and southern Africa. 
Uses In Kenya the vapour of crushed leaves 
of Cynoglossum coeruleum is inhaled to treat 
fever and influenza and crushed leaves are 
rubbed on scorpion sting wounds. A decoction 
of the leaves is drunk during delivery for quick 
removal of the placenta. A decoction made from 
DALECHAMPIA 217 
pounded and soaked roots is drunk by preg-
nant women to relieve abdominal pain. In 
southern Africa the crushed plants are applied 
to wounds as a plaster and the whole plant is 
used as a medicine for colic. In DR Congo it is 
used as a vermifuge specifically against tape-
worm. In Kenya it is reportedly grazed by live-
stock. 
Properties Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are 
common constituents of the Boraginaceae and 
Asteraceae and the Papilionoid genus Crotala-
ria. They are derived from amino acids includ-
ing ornithine. Many pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
have pronounced hepatic toxicity, but the lungs 
and other organs may be affected as well. 
Mutagenic and carcinogenic activities of pyrrol-
izidine alkaloids have been reported. 
No specific analyses of the properties of Cy-
noglossum coeruleum are known. Several other 
Cynoglossum species are highly toxic for horses 
and cattle, mainly during the rosette stage, due 
to the presence of pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Two 
pyrrolizidine alkaloids have been recorded 
from another African species, Cynoglossum 
lanceolatum Forssk.: cynaustraline and cy-
naustine, and five from the Asian and Ameri-
can Cynoglossum amabile Stapf & 
J.R.Drumm.: supinine, amabiline, rinderine, 
echinatine and 3'-0-acetylechinatine. Cy-
noglossum officinale L., a native of Europe and 
western temperate Asia and an introduced 
weed in the United States, is by far the most 
comprehensively studied species of the genus. 
Botany Perennial, biennial or annual herb 
up to 120 cm tall, very densely hairy on young 
parts, usually with thick woody taproot. Leaves 
alternate, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 2-10 cm long in basal leaves, upper 
leaves sessile; blade narrowly ovate, elliptical-
oblong, linear-oblong or oblanceolate, basal 
ones 8—21(-30) cm x 1-6 cm, rough with short 
adpressed hairs from white cystolith dots, apex 
acute. Inflorescence an axillary or terminal 
scorpioid cyme, simple, dichasial or trifid, 
without bracts. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous; corolla blue or pinkish mauve, tube c. 
2 mm long. Fruit consisting of 4 compressed 
ovoid nutlets, (2.5-)3.5-4 mm long, reddish, 
covered all over by barbed hairs. 
Cynoglossum comprises about 50 species, and 
has a worldwide distribution. Cynoglossum 
coeruleum is variable and several subspecies 
are distinguished. Intermediates between Cy-
noglossum coeruleum and Cynoglossum lanceo-
latum occur, making a distinction between 
species complicated. Cynoglossum lanceolatum 
is used in Ethiopia as a febrifuge and leaves 
are added to soup in Nigeria. In Vietnam, it is 
considered diuretic. Cynoglossum monophle-
bium Baker is an endemic of Madagascar and 
is used as an antirheumatic. Cynoglossum 
amabile has been introduced in East Africa as 
an ornamental and has become naturalized in 
parts of Tanzania. It is used in traditional Chi-
nese medicine to treat cough, scrofula and to 
stop bleeding of wounds. 
Ecology Cynoglossum coeruleum occurs in a 
wide variety of habitats such as (overgrazed) 
grassland, bushland, evergreen forest and as a 
weed in fields at 750-3150(-3650) m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Germ-
plasm collections of Cynoglossum do not exist. 
This fairly widespread species of various habi-
tats is not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Little is known about the proper-
ties of Cynoglossum coeruleum. Studies of re-
lated species report interesting properties, e.g. 
wound healing and antibacterial activities. 
Research on these aspects in Africa is desir-
able, and might enhance the medicinal impor-
tance in the region. Improvements in the taxo-
nomie classification are considered only possi-
ble after detailed study of the taxa in both Af-
rica and India. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Giday et 
al., 2003; Lugt & Lemmens, 2003; van Dam, 
Verpoorte & van der Meijden, 1994; Verdcourt, 
1991. 
Other references Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Chifundera, 2001; Iwu, 1993; 
Jansen, 1981; Kokwaro, 1993; Suri, Sawhney & 
Atal, 1975; Taton, 1971. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
DALECHAMPIA IPOMOEIFOLIA Benth. 
Protologue Hook., Niger FL: 500 (1849). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Dale-
champia ipomoeifolia occurs from Sierra Leone 
east to Ethiopia, Uganda and Tanzania. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire the flowering aerial 
parts are applied topically to calm costal and 
rheumatic pain. 
Botany Monoecious, twining shrub up to 7 
m tall; stems thinly hairy. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules linear to linear-lanceolate, up 
to 1 cm long; petiole up to 10 cm long; blade 
triangular-ovate, 4—12 cm x 2—7 cm, sometimes 
shallowly or deeply 3-lobed, base cordate, 
glands 1.5 mm long, apex acute to acuminate, 
218 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
margins almost ent i re to glandular-toothed, 
short -hairy benea th . Inflorescence axillary or 
te rmina l on la teral shoots, with peduncle up to 
14 cm long, flowers densely crowded in a male 
and female part , subtended by 2 large, t r iangu-
lar-ovate bracts , 2-3.5 cm x 1.5-3 cm, these 5-
veined from the base and pale green to yellow-
ish; male par t of inflorescence a 14-20-flowered 
compound cyme, sur rounded by an involucre 5— 
6 mm in diameter , on 4 - 5 mm long peduncle, a 
central mass of fused bracts a t base, covered 
with resin; female inflorescence an almost ses-
sile 3-flowered cyme, subtended by 2 - 3 t r ans -
versely ovate bracts c. 2 mm x 3.5 mm. Flowers 
unisexual ; petals and disk absent; pedicel 1-2 
m m long, in female flowers extending to 1.2 
cm; male flowers with 4-6 , elliptical-ovate se-
pals c. 2 m m long, pale yellow, s t amens 10-20; 
female flowers with 6 pinnatifid sepals c. 2.5 
mm long, extending to 1 cm in fruit, with 6 
pai rs of l inear la te ra l lobes, densely stiff ha i ry 
a t margins , ha i r s white and ur t icant , ovary 
superior, 3-lobed, short-hairy, 3-celled, style up 
to 7 m m long, broadened a t apex. Frui t a 3-
lobed capsule c. 5 m m x 8 mm, short-hairy, 
grey or brownish, 3-seeded. Seeds spherical, c. 
3 mm in diameter , brown, grey-mottled. 
Dalechampia comprises about 120 species and 
occurs throughout the tropics, bu t is best rep-
resented in tropical America, especially Brazil. 
In cont inental tropical Africa 7 species occur, 
and in Madagascar 9 species. The crushed 
fresh leaves and roots of Dalechampia clemati-
difolia Baill. from Madagascar are vesicant 
and are applied to s tubborn ulcers. The aerial 
pa r t s a re used to dye Raphia cloth black. Most 
Dalechampia spp. are pollinated by bees, which 
use t he t r i te rpene resin produced in the inflo-
rescence in nest construction. 
E c o l o g y Dalechampia ipomoeifolia is mainly 
found a t forest margins , up to 1200 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Dale-
champia ipomoeifolia has a large a rea of dis-
t r ibut ion and is relatively common; it is there-
fore not likely to be th rea tened by genetic ero-
sion. 
P r o s p e c t s Dalechampia ipomoeifolia will 
r emain of local importance only as a medicinal 
plant . Nothing is known about i ts active com-
pounds. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Burkill , 1994; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1987. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Armbrus te r & Steiner, 
1992; Perne t & Meyer, 1957; Stäuble, 1986. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
D A T U R A M E T E L L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pl. 1: 179 (1753). 
F a m i l y Solanaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 24, 48 
S y n o n y m s Datura fastuosa L. (1759). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Downy thorn apple, 
metel thorn apple, metel (En). Métel, stra-
moine métel, concombre diable, concombre à 
chien, t rompet te de la mort (Fr). Cornucopia, 
trombetäo-roxo, t rombeta do juizo, burbiaca 
(Po). M n a n a h a , mnawha , m n a r a h a , m r a n a h a , 
mvundovundo wa chamboni, m u r a n h a (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Datura 
metel is nat ive to the Americas and h a s been 
introduced from the re throughout t he tropics 
and subtropics. It is probably grown through-
out tropical Africa as an ornamenta l . It is 
documented as a na tura l ized weed in many 
African countries bu t is probably seriously un-
der-reported. 
U s e s Datura metel and Datura stramonium 
L. have largely similar medicinal uses 
throughout the world. In tropical Africa as well 
as in Asia the most widely documented use of 
Datura metel is for relieving a s thma , cough, 
tuberculosis and bronchit is by smoking the 
dried leaves, roots or flowers as a cigaret te or 
in a pipe. These ' a s thma cigaret tes ' have been 
shown to be very effective in some cases, bu t in 
other cases they h a d little or no effect. Ciga-
re t tes made with the leaves are also used to 
t r ea t Parkinson 's disease. Widespread is also 
the use of different p lant pa r t s in various 
prepara t ions for sedat ing pa t ien ts with menta l 
disorders. In Africa other t radi t ional uses of 
the leaves include the t r ea tmen t of haemor-
rhoids, boils, sores, skin diseases, rheumat i sm, 
Datura metel - naturalized 
DATURA 219 
headache, toothache, cholera, parasites such as 
ringworm and guinea worm, and as an aborti-
facient and anaesthetic. In Senegal, Guinea, 
Ghana and Nigeria crushed leaves are applied 
as poultices on inflammatory swellings and 
rheumatic joints. In Ghana a decoction of the 
leaves is used as eye drops to cure conjunctivi-
tis and other eye complaints. In Nigeria dried 
leaves are mixed with salt and pepper and 
burnt to treat asthma. In Ethiopia the seed oil 
is used for massaging painful body parts. In 
Asia Datura metel has similar medicinal appli-
cations, and it is used additionally to treat hy-
drophobia, epilepsy, convulsion, syphilis, in-
flammation of the breasts, smallpox, mumps 
and leprosy. 
Datura metel is also widely used as a pesticide. 
Seeds mixed with sorghum flour are used as 
poison bait for rats. Plant extracts have been 
used successfully against caterpillar pests in 
forestry, cotton pathogens and domestic vermin 
such as fleas and jigger, and to reduce insect 
damage in stored wheat and maize. They are 
useful to control the root knot nematode, 
Meloidogyne javanica. In Tanzania an extract 
made from the roots is sprinkled in houses to 
repel snakes. 
In Africa Datura metel has ritual uses in many 
countries, e.g. in initiation rites in Nigeria and 
Mozambique. Most commonly the leaves are 
smoked, or they are boiled and eaten; seeds are 
similarly used. Roots, seeds or leaves are added 
to alcoholic drinks to increase the intoxicating 
effect. Side effects include dry mouth and 
throat, eye pain, blurred vision, restlessness, 
dizziness, cardiac arrythmia, flushing and 
faintness. An overdose will cause headache, 
nausea, vomiting and affect the central nerv-
ous system causing symptoms including disori-
entation, hallucinations, euphoria, inappropri-
ate affect, short-term memory loss and coma. 
The seeds are also used for criminal purposes. 
Hospital admissions and fatalities, most often 
of adolescents, are not uncommon. It is for this 
reason that several countries including France 
have removed datura cigarettes from the 
Pharmacopoeia in 1992. 
Datura metel is commonly cultivated as an 
ornamental, particularly types with double 
flowers and purple flowers. In East Africa the 
leaves are used to dye cloth green. In Ethiopia 
the seed oil is rubbed into fresh hides as a first 
step in the curing process. 
Production and international trade No 
trade statistics are available for Datura metel, 
although it is occasionally used for industrial 
extraction of tropane alkaloids. At the begin-
ning of the 1980s the market prices of scopola-
mine hydrobromide and hyoscyamine sulphate 
were approximately US$ 850/kg and US$ 
470/kg, respectively. 
Properties The leaves of Datura metel con-
tain 0.2-0.6% tropane alkaloids, the flowers 
0.1-1.0% and the seeds 0.2-0.5%. In tetraploid 
plants alkaloid content is almost double that of 
diploid plants. Scopolamine (= hyoscine) is the 
major constituent in mature leaves (up to 75% 
of the total alkaloid content). Other alkaloids 
are hyoscyamine (= (—)-hyoscyamine or (-)-
atropine), norhyoscyamine, norscopolamine, 
hydroxy-6-hyoscyamine and meteloidine. Al-
though atropine (= (-t-)-atropine or (+)-
hyoscyamine) has often been reported to be 
present in Datura spp., it is unclear whether it 
is really a natural product or an artefact ob-
tained during isolation. Scopolamine and 
hyoscyamine are anticholinergics. They act by 
competitively and reversibly inhibiting the 
neuro-transmitter acetylcholine from binding 
to its muscarinic receptors and this antago-
nism leads to sympathomimetic-like effects in 
the organs. They increase the heart rate, in-
duce relaxation and motor inhibition in smooth 
muscles, decrease secretions, and induce dila-
tion of the pupils of the eyes. Although at low 
doses their action tends to be depressant and 
sedative, at high doses they cause substantial 
excitation: agitation, disorientation, exagger-
ated reflexes, hallucinations, delirium, mental 
confusion and insomnia. Hyoscyamine is used 
to provide symptomatic relief of various gastro-
intestinal disorders including spasms, peptic 
ulcers, irritable bowel syndrome, pancreatitis, 
colic and inflammation of the bladder. It has 
also been used to relieve some heart problems, 
to reduce excess saliva production and control 
some of the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. 
Scopolamine is used in ophthalmology to dilate 
pupils, as an analgesic and to prevent motion 
sickness. 
In-vitro production of scopolamine and 
hyoscyamine is feasible, though uneconomical. 
Cultures of hairy roots of Datura metel are the 
most productive. The growth and production of 
hyoscyamine and scopolamine in in-vitro root 
cultures was encouraged by using Gamborg's 
B5 liquid medium with half-strength salts. In 
this medium the excretion of scopolamine rose 
from 8.7% to 70%. Biomass and alkaloid pro-
duction also increased when the permeabilizing 
agent Tween 20 was added for 24 hours after 2 
and 4 weeks of culture. After 4 weeks, biomass 
220 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
yield was 2.3 mg/1 per day and scopolamine 
yield 0.84 mg/1 per day. 
Several withanolides have been identified from 
the flowers and aerial parts of Datura metel, 
some of these with cytotoxic activity. 
The seed of Datura metel contains about 16% 
oil with an approximate fatty acid composition 
of palmitic acid 14%, oleic acid 30% and linoleic 
acid 52%. The oil also contains considerable 
quantities of sterols (about 13.4 g/kg) and toco-
pherols (about 3.4 g/kg) which are considered 
to be of medicinal interest. 
Adulterations and substitutes Tropane 
alkaloids similar to those found in Datura are 
known from several other Solanaceae (e.g. 
hyoscyamine and scopolamine in Atropa bella-
donna L. and Hyoscyamus spp.). Scopolamine 
is found in high quantity in Duboisia spp., 
which are used for industrial production in 
Australia. 
Description Annual or short-lived perennial 
erect herb up to 2 m tall, often much-branched; 
stem short-hairy to glabrous. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules absent; petiole up to 16 cm 
long; blade ovate to often slightly angular, 4-25 
cm x 2-20 cm, base cuneate, rounded or trun-
cate, apex acute to acuminate or obtuse, mar-
gin entire to coarsely toothed, with or without 
Datura metel - 1, stem with flowers and young 
fruit; 2, fruit; 3, seeds. 
Source: PROSEA 
prickles and stellate hairs, pinnately veined. 
Flowers axillary, solitary, rarely paired, bisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 5-11 mm long, 
up to 20 mm long in fruit; calyx tubular, 4-7.5 
cm long, lobes almost equal, 0.5-2.5 cm long; 
corolla trumpet-shaped to tubular, 12-19 cm 
long, white, yellow, violet or purplish; stamens 
inserted above the middle of the corolla tube, 
alternate with corolla lobes, included, fila-
ments short and thick, anthers yellow; ovary 
superior, 2-6-celled, style slender, up to 13(— 
17) cm long, stigma small, 2-lobed. Fruit an 
upright or nodding, ovoid or almost globose 
capsule up to 4 cm x 3.5 cm, reddish brown to 
purplish, spines few to many, stout, conical, 
usually many-seeded. Seeds almost D-shaped, 
flattened, 4-6 mm x 4-5 mm x c. 1.5 mm, 
white, yellowish brown or brown. Seedling with 
epigeal germination; cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Other botanical information Datura 
comprises about 10 species, which all origi-
nated in the New World; most species have 
been introduced throughout the world. Datura 
metel belongs to section Dutra and is easily 
confused with other Datura spp., especially 
Datura inoxia Mill., but the latter species is 
characterized by the long, soft spines on the 
fruit and the short-hairy stem and leaves. It is 
practically impossible to separate ethnobotani-
cal records on the 2 species, also in Africa, and 
they probably have similar medicinal uses. 
Brugmansia is considered here as a separate 
genus, although it is often treated as a section 
of Datura (section Brugmansia). It mainly dif-
fers in its habit (a woody, comparatively long-
lived shrub or small tree), its mode of growth 
(reproducing vegetatively by root suckers), its 
pendulous or inclined flowers open throughout 
anthesis for 4-6 days with spathe-like, not 
circumscissile calyx and long pedicel, and its 
fruit being a usually indéhiscent, unarmed 
berry. Chemically, Datura and Brugmansia are 
similar, and consequently they have similar 
medicinal applications. However, the primary 
use of the Brugmansia species is ornamental. 
Growth and development Only the basal 
part of the stem remains vegetative; flowering 
occurs on the branched part of the plant and 
branches do not resume vegetative growth af-
ter flowering and fruiting. The flowers are 
closed during the day and open in the evening, 
and are reported to be pollinated by hawk 
moths and to be largely self fertile. 
In studies in India it was found that mature 
leaves of about the middle of the stems of Da-
tura metel had the maximum alkaloid content, 
DATURA 221 
and that very young fruits possessed a higher 
content of alkaloids than older fruits. In Da-
tura metel grown experimentally in Iran, the 
highest scopolamine concentrations were found 
in the stems (0.3%) and young leaves (0.25%) of 
6-week-old plants and in the roots (0.2%) of 16-
week-old plants. 
Ecology Datura metel is locally abundant in 
waste places, roadsides, brushwood, open 
grassland, teak forest and on river banks, from 
sea-level up to 1000 m altitude. It tolerates 
various soil types but prefers clayey or loamy 
soils. Datura metel, often with a double and 
purplish corolla, is widely cultivated in gar-
dens. 
Propagation and planting Datura metel is 
generally cultivated from seed sown either 
directly in the field or in a nursery bed. Soak-
ing seed overnight improves germination. Per 
ha, 7-8 kg of seed is needed. Seed starts ger-
minating after about 2 weeks, and germination 
is complete after one month. If the seed is sown 
in a nursery, seedlings are transplanted when 
8-12 cm tall. Normal spacing is 70-100 cm. 
Management Weeding and thinning of a 
direct sown crop should be done when the 
plants are about 10 cm tall; a second weeding 
is done one month later. Irrigation may be nec-
essary and should be done at intervals of 10-15 
days. 
Diseases and pests Datura metel is a host 
for many diseases and pests that affect solana-
ceous crops. It can be infected by wilt and root 
rot caused by the fungus Sclerotium rolfsii, 
root rot caused by the fungus Corticium solani 
(synonym: Thanatephorus cucumeris) and by 
several virus diseases that cause symptoms 
like leaf curl, retarded growth and yellowing of 
leaves. Alternaria crassa, a fungus that causes 
leaf spot and can kill Datura spp., has not yet 
been reported from tropical Africa. 
Harvesting When flowering starts, about 4 
months after sowing, tender branches and 
leaves are harvested. Several more harvests 
are possible at intervals of 1-2 months. Fruits 
are harvested when ripe. 
Yield In Nigeria the total alkaloid content of 
Datura metel has been shown to peak in the 
hot and dry season, and it was lowest in the 
rainy season. In India, yields per ha of 10.5-
14.5 t of fresh plant material and 750-1200 kg 
of seed of Datura metel have been reported. 
Handling after harvest The tender 
branches and leaves are dried in the shade. 
Fruits are dried in the sun till they dehisce. 
The seeds are separated by threshing and after 
further drying packed for transport. 
Genetic resources Datura metel has an 
extremely wide geographical distribution, pre-
fers anthropogenic habitats and is therefore 
not liable to genetic erosion. 
Breeding In order to develop industrial 
plantations for alkaloid extraction, research 
should focus on breeding for a high alkaloid 
content, combined with the development of 
proper means of vegetative propagation. In 
India some improved cultivars have been re-
leased. Producing and selecting interspecific 
hybrids of Datura for high scopolamine produc-
tion, succesfully done with Brugmansia in Ec-
uador, is promising. 
Prospects Although the tropane alkaloids 
scopolamine, hyoscyamine and atropine can be 
prepared synthetically, it is more economical to 
extract them from plants such as Datura spp. 
However, Atropa, Duboisia and Hyoscyamus 
species are the major sources of raw materials. 
On the world market of pure tropane alkaloids, 
it will be difficult for African producers to com-
pete with producers in China, India and Aus-
tralia. 
Major references Afsharypuor, Mostajeran 
& Mokhtary, R., 1995; Burkill, 2000; Braun et 
a l , 1991; Goncalves, 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Prasad et al., 2005; Sri Hartati, Imastini Dinu-
riah & Blomqvist, 1999. 
Other references Blomqvist, 1997; Braun 
et al., 1991; Debnath, Malik & Bisen, 2006; 
Fortin, Lô & Maynart, 1990; Gupta, Bagchi & 
Ray, 1991; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoon-
doyal, 1997; Hadkins et a l , 1997; Kitagawa et 
a l , 2000; Levy & Regalado, 1991; Pan, Wang & 
Hu, 2007; Ramadan, Zayed & El Shamy, 2007; 
Roddick, 1991; Sarin, 1982; Sobti & Kaul, 
1982; Zayed, Wink & El Shamy, 2006. 
Sources of illustration Sri Hartati, 
Imastini Dinuriah & Blomqvist, 1999. 
Authors O.O. Nuga & M.P. Setshogo 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
DATURA STRAMONIUM L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 179 (1753). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number In = 24 
Vernacular names Thorn apple, green 
thorn apple, Jimson weed, Jamestown weed, 
devil's apple, devil's trumpet, stramonium 
(En). Pomme épineuse, stramoine, datura, 
feuille du diable, herbe du diable (Fr). Figueira 
222 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
do inferno, pomo espinhoso, erva dos bruxos, 
palha verde, estramonio (Po). Muranha (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Datura 
stramonium is native to the Americas and has 
been introduced in many tropical, subtropical 
and even temperate regions. It is a naturalized 
weed in many African countries, but is proba-
bly seriously under-reported. 
Uses Datura stramonium and Datura metel 
L. have largely similar medicinal uses 
throughout the world. The most widely known 
use of Datura stramonium and of other Datura 
species is for relieving asthma, cough, tubercu-
losis and bronchitis by smoking the dried 
leaves, roots or flowers. 'Asthma cigarettes' 
have been shown to be very effective in some 
cases, but in other cases they had little or no 
effect. Cigarettes made with the leaves are also 
used to treat Parkinson's disease. A decoction 
or infusion of leaves is given as a sedative to 
mental and schizophrenic patients. The leaves 
are applied as a dressing to cure rheumatic 
pain, swellings, wounds, gout, burns, ingrown 
toe-nails, fungal infections, tumours and ul-
cers. Dried pulverized leaves are dusted on 
wounds or applied after mixing the powder 
with fat or Vaseline. 
In DR Congo pounded fresh root and fresh 
leaves are soaked in water and the liquid is 
given in enema as an abortifacient. In Zim-
babwe a hot poultice of leaves and roots is ap-
plied to goitre. A leaf infusion is drunk to treat 
venereal diseases; to cure ulcers the skin is 
washed with an infusion of roots and leaves. In 
Burundi leaf ash is eaten as a cure for whoop-
ing cough. In Rwanda a leaf infusion is taken 
as an antispasmodic and to reduce stomach 
acidity. In Kenya dried and ground leaves and 
Datura stramonium - naturalized 
seeds are eaten mixed with fat to treat ring-
worm. Headache is relieved by rubbing the 
scalp with leaves or leaf sap. Hair loss is coun-
tered by applying fruit sap or leaf pulp and 
these also serve to remedy dandruff. In Ethio-
pia pieces of young fruit are sucked against 
tonsillitis and sore throat and applied to ab-
scesses and swollen glands. In Kenya and Le-
sotho the fruit is heated in hot ash and after 
cooling juice is squeezed and used as ear drops 
to treat earache. In Zimbabwe an infusion of 
fruit ash is drunk to treat stomach-ache. In 
Ethiopia the smoke of burning seeds is inhaled 
to relieve toothache, while in Kenya fresh 
green fruit is applied for this purpose. In Na-
mibia a leaf extract is administered to cows to 
ensure a rapid expulsion of the afterbirth and 
pulped roots are mixed with water and given to 
cattle to cure lung diseases. The dried leaves 
and seeds of Datura stramonium are included 
in the pharmacopoeias of many Western coun-
tries as an antispasmodic and for treatment of 
asthma, whooping cough and Parkinson's dis-
ease. 
The narcotic use of Datura stramonium varies 
between cultures. In Central and South Amer-
ica hallucinogenic uses are common among 
native tribes. In Africa, before they enter fight-
ing contests, young men of the Fulfulde people 
of the border area of Niger and Nigeria are 
served drinks containing Datura seeds. This 
increases their courage and pain tolerance. The 
leaves are most commonly used as a narcotic, 
either smoked or boiled and eaten; seeds are 
similarly used. Roots, seeds or leaves are added 
to alcoholic drinks to increase the intoxicating 
effect. Side effects include dry mouth and 
throat, eye pain, blurred vision, restlessness, 
dizziness, arrythmia, flushing and faintness. 
An overdose will cause headache, nausea, vom-
iting and affect the central nervous system 
causing disorientation, hallucinations, eupho-
ria, inappropriate affect, short-term memory 
loss and coma. The seeds are also used for 
criminal purposes. Hospital admissions and 
fatalities, most often of adolescents, are not 
uncommon. It is for this reason that several 
countries including France have removed da-
tura cigarettes from the Pharmacopoeia in 
1992. 
Reports on the use of the plant as an insecti-
cide vary from good control of aphids in crops 
in Namibia to no effects in Australia. In East 
Africa the leaves yield a green dye that is used 
to dye cloth; in Lesotho the twigs yield a blue-
green dye that is used for house decoration. In 
DATURA 223 
Ethiopia the plant has been used to tattoo the 
gums, partly as a treatment of gingivitis or 
dental decay. The stems are used as firewood. 
In Kenya the seed oil is used as massage oil. 
Production and international trade In 
tropical Africa Datura stramonium is mainly 
used locally, but it is important for the interna-
tional pharmaceutical industry. For example, 
in France 20-30 t of leaves were used around 
1990 to produce anti-asthma and antispasm 
medicines and medicines against Parkinson's 
disease. There are many brand names for 
hyoscyamine and atropine on the world mar-
ket. 
Properties The concentration of total alka-
loids in the leaves of Datura stramonium is 
0.2-0.5%, hyoscyamine being the major com-
pound and scopolamine (= hyoscine), apoatro-
pine, tropine, belladonnine and hyoscyamine 
N-oxide minor compounds; more than 70 alka-
loids have been identified in the various parts 
of the plant. Biosynthetically, the main com-
pounds all belong to the tropane alkaloids and 
are derived from the amino acid ornithine. 
Hyoscyamine, atropine and scopolamine are 
anticholinergics, specifically antimuscarinics. 
They act by competitively and reversibly inhib-
iting the neuro-transmitter acetylcholine from 
binding to its muscarinic receptors, and this 
antagonism leads to sympathomimetic-like 
effects in the organs. They increase the heart 
rate, induce relaxation and motor inhibition in 
smooth muscles, decrease secretions, and in-
duce dilation of the pupils of the eyes. Al-
though hyoscyamine has a stronger activity 
than atropine or scopolamine, atropine is more 
commonly prepared and used. Although at low 
doses their action tends to be depressant and 
sedative, at high doses they cause substantial 
excitation: agitation, disorientation, exagger-
ated reflexes, hallucinations, delirium, mental 
confusion and insomnia. Hyoscyamine is used 
to provide symptomatic relief of various gastro-
intestinal disorders including spasms, peptic 
ulcers, irritable bowel syndrome, pancreatitis, 
colic and inflammation of the bladder. It has 
also been used to relieve some heart problems, 
to reduce excess saliva production and control 
some of the symptoms of Parkinson's disease. 
The Datura stramonium powder listed in the 
Dutch Pharmacopoeia (8th edition) is titrated to 
contain 0.23-0.27% total alkaloids. It is an 
ingredient of antitussive syrups, but is mostly 
used in the form of cigarettes to relieve respi-
ratory difficulties, together with other drugs. 
Tropane alkaloids can be biosynthesized in cell 
suspension cultures of Datura stramonium in 
shake flasks and bioreactors. Calluses have 
been induced from leaves, stems and roots and 
cultured on Gamborg's B5 or Murashige and 
Skoog medium supplemented with growth 
regulators. The highest alkaloid content was 
produced in leaf calluses grown on a medium 
with low concentrations of growth regulators 
(0.1 mg/ml of benzyladenine and 2,4-D), and in 
cultures grown in the dark. Total alkaloid pro-
duction in a cell culture supplemented with 
phenylalanine and ornithine was 5 times 
higher than in the control culture, and higher 
ratios of tropine to tropic acid also stimulated 
alkaloid production. A hyoscyamine production 
of up to 7.5 mg/1 daily was recorded in root 
cultures on Gamborg's B5 medium containing 
5% sucrose at 20-25°C. 
Methanol leaf extracts showed slight antibac-
terial activity against gram-positive bacteria in 
a dose dependent manner but no activity was 
found against Escherichia coli and Pseudomo-
nas aeruginosa. 
The seed contains about 17% of a pale yellow 
oil. 
Adulterations and substitutes Tropane 
alkaloids similar to those found in Datura are 
known from numerous Solanaceae (e.g. 
hyoscyamine and scopolamine in Atropa bella-
donna L. and Hyoscyamus muticus L.). Sco-
polamine is found in high quantity in in Duboi-
sia spp., which are used for industrial produc-
tion in Australia. 
Description Annual or short-lived perennial 
erect herb up to 2 m tall, often much-branched; 
stem sparsely hairy to glabrous. Leaves alter-
nate, simple, minutely hairy; stipules absent; 
petiole up to 9.5 cm long; blade ovate to rhom-
bic-ovate or elliptical, 3-20 cm x 1—15 cm, base 
cuneate, rounded, truncate or cordate, apex 
acute to acuminate or obtuse, margins sharply 
toothed with irregular teeth or almost entire, 
pinnately veined. Flowers axillary, solitary, 
rarely paired, bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel 5-15 mm long, up to 30 mm long in 
fruit; calyx tubular, 2.5—5 cm long, lobes un-
equal, 0.5—1 cm long; corolla trumpet-shaped to 
tubular, 6-10 cm long, white or faintly tinged 
purple, sometimes violet or purplish in the 
tube; stamens inserted above the middle of the 
corolla tube, included, filaments short and 
thick, anthers yellow; ovary superior, 2(-4)-
celled, style slender, 3.5-7 cm long, stigma 
large, 2-lobed. Fruit an upright, almost globose 
to ovoid capsule up to 5 cm x 4.5 cm, yellowish 
to brown, spines few to many, slender, stiff, up 
224 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Datura stramonium - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
to 16 mm long, many-seeded. Seeds almost D-
shaped, flattened, 3.5-4.5 mm x 2.5-3.5 mm x 
c. 1 mm, dark brown to black. Seedling with 
epigeal germination; cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Other botanical information Datura 
comprises about 10 species, which all origi-
nated in the New World; most species have 
been introduced throughout the world. Datura 
stramonium belongs to section Stramonium. 
Datura ferox L. (longspine thornapple, fierce 
thornapple) belongs to the same section, and is 
recorded with certainty only in Cape Verde, 
Namibia, Botswana and Zimbabwe. Compared 
to Datura stramonium, it has wider leaves and 
larger fruits with fewer but stouter spines. The 
medicinal uses are similar to those for the 
other Datura species. The main alkaloid in its 
leaves is scopolamine and not hyoscyamine as 
in Datura stramonium, although both species 
produce hyoscyamine in the roots. In Datura 
ferox hyoscyamine is transformed into sco-
polamine in the above-ground parts. 
Brugmansia is considered here as a separate 
genus, although it is often treated as a section 
of Datura (section Brugmansia). It mainly dif-
fers in its habit (a woody, comparatively long-
lived shrub or small tree), its mode of growth 
(reproducing vegetatively by root suckers), its 
pendulous or inclined flowers open throughout 
anthesis for 4-6 days with spathe-like, not 
circumscissile calyx and long pedicel, and its 
fruit being a usually indéhiscent, unarmed 
berry. Chemically, Datura and Brugmansia are 
similar, and consequently they have similar 
medicinal applications. However, the primary 
use of the Brugmansia species is ornamental. 
Growth and development Only the basal 
part of the stem remains vegetative; flowering 
occurs on the branched part of the plant and 
branches do not resume vegetative growth af-
ter flowering and fruiting. The flowers are 
closed during the day and open in the evening, 
and are reported to be pollinated by hawk 
moths and to be largely self-fertile. 
The hyoscyamine/scopolamine ratio in Datura 
stramonium is influenced by the developmental 
stage reached by the plants. In younger plants 
scopolamine is the main alkaloid, whereas 
hyoscyamine mostly becomes the dominant 
alkaloid when flower development has started. 
The alkaloids are produced in the roots and 
transferred to the leaves, flowers and finally 
the fruits. 
Ecology Datura stramonium occurs in open 
locations such as grassland, roadsides, waste 
places, scrub vegetation and open forest. It 
tolerates various soil types but prefers clayey 
or loamy soils. Datura stramonium is frost sen-
sitive. In the United States and Australia Da-
tura stramonium is considered a serious weed 
in crops; elsewhere it is considered a weed in 
waste land. Control is difficult as Datura stra-
monium is resistant to most commonly used 
herbicides. Contamination of wheat, rye, 
buckwheat and linseed with seeds of Datura 
stramonium resulting in poisoning have been 
reported. 
Propagation and planting Datura stra-
monium is generally cultivated from seed sown 
either directly in the field or in a nursery bed. 
Soaking seed overnight improves germination. 
Per ha, 7-8 kg of seed is needed. Seed starts 
germinating after about 2 weeks, and germina-
tion is complete after one month. If the seed is 
sown in a nursery, seedlings are transplanted 
when 8-12 cm tall. Normal spacing is 70-100 
cm, but in India a spacing of 3 m is common 
practice. 
Management Experiments in Burundi with 
the cultivation of Datura stramonium showed 
that the application of chemical fertilizers and 
manure resulted in an increased production of 
total alkaloids. As a result of experiments in 
D E T A R I U M 225 
Burk ina Faso, deflowering was recommended 
to increase the total alkaloid content in the 
leaves. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Many pests and dis-
eases affecting solanaceous crops also affect 
Datura stramonium. 
H a r v e s t i n g In exper iments in Burund i it 
was demons t ra ted t h a t the best t ime for har-
vest ing leaves of Datura stramonium was 8 
weeks after sowing, because alkaloid content 
was t h e n highest . On the basis of exper iments 
in Burk ina Faso, it was recommended to har-
vest the leaves in the early morning or late 
afternoon. 
Yie ld The highest yields of scopolamine and 
hyoscyamine from Datura stramonium in Alge-
ria were 7.5 kg/ha and 21 kg/ha, respectively. 
In India 1-1.5 t /ha of dry leaves and 500-600 
kg/ha of seeds have been obtained. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The tender 
branches and leaves are dried in the shade. 
Fru i t s a re dried in the sun unt i l they dehisce. 
The seeds are separa ted by th resh ing and after 
fur ther drying packed for t ranspor t . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Datura stramonium h a s 
a wide geographical distr ibution, prefers an-
thropogenic hab i ta t s and is therefore not liable 
to genetic erosion. 
B r e e d i n g No a t t empt s have been made to 
improve Datura stramonium for yield of alka-
loids bu t the genetics of Datura spp. have been 
extensively studied. Interspecific crosses with 
Datura ferox yield Fi-plants t h a t have the ca-
pabili ty to t ransform hyoscyamine into sco-
polamine; th is character is t ic is dominant and 
monofactorial. 
P r o s p e c t s Although the t ropane alkaloids 
scopolamine, hyoscyamine and atropine can be 
produced synthetically, it is more economical to 
extract t hem from p lan ts such as Datura spp. 
However, Atropa, Duboisia and Hyoscyamus 
species a re t he major sources of raw mater ia ls . 
On the world marke t of pu re t ropane alkaloids, 
it will be difficult for African producers to com-
pete with producers in China, India and Aus-
t ra l ia . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Berkov, Zayed & Don-
cheva, 2006; Burkill , 2000; Dethier, Cordier & 
Demeyer, 1993; Goncalves, 2005; Neuwinger, 
2000; Nkurunziza , undated; Philipov, Berkov & 
Doncheva, 2007; Sri Har ta t i , Imas t in i Dinu-
r iah & Blomqvist, 1999. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Abebe & Hagos, 1991; Al-
Shaikh & Sablay, 2005; Blomqvist, 1997; 
B raun et a l , 1991; Eftekhar, Yousefzadi & 
Tafakori, 2005; Fortin, Lô & Maynar t , 1990; 
Fr iedman, 2004; Gedif & Hahn , 2003; Gelfand 
et a l , 1985; Gonçalves, 2002; Gurib-Fakim et 
a l , 1993; Hamill et al., 2000; Hegnauer , 1973; 
M a u n d u et a l , 2001; Nwosu, 1999; Reisman-
Berman, Fvigel & Rubin, 1988; Roddick, 1991. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion DeWolf, 1956; Gon-
calves, 2005. 
A u t h o r s F.S. Ma i ru ra & M.P. Setshogo 
DETARIUM MICROCARPUM Guil l . & P e r r . 
P r o t o l o g u e Fl. Seneg. tent . 1: 271, t ab . 59 
(1832). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 22 
S y n o n y m s Detarium senegalense auct. non 
J .F.Gmel. 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Sweet dattock (En). 
Dankh, peti t dé tar (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Deta-
rium microcarpum occurs na tura l ly in t he 
drier regions of West and Cent ra l Africa, from 
Senegal and Gambia east to Sudan. 
U s e s The bark, leaves and roots of Detarium 
microcarpum a re widely used throughout i ts 
distr ibution area because of the i r diuretic and 
as t r ingent propert ies . They a re prepared as 
infusions or decoctions to t r ea t rheumat i sm, 
venereal diseases, urogenital infections, haem-
orrhoids, caries, biliousness, stomach-ache, 
in tes t ina l worms and diarrhoea including dys-
entery. They a re also used agains t malar ia , 
leprosy and impotence. A decoction of the pow-
dered bark is widely t aken to alleviate pain, 
e.g. headache, sore throat , back pain and pain-
ful mens t rua t ion . The fresh ba rk or leaves are 
Detarium microcarpum - wild 
226 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
applied to wounds, to prevent and cure infec-
tions. 
In Mali the bark is also used to treat measles, 
nocturia, hypertension, itch and tiredness, 
while a decoction of the leaves or roots is taken 
against paralysis, meningitis, tiredness, 
cramps and difficult delivery. The powdered 
seeds are applied to skin infections and in-
flammations, whereas the fruit is eaten to cure 
meningitis and malaria. In Burkina Faso the 
fruit pulp is used for treating skin infections. A 
preparation of the fruits is taken against dizzi-
ness in Niger and Togo. In Senegal a mixture 
of the leaves of Detarium microcarpum, Sclero-
carya birrea (A.Rich.) Höchst, and Acacia ma-
crostachya Rchb. ex DC. pounded in milk is 
considered very efficient for snakebites. In Be-
nin a decoction of the leaves is taken to treat 
fainting and convulsions. In West Africa the 
roots are part of a medico-magical treatment 
for mental conditions, and for protection 
against bad spirits. In veterinary medicine the 
leaves and roots are used to treat diarrhoea in 
cattle in southern Mali, and in Benin to treat 
constipation. In Niger cattle are made to inhale 
the smoke of the leaves to treat fever. 
The fruit is sweet and commonly eaten fresh, 
while the pulp is used in the preparation of 
cakes and couscous. The pulp is used as a sub-
stitute for sugar. The seeds are used as frank-
incense and to make necklaces for women. The 
seeds and leaves are eaten as a condiment and 
vegetable. The wood is hard and tough, with a 
regular grain, and is easy to work. It is used for 
carpentry, fence poles and joinery. It is durable 
and long-lasting even under water. The wood is 
well appreciated as firewood, as it lights 
quickly even if wet. Detarium microcarpum is 
well integrated in the traditional agroforestry 
systems of the Sahel, and it can be coppiced 
well. The leaves and flowers are used as fodder, 
and the seeds as pig feed. In southern Mali the 
leaves are used as roofing material, and as 
organic fertilizer. In Burkina Faso the leaves 
are used to make masks. The heated roots are 
sweet scented and are used as a perfume by 
Dinka women in Sudan, and as a mosquito-
repellent in Chad. 
Production and international trade Statis-
tics on production and trade of Detarium mi-
crocarpum are scarce, despite the fact that the 
leaves and roots are commonly sold on markets 
throughout West Africa. In 2005 1 kg of fruits 
sold for about US$ 0.04 during harvest time in 
Mali and about US$ 0.70 at the market in Da-
kar, Senegal. The seeds were sold in 2004 in 
francophone West Africa for € 8.50/kg. 
Properties The ethanol extract of the bark 
showed antimicrobial action against Pseudo-
monas aeruginosa, Citrobacter freundii, Kleb-
siella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus, 
Streptococcus pyogenes and Listeria monocyto-
genes. The extract showed moderate antitu-
mour activity against breast cancer cells. The 
flavanes present in a methanol extract of De-
tarium microcarpum showed strong inhibitory 
effects on HIV-1 or HIV-2 infection. A bark 
extract showed significant molluscicidal activ-
ity against Lymnaea natalensis. It has been 
found to contain 2 tetranorditerpenes, the 
clerodane diterpenes catechine and cis-2-
oxokolavenic acid (0.5%), the diterpene copalic 
acid (1.7%) and coumarin (1%). A methanol 
extract of the leaves exhibited strong feeding 
deterrent activity against the termite Reticu-
litermes speratus. Four clerodane diterpenes 
were isolated as active components, which pos-
sessed strong antifeedant activity at 1%. 
The seeds yield 7.5% oil, with linoleic acid be-
ing the predominant fatty acid. The gum con-
tent (water-soluble polysaccharides) is high. 
The hulled seed flour contains per 100 g: water 
3.5-6.5 g, crude fibre 3 g, crude fat 13-15 g, 
crude protein 13.5-27 g, carbohydrate 39 g, Ca 
500 mg, Mg 500 mg, Fe 100 mg. The major 
alcohol-soluble sugar in the hulled seed flour is 
sucrose. The seed flour is used as a traditional 
emulsifying, flavouring and thickening agent. 
Roasting the seeds increases crude fat content, 
crude protein content, ash content, the water 
absorption capacity, oil absorption capacity and 
gelation temperature, but decreases carbohy-
drate content, crude fibre content, the emulsion 
capacity and the swelling index. Soaking the 
seeds increased moisture content, carbohydrate 
content, crude protein content, ash content, the 
water absorption capacity, oil absorption capac-
ity, gelation temperature and the swelling in-
dex, but decreased crude fat content, crude 
fibre content and the emulsion capacity. 
The seed gum contains D-galactose as a major 
monosaccharide, as well as D-mannose and D-
glucose. Incorporation of 0.5% gum in wheat 
flour increased the water absorption and the 
mixing tolerance index of the dough signifi-
cantly. Oil-water emulsions stabilised by the 
seed flour or gum tolerate freezing and thaw-
ing better than commercial salad dressing, egg 
powder and gum tragacanth emulsions. Addi-
tion of the seed polysaccharide to fruit products 
(mango, orange, pineapple, tomato) improved 
their stability in storage (at 26°C) for at least 2 
DETARIUM 227 
months and was well acceptable to consumers. 
The fruit pulp contains 90% dry matter, of 
which 4-6 g/100g protein and 3 mg/100 g 
ascorbic acid. 
The wood of Detarium microcarpum is dark 
brown, rough and moderately heavy. 
Adulterations and substitutes The fruits 
of Detarium senegalense J.F.Gmel. are eaten as 
substitute for those of Detarium microcarpum, 
although the fruits of certain populations are 
toxic. 
Description Small tree up to 10 m tall; root 
system horizontal; bole usually straight, cylin-
drical, 30 cm in diameter; bark scaling on older 
branches, grey, brown or reddish; crown irregu-
lar. Leaves alternate, paripinnately compound 
14-20 cm long, with 3-4(-6) pairs of leaflets, 
short hairy when young, glabrescent; stipules 
linear, 4-6 mm long, caducous; petiole 1-3 cm 
long; petiolule 0.5-1 cm long; leaflets alternate 
to subopposite, ovate, oblong to elliptical, 7-11 
cm x 3.5—5 cm, base rounded, apex usually 
emarginate, thickly leathery, with numerous 
translucid gland-dots. Inflorescence a compact 
axillary panicle, 5—15(-25) cm long, 1-several 
together, 3-60-flowered. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, sessile, fragrant; sepals 4, elliptical, 
white or cream, densely pubescent outside; 
Detarium microcarpum - 1, flowering branch; 
2, flower; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
petals absent; stamens (8-)10, free; ovary su-
perior, sessile, 1-celled, style slender, stigma 
terminal, head-shaped. Fruit an ovoid or 
rounded, indéhiscent drupe-like pod, 2.5-4.5 
cm in diameter, more or less flattened, gla-
brous, yellowish when ripe, with c. 1 cm of 
greenish mealy pulp, fibrous and sweet, 1-
seeded. Seed orbicular, 15-20 mm x 6.5-8.5 
mm. Seedling with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Detarium 
belongs to the tribe Detarieae and is related to 
Copaifera. It is confined to Africa and com-
prises 3 species: Detarium microcarpum, De-
tarium senegalense J.F.Gmel. and Detarium 
macrocarpum Harms, which are morphologi-
cally very similar, but ecologically differenti-
ated. Detarium microcarpum is typically a spe-
cies of the dry savanna, Detarium senegalense 
is more riparian and also occurs in dry forest, 
and Detarium macrocarpum occurs in humid 
forest. 
Growth and development Detarium mi-
crocarpum regenerates well from shoots pro-
duced by the trunk or roots. Shoots from the 
trunk are much more vigorous than seedlings 
and can reach a height of 1.5-2 m in 1-2 years. 
In Cameroon the average seedling height after 
3 years is 0.6 m, and the seedling may reach 
1.5 m in 4 years. Detarium microcarpum flow-
ers during the rainy season, from July-
September(-November), and bears fruit from 
September-January(-May). It sheds its leaves 
in November and produces new ones in March. 
The main flowering period of a tree is up to 8 
days only, and flowers are pollinated by in-
sects, especially in the mornings. Trees often 
produce seedless fruits. 
Ecology Detarium microcarpum grows on 
dry soil in wooded savanna and open woodland, 
and is locally very common. It is most common 
in regions with an annual rainfall of 600-1000 
mm. It is mainly found on shallow, stony and 
lateritic soils, and on hills. 
Propagation and planting The seeds can 
be stored at ambient temperature (26CC) for 5 
years. To break dormancy, they are soaked in 
sulphuric acid for 30 minutes, followed by 
thorough washing and soaking in water for 24 
hours. Scarification with sand and additional 
fungicide treatment also improves germina-
tion. The dormancy can also be broken by boil-
ing the seeds for 7 minutes followed by soaking 
in lukewarm water for 24 hours. The weight of 
100 seeds is 150-200 g. 
In a nursery germination started 8—10 days 
after sowing. After 47 days, 71-100% of the 
228 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
seeds sown in polythene bags had germinated. 
Na tu ra l germinat ion is hampered by bush fires 
a n d dry spells. Direct-sown p lan ta t ions have 
not been successful because of the slow early 
growth. Detarium microcarpum can also be 
multiplied by grafting adul t twigs or shoots. 
Protocols for micropropagation of Detarium 
microcarpum using axillary expiants or cotyle-
dons have been developed. Using 6-benzyl-
aminopur ine ins tead of kinet in enhanced shoot 
formation. 
M a n a g e m e n t The density of Detarium mi-
crocarpum in n a t u r a l s t ands can be up to 270 
t rees/ha. Young t rees are regularly cut down on 
agr icul tural land because of the horizontal 
rooting system. The t rees are pruned to st imu-
late fruit production on young branches . The 
t rees a re ei ther cut a t soil level or at 10-60 cm 
height; suckers formed on high s tumps survive 
bush fires bet ter t h a n root suckers. 
H a r v e s t i n g The p lan t pa r t s used are har-
vested according to need and availability. 
Frui ts are harves ted from March to May, 
leaves from April to November, while roots and 
ba rk are harves ted throughout the year. 
Yie ld In Mali a t ree can produce 675 fruits 
on average, i.e. about 7 kg. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The fruits of De-
tarium microcarpum can be kept for 1-3 years 
in ju te bags. The leaves and ba rk are used 
fresh or dried for future use. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Detarium microcarpum 
is not genetically endangered, bu t in regions 
where populat ion p ressure is h igh it is overex-
ploited for wood and is also frequently cut 
down on agricul tural land. This can lead to i ts 
local d isappearance. 
Germplasm collections are held a t the Ins t i tu t 
d'Economie Rura le (1ER) in Mali and a t the 
Centre Nat ional des Semences Forest ières 
(CNSF) in Burk ina Faso. 
B r e e d i n g A morphological and biochemical 
character izat ion of different populat ions of 
Detarium microcarpum in southern Mali was 
made as the first s tep in a s tudy of the genetic 
s t ruc ture of the species. The farmers ' cri teria 
for dis t inguishing types of Detarium microcar-
pum re la te especially to ba rk colour, leaf size 
and fruit quality. 
P r o s p e c t s Detarium microcarpum is consid-
ered a valuable species because of i ts medicinal 
propert ies, edible fruit and ha rd wood. To pre-
vent overexploitation, it should be protected 
from cut t ing and bushfires. The species is 
worth domesticating. Despite the numerous 
medicinal uses , phytochemical analyses are 
scarce and deserve more at tent ion. The seed 
flour has good nutr i t ional quality and the func-
t ional proper t ies confirmed the i r suitabil i ty for 
use in various food prepara t ions . There are 
several opportuni t ies for increased use of this 
mul t ipurpose species. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Abreu et al., 1998; Abreu 
et a l , 1999; Adjanohoun et a l , 1989; Baer t s & 
Lehmann , 2002b; Burkill , 1995; Dione, 2001; 
Keay, Hoyle & Duvigneaud, 1958; Kerharo & 
Adam, 1974; Kouyaté, 2005; Leung, Busson & 
Ja rd in , 1968. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1985; 
Akpata & Miachi, 2001; Bationo, Ouedraogo & 
Guinko, 2001; Baumer , 1995; Couteron & Ber-
geret, 1995; Hugé, 2002; Idu, Ijomah & Omon-
hinmin, 2002; Kouyaté, Meyer & van Damme, 
2002; Lajide, Escoubas & Mizutani , 1995; 
Mahmood et al., 1993; Meyer, 2001; Mous tapha 
et al., 2003; Neuwinger, 1996; Njoku, Obioma 
& Frank , 1999; Okorie & Amaechi, 2003; On-
weluzo, Leelavathi & Rao, 1999; Onweluzo et 
al., 1999; Sanogo & Sanogo, 2000; Van den 
Eynden, Van D a m m e & de Wolf, 1994; Witt ig 
& Guinko, 1998. 
S o u r c e s of i l l u s t r a t i o n Berhaut , 1975b; 
Aubréville, 1968. 
A u t h o r s A.M. Kouyaté & P. van D a m m e 
DlCHOSTEMMA GLAUCESCENS P i e r r e 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. Mens . Soc. Linn. Par is 
2(159): 1260 (1896). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Di-
chostemma glaucescens occurs from Nigeria 
eas t to the Cent ra l African Republic and south 
to DR Congo. 
U s e s In Gabon a s tem bark macerat ion is 
considered a tonic for nurs ing women. It is also 
t aken as an emetic. In Congo an infusion of 
young leaves is t aken to t r ea t gastro- intest inal 
and liver complaints; the leaves a re also ea ten 
as a salad for the same purpose. In DR Congo 
the foul-smelling ba rk powder applied to the 
skin repels bi t ing red ants ; sometimes it is also 
pu t in t he nest . Bark powder in wate r is t aken 
to t r ea t insani ty and the ba rk en te rs in a mix-
tu re to t r ea t male infertility. The sap is applied 
to tee th to t r ea t toothache. In Cameroon and 
Gabon the juice of the twigs is an ingredient of 
arrow poison. 
The whi t ish pink wood is used in house con-
struction and as fuel. 
P r o p e r t i e s A pre l iminary tes t showed t h a t 
DIPLORHYNCHUS 229 
the leaves are rich in tannins. 
Botany Monoecious, small, slender tree up 
to 13 m tall; twigs glabrous, with abundant 
latex. Leaves alternate, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 7-12 mm long; blade 
elliptical-oblong to lanceolate, 8-19 cm x 2.5-8 
cm, base cuneate, apex acuminate, firmly pa-
pery to leathery, glabrous, glossy green above, 
glaucous beneath, pinnately veined with 6-8 
pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence a terminal, 
pyramidal, loose panicle up to 40 cm long, with 
powder-like indumentums, branches terminat-
ing in a group of 3 flower clusters enclosed by 2 
deeply concave bracts, soon falling, leaving 
conspicuous scars; each flower cluster with 
cup-like, 4-angled, glandular involucre c. 2.5 
mm long, containing 5-10 male flowers, some-
times also with a female flower. Flowers uni-
sexual; male flowers reduced to a single, 
jointed stamen; female flowers reduced to a 
stalked ovary, usually 4-celled, with 4 styles 
fused at base, notched or shortly 2-fid at apex. 
Fruit a 4-lobed capsule 2.5—3.5 cm in diameter, 
depressed, appressed hairy with brown to dull 
purple hairs, 4-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid to al-
most globose, c. 11 mm in diameter, smooth, 
brown. 
Dichostemma comprises 2 species, which both 
occur in tropical Africa. 
Ecology Dichostemma glaucescens occurs in 
rainforest, including secondary forest, as an 
understorey tree, from sea-level up to 500 m 
altitude. It is locally dominant along rivers, e.g. 
in Congo. 
Genetic resources and breeding Di-
chostemma glaucescens is common in its area 
of distribution and therefore not threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Dichostemma glaucescens will 
probably remain of local importance only 
unless chemical and pharmacological analyses 
reveal interesting compounds or pharmacologi-
cal activities. 
Major references Brown, Hutchinson & 
Prain, 1909-1913; Burkill, 1994; Neuwinger, 
1996; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Falconer, 1990; Keay, 
1989; Pauwels, 1993; Raponda-Walker & Sil-
lans, 1961; Terashima, Ichikawa & Sawada, 
1988. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
DIPLORHYNCHUS CONDYLOCARPON 
(Müll.Arg.) Pichon 
Protologue Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Pa-
ris, sér. 2, 19: 368 (1947). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number In = 22 
Synonyms Diplorhynchus mossambicensis 
Oliv. (1881). 
Vernacular names Horn-pod tree, wild 
rubber (En). Jasmineiro de Africa, jasmineiro 
de Cazengo (Po). Mtogo (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Diplo-
rhynchus condylocarpon occurs from DR Congo 
and Tanzania south to South Africa, but is rare 
in Namibia and Botswana. 
Uses Throughout its area of distribution, a 
decoction of the root bark of Diplorhynchus 
condylocarpon is used to treat indigestion, di-
arrhoea, fever, snakebites, infertility and vene-
real diseases. In Tanzania a root decoction is 
used to treat rectal prolapse, diabetes, testicle 
inflammation and is applied externally to treat 
sore eyes. It is also taken to facilitate giving 
birth. In Malawi a leaf infusion is used to treat 
headache and stomach problems, while a de-
coction of the root with salt is used to treat 
cough. The latex is smeared on cuts to heal 
them. In Zambia a root decoction is used to 
treat chronic cough, pneumonia and pulmonary 
tuberculosis. The body is washed with a root 
infusion to treat measles, and the infusion is 
also taken orally. Root powder is taken with 
food to treat anorexia and in porridge to treat 
pain in the digestive tract. 
The wood of Diplorhynchus condylocarpon is 
suitable for ornaments, furniture, fencing and 
firewood and to make charcoal. Diplorhynchus 
condylocarpon is a food plant of the edible cat-
erpillar Brunaea alcinoe. In Zambia branches 
are cut as cattle feed. The bark fibre is used for 
weaving in a similar way as the bark fibre of 
baobab (Adansonia digitata L.). In DR Congo 
the latex is used to repair bicycle tyres and for 
trapping birds. In Namibia it is used as glue to 
stick feathers and metal tips to arrows. In 
southern Africa the latex is also smeared on 
hides of drums to improve the tone. 
Properties Alkaloids are present in both the 
stem bark and root bark of Diplorhynchus 
condylocarpon, the latter being richer. These 
alkaloids belong to 3 main groups: yohimbine 
and its isomer ß-yohimbine; nor-macusine B 
(tombozine or diplorrhyne), stemmadenine and 
condylocarpine; and 14-hydroxy-(-)-akuammi-
cine (mossambine or diplorhyncine) and nor-
230 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
fluorocurarine. Most of these compounds also 
occur in o ther members of Apocynaceae. 
An aqueous extract of the roots and s tems is 
reported to be a useful sympatholytic. Ethano-
lic extracts of the roots did not show a signifi-
cant ant iplasmodial activity in vitro. 
B o t a n y Shrub or small t ree up to 12(-20) m 
tall, with white or yellow latex; bole up to 50 ( -
200) cm in diameter; bark smooth to rough, 
longitudinally fissured or ret iculate , greyish to 
brownish or blackish. Leaves decussately oppo-
site, simple and entire; st ipules absent; petiole 
1-2 cm long, hairy; blade obovate to elliptical, 
ovate or almost circular, 4 -9 cm x 2 - 5 cm, base 
cuneate to obtuse, apex acute, acuminate , 
rounded or emarg ina te , leathery, glabrous to 
short ly hairy. Inflorescence a lax to congested 
thyrsoid cyme, t e rmina l and in axils of t he up-
per leaves; peduncle 0.5-4 cm long; bracts ob-
scure, rounded. Flowers bisexual, regular , 5-
merous, very sweet-scented; pedicel 0.5-2.5 
m m long; sepals connate a t base, ovate, acute; 
corolla tube cylindrical, 2—3 m m x 1—1.5 mm, 
constricted a t throat , lobes narrowly oblong to 
narrowly ovate, c. 5 mm long, rounded to 
slightly acute, with many glandular ha i rs , wi th 
a scale between bases of lobes, whi te to creamy; 
s t amens inser ted near the middle of the corolla 
tube and included, an the r s c. 1 m m long; ovary 
superior, consisting of 2 free, obovoid carpels, 
style slender, c. 1 m m long, pistil head almost 
cylindrical, woolly hairy. Fru i t consisting of 2 
obliquely oblong, widely spreading follicles 3— 
6.5 cm x 1-2 cm, coherent at the base, apex 
abrupt ly curved, woody, green or pale to da rk 
brown, 2-valved, 4-seeded. Seeds obliquely ob-
long, 3.5-4.5 cm long, lateral ly compressed, 
da rk brown, a t apex wi th large t r an spa ren t 
wing. 
Diplorhynchus comprises a single species. 
E c o l o g y Diplorhynchus condylocarpon oc-
curs in dry deciduous woodland and on stony 
hillsides, up to 1700 m al t i tude. 
M a n a g e m e n t Propagat ion can be done by 
m e a n s of seed, cut t ings and Wildlings. Cut 
t r u n k s sprout easily from the base . Coppicing 
and pollarding are appropr ia te managemen t 
techniques. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s and b r e e d i n g Diplo-
rhynchus condylocarpon is widespread in most 
of i ts a rea of distr ibution and is not in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Diplorhynchus condylocarpon is a 
useful medicine in ru ra l communit ies . In view 
of its many medicinal uses, fur ther research 
into the pharmacological activities of Diplo-
rhynchus condylocarpon may prove worth-
while. 
M a j o r r e f e r e n c e s Chilufya & Tengnäs , 
1996; Hedberg et al., 1982; Leeuwenberg et al., 
1985; Neuwinger, 2000; Plaizier, 1980. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Chhabra , M a h u n n a h & 
Mshiu, 1987; Ch inemana et al., 1985; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Gelfand et al., 1985; Kokwaro, 
1993; La tham, 2004; Leger, 1997; Ndubani & 
Höjer, 1999; van Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
A u t h o r s A. de Ruijter 
DlSCOCLAOXYLON HEXANDRUM (Müll .Arg.) 
P a x & K.Hoffm. 
P r o t o l o g u e Engl., Pflanzenr. IV 147 VII: 
137 (1914). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
S y n o n y m s Claoxylon hexandrum Müll.Arg. 
(1864). 
Origin and geographic distribution Disco-
claoxylon hexandrum occurs from Sierra Leone 
eas t to G h a n a and from Nigeria eas t to Uganda 
and south to DR Congo. 
U s e s In G h a n a a decoction of the leafy twigs 
is t aken as a purgat ive . Children play with the 
br ight red seeds. 
B o t a n y Small, dioecious, sparingly branched 
small t ree up to 6(-10) m tall; bark grey; young 
shoots and petioles sparingly short-hairy, la ter 
almost glabrous, yellowish grey-green. Leaves 
a l te rna te , simple; s t ipules tiny, soon falling; 
petiole (5-)8-17(-20) cm long, purpl ish; blade 
elliptical-oblong, 20 -35 cm x 10-15 cm, base 
rounded to cuneate , apex acute to obtuse, mar-
gins toothed, firmly papery to leathery, almost 
glabrous, bu t short -hairy on main veins, pur-
plish, la ter dark and glossy green. Inflores-
cence an axillary raceme up to 30(-50) cm long; 
brac ts c. 1.5 mm long, acuminate , densely 
hairy. Flowers unisexual , peta ls absent; male 
flowers wi th jointed pedicel 3-4(—7) m m long; 
sepals 4, broadly t r iangular-ovate , c. 1.5 mm 
long, densely short-hairy outside, glabrous 
inside, pale green, disk shallowly lobed, c. 1.5 
m m in diameter , papillose, s t amens 6-7(-9) , 
f i laments c. 0.5 m m long, free; female flowers 
almost sessile, pedicel extending to 2 m m in 
fruit, basal ly jointed, calyx lobes 4, ovate, 1-1.5 
m m long, uni ted a t base, densely woolly hai ry 
outside, grey-green, disk glands 2, broadly tri-
angular , c. 1 mm x 1.5 mm, ovary superior, 2-
lobed, c. 1.5 mm in diameter , densely woolly 
hairy, 2-celled, styles 2, c. 0.5 m m long, free, 
feathery-hairy. Fru i t a 2-lobed capsule c. 5 mm 
DISCOGLYPREMNA 231 
x 10 mm, lobes almost globular, densely yel-
lowish grey-green woolly hairy, 2-seeded. Seeds 
almost globose, 3.5-4 mm in diameter, smooth, 
blackish, with a yellow, fleshy pseudoaril. 
Discoclaoxylon comprises 4 species, which all 
occur in tropical Africa. Discoclaoxylon hexan-
drum is the only species with a relatively wide-
spread distribution; the other 3 species are 
endemic to different islands in the Gulf of 
Guinea. How distinct they are from one an-
other requires further study. Some authors 
include Discoclaoxylon in Claoxylon. 
Ecology Discoclaoxylon hexandrum occurs 
in the understorey of secondary forest, often 
near paths, from sea-level up to 1200 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and b reeding Disco-
claoxylon hexandrum occurs in secondary vege-
tation and does not seem to be threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Discoclaoxylon hexandrum. will 
probably remain of limited local importance as 
a medicinal plant. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Irvine, 
1961; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Govaerts, 
Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 2000; Keay, 1958a; 
Keay, 1989. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
DISCOGLYPREMNA CALONEURA (Pax) Prain 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1911: 
317(1911). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 6 
Vernacular names Atieghe (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Dis-
coglypremna caloneura occurs from Guinea 
east to Uganda and south to DR Congo. 
Uses In West Africa a decoction of the 
crushed leaves is taken as an expectorant in 
bronchial problems. The seed or seed oil is 
taken as an emetic and purgative against dys-
entery, diarrhoea and oedema, and to help in 
cases of difficult childbirth and as an abortifa-
cient. The seed oil mixed with bait is used to 
kill unwanted animals. In Congo a bark decoc-
tion is taken to relieve coughing fits and intes-
tinal pain caused by food poisoning, and as an 
emetic. Bark powder is applied to sores to pro-
mote healing. A maceration of ground leaves in 
water is applied to the head to kill lice. 
The wood is easy to carve and masks and do-
mestic utensils are made from it. It is suitable 
for light construction, light flooring, joinery, 
interior trim, ship building, vehicle bodies, 
furniture, cabinet work, boxes, crates, matches, 
turnery, veneer, plywood, hardboard, particle 
board and pulpwood. It is also used as fuel. In 
Ghana the fleshy fruits are used as bait in bird 
traps. 
Properties Preliminary tests showed the 
presence of tannins in the stem bark and roots, 
and several diterpene derivatives in the stem 
bark. The stem bark also contains 3-O-acetyl 
aleuritolic acid, which exhibited significant 
antifilarial activity, affecting the vitality of 
adult male filaria of Onchocerca gutturosa. A 
crude ethanolic leaf extract showed moderate 
bacteriostatic effects in vitro against Staphylo-
coccus aureus and Enterococcus faecalis. 
The heartwood is whitish to yellowish brown 
and indistinctly demarcated from the sapwood. 
The grain is straight, texture rather coarse. 
Radial surfaces show some darker streaks and 
a slight silvery figure. The wood is lightweight, 
with a density of 380-420 kg/m^ at 12% mois-
ture content. It air dries fairly well and rap-
idly. The rates of shrinkage are moderate, from 
green to oven dry 2.0-4.0% radial and 5.6-7.5% 
tangential. Once dry, it is moderately stable in 
service. 
At 12% moisture content, the modulus of rup-
ture is 64-85 N/mm2, modulus of elasticity 
6960-8430 N/mm2, compression parallel to 
grain 24-36 N/mm2, shear 4.5-6 N/mm2, cleav-
age 7.5-17 N/mm and Chalais-Meudon side 
hardness 1.0-1.4. 
The wood is easy to saw and work with both 
hand and machine tools. It planes to a nice 
surface. It is easy to nail and screw, and it 
glues satisfactorily. Veneer production by peel-
ing and slicing gives good results. The wood is 
not durable, being liable to blue stain, termite 
and Lyctus attacks. The heartwood is resistant 
to impregnation by preservatives, the sapwood 
permeable. 
The papermaking qualities of the wood have 
been examined in a series of tests. They were 
not good enough to recommend the establish-
ment of plantations for paper pulp. The wood 
ash is reported to produce sores on the skin. 
Botany Large, dioecious tree up to 45 m tall; 
bole branchless for up to 30 m, up to 200 cm in 
diameter, with buttresses up to 3 m high; bark 
smooth, silvery; twigs dark purplish grey, spar-
ingly short-hairy, later almost glabrous. Leaves 
alternate, simple, almost opposite to verticil-
late below the inflorescence; stipules tiny, soon 
falling; petiole (l-)3-5(-7) cm long, slightly 
232 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Discoglypremna caloneura - 1, flowering branch; 
2, male flower; 3, female flower; 4, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
thickened at both ends, short-hairy above; 
blade oblong, elliptical-oblong to sometimes 
rounded, (3-)6-10(-15) cm x (2-)4-6(-10) cm, 
base rounded to cuneate with 2 elliptical 
glands, apex short-acuminate, margins entire 
or with remote, rounded teeth, 3-veined at 
base, almost glabrous, but short-hairy on main 
veins, purplish, later dark and glossy green. 
Inflorescence a terminal panicle with racemose 
branches, some arising from the base; male 
inflorescence up to 20 cm long; female inflores-
cence up to 8(-12) cm long; bracts c. 1 mm long, 
acuminate, hairy. Flowers unisexual, petals 
absent; male flowers with jointed pedicel 1—1.5 
mm long, sepals 3-4, ovate, c. 1.5 mm long, 
acute, densely short-hairy outside, greenish, 
disk glands c. 15, ovoid, c. 0.5 mm in diameter, 
hairy at apex, stamens (6-)8(-15), filaments c. 
2 mm long, free; female flowers with pedicel 1— 
1.5 mm long, jointed at base, calyx lobes (4-)5, 
ovate, c. 1.5 mm long, acute, reflexed, short-
hairy outside, disk glands 6-8, obovoid, ovary 
superior, 3-lobed, c. 1.5 mm in diameter, 
densely yellowish hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 1 
mm long, free, feathery-hairy. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule 4-5 mm x 6-8 mm, smooth, sparsely 
short-hairy, greenish, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 3 -
4 mm x 2-3 mm, smooth, black, with a red, 
fleshy pseudoaril. 
Discoglypremna comprises a single species. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: (1: growth ring boundaries dis-
tinct); (2: growth ring boundaries indistinct or 
absent). Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 13: 
simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel pits 
alternate; 23: shape of alternate pits polygonal; 
27: intervessel pits large (> 10 um); 31: vessel-
ray pits with much reduced borders to appar-
ently simple: pits rounded or angular; 32: ves-
sel-ray pits with much reduced borders to ap-
parently simple: pits horizontal (scalariform, 
gash-like) to vertical (palisade); 42: mean tan-
gential diameter of vessel lumina 100—200 um; 
(43: mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
> 200 u\m); 46: < 5 vessels per square millime-
tre; 56: tyloses common. Tracheids and fibres: 
61: fibres with simple to minutely bordered 
pits; 66: non-septate fibres present; 68: fibres 
very thin-walled; 69: fibres thin- to thick-
walled. Axial parenchyma: (76: axial paren-
chyma diffuse); 77: axial parenchyma diffuse-
in-aggregates; 93: eight (5-8) cells per paren-
chyma strand. Rays: 97: ray width 1-3 cells; 
(98: larger rays commonly 4- to 10-seriate); 
(100: rays with multiseriate portion(s) as wide 
as uniseriate portions); (107: body ray cells 
procumbent with mostly 2-4 rows of upright 
and/or square marginal cells); 108: body ray 
cells procumbent with over 4 rows of upright 
and/or square marginal cells; 115: 4—12 rays 
per mm; 116: > 12 rays per mm. Mineral inclu-
sions: 136: prismatic crystals present; 137: 
prismatic crystals in upright and/or square ray 
cells; 140: prismatic crystals in chambered 
upright and/or square ray cells; (141: prismatic 
crystals in non-chambered axial parenchyma 
cells); 142: prismatic crystals in chambered 
axial parenchyma cells; (144: druses present); 
(145: druses in ray parenchyma cells); (146: 
druses in axial parenchyma cells); (148: druses 
in chambered cells). 
(M. Thiam, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
Ecology Discoglypremna caloneura occurs in 
rainforest and old secondary forest, from sea-
level up to 1100 m altitude. In West Africa it 
flowers from November to March and fruits 
from December to April. The fruits are dis-
persed by birds. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Discoglypremna caloneura is 
DRYPETES 233 
a t risk of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Discoglypremna caloneura has 
several in teres t ing medicinal uses, and more 
research into its chemistry and pharmacologi-
cal activity seems war ran ted . 
M a j o r r e f e r e n c e s Atindehou et al., 2002; 
Burkill, 1994; Manewa, 1997; Neuwinger, 
2000; Nyasse et a l , 2006. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Abbiw, 1990; Akoègni-
nou, van der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006; 
Akubue, Mit ta l & Aguwa, 1983; Bolza & 
Keat ing, 1972; InsideWood, undated; Nor-
mand, 1955; Petroff, Doat & Tissot, 1967; 
Stäuble, 1986; Takahash i , 1978; Téré, 2000. 
S o u r c e s of i l l u s t r a t i o n Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
DRYPETES CHEVALIERI Beil le 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. Soc. Bot. France 61, Mém. 
8: 293 (1917). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae (APG: Putranj iva-
ceae) 
Or ig in a n d g e o g r a p h i c d i s t r i b u t i o n Dry-
petes chevalieri occurs from Liberia eas t to 
Congo. 
U s e s In Liberia the sap from the leaves and 
twigs is t aken to t r ea t dysentery and other 
intes t inal t roubles. In Côte d'Ivoire the pow-
dered leaves are sniffed to t r ea t colds, s inusit is 
and bronchial problems. 
In Nigeria twiggy branches are made into 
brooms. 
P r o p e r t i e s An extract of the dried s tem 
yielded the sterol erythrodiol and the tr i ter-
penes drypechevalin A and drypechevalin B, 
lupeol, lupeone, putranj ivadione and friedelin. 
B o t a n y Monoecious or dioecious shrub or 
small t ree up to 6 m tall; young s tems with 
yellow to orange erect ha i rs . Leaves a l te rna te , 
distichously ar ranged, simple; s t ipules small, 
soon falling; petiole up to 4 mm long; blade 
ovate to orbicular, 5-18 cm x 2-7.5 cm, base 
asymmetr ical , one side deeply cordate, over-
lapping the twig, other side rounded to cordate, 
amplexicaul on young la tera l shoots, apex long-
acuminate , marg ins sharply toothed, with 6-8 
pairs of looping la tera l veins. Flowers axillary, 
unisexual , regular; peta ls absent; male flowers 
2 - 3 together, with pedicel up to 2 mm long, 
sepals 4, small, short-hairy, s t amens 8-15; 
female flowers solitary, wi th a pedicel up to 8 
mm long, sepals 4, t r i angu la r to rounded, c. 2 
mm long, short-hairy, yellowish green, ovary 
superior, slightly 2-lobed, densely white-hairy, 
2-celled, styles 2, c. 1 mm long, s t igma large, 2-
lobed, flattened. Frui t an ellipsoid drupe up to 
2.5 cm long, short-hairy, smooth, yellow to or-
ange, 2-seeded. Seeds compressed ovoid, pale 
cream to brown. 
Drypetes comprises about 210 species and is 
dis t r ibuted throughout the tropics and subtrop-
ics. About 60 species occur in continental Af-
rica and about 15 in the Indian Ocean is lands. 
Several other Drypetes spp. a re medicinally 
used in West Africa. Drypetes ivorensis Hutch . 
& Dalziel occurs from Liberia eas t to Camer-
oon. In Côte d'Ivoire the ba rk and fruits are 
crushed to make a dressing to m a t u r e ab-
scesses. The bark is toxic and is used to pre-
pare bai t to poison r a t s and mice. In Liberia 
the fruits are ea ten. Small rice mor ta rs a re 
made from the wood. Drypetes leonensis Pax 
occurs from Guinea to the Cent ra l African Re-
public, Gabon and DR Congo. A pa lm wine 
macerat ion of the s tem bark is d runk to t r ea t 
colic in children. The vapour from boiling ba rk 
is inhaled and a decoction is used as a mouth 
wash to t r ea t scurvy. 
E c o l o g y Drypetes chevalieri occurs in wet or 
dry forest, from sea-level up to 1000 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Drypetes 
chevalieri is relatively common in its distribu-
tion area and therefore probably not threa t -
ened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Drypetes chevalieri has several 
medicinal uses. Research showed the presence 
of several phytochemically active compounds, 
bu t more research is needed to eva lua te i ts 
potential . 
M a j o r r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1994; Hawthorne 
& Jongkind, 2006; Wansi et a l , 2006. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Neuwinger, 2000; Wur-
dack et al., 2004. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
D R Y P E T E S G O S S W E I L E R I S.Moore 
P r o t o l o g u e Journ . Bot. 58: 271 (1920). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae (APG: Putranj iva-
ceae) 
S y n o n y m s Drypetes amoracia Pax & 
K.Hoffm. (1922). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Horseradish tree, ok-
huaba , akot (En). Bossmé, yungu, youngou 
(Fr). 
Or ig in a n d g e o g r a p h i c d i s t r i b u t i o n Dry-
petes gossweileri occurs from Nigeria eas t to 
t he Central African Republic and south to DR 
234 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Drypetes gossweileri - wild 
Congo. 
Uses The bark has a pungent taste, and has 
many medicinal uses. A bark decoction or mac-
eration is widely drunk as a purgative to expel 
intestinal worms and treat diarrhoea; it is also 
applied as an enema. The ground stem bark 
mixed with palm oil is rubbed in to treat head-
ache, toothache, intercostal pain, kidney pain, 
rheumatism and bronchitis. 
In Cameroon and Congo stem bark powder is 
eaten to treat sexual asthenia and to treat ve-
nereal diseases. In Congo the bark powder 
cooked with banana is taken as an aphrodisiac. 
In the Central African Republic a bark decoc-
tion is drunk as a tonic after childbirth, and to 
treat bronchitis, cough and other lung prob-
lems. A bark decoction is rubbed onto scabies 
and is also used for bathing children to treat 
fever. A paste of stem bark scrapings in water 
is applied to injuries, ulcers and swellings. In 
DR Congo a leaf decoction is used as a wash 
and is drunk as a treatment for asthma in 
children. The bark powder is taken by women 
to induce abortion. 
The stem bark, leaves and fruits are used to 
stupefy fish to catch them more easily. In 
Cameroon the cooked seeds are eaten by the 
Baka pygmies. The wood is used for planks and 
carpentry, but the sawdust can cause dermati-
tis, ocular and respiratory problems. In Gabon 
the fruit husks are used in ritual dances, at-
tached to the limbs and clothing. In Congo the 
strong-smelling roots are placed on the roof or 
a root decoction is sprinkled around the house 
to repel snakes. 
Production and international trade Dry-
petes gossweileri is only traded locally as a me-
dicinal plant. The dried stem bark is sold in the 
local markets of Cameroon for the treatment of 
typhoid diarrhoea; in 2002 the bark was sold at 
about US$ 0.20 per g. 
Properties All parts of the tree when 
bruised or cut emit a pungent smell, resem-
bling that of horseradish or mustard. The es-
sential oil of the stem bark obtained from sam-
ples from the Central African Republic and 
Gabon contained mainly benzyl isothiocyanate 
(56-94%), accompanied by benzyl cyanide and 
benzaldehyde. The main component in a sam-
ple from Cameroon was benzyl cyanide (19.4— 
73.7%). Minor compounds are the triterpenes 
friedelin, friedelane-3,7-dione and derivatives, 
methyl putranjate, stearic acid, stigmasterol 
stéarate and ß-sitosterol stéarate. The bark 
also contains the alkaloid drypetesgenine and 
the podocarpane diterpenoid gossweilone. 
Crude aqueous and ethanol extracts of the 
stem bark inhibited the growth of Escherichia 
coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Klebsiella sp. and Proteus sp., with 
the ethanol extracts exhibiting the highest 
inhibitory activity. The acetone extract of the 
stem bark showed a strong purgative effect in 
mice. The LDso of the methanol stem bark ex-
tract in the brine shrimp test was low. The 
extract showed significant phytotoxic activity 
against Lemna minor L. as well as antifungal 
activity against Microsporum canis and 
Trichophyton longiformis. The antioxidant and 
antiradical activities of the essential oil were 
found to be low. 
The wood is pale yellow or whitish with fine 
texture and moderately heavy, with a density 
of 760-800 kg/m3 at 12% moisture content. It is 
moderately hard, elastic and often has a bad 
smell. 
Adulterations and substitutes The pun-
gent smell and medicinal uses of the stem bark 
of Drypetes gossweileri are similar to those of 
the roots of Pentadiplandra brazzeana Baill. 
And the two species are often used indiscrimi-
nately. 
Description Medium-sized dioecious tree up 
to 30(-42) m tall; bole straight, up to 120 cm in 
diameter, often irregularly fluted; bark greyish 
green to yellowish green, with many lenticels, 
strong-smelling when cut. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules small; petiole up to 2 cm long; 
blade oblong, 10-24 cm x 3-9 cm, base cuneate 
to rounded, asymmetrical, apex acuminate, 
margins toothed or sometimes entire, leathery, 
glabrous. Inflorescence an axillary fascicle, 
female one few-flowered. Flowers unisexual, 
DRYPETES 235 
regular; pedicel up to 2 cm long; sepals 5, 
ovate, 12-16 mm long, densely short-hairy, 
brownish green; petals absent; male flowers 
with c. 30 stamens, disk cup-shaped; female 
flowers with superior ovary, short-hairy, styles 
2. Fruit an apple-shaped drupe 8-10 cm x 5-6 
cm, greenish brown or yellow, velvety brown-
hairy, pulp yellow, 3-7-seeded. Seeds com-
pressed ovoid, pale brown. 
Other botanical information Drypetes 
comprises about 210 species and is distributed 
throughout the tropics and subtropics. About 
60 species occur in continental Africa and 
about 15 in the Indian Ocean islands. Several 
other Drypetes spp. are medicinally used in 
Central Africa. Drypetes capillipes (Pax) Pax & 
K.Hoffm. occurs throughout Central Africa. In 
Cameroon pulverized root bark is applied to 
furuncles to ripen them. In Congo a bark decoc-
tion is used as a mouthwash to treat toothache 
and as a wash to treat kidney pain. The neck is 
massaged with the leaves to treat a stiff neck. 
Drypetes klainei Pierre ex Pax occurs in Côte 
d'Ivoire and Gabon, and in Gabon a maceration 
or decoction of fresh stem bark is rubbed in to 
treat rheumatism. An extract of the stem bark 
together with dried unripe fruits of hot pepper 
is drunk to expel worms. A decoction of the 
stem bark and leaves of Drypetes natalensis 
(Harv.) Hutch., occurring in eastern and south-
ern Africa, is taken to reduce fever in patients 
with malaria. The wood is used for firewood, 
charcoal, wooden spoons, tool handles and 
beds. 
Growth and development Drypetes gosswei-
leri flowers from May to December and fruits 
mainly in June. In Cameroon it was found that 
it forms an association with vesicular-
arbuscular mycorrhizae (VAM). 
Ecology Drypetes gossweileri occurs in semi-
deciduous humid forest, including secondary 
forest, at low altitudes. 
Handling after harvest The harvested 
stem bark is used fresh or can be dried for later 
use. 
Genetic resources There are no signs that 
Drypetes gossweileri is threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Drypetes gossweileri does not 
seem to be of particular interest to researchers, 
which is possibly due to the cyanide-containing 
compounds in the stem bark. The stem bark is 
expected to remain important in traditional 
medicine though. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1996; 
Bouquet, 1969; Burkill, 1994; Keay, 1958a; 
Mve-Mba et al., 1997; Neuwinger, 2000; Ngou-
payou, 2003; Tailfer, 1989; Vivien & Fauré, 
1985. 
Other references Agnaniet et al., 2003; 
Betti, 2002; Dupont et al., 1997; Gessler et a l , 
1995; Ijah & Oyebanji, 2003; Lovett et al., 
2006; Ndouga et a l , 1991; Ngouela et al., 2003; 
Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 1961; Sow et al., 
1994; Thirakul, 1983; Vivien & Fauré, 1988. 
Authors A.T. Tchinda & V.S.T. Sob 
D R Y P E T E S MOLUNDUANA Pax & KHoffm. 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenr. IV 147 XV: 
258 (1922). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Putranjiva-
ceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution Dry-
petes molunduana occurs in Nigeria, Cameroon 
and Gabon. 
Uses In Cameroon a decoction of the leafy 
stem is taken to treat inflammations, boils, 
swellings and tumours. It is also used as a pain 
killer. 
The wood is hard and in southern Nigeria it is 
used for construction. 
Properties Chemical analysis of the stems 
revealed the presence of the sesquiterpene lac-
tone drypemolundein A, friedelane-3,7-dione 
and the friedelane derivatives drypemolundein 
B and acetyldrypemolundein, erythrodiol, 
oleanolic acid, hederagenin, syringaresinol and 
bayogenin. 
Oral administration of the stem extract showed 
significant anti-inflammatory and analgesic 
activities in rats. Drypemolundein A is mainly 
responsible for these activities. Drypemolun-
dein B was found to be inactive. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 6 
m tall; branchlets deeply grooved, short-hairy. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules 5-10 mm 
long, persistent; blade elliptical-oblong to 
obovate-oblong, 11-27 cm x 4-9 cm, base 
cuneate to obtuse, apex long-acuminate, mar-
gins toothed. Inflorescence a dense fascicle, 
cauliflorous on the main stem. Flowers unisex-
ual, regular, sweet-scented; sepals 5, ovate, 6—9 
mm x 4-6 mm, short-hairy outside, greenish to 
yellowish or white; petals absent; male flowers 
with short pedicel, stamens 12—18; female 
flowers with a short pedicel, extending up to 
2.5 cm in fruit, ovary superior, globose, white-
hairy, styles 2, triangular, persistent. Fruit an 
ovoid to ellipsoid drupe, c. 3 cm x 2.5 cm, or-
ange to red when ripe, 2-seeded. Seeds com-
236 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
pressed ovoid, pale brown. 
Drypetes comprises about 210 species and is 
dis t r ibuted throughout the tropics and subtrop-
ics. About 60 species occur in cont inental Af-
rica and about 15 in the Indian Ocean islands. 
Drypetes staudtii (Pax) Hutch, occurs in Nige-
ria and Cameroon. It is listed as vulnerable in 
the IUCN Red List of th rea tened species. In 
Cameroon different p lan t pa r t s are medicinally 
used in infusions and decoctions. The seeds 
were found to contain t r i terpenoids and flavon-
oids. One species from the Indian Ocean is-
lands is medicinally used. The pulp made from 
the leafy branches of Drypetes madagascarien-
sis (Lam.) Humber t & Leandri , endemic to 
Madagascar , is rubbed into scarifications to 
increase milk production. The fruits are ea ten 
by children. 
E c o l o g y Drypetes molunduana occurs in the 
unders torey of p r imary forest, from sea-level 
up to 1000 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s and b r e e d i n g There 
are no signs t h a t Drypetes molunduana is 
th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Drypetes molunduana mer i t s 
further phytochemical and pharmacological 
research as t he resu l t s so far have been prom-
ising. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1994; Keay, 
1958a; Nkeh et al., 2001; Nkeh et al., 2003; 
Wandji et a l , 2000. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Cheek, 2004b; Leandri , 
1958; McPherson, 2000. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
ECHIUM STENOSIPHON Webb 
P r o t o l o g u e Hook., Niger FL: 155, t. 15 
(1849). 
F a m i l y Boraginaceae 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Lingua de vaca (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Echium 
stenosiphon is endemic to Cape Verde. 
U s e s In Cape Verde Echium stenosiphon is 
used to prepare a dr ink to cure colds. It is con-
sidered a valuable forage plant , especially the 
flowers, which are appreciated by livestock. 
P r o p e r t i e s No information on the chemical 
propert ies of Echium stenosiphon is available, 
but probably pyrrolizidine alkaloids are pre-
sent as in other species of the Boraginaceae. 
Seed of several Echium species is rich in y-
linolenic acid. 
B o t a n y Shrub or unde r sh rub up to 1.2 m 
tall, little branched, brist ly hairy. Leaves al-
t e rna te , simple and ent i re ; s t ipules absent; 
petiole up to 2(-3) cm long; blade ovate, ellipti-
cal, obovate or rare ly lanceolate, 3.5-14 cm x 
2 -5 cm, base cuneate or rounded, apex acute to 
rounded. Inflorescence a very lax, thyrsoid 
panicle with 3-10 la tera l cymes. Flowers bi-
sexual, 5-merous; calyx deeply lobed, lobes 
unequal ; corolla lilac-blue, tube slightly curved, 
up to 2.5 cm long, lobes up to 2.5 mm long; 
s t amens inser ted on the corolla tube, unequal ; 
ovary superior, 4-parted, style up to 2.5 cm 
long, s t igma head-shaped. Frui t spli t t ing into 4 
murica te nut le ts , each up to 3 mm long. 
Echium comprises about 45 species, more t h a n 
half of them endemic to Cape Verde, Madeira , 
the Azores and Canary Is lands, while the other 
species have mainly a European, Mediterra-
nean or North African distr ibution with a few 
species extending into Asia. Echium arenarium 
Guss. is applied in Su d an as a poultice agains t 
tumours and abscesses. In tropical Africa 
Echium horridum Bat t . is only recorded in 
Maur i tan ia , where it is considered to be useful 
fodder. It contains echimidine as major pyrrol-
izidine alkaloid, which is hepatotoxic, pneumo-
toxic, mutagenic and carcinogenic. Ext rac ts of 
the aer ial pa r t s inhibit the growth of the gram-
negative bacter ia Escherichia coli and Kleb-
siella and of the fungus Candida albicans. 
E c o l o g y Echium stenosiphon occurs in rocky 
escarpments and fallow fields from sea-level up 
to 1250 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Echium 
stenosiphon is considered vulnerable and 
measures to conserve it are long overdue. 
Clearing for agricul ture is a major th rea t . No 
germplasm collections exist. 
P r o s p e c t s The use of Echium stenosiphon in 
t radi t ional medicine and as forage seems mar-
ginal and will probably not gain in importance. 
The possible presence of toxic pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids w a r r a n t s research. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Gomes et al., 1995; Hilger 
& Bohle, 2000; Johnston, 1953; Mar t ins , 1995 
Silva et al., 1999. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Andrews, 1956; Burkill 
1985; El-Shazly et a l , 1999; G r a h a m et al. 
2000; Guil-Guerrero, Garcia-Maroto & Gi 
menez-Gimenez, 2001; Mahmoud et al., 1995. 
Qaiser, 1979; Verdcourt , 1991; Yousif, I skander 
& Eisa, 1983. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
EHRETIA 237 
EFULENSIA CLEMATOIDES C.H.Wright 
Protologue Dyer, Icon. pi. 26: t. 2518 
(1897). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Deidamia clematoides (C.H.Wright) 
Harms (1897). 
Origin and geographic distribution Efulen-
sia clematoides occurs from southern Nigeria to 
DR Congo. 
Uses In DR Congo a concentrated root decoc-
tion of Efulensia clematoides is used to produce 
arrow poison. The leaves are eaten to treat 
liver problems and enlargement of the spleen. 
Properties Some saponins are present in 
the bark and roots of Efulensia clematoides. 
Hydrocyanic acid is abundant in the roots and 
traces of it occur in the bark. Efulensia clema-
toides contains the cyanohydrin glycosides bar-
terin (tetraphyllin B) and deidaclin. 
Botany Liana up to 30 m long; stem up to 5 
cm in diameter, axillary tendrils present or 
not. Leaves alternate, 3-foliolate; stipules lin-
ear, 1.5-5 mm long; petiole 3.5-8.5 cm long, 
with a pair of glands at base; petiolules 1-3 
mm long, distinctly articulate; leaflets obovate 
to elliptical, 3.5-12 cm x 2.5-7.5 cm, base 
cuneate to obtuse, apex acuminate or obtuse 
and mucronate, glossy at both sides, glaucous 
beneath. Inflorescence a terminal cyme, 10— 
many-flowered, often with a tendril in place of 
the terminal flower; peduncle 3-20 cm long. 
Flowers bisexual or functionally unisexual 
regular, 5-merous, glabrous, whitish to green 
ish; pedicel 10-20 mm long; hypanthium shal 
lowly cup-shaped or nearly flat, c. 5 mm wide: 
sepals ovate, 6-10 mm long, apex obtuse to 
acute; petals oblong, 5-8 mm long, apex acute 
corona white, with tube 1-1.5 mm high and 
threads 3-7 mm long; stamens fused at base 
for 1—1.5 mm, sometimes with 5 small teeth 
alternating with the 6-10 mm long filaments; 
ovary superior, ellipsoid, 2-3 mm long, with 
stipe up to 1 mm long, 1-celled, styles 3, almost 
free to over halfway fused, 2-3 mm long, stig-
mas globose. Fruit a globular to flattened cap-
sule c. 1.5 cm x 2.5 cm, with (2-)3(-4) longitu-
dinal grooves, yellow to orange, 4-12-seeded. 
Seeds 7.5—9.5 mm long, with roughly pitted 
black testa. 
Efulensia comprises 2 species, both occurring 
in tropical Africa. 
Ecology Efulensia clematoides occurs in 
rainforest on dry and swampy localities, often 
in secondary forest and forest margins, from 
sea-level up to 900 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Efulen-
sia clematoides is widely distributed and not 
threatened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of the medicinal use on 
record, research into the properties of Efulen-
sia clematoides may prove worthwhile. How-
ever, the species is likely to remain of limited 
importance. 
Major references Bouquet & Debray, 1974; 
Burkill, 1997; Neuwinger, 2000; Olafsdottir, 
Andersen & Jaroszewski, 1989; Robyns, 1995. 
Other references de Wilde, 1974; Long, 
Clapp & Ettlinger, 1970; Paris, Bouquet & 
Paris, 1969; Yamada, 1999. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
EHRETIA OBTUSIFOLIA DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 9: 507 (1845). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Synonyms Ehretia coerulea Gurke (1900). 
Vernacular names Sandpaper bush, big-
leaved puzzle bush (En). Mkilika (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ehretia 
obtusifolia occurs in almost all countries of 
eastern and southern Africa and in Madagas-
car. It extends into Asia up to Pakistan and 
northwest India. 
Uses In Zimbabwe the leaves of Ehretia ob-
tusifolia are used as an infusion to treat sore 
throat and are rubbed on the gums of infants 
suffering from teething pains. In Zimbabwe 
powdered root is added to porridge to treat 
painful menstruation and infertility in women 
and an infusion of the roots is taken against 
retained placenta. A decoction of the roots is 
taken as a painkiller, specifically against ab-
dominal pain in Zimbabwe and in Tanzania. 
The wood is used to make pestles for pounding 
grain in Zimbabwe. In Pakistan the leaves are 
used as a fodder and the wood as firewood. 
Properties Ehretia obtusifolia has so far 
escaped attention of pharmacological research, 
but several Asian species of the genus (e.g. 
Ehretia philippinensis DC.) have been the sub-
ject of tests and analyses. In tests with mice, a 
crude stem bark extract of Ehretia philippinen-
sis was found to be moderately toxic when ad-
ministered intraperitoneally and slightly toxic 
when administered orally. A decrease in motor 
activity and slight analgesia were observed as 
well. Extracts of the stem bark showed inhibi-
tory activity against compound 48/80, a potent 
histamine liberator. Rosmarinic acid was iden-
238 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tified as the active constituent. A stem bark 
extract was also tested for anti-inflammatory 
activity using animal models, and was found 
comparable in potency to an aspirin reference. 
Five cyanoglucosides have been isolated: ehre-
tiosides Al, A2, A3 and B, and simmondsin. 
Botany Deciduous shrub or small tree up to 
6 m tall; often straggling or with several 
branches from base; bark grey. Leaves alter-
nate, simple; petiole up to 2 cm long; blade 
elliptical, oblong-elliptical or obovate, 1—9(—11) 
cm x 0.5-6(-8.5) cm, pubescent to velvety; base 
cuneate; apex obtuse to shortly acuminate. 
Inflorescence a corymbose cyme, terminal or on 
short lateral shoots, c. 2.5 cm wide, many-
flowered, axes densely glandular pubescent. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; 
pedicel up to 4.5 mm long; calyx lobes ovate, 
elliptical or narrowly triangular, 2 mm x 1 mm, 
puberulous, only joined at the base; corolla 
pink, blue, pale lilac or mauve, tube cylindrical, 
4-4.5 mm long, lobes narrowly triangular to 
oblong, 3-4.5 mm x 1 mm, acute or obtuse; 
stamens exserted for 2-4 mm; ovary superior, 
2-celled, style 3-6 mm long, deeply forked. 
Fruit a globose drupe 5-6 mm in diameter, 
orange or red, splitting into two 2-seeded pyre-
nes. 
The genus Ehretia comprises about 33 species, 
most of them in tropics and subtropics of the 
Old World and a few in Central America and 
the West Indies. Ehretia is sometimes placed in 
the small family Ehretiaceae. Several other 
African Ehretia species are used in traditional 
medicine as well as for timber. A root decoction 
of Ehretia bakeri Britten, a species restricted to 
Kenya and Tanzania, is used as a cure for gon-
orrhoea in Kenya. Ehretia caerulea is some-
times distinguished as a separate species dif-
fering in its much-branched inflorescence and 
blue to purplish blue corolla colour (versus the 
white tube and mauve or blue lobes in Ehretia 
obtusifolia). However, as both species occur in 
Zimbabwe and it is not clear to which one the 
information on uses refers, they are kept to-
gether here, with Ehretia coerulea as a syno-
nym of Ehretia obtusifolia. 
Ecology Ehretia obtusifolia is found in 
woodland, wooded grassland and in thickets, 
often in rocky localities at of 700-1500 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Ehretia 
obtusifolia is widespread but obviously not 
common in most of its range. In Madagascar 
the species is only known from 4 collections 
and hence qualified there as 'Endangered' ac-
cording to the IUCN Red List categories. 
Prospects Research on the pharmacological 
compounds of Ehretia obtusifolia may prove 
worthwhile, because Asian Ehretia species 
have compounds with interesting activities. 
Major references Gelfand et al., 1985; 
Schmelzer, 2003; Verdcourt, 1991. 
Other references Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Hutchings et a l , 1996; Kokwaro, 1993; Martins 
& Brummitt, 1990; Retief & van Wyk, 2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ELAEOPHORBIA DRUPIFERA (Thonn.) Stapf 
Protologue Prain, Icon. pi. 29: t. 2823 
(1906). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Euphorbia drupifera Thonn. 
(1827). 
Vernacular names Pago olho de marcaçao 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Elaeo-
phorbia drupifera occurs from Guinea east to 
Uganda and south to DR Congo and perhaps 
Angola. 
Uses The latex is commonly applied to ring-
worm, snakebites, insect stings and scorpion 
stings to relieve the pain. It is applied to warts 
because of its caustic effects. It is also applied 
to the gums against toothache. Ground leaves 
with salt and chopped onions are applied to 
Guinea worm sores, to extract the worms. In 
Côte d'Ivoire a leaf decoction is taken as a pur-
gative, or applied as an enema for the same 
purpose. In West Africa and Gabon the latex 
dissolved in water is drunk or latex is eaten in 
manioc porridge or on a piece of sugar cane as 
Elaeophorbia drupifera - wild and planted 
ELAEOPHORBIA 239 
a purgative. In Congo a bark decoction is used 
as mouth wash to treat toothache. In DR Congo 
root bark sap is rubbed in and scrapings are 
used as a dressing to treat craw-craw wounds. 
A leaf decoction is drunk to treat cough and 
whooping cough, and is also used to wash lep-
rous sores. 
The latex or crushed leaves are widely used as 
a fish poison or as an ingredient of arrow poi-
son. In Ghana the fruit is also used as fish poi-
son. The latex is also used as ordeal poison. 
Throughout West Africa and in Gabon Elaeo-
phorbia drupifera is planted near villages for 
use in religious rituals. Mixed with oil the latex 
is applied to the eyeball, which affects the optic 
nerve and causes strange visual effects and 
confusion. It can also lead to severe eye dam-
age. The plants are planted near houses and on 
graves to protect against bad spirits and light-
ning. In West Africa Elaeophorbia drupifera is 
also planted as a live fence around home gar-
dens. In Ghana the soft wood is used to smoke 
fish. 
Properties The stem latex contains 0.3— 
0.5% of the diterpene alcohol ingenol and sev-
eral ingenol diterpene esters. Ingenol is also 
present in Euphorbia spp. The esters are toxic 
and co-carcinogens. The triterpenes euphol, 
tirucallol and euphorbol were also isolated as 
major components. The latex contains the 
lectins euphorbain di and euphorbain da, which 
agglutinate erythrocytes in vitro. 
Extracts of the latex were found to inhibit rep-
lication and cytopathicity of several HIV-1 and 
HIV-2 strains, even after delayed treatment. 
The latex was also selectively toxic to Molt-
4/HIV cells and inhibited HIV-1 reverse tran-
scriptase. 
A crude leaf extract evoked significant dose-
dependent contractions in isolated guinea-pig 
ileum and rat uterine preparations. It signifi-
cantly reduced blood glucose levels in rats. A 
crude root extract decreased both the blood 
pressure and heart rate in a dose-dependent 
manner in anaesthetized rats. Also, the extract 
was found to prolong acetylcholine-induced 
hypotension in rats. In-vitro studies using iso-
lated arterial strips revealed that the extract 
had a dose-dependent relaxant effect on vascu-
lar smooth muscle tissue. The water extract of 
leaves administered orally in graded doses to 
rats did not show adverse changes in liver and 
kidney. 
A crude leaf extract administered intraperito-
neally showed an LD50 of 135 mg/kg in mice, 
and a crude root extract an LDso of 145 mg/kg. 
Descript ion Monoecious, glabrous, small to 
medium-sized tree up to 22 m tall, with copious 
white latex; bole stout, up to 60 cm in diame-
ter, often low-branching; bark grey, rough; 
branches spreading, forming a large rounded 
crown, branchlets obtusely 5-angled, becoming 
cylindrical, with conspicuous leaf scars. Leaves 
arranged spirally, crowded at branch apex, 
simple and entire; stipules soon falling; petiole 
up to 2.5 cm long, subtended by a pair of prick-
les up to 3 mm long; blade oblanceolate, up to 
28 cm x 10 cm, base cuneate, apex rounded to 
emarginate, fleshy, pinnately veined. Inflores-
cence an axillary cyme, usually 3 together, 1-2-
forked, consisting of cyathia; peduncle up to 4.5 
cm long and branches up to 2.5 cm long; bracts 
broadly deltoid, c. 7 mm long, paired, persis-
tent; cyathia sessile, c. 4 mm x 12 mm, involu-
cre widely funnel-shaped, 5-lobed, with large 
glands c. 2.5 mm x 6 mm, brownish yellow, 
each cyathium containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual, perianth absent; male flowers with fan-
shaped bracteoles, consisting of a single sta-
men c. 4 mm long; female flowers consisting of 
a superior ovary, 3-celled, smooth, merging 
into the pedicel, styles 3, c. 1.5 mm long, fused, 
Elaeophorbia drupifera - 1, flowering and fruiting 
branch; 2, cyathium. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
240 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
s t igmas flattened, reflexed. Frui t an almost 
sessile, obovoid, slightly 3-lobed, fleshy drupe 
up to 5 cm x 3.5 cm, green becoming yellow; 
stone grooved, 1-3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 7—8 
mm x 4.5 mm, wi th 2 ridges, smooth, greyish 
brown. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Elaeophor-
bia comprises 3-5 species in tropical Africa. It 
is sometimes included in Euphorbia, from 
which it differs in lacking a pe r i an th in the 
female flowers, in the ovary merging into the 
pedicel, and in its large indéhiscent drupe-like 
fruits in contrast to the dry dehiscent fruits of 
Euphorbia. Elaeophorbia drupifera and Elaeo-
phorbia grandifolia (Haw.) Croizat a re closely 
re la ted and the common occurrence of inter-
media te specimens e.g. in Ghana indicates t h a t 
it could represent a single var iable species. 
In Centra l Africa Elaeophorbia drupifera is 
somet imes confused wi th Euphorbia teke 
Schweinf. ex Pax. 
E c o l o g y Elaeophorbia drupifera occurs in 
forest edges, flooded coastal plains and occa-
sionally rainforest, on brown-black humid soil, 
often nea r te rmi tar ia , a t 700-1000 m al t i tude . 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Elaeophorbia 
drupifera is propagated by seed or Wildlings. 
Elaeophorbia grandifolia is also propagated by 
stem cutt ings, and this may be a sui table 
propagat ion method for Elaeophorbia drupi-
fera. 
H a r v e s t i n g The leaves, bark , roots and la-
tex can be harves ted whenever the need ar ises . 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t All p lant pa r t s 
t h a t a re harves ted are used fresh, as is the 
latex. The latex may also be used after coagu-
lation. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Elaeophorbia drupifera 
is widespread and relatively common, and 
therefore not likely th rea tened by genetic ero-
sion. 
P r o s p e c t s The latex of Elaeophorbia drupi-
fera is caustic and co-carcinogenic, and it 
should therefore be used with extreme care. 
However, the ant i-HIV tes ts in vitro are prom-
ising, and more research should be done to 
evaluate the possible development of lead com-
pounds for the pharmaceut ica l industry . Bio-
systematic s tudies a re needed to clarify the 
s ta tus of Elaeophorbia drupifera and Elaeo-
phorbia grandifolia. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Ayisi & Nyadedzor, 2003; 
Burkill , 1994; Car te r & Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; 
Hal l & Swaine, 1981; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 
2006; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Nielsen e t al., 1979; Ponsinet & Ourisson, 
1968. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Abo, 1994; Ahiahonu & 
Goodenowe, 2007; Akoègninou, van der Burg & 
van der Maesen, 2006; Akpanab ia tu et al., 
2003; Ayensu, 1978; Bruyns , Mapaya & Hed-
derson, 2006; Eno & I tam, 1998; Eno & Itam, 
1999; Eno & Owo, 1999; Eno et al., 1999; Gas-
sita et al. (Editors), 1982; Keay, 1958a; Lynn & 
Clevette-Radford, 1985; Lynn & Clevette-
Radford, 1986; Lynn & Clevette-Radford, 
1987a; Lynn & Clevette-Radford, 1987b; 
Terash ima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
E L A E O P H O R B I A G R A N D I F O L I A (Haw.) Cro iza t 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. J a rd . Bot. E t a t 15: 109 
(1938). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Elaeo-
phorbia grandifolia occurs from Senegal east to 
Benin and also in Cameroon, t h e Cent ra l Afri-
can Republic and Gabon. 
U s e s The latex is used as a drast ic purgat ive 
and is only used in serious s i tuat ions, such as 
food poisoning and severe constipation. In 
Senegal and Sierra Leone the latex is applied 
to t he gums to assist tooth extraction. In Côte 
d'Ivoire a leaf extract is t aken to t r ea t angina 
and chest complaints . Dried powdered leaves in 
wate r are also t aken to t rea t chest complaints . 
A ba rk or leaf decoction is applied to guinea 
worm sores to assist extraction of the worms, 
and the pulped ba rk is applied as a dressing. 
The latex h a s been applied to relieve the pain 
of scorpion st ings and to remove war t s . In 
Ghana a leaf decoction is used as a contracep-
tive, and it is external ly applied to heal boils, 
r ingworm and war t s . In Togo the latex in wate r 
is t aken to t r ea t haemorrhoids . 
The latex is used in arrow and fish poisons in 
Côte d'Ivoire, G h a n a and Gabon, whereas in 
Burk ina Faso t he roots a r e used in t he prepa-
rat ion of arrow poison. In Côte d'Ivoire sus-
pected cr iminals have the latex applied to the 
eye as an ordeal-poison. A herbal ant idote is 
applied quickly if t he suspect admi t s to the 
crime, bu t cases of pe rmanen t eye damage 
have been recorded. 
In West Africa Elaeophorbia grandifolia is 
widely p lanted to protect agains t l ightning and 
to keep away ghosts and evil spir i ts . In Sierra 
Leone i t is p lan ted as a hedgerow. 
ERYTHROCOCCA 241 
Properties The latex contains 0.3-0.5% of 
the diterpene alcohol ingenol and several in-
genol diterpene esters. Ingenol is also present 
in Euphorbia spp. The esters are toxic and co-
carcinogens. The triterpenes euphol, tirucallol 
and euphorbol have also been isolated. The 
latex also contains the lectins euphorbain di 
and euphorbain ds, which agglutinate erythro-
C5'tes in vitro. The latex was found to be highly 
irritant in mouse ear tests. 
Botany Monoecious, glabrous small tree up 
to 15(-25) m tall, with copious white latex; bole 
stout, up to 80 cm in diameter, often low-
branching; bark grey, rough; branches spread-
ing, forming a large rounded crown, branchlets 
obtusely 5-angled, becoming cylindrical, with 
conspicuous leaf scars. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, crowded at branch apex, simple and en-
tire; stipules soon falling; petiole up to 3 cm 
long, subtended by a pair of prickles up to 3 
mm long; blade ovate to oblanceolate, 8—30(-
40) cm x 4-12 cm, base cuneate, apex rounded 
to emarginate, fleshy, pinnately veined. Inflo-
rescence an axillary cyme, usually 3 together, 
consisting of cyathia; peduncle up to 4.5 cm 
long and branches up to 2.5 cm long; bracts 
broadly deltoid, c. 7 mm long, paired, persis-
tent; cyathia sessile, c. 15 mm in diameter, 
involucre widely funnel-shaped, 5-lobed, with 
large glands c. 2.5 mm x 6 mm, brownish yel-
low, each cyathium containing 1 female flower 
surrounded by many male flowers. Flowers 
unisexual, perianth absent; male flowers with 
fan-shaped bracteoles, consisting of a single 
stamen c. 4 mm long; female flowers consisting 
of a superior, 3-celled, smooth ovary merging 
into the pedicel, styles 3, c. 1.5 mm long, fused, 
stigmas flattened, reflexed. Fruit an almost 
sessile, obovoid, slightly 3-lobed, fleshy drupe 
up to 3.5 cm x 2.5 cm, green becoming yellow; 
stone grooved, 1-3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 8 
mm x 4.5—5 mm, with 2 ridges, smooth, greyish 
brown. 
Elaeophorbia comprises 3-5 species in tropical 
Africa. It is sometimes included in Euphorbia, 
from which it differs in lacking a perianth in 
the female flowers, in the ovary merging into 
the pedicel, and in its large indéhiscent drupe-
like fruits in contrast to the dry dehiscent 
fruits of Euphorbia. Elaeophorbia grandifolia 
and Elaeophorbia drupifera (Thonn.) Stapf are 
closely related and the common occurrence of 
intermediate specimens, e.g. in Ghana, indi-
cates that they could represent a single vari-
able species. 
Ecology Elaeophorbia grandifolia occurs in 
dry forest, on rocky slopes, from sea-level up to 
800 m altitude. It sometimes also occurs in 
moist lowland forest. 
Management Elaeophorbia grandifolia can 
be easily propagated by stem cuttings, which 
should be at least 20 cm long. After cutting 
they should be allowed to lie in a shaded place 
for at least a week to develop a callus on the 
cut end. Elaeophorbia grandifolia can also be 
grown from seed. 
Genetic resources and breeding Elaeo-
phorbia grandifolia is widespread and rela-
tively common, and therefore not likely threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The latex of Elaeophorbia gran-
difolia is caustic and co-carcinogenic, and it 
should therefore be used with extreme care in 
local medicine. Biosystematic studies are 
needed to clarify the status of Elaeophorbia 
grandifolia and Elaeophorbia drupifera. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Eggli, 2002; 
Keay, 1958a; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 
2000. 
Other references Abo, 1994; Bruyns, Ma-
paya & Hedderson, 2006; Dalziel, 1937; Eggli, 
2002; Evans & Kinghorn, 1977; Hall & Swaine, 
1981; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006; Mshana et 
al., 2000. 
Authors L.E. Newton 
ERYTHROCOCCA ANOMALA (Juss. ex Poir.) 
Prain 
Protologue Ann. Bot. 25: 614 (1911). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In - 30 
Synonyms Erythrococca aculeata Benth. 
(1849). 
Vernacular names Bush lime (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ery-
thrococca anomala occurs from Guinea Bissau 
east to Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea (Bioko) 
and Gabon. 
Uses The leaves are laxative and purgative 
and considered very effective against tape-
worm. A decoction of young leaves is applied 
against skin lesions and subcutaneous para-
sites. Sap of the leaves is used as eye drops to 
treat sore eyes, as nose drops to treat sinusitis 
and as ear drops to treat ear infections. To 
treat eye injuries, leaves are folded into a fun-
nel and filled with water; after a while the wa-
ter is dropped into the eye. Leafy twigs are 
used to clean and disinfect wounds and ulcers. 
In Guinea dried and ground leaves mixed with 
242 MEDICINAL PLANTS l 
seeds of melegueta pepper (Aframomum me-
legueta (Roscoe) K.Schum.) is taken as a snuff 
against chronic headache. Leaf pulp is also 
used as a rub to treat local pain. In Côte 
d'Ivoire powdered leaves alone or mixed with 
those of Psychotria peduncularis (Salisb.) Stey-
erm. and clay are applied in friction against 
malaria in children and rubbed on the neck 
and throat against meningitis. In Cameroon a 
decoction of the leaves is taken to expel tape-
worms. A leaf macerate is applied to the tooth 
to treat toothache. In Nigeria the bark is used 
against arthritis and rheumatism. The fruit 
pulp or the root bark are taken as a tonic 
against general weakness. 
Properties The roots and bark contain 
about 1% alkaloids, the twigs and leaves about 
0.1%. Alkaloids have also been found in the 
seeds. 
Botany Dioecious, spiny shrub up to 3 m 
tall; bark flaky, brown. Leaves alternate, sim-
ple; stipules formed into persistent spines, 
brown; petiole short; blade ovate to oblong, 4—5 
cm x 2-3 cm, base obtuse, apex acuminate, 
margin wavy, glabrous, pinnately veined with 
2-3 pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axil-
lary raceme. Flowers unisexual, minute, whit-
ish to pale yellow; calyx 4-lobed; corolla absent; 
male flowers with 9-15 stamens; female flow-
ers with superior ovary, 3-lobed. Fruit a 2(-3)-
lobed capsule, red when mature. Seeds globu-
lar, pitted, covered by a thin orange to bright 
red aril. 
Erythrococca comprises about 40 species and is 
confined to mainland Africa. Erythrococca 
anomala is a fast growing heliophile. It flowers 
at the end of the dry season and the beginning 
of the rainy season. 
Erythrococca africana (Baill.) Prain occurs 
from Cape Verde and Senegal to Cameroon. 
The powdered dry leaves are taken with food 
as a mild purgative; crushed leaves are applied 
to whitlow. In Nigeria hunters add the leaves 
to meat to make it tender. Erythrococca cheva-
lieri (Beille) Prain, occurring from Guinea east 
to Cameroon and the Congo basin, and Ery-
thrococca welwitschiana (Müll.Arg.) Pax & 
K.Hoffm. from Central Africa have similar me-
dicinal uses in Congo. The leaves are consid-
ered aphrodisiac and are taken against gonor-
rhoea and are also applied to heal sores and 
scabies. Leaf sap is drunk against bronchial 
complaints and is externally applied to treat 
itch and a stiff neck. An infusion of the roots is 
taken to relieve stomach complaints. The 
leaves are eaten as a vegetable. In Cameroon 
Erythrococca chevalieri is also used in witch-
craft. Erythrococca hispida (Pax) Prain occurs 
in forest in Cameroon. The leaves are ground 
with salt and applied to scarifications to treat 
kidney pain. Young leaves are eaten with vege-
table salt and cooked banana against gastro-
intestinal problems. 
Ecology In Sierra Leone Erythrococca 
anomala occurs in forest relics in the savanna; 
in Cameroon in riverine forest and in shady 
forest undergrowth. It occurs from sea-level up 
to 1600 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Erythro-
cocca anomala has a wide distribution and is 
common, and is not in danger of genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Erythrococca anomala has impor-
tant uses in traditional medicine. As a recent 
revision of the genus is lacking and almost 
nothing is known on its chemical and pharma-
cological properties, there is an urgent need for 
botanical and pharmacological studies to verify 
its potential. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1996; 
Basilevskaia, 1969; Burkill, 1985; Keay, 1958a; 
Tokuoka, 2007. 
Other references Brisson, 1988; Kabouw et 
al., 2008; Keita et a l , 1999; Malato Beliz, 1977. 
Authors R.B. Jiofack Tafokou 
ERYTHROCOCCA BONGENSIS Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 19: 88 (1894). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Ery-
thrococca bongensis occurs from southern Su-
dan and Ethiopia south to eastern DR Congo, 
Burundi and Tanzania. 
Uses Leaf sap diluted with water is drunk or 
leaves mixed with butter are eaten against 
cough. Leaves are eaten against stomach com-
plaints and are given, sometimes in decoction, 
to children as a fortifier. A leaf decoction is 
drunk, or used as a wash or vapour bath, 
against diarrhoea. A decoction of leaves and 
roots is drunk to expel intestinal parasites. 
Leaf powder is sniffed against vomiting. An 
infusion of the leaves is used as a wash to treat 
skin problems, while a decoction of leafy twigs 
is applied as a wash to treat rectal prolapse. A 
decoction of the leaves together with several 
other plants is taken orally or is applied as an 
enema against diarrhoea. An infusion of the 
leaves mixed with several other plants is ap-
plied as an enema against various skin infec-
ERYTHEOCOCCA 243 
tions. A decoction of the leaves, also mixed with 
several other plants, is given to drink to 
women whose foetus does not move. Leaves 
and stems are applied as an enema against 
haemorrhoids. A decoction of the roots and 
leaves together with the leaves of Hibiscus 
fuscus Garcke is drunk against intestinal para-
sites. An infusion of the root is given as an en-
ema against stomach-ache and indigestion. In 
Uganda ground leaves mixed with milk are 
drunk or raw leaves are eaten to expel tape-
worm. Root or leaf powder is taken in milk to 
treat tonsillitis. In Rwanda a decoction of the 
leaves with salt is given against dehydration, 
while the residue is rubbed onto the skin. 
In veterinary medicine, leaf sap is given to 
facilitate parturition. A decoction of the leaves 
is given in serious cases of anthrax and East 
Coast fever. 
The leaves are eaten as a vegetable. The 
branches are used to make arrow shafts and 
walking sticks. 
Properties No information is available on 
the pharmaceutical or chemical properties of 
Erythrococca bongensis. 
Fresh leaves contain per 100 g: water 68 g, 
protein 7.2 g, fat 2.7 g, carbohydrate 18.5 g, 
fibre 4.3 g, Ca 678 mg and P 107 mg (Leung, 
Busson & Jardin, 1968). 
Botany Dioecious, erect or scandent shrub 
or small tree up to 3.5(—6) m tall; bark pale 
grey or brown, flaking; branchlets grey-green, 
hairy when young, becoming glabrous. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules developed into 
spines c. 2 mm long, straight or hooked, yellow-
ish; petiole (2-)3-9 mm long, hairy, becoming 
glabrous; blade ovate, elliptical or elliptical-
lanceolate, (l-)3-7.5(-12) cm x (0.5-)l-3(-5) 
cm, base cuneate, apex obtuse or rarely acute, 
margins notched or toothed, pinnately veined 
with 5-7 pairs lateral veins, often looped. In-
florescence a head, solitary or fascicled, sessile 
or with peduncle up to 1.5 cm long; bracts min-
ute. Flowers unisexual; male flowers with 
slender pedicel up to 12 mm long, flexible, gla-
brous, calyx with 3(-4) lobes, triangular to 
ovate, c. 1.5 mm x 1 mm, greenish cream, gla-
brous, extra-staminal disk-glands 7, small, 
rounded, inter-staminal glands numerous, an-
gular, truncate, dark green, stamens 9-15 in 2 
whorls, c. 0.5 mm long; female flowers with 
pedicel up to 4 mm long, calyx lobes smaller, 
disk glands 3, ovate, flattened, ovary superior, 
3-lobed, c. 1 mm in diameter, style c. 1 mm 
long, stigma fringed, white. Fruit composed of 
2—3 free cocci, each 3.5—4 mm in diameter, 
sparingly hairy, greenish or purplish, each 
coccus 1-seeded. Seed almost spherical, 3—3.5 
mm in diameter, shallowly pitted or netted, 
aril orange-yellow or red. 
Erythrococca comprises about 40 species and is 
confined to mainland Africa. Several other 
Erythrococca spp. have medicinal uses in Cen-
tral and eastern Africa. Erythrococca atro-
virens (Pax) Prain occurs in equatorial Africa, 
extending south-east to Zambia. Leaf sap or a 
paste from the roots, heated together with 
lemon juice, is applied to syphilitic sores. Leaf 
powder is applied to wounds. The leaves are 
eaten as a vegetable. Erythrococca fischeri Pax 
occurs in eastern equatorial Africa. A decoction 
of its root is drunk to treat intestinal worm 
infections and gonorrhoea. The fruits are edi-
ble. Erythrococca menyharthii (Pax) Prain oc-
curs in East and southern tropical Africa. The 
roots are ground and eaten with honey against 
cough. Leaf sap is applied as drops in the eye 
as anti-venom after attacks by spitting snakes. 
The leaves are eaten as a vegetable and used to 
add taste to other vegetables. The fruits are 
edible. 
Ecology Erythrococca bongensis occurs in 
forest edges and associated bushland or thick-
ets, especially in fire-protected localities, along 
rivers and lakesides, in the shade of riverine 
Acacia forest and in savanna, at 200-2450 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Because 
of its wide distribution there are no indications 
that Erythrococca bongensis is threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Erythrococca bongensis has im-
portant uses in traditional medicine and as a 
leafy vegetable. As a recent revision of the ge-
nus is lacking and nothing is known on its 
chemical and pharmacological properties, there 
is an urgent need for research to verify its po-
tential. 
Major references Baerts & Lehmann, 2008a; 
Leung, Busson & Jardin, 1968; Neuwinger, 
2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1991a. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Geissler et a l , 2002; Ichikawa, 
1987; Kokwaro, 1993; Latham, 2004; Maundu 
et al., 2001; Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
244 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
E R Y T H R O P H L E U M A F R I C A N U M (Welw. ex 
Benth . ) H a r m s 
P r o t o l o g u e Repert . Spec. Nov. Regni Veg. 
12: 298 (1913). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Ordeal t ree (En). Mu-
carât i (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ery-
throphleum africanum occurs in much of tropi-
cal Africa, from Senegal eas t to Sudan, and 
south throughout Centra l Africa, Kenya, Tan-
zania and southern Africa to Transvaa l . 
U s e s In Ghana a mouth wash for relieving 
toothache is made from the ba rk of Erythro-
phleum africanum. In Zimbabwe an infusion of 
the ba rk is d runk to t rea t s tomach-ache or 
dysmenorrhoea. The ba rk steeped in wate r is 
applied externally and internal ly to cure car-
diac diseases and epilepsy. In Namibia the 
powdered root ba rk mixed with ur ine is applied 
to the skin to t r ea t leprosy. A hot wate r extract 
from pounded roots is d runk to induce vomiting 
in case of poisoning and as a cure for insani ty. 
Inhal ing the smoke of burn ing leaves is said to 
relieve pain. A pas te of root ba rk is applied to 
the skin to cure scabies. The ba rk has been 
used as an ordeal poison in Tanzania , Malawi 
and Zimbabwe. 
The t imber of Erythrophleum africanum and 
several other Erythrophleum species is mar-
keted under the t r ade n a m e 'missanda' . It is 
used for furniture, heavy and light construc-
tion, posts, poles and tool handles . The wood is 
used as firewood and to make good-quality 
charcoal, useful in iron working. Cut t ings are 
used to establish living fences. The gum from 
the ba rk is used to make baske ts wate r proof 
and to fix arrow heads and hoe and axe han-
dles. In Zambia the foliage is reportedly used 
as a fodder bu t sources from several other 
countries report t h a t it is toxic and t h a t cat t le 
are kept away from it. 
P r o p e r t i e s The complex alkaloids of 
Erythrophleum spp. are es ters of tricyclic diter-
pene acids, and 2 main types exist: dimethyl-
aminoethyles ters and monomethylamino-
ethylesters (nor-alkaloids). In addition, com-
pounds have been found in which the amine 
link is replaced by an amide link, bu t it is not 
clear whe ther these are na tu r a l compounds or 
artefacts. The ba rk of Erythrophleum afri-
canum contains erythrophlamine, norcas-
samidine, norerythrophlamide and norerythro-
s tachamide. The alkaloid content of the ba rk 
ranges from 0.04% to 0.6%. The alkaloids have 
similar cardiotonic, anaesthet ic and diuretic 
propert ies as those from other Erythrophleum 
spp. 
The ba rk contains the flavone 2,3-dihydroxy-
myricetin t h a t colours violet after addition of 
magnes ium powder and a few drops of hydro-
chloric acid. This reaction allows it to be dis-
t inguished from the ba rk of Erythrophleum 
suaveolens (Guill. & Perr.) Brenan, which col-
ours orange after t r e a t m e n t because of the 
presence of luteolin. 
The wood is red-brown, heavy, ha rd and very 
durable and is res i s tan t to termites , powder-
post beetles and mar ine borers . 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s Erythro-
phleum alkaloids have similar pharmacological 
activities as digitoxine and ouabain. 
B o t a n y Small t ree up to 15 m tall; bole 
s t ra ight and cylindrical, up to 120 cm in di-
ameter; crown spreading, fairly dense; young 
pa r t s very variable hairy. Leaves a l te rna te , 
bipinnately compound with (2-) 3—4 pairs of 
opposite p innae; st ipules minute ; petiole 3 .5 -
5.5 cm long, rachis 3-15 cm long; leaflets alter-
nate , 8-17 per pinna, elliptical or ovate, up to 
6.5 cm x 3.5 cm, base asymmetrical , apex ob-
tuse to rounded. Inflorescence an axillary or 
te rmina l panicle consisting of spike-like ra-
cemes up to 10 cm long, often shortly hairy. 
Flowers bisexual, regular , 5-merous, whi te to 
yellowish green; pedicel c. 1 mm long, hairy; 
calyx c. 2.5 mm long, tube about as long as 
lobes; peta ls narrowly obovate, up to 4 m m x 1 
mm; s t amens 10, free, up to 8 m m long; ovary 
superior, long woolly hairy, 1-celled, s t igma 
broadly pel ta te . F ru i t a flat, s t ra ight , dehiscent 
pod, elliptical in outline, 5-19 cm x 2-4.5 cm, 
base rounded, apex rounded or tapering, thick 
leathery, pendulous, 3—4-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 
compressed, c. 12 mm x 10 mm x 4 mm. 
Erythrophleum comprises about 10 species, 4 
or 5 of which occur in cont inental Africa, 1 in 
Madagascar , 3 in eas te rn Asia, and 1 in Aus-
tral ia . The genus is one of the few Caesalpini-
aceae reported to contain alkaloids. The areas 
of distr ibution of Erythrophleum africanum 
and Erythrophleum suaveolens largely overlap 
and the 2 species share many uses and proper-
ties and therefore confusion is qui te likely. The 
resul t s of earl ier pharmacological work are 
b lurred by doubtful identifications. The 2 spe-
cies differ in ecology, a number of morphologi-
cal character is t ics and the alkaloid profile of 
the bark . Nodulat ion and vesicular-arbuscular 
mycorrhizae were observed in the roots of 
ERYTHROPHLEUM 245 
Erythrophleum africanum. The rhizobium in-
volved in nodulation probably belongs to the 
genus Brady rhizobium. 
Ecology Erythrophleum africanum is com-
mon in deciduous woodland, and is absent from 
riparian woodlands and the dry savanna of the 
Sahel. It occurs at 600-1400 m altitude, and 
resists bushfires. 
Management Erythrophleum africanum 
can be grown from seed, but Wildlings are used 
as well. Coppicing and pollarding are recom-
mended management practices for Erythro-
phleum, africanum in Zambia but coppicing 
often gives poor results. 
Genetic resources and breeding Erythro-
phleum africanum is widespread and not com-
mercially exploited on a large scale. There is no 
reason to assume it will become threatened in 
the near future. 
Prospects The huge variation in alkaloid 
contents of Erythrophleum africanum bark 
warrants caution in medicinal use. Morpho-
logical and pharmacological studies could yield 
a better understanding of the variation in this 
species. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2004; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Neuwinger, 1996; von Koenen, 
2001. 
Other references Brenan, 1967; Burkill, 
1995; Chilufya & Tengnäs, 1996; Gelfand et al., 
1985; Hogberg & Alexander, 1995; Luoga, Wit-
kowski & Balkwill, 2004; Manfouo et a l , 2005; 
Ross, 1977; Storrs, 1979. 
Authors V. Kawanga 
ERYTHROPHLEUM COUMINGA Baill. 
Protologue Adansonia 10: 105 (1871). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ery-
throphleum couminga is endemic to Madagas-
car and restricted to a part of the west coast of 
about 400 km long and extending 30-40 km 
inland. 
Uses The powdered bark of Erythrophleum 
couminga is used in minute doses as a purga-
tive and laxative. In former days, it was used 
as an ordeal poison. The branches are used as 
fence posts but the wood is hardly used other-
wise. 
Properties The leaves of Erythrophleum 
couminga are toxic to cattle, but bark and 
flowers are even more poisonous. The odour of 
the flowers is said to cause violent headaches 
and to kill birds. The alkaloid content of the 
bark is 0.3-0.5%. The bark contains several 
complex diterpenoid alkaloids, which are esters 
of tricyclic diterpene acids, with as main com-
ponents alkaloids of the dimethylaminoethyles-
ter type, e.g. coumingine. The alkaloids have a 
stimulant effect on the heart like the cardiac 
glycosides of Digitalis, but the effect is very 
short-lasting. Coumingine has similar effects 
as cassaine and cassaidine, which are major 
components in other Erythrophleum species. 
They have strong anaesthetic and diuretic ef-
fects, and increase contractions of the intestine 
and uterus. Apart from an increase of heart 
contraction in systole, the alkaloids also dem-
onstrated an increase in diastole. In addition, 
coumingine caused depressive effects. 
Coumingine produced severe and long-lasting 
diarrhoea when given orally. In higher doses, 
the bark extract is an extremely strong, rapid-
acting cardiac poison, in warm-blooded animals 
causing shortness of breath, seizures and car-
diac arrest in a few minutes. 
The wood is hard and durable and is resistant 
to decay. 
Botany Small to medium-sized deciduous 
tree up to 20 m tall; bark rough, fissured; 
young twigs thinly pubescent, soon glabres-
cent. Leaves alternate, bipinnately compound 
with 2—4 pairs of pinnae; stipules triangular, c. 
1 mm long, soon falling; petiole 2-6 cm long, 
rachis up to 20 cm long; leaflets alternate, 8-12 
per pinna, ovate, up to 6 cm x 3.5 cm, base 
rounded, apex shortly acuminate. Inflorescence 
an axillary panicle consisting of spike-like ra-
cemes up to 10 cm long; peduncle hairy. Flow-
ers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, whitish yellow; 
pedicel c. 1 mm long, hairy; calyx with tube c. 2 
mm long, lobes triangular, 1-1.5 mm long; pet-
als oblong to obovate, up to 3 mm long; sta-
mens 10, free, 6-8 mm long; ovary superior, 
densely woolly hairy, 1-celled, stigma small, 
cup-shaped. Fruit a flat, straight or slightly 
curved, dehiscent pod 20-25 cm x c. 5 cm, apex 
rounded or obtuse, woody, pendulous, (2—)4—8-
seeded. Seeds disk-like to oblong or triangular, 
flattened, 18-23 mm x 17-20 mm x 6-8 mm. 
Erythrophleum comprises about 10 species, 4 
or 5 of which occur in continental Africa, 1 in 
Madagascar, 3 in eastern Asia, and 1 in Aus-
tralia. The genus is one of the few Caesalpini-
aceae reported to contain alkaloids. Erythro-
phleum couminga resembles the African 
mainland species Erythrophleum suaveolens 
(Guill. & Perr.) Brenan but has larger, more 
robust pods and seeds and is apparently more 
246 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
poisonous. Erythrophleum couminga flowers in 
the period July-October. 
Ecology Erythrophleum couminga occurs in 
deciduous woodland on sandy soils near sea-
level and in wooded grassland in association 
with palms. It is resistant to annual grassland 
fires. 
Genetic resources and breeding Erythro-
phleum couminga is restricted to a small area, 
but quite common. The limited use indicates 
that it is not subject to threats of genetic ero-
sion or extinction. 
Prospects Erythrophleum couminga is 
likely to remain little used. 
Major references du Puy et al., 2002; Heg-
nauer & Hegnauer, 1996; Rasoanaivo, Petit-
jean & Conan, 1993; Schatz, 2001. 
Other references Cronlund & Oguakwa, 
1975; Hegnauer & Hegnauer, 1994; Oguakwa 
& Cronlund, 1976; Hegnauer & Hegnauer, 
1994. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ERYTHROPHLEUM IVORENSE A.Chev. 
Protologue Vég. util. Afr. trop. Franc. 5: 
178 (1909). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
Vernacular names Ordeal tree, sasswood 
tree (En). Lim du Gabon, tali (Fr). Mancone 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ery-
throphleum ivorense occurs from Gambia to the 
Central African Republic and Gabon. 
Uses The bark traded as 'sassy-bark', 'man-
cona bark', 'casca bark' or 'écorce de tali' has 
Erythrophleum ivorense - wild 
several medicinal uses. A bark extract is taken 
orally in Sierra Leone as an emetic and laxa-
tive, and is applied externally to relieve pain. 
In Côte d'Ivoire water, in which the bark of 
young branches of Erythrophleum ivorense is 
crushed, is rubbed on the skin to treat small-
pox. 
The bark and sometimes the seeds are widely 
used as hunting and ordeal poison. In Liberia 
and Gabon the bark of Erythrophleum ivorense 
is preferred to that of Erythrophleum 
suaveolens (Guill. & Perr.) Brenan. The bark is 
used as fish poison in Sierra Leone. 
The timber of Erythrophleum ivorense is mar-
keted as 'erun', 'missanda', 'sasswood', 'alui', 
'bolondo' or 'tali'. The wood is quite hard and 
heavy, and suitable for joinery, flooring, rail-
way sleepers, harbour and dock work, turnery, 
construction and bridges. It is also used for 
boat building and wheel hubs. It makes excel-
lent charcoal and good firewood. In Sierra 
Leone and Côte d'Ivoire the bark is used for 
tanning. A bark decoction added to fermenting 
palm wine would make it a more potent drink. 
Production and international trade In 
trade statistics, the timber of Erythrophleum 
ivorense and Erythrophleum suaveolens is usu-
ally not differentiated. In 2005 the export of 
Erythrophleum ('tali') logs from Cameroon 
amounted to 37,500 m3 and of sawn wood to 
38,600 m3, which made Erythrophleum the 
fourth most important timber of Cameroon. In 
2005 the price of logs free-on-board was US$ 
123-151/m3, depending on the quality. The 
major importer is China. 
Properties The alkaloid content of Erythro-
phleum ivorense is similar to that of Erythro-
phleum suaveolens; only the distribution of the 
main compounds is different. First investiga-
tions yielded the alkaloid erythrophleine, but 
this was later identified as a mixture of differ-
ent alkaloids with similar activities. The alka-
loids are esters of tricyclic diterpene acids, and 
2 main types exist: dimethylaminoethylesters 
and monomethylaminoethylesters (nor-alkaloids). 
In addition, compounds have been found in 
which the amine link is replaced by an amide 
link, but it is not clear whether these are natu-
ral compounds or artefacts. The bark contains 
as main components alkaloids of the dimethyl-
aminoethylester type: cassaine, cassaidine and 
erythrophleguine, but no dominant alkaloid of 
the amide type. The alkaloid content of the 
bark ranges from 0.2% to 1.1%. In high doses, 
the bark extract is an extremely strong, rapid-
acting cardiac poison, in warm-blooded animals 
ERYTHROPHLEUM 247 
causing shortness of breath, seizures and car-
diac arrest in a few minutes. 
The alkaloids have a stimulant effect on the 
heart similar to that of the cardenolides digi-
toxine (from Digitalis) and ouabain (from Stro-
phanthus gratus (Wall. & Hook.) Baill.), but 
the effect is very short-lasting, as the alkaloids 
are quickly metabolized in the organism. Cas-
saine and cassaidine have strong anaesthetic 
and diuretic effects, and increase contractions 
of the intestine and uterus. Apart from an in-
crease of heart contraction in systole, the alka-
loids also demonstrated an increase in diastole. 
In addition, cassaidine caused depressive ef-
fects, while cassaine caused a violent state of 
excitation. Although the alkaloid content in the 
seeds is markedly lower than in the stem bark, 
the seeds are more toxic. This strong activity is 
due to a strong haemolytic saponin, which acts 
in a synergistic way with the alkaloids. 
Wood from Erythrophleum ivorense and 
Erythrophleum suaveolens is not differentiated 
in trade and the following wood description is 
applicable to both species. 
The heartwood is yellowish brown to reddish 
brown, darkening on exposure, sometimes 
striped, clearly demarcated from the 3-6 cm 
wide, creamy-yellow sapwood. The grain is 
interlocked, texture coarse. The wood is mod-
erately lustrous. 
The density is about 900 kg/m3 at 12% mois-
ture content. The wood dries slowly with high 
risks of distortion and checking. The shrinkage 
rates from green to oven dry are 5.1-5.8% ra-
dial and 8.4-8.6% tangential. Once dry, the 
wood is moderately stable in service. 
At 12% moisture content, the modulus of rup-
ture is 99-162 N/mm2, modulus of elasticity 
10,550-19,500 N/mm2, compression parallel to 
grain 56-97 N/mm2 and Janka side hardness 
13,000 N. 
The wood is difficult to saw; stellite-tipped 
sawteeth are recommended. Finishing is gen-
erally fair, but planing may be difficult due to 
interlocked grain. Pre-boring is necessary for 
nails and screws. The gluing properties are 
good. 
The wood is durable and resistant to fungi, dry 
wood borers and termites. It is suitable for use 
in contact with the ground. It is not permeable 
for preservatives. The sawdust may irritate 
mucous membranes and may cause allergy and 
asthma of labourers in sawmills. 
Adulterations and substitutes Erythro-
phleum alkaloids have similar pharmacological 
activities as digitoxine and ouabain. The tim-
ber from Erythrophleum ivorense and Erythro-
phleum suaveolens is marketed indiscrimi-
nately under the trade names: 'tali', 'erun', 
'bolondo' and 'alui'. The timber of Pachyelasma 
tessmannii (Harms) Harms resembles that of 
Erythrophleum, hence the trade name 'faux 
tali'. Erythrophleum wood can be used as a 
substitute for azobé (Lophira alata Banks ex 
P.Gaertn.). 
Description Large tree up to 40 m tall; bole 
cylindrical, but sometimes fluted at base, with 
or without buttresses; bark scaly, often fis-
sured, grey, inner bark reddish, granular; 
young twigs brown hairy. Leaves alternate, 
bipinnately compound with 2-4 pairs of pin-
nae; stipules minute; petiole 2-7 cm long, ra-
chis 5-15 cm long; leaflets alternate, (6-)8-14 
per pinna, elliptical to ovate, up to 8.5 cm x 4 
cm, base asymmetrical, apex shortly acumi-
nate. Inflorescence an axillary or terminal 
panicle consisting of spike-like racemes up to 8 
cm long, shortly reddish brown hairy. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, red-brown; pedicel 
c. 1 mm long, shortly hairy; calyx c. 1.5 mm 
long, lobes c. 0.5 mm long; petals narrowly 
obovate, c. 2 mm x 0.6 mm, densely hairy; sta-
mens 10, free, 2-3.5 mm long; ovary superior, 
Erythrophleum ivorense - 1, branch with leaf 
and inflorescence; 2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
248 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
long woolly hairy, 1-celled, s t igma broadly pel-
ta te . Frui t a flat, elliptical, dehiscent pod 5-10 
cm x 3-5 cm, base rounded, apex obtuse or 
rounded, thick leathery, pendulous, 2—6(—10)-
seeded. Seeds ovoid, compressed, c. 13 mm x 9 
mm x 5 mm. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Erythro-
phleum comprises about 10 species, 4 or 5 of 
which occur in cont inental Africa, 1 in Mada-
gascar, 3 in eas te rn Asia, and 1 in Austra l ia . 
The genus is one of the few Caesalpiniaceae 
reported to contain alkaloids. Erythrophleum 
ivorense and Erythrophleum suaveolens share 
many uses, vernacular names , t r ade names 
and propert ies and therefore confusion is com-
mon. Especially the resul ts of earl ier pha rma-
cological work are b lurred by doubtful identifi-
cations. The 2 species differ in ecology, some 
morphological characterist ics and the alkaloid 
profile in the bark . Only in semi-deciduous 
forest does Erythrophleum ivorense co-occur 
with Erythrophleum suaveolens, from where 
the la t te r extends into drier hab i t a t s like wood-
land savanna . However, it is often difficult to 
dis t inguish the two species from each other. 
The leaflets of Erythrophleum suaveolens a re 
often wider, i ts inflorescences wider (often 1.5 
cm versus 1 cm in Erythrophleum ivorense) and 
its pods longer. 
A n a t o m y Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: (1: growth r ing boundar ies dis-
tinct); (2: growth r ing boundar ies indistinct or 
absent) . Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 13: 
simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel pi ts 
a l te rna te ; 23: shape of a l te rna te pi ts polygonal; 
26: intervessel pi ts medium (7-10 |im); 29: 
ves tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pi ts with distinct 
borders; similar to intervessel pits in size and 
shape throughout the ray cell; 43: mean tan-
gential d iameter of vessel lumina > 200 um; 46: 
< 5 vessels per square mill imetre; 47: 5-20 
vessels per square mill imetre; 58: gums and 
other deposits in heartwood vessels. Tracheids 
and fibres: 61 : fibres with simple to minutely 
bordered pits; 66: non-septate fibres present ; 
69: fibres thin- to thick-walled; 70: fibres very 
thick-walled. Axial parenchyma: 79: axial pa-
renchyma vasicentric; 80: axial parenchyma 
aliform; 81 : axial parenchyma lozenge-aliform; 
(83: axial pa renchyma confluent); (84: axial 
parenchyma uni la te ra l para t racheal ) ; 91: two 
cells per parenchyma s t rand; 92: four (3-4) 
cells per pa renchyma s t rand; (93: eight (5-8) 
cells per parenchyma s t rand) . Rays: (96: rays 
exclusively uniseriate) ; (97: ray width 1-3 
cells); 104: all ray cells procumbent; 115: 4-12 
rays per mm; 116: > 12 rays per mm. Mineral 
inclusions: (136: pr ismat ic crystals present); 
(142: pr ismat ic crystals in chambered axial 
pa renchyma cells). 
(E. Uet imane , H. Beeckman & P.E. Gasson) 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Erythrophleum 
ivorense flowers dur ing the ra iny season. Modu-
lation was observed in p r imary rainforest and 
the rhizobium involved belongs to the genus 
Bradyrhizobium. In Côte d'Ivoire the mean 
annua l bole d iameter increment has been re-
corded as 6.5 mm, in the Centra l African Re-
public 4.5 mm. 
E c o l o g y Erythrophleum ivorense occurs in 
evergreen pr imary and secondary forest and 
moist semi-deciduous forest. Erythrophleum 
ivorense is essentially a t ree of old secondary 
forest. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Erythrophleum 
ivorense has been classified as a non-pioneer 
light demander . Seedlings are often found in 
smaller forest gaps. Erythrophleum ivorense 
can be propagated in nurser ies ; seed takes 3 
weeks to germinate . Inoculation wi th Brady-
rhizobium is beneficial and resul ts in increases 
in height and d iameter of about 40% after 4 
months . 
M a n a g e m e n t Erythrophleum ivorense t rees 
usual ly occur scat tered in the forest. In Gabon 
the average bole volume h a s been recorded as 
1.4 m3 /ha. In Liberia the mean density of t rees 
with a min imum bole d iameter of 60 cm is 0.7 
tree/ha. Reforestation with Erythrophleum 
ivorense is an option in degraded forests where 
n a t u r a l regenerat ion of economically impor tan t 
species is unlikely. In Gabon the clear-cut 
method is superior to enr ichment plant ing: 6 
years after p lant ing the survival ra te was 97% 
vs 79%, the height 16 m vs 11 m and the bole 
d iameter 13.6 cm vs 6.8 cm for the 2 methods 
respectively. 
H a r v e s t i n g Old Erythrophleum ivorense 
t rees very often have hea r t rot. The ba rk of 
Erythrophleum ivorense is harves ted from the 
wild whenever the need occurs. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The logs sink in 
wate r and can consequently not be t ranspor ted 
by floating along a river. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Erythrophleum ivorense 
is often a b u n d a n t in West and Cent ra l African 
evergreen forest. Although logging of Erythro-
phleum ivorense for i ts t imber h a s shown a 
distinct increase in Cameroon, the re a re no 
indications t h a t the species is unde r too much 
pressure yet. 
ERYTHROPHLEUM 249 
Prospects Erythrophleum iuorense contains 
pharmacologically interesting compounds and 
further study of its pharmacology is justified. 
Internal use of unpurified medicines made 
from Erythrophleum ivorense is extremely dan-
gerous. The differences in active ingredients 
between individual trees in a single population 
and the differences in composition related to 
age of the plant are large. Although Erythro-
phleum iuorense has recently gained much im-
portance as a timber tree, especially in Camer-
oon, comparatively little is known about proper 
management practices for sustainable harvest-
ing in natural forest. 
Major references Aubréville, 1959b; Au-
breville, 1968; Burkill, 1995; Chudnoff, 1980; 
CIRAD Forestry Department, 2003; Cronlund, 
1976; de Saint-Aubin, 1963; ITTO, 2004; Neu-
winger, 1996; Richter & Dallwitz, 2000. 
Other references Bakarr & Janos, 1996; 
Diabate et al., 2005; Durrieu de Madron, Nasi 
& Détienne, 2000; Hegnauer & Hegnauer, 
1996; Hogberg & Alexander, 1995; InsideWood, 
undated; Koumba Zaou et al., 1998; Siepel, 
Poorter & Hawthorne, 2004; Sprent, 2005; 
Voorhoeve, 1979. 
Sources of illustration Voorhoeve, 1979. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
ERYTHROPHLEUM SUAVEOLENS (Guill. & 
Perr.) Brenan 
Protologue Taxon 9: 194 (1960). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number In - 24, 28 
Synonyms Erythrophleum guineense G.Don 
(1832). 
Vernacular names Forest ordeal tree, red 
water tree, sasswood tree (En). Bois rouge, 
poison d'épreuve, tali, grand tali, mancône (Fr). 
Mancone, muave (Po). Mwavi, mwavi dume, 
mbaraka mkuu, mkelekele (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ery-
throphleum suaveolens is distributed from 
Senegal to Sudan and Kenya in the east and 
from there south to Zimbabwe and Mozam-
bique. It has been introduced as an ornamental 
in tropical Asia. 
Uses The bark, traded as 'sassy-bark', 'man-
cona bark' or 'casca bark' is used as emetic and 
purgative. The crushed bark is applied to 
swellings caused by Filaria. In DR Congo the 
dried powdered bark is taken as a snuff to cure 
headache. In Kenya a diluted decoction of the 
Erythrophleum suaveolens - wild 
roots is used as an anthelminthic, especially 
against tapeworm. In Malawi a decoction of the 
roots and bark is applied to soothe general 
body pain. Pieces of root or bark are a protec-
tive and love charm. The bark has been used in 
arrow poisons and as ordeal poison and the 
bark and leaves as fish poison. The use as an 
anaesthetic for fish in aquaculture is tricky as 
small differences in dosage will kill, rather 
than stupefy fish. In the Western world, bark 
extracts were used in the late 19th century to 
treat heart failure. Side effects and better re-
sults with digitoxine ended this practice. 
The tree produces quite hard, heavy and dura-
ble wood, marketed as 'alui', 'tali', 'erun', 'mis-
sanda' or 'sasswood', which is suitable for join-
ery, flooring, railway sleepers, harbour and 
dock work, turnery, construction and bridges. 
It is also used for boat building and wheel 
hubs. The bark has been used in West Africa 
for tanning hides and skins; it is used in DR 
Congo to colour leather brown. Erythrophleum 
suaveolens is planted as an ornamental and 
avenue tree. In West Africa the powdered bark 
is mixed with the residue of palm oil process-
ing, and after boiling it is mixed with seeds of 
maize, cowpea or cotton, which effectively re-
duces pest damage to the seeds. Dried leaves 
are mixed with stored grains and pulses to 
repel or kill storage insects. The use in agrofor-
estry has been promoted: nitrogen fixation and 
the large amount of leaf litter are advanta-
geous to intercrops. However, in experiments a 
negative effect of Erythrophleum suaveolens 
leaf mulch on the yield of crops has been noted. 
When clearing bush to prepare fields, trees are 
often left standing because the wood is hard 
250 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and felling is too taxing. Erythrophleum 
suaveolens wood is not highly valued as fire-
wood but charcoal made from it is excellent. 
Production and international trade Export 
of bark of Erythrophleum for medicinal pur-
poses no longer plays a role. In local markets 
however, the bark is an important and expen-
sive article. In trade statistics, the timber of 
Erythrophleum ivorense and Erythrophleum 
suaveolens (Guill. & Perr.) Brenan is usually 
not differentiated. In 2005 the export of 
Erythrophleum ('tali') logs from Cameroon 
amounted to 37,500 m3 and of sawn wood to 
38,600 m3, which made Erythrophleum the 
fourth most important timber of Cameroon. In 
2005 the price of logs free-on-board was US$ 
123-151/m3, depending on the quality. The 
major importer is China. 
Properties The alkaloid content of bark was 
found to range from 0.3% to 1.5%. The alkaloid 
content was found to vary with the age of the 
tree: a water extract of the bark contained 
0.5% and 0.9% respectively in 60 year- and 150 
year-old trees. 
The alkaloid content of Erythrophleum 
suaveolens is similar to that of Erythrophleum 
ivorense; only the distribution of the main 
compounds is different. First investigations 
yielded the alkaloid erythrophleine, but this 
was later identified as a mixture of different 
alkaloids with similar activities. The alkaloids 
are esters of tricyclic diterpene acids, and 2 
main types exist: dimethylaminoethylesters 
and monomethylaminoethylesters (nor-alkaloids). 
In addition, compounds have been found in 
which the amine link is replaced by an amide 
link, but it is not clear whether these are natu-
ral compounds or artefacts. The bark contains 
as main components alkaloids of the dimethyl-
aminoethylester type: cassaine, erythrophlamine, 
erythrophleguine and norcassamidine as well 
as the amide erythrophlamide. The bark ex-
tract has excellent local anaesthetic activity on 
eyes and skin, although its use on the eye was 
disputed because of its irritant effect on the 
conjunctiva. Trials using it as anaesthetic in 
operations or tooth extractions were less suc-
cessful, as symptoms of poisoning appeared in 
higher doses. In high doses, the bark extract is 
an extremely strong, rapid-acting cardiac poi-
son, in warm-blooded animals causing short-
ness of breath, seizures and cardiac arrest in a 
few minutes. 
The alkaloids have a stimulant effect on the 
heart similar to that of the cardenolides digi-
toxine (from Digitalis) and ouabain (from Stro-
phantus gratus (Wall. & Hook.) Baill.), but 
the effect is very short-lasting, as the alkaloids 
are rapidly metabolized in the organism. The 
alkaloids also have strong diuretic effects, and 
increase contractions of the intestine and 
uterus. Apart from an increase of heart con-
traction in systole, the alkaloids also demon-
strated an increase in diastole. In addition, 
cassaine caused a violent state of excitation. 
Although the alkaloid content in the seeds is 
markedly lower than in the stem bark, the 
seeds are more toxic. This strong activity is due 
to a strong haemolytic saponin, which acts in a 
synergistic way to the alkaloids. Norcas-
samidine has local anaesthetic action, and is a 
convulsant. 
The bark further contains procyanidins (poly-
phenols) and hence has antioxidant properties. 
The relaxant effect of the bark extract of 
Erythrophleum suaveolens is due to its procya-
nidins. 
The bark also contains the trihydroxystilbene 
resveratrol. Resveratrol shows antiplatelet 
aggregation, coronary vasodilator, antileukae-
mic, antifungal and protein-tyrosine kinase 
inhibitory activities. Trihydroxystilbenes are 
thought to protect against atherosclerosis and 
coronary heart disease. Resveratrol is, how-
ever, only registered as a food supplement, not 
as a medicine. The bark contains the flavone 
luteolin that colours orange after addition of 
magnesium powder and a few drops of hydro-
chloric acid. This reaction allows it to be dis-
tinguished from the bark of Erythrophleum 
africanum (Welw. ex Benth.) Harms, which 
colours violet after treatment because of the 
presence of 2,3-dihydroxymyricetin. 
Wood from Erythrophleum ivorense and Ery-
throphleum suaveolens is not differentiated in 
trade and the following wood description is 
applicable to both species. 
The heartwood is yellowish brown to reddish 
brown, darkening on exposure, sometimes 
striped, clearly demarcated from the 3-6 cm 
wide, creamy-yellow sapwood. The grain is 
interlocked, texture coarse. The wood is mod-
erately lustrous. 
The density is about 900 kg/m3 at 12% mois-
ture content. The wood dries slowly with high 
risks of distortion and checking. The shrinkage 
rates from green to oven dry are 5.1-5.8% ra-
dial and 8.4-8.6% tangential. Once dry, the 
wood is moderately stable in service. 
At 12% moisture content, the modulus of rup-
ture is 99-162 N/mm2, modulus of elasticity 
10,550-19,500 N/mm2, compression parallel to 
ERYTHROPHLEUM 251 
grain 56-97 N/mm2 and Janka side hardness 
13,000 N. 
The wood is difficult to saw; satellite-tipped 
sawteeth are recommended. Finishing is gen-
erally fair, but planing may be difficult due to 
interlocked grain. Pre-boring is necessary for 
nails and screws. The gluing properties are 
good. 
The wood is durable and resistant to fungi, dry 
wood borers and termites. It is suitable for use 
in contact with the ground. It is not permeable 
for preservatives. The sawdust may irritate 
mucous membranes and may cause allergy and 
asthma of labourers in sawmills. 
Adulterations and substitutes Erythro-
phleum alkaloids have similar pharmacological 
activities as digitoxine and ouabain. The tim-
ber from Erythrophleum suaveolens and 
Erythrophleum ivorense is marketed indis-
criminately under the trade names 'tali', 'erun', 
'bolondo' and 'alui'. 
Description Medium-sized tree up to 25(-
30) m tall, often branching low; bark finely 
fissured, scaly, grey; twigs glabrous. Leaves 
alternate, bipinnately compound with 2-4 
pairs of pinnae; stipules minute, soon falling; 
Erythrophleum suaveolens - 1, branch with part 
of leaf and inflorescence; 2, flower; 3, pod. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
petiole and rachis up to 35 cm long, petiole 
thickened at base; leaflets alternate, 7-14 per 
pinna, ovate to ovate-elliptical, up to 9 cm x 5.5 
cm, base asymmetrical, apex obtusely acumi-
nate. Inflorescence an axillary panicle consist-
ing of spike-like racemes up to 12 cm long, 
shortly yellowish hairy. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, yellowish white to greenish yel-
low; pedicel c. 1.5 mm long, reddish hairy; ca-
lyx lobes 1—1.5 mm long; petals 2-3 mm x 0.5 
mm, short hairy at margins; stamens 10, free, 
c. 5 mm long; ovary superior, rusty hairy, 1-
celled, stigma cup-shaped. Fruit a flat, slightly 
curved, dehiscent pod 5-17 cm x 3-5 cm, stipe 
often lateral, broadly rounded at apex, pendu-
lous, 6-11-seeded. Seeds oblong-ellipsoid, c. 15 
mm x 11 mm x 5 mm. 
Other botanical information Erythro-
phleum comprises about 10 species, 4 or 5 of 
which occur in continental Africa, 1 in Mada-
gascar, 3 in eastern Asia, and 1 in Australia. 
The genus is one of the few Caesalpiniaceae 
reported to contain alkaloids. Erythrophleum 
suaveolens superficially resembles Burkea afri-
cana Hook. Mistakes in identification have led 
to accidental poisoning and even death. 
Erythrophleum lasianthum Corbishley, the 
'Swazi ordeal tree', closely resembles Erythro-
phleum suaveolens. It is restricted to the area 
from southern Mozambique south to Swazi-
land. In South Africa the powdered bark is 
taken as a snuff to relieve headache, as a rem-
edy for other pains and fever, and to cure lung 
sickness in cattle. The bark has been used as 
ordeal poison in the same way as Erythro-
phleum suaveolens, and is also used as a fish 
and rat poison. The bark contains cardioactive 
alkaloids, mainly norcassamidine. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth ring boundaries indis-
tinct or absent. Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
13: simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel 
pits alternate; 23: shape of alternate pits po-
lygonal; 26: intervessel pits medium (7-10 um); 
(27: intervessel pits large (> 10 um)); 29: ves-
tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pits with distinct bor-
ders; similar to intervessel pits in size and 
shape throughout the ray cell; 42: mean tan-
gential diameter of vessel lumina 100-200 um; 
43: mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
> 200 am; 46: < 5 vessels per square millimetre; 
(47: 5—20 vessels per square millimetre); 58: 
gums and other deposits in heartwood vessels. 
Tracheids and fibres: 61: fibres with simple to 
minutely bordered pits; 66: non-septate fibres 
252 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
present; 70: fibres very thick-walled. Axial pa-
renchyma: 80: axial parenchyma aliform; 81: 
axial parenchyma lozenge-aliform; 83: axial 
parenchyma confluent; 84: axial parenchyma 
unilateral paratracheal; 91: two cells per pa-
renchyma strand; 92: four (3-4) cells per pa-
renchyma strand. Rays: 97: ray width 1-3 cells; 
104: all ray cells procumbent; 115: 4-12 rays 
per mm. Storied structure: 118: all rays sto-
ried; 122: rays and/or axial elements irregu-
larly storied. Mineral inclusions: 136: prismatic 
crystals present; 142: prismatic crystals in 
chambered axial parenchyma cells. 
(E. Uetimane, H. Beeckman & P.E. Gasson) 
Growth and development Regeneration of 
Erythrophleum suaveolens is best in fairly open 
forest. Flowering has been noted to occur in 
January-April in West Africa, December-
February in Kenya and in March-July in 
southern Africa. Nodulation was observed and 
the rhizobium involved belongs to the genus 
Brady rhizobium. 
Ecology Erythrophleum suaveolens occurs in 
moist semi-deciduous forests, gallery forest and 
wooded grasslands, from sea-level up to 1100 m 
altitude. It is absent from the evergreen forest. 
Propagation and planting Erythrophleum 
suaveolens can be propagated in nurseries; 
seed takes 3 weeks to germinate. Inoculation 
with Bradyrhizobium is beneficial, with in-
creases in height and diameter of 20% and 28% 
respectively after 4 months. 
Management In Sierra Leone attempts 
have been made to grow Erythrophleum 
suaveolens in plantations, but growth was 
slow. 
Harvesting The main parts of Erythro-
phleum suaveolens harvested for medicinal 
purposes are roots and bark, while the wood is 
exploited for timber. Traditional herbalists use 
ad hoc techniques to excavate the roots and 
debark the stems. Virtually all trees are used, 
from young to old ones. 
Handling after harvest Erythrophleum 
suaveolens roots and bark are washed and air-
dried before use or trade. In Malawi sawing of 
the logs mainly takes place in the forest and 
the timber is transported to timber merchants 
before or after seasoning. 
Genetic resources Erythrophleum suaveo-
lens is widespread and locally common, and as 
such not threatened by genetic erosion. How-
ever, locally it is heavily exploited. One can 
hardly find a mature tree of Erythrophleum 
suaveolens that has not been debarked in Ma-
lawi and therefore it is a species of conserva-
tion concern there. 
Prospects Erythrophleum suaveolens is an 
important medicinal plant and further study of 
its pharmacology is justified. Internal use of 
unpurified medicines made from Erythro-
phleum suaveolens is extremely dangerous. 
The difference in active ingredients between 
individual trees in a single population and the 
differences in composition related to age of the 
plant are not understood at all, which makes 
use even more hazardous. Breeding and man-
agement programmes should be started in tar-
get countries to enhance deliberate propaga-
tion and establishment in indigenous forests 
and plantations. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2004; Ayensu, 
1978; Betti, 2002; Brenan, 1967; Burkill, 1995; 
Kamanyi et al., 2003; Marshall, 1998; Oliver-
Bever, 1986; Neuwinger, 1996. 
Other references Abbiw, 1996; Aubréville, 
1968; Beentje, 1994; Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Cronlund, 1976; Diabate et al., 2005; Hegnauer 
& Hegnauer, 1996; InsideWood, undated; 
Ladipo & Onyeachusim, 1993; McGaw, Jäger & 
van Staden, 1997; Mgbenka & Ejiofor, 1998; 
Naderali, Doyle & Williams, 2000; Onuorah, 
2001; Sprent, 2005; Wilczek et a l , 1952. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors J.M. Okeyo 
EUPHORBIA ANTSO Denis 
Protologue Euphorb. Iles Austr. Afr.: 45 
(1921). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia antso is endemic to southern Madagas-
car. 
Uses The latex is toxic and caustic. It is ap-
plied to the skin to treat scabies and is used to 
poison rodents. The latex is also used in reli-
gious ceremonies. 
In the past the dried stem was used to start 
fire by friction. Euphorbia antso is sometimes 
sold on the internet as it has some ornamental 
value. 
Properties The wood is soft and perishable. 
Botany Monoecious, deciduous, glabrous, 
strongly branched shrub or small tree up to 15 
m tall; bark pale greyish brown; copious latex 
in all parts. Leaves arranged spirally, crowded 
towards the stem apex, simple and entire, al-
most sessile; stipules absent; blade lanceolate, 
up to 9 cm x 1.5 cm, base cuneate, apex acute, 
EUPHORBIA 253 
midvein prominent, lateral veins not promi-
nent. Inflorescence a terminal 3-5-rayed false 
umbel, consisting of a central, almost sessile, 
gland-bearing cluster, called a 'cyathium', c. 1 
cm in diameter, enclosed in a funnel-shaped 
involucre, and containing 1 female and many 
male flowers; basal bracts 5-8, leafy, pale 
green, upper bracts deltoid, c. 2 cm long, yel-
lowish; nectar-producing glands 2-5, tubular, 
yellowish green or red. Flowers unisexual; 
male flowers consisting of a single stamen; 
female flowers with superior ovary, purple, 3-
celled, style long. Fruit a round to lobed cap-
sule, 2-4 cm in diameter, covered with fleshy 
spines, 3-seeded. Seed globose, 1 cm in diame-
ter. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Most species present in 
Madagascar are endemic to the island. 
Several other endemic, non-succulent, shrub-
like Euphorbia species have medicinal uses in 
Madagascar. Root decoctions of Euphorbia 
boivinii Boiss., Euphorbia erythroxyloides 
Baker and Euphorbia tetraptera Baker (syno-
nym: Euphorbia bakeriana Baill.) are used to 
treat stomach-ache and lumbago. A root decoc-
tion of Euphorbia erythroxyloides is drunk to 
treat kidney problems and increase urine pro-
duction. Its root sap is drunk as a purgative. 
This species is endangered and occurs on the 
IUCN Red List. The latex of Euphorbia boivinii 
is used to poison rats. The latex of Euphorbia 
pervilleana Baill. is applied to warts. The 
spineless shrub Euphorbia pyrifolia Lam. 
('tanghin rouge') is endemic to the Seychelles, 
Réunion and Mauritius. In Mauritius a decoc-
tion of the aerial parts is taken to treat teta-
nus. 
Ecology Euphorbia antso occurs in decidu-
ous forest and thickets, from sea-level up to 
500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia antso is relatively common in its area of 
distribution, although it is becoming less com-
mon in the coastal region due to habitat de-
struction. There are no signs of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Euphorbia antso will probably 
remain of local importance as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Eggli, 2002; Razafiarison, 
1993; Stiles, 1998. 
Other references Cremers, 1977; Debray, 
Jacquemin & Razafindrambao, 1971; Gurib-
Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1996; Haever-
mans & Labat, 2004; Rakotondravony & Vola-
harisolo, 2000; Ravelombola, 2004; Steinmann 
& Porter, 2002. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA CALYPTRATA COSS. & Kralik 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Bot. France 4: 495 
(1857). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 40 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia calyptrata occurs in Mauritania and 
throughout northern Africa. 
Uses The nomadic Touareg people in the 
Sahara region apply the latex to warts and 
pustules. The crushed fresh leaves are applied 
to snakebites and scorpion stings. The pow-
dered dried leaves, mixed with honey, are ap-
plied to the eyes against conjunctivitis and 
trachoma, or boiled in oil and massaged onto 
the skin to treat baldness, rheumatism and 
numbness because of the cold. Leaf powder is 
applied to infected wounds. 
The latex is very irritating to the skin and 
caustic to the eyes. It is considered very poi-
sonous and the nomads prevent their camels 
from browsing on the plants. 
Properties Crude methanol extracts from 
both roots and cell cultures of Euphorbia calyp-
trata were found to possess significant activi-
ties on the central nervous system (CNS). From 
both the crude methanolic root extract and the 
cell cultures the diterpenoids helioscopinolide 
A, C, D and E were isolated. These diterpenes, 
administered intraperitoneally to mice, showed 
different effects on the CNS. Helioscopinolide C 
showed a clear depressant effect, helioscopino-
lide E a mild, short-duration depressant effect, 
whereas helioscopinolides A and D had an op-
posite, excitatory effect. 
Biotransformation of the ergot alkaloids chano-
clavine, agroclavine and elymoclavine by Eu-
phorbia calyptrata cell culture is being at-
tempted, to obtain derivatives with promising 
medicinal properties. 
Botany Monoecious, annual to perennial 
glabrous herb up to 70 cm tall, with a fleshy 
taproot. Leaves arranged spirally, simple and 
entire, sessile; stipules absent; blade linear, up 
to 10 cm long, base tapering, apex 2-3-fid, in 
upper leaves acute. Inflorescence a terminal or 
axillary cluster of flowers, called a 'cyathium', 
254 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
on short leafy shoots; cyathia almost sessile, 2— 
3 mm in diameter, with a cup-shaped involu-
cre, lobes minute, glands 4, transversely ovate, 
with 2-4 short horns or palmately 6-10-fid, 
each involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual, greenish; male flowers sessile, bracte-
oles 2-fid, perianth absent, stamen c. 1.5 mm 
long; female flowers with pedicel c. 1.5 mm 
long, reflexed in fruit, perianth a rim, ovary 
superior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, 2-fid. 
Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 5-6 mm in diameter, 3-
seeded. Seeds conical, 2-2.5 mm long, smooth, 
bluish grey, caruncle large with 10—15 mem-
branous ridges. 
Var. involucrata Batt. differs from var. calyp-
trata in its large bracts clasping the stem. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. 
Euphorbia retusa Forssk. (synonym: Euphorbia 
cornuta Pers.) occurs from Mauritania through 
northern Africa east to western Asia. The 
Touareg people apply the latex to eczema, 
warts, ingrown eyelashes and scorpion stings. 
In Saudi Arabia the aerial parts are used as an 
expectorant in the treatment of coughs and 
asthma. 
Ecology Euphorbia calyptrata occurs in 
sandy, rocky localities, sandy wadis and sandy-
muddy soils, sometimes in large stands. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia calyptrata is relatively common in its dis-
tribution area and not threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects The helioscopinolides isolated 
from Euphorbia calyptrata showed interesting 
activity on the central nervous system. More 
research on chemistry and pharmacology is 
therefore needed to evaluate the potential of 
Euphorbia calyptrata as a medicinal plant in 
drug development. 
Major references Hammiche & Maiza, 
2006; Jafri & El-Gadi, 1982; Ozenda, 1977; 
Scigelova et al., 1995; Speroni et al., 1991. 
Other references Atiqur Rahman et al., 
2004; Borghi et a l , 1991; Crespi-Perellino et 
al., 1996; Kren et al., 1996a; Kren et al., 1996b; 
Minghetti et al., 1996; Sahara Nature, 2008. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
E U P H O R B I A CANDELABRUM Trémaux ex 
Kotschy 
Protologue Mitt. Geogr. Ges. Wien 1: 169 
(1857). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2re = 56 
Synonyms Euphorbia reinhartii Volk. 
(1899). 
Vernacular names Candelabra tree, tree 
euphorbia (En). Euphorbe candélabre (Fr). 
Mtungutungii, mtongotongo, mtupa, mtomwu 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia candelabrum occurs from Sudan, 
Ethiopia and Somalia south to DR Congo and 
Zimbabwe. 
Uses The latex is very toxic and may cause 
blindness when it comes into contact with the 
eyes. It is also blistering and irritating to the 
skin and mucous membranes. In Central Africa 
several drops of latex diluted in water are 
taken to treat coughs and tuberculosis, or as an 
emetic and abortifacient. The latex is also ap-
plied to wounds, sores and warts. The Loita 
Maasai people mix the latex with fat, which is 
rubbed on the body to treat malaria. A decoc-
tion of the pith of the branches is given to 
women just after childbirth to expel the pla-
centa. In Kenya and Tanzania roots are boiled 
with chicken or meat, or with stomach fluids 
from a slaughtered goat or cow, and the liquid 
is drunk as a strong emetic to treat stomach-
ache, severe constipation and infertility. Latex 
is taken in porridge as a strong purgative, and 
to treat HIV infection. In Kenya the latex is 
also applied to wounds and sores of cattle. 
Stem ash is powdered and used to treat eye 
Euphorbia candelabrum - wild 
EUPHORBIA 255 
infections. The latex is an ingredient of arrow 
poison. Fresh, pounded branches are thrown 
into watering holes and streams as a fish poi-
son and to poison wild animals. 
The stems can be used as firewood, although 
the smoke is irritant. The light, durable wood 
is used to make roofing, tables, doors, matches, 
boxes, mortars, musical instruments and sad-
dles. The trunk split into halves is hollowed 
and re-joined to make beehives. Cut branches 
are used as fencing and planted for shade. The 
flowers of Euphorbia candelabrum produce 
much nectar, but the honey causes a burning 
sensation in the mouth, which is intensified by 
drinking water. The sticky latex is used as 
birdlime. 
Properties The latex of Euphorbia candela-
brum contains highly irritant ingenol diterpene 
esters. Ingenol and its derivatives show tu-
mour-promoting activity, but also anti-HIV and 
anti-leukaemia activities. Much research is 
directed toward synthesis and biological 
evaluation of ingenol analogs and derivatives. 
The latex also contains about 12.5% rubber. 
Latex from cultivated plants in the United 
Kingdom was moderately irritant in the mouse 
ear test, with an ID50 = 1.6 ug / 5 ml after 4 
hours, which is similar to the latex of Euphor-
bia tirucalli L., and much less irritant than the 
latex of Euphorbia ingens E.Mey. ex Boiss. An 
ethanol extract of the stem showed low toxicity 
in the brine-shrimp test. 
Description Monoecious, succulent small 
tree up to 12(-20) m tall with abundant latex; 
bole up to 90 cm in diameter; bark grey, 
roughly fissured; branches persistent from c. 3 
m upwards, almost erect, rebranching, forming 
a large, broadly rounded crown, terminal 
branches fleshy, 5-10 cm in diameter, con-
stricted at irregular intervals into oblong seg-
ments 15-25 cm long, usually 4-angled, with 
wings up to 2.5 cm wide, margins of angles 
entire to toothed, with shallow teeth 1-1.5 cm 
apart; spine shields obtusely triangular, c. 8 
mm x 7 mm, soon becoming corky, with 2 pairs 
of spines, 1 pair stout, c. 5 mm long, 1 (stipu-
lar) pair triangular, c. 1.5 mm long, flexible, 
soon falling. Leaves at the end of branches, in 4 
rows, sessile; stipules transformed into small 
spines; blade deltoid, c. 5 mm x 5 mm, soon 
falling, in young plants up to c. 7 cm x 1.5 cm. 
Inflorescence an axillary cyme, 1-6 crowded 
together at the end of branches, consisting of 
clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 'cy-
athium'; peduncle 5-20 mm long, branches 2, c. 
5 mm long; bracts 2, c. 5 mm long; cyathia c. 4 
Euphorbia candelabrum - 1, habit; 2, top of 
branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
mm x 9 mm, with a cup-shaped involucre, lobes 
c. 2.5 mm long, glands 5, transversely ellipti-
cal, c. 2 mm x 4 mm, golden-yellow, each in-
volucre containing 1 female flower surrounded 
by many male flowers. Flowers unisexual; male 
flowers sessile, perianth absent, stamen c. 6 
mm long; female flowers with pedicel c. 5 mm 
long in fruit, perianth irregularly 3-lobed, lobes 
filiform, 2—4 mm long, ovary superior, gla-
brous, (2-)3-celled, styles (2-)3, c. 3 mm long, 
fused at base, apex 2-fid. Fruit an almost glo-
bose, shallowly (2—)3-lobed capsule c. 8 mm x 
12 mm, fleshy, green becoming red, hardening 
before dehiscence, (2—)3-seeded. Seeds almost 
globose, c. 3 mm in diameter, greyish brown 
speckled with pale brown, smooth. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean islands. 
Euphorbia candelabrum belongs to subgenus 
Euphorbia, section Euphorbia, a large group 
which is characterized by succulent, usually 
angular stems, stipules modified into small 
spines (or absent), a spine shield with an addi-
256 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tional pair of spines (sometimes fused into a 
single spine), axillary inflorescences and seeds 
without a caruncle. Euphorbia candelabrum 
comprises 2 varieties; var. bilocularis (N.E.Br.) 
S.Carter has 2-celled fruits instead of 3-celled 
fruits of var. candelabrum. 
Euphorbia candelabrum is very similar to Eu-
phorbia ingens from southern Africa, and may 
be conspecific. The branches of Euphorbia in-
gens are usually more distinctly and shortly 
segmented, the teeth along the angles are usu-
ally further apart and the branch tips bear 
fewer inflorescences. Euphorbia conspicua 
N.E.Br, (synonym: Euphorbia candelabrum 
Welw. non Kotschy), a tree up to 15 m tall en-
demic to western Angola, is also very similar to 
Euphorbia candelabrum, as is Euphorbia abys-
sinica J.F.Gmel. (synonym: Euphorbia obovali-
folia A.Rich.), which occurs from Sudan east to 
Djibouti and Somalia. In Ethiopia a stem bark 
decoction of Euphorbia abyssinica is taken to 
treat gastro-intestinal complaints. Latex is 
taken in milk or eaten with bread to treat gon-
orrhoea or ascariasis. Latex is applied to 
wounds to accelerate healing. The latex is ap-
plied to ticks of cattle. The soft, yellow wood is 
used as firewood and for roofing, matches, 
boxes, tables and saddles. Euphorbia am-
pliphylla Pax (synonym: Euphorbia obovalifo-
lia auct. non A.Rich.) is a montane forest tree 
and occurs from Ethiopia and Somalia south to 
Malawi and Zambia. In Ethiopia a little latex, 
probably in water, is taken orally to treat ra-
bies. In Kenya a wood decoction is given to 
treat stomach-ache during childbirth. 
Ecology Euphorbia candelabrum is a strik-
ing tree, growing in dry deciduous and ever-
green open wooded grasslands, on rocky slopes, 
sometimes on termite mounds, from sea-level 
up to 2200 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Euphorbia 
candelabrum can be propagated by seed or by 
stem cuttings. Seeds germinate readily after 
they have fallen from the trees. Stem cuttings 
need to be stored for a few days to dry before 
planted or else they will rot. It is best to plant 
the cuttings when the rain is about to stop, in a 
well-drained soil. 
Management If grown as a live fence Eu-
phorbia candelabrum needs continuous rein-
forcement planting. 
Harvesting The latex or branches can be 
harvested whenever the need arises. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia candelabrum 
is relatively common in its large area of distri-
bution and is therefore not at risk of genetic 
erosion. As a succulent Euphorbia species, its 
trade is controlled under CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Despite the many traditional 
medicinal uses, not much is known concerning 
the chemistry and pharmacology of Euphorbia 
candelabrum. It contains carcinogenic ingenol 
diterpene esters and the latex should therefore 
be used with care. 
Several tree-sized Euphorbia spp. occurring in 
tropical Africa are very similar to Euphorbia 
candelabrum. They may be conspecific and 
detailed fieldwork is needed to establish their 
status. 
Major references Beentje, 1994; Bekele-
Tesemma, 2007; Carter & Radcliffe-Smith, 
1988; Evans & Soper, 1978; ITDG & IIRR, 
1996; Maundu et al., 2001; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Uzabakiliho, Largeau & 
Casadevall, 1987. 
Other references Carter, 1985; Giday et 
al., 2007; Gilbert, 1990; Heine & Heine, 1988b; 
Ichikawa, 1987; Ratende, Birnie & Tengnäs, 
1995; Moshi et a l , 2004; SEPASAL, 2008b; 
Teklehaymanot et a l , 2007; Yamada, 1999. 
Sources of illustration Bekele-Tesemma, 
2007. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA CHAMAESYCE L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 455 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Wood spurge, ground 
spurge, prostrate sandmat (En). Euphorbe pe-
tit-figuier (Fr). 
Chromosome number 2n = 18 
Synonyms Chamaesyce canescens (L.) 
Prokh. (1933). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia chamaesyce occurs from the Canary 
Islands east throughout the Mediterranean 
region to north-western Russia and Pakistan. 
It is becoming naturalized in the United States 
and Japan. In tropical Africa it occurs in Cape 
Verde. 
Uses In Cape Verde large quantities of the 
leaves are put in water holes and canals as a 
fish poison. In southern Europe an infusion of 
the aerial parts is applied to painful scars and 
as eye drops to treat weak eyes. 
In Turkey the whole plant is roasted and 
eaten. 
Properties Several ergostane-type steroids 
have been isolated from the plant, including 
obtusifoliol, as well as several triterpenoids, 
EUPHORBIA 257 
including lupeol, butyrospermol, wrightial, lup-
20(30)-ene-3ß,29-diol, lla,12a-oxidotaraxerol 
and several derivatives. An ergostane-type 
steroid showed a potent inhibitory effect on 
Epstein-Barr virus early antigen activation 
induced by the tumour promoter 12-0-
tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA). Two 
oleananes showed strong cytotoxicity against a 
panel of 39 human cancer cell lines. 
Botany Monoecious, prostrate, annual herb 
with branches up to 30 cm long; whole plant 
glabrous to short-hairy. Leaves opposite, sim-
ple; stipules triangular, c. 0.5 mm long; petiole 
short; blade oblong to obovate, 2-8 mm x 2-4 
mm, base asymmetrical, one side obliquely 
rounded and the other cordate, apex rounded 
or notched, margins entire or toothed. Inflores-
cence an axillary cluster of flowers, called a 
'cyathium'; cyathia almost sessile, c. 0.5 mm 
long, with a cup-shaped involucre, lobes trian-
gular, minute, margin hairy; glands 4, minute, 
elliptical, with very small 3-lobed appendages, 
each involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual; male flowers sessile, bracteoles linear, 
perianth absent, stamen tiny; female flowers 
with short pedicel, perianth a rim, ovary supe-
rior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, minute, 2-fid. 
Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 1.5 mm x 1.5 mm, 
glabrous to densely short-hairy, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, c. 1 mm long, acutely 4-angled, 
without caruncle. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia chamaesyce 
belongs to subgenus Chamaesyce section 
Chamaesyce, a group of annual or sometimes 
perennial herbs with obvious stipules, further 
characterized by a main stem aborting at the 
seedling stage, the plant thus consisting of an 
expanded dichotomously branching umbel-like 
inflorescence, with the floral bracts appearing 
as normal leaves, cyathia solitary or up to 5 
together in congested leafy cymes, 4 involucral 
glands with petal-like appendages or entire 
and conical seeds without a caruncle. 
Another Euphorbia from Cape Verde, Euphor-
bia tuckeyana Steud. ex Webb ('Cabo Verde 
spurge'), is used medicinally. It is a shrub up to 
3 m tall. The latex is applied to decaying teeth 
and also to mark animal hides. The wood is 
used as firewood. It is sometimes sold as an 
ornamental in Europe. The aerial parts contain 
the jatrophane diterpene polyesters tuckey-
anols A and B and euphotuckeyanol, several 
cycloartane-type triterpenes, including cyclotu-
canol, cycloeucalenol and 24-methylenecyclo-
artanol, as well as helioscopinolides A, B, D 
and E, naringenin, aromadendrin, coniferalde-
hyde, several 5-hydroxyphorbol derivatives and 
dehydrodiconiferyl diacetate. Simiarenone and 
ß-sitosterol were also isolated. Several com-
pounds have shown to be moderate inhibitors 
of the growth of gastric and pancreatic tumour 
cell lines. Several plant extracts exhibited ac-
tivity against Gram-positive bacteria and Can-
dida albicans. 
Ecology Euphorbia chamaesyce occurs in 
dry, sandy to stony soils and along roadsides, 
from sea-level up to 1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Euphorbia chamaesyce is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Several of the compounds present 
in Euphorbia chamaesyce show very potent 
inhibitory effects on Epstein-Barr virus and 
strong cytotoxicity against a range of human 
cancer cell lines. Therefore more research is 
warranted to evaluate the potential of this spe-
cies for the development of lead compounds. 
Major references Figueiredo, 1996; Ker-
haro, Guichard & Bouquet, 1961; Tanaka et al., 
2000; Tanaka et al., 2006. 
Other references Duarte, Lage & Ferreira, 
2008; Ferreira, Duarte & Ascenso, 1996; 
Ferreira, Pinto & Ascenso, 2001; Ozenda, 1977; 
Tanaka et al., 1994; Tanaka et a l , 1999; Tosco, 
2005. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA CONVOLVULOIDES Höchst, ex 
Benth. 
Protologue Hook., Niger FL: 499 (1849). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia convolvuloides occurs in the drier parts 
of West Africa, from Mauritania and Senegal 
east to Sudan. 
Uses In Senegal and Ghana an infusion of 
the plant is taken to treat urethritis and sexu-
ally transmitted diseases, while in Côte 
d'Ivoire an infusion is applied as eye drops to 
treat eye problems. In Nigeria crushed leaves, 
mixed with palm oil, are applied to dry up the 
rashes associated with measles, chickenpox 
and formerly smallpox. The crushed leaves are 
taken to treat diarrhoea as they have an as-
tringent effect, and an infusion of the dried 
258 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
leaves is taken against dysentery. In contrast, 
an infusion of the whole plant is taken orally or 
as an enema for its laxative effects. An extract 
of the plant is taken to treat coughs, a sore 
throat, asthma and bronchitis. The vapour of 
latex in hot water is also inhaled to treat 
coughs and bronchitis. The pulp of fresh leaves 
mixed with those of Citrullus colocynthis (L.) 
Schrad., and sometimes with other plants, is 
applied to the breasts or given in infusion to 
increase milk production and quality of the 
milk. In Nigeria scorpion stings and snakebites 
are said to be prevented if the plant is chewed 
and swallowed, and a mixture of the plant, 
saliva and the sap of Calotropis procera (Aiton) 
R.Br, is rubbed on the hands. The latex is con-
sidered an antidote for scorpion stings. The 
plant is also considered narcotic and is used 
magically. In Senegal a plant infusion is given 
to cattle to drink to treat urinary infections. 
Euphorbia convolvuloides is generally browsed 
by livestock. 
Properties The aerial parts have an astrin-
gent effect due to the presence of tannins. 
Botany Monoecious, erect, hairy, annual 
herb up to 40 cm tall; branches drooping at the 
tips, often reddish. Leaves opposite, distichous, 
simple; stipules minute; petiole up to 1 mm 
long; blade oblong to lanceolate, 2—4 cm x 0.5-
1.5 cm, base slightly unequal, cuneate, apex 
acute, margins minutely toothed. Inflorescence 
a terminal or axillary cluster of flowers, called 
a 'cyathium', several cyathia densely clustered 
together, pink; cyathia almost sessile, c. 1 mm 
x 1 mm, with a cup-shaped involucre, densely 
white-hairy, lobes triangular, minute, hairy, 
glands 4, tiny, round, with or without append-
ages, pink with white rim, each involucre con-
taining 1 female flower surrounded by many 
male flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers 
sessile, bracteoles linear, perianth absent, 
stamen c. 0.5 mm long; female flowers with 
pedicel c. 1.5 mm long, reflexed in fruit, peri-
anth a rim, ovary superior, densely hairy, 3-
celled, styles 3, minute. Fruit a hairy 3-lobed 
capsule c. 2 mm in diameter, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, c. 1.5 mm long, acutely 4-5-angled, whit-
ish or pale reddish, without caruncle. Seedling 
with epigeal germination; cotyledons almost 
sessile, elliptical; epicotyl absent. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia convolvuloides 
belongs to subgenus Chamaesyce section 
Chamaesyce, a group of annual or sometimes 
perennial herbs with obvious stipules, further 
characterized by a main stem aborting at the 
seedling stage. The plant thus consists of an 
expanded dichotomously branching umbel-like 
inflorescence, with the floral bracts appearing 
as normal leaves, cyathia solitary or up to 5 
grouped together in congested leafy cymes, 4 
involucral glands with petal-like appendages or 
entire and conical seeds without a caruncle. 
Euphorbia kilwana N.E.Br, (synonym: Eu-
phorbia convolvuloides var. integrifolia Pax) 
occurs in Tanzania, Malawi, Zimbabwe and 
Mozambique and closely resembles Euphorbia 
convolvuloides. Euphorbia forskalii J.Gay 
(synonym; Euphorbia aegyptiaca Boiss.) also 
belongs to section Chamaesyce and occurs on 
clay soils throughout tropical West Africa east 
to Somalia, and from northern Africa east to 
the Arabian Peninsula and Turkey. It also oc-
curs in Namibia. In Nigeria extracts of Eu-
phorbia forskalii are taken as a purgative to 
treat tapeworm; the latex is applied to warts, 
sores, guinea-worm and jiggers. In Nigeria and 
Sudan the plant is pounded with a little water 
and applied to the head and neck to treat head-
ache, bone fractures or traumatic swellings. In 
Sudan the latex is applied to the breasts as a 
galactagogue. Sheep and goats browse the 
plants. Petroleum-ether extracts of the whole 
plant show significant activity against fresh-
water snails. 
Several other Euphorbia spp. not belonging to 
section Chamaesyce are used medicinally in 
West Africa. Euphorbia baga A.Chev. has a 
rounded tuber and short thickened stems with 
tufts of lanceolate, acute leaves at the apex. It 
occurs from Côte d'Ivoire and Mali east to Ni-
geria and also in Sudan. In Sudan the latex or 
crushed plant is used as fish poison. Euphorbia 
kerstingii Pax occurs from Togo east to Camer-
oon. It has annual stems up to 16 cm long aris-
ing from a woody rootstock. The Kotokoli peo-
ple from Togo use a plant extract to harden the 
fontanel of newborn babies. 
Ecology Euphorbia convolvuloides occurs in 
savanna, waste places and along roadsides, 
sometimes as a weed in crops, usually on sandy 
soil. 
Management Euphorbia convolvuloides can 
be collected during the rainy season, and dried 
for future use. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia convolvuloides is relatively common in its 
area of distribution and there are no signs that 
it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
EUPHORBIA 259 
Prospects Euphorbia convolvuloides has 
many local medicinal uses but will remain of 
local importance only, unless chemical and 
pharmacological research can confirm its me-
dicinal value. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Brown, Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; 
Burkill, 1994; Neuwinger, 2000; Stäuble, 1986. 
Other references Berhaut, 1975a; Bouquet 
& Debray, 1974; Iwu, 1993; Keay, 1958a; Le 
Bourgeois & Merlier, 1995; Manu, 2002. 
Authors O.M. Grace 
EUPHORBIA COOPERI N.E.Br, ex A.Berger 
Protologue Sukkul. Euphorb.: 83 (1906). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Lesser candelabra tree, 
Transvaal candelabra tree (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia cooperi occurs from Tanzania south to 
north-eastern South Africa and Swaziland. 
Uses The latex is said to be one of the most 
poisonous of the Euphorbia spp., causing in-
tense skin irritations and producing a burning 
sensation in the throat when standing next to 
bleeding plants. The latex may cause blindness 
if it comes into the eyes. It has a pungent, acrid 
smell. In South Africa the latex is boiled until 
black and then dried; the powder is applied to 
infected wounds. A root decoction, together 
with a root decoction of Euphorbia ingens 
E.Mey. ex Boiss., is applied as a dressing to 
treat paralysis. A bundle of grass soaked in the 
latex is attached to a stone and thrown into the 
water as fish poison. 
Euphorbia cooperi is sometimes used to make 
fence poles. The flowers produce much nectar, 
but the honey, known as 'noors honey', causes a 
burning sensation in the mouth, which is in-
tensified by drinking water. Euphorbia cooperi 
is planted as an ornamental in succulent gar-
dens or rock gardens in South Africa and the 
United States. 
Properties Several diesters and triesters of 
16-hydroxy-12-desoxyphorbol were isolated 
from the latex. The diterpene esters showed 
more or less pronounced irritation on mice 
ears, as well as tumour-promoting activity in 
vitro. 
Botany Monoecious, succulent, candelabri-
form small tree up to 6(-9) m tall, with abun-
dant latex; bole stout, cylindrical, scarred from 
fallen branches; branches curved upwards, 
simple or sometimes branched near the apex, 
forming a flat-topped crown, branches 5-20 cm 
in diameter, deeply constricted at irregular 
intervals into oblong segments 10-50 cm long, 
(3-)4-6(-8)-angled, margins of angles wavy, 
with tubercles 8-25 mm apart; spine shields 
joined into a continuous horny margin 3-10 
mm large, with 2 pairs of spines, 1 pair of stout 
spines up to 10 mm long, 1 (stipular) pair tiny, 
soon falling. Leaves at the end of branches, in 
3-7 rows, sessile; stipules transformed into 
tiny spines; blade deltate, c. 1.5 mm x 1.5 mm, 
soon falling. Inflorescence an almost sessile, 
axillary cyme, crowded at the end of branches, 
1-3 together in a horizontal line, consisting of 
clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 'cy-
athium', cyme branches 2; bracts 2, tiny; cy-
athia c. 4.5 mm x 8 mm, with a cup-shaped 
involucre, lobes c. 1.5 mm long, glands 5, 
transversely oblong, c. 1.5 mm x 4 mm, golden-
yellow, each involucre containing 1 female 
flower surrounded by many male flowers. 
Flowers unisexual; male flowers sessile, peri-
anth absent, with a single stamen; female 
flowers with pedicel 4-10 mm long in fruit, 
perianth shallowly 3-lobed, ovary superior, 
glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, variably fused, 2 -
5.5 mm long, apex 2-fid. Fruit an obtusely to 
deeply 3-lobed capsule 6-10 mm x 10-13.5 
mm, fleshy, green becoming red, 3-seeded. 
Seeds almost globose, 2.5-3.5 mm in diameter, 
pale greyish brown speckled with pale brown, 
smooth. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia cooperi belongs to subgenus 
Euphorbia, section Euphorbia, a large group 
which is characterized by succulent, usually 
angular stems, stipules modified into small 
spines (or absent), a spine shield with an addi-
tional pair of spines (sometimes fused into a 
single spine), axillary inflorescences and seeds 
without a caruncle. Euphorbia cooperi is vari-
able and 3 varieties are distinguished. 
There are several other tree-sized Euphorbia 
spp. with medicinal uses. Euphorbia magni-
capsula S.Carter occurs in East Africa. In 
Kenya the crushed roots in water are given to 
sheep and goats to treat coenurosis, an infec-
tion with tapeworm larvae. The dried stems 
with the thorns burnt off are crushed in water 
and cattle are given the water to drink to treat 
venereal diseases. Euphorbia magnicapsula is 
cultivated as an ornamental pot plant in the 
United States. Euphorbia nyikae Pax ex Engl. 
260 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
occurs in Kenya and Tanzania. In Kenya the 
latex is added to Acokanthera arrow poison 
used by the Giriama people. Young pounded 
stems are thrown in water as fish poison. In 
Tanzania a root decoction or latex in soup is 
drunk to treat urinary tract infections and epi-
lepsy. Euphorbia nyikae is also planted as a 
hedge. Euphorbia bussei Pax has the same 
distribution area and can be confused with 
Euphorbia nyikae. Stems of Euphorbia bussei 
are used by the Kamba people to build grain 
stores. Euphorbia trigona Mill, from Central 
Africa, Angola and Malawi is commonly 
planted as a ritual plant and hedge near vil-
lages, especially in Gabon. It is possibly of hy-
brid origin, as it is only known in cultivation 
and is not known to flower. The latex is an 
additive to Periploca nigrescens Afzel. arrow 
poison, and is also used as fish poison or as a 
criminal poison. The latex is also used during 
trials by ordeal. In Congo some drops of latex 
in palm wine are taken in severe cases of con-
stipation or in case of an epileptic attack. Eu-
phorbia trigona is widely cultivated as a pot 
plant. The latex contains 8-methoxyingol es-
ters, which are very irritant to the skin. It also 
contains lectins with potent erythrocyte agglu-
tinating ability. 
Ecology Euphorbia cooperi occurs in wooded 
grassland and on rocky hillsides, usually form-
ing colonies, at 200-1500 m altitude. It flowers 
from September to October. The ripe fruits 
burst open, flinging seeds several metres away. 
Management Euphorbia cooperi is easily 
propagated from seeds or cuttings, which must 
be dried before planting to prevent rotting. 
Great care must be taken when collecting cut-
tings, to prevent the poisonous latex from com-
ing into contact with skin or eyes. Euphorbia 
cooperi does not require much water. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia cooperi is relatively common in its area of 
distribution and there are no signs of genetic 
erosion. As a succulent Euphorbia species, its 
trade is controlled under CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects The latex of Euphorbia cooperi is 
in general too toxic to be medicinally used. 
Several irritant and cocarcinogenic derivatives 
of 16-hydroxy-12-desoxyphorbol were isolated, 
indicating that its use in modern medicine will 
be limited. 
Major references Baloyi & Ferreira, 2005; 
Carter & Leach, 2001; Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Gschwendt & Hecker, 1971; Gundidza, Sorg & 
Hecker, 1992. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Clark, 
Appleton & Drewes, 1997; Eggli, 2002; 
Gschwendt & Hecker, 1970; ITDG & IIRR, 
1996; Latham, 2007; Neuwinger, 1996; Neu-
winger, 2000; Sosath, Ott & Hecker, 1988; Ty-
iso & Bhat, 1998. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA CROTONOIDES Boiss. 
Protologue A.DC, Prodr. 15(2): 98 (1862). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia crotonoides occurs from Sudan and 
Ethiopia southwards throughout East Africa 
and southern Africa. 
Uses In Ethiopia a root decoction is taken to 
treat stomach problems and hookworm infec-
tion. In East Africa the root bark is chewed and 
the sap is swallowed as a purgative to treat 
obesity. The latex is applied to warts and skin 
diseases. An infusion of the aerial parts is 
mixed with other plants and taken to treat 
malaria. 
Botany Monoecious, much-branched, annual 
herb up to 50(-100) cm tall, with spreading 
white hairs and white latex; branches longitu-
dinally ridged to winged. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules glandular, dark red; petiole up 
to 5 cm long, 2-winged; blade linear-lanceolate 
to ovate, 3—14 cm x 0.5-6 cm, base tapering 
into the petiole, apex acute, margins almost 
entire to toothed, teeth gland-tipped, red, mid-
vein winged on lower surface. Inflorescence an 
axillary or terminal cyme consisting of clusters 
of flowers, each cluster called a 'cyathium', in 
3-branched umbels; branches up to 12 cm long; 
bracts narrower than leaves, with petiole up to 
c. 5 mm long; cyathia almost sessile, c. 2.5 mm 
x 3.5 mm, with a cup-shaped involucre, lobes 
quadrangular, c. 2 mm long, margin hairy, 
glands 4, transversely elliptical, c. 1 mm x 1.5 
mm, yellow, turning brown then red, each in-
volucre containing 1 female flower surrounded 
by many male flowers. Flowers unisexual; male 
flowers sessile, bracteoles fringed, perianth 
absent, stamen c. 3 mm long; female flowers 
with pedicel c. 3 mm long in fruit, ovary supe-
rior, densely hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, 2-2.5 mm 
long, fused to halfway, apex thickened, spread-
ing. Fruit an almost globose capsule 6.5-7 mm 
in diameter, base truncate, with shallow longi-
tudinal grooves, long-hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid or conical, 4-angled, c. 4.5 mm x 2.5 mm, 
apex rounded or acute, obscurely or distinctly 
warty, brown to grey or reddish black; caruncle 
EUPHORBIA 261 
absent. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia crotonoides 
belongs to subgenus Eremophyton, section 
Pseudacalypha, a group consisting of annual or 
short-lived perennial herbs or shrubs with 
glandular or filamentous stipules, leafy bracts, 
4 involucral glands, almost globose capsules on 
a short pedicel and warty seeds without a ca-
runcle. In southern Africa the growth of Eu-
phorbia crotonoides is more lush and the leaves 
are more ovate. Throughout the species range 
the size of the glandular teeth on the leaf mar-
gins varies considerably, as does the density of 
the hairiness and the colour of the seeds. 
Several other Euphorbia spp. of section Pseu-
dacalypha are used for medicinal purposes in 
tropical Africa. Euphorbia acalyphoides 
Höchst, ex Boiss. occurs from Sudan east to 
Somalia and Kenya, in Angola, and also in 
Yemen and Saudi Arabia. In Somalia the 
crushed herb or the latex is applied to fungal 
skin diseases. Euphorbia hadramautica Bak. 
occurs in Ethiopia and Somalia and possibly in 
northern Kenya; it is also found in Yemen, 
including Socotra. In Somalia the latex is ap-
plied to foot rot and foot abscesses in sheep and 
goats, and skin parasites of camels. Euphorbia 
systyloides Pax occurs from Kenya and Uganda 
south to Zimbabwe and Mozambique. In south-
ern Uganda a leaf decoction with salt is taken 
to treat tapeworm infections. The leaves are 
eaten by goats and camels. The following spe-
cies belong to Euphorbia section Eremophyton, 
which differs mainly from section Pseudacaly-
pha by oblong, well exserted capsules and 
seeds with a cap-like caruncle. Euphorbia 
agowensis Höchst, ex Boiss. occurs in Ethiopia, 
Somalia, Kenya and Angola, and also in Yemen 
and India. In Somalia the crushed herb or the 
latex is applied to fungal skin diseases. Eu-
phorbia polyantha Pax occurs in Ethiopia, So-
malia, Kenya and Tanzania. In Somalia the 
latex is taken in milk as a purgative to treat 
stomach problems. In Tanzania a stem bark 
decoction is taken to treat stomach troubles 
and oedema. 
Ecology Euphorbia crotonoides occurs on 
sandy and stony soils in open grassy woodland 
or disturbed localities, at 350-1250 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia crotonoides is widespread and common and 
not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Euphorbia crotonoides will 
probably remain of local importance as a me-
dicinal plant. 
Major references Carter & Leach, 2001; 
Gemedo-Dalle, Maass & Isselstein, 2005; Giday 
et al., 2003; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Catley & Mohammed, 
1996; Eggli, 2002; Hamill et al., 2003; Heine & 
Heine, 1988b; Hurskainen, 1994; Samuelsson 
e t a l , 1992. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA DIDIEREOIDES Denis & Leandri 
Protologue Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., Pa-
ris, sér. 2, 6: 121 (1934). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia didiereoides is endemic to central and 
southern Madagascar. 
Uses A leaf decoction is taken to treat 
coughs in children, urogenital infections, 
haematuria and prostatic hypertrophy. 
Euphorbia didiereoides is used as a succulent 
pot plant. 
Botany Monoecious, succulent, very spiny 
shrub with many erect stems from the base, up 
to 2.5 m tall; stems up to 15 cm in diameter, 
tapering to c. 3 cm at apex, with many short 
branches of 1-2 cm long; copious latex in all 
parts. Leaves arranged spirally, simple and 
entire, almost sessile; stipular spines 2, long, 
with cluster of shorter spines at base; blade 
lanceolate, V-folded, up to 2.5 cm x 1.5 cm, 
base cuneate, apex acute, margins red, densely 
hairy beneath, midvein prominent. Inflores-
cence a dense terminal head, consisting of clus-
ters of flowers, each cluster called a 'cyathium', 
c. 3 mm in diameter, enclosed in an involucre, 
containing 1 female flower, several male flow-
ers and several glands; peduncle up to 15 cm 
long, hairy; bracts erect, yellow to orange, 
hairy; nectar-producing glands ovate, yellow. 
Flowers unisexual; male flowers consisting of a 
single stamen; female flowers with superior 
ovary, 3-celled. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule, c. 5 mm 
in diameter, dark red, hairy. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Most species present in 
Madagascar are endemic to the island. Eu-
phorbia didiereoides belongs to subgenus La-
canthis. The spiny, succulent Euphorbia pri-
262 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mulifolia Baker also belongs to this subgenus. 
The latex is applied to syphilitic sores. The 
thickened root is used as bait to poison rats; it 
is also used for criminal purposes. 
Several small leafy Euphorbia spp. endemic to 
Madagascar are also used medicinally. 
The leafy stems of Euphorbia emirnensis Baker 
are crushed and the latex applied on skin para-
sites and warts. The thickened root is very 
toxic and fried slices are used as bait to poison 
rodents; it is also used as fish poison. An infu-
sion of the leafy stem of Euphorbia orthoclada 
Baker is widely taken as a diuretic to treat 
kidney problems. The latex of Euphorbia 
trichophylla Baker is put on a sweet and given 
to children as a vermifuge. The latex is also 
used in bait to poison rats. The plant is used to 
prepare a black dye for locally made cloth. Eu-
phorbia trichophylla is classified as vulnerable 
on the IUCN Red List. 
For ornamental purposes Euphorbia didiereoides 
has been hybridized, e.g. with Euphorbia milii 
Des Moul. resulting in Euphorbia 'Honkytonk'. 
Ecology Euphorbia didiereoides occurs on 
rock outcrops scattered in grassland and in the 
plateau areas, from sea-level up to 700 m alti-
tude. 
Management Euphorbia didiereoides can be 
propagated by stem cuttings or seed. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia didiereoides has a limited distribution area, 
and numbers are diminishing due to habitat 
degradation, fires and collection for horticul-
tural trade. Euphorbia didiereoides is classified 
as endangered on the IUCN Red List of threat-
ened species. As a succulent Euphorbia species, 
its trade is controlled under CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Euphorbia didiereoides has some 
interesting local uses, but no phytochemical 
analyses have been done. More research is 
therefore warranted in order to evaluate its 
potential. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Eggli, 2002; Ralantoniri-
na, 1993; Rasolondratovo et al., 1995. 
Other references Cremers, 1977; Haever-
mans, 2004; Haevermans et al., 2004; Leandri, 
1962; Raharinirina, 2006; Randriamantsoa, 
2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
E U P H O R B I A GRANTII Oliv. 
Protologue Trans. Linn. Soc. London 29: 
144(1875). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names African milkbush (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia grantii occurs from eastern DR Congo, 
Uganda and Kenya south to Tanzania and 
northern Zambia. 
Uses The milky latex of Euphorbia grantii is 
used medicinally, despite its toxicity. The latex 
may cause rupturing of the cornea if it comes 
into contact with the eyes, and poisoning in 
people and animals if ingested. In East Africa 
the latex is applied to wounds to promote blood 
clotting and tissue healing. The latex is 
warmed by placing a section of the stem in hot 
ash, and applied as ear drops to treat earache. 
In Rwanda and Burundi the diluted latex is 
drunk to treat infections of tapeworm and 
other intestinal worms. Stem ash is applied to 
sores caused by leprosy. In Rwanda a leaf de-
coction, roasted leaves or leaf sap mixed with 
beer is taken to treat gonorrhoea. 
The roots are a strong purgative and are given 
to children to chew to treat stomach com-
plaints, whereas adults chew the roots as an 
emetic to treat epilepsy, poisoning and snake-
bites. Ground roots are eaten in porridge to 
treat constipation. The Maasai people use the 
stems in a tonic that is mixed with soup and 
given to new mothers after labour. The leaves, 
bark and roots are boiled and given to cattle, to 
prevent infection of the uterus when the pla-
centa is expelled. 
In Rwanda and Tanzania the latex is added to 
Acokanthera schimperi (A.DC.) Schweinf. ar-
row poison. 
The stems are taken as a recreational stimulat-
ing drug by the Maasai people. Euphorbia 
grantii is sometimes planted as a hedge. 
Properties Euphorbia grantii, like many 
related species, has severely irritant effects on 
the skin and mucosa. The principle toxic con-
stituents in Euphorbia species are diterpenes 
present in the milky latex. The rubber content 
of latex from Euphorbia grantii is low (2.5-
6.9% of dry latex). From the stem 3-0-
methylquercetin and several other 3 -
methoxyflavones were isolated, exhibiting po-
tent antiviral activity against picornaviruses 
such as polio-, Coxsackie- and rhino-viruses, 
and against vesicular stomatitis virus at low 
concentrations (0.01 ug/ml) and with minimal 
cytotoxicity. Biochemical studies on the 
EUPHORBIA 263 
mechanism of action of these compounds on 
poliovirus replication suggested that these 3-
methoxyflavones are able to protect the host 
cells from a virus-induced shutdown of cellular 
protein synthesis. Naturally occurring and 
synthetic 3-O-methylquercetin are equally ef-
fective. Strikingly, other natural compounds 
structurally related to 3-O-methylquercetin 
such as quercetin, catechin, kaempferol, 
myricetin and rutin do not block poliovirus 
replication. 
In-vivo bioassays have shown that 3-O-
methylquercetin has anti-inflammatory activ-
ity, with up to 55% and 31% inhibition of acute 
and chronic inflammation, respectively. Due to 
its multiple bioactivities, and the absence of 
ciliotoxicity towards nasal cilia, 3-O-
methylquercetin has shown potential as a na-
sal antirhinoviral drug to treat the common 
cold. 
Botany A few-stemmed shrub or sparingly 
branched small tree up to 9 m tall; bark 
smooth, grey, horizontally grooved; branches 
semi-succulent, with large prominent closely-
set leaf scars and abundant latex. Leaves al-
ternate, simple and entire, sessile, glabrous; 
stipules glandular, minute, soon falling; blade 
linear to linear-lanceolate, up to 30 cm x 3 cm, 
base rounded, apex acuminate, midrib promi-
nent on the lower surface, pale green. Inflores-
cence a short-hairy, 3-branched umbel, consist-
ing of clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 
'cyathium'; peduncle up to 10(-15) cm long; 
branches up to 5(-7) cm long, each forking up 
to 8 times; bracts sessile, deltoid, c. 4 cm x 4 
cm, base slightly cordate, apex long-acuminate; 
cyathia c. 1 cm x 3 cm, with a barrel-shaped 
involucre, lobes c. 3 mm x 5 mm, rounded, 
margin sharply toothed, all parts short-hairy, 
glands 4, spreading, c. 4 mm x 8 mm, trans-
versely elliptical, outer margin with 6-10 fin-
ger-like processes c. 8 mm long, branching sev-
eral times at the tips and terminating in min-
ute knobs, the glands yellowish green, with 
reddish processes; each involucre containing 1 
female flower surrounded by many male flow-
ers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers with 
many fan-shaped, deeply divided, feathery 
bracteoles, stamen c. 15 mm long; female flow-
ers with curved pedicel up to 1.5 cm long in 
fruit, perianth with lobes c. 1.5 mm long, ovary 
superior, short-hairy, 3-celled, styles c. 1 cm 
long, fused to nearly halfway, with shortly 2-fid 
thickened stigma. Fruit an almost globose cap-
sule c. 13 mm x 17 mm, glabrous when mature, 
tinged purplish, 3-seeded. Seeds almost glo-
bose, c. 6 mm x 5 mm, slightly compressed lat-
erally and obscurely 3-angled, surface minutely 
rough, greyish brown. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia grantii belongs 
to section Trichadenia, a group of trees, shrubs 
or perennial herbs with a fleshy rootstock and 
usually fleshy stems, stipules absent or soon 
falling or modified into glands, large, terminal, 
umbel-like inflorescences, glands usually with 
slender lobes or appendages, relatively large 
fruits and seeds without a caruncle. Several 
other Euphorbia spp. of section Trichadenia 
are used in medicine in tropical Africa. Eu-
phorbia noxia Pax occurs in Somalia and 
southern Yemen; in Somalia the latex is an 
ingredient of arrow poison. Euphorbia so-
malensis Pax occurs in Ethiopia and Somalia. 
In Somalia the latex is applied to bruised skin 
caused by mange; it is applied undiluted to the 
skin of camels and diluted to sheep and goats. 
The latex of Euphorbia transvaalensis Schltr. 
from southern Africa is used to treat warts. 
Euphorbia monteiri Hook.f. belongs to section 
Pseudeuphorbium which has many characteris-
tics similar to those of section Trichadenia, but 
the fleshy, tuberous roots are lacking and the 
stem is succulent with prominent tubercles. 
Euphorbia monteiri occurs in Angola, Namibia, 
Botswana, Zimbabwe and South Africa. In 
Namibia the latex is applied to decaying teeth. 
An infusion of the crushed roots is drunk as a 
purgative. Sliced lateral roots are added to 
boiling milk, which is drunk as a blood purifier 
and tonic. Crushed roots are added to milk for 
better butter production. In Botswana a leaf 
and root decoction is taken to treat biliousness. 
In southern Zimbabwe the roots are taken as 
an emetic. Cooked aerial parts are given to 
aggressive dogs. 
Ecology Euphorbia grantii occurs in sandy 
or rocky soils, in open woodland, and on rocky 
hillsides, up to 1750 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia grantii is fairly common throughout its 
extensive range and there are no signs of ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects The 3-methoxyflavones isolated 
from the stem of Euphorbia grantii show inter-
esting antiviral activity and merit further re-
search. 
Major references Carter & Leach, 2001; De 
Meyer et a l , 1991; Dimova et al., 2003; Neu-
264 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
winger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Catley & Mohammed, 
1996; Deng et al., 1997; Ichikawa, 1987; Mid-
dleton, Kandaswami & Theoharides, 2000; 
Minja, 1999; SEPASAL, 2008h; Uzabakiliho, 
Largeau & Casadevall, 1987; van Hoof et al., 
1984; Vlietinck et al., 1995; Vrijsen et al., 1987. 
Authors O.M. Grace & D.G. Fowler 
E U P H O R B I A GRANULATA Forssk. 
Protologue Fl. aegypt.-arab.: 94 (1775). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 22 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia granulata occurs in northern and east-
ern Africa east to central Asia and India. In 
tropical Africa it occurs in dry regions from 
Mauritania east to Somalia and south to Tan-
zania. 
Uses The nomadic Touareg people of the 
Sahara use the latex internally to expel intes-
tinal worms, and externally apply it to snake-
bites and scorpion stings. In Saudi Arabia the 
latex is taken as a purgative, anthelmintic and 
diuretic, as well as for its blood purifying prop-
erties. 
Properties From petroleum and alcoholic 
extracts of the whole plant the following com-
pounds were isolated: hentriacontane, dotriac-
ontanol, lupeol acetate, taraxasterol acetate, 
lupeol, taraxasterol, sitosterol and gallic acid. 
A methanol extract of the leaves showed con-
siderable inhibitory effects against HIV-1 pro-
tease. A water extract of the leaves showed 
considerable inhibitory effects against hepatitis 
C virus protease. 
An aqueous extract of Euphorbia granulata 
significantly and invariably inhibited germina-
tion and radicle growth of a range of crop 
plants and weeds in a laboratory bioassay. 
Artificially decomposed Euphorbia granulata 
litter in a nutrient medium significantly re-
duced germination and fresh and dry weight 
gain of the same test species. The toxins af-
fected germination and growth independently 
and it is therefore suggested that its litter 
must be removed from the fields during weed-
ing. 
Botany Monoecious, prostrate, annual herb 
with branches up to 15 cm long; whole plant 
short-hairy or sparsely hairy. Leaves opposite, 
simple; stipules up to 1.5 mm long, deeply 2-4-
fid; petiole up to 1 mm long; blade obovate to 
oblong-ovate, up to 8 mm x 4.5 mm, base 
obliquely rounded to cordate, apex rounded, 
margins entire or toothed. Inflorescence a ter-
minal or pseudo-axillary cluster of flowers, 
called a 'cyathium', on short leafy shoots; cy-
athia almost sessile, c. 1 mm x 1 mm, with a 
cup-shaped involucre, lobes triangular, minute, 
margin hairy; glands 4, minute, transversely 
elliptical, with very small appendages, pink or 
white, each involucre containing 1 female 
flower surrounded by many male flowers. 
Flowers unisexual; male flowers sessile, brac-
teoles linear, perianth absent, stamen c. 1 mm 
long; female flowers with pedicel c. 1.5 mm 
long, reflexed in fruit, perianth a rim, ovary 
superior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, minute, 2-
fid. Fruit an acutely 3-lobed capsule c. 1.5 mm 
x 1.5 mm, 3-seeded. Seeds oblong-conical, c. 1 
mm x 0.5 mm, acutely 4-angled, transversely 
wrinkled, pinkish brown, without caruncle. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia granulata be-
longs to subgenus Chamaesyce section 
Chamaesyce, a group of annual or sometimes 
perennial herbs with obvious stipules, further 
characterized by a main stem aborting at the 
seedling stage, the plant thus consisting of an 
expanded dichotomously branching umbel-like 
inflorescence, with the floral bracts appearing 
as normal leaves, cyathia solitary or up to 5 
grouped together in congested leafy cymes, 4 
involucral glands with petal-like appendages or 
entire and conical seeds without a caruncle. In 
Euphorbia granulata 3 varieties are distin-
guished, based mainly on the hairiness of the 
plants. 
Euphorbia scordiifolia Jacq. also belongs to 
subgenus Chamaesyce, and occurs from West 
Africa and northern Africa east to Ethiopia and 
also in the Arabic Peninsula. In Senegal the 
aerial parts enter in a mixture with other 
plants used as a bath to treat mental illness. In 
Nigeria the latex is applied as an analgesic to 
aching teeth and tsetse fly bites. A plant decoc-
tion is applied to breasts as a galactagogue. In 
Nigeria and Ethiopia the latex is taken to treat 
dysentery. In Saudi Arabia an extract of the 
aerial parts is taken to treat fever and consti-
pation. In West Africa cattle, sheep and goats 
browse the plants, although they have also 
been reported as poisonous. 
Ecology Euphorbia granulata occurs in ex-
posed sandy, gritty to stony soils, often on lava, 
from sea-level up to 1000 m altitude. It is also 
EUPHORBIA 265 
a weed in agricultural land. 
Management Euphorbia granulata is a host 
of the nematodes Meloidogyne incognita and 
Meloidogyne javanica. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia granulata is a common weedy plant 
throughout its area of distribution and is there-
fore not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Several extracts of the leaves of 
Euphorbia granulata show interesting inhibi-
tory effects against HIV-1 protease and hepati-
tis C virus protease, and more research con-
cerning its chemistry and pharmacology is 
needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Atiqur Rahman et al., 
2004; Carter & Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; Hammi-
che & Maiza, 2006; Hussein et al., 2000; Hus-
sein et al., 1999. 
Other references Ahmad, 1986; Asres et 
a l , 2005; Burkill, 1994; Hussain, 1980; Jansen, 
1981; Mani & Al Hinai, 1996; Neuwinger, 
2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA HETEROPHYLLA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 453 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 12, 14, 19, 27, 
28; 2re = 46, 54, 56 
Synonyms Euphorbia geniculata Ortega 
(1979). 
Vernacular names Fiddler's spurge, mole 
plant, annual poinsettia, wild poinsettia, Japa-
nese poinsettia (En). Caca poule (Fr). Flor do 
poeta (Po). Kisawanyemungo (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
Euphorbia heterophylla - naturalized 
phorbia heterophylla is native to Central and 
South America, but now widely distributed 
throughout the tropics and subtropics. It occurs 
throughout most of tropical Africa and the In-
dian Ocean islands, as well as in the Mediter-
ranean region and South Africa. 
Uses Euphorbia heterophylla is widely used 
in traditional African medicine and elsewhere 
in tropical countries. In Africa a decoction or 
infusion of the stems and fresh or dried leaves 
is taken as a purgative and laxative to treat 
stomach-ache and constipation, and to expel 
intestinal worms. A leaf infusion is used as a 
wash to treat skin problems, including fungal 
diseases, and abscesses. In Nigeria the latex 
and preparations of the leaves and root are 
applied to treat skin tumours. In East Africa 
the roots are used in the treatment of gonor-
rhoea or to increase milk production in breast-
feeding women. The latex is irritant to the skin 
and eyes and may be employed as a rubefacient 
and to remove warts. However, the latex is also 
used as an antidote against the irritation 
caused by the latex of other Euphorbia species. 
In peninsular Malaysia a leaf extract is taken 
to treat body pain. The latex is used in the 
preparation of arrow poison and fish poison. 
In Benin the leaves are eaten as a vegetable or 
famine food, despite their laxative action. The 
plant is grazed by livestock, and can be fed to 
guinea pigs as an addition to fresh forage. 
Honey bees collect the nectar from the flowers. 
Properties All parts of Euphorbia hetero-
phylla contain latex: leaves 0.42%, stems 
0.11%, roots 0.06% and whole plant up to 
0.77%. In Sudan it is reported to have been 
exploited during World War II as a substitute 
for rubber, but this has never been followed up. 
The plant furthermore contains lectins and 
carbohydrates. A dimeric N-acetylgalactosami-
ne-specific lectin was isolated from the seeds. 
Germinating seeds contain endo-l,4-ß-
glucanases which degrade carboxymethylcellu-
lose. The red colouring matter of the coloured 
leaves and bracts is porcetin. The ethylacetate 
fraction of a leaf decoction contained quercetin 
tetracetate. The butanolic fraction had laxative 
action and contained saponins, phenols and 
terpenes including phorbolic diterpenes. The 
residual aqueous solution contained mainly 
sugars. The purgative action was found to be a 
joint action of both the phorbols and the bulk-
forming laxative sugars. A water extract from 
the leaves exhibited strong purgative effects 
when given orally to rats. In-vitro experiments 
with guinea-pig ileum suggest that the effect is 
266 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
caused by an increase in in tes t inal motility. 
The hexane, chloroform and ethyl acetate ex-
t rac ts from the roots showed significant anti-
nociceptive activity in r a t s a t doses of 150-300 
mg/kg. An aqueous decoction of the leaves 
showed significant antinociceptive activity in 
r a t s a t doses of 50-150 mg/kg. The crude wa te r 
extracts of the aerial par ts , given orally to ra ts , 
caused anorexia, anaemia and excitement fol-
lowed by dullness. They also caused leucocyto-
sis and a significant increase in t he level of 
a lbumin. 
The butanol extract of the dried leaves exhib-
ited marked inhibitory action on the growth of 
Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa, Klebsiella pneumoniae 
and Bacillus subtilis a t 100 mg/ml. A methanol 
extract of the aer ial pa r t s showed moderate 
ant iplasmodial activity. A leaf extract showed 
significant nematicidal activity against Meloi-
dogyne graminicola. An extract of the aerial 
pa r t s given orally to goats showed moderate 
activity agains t several in tes t inal nematodes , 
such as Haemonchus, Trichostrongylus, 
Bunostomum and Oesophagostomum. 
Extracts from the fresh shoots produced inhibi-
tory effects on the early seed germinat ion of 
tomato, pepper and cowpea. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Monoecious, annua l , sparsely 
branched herb up to 100 cm tall ; s t ems often 
t inged red towards the apex, with copious la-
tex. Leaves a r ranged spirally, crowded a t s tem 
apex, simple; s t ipules modified into purpl ish 
glands; petiole up to 2(-4) cm long; blade ovate 
to lanceolate, up to 12 cm x 6 cm, base cuneate , 
apex obtuse to slightly acuminate , marg ins 
with minute gland-tipped teeth, glabrous to 
sparsely hai ry on the main veins; upper leaves 
often with whit ish or reddish base. Inflores-
cence a compact axillary or te rmina l cyme con-
sist ing of clusters of flowers, each cluster called 
a 'cyathium', forking c. 5 t imes, rays becoming 
progressively shorter; basal bracts s imilar to 
the leaves bu t paler green, progressively 
smaller and more lanceolate, almost sessile; 
cyathia almost sessile, c. 3.5 mm x 2.5 mm, 
wi th an urn-shaped involucre, lobes circular, c. 
1.5 m m long, toothed, marg in hairy; gland 1, 
pel ta te , funnel-shaped, c. 1 mm in diameter , 
red-r immed, each involucre containing 1 fe-
male flower sur rounded by many male flowers. 
Flowers unisexual ; male flowers sessile, brac-
teoles few, fringed, pe r i an th absent , s t amen c. 
4 mm long; female flowers with pedicel c. 6 mm 
long in fruit, pe r i an th a rim, ovary superior, 
glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 1 mm long, 2-fid. 
Euphorbia heterophylla - 1, flowering branch; 
leaf showing variability in shape; 3, cyathium; 
4, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
Frui t a deeply 3-lobed capsule c. 4.5 mm x 5.5 
mm, glabrous, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 2.5 mm 
in diameter , warty, blackish brown. Seedling 
with epigeal germinat ion; cotyledons elliptical, 
c. 1.5 cm long, apex acute; hypocotyl, up to 4 
cm long; first leaves near ly opposite, lanceo-
late, la ter a l te rna te , toothed or not. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distr ibution, with a t least 750 species 
occurring in cont inental Africa and about 150 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
is lands. Euphorbia heterophylla belongs to the 
subgenus Poinsettia, section Poinsettia, a group 
of herbs or shrubs, with st ipules modified into 
glands, further character ized by cyathia in 
densely branching cymes, large and leafy 
bracts , 1 funnel-shaped involucral gland with 5 
lobes, capsules exserted on reflexed pedicels 
and seeds without a caruncle. Several species 
from this section are p lanted as o rnamenta l s 
because of the brightly coloured bracts . Eu-
phorbia heterophylla and Euphorbia cyatho-
phora Murray , also originating from tropical 
America, are now regarded as two distinct spe-
cies, bu t have not been t rea ted as such in older 
EUPHORBIA 267 
literature. Therefore much of the older litera-
ture cannot be regarded as referring to either 
of these species. Euphorbia cyathophora is 
grown as an ornamental, especially in the 
United States. In Brazil, the red-coloured 
leaves are used as a dye. 
The leaves of Euphorbia heterophylla occurring 
in East Africa show little of the variation char-
acteristic of this widespread species. Elsewhere 
in tropical Africa more variation in leaf shape 
is present. 
Growth and development Euphorbia he-
terophylla is an annual with a life cycle of 45-
50 days, and is thus capable of several life cy-
cles per rainy season. It can be found flowering 
and fruiting throughout the year if enough 
water is available. 
Ecology Euphorbia heterophylla grows in 
disturbed localities, as a weed of cultivation 
and waste land, in gardens and along road-
sides, from sea-level up to 3000 m altitude. It 
prefers full sun but is shade-tolerant. 
Propagation and planting Euphorbia he-
terophylla is propagated by seed. Fresh seed 
germinates readily under tropical conditions, 
but remains dormant under temperate circum-
stances. Both light and temperature influence 
the breaking of dormancy. The turning of soil 
favours germination and seeds germinate even 
when at a depth of 10 cm in the soil. 
Experiments with the post-emergence herbi-
cide glyphosate, sprayed on top of potted soil 
did not affect the emergence of seeds planted 2 
cm deep; glyphosate at 1.5 kg/ha even stimu-
lated the emergence of seeds on the soil sur-
face. This stimulatory effect of direct contact 
with glyphosate on germination of the seeds 
was confirmed in laboratory tests. 
Management Euphorbia heterophylla is a 
common and troublesome, nitrophilic weed in 
arable land in tropical Africa, and should be 
controlled. Hand weeding is commonly used, as 
chemical control is too costly. 
Sphaceloma poinsettiae, a scab-causing fungus 
that attacks Euphorbia heterophylla, could be 
used as a mycoherbicide, as on several occa-
sions this fungus has been observed to cause 
devastating epidemics in the field on this host. 
Diseases and pests Euphorbia heterophylla 
is a host of several crop viruses, including cas-
sava common mosaic potexvirus (CsCMV), Eu-
phorbia mosaic bigeminivirus (EuMV), tomato 
yellow leaf curl virus (TYLCV) and mungbean 
yellow mosaic virus (MYMV). It is moderately 
susceptible to root-knot nematodes, Meloi-
dogyne spp. 
Handling after harvest The leaves may be 
dried, powdered and kept for future use. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia heterophylla 
has a large area of distribution and is a weed; 
it is therefore not under threat of genetic ero-
sion. 
Breeding Euphorbia heterophylla is some-
times cultivated as an ornamental with 
brightly coloured upper leaves and bracts. 
Prospects Although Euphorbia heterophylla 
is an important medicinal plant in Africa, it is 
considered a noxious weed and, as such, it is 
often weeded. More research on its chemistry 
and pharmacology is needed to fully evaluate 
its potential. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Carter & 
Leach, 2001; Falodun & Agbakwuru, 2004; 
Falodun, Okunrobo & Uzoamaka, 2006; Hamill 
et a l , 2000; Kokwaro, 1993; Nechet, Barreto & 
Mizubuti, 2004; Nguyen Nghia Thin & Sosef, 
1999; SEPASAL, 2008d; Vamsidhar et al., 2000. 
Other references Aarestrup, Karam & 
Fernandes, 2008; Aarestrup, Karam & Fer-
nandes, 2008; Adedapo, Abatan & Olorunsogo, 
2004; Adjanohoun et al., 1989; Adjanohoun et 
al., 1993; Akah, 1989; Bannon, Baker & 
Rogers, 1978; Clarkson et a l , 2004; Eke & 
Okereke, 1996; Eniola-Tijani & Fawusi, 1991 
Falodun, Agbakwuru & Ukoh, 2003; Gill, 1992 
Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1996 
Ipou, 2005; Latham, 2005; Le Bourgeois & 
Merlier, 1995; Nsimba-Lubaki, Peumans & 
Carlier, 1983; Saimo et al., 2003; Suda & Gior-
gini, 2003; Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003; 
Wome, 1985. 
Sources of illustration Nguyen Nghia 
Thin & Sosef, 1999. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
EUPHORBIA HIRTA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 454 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In = 18, 20, 22, 32 
Synonyms Euphorbia pilulifera L. (1753), 
Chamaesyce hirta (L.) Millsp. (1909). 
Vernacular names Snakeweed, pill-bearing 
spurge, asthma herb (En). Jean Robert, mal-
nommée, euphorbe pilulifère (Fr). Erva de 
Santa Luzia, luzia, burra leiteira, erva an-
dorinha (Po). Mziwaziwa, kinywele, kitadali, 
kitapiaroho, kiziwa, mwache, wiza (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia hirta is native to Central America and 
a very common weed of the tropics and sub-
268 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Euphorbia hirta - naturalized 
tropics; it occurs throughout tropical Africa and 
also in South Africa. 
Uses Euphorbia hirta is an important me-
dicinal herb used throughout its distribution 
area, including tropical Africa. It is held in 
high esteem, as a decoction or infusion, to treat 
gastrointestinal disorders, including intestinal 
parasites, diarrhoea, peptic ulcers, heartburn, 
vomiting and amoebic dysentery. It is also re-
garded as an outstanding medication to treat 
respiratory system disorders, including asthma, 
bronchitis, hay fever, laryngeal spasms, em-
physema, coughs and colds. The leaves are 
mixed with those of Datura metel L. in prepar-
ing 'asthma cigarettes'. Other principal uses 
are as a diuretic to treat uro-genital diseases, 
such as kidney stones, menstrual problems, 
sterility and venereal diseases. The plant is 
also used to treat affections of the skin and 
mucous membranes, including warts, scabies, 
tinea, thrush, aphthae, fungal afflictions, mea-
sles, Guinea-worm and as an antiseptic to treat 
wounds, sores and conjunctivitis. The plant has 
a reputation as an analgesic to treat severe 
headache, toothache, rheumatism, colic and 
pains during pregnancy. It is used as an anti-
dote and pain relief of scorpion stings and 
snakebites. It is antipyretic and anti-inflamma-
tory. The use of the latex to facilitate removal 
of thorns from the skin is common. Its use in 
the treatment of jaundice, hypertension, oe-
dema, anaemia and malaria, as an aphrodisiac, 
and to facilitate childbirth has also been re-
ported. In West Africa the plants are widely 
used as a galactagogue, and in Nigeria they are 
marketed for this purpose. In Uganda whole 
plants are chewed to induce labour during 
childbirth. 
Euphorbia hirta is included in the African 
pharmacopoeia of the Organization of African 
Unity as a dysentery medication. 
In Java and India the tender shoots serve as 
famine food, raw or steamed, but they may 
cause intestinal complaints. In West Africa 
Euphorbia hirta is used as a livestock fodder. 
Production and international trade Dried 
plants, seeds and tinctures made from Euphor-
bia hirta are sold in local markets and through 
the internet. 
Proper t ies Important constituents of the 
aerial parts are terpenoids, including triter-
penes: a-amyrin, ß-amyrin, friedelin, taraxerol, 
and esters of it: taraxerone, llct,12a-oxido-
taraxerol, cycloartenol, 24-methylene-cycloartenol, 
and euphorbol hexacosoate. The aerial parts 
and roots also contain diterpene esters of the 
phorbol type and ingenol type, including 12-
deoxyphorbol-13-dodecanoate-20-aeetate, 12-
deoxyphorbol-13-phenylacetate-20-acetate, ingenol 
triacetate, as well as the highly toxic tinya-
toxin, a resiniferonol derivative. Other terpe-
noids isolated are sterols including ß-sitosterol, 
campesterol, cholesterol and stigmasterol. 
Tannins isolated include the dimeric hydroly-
sable dehydroellagitannins euphorbins A, B, C, 
E and terchebin, the monomeric hydrolysable 
tannins geraniin, 2,4,6-tri-O-galloyl-ß-D-glucose 
and 1,2,3,4,6-penta-O-galloyl-ß-D-glucose and 
the esters 5-O-caffeoylquinic acid (neochloro-
genic acid) and 3,4-di-O-galloylquinic acid, and 
benzyl gallate. Acids isolated include ellagic 
acid, gallic acid, tannic acid, maleic acid and 
tartaric acid. Flavonoids isolated include 
quercetin, quercitrin, quercitol and derivatives 
containing rhamnose, quercetin-rhamoside, a 
chlorophenolic acid, rutin, leucocyanidin, leu-
cocyanidol, myricitrin, cyanidin 3,5-diglucoside, 
pelargonium 3,5-diglucoside and camphol. The 
flavonol glycoside xanthorhamnin was also 
isolated. The stems contain the hydrocarbon 
hentriacontane and myricyl alcohol. The latex 
contains inositol, taraxerol, friedelin, ß-
sitosterol, ellagic acid, kaempferol, quercitol 
and quercitrin. The mineral content of a sam-
ple of the dried leaves was: Ca 1.1%, P 0.3%, Fe 
0.03%, Mg 0.5%, Mn 0.01%, Zn 0.01% and Cu 
0.002%. Fresh leaves from Euphorbia hirta 
plants of Nigerian origin were found to contain 
high levels of Mn (189 ppm), Cu (30.5 ppm), Zn 
(152 ppm), and NO3 (4600 ppm). Varying pro-
portions of Fe, Mg, K, Ca and Na were found. 
The levels of chemicals are high enough to con-
stitute a source of toxicosis to animals consum-
EUPHORBIA 269 
ing the plants and should also be a source of 
concern in medicinal use. 
Few toxic effects have been documented for 
Euphorbia hirta. An ether extract was found to 
be toxic in a brine shrimp lethality test, 
whereas ethyl acetate and aqueous extracts 
were within safe limits. In another test, how-
ever, an aqueous crude extract was found to 
cause testicular degeneration in sexually ma-
ture male rats as well as a reduction in the 
mean seminiferous tubular diameter. Several 
other extracts given orally to rats caused dull-
ness and anorexia and induced a 20% mortality 
rate. Some fractions from the ethanolic extract 
showed potentially deleterious effects on the 
blood serum chemistry of rats. In feeding ex-
periments with rats however, no difference in 
the blood serum was found after a prolonged 
period of adding Euphorbia hirta to the diet. It 
was also found that drying Euphorbia hirta 
prior to extraction considerably reduces the 
cytotoxic activity of certain of its extracts. 
Several of the traditional medicinal uses of 
Euphorbia hirta have been supported by in-
vitro studies. An aqueous extract of the whole 
plant acts as an antidiarrhoeic agent by anti-
amoebic, antibacterial and antispasmodic ac-
tivities. The antidiarrhoeal activity is attrib-
uted to quercitrin through the release of the 
aglycone quercetin in the intestine. Quercitrin 
showed antidiarrhoeic activity at doses of 50 
mg/kg in mice. 
A crude plant extract and an ethanolic extract 
had significant anti-amoebic activity against 
Entamoeba histolytica in vitro at 35 mg/ml. An 
aqueous lyophilysate of the whole plant showed 
higher activity against Entamoeba histolytica 
than either the ethyl acetate or methanol ex-
tracts, at 30 mg/ml. An aqueous plant extract 
showed concentration-related activity against 
non-pathogenic amoebae of the Amoeba proteus 
type. Different extracts from the aerial parts 
showed antibacterial activity against a wide 
spectrum of both gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria. Extracts of the aerial parts 
showed strong antibacterial activity against 
Shigella dysenteriae, a causal agent for dysen-
tery in humans. The active compound was 
found to be ethyl gallate, which has broad spec-
trum antibiotic activity at non-toxic doses. A 
crude ethanol extract of the whole plant 
showed dose-dependent activity against Can-
dida albicans, but not against several other 
pathogenic fungi. Some of the isolated antibac-
terial compounds were taraxerone and 
lla,12a-oxidotaraxerol, which showed low 
cytotoxicity. 
Ethanol, petroleum ether and dichloromethane 
extracts of whole plants showed significant in-
vitro antiplasmodial activity (ICso = 3 (ig/ml) 
and decreased growth of Plasmodium falcipa-
rum by 89-100% at a test concentration of 6 
|ig/ml. In-vivo, the extracts reduced parasitae-
mia in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei 
berghei at oral doses of 100—400 mg/kg per day. 
From a methanolic extract of the aerial parts 
the flavonol glycosides afzelin, quercitrin and 
myricitrin were isolated, which showed prolif-
eration inhibition of Plasmodium falciparum, 
with ICso values of 1.1, 4.1, 5.4 |ig/ml respec-
tively, while they exhibited little cytotoxic ef-
fect against human epidermoid carcinoma KB 
3-1 cells. An ethanolic extract was active in 
selectively inhibiting Herpes simplex virus 
type-1 (0.001-0.1 mg/ml). 
A lyophilized aqueous extract of the aerial 
parts has been evaluated for analgesic, antipy-
retic and anti-inflammatory properties in mice 
and rats. The extract exerted central analgesic 
properties at doses of 20 and 25 mg/kg, and 
antipyretic activity at doses of 100 and 400 
mg/kg, whereas anti-inflammatory effects 
against carrageenan-induced oedema in rats 
were observed at a dose of 100 mg/kg. The 
aqueous extract of the aerial parts has been 
found to strongly reduce the release of pros-
taglandins, and thus depress inflammation. An 
ethanolic extract of the aerial parts was found 
to possess a prominent anti-anaphylactic activ-
ity and also showed significant antihistaminic, 
anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive 
properties in various animal models. 
Water and ethanolic leaf extracts produced a 
time-dependent increase in urine output in 
rats. A methanol extract of leaves and stems 
inhibited the activity of angiotensin-converting 
enzyme by 90% at 500 (xg and 50% at 160 |ag. 
The extract (10 mg/100 g, intraperitoneally) 
significantly decreased the amount of water 
consumed by rats. An ethanolic extract of the 
whole plant showed a dose-dependent ulcer 
protective effect in rats. The active compound 
was found to be quercetin, which had an anti-
ulcer activity ranging from 48—64% comparable 
to 61-80% of the standard drug ranitidine. An 
ethanolic extract of the aerial parts showed 
significant hepatoprotective activity in rats. 
Extracts of whole plant material have oestro-
genic activity in female guinea pigs, when 
given orally. 
In organ bath tests with ileum preparations, 
shikimic acid and choline extracted from the 
270 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
aerial parts had relaxing and contracting prop-
erties, respectively. Shikimic acid also has 
acute toxicity, mutagenicity and carcinogenic-
ity. 
The aqueous crude extract significantly re-
duced the faecal egg count of helminths in 
dogs. 
Several of the extracts of Euphorbia hirta 
showed potential for controlling plant diseases 
and pests. For example, a whole plant extract 
inhibited growth of vascular wilt (Fusarium 
oxysporum) and the causal agent of sheath rot 
of rice, Sarocladium oryzae; aqueous extracts 
of the aerial parts inhibited aflatoxin produc-
tion by Aspergillus parasiticus on agricultural 
crops, including rice, wheat, maize and 
groundnuts. Leaf extracts completely inhibited 
soft rot infection caused by the bacteria Er-
winia carotovora pv. carotovora. The infectivity 
of tobacco mosaic virus on Nicotiana glutinosa 
L. was strongly inhibited (>80%) by tannins 
extracted from the aerial parts. The latex in-
hibited sugarcane mosaic virus-A by 78.5% and 
sugarcane mosaic virus-F by 80%. 
Root and leaf extracts showed nematicidal ac-
tivity against Meloidogyne incognita; a whole 
plant extract effectively reduced hatching in 
the nematode Heterodera avenae. A 10% etha-
nol crude extract showed significant larvicidal 
action against the larvae of the tick Boophilus 
microplus. 
Aqueous stem, latex and leaf extracts have 
potent molluscicidal activity against the fresh-
water snails Lymnaea acuminata and Indo-
planorbis exustus, both intermediate hosts of 
Fasciola hepatica and Fasciola gigantica, 
which cause endemic fascioliasis in cattle and 
livestock. Toxicity of the extracts was time 
dependent and dose dependent against both 
snails. The doses that can be used for killing 
90% of the Lymnaea acuminata populations 
are safe for the fish Channa punctatus. 
Description Annual, branched herb, pros-
trate to ascending, with branches up to 50 cm 
long, with latex; all parts short-hairy and with 
sparse yellow hairs c. 1.5 mm long. Leaves op-
posite, distichous, simple; stipules linear, up to 
2.5 mm long; petiole up to 3.5 mm long; blade 
ovate, 1-4 cm x 0.5-2 cm, base very unequal, 
one side cuneate, the other side rounded, apex 
almost acute, margin finely toothed, often with 
a purple blotch near the midvein. Inflorescence 
a terminal or axillary cluster of flowers, called 
a 'cyathium', with several cyathia densely clus-
tered into a cyme c. 15 mm in diameter; pedun-
cle up to 15(-20) mm long; cyathia with a cup-
Euphorbia hirta - 1, plant habit; 2, 
athium; 3, mature cyathium; 4, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
young cy-
shaped involucre c. 1 mm in diameter, tinged 
purple, lobes triangular, fringed, glands 4, tiny, 
elliptical, green or purplish, with minute white 
to pink appendages, each involucre containing 
1 female flower surrounded by many male 
flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers ses-
sile, bracteoles linear, fringed, perianth absent, 
stamen 1, c. 1 mm long; female flowers with 
short pedicel, perianth a rim, ovary superior, 
short-hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, minute, apex 2-
fid. Fruit a just exserted, acutely 3-lobed cap-
sule c. 1 mm in diameter, base truncate, short-
hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds oblong-conical, c. 1 mm 
long, slightly wrinkled, pinkish brown, without 
caruncle. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia hirta belongs to subgenus 
Chamaesyce section Hypericifoliae, a group of 
annual herbs with obvious stipules, which is 
further characterized by the main stem abort-
ing at the seedling stage and the plant thus 
EUPHORBIA 271 
consisting of an expanded, dichotomously 
branching inflorescence, with the floral bracts 
appearing as normal leaves, cyathia clustered 
into 10 or more stalked, head-like cymes, 4 
involucral glands with petal-like appendages or 
entire and conical seeds without a caruncle. 
Growth and development Ants may be 
dispersal agents of Euphorbia hirta seeds. 
Ecology Euphorbia hirta grows in culti-
vated fields, gardens, roadsides and waste 
places, from sea-level up to 2000 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Euphorbia 
hirta produces up to 3000 seeds per plant, 
which show a germination rate of up to 92%. 
Seeds can be dried without damage to low 
moisture contents, usually much lower levels 
than normally reached in nature. Over a wide 
range of storage environments, their longevity 
increases with reduction in both moisture con-
tent and temperature. Regeneration can also 
be achieved from leaf expiants or stem seg-
ments. 
Management Euphorbia hirta is considered 
a weed, and can be a nuisance in crops due to 
the large number of seedlings. 
Diseases and pests Euphorbia hirta is a 
host to many fungal pathogens and may as 
such act as a reservoir of pathogenic fungi, 
which can infect nearby susceptible crops. Try-
panosomatid flagellates (Phytomonas spp.) 
were detected in Euphorbia hirta plants in 
coconut plantations. Euphorbia hirta also acts 
as a host to several insect vectors, including 
the aphid Aphis craccivora, a vector of the ro-
sette virus disease of groundnut, and Aphis 
gossypii. 
Handling after harvest All parts of Eu-
phorbia hirta are usually used fresh, but some-
times they are dried for future use. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia hirta is a 
very common weed and has a very large area of 
distribution. Therefore there is no risk of ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Considering that the pharmacol-
ogical action of Euphorbia hirta for the treat-
ment of many ailments has been validated, and 
that the plant is reasonably safe to use, this 
plant has not received sufficient promotion for 
use as herbal medicine. Its development will be 
important in the improved delivery of primary 
health care in developing countries. Euphorbia 
hirta may find potential use in integrated pest 
management as a simple, cheap and safe natu-
ral product insecticide. 
Major references Anuradha et al., 2008; 
Burkill, 1994; Carter & Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; 
Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1996; 
Lanhers et al., 1991; Lui et a l , 2007; Neu-
winger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; Nguyen Nghia 
Thin & Sosef, 1999; Youssouf et al., 2007. 
Other references Abu Sayeed et al., 2005; 
Adedapo et al., 2005; Adjanohoun, 1986; Edwin 
et al., 2007; Hiermann & Bucar, 1994; Johnson 
et al., 1999; Lanhers et al., 1990; Masood & 
Ranjan, 1991; Ogbulie, 2007; Oyewale, Mika & 
Peters, 2002; Rao et a l , 2003; Sawadogo et al., 
1988; Singh et a l , 2006; Singh et a l , 2005; 
Somchit et al., 2001; Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 
2003; Tona et al., 2004; Wallace et a l , 1990; 
Wome, 1984. 
Sources of illustration Nguyen Nghia 
Thin & Sosef, 1999. 
Authors J.R.S. Tabuti 
E U P H O R B I A H Y P E R I C I F O L I A L . 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 454 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 7, 8, 16, 28; 2n = 
16, 18, 22, 32 
Synonyms Chamaesyce hypericifolia (L.) 
Millsp. (1909). 
Vernacular names Graceful sandmat, 
graceful spurge, large spotted spurge (En). 
Herbe colique (Fr). Lechosa, lecheleche, yerba 
golondrina, canchlagua (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia hypericifolia originates from tropical 
and subtropical America and has spread to 
tropical Africa and India. Its distribution in 
tropical Africa is not clear as it is confused 
with Euphorbia indica Lam. It occurs with 
certainty in West Africa, Burundi and on Mau-
ritius. 
Uses In West Africa and Burundi the latex is 
applied as a caustic on cuts and wounds; in 
West Africa the latex is taken in water as a 
purgative. In Burundi a vapour bath of the leaf 
decoction is applied to treat headache. In Mau-
ritius a plant decoction is taken to treat diar-
rhoea, dysentery and colic. The plant is consid-
ered astringent and calming. 
The principal use of Euphorbia hypericifolia in 
tropical and subtropical America is in a decoc-
tion or infusion of the leaves and roots for the 
treatment of a wide variety of gastro-intestinal 
disorders with watery and mucous discharges. 
Euphorbia hypericifolia is also used in the 
treatment of gonorrhoea, menorrhagia, leuco-
rrhoea, pneumonia and bronchitis. The leaves 
have a sweetish taste, followed by a sensation 
272 MEDICINAL PLANTS l 
of harshness. 
Production and international trade Eu-
phorbia hypericifolia is widely traded in the 
United Stated in tablets and powders, mainly 
to treat bowel disorders. It is traded interna-
tionally through the internet. 
Properties From the aerial parts aliphatic 
alcohols have been isolated as have the sterols 
taraxerol, ß-sitosterol, stigmasterol, campestol 
and the flavonoids kaempferol, quercetin, 
quercetrin (quercetin-3-rhamnoside), rham-
netin-3-galactoside, rhamnetin-3-rhamnoside 
and ellagic acid. 
Leaf extracts showed significant growth inhibi-
tory effect against Aspergillus flavus in vitro, 
and also inhibited the production of aflatoxins 
almost completely, with greater inhibition at 
higher concentrations. 
Botany Glabrous annual, branched herb, 
spreading or erect, up to 60 cm tall, apex of 
branches drooping, with latex. Leaves opposite, 
simple; stipules triangular, 1-2 mm long, one 
pair often fused, hairy at margins; petiole 1-2 
mm long; blade elliptical-oblong to oblong, 1-
2(-3.5) cm x 0.5-l(-1.5) cm, base cuneate, 
asymmetric, apex obtuse, margin obscurely 
toothed. Inflorescence an axillary cluster of 
flowers, called a 'cyathium', cyathia densely 
clustered into a head c. 1.5 cm in diameter; 
peduncle up to 3 cm long; cyathia almost ses-
sile, c. 1 mm long, with a cup-shaped involucre, 
lobes triangular, minute, glands 4, tiny, almost 
round, stiped, with circular, white to pink ap-
pendage, each involucre containing 1 female 
flower surrounded by many male flowers. 
Flowers unisexual; male flowers sessile, brac-
teoles linear, perianth absent, stamen c. 0.5 
mm long; female flowers with short pedicel, 
perianth a rim, ovary superior, glabrous, 3-
celled, styles 3, minute. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 
c. 1.5 mm in diameter, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 
1 mm long, 4-angled, slightly wrinkled, greyish 
purple, without caruncle. 
Pollination of Euphorbia hypericifolia is proba-
bly effected by small insects and the seeds have 
been seen to be dispersed by ants. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia hypericifolia 
belongs to subgenus Chamaesyce section Hy-
pericifoliae, a group of annual herbs with obvi-
ous stipules, further characterized by the main 
stem aborting at the seedling stage. The plant 
thus consists of an expanded dichotomously 
branching inflorescence, with the floral bracts 
appearing as normal leaves, cyathia clustered 
10 or more in stalked, head-like cymes, 4 in-
volucral glands with petal-like appendages or 
entire and conical seeds without a caruncle. 
Euphorbia indica Lam. also belongs to section 
Hypericifoliae. It originates from India and Sri 
Lanka and has been introduced as a weed in 
East and southern Africa, as well as in Réun-
ion and Mauritius. It was mistakenly consid-
ered to be synonymous with Euphorbia hy-
pericifolia L., but it differs by having stipules 
that are not fused and a hairy fruit. In East 
Africa the latex is used as a purgative and as a 
caustic on skin lesions. In Kenya the latex is 
applied to the eyes to treat eye infections and 
catarrh. In Tanzania ground plants are added 
to bath water to treat oedema. In Mauritius a 
plant decoction is taken to treat diarrhoea and 
dysentery. 
Ecology Euphorbia hypericifolia occurs 
along roadsides, stony river sides, in waste 
places and as a weed in cultivation, from sea-
level up to 600 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia hypericifolia has a large area of distribu-
tion and is weedy of nature. Therefore it is not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Euphorbia hypericifolia has con-
siderable value as a medicinal plant, although 
more research needs to be done to evaluate its 
chemistry and pharmacology. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Gurib-
Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1996; Hasan & 
Abdel Mallek, 1994; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Ehrenfeld, 1976; 
Ehrenfeld, 1979; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Authors V.E. Emongor 
E U P H O R B I A INGENS E.Mey. ex Boiss. 
Protologue A.DC, Prodr. 15(2): 87 (1862). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2re = 40 
Synonyms Euphorbia similis A.Berger 
(1907). 
Vernacular names Candelabra tree, com-
mon tree euphorbia (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia ingens occurs from the Caprivi strip 
(Namibia), Zambia and Botswana east to Mo-
zambique and south to eastern South Africa 
and Swaziland. 
Uses The latex is very toxic, causing intense 
EUPHORBIA 273 
irritation and blistering to the skin and mu-
cous membranes. If the latex comes into con-
tact with the eyes, it causes temporary or even 
permanent blindness. Medicinally, the latex is 
taken in very small amounts, often on sugar, as 
a drastic purgative and to treat alcohol de-
pendency. Pulverized root or a few drops of 
latex in porridge is eaten to treat bronchitis. In 
Zimbabwe the stems of Brachystegia spici-
formis Benth. are chewed and the fibres dipped 
in the latex of Euphorbia ingens; the fibres are 
then dried and burnt and the smoke inhaled to 
treat asthma and bronchitis. In South Africa 
the Venda people use the latex to treat chronic 
ulcers, warts and cancer. There are several 
cases recorded of overdoses, causing vomiting, 
violent abdominal pain and excessive purging, 
and even death. 
In Zimbabwe and South Africa a bundle of 
grass soaked in latex is thrown into water as a 
fish poison. 
The wood is light and tough and is used to 
make boats, planks and doors. Before cutting, 
the trunk is scorched to prevent the toxic latex 
from splashing. The flowers of Euphorbia in-
gens and several other tree-sized Euphorbia 
spp. produce much nectar, but the honey, 
known as 'noors honey', causes a burning sen-
sation in the mouth, which is intensified by 
drinking water. Euphorbia ingens is planted as 
an ornamental in succulent gardens or rock 
gardens in South Africa and the United States. 
Properties The latex and roots of Euphor-
bia ingens contain ingenol, a tetracyclic diter-
pene ester of the ingenane type, based on the 
parent alcohol 16-hydroxyingenol and several 
derivatives. Ingenol and its derivatives show 
tumour-promoting, anti-HIV and anti-leukae-
mia activities. Much research is directed to-
ward synthesis and biological evaluation of 
ingenol analogs and derivatives. The irritant 
ingenol esters of the latex have ID50 values of 
0.004-0.02 \ig in mice-ear tests. 
An extract of the pounded branches in water 
was given to chickens before or during Newcas-
tle disease outbreaks. The rate of mortality 
reduction ranged between 38% for chickens 
given the extract during a Newcastle disease 
outbreak as a therapeutic measure and 100% 
for chickens given the extract as a prophylactic 
measure. 
Different concentrations of latex were used in 
mortality tests with several aquatic animals. 
The latex was found to be a short-lived and 
effective fish poison. Within 12 hours all the 
fish and half the frogs died, whereas crabs and 
snails appeared not to suffer any detrimental 
effects. The poison degraded and became harm-
less to fish within 48 hours. 
Botany Monoecious, succulent small tree up 
to 12(—15) m tall, with abundant latex; bole 
stout; bark grey, roughly fissured; branches 
persistent from c. 3 m upwards, almost erect, 
rebranching, forming a large, broadly rounded 
crown; terminal branches fleshy, 6-12 cm in 
diameter, constricted at irregular intervals into 
oblong segments 10-15 cm long, 4-angled, 
wings up to 3 cm wide, margins of angles 
straight to wavy, with shallow tubercles 1-2 
cm apart; spine shields obtusely triangular, c. 6 
mm x 5 mm, soon becoming corky, with 2 pairs 
of spines, 1 pair stout, c. 5 mm long, 1 (stipu-
lar) pair triangular, c. 1.5 mm long, flexible, 
soon falling. Leaves at the end of branches, in 4 
rows, sessile; stipules transformed into small 
spines; blade obovate, c. 3 mm x 3 mm, soon 
falling, in young plants up to 8 cm x 2 cm. In-
florescence an axillary cyme, 1-3 together 
crowded at the end of branches, consisting of 
clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 'cy-
athium', peduncle 8-20 mm long, branches 2, c. 
5 mm long; bracts 2, c. 5 mm long; cyathia c. 5 
mm x 10 mm, with a cup-shaped involucre, 
lobes c. 2.5 mm long, glands 5, transversely 
elliptical, c. 2 mm x 4 mm, golden-yellow, each 
involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual; male flowers sessile, perianth absent, 
stamen c. 5.5 mm long; female flowers with 
pedicel c. 5 mm long in fruit, perianth irregu-
larly 3-lobed, lobes filiform, 2-4 mm long, 
ovary superior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, 3 -
3.5 mm long, fused at base, apex 2-fid. Fruit an 
obtusely 3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm x 10 mm, 
fleshy, green becoming red, hardening before 
dehiscence, 3-seeded. Seeds almost globose, c. 4 
mm x 3 mm, greyish brown speckled with pale 
brown, smooth. 
The flowers of Euphorbia ingens are pollinated 
by butterflies, bees and other insects, and the 
seeds are dispersed by birds, which feed on the 
fruits. Birds also like nesting in these trees; 
hole-nesting birds such as woodpeckers often 
use dead sections. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia ingens belongs 
to section Euphorbia, a large group which is 
characterized by succulent, usually angular 
stems, stipules modified into small spines (or 
274 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
absent), a spine shield with an additional pair 
of spines (sometimes fused into a single spine), 
axillary inflorescences and seeds without a 
caruncle. Euphorbia ingens is very similar to 
Euphorbia candelabrum Trémaux ex Kotschy 
from East and northeastern Africa, and may be 
conspecific. The branches of trees in southern 
Africa are usually more distinctly and shortly 
segmented, the tubercle teeth along the angles 
are usually further apart and the branch tips 
are fewer-flowered. 
Euphorbia conspicua N.E.Br, is a small tree up 
to 15 m tall endemic to western Angola; it is 
also very similar to Euphorbia candelabrum. 
The latex is taken as a purgative to treat con-
stipation, and also to treat breast inflamma-
tion, epilepsy, coughs and tuberculosis. 
Ecology Euphorbia ingens occurs in dry 
mopane and wooded grassland, often on rocky 
outcrops, from sea-level up to 1600 m altitude. 
It can survive in areas that go through long 
periods of drought or are generally very dry. 
Management As an ornamental Euphorbia 
ingens is a hardy succulent and needs little or 
no maintenance. It does best in the open sun. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia ingens is relatively common in its distribu-
tion area; small trees are only browsed by rhi-
noceros, and therefore it is not threatened by 
genetic erosion. All succulent Euphorbia spp. 
are listed in CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects The latex of Euphorbia ingens is 
highly poisonous and medicinally it should 
therefore be used with great care. Only few 
chemical analyses have been done, and virtu-
ally no pharmacological tests. Because the la-
tex contains ingenol and derivatives more re-
search is warranted. 
Major references Carter & Leach, 2001; 
Coates Palgrave, 1983; Kellerman, Coetzer & 
Naudé, 1988; Neuwinger, 2000; van Wyk, van 
Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 2002. 
Other references Bossard, 1996; Carter, 
1985; Grace et al., 2002; Kaoma & Chiteta, 
2001; Le Roux, 2004; Opferkuch et al., 1981; 
Opferkuch & Hecker, 1982; Ross & Steyn, 
2004; SEPASAL, 2008f; van Wyk & Gericke, 
2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA LUGARDIAE (N.E.Br.) Bruyns 
Protologue Taxon 55(2): 413 (2006). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 17 
Synonyms Monadenium lugardiae N.E.Br. 
(1909). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia lugardiae occurs in Malawi, Zambia, 
Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South 
Africa. 
Uses In Zimbabwe and South Africa a few 
drops of stem or root latex are mixed in por-
ridge or milk and taken to treat ascites, stom-
ach-ache, chest pain, headache, measles, 
pneumonia and asthma; the latex is also taken 
as an abortifacient. The latex is a violent pur-
gative, and can cause vomiting and haemor-
rhagic gastroenteritis, cirrhosis of the liver and 
sometimes death. It is also used to expel worms 
in dogs. The latex taken together with plant 
sap of Portulaca quadrifida L. has been applied 
as a remedy for gonorrhoea. In South Africa 
plant ash is rubbed into scarifications to treat 
rheumatic pain. Consumption of the root can 
cause hallucinations and delirium, and a piece 
of the root is taken by diviners to see visions 
and to make prophecies. Eating the raw root 
produces a burning sensation in the mouth and 
gullet. 
Euphorbia lugardiae is grown as an ornamen-
tal pot plant. 
Properties The latex from the aerial parts 
and a methanol extract from the stem had a 
dualistic effect on isolated guinea-pig ileum, as 
they had contractile activity at lower concen-
trations, but an inhibitory effect on the con-
tractions at higher concentrations. 
When 1 ml of pure or water-diluted latex from 
the aerial parts (at concentrations of 10% or 
1%) was given orally to 3-month-old rats, all 
rats died within 20 minutes. Concentrations of 
0.1% or 0.01% caused severe diarrhoea lasting 
7 days and a 10-15% loss in weight. The latex 
is very acid, with a pH of as low as 2, and can 
cause dermatitis. The latex also showed sig-
nificant insecticidal activity in vitro. 
Botany Monoecious, succulent shrub up to 
60 cm tall, branching from the base, erect or 
slightly decumbent; roots thick and fleshy; 
stems cylindrical, up to 3 cm in diameter, with 
flattened tubercles c. 1.5 cm x 1 cm in a dia-
mond-shaped pattern, with circular leaf scars 
c. 2 mm in diameter at apex. Leaves arranged 
spirally, crowded towards the stem apex, sim-
ple, almost sessile; stipules modified into a 
cluster of 3—5 soft spines up to 2 mm long, soon 
falling; blade obovate, up to 9 cm x 4 cm, base 
cuneate, apex rounded, margins wavy, fleshy, 
minutely short-hairy, pinnately veined. Inflo-
rescence an axillary cyme, consisting of clus-
EUPHORBIA 275 
ters of flowers, each cluster called a 'cyathium'; 
peduncle 5-8 cm long and branches 2-4 mm 
long; bracts fused into a cup c. 7 mm x 7 mm, 
shortly notched between acute lobes, with 
prominent midveins, often tinged pinkish; cy-
athia c. 4 mm in diameter, with cup-shaped 
involucre, cream with yellow rim, 5-lobed with 
lobes c. 1 mm x 1.5 mm, toothed, with 1 horse-
shoe-shaped gland c. 2 mm long, each involucre 
containing 1 female flower surrounded by 
many male flowers. Flowers unisexual; male 
flowers sessile with bracteoles c. 2.5 mm long, 
fringed, perianth absent, stamen c. 4 mm long; 
female flowers with pedicel up to 8 mm in fruit, 
perianth 3-lobed, c. 2.5 mm in diameter, ovary 
superior, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 1.5 mm long, 
fused at base, deeply bifid at apex. Fruit a 3-
lobed capsule c. 6 mm x 6 mm, with a pair of 
fleshy crested ridges along the ribs, 3-seeded. 
Seeds oblong, c. 3.5 mm x 1.5 mm, 4-angled, 
minutely rough, pale brownish grey, caruncle 
cap-shaped, c. 1 mm in diameter, on a short, 
thin stalk. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution. Monadenium 
(about 70 species in continental Africa) had 
always been kept separate from Euphorbia, but 
recent molecular analyses found Monadenium 
to be nested within Euphorbia, and it is there-
fore included within Euphorbia, as section 
Monadenium in subgenus Euphorbia. 
Ecology Euphorbia lugardiae occurs on 
granite outcrops, in sandy soil among rocks in 
wooded grassland and open Brachystegia wood-
land, and also in shade on termite mounds, 
often in colonies, at 100—1100 m altitude. 
Management As a pot plant Euphorbia 
lugardiae needs full sun to light shade, and a 
well-drained soil mix consisting of 2 parts sand 
to 1 part loam and 1 part peat moss. After wa-
tering the plants should be allowed to dry thor-
oughly before watering again. A single fertil-
izer application is recommended during the 
growing season. Too much water and fertilizer 
will cause root rot. During the cold season, only 
enough water should be given to keep the 
leaves from shrivelling and dropping off. 
Euphorbia lugardiae is mainly propagated 
from stem cuttings; stem tips 10-15 cm long 
are used. After cutting, the stems are dipped in 
charcoal dust to seal the cut and then left to 
form callus for a week before inserting the cut-
ting into the soil. Cuttings should root in 6-8 
weeks. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia lugardiae is rather uncommon in its distri-
bution area, but there are no signs that it is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Euphorbia lugardiae has several 
medicinal uses, but chemical analyses and 
pharmacological evidence of its usefulness is 
lacking. Additional research is therefore war-
ranted. 
Major references Bruyns, Mapaya & Hed-
derson, 2006; Carter & Leach, 2001; Gundidza, 
1993; Neuwinger, 2000; van Wyk & Gericke, 
2000. 
Other references De Smet, 1996; Gelfand 
et al., 1985; Gundidza, 1986; Gundidza, 1990; 
Gundidza, 1991; Lemke, 2005; Steenkamp, 
2003; Steinmann & Porter, 2002. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
E U P H O R B I A MAINTY (Poiss.) Denis ex Lean-
dri 
Protologue Cat. PL Madag., Euphorb.: 16 
(1935). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia mainly is endemic to south-eastern 
Madagascar. 
Uses The latex is taken in water as a vermi-
fuge, despite its toxicity. The use is well-known 
and people are careful about the quantities 
used. 
The latex was formerly mixed with fibres from 
other plants to make wooden boats watertight; 
it was also made into varnish to make boats 
water resistant. The latex is mixed with latex 
from other plants to make a rubber. The plants 
are browsed by cattle. Euphorbia mainty is 
grown as a pot plant in Europe and the United 
States. 
Botany Monoecious, glabrous, much-
branched shrub up to 8 m tall, most of the time 
leafless; branches slender, cylindrical, with 
compressed tips, green; stems with white latex. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple and entire, 
almost sessile, on new growth only, soon de-
ciduous; blade oblong, up to 15 mm x 3 mm, 
base cuneate, apex rounded. Inflorescence a 
cyme near the end of branches, hairy, consist-
ing of clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 
'cyathium'; cyathium unisexual, c. 4 mm in 
diameter, developing only male flowers or a 
single female flower; nectar producing glands 
yellow. Flowers unisexual; male flowers con-
sisting of a single stamen; female flowers with 
superior ovary, 3-celled. Fruit an almost glo-
bose capsule, c. 8 mm in diameter, on reflexed 
276 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
pedicel c. 1 mm long, 3-seeded. Seed ovoid, c. 
3.5 mm x 2.5 mm. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Most species present in 
Madagascar are endemic to the island. Several 
other Euphorbia spp. with small leaves and 
photosynthetic stems, endemic to Madagascar, 
are locally used. The steam of leafy twigs in 
boiling water of Euphorbia plagiantha Drake 
(synonym: Euphorbia fiha Decary) is inhaled to 
treat asthma. The thick latex is used as glue 
for wood and paper. The very corrosive latex of 
the crushed stems of Euphorbia enterophora 
Drake, Euphorbia decorsei Drake and Euphor-
bia plagiantha are all used as fish poison. The 
trunk of Euphorbia enterophora is covered with 
a wax, which was formerly harvested for pol-
ishing. Euphorbia enterophora is also planted 
as a pot plant and sold as such on the internet. 
Ecology Euphorbia mainty occurs in dry 
thickets and open forest, from sea-level up to 
500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Eu-
phorbia mainty is common there are no threats 
to its genetic diversity. As a (semi-)succulent 
Euphorbia species, its trade is controlled under 
CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Euphorbia mainty will probably 
remain of local importance as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Debray, Jacquemin & Ra-
zafindrambao, 1971; Eggli, 2002. 
Other references Cremers, 1977; Cremers, 
1978; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA MATABELENSIS Pax 
Protologue Ann. Naturhist. Mus. Wien 15: 
51 (1900). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Three-forked euphorbia 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia matabelensis occurs in Somalia, south-
ern Kenya, Tanzania and throughout southern 
Africa. 
Uses In Malawi a root decoction together 
with leaves of Dichrostachys cinerea (L.) Wight 
& Arn. is drunk to treat depression, high blood 
pressure and swollen lymph glands. In Zim-
babwe root powder is rubbed into scarifications 
on the breasts as a galactagogue for foster 
mothers. A decoction of the chopped roots or 
latex is taken as a purgative in case of poison-
ing and to induce abortion. The latex is put 
into drinking water of chickens to treat diar-
rhoea and Newcastle disease. 
In Tanzania the boiled latex is used as birdlime 
or sometimes as chewing gum. 
Properties An ingenol diterpene isolated 
from the latex exhibited irritant activity in the 
mouse ear test. 
Botany Monoecious, slightly succulent, de-
ciduous shrub up to 3(-8) m tall with abundant 
latex; bark greyish brown, peeling; branches 
ascending, drooping at apex, young branches 
densely short-hairy, usually spine-tipped, 
branching trichotomous at apex. Leaves ar-
ranged spirally or crowded at branch apex, 
simple and entire; stipules glandular, minute; 
petiole 1-5 mm long; blade oblanceolate to 
obovate, c. 5.5 mm x 2.5 mm, base cuneate, 
apex rounded, lower surface short-hairy when 
young. Inflorescence an axillary cyme consist-
ing of clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 
'cyathium', in 3-7-branched umbels; branches 
up to 10 mm long; bracts leaf-like, c. 5 mm 
long, yellowish green; cyathia almost sessile or 
central one of an umbel on a peduncle up to 5 
mm long, c. 3.5 mm x 6 mm, with a cup-shaped 
involucre, lobes c. 1.5 mm long, rounded, 
deeply fringed, glands 5, shallowly saucer-
shaped, 2-2.5 mm in diameter, yellow, each 
involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual; male flowers sessile, bracteoles fringed, 
perianth absent, stamen c. 4.5 mm long; female 
flowers with pedicel c. 5 mm long in fruit, 
ovary superior, densely short-hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, c. 2 mm long, fused at base, apex 2-fid. 
Fruit an obtusely 3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm x 8 
mm, densely short-hairy, green becoming red, 
3-seeded. Seeds globose, c. 3.5 mm in diameter, 
smooth, brown, obscurely speckled. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia matabelensis belongs to 
section Lyciopsis, a group of tuberous herbs or 
shrubs, characterized by glandular stipules, 
terminal or axillary cymes in large umbels, 
almost sessile capsules and seeds without a 
caruncle. Several other species with medicinal 
uses belong to this section or occur in the re-
gion. Euphorbia cuneata Vahl occurs from 
EUPHORBIA 277 
Guinea east to Somalia and south through 
East Africa to Mozambique; it also occurs 
throughout the Arabic Peninsula. In East Af-
rica the latex is applied to warts, wounds and 
sores. The latex in water is given to calves with 
hepatitis. A decoction of the stem bark and 
roots is given to cattle for the expulsion of a 
retained placenta. The plants are sometimes 
browsed by camels, goats and sheep. The stem 
is used to make earrings and knife handles. 
The stems are used for fencing during ceremo-
nies. The sticky latex is used to remove dust 
from the eye. Euphorbia espinosa Pax is a 
shrub from Kenya, Tanzania and southern 
Africa. Latex in milk, porridge or egg is taken 
as an emetic in case of suspected poisoning or 
indigestion. Euphorbia joyae Bally & S.Carter 
is a shrub endemic to Kenya, where the Boran 
people take a root decoction to treat coughs. 
Euphorbia namibiensis Marloth has a short, 
strongly tuberculate, succulent stem with short 
branches and occurs in Namibia and Bot-
swana. In Botswana a decoction of the aerial 
parts is taken to treat venereal diseases and 
stomach-ache, or smoke of the burning plant is 
inhaled for these purposes. A root decoction is 
taken to induce vomiting after ingestion of 
poison. Euphorbia radiifera L.C.Leach has 
annual stems arising from an elongate tuber; it 
is endemic to Angola. Painful legs are mas-
saged with the crushed plant and hot water. 
Ecology Euphorbia matabelensis occurs in 
open deciduous woodland, in sandy soils, often 
on rocky outcrops and hillsides, at 450-1900 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Euphorbia matabelensis is 
threatened by genetic erosion. As a succulent 
Euphorbia species, its trade is controlled under 
CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Ingenol diterpenes can cause 
skin irritation and have tumour promoting 
properties. The use of the latex of Euphorbia 
matabelensis for medicinal purposes should 
therefore be discouraged. 
Major references Carter & Leach, 2001; 
Gelfand et al., 1985; Gundidza, Sorg & Hecker, 
1993; Neuwinger, 2000; SEPASAL, 2008g. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Bossard, 
1996; Chinemana et al., 1985; Eggli, 2002; 
Heine & Heine, 1988b; Ichikawa, 1987; Ker-
haro, Guichard & Bouquet, 1961; Kokwaro, 
1993; Minja, 1999; SEPASAL, 2008i. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA PAGANORUM A.Chev. 
Protologue Rev. Int. Bot. Appl. Agric. Trop. 
13:556(1933). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia paganorum occurs from Senegal east 
to northern Nigeria, in Gabon and possibly also 
in southern Sudan. It is confused with Euphor-
bia sudanica A.Chev. and part of its distribu-
tion area may need to be attributed to this last 
species. 
Uses The uses of Euphorbia paganorum also 
apply to Euphorbia sudanica, a very similar 
species. In Senegal and northern Côte d'Ivoire 
a decoction of the stem ash, together with 
leaves of Sarcocephalus latifolius (Sm.) 
E.A.Bruce, is used to wash the body to treat 
leprosy. Stem or root decoctions or latex are 
applied to wounds and sores, but in general 
Euphorbia paganorum is considered too poi-
sonous for medicinal use. The very caustic la-
tex is used as an ingredient of arrow poison 
and in bait for trapping animal pests. 
In Mali Euphorbia paganorum is planted in 
villages as a fetish plant. The flowers are 
much-visited by bees. 
Properties A preliminary test of the latex 
showed the presence of diterpene esters of the 
alcohol 12-deoxyphorbol. 
Botany Monoecious, deciduous, succulent 
shrub up to 1.5(-2) m tall, much-branching 
from the base; stem cylindrical, 2-5 cm in di-
ameter, green to grey, smooth, with abundant 
latex; spine shields triangular on small tuber-
cles, with 1 pair of spines 5-12 mm long, 
sturdy, fewer on old stems. Leaves arranged 
spirally at the end of branches, sessile; stipules 
a pair of tiny spines or absent; blade obovate to 
obtriangular, 2-8 cm x 1-5 cm, fleshy, base 
tapering, apex acute and toothed. Inflorescence 
an axillary, simple cyme, consisting of clusters 
of flowers, each cluster called a 'cyathium', at 
the end of branches; peduncle c. 3 mm long, 
branches 2, often aborting; bracts 2, tiny; cy-
athia c. 5 mm in diameter, with a shortly cup-
shaped involucre, green, 5-lobed, glands 5, ob-
long, yellow, each involucre containing 1 fe-
male flower surrounded by many male flowers. 
Flowers unisexual; male flowers sessile, peri-
anth absent, stamen 1; female flowers with 
pedicel 4-6 mm long in fruit, perianth 3-lobed, 
ovary superior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, 
fused at base. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 15 mm 
x 12 mm, glabrous, grey to pale brown, 3-
seeded. Seeds oblong, c. 8 mm x 3 mm. 
278 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Leaves are only present for about 3 months, 
during the rainy season; flowers appear at the 
end of the dry season, on bare branches. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia paganorum belongs to sec-
tion Euphorbia, a large group which is charac-
terized by succulent, usually angular stems, 
stipules modified into small spines (or absent), 
a spine shield with an additional pair of spines 
(sometimes fused into a single spine), axillary 
inflorescences and seeds without a caruncle. 
Euphorbia paganorum and the following spe-
cies belong to a group of much-branched, succu-
lent shrubs up to 3 m tall, with branches more 
than 1.5 cm in diameter and with (2—)4 spines 
per spine shield. 
Euphorbia sudanica occurs from Senegal east 
to Sudan. The main difference with Euphorbia 
paganorum is that it has thinner branches, 1-2 
cm in diameter. It has similar uses as Euphor-
bia paganorum. The caustic latex is applied to 
peanuts to prevent them being eaten by mon-
keys and birds. In Niger Euphorbia sudanica is 
planted as a boundary marker. Euphorbia bre-
viarticulata Pax occurs from Ethiopia and So-
malia south to Tanzania. In Tanzania latex is 
applied topically to treat haemorrhoids. Latex 
mixed with ground fresh leaves of Acacia 
edgeworthii T.Anderson and honey is applied to 
wounds and sores caused by Filariasis. Euphor-
bia heterochroma Pax occurs in Kenya, Uganda 
and Tanzania. A latex infusion or root decoc-
tion is taken to treat venereal diseases. In 
Uganda latex mixed with clay is applied to the 
skin or in incisions to treat syphilis. In Kenya 
an infusion of the latex or of the roasted stems 
is taken to treat fever, diarrhoea, cough, tuber-
culosis and pneumonia. A leaf decoction is 
taken to treat stomach-ache. In Uganda the 
latex is applied to incisions to treat pyomyosi-
tis. Latex is used as nose drops to treat mi-
graine and insanity. In Kenya a root or stem 
infusion is given to camels to drink to treat 
persistent cough and haemorrhagic septicae-
mia. The boiled stem of Euphorbia heterospina 
S.Carter from Kenya and Uganda is drunk 
with soup or milk to treat diarrhoea. Euphor-
bia polyacantha Boiss. (synonym: Euphorbia 
thi Schweinf.) occurs from Sudan to Eritrea, 
Somalia and Yemen. In Eritrea the stem is 
crushed in water and applied to crops as an 
insecticide. Euphorbia polyacantha is planted 
as an ornamental in home gardens, as a live 
fence and for soil conservation purposes. In 
Sudan the crushed stems are applied to scor-
pion stings. Euphorbia quadrangularis Pax is 
endemic to Tanzania. Latex is rubbed into 
scarifications on the eyebrows to treat head-
ache, and the roots are used to ease backache 
and chest and rib pain. 
Ecology Euphorbia paganorum occurs on 
rocky soils in arid savanna, often gregarious, 
up to 600 m altitude. 
Management Euphorbia paganorum is eas-
ily and quickly propagated by stem cuttings, 
which should be at least 20 cm long and pref-
erably cut from the woody base of a branch. 
After cutting they need to dry in the shade for 
at least two weeks for callus to form on the cut 
end. Euphorbia paganorum can also be grown 
from seed. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no indications that Euphorbia paganorum 
is threatened by genetic erosion. As a succulent 
Euphorbia species, its trade is controlled under 
CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects As almost no chemical or phar-
macological research has been done on Eu-
phorbia paganorum, it is not clear whether the 
latex contains pharmacologically important 
compounds. Other Euphorbia spp. containing 
diterpenes of the tigliane type show promising 
results, thus more research is warranted. As it 
is not clear whether Euphorbia paganorum 
and Euphorbia sudanica are really different 
species, taxonomical research is needed to elu-
cidate their status. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Eggli, 2002; 
Evans & Kinghorn, 1977; Keay, 1958a; Neu-
winger, 1996. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2002; Baerts 
& Lehmann, 2008b; Bein et al., 1996; Chevalier, 
1933; Chevalier, 1948; Inngjerdongen et al., 
2004; ITDG & IIRR, 1996; Kamuhabwa, 
Nshimo & de Witte, 2000; Newton, 1992; 
Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003. 
Authors L.E. Newton 
E U P H O R B I A P E P L U S L . 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 456 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 16 
Vernacular names Petty spurge, radium 
weed, cancer weed, milkweed, wartweed, ra-
dium plant (En). Euphorbe omblette, herbe de 
lait, esule ronde, euphorbe des vignes, réveille-
matin des vignes, euphorbe des jardins (Fr). 
EUPHORBIA 279 
Leitaria, ésula redonda, trovisco (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia peplus originates from Europe, tem-
perate Asia and northern Africa, and is now 
widespread in temperate, subtropical and 
tropical regions of the world. In tropical Africa 
it occurs from Sudan, Eritrea and Somalia 
south to Zimbabwe, and also in Réunion and 
Mauritius. 
Uses Euphorbia peplus is one of a number of 
plants in the Euphorbiaceae family that has 
attracted attention as a home remedy for skin 
cancer, particularly basal cell carcinomas. The 
milky latex is toxic and irritant and is widely 
known as a therapeutic agent for the removal 
of warts and sun-spots on the skin. The plant is 
also used for its expectorant, anthelmintic, 
antipyretic and anti-inflammatory activities. In 
Mauritius a leaf decoction is taken to treat 
diarrhoea and dysentery. 
In Europe and Australia the latex is used in 
local medicine against corns and waxy growths, 
and an infusion of the aerial parts is taken to 
treat asthma, catarrh and as a purgative. In 
Saudi Arabia an infusion of the aerial parts is 
applied for the lowering of blood pressure. Eu-
phorbia peplus was widely used in the Ukraine 
in the 1990s as a treatment for cancer of the 
stomach, liver and uterus. 
The latex causes irritation of the skin, eyes and 
mucous membranes. Due to the toxicity of the 
latex, it is advised to use the plant topically 
only. 
Production and international trade Eu-
phorbia peplus is grown in Australia for extrac-
tion of its anti-cancer compounds, but quanti-
ties are unknown. 
Properties Euphorbia peplus latex yields 
Euphorbia peplus - naturalized 
mostly diterpenes of the jatrophane, pepluane 
and ingenane types. Jatrophane and pepluane 
diterpenes are non-inflammatory, whereas 
ingenane diterpenes, including ingenol 3-
angelate (PEP005) and ingenol, are responsible 
for the irritant and tumour-promoting properties 
of the latex. Of the pepluane esters, pepluanone 
showed significant anti-inflammatory activity 
in vivo on carrageenan-induced rat paw oedema. 
Of the ingenane compounds, 5-deoxyingenol, 
20-deoxyingenol 3-O-angelate and ingenol 20-
O-octanoate exhibited strong inflammatory 
activities on mice skin, but less strong and 
more prolonged than several phorbol esters of 
related Euphorbia species. In addition to these 
diterpenes, the latex contains the triterpenoids 
obtusifoliol, cycloartenol, 24-methylenecyclo-
artanol, and the 24-acyclic triterpene alcohol, 
peplusol, the steroids cholesterol, campesterol, 
stigmasterol, ß-sitosterol, 28-isofucosterol, the 
flavonoids quercetine, quercetin-3-galactoside, 
kaempferol, kaempferol-3-galactoside and rham-
netin-3-galactoside, tannins and anthraquinones. 
From air-dried powdered whole plants simi-
arenone, nepehinol, alangidiol, cycloartenone, 
cycloartenol, 24-methylenecycloartanol, obtusi-
foliol and stigmastanol were isolated. The 
epicuticular leaf wax contains large amounts of 
pentacyclic triterpenoids in addition to the 
common lipid wax constituents: alkanes, wax 
esters, aldehydes, primary alcohols and fatty 
acids. Most of the triterpenoids were triterpe-
nols, as well as their acetates, fatty acid esters 
and the corresponding ketones. 
The most active compound is a hydrophobic 
diterpene ester, ingenol 3-angelate (PEP005), 
an irritant compound, which possesses topical 
anti-tumour activity against human cancer cell 
lines grown as subcutaneous tumours in mice. 
It has given more than 90% complete responses 
on different skin cancers in a Phase II clinical 
trial. The LD90 for PEP005 for a panel of tu-
mour cell lines was 180-220 uM. PEP005 thus 
emerges as a potential new topical anti-skin 
cancer agent that has a novel mode of action 
involving plasma membrane and mitochondrial 
disruption, primary necrosis and potent activa-
tion of protein kinase C. PEP005 also has po-
tent antileukaemic effects, inducing apoptosis 
in myeloid leukaemia cell lines. It also had 
powerful inhibitory activity against a wide 
range of other tumours tested, including breast 
cancer cells. In preclinical studies it was also 
shown to have activity against human mela-
noma xenografts in mice. The intellectual 
property on the use of ingenane, jatrophane 
280 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and pepluane type diterpenes, which are being 
used as anti-neoplastic differentiation control 
agents, is the subject of several patent applica-
tions. 
Several diterpenes exhibited a pronounced or 
moderate anti-herpes virus effect (IC50 of 2.5— 
8.3 ug/ml) in vitro. The observed HSV-2 inhibi-
tory activities were not associated with viruci-
dal effects. 
A crude chloroform extract and hot water ex-
tract of the aerial parts showed significant 
molluscicidal activity against Biomphalaria 
alexandrina and Bulinus truncatus. An acetone 
extract showed larvicidal activity against the 
mosquito Culex pipiens. A methanolic leaf ex-
tract inhibited the growth of Aspergillus flavus, 
and also inhibited the production of aflatoxins 
(73-100%), with greater inhibition at higher 
concentrations. 
Experimental feeding of Euphorbia peplus 
caused blood-stained faeces and excessive sali-
vation in calves. Lactating goats, which fed on 
the aerial parts mixed with their usual green 
fodder, showed symptoms of general poisoning; 
the main toxic effects were seen in the heart, 
lung and liver. Histopathological examinations 
revealed that the primary toxic effects origi-
nated from degenerative changes in parenchy-
mal and endothelial cells. The milk of the goats 
fed on Euphorbia peplus, consumed by their 
offspring, caused poisoning and even death, 
with signs similar to those observed in the 
adults. The toxicity is caused by ingenane type 
diterpenes. 
Description Monoecious, annual, erect herb 
up to 30 cm tall, glabrous, with latex in aerial 
parts. Leaves alternate in lower part of the 
stem, opposite in upper part, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole up to 1 cm long; blade 
obovate, up to 2.5 cm x 1.5 cm, base cuneate, 
apex rounded. Inflorescence an axillary or ter-
minal cyme consisting of clusters of flowers, 
each cluster called a 'cyathium', in 3-branched 
umbels; branches up to 3.5 cm long; bracts 
similar to the leaves, sessile; cyathia almost 
sessile, c. 1 mm x 1 mm, with a cup-shaped 
involucre, lobes rounded, minute, margin 
hairy; glands 4, transversely oblong, c. 0.5 mm 
long, with 2 horns up to 1 mm long, each in-
volucre containing 1 female flower surrounded 
by male flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flow-
ers sessile, bracteoles linear, fringed, perianth 
absent, stamen c. 1 mm long; female flowers 
with pedicel c. 3 mm long in fruit, ovary supe-
rior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 0.5 mm long, 
spreading. Fruit a deeply 3-lobed capsule c. 2 
Euphorbia peplus - 1, plant habit; 2, cyathium; 
3, seed-
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
mm in diameter, base truncate, with fleshy 
longitudinal ridges, 3-seeded. Seeds oblong-
ovoid, c. 1.5 mm x 1 mm, warty, reddish brown 
becoming grey; caruncle c. 0.3 mm in diameter. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia peplus belongs to section 
Esula, a group of annual or perennial herbs 
characterized by absence of stipules, cyathia in 
axillary and terminal umbel-like cymes, leafy 
or deltoid bracts, 4 involucral glands, entire or 
with 2 horns, fruits exserted on reflexed pedicel 
and seeds with a caruncle. Several other spe-
cies from this section are medicinally used, 3 of 
them are mentioned hereafter. 
Euphorbia cyparissioides Pax occurs from Ni-
geria east to Ethiopia and throughout east and 
southern Africa. In East Africa root powder is 
eaten with porridge as a strong purgative. 
Euphorbia petitiana A.Rich, occurs in Ethiopia 
and Yemen. In Ethiopia an infusion of the ae-
rial parts is taken as an anthelmintic. Euphor-
EUPHORBIA 281 
bia ugandensis Pax & K.Hoffm. occurs in 
Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. In Kenya the 
Maasai people take a leaf infusion as an emetic 
to treat colds and cough. 
Growth and development Euphorbia 
peplus can be found flowering throughout the 
year if enough water is available. The plant 
develops rapidly as it matures in 12-14 weeks. 
Ecology Euphorbia peplus occurs in dis-
turbed localities, gardens, pavements, waste 
places and pastures, from sea-level up to 1500 
m altitude. It prefers shaded localities. 
Propagation and planting The seeds of 
Euphorbia peplus are small (about 1700 per g) 
and have a germination rate of more than 70%. 
Management In Australia Euphorbia 
peplus is grown in small plots for latex produc-
tion. As the plants can be easily killed by her-
bicides, and because they do not spread beyond 
shade, the risk that it will become an invasive 
weed is small. It is potentially suitable for 
large-scale agricultural production. 
Diseases and pests Rust and other fungal 
diseases may become a problem of Euphorbia 
peplus in the maturing stages. It can also be 
attacked by viruses and is a host of cabbage 
whitefly (Aleyrodes proletella), a possible reser-
voir of cabbage black ring virus. 
Harvesting If enough water is available 
throughout the year, Euphorbia peplus grows 
and produces seeds all year round and can be 
harvested for latex or seed whenever the need 
arises. 
Yield In Australia the fresh plant yield of 
Euphorbia peplus is 1—1.5 kg/m2, and latex 
yield is 100-300 mg/kg freshly harvested plant 
parts. 
Handling after harvest In Africa the latex 
of Euphorbia peplus is usually used fresh; in 
Australia active compounds are extracted in-
dustrially. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia peplus has a 
very large area of distribution, has a short life 
cycle and produces many seeds. Therefore, 
there is no risk of genetic erosion. 
Breeding There are currently no breeding 
programmes of Euphorbia peplus to increase 
the amount of diterpenes in the latex. 
Prospects Several of the active compounds 
of Euphorbia peplus are good candidates to be 
developed into anticancer drugs considering 
the promising pharmacological studies and 
clinical trials results. As the active compounds 
are complex molecules, they have not yet been 
chemically produced, and can only be obtained 
directly from the plant. More research into 
large-scale production and mechanisation of 
cultivation and latex extraction is needed. 
Major references Carter & Leach, 2001; 
Challacombe et a l , 2006; Corea et al., 2005; 
Davis & Parsons, 2002; Gillespie, Zhang & 
Hersey, 2004; Green & Beardmore, 1988; 
Hampson et al., 2005; Hemmers, Gülz & 
Marner, 1988; Nawito et al., 1998; Ogbourne et 
al., 2004. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Burkill, 
1994; Corea et al., 2004; Giner, Berkowitz & 
Andersson, 2000; Gayar, Shazli & Abbassy, 
1971; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 
1996; Hartwell, 1970; Hasan & Abdel Mallek, 
1994; Hohmann et al., 2000; Hohmann et al., 
1999a; Hohmann et al., 1999b; Jakupovic et al., 
1998; Jansen, 1981; Lotfy & Abdel Gawad, 
2000; Mucsi et a l , 2001; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Rizk et al., 1985; Scott, 1982; Shoeb, El-Eman 
& Osman, 1982. 
Sources of illustration Ross-Craig, 1970. 
Authors A.T. Tchinda 
EUPHORBIA PERESKIIFOLIA Houllet ex Baill. 
Protologue Adansonia 1: 105 (1861). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Synadenium pereskiifolium 
(Houllet ex Baill.) Guillaumin (1935). 
Vernacular names Kiyuyu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia pereskiifolia occurs in Kenya and Tan-
zania. 
Uses In Kenya Euphorbia pereskiifolia is 
used by traditional doctors in the preparation 
of an anti-asthma drug. Although it is a highly 
poisonous plant, traditional doctors have used 
a leaf decoction, mixed with lemon juice, bak-
ing soda and honey, effectively in the treat-
ment of asthma for decades with no adverse 
effects. The leaves are reported to be a strong 
purgative. In Tanzania women suffering from 
excessive menstruation drink the juice of fresh 
crushed leaves. Leprosy is treated with the ash 
of dried burnt leaves. The latex is highly irri-
tating to the skin and mucous membranes, 
causing blisters and pain. Several peanuts 
dipped into the latex are eaten as a drastic 
purgative. Boils are treated with the latex. 
Roots also contain the strong latex, and a cold 
water extract of peeled roots is mixed with 
sugar and left standing for three days, after 
which it is drunk against heavy coughs and 
tuberculosis. 
In addition to medicinal uses, the latex is an 
282 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ingredient in arrow poison in Kenya. In Kenya 
and Tanzania the latex is used as fish poison. 
Properties Preliminary phytochemical 
screening of the aqueous extract of the leaves 
and stems revealed the presence of glycosides, 
terpenoids, flavonoids and other phenolic com-
pounds. 
An aqueous extract of the stems and leaves 
contracted the isolated guinea pig ileum. A 
glycoside, 2-O-ß-D-glucopyranosyl-L-malic acid 
was isolated from the aqueous extract, but this 
was found to be inactive. 
Botany Monoecious, succulent shrub up to 5 
m tall, laxly branched; stems cylindrical, with 
copious latex. Leaves arranged spirally, simple 
and usually entire; stipules modified into small 
brown glands; petiole winged, c. 1 cm long; 
blade obovate, up to 19 cm x 10 cm, base 
cuneate, apex obtuse to rounded, fleshy, gla-
brous, pinnately veined, midvein prominent 
beneath. Inflorescence an axillary false umbel, 
composed of 2-5 cymes, consisting of clusters of 
flowers, each cluster called a 'cyathium'; pe-
duncle up to 4 cm long and branches c. 2 cm 
long; bracts broadly ovate, c. 3.5 mm x 3 mm, 
short-hairy; cyathia with a funnel-shaped in-
volucre c. 2.5 mm x 6 mm, densely short-hairy 
below, glandular rim c. 1 mm wide, deeply fur-
rowed, greenish yellow, lobes c. 1.5 mm in di-
ameter, margin hairy, each cyathium contain-
ing 1 female flower surrounded by several male 
flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers ses-
sile with fan-shaped, fringed bracteoles, peri-
anth absent, stamen c. 3 mm long; female flow-
ers with pedicel up to 6 mm in fruit, perianth 
obtusely 3-lobed, ovary superior, 3-celled, 
styles 3, c. 2 mm long, fused to halfway, deeply 
bifid at apex. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm x 
7 mm, short-hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 2.5 
mm x 2 mm, obtusely 4-angled, minutely 
rough, pale brownish grey, caruncle minute. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution. Synadenium 
(about 15 species in continental Africa) has 
classically been kept separate from Euphorbia, 
mainly because the glands of the cyathia form 
a ring in Synadenium, whereas the glands in 
Euphorbia are separate or only touching. How-
ever, recent molecular analyses found Synade-
nium to be nested within Euphorbia, section 
Monadenium, and it is therefore now included 
in Euphorbia. Several other Euphorbia spp., 
belonging to section Monadenium, have me-
dicinal uses. Euphorbia cupularis Boiss. ('dead 
man's tree'; synonym: Synadenium cupulare 
(Boiss.) L.C.Wheeler) occurs in Mozambique 
and South Africa. The latex is extremely toxic, 
irritant and blistering, and never taken inter-
nally. In South Africa ground dry leaves or 
ground leaves in water are sniffed to treat 
headache, catarrh and flu. Dried leaves are 
eaten to treat asthma. Latex is placed in a hol-
low tooth to treat toothache; latex is also 
rubbed on infected wounds. The burnt roots are 
used with other plants to treat paralysis. The 
bark is employed in a potent sorcery charm. An 
ethanolic leaf extract significantly inhibited 
prostaglandin-synthesis. Euphorbia neoglau-
cescens Bruyns (synonym: Synadenium glau-
cescens Pax) is a succulent tree endemic to 
Tanzania and morphologically similar to Eu-
phorbia pereskiifolia; it has similar medicinal 
uses. The juice of fresh, crushed leaves is 
drunk to treat excessive menstruation and as a 
purgative; a leaf decoction with lime juice, bak-
ing soda and honey added is drunk to treat 
asthma. The ashes of dried leaves are mixed 
with water and applied to treat leprosy. A root 
bark extract is taken with sugar to treat severe 
cough and tuberculosis; a root extract is used 
as ear drops to treat earache. A few drops of 
latex are put on 1-2 peanuts and eaten as a 
purgative. The latex is also used as a fish poi-
son. 
Ecology Euphorbia pereskiifolia occurs on 
sandy soil or on rocks in coastal or riverine 
woodland, from sea-level up to 250 m altitude. 
Management Euphorbia pereskiifolia is 
easily and quickly propagated by stem cut-
tings, which should be at least 20 cm long. Af-
ter cutting they should be allowed to lie in a 
shaded place for at least a week for a callus to 
form on the cut end. Care should be taken that 
the latex does not touch the skin or mucous 
membranes because of its irritating properties. 
Euphorbia pereskiifolia can also be grown from 
seed. Mostly wild plants are used, or a few 
trees planted near villages, and no manage-
ment practices are required. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though Euphorbia pereskiifolia only occurs in 
Kenya and Tanzania, there are no signs that it 
is threatened by genetic erosion. As a (semi-
succulent Euphorbia species, its trade is con-
trolled under CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects The use of Euphorbia pereskiifo-
lia as a medicinal plant is not recommended 
because of its very toxic latex. Unless interest-
ing pharmacological compounds are isolated, 
the species will remain of local importance as a 
medicine against asthma. 
Major references Bruyns, Mapaya & Hed-
EUPHORBIA 283 
derson, 2006; Carter & Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; 
Eggli, 2002; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 
2000. 
Other references Chhabra, Mahunnah & 
Mshiu, 1990; Chhabra, Uiso & Mshiu, 1984; 
Grace et al., 2002; Hedberg et a l , 1983a; Her-
mansson et al., 1990; Jäger, Hutchings & van 
Staden, 1996; Neuwinger, 2004; Powys & 
Duckworth, 2006; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Authors L.E. Newton 
E U P H O R B I A P O I S S O N I I P a x 
Protologue Bull. Mus. natn. Hist, nat., 
Paris 8: 62 (1902). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Candle plant (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia poissonii occurs from southern Burk-
ina Faso and Ghana east to Cameroon. It pos-
sibly also occurs in Guinea, Côte d'Ivoire and 
Mali. 
Uses The latex of Euphorbia poissonii is 
very caustic and toxic, and very irritating to 
the skin and mucous membranes. It can cause 
blindness when in contact with the eyes. De-
spite its toxicity, it is used medicinally. In Ni-
geria a few drops of latex are applied to 
Guinea-worm sores and to skin papilloma. A 
few drops of latex with sugar cane or in palm 
wine or soup are taken as a purgative. In Cam-
eroon the latex extracted from the leaves is 
applied to treat lumbago. It is also placed in a 
carious tooth to relieve toothache or to help to 
loosen the tooth and render extraction easier. 
Throughout West Africa the latex is used as 
Euphorbia poissonii - wild 
fish poison. A piece of stem is mixed with the 
seeds of Strophanthus to prepare arrow poison. 
In Nigeria the latex is said to be added some-
times to tobacco snuff to increase its pungency. 
The Hausa people use the latex on cereals to 
catch guinea fowl. The latex is also used in bait 
to kill rodents and birds, and is used for remov-
ing hairs from hides. The latex is applied as 
glue on branches to capture birds. The latex is 
highly poisonous when added to food, drinking 
water and kola nuts, and in Nigeria homicides 
are sometimes committed through Euphorbia 
poissonii poisoning. 
In West Africa Euphorbia poissonii is some-
times planted in gardens as an ornamental 
plant or as a hedge around fields and grave-
yards. In Europe and the United States it is 
kept as a pot plant in succulent collections. The 
flowers are much visited by bees and other 
insects. 
Euphorbia poissonii closely resembles Euphor-
bia unispina N.E.Br., and they have similar 
uses. 
Production and international trade Several 
compounds isolated from Euphorbia poissonii 
are internationally traded. Resiniferatoxin was 
sold on the internet in 2007 for US$ 35 (1 mg) 
to US$ 525 (25 mg); tinyatoxin was sold for 
US$ 60 (1 mg) to US$ 240 (5 mg). Euphorbia 
poissonii is also traded on the internet as an 
ornamental plant. 
Properties The latex of Euphorbia poissonii 
contains esters of the diterpene tigliane type 
alcohols 12-deoxyphorbol and 12-deoxy-16-
hydroxyphorbol, the diterpene daphnane type 
alcohol resiniferonol, and several esters of the 
macrocyclic diterpene alcohol 19-hydroxyingol, 
e.g. the pentacyclic euphorianin. Most com-
pounds isolated are mono- and di-esters of 12-
deoxyphorbol. Daphnane esters are generally 
known for their potent skin irritant properties, 
whereas tigliane esters are toxic and tumour 
promoters; however, some of the tigliane com-
pounds, especially 12-deoxyphorbol derivatives, 
possess anticancer activities. 
The variety of irritant compounds present in 
high concentrations is reflected by the irritant 
activity of the latex, which is more than 30 
times stronger in Euphorbia poissonii latex 
(ID50 = 0.1 |ig / 5 ul) than in the latex of e.g. 
Euphorbia unispina, although after 24 hours 
both activities have almost the same value. 
The isolated aromatic esters of the daphnane 
type are more potent irritants in mouse ear 
tests than the aromatic tigliane esters, espe-
cially resiniferatoxin (ID50 = 0.00021 nMol / 5 
284 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
|ig) and tinyatoxin (ID50 = 0.0012 nMol / 5 \ig). 
Of the 6 isolated aromatic tigliane esters, the 
highly irritant 12-deoxyphorbol-13-0-phenyl-
acetate-20-O-acetate (ID50 = 0.075 nMol / 5 ug) 
is the major compound; candletoxin A, candle-
toxin B and DPP (12-deoxyphorbol 13-phenyl-
acetate) are also strongly irritant. The irritant 
activity of resiniferatoxin and tinyatoxin is 
rapid. It reaches a maximum within 4 hours 
and then fades to inactivity after 24 hours. 
Resiniferatoxin and tinyatoxin are highly toxic, 
as they bind to pain receptors in the same way 
as capsaicin, but much more powerfully. They 
stimulate the neurons to fire repeatedly until 
the neuron dies, causing searing pain and 
sending the victim into severe anaphylactic 
shock. Resiniferatoxin is used in the treatment 
of incontinence associated with an overactive 
bladder. It also has antifeedant and analgesic 
properties. Efforts have been made to synthe-
size this compound. In laboratory tests, DPP 
induced the expression of HIV-1 in latently 
infected T cells and rendered them sensitive to 
killing by an immunotoxin. DPP is 20- to 40-
fold more potent than the related phorbol ester 
prostratin, and the combination of high po-
tency and antitumour promoting activity 
makes DPP an attractive candidate for therapy 
of HIV-1 infection. 
During further phytochemical studies on the 
latex, derivatives of 19-hydroxyingol were iso-
lated. These compounds showed cytotoxic ac-
tivities against 6 human solid tumour cell lines 
(lung carcinoma, breast carcinoma, colon 
adrenocarcinoma, kidney carcinoma, prostate 
adenocarcinoma and pancreatic carcinoma). 
Moreover, most of the 12-deoxyphorbol ester 
derivatives showed selective cytotoxicity for the 
human kidney carcinoma cell line with poten-
cies for one compound exceeding those of the 
anticancer drug adriamycin by 10,000 times. 
A root extract of Nigerian material, screened 
for molluscicidal activity on the freshwater 
snail Bulinus globulus, was reported as being 
inert. 
Description Monoecious, candelabriform 
shrub up to 2 m tall; branches cylindrical, 3 -
3.5(-4) cm in diameter, silvery grey, covered 
with prominent rounded tubercles and horny 
spine shields up to 8 mm in diameter, grey, 
with 1 spine on young plants or spine rudimen-
tary, with white latex. Leaves arranged spi-
rally at stem apex in 8-10 ranks, simple and 
entire, soon falling; stipules, if present, modi-
fied into small spines, soon falling; petiole 
short, thick; blade obovate to spoon-shaped, 5— 
14 cm x 3-7 cm, base long-cuneate, apex deeply 
notched, fleshy, glabrous, pinnately veined. 
Inflorescence an axillary cyme, numerous at 
the ends of branches, consisting of clusters of 
flowers, each cluster called a 'cyathium'; pe-
duncle and branches short; bracts 2, ovate, c. 2 
mm long, membranous; cyathia c. 8 mm in 
diameter, with a shortly funnel-shaped involu-
cre, green, 5-lobed with broadly ovate, fringed 
lobes, glands 5, elliptical, touching, green, each 
involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual; male flowers sessile, perianth absent, 
stamen shortly exserted, red; female flowers 
with curved pedicel 5-12 mm long in fruit, 
perianth 3-lobed, ovary superior, glabrous, 3-
celled, styles 3. Fruit a deeply 3-lobed capsule 
5-6 mm in diameter, lobes almost globose, gla-
brous, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 2 mm long, 
smooth, pale grey with a few darker markings. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia poissonii belongs to subge-
nus Euphorbia section Euphorbia, a large 
group which is characterized by succulent, an-
gular stems, stipules modified into small 
spines, a spine shield with a pair of spines 
(sometimes fused into a single spine), axillary 
inflorescences and seeds without caruncle. Eu-
phorbia poissonii closely resembles Euphorbia 
unispina N.E.Br., and they have overlapping 
medicinal uses. 
Euphorbia sapinii De Wild, occurs from Cam-
eroon and the Central African Republic south 
to western DR Congo, and is closely related to 
Euphorbia poissonii and Euphorbia unispina. 
In the Central African Republic and DR Congo 
the latex is rubbed onto the skin of dogs to 
treat scabies. The latex is also an ingredient for 
spear poison; it is used as a fish poison and 
sometimes as an ordeal poison in the form of 
eye drops. 
Growth and development Euphorbia pois-
sonii flowers at the end of the dry season, be-
fore new leaves are formed. 
Ecology Euphorbia poissonii occurs on rocks 
and dry stony soils, usually in open woodland 
with grass, at 400-700 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Euphorbia 
poissonii can be propagated by seed or by stem 
cuttings. Stem cuttings should be at least 20 
cm long and preferably cut from the base of a 
branch where the cut surface is woody. After 
EUPHORBIA 285 
cutting they should be allowed to dry for at 
least 2 weeks for a callus to form on the cut 
end. 
Management Euphorbia poissonii latex is 
harvested from wild plants or from those 
planted near villages. 
Harvesting Harvesting of the leaves is sea-
sonal because the plants are leafless in the dry 
season. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia poissonii has 
a relatively large area of distribution and is 
locally common. Therefore it is not likely to be 
threatened by genetic erosion. Trade in all suc-
culent Euphorbia spp. is controlled under 
CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Although Euphorbia poissonii 
has useful biological activities, its use for me-
dicinal purposes is limited by the toxicity of the 
latex. However, the prospects of some of its 
compounds are good; for example, resinifera-
toxin is going through phase II clinical trials 
and DPP can be used in the therapy of persis-
tent HIV-1 infection. 
The taxonomy and distribution areas of Eu-
phorbia poissonii, Euphorbia unispina and 
some other closely related species need to be 
reviewed as they resemble each other closely. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1996; 
Arbonnier, 2002; Burkill, 1994; Brown, Hut-
chinson & Prain, 1909-1913; Dalziel, 1937; 
Evans & Schmidt, 1977; Evans & Schmidt, 
1979; Keay, 1958a; Neuwinger, 1996. 
Other references Aubréville, 1950; Eggli, 
2002; Fakunle & Ekong, 1978; Fakunle, Con-
nolly & Rycroft, 1989; Fatope et a l , 1996a; 
Fatope et al., 1996b; Graham et al., 2000; Neu-
winger, 2000; Schmidt & Evans, 1976; Schmidt 
& Evans, 1977; Schmidt & Evans, 1978; Smith 
& Evans, 1980. 
Authors A.T. Tchinda 
EUPHORBIA PROSTRATA Aiton 
Protologue Hort. kew. 2 : 139 (1789). 
Family name Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18, 20 
Synonyms Chamaesyce prostrata (Aiton) 
Small (1903). 
Vernacular names Prostrate spurge, pros-
trate sandmat, trailing red spurge (En). 
Rougette, rosette, petit trèfle, petite teigne 
noire (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia prostrata is native to the West Indies, 
but is now widely distributed throughout the 
Euphorbia prostrata - naturalized 
tropics and sub tropics. It occurs throughout 
tropical Africa and the Indian Ocean islands. 
Uses All parts of Euphorbia prostrata are 
widely used in African traditional medicine. In 
Burkina Faso the leaves are rubbed onto wasp 
stings and scorpion stings. In Togo a leaf decoc-
tion is drunk to treat threatened abortion. 
Small balls of ground plants are inserted into 
the vagina to treat female sterility and painful 
menstruation. In Benin the pounded aerial 
parts with pounded shells are taken to treat 
irregular menstruation. Ground leaves in wa-
ter are administered against difficult child-
birth. In Nigeria a plant decoction is taken for 
its astringent, vulnerary and anthelmintic 
properties, and crushed plants are used by the 
Igbo people as a poultice for broken arms. In 
Cameroon crushed leaves are eaten to treat 
amoebic dysentery. In Gabon a leaf extract is 
applied as an enema to treat inflammations. 
Leaf powder mixed with palm oil is rubbed on 
the head to treat headache. In DR Congo the 
whole plant or only the leaves are warmed over 
a fire, crushed and squeezed on the body to 
cure insect bites and fungal infection. An infu-
sion or decoction of the leaves is also taken 
orally to treat fungal infections. The crushed 
whole plant is eaten with bread against kidney 
stones. In Kenya Maasai people chew the plant 
to treat gonorrhoea. In Uganda crushed fresh 
leaves in water are used as a mouthwash and 
gargle to treat oral sores. Pregnant women eat 
the boiled shoots, mixed with sesame, to reduce 
the risk of miscarriage. Plant juice is taken to 
induce labour during childbirth. A bath of the 
plant infusion is recommended to treat insan-
ity. In Angola a vapour bath of the whole plant 
286 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
is taken to treat scabies; the plant is also 
crushed and applied on the affected spots. 
Throughout the Indian Ocean islands an infu-
sion of the leaves or aerial parts is taken either 
alone or combined with other plants to treat 
diarrhoea, dysentery and stomach-ache. In the 
Comoros, the plant is used in association with 
other plants to treat deformations of the spinal 
column. In Réunion a bath with the whole 
plant is taken to facilitate healing of measles 
and other skin eruptions. In Mauritius a decoc-
tion of the whole plant is taken orally to treat 
painful menstruation and used as an eye wash 
against conjunctivitis. 
The latex is applied to warts and abscesses. It 
is also used as an arrow poison. 
Similar uses as above have been reported from 
other parts of the world. In the United States 
the latex is applied to snakebites, in Mexico 
and Venezuela to tumours and in India the 
latex is used to treat diabetes, as it is consid-
ered to have hypoglycaemic and anti-
inflammatory activities. The plant is also used 
to treat asthma and an infusion is taken as a 
blood purifier. In French Guyana the aerial 
parts in decoction are taken as a bitter diu-
retic. Crushed fresh plants are applied as an 
embrocation to heal sprains and strains. 
Properties The latex is irritant and blister-
ing to the skin and mucous membranes and is 
reported to cause blindness. From different 
fractions of extracts of the dried leaves a range 
of hydrolyzable ellagitannins were isolated, 
including prostratins A, B and C, euphorbins G 
and H, tellimagradin I and II, and rugosins A, 
D, E and G. Flavonoids isolated from the aerial 
parts include: kaempferol, cosmosiin (apigenin-
7-glucoside), rhamnetin-3-galactoside, quercetin 
and quercetin-3-rhamnoside. Other constitu-
ents of the aerial parts include the sterols ß-
amyrine acetate, ß-sitosterol, campesterol, stig-
masterol and cholesterol. The aerial parts also 
contain the terpene alcohol ß-terpineol, gallic 
acid, corilagin, 1,2,3-tri-O-galloyl-D-glucose, 
geraniin, and various amino acids, including n-
valeramide and N,N-dimethyl-4-benzoxybutyl-
amine. From the roots a myricylic alcohol and 
two triterpenes, taraxerol and tirucallol, have 
been isolated. Both flavonoids and tannins 
have been reported to have anti-inflammatory, 
analgesic, haemostatic, antithrombic and vaso-
protective actions. The flavonoids furthermore 
have antiviral, anti-allergic, antiplatelet, anti-
tumour and antioxidant properties. 
The ethanol and water extracts of the whole 
plant showed significant antifungal activity 
against the dermatophytes Trichophyton men-
tagrophytes, Trichophyton simii and Micro-
sporum gypseum in vitro and in vivo in goats 
and rabbits. The extracts cured the lesions 
caused by these fungi in 3-4 weeks and were 
as effective as benzoic acid. A water extract 
inhibited growth, spore formation, and entero-
toxin production of Clostridium perfringens 
type A. Ethanolic extracts from the aerial parts 
showed significant antibacterial activity 
against Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis. 
An aqueous ethanol extract showed significant 
antibacterial activity in vivo against Shigella 
dysenteriae in tests with rats. A methanol ex-
tract of the leaves showed considerable inhibi-
tory effects against HIV-1 protease, and a wa-
ter extract against hepatitis C virus protease. 
The ethyl acetate fraction of the ethanol ex-
tract administered orally to rats at 200 mg/kg 
inhibited 76% of acute carrageenin-induced 
paw oedema and showed significant anti-
inflammatory activity when applied topically in 
carrageenin-induced paw oedema in mice. 
Various doses of powdered plants as well as 
methanol extracts administered orally to rab-
bits produced significant hypoglycaemic effects 
in normal rabbits, but had no effect in alloxan-
diabetic rabbits. 
Euphorbia prostrata shows strong seed germi-
nation inhibiting effects on wheat and a range 
of horticultural crops, including carrot, tomato, 
lettuce and onion. 
Adulterations and substitutes Euphorbia 
prostrata resembles Euphorbia thymifolia L. 
and has similar medicinal uses. 
Description Monoecious, prostrate, annual 
herb with branches up to 20 cm long, tinged 
purplish, with numerous adventitious roots; 
stems with latex. Leaves opposite, distichous, 
simple; stipules triangular, c. 1 mm long, 2-
toothed; petiole up to 1 mm long; blade ovate, 
up to 8 mm x 5 mm, base unequal, one side 
cuneate, the other side rounded, apex rounded, 
margins shallowly toothed, glabrous above, 
sparsely hairy beneath. Inflorescence a termi-
nal or axillary cluster of flowers, called a 'cy-
athium', on short leafy shoots; cyathia almost 
sessile, c. 1 mm x 0.5 mm, with a barrel-shaped 
involucre, lobes triangular, minute, margin 
hairy; glands 4, minute, transversely elliptical, 
red, with very small pink or white appendages, 
each involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by few male flowers. Flowers unisex-
ual; male flowers sessile, bracteoles hair-like, 
perianth absent, stamen c. 1 mm long; female 
flowers with pedicel c. 1.5 mm long and re-
EUPHORBIA 287 
Euphorbia prostrata - 1, plant habit; 2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
flexed in fruit, perianth a rim, ovary superior, 
glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, minute, 2-fid. Fruit 
an acutely 3-lobed capsule c. 1.5 mm x 1.5 mm, 
base truncate, sutures purplish and hairy, 3-
seeded. Seeds oblong-conical, c. 1 mm x 0.5 
mm, acutely 4-angled, transversely wrinkled, 
grey-brown, without caruncle. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia prostrata belongs to subge-
nus Chamaesyce section Chamaesyce, a group 
of annual or sometimes perennial herbs with 
obvious stipules, further characterized by a 
main stem aborting at the seedling stage. The 
plant thus consists of an expanded, dichoto-
mously branching umbel-like inflorescence, 
with the floral bracts appearing as normal 
leaves, cyathia solitary or up to 5 together in 
congested leafy cymes, 4 involucral glands with 
petal-like appendages or entire and conical 
seeds without a caruncle. 
Several other Euphorbia spp. belonging to sec-
tion Chamaesyce are medicinally used. Eu-
phorbia inaequilatera Sond. occurs from Mau-
ritania and Senegal east to Eritrea and Soma-
lia and south to South Africa. It also occurs in 
the Arabian Peninsula and Pakistan. In DR 
Congo the pounded plant is applied to wounds 
and burns. In Rwanda an extract of the plant is 
used as eye bath to treat eye infections. In East 
Africa plant powder is applied to wounds. The 
aerial parts are chewed to treat gonorrhoea. In 
Namibia leaf sap is applied to wounds. Tea 
from the leaves is drunk as a blood purifier. 
Leaf pulp is applied to skin rashes. A leaf and 
root infusion is drunk to accelerate birth giv-
ing. Powdered dried plants are eaten as a car-
diac medicine. The roots are used as a fish poi-
son. The plant is browsed by camels, goats and 
sheep. 
Growth and development Euphorbia pros-
trata grows rapidly and flowers and fruits 12-
14 weeks after germination. It can be found 
flowering and fruiting throughout the year if 
enough water is available. 
Ecology Euphorbia prostrata grows in gar-
dens, on disturbed ground, in cultivated land 
and roadsides, especially in sandy soils, from 
sea-level up to 2050 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Euphorbia 
prostrata is a prolific seed producer. Most seeds 
will germinate at the same time when ecologi-
cal conditions are favourable, especially during 
the rainy season. 
Management Euphorbia prostrata is con-
sidered a weed, and can be a nuisance in crops 
due to the large number of seedlings. It is 
known to accumulate heavy metals from the 
soil. 
Diseases and pests Euphorbia prostrata is 
a host of the root-knot nematodes Meloidogyne 
incognita and Meloidogyne javanica. 
Handling after harvesting Euphorbia 
prostrata is usually used fresh for medicinal 
purposes. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia prostrata has 
a very large area of distribution and is weedy, 
and is thus not at risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Euphorbia prostrata has many 
local medicinal use and showed antibacterial 
activities as well as inhibitory effects against 
HIV-1 protease and hepatitis C virus protease. 
Although considerable chemical and pharma-
cological research has been done, more re-
search is still needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Alarcon-Aguilara et al., 
1998; Bouquet & Debray, 1974; Carter & 
Leach, 2001; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoon-
doyal, 1996; Hussein et al., 2000; Hussein et 
al., 1999; Kamgang et al., 2007; Neuwinger, 
288 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
2000; Nguyen Nghia Thin & Sosef, 1999; Sin-
gle & Pathak, 1989. 
Other references Akhtar, Khan & Khaliq, 
1984; Burkill, 1994; El Mahy, 2004; Garcia et 
al., 2002; Holm et al., 1977; Ivens, 1967; Ka-
matenesi-Mugisha & Oryem-Origa, 2007; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Lavergne & Vera, 1989; Na-
coulma-Ouédraogo, Millogo-Rasolodimby & 
Guinko, 1998; Noumi & Yomi, 2001; Ogwal, 
1996; Pal & Gupta, 1979; SEPASAL, 2008e; 
Singla & Pathak, 1990; Singla & Pathak, 1991; 
Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962; Wome, 1985; Yoshida et al., 
1990. 
Sources of illustrations Berhaut, 1975a. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
EUPHORBIA PSEUDOGRANTII Bruyns 
Protologue Taxon 55(2): 414 (2006). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In = 36 
Synonyms Synadenium grantii Hook.f. 
(1867). 
Vernacular names African milkbush, coat-
of-many-colours (En). Kinyunywa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia pseudograntii occurs from Ethiopia 
south to eastern DR Congo and Tanzania and 
probably also in Malawi, Zambia and Zim-
babwe. 
Uses In DR Congo the latex of Euphorbia 
pseudograntii is applied to warts, and leaf sap 
to treat cardiac problems. The powder from 
dried young stems mixed with salt is licked to 
soothe cough. In Rwanda and Burundi the la-
tex is applied to cure syphilis. In Burundi sev-
Euphorbia pseudograntii - wild 
eral drops of latex from warmed leaves are 
taken to expel intestinal parasites and some-
times tapeworm. In Uganda and Tanzania the 
latex is applied to abscesses to mature them. 
Leaf sap is taken to treat excessive menstrua-
tion. In East Africa leaf preparations are ex-
ternally applied to psoriasis and impetigo. A 
decoction of the stem bark or the latex is taken 
to expel a retained placenta, whereas a leaf 
decoction is drunk as an abortifacient. Pulver-
ized leaves are rubbed into scarifications to 
treat backache. Leaf ash is taken in water to 
treat a sore throat. Pulverized leaves are ap-
plied to wounds. A root extract or sap from the 
crushed stem is used as ear drops to treat ear-
ache. In Tanzania a root preparation is used as 
a malaria remedy. 
In Kenya the roots, in a mixture with parts of 
other plants, are boiled and the liquid is given 
to drink to cattle suffering from anthrax or 
blackquarter. The latex is also used as a blis-
tering remedy on swollen glands caused by 
East Coast Fever in cattle. 
In DR Congo the latex of young stems and 
leaves is used for tattooing. The latex can be 
fatal if ingested and is also used as a fish poi-
son. In Rwanda the latex is an ingredient of 
arrow poison. In Kenya and Tanzania the plant 
is sometimes used for criminal purposes. 
Euphorbia pseudograntii is sometimes culti-
vated as a greenhouse plant in temperate re-
gions or as a garden plant in Kenya. 
Properties Euphorbia pseudograntii has 
long been recognized as being very toxic and 
irritant. Contact of the latex with the skin or 
mucous membranes will cause a burning sen-
sation, dermatitis and blisters. Symptoms may 
not be developed immediately and can be de-
layed for hours. 
The latex of Euphorbia pseudograntii yields 
several diterpene esters of the tigliane type 
derived from 4-desoxyphorbol, of which 4-
deoxyphorbol-13-phenylacetate-12-tigliate 
showed very strong skin irritant activity, with 
an IDso of 0.000064 nMol/ear in mice. As a 
comparison, the standard irritant TPA (12-0-
tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate) has an IDr,o of 
0.016 nMol/ear. The tumour-promoting activity 
of the isolated diester was found to be low. The 
other esters were relatively unstable and had 
only slight irritant activities. Subcutaneous 
injection of 0.5-1 ml latex into guinea pigs re-
sulted in 40% mortality after 48-72 hours, the 
surviving animals developed severe oedema, 
skin lesions and necrosis. An ethanolic extract 
of the latex induced significant, dose-
EUPHORBIA 289 
dependent reversible hypothermia when in-
jected intraperitoneally in rats and rabbits. In 
anaesthetized dogs, a slight rise in blood pres-
sure with diuresis was induced by low doses, 
whereas high doses caused a severe to fatal 
drop in blood pressure, and several other ef-
fects. 
The triterpenoids euphol, euphorbol and tiru-
callol were isolated from the acetone extract of 
the latex. Intravenous administration of euphol 
caused hypotensive activity in normotensive 
anaesthetized dogs and rats. The LD50 is 1.5 
g/kg in mice intraperitoneally and more than 2 
g/kg orally. 
The latex also contains rubber (cis-1,4 linked 
polyisoprene) and ionol, an antioxidant which 
could play a role in the stabilization of Euphor-
bia pseudograntii latex. Furthermore, several 
acetylcholinesterase isozymes and proteolytic 
enzymes were purified from the latex, one of 
them with fibrinolytic and fibrinogenolytic 
properties, as well as several lectins, one of 
them exhibiting maximum agglutinating activ-
ity towards human O-group erythrocytes. 
The acetone extract of dried latex showed high 
molluscicidal activity against the freshwater 
snails Biomphalaria alexandrina and Bulinus 
truncatus. The latex also has some acaricidal 
properties; in a trial in Uganda, the extract 
killed 62% of ticks. The latex showed signifi-
cant nematicidal activity against Meloidogyne 
javanica infecting sunflower under greenhouse 
conditions. 
Description Monoecious, rather succulent 
shrub or small bushy tree up to 5(-10) m tall; 
stems cylindrical, older stems pale grey, with 
prominent leaf scars on green stems and copi-
ous latex. Leaves arranged spirally, simple and 
entire; stipules modified into small brown 
glands; petiole up to 8 mm long; blade elliptical 
to oblanceolate, up to 15 cm x 6(-8) cm, base 
long-cuneate, apex obtuse to short-acuminate, 
fleshy, margin curled down, nearly glabrous, 
pinnately veined, midvein prominent below, 
rounded, green or sometimes tinged red be-
neath. Inflorescence a lax axillary cyme, con-
sisting of clusters of flowers, each cluster called 
a 'cyathium'; peduncle up to 5 cm long, short-
hairy, branches 1-3 cm long; bracts 2, c. 4 mm 
x 4 mm, short-hairy, reddish green, persistent; 
cyathia c. 3 mm x 6.5 mm, with a funnel-
shaped involucre, bright red, 5-lobed with lobes 
c. 2 mm x 2 mm, with glandular rim c. 1 mm 
wide, deeply furrowed, red, each cyathium con-
taining 1 female flower surrounded by male 
flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers ses-
Euphorbia pseudograntii - flowering branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
sile with linear bracteoles, fringed, with red 
tips, perianth absent, stamen c. 4 mm long, 
shortly exserted; female flowers with pedicel 
up to 5(—9) mm in fruit, perianth a 3-lobed rim, 
ovary superior, densely short-hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, c. 2 mm long, fused at base, bifid at 
apex. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm x 8 mm, 
short-hairy, red, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 2.5 
mm x 2 mm, pale brownish grey, minutely tu-
berculate, caruncle rudimentary. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution. Synadenium (about 15 spe-
cies in continental Africa) has classically been 
kept separate from Euphorbia, mainly because 
the glands of the cyathia form a ring, whereas 
the glands of Euphorbia species are separate or 
only touching. However, recent molecular analy-
ses found Synadenium to be nested within Eu-
phorbia section Monadenium, and therefore it 
is now included in Euphorbia. Euphorbia 
pseudograntii Bruyns is an invalid name as 
Euphorbia pseudograntii Pax already existed 
for another species, a fact overlooked by 
Bruyns. This is in the process of being cor-
rected. The specimens of Euphorbia pseudo-
grantii Bruyns in southern Africa might belong 
to Euphorbia kirkii (N.E.Br.) Bruyns (syno-
290 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
nym: Synadenium kirkii N.E.Br.), which has 
hai ry leaf margins and lower midvein, a yellow 
glandular involucre r ing and seeds with an 
obvious caruncle. 
The n a m e Synadenium grantii is internat ion-
ally used for an o rnamen ta l plant , bu t this 
usual ly concerns Euphorbia bicompacta 
Bruyns . Especially Euphorbia bicompacta var. 
rubra (S.Carter) Bruyns is a widespread orna-
menta l and hedge p lan t in subtropical gardens 
and a pot p lan t in Europe and the United 
Sta tes . It mainly differs from Euphorbia pseu-
dograntii by having broadly obovate, sparsely 
toothed leaves, a prominent , sharp midvein 
below, blade usual ly with a red blotch below, 
and short, reddish-purple inflorescences. Eu-
phorbia bicompacta occurs wild or cult ivated in 
Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda and Tanzania . In 
Kenya, p lant sap is used for t r ea t ing Eas t 
Coast fever in catt le. A decoction of i ts leaves 
and s tem bark is given to dr ink to catt le to 
control ticks. Euphorbia triangolensis Bruyns 
(synonym: Synadenium angolense N.E.Br.) 
occurs in Malawi, Zambia and Angola. In An-
gola a root infusion is d runk to t rea t pain in 
the hips and madness . An infusion of unspeci-
fied p lan t pa r t s is t aken to t r ea t stomach-ache, 
dropsy, stitch, urogenital problems, excessive 
menst rua t ion , tuberculosis and cardiac palpi-
ta t ions . The latex is used as fish poison. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t In cultivation 
Euphorbia pseudograntii is moderately slow-
growing, growing faster in w a r m tropical con-
ditions with a b u n d a n t rainfall. Under garden 
conditions a t high al t i tudes, it can reach 3 m in 
height in 5 years . 
E c o l o g y Euphorbia pseudograntii is xero-
phytic and thr ives on rocky hills with dry open 
woodland in the eas t African uplands , a t 9 0 0 -
2100 m al t i tude and an annua l rainfall of 6 0 0 -
900 mm. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Euphorbia 
pseudograntii is easily propagated from seed, 
s tem cutt ings and root cut t ings. Fresh cut t ings 
should be dipped in charcoal dus t to stop the 
leaking of latex and should be p lanted in sand 
to root. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Excessive rainfall and 
cold conditions cause the s tem to rot. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t One should t ake 
great care to avoid latex falling on skin, lips 
and eyes, and gloves are recommended for 
handl ing. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Euphorbia pseudogran-
tii is relatively common in its distr ibution area 
and there are no signs t h a t it is th rea tened by 
genetic erosion. As a (semi-)succulent Euphor-
bia species, i ts t r ade is controlled under CITES 
appendix 2. 
P r o s p e c t s The use of Euphorbia pseudo-
grantii as a medicinal p lant is not recom-
mended because of i ts very toxic latex. The 
t igliane di terpene es ters isolated from the latex 
have not yet yielded in teres t ing pharmacologi-
cal compounds. The enzymes and lectins iso-
lated from the latex might have some potential 
in future, bu t more research is required. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Bruyns, Mapaya & Hed-
derson, 2006; Carter , 1987; Car ter & Radcliffe-
Smith, 1988; ITDG & IIRR, 1996; Neuwinger, 
1996; Rajesh et al., 2006; S te inmann & Porter , 
2002; Wat t & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Bagavathi , Sorg & 
Hecker, 1988; Banderembako & Nti tangi-
rageza, 1978; Beentje, 1994; Bossard, 1993; 
Chifundera, 2001; El Sayed, 1993; Govindappa 
et a l , 1987; Kinghorn, 1980; Mrinal ini et al., 
2002; Neuwinger, 2000; Nielsen et al., 1979; 
Olivier et a l , 1992; Okello-Onen et al., 2004; 
P r emara tna , S h a d a k s h a r a s w a m y & Nanjappa, 
1981; Shoeb et a l , 1990; Tabut i , Lye & Dhil-
lion, 2003; Unnikr i shnan , Desai & Gu-
ruswamy, 1987; Uzabakil iho, Largeau & 
Casadevall , 1987; Van Puyvelde et a l , 1983; 
van Wyk, van Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 
2002. 
S o u r c e s o f i l l u s t r a t i o n Car te r & Radcliffe-
Smith, 1988. 
A u t h o r s M.J. Nicholson 
E U P H O R B I A Q U I N Q U E C O S T A T A Vo lkens 
P r o t o l o g u e Notizbl. Bot. Gar t . Berlin-
Dahlem 2: 266 (1899). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Mchorongo (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia quinquecostata occurs in Kenya, Tan-
zania and Mozambique. 
U s e s In Tanzania a s tem infusion is given to 
children to expel in tes t ina l worms; it is also 
t a k e n to t r ea t s tomach-ache and is external ly 
applied to heal wounds. The latex is rubbed 
into the skin in case of pain in the ribs, bu t th is 
should be done with caution as it causes blis-
ters . 
In t he Tanga region of Tanzan ia the latex is 
used as bird lime. 
P r o p e r t i e s An ethyl acetate extract of the 
wood of Euphorbia quinquecostata using a 
phorbol d ibutyra te receptor-binding assay sys-
EUPHORBIA 291 
tem as a monitor yielded 4 inhibitory com-
pounds; 2 were ingenane ester derivatives, 17-
hydroxyingenol 20-hexadecanoate and ingenol 
20-hexadecanoate, and the other 2 were ent-
atisane derivatives. Also isolated from this 
extract were constituents inactive in this bio-
assay, including xanthoxylin, 6-hydroxy-7-
methoxycoumarin (isoscopoletin), lupeol ace-
tate, ß-sitosterol, sitosterol-ß-D-glucopyranoside, 
6,7,8-trimethoxycoumarin, 3,4-dimethoxy-
cinnamaldehyde, N-butylaniline and vanillin. 
A later isolated ent-isopimarane-type diterpene 
and a dihydrobenzofuran neolignan were inac-
tive in assays for the induction of quinone re-
ductase in hepatoma cells and for the inhibi-
tion of the transformation of murine cells, but 
3,4-dimethoxycinnamaldehyde was significantly 
active in these assays. 
Botany Monoecious, succulent small tree up 
to 10(-15) m tall with abundant latex; bole 
simple, up to 50 cm in diameter, with loosely 
spiraled rows of spines and scars of fallen 
branches; bark grey-brown, flaking; primary 
branches 2-4 m long, with whorls of secondary 
branches, directing upwards, forming a 
rounded crown; terminal branches fleshy, (3-
)5(-6)-angled, 2—4(—7) cm in diameter, con-
stricted at irregular intervals into oblong seg-
ments 5-15 cm long, margins of angles straight 
to toothed, with teeth 5-15 mm apart; spine 
shields oblong-triangular, c. 1.5 mm x 2 mm, 
with 1 pair of spines 2—8(—10) mm long. Leaves 
at the end of branches, in 4 rows, sessile; stip-
ules absent; blade deltoid, c. 2 mm x 2 mm, 
soon falling. Inflorescence an axillary cyme, 1— 
3 together in a horizontal row, consisting of 
clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 'cy-
athium', crowded at the end of branches; pe-
duncle 2-3 mm long, branches 2, short; bracts 
2, c. 2 mm long; cyathia c. 2.5 mm x 4 mm, 
with a cup-shaped involucre, lobes c. 1 mm 
long, glands 5, transversely oblong, c. 1 mm x 2 
mm, golden-yellow, each involucre containing 1 
female flower surrounded by many male flow-
ers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers sessile, 
perianth absent, stamen c. 4 mm long; female 
flowers with pedicel c. 7 mm long in fruit, peri-
anth 3-lobed, ovary superior, glabrous, 3-celled, 
styles 3, c. 1 mm long, fused at base, apex 2-fid. 
Fruit a deeply 3-lobed capsule c. 4.5 mm x 7 
mm, fleshy, 3-seeded. Seeds almost globose, c. 
2.5 mm x 2 mm, grey-mottled, smooth. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia quinquecostata 
belongs to section Euphorbia, a large group 
which is characterized by succulent, usually 
angular stems, stipules modified into small 
spines (or absent), a spine shield with an addi-
tional pair of spines (sometimes fused into a 
single spine), axillary inflorescences and seeds 
without a caruncle. 
Some other species from this section are med-
icinally used in tropical Africa. Euphorbia ro-
becchii Pax occurs in Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya 
and Tanzania. In Somalia the latex is widely 
used in the treatment of cattle diseases, includ-
ing foot rot, foot abscesses, mange, ringworm 
and ticks. In Tanzania dried stem bark is 
boiled with butter and coffee beans, and the 
decoction is rubbed onto inflamed lymph nodes. 
The latex is applied to the skin of camels to 
treat contagious skin necrosis. 
Euphorbia teke Schweinf. ex Pax (synonym: 
Euphorbia tisserantii A.Chev. & Sillans) occurs 
from the Central African Republic and south-
ern Sudan south to Congo and DR Congo and 
east to Uganda and Tanzania. In the Central 
African Republic the latex is boiled with an egg 
and taken as a strong purgative to treat gonor-
rhoea. 
Ecology Euphorbia quinquecostata occurs 
on rocky hillsides, and is usually the dominant 
tree in mixed deciduous woodland, at 600-1250 
m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Euphorbia quinquecostata is 
threatened by genetic erosion. All succulent 
Euphorbia spp. are listed in CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Euphorbia quinquecostata yields 
several interesting compounds, which merit 
further research into their anticancer activities. 
Major references Carter & Radcliffe-Smith, 
1988; Elia, 2007; Kokwaro, 1993; Mbwambo et 
al., 1996. 
Other references Catley & Mohammed, 
1996; ITDG & IIRR, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Su et a l , 2002. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA SCHIMPERIANA Scheele 
Protologue Linnaea 27: 344 (1843). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In = 20 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia schimperiana occurs in Cameroon and 
from Eritrea south through East Africa, 
Rwanda, Burundi and eastern DR Congo to 
292 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Zimbabwe and Mozambique. It also occurs in 
Madagascar and Rodrigues (Mauritius), and on 
the Arabian Peninsula. 
Uses In Rwanda the latex is used as ear 
drops to treat otitis. Leaf powder is applied to 
impetigo and stubborn skin infections. In 
Ethiopia an infusion of the aerial parts is taken 
as a purgative, to treat venereal diseases and 
as an anthelmintic. The fruits, crushed to-
gether with roots of Cyathula polycephala 
Baker, and mixed with water are taken to treat 
anthrax in cattle. In Kenya and Tanzania leaf 
paste in water is taken to treat coughs and 
colds. In Tanzania a leaf and root decoction is 
taken as a purgative. The latex is applied ex-
ternally to treat snakebites. 
In Kenya the plants are grazed by all domestic 
animals. 
Properties The methanol extract of dry 
stems showed strong molluscicidal activity 
(LD50 = 5.7 ppm) against Biomphalaria pfeif -
feri, a vector of schistosomiasis. This activity 
was associated with terpenoids and phenolics. 
The effects of the extract on various snail tis-
sues (gut, digestive gland and epidermal layer) 
were time and concentration dependent, and 
the results show that the epithelium layer is 
probably the primary site affected. The toxic 
and mutagenic activities of the methanol ex-
tract of the stems were investigated in mice, 
and showed slight toxicity to the skin and 
moderately irritant activity to the ocular tis-
sue. The extract significantly increased the 
frequency of micronuclei division, especially at 
high concentrations, indicating that it has 
mutagenic activity. 
Botany Monoecious, much-branched, annual 
or short-lived perennial herb up to 2 m tall, 
glabrous or with long, crisped hairs on the 
stem below the leaves or on the fruit; stems 
with conspicuous leaf scars, with latex. Leaves 
alternate, simple and entire, sessile, crowded; 
stipules absent; blade ovate-lanceolate to 
lanceolate, up to 15 cm x 2 cm, base cuneate, 
apex with short point, midvein winged on lower 
surface. Inflorescence an axillary or terminal 
cyme consisting of clusters of flowers, each 
cluster called a 'cyathium', in 3-15-branched 
umbels; branches up to 15 cm long; bracts ses-
sile, deltoid, 1-4 cm long, long-acuminate; cy-
athia with peduncle up to 3 mm long, c. 2 mm 
x 2 mm, with a cup-shaped involucre, lobes 
quadrangular, c. 0.5 mm long, shallowly 2-
lobed, hairy at margin; glands 4, transversely 
elliptical, c. 1 mm x 1.5-2 mm, 2-horned, horns 
up to 1.5 mm long, green turning brownish red, 
each involucre containing 1 female flower sur-
rounded by many male flowers. Flowers uni-
sexual; male flowers sessile, bracteoles linear, 
fringed, perianth absent, stamen c. 4.5 mm 
long; female flowers with pedicel up to 5.5 mm 
long, ovary superior, glabrous or hairy, 3-
celled, styles 3, up to 2.5 mm long, fused at 
base, apex 2-fid, spreading. Fruit a deeply 3-
lobed capsule c. 4 mm x 4.5 mm, base truncate, 
3-seeded. Seeds oblong, slightly compressed, 2 -
2.5 mm x 1.5-2 mm, smooth, shiny black be-
coming grey; caruncle 0.5 mm in diameter, 
wrinkled, yellowish. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia schimperiana belongs to 
section Esula, a group of annual or perennial 
herbs characterized by the absence of stipules, 
cyathia in terminal umbel-like cymes, leafy or 
deltoid bracts, 4 involucral glands, entire or 
with 2 horns, fruits exserted on reflexed pedicel 
and seeds with a caruncle. In Euphorbia 
schimperiana 3 varieties have been recognized: 
var. schimperiana, which is completely gla-
brous, var. pubescens (N.E.Br.) S.Carter, with 
short-hairy stem below the leaves and var. 
velutina N.E.Br, with hairy fruits. 
Euphorbia depauperata Höchst, ex A.Rich, is a 
variable perennial herb which also belongs to 
section Esula and which occurs in West, East 
and southern Africa. In Ethiopia a leaf or root 
infusion is taken as an anthelmintic and pur-
gative. In Kenya the plant is grazed by all do-
mestic animals. 
Ecology Euphorbia schimperiana occurs in 
grassland, evergreen bushland and montane 
forest, at 1350-3000 m altitude. It is also a 
weed in cultivation. 
Genetic resources and breeding Euphor-
bia schimperiana is a widespread and variable 
species with a tendency to form distinctive 
local variants. 
Prospects Euphorbia schimperiana is prom-
ising as a molluscicide, but more research is 
needed to identify the chemical compounds 
responsible for this activity. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Carter & 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; Ekram & Najia, 2006; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Al Zanbagi, Banaja & 
Barrett, 2000; Al Zanbagi, Banaja & Barrett, 
2002; Al Zanbagi, Barrett & Banaja, 2000; 
Jansen, 1981; Yineger et a l , 2007. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA 293 
E U P H O R B I A S U B S A L S A H i e r n 
Protologue Cat. afr. pl. 1(4): 948 (1900). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia subsalsa occurs in Angola and Na-
mibia. 
Uses A powder is prepared by pounding the 
sun-dried stem, from which the thorns are 
burnt off. This powder is smeared on incisions 
of the skin to ease pain when making tattoos. 
In northern Namibia latex of Euphorbia sub-
salsa is occasionally added to arrow poison 
made from the bitter root sap or latex of 
Adenium boehmianum Schinz, or arrow or 
spear poison made from the seeds or latex of 
Fockea multiflora K.Schum. to increase their 
efficacy. The Himba people of Namibia mainly 
use the latex to kill wild animals by poisoning 
the drinking water. 
Botany Monoecious shrub up to 60(-120) cm 
tall, branching from the base; branches 4-
angled, angles with wavy teeth up to 2 cm 
apart; stem up to 1 cm in diameter, not or dis-
tantly constricted into segments, pale green 
with a longitudinal stripe, with white latex; 
spine shield elongated, often joined into a 
horny margin, with 2 pairs of spines closely set 
on each spine shield, the lower pair 6-16 mm 
long, sturdy, the upper pair 2-5 mm long, 
brown or dark grey. Leaves rudimentary, scale-
like, minute, soon falling; stipules modified 
into small spines on the upper part of the spine 
shield. Inflorescence an axillary, almost sessile, 
simple cyme, consisting of clusters of flowers, 
each cluster called a 'cyathium'; cyme branches 
0-2, short; bracts 2; cyathia c. 3 mm in diame-
ter, with a shortly cup-shaped involucre, green, 
5-lobed with broadly ovate, fringed, emarginate 
lobes, glands 5, elliptical, not touching, yellow, 
female flower 1, surrounded by many male 
flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers ses-
sile, perianth absent, stamen shortly exserted; 
female flowers almost sessile, perianth 3-lobed, 
ovary superior, glabrous, 3-celled, styles 3, 
fused at base. Fruit an almost sessile, obtusely 
3-lobed capsule 2.5-3.5 mm in diameter, gla-
brous, brown, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 2 mm 
long, with small warts. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distribution, with at least 750 
species occurring in continental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean islands. Euphorbia subsalsa be-
longs to subgenus Euphorbia, section Euphor-
bia, a large group which is characterized by 
succulent, angular stems, stipules modified 
into small spines, a spine shield with an addi-
tional pair of spines (sometimes fused into a 
single spine), axillary inflorescences and seeds 
without a caruncle. Euphorbia subsalsa and 
the species mentioned below are characterized 
by the small size of the plants and the 
branched, 4-angled, succulent stems with 4 
spines per spine shield and almost sessile 
fruits. 
Euphorbia kaokoensis (A.C.White, R.A.Dyer & 
B.Sloane) L.C.Leach is endemic to Namibia. It 
was formerly considered a variety of Euphorbia 
subsalsa, but is distinguished by its 5-7-ribbed 
branches, longer and more densely set spines; 
its medicinal uses are similar to those of Eu-
phorbia subsalsa. Euphorbia tenuispinosa Gilli 
occurs in Kenya and Tanzania; the Galla peo-
ple in Kenya use the latex as the main ingredi-
ent of arrow poison. Euphorbia schinzii Pax 
occurs in Botswana, Zimbabwe and northern 
South Africa; references to its presence in 
Kenya probably concern Euphorbia angusti-
flora Pax. In Zimbabwe root powder is rubbed 
into scarifications on the breasts as a galac-
tagogue. Euphorbia uhligiana Pax occurs in 
Kenya and Tanzania. A stem decoction is 
drunk to treat colds. Sap is applied to wounds 
to heal them. In Kenya a bitter root and stem 
decoction is taken to treat fever, including ma-
laria. Euphorbia virosa Willd. occurs in Angola, 
Namibia and the Cape Province of South Af-
rica. In northern Namibia latex is added to 
arrow poison made from the bitter root sap or 
latex of Adenium boehmianum Schinz. Latex or 
powder of dried branches is used to poison 
hyenas and jackals, and also to poison water-
holes. Black rhinoceros is reported to browse 
the plant. The latex contains esters of diter-
pene alcohols of the tigliane type. Honey from 
Euphorbia virosa is unpalatable because it 
causes a burning sensation when eaten. 
Ecology Euphorbia subsalsa occurs in 
shrubland, often dominated by mopane (Colo-
phospermum mopane (Benth.) J.Léonard), at 
about 1000 m altitude. It occurs mainly on cal-
careous soils. 
Management Euphorbia subsalsa is only 
harvested from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though Euphorbia subsalsa occurs in a rela-
tively small area, there are no signs that it is 
threatened by genetic erosion. As a (semi-
succulent Euphorbia species, its trade is con-
trolled under CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects The latex of Euphorbia subsalsa 
294 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
is apparently very poisonous and it will remain 
of local importance only, unless chemical or 
pharmacological research demonstrates inter-
esting properties. 
Major references Eggli, 2002; Neuwinger, 
1996; SEPASAL, 2008j; van Wyk & Gericke, 
2000. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Brown, 
Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; Gelfand et al., 
1985; Heine & Heine, 1988b; Kokwaro, 1993; 
SEPASAL, 20081. 
Authors G.H.Schmelzer 
EUPHORBIA THYMIFOLIA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 454 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In - 18 
Vernacular names Thyme-leaf spurge, 
Gulf sandmat, chamber bitter (En). Petite 
rougette, euphorbe à feuilles de thym (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia thymifolia is native to tropical America 
and is now widely distributed throughout the 
tropics and subtropics. It is widespread in West 
Africa and the Indian Ocean islands, and ad-
vancing in eastern and southern Africa. 
Uses Euphorbia thymifolia is widely used in 
Africa in decoction or infusion against dysen-
tery, enteritis, diarrhoea and venereal dis-
eases. The dried leaves and seeds are slightly 
aromatic and are used as a stimulant, astrin-
gent, anthelmintic and laxative. A decoction of 
fresh aerial parts is applied externally to treat 
dermatitis, eczema and skin inflammations. An 
infusion of the leafy stems is taken as a bitter 
diuretic. Women with heavy menstruation 
Euphorbia thymifolia - naturalized 
drink the latex as a tonic. Fresh crushed plants 
are applied as a plaster for healing sprains. 
The latex is applied to warts. In Sierra Leone 
the leaves are pulped with water and applied 
to the head to treat headache. The leaves are 
used in a decoction to treat cystitis and kidney 
ailments. In Côte d'Ivoire and Congo a decoc-
tion of the whole plant is drunk to treat lung 
problems. In Congo ground fresh leaves are 
rubbed in to treat intercostal pain. A macera-
tion of the dried leaves is drunk for facilitating 
childbirth; it is claimed to stimulate contrac-
tions of the uterus. 
In Mauritius plant and seed decoctions are also 
taken as a galactagogue, and to treat hyper-
tension and venereal diseases. A decoction of 
the whole plant is taken to treat absence of 
menstruation and applied externally as an eye 
wash to treat conjunctivitis. On Rodrigues the 
crushed plant is applied to measles and other 
skin eruptions. 
In South America and continental Asia similar 
medicinal uses as above are recorded. In 
southern India the latex is applied as a remedy 
for ringworm and scabies. The plant is also 
used in the treatment of impotence. Crushed 
plants are rubbed on the scalp for strengthen-
ing the skull bones of children to enable them 
to carry loads on their heads as adults, and 
also as mild irritating rubefacient products to 
treat alopecia. In Trinidad a decoction of the 
plant is taken to treat fever, influenza, hyper-
tension and venereal diseases. 
In East Africa the latex is applied to treat sca-
bies in sheep. 
Properties From an aqueous acetone ex-
tract of the dried whole plant a range of hydro-
lysable tannins, including ellagitannins and 
gallotannins, were isolated. These tannins are 
pedunculagin, 1-desgalloyleugeniin, eugeniin, 
rugosin B, corilagin, geraniin, bixanin, 5-
desgalloylstachyurin, casuariin, several deriva-
tives of galloyl-ß-D-glucose, several derivatives 
of hexahydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose, mallotinic 
acid, as well as l-0-galloyl-3,6-(R)-valoneayl-ß-
D-glucose, an isomer of mallotinic acid. Fla-
vonoids isolated from the aerial parts include: 
kaempferol, cosmosiin (apigenin-7-glucoside), 
quercetin, quercetin-3-ß-galactoside, quercetin-
3-rhamnoside as well as ß-amyrine, ß-sito-
sterol, campesterol, stigmasterol, epitaraxerol, 
n-hexacosanol, euphorbol, 24-methylene cyclo-
artenol and cholesterol. Furthermore, the fol-
lowing compounds were isolated from the ae-
rial parts: 12-deoxy-4-ß-hydroxyphorbol-13-
dodecanoate-20-acetate, 12-deoxy-4-ß-hydroxy-
EUPHORBIA 295 
phorbol-13-phenylacetate-20-acetate and 12-
deoxyphorbol-13,20-diacetate. Both flavonoids 
and tannins have been reported to have anti-
inflammatory, analgesic, haemostatic, anti-
thrombic, antioxidant and vasoprotective ac-
tions. The flavonoids furthermore have antivi-
ral, anti-allergic, anti-inflammatory, and anti-
tumour properties. The essential oil from the 
leaves has a pungent odour and irritating 
taste, and contains cymol, carvacrol, limonene, 
sesquiterpenes and salicylic acid. The essential 
oil is put into medicinal soaps for treatment of 
erysipelas, sprays to keep off flies and mosqui-
toes, and a vermifuge for dogs. 
An extract prepared with 1.5% HCl inhibited 
the growth of gram-positive (Bacillus subtilis) 
and gram-negative (Escherichia coli) bacteria. 
Ethyl acetate and chloroform extracts of the 
aerial parts inhibited the growth of Escherichia 
coli and Shigella flexneri in vitro. The ethyl 
acetate extract was also found to be active 
against Shigella flexneri in vivo; 80% of the 
infected mice were cured when given 1500 
|ig/day orally. The ethanol and water extracts 
of the whole plant showed significant antifun-
gal activity against the dermatophytes Tricho-
phyton mentagrophytes and Trichophyton ver-
rucosum in vitro and in vivo in calves. The 
ether extract of the whole plant showed signifi-
cant activity against the Sarcoptes scabei mite, 
which causes scabies. 
Several extracts from the whole plant as well 
as pure compounds (3-0-galloyl-4,6-(S)- hexa-
hydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose, rugosin B and 
1,3,4,6-tetra-O-galloyl-K-ß-D-glucose) possessed 
antioxidant activities. In addition, 3-O-galloyl-
4,6-(S)-hexahydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose and 
the ethyl acetate fraction of the extract also 
showed significant activity against Herpes 
simplex virus type 2 in vitro in a dose-depen-
dent manner. The ethyl acetate extract signifi-
cantly reduced virus infectivity at a concentra-
tion of 4 ug/ml, whereas 3-0-galloyl-4,6-(S)-
hexahydroxydiphenoyl-D-glucose obviously 
diminished virus infectivity at a concentration 
of 0.5 |xg/ml. Several derivatives of galloyl-ß-D-
glucose show significant cytotoxicity against a 
range of human tumour cell lines. 
In pot tests, infection of Vigna radiata (L.) 
R.Wilczek by tomato spotted wilt virus (TSWV) 
was prevented by spraying the plants first with 
water extracts of whole Euphorbia thymifolia 
plants. 
Adulterations and substitutes Euphorbia 
thymifolia resembles Euphorbia prostrata L. 
and has similar medicinal uses. 
Description Monoecious, prostrate, annual 
herb with branches up to 25 cm long, with nu-
merous adventitious roots; stems with latex. 
Leaves opposite, distichous, simple; stipules 
linear, c. 1 mm long, deeply 2-3-toothed; peti-
ole c. 0.5 mm long; blade ovate, up to 8 mm x 4 
mm, base unequal, one side cuneate, the other 
side rounded, apex rounded, margins shallowly 
toothed, glabrous above, sparsely long-hairy 
beneath. Inflorescence a terminal or axillary 
cluster of flowers, called a 'cyathium', on short 
leafy shoots; cyathia almost sessile, c. 0.5 mm x 
0.5 mm, with a funnel-shaped involucre, lobes 
triangular, minute, margin hairy, glands 4, 
minute, almost circular, red, with very small 
red appendages, each involucre containing 1 
female flower surrounded by few male flowers. 
Flowers unisexual; male flowers sessile, brac-
teoles hair-like, perianth absent, stamen c. 1 
mm long; female flowers almost sessile, peri-
anth a rim, ovary superior, glabrous, 3-celled, 
styles 3, minute, 2-fid. Fruit an acutely 3-lobed, 
almost sessile capsule c. 1 mm x 1 mm, base 
truncate, short-hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds conical, 
c. 0.5 mm in diameter, acutely 4-angled, shal-
lowly transversely wrinkled, reddish brown, 
without caruncle. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
Euphorbia thymifolia - 1, plant habit; 2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
296 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
species in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. Euphorbia thymifolia belongs to sub-
genus Chamaesyce, section Chamaesyce, a 
group of annual or sometimes perennial herbs 
with obvious stipules, further characterized by 
a main stem aborting at the seedling stage, the 
plant thus consisting of an expanded dichoto-
mously branching umbel-like inflorescence, 
with the floral bracts appearing as normal 
leaves, cyathia solitary or up to 5 together in 
congested leafy cymes, 4 involucral glands with 
petal-like appendages or entire and conical 
seeds without a caruncle. Several other Eu-
phorbia spp. belonging to this section are med-
icinally used. Euphorbia glanduligera Pax oc-
curs in Namibia, Botswana and South Africa. 
In Namibia fresh or sun-dried leaves are 
pounded and rubbed into scarifications in the 
chest to increase milk flow in lactating women. 
Euphorbia polycnemoides Höchst, ex Boiss. 
occurs from Senegal east to Somalia and south 
to Malawi and Zambia. It also occurs on the 
Arabian Peninsula. In Nigeria the medicinal 
uses are similar to those of Euphorbia convol-
vuloides Höchst.; crushed leaves, mixed with 
palm oil, are applied to dry up the rashes asso-
ciated with measles, chickenpox and formerly 
smallpox. The crushed leaves are taken to treat 
diarrhoea and an infusion of the dried leaves is 
taken against dysentery. In contrast, an infu-
sion of the whole plant is taken orally or as an 
enema for its laxative effects. An extract of the 
plant is taken to treat coughs, a sore throat, 
asthma and bronchitis. In Tanzania a decoction 
of the whole plant, together with the whole 
plant of Euphorbia convolvuloides, is taken to 
treat dysentery. The latex is rubbed on the 
breasts to stimulate milk flow. The plant is 
browsed by sheep and camels. 
Growth and development Euphorbia thy-
mifolia grows very rapidly and completes its 
life cycle in 3-4 months; it can be found flower-
ing and fruiting throughout the year in warm 
tropical conditions. Pollination is effected by 
insects. 
Ecology Euphorbia thymifolia is a common 
weed of cultivated and waste ground, often on 
sandy or gravelly soils, up to 1650 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Seed germina-
tion of Euphorbia thymifolia occurs at the start 
of rainy season, or throughout the year if 
enough water is available. 
Diseases and pests Euphorbia thymifolia is 
a host to the root-knot nematodes Meloidogyne 
jauanica and Rotylenchulus reniformis. 
Handling after harvesting Plant material 
is washed and used fresh, or dried for later use. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia thymifolia 
has a pantropical distribution and is weedy; 
therefore it is not threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Euphorbia thymifolia has many 
local medicinal uses and showed antibacterial 
and antifungal activities as well as inhibitory 
effects against Herpes virus type 2. Although 
considerable chemical and pharmacological 
research has been done so far, more research is 
still needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Agarwal & Baslas, 1981; Bouquet 
& Debray, 1974; Burkill, 1994; Carter & Leach, 
2001; Lee et al., 1997; Lin et al., 2002; Phuong 
et a l , 2006; Yang et al., 2005. 
Other references Gurib-Fakim, Guého & 
Bissoondoyal, 1996; Gurib-Fakim et al., 1993; 
Jabbar & Khan, 1965; Khan, Rahman & Nur-e-
Kamal, 1988; Kokwaro, 1993; Lavergne & 
Véra, 1989; Lee et a l , 1990; Manickam & Ra-
jappan, 1998; Manickam & Rajappan, 1999; 
Nguyen Nghia Thin & Sosef, 1999; Oliver-
Bever, 1986; Pal & Gupta, 1979; Sarkar, 1986; 
SEPASAL, 2008c; Sofowora, 1982; Stäuble, 
1986; Wome, 1985. 
Sources of illustration Berhaut, 1975a. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
E U P H O R B I A T I R U C A L L I L . 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 452 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In - 10, 20 
Synonyms Euphorbia laro Drake (1899). 
Vernacular names Finger tree, finger eu-
phorbia, petroleum plant, pencil tree, rubber 
hedge euphorbia, rubber euphorbia, African 
milkbush (En). Euphorbe effilée, tirucalli (Fr). 
Almeidinha (dried latex), cassoneira, aveloz, 
euforbia (Po). Mtupa mwitu, malangili, mwasi, 
mchakaazi, mtovua macho (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia tirucalli originates in eastern tropical 
Africa, and has long since become naturalized 
in other parts of Africa, including South Africa 
and the Indian Ocean islands. It is widely 
naturalized and planted as an ornamental 
throughout the tropics and subtropics and is 
grown as a pot plant in temperate regions. 
Uses In Africa including Madagascar the 
latex of Euphorbia tirucalli is used for its po-
tent purgative and emetic properties to treat 
stomach complaints, constipation, intestinal 
EUPHORBIA 297 
Euphorbia tirucalli - wild, planted and natu-
ralized 
worms, headache, asthma, epilepsy, palpita-
tions, poisoning and snakebites. A few drops of 
latex are reportedly sufficient to cause vomit-
ing, and are taken in milk as an antidote to 
poisoning or snakebites. Anecdotal evidence 
suggests that the risks of a lethal overdose are 
high, particularly when treating children. The 
latex has severely irritant effects on the skin 
and mucosa. It causes painful blistering and 
inflammation, and may cause blindness if it 
comes into contact with the eyes. Heated 
branches are chewed and the latex is swal-
lowed to relieve a sore throat and dry cough, 
but also to induce labour during childbirth. The 
latex is externally applied to warts, wounds, 
skin complaints, swollen glands, oedema, 
haemorrhoids, rheumatism, toothache, earache 
and tumours. In Brazil the latex is widely used 
to treat cancer, but in some areas where it is 
commonly used, tumours of the nose are preva-
lent and thought to be related to this use. The 
roots of Euphorbia tirucalli are widely taken 
alone or in a mixture to treat schistosomiasis 
and sexually transmitted diseases. In Mauri-
tius a root and bud decoction is taken as a 
laxative, and to treat coughs and pectoral pain. 
Ash from burned branches and stems is used to 
treat whooping cough and is externally applied 
as a caustic to open abscesses. Pulped twigs are 
applied to oedema of the legs. 
The latex is taken in therapy of sexual impo-
tence and sterility in East Africa, and else-
where as a sexual stimulant, and it is also said 
to promote breast enlargement. In East Africa 
the latex is commonly used as arrow poison 
and as an ingredient for bait to kill rodents and 
other wild animals; the pulped stems are 
thrown in water as fish poison. In south-
western DR Congo the latex has been used in 
high doses as a trial by ordeal poison; in vari-
ous countries it is used as criminal poison. The 
latex is also used as a fly repellent in West 
Africa and a mosquito and termite repellent in 
Tanzania. In India the latex is used as an in-
secticide. 
Goats and sheep browse the green parts of the 
plant. The toxicity of the latex is considered 
seasonal or reduced in young plant parts, and 
young branches are even roasted and chewed. 
Euphorbia tirucalli is widely planted as an 
ornamental in gardens and as a pot plant, and 
a golden-stemmed cultivar exists. It is widely 
cultivated as a hedge and around cattle enclo-
sures, as it is considered impenetrable, due to 
the poisonous latex and dense growth; it is also 
planted as a firebreak and boundary marker. 
The plants are used to control soil erosion, to 
stabilize sand dunes, and, in some parts of Af-
rica, as grave-markers. In agriculture Euphor-
bia tirucalli is used for mulch and as pesticide. 
It is unsuitable for intercropping as the plants 
suppress undergrowth, including crops. In 
South Africa it is reported to keep moles away. 
The white wood is used to make rafters, gran-
ary floors, house posts, toys and veneer. It is 
also used as firewood when no other fuel is 
available. Gunpowder for fireworks has been 
produced from the charcoal. The latex is a 
source of natural rubber, but its resin content 
is too high for economic use. Resin from the 
latex appeared useful for application in lino-
leum, oilskin and leather cloth industries, but 
is not durable as a varnish. Biomass can be 
converted into gas, liquid fuels and solid fuels 
such as pellets, briquettes and charcoal. The 
latex has strong fixative properties and is used 
in coastal East Africa to fix knife-blades to 
wooden handles and spear-heads to shafts. In 
Malawi the latex is used as bird lime to trap 
birds. Zulu warriors used it to make head-
dresses. In Gabon and the Seychelles Euphor-
bia tirucalli is planted in villages as a medico-
magical plant. 
Production and international trade In the 
1980s Euphorbia tirucalli was planted in 
Senegal, East Africa, Brazil and Japan as a 
potential energy crop; later trials concentrated 
on biogas production, but no recent information 
is available. Euphorbia tirucalli is widely 
traded on the internet as an ornamental. 
Properties The chemical composition of 
Euphorbia tirucalli has been subject to many 
298 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
investigations, and from all plant parts a wide 
range of diterpene esters has been isolated. 
These diterpenes are of the tigliane, ingenane 
and daphnane types, and are based on the par-
ent alcohols ingenol, phorbol, resiniferonol, 12-
deoxyphorbol and the rare 4-deoxyphorbol and 
12-deoxy-4ß-hydroxyphorbol. The latex is an 
emulsion of about 30% terpenes in water. Sev-
eral chemical races exist with different diter-
pene profiles, e.g. from East Africa, Madagas-
car, South Africa, India and South America. 
Samples of latex from South Africa and Colom-
bia, for instance, contained predominantly irri-
tant and tumour-promoting esters of 4-
deoxyphorbol and highly unsaturated aliphatic 
acids. The main irritants in samples from 
Madagascar were 3-acylates of ingenol and di-
esters of phorbol containing an acetate group 
and a long-chain highly unsaturated acyl 
group. The acyl groups were similar to those in 
latex from South Africa, while esters of 4-
deoxyphorbol were completely absent from the 
Madagascan material. Latex from greenhouse 
plants in Germany did not contain tigliane- or 
ingenane-type diterpene esters and did not 
exhibit irritant activity. 
Other terpenes isolated from latex of different 
origins are the diterpenes euphol and its 
stereoisomer tirucallol, the highly toxic daph-
nane diterpene ester tinyatoxin, the triterpe-
noids euphorbinol, cycloeuphorbinol, eu-
phorone and the 31-nortriterpene cycloeuphor-
denol and the macrocyclic diterpene tiru-
calicine. The latex also contains an isoquino-
line alkaloid as well as the sterols taraxasterol, 
phorbosterol, euphorbosterol, a-amyrine and 
cycloartenol. Four trypsine-like proteolytic 
enzymes, euphorbains tl—14, have also been 
isolated. The twigs have yielded taraxasterol, 
ß-sitosterol, ellagic acid, kaempferol, glucose 
and the hydrocarbon hentriacontane, as well as 
an alcoholic analogue. The whole plant con-
tains 7.4% citric acid with some malonic and 
succinic acid. The stem bark yielded the follow-
ing compounds: cycloartenol, 24-methylene 
cycloartenol, ß-sitosterol, a-taraxerol, euphor-
bol, euphorbol-hexacosonoate, taraxerone as 
well as diterpene esters, including ingenol tri-
acetate, the pentacyclic triterpene euphorcinol 
and the taraxerane type triterpene euphorgi-
nol. Several diterpene esters, tiglianes and 
daphnanes have been isolated from the roots, 
based on 12-deoxyphorbol, 12-deoxy-16-
hydroxyphorbol and resiniferol, including 
tinyatoxin and candletoxin A. Two antho-
cyanins were also isolated from the roots. 
A biopolymeric fraction of the aerial parts 
showed dose dependent anti-arthritic activity 
in vitro and also showed immunomodulatory 
capacity in both rats and mice. The LDr,o in 
healthy mice and rats exceeded 2000 mg/kg. 
In-vivo mammal bioassays have demonstrated 
dose-dependent anti-inflammatory activity of 
aqueous extracts, which inhibited oedema by 
up to 68%. 
Euphorbia tirucalli is a cause of Burkitt's lym-
phoma, a highly aggressive tumour endemic to 
children in the Central African Region, where 
Euphorbia tirucalli is widely used in tradi-
tional medicine. The epidemiology of Burkitt's 
lymphoma is unclear, but has been associated 
with plant species such as Euphorbia tirucalli 
and Jatropha curcas L., as well as with ma-
laria and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV); these as-
sociations are generally weak in areas of low 
incidence. The diterpene esters from the latex 
of Euphorbia tirucalli activate latent EBV 
within a cell, and a plant extract induces con-
tinuous mitosis and chromosomal rearrange-
ments in EBV infected B-lymphocytes in vitro. 
The cocarcinogenic compound, a 4ß-deoxy-
phorbol ester isolated from the latex, was 
found to reduce the EBV-specific cytotoxic T-
cell function. These activities of the 4ß-deoxy-
phorbol ester suggest that it plays a role in the 
modification of human retroviral infections in 
vivo, including AIDS and human T-cell leu-
kaemia virus type 1 (HTLV-1) associated dis-
eases. An ethanol extract of the dried aerial 
parts given orally to tumour-bearing mice 
showed myelosuppression in bone marrow and 
enhanced resistance by significantly reducing 
tumour growth in the peritoneal cavity. 
Extracts of Euphorbia tirucalli have exhibited 
in-vitro antimicrobial activity against gram-
negative and gram-positive bacteria, certain 
fungal plant pathogens, and the Herpes sim-
plex virus, the latter in the absence of cytotox-
icity (therapeutic index >7.1). An aqueous ex-
tract also showed significant antibacterial ac-
tivity against the crop pathogens Erwinia caro-
tovora, Xanthomonas campestris and Pseudo-
monas solanacearum. Extracts of the latex and 
stem bark have shown larvicidal activity 
against larvae of the mosquito Culex quinque-
fasciatus, nematicidal effects against the para-
sitic nematode Heterodera cajani and also 
against Hoplolaimus indicus, Helicotylenchus 
indicus and Tylenchus filiformis in vitro. The 
aqueous latex extracts showed significant mol-
luscicidal activity against the freshwater snails 
Lymnaea acuminata, Lymnaea natalensis, 
EUPHORBIA 299 
Biomphalaria glabrata and Bulinus guernei. 
Rubber produced from the latex of Euphorbia 
tirucalli is limited in quality by its high resin 
content, which can be up to 82%. The rubber 
content of the latex is very variable; fresh latex 
contains on average 13% rubber, but may be as 
low as 1.6%. 
Euphorbia tirucalli may become an important 
biofuel plant. Initial attention focussed on the 
latex for the conversion of the terpenoids into 
biopetrol. However, experimental plantations 
for biopetrol production were not economically 
viable, as the production cost per barrel of oil 
was estimated to be between US$ 150 and US$ 
200. Attention later shifted to the conversion of 
the whole biomass into methane. 
Estimates of the gross energy value of Euphor-
bia tirucalli dry biomass range from 15,900 
kj/kg to 17,600 kJ/kg, fresh material contain-
ing about 85% water. Fermentation of chopped, 
fresh aerial parts gives yields of biogas compa-
rable to other agro-industrial wastes. Euphor-
bia tirucalli could be an appropriate plant for 
methane production in the Sahel where food 
crops do not yield well, since it is well adapted 
to poor soils. In other experiments, Euphorbia 
tirucalli stems increased yields of biogas from 
fermented cattle manure. Optimal methaniza-
tion occurs on freshly chopped material at 
about 48°C. 
The latex shows similarity in composition and 
activity to the highly poisonous croton seed oil 
from Croton tiglium L. When ingested, the 
latex causes congestion in the stomach, intes-
tines, kidneys and spleen. A 400 pi dose of di-
luted latex given to rats is sufficiently potent to 
cause stomach perforation and death. Doses of 
up to 30 g/kg fresh Euphorbia tirucalli fed to 
cattle reportedly cause mild symptoms of poi-
soning. Neither genotoxic nor anti-genotoxic 
effects were established in tests of aqueous 
latex solutions using the fruitfly Drosophila 
melanogaster. 
Euphol is present in large amounts in the la-
tex, but tirucallol predominated in greater 
quantities in expiants and callus cultures indi-
cating synthesis and/or accumulation of tiru-
callol by cells other than the laticifer cell. 
Sterol production was significantly enhanced 
by certain nutrient media, as well as indole-3-
acetic acid, and depressed by benzyladenine. 
The wood is pale, hard and with a fine texture, 
and is rarely attacked by insects. 
Description Succulent, much-branched, 
monoecious or more often dioecious shrub to 4 
m tall or small tree up to 10(-15) m tall; 
Euphorbia tirucalli - 1, habit; 2, part of branch 
with male inflorescences; 3, part of branch with 
fruits. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
branchlets rounded, c. 7 mm in diameter, often 
produced in whorls, brittle, green with longitu-
dinal fine stripes and very small leaf scars, the 
extreme tips of young leafy branchlets sparsely 
short-hairy, with copious white to yellowish 
latex. Leaves arranged spirally, present only at 
the tips of young branchlets and quickly fal-
ling, simple and entire, almost sessile; stipules 
minute, glandular, dark brown; blade linear-
lanceolate, c. 15 mm x 2 mm, fleshy. Inflores-
cence a terminal umbel-like cyme, 2-6 together 
at the apex of branchlets, each forking 2-4 
times, composed of dense clusters of flowers, 
each cluster called a 'cyathium', developing 
only male flowers (sometimes with a few fe-
male flowers), or only female flowers; bracts c. 
2 mm long, rounded; cyathia almost sessile, c. 3 
mm x 4 mm, involucre cup-shaped, glands 5, 
up to 1.5 mm x 2 mm, bright yellow, lobes tri-
angular, c. 0.5 mm long. Flowers unisexual; 
male flowers with linear bracteoles, plumose at 
apex, stamen c. 4.5 mm long; female flowers 
with small bracteoles, pedicel up to 10 mm long 
in fruit, hairy, perianth distinctly 3-lobed, lobes 
300 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
c. 0.5 mm long, ovary superior, 3-celled, styles 
c. 2 mm long, fused at base, with thickened 
deeply bifid recurved stigma. Fruit a nearly 
globose capsule c. 8 mm x 8.5 mm, almost gla-
brous, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 3.5 mm x 3 
mm, smooth, speckled with brown and with a 
dark brown ventral line; caruncle 1 mm across. 
Other botanical information Euphorbia 
comprises about 2000 species and has a world-
wide distribution, with at least 750 species 
occurring in continental Africa and about 150 
in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean islands. 
Euphorbia tirucalli belongs to section Tiru-
calli, a group which is characterized by cylin-
drical, succulent branches with copious latex, 
small, quickly falling leaves, cyathia in termi-
nal umbel-like cymes, 5 glands, an exserted 
fruit and seeds with a caruncle. The species 
mentioned below also belong to this section. 
Euphorbia damarana L.C.Leach is endemic to 
Namibia; the toxic latex is used to pollute wa-
ter holes to poison and catch game drinking 
from them. The latex is highly irritating to the 
skin and mucous membranes. Euphorbia gos-
sypina Pax occurs from Somalia south to Zim-
babwe. In Kenya a decoction of the pounded 
stems is drunk to treat swollen legs and gen-
eral body pain. In Tanzania the latex is applied 
as eye drops to treat conjunctivitis, as ear 
drops to treat oral infections and also to warts 
that have first been cut open. The diluted latex 
of small twigs is taken to treat laryngitis. In 
Somalia the latex is applied to mange in live-
stock. Euphorbia spartaria N.E.Br, is endemic 
to Namibia; the latex is applied to warts. 
Growth and development Euphorbia tiru-
calli is a rare example of a species in which the 
physiological mechanisms of Crassulacean Acid 
Metabolism (CAM) in the stems are combined 
with Cs photosynthesis in the leaves. Other 
adaptations to drought include succulent stems 
and sunken stomata. Salt tolerance in Euphor-
bia tirucalli is attributed to adaptations that 
limit the uptake of salt ions by the roots, and 
store the ions in the roots and stems. Euphor-
bia tirucalli grows vigorously once established. 
Leaves are only present during the rainy sea-
son and flowering starts at the end of the dry 
season before new leaves are formed. Pollina-
tion is by insects. 
Ecology Euphorbia tirucalli is very well 
adapted to semi-arid conditions, but also occurs 
in both dry and moist forest, savanna and 
shrub land, and withstands salt stress associ-
ated with coastal conditions, but no frost. It 
occurs from sea-level up to 2500 m altitude. It 
grows well on a wide variety of light-textured, 
neutral to acidic soils. It is commonly associ-
ated with human settlements and becomes 
naturalized rapidly. It is locally common and 
often occurs in groups. 
Propagation and planting Euphorbia ti-
rucalli is sometimes propagated by seed, but 
usually by stem or root cuttings, and estab-
lishes quickly on almost any soil. Cuttings 
should be at least 10 cm long and should be left 
to dry for at least 24 hours before planting. For 
ornamental purposes, cuttings of 35-40 cm 
long are usually taken and for hedges cuttings 
of up to 1 m long. Euphorbia tirucalli can also 
be propagated through micro-propagation. 
When grown as a fuel crop, cuttings can be 
planted very densely depending on the climatic 
and edaphic conditions, at 10,000-20,000 
plants/ha. In Kenya freshly planted cuttings 
are protected from browsing and sun by Acacia 
branches. Planting can start at the beginning 
of the rainy season. Weeding is necessary only 
as seedlings become established; later, weeds 
are suppressed by litter from the crop. 
Management Euphorbia tirucalli may be 
coppiced, trimmed and top-pruned to establish 
a living fence or hedge. As it is well adapted to 
semi-arid conditions and can be grown on mar-
ginal land, plantations were established for use 
as energy crop. Application of single-nutrient 
or compound fertilizer results in increased 
growth. In Zimbabwe, plantations of Euphor-
bia tirucalli have succeeded in some instances 
on the spoil mounds of arsenic mines. 
Diseases and pests In India several dis-
eases occur including stem rot caused by 
Phoma sorghina and necrotic spots by Alter-
naria sp.; Nectria euphorbiana was found on 
dead stem material. In Pakistan Euphorbia 
tirucalli is a host of Botryodiplodia theobromae 
and also of Cuscuta spp. Euphorbia tirucalli 
can be severely affected by nematodes, includ-
ing Meloidogyne spp. Aphids, mealy bugs and 
grasshoppers feed on the plants, whereas mites 
occur on leaves and young growth, especially in 
greenhouses. 
Harvesting Branches of Euphorbia tirucalli 
can be cut for medicinal use whenever the need 
arises. In biofuel plantations the plants can be 
cut at 20—30 cm above the ground. 
Yield Yield of Euphorbia tirucalli stems for 
biofuel production varies greatly with density 
of planting, number of cuttings per year, an-
nual rainfall and soil type. In Thailand yields 
varied between 150 t/ha fresh weight and 2.3 
t/ha dry weight for high-density plots (10,000 
EUPHORBIA 301 
plants/ha) with 6 harvests, and 25.5 t/ha fresh 
weight for low density plots (1600 plants/ha) 
with one harvest. 
In biogas production, the low N content and 
easily decomposed stem pieces of Euphorbia 
tirucalli result in high methane output rates. 
In an experiment in India, 375 g fresh stem 
cuttings and 375 g fresh cattle manure were 
fermented in 750 ml water and yielded 19.2 1 
gas. A field producing 500 t/ha/y of biomass 
would result in 137 kg/dry matter/day and 31 
m3 methane per day or about 20 kg methane 
per day. 
Handling after harvest In medicine, the 
harvested parts of Euphorbia tirucalli are usu-
ally used fresh. 
Genetic resources Euphorbia tirucalli is 
widely planted and naturalized and is there-
fore not threatened by genetic erosion. As a 
succulent Euphorbia species, its trade is con-
trolled under CITES appendix 2. 
Prospects Euphorbia tirucalli is an impor-
tant multi-purpose plant. It has many medici-
nal uses, which are partly confirmed by phar-
macological tests. As the latex has tumour-
promoting properties and is implicated in the 
epidemiology of Burkitt's lymphoma, its use in 
traditional medicine should be discouraged. 
Further research is warranted to clarify its 
antibacterial and anti-arthritic activities. 
Euphorbia tirucalli is a unique example of a 
plant combining permanent crassulacean acid 
metabolism (CAM) stems with short-lived Ca 
leaves. During humid spells when leaves are 
present, this combination allows high CO2 up-
take and, thus, elevated growth rates. It is a 
low-input plant, with high drought and salinity 
stress tolerance that can be grown on land that 
is not suitable for crops. It has the potential to 
provide semi-arid zone inhabitants with an 
energy solution in the form of a biomass that 
can be converted to gaseous, liquid or solid 
biofuels. More research is needed and should 
cover crop genetic improvement, improved 
farming techniques to intensify production, 
improve the product quality, and develop effi-
cient technologies to extract and use the biofu-
els. 
Major references Bani et al., 2007; Burkill, 
1994; Cardy, Sharp & Little, 2001; Carter & 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; MacNeil et a l , 2003; 
Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; Nguyen 
Nghia Thin & Sosef, 1999; Valadares et a l , 
2006; van den Bosch, 2004. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2004; De-
clerck et al., 1985; De Oliveira & Nepomuceno, 
2004; Furstenberger & Hecker, 1986; Gurib-
Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Hecker, 1977; Kaji-
kawa et al., 2005; Kamar, 1994; Katende, 
Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Leach, 1973; Passi-
longo-Silva et al., 2007; Rajasekaran, Swami-
natha & Jayapragasm, 1989; Ralantonirina, 
1993; Razanamparany, 1986; Samuelsson et 
al., 1992; SEPASAL, 2008k; Sow et al., 1989; 
Tiwaru & Singh, 2005; Van Damme, 1990; 
Yadav et al., 2002. 
Sources of illustration Carter & Radcliffe-
Smith, 1988; Coates Palgrave, 1983. 
Authors O.M. Grace 
E U P H O R B I A UNISPINA N.E.Br. 
Protologue Dyer, FI. trop. Afr. 6(1): 561 
(1911). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Candle plant (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Eu-
phorbia unispina occurs from Guinea and Mali 
east to southern Sudan. 
Uses The latex of Euphorbia unispina is 
very caustic and toxic, and very irritating to 
the skin and mucous membranes. It can cause 
blindness when in contact with eyes. Despite 
its toxicity, it is medicinally used. In Guinea, 
Mali and Côte d'Ivoire the latex is applied to 
the neck to cure sleeping sickness, because it is 
believed that the disease is caused by ganglia 
in the neck. In Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria the 
latex is applied to leprosy sores. Two drops of 
latex on an egg are eaten as an anthelmintic. 
In Benin stem ash is inhaled to treat asthma; 
palm oil with latex is taken to treat constipa-
tion and colic; a macerate of the cut stems in 
water is applied to skin diseases and haemor-
rhoids. In northern Nigeria the latex is rubbed 
onto the body to treat mental illness. In Cam-
eroon the latex is placed in a carious tooth to 
relieve toothache or to help to loosen the tooth 
and render extraction easier. Dried leaves are 
smoked in a pipe to treat bronchitis. 
In addition to medicinal uses, the latex is 
widely used in the preparation of arrow poison, 
though always mixed with other ingredients, 
such as seeds of Strophanthus species. It is also 
used in fish poison and animal traps. In north-
ern Nigeria the latex is reported to be used as a 
poison to commit murder and suicide. The latex 
is applied to scarifications to thicken them. In 
West Africa Euphorbia unispina is sometimes 
planted in gardens as an ornamental plant or 
as a hedge around fields and graveyards. In 
302 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Europe and the United Sta tes it is a ra re pot 
p lan t in succulent collections. 
Euphorbia unispina closely resembles Euphor-
bia poissonii Pax, and they have s imilar uses. 
Product ion and international trade Some 
compounds isolated from Euphorbia unispina 
are sold on the in ternet . Resiniferatoxin was 
sold in 2007 for US$ 35 (1 mg) to US$ 525 (25 
mg); t inyatoxin was sold for US$ 60 (1 mg) to 
US$ 240 (5 mg). Euphorbia unispina is also 
t raded on the in te rne t as an o rnamen ta l plant . 
P r o p e r t i e s The latex of Euphorbia unispina 
contains es ters of di terpene alcohols of the 
t igliane type, 12-deoxyphorbol and 12-deoxy-
16-hydroxyphorbol, and the daphnane type, 
resiniferonol, as well as several macrocyclic 
es ters of the di terpene alcohol 18-hydroxyingol. 
D a p h n a n e esters a re generally known for their 
potent skin i r r i t an t propert ies whereas t igliane 
es ters are toxic and tumour promoters; some 
tigliane esters , however, possess ant icancer 
activities. 
Euphorbia unispina contains a smaller variety 
of chemical compounds t h a n Euphorbia pois-
sonii and also in lower concentrat ions. This is 
reflected by the i r r i t an t activity of the latex, 
which is more t h a n 30 t imes less t h a n in Eu-
phorbia poissonii latex, a l though after 24 hours 
both activities have almost the same value. 
The isolated aromatic es ters of the daphnane 
type are more potent i r r i t an t s in mouse ear 
tes ts t h a n the aromat ic t igliane esters , espe-
cially resiniferatoxin (IDBO = 0.00021 nMol / 5 
ug) and t inyatoxin (IDBO = 0.0012 nMol / 5 (ig), 
whereas proresiniferatoxin is almost inactive. 
The isolated aromatic t igliane esters , candle-
toxin A (ID50 - 0.48 nMol / 5 ug) and candle-
toxin B (ID50 = 0.19 nMol / 5 ug), as well as 
DPP (12-deoxyphorbol 13-phenylacetate; IDBO = 
0.064 nMol / 5 ug) were also strongly i r r i tan t . 
The major compound isolated from Euphorbia 
poissonii, the highly i r r i t an t 12-deoxyphorbol-
13-O-phenylacetate-20-O-acetate, was not iso-
lated from Euphorbia unispina. The i r r i t an t 
activity of resiniferatoxin and t inyatoxin is 
rapid and reaches a max imum within 4 hours 
and then fades to inactivity after 24 hours . 
Resiniferatoxin is highly toxic, as it b inds to 
pa in receptors in t he same way as capsaicin 
bu t much more powerfully. It s t imula tes the 
neurons to fire repeatedly unt i l t he neuron 
dies, causing sear ing pain and sending the 
victim into severe anaphylact ic shock. It is 
used in the t r e a t m e n t of incontinence associ-
ated wi th an overactive bladder. It also h a s 
ant i feedant and analgesic propert ies . Efforts 
are being made to synthesize th is compound, 
as it will be of use in the elucidation of the 
binding characterist ics of resiniferatoxin to its 
receptor sites. 
B o t a n y Monoecious, candelabriform, sparsely 
branching shrub up to 3.5 m tall; branches 
cylindrical, up to 2.5 cm in diameter , silvery 
grey, covered with shallow tubercles and horny 
spine shields up to 1 cm in diameter , grey, with 
1 spine, wi th whi te latex. Leaves a r ranged 
spirally a t s tem apex in 4—5 ranks , simple, 
soon falling; s t ipules modified into 2 stout 
spines 6-10 mm long; petiole short, thick; 
blade oblong to spoon-shaped, 5—12 cm x 1.5-5 
cm, base long-cuneate, apex notched and 
fringed, acute or rounded, almost ent ire , fleshy, 
glabrous, pinnately veined. Inflorescence an 
axillary cyme at t he ends of branches , consist-
ing of clusters of flowers, each cluster called a 
'cyathium'; peduncle short; cyme branches c. 2, 
short; brac ts 2, ovate, c. 2 m m long, membra-
naceous; cyathia c. 4 m m in diameter , wi th a 
short ly funnel-shaped involucre, green, 5-lobed 
with broadly ovate, fringed lobes, glands 5, 
elliptical, touching, red, each cyathium con-
ta ining 1 female flower sur rounded by many 
male flowers. Flowers unisexual; male flowers 
sessile, pe r i an th absent , s t amen shortly ex-
serted, red; female flowers with curved pedicel 
4 - 8 m m long in fruit, pe r ian th 5-lobed, ovary 
superior, 3-celled, glabrous, styles 3, up to 2 
mm long, slender, fused a t base, bifid a t apex. 
Frui t an obtusely 3-lobed capsule c. 6 mm in 
diameter , glabrous, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid. 
Euphorbia comprises about 2000 species and 
has a worldwide distr ibution, with a t least 750 
species occurring in cont inental Africa and 
about 150 species in Madagascar and the In-
dian Ocean is lands. Euphorbia unispina be-
longs to subgenus Euphorbia, section Euphor-
bia, a large group which is character ized by 
succulent, angu la r s tems, s t ipules modified 
into small spines, a spine shield with a pai r of 
spines (sometimes fused into a single spine), 
axillary inflorescences and seeds wi thout ca-
runcle. P lan t s of Euphorbia poissonii Pax hav-
ing small spines resemble Euphorbia unispina 
closely. The former may be dist inguished from 
Euphorbia unispina by t he s touter flowering 
branches , with leaves in 8-10 r a n k s ins tead of 
4 - 5 , by the usual ly rud imen ta ry spines, and by 
the numerous inflorescences densely clustered 
a t the end of the shoots. 
Euphorbia unispina flowers a t the end of the 
dry season, before new leaves are formed. 
Several other Euphorbia species closely related 
EXCOKCARIA 303 
to Euphorbia unispina have medicinal uses. 
Euphorbia meridionalis P.R.O.Bally & S.Carter 
occurs in Kenya and Tanzania ; in Kenya the 
Maasa i people dr ink wate r or soup in which 
slices of s tem are boiled, to induce diarrhoea to 
t r ea t malar ia and venereal diseases. Euphor-
bia schizacantha Pax occurs in Ethiopia, Soma-
lia and nor thern Kenya, and in Somalia the 
crushed p lan t is applied to the anus to t rea t 
haemorrhoids . In Ethiopia a root infusion is 
d runk to t rea t cough. Euphorbia schizacantha 
is sought after by plant collectors because of i ts 
drooping branches and because the fusion of 
the 2 main spines is not complete, t hus having 
a forked t ip. Euphorbia venenifica T remaux ex 
Kotschy occurs in Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia and 
Uganda . The latex is very caustic and toxic, 
and in southern Sudan it is pa r t of an arrow 
poison. In southern Chad and southern Sudan 
the latex is also used as fish poison. 
E c o l o g y Euphorbia unispina occurs on 
rocky hills and slopes in savanna . It is locally 
common. 
M a n a g e m e n t Euphorbia unispina is easily 
propagated by s tem cutt ings; these should be 
a t least 20 cm long, preferably cut a t the base 
of a b ranch where the cut surface will be 
woody. After cut t ing they should be allowed to 
lie in a shaded place for a t least 2 weeks for a 
callus to form on the cut end. Euphorbia 
unispina can also be grown from seed. Euphor-
bia unispina latex is usual ly harves ted from 
wild p lan ts or from those planted near villages. 
Harves t ing of the leaves is seasonal because 
the p lan ts are leafless in the dry season. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Euphor-
bia unispina is locally common and probably 
not th rea tened by genetic erosion. As a (semi-) 
succulent Euphorbia species, i ts t r ade is con-
trolled unde r CITES appendix 2. 
P r o s p e c t s Although Euphorbia unispina 
has useful biological activities, its use for me-
dicinal purposes is l imited by the toxicity of the 
latex. However, the prospects of some of i ts 
compounds are good; for example, resinifera-
toxin is going through phase 2 clinical t r ia ls 
and D P P can be used in the the rapy of persis-
ten t HIV-1 infection. The taxonomy and distri-
but ion a reas of Euphorbia unispina, Euphorbia 
poissonii and Euphorbia venenifica need to be 
reviewed as these species resemble each other 
closely. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Asres et al., 2005; Bur-
kill, 1994; Eggli, 2002; Keay, 1958a; Neuwinger, 
1996. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Evans & Kinghorn, 1977; Evans & Schmidt, 
1977; Gemedo-Dalle, Maass & Isselstein, 2005; 
Kiringe, 2006; Neuwinger, 1996; Newton, 1992; 
Rauh, Loffler & Uhlarz , 1969; Samuelsson et 
a l , 1992; Stäuble, 1986. 
A u t h o r s L.E. Newton 
EXCOECARIA GRAHAMII S tapf 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1906: 81 
(1906). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
S y n o n y m s Sapium grahamii (Stapf) Pra in 
(1913). 
Origin and geographic distribution Excoe-
caria grahamii occurs from Guinea eas t to Ni-
geria. 
U s e s The p lan t is very toxic. A decoction of 
the whole plant is used as a ba th to t r e a t skin 
affections and oedema, and is t aken internal ly 
to t rea t skin affections, including leprosy and 
ascites, which require drast ic purging. An ex-
t rac t of t he pounded leaves is applied to guinea 
worm sores or a few drops of the latex are ap-
plied to the sore to help extract the paras i te . In 
Côte d'Ivoire the smoke of b u r n t and ground 
fresh roots together with those of Gnidia 
kraussiana Meisn. is inhaled to t rea t halluci-
nat ions . In Burk ina Faso a leaf decoction is 
t aken to induce abortion. 
The latex from the root is a powerful caustic; 
ground up with a litt le wate r it is applied on a 
stick to produce red or black marks on the face, 
causing swelling and finally a tat too. It is 
sometimes used for r i tua l scarifications, as a re 
the crushed leaves. The root is sometimes an 
ingredient of arrow poison. It is also used for 
cr iminal purposes. 
P r o p e r t i e s The alcoholic leaf extract, intra-
venously injected in the hea r t muscle of rabbi t s 
in vivo, has a short s t imulatory effect, resem-
bling t h a t of cardiotonic compounds. 
B o t a n y Monoecious small , unbranched, gla-
brous shrub up to 60(-90) cm tall with milky, 
sticky latex and deep, creeping rhizomes. 
Leaves a l te rna te , simple; st ipules small, soon 
falling; petiole up to 1.5 cm long; blade ellipti-
cal, elliptical-oblong to elliptical-obovate, 4 -15 
cm x 3-5 cm, base rounded or cuneate , wi th 2 
glands, apex obtuse to acute, marg ins minute ly 
toothed, pale green benea th . Inflorescence a 
slender, t e rmina l spike up to 5 cm long, mostly 
with many male flowers and 1-2 female flow-
ers a t base. Flowers unisexual , regular , sessile, 
peta ls absent , disk absent; male flowers with 3 
304 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Excoecaria grahamii - 1, flowering twig; 2, part 
of inflorescence; 3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
elliptical sepals, reddish, stamens 3; female 
flowers with 3 rounded to ovate sepals, obtuse, 
toothed to entire, ovary superior, smooth, 3-
celled, styles 3, almost free. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule 2-2.5 cm in diameter, hard, pale brown 
to pinkish, dehiscing explosively, 3-seeded. 
Seeds almost globose, c. 5 mm long, brown to 
yellow. 
Excoecaria occurs in the Old World tropics and 
Pacific islands and comprises 35 species; about 
6 species occur in continental Africa and about 
5 in Madagascar. Formerly, many Excoecaria 
species were included in Sapium, which is now 
considered to be native only to the New World. 
Excoecaria guineensis (Benth.) Müll.Arg occurs 
in West and Central Africa. In Nigeria a decoc-
tion of its root bark or stem bark is taken in 
small doses as a purgative in case of constipa-
tion and also to treat kidney diseases. A decoc-
tion of the stem bark is also used as an emetic. 
In DR Congo the leaf sap is applied to sores. 
The sap is acrid and poisonous. 
Ecology Excoecaria grahamii occurs in sa-
vanna and at forest edges, usually on moist 
soil. It flowers and fruits from June to March. 
Genetic resources and breeding Excoe-
caria grahamii is relatively common in its 
fairly large distribution area and therefore not 
likely to be threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Excoecaria grahamii is very poi-
sonous, and will therefore remain of limited 
use in local medicine. It would be interesting to 
evaluate its pharmacological properties as 
other Excoecaria spp. yield compounds with 
interesting anti-HIV activities. 
Major references Belemtougri, Samate & 
Millogo-Rasolodimby, 1995; Burkill, 1994; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Neuwinger, 1998. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Brown, Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; 
Léonard, 1962; Stäuble, 1986. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
EXCOECARIA MADAGASCARIENSIS (Baill.) 
Müll.Arg. 
Protologue A.DC, Prodr. 15(2.2): 1219 
(1866). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Excoecaria sylvestris S.Moore 
(1911). 
Vernacular names Milky mangrove, red 
ears (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Excoe-
caria madagascariensis occurs from Somalia 
south to Tanzania, and also in Zimbabwe, 
northern South Africa, Swaziland and Mada-
gascar. 
Uses In Kenya the Giriama and Teita people 
use the plant sap in the preparation of hunting 
arrow poison, often in combination with the 
latex of Acokanthera schimperi (A.DC.) 
Schweinf. and the tuber of Dioscorea quarti-
niana A.Rich. The sap causes painful blisters 
when it touches the skin. The plants are very 
toxic to cattle and camels. 
The wood is used as firewood and for charcoal 
production and also to make tool handles. 
Properties No chemical or pharmacological 
analyses have been carried out for Excoecaria 
madagascariensis, but several highly toxic 
alkaloids (excoecarins) and phorbol esters have 
been reported in other Excoecaria species. 
Botany Monoecious glabrous shrub or small 
tree up to 4(-7) m tall; bark rough or smooth, 
with colourless or milky latex. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; stipules triangular-ovate, c. 
2.5 mm long, soon falling; petiole up to 1 cm 
long, channeled above; blade elliptical, ellipti-
cal-oblong to elliptical-oblanceolate, 4-17 cm x 
FLUEGGEA 305 
2-6 cm, base cuneate, apex obtuse to emargi-
nate, glossy and dark green above, reddish 
brown when young. Inflorescence an axillary 
spike in the upper leaf axils, 2-3 cm long, with 
only male flowers or with some female flowers 
at base. Flowers unisexual, regular, sessile, 
petals absent, disk absent; male flowers with 3 
lanceolate sepals c. 0.5 mm long, acute, 
toothed, pale yellow-green or whitish, stamens 
3, c. 1 mm long; female flowers with 3 rounded 
to ovate sepals c. 0.5 mm long, obtuse, toothed, 
ovary superior, 3-lobed, smooth, 3-celled, styles 
3, fused at base, recurved. Fruit a 3-lobed cap-
sule c. 1 cm in diameter, smooth, green, turn-
ing red or yellowish, 3-seeded. Seeds globose, c. 
4 mm in diameter, smooth, greyish brown, 
mottled. 
Excoecaria occurs in the Old World tropics and 
Pacific islands and comprises 35 species; about 
6 species occur in continental Africa and about 
5 in Madagascar. Formerly, many Excoecaria 
species were included in Sapium, which is now 
considered to be native only to the New World. 
Excoecaria bussei (Pax) Pax occurs in southern 
Africa. A root decoction is taken as an emetic. 
The plant sap is considered poisonous, and 
cattle do not browse the plant. Sometimes the 
seeds are chewed; they are tasteless at first but 
later produce a peppery, burning sensation, 
which lasts a long time. Most people consider 
them poisonous. The latex of Excoecaria ben-
thamiana Hemsl. ('bois chariot', 'bois jasmin 
rouge'), a rare endemic of the Seychelles, is a 
powerful vesicant and is applied externally to 
warts. 
Ecology Excoecaria madagascariensis oc-
curs in thickets and evergreen forest, often on 
sandy soils along rivers, from sea-level up to 
1850 m altitude. 
Management Excoecaria madagascariensis 
can be propagated through Wildlings and cut-
tings. It is moderately fast growing and can be 
pruned and pollarded. 
Genetic resources and breeding Excoe-
caria madagascariensis is locally common in 
East Africa and Madagascar, but in Swaziland 
there are indications that it is at risk of genetic 
erosion because of forest clearing and invasion 
of alien plants, such as Chromolaena odorata 
(L.) R.King & H.Rob, and Melia azedarach L. 
Prospects The latex of Excoecaria mada-
gascariensis is very poisonous, but nothing is 
known about its chemical properties. As other 
Excoecaria species yield chemical compounds 
with interesting pharmacological activities, 
more research is warranted. Excoecaria mada-
gascariensis is also considered a useful indica-
tor of underground water and could be applied 
for soil erosion control in riparian areas. 
Major references Beentje, 1994; Léonard, 
1959; Neuwinger, 1998; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other references Burrows et al., 2003; 
Coates Palgrave, 1983; Dumetz, 1999; Gurib-
Fakim & Brendler, 2004. 
Authors O.O. Beth well 
FLUEGGEA VIROSA (Roxb. ex Willd.) Voigt 
Protologue Hort, suburb. Calcutt.: 152 
(1845). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number In = 26 
Synonyms Flueggea microcarpa Blume 
(1825), Securinega microcarpa (Blume) 
Müll.Arg. (1866), Securinega virosa (Roxb. ex 
Willd.) Baill. (1866). 
Vernacular names White-berry bush, 
snowberry tree, Chinese waterberry, simpleleaf 
bushweed, common bushweed (En). Balan des 
savanes (Fr). Mkwamba, mkwamba maji, 
mteja (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Flueg-
gea virosa occurs naturally throughout tropical 
Africa from Mauritania east to Somalia and 
south to South Africa, and also in Madagascar 
and Réunion. It is also distributed from Egypt, 
the Arabian Peninsula, through tropical Asia 
to Japan, Australia and Polynesia. 
Uses Flueggea virosa is an important me-
dicinal plant in tropical Africa, used for the 
treatment of a wide variety of ailments, alone 
or in combination with other plants. All parts 
Flueggea virosa - wild 
306 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
of the plant are used, but the root is considered 
the most active part. A root decoction or root 
powder taken in water or as a bath is used to 
treat liver, bile, kidney, urinary and venereal 
diseases, and also to treat testicular inflamma-
tion, frigidity, sterility, heavy menstruation, 
rheumatism and arthritis. Root preparations 
are also widely taken as a tonic, as an aphrodi-
siac or to treat impotence. Sometimes leaves or 
leafy twigs are used for this purpose. A root 
infusion or decoction is commonly taken to 
treat upper respiratory tract infections, rang-
ing from cough to tuberculosis, and to treat 
abdominal complaints, including stomach-ache, 
dysentery, intestinal worms and schistosomi-
asis. The root or fruit is chewed to treat snake-
bites and the bite is dabbed with a decoction of 
them. Root pulp acts as an analgesic and is 
rubbed on the head to treat headache and on 
the back to treat backache and hernia. A root 
decoction or infusion is applied externally to 
wounds, boils and ulcers and different skin 
ailments, including itching rash and candido-
sis. Pulped fruits are also rubbed on the skin to 
treat itch. Leaves and leafy twigs in decoction 
or infusion are commonly taken to treat ma-
laria, fever, jaundice, measles, oedema, vertigo, 
sickle cell anaemia, convulsions, vomiting, 
stomach-ache, intestinal worms, constipation, 
dysentery and difficult delivery. Leaf sap is 
used topically against conjunctivitis and ear-
ache, and as nose drops to treat headache, in-
cluding migraine. It is rubbed on the joints and 
limbs to treat feverish stiffness and pain. In 
Niger the aerial parts in decoction are taken as 
a tonic. In the Central African Republic a de-
coction of the leaves is used in baths to invigo-
rate the body. In Burundi and Tanzania a leaf 
decoction is taken to treat lactation disorders 
and is also given to nursing mothers whose 
baby is sickly at birth or to women with risk of 
still-born babies. In Uganda leaf powder is 
taken for abortion. A decoction of leafy twigs or 
fresh leaf sap is used as nose drops to cure epi-
lepsy and insanity. 
In Tanzania a root decoction is taken to treat 
epilepsy, convulsions and rectal and uterine 
prolapse. A root bark infusion is taken to treat 
HIV-related diseases. In Zimbabwe root pow-
der in porridge is applied to depressed fon-
tanelles, while the Ndebele people commonly 
eat it before intercourse as a contraceptive. In 
Madagascar a root decoction is taken to treat 
toothache. In Mauritania a decoction of the 
stem bark is mixed with other plant parts and 
is used to treat intestinal worms in livestock. 
In Ghana, Nigeria and Sudan a bark extract is 
used to control vermin (water fleas, rats, and 
mice) and as a fish poison, but its toxicity 
seems to be low. In the Central African Repub-
lic a decoction made from the root and stem 
bark is used as poison for ritual judgment. In 
East Africa a root infusion is taken to treat 
diseases caused by witchcraft. 
Flueggea virosa has many other uses. The 
leaves yield a black dye used to dye palm fibres 
black. In Madagascar the dye is considered of 
low quality as it gives an irregular colour. A 
red dye made from the fruit is used as ink. 
Bark is used for tanning in India. The bushy 
nature, attractive foliage and white waxy fruits 
make Flueggea virosa an interesting ornamen-
tal. The leaves and fruits are readily browsed 
by livestock, and are also given as fodder. The 
fruits are edible when mature. They are juicy 
and sweet with a slightly bitter taste. They are 
mainly eaten by children, but are also made 
into an alcoholic drink. The fruits are also fed 
to domestic fowl. The wood is commonly used 
to make beds, fish traps, wicker traps, chair 
legs, roof structures for granaries and huts, 
kitchen utensils and storage pots. In Ethiopia 
the stems are woven into shelves and in Zanzi-
bar they are split for basketry. Twigs are cut to 
make toothbrushes. Flueggea virosa is widely 
used for firewood and charcoal production, and 
in northern Nigeria, Mali and Ghana it is 
commonly grown as a hedge. In Ghana a gum 
is obtained from the stems, which has been 
used for sealing envelopes. The Maasai people 
of Kenya use the wood ash to clean milk con-
tainers. The Gamba people of Kenya apply 
pounded leaves as an insect repellent. In 
Madagascar branches are put on roofs for this 
purpose. 
Production and international trade De-
spite the popularity of Flueggea virosa in a 
wide variety of medicinal and other uses, no 
information on its trade is available. As it is 
common, it is probably mainly traded locally. 
Flueggea virosa is traded as an ornamental. 
Properties All plant parts of Flueggea vi-
rosa contain indolizidine alkaloids, mainly 
isomers and derivatives of the highly toxic se-
curinine, which is known from the arrow poi-
son plant Securidaca longipedunculata Fresen. 
The main alkaloids related to securinine are 
virosecurinine (0.5% in the leaves), viroallose-
curinine, norsecurinine, dihydronorsecurinine 
(virosine); other alkaloids include hordenine 
and N-methyltetrahydro-ß-carboline. Secur-
inine has never been detected in Flueggea vi-
FLUEGGEA 307 
rosa. Other compounds isolated from the leaves 
are the isocoumarine bergenin, gallic acid and 
ellagic acid, and the flavonoids quercetin and 
rutin. The stem bark contains the triterpenes 
friedelin and friedelinol. The twigs contain 
about 8% tannins. The root bark contains 0.4— 
0.6% alkaloids, the entire root 0.04%. The root 
bark of a plant collected in Taiwan contained 
1.6% norsecurinine and 0.06% dihydronorse-
curinine. 
Petroleum spirit, chloroform and ethanol ex-
tracts of the root bark were tested for antim-
icrobial activity against a range of organisms 
in vitro. The chloroform and the petroleum 
spirit extracts resulted in a 4-fold and 2-fold 
potentiation, respectively, of the activity of the 
antibiotic norfloxacin against methicillin-
resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Ethanol and 
chloroform extracts showed significant antim-
icrobial activities, and moderate antioxidant 
and free-radical scavenging activities. A 
methanol extract of the dried fruit pulp and the 
ethanolic root extract showed significant anti-
fungal activities against Trichytum mentagro-
phytes and Candida albicans. Methanol and 
water extracts of the leaves showed strong an-
timalarial activity, significantly inhibiting the 
growth of Plasmodium falciparum in vitro in a 
dose-dependent manner. 
Bergenin from Flueggea virosa showed an in-
hibitory effect on the growth of the bloodstream 
form of Trypanosoma brucei with an ICso value 
of 1 uM. It also showed significant anti-
arrhythmic activity in rats and has good poten-
tial for treating cardiac arrhythmias. Bergenin 
also showed a significant lipid-lowering and 
atherogenic index decrease in hyperlipidaemic 
rats. Bergenin is also extracted from other 
plant species; in Asia especially it is used for 
many pharmacological purposes, several of 
which are in line with traditional uses of 
Flueggea virosa in Africa. Furthermore, oral 
administration of bergenin showed significant 
protection against pylorus-ligated and aspirin-
induced gastric ulcers in rats and cold restraint 
stress-induced gastric ulcers in rats and guinea 
pigs. The alkaloid virosecurinine is mildly toxic 
to mice with an LDso of 73 mg/kg body weight. 
Death results from violent tonic convulsions 
and paralysis similar to those observed with 
strychnine poisoning. Alcoholic leaf extracts 
showed significant cytotoxicity in different 
tumour cell lines in vitro. Virosecurinine was 
primarily responsible for the cytotoxicity; viro-
allosecurinine was only cytotoxic to one of the 
cell lines. 
A root bark extract and a total alkaloid prepa-
ration caused a transient fall in arterial blood 
pressure in dogs. Extracts of roots and root 
bark had a slightly depressive action on the 
isolated intestine of rabbits, which rapidly 
normalized. The extracts showed weak haemo-
lytic activity. An aqueous root extract showed a 
slight activity in the oral glucose tolerance test 
in rabbits, but did not lower blood glucose be-
low fasting levels in either the fed or fasted 
state. 
About 92% of the fresh fruit is pulp; the compo-
sition of the fruit pulp per 100 g is approxi-
mately: water 84 g, soluble carbohydrate 12 g, 
protein 0.5 g and fat 0.3 g. The wood has a fine 
texture, reddish yellow, and is very strong, 
elastic and durable. 
Description Dioecious, deciduous, much-
branched shrub or small tree up to 4(-6) m tall; 
bark grey-brown, smooth, fissured or rough; 
branches erect or arching, lower branches often 
with thorny end. Leaves distichously alternate, 
simple and entire; stipules lanceolate, 1.5-2 
Flueggea virosa - 1, part of male flowering 
branch; 2, male flower; 3, part of fruiting 
branch; 4, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
308 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mm long, acute, fringed, deciduous; petiole 3-6 
mm long, grooved above, narrowly winged; 
blade almost orbicular to obovate or elliptical, 
( l - ) 2 -4 ( -6 ) cm x (0 .5 - ) l -2 ( -3 ) cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex obtuse, rounded or 
notched, thinly papery, pinnately veined with 
5-9 pai rs of la te ra l veins. Inflorescence an axil-
lary fascicle, many-flowered in male p lants , 
few-flowered in female p lants . Flowers unisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 
up to 9 mm long; sepals slightly unequal , 
obovate to lanceolate, fringed, pale greenish 
yellow; petals absent; male flowers with free 
s tamens , exserted, fi laments 2 -3 mm long, disk 
glands fleshy, yellow, rud imen ta ry ovary with 
3 styles, up to 2 m m long, fused a t base; female 
flowers with annu la r disk, shallowly 5-lobed, 
ovary superior, ovoid, 3-celled, styles 3, fused, 
s t igmas 2-fid, spread horizontally. Fru i t a 
somewhat fleshy slightly 3-lobed, globose cap-
sule, 3-5 mm in diameter , tardi ly dehiscent, 
smooth, glabrous, white , up to 6-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, 2 - 3 m m long, shiny, yellowish brown. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Flueggea 
comprises 15 species and occurs in the tropics 
and subtropics of both hemispheres , extending 
into w a r m tempera te zones. Only Flueggea 
virosa occurs in tropical Africa. Flueggea was 
included in Securinega, bu t impor tan t differ-
ences exist be tween the two genera in seed 
morphology, pollen sculpture and wood anat -
omy. Securinega now comprises 5 species and 
is restr icted to Madagascar and the Mascarene 
is lands. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Flueggea virosa 
usual ly flowers a t the end of the dry season 
and dur ing the ra iny season. In Kenya fruits 
a re available in J u n e and July, while in Tan-
zania they are m a t u r e between April and J u n e . 
Seeds are dispersed by birds. 
E c o l o g y Flueggea virosa is common in a 
wide var ie ty of habi ta t s , in forest edges, bush-
land, grassland, woodland and thickets . In 
drier a reas it occurs mainly along wate r 
courses, and in swampy habi ta t s , sometimes on 
te rmi te mounds and rocky slopes; it is also 
common in dis turbed localities and fallow land, 
from sea-level up to 2300 m al t i tude. 
M a n a g e m e n t Flueggea virosa is collected 
from the wild and is only cult ivated as an or-
namen ta l . It is commonly spared when clearing 
land or a t weeding operat ions. It is a fast grow-
ing ha rdy shrub suitable for p lan t ing u n d e r 
various conditions. 
H a r v e s t i n g All p lan t pa r t s harves ted are 
e i ther used fresh or dried and stored for future 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Flueggea virosa is 
widely dis t r ibuted in diverse ecological habi-
t a t s and therefore not th rea tened by genetic 
erosion. In te rna t iona l Livestock Research In-
st i tute , Kenya holds a single accession. It is 
listed as an invasive species in Florida, Uni ted 
Sta tes . 
P r o s p e c t s Flueggea virosa is a very impor-
t a n t medicinal p lant in local medicine. Much 
research has been done on the chemistry and 
pharmacological activities of the different com-
pounds and prepara t ions . Different p lan t pa r t s 
show significant activity agains t a var ie ty of 
bacter ia and fungi including h u m a n pathogens . 
More research is needed to fully evaluate its 
other uses, e.g. for female infertility, as snake 
venom antidote, analgesic, for increased sexual 
desire, agains t diarrhoea, abdominal pains and 
venereal diseases. The bushy na ture , a t t ract ive 
foliage and white waxy fruits of Flueggea vi-
rosa make it an in teres t ing o rnamenta l . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Berhaut , 1975a; Burkill, 
1994; Clarkson et al., 2004; Dickson et al., 
2006; Hutchings et al., 1996; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Ruffo, 
Birnie & Tengnäs , 2002; Webster, 1984. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1989 
Adjanohoun et al., 1993; Arbonnier, 2002; Bou 
quet & Debray, 1974; Coates Palgrave, 1983 
Fre iburghaus et al., 1996b; Goei et al., 1997: 
Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Hedberg et al. 
1983a; Kokwaro, 1993; Kraft et al., 2003 
M a u n d u & Tengnäs , 2005; Moshi et al., 2000 
Niang, 1987; Nyasse et al., 2004; Polygenis-
Bigendako, 1990; Pu et a l , 2002; Samuelsson 
et a l , 1992; Tabuti , Lye & Dhillion, 2003; Ta-
t ema t su et al., 1991. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Boulos, 2000a. 
A u t h o r s J .R.S. Tabut i 
F U M A R I A MURALIS Sond. ex W.D.J .Koch 
P r o t o l o g u e Syn. fl. germ, helv., éd. 2, 3: 
1017 (1845). 
F a m i l y Fumar iaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 48 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Common ramping-
fumitory, wall fumitory (En). Fumete r re , fume-
ter re des mur s (Fr). Fumâr i a das paredes , sal-
ta-sebes (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Fu-
maria muralis is indigenous in wes tern Europe 
and nor thern Africa, and has been introduced 
in some localities of tropical Africa: Réunion, 
GLORIOSA 309 
Mauritius and southern Africa. In Réunion and 
Mauritius it is naturalized. It has also been 
introduced in the Americas and Australia. 
Uses In Réunion and Mauritius a decoction 
of the plant added to a bath is used to treat 
eczema, acne, ringworm, scurvy, itch and 
wounds. It is also used as an eye bath to treat 
conjunctivitis. It is used internally as a tonic 
and stimulant, being credited with blood puri-
fying, bile secretion regulating, liver stimulat-
ing, laxative, purgative, antidiabetic and hypo-
cholesterolaemic properties. A syrup made 
from the whole plants of Fumaria muralis is 
administered to children suffering from gastro-
enteritis. Fumaria spp. have been used for 
similar purposes in Europe, with Fumaria offi-
cinalis L. as the most important species. Phy-
topharmaceuticals based on Fumaria are tradi-
tionally used to enhance renal and digestive 
elimination functions and as a choleretic. 
Properties Several isoquinoline alkaloids 
have been isolated from Fumaria muralis. One 
of them, fumarophycine, has antioxidant activ-
ity. The isoquinoline alkaloid sanguinarine has 
been isolated from the related Fumaria offici-
nalis. This compound is toxic, but also pos-
sesses strong antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory 
and antioxidant properties. It has been sug-
gested that it could serve as a drug for the 
management of hyperproliferative skin disor-
ders, including skin cancer. Another alkaloid in 
Fumaria officinalis is protopine, which is a 
spasmolytic, anticholinergic, anti-arrhythmic 
and antibacterial. 
Botany Straggling annual herb with flex-
uous stems up to 50(-80) cm long, glabrous and 
slightly glaucous. Leaves alternate, bipinnately 
compound, petiolate; stipules absent; leaflets 
with ovate to oblong-lanceolate lobes. Inflores-
cence a stalked, bracteate raceme, seemingly 
opposite the leaves, up to 15(-20)-flowered. 
Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic; pedicel short; 
sepals 2, lateral, 2.5-5 mm x 1.5-3 mm, 
toothed; corolla 9-12 mm long, consisting of a 
spurred upper petal, 2 inner ones and a lower 
one, pink, blackish red at tips; stamens 6, in 2 
bundles of 3; ovary superior, 1-celled. Fruit a 
small globose nut c. 2 mm in diameter, smooth, 
1-seeded. 
Fumaria comprises about 60 species, most of 
them native to Europe. Only a single species is 
indigenous in tropical Africa: Fumaria abys-
sinica Hammar, which occurs from eastern DR 
Congo east to Eritrea, Djibouti and Somalia, 
and south to Tanzania. There are no uses 
known for this species. Apart from Fumaria 
muralis, Fumaria officinalis L. has been intro-
duced locally in Africa, e.g. in South Africa. 
The two species are difficult to distinguish, 
Fumaria officinalis having narrower leaflet 
lobes, slightly smaller flowers and slightly 
rough fruits; they have been much confused. 
The small size of the flowers as reported for the 
plants in the Indian Ocean islands raises 
doubts about the identification as Fumaria 
muralis. 
Ecology Fumaria muralis occurs in fields, 
gardens and waste places. 
Management Fumaria muralis may behave 
as a weed, e.g. in sugar cane and vegetables in 
Réunion and Mauritius, and in wheat and bar-
ley in South Africa. The plants are collected 
from the wild for medicinal purposes when the 
need arises. 
Genetic resources and breeding Fumaria 
muralis spreads as a weed in several regions of 
the world; it is certainly not threatened by ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Although internal applications of 
Fumaria spp. have a long tradition, they are 
not supported by valid clinical trials. Caution 
is needed because of the toxicity. External us-
age against skin complaints seems more prom-
ising, but more pharmacological studies are 
needed to confirm activity and safety. Fumaria 
spp. are not obvious candidates for promotion 
as medicinal plants in tropical Africa because 
most of them are not indigenous and occur only 
very locally. 
Major references Exell, 1960; Gurib-Fakim, 
Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1997; Lavergne & Vera, 
1989; Sousek et al., 1999. 
Other references Adhami et al., 2003; 
Bruneton, 1995; Marais, 1980b; van Wyk, van 
Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 2002. 
Authors R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
GLORIOSA SUPERBA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 305 (1753) 
Family Colchicaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14, 22, 33, 44, 
66, 77, 84, 88, 90 
Synonyms Gloriosa simplex L. (1767), Glo-
riosa virescens Lindl. (1825), Gloriosa abyssini-
ca A.Rich. (1850), Gloriosa carsonii Baker. 
(1895), Gloriosa minor Rendle (1896), Gloriosa 
baudii (N.Terracc.) Chiov. (1916). 
Vernacular names Glory lily, flame lily, 
climbing lily, creeping lily (En). Lis de Mala-
bar, lis grimpant, lis glorieux (Fr). Garras de 
310 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tigre, aranha de emposse (Po). Mkalamu, ki-
manja nouchawi (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Glori-
osa superba occurs naturally in Africa, in In-
dia, and southeastern Asia, and is nowadays 
distributed widely throughout the tropics, and 
worldwide as a pot plant. In Africa, its distri-
bution is from Senegal east to Ethiopia and 
Somalia, and south to South Africa. 
Uses In tropical Africa the different parts of 
Gloriosa superba have a wide variety of uses, 
especially in traditional medicine. In Côte 
d'Ivoire a leaf decoction applied as a liniment 
eases cough and general pain, and leaf juice is 
instilled into the nose in case of fainting. In 
Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso leaves are ad-
ministered in enema as a decongestant. In 
Congo crushed leaves are applied to the chest 
to treat asthma. In Burundi a leaf decoction is 
recommended for treating dropsy of the scro-
tum, while the leaf pulp serves against rheu-
matism. The Ulanga people of Tanzania burn 
the herb and apply ash on wounds to promote 
healing. They also drink the plant juice as an 
antimalarial. 
At low doses, the tuber has numerous medici-
nal applications. It is used traditionally for the 
treatment of bruises, colic, chronic ulcers, 
haemorrhoids and cancer, and is also employed 
as a tonic and purgative. It is put into poultices 
to relieve neuralgia, and used in topical appli-
cations to treat arthritic conditions, swellings 
of the joints, sprains and dislocations. The tu-
ber is claimed to have antidotal properties to 
snakebites. In Sudan tuber sap is an ingredient 
of a drink that induces sleep. The Marakwet 
people of Kenya take a tuber decoction against 
abdominal disorders and to induce abortion. 
Gloriosa superba - wild 
Macerated tuber is also taken against small-
pox, leprosy, eczema, itch, and ringworm. In 
DR Congo the rasped and washed tuber is used 
externally to treat venereal diseases and stom-
ach-ache. 
The anthelmintic properties of the tuber, fruits 
and leaves are widely known and they are used 
to treat infections of guinea-worms, schisto-
somes (causing bilharzia), roundworm, tape-
worm, liver fluke and filaria. A rectal injection 
of the juice from mashed leaves is applied to 
cure female sterility among Pygmy groups. A 
paste made from the tuber is applied externally 
to facilitate parturition. The Ulanga people of 
Tanzania use tuber juice for ear drops to treat 
earache, while the Shona people of Zimbabwe 
drop tuber juice on painful teeth. In Zambia 
the tuber is part of a preparation for impo-
tence, and is used as an abortifacient. Soup 
made from leaf or tuber sap is given to women 
suffering from sterility, delayed puberty, de-
layed childbirth and menstrual problems. Leaf 
juice, unripe fruits mixed with butter, and tu-
ber macerate are frequently used to kill head 
lice. 
In northern Nigeria the tuber is added to arrow 
poison based on Strophanthus sp. In coastal 
Kenya and Tanzania, powdered tuber is com-
monly used as a suicidal agent and to commit 
homicide, because of its high toxicity. The spe-
cies is also widely believed to have magical 
properties. 
Several cultivars of Gloriosa superba are culti-
vated in the tropics and under greenhouse con-
ditions in temperate regions, the commonest 
being 'Rothschildiana'. It is grown both as a cut 
flower and as a pot plant. 
Production and international trade Glori-
osa superba is exported by India and Sri Lanka 
to pharmaceutical industries, and more re-
cently also by a few African companies based in 
Nigeria, Cameroon and Zimbabwe. Quantities 
involved are not known. 
Properties The medicinal importance of 
Gloriosa superba is due to the presence of alka-
loids in all parts of the plant, mainly colchicine 
(superbine), an amino alkaloid derived from 
the amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine. 
The presence of colchicine-type alkaloids with a 
tropolone ring is characteristic for most genera 
in Colchicaceae. The seeds are the best source 
of colchicine, as their content is 2-5 times 
higher than in the tubers. A report from 
Rwanda claims that the highest colchicine con-
tent is found in young leaves. 
Several colchicine-related alkaloids have been 
GLORIOSA 311 
isolated from tubers and seeds. They are 
mostly demethyl substitutes and include corni-
gerine, which is a potent antimitotic, and col-
chicoside used as a muscle relaxant. A plant 
can contain up to 0.9% colchicine and 0.8% 
colchicoside. 
In medicine, colchicine is used in the treatment 
of gout. In spite of its serious side-effects it is 
still commonly used for acute gout. It reduces 
the inflammatory reaction to urate crystals 
deposited in the joints. Its efficacy might be 
due to decreased leukocyte mobility. The sub-
stance is not an analgesic, and has no effect on 
blood concentration, nor on renal excretion of 
uric acid. Diarrhoea, nausea, vomiting and 
abdominal pains are the first signs of poisoning 
and occur at doses equal to or lower than those 
needed to treat gout. The diarrhoea may be-
come severe and haemorrhagic. A burning sen-
sation in the throat, stomach and skin may 
also be an early sign of intoxication. Nibbling 
on the tubers causes numbness of the lips and 
tongue and loss of body hair. Severe reactions 
include extensive vascular damage and acute 
renal toxicity with oliguria and haematuria. 
The patients may develop convulsions, delir-
ium, muscle weakness, neuropathy and ascend-
ing paralysis of the central nervous system. In 
patients who have taken an overdose of Glori-
osa superba tubers, death occurs as a result of 
respiratory depression and cardiovascular col-
lapse within a few days. 
Colchicine is a powerful antimitotic agent that 
blocks or suppresses cell division by inhibiting 
mitosis, the division of a cell's nucleus. It is 
used in plant breeding to induce polyploidy, as 
it allows chromosome division but inhibits for-
mation of a mitotic spindle figure, which guides 
the separation of the two sets of haploid chro-
mosomes. As a result no sister cells are formed. 
Once the treatment has stopped, however, the 
normal spindle figure forms again. Colchicine 
also inhibits the division of animal cells, but it 
is too toxic to be used to arrest tumour growth. 
A biosynthetic precursor of colchicine, demecol-
cine, has a wider margin of safety and is used 
to treat myelogenic leukaemia and malignant 
lymphoma. Extracts of the shoots and of the 
tubers of Gloriosa superba show strong 
nematicidal activity, which can be largely at-
tributed to colchicine. The chemical constitu-
ents of the tuber are known to be very poison-
ous to fish. Severe damage is done by colchi-
cine-containing plants to livestock in different 
parts of Africa. 
In vitro production of colchicine is feasible, 
although the levels are in general 10-25 times 
lower than those found in plants grown in vivo. 
Adulterations and substitutes The corms 
of Colchicum autumnale L. and Iphigenia spp. 
(also Colchicaceae) are traditional sources of 
colchicine. An increase in demand for colchi-
cine stimulated the search for an alternative 
source, leading to Gloriosa superba. Chemical 
synthesis of colchicine is possible but compli-
cated. Synthesis is expected to remain an im-
portant target of the chemical industry. In-
vitro production of colchicine is also possible 
but gives low yields. 
Description Climbing, sometimes erect 
herb up to 4 m long; stem annual, glabrous and 
sparsely branched; tuber perennial, horizontal, 
abruptly bent in a V or L shape, roots fibrous. 
Leaves in whorls of 3-4, opposite or alternate, 
simple, sessile; blade ovate to lanceolate, 6-
15(-20) cm x 1.5-4 cm, base obtuse, apex of 
upper leaves with or without 1-2 cm long ten-
dril, parallel-veined. Flowers axillary, solitary, 
bisexual, regular, 6-merous, 4.5-7 cm in di-
ameter, showy, pendulous; pedicel 4-20 cm 
long; perianth segments free, lanceolate or 
oblanceolate, 5—7(—9) cm x 1(—2) cm, often with 
undulate margins, strongly reflexed when ma-
Gloriosa superba - 1, flowering stem; 2, tubers; 
3, fruit. 
Source: PROSEA 
312 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ture , persis tent , usual ly yellow and red, less 
often yellow, red or white; s t amens with fila-
ments 2 -5 cm long, spreading, an the r s 7-10 
mm long, opening hy longitudinal slits; ovary 
superior, 3-celled, carpels coherent only by 
the i r inner margins , style filiform, 2-4(-5.5) 
cm long, bent a t a r ight angle basally. Fru i t a 
loculicidal, oblong capsule 4 -6 cm x 1-2 cm, 
containing up to 20(—40) seeds. Seeds ovoid, 4— 
5 mm in diameter , sur rounded by a fleshy, red 
sarcotesta. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n The taxon-
omy of Gloriosa is confused, and up to 27 spe-
cies have been recognized. Gloriosa superba is 
considered here a single highly variable spe-
cies. In Zimbabwe morphologically uniform 
populat ions occur which have variable poly-
ploidy levels, bu t the cytological differentiation 
does not reflect any precise geographical t rend. 
The widely cult ivated cult ivar 'Rothschildiana' 
is hexaploid. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Gloriosa su-
perba is a typical geophyte whose aerial s tems 
die down in the dry season and the tuber is 
dormant dur ing this period, only sprout ing 
with the ra ins . Two or more tubers develop 
dur ing each growing season, while the previous 
season's tuber s t a r t s to shrivel. The tuber con-
ta ins mainly starch, which increases gradual ly 
unt i l t he tuber is full grown. Colchicine content 
in tubers increases s imultaneously. P lan t s 
propagated from seeds t ake 3-4 years to bloom. 
P lan t s produced from tubers develop (1—)3—6 
stems, which s ta r t flowering after 5-8 weeks 
and continue flowering for about another 7 
weeks, after which the s tems die. Development 
from visible flower bud to bloom takes about 2 
weeks and anthes is occurs 1 day la ter with the 
s t igma being receptive for 4 days; an the r de-
hiscence is one day after an thes is . The same 
branch flowers a t 3-day intervals . Terminal 
flowers do not usual ly set fruit, bu t if they do, 
only a few seeds are produced. Pollination is 
probably by butterfl ies and sunbirds . Fru i t s 
a re m a t u r e 6—10 weeks after pollination. The 
red sarcotesta suggests seed dispersal by ani-
mals . The dimensions and branching pa t t e rn of 
the p lants are strongly correlated with tuber 
weight. 
E c o l o g y Gloriosa superba prefers a climate 
with a pronounced ra iny season, avoiding per-
humid tropical a reas . It is most common in 
forest-savanna boundaries . It is locally com-
mon in thickets, hedges, open forest, grass land 
and bushland, where it can be seen scrambling 
through shrubs, and is also found in aban-
doned cult ivated a reas . It occurs from sea-level 
up to 2500 m al t i tude. Gloriosa superba grows 
best in well-drained, acid to neu t ra l soil rich in 
organic mat te r . 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Gloriosa su-
perba is propagated mainly dur ing the ra iny 
season, by bulblets, division of the tubers or 
from seed. V- or L-shaped tubers should be 
divided every third year. The tuber is delicate, 
and should be teased apa r t gently jus t before 
new growth begins, when the buds are easiest 
to spot. Each tuber pa r t mus t contain several 
axillary buds t h a t ensure the formation of ad-
venti t ious s tems and roots. Vegetative propa-
gation by tubers is common practice but slow 
as the max imum number of daugh te r tubers 
produced per p lant per year is two. Separa t ing 
2-lobed tubers produces a higher percentage of 
flowering p lants t h a n leaving the tubers undi-
vided (97% versus 63%). Sprout ing of the tu-
bers is i r regular and reaches about 60% in 30 
days. Tuber dormancy can be overcome by 
soaking in continuously aera ted water . Small 
tubers have been found to have a higher suc-
cess ra te t h a n bigger ones. Tubers of 50-60 g 
are p lanted horizontally and 30-45 cm apa r t in 
well-tilled soil a t a depth of 6—8 cm in furrows 
45-60 cm apar t . A closer spacing gives a h igher 
percentage of cross-pollination resul t ing in 
improved fruit set. The best p lan t ing medium 
is a 1:1:2 mixture of soil, sand and compost. 
Growing Gloriosa superba from seed requires 
more t ime. The seeds have to be soaked over-
night in w a r m water , and then p lanted in a 
well-drained medium. Germinat ion is erra t ic 
and may t ake from 3 weeks to 3 months . Seed-
lings grow rapidly and mostly produce tubers 
by their second year; flowering s t a r t s in the 
fourth year. Chemical scarification (e.g. with 
1% hypochlorite) or removal of the sarcotesta 
reduces seed dormancy from 6—9 months to 
about 4 months , and accelerates germinat ion to 
11-15 days. Germinat ion ra tes as high as 97% 
have been reached for seeds incubated a t 2 0 -
25°C for a period of 31 days. Higher tempera-
tu res have adverse effects. 
As seed germinat ion is poor and vegetat ive 
propagat ion is slow, methods of rapid micro-
propagat ion have been developed, us ing ex-
p lan ts preferably from tubers and an auxin-
enriched growth medium. Expiants from mer-
is tematic pa r t s of the tuber yield the highest 
n u m b e r of p lant le ts . A growth medium con-
ta in ing th iamine hydrochloride and NaCl 
yielded large numbers of m a t u r e microtubers 
in 3—4 months . Periodic da rkness accelerates 
GLORIOSA 313 
this process. 
Management Gloriosa superba prefers light 
to medium shade. In general, the plants are 
grown organically. Before sowing, 15-20 t of 
farmyard manure is applied. It is also possible 
to apply a dose of 40 kg N, 50 kg P2O, and 75 
kg KaO per ha at planting with a top dressing 
of 80 kg N per ha, 8 weeks after planting. The 
top dressing should coincide with staking of the 
growing stems. Irrigation is needed for dry 
spells during the initial stages of growth. Irri-
gation applied after flowering may cause the 
tubers to rot. Poor fruit set is a problem in 
plantings in southern India. This may be at-
tributed to inadequate pollination, which can 
be overcome by artificial pollination. Although 
considerable information is available on the 
cultivation of Gloriosa superba under green-
house conditions, the techniques used are not 
applicable to field conditions in tropical re-
gions. 
Different pollination methods were studied 
including natural pollination, controlled selfing 
and cross-pollination. Although flower colour 
and shape seem to favour cross-pollination, 
self-pollination provides better results. Con-
trolled selfing between flowers on the same 
plant (idiogamy) gives significantly higher seed 
yield (9.2 g/plant), compared to naturally polli-
nated ones (4.3 g/plant). 
Diseases and pests Leaf blight (Curvularia 
lunata) and tuber rot (Sclerotium spp.) are 
important fungal diseases of Gloriosa superba 
under per-humid conditions. Caterpillars of the 
moths Polytela gloriosa and Chrysodeixis chal-
cites attack foliage and flower buds. Under 
greenhouse conditions, lice and thrips can be a 
problem. 
Harvesting Mature fruits of Gloriosa su-
perba are hand picked, and the tubers are dug 
out manually. 
Yield In South Africa the seed production of 
'wild-type' plants is positively correlated with 
height of the plant, and is on average 258 seeds 
per plant for plants 60-65 cm tall compared 
with about 30 seeds per plant for plants 30-40 
cm tall. In Tamil Nadu, India, small-scale 
plantings, raised from tubers, yield on average 
250-300 kg seed/ha from the second year on-
wards. 
Handling after harvest Seeds and tubers 
are traded in various forms: fresh, dry, pow-
dered, or in oil. In South-East Asia, after har-
vesting, mature fruits of Gloriosa superba are 
left in the shade to dry for 7-10 days. The 
fruits are then split open and the seeds re-
moved, dried for a week in the shade and sub-
sequently sun dried for another week. 
Genetic resources Gloriosa superba has a 
wide natural distribution, and many selections 
are cultivated. Local depletion of the resource 
does occur, in India particularly, where the 
species has become endangered due to overcol-
lection of the tubers. Although in its natural 
habitat, seed set and germination is poor. Glo-
riosa superba is not threatened and the diver-
sity still offers opportunities for further selec-
tion either for chemical constituents or as an 
ornamental. Investment analysis shows that 
Gloriosa superba cultivation is profitable under 
both irrigated and rainfed conditions. There 
are no known germplasm collections of Glori-
osa superba. 
Breeding There are several cultivars of Glo-
riosa superba for ornamental purposes, with 
'Rothschildiana' being the most frequently en-
countered; 'Lutea' is a yellow flowered form, 
while 'Citrina' is yellow with dark red mark-
ings. There is also a dwarf cultivar called 
'Nana'. 
Prospects Gloriosa superba is widely used 
as a medicinal plant in Africa, despite the fact 
that the whole plant is very poisonous. It is 
therefore recommended that protocols for safe 
use of the different plant parts be developed. 
Gloriosa superba is commonly grown as a gar-
den ornamental in the tropics and also shows 
interesting potential as a source of colchicine. 
Thus, in Africa there might be good opportuni-
ties for planting the crop commercially for or-
namental purposes, or for the production of 
colchicine. 
Major references Bunyapraphatsara & van 
Valkenburg, 1999; Burkill, 1995; Duke, 1992; 
Finnie & Van Staden, 1994; Iwu, 1993; Le 
Roux & Robbertse, 1994; Le Roux & Robbertse, 
1997; Neuwinger, 1996; Raina & Gupta, 1999; 
Sivakumar & Krishnamurthy, 2000. 
Other references Chumsri et al., 2000; 
Cortnummé, Wehrenfennig & Horn, 1997; 
Engprasert, 1995; Farooqi et al., 1993; Fer-
nando & Widyaratna, 1997; Field, 1972; 
Khumwanich, 1999; Maroyi, 1999; Ntahom-
vukiye et a l , 1984; Pandey & Haseeb, 1988; 
Saravanan & Buvaneswaran, 2003; Sivakumar 
& Krishnamurthy, 2002; Tarar & Vishwa-
karma, 1995; van Wyk, van Heerden & van 
Oudtshoorn, 2002; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Sources of illustration Bunyapraphatsara 
& van Valkenburg, 1999. 
Authors E. Dounias 
314 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
GRIFFONIA SIMPLICIFOLIA (Vahl ex DC.) 
Baill. 
Protologue Adansonia 6(2): 197 (1866). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Synonyms Bandeiraea simplicifolia (Vahl 
ex DC.) Benth. (1865). 
Origin and geographic distribution Griffo-
nia simplicifolia is distributed from Liberia to 
Gabon. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria the pulped 
bark is applied to syphilitic sores. A leaf decoc-
tion is used as an emetic, cough medicine and 
aphrodisiac. A decoction of stems and leaves is 
taken as a purgative to treat constipation and 
is used externally as an antiseptic wash to 
treat suppurating wounds. Leaf sap is used as 
eye drops to cure inflamed eyes and is drunk or 
applied as an enema to cure kidney problems. 
Stems and stem bark are made into a paste 
that is applied to decaying teeth, and a paste 
made from the leaves is applied to burns. 
Ground twig bark, mixed with lemon juice and 
Capsicum pepper, is applied to scarifications to 
treat intercostal pain. Chewing the stems is 
claimed to produce an aphrodisiac effect. The 
leaves are put in chicken pens to kill lice. In 
Nigeria an extract from the powdered roots has 
been used to treat sickle cell anaemia. 
The wood is hard and tough and in Ghana 
stems are used to make walking sticks. The 
leaves are used in the production of palm wine, 
and give the wine a bitter taste. Sap that ex-
Griffonia simplicifolia - wild 
udes from cut stems can be drunk to quench 
thirst. In Ghana the roots are chewed and 
dried to produce a white powder that is used by 
women to powder their face. A black dye is 
obtained from the leaves. The pods are made 
into toy whistles and spoons. The leaves are 
highly valued as animal feed and are said to 
stimulate reproduction. Free-ranging cattle 
browse heavily on the shrubs. The stems are 
used to make baskets and chicken cages, and 
also beaten into fibres serving as chewing 
sponges, a popular means of tooth cleaning in 
Ghana. The stems and roots are used as chew-
sticks. 
Production and international trade The 
seed of Griffonia simplicifolia is an industrial 
source of 5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP), a sero-
tonin precursor. Trade statistics are not avail-
able. In the early 1990s the annual export from 
Ghana to Germany amounted to 80 t. In view 
of the increased demand for 5-HTP in the 
Western world, the trade must have expanded 
since then. In 1999 the wholesale price of seed 
was US$ 8-9 per kg. 
Properties The leaves of Griffonia simplici-
folia contain a volatile oil and coumarins. The 
ripe seeds contain 6-14% 5-HTP. In the leaves 
5-HTP is accompanied by 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(= serotonin), each at a concentration of 0.1— 
0.2%. In humans, 5-HTP increases the synthe-
sis of serotonin in the central nervous system 
and has been shown to be effective in treating 
a wide variety of conditions, including depres-
sion, fibromyalgia, obesity, chronic headaches 
and insomnia. 5-HTP is poisonous to insects, 
i.e. bruchids (Callosobruchus maculatus). The 
cyanoglucoside lithospermoside (= griffonin) 
has been isolated from the roots; it is the active 
ingredient against sickle-cell anaemia. 
In the seeds a number of lectins are found. One 
of them is of the acetylglucosamine-group 
which is commonly found in Poaceae and So-
lanaceae but is rare in Leguminosae. Some 
lectins have insecticidal properties. Isolectin 
B4 isolated from Griffonia simplicifolia is used 
as a marker of small primary sensory neurons 
in neurological research. 
As a fodder Griffonia simplicifolia is appreci-
ated for its vigour, high palatability, high crude 
protein content (about 16%), high P content 
(about 0.12%) and high Ca content (about 
2.2%). 
Adulterations and substitutes Lithos-
permoside (= griffonin) has been isolated from 
several plants, e.g. from the African Lophira 
alata Banks ex C.F.Gaertn. and Tylosema fas-
G R I F F O N I A 315 
soglense (Schweinf.) Torre & Hillc. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Shrub or large l iana with gla-
brous, brown-black branches . Leaves a l te rna te , 
simple, glabrous; s t ipules t r iangular , 1 mm 
long, soon falling; petiole up to 1.5 cm long; 
blade ovate, 6-12 cm x 3—6 cm, base rounded to 
cordate, apex rounded to short -acuminate , 3 ( -
5)-veined from the base, re t iculate veins 
prominent on both sides. Inflorescence an axil-
lary, pyramidal raceme 5-20 cm long; bracts 
and bracteoles t r iangular , very small, persis-
tent . Flowers bisexual, almost regular , 5-
merous; pedicel 3—4 mm long; receptacle urn-
shaped, 1-1.5 cm long, pale green; calyx tube 
12—15 m m long, orange, lobes t r iangular , up to 
2 m m long; petals almost equal, elliptical, 10— 
12 m m long, fleshy, greenish, sparsely short-
ha i ry on the margin; s t amens 10, fi laments 
filiform, up to 2 cm long; ovary superior, c. 4 
mm long, stiped, style 1-2 mm long, persis tent , 
s t igma small . Fru i t an oblique-cylindrical pod 
c. 8 cm x 4 cm, stipe 1-1.5 cm long, inflated, 
leathery, 1—4-seeded. Seeds orbicular, c. 18 m m 
x 5 m m x 6 mm, glabrous. Seedling with 
epigeal germinat ion. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Griffonia oc-
Griffonia simplicifolia - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
curs in tropical Africa. It belongs to the tr ibe 
Cercideae and comprises 4 species. Griffonia 
physocarpa Baill., Griffonia tessmannii (De 
Wild.) Compère and Griffonia speciosa (Benth.) 
Taub, occur from Nigeria east to DR Congo and 
south to Angola. They a re less common t h a n 
Griffonia simplicifolia. The ma in use of Griffo-
nia physocarpa is as a dye plant . In DR Congo 
Griffonia tessmannii, Griffonia physocarpa and 
Griffonia speciosa have similar medicinal uses . 
A decoction of the aerial pa r t s is d runk to t r ea t 
gonorrhoea and stomach problems. Feverish 
children a re ba thed in the same decoction to 
br ing down the t empera tu re . Young leaves are 
chopped and ea ten as an aphrodisiac and 
pulped they serve to massage body pa r t s with 
oedema. The seeds of Griffonia physocarpa and 
Griffonia speciosa contain high concentrat ions 
of 5-HTP. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t In West Africa 
Griffonia simplicifolia flowers from Ju ly till 
November. Pods r ipen from August onwards . 
E c o l o g y Griffonia simplicifolia occurs in 
grass savanna , in coastal p la ins on te rmi te 
mounds, in scrub thickets , secondary and dis-
turbed forest, and along the margins of pri-
mary forest. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Propagat ion by 
seed gave poor resul t s and different seed 
t r ea tmen t s did not improve germinat ion, al-
though fungicide t r ea tmen t of the seed ap-
peared beneficial for es tabl ishment . Use of 
s tem cut t ings h a s not been successful. In pro-
ductivity t r ia ls Wildlings were successfully 
used as p lan t ing mater ia l ; th is is impractical a t 
a larger scale. 
M a n a g e m e n t There are no indications t h a t 
Griffonia simplicifolia is current ly being culti-
vated. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Griffonia simplicifolia 
is a host for several lepidopteran defoliators of 
t he impor tan t t imber t ree Mansonia altissima 
(A.Chev.) A.Chev. 
H a r v e s t i n g For local medicinal use Griffo-
nia simplicifolia is harves ted in small quant i -
ties. Although harves t ing seeds from the wild 
is usual ly fairly susta inable , there are worry-
ing reports of l ianas being cut down on a large 
scale to be able to collect the seeds. Harves t ing 
for fodder is best done a t in tervals of 12 weeks, 
as total herbage yields a re then considerably 
higher t h a n when harves ted a t 6 week inter-
vals. 
Yield In G h a n a herbage yield of Griffonia 
simplicifolia was comparable to t h a t of Leu-
caena leucocephala (Lam.) de Wit, bu t both 
316 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
were outyielded by Gliricidia sepium (Jacq.) 
Kunth ex Walp. There are no data available on 
seed yield. 
Handling after harvest The seeds of Grif-
fonia simplicifolia are extracted in factories in 
the United States, Germany and probably 
elsewhere. The extract is either a grey-white 
powder or pale brown crystals containing 95-
98% 5-HTP and is sold wholesale at about US$ 
800 per kg (prices in 2000). It is finally sold 
mixed with vitamins and packed in capsules or 
mixed with green tea or yerba mate. 
Genetic resources Even though Griffonia 
simplicifolia is reportedly common, the high 
commercial value of the seeds forms a serious 
threat. Destructive harvesting combined with 
high grazing pressure could contribute to re-
duction of populations. 
Breeding The insecticidal lectins of Griffo-
nia are of interest for plant breeders who want 
to build in insect resistance in other crops. 
Prospects Griffonia simplicifolia will re-
main in high demand as a natural alternative 
for the antidepressant Prozac. Measures for 
sustainable harvesting need to be enforced or 
developed. Research to domesticate this species 
is urgently needed, solving the problems with 
germination being a first step. 
Major references Aubréville, 1968; Bell, 
Fellows & Qureshi, 1976; Birdsall, 1998; Bou-
quet, 1969; Burkill, 1995; Cunningham & 
Schippmann, 2000; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 
2006; Mangenot, 1957. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Ayensu, 1978; Barnes, 1998; Das et a l , 
2004; Hegnauer & Hegnauer, 1994; Irvine, 
1961; Iwu, 1993; Kerharo & Bouquet, 1950; de 
Koning, 1983; Tra Bi, Kouamé & Traoré, 2005; 
Waiton, 1986; Wilczek et al., 1952; Wobil, 2005; 
Zhu-Salzman et al., 2003. 
Sources of illustration Mangenot, 1957. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
G R O S S E R A M A C R A N T H A P a x 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenr. IV, 147(7): 426 
(1914). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Grosse-
ra macrantha occurs in Cameroon, the Central 
African Republic, Congo and DR Congo. 
Uses In Congo powdered bark is applied to 
sores, after these have been washed with a 
decoction of the bark. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 
6(-20) m tall; bole up to 35 cm in diameter; 
twigs short-hairy, later glabrescent. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules small, soon falling; 
petiole 1.5-10 cm long; blade elliptical, 6-33 
cm x 2.5—13 cm, base cuneate with 2 sessile 
glands, apex acute to rounded, margins finely 
toothed, short-hairy, later almost glabrous, 
glandular-punctate beneath. Inflorescence a 
terminal or sometimes axillary panicle at the 
end of a branch, (5-) 10—25 cm long, densely 
short-hairy. Flowers unisexual, white; male 
flowers with pedicel up to 6 mm long, calyx 
splitting into 2-3 lobes 3-4 mm long, short-
hairy outside, petals 5, orbicular, 2-4 mm in 
diameter, stamens 16-25, free, up to 4 mm 
long, disk glands 5; female flowers with pedicel 
up to 6 mm long, enlarging to c. 12 mm in fruit, 
sepals 5, ovate to almost round, c. 2 mm long, 
hairy outside, petals 5, orbicular, 2-3 mm in 
diameter, enlarging up to 5 mm, hairy outside, 
disk cup-shaped, margin densely hairy, ovary 
superior, rounded, densely hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, 2-fid at apex, hairy. Fruit a 3-lobed 
capsule 8—10 mm x 14-15 mm, hairy, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, 6-8 mm x 5-7 mm, pale brown 
mottled with dark brown. 
Grossera comprises 8 species, 7 occurring in 
the forest zone of continental Africa and 1 in 
dry deciduous forest in Madagascar. 
Ecology Grossera macrantha occurs in the 
understorey of dense rainforest and periodi-
cally inundated rainforest, also as a pioneer 
species in forest gaps, from sea-level up to 450 
m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Grossera 
macrantha is locally common as a pioneer spe-
cies, and therefore probably not threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Grossera macrantha will proba-
bly remain of minor importance as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Léonard, 
1962. 
Other references Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
HARRISONIA ABYSSINICA Oliv. 
Protologue FI. trop. Afr. 1: 311 (1868). 
Family Simaroubaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 16 
Synonyms Harrisonia occidentalis Engl. 
(1895). 
Vernacular names Baingou (Fr). Msam-
HARRISONIA 317 
burini, mkidori, mpapuradoko, mkusu, mkoro-
mando, msoma (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Harri-
sonia abyssinica is widespread in tropical Af-
rica. 
Uses Throughout tropical Africa the root 
powder or a root decoction or infusion is taken 
to treat venereal diseases, fever and malaria, 
diarrhoea, urinary problems and intestinal 
worms. Less often a leaf and twig decoction is 
used for these purposes. In Ghana pounded 
and boiled root is taken to treat cough and 
whooping cough. In Ethiopia the Shinasha 
(Boro) people use a decoction of roots to treat 
dysmenorrhoea. In Kenya a root decoction is 
drunk as a remedy for dizziness, insomnia, 
nausea, vomiting, bubonic plague, swollen tes-
ticles and tuberculosis. It is also taken to in-
duce abortion. The Nyamwezi people swallow 
the smoke from burning root bark to treat 
hookworm infections. The roots and bark are 
crushed and soaked in water and drunk to pu-
rify and strengthen the body. In Kenya and 
Tanzania a root decoction is drunk in the 
treatment of cancer. The root is also used as a 
rubefacient. In Uganda a root infusion is drunk 
to treat snakebites, hernia and is used as nose 
drops to treat insanity. The root powder is ap-
plied to incisions to treat migraine. 
Throughout tropical Africa crushed leaves, a 
leaf decoction or infusion are used as a wash to 
disinfect wounds and abscesses. A root decoc-
tion is used for this purpose by the Shinasha 
people of Ethiopia. In Togo a leaf decoction is 
drunk to treat diabetes. In Kenya a decoction 
of leaves and twigs is drunk to treat haemor-
rhoids. The Nyamwezi people apply the pulped 
leaves to snakebites. Leaf sap is drunk to treat 
Harrisonia abyssinica - wild 
general body pain. In Tanzania a hot leaf de-
coction is prepared as an inhalation to treat 
headache. In Uganda a root decoction is used 
in the treatment of livestock against east coast 
fever and lumpy skin disease. 
The fruits are edible. The wood is easy to work, 
durable and resistant to fungi, termites and 
wood borers and used for making stools, bows, 
in house construction and as firewood. In 
Ghana the stems with the bark removed are 
used to make state umbrellas and as the sup-
ports of chiefs' palanquins. The leaves are an 
important fodder throughout tropical Africa. In 
Kenya pruned shrubs are used as a living fence 
for cattle kraals. In Uganda Harrisonia abys-
sinica is planted to protect the garden and 
house against bad spirits. 
Production and international trade A root 
decoction of Harrisonia abyssinica is sold in 
many traditional markets in Kenya, in bottles 
of 300-500 ml. 
Properties From the root bark and stem 
bark of Harrisonia abyssinica many pharmaco-
logically active compounds have been isolated, 
mainly limonoids, which are highly oxygenated 
terpenoids, several other terpenoids, steroids 
and chromone derivatives. The most important 
limonoids isolated are atalantolide, obacunone, 
harrisonin, 12ß-acetoxyharrisonin and deoxyo-
bacunone. Terpenoids isolated are the triterpe-
noids 5-dehydrooriciopsin, llß,12ß-diacetoxy-
harrisonin and 3-friedelanone, and the cyclo-
terpene cycloabyssinone (stem bark), the spiro-
tetranortriterpenoid pedonin (root bark), and 
the quassinoid perforaquassin A. Sterols and 
ketosteroids isolated are ß-sitosterol, stigmas-
terol and derivatives, campesterol, ß-sitoste-
none, stigmastenone and campestenone. Frac-
tionation of the n-hexane extract of the leaves 
afforded several unusual prenylated poly-
ketides: oumarone, bissaone and aissatone. 
The methanolic root extract showed significant 
antiplasmodial activity against chloroquine-
sensitive and chloroquine-resistant strains of 
Plasmodium falciparum. The methanolic and 
water extracts from the stem bark showed 
moderate antiplasmodial activity in vitro, and 
low toxicity in the brine shrimp toxicity test. 
Crude and methanolic root extracts showed 
significant in-vitro antibacterial activity 
against different strains of Helicobacter pylori, 
but the effect on a large number of strains of 
other bacteria was very small. Methanolic root 
and stem bark extracts showed significant con-
trol of Giardia lamblia (a parasite causing gas-
troenteritis) in vitro. Methanolic root extracts 
318 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
showed significant cytotoxic activity against 
several human cell lines. A methanol« leaf 
extract showed no cytotoxicity, but significant 
antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus 
aureus, Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli and 
Mycobacterium phlei, as well as moderate anti-
viral activity against Herpes simplex. The an-
tibacterial activities are mainly due to the li-
monoids. Ethanolic leaf extracts did not show 
significant antibacterial, antitrypanosomal or 
antiplasmodial activities. 
Root bark and twig extract showed significant 
antibacterial activity against Staphylococcus 
aureus in vitro and moderate activity against 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae, the bacteria responsible 
for the disease gonorrhoea. A methanol extract 
of dried root bark showed significant antifun-
gal activity against Trichophyton mentagro-
phyte and Candida albicans. 
Atalantolide has shown significant immuno-
suppressant activities, and has been patented 
for this purpose in the United States. 
Obacunone was found to inhibit azoxymethane-
induced colon carcinogenesis in rats. 
Crude root extracts showed strong insect an-
tifeedant activities. Pedonin showed an-
tifeedant activity against larvae of the African 
sugarcane borer Eldana saccharina and the 
bean pod borer Maruca vitrata. Obacunone and 
harrisonin showed antifeedant activity against 
larvae of the African armyworm Spodoptera 
exempta, Maruca vitrata and Eldana sac-
charina. 
Deoxyobacunone, obacunone, harrisonin, 12ß-
acetoxyharrisonin and pedonin exhibited sig-
nificant stimulatory activity (up to 98%) on the 
germination of conditioned Striga hermonthica 
seeds. 
The leaves of Harrisonia abyssinica are rich in 
protein, but their utilization as a fodder is 
hampered by the high tannin content. 
Description Evergreen, much-branched 
shrub or small tree, sometimes climbing, up to 
6(-13) m tall; bole and larger branches with up 
to 2 cm long thorns on conical corky out-
growths; bark pale brown to grey; branches 
long and flexible. Leaves alternate, imparipin-
nately compound with 2-7 pairs of leaflets, up 
to 25 cm long, glabrous or hairy; stipules ab-
sent; petiole up to 3 cm long, with 2 recurved 
spines at base, petiole and rachis with 1-3 mm 
wide wings; petiolules 0-2 mm long; leaflets 
elliptical or broadly obovate to almost circular, 
0.5-9 cm x 0.5—4 cm, base asymmetrical, 
cuneate to rounded, apex rounded to acumi-
nate, margins variably toothed or entire. Inflo-
Harrisonia abyssinica - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
detail of twig and leaf; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
rescence an axillary or terminal, erect panicle 
2-14 cm long, glabrous to hairy. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 4-5(—6)-merous; pedicel variable 
in length; sepals almost free, triangular to 
ovate, c. 1 mm long, glabrous or hairy; petals 
ovate to lanceolate, 2-5.5 mm x 1—2 mm, gla-
brous or hairy; stamens 8-10, up to 4 mm long; 
ovary superior, 4—5(-6)-lobed, c. 2 mm long, 
styles united, up to 1 mm long, stigma 4—5(—6)-
lobed, head-shaped. Fruit a 4-8-lobed, de-
pressed globose berry 4—9 mm in diameter, red 
to black when ripe, glabrous, fleshy, 4-8-
seeded. Seeds ovoid, 3.5-5 mm x 2.5-3 mm, 
smooth. 
Other botanical information Harrisonia 
comprises 3 species, 2 of which occur in tropical 
Asia. Molecular analyses have shown that 
Harrisonia seems to be more closely related to 
the Rutaceae than to the Simaroubaceae. 
Harrisonia abyssinica is variable, especially 
size, shape and hairiness of the leaves, espe-
cially in East Africa. 
Growth and development In Ghana Har-
risonia abyssinica flowers from February-
March and fruits in October. It is a strong 
HELIOTROPIUM 319 
grower and the roots spread widely. 
Ecology Harrisonia abyssinica occurs in dry 
evergreen forest, forest edges, wooded grass-
land, riverine forest and coastal areas, from 
sea-level up to 1700 m altitude. It may form 
dense thickets on eroded soils. Annual rainfall 
in its area of distribution ranges between 150 
mm and 2000 mm. 
Propagation and planting Harrisonia 
abyssinica can be propagated by seed, stem 
cuttings and through micropropagation. Stem 
cuttings root easily when treated with the root-
ing hormone indole-3-butyric acid. 
Management In western Kenya Harrisonia 
abyssinica trees are used as shade trees 
around homesteads and pruned trees and 
shrubs are used as living fences for cattle 
kraals. However, no information is available 
about its cultivation and management for me-
dicinal purposes. In southern Sudan the Moru 
people consider Harrisonia abyssinica a weed 
and burn it, because it shades out the sorghum 
sown under it. 
Harvesting Leaves, roots, bark and fruits 
are collected from the wild and used immedi-
ately or dried and stored for use throughout 
the year. 
Handling after harvest A decoction of the 
leaves, roots and bark of Harrisonia abyssinica 
can be used immediately or put in bottles to be 
used within a week. If refrigerated the decoc-
tion can be stored for up to 1 year. For long 
term storage (3-6 months) the leaves, roots 
and bark are sun dried and stored in airtight 
containers. 
Genetic resources Harrisonia abyssinica is 
widely used for medicinal purposes, and is 
probably locally overharvested, which calls for 
conservation and research on propagation and 
domestication. No systematic germplasm col-
lection or preservation programmes exist in 
tropical Africa. However, there are small col-
lections in botanical gardens and research in-
stitutions in Kenya, Uganda, Tanzania, Ethio-
pia and Nigeria. 
Prospects Harrisonia abyssinica has con-
siderable value as a medicinal plant because it 
can be used to treat a wide range of diseases 
and ailments including malaria, sexually 
transmitted diseases, diarrhoea, intestinal 
worms and wounds and abscesses. Extraction 
and identification of the active ingredients in 
the bark, roots and leaves may provide useful 
drugs. International trade in Harrisonia abys-
sinica has been hindered by lack of appropriate 
post-harvest, processing and preservation 
technologies and lack of appropriate documen-
tation and scientific experimentation to verify 
herbalists' claims. 
Major references Balde et al., 1995; Bur-
kill, 2000; Chase, Morton & Kallunki, 1999; 
Johns, Kokwaro & Kimanani, 1990; Kirira et 
al., 2006; Kokwaro, 1993; Masinde, 1996; Ru-
gutt, Rugutt & Berner, 2001; Stannard, 2000; 
Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Anani et al., 2000; Balde 
et a l , 2000; Beentje, 1994; El Tahir, Satti & 
Khalid, 1999; Fabry, Okemo & Ansorg, 1996; 
Fernando & Quinn, 1995; Hassanali et al., 
1986; Hudson et a l , 2000; Johns et al., 1995; 
Kamuhabwa, Nshimo & de Witte, 2000; Keita 
et a l , 1995; Neuwinger, 2000; Okemo & Mwa-
tha, 2002; Rajab et a l , 1997; Rubanza et al., 
2005; Runyoro et al., 2006b; Sawhney et al., 
1979; Sharland, 2006; Tabuti, Dhillion & Lye, 
2003; Timberlake, 1987. 
Sources of illustration Wild & Phipps, 
1963. 
Authors V.E. Emongor 
H E L I O T R O P I U M A E G Y P T I A C U M L e h m . 
Protologue Sem. hort. bot. hamburg.: 20 
(1824). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Helio-
tropium aegyptiacum is found in Sudan, Ethio-
pia, Eritrea, Djibouti, Somalia and northern 
Kenya and also in Egypt and the Arabian pen-
insula. 
Uses The pulp of fresh roots of Heliotropium 
aegyptiacum, is applied to snakebites and scor-
pion stings in Somalia. The ash of burned roots 
is applied to wounds or alternatively, a mixture 
of leaf pulp and myrrh (resin of Commiphora 
myrrha (Nees) Engl.) is used. In Ethiopia the 
leaves are applied to the skin as a treatment 
for dandruff. 
Properties No details have been published 
on the composition of Heliotropium aegyptia-
cum. In view of the uses that are similar to 
those of some better studied species of Helio-
tropium, it is probable that pyrrolizidine alka-
loids are responsible for the pharmacological 
actions and for cases of poisoning in livestock 
in East Africa. 
Botany Annual or short-lived perennial, 
erect herb, up to 75 cm tall, branched from the 
base. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules absent; 
petiole up to 5 cm; blade broadly ovate to ellip-
tical, 1-10 cm x 0.5-7 cm; base shortly 
320 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cuneate; apex obtuse, mucronate; margin en-
tire or undulate-crenate. Inflorescence a termi-
nal, spike-like cyme. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
5-merous, sessile; calyx 3-4 mm long, lobed 
almost to base, enlarging in fruit; corolla white, 
4-6 mm long, tube constricted at throat, lobes 
ovate. Fruit splitting into 4 nutlets. 
Ecology Heliotropium aegyptiacum is found 
in Commiphora-Acacia open scrub vegetation 
with succulents and in Acacia-Hyphaene asso-
ciations at 350-700 m altitude. In Egypt it is 
found on the banks of the Nile and in moist 
stony ground. In Eritrea it was found to be a 
preferred host of gregarizing adults and hop-
pers of the desert locust. 
Genetic resources and breeding In view 
of its fairly wide distribution and weedy na-
ture, there seem to be no threats of genetic 
erosion for Heliotropium aegyptiacum. 
Prospects As the use of Heliotropium aegyp-
tiacum in traditional medicine seems re-
stricted, it is likely to remain of limited impor-
tance only. 
Major references Giday et al., 2003; Neu-
winger, 2000. 
Other references Boulos, 2000a; Diane, 
Förther & Hilger, 2002; Singh et al., 1994; 
Verdcourt, 1991; Woldewahid, 2003. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
HELIOTROPIUM INDICUM L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 130 (1753). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22, 24 
Vernacular names Indian heliotrope, turn-
sole (En). Herbe papillon, monte au ciel, herbe 
à verrues (Fr). Heliotrópio-indiano, borragem 
brava, fedegoso (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Helio-
tropium indicum has a pantropical distribu-
tion, but is probably native of tropical America. 
It is widespread and common throughout Af-
rica. 
Uses Heliotropium indicum has been used 
widely for centuries on warts and to treat in-
flammations and tumours. Throughout tropical 
Africa it is used as an analgesic (rheumatism), 
diuretic and for numerous skin problems (e.g. 
yaws, urticaria, scabies, ulcers, eczema, impe-
tigo). There is ample variation in plant parts 
used, and in methods of preparation and ad-
ministration. In Nigeria, an infusion of the 
plant is used as an eye-lotion and to clean ul-
cers. In Gabon the powdered leaves are used to 
Heliotropium indicum - wild 
treat infected gums. The Ngoni of Tanzania 
drink an extract made from the roots to treat 
yaws. In Madagascar a plant infusion is used 
as a strong diuretic. In the Seychelles the 
leaves are applied as an analgesic to treat 
stomach-ache in adult patients after opera-
tions. In Mauritius a leaf infusion is taken 
against kidney infections and as a diuretic. A 
poultice made from the leaves is applied to 
rheumatic limbs, to wounds and insect bites. A 
flower decoction is an emmenagogue in small 
doses and an abortifacient in large doses. Pros-
tate infections are treated with a decoction 
made from a mixture with other plants. 
In Gambia the whole plant is buried and after 
the fleshy tissue has rotted away the remain-
ing fibre is used to make false hair for women. 
Properties Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are a 
common constituent of various genera belong-
ing to the Boraginaceae and Asteraceae and the 
papilionoid genus Crotalaria. They exhibit 
pronounced toxic effects on liver and lungs, but 
cytotoxic effects and other mutagenic and car-
cinogenic activities have also been reported. 
From Heliotropium indicum the pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids indicine, indicine-N-oxide, acetyl-
indicine, indicinine, heleurine, heliotrine, su-
pinine, supinidine and lindelofidine have been 
isolated, all of them with hepatoxic activity. 
Furthermore the alkaloids trachelanthamidine 
and retronecine and the pyrrolizidine precursor 
amines (in leaves and inflorescence) putre-
scine, spermidine and spermine were isolated. 
The seeds contain 12% oil and 1.8% nitrogen. 
The nitrogen-containing lipid fraction con-
tained Cie and Ci» acids esterified with 1-
cyano-2-hydroxymethylprop-l-en-3-ol. 
HELIOTROPIUM 321 
Heliotropium indicum grown under greenhouse 
conditions showed the highest content of alka-
loids at the beginning of the flowering period. 
The young leaves, seedlings and inflorescences 
showed high alkaloid levels and with ageing, 
the level of alkaloids decreased 20 fold in the 
leaves. The highest alkaloid content was found 
in the roots and inflorescence and these also 
had the highest relative amounts of N-oxide, 
ranging from 60-90% of the total alkaloid con-
tent. No significant age-dependent differences 
in N-oxides were found. 
Extracts of Heliotropium indicum have been 
shown to have strong antibacterial and anti-
tumour activities, but no antifungal activity. 
Furthermore, they showed wound healing ac-
tivity in rats. The active principle was found to 
be indicine-N-oxide which has been synthe-
sized in an efficient way. Indicine N-oxide has 
reached Phase I clinical trials in advanced can-
cer patients. 
Aqueous leaf extracts of Heliotropium indicum 
had an allelopathic effect on rice seedlings; 
phenolic compounds may be held responsible 
for this. 
Ingestion of Heliotropium is dangerous. Fatal 
accidental poisoning in humans by drinking 
herbal tea, consuming grain contaminated with 
Heliotropium seeds, and as a result of medici-
nal use has been recorded. Additionally, pyrrol-
izidine alkaloids are excreted in milk, and the 
use by lactating mothers is a toxicity hazard to 
babies. The plants are considered toxic to live-
stock with several records of fatal poisoning. 
Adulterations and substitutes Many 
other species of Heliotropium contain pyrrol-
izidine alkaloids and are often used as substi-
tutes for Heliotropium indicum. 
Description Annual or perennial, erect 
herb, up to 1.5 m tall, woody at the base, usu-
ally much branched. Leaves alternate or oppo-
site, simple; stipules absent; petiole 1-7 cm 
long; blade ovate to elliptical, (1.5-)3-16 cm x 
(0.5—)1.5—10 cm; base truncate but narrowly 
decurrent; apex acute or acuminate; margin 
irregularly undulate, bristly hairy. Inflores-
cence a scorpioid, simple, many-flowered cyme, 
2.5-45 cm long. Flowers, bisexual, regular, 5-
merous; calyx with almost free, unequal lobes, 
bristly, white hairy; corolla salver-shaped, tube 
3-4.5 mm long, lobes rounded, c. 1 mm long, 
pale-violet, blue or white; stamens included in 
corolla tube, with very short filaments; ovary 
superior, 4-celled. Fruit 2—3 mm long, splitting 
into 4 nutlets. Seedling with epigeal germina-
tion; cotyledons leafy, rounded. 
Heliotropium indicum - 1, plant habit; 2, flower; 
3, fruit; 4, fruit in cross-section. 
Source: PROSEA 
Other botanical information Heliotro-
pium comprises about 250 species and is dis-
tributed in tropical, subtropical and warm 
temperate zones of all continents. The classifi-
cation suffers from the absence of a recent 
taxonomie revision covering Old World and the 
New World species. Heliotropium is of special 
interest in eastern and northern East Africa as 
it is associated with the initial swarming areas 
of migratory locusts (Locusta migratoria). 
Likewise butterflies are often associated with 
Heliotropium as they require certain pyrrol-
izidine alkaloids as precursor for their phero-
mones. 
Heliotropium amplexicaule Vahl is native to 
South America, but is now found throughout 
the tropics. In pastures it can cause fatal poi-
soning in cattle. In Mauritius, where it is lo-
cally a weed in sugarcane, a decoction of the 
plant is drunk to cure cough and fever. Helio-
tropium curassavicum L. is another native of 
the New World which has been introduced in 
the Old World tropics. It is less widespread in 
tropical Africa than Heliotropium indicum and 
no medicinal uses have been reported from 
Africa. In the Americas, however, uses similar 
to those of Heliotropium indicum are recorded. 
322 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
In Madagascar, Heliotropium curassavicum is 
burnt in the fields, as it provides good ash. Its 
English names, 'alkali heath', 'salt heliotrope' 
and 'seaside heliotrope', and its French name, 
'verveine bord-de-mer', refer to its preferred 
habitat: saline lake- and seashores. 
Growth and development Heliotropium 
indicum may flower throughout the year. The 
flowering season is very long and new flowers 
develop apically within the cyme while mature 
nutlets are already present at the base of the 
inflorescence. 
Ecology Heliotropium indicum is found in 
sunny localities, on waste land, in periodically 
desiccating pools and ditches and anthropo-
genic habitats, generally below 800 m altitude. 
It is widely considered a weed of fields and 
pastures. 
Management For medicinal uses Heliotro-
pium indicum is exclusively collected from the 
wild. 
Handling after harvest The plants are 
generally collected when fully grown and can 
be used either dry or fresh. 
Genetic resources Heliotropium indicum is 
widespread both in the Old World and New 
World, and there is no risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Heliotropium alkaloids have been 
considered as potential agents in chemother-
apy and clinical trials have been executed. 
However, the applications in cancer therapy 
are limited by the toxic effects, in particular 
the hepatotoxic effect, of the pyrrolizidine alka-
loids. External application to promote wound 
healing and to fight infections seems less haz-
ardous, but more research is needed. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1983a; 
Burkill, 1985; Catalfamo, Martin Jr & Birecka, 
1982; Iwu, 1993; Jelager, Gurib-Fakim & Ad-
sersen, 1998; Kugelman et al., 1976; Misawa, 
Hayashi & Takayama, 1983; Rajangam, 1997; 
Verdcourt, 1991; Wongsatit Chuakul, Nop-
pamas Soonthornchareonnon & Promjit Sara-
lamp, 1999a. 
Other references Ahmad, Ansari & Os-
man, 1978; Bernardo & Oliver, 2000; Birecka 
et al., 1984; Carballo et al., 1992; Davicino, 
Pestchanker & Giordano, 1988; Decary, 1946; 
Fernandez, Ceniza & Amihan, 1994; Gurib-
Fakim et al., 1993; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & 
Bissoondoyal, 1995; Hartmann, 1999; Kok-
waro, 1993; Le Gall et a l , 2003; Martins & 
Brummitt, 1990; Ogawa, Niwa & Yamada, 
1993; Ohnuma et a l , 1982; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961; Reddy, Rao &, 2002; Srinivas, 
Rao & Rao, 2000; van Weeren et al., 1999. 
Sources of illustration Wongsatit Chua-
kul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Prom-
jit Saralamp, 1999a. 
Authors A. Gurib-Fakim 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
HELIOTROPIUM OVALIFOLIUM Forssk. 
Protologue Fl. Aegypt.-Arab.: 38 (1775). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number: 2n = 22 
Vernacular names Grey leaf heliotrope 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Helio-
tropium ovalifolium is widespread in tropical 
and subtropical Africa including Madagascar. 
Its range extends to tropical Asia and Austra-
lia. 
Uses Heliotropium ovalifolium is used 
against syphilis in at least 3 different African 
countries and is reported to have analgesic 
properties. In Tanzania the dried plant is 
mixed with butter and the mixture is smeared 
thickly over painful places during fever. In 
both Ethiopia and Tanzania it is applied to 
scorpion stings. In Senegal and Kenya the 
plant is grazed by all livestock and in Australia 
by camels. In Zambia however, it is not grazed 
by cattle. In Kenya, the leaves are chewed as a 
substitute for tobacco. 
Properties Pyrrolizidine alkaloids are a 
common constituent of the Boraginaceae and 
Asteraceae and the Papilionoid genus Crotala-
ria. These alkaloids exhibit pronounced toxic 
effects on the liver and lungs, whereas cyto-
toxic, mutagenic and carcinogenic activities 
Heliotropium ovalifolium - wild 
HELIOTROPIUM 323 
have also been reported. The alkaloids 
retronecine, helifoline and heliotropamide have 
been isolated. Helifoline has been reported to 
show in vivo and in vitro ganglion-blocking 
activity. Retronecine (the amino-ethanol moi-
ety of many pyrrolizidine alkaloids but without 
the ester-part) and helifoline (a 1,2-saturated 
retronecine analogue) are expected not to be 
hepatotoxic. Supinine (a pyrrolizidine alka-
loid), and heliophenanthrone (a phenanthrone 
derivative), as well as the benzoquinones helio-
tropinone A and B have been isolated from the 
aerial parts of the plant. Both quinones have 
exhibited antifungal and antibacterial proper-
ties. The alkaloid heliotropamide did not show 
any antifungal or antibacterial activity nor did 
it show any radical-scavenging activity. 
Cases of poisoning of sheep and goat in Sudan 
have been reported, and a fatal liver disease of 
horses in Australia has been attributed to 
Heliotropium ovalifolium as well. In southern 
Africa Heliotropium ovalifolium is suspected to 
be the cause of the 'floppy trunk syndrome', a 
lethal affliction in elephants. In Nigeria, the 
plant is considered to be poisonous, causing 
diarrhoea and vomiting. 
Adulterations and substitutes Many other 
species of Heliotropium contain pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids and are often used for similar pur-
poses as Heliotropium ovalifolium. 
Description Perennial herb, up to 90 cm 
tall, sometimes with woody base, much 
branched; young branches silvery pubescent. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules absent; peti-
ole up to 1.5(-2) cm long; blade elliptical or 
obovate, up to 5.5 cm x 2.5 cm; base cuneate; 
apex retuse, mucronate or acute. Inflorescence 
a spike-like cyme, silky hairy, without bracts, 
with flowers arranged in two ranks, up to 4 cm 
long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; ca-
lyx with almost free lobes, densely covered 
with antrorse hairs; corolla funnel-shaped, up 
to 3 mm long, pubescent outside, lobes ovate-
triangular, up to 2 mm long; stamens included 
in corolla tube, with very short filaments; 
ovary superior, 4-celled. Fruit splitting into 4 
nutlets, densely white hairy. 
Other botanical information Heliotropium 
comprises about 250 species and is distributed 
in tropical, subtropical and warm temperate 
zones of all continents. The classification suf-
fers from the absence of a recent taxonomie 
revision covering Old World and New World 
species. The genus Heliotropium is of special 
interest in eastern and northern East Africa as 
it is associated with the initial swarming areas 
Heliotropium ovalifolium - 1, plant habit; 2, 
flower; 3, fruit; 4, nutlets. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
of migratory locusts (Locusta migratoria). 
Likewise butterflies are often associated with 
Heliotropium as they require certain pyrrol-
izidine alkaloids as precursor for their phero-
mones. 
Heliotropium ovalifolium, Heliotropium cilia-
turn Kaplan and Heliotropium strigosum Willd. 
belong to the subgenus Orthostachys. Heliotro-
pium ciliatum is found in Angola, Namibia, 
Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South 
Africa. Its leaves are boiled and the water is 
drunk to cure fever and stomach-ache by Kala-
hari bushmen. In Namibia a decoction of roots 
and leaves is drunk or applied as an enema to 
treat pain in the legs. Oedema as a result of 
cardiac problems is treated by bathing with a 
decoction of the whole plant or as a steam bath. 
Heliotropium strigosum is widespread in tropi-
cal Africa and Asia as well as in Australia. It is 
used in Tanzania and DR Congo to treat ab-
scesses of the breast by applying a mixture of 
the whole plant with butter. In Sudan the 
plant is thought to be effective in treating scor-
pion stings. In India it is used to treat snake-
bites, insect and scorpion stings, as a painkiller 
for pain in the limbs, to treat sore eyes and for 
healing boils, wounds and ulcers. It is eaten by 
camels in Sudan but not by livestock in Sene-
gal. Heliotropium strigosum is a variable spe-
324 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cies. The inflorescence lacking bracts distin-
guishes it from most of the other Heliotropium 
species in tropical Africa. Heliotropium su-
pinum L. belongs to the subgenus Piptoclaina, 
which is closely related to subgenus Or-
thostachys. It is widely distributed in tropical 
Africa, South Africa, northern Africa, southern 
Europe and south-west Asia. In Namibia the 
pulped plant is mixed with water and applied 
to tumours. The pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
heliotrine and lasiocarpine have been isolated, 
and extracts have been tested as a control 
agent for Sclerotinia sclerotiorum, a chickpea 
disease, with limited success. 
Growth and development Heliotropium 
ovalifolium may flower throughout the year. 
The flowering season is long and new flowers 
develop apically within the cyme while mature 
nutlets are already present at its base. Helio-
tropium ovalifolium can behave as a pioneer 
species and stays green well into the dry sea-
son. 
Ecology Heliotropium ovalifolium occurs in 
diverse habitats, though drier places are pre-
ferred in general. 
Handling after harvest Heliotropium 
plants are generally collected when fully grown 
and can be used either fresh or dry. 
Genetic resources Heliotropium ovali-
folium is very widespread; and there is no risk 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Heliotropium alkaloids have been 
considered as a potential agent in chemother-
apy and clinical trials have been executed. 
They have not been taken into pharmaceutical 
use as they have serious toxic (including hepa-
totoxic) effects attributed to the pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids. External application to promote 
wound healing and to fight infections seems 
less hazardous, but more research is needed. 
The role of Heliotropium ovalifolium in the 
breeding success of pest insects deserves atten-
tion. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Creeper et 
al., 1999; Guntern, 2003; Jansen, 1981; Neu-
winger, 2000; Verdcourt, 1991; Wongsatit 
Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & 
Promjit Saralamp, 1999a. 
Other references Boppré & Fischer, 1999; 
Dorges, Heucke & Dance, 2003; Getahun, 1976; 
Guilet et al., 2003; Guntern et al., 2001; Gun-
tern et al., 2003; Martins & Brummitt, 1990. 
Sources of illustration Andrews, 1956. 
Authors A. Gurib-Fakim 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
HELIOTROPIUM RAMOSISSIMUM (Lehm.) DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 9: 536 (1845). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number n = 16 
Synonyms Heliotropium undulatum Vahl 
(1790), Heliotropium bacciferum auct. non 
Forssk. 
Vernacular names Wavy heliotrope (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Helio-
tropium ramosissimum is found in West Africa, 
Sudan and Egypt, extending to the Arabian 
peninsula and to Afghanistan. It has been in-
troduced in parts of the United States, and is 
considered a weed there. 
Uses In Niger dried and powdered plant 
parts of Heliotropium ramosissimum are added 
to water and drunk to combat fatigue. Leaf sap 
is applied to burns in Mauritania. In northern 
Nigeria it is applied topically to treat headache 
and used internally to treat gonorrhoea and to 
increase lactation. The plant is eaten by goats 
but not by other livestock in Senegal; it is said 
to provide a good fodder for camels and other 
livestock in Mauritania. In the western Sahara 
a macerate of the plant is used as ink. 
Properties No data on the properties of 
Heliotropium ramosissimum appear to have 
been published but pharmacological properties 
are likely due to the presence of pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids as in other species of the genus, e.g. 
Heliotropium indicum L. and Heliotropium 
ovalifolium Forssk. In Australia sale, supply 
and use of Heliotropium ramosissimum is pro-
hibited by the Ministry of Health because of 
the serious danger to health. 
Botany Perennial, ascending or procumbent 
herb up to 50 cm tall; stem much branched 
from woody base, pubescent, white-bristly. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules absent; peti-
ole up to 1 cm long; blade linear-lanceolate, 
0.5-2.5 cm x 0.2—1.6 cm, base cuneate, apex 
acute or obtuse; margin revolute. Inflorescence 
a terminal, forked, spike-like cyme with flow-
ers in 2 rows. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, sessile; calyx lobes narrowly elliptical, 
up to 3 mm long, persistent in fruit; corolla 
funnel-shaped, up to 4.5 mm long, lobes up to 1 
mm long, almost suborbicular, white. Fruit 
globose, splitting into 4 nutlets, each up to 2.5 
mm in diameter, hairy. 
Heliotropium ramosissimum and Heliotropium 
bacciferum Forssk. (synonym: Heliotropium 
crispum Desf.) have often been confused. 
Probably Heliotropium bacciferum is found in 
Africa only in Cape Verde, North Africa, Sudan 
HELIOTROPIUM 325 
and Madagascar. Its distribution further covers 
the Arab peninsula to Pakistan and Afghani-
stan and there the ranges of the 2 species over-
lap. The main distinction between the species 
is that in Heliotropium bacciferum the flowers 
are in a single row, flowers and fruits are gla-
brous while in Heliotropium ramosissimum 
flowers are in 2 rows and fruits are hairy. 
Heliotropium bacciferum is medicinally used in 
Cape Verde as a cardiotonic and further me-
dicinal uses are reported from throughout 
North Africa, the Arabian peninsula and from 
Pakistan. It is used as a repellent for storage 
insects in Egypt and Pakistan. In Cape Verde, 
Algeria and the Arabian peninsula it is report-
edly grazed by livestock. The pyrrolizidine al-
kaloids heleurine, heliotrine, supinine and eu-
ropine have been isolated from Heliotropium 
bacciferum. In Ethiopia Heliotropium pterocar-
pum (DC. & A.DC.) Höchst. & Steud. ex Bunge 
is used to treat fevers. It is closely related to 
both Heliotropium ramosissimum and Helio-
tropium bacciferum, but differs in having a 
fruit with 2 winged nutlets. Heliotropium 
pterocarpum is found in Sudan, Eritrea, Ethio-
pia. Egypt and the Arabian peninsula, where it 
grows in sandy desert plains and at the edges 
of littoral salt marshes and is eaten by camels. 
Nursery sites of locusts are often found in 
vegetation dominated by Heliotropium ptero-
carpum. 
Ecology Heliotropium ramosissimum is 
found in sandy wadis, on calcareous ridges, and 
is sometimes abundant in poor pastures. 
Genetic resources and breeding Helio-
tropium ramosissimum is generally common 
wherever it occurs and there is no threat of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects The distinction between Helio-
tropium ramosissimum and Heliotropium bac-
ciferum, especially important in West Africa, is 
obviously not always made correctly. Both spe-
cies however, deserve pharmacological/toxico-
logical research because they are used inter-
nally in traditional medicine despite the pre-
sumed presence of toxic pyrrolizidine alkaloids. 
Major references Adam, Echard & Lescot, 
1972; Burkill, 1985; Riedl, 1967. 
Other references Boulos, 1983; Boulos, 
2000a; Elhag-Eltayeb, 2000; Farrag-Nawal et 
al., 1996; Giday et a l , 2003; Martins, 1995. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
HELIOTROPIUM STEUDNERI Vatke 
Protologue Ost. Bot. Zeitschr. 25: 167 
(1875). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Helio-
tropium steudneri is native of East and south-
ern Africa, from Ethiopia south to Namibia and 
South Africa. 
Uses In Tanzania the leaf juice is applied to 
cuts to stop bleeding and to prevent infection. 
In Namibia plants are dipped in boiling water 
and then squeezed over bruises. The Maasai 
people in Kenya and Tanzania apply drops of 
leaf juice to the eyes of their cattle to cure con-
junctivitis. 
Properties The pyrrolizidine alkaloid lycop-
samine has been isolated from the leaves of 
Heliotropium steudneri. As its uses are similar 
to those of some better studied species of the 
genus such as Heliotropium indicum L. and 
Heliotropium ovalifolium Forssk., pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids are probably responsible for the al-
leged medicinal properties. Several butterfly 
species depend on plants to provide them with 
lycopsamine as a precursor of the pheromone 
danaidone. The flowers have a bad smell which 
is believed to help pollination by flies. 
Botany Perennial, erect or spreading herb 
or subshrub up to 1 m tall, with woody root-
stock; stem branched, densely and persistently 
hairy. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules ab-
sent; petiole absent or short, up to 1 cm long; 
blade narrowly elliptical to elliptical-lanceolate 
or oblong, l-9(-13) cm x 0.5-2.5(-3.2) cm; base 
cuneate, apex acute, margin crenulate, fre-
quently bullate above with venation impressed. 
Inflorescence a terminal cyme, mostly simple, 
sometimes 2-3-branched, short and scorpioid 
at first, extending up to 37 cm long. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, sessile; calyx 2.5— 
5.5 mm long, lobed almost to base, densely 
pubescent; corolla white or creamy-yellow, 4-6 
mm long, tube glabrous and narrow at base, 
funnel-shaped and pubescent above, lobes ob-
long to obovate-oblong, up to 3 mm x 2 mm. 
Fruit depressed ovoid, splitting into 2 nutlets. 
Ecology Heliotropium steudneri is found in 
open localities, grassland and dry bushland on 
dry, poor, often sandy soil at 100-1350 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Helio-
tropium steudneri is fairly widespread and 
common and therefore not in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects The external uses of Heliotro-
326 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
pium steudneri in traditional medicine deserve 
attention by researchers. 
Major references Baerts & Lehmann, 
2002c; Martins & Brummitt, 1990; Meinwald, 
2000; Neuwinger, 2000; Verdcourt, 1991. 
Other references Burkill, 1985; Imamura, 
2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
HELIOTROPIUM ZEYLANICUM (Burm.f.) Lam. 
Protologue Encycl. 3: 94 (1789). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 28 
Synonyms Heliotropium subulatum (A.DC.) 
Vatke (1882). 
Origin and geographic distribution Helio-
tropium zeylanicum is widespread throughout 
mainland tropical Africa. It is also found in 
Comoros, South Africa, the Arabian peninsula, 
Pakistan and India. 
Uses In Nigeria the plant is applied to scor-
pion stings and to sore breasts. In Kenya and 
Tanzania the leaves and roots are pounded and 
boiled, and the decoction is drunk to treat post-
partum ailments and to promote menstruation. 
Leaves and stems are used as a poultice in DR 
Congo and Tanzania to treat yaws. A poultice 
of the leaves, sometimes mixed with butter, is 
used in Tanzania to treat boils. In Kenya a root 
infusion which has stood overnight is taken as 
a stomachic and laxative. Traditional medici-
nal use in India includes treating boils, sores, 
ulcers, throat infections, insect stings and 
snakebites. In Somalia the plant is said to be 
grazed by all livestock. In Tanzania the plant 
is considered useful as fodder and as an orna-
mental. In Nigeria it is eaten as a stimulant 
and a bitter tonic, probably because it colours 
the lips and saliva red as do kola nuts. In Tan-
zania young leaves are cooked and eaten as a 
vegetable. 
Properties The aerial parts of Heliotropium 
zeylanicum contain the pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
subulacine-N-oxide, 7-angeloyl heliotrine, 
retronecine and heliotrine. The crude ethanol 
and hexane extracts have significant in-vitro 
activity against Coxsackie, poliomyelitis and 
measles viruses and 7-angeloyl heliotrine and 
heliotrine have shown in-vitro activity against 
poliomyelitis and vesicular stomatitis viruses. 
Antitumour activity of several extracts and 
isolated alkaloids has been confirmed in in-
vitro tests on several cancer cell lines including 
Sarcoma 180, human carcinoma of the naso-
pharynx and lymphocytic leukaemia. Extracts 
as well as isolated alkaloids have shown antim-
icrobial activity in tests with the bacteria Es-
cherichia coli, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Ba-
cillus subtilis, Bacillus anthracis and Staphy-
lococcus aureus, and the fungi Aspergillus fu-
migatus, Aspergillus niger, Rhizoctonia phase-
oli and Pennicilium chrysogenum. 
Botany Perennial, erect or procumbent herb 
up to 60(-90) cm tall, usually with thick root-
stock; stem branched, woody at base. Leaves 
alternate, simple, more or less sessile; stipules 
absent; blade linear to elliptical or sometimes 
lanceolate, l-9(-12) cm x 0.2-l(-2.5) cm, base 
narrowly attenuate, apex acute. Inflorescence a 
spike-like, one-sided, single or paired cyme up 
to 30 cm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, sessile; calyx lobes narrowly elliptical, 
up to 2 mm x 1 mm, enlarging in fruit; corolla 
with cylindrical tube, white, up to 4.5 mm long, 
lobes up to 3 mm long, spreading, long acumi-
nate with tip bent back inwards. Fruit almost 
globose, up to 2.5 mm in diameter, splitting 
into 4 nutlets. 
Ecology Heliotropium zeylanicum is found 
in dry woodland, savanna, open localities, on 
sandy riverbanks and on edges of lakes and 
rivers up to 2000 m at altitude. It is an impor-
tant weed in Egypt and Ethiopia and probably 
elsewhere. 
Genetic resources and breeding Helio-
tropium zeylanicum is widespread and common 
throughout its area of distribution. Its weedy 
nature further assures that it is not threat-
ened. 
Prospects Heliotropium zeylanicum has 
promising medicinal properties which merit 
further research. It should be realized that use 
as an internal medicine can be dangerous with 
possible liver damage and poisoning as a re-
sult. Use as a vegetable has to be discouraged 
for the same reason. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Neu-
winger, 2000; Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 2002; 
Taton, 1971; Verdcourt, 1991. 
Other references Kokwaro, 1993; Martins 
& Brummitt, 1990; Singh, Sahu & Singh, 2002; 
Singh et al., 2002. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
HILLERIA 327 
HILLERIA LATIFOLIA (Lam.) H.Walter 
Protologue Engl.,Pflanzern-. IV, 83: 81 
(1909). 
Family Phytolaccaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 36 
Origin and geographic distribution Hilleria 
latifolia possibly originates from South Amer-
ica, but others believe it originates from the 
Old World. It occurs in tropical Africa from 
Guinea east to Ethiopia, and south to Angola, 
Mozambique and northern South Africa. It also 
occurs in Madagascar and in Sri Lanka. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf decoction is 
taken or administered by enema to treat as-
cites and food poisoning, as it causes violent 
purging. The leaf sap is considered haemo-
static. Pulped leaves are applied topically to 
painful areas and to treat persistent headache. 
A leaf decoction is taken to treat coughing of 
blood. In Ghana the boiled plant is eaten to 
treat guinea worm. The vapour from the leaf 
decoction is inhaled to cure jaundice. The 
leaves, together with those of Piper guineense 
Schumach. & Thonn., are applied to the body 
to cure swellings and leprosy. Ground to a 
paste together with Alternanthera pungens 
Kunth or Capsicum pepper (Capsicum annuum 
L.), they are topically applied to treat rheuma-
tism. The crushed plant is applied to breast 
cancer. The flowers are ground to a paste and 
taken with orange juice to treat asthma. In 
Nigeria the leaves are eaten in soup to treat 
gonorrhoea. In Congo the leaves are used to 
treat gynaecological disorders in which purging 
is considered necessary. In Congo and DR 
Congo the crushed plant or crushed simmered 
leaves are applied as a poultice or in lotions to 
treat skin infections, scabies and smallpox. The 
sap is also used as ear drops to treat ear infec-
tions. The pounded leaves mixed with stem sap 
of Castus af er Ker Gawl. are taken to treat colic 
and gonorrhoea. In Nigeria the leaves are a 
component of 'nature cure bitters' a popular 
polyherbal formulation used for a variety of 
ethnomedicinal purposes. 
In Ghana the presence of the plant is used as 
an indication of soil suitable for cocoa cultiva-
tion. 
In Narok District of Kenya the Maasai people 
use the blackened stems for drawing eyebrows. 
There is controversial information concerning 
the toxicity of the plant. In Côte d'Ivoire the 
plant is considered a violent poison, but in Ni-
geria and Cameroon the leaves are eaten as a 
vegetable or in soup. In Ghana the dried fruits 
are eaten as a relish. In Côte d'Ivoire cattle and 
sheep refuse to browse the plant, whereas in 
Ghana the leaves are browsed by sheep and 
goats, but the flowers and fruits are considered 
fatally poisonous. 
Properties There is little information on 
phytochemistry and pharmacological activities 
of Hilleria latifolia available. The presence of a 
flavonoid, probably also alkaloids, and some 
glycosides have been reported. A crude extract 
of the stem bark caused significant mortality in 
vitro of adults and microfilariae of Onchocerca 
volvulus, which causes river blindness. 
The leaves contain per 100 g edible portion: 
water 84.3 g, energy 184 kJ (44 kcal), fat 0.8 g, 
carbohydrate 7.8 g, Ca 349 mg, Fe 4.1 mg, 
ascorbic acid 22 mg (Leung, Busson & Jardin, 
1968). 
Botany Shrubby herb up to 2 m tall, with 
some weak bristly hairs on young branches. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole (l-)2-5(-7) cm long; blade ovate 
or elliptical to broadly lanceolate, 8-16(-20) cm 
x 3.5—7.5(—9) cm, base rounded to cuneate and 
often unequal, apex long-acuminate. Inflores-
cence an axillary, sometimes terminal, raceme 
4-10 cm long, up to 30 cm in fruit, many-
Hilleria latifolia - 1, flowering branch; 2, flower; 
3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
328 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
flowered; axis hairy; bracts 1-2 mm long, cau-
date, caducous. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 
4-merous; pedicel 1—2 mm long, c. 5 mm in 
fruit; sepals oblong-elliptical, 1.5-2 mm long, c. 
4 mm in fruit, 1 sepal free, 3 united to the mid-
dle, green to white, turning yellow to red; pet-
als absent; stamens free, a little shorter than 
sepals; ovary superior, slightly laterally com-
pressed, 1-celled, stigma almost sessile, head-
shaped. Fruit a lens-shaped utricle, 2-3 mm in 
diameter, pericarp very thin, reticulately wrin-
kled, adhering to seed, yellow to dark red or 
purple. Seed lens-shaped, black. 
Hilleria comprises 3 South American species 
and belongs to the tribe Riuineae. Hilleria lati-
folia is often considered to have been intro-
duced from South America, but its occurrence 
in little disturbed forest in East Africa and 
Madagascar may indicate that it is native in 
these regions. 
Ecology Hilleria latifolia occurs in rainfor-
est, riverine and groundwater forest, also along 
forest margins and roads and in plantations, at 
500-1600 m altitude. It has been a weed of 
cultivated fields since the early days of oil palm 
cultivation in West Africa. 
Genetic resources and breeding Hilleria 
latifolia is relatively common in its wide area 
of distribution, also in secondary vegetation, 
and therefore not endangered by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Hilleria latifolia has many inter-
esting medicinal uses, but almost no informa-
tion is available on chemical compounds or 
pharmacological activities. It would therefore 
be useful to verify these uses through scientific 
tests. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Neuwin-
ger, 2000; Nowicke, 1968; Titanji et al., 1987. 
Other references Aniagu et al., 2005; 
Leung, Busson & Jardin, 1968; Mensah, 1991; 
Polhill, 1971; Sowunmi, 1985; Stannard, 1988b. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
HlLSENBERGIA PETIOLARIS (Lam.) J.S.Mill. 
Protologue Adansonia, Sér. 3, 25: 184 
(2003). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Synonyms Ehretia petiolaris Lam. (1785), 
Bourreria petiolaris (Lam.) Thulin (1987). 
Vernacular names Bois de pipe, herbe ci-
paye (Fr). Mbunduki, mtundutundu, mpanda-
yongoo (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Hilsen-
bergia petiolaris is native to Kenya, Tanzania, 
Mozambique, the Mascarenes and Madagascar. 
Uses In Mauritius the leaves of Hilsenbergia 
petiolaris are used to treat skin infections and 
childhood eczema ('tambave'). In Tanzania the 
wood is used for firewood, building poles, tool 
handles and other small objects. 
Properties The stems and leaves of Hilsen-
bergia petiolaris are reported to contain alka-
loids, triterpenes, saponins and traces of fla-
vonoids, but no results of analyses of the chem-
istry or pharmacology of the species, or of any 
other Hilsenbergia species, have been pub-
lished. 
Botany Shrub or tree up to 7.5(-12) m tall, 
occasionally scandent; stems often hollow; bark 
smooth, grey-brown or grey, rough, fissured 
longitudinally. Leaves alternate, simple; stip-
ules absent; petiole slender, up to 5 cm long; 
blade oblong-elliptical to obovate-elliptic, 1-14 
cm x 0.5-7.5 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
rounded to acute, glabrous. Inflorescence a lax, 
pendulous, corymbose cyme, up to 15 cm long, 
many-flowered, axes pubescent. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel up to 2 
mm long; calyx 3.5 mm long, lobes valvate, 
narrowly triangular, up to 2 mm x 2 mm, gla-
brous to pubescent outside, pubescent inside; 
corolla campanulate, waxy white, tube 3-5 mm 
long, lobes broadly triangular or ovate, re-
flexed, 0.5-1.5 mm long, apex rounded; sta-
mens inserted on corolla tube; ovary superior, 
4-celled, style 2.5 mm long, with bifid stigma. 
Fruit a globose drupe c. 6 mm in diameter, 
orange-yellow to red, with 4 ridged and winged 
pyrenes. 
Hilsenbergia species have formerly been placed 
in the genera Ehretia and Bourreria. Bourreria 
now comprises only a number of Neotropical 
species. Ehretia is pantropical and differs from 
Hilsenbergia in having smooth to slightly 
ridged pyrenes and imbricate calyx lobes. 
Hilsenbergia comprises 18 species, 13 of which 
are endemic to Madagascar. Hilsenbergia 
nemoralis (Gurke) J.S.Miller (synonyms: 
Ehretia nemoralis Gurke, Ehretia litoralis 
Gurke) closely resembles Hilsenbergia 
petiolaris but the underside of the leaves is 
pubescent to woolly in the former and glabrous 
in the latter. Hilsenbergia nemoralis is re-
stricted to Kenya, Tanzania and Mozambique 
and is found in the same coastal habitat as 
Hilsenbergia petiolaris, but also further inland 
and at higher altitudes. The Swahili names 
HOLABRHENA 329 
'mbunduki' and 'mtundutundu' are used for 
both species and relate to the hollow stems. 
The roots of Hilsenbergia nemoralis are used in 
a decoction in Tanzania to cure stomach-ache. 
Hilsenbergia lyciacea (Thulin) J.S.Mill, (syno-
nym: Bourreria lyciacea Thulin) occurs in 
Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya and Madagascar and 
can be distinguished by its distinctly branched 
style and flowers that are solitary or 2 to-
gether. In Madagascar it is used to treat diar-
rhoea and haemorrhaging. 
Ecology Hilsenbergia petiolaris is found in 
dry coastal forest, littoral scrub vegetation and 
on coral cliffs, just above the high-tide mark 
and sand dunes, mainly up to 30 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Hilsen-
bergia petiolaris is fairly restricted in habitat 
requirements but there are no threats of ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Hilsenbergia 
petiolaris will remain of limited use only. 
Major references Lovett, Ruffo & Gereau, 
2003; Miller, 2003; Thulin, 1987. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Gurib-
Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Verdcourt, 1991. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
HOLARRHENA FLORIBUNDA (G.Don) 
T.Durand & Schinz 
Protologue Etudes fl. Congo: 190 (1896). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number In = 20 
Synonyms Holarrhena africana A.DC. 
(1844), Holarrhena wulfsbergii Stapf (1902). 
Vernacular names False rubber tree, co-
nessi bark, kurchi bark (En). Holarrhène, ho-
larrhène du Sénégal (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Holar-
rhena floribunda occurs from Senegal east to 
Sudan, and south to DR Congo and Cabinda 
(Angola). 
Uses The bark is widely applied in West 
Africa, in decoction or macerated in palm wine, 
to treat dysentery and diarrhoea. In Senegal, 
the roots are used for the same purposes, and 
are further used to treat stomach complaints, 
including constipation and colic, to prevent 
spontaneous abortion, to treat sterility and as 
a diuretic to treat venereal diseases. An infu-
sion of the leaves is taken to treat diabetes and 
amenorrhoea. In Sierra Leone the leaves, 
mixed with kola nut are eaten to treat gonor-
rhoea. In Guinea Bissau the fruit is used to 
Holarrhena floribunda - wild 
prepare a remedy for dropsy. The latex is ap-
plied to snakebites. The stem bark and leaves 
are also widely used to treat fever, especially 
malaria. They are boiled and added to a bath, 
or taken orally. In Côte d'Ivoire a decoction of 
the bark is used as an enema or in baths to 
treat skin affections. The leaf sap is sprinkled 
on wounds as a haemostatic. The leaves, 
mashed with those of Myrianthus arboreus 
P.Beauv. and fruits of Capsicum pepper in wa-
ter, are applied as an enema against kidney 
pain. The latex has been used as arrow poison 
or fish poison. Like other lactiferous plants, it 
is considered galactagogue for cattle. 
The wood is used for carvings, combs, axe han-
dles and small utensils. In Ghana it is consid-
ered to be the best white wood available for 
these purposes. It is usable for packing cases 
and house construction. The stems are used for 
the construction of granaries in Benin, as they 
are easy to work and resistant to the beetle 
Prostephanus truncatus, a pest of stored grain. 
The wood is suitable for shaving into wood-
wool for packing fruit. Young stems are flexible 
and can be bent to make handles of walking 
sticks. The bark yields copious white sticky 
resinous latex, which is of little use, but can 
serve as glue. In Guinea Bissau the hair from 
the seeds is used for filling pillows. In Côte 
d'Ivoire the trees are retained in cacao planta-
tions to provide shade and fuel wood. In Ghana 
and DR Congo charcoal is produced from the 
wood. Edible caterpillars feed on the leaves. 
Holarrhena floribunda is an attractive tree 
with white fragrant flowers, and is widely used 
for ritual purposes. 
Properties Holarrhena floribunda yields a 
330 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
large number of alkaloids. The highest concen-
t ra t ion is found in the root ba rk (2-4%), fol-
lowed by the s tem bark (1-2.5%) and the leaves 
and flowers (less t h a n 1%). Most of the main 
alkaloids of the s tem bark and root bark are 
steroid alkaloids derived from conanine or the 
closely related conamine, which also occur in 
other Holarrhena species. The main alkaloid of 
the s tem bark and root ba rk is conessine, and 
minor compounds are norconessine (kurchine), 
conessimine, kurchamine , conimine, conamine 
and holar rhenine . The leaves contain mainly 
steroid alkaloids derived from pregnane , such 
as holarrhimine, holaphyllamine, holamine 
and holaphylline, as well as the alkaloid tria-
canth ine (an adenine derivative). The seeds 
contain conessine, norconessine, conamine and 
conarrhimine. 
Conessine h a s sedative, centra l nervous system 
depressant , cardiac depressant , ant ipyret ic and 
analgesic activities. It also h a s significant anti-
amoebic activity, bu t it needs to be used wi th 
caution because it can produce neurological 
problems such as vertigo, t remors , insomnia, 
agi tat ion or anxiety. Conessine also shows an-
t ibacterial and antifungal activities against a 
range of h u m a n pathogens in vitro. The steroid 
alkaloids present in the s tem ba rk and root 
bark have hypotensive activity and are simul-
taneously local anaes the t ic and spasmolytic, 
bu t they are also cardiotoxic. Tr iacanth ine also 
has hypotensive activity, bu t is also car-
diotonic, ant ispasmodic and a respiratory ana-
leptic. In addition, t r i acan th ine s t imula tes the 
development of m a t u r e red blood cells and acts 
on exper imental anaemia in rabbi ts . Many of 
the pregnane derivatives can be used as a 
s t a r t ing ma te r i a l for the par t i a l synthesis of 
pharmaceut ica l steroids, such as adrenocortical 
hormones (corticosteroids) and sex hormones 
(e.g. oestrogens, progestrogens and androgens). 
Holamine, holaphyl lamine and holaphylline 
show significant ant i- inf lammatory propert ies . 
They cause sodium retent ion and act as a diu-
retic in r a t s . Aqueous extracts of the root bark, 
s tem bark or leaves have relatively low toxic-
ity. A s tem bark extract showed significant 
activity in vitro agains t several h u m a n tumour 
cell lines. Different extracts of the s tem bark 
have shown significant inhibitory activity 
agains t drug-res is tant s t ra ins of Plasmodium 
falciparum in vitro. Lupeol long-chain fatty 
acid es ters were isolated as some of t he active 
compounds. Conessine was found to possess a 
wide range of disruptive activities aga ins t 4 
insect species, and showed potent ia l as a larval 
growth inhibitor, s ter i lant and ant ifeedant in 
laboratory tests . 
Callus cul tures from Holarrhena floribunda 
t issue produce alkaloids including conessine. 
Callus derived from root t issue was richer in 
alkaloids t h a n t h a t derived from s tem tissue. 
Colchicine h a d a marked positive effect on con-
essine production. 
The wood is soft and white with no distinction 
between sapwood and heartwood. It works 
well, is easy to nail, bu t is per ishable and not 
res i s tan t to te rmi tes . 
D e s c r i p t i o n Shrub or small to medium-
sized t ree up to 25 m tall, with a b u n d a n t white 
latex in all par t s ; bole up to 30 cm in diameter ; 
ba rk in young t rees near ly smooth, la ter corky, 
pale grey to dark brown. Leaves opposite, sim-
ple and entire; s t ipules obscure; petiole up to 1 
cm long, shortly hairy, g landular a t base; blade 
ovate to elliptical, 2-14(-20) cm x 2 . 5 - 8 ( - l l ) 
cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex acuminate 
to acute, short ly ha i ry to glabrous, p innate ly 
veined with 5-14 pai rs of la te ra l veins. Inflo-
rescence a seemingly axillary cyme, dense and 
many-flowered; peduncle 0.5-1.5 cm long; 
bracts l inear, 1-2 mm long, shortly hairy. 
Flowers bisexual, regular , 5-merous, fragrant; 
Holarrhena floribunda - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
part of fruit, one follicle removed; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
HOLARRHENA 331 
pedicel 0 .5-1 mm long; sepals elliptical, 1-4.5 
mm long, free or fused at base, shortly hairy; 
corolla tube cylindrical, 6.5-9 m m x 0.5-1.5 
mm, shortly hai ry outside and inside from the 
th roa t to the insert ion of the s tamens , lobes 
elliptical, 7-11.5 mm x 2-3 .5 mm, spreading to 
recurved, shortly hairy to glabrous, white; 
s t amens inserted 2 - 3 mm from the corolla 
base, included; ovary superior, ovoid, consist-
ing of 2 carpels connate a t extreme base, style 
cylindrical, c. 2 m m long, pistil head ovoid, 
s t igma 2-lobed. Frui t composed of 2 long and 
slender follicles 30-60 cm x 5-7 mm, pendu-
lous, dehiscent, pale grey to dark brown, many-
seeded. Seeds narrowly oblong, 11-16 m m long, 
grooved, glabrous, with a dense tuft of 4 - 6 cm 
long ha i r s a t apex. Seedling wi th epigeal ger-
minat ion; cotyledons 2 .5-3 mm long. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Holarrhena 
comprises 4 species, 2 of which occur in tropical 
Africa (one of these also in Asia) and 2 of which 
are restr ic ted to tropical Asia. Holarrhena 
floribunda and Holarrhena pubescens Wall, ex 
G.Don differ in flower size and fruit size, the 
flowers of Holarrhena floribunda being smaller 
and its fruits larger. The distr ibution a reas of 
the two species only overlap in eas te rn DR 
Congo. Holarrhena congolensis Stapf from 
western DR Congo and Cabinda (Angola) is 
considered a hybrid between Holarrhena pu-
bescens, introduced from Mozambique, and 
Holarrhena floribunda. 
A n a t o m y Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth r ing boundar ies indis-
tinct or absent . Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
(7: vessels in diagonal and/or radia l pa t te rn) ; 
(10: vessels in radia l mult iples of 4 or more 
common); 13: simple perforation plates; 22: 
intervessel pits a l t e rna te ; (23: shape of alter-
na t e pits polygonal); 24: intervessel pits minute 
(< 4 um); 25: intervessel pits small (4-7 um); 
29: ves tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pi ts with dis-
tinct borders; s imilar to intervessel pits in size 
and shape throughout the ray cell; 41 : mean 
tangent ia l d iameter of vessel lumina 50-100 
um; 48: 20—40 vessels per square mill imetre. 
Tracheids and fibres: (61: fibres with simple to 
minute ly bordered pits); 62: fibres with dis-
t inctly bordered pits; 66: non-septa te fibres 
present ; 69: fibres thin- to thick-walled. Axial 
parenchyma: 76: axial pa renchyma diffuse; 77 
axial pa renchyma diffuse-in-aggregates; 92 
four (3-4) cells per parenchyma s t rand; 93 
eight (5—8) cells per parenchyma s t rand . Rays 
97: r ay width 1-3 cells; (106: body ray cells 
procumbent with one row of upr ight and/or 
square margina l cells); 107: body ray cells pro-
cumbent with mostly 2-4 rows of upr ight 
and/or square margina l cells; 108: body ray 
cells procumbent with over 4 rows of upr ight 
and/or square marginal cells; 115: 4 -12 rays 
per mm. Mineral inclusions: 136: pr ismatic 
crystals present ; 142: pr ismatic crystals in 
chambered axial parenchyma cells. 
(M. Thiam, P. Dét ienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Holarrhena 
floribunda may become a t ree under humid 
conditions, bu t r emains a bushy shrub in sa-
vanna on lateri t ic soils. It sheds its leaves a t 
the end of t he dry season and new leaves ap-
pear a t the beginning of the ra iny season. The 
flowers appear shortly after the leaves; the 
flowering period is short . F ru i t s m a t u r e a few 
months after flowering, bu t do not dehisce un-
til 3-4 months later . Holarrhena floribunda 
coppices well and can survive bush fires by 
producing suckers from burned-down s tumps . 
E c o l o g y Holarrhena floribunda occurs in 
deciduous forest, open localities in dense forest, 
woodland and savanna , on clay, sand, lateri t ic 
soils or rocky outcrops, from sea-level up to 
1000 m al t i tude . 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Holarrhena 
floribunda is easily propagated by seed, suck-
ers or smal l -diameter cut t ings. Fresh seed h a s 
a high germinat ion ra te , bu t loses its viability 
after having been stored for a year. 
M a n a g e m e n t Former cultivation a t t empt s 
of Holarrhena floribunda in Burkina Faso in-
volved t ransp lan ta t ion of p lant le ts t aken from 
n a t u r a l populations, bu t 50% failure occurred 
because the roots had difficulty piercing the 
locally present lateri t ic ha rdpan . Good resul t s 
have been obtained with nursery-grown plants 
p lanted out a t a spacing of 3 m x 3 m in a soil 
wi thout la ter i te , preferably with mulching. 
Shade should be avoided. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s In Nigeria larvae of the 
Sa turn i id butterfl ies Imbrasia epimethea and 
Bunaea alcinoe seriously defoliate Holarrhena 
floribunda. They a re both ea ten in DR Congo. 
H a r v e s t i n g Populat ions of Holarrhena 
floribunda in Burkina Faso a re extensively 
harves ted for their s tem bark . The root ba rk is 
difficult to ha rves t in t he h a r d lateri t ic soils; 
therefore harves t ing s tem bark is preferred, 
despite i ts lower conessine content. The s tem 
bark is harves ted by coppicing or peeling. 
S tems of less t h a n 0.5 cm diameter have a low 
alkaloid content and should be discarded. In 
case of peeling, ba rk pieces are vertically 
332 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
stripped from trunks, taking care not to ring 
the tree and damage the vascular system. 
Yield Bushy shrubs on hard, poor soils con-
tain the highest levels of conessine. The con-
essine content of the stem bark and leaves in-
creases as a function of the stem diameter. The 
yield of a 5-year-old plantation was estimated 
at 975 kg/ha of stem bark and 7.8 kg/ha of con-
essine. The maximum content is attained at 8— 
12 years. 
Handling after harvest The bark of Holar-
rhena floribunda is dried for later use or trade. 
Debarked wood can serve as firewood. 
Genetic resources In the relatively dry 
West African countries, the bark of Holarrhena 
floribunda is overharvested and the species 
has become endangered. In the forest zone, it is 
still widespread and common, and not at risk of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects The steroid alkaloids of Holar-
rhena spp. might be usable as starting material 
for the partial synthesis of steroids of pharma-
ceutical interest, and thus deserve further at-
tention. There is an urgent need to domesticate 
Holarrhena floribunda or at least develop sus-
tainable harvesting methods of the bark in the 
Sahel zone to protect the species from local 
extinction. 
Major references Abreu et al., 1999; Bur-
kill, 1985; de Kruif, 1981; Fotie et al., 2006; 
Lévy et al., 1990; Neuwinger, 2000; Oliver-
Bever, 1986; Tamboura et al., 2005; World 
Agroforestry Centre, undated. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Akpalu, 1998; Arbonnier, 2002; Bisset, 
1981; Bouillard, 1987; Chukwurah, 1997; 
Fortin, Lô & Maynart, 1990; Guissou, Millogo-
Koné & Kaboré, 1992; Herzog, 1994; Inside-
Wood, undated; Kossou, 1992; Latham, 2004; 
Sourabie, Kabore & Guissou, 1994; Tamboura 
et al., 2004; Wongsatit Chuakul, Noppamas 
Soonthornchareonnon & Promjit Saralamp, 
1999b. 
Sources of illustration de Kruif, 1981. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
HOLARRHENA PUBESCENS Wall, ex G.Don 
Protologue Gen. hist. 4: 78 (1837). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2re = 22 
Synonyms Holarrhena antidysenterica (L.) 
Wall, ex A.DC. (1844) p.p., Holarrhena febri-
fuga Klotzsch (1862). 
Vernacular names Conessi, fever pod, 
holarrhena, kurchi bark, tellichery bark (En). 
Ecorce de conessie (Fr). Quina, erva do Mala-
bar (Po). Mti mweupe, mkwale (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Holar-
rhena pubescens is indigenous in the eastern 
part of tropical Africa and in tropical Asia 
(from India to Vietnam). In Africa, it occurs 
from eastern DR Congo and Kenya south to 
northern South Africa. It is planted in botani-
cal gardens in Africa, India and the Indian 
Ocean Islands. 
Uses The stem bark and root bark of Holar-
rhena pubescens are used throughout its distri-
bution area in the treatment of amoebic dysen-
tery. The stem bark is listed in the Pharmaco-
poeia of India. Although slow in action com-
pared with emetine, it is less toxic and can be 
administered orally. The bark has astringent, 
anthelminthic, stomachic, febrifugal and tonic 
properties. In Kenya the pounded leaves in 
water are taken to cure stomach-ache. An infu-
sion of the roots is furthermore taken to stimu-
late milk production. In southern Africa an 
infusion of the powdered root is taken to treat 
constipation, asthma, abdominal pains and 
infertility. It is also taken as an abortifacient 
and aphrodisiac. The root boiled in milk is ap-
plied against snakebites and is used in the 
treatment of venereal diseases. A hot decoction 
of the stem bark is used as a gargle to treat 
toothache. Juice from the fruit is taken to treat 
cough. In India the bark and leaves are exter-
nally applied to cure scabies, boils, ulcers and 
haemorrhoids. A powder prepared from the 
roots and leaves is administered to stop haem-
orrhages after childbirth and nose bleeding. 
The oil from the seeds is considered to possess 
similar properties as the bark. 
Holarrhena pubescens - wild 
HOLARRHENA 333 
The wood is popular for turning and carving. It 
is used to make small articles such as combs, 
picture frames, carved boxes, toys, spoons, 
knives, walking sticks and beads, and some-
times for furniture and ploughs. It has been 
used to make paper. Holarrhena pubescens 
may prove useful for the reforestation of defor-
ested land in comparatively dry regions, also 
because it is not readily browsed even by goats. 
A dye similar to henna is extracted from the 
leaves, while the wood ash is used as a mor-
dant. The floss from the seeds is used for stuff-
ing pillows. Holarrhena pubescens is also culti-
vated in India as an ornamental for its attrac-
tive flowers. 
Production and international trade Al-
though Holarrhena pubescens has been known 
as a medicinal plant since historic times, data 
on its production and international trade are 
scarce. It is mainly grown or collected for do-
mestic or local use, and the root bark is sold in 
local markets for medicinal purposes, e.g. in 
Zimbabwe and South Africa. There is some 
trade through internet, mainly from India. 
Properties The stem bark, root bark and 
seeds of Holarrhena pubescens yield more than 
40 alkaloids. The highest concentration is 
found in the stem bark and root bark, up to 
4.3%, but only 0.4% has been reported for flow-
ering plants. The leaves contain 1-1.5% and 
the seeds 0.6—1.8%. According to the Pharma-
copoeia of India, the bark should contain about 
2% alkaloids. Most of the alkaloids of the stem 
bark and root bark are steroid alkaloids de-
rived from conanine or the closely related 
conamine, which also occur in other Holar-
rhena species. The main alkaloid of the stem 
bark and root bark is conessine; other com-
pounds are norconessine (kurchine), cones-
simine, kurchamine, kurchessine, kurcho-
lessine, conimine, conamine and holarrhenine. 
The leaves contain mainly steroid alkaloids 
derived from pregnane, such as holarrhimine, 
holaphyllamine, holamine and holaphylline, as 
well as the alkaloid triacanthine (an adenine 
derivative). Various amino-glycosteroids are 
also present in the leaves. These substances 
contain an amino-sugar and in some of them, 
e.g. holarosine and holacurtine, the steroidal 
part of the molecule is a cardenolide. The seeds 
contain conessine, norconessine, conamine and 
conarrhimine. 
Conessine has sedative, central nervous system 
depressant, cardiac depressant, antipyretic and 
analgesic activities. It also has significant anti-
amoebic activity, but it needs to be used with 
caution because it can produce neurological 
problems such as vertigo, tremors, insomnia, 
agitation or anxiety. Conessine also shows an-
tibacterial and antifungal activities against a 
range of human pathogens in vitro. Several 
other steroidal alkaloids also show antibacte-
rial and antifungal activities. The steroid alka-
loids present in the stem bark and root bark 
have hypotensive activity and are simultane-
ously local anaesthetic and spasmolytic, but 
they are also cardiotoxic. Triacanthine also has 
hypotensive activity, but is also cardiotonic, 
antispasmodic and a respiratory analeptic. In 
addition, triacanthine stimulates the develop-
ment of mature red blood cells and acts on ex-
perimental anaemia in rabbits. Many of the 
pregnane derivatives can be used as a starting 
material for the partial synthesis of pharma-
ceutical steroids, such as adrenocortical hor-
mones (corticosteroids) and sex hormones (e.g. 
oestrogens, progestrogens and androgens). 
Holamine, holaphyllamine and holaphylline 
show significant anti-inflammatory properties. 
Aqueous extracts of the root bark, stem bark or 
leaves have relatively low toxicity. The alco-
holic extract of the fruit showed anticancer 
activity against human epidermoid carcinoma 
of the nasopharynx in tissue culture. The 
aqueous extract of the fruits exhibited hypogly-
caemic effects in rats. 
Different extracts of Holarrhena pubescens 
seed or bark showed significant antibacterial 
and antifungal activities against a wide range 
of human pathogens, including several antibi-
otic-resistant strains. The bark extract also 
shows antiplasmodial activity. A stem bark 
decoction showed anti-ulcerogenic effects in 
different models of gastroduodenal ulcers in 
rats. It also showed antimicrobial activity 
against enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli 
strains. Conessine was found to possess a wide 
range of disruptive activities against 4 insect 
species, and showed potential as a larval 
growth inhibitor, sterilant and antifeedant in 
laboratory tests. 
Callus cultures of Holarrhena pubescens yielded 
a maximum of 300 mg alkaloids per 100 g dry 
cells in 40 days; a suspension culture reached 
130 mg per 100 g dry cells in 8 days. The alka-
loid production can be boosted by adding cho-
lesterol as a precursor. About 90% of the total 
alkaloids produced in the cell cultures were 
conessine. In later experiments, also amino-
pregnane and other conanine type alkaloids 
were obtained. 
The wood of Holarrhena pubescens is moder-
334 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ately soft and white, with straight grain and 
fine and even texture; there is no distinction 
between sapwood and heartwood. The wood 
turns yellowish or pinkish with age. The tim-
ber seasons well and develops few end splits 
and surface cracks with little tendency to 
warping, but is liable to damage by insects. Air 
drying as log reduces surface cracking, 
whereas kiln drying improves the colour of the 
timber and reduces liability to insect attack. 
The wood is easy to saw and machine and 
fairly durable under cover. 
Adulterations and substitutes In India 
the seeds or bark of Holarrhena pubescens are 
sometimes adulterated with those of Wrightia 
tinctoria R.Br., which do not have the same 
medicinal properties, although both show anti-
bacterial activity. The seeds of Holarrhena 
pubescens are intensely bitter, while those of 
Wrightia tinctoria are tasteless. The stem bark 
of Funtumia africana (Benth.) Stapf also con-
tains steroid alkaloids of the conanine-type, 
with similar pharmacological activities as ex-
tracts of the stem bark of Holarrhena pubes-
cens. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 9(— 
18) m tall, with abundant white latex in all 
parts; bole up to 25 cm in diameter; bark in 
young trees nearly smooth, later corky, longi-
tudinally fissured, pale to dark grey; 
branchlets shortly hairy. Leaves opposite, sim-
ple and entire; stipules obscure; petiole up to 1 
cm long, shortly hairy, glandular at base; blade 
almost circular to ovate or elliptical, 1.5-20 cm 
x 1.5-11 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
acuminate to acute, shortly hairy to glabrous, 
pinnately veined with 5-25 pairs of lateral 
veins. Inflorescence a seemingly axillary cyme, 
rather lax, many-flowered; peduncle 1-1.5 cm 
long, shortly hairy; bracts linear, 1-2 mm long, 
shortly hairy. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, fragrant; pedicel 0.5-1 mm long; se-
pals elliptical to linear, 2-12 mm long, free or 
fused at base, shortly hairy; corolla tube cylin-
drical, 9-19 mm x 0.5-2 mm, shortly hairy 
outside and inside from the throat to the inser-
tion of the stamens, lobes elliptical, 10-24(-30) 
mm x 3—8 mm, spreading to recurved, shortly 
hairy to glabrous, white; stamens inserted 1.5-
2.5 mm from the corolla base, included; ovary 
superior, ovoid, consisting of 2 carpels connate 
at extreme base, style cylindrical, c. 1 mm long, 
pistil head ovoid, stigma 2-lobed. Fruit com-
posed of 2 long and slender follicles 20-38 cm x 
2—9 mm, pendulous, dehiscent, pale grey to 
dark brown, many-seeded. Seeds narrowly ob-
Holarrhena pubescens - 1, tree habit; 2, flower-
ing twig; 3, opened flower; 4, fruit; 5, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
long, 9—16 mm long, grooved, glabrous, with a 
dense tuft of 2.5-4.5 cm long hairs at apex. 
Seedling with epigeal germination; cotyledons 
2-3 mm long. 
Other botanical information Holarrhena 
comprises 4 species, 2 of which occur in tropical 
Africa (one of these also in Asia) and 2 of which 
are restricted to tropical Asia. Holarrhena pu-
bescens and Holarrhena floribunda (G.Don) 
T.Durand & Schinz differ in flower size and 
fruit size, the flowers of Holarrhena pubescens 
being larger and its fruits smaller. The distri-
bution areas of the two species only overlap in 
eastern DR Congo. Holarrhena congolensis 
Stapf from western DR Congo and Cabinda 
(Angola) is considered a hybrid between Holar-
rhena pubescens, introduced from Mozambique, 
and Holarrhena floribunda. 
Growth and development Holarrhena 
pubescens sheds its leaves at the end of the dry 
season and new leaves appear at the beginning 
of the rainy season. The flowers appear shortly 
after the leaves; the flowering period is short. 
Fruits mature a few months after flowering, 
but do not dehisce until 3-4 months later. 
Holarrhena pubescens coppices well and can 
survive bush fires by producing sucker shoots 
HUNTERIA 335 
from burned-down stumps. Juvenile plants are 
more susceptible to damage by fire than older 
ones. Though sensitive to frost, the plant re-
covers easily from damage. It can stand slight 
shade but develops best in full light and it is 
drought-hardy. Natural reproduction is abun-
dant owing to regular and copious seeding from 
an early age, comparative immunity of the 
plant to damage by animals and its power of 
recovery from injury. Seeds, that are dispersed 
by wind germinate during the early rains, and 
seedlings attain 10-15 cm by the end of the 
first year. In subsequent years, growth is more 
rapid, the mean annual diameter increment 
being 7-8 mm. In India, early height increment 
of Holarrhena pubescens is low, only 10-15 
cm/year under natural conditions. 
Ecology Holarrhena pubescens occurs in dry 
evergreen to dry deciduous forest, scrub wood-
land, savanna, or in rocky localities, often near 
watercourses, up to 1500 m altitude. It is a 
pioneer species that quickly invades open 
spaces. 
Propagation and planting Holarrhena 
pubescens can be propagated by seed, either by 
direct sowing or by raising seedlings in a nurs-
ery. Fresh seeds have a high percentage of 
germination, but in seeds more than one year 
old the viability is low. There are 32,000-
35,000 seeds/kg. The seed usually germinates 
in 2-3 weeks. In India the species is success-
fully intercropped with field crops. 
Tissue culture of Holarrhena pubescens 
through nodal and shoot-segment expiants has 
been successful. 
Management As far as is known, Holar-
rhena pubescens is not cultivated on a large 
scale. In India it is used in reclaiming waste-
land. Weeding, periodic thinning and loosening 
of soil are beneficial. Established plants are 
fast growing and require little or no manage-
ment. For ornamental purposes shrubs are 
pruned to improve their appearance. To main-
tain vigorous growth, pruning should start as 
early as 12 months after planting and should 
be repeated at least once a year. The degree of 
pruning depends on the management objec-
tives: severe pruning favours stem diameter 
growth and bark production; denser stands are 
needed for rapid leaf production. 
Harvesting Stem bark, root bark, leaves 
and seeds are collected for medicinal purposes 
from the wild. The root bark and stem bark are 
also harvested from cultivated trees. The stem 
bark is mainly collected from 8-12 year-old 
trees. The alkaloid content varies with the age 
of the tree and the season. 
Handling after harvest The bark needs to 
be freed from attached wood, and is cut into 
small pieces of 1-6 cm long and 1-7 mm thick. 
The dried stem bark and root bark should be 
stored in dry, well-closed containers. 
Genetic resources Holarrhena pubescens is 
widely distributed in tropical Africa and conti-
nental Asia and is found in open anthropogenic 
habitats. Therefore the risk of genetic erosion 
seems limited. 
Prospects Holarrhena pubescens is an im-
portant medicinal plant in the tropics. Its ster-
oid alkaloids may be useful for synthesis of 
pharmaceutical products. Conessine is a possi-
bly valuable alternative for well-known drugs 
like emetine in the treatment of amoebic dys-
entery. Outside India there is no commercial 
production, and this deserves more attention, 
given the easy propagation and management of 
Holarrhena pubescens. Development of sus-
tainable collection methods is recommended 
and the possibilities for using leaves or seed 
instead of stem and root bark deserve investi-
gation. 
Major references de Kruif, 1981; Jolly & 
Mechery, 1996; Kaul & Atal, 1983; Kumar, 
Sharma & Agrawal, 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Raha & Roy, 2001; Williamson, 1955; Wongsa-
tit Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon 
& Promjit Saralamp, 1999b. 
Other references Aqil et al., 2005; Begum 
et a l , 1994; Bhutani et al., 1990; Bisset, 1981; 
Chakraborty & Brantner, 1999; Coates Pal-
grave, 1983; Endress et al., 1990; Gelfand et 
a l , 1985; Jayaswal, 1977; Kavitha, Shilpa & 
Devaraj, 2003; Khan, 1987; Kokwaro, 1993; 
Omino & Kokwaro, 1993; Omino, 1996; Panda 
et al., 1991; Panda, Mishra & Bisaria, 1992; 
Raha & Roy, 2003; Raman, Sultana & Anwar, 
2004; Rani & Khullar, 2004; Simonsen et a l , 
2001. 
Sources of illustration Wongsatit Chua-
kul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Prom-
jit Saralamp, 1999b. 
Authors A. Maroyi 
HUNTERIA CONGOLANA Pichon 
Protologue Bot. Soc. Brot. sér. 2, 27: 101 
(1953). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Hunte-
ria congolana occurs in DR Congo and Kenya. 
Uses In DR Congo and Kenya a decoction or 
336 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
infusion of the ba rk of Hunteria congolana is 
t a k e n as an anthelmint ic and to t r ea t fever, 
s tomach-ache and diarrhoea. The seeds a re 
t aken for the same purposes. A root decoction, 
mixed with pa r t s of other p lant species, is used 
in DR Congo to make arrow poison. 
P r o p e r t i e s Some 23 indole alkaloids have 
been isolated from Hunteria congolana. Ebur-
namonine (synonyms: v inburnine , vincamone) 
from the roots and akuammic ine and pseudoa-
kuammigine from the seeds have an effect on 
the vasomotor and respiratory centres of the 
bra in . In tes ts with rodents and cats oral appli-
cation gave an increased tonus, increased blood 
pressure and in some cases s t rong muscular 
contractions and even death . Low doses may 
resul t in an increase of ar ter ia l blood pressure . 
These activities a re comparable to those of 
s t rychnine. Pseudoakuammigine is an indirect, 
reversible and competitive parasympathomi-
metic. 
B o t a n y Shrub or small to medium-sized t ree 
up to 20 m tall, with milky to yellow latex in all 
pa r t s ; bole s inuous or s t raight , up to 30 cm in 
diameter , fluted. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; st ipules absent; petiole 1-2 cm long; 
blade elliptical to oblong, up to 18.5 cm x 6 cm, 
acute to obtuse a t base, acumina te a t apex, 
glabrous, pinnately veined. Inflorescence a 
te rmina l or axillary cyme 3-3.5 cm long, 7 -
18(-45)-flowered; peduncle up to 1.5 cm long. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 2 -
5 mm long; sepals almost free, erect, ovate, 1— 
1.5 mm long; corolla white or yellow, creamy 
pink in bud, tube cylindrical, c. 5 mm long, 
lobes narrowly ovate to oblong, 4 - 8 mm long; 
s t amens inser ted in the upper pa r t of the co-
rolla tube jus t above a belt of ha i rs ; ovary su-
perior, composed of 2 separa te carpels, gradu-
ally nar rowing into the style. Fru i t consisting 
of 2 separa te ellipsoid to globose indéhiscent 
mericarps, somewhat flattened, 2-2.5 cm long, 
yellow to br ight orange, smooth, dull, 1—3-
seeded. Seeds ovoid to ellipsoid, 7-15 m m long; 
cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Hunteria comprises 12 species, which all occur 
in Africa. Hunteria congolana, Hunteria umbel-
lata (K.Schum.) Hall.f. and Picralima nitida 
(Stapf) T.Durand & H.Durand are confused in 
the l i te ra ture . Hunteria congolana flowers and 
fruits throughout the year. 
E c o l o g y Hunteria congolana occurs in the 
unders torey of p r imary forest, rarely in secon-
dary forest and gallery forests, a t 500-1700 m 
al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g In DR 
Congo Hunteria congolana is fairly widespread 
and it does not appear to be th rea tened . In 
Kenya it h a s been collected only twice on 
Mount Kulal. The s t a tu s of the Kenyan popula-
tion is uncer ta in but deserves in situ and ex 
situ conservation. 
P r o s p e c t s Hunteria congolana, other 
Hunteria spp. and also the closely related 
Picralima nitida deserve more a t tent ion from 
researchers because of the in teres t ing pharma-
cological activities. Careful distinction of the 
different species is necessary, as the number 
and type of alkaloids within each species only 
par t ly overlaps with others . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill, 1985; Burkill, 
2000; Neuwinger, 1998; Omino, 1996. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Neuwinger, 2000; Omino, 
2002; Terash ima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
A u t h o r s M.J. Boone 
HUNTERIA UMBELLATA (K.Schum.) Ha l l i e r f. 
P r o t o l o g u e J a h r b . Hamburg . Wiss. Anst . 
Beih. 17(3): 190 (1900). 
F a m i l y Apocynaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 22 
S y n o n y m s Picralima elliotii (Stapf) Stapf 
(1908), Hunteria eburnea Pichon (1953), 
Hunteria elliotii (Stapf) Pichon (1953), Hunte-
ria mayumbensis Pichon (1953). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Demouain (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Hunte-
ria umbellata occurs th roughout West and 
Centra l Africa, east to central DR Congo, and 
south to Cabinda (Angola). 
U s e s In Sierra Leone the bark of Hunteria 
umbellata is made into a bi t ter tonic and used 
as a stomachic and as a lotion to t r ea t fever. A 
fresh root-bark extract is applied in Côte 
d'Ivoire to sores caused by leprosy. This medi-
cation is highly toxic and fatalities have been 
recorded. Fru i t s a re toxic and are used for 
cr iminal purposes. The fruit is rich in latex 
t h a t is a n ingredient of arrow poison in Côte 
d'Ivoire. In Ghana and Nigeria t he root and 
s tem bark are used as an anthelmint ic , espe-
cially agains t guinea worm, filaria worms and 
schistosomiases (causing bilharzia) . Aqueous 
and alcoholic extracts of the seeds are used as 
a cure for piles, yaws, diabetes and stomach 
ulcers in Nigeria. The bark and the root are 
used as a bi t ter tonic in Nigeria, and powdered 
root and root decoctions are used to prevent 
miscarr iage and to t r ea t menorrhagia . In Cam-
eroon a ba rk or fruit decoction is t aken to t rea t 
HUNTERIA 337 
stomach-ache, liver problems and hernia. The 
plant is also used in the treatment of geriatric 
problems. Hunteria umbellata extracts are 
used in Germany for phytotherapeutic pur-
poses, to reduce the heart rate, as an aphrodi-
siac, to decrease blood pressure and reduce 
blood lipid content. 
The creamy to yellowish brown, hard wood is 
locally used for carving, making combs, spoons, 
tool handles, police batons, carpenter planes, 
weaving shuttles and other small articles. In 
Nigeria forked stems are used as house posts 
and are considered very durable and immune 
to termites. In Côte d'Ivoire the wood is used as 
firewood. 
Production and international trade In 
Ghana the bark of Hunteria umbellata is har-
vested and is exported for medicinal use, but 
quantities are unknown. The major destination 
seems to be Germany. 
Properties Some 20 indole alkaloids have 
been isolated from Hunteria umbellata, most 
occurring in the stem bark and root bark. Alka-
loids that have shown pharmacological activity 
are eburnamine, eburnamonine (synonyms: 
vinburnine, vincamone), hunteriamine, hunterine, 
vincamine and corymine. Eburnamonine, eb-
urnamine and hunterine show cardio-vascular 
properties, some symphathomimetic properties 
and a strong and lasting hypotensive action. 
Eburnamonine has the same pharmacological 
effect as strychnine and is useful as a cere-
brovascular agent. This alkaloid is abundantly 
present in the seeds and is a stimulant of the 
central nervous system, and seems to have a 
positive effect on the general blood circulation. 
Vincamine exhibits significant activity as an 
anti-hypertensive and sedative agent. Research 
supports the traditional use of seed extracts in 
Nigeria for treatment of diabetes, as it in-
creases the activity of glucokinase and lowers 
blood glucose levels in alloxan diabetic rabbits. 
Hunteriamine showed hypotension of short 
duration in dogs and cats. 
Aqueous and methanolic extracts of the leaves, 
seeds and stem bark have shown significant 
anthelmintic activity against earthworms. The 
methanolic extract of the stem bark has the 
highest activity. Tests with leaf extracts have 
shown molluscicidal action on the freshwater 
snail Bulinus globulus. 
The wood is very hard, fine grained, creamy, 
brown to yellow or orange. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 15(-22) m 
tall, with colourless or milky latex in all parts; 
bole sinuous or straight, up to 40 cm in diame-
Hunteria umbellata -
flower; 3, part of fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique 
1, flowering twig; 2, 
iu Bénin 
ter, fluted; outer bark 1 mm thick, rough or 
smooth, grey to dirty brown; crown dense. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 1-2.5 cm long; blade elliptical to 
oblong, up to 22.5 cm x 11 cm, cuneate to ob-
tuse at base, obtuse to acuminate at apex, gla-
brous, leathery, pinnately veined. Inflorescence 
a terminal, rarely axillary, dense to lax cyme, 
10—20(-80)-flowered; peduncle up to 1.5 cm 
long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fra-
grant; pedicel 3—7 mm long; sepals almost free, 
broadly ovate to triangular, 0.5—2 mm long, 
erect and stuck to the corolla tube with thick 
resinous substance; corolla white, creamy or 
pale yellow, with cylindrical tube 4—8 mm long, 
lobes 6-12 mm long, twisted in bud, with a belt 
of hairs inside the tube just below the insertion 
of the stamens; stamens inserted in the upper 
part of the corolla tube; ovary superior, com-
posed of 2 separate carpels, abruptly narrowing 
into the style, terminating in a stigmatic ellip-
soid basal part and a 2-lobed apex. Fruit con-
sisting of 2 separate globose mericarps 3—6 cm 
long, yellow, smooth, 8-25-seeded. Seeds ob-
long to ellipsoid, 1-1.5 cm long, flattened at 
338 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
one side. 
Hunteria comprises 12 species, which all occur 
in Africa. In Ghana the bark of Hunteria 
ghanensis J.B.Hall & Leeuwenb., which occurs 
in Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana, is mixed with some 
other species and taken as a stomachic and to 
treat difficulties with urination. It is confined 
in the south of Ghana to extremely dry forest, 
where the expansion of agriculture has caused 
severe decline of the habitat. Therefore, it 
qualifies as 'endangered' on the IUCN Red 
List. Hunteria ballayi Hua occurs in Central 
Africa (Cameroon, Central African Republic, 
Gabon and Congo). Women swallow the seed 
together with the sweet mesocarp as a fertility 
drug. Hunteria simii (Stapf) H.Huber is dis-
tributed in West Africa (Guinea, Sierra Leone, 
Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire). The hard, yellow 
wood is used to make small objects in Côte 
d'Ivoire. No records have been found on me-
dicinal use. Hunteria umbellata, Hunteria con-
golana Pichon and Picralima nitida (Stapf) 
T.Durand. & H.Durand have been confused in 
the literature. Hunteria umbellata flowers and 
fruits all year round. 
Ecology Hunteria umbellata occurs in rain 
forest and gallery forest, also in secondary for-
est,up to 600 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Hunteria 
umbellata is considered a threatened species in 
Ghana and Nigeria. 
Prospects Many alkaloids have been iso-
lated from Hunteria umbellata, but little is 
known about the pharmacological activities of 
most of them. Some alkaloids show promising 
cerebrovascular and cardiovascular activities, 
which merit further research. As the habitat of 
Hunteria umbellata is disappearing fast, it is 
necessary to investigate possibilities for pro-
tecting it. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Dalziel, 
1937; Neuwinger, 2000; Oliver-Bever, 1986; 
Omino, 1996. 
Other references Adegoke & Alo, 1986; 
Bouquet & Debray, 1974; Burkill, 2000; En-
dress et al., 1996; Herzog, 1994; Oluwemimo & 
Usifoh, 2001; Raman & Mallam, 1994; Renner, 
1963; Vercauteren et a l , 1980. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors M.J. Boone 
HUNTERIA ZEYLANICA (Retz.) Gardner ex 
Thwaites 
Protologue Enum. pi. zeyl. 3: 191 (1860). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Hunteria corymbosa Roxb. 
(1824). 
Vernacular names Mziwaziwa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Hunte-
ria zeylanica is widely distributed in eastern 
Africa, from southern Somalia to Mozambique, 
and in tropical Asia. 
Uses In Kenya a leaf decoction of Hunteria 
zeylanica is drunk to cure stomach-ache. 
Pounded leaves mixed with water are given as 
a galactagogue to cows. 
The hard, whitish to yellowish wood is used for 
handles of knives, swords or axes, combs, 
boxes, sheaths and bows, and as firewood. The 
latex is used as a substitute for rubber. The 
tree is used as an ornamental because of its 
dark green shiny leaves and sweet-scented 
white flowers. 
Properties Over 20 indole alkaloids have 
been isolated from Hunteria zeylanica. The 
alkaloid corymine was extracted from the 
leaves. This compound aggravated convulsions 
induced by either picrotoxin or strychnine. In 
tests with mice, a crude methanol extract of 
the leaves produced biphasic effects on the 
central nervous system, depression and stimu-
lation, whereas corymine only had a stimula-
tory effect. A stem bark extract showed anti-
inflammatory activity in mice, and an inhibi-
tory effect on 5-lipoxygenase activity in vitro, 
but neither (—)-eburnamine nor pleiomutinine, 
major constituents of the alkaloid extract, were 
responsible for these activities. This extract 
also exhibited antinociceptive and antipyretic 
effects in mice and rats; the former effect may 
be mediated by the anti-inflammatory action. 
The results of tests with mice suggest that a 
stem bark extract has peripheral analgesic and 
mild antipyretic effects, with strictosidinic acid 
as the major active constituent. 
Botany Evergreen shrub or small to fairly 
large tree up to 15 m tall, with colourless or 
milky latex in all parts; bole sinuous or 
straight, up to 30 cm in diameter, fluted; bark 
smooth or slightly fissured, grey, inner bark 
bright orange. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-1.5 cm long; 
blade elliptical to oblong or obovate, up to 21 
cm x 7 cm, cuneate to rounded at base, 
rounded to acuminate at apex, leathery, gla-
HYMENOCARDIA 339 
Hunteria zeylanica - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
opened corolla; 3, pistil; 4, fruiting branch. 
Source: PROSEA 
brous, pinnately veined. Inflorescence a termi-
nal, compound, dichasial cyme, many-flowered; 
peduncle 1—4 cm long. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 4-10 mm long; 
sepals free, 1-2.5 mm long, with colleters in-
side, ovate to triangular or elliptical, obtuse to 
shortly acuminate at apex; corolla white to pale 
yellow, with almost cylindrical tube 6—10 mm 
long, pubescent inside below the stamens, lobes 
twisted in bud; stamens inserted in upper part 
of corolla tube, filaments short; ovary superior, 
composed of 2 separate carpels united at the 
extreme base by a disk-like thickening, style 
up to 7 mm long, terminating in a stigmatic 
globose basal part and a stigmoid apex. Fruit 
composed of 2 separate, obovoid to globose 
mericarps up to 3 cm long, stiped at base, yel-
low or orange, smooth, usually 2-seeded. Seeds 
oblong to ellipsoid, 1-1.5 cm long, smooth, or-
ange; cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Hunteria zeylanica flowers in January-
February in Mozambique, in September-
January in Kenya and all year round in Tan-
zania. 
Hunteria comprises 12 species, which all occur 
in Africa. Only Hunteria zeylanica extends to 
tropical Asia. Hunteria is related to Pleiocarpa 
and Picralima. 
Ecology Hunteria zeylanica occurs in dry 
coastal forest, mixed evergreen forest, gallery 
forest and wooded bushland. Along the coast it 
grows on sandy soil or coral rock, but it is also 
found on sandy gravelly soils along rivers 
inland, up to 350 m altitude. The trees can 
withstand waterlogging and salinity. 
Genetic resources and breeding Hunte-
ria zeylanica is locally common but restricted 
in its range in Africa and may therefore be 
threatened. There are no known accessions in 
genebanks. 
Prospects The results of pharmacological 
research, mainly from Thailand, show several 
interesting activities of Hunteria zeylanica 
extracts: anti-inflammatory, analgesic and 
antipyretic activities. These warrant more in-
vestigation towards the possible development 
of Hunteria zeylanica as a medicinal plant of 
importance. 
Major references Leeuwenberg et al., 1985; 
Omino, 1996; Omino, 2002; Sriana Azis, 2003. 
Other references Endress et al., 1996; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Leewanich et al., 1996; Lee-
wanich et al., 1997; Neuwinger, 1998; Omino & 
Kokwaro, 1993; Reanmongkol et al., 1995a; 
Reanmongkol et al., 1995b; Reanmongkol et 
al., 2000. 
Sources of illustration Sriana Azis, 2003. 
Authors M.J. Boone 
Based on PROSEA 12(3): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 3. 
HYMENOCARDIA ACIDA Tul. 
Protologue Ann. Sei. Nat., Bot. sér. 3, 15: 
256 (1851). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number n = 13 
Vernacular names Heart-fruit (En). 
Cceurs-volants (Fr). Uapau (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Hy-
menocardia acida occurs throughout tropical 
Africa, from Senegal east to Ethiopia and south 
to South Africa. 
Uses The acidic leaves, stem bark and roots 
are commonly used as medicines. A leaf infu-
sion is taken to treat chest complaints and 
smallpox, a leaf and root infusion is taken to 
treat oedema caused by malnutrition and an 
extract of the leafy twigs is rubbed in to 
strengthen sickly children. A leaf macerate or 
leaf decoction is taken to treat stomach-ache, 
340 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Hymenocardia acida - wild 
trypanosomiasis and coughs. A leaf decoction 
or leaf sap is used as eye drops to treat eye 
infections; together with honey they are taken 
to treat gall bladder problems and fever, and 
also as a bath to treat fever and haemorrhoids. 
Leaf sap is also used as ear drops to treat oti-
tis. Leaf powder is taken as snuff to treat 
headache; the vapour of the boiling leaves is 
inhaled to treat headache. Leaf powder is topi-
cally applied in friction to treat rheumatic 
pains, toothache and fever; it is also sprinkled 
on sores after washing. Leaf powder in food is 
taken to treat asthma. A leaf decoction is taken 
as an emetic and to treat snakebites. A decoc-
tion of the leafy twigs is used for bathing to 
treat tetanus, convulsions and exhaustion. 
The bitter stem bark is slightly astringent and 
causes copious salivation when chewed. In 
West Africa it is chewed together with kola 
(Cola spp.) to treat dysentery. A bark decoction 
is widely taken to treat pulmonary affections, 
including tuberculosis; it is also used as a 
steam bath, alone or with the fruits, to treat 
breathing difficulties and colds. The powdered 
bark, together with parts of other plants, is 
used as a macerate to treat fractures. The 
powdered bark with copper dust is sprinkled on 
syphilitic sores. Powdered bark in water or 
pulped bark is taken internally to treat ab-
dominal pains, diarrhoea, dysentery, men-
strual pains, female infertility, painful swell-
ings, cough and epileptic fits. The powdered 
bark in water or a bark decoction is applied as 
a poultice to treat colic, abscesses and tumours, 
eye infections, migraine and also skin afflic-
tions such as itch, prickly heat, parasites and 
leprosy. 
A root decoction or a leaf infusion is drunk 
against threatened abortion, as an aphrodisiac 
and to treat severe stomach-ache. A root decoc-
tion or root bark in porridge is taken as a febri-
fuge, to treat malaria, arterial hypertension 
and amoebic dysentery. It is also drunk or used 
as a mouth wash to treat toothache and in-
fected gums. Root sap and fruit juice are used 
as ear drops to treat earache and also to treat 
toothache. Root ash is also applied to treat 
toothache. Root powder is applied to skin dis-
eases. In southern Africa steam inhalations 
from the root powder are considered cleansing 
for the stomach. Powdered root in porridge is 
given to breast-feeding women to diminish the 
milk flow. Powdered fresh roots are also taken 
to treat anaemia, including sickle cell anaemia. 
Pulped roots and leaves are applied to haemor-
rhoids and rectal prolapse. A fresh root decoc-
tion is also taken to treat haemorrhoids. A root 
or stem bark decoction is taken as an antidote 
for plant poisoning. 
In Central Africa a brownish red dye obtained 
from the bark is used to colour raffia work and 
cloth; the bark contains much tannin and is 
used for tanning leather. The young leaves and 
twigs are commonly browsed by cattle and in 
DR Congo they are eaten by edible caterpillars. 
Bees commonly visit the flowers for nectar and 
pollen. The young fruits are eaten by children, 
although they are rather sour. In West and 
Central Africa, the wood is considered brittle, 
and not much used as a timber. In East and 
southern Africa the wood is known for its 
hardness and resistance to termites; it is used 
to make house posts, poles, pestles and tool 
handles. The wood is commonly used as fuel 
and for charcoal production; it burns slowly 
with a hot flame and little smoke. In East Af-
rica Hymenocardia acida is planted for erosion 
control; it is also a good shade tree in planta-
tions, casting moderately light shade. Young 
leafy shoots of Hymenocardia acida are some-
times eaten as a condiment. The twigs are used 
as toothbrush. The stem bark is made into 
rope. 
Properties Preliminary studies of the chem-
istry of Hymenocardia acida showed the pres-
ence of saponins. From the root bark the 
cyclopeptide alkaloid hymenocardine was iso-
lated. All plant parts contain tannin, the stem 
bark being richest (up to 12%). The bark con-
tains amphiphile lupane-type triterpenoids, 
which are associated with its antimalarial and 
anti-inflammatory activities. 
A dichloromethane extract of the leafy twigs 
HYMENOCAEDIA 341 
showed significant antitrypanosomal activity; 
different root and leaf extracts only showed 
moderate activity. Methylene chloride and 
methanolic stem bark and root extracts showed 
moderate activity against Plasmodium falcipa-
rum in vitro. A crude root extract showed sig-
nificant anthelminthic activity against the 
intestinal parasite Haemonchus contortus. In 
an in-vitro test of plants from DR Congo, water 
extracts, and to a lesser extent ethanol ex-
tracts, of the leaves showed significant effect 
against sickle cell formation. An ethanolic root 
extract showed marked antibacterial activity 
against Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus 
aureus, Streptococcus mutans and Salmonella 
enterica in vitro, as well as spasmolytic and 
anti-inflammatory activities in vivo in mice 
and rats. An aqueous stem bark extract 
showed significant anti-ulcer activity against 
induced gastric lesions in rats. A methanolic 
leaf extract showed very high radical scaveng-
ing activity, comparable to tocopherol. Metha-
nol extracts from the root bark exhibited mod-
erate cytotoxic activity against 60 human cell 
lines of the National Cancer Institute of the 
United States. 
The wood is pale brown or pink, darkening to 
orange, hard, with fine texture and conspicu-
ous annual rings. 
Description Dioecious, deciduous shrub or 
small tree up to 6(-10) m tall, often straggling; 
bole up to 30 cm in diameter, often stunted or 
contorted; bark smooth, pale brown or grey, 
flaking off, showing a powdery reddish to or-
ange inner bark; upper branches spreading, 
lower branches drooping; young shoots short-
hairy. Leaves alternate, simple and entire; 
stipules 1-3 mm long, linear, soon falling; peti-
ole 0.5-1.5 cm long, short-hairy; blade ellipti-
cal-ovate to oblong-oblanceolate, 2.5-9.5 cm x 
1.5-5 cm, base rounded, apex rounded to ob-
tuse, short-hairy to almost glabrous above, 
densely soft-hairy below or almost glabrous 
except main veins, sparingly to evenly yellow-
ish gland-dotted. Male inflorescence a dense 
axillary spike up to 7 cm long, solitary or fasci-
cled; female inflorescence a terminal few-
flowered raceme up to 3 cm long, usually sev-
eral together, or flowers solitary. Flowers uni-
sexual, petals absent, disk absent; male flowers 
sessile, calyx 1.5-2 mm in diameter, shallowly 
5-lobed, lobes obtuse, ciliate, pinkish, stamens 
4-6, c. 1.2 mm long, free; female flowers with 
pedicel c. 1 mm long, extending up to 2 cm in 
fruit, sepals 5-9, linear, 1.5-4 mm long, some-
times fused at base, soon falling, pinkish, ovary 
Hymenocardia acida - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
female flower; 3, infructescence. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
superior, obovoid, 2-winged in upper half, 
gland-dotted, glabrous to densely short-hairy, 
glaucous to red, 2-celled, styles 2(-3), 2-20 mm 
long, free. Fruit a V-shaped, flattened capsule, 
2-3.5 cm x 2.5-4 cm, with 2 apical divergent 
rounded to rhomboid membranous striate 
wings, rounded to cordate at base, glabrous to 
hairy, gland-dotted or not, yellow-green at 
first, turning pink then reddish brown, 2-
seeded, on a stipe up to 2 mm long. Seeds com-
pressed circular, c. 10 mm x 5 mm, smooth, 
shiny, dark purplish brown, streaked with 
black. 
Other botanical information Hymenocar-
dia comprises 6 species, 5 of which occur in 
continental Africa and 1 in South-East Asia. 
Hymenocardia shows similarities in wood 
anatomy and pollen morphology to Ulmaceae 
which, coupled to the winged fruits, caused 
some botanists to place it in a family of its own, 
Hymenocardiaceae. Closer examination has 
shown that most similarities are superficial 
and possibly the result of convergence. Two 
varieties are distinguished in Hymenocardia 
acida: var. acida, which is distributed through-
342 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
out tropical Africa, and var. mollis (Pax) 
Radcl.-Sm., with short-hairy fruits, which oc-
curs from DR Congo south to Mozambique. 
Hymenocardia heudelotii Müll.Arg. is also 
medicinally used in West Africa. In Sierra 
Leone the leaf sap is used as eye drops to treat 
ophthalmia. 
Growth and development Hymenocardia 
acida starts flowering mainly during the sec-
ond half of the dry season, when new leaves 
also develop. In Benin it flowers from January 
to October and fruits from February to October; 
in Zambia it flowers in September-November 
and seeds mature in June-September. 
Ecology Hymenocardia acida occurs in sa-
vanna and deciduous woodland, also on lake-
shore sand dunes. It occurs mainly on sandy, 
loamy or clayey soils, from sea-level up to 1750 
m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Hymenocardia 
acida is propagated by seed and by Wildlings. 
The fruits are dewinged and soaked in cold 
water for 48 hours before sowing. Direct seed-
ing is possible. 
Management Hymenocardia acida can be 
coppiced. 
Diseases and pests Hymenocardia acida is 
a host for the fungus Coniella diplodiella, 
which causes white rot of grapes (Vitis vinifera 
L.). 
Harvesting The stem bark and roots of Hy-
menocardia acida can be harvested whenever 
the need arises. The leaves can be harvested 
during the rainy season, as the species is de-
ciduous. 
Genetic resources Hymenocardia acida is 
widely distributed throughout tropical Africa, 
and is locally common. It is therefore not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Hymenocardia acida is an impor-
tant medicinal plant throughout tropical Af-
rica, and the effectiveness of many traditional 
uses has been confirmed by preliminary phar-
macological research. However, not much is 
known about the active compounds, and there-
fore more research is warranted. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2004; Berhaut, 
1975a; Burkill, 1994; Hoët et al., 2004b; Koné 
et al., 2005; Levin & Simpson, 1994; Mpiana et 
a l , 2007; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1996a; Sofidiya et al., 2006. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Atindehou et al., 2004; Chilufya & 
Tengnäs, 1996; Coates Palgrave, 1983; Frei-
burghaus et al., 1996a; Latham, 2004; Mark-
ström, 1977; Muanza et a l , 1995; Muanza et 
al., 1994; Nacoulma-Ouédraogo & Millogo-
Rasolodimby, 2002; Nkounkou-Loumpangou et 
al., 2005; Sackeyfio, 1988; Sharma & Singh, 
2002; Stäuble, 1986; Ukwe, 2004; Vonthron-
Sénécheau et al., 2003; World Agroforestry 
Centre, undated. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
HYOSCYAMUS MUTICUS L. 
Protologue Mant. pl. 1: 45 (1767). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 28, 56 
Synonyms Hyoscyamus falezlez Coss. 
(1864). 
Vernacular names Egyptian henbane, 
Egyptian hemp (En). Jusquiame d'Egypt (Fr). 
Meimendro negro (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution In 
tropical Africa Hyoscyamus muticus is re-
stricted to the fringes of the Sahara from Mau-
ritania to Sudan. It also occurs in the Mediter-
ranean countries. 
Uses Fresh leaves are applied as a poultice 
to relieve pain. Dried leaves are smoked in 
cigarettes to treat asthma but also for their 
intoxicating effect. The plant is reputed to be 
poisonous. Fatalities on record involve eating 
dates poisoned with the plant and eating lo-
custs that had eaten the plant. The Tuareg 
people use the plant as a fish poison. In north-
ern Nigeria it is sometimes cultivated for me-
dicinal use. 
Records of value for grazing vary and range 
from resulting in fat animals on the one hand 
Hyoscyamus muticus - wild 
HYOSCYAMUS 343 
to demented sheep on the other. The variation 
in alkaloid content by growth stage and among 
populations may be reasons for variations in its 
toxicity and its value as fodder. 
Production and international trade About 
500-600 t of Hyoscyamus muticus stems and 
leaves, most of it collected in the wild, are ex-
ported annually from Egypt to Germany. 
Properties The leaves of Hyoscyamus muti-
cus have a high alkaloid content, with up to 
5.2% of dry matter in individual plants. In 
smaller amounts, alkaloids are also present in 
roots and stems and the marketed product is a 
mixture of stems and leaves. The major alka-
loid is hyoscyamine, but scopolamine (= hyos-
cine), tigloidine and tropine are also present. 
Scopolamine content is of interest to the phar-
maceutical industry. In general the level of 
scopolamine is low in leaves, as low as 0.02%, 
but in the 'Cairo' strain, the scopolamine con-
tent of the leaves can exceed 4%. Atropine (a 
racemic mixture of d- and 1-hyoscyamine) and 
scopolamine are used in ophthalmology as an 
analgesic, and scopolamine is used to cure or 
prevent motion sickness. These tropane alka-
loids are classified as anticholinergics as they 
bind to acetylcholine receptors. In-vitro produc-
tion of hyoscyamine and scopolamine is feasible 
but is not economical. 
The seed oil contains considerable quantities of 
sterols (about 11.6 g/kg) and tocopherols (about 
2.9 g/kg) and is thought to be of medicinal in-
terest. 
Adulterations and substitutes Species of 
other genera of Solanaceae such as Duboisia, 
Datura and Atropa are also used for their tro-
pane alkaloids. Other species of Hyoscyamus 
also have medicinal uses and contain the same 
alkaloids but in lower concentrations. 
Description Perennial herb or shrub up to 
1.5 m tall, glabrous or hairy; stems thick, suc-
culent. Leaves arranged spirally, simple, with 
stellate and simple hairs; stipules absent; peti-
ole 1.5-5.5(-13) cm long; blade elliptical to 
ovate, 4-12 cm x 1-9 cm, base cuneate, apex 
acute, margin coarsely toothed, upper leaves 
smaller and often entire. Inflorescence a dense 
terminal cyme, elongating up to 30 cm long or 
more. Flowers bisexual, 5-merous; calyx regu-
lar, funnel-shaped, 5-toothed, teeth c. 5 mm 
long, in fruit c. 2 cm long; corolla zygomorphic, 
broadly funnel-shaped, 5-lobed, lobes c. 2 cm 
long, white to pink with dark violet veins or 
spots; stamens exserted, anthers c. 4 mm long; 
ovary superior, 2-celled, style very long, thin. 
Fruit an obovoid capsule c. 6 mm in diameter, 
Hyoscyamus muticus - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
flower with calyx removed; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
dehiscing by an equatorial circular slit, many-
seeded. Seeds kidney- or wedge-shaped, c. 1 
mm x 1.5 mm. 
Other botanical information Hyoscyamus 
comprises about 20 species and is found in 
Europe, northern Africa and south-western 
and central Asia. Hyoscyamus muticus has 
been introduced in India and Pakistan, tested 
as a crop and even subjected to breeding, but 
commercial cultivation apparently has not 
been successful. Most literature from Pakistan 
and India on Hyoscyamus muticus probably 
relates to other species. Hyoscyamus insanus 
Stocks occurs in Iran, Afghanistan, Pakistan 
and India and is used medicinally, sometimes 
even being cultivated for medicinal purposes. 
Hyoscyamus niger L. is commonly cultivated in 
India. 
Ecology Hyoscyamus muticus occurs in de-
sert areas in rocky localities, wadis and plains. 
Propagation and planting Direct sowing 
is recommended. Germination has been re-
ported as erratic and troublesome, but treat-
ment of the seeds with concentrated sulphuric 
acid for 75 seconds, fluctuating temperatures 
344 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
between day and night and the use of kinetin 
(60 mg/1) all promote germination. Spacing for 
optimal leaf production and alkaloid yield is 
about 45 cm between rows and 15 cm in the 
rows. 
Management The critical period of competi-
tion with weeds is 30-75 days after sowing, 
when weeds can reduce yield by as much as 
60%. In field trials in Egypt the response of 
Hyoscyamus muticus to compost and chicken 
manure, either alone or in combination with 
different rates of NPK, was investigated. All 
treatments increased plant height, number of 
branches, and fresh and dry weights of leaves, 
stems and roots per plant and per ha. Highest 
yield of alkaloids (about 88 kg/ha) was obtained 
with high levels of manure and NPK. The com-
bined effect of organic manure and NPK re-
sulted in the highest content of hyoscyamine 
(65% of total alkaloids). Irrigation can increase 
plant yield but reduces alkaloid content. 
Diseases and pests A large number of pests 
and diseases have been reported for Hyoscya-
mus muticus, but the extent of damage caused 
is unknown. Some of the more important prob-
lems are root-knot nematode (Meloidogyne 
incognita), Alternaria leaf spot, cucumber mo-
saic virus (CMV), bacterial blight (Pseudomo-
nas cichorii) and aphids (Myzus persicae). In 
Sudan the plants were attacked by caterpillars 
(Heliothis sp.). 
Harvesting Hyoscyamus muticus should be 
harvested about 3 weeks after the beginning of 
flowering when the first fruits are ripe. After 
that time the alkaloid yield will drop, although 
the plant yield will still increase. In Sudan the 
summer crop is harvested after about 145 days, 
the winter crop after 190 days. 
Yield In Egypt and Sudan Hyoscyamus mu-
ticus yields about 2 t/ha of dry plant material 
and 20-30 kg/ha of alkaloids. 
Handling after harvest Fresh leafy stems 
are dried in the sun for 2—3 days and then 
dried in the shade till they are crisp and dry. 
Genetic resources Harvesting from the 
wild, as currently is the practice in most of the 
area where it is native, can deplete populations 
of Hyoscyamus muticus. This is an incentive for 
cultivation, but a serious danger of genetic 
erosion is not foreseen. There are a few acces-
sions in germplasm collections in the United 
States, Germany, Switzerland and the Nether-
lands. 
Breeding In India breeding and selection 
work resulted in selection of a vigorously grow-
ing, autotetraploid, highly fertile mutant. It 
produced 4.5 t/ha of dry matter (about 23 kg 
alkaloids/ha), but this selection was never re-
leased. Scopolamine content was found to be 
inherited straightforwardly and with breeding 
the content could be increased by a factor 20 in 
4 generations. 
Prospects Hyoscyamus muticus can become 
an important commercial crop in dry areas of 
tropical Africa. It could secure the supply of 
hyoscyamine and scopolamine for local phar-
macological industries as well as for export 
markets. Selection, breeding and research into 
optimal management of the crop would offer 
prospects for increased productivity. Recent 
analysis of the seed oil makes it a potentially 
interesting source for essential fatty acids and 
lipid-soluble bioactives. 
Major references Batanouny, 1999; Boulos, 
2000b; Bruneton, 1999; El Sheikh et al., 1982; 
Lavania, 1986. 
Other references Burkill, 2000; El-Bahr & 
Ghanem, 1997; Misra, Sharma & Lai, 1992; 
Naguib & Aziz, 2003; Oksman-Caldentey et a l , 
1987; Oksman-Caldentey et al., 1989; Rama-
dan, Zayed & El Shamy, 2007; Siddiqi, 1978; 
SEPASAL, 2007a. 
Sources of illustration Siddiqi, 1978. 
Authors N.S. Alvarez Cruz 
JATEORHIZA MACRANTHA (Hook.f.) Exell & 
Mendonça 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 73, Suppl. Polypet.: 
10 (1935). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Jateorhiza strigosa Miers (1849). 
Origin and geographic distribution Jateo-
rhiza macrantha occurs from south-western 
Nigeria and Bioko (Equatorial Guinea) east to 
eastern DR Congo and south to Cabinda (An-
gola). 
Uses The Edo people of south-eastern Nige-
ria apply leaf sap, mixed with other medicines, 
to stop bleeding during pregnancy. In western 
Cameroon the bark, together with that of Kige-
lia africana (Lam.) Benth., is used against 
snakebites, whereas hairs from the stem are 
applied as a dressing on ulcers. In DR Congo 
leaf sap is dropped into the ears, nose or eyes 
against headache. The succulent roots are 
eaten in times of famine. The Efe people of DR 
Congo tie the leaves to the cut end of the raffia 
palm to increase the flow of sap for palm wine. 
They also eat the sweet fruit, and girls tie the 
twining stem around the limbs when dancing. 
JATEORHIZA 345 
P r o p e r t i e s The roots contain the di terpenes 
columbin, chasman th in and palmar in , and the 
alkaloids columbamine, ja t rorrhiz ine and pal-
mat ine . 
B o t a n y Dioecious, strongly hai ry l iana with 
tuberous roots. Leaves a l ternate ; s t ipules ab-
sent; petiole 12-20 cm long, robust, appressed 
hairy; blade broadly rounded in outline, pal-
mately 3-5-lobed, 20-25 cm x 20-26 cm, base 
rounded or cordate, lobes t r iangular , acumi-
nate a t apex, thin, appressed hai ry on both 
surfaces, pa lmate ly veined wi th 5-7 main 
veins. Male inflorescence an axillary panicle, 
several together, up to 25 cm long, b ranches 3— 
4 cm long, bear ing clusters of 3-7 flowers; fe-
male inflorescence an axillary raceme up to 25 
cm long. Flowers unisexual; sepals 6, 3 outer 
ones oblong to elliptical, c. 4 mm x 2 mm, 3 
inner ones obovate, c. 2.5 m m wide, greenish or 
whit ish; peta ls 6, c. 2.5 mm long, somewhat 
concave, abrupt ly bent inwards a t apex, mar-
gins incurved; male flowers sessile, with 6 free 
s t amens c. 2.5 m m long, fi laments joined to the 
top; female flowers with pedicel 3-5 mm long, 
wi th 6 tongue-shaped s taminodes 1.5-2 mm 
long, ovary superior, consisting of 3 free ovoid 
carpels 2.5—3 m m long, styles short, recurved, 
s t igma broad. Frui t composed of up to 3 ovoid 
drupelets 2 -3 cm x c. 2 cm, yellowish ochre to 
orange-red, covered with stiff long brown hairs , 
pulp slimy, creamy-white, stone kidney-
shaped, hard, 1-seeded. Seed 1.5-2 cm long, 
with fleshy, r umina t e endosperm. 
Dur ing flowering Jateorhiza macrantha loses 
its leaves. 
Jateorhiza comprises 2 species, both in tropical 
Africa. It was formerly considered a section of 
Chasmanthera. 
E c o l o g y Jateorhiza macrantha occurs in 
dense and humid evergreen or semi-evergreen 
forest a t low to medium al t i tudes . 
M a n a g e m e n t Jateorhiza macrantha is col-
lected from the wild, bu t in Cameroon it is also 
re ta ined as a medicinal p lan t on cocoa farms. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Jateo-
rhiza macrantha is fairly widely dis t r ibuted 
and the re are no signs t h a t it is in danger of 
genetic erosion where forest remains . 
P r o s p e c t s Too little is known about the 
pharmacological propert ies of Jateorhiza ma-
crantha to assess its potential , bu t i ts medici-
nal uses w a r r a n t init ial screening. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Bur kill, 1997; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Terash ima & Ichi-
kawa, 2003. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Bouquet, 1969; Laird, 
Leke Awung & Lysinge, 2007; Neuwinger, 
2000; Oliver-Bever, 1983a; Sandberg, Perera-
Ivarsson & El-Seedi, 2005; Troupin, 1962. 
A u t h o r s L.P.A. Oyen 
JATEORHIZA PALMATA (Lam.) M i e r s 
P r o t o l o g u e Hook., Niger FL: 214 (1849). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
S y n o n y m s Jateorhiza columba (Roxb.) Oliv. 
(1868). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Columba, calumba, 
Colombo (En). Colombo (Fr). Calumba, colum-
ba, Colombo do Africa (Po). M k a u m w a (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Jateo-
rhiza palmata occurs na tura l ly in Kenya, Tan-
zania, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and 
South Africa (Kwazulu-Natal) . It is cult ivated 
in Mozambique, and cult ivated and locally 
natura l ized in many tropical countries, includ-
ing Ghana , Madagascar , Maur i t ius , Réunion 
and also in India and Brazil. 
U s e s The root is the source of the formerly 
popular medicine ' radix calumbae ' t h a t was 
imported into Europe from Mozambique and 
Tanzania . It was used agains t dyspepsia and 
diarrhoea, and especially suitable for people 
with a weak stomach. In Tanzania the root is 
ea ten against snakebi tes and as a vermifuge. 
The Zigua people of Tanzania use it to t r ea t 
hern ia and rup tu res . Root scrapings are ap-
plied onto scarifications made in abscesses to 
m a t u r e them. Throughout south-eastern Africa 
the roots are considered tonic and a re t a k e n 
agains t dysentery and diarrhoea, whereas in 
India they are t aken as a bi t ter tonic with an-
tipyretic and anthelmint ic propert ies, aga ins t 
gastric irr i tabil i ty and vomiting dur ing preg-
nancy. In Europe Jateorhiza palmata is still 
used in laxative herbal mixtures . 
In Italy and the United S ta tes the root has 
been added to herbal b i t ters . 
Product ion and international trade The 
dried root is t raded internat ional ly, bu t the 
cur rent extent of the t r ade is unknown. It is 
sold th rough the in te rne t on a small scale. 
P r o p e r t i e s The succulent roots contain the 
diterpenoid furanolactones columbin, pa lmar in 
and chasman th in and several related gly-
cosides including palmatosides A-G, and the 
protoberberine alkaloids palmat ine , ja t rorrhiz-
ine, bisjatrorrhizine and columbamine. They 
also contain t races of the sapogenins diosgenin 
and kryptogenin. The roots contain about 1% of 
a greenish essent ia l oil with a fragrance remi-
346 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
niscent of hay; older roots contain very little of 
it. The essential oil consists mainly of thymol. 
The roots are rich in s tarch. 
In a tes t with ra t s , columbin suppressed the 
induction of adenocarcinomas in the colon by 
adminis t ra t ion of the carcinogen azoxyme-
thane . Columbin shortened the sleeping t ime 
induced by a u r e t h a n e and a-chloralose mix-
ture , bu t prolonged the sleeping t ime induced 
by hexobarbital . This may be explained by an 
effect of columbin on drug metabolizing en-
zymes in the liver. A methanol extract obtained 
from the rhizome inhibited the growth in vitro 
of a range of fungi tested. In the European Un-
ion the use of the essential oil (calumba ex-
tract) is permit ted in an imal feeds (CoE 247). 
B o t a n y Dioecious l iana from tuberous roots; 
branchle ts densely appressed hai ry . Leaves 
a l te rna te ; st ipules absent; petiole 18-25 cm 
long; blade broadly rounded in outline, pal-
mately 5-lobed, 15-35 cm x 16-40 cm, base 
deeply cordate, lobes ovate and acumina te a t 
apex, membranous , appressed ha i ry on both 
surfaces, palmately veined with 5 main veins. 
Male inflorescence a branched axillary panicle 
up to 40 cm long, b ranches 2-10 cm long, bear-
ing clusters of 3-7 flowers; female inflorescence 
an axillary raceme up to 10 cm long. Flowers 
unisexual , sessile; sepals 6, 3 outer ones oblong 
to elliptical, 3 inner ones obovate, c. 3 mm x 1.5 
mm; peta ls 6, c. 2 m m long, somewhat concave, 
mostly abrupt ly ben t inwards a t apex, margins 
incurved; male flowers wi th 6 free s t amens 1-2 
m m long, slightly fused to the petals ; female 
flowers with 6 tongue-shaped staminodes, 
ovary superior, consisting of 3 free, ovoid car-
pels, styles short, recurved, s t igma broad. Frui t 
composed of up to 3 ovoid drupelets 2-2.5 cm x 
1.5-2 cm, appressed stiff hairy, stone ovoid, 
flattened, one side smooth, other side wi th 
silky hai rs , 1-seeded. Seed with fleshy, rumi-
na te endosperm. 
In Mozambique the s tems growing from the 
roots may be annua l . 
Jateorhiza comprises 2 species, both in tropical 
Africa. It was formerly considered a section of 
Chasmanthera. 
E c o l o g y Jateorhiza palmata occurs in rain-
forest and fringing forest, up to 1500 m alti-
tude . 
M a n a g e m e n t The tubers are dug up dur ing 
dry weather . The tubers a re rejected and the 
succulent roots a re cleaned and cut t rans-
versely or obliquely into slices, which are dried 
in the shade. After drying they are about 0 . 5 -
1.5 cm thick. After washing and brushing, the 
slices are graded and marke ted as 'radix ca-
lumbae ' . Compact, uniform and br ight yellow 
coloured pieces are preferred. The drug h a s a 
short-mealy fracture, slight musty odour and a 
very bi t ter tas te . It is sometimes adul te ra ted 
with pieces of sliced rhizome and in India with 
pieces of the s tem of Coscinium fenestratum 
Colebr. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g As 
Jateorhiza palmata h a s a wide distr ibution 
and is cult ivated as a home-garden plant , it is 
not in danger of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s 'Radix calumbae ' h a s lost much of 
i ts former importance in medicine a t least in 
the Western World. Jateorhiza palmata is 
likely to re ta in some importance in herbal bit-
ters , bu t there are no indications t h a t it will 
become an impor tan t source of extracts or 
chemical compounds for the pharmaceut ica l 
industry . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s CSIR, 1959; Cunning-
ham, 1993; Troupin, 1956; Troupin & Con-
çalves, 1973; Wat t & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1997; Carvalhas , 
1972; d'Oliveira Feijào, 1960; Horn & Steffen, 
1968; I tokawa et a l , 1987; Kohno et al., 2002; 
Neuwinger, 2000; S tu rm & Stuppner , 1998; 
Wada et al., 1995. 
A u t h o r s L.P.A. Oyen 
JATROPHA CHEVALIERI Beule 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. Soc. Bot. France 55, Mém. 
8: 83 (1908). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Jatro-
pha chevalieri occurs in Maur i tan ia , Senegal, 
Mali and Niger. 
U s e s In Senegal the leaves and la tex are 
considered haemosta t ic , and a re applied di-
rectly on wounds to stop bleeding. The latex is 
also locally applied to mumps . The root extract 
is t aken for t rea t ing complications of syphilis 
and leprosy. In Niger the oil from the grilled 
seeds is applied to boils and abscesses. Pow-
dered seed mixed with lizard fat, is massaged 
onto the skin to t r ea t spleen pain. The leaves 
are used to apply h e n n a to the skin. 
P r o p e r t i e s The latex of Jatropha chevalieri 
contains the cyclic oligopeptides chevalierin A, 
B, and C. Chevalierin A showed weak activity 
agains t Plasmodium falciparum. Jatropha 
chevalieri is toxic to herbivores. 
B o t a n y Deciduous, somewhat succulent, 
monoecious shrub up to 1 m tall; b ranches Ion-
JATROPHA 347 
gitudinally striate, glabrous. Leaves alternate; 
stipules divided into filiform segments; petiole 
3-7 cm long, glabrous; blade broadly ovate in 
outline, 5-lobed to the middle, 6-12 cm long, 
base deeply cordate, lobes ovate, sharply sinu-
ately 5-8-toothed, papery, glabrous. Inflores-
cence a terminal corymb, with a solitary female 
flower terminating each major axis and male 
flowers in lateral cymules; peduncle up to 3 cm 
long, glabrous; bracts lanceolate, apex acumi-
nate, with gland-tipped teeth. Flowers unisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel short; sepals 
fused at base, 2—3 mm long; petals slightly 
longer than the sepals, apex rounded, greenish 
yellow; disk fleshy; male flowers with 8 sta-
mens, filaments partially fused; female flowers 
with superior ovary, 3-celled, styles 3, fused at 
base, stigma 2-lobed. Fruit a somewhat fleshy 
to dry capsule, broadly ellipsoid, up to 1.5 cm 
long, shallowly 3-lobed, dehiscent into 2-valved 
cocci, usually 3-seeded. Seeds oblong-ellipsoid, 
up to 1 cm long, smooth, caruncle large, 5-6-
partite. 
Jatropha comprises about 170 species, mainly 
in warm temperate regions and seasonally dry 
tropics. Africa counts 70 native species and 
Madagascar has 1 endemic. Another West Afri-
can species with medicinal uses is Jatropha 
kamerunica Pax & K.Hoffm. from Senegal, 
Mali and Cameroon. In Senegal the seeds are 
taken as a strong purgative. 
Ecology Jatropha chevalieri occurs mainly 
on sandy soils, e.g. sand dunes. In the dry zone 
of Mauritania it occurs in wadis, in the Sahel 
zone in savanna and shrub vegetation. 
Genetic resources and breeding Jatro-
pha chevalieri is not very common, but is 
probably not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Jatropha chevalieri has not been 
subjected to extensive chemical or pharmacol-
ogical research, despite its interesting local 
uses. The latex contains cyclic peptides, com-
pounds which show a large spectrum of biologi-
cal activity and are sought after as promising 
lead compounds for drug discovery. 
Major references Baraguey et al., 1998; 
Berhaut, 1975a; Brown, Hutchinson & Prain, 
1909-1913; Burkill, 1994. 
Other references Adam, Echard & Lescot, 
1972; Keay, 1958a; Kerharo, 1971; Taleb, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
JATROPHA CURCAS L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 1006 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22, 33, 44 
Synonyms Jatropha afrocurcas Pax (1909). 
Vernacular names Jatropha, physic nut, 
purging nut, Barbados nut (En). Pourghère, 
purghère, grand pignon d'Inde, fève d'enfer, 
gros ricin, médicinier purgatif (Fr). Purgueira, 
pinhao, ricino major, grào de maluco, 
galamaluco (Po). Mbono (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Jatro-
pha curcas probably originated in Mexico or 
neighbouring parts of Central America, which 
are the only areas where it has often been col-
lected from undisturbed vegetations. Portu-
guese seafarers took it to Cape Verde, where it 
became an export crop, at one time represent-
ing 60% of the total value of agricultural ex-
ports. It was distributed all over the world long 
ago and is now naturalized throughout the 
tropics and subtropics. 
Uses Throughout tropical Africa, different 
parts of Jatropha curcas are used for a range of 
medicinal purposes. It is a source of oil that is 
traditionally used for soap production and as a 
source of energy; it is also an important hedge 
plant. The oil-rich seeds and seed oil (called 
'oleum ricini majoris' or for good reason 'oleum 
infernale' or 'hell oil') are used as purgative 
and to expel internal parasites, although their 
application often leads to strong irritation of 
the gastro-intestinal tract or even poisoning. 
The leaves and bark have the same purgative 
effect. The oil is also applied internally and 
externally as an abortifacient, and externally 
as a rubefacient to treat rheumatic conditions 
Jatropha curcas - planted and naturalized 
348 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and a variety of skin infections, although its 
use on the skin may also cause an irritative 
rash. The oil is used as an ingredient of hair 
conditioners. The latex has a widespread repu-
tation for healing wounds, as a haemostatic 
and for curing skin problems; it is applied ex-
ternally to treat infected wounds, ulcers, ring-
worm, eczema, dermatomycosis, scabies and 
sarcoptic mange in sheep and goats. Upon dry-
ing, the initially viscous latex forms an airtight 
film, resembling that produced by collodion. 
The latex has a styptic effect and is used 
against pains and stings of bees and wasps. 
Dried and pulverized root bark is made into 
poultices and is taken internally to expel 
worms and to treat jaundice. Leaves are also 
applied on wounds and in decoction they are 
used against malaria in Mali and Madagascar, 
while in Benin and Réunion a decoction is 
taken against hypertension. The leaf sap is 
used externally to treat haemorrhoids in Benin 
and Madagascar. In Guinea Bissau a hot water 
extract of the leaves is taken orally to acceler-
ate secretion of milk in women after childbirth. 
Fresh stems are used as chew sticks to 
strengthen the gums, and to cure bleeding, 
spongy gums or gum boils. A decoction of the 
roots is a cure for diarrhoea and gonorrhoea. In 
Madagascar a decoction of the leaves and roots 
is taken to treat malaria. Jatropha curcas is 
also used in the preparation of arrow poison 
and in the Philippines the bark is used to pre-
pare a fish poison. The seeds are often a source 
of accidental poisoning, both in animals and 
humans. 
The seed oil is not edible as it contains toxic 
compounds. Traditionally, it is used for the 
manufacture of candles and soap, as lamp oil 
and as fuel for cooking. It is a poor lubricant as 
it dries quickly. Throughout the tropics and 
warm subtropics Jatropha curcas is increas-
ingly planted for bio-fuel purposes. The oil is 
either used directly in adapted engines power-
ing local grain mills, oil presses, water pumps 
and small generators, or first refined by trans-
esterification with methanol or ethanol to pro-
duce regular fuel suitable for high-performance 
diesel engines. 
The seed cake left after oil extraction is too 
toxic to be used as animal feed, but constitutes 
a valuable organic fertilizer rich in nitrogen. 
Some accessions of Jatropha curcas found e.g. 
in Mexico are almost free of toxins and the seed 
cake from such selections would provide a nu-
tritious feedstock on account of the high pro-
tein content. Their seeds are sometimes boiled 
or roasted and eaten as a snack, and young 
leaves as a vegetable. 
Leaf sap yields a black dye or ink that is said 
to be indelible; the bark yields a dark blue dye, 
which, however, is not fast. Ash from the roots 
and branches is used as cooking salt, and as lye 
in dyeing. Jatropha curcas is widely cultivated 
in the tropics as a living fence, for erosion con-
trol, demarcation of boundaries and for protec-
tion of homesteads, gardens and fields against 
browsing animals. In Madagascar and else-
where in Africa it serves as a support for va-
nilla, black pepper and yams. The wood is very 
poor as fuelwood. Hybrids of Jatropha curcas 
and other Jatropha species are grown as or-
namentals. 
Production and international trade Official 
statistics on areas planted and production are 
still lacking. In recent years, Jatropha curcas 
has become the focus of large planting pro-
grammes in several tropical countries on ac-
count of its potential as a bio-fuel crop with low 
agro-ecological demands. Most of these are still 
in the pilot stage of development, together 
probably not exceeding 100,000 ha. India alone 
may have more than 10 million ha of small-
scale and large plantations by 2030, mostly on 
reclaimed wastelands. Countries in tropical 
Africa with major development projects for 
jatropha bio-fuel production include Mali, 
Burkina Faso, Ghana, Tanzania, Malawi, 
Zambia and Madagascar. The total length of 
jatropha hedges in tropical Africa is estimated 
at 75,000 km, yielding potentially 60,000 t of 
seeds per year. 
Prices of jatropha seeds vary between coun-
tries. Where seeds were used for manufactur-
ing soap (Mali, Tanzania) the price per kg was 
close to US$ 0.10. Once the demand for seeds 
for bio-fuel increases, the prices of seeds will 
rise. In India a price of US$ 0.40 per 1 of jatro-
pha-based fuel is expected to be realistic (cost 
price plus modest profit margin). To this price 
tax has to be added and the value of carbon-
credit-certificates deducted. Prices for gasoil in 
landlocked countries of West Africa were US$ 
0.80-0.97 in 2007. It is estimated that large-
scale plantations and oil extraction mills could 
produce jatropha bio-fuel in West Africa at a 
price 5—12% cheaper than current gasoil prices. 
In remote areas, small-scale production and 
use of bio-fuel from Jatropha curcas is obvi-
ously more promising than the modest margins 
predict. 
Properties Decorticated seeds (kernels) 
contain per 100 g: water 3-6 g, energy 3100-
JATROPHA 349 
3300 kJ (740-790 kcal), protein 23-29 g, fat 
53-70 g, neutral detergent fibre 4 g, acid de-
tergent fibre 0.1-0.2 g, ash 3.8 g. Fat content of 
whole seeds is 32-45%, since the seed coat con-
stitutes 35-40% of total seed weight. The fatty 
acid composition of the oil is: palmitic acid 3.5— 
15.6%, palmitoleic acid 0.7-0.9%, stearic acid 
6.7-7.5%, oleic acid 34.3-46.3%, linoleic acid 
30.8-43.1%, linolenic acid 0.2% and traces of 
myristic, pentadecanoic, margaric, margaroleic, 
arachidic, gadoleic, behenic, lignoceric and 
nurvonic acids. Depending on the origin, either 
the oleic or linoleic acid content is higher. The 
bio-fuel produced after trans-esterification of 
the oil has characteristics similar to petro-
diesel. The energy balance (the total energy 
inputs into the crop : the energy output) of jat-
ropha bio-fuel is estimated at 1 : 4-5, which is 
considerably better than for rapeseed (Canola) 
oil. Protein content of the seed cake after oil 
extraction is about 60% with a composition in 
essential amino acids similar to soya bean pro-
tein, but higher in sulphur-containing amino 
acids. 
The toxic compounds in the seed and seed-oil 
are esters of the diterpenoid 12-deoxy-16-
hydroxy-phorbol; in toxic cultivars up to 2.7 
mg/g has been found, in non-toxic ones 0.1 
mg/g. As they are thermo-stable, the oil and 
seed cake cannot be detoxified by heating. 
Quantitative toxicity assessment studies have 
been effected in many animal models. The irri-
tant properties of the seed oil have been evalu-
ated in the mouse irritation test. Another study 
showed that the oil does not have mutagenic 
properties, so that there is no danger for work-
ers handling the cake; however, after initiation 
with 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene, the oil 
induced skin tumours. The seeds also contain a 
toxic protein fraction: 'curcin'. Purified proteins 
from this fraction have been shown to inhibit 
protein synthesis in vitro in a way similar to 
that of ricin from castor (Ricinus communis L.). 
However, curcin lacks the protein-moiety that 
allows ricin to pass cell membranes, making 
curcin a much less dangerous toxin. Curcin has 
a significant antitumour effect in several tu-
mour cell lines and its mechanisms are related 
to the N-glycosidase activity. The anti-
metastatic potential of curcusone B, a diter-
pene isolated from the aerial parts, was inves-
tigated against 4 human cancer cell lines. 
Treatment with non-cytotoxic doses of curcu-
sone B effectively suppresses the metastatic 
processes. Extracts from the seeds showed 
pregnancy-terminating effects in rodents, but it 
is unclear whether this is due to a specific ac-
tion or a result of general toxicity. 
The latex from Jatropha curcas has shown 
proteolytic activity that may be responsible for 
some of its therapeutic effects, e.g. healing 
wounds and haemostatic (coagulating effect). 
The diluted latex however shows anticoagulant 
activities. Analysis of the latex resulted in the 
isolation of the protease 'curcain'. The wound-
healing properties of curcain were investigated 
in a mouse model. Application of curcain in a 
hydrophilic ointment (0.5-1%) showed better 
wound-healing properties than observed for 
nitrofurazone, a common drug for wound heal-
ing. The latex also contains the cyclic octapep-
tide 'curcacycline A' and the cyclic nonapeptide 
'curcacycline B'. Curcacycline A showed a mod-
erate dose-dependent inhibition of human T 
cell proliferation, while no direct cytotoxic ef-
fects were observed. In a clinical trial common 
warts treated with the latex disappeared com-
pletely after 16-20 days. Curcacycline B en-
hances the rotamase activity of human cyclo-
philin B. The leaves of Jatropha curcas have a 
potent cardiovascular action, somewhat similar 
to that of ß-blockers. A methanol extract of the 
leaves showed moderate protection of human 
cell-lines in vitro against HIV, while a water 
extract from the branches strongly inhibited 
the HIV-induced cytopathic effects with low 
cytotoxicity. The methanol extract of the roots 
showed significant activity against castor oil-
and magnesium sulfate-induced diarrhoea in 
mice through inhibition of prostaglandin bio-
synthesis and reduction of osmotic pressure. 
The latex shows significant antibacterial action 
against a variety of gram-positive bacteria. 
Ground seeds showed molluscicidal activity 
against different species that are host for hu-
man diseases. The seed oil has pesticidal prop-
erties comparable to that of neem (Azadirachta 
indica A.Juss.) against insects such as the cot-
ton bollworm (Helicoverpa armigera) and the 
cowpea weevil (Callosobruchus maculatus). It 
is also effective against termites. The latex is 
strongly inhibitory to several fungal diseases of 
crops, e.g. Phytophthora palmivora and Fusa-
rium solani and also to watermelon mosaic 
virus. Steroids (stigmasterol, ß-sitosterol, ß— 
sitosterol-ß—D-glucoside) and flavonoids have 
been found to be present too. 
Description Deciduous, somewhat succu-
lent, monoecious shrub or small tree up to 5(-
8) m tall; stem arising from a thick, perennial 
rootstock, with watery to whitish latex; bark 
smooth, grey or reddish, shiny, peeling off in 
350 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Jatropha curcas - 1, flowering branch; 2, fe-
male flower; 3, opened female flower; 4, male 
flower; 5, opened male flower; 6, fruits; 7, fruit 
in longitudinal section; 8, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
papery scales. Leaves alternate, simple; stip-
ules minute, soon falling; petiole (3-)10-15(-
20) cm long, glabrous; blade broadly ovate in 
outline, usually shallowly 5-lobed, 7-14(-18) 
cm x 5.5-14(-18) cm, base shallowly to deeply 
cordate, apex acute, margins usually entire, 
glabrous, 5-7-veined from the base. Inflores-
cence a terminal or axillary umbel-like cyme, 
often paired, with a solitary female flower ter-
minating each major axis and many male flow-
ers on lateral branches; peduncle up to 5(—7) 
cm long, hairy; bracts elliptical-lanceolate, c. 1 
cm long, acuminate. Flowers unisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, greenish yellow; male flower 
with ovate calyx lobes c. 2 mm long, petals 
fused in lower half, lobes oblong to ovate, c. 3 
mm long, disk composed of 5 free glands, sta-
mens 8, in 2 distinct whorls, the 5 outer fused 
at base, the 3 inner with filaments completely 
fused; female flower with ovate-lanceolate ca-
lyx lobes 4-5 mm long, hairy, petals c. 6 mm 
long, free, disk composed of 5 free glands, ovary 
superior, ovoid-ellipsoid, 3-celled, styles 3, 
fused at base, stigmas 2-lobed, staminodes 10. 
Fruit a broadly ellipsoid capsule 2.5-3 cm x c. 
2 cm, smooth-skinned, initially fleshy and 
green, turning yellow and eventually dry and 
black, late dehiscent, 3-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 
1-2 cm long, mottled black and coarsely pitted. 
Seedling with epigeal germination, forming a 
taproot and 4 peripheral roots; hypocotyl elon-
gated; cotyledons broadly oblong and emergent; 
first 2 leaves alternate. 
Other botanical information Jatropha 
belongs to the tribe Jatropheae of the subfam-
ily Crotonoideae. The genus comprises about 
170 species, most of them in warm temperate 
and subtropical regions and seasonally dry 
tropics. Africa counts about 70 native species, 
Madagascar 1 endemic. Jatropha curcas be-
longs to subgenus Curcas. Several Jatropha 
species are widely grown in the tropics as me-
dicinal or ornamental plants; they sometimes 
escape from cultivation. 
The seeds of Jatropha mahafalensis Jum. & 
H.Perrier, endemic to Madagascar, contain an 
oil called 'huile de Betrata' with similar proper-
ties as Jatropha curcas and with similar tradi-
tional uses. The oil is also used for lighting and 
applied as hair oil against lice. A root decoction 
is taken as an invigorating drink. The latex 
contains a cyclic heptapeptide, named mahafa-
cyclin A. 
Growth and development Growth in Ja-
tropha curcas is intermittent and sympodial; it 
follows the architectural model of Leeuwen-
berg. Dormancy is induced by fluctuations in 
rainfall, temperature and light. Not all plants 
respond simultaneously; in a hedge plants 
without leaves may be found besides ones full 
of green leaves. Flowers of Jatropha curcas 
produce nectar and are scented. The nectaries 
are hidden in the corolla and only accessible to 
insects with a long proboscis or tongue. The 
sweet, heavy perfume at night and greenish 
yellow colour of the flowers suggest that they 
are pollinated by moths. In inflorescences, the 
female flowers open one or two days before the 
male ones or at the same time as the earliest 
male flowers. Male flowers last only one day. 
Seed never sets in indoor cultivation unless the 
flowers are pollinated by hand. Plants raised 
from seed are more resistant to drought than 
those raised from cuttings, because they de-
velop a taproot. Fruit development from flower-
ing to seed maturity takes 80-100 days. Plants 
from cuttings produce seeds earlier than plants 
grown from seed. Full production is achieved in 
the 4th or 5th year. Mycorrhizae have been ob-
served on the roots; they promote growth, espe-
cially where phosphate is limiting. The poten-
JATROPHA 351 
tial lifespan of Jatropha curcas is 30-50 years. 
Ecology Jatropha curcas occurs in semi-arid 
tropical and warm subtropical climates with 
mean daily temperatures of 20-30°C and an-
nual rainfall of 300-600 mm. It does not with-
stand frost, but is resistant to periods of 
drought of up to 7 months. It will grow on de-
graded, sandy or gravelly and even saline soils 
with low nutrient content, but cannot survive 
in waterlogged terrain. However, economically 
sustainable oil production requires well-
drained soils of reasonable physical and chemi-
cal quality, and at least 750 mm annual rain-
fall, or supplementary irrigation. 
Propagation and planting Propagation is 
done by seeds or cuttings. The 1000-seed 
weight is 400-730 g. Seed storage behaviour is 
orthodox. The average germinating capacity 
after 7 years storage at 16°C is about 50%. 
Seeds are sown at the beginning of the rainy 
season. Soaking overnight improves germina-
tion. Under good conditions seeds germinate in 
about 10 days. Seeds can also be sown in seed-
beds or containers and 4-6 months later trans-
planted into the field. Nursery-grown seedlings 
have a higher survival rate than direct-seeded 
ones. Hedges around homesteads or fields are 
mostly grown from cuttings. Branch cuttings of 
30 cm length planted directly in the field a few 
weeks before the beginning of the rainy season 
will root and regrow easily, as a wax coat pro-
tects the cuttings from drying out. However, 
raising plants in a nursery from rooted cut-
tings with only 2-3 nodes, prior to field plant-
ing, has the advantage of a much larger multi-
plication rate for valuable selections intended 
for high-yielding plantations. Clonal propaga-
tion by tissue culture, starting from hypocotyl-, 
petiole- or leaf-explants, is technically possible 
but rather expensive for mass-propagation. 
In plantations established for oil production, 
spacings applied are 2—3 m between and 2-2.5 
m within rows, giving plant densities of 1350-
2500 plants/ha. 
Management Cultural practices in new 
plantations include regular weeding, pruning 
and fertilization. Recently planted seedlings 
have to be protected against ruminants, be-
cause they have not yet developed the repellent 
toxins in leaves and shoots. Pruning starts 3-4 
months after field planting to induce a frame 
with up to 25 branches for increased flowering 
and fruit set; maintenance pruning of mature 
shrubs aims at inducing growth of new laterals 
and restricting height to facilitate harvesting. 
When grown as a protective hedge, regular 
pruning is needed to reduce shade on 
neighbouring crops. Nutrient requirements for 
maximum oil production are not yet well-
defined for Jatropha curcas, but it appears to 
respond particularly well to organic fertilizers, 
including the composted fruit walls and seed 
cake. Leaf litter and prunings from the planta-
tion will also contribute to improving the or-
ganic matter content of the soil. Addition of N, 
P and K fertilizers to the planting hole will 
boost early establishment and rapid growth of 
new plantations. Where climatic and soil condi-
tions are favourable and the plants are spaced 
more widely, intercropping with vegetables or 
pulses is possible. Fertilization of the intercrop 
will then also benefit the jatropha crop. 
Diseases and pests Jatropha curcas is 
rarely attacked by diseases or pests. Powdery 
mildew may damage leaves and flowers, while 
Altemaria may cause leaf fall. Caterpillars of 
Spodoptera litura feed on the leaves, while 
several species of beetles feed on the leaves of 
young plants. These pests may also affect 
intercrops grown together with Jatropha cur-
cas. It is an alternative host for cassava vi-
ruses, so it should not be planted as a fence 
around cassava fields. 
Harvesting Harvesting and separation of 
seeds from the fruits is done manually. The 
best pickers can harvest about 30 kg fruit per 
hour, which is approximately 18 kg of seeds. 
Since the fruits stay on the branches for quite 
some time, they have to be picked or knocked 
down with a stick. 
Yield Annual seed production of mature 
plants, raised from seedlings, may vary from 
300 g to 3(-6) kg, depending on the growing 
conditions and inherent production capacity. 
Available data from pilot plantations show the 
following seed yields per ha: 0.5 t within 1 year 
after field planting, 1.2—1.5 t in year 2 and 
further increasing to 2.5-3.0 t from year 5 on-
wards when the plantation is in full produc-
tion. Yields of 5 t of seeds/ha, which is equiva-
lent to 1.6-2.0 t of oil plus 3.0-3.4 t of seed 
cake, have been claimed for jatropha planta-
tions under optimum agro-ecological conditions 
(e.g. India and Nicaragua). 
Old and dense hedges in and around villages or 
towns may produce 2 kg of seeds per m and per 
year (height 5-6 m, good soil, 800 mm annual 
rainfall), pruned hedges around gardens and 
fields usually not more than 0.8 kg. 
Handling after harvest Seeds for planting 
should be carefully dried in the shade until 6-
9% moisture content and stored cool in airtight 
352 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
containers. Traditional oil extraction involves 
boiling of roasted and ground seeds until the 
floating oil can be skimmed off the surface. 
More efficient methods are based on oil extru-
sion by hand-operated or mechanized screw 
presses. The extraction efficiency of this cold 
method of oil extraction is increased considera-
bly by prior crushing of the seeds in a hammer 
mill. The remaining seed cake requires com-
posting before use as organic fertilizer. The oil 
may be refined in a continuous trans-
esterification reactor to produce bio-fuel of die-
sel-oil quality and glycerol as a valuable by-
product. The bio-fuel represents about 92% in 
weight of the initial oil. 
Genetic resources Several types of Jatro-
pha curcas are known. A non-toxic type is 
grown in Mexico (no phorbol esters in the 
seeds). In Nicaragua a type exists with larger 
leaves with rounded lobes, and larger but fewer 
fruits and seeds. Male sterile types exist, which 
produce more fruits than normal types. A 
provenance trial in the late 1980s showed that 
different selections from Africa showed signifi-
cant differences in vegetative development, but 
not in morphological characters. Wageningen 
University (Netherlands) has started a pro-
gramme to collect and evaluate germplasm of 
Jatropha curcas, maintain it in field gene 
banks and initiate breeding work. 
The Banco Nacional de Germoplasma Vegetal, 
Departamento de Fitotecnia, Universidad 
Autónoma de Chapingo, Chapingo, Mexico and 
the Departamento de Biologia, Universidad 
Nacional Autónoma de Nicaragua, León, Nica-
ragua both hold about 100 accessions of Jatro-
pha curcas, but collection, characterization and 
maintenance of germplasm covering the full 
variation of the species is still very much 
needed. 
Breeding Most plant material used so far is 
derived from simple selection within semi-wild 
populations or landraces. Between-plant varia-
tion for vigour and seed yield is tremendous 
and great genetic improvement in seed yields 
and other important characteristics may, 
therefore, be expected from systematic breed-
ing. Breeding programmes have been initiated 
recently in several countries, e.g. at Wagenin-
gen University (Netherlands), but information 
on progress is not yet available. Obviously, oil 
yield per ha will dominate breeding objectives 
for Jatropha curcas cultivars for bio-fuel pro-
duction. Cultivars with compact growth would 
facilitate harvesting. 
Prospects The multiple traditional uses of 
Jatropha curcas, as medicinal, nonfood-
vegetable oil and auxiliary plant, have been 
well exploited in the tropics and subtropics for 
hundreds of years. Its considerable potential as 
an oil crop for bio-fuel purposes at relatively 
low costs and modest demands on the local 
agro-ecosystem has received much attention in 
recent years. Prospects are that within the 
next decade or so, Jatropha curcas will become 
a major source of renewable energy in the drier 
rural areas of (sub)tropical Asia, Africa and 
America. Much agronomic and breeding work 
needs still to be done to maximize the oil pro-
duction potential per ha and thus improve the 
economic sustainability of jatropha oil produc-
tion. Rapid multiplication techniques and fa-
cilities have to be developed to make improved 
planting material available in adequate 
amounts. This is especially urgent as planting 
of unimproved material not only leads to low 
returns on investments, but may also lead to a 
loss of interest in this crop. More research 
should also be initiated on medicinal properties 
of different plant parts, e.g. wound healing, 
antimalarial and anti-HIV effects. Investiga-
tion of the agronomic and medicinal potential 
of other Jatropha species would be valuable as 
well. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Francis, 
Edinger & Becker, 2005; Gübitz, Mittelbach & 
Trabi, 1999; Heller, 1996; Henning, 2001b; 
Makkar, Aderibigbe & Becker, 1998; Mujum-
dar & Misar, 2004; Openshaw, 2000; Osoniyi & 
Onajobi, 2003; Susiarti, Munawaroh & Hor-
sten, 1999. 
Other references Anonymous, 1997-1998; 
Baraguey et al., 2000; Fangrui & Milford, 1999; 
Grimm, 1999; Haas & Mittelbach, 2000; Heim, 
Garrigue & Husson, 1919; Henning, 2001a; Lin 
et al., 2003; Maheu & Husson, 1920; Makkar & 
Becker, 1999; Makkar, Becker & Schmook, 
1998; Muangman, Thippornwong & Tohtong, 
2005; Mujumdar et al., 2001; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Rajore, Sardana & Batra, 2002; Rouillard & 
Guého, 1983; Satish Lele, 2007; SEPASAL, 
1999; Shah, Sharma & Gupta, 2004; Songjang 
& Wimolwattanasarn, 2004; Sujatha & Pra-
bakaran, 2003; Venturini del Greco & Rade-
makers, 2006; World Agroforestry Centre, un-
dated. 
Sources of illustration Susiarti, Mun-
awaroh & Horsten, 1999. 
Authors R.K. Henning 
JATROPHA 353 
J A T R O P H A DICHTAR J.F.Macbr. 
Protologue Candollea 5: 381 (1934). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Jatro-
pha dichtar occurs in eastern Ethiopia, Soma-
lia and northern Kenya. 
Uses In northern Somalia and in Kenya the 
sap of the aerial parts is used as eye drops to 
treat eye infections. A root decoction is taken to 
treat abdominal pain. The peeled root is 
crushed and soaked in cold water, and the bit-
ter infusion is taken as an emetic and laxative. 
The root can also be chewed and swallowed for 
these purposes. 
Properties Neither chemical analysis nor 
phytopharmacological screening has been done 
on Jatropha dichtar. 
Botany Much-branched monoecious shrub 
up to 3 m tall, with stiffly erect branches aris-
ing from near ground-level; bark dark purplish 
brown, peeling; short shoots densely shortly 
hairy; sap watery, turning reddish and drying 
black. Leaves alternate, 2-3 at the apex of 
short shoots; stipules forming strong, straight 
spines (0.5-)l-5 cm long, sharply pointed, pur-
plish brown or black; petiole 0.5-2 cm long; 
blade broadly ovate to almost round in outline, 
shallowly 3-5-lobed, 1.5—5.5 cm x 1.5-6 cm, 
base narrowly cordate, lobes rounded, apex 
obtuse, almost entire or indistinctly toothed, 
densely shortly hairy, greyish yellow-green. 
Inflorescence a dense axillary cyme up to 6.5 
cm long, with a solitary female flower termi-
nating each major axis and male flowers in 
lateral cymules; peduncle short, densely 
shortly hairy; bracts ovate-lanceolate to linear-
lanceolate, 3-9 mm long, densely shortly hairy. 
Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-merous, cream-
coloured; pedicel short; calyx lobes linear-
lanceolate, densely hairy outside; petals 
oblanceolate, 14-19 mm x 5-7 mm, rounded, 
clawed, reflexed; disk glands 5, free; male flow-
ers with calyx lobes 4-5(-8) mm long, petals 
fused at base, disk glands cylindrical, stamens 
10 with filaments fused except at apex; female 
flowers with calyx lobes 1—1.5 cm long, petals 
free, disk glands ovoid, ovary superior, almost 
globose, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 1 cm long, fused at 
base, stigma 2-lobed. Fruit a 3-lobed ovoid cap-
sule 1.5-2.5 cm x 2-3 cm, each lobe with a 
thick apical ridge, densely shortly hairy, green, 
tinged orange-pink at apex, dehiscent into 2-
valved cocci, usually 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 
1.5 cm x 1 cm, dark brown mottled, somewhat 
shiny, caruncle covering the apex, fringed. 
Jatropha comprises about 170 species, mainly 
in warm temperate regions and seasonally dry 
tropics. Africa counts 70 native species and 
Madagascar has 1 endemic. Several other Ja-
tropha species occur in the same region as Ja-
tropha dichtar and have medicinal uses. In 
Kenya the latex from Jatropha ellenbeckii Pax 
is applied to wounds to improve healing. In 
Somalia and Ethiopia pieces of root of Jatropha 
rivae Pax are eaten as a strong purgative. In 
Kenya an infusion of the roots of Jatropha par-
vifolia Chiov. is taken as an emetic and to treat 
fever. The plant is burnt inside the home as the 
bad smell keeps flies and mosquitoes away. Its 
twigs are used as a layer under the sleeping 
mat. In Somalia the fresh roots of Jatropha 
nogalensis Chiov. are chewed to treat snake-
bites, and the juice is also externally applied to 
the wound. The roots of Jatropha spicata Pax, 
from East and southern Africa are cooked in 
Somalia with chicken and the soup is eaten to 
treat gonorrhoea. The ground root mixed with 
water is taken as a strong purgative. In Kenya, 
the Boran people take a leaf or stem infusion 
as a laxative. The ethanol extract of the roots 
showed antibacterial activity in vitro. 
Ecology Jatropha dichtar occurs among 
lava rocks, and is locally common in open bush-
land on red sandy soils, at 200—900 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Jatro-
pha dichtar is relatively common in its distri-
bution area and not threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Unless pharmacological and 
chemical analyses prove otherwise, Jatropha 
dichtar will remain of local importance only. 
Major references Heine & Heine, 1988b; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1987. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Elmi et 
a l , 1986; Gilbert, 1995; Guillaumet, 1972; 
Jäger, 2003; Samuelsson et al., 1992. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
JATROPHA GLAUCA Vahl 
Protologue Symb. bot. 1: 78 (1790). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Jatropha lobata (Forrsk.) 
Müll.Arg. (1866). 
Origin and geographic distribution Jatro-
pha glauca occurs in Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Djibouti and Somalia, and extends to Yemen 
and Saudi Arabia. 
354 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Uses In Ethiopia the whole plant including 
the root is mashed in water and the liquid is 
taken to treat constipation and used as ear 
drops to treat earache. The sap is taken as an 
astringent. 
Properties Methanol and chloroform ex-
tracts of fresh or dry leaves showed significant 
molluscicidal activity against the snail vector 
of schistosomiasis, Biomphalaria pfeifferi. The 
chloroform extract of the dry leaves showed the 
highest activity (LD50 10-100 ppm). Cold water 
extracts of the dry leaves also showed mollus-
cicidal activity. 
Botany Small monoecious shrub up to 1 m 
tall with smooth, pale branches; stems and 
leaves glabrous to shortly hairy. Leaves alter-
nate; stipules with 4-6 linear, gland-tipped 
lobes l(-20) mm long; petiole 1-7 cm long; 
blade rounded in outline, deeply 3-5-lobed, 
base cuneate to truncate, middle lobe oblanceo-
late, 3.5-8 cm x 1.5-4 cm, the lateral lobes 
smaller, margins coarsely and irregularly 
toothed. Inflorescence a dense leaf-opposed 
cyme 2-11 cm long, with a solitary female 
flower terminating each major axis and male 
flowers in lateral cymules; peduncle up to 6.5 
cm long. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
pale red; pedicel short; male flowers with c. 1.5 
mm long calyx lobes, petals fused at base, 
obovate, c. 4 mm long, stamens 8; female flow-
ers with 3-5 mm long calyx lobes, with stalked 
glands at margins, petals fused at base, oblong, 
c. 4 mm long, soon falling, ovary superior, al-
most globose, 3-celled, styles 3, 1.5 mm long, 
fused at base, 1.5 mm long, stigma 2-lobed. 
Fruit an almost globose capsule, c. 1 cm in di-
ameter, glabrous, dehiscent into 2-valved cocci, 
usually 3-seeded. Seeds oblong, 8 mm x 4.5 
mm, pale grey, caruncle deeply fringed. 
Jatropha comprises about 170 species, mainly 
in warm temperate regions and seasonally dry 
tropics. Africa counts 70 native species and 
Madagascar has 1 endemic. Several other Ja-
tropha species occur in the same region as Ja-
tropha glauca and have medicinal uses. In Su-
dan the root and stem extract of Jatropha 
aethiopica Müll.Arg. is taken to treat epilepsy 
and rabies. In Ethiopia the sap of the petiole of 
Jatropha pelargoniifolia Courbai is applied to 
ulcers. In Sudan an infusion of the roots and 
stem of Jatropha aceroides (Pax & K.Hoffm.) 
Hutch, is taken as a molluscicide. The metha-
nol and chloroform extract of the root, stem 
and seeds showed significant antibacterial ac-
tivity against Bacillus subtilis and Staphylo-
coccus aureus, and the stem and root extract 
also against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. The 
plant is poisonous to livestock. 
Ecology Jatropha glauca occurs in open 
bush land, extending to semi-desert conditions, 
on lava and limestone, from sea-level up to 
1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Jatro-
pha glauca is relatively common in its distribu-
tion area and is not browsed by livestock. It is 
therefore not likely to be threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Jatropha glauca shows interest-
ing molluscicidal activities, and it would be 
worthwhile investigating the species chemi-
cally and pharmacologically in order to evalu-
ate its possibilities. 
Major references Al Zanbagi, Banaja & 
Barrett, 2000; Gilbert, 1995; Jansen, 1981; le 
Floc'h et al., 1985. 
Other references Barri et al., 1983; Ele-
gami et al., 2001; Gilbert, Holmes & Thulin, 
1993; Hemming & Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
JATROPHA GOSSYPIIFOLIA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 1006 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number In = 22 
Vernacular names Cotton-leaved physic 
nut, bellyache bush, wild cassada, red fig-nut 
flower (En). Pourghère rouge, médecinier sau-
vage, médecinier rouge (Fr). Chagas velhas, 
pinhao roxo, piäo vermelho (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Jatro-
pha gossypiifolia is native to tropical America 
Jatropha gossypiifolia - planted and naturalized 
JATROPHA 355 
from Mexico to Paraguay and the Caribbean 
region. It has been introduced as an ornamen-
tal and medicinal plant elsewhere in tropical 
America and in many parts of the Old World 
tropics, and regularly escapes from cultivation. 
Jatropha gossypiifolia occurs throughout tropi-
cal Africa, except the dry regions in southern 
Africa, but including South Africa. 
Uses Throughout tropical Africa, different 
parts of Jatropha gossypiifolia are used for a 
range of medicinal purposes, in a similar way 
as Jatropha curcas L. The oil-rich seeds and 
seed oil are used as a drastic purgative and 
emetic and to expel internal parasites. The 
leaves and bark have the same purgative ef-
fect. The oil is applied internally as abortifa-
cient, and externally as rubefacient to treat 
rheumatic conditions and a variety of skin in-
fections, although its use on the skin may also 
cause an irritative rash. In Senegal the seed oil 
is also applied against leprosy and rabies. The 
sap has a widespread reputation for healing 
wounds, as a haemostatic and for curing skin 
problems; it is applied externally to treat in-
fected wounds, ulcers, cuts, abrasions, ring-
worm, eczema, dermatomycosis, scabies and 
venereal diseases. The sap has a styptic effect 
and is used against pains and bee and wasp 
stings. Dried and pulverized root bark is made 
into poultices and is taken internally to expel 
worms and to treat oedema. 
In Senegal a decoction of the leaves is taken to 
treat colic, stomach-ache and fever, including 
malaria. In Ghana the leaves are used as a 
purgative, and the leaf sap is applied to the 
tongue of babies to treat thrush and to in-
flamed tongues of adults. The pith of old stems 
is inserted into the nostril to cause sneezing to 
cure headache. In the Caribbean the plant sap 
is traditionally used in the treatment of cancer. 
In the West Indies an infusion of the stem is 
taken to treat hypertension. 
In West Africa Jatropha gossypiifolia is 
planted around villages as a hedge plant for its 
striking dark red young foliage and also to pro-
tect the houses against fire. It is also planted 
near houses to keep snakes away. It is locally 
planted for field boundary marking. It is some-
times grown as a container plant. The seed oil 
is used as lamp oil and fuel. 
Production and international trade Al-
though Jatropha gossypiifolia is widely planted 
as an ornamental and hedge plant, and has 
become locally naturalized, there are no data 
available on trade in Africa or elsewhere. 
Properties The seed contains per 100 g: 
protein 13 g, crude oil 36 g, carbohydrate 30 g 
and fibre 9 g. The fatty acid composition of the 
oil is: unsaturated fatty acids 74% of which 
palmitic acid up to 31% and oleic acid and li-
noleic acid 68-84%, and further traces of 
caprylic acid, myristic acid, stearic acid, ara-
chidic acid, behenic acid, lignoceric acid, 
palmitoleic acid and vernolic acid. The energy 
value of the seed oil is 42,000 kJ/kg. 
An alcoholic root extract of Jatropha gossypiifo-
lia showed significant inhibitory activity in 
different human cancer cell lines. This finding 
led to the isolation of the macrocyclic diter-
penes jatrophone and related jatrophanes. 
Evaluation of this activity in the P-388 lym-
phocytic leukaemia test in vitro and in vivo 
and in Eagle's carcinoma of the nasopharynx in 
vitro revealed that most of these components 
were very active. In addition, it was found that 
jatrophone had direct inhibitory effects on con-
tractions of cardiac and smooth muscle prepa-
rations, which were typically non-competitive 
in nature. The action of jatrophone may involve 
more than one mechanism; this might be re-
lated to alterations in the Ca2+ handling by 
cells. Later, the diterpenoids jatropholones A 
and B were isolated from the roots. They have 
shown only little biological activity. An ethanol 
extract from the stems caused a significant and 
dose-dependent reduction of the systolic blood 
pressure when given orally to rats. An aqueous 
extract of the stems increased the amplitude 
between the systolic tone and the diastolic tone 
of the arterial pressure in guinea pig. In rabbit, 
the extract markedly reduced the level of arte-
rial pressure. A leaf extract showed significant 
activity as an anticoagulant for haematological 
analyses. The anticoagulant effect of the ex-
tract was found to be comparable to that of 
dipotassium ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid. 
The leaf extract must be purified to remove 
interfering substances to make it suitable for 
biochemical analyses. On the contrary, the sap 
from the stem showed significant coagulant 
activity in vitro. 
A methanolic seed extract was found to be ac-
tive against the snail Bulinus globosus, but 
was considered of little value, because of the 
large quantity required for lethal concentra-
tions and the rapid inactivation under field 
conditions. The stem sap, however, was 
strongly active against the snail Lymnaea 
acuminata in its aquatic environment. The 
toxicity of the sap is partly due to inhibitory 
effects on acetylcholinesterase, and on acid and 
alkaline phosphatases in the snail. The cyclic 
356 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
peptides cyclogossine A, B and C were isolated 
from the stem sap. Methanol and n-hutanol 
extracts of unripe seeds showed significant 
molluscicidal activity against the snails Lym-
naea luteola and Indoplanorbis exustus, the n-
butanol extract being more toxic to the egg and 
adult stages of both snails. Furthermore, jatro-
phone and jatropholone A and B from the roots 
were tested against the snail Biomphalaria 
glabrata. Only jatrophone showed significant 
molluscicidal activity. Crude hot water extracts 
from the aerial parts were examined for anti-
malarial properties against Plasmodium falci-
parum in vitro, and were found to be capable of 
100% growth inhibition. Hexane extracts of the 
fresh fruits showed significant activity against 
fungi and some bacteria. Stem sap was found 
to inhibit the growth of Helminthosporium 
oryzae and Alternaria brassicicola. The ethano-
lic stem extract showed significant larvicidal 
activity against larvae of the tick Boophilus 
microplus. 
In addition to the compounds mentioned above, 
phytochemical investigations revealed the 
presence of lignans (e.g. gadain, jatrodien, gos-
sypifan, gossypidien and prasanthaline) in the 
light petroleum extract of stem, root and seeds, 
the alkaloid jatrophine in the sap, and flavon-
oids (apigenin, vitexin and isovitexin) and 
triterpenes in the ethanolic leaf extract. 
Description Much-branched, deciduous, 
somewhat succulent, monoecious shrub up to 3 
m tall; rhizome thick, with orange-pink to 
brownish sap; bark smooth, green, peeling off 
in thin grey layers; stem and young leaves dark 
purple, glabrous. Leaves alternate; stipules c. 5 
mm long, divided into many segments, gland-
tipped; petiole 8—12 cm long, with simple to 3-
fid glandular hairs; blade broadly ovate in out-
line, 6—10 cm x 8-14 cm, shallowly to deeply 
3(-5)-lobed, base shallowly cordate, lobes 
obovate to oblanceolate, middle lobe longest, 
apex acute, margins glandular and minutely 
toothed, otherwise glabrous. Inflorescence a 
sparingly flowered leaf-opposed cyme, with a 
solitary female flower terminating each major 
axis and male flowers in lateral cymules; pe-
duncle up to 6 cm long, shortly hairy; bracts 
linear-lanceolate, c. 1.5 cm long, acuminate, 
margin with glandular hairs. Flowers unisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous, dark red; male flowers 
with elliptical-lanceolate calyx lobes c. 3 mm 
long, glandular at margins, petals fused in 
lower half, lobes obovate, c. 4 mm long, disk 
composed of 5 free glands, stamens 8, in 2 dis-
tinct whorls, the 5 outer fused to halfway, the 
Jatropha gossypiifolia - flowering and fruiting 
branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
inner 3 almost completely fused; female flowers 
with calyx lobes and petals twice as large as in 
male flowers, disk shallowly 5-lobed, ovary 
superior, globose to shallowly 3-lobed, 6-ribbed, 
3-celled, styles 3, c. 2 mm long, fused at base, 
stigma 2-lobed. Fruit a somewhat fleshy to dry, 
globose to 3-lobed capsule, c. 1 cm in diameter, 
sparingly hairy to glabrous, green becoming 
brownish, dehiscent into 2-valved cocci, usually 
3-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, c. 7.5 mm x 4.5 mm, 
glabrous, pale grey-brown, caruncle with many 
lobes, dark brown. Seedling with epigeal ger-
mination. 
Other botanical information Jatropha 
comprises about 170 species, mainly in warm 
temperate regions and seasonally dry tropics. 
Africa counts 70 native species and Madagas-
car has 1 endemic. In East Africa and Asia all 
Jatropha gossypiifolia plants are referred to as 
var. elegans (Pohl) Müll.Arg., which differs 
from var. gossypiifolia in having minutely 
toothed and glandular-hairy leaf margins. Sev-
eral other Jatropha species known for their 
ornamental value are locally used as a purga-
tive, e.g. Jatropha multifida L. and Jatropha 
podagrica Hook. 
Growth and development Jatropha gos-
JATROPHA 357 
sypiifolia starts flowering and fruiting at the 
start of the rainy season, and can continue 
throughout the year if soil moisture remains 
high. Flowering can start in plants 4-6 weeks 
old, but generally starts 2 years after sowing. 
High densities of Jatropha gossypiifolia plants 
reduce flowering and fruiting. The plant can 
produce seed by selfing or cross-pollination, 
and many insects, including bees, visit the 
flowers to collect the nectar. 
Ecology Where Jatropha gossypiifolia is 
naturalized, it occurs in regions with a pro-
nounced dry season, along roads, on waste 
places, in grassland and shrub vegetation, gen-
erally at low altitudes in coastal areas. Annual 
rainfall requirements are 400-1200 mm. It 
grows on well-drained sand, sandy loams and 
stony soils. 
Propagation and planting Jatropha gos-
sypiifolia can be propagated by seed and rhi-
zome or stem cuttings. Stem cuttings are most 
vigorous and root best using IBA, although 
rooting also occurs without this hormone. The 
fruits float, facilitating long-distance dispersal 
of seeds along watercourses and onto flood-
plains. 
Management Jatropha gossypiifolia can 
become weedy, as it is an opportunistic invader 
of disturbed sites, e.g. in sugar cane fields in 
Mauritius. In northern Australia it has become 
a noxious weed, especially of rangeland in sea-
sonally inundated flood plains, where competi-
tion with other plant species is limited. It can 
be controlled effectively by herbicides, me-
chanical means and by burning. In Central 
America biological control is effected through 
Jatropha mosaic virus (transferred by white 
fly) and recently in northern Australia through 
the seed-sucking bug Agonosoma trilineatum. 
In a heavily infested soil, up to 3.8 million 
seeds/ha are present at 1—5 cm soil depth, and 
weeding has to be continued for several years. 
Diseases and pests Jatropha gossypiifolia 
is generally not attacked by diseases or pests in 
tropical Africa. 
Yield The seed yield is 500 kg per ha annu-
ally, with seed shell to kernel ratio of 35:65. 
Genetic resources As Jatropha gossypiifo-
lia is widely planted as an ornamental and 
medicinal plant, and locally commonly natural-
ized, it is not endangered by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Jatropha gossypiifolia is an in-
teresting medicinal plant with many medicinal 
uses. Especially its anticancer and mollus-
cicidal activities have been investigated, with 
promising results, but more research is war-
ranted to confirm the activities of the individ-
ual compounds. In addition, the antiplasmodial 
activity, blood pressure lowering activity and 
coagulant or anticoagulant properties of differ-
ent plant parts need to be studied in more de-
tail. 
Major references Abbiw, 1990; Abreu et 
al., 2003; Betancur-Galvis et a l , 2003; Csur-
hes, 1999; Oduola, Avwioro & Ayanniyi, 2005; 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Sukumaran, Parashar 
& Rao, 1995; Traoré et al., 1999. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2002; Bebawi 
& Campbell, 2002; Berhaut, 1975a; Burkill, 
1994; Gbeassor et a l , 1989; Kumar & 
Swarnkar, 2003; Kupchan et a l , 1976; Mshana 
et al., 2000; Neuwinger, 2000; Ogbobe & 
Akano, 1993; Pandey, Maity & Samaddar, 
1996; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Raina & Gaikwad, 
1987; Seigler, 1994; Singh & Agarwal, 1988; 
Stäuble, 1986. 
Sources of illustration Berhaut, 1975a. 
Authors V. Kawanga 
JATROPHAzEYHERiSond. 
Protologue Linnaea 23: 117 (1850). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Jatro-
pha zeyheri occurs in Botswana, Zimbabwe, 
northern South Africa and Swaziland. 
Uses The Xhosa people apply the powdered 
rhizome externally to wounds, boils and burns 
to heal them fast. Young shoots are rubbed in 
for this purpose, or plant sap is applied. A rhi-
zome infusion is taken to treat uterine pain, 
irregular periods, leg and feet pain, and is 
given as an emetic to treat food poisoning. A 
rhizome decoction is taken to treat headache 
and cough, and also as a blood purifier and 
purgative. Overdoses are dangerous as the 
plants are poisonous. 
Properties A stem infusion of Jatropha 
zeyheri did not show antibacterial activity in 
vitro, although an ethyl-acetate extract did 
show some antibacterial activity against Bacil-
lus subtilis and Staphylococcus aureus, but 
only in very large doses. The daphnane diter-
penoid jaherin, isolated from the plant, has 
shown some antimicrobial activity. 
Botany Perennial, somewhat succulent, 
monoecious, densely hairy herb up to 30 cm 
tall, sometimes creeping; rhizome thick; stems 
simple or sparingly branched; sap watery, 
greenish. Leaves alternate; stipules c. 2 mm 
long, divided into filiform segments, gland-
358 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tipped; petiole 1—5 mm long; blade broadly 
ovate in outline, deeply 3-5-lobed, 5-12 cm 
long, base cuneate to truncate, lobes narrowly 
elliptical-oblanceolate, apex acute, lateral lobes 
progressively shorter, almost entire. Inflores-
cence a terminal corymb up to 10 cm long, with 
a solitary female flower terminating each ma-
jor axis and male flowers in lateral cymules; 
peduncle up to 2.5 cm long; bracts linear-
lanceolate, 0.5—1 cm long, apex acuminate, 
gland-tipped. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-
merous, cream-coloured; pedicel c. 2 mm long; 
male flowers with c. 0.5 mm long calyx tube, 
lobes lanceolate, 2-3 mm long, glandular hairy, 
petals oblanceolate, c. 4.5 mm long, disk glands 
5, free, stamens 8, partially fused; female flow-
ers with c. 2 mm long calyx tube, lobes triangu-
lar-lanceolate, 4-7 mm long, petals oblong-
lanceolate, 7-8 mm long, disk glands 5, free, 
ovary superior, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 3 mm long, 
fused at base, stigma 2-lobed. Fruit an almost 
cylindrical, smooth capsule, 11-13 mm x 9-12 
mm, densely shortly hairy, dehiscent into 2-
valved cocci, usually 3-seeded. Seed com-
pressed-ellipsoid, up to 9 mm long, smooth, 
mottled brown, caruncle 2 x 4 mm, 2-lobed, 
lobes fringed, golden brown. 
Jatropha comprises about 170 species, mainly 
in warm temperate regions and seasonally dry 
tropics. Africa counts 70 native species and 
Madagascar has 1 endemic. Several other Ja-
tropha species occurring in the same region as 
Jatropha zeyheri also have medicinal uses. A 
rhizome decoction of Jatropha erythropoda Pax 
& K.Hoffm. is drunk by Kalahari bushmen to 
treat blood in the urine and stomach-ache, and 
the plant is rubbed on the skin to treat wounds 
and venereal diseases. The dried rhizome pow-
der of Jatropha hirsuta Höchst, from Mozam-
bique and South Africa is applied to fresh 
wounds to heal them. A rhizome extract is used 
as an enema to cure fever. 
Ecology Jatropha zeyheri occurs in wooded 
grassland with scattered shrubs, in mopane 
woodland on sand, also in disturbed areas, at 
900-1250 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Ja-
tropha zeyheri is fairly widespread and occurs 
in disturbed areas, there are no indications 
that it is in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Jatropha zeyheri has similar 
wound-healing and emetic properties as many 
other Jatropha species, but virtually nothing is 
known about the chemical compounds, and 
only very little about the pharmacology. More 
research is warranted to investigate whether it 
contains promising lead compounds. 
Major references Arnold et al., 2002; Carter 
& Leach, 2001; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Dekker et 
al., 1987; Elmi et al., 1986; Imamura, 2001; 
van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn & Gericke, 1997. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
KlRKIA TENUIFOLIA Engl. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 32: 123 (1902). 
Family Simaroubaceae (APG: Kirkiaceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution Kirkia 
tenuifolia is distributed in Ethiopia, Somalia 
and Kenya. 
Uses In Somalia a bark decoction of Kirkia 
tenuifolia is drunk to cure cholera. In Kenya 
the bark is chewed against thirst. 
Properties No studies on the properties of 
Kirkia tenuifolia have been published. Quassi-
noids and indole alkaloids, characteristic of the 
Simaroubaceae, are probably responsible for 
the medicinal properties. An aqueous stem 
bark extract showed significant inhibition of 
cholera toxin-induced intestinal hypersecretion 
in mice. 
Botany Semi-deciduous, monoecious shrub 
or small tree up to 8 m tall; bark grey, fissured 
with age; crown bushy, spreading; branches 
almost at right angles to main stem. Leaves 
alternate, clustered at ends of branches, up to 
9 cm long, imparipinnately compound with (2-) 
3(-4) pairs of leaflets; stipules absent; petiole 
and rachis hairy; petiolules short or absent but 
on terminal leaflet 5-10 mm long; leaflets al-
ternate, opposite at top of leaf, narrowly ellipti-
cal to orbicular, 1-2.5 cm x 1-2 cm, base 
rounded to cuneate, apex rounded to notched, 
margin usually entire, glabrous or hairy. Inflo-
rescence an axillary thyrse up to 6.5 cm long, 
hairy or glabrous. Flowers unisexual, regular, 
4-merous; sepals almost free, deltoid, c. 1.5 mm 
x 1.5 mm, short-hairy outside; petals free, 
lanceolate, 3—5 mm x 0.5-1 mm, glabrous or 
short-hairy outside, greenish yellow to cream; 
stamens free, in female flowers reduced; ovary 
superior, 4-celled, reduced in male flowers. 
Fruit an ellipsoid to shortly cylindrical berry 
10-12 mm x 6-8 mm, 4-angled, woody, short-
hairy to glabrous, separating into 1-seeded 
mericarps, each attached by a strip of tissue to 
top of central column. Seeds almost as large as 
mericarp, rounded at one end and pointed at 
the other, 3-angled. 
Kirkia comprises 5 species, distributed in tropi-
KNIPHOFIA 359 
cal Africa from Ethiopia and Somalia to north-
ern South Africa. 
Ecology Kirkia tenuifolia occurs in Acacia-
Commiphora bushland at 100-1000 m altitude. 
It is usually found on red sandy to stony soil 
and on limestone. In Somalia it is not a com-
mon species and is not associated with specific 
soil requirements. 
Management Kirkia tenuifolia is easily 
propagated using seed or stem parts. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though Kirkia tenuifolia is not widely distrib-
uted and not common, it is unlikely to be 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Kirkia tenuifolia will probably 
remain of local importance as a medicinal 
plant, unless pharmacological research shows 
interesting opportunities for drug development. 
Monitoring the populations is useful to detect 
threats. 
Major references Beentje, 1994; Samuels-
son et a l , 1993; Stannard, 1981; Thulin, 1999. 
Other references Claeson & Samuelsson, 
1989; Gemedo-Dalle, Maass & Isselstein, 2005; 
Stannard, 2000; Wieland & Werger, 1985. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
KNIPHOFIA FOLIOSA Höchst. 
Protologue Flora 27: 30 (1844). 
Family Asphodelaceae 
Vernacular names Torch lily, red hot poker 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Knip-
hofia foliosa is endemic to Ethiopia. 
Uses The rhizomes of Kniphofia foliosa are 
used in Ethiopia for the treatment of abdomi-
nal cramps. The plant is also used to eradicate 
endoparasites in cattle. The rhizome is said to 
be edible. Kniphofia foliosa is sometimes 
planted as an ornamental in Europe. 
Properties Knipholone was isolated from 
the roots of Kniphofia foliosa. It was the first 
phenylanthraquinone to be isolated and has 
since also been found in Bulbinella, Bulbine 
and Senna. Phenylanthraquinones have an-
tiplasmodial activity with little cytotoxicity. 
The antiplasmodial activity is slightly less 
than that of chloroquine, and chloroquine re-
sistant Plasmodium strains are resistant to the 
Kniphofia compounds as well. The roots of 
Kniphofia foliosa further contain the an-
thraquinone chrysophanol as well as putre-
scine-derived amides. 
Botany Robust perennial herb up to 175 cm 
tall, forming clumps, without stem, rarely with 
stem up to 40 cm long, with thick erect rhi-
zome. Leaves in basal rosette, simple, spread-
ing, without stipules and petiole, linear to 
lanceolate, up to 100 cm x 4(—7) cm, keeled, 
apex long-acuminate, margin finely toothed. 
Inflorescence a terminal raceme 15-40 cm long, 
very densely flowered; peduncle erect, 30-150 
cm long; bracts ovate to ovate-lanceolate, 4-12 
mm long, finely toothed. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 3-merous; pedicel 3—4 mm long; peri-
anth funnel-shaped, 18-27 mm long, slightly 
constricted at base, widening at mouth, peri-
anth lobes up to 6 mm x 3 mm, yellow, orange 
or red; stamens 6, 8-15 mm long, exserted; 
ovary superior, 3-celled, style slender, 8-15 
mm long, stigma minute. Fruit an ovoid cap-
sule c. 8 mm long, dehiscing loculicidally, 
brown to black, few-seeded. Seeds slightly flat-
tened, 3-angled, grey-black. 
Kniphofia comprises about 65 species of which 
about 45 in southern Africa. In Ethiopia 7 spe-
cies occur, including 5 endemics. Isoenzyme 
analysis showed that the Ethiopian endemic 
species share a fairly recent common ancestor, 
but have differentiated in floral and inflores-
cence characteristics through rapid evolution. 
Kniphofia linearifolia Baker is distributed 
from Malawi, Zimbabwe and Mozambique into 
South Africa. In Zimbabwe the powdered root 
is mixed with food to treat infertility in women. 
Kniphofia linearifolia is widely planted as an 
ornamental and cut flower in southern Africa. 
Ecology Kniphofia foliosa grows along road-
sides, in overgrazed grassland with scattered 
trees, on hillsides with rocky outcrops and on 
mountains at 2500-4000 m altitude. 
Management Kniphofia foliosa is only har-
vested from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Knip-
hofia foliosa is fairly widespread in Ethiopia 
and there are no indications of over-utilization. 
Prospects Kniphofia foliosa will remain of 
local importance as a medicinal plant. It re-
mains of interest to pharmacologists for its 
antiplasmodial activity and has potential as an 
ornamental. 
Major references Dagne & Steglich, 1984; 
Demissew Sebsebe & Nordal, 1997; Wirtu et 
al., 1999. 
Other references Abegaz, 2002; Bring-
mann et a l , 1999; Gelfand et al., 1985; Tekle-
haymanot et al., 2004; Wube et a l , 2005. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
360 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
KOLOBOPETALUM AURICULATUM Engl. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 26: 410 (1899). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Kolo-
bopetalum auriculatum occurs in the coastal 
areas along the Gulf of Guinea, from Côte 
d'Ivoire to DR Congo and Cabinda (Angola). 
Uses An infusion of the leaves and seeds is 
taken against sleeplessness, and an infusion of 
the leaves and twigs is used as a mouthwash 
against oral infections including aphthae. 
Proper t ies The plant contains O-methyl-
flavinanthine, which has a morphine-like 
structure and a narcotic-analgesic action of 
about 20% of the strength of morphine. From 
the leaves and stem the aporphine alkaloids N-
methylcorydine and magnoflorine have been 
isolated. 
Botany Dioecious slender liana; stems with 
numerous aerial roots. Leaves alternate, sim-
ple; stipules absent; petiole 2-9 cm long, bent 
at the base and sometimes twisted; blade ellip-
tical to ovate, 5—15 cm x 3.5-9 cm, base cor-
date, sometimes slightly peltate, apex long-
acuminate, margins slightly toothed, thinly 
leathery, glabrous and shiny above, pinnately 
veined with 3-4 pairs of lateral veins. Inflores-
cence an axillary panicle 40-60 cm long, 
branches up to 20 cm long; bracts lanceolate, c. 
1 mm long; female inflorescence raceme-like. 
Flowers unisexual, small; pedicel 2-3.5 mm 
long; sepals 6, in 2 whorls, 3 outer ones broadly 
ovate, c. 0.5 mm long, yellowish white, 3 inner 
ones ovate-oblong, c. 2 mm x 1 mm, yellow to 
pale pink, membranous; petals 6, 1—1.5 mm 
long, bent inwards at base; male flowers with 
(3-)6 stamens, filaments slender or swollen or 
partly fused, anthers globular; female flowers 
with 3 small, linear staminodes, ovary supe-
rior, composed of 3 free carpels, styles short, 
stigma 3-lobed. Fruit composed of 1-3 ellipsoid 
drupes 1-1.5 cm x 0.5—1 cm, apex covered with 
the remainder of the style, glabrous, stone hard 
and brittle, densely spiny outside, 1-seeded. 
Seed kidney-shaped, 3-8 mm x 2 mm. 
Kolobopetalum comprises 4 species, all from 
the forest area of Africa. Kolobopetalum cheva-
lieri (Hutch. & Dalziel) Troupin, from West and 
Central Africa, is also used medicinally. In 
Congo the plant sap is applied to scarifications 
on the arms of a dying patient as a last effort of 
revival. In DR Congo a leaf infusion is taken to 
treat psychosis and to treat intercostal pain. 
Leaf sap is applied as eye drops to treat eye 
infections in dogs. The supple stems are used 
as rope. 
Ecology Kolobopetalum auriculatum occurs 
in rainforest and forest regrowth, up to 400 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Kolo-
bopetalum auriculatum also occurs in secon-
dary vegetation and the area of distribution is 
large, there are no signs of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Too little is known about the 
chemical and pharmacological properties to 
assess the potential of Kolobopetalum auricula-
tum. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Oliver-
Bever, 1983b; Troupin, 1951. 
Other references Baerts & Lehmann, 2006e; 
Dwuma-Badu et al., 1980a; Osei, 1977. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
LEPIDIUM AFRICANUM (Burm.f) DC. 
Protologue Syst. nat. 2: 552 (1821). 
Family Brassicaceae (Cruciferae) 
Chromosome number 2n - 16 
Vernacular names African pepperwort, 
pepperweed, Cape peppercress (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Lepi-
dium africanum occurs from eastern DR 
Congo, Sudan and Ethiopia south to Namibia 
and South Africa, and in the Indian Ocean 
islands. It has been introduced in Europe, the 
United States, Australia and New Zealand. 
Uses In Namibia the leaves are used in tra-
ditional medicine to treat cough, bronchitis and 
sore throat. Dried unripe seed is added to food 
for the treatment of stomach ulcers. The leaves 
are eaten as a vegetable. In South Africa, 
Lepidium africanum is grazed by sheep during 
the dry season. 
Botany Annual or short-lived perennial herb 
up to 75(-100) cm tall; stems erect or strag-
gling, usually much branching, finely hairy. 
Leaves alternate, simple, first leaves in a 
short-lived rosette; stipules absent; petiole 
short; blade lanceolate to oblanceolate, up to 6 
cm long, cuneate at base, acute at apex, irregu-
larly toothed, sparsely hairy or glabrous. Inflo-
rescence a terminal raceme up to 15 cm long, 
many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 4-
merous, minute, greenish; pedicel 2.5-4 mm 
long; sepals ovate, 0.5-1 mm long; petals ab-
sent or narrowly spatulate or linear and up to 
0.5 mm long; stamens 2; ovary superior, 
broadly elliptical, flat, 2-celled, with projecting 
style. Fruit an elliptical to ovate, flattened 
silique 2-3.5 mm x 1.5-2.5 mm, slightly 
LEPIDIUM 361 
notched, with style not projecting outside the 
sinus, 2-seeded. Seeds 1—1.5 mm long, bright 
red-brown. 
Lepidium comprises about 200 species and is 
distributed worldwide. In tropical Africa about 
10 species are found. Two subspecies are dis-
tinguished within Lepidium africanum: subsp. 
africanum and subsp. divaricatum (Aiton) Jon-
sell (synonym: Lepidium divaricatum Aiton); 
the latter is confined to Namibia and South 
Africa and differs from subsp. africanum 
mainly in its stems branching from the base (in 
subsp. africanum only in upper half of stem) 
and its slightly larger fruits and seeds. 
Ecology Lepidium africanum occurs on 
roadsides, open grassland and as a weed in 
fields, at (100-)1100-2600 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Lepi-
dium africanum occurs widespread and often 
in disturbed habitats, and is thus not threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Research on the phytochemistry 
and pharmacological properties of Lepidium 
africanum is desirable to confirm its medicinal 
activity. This may lay the foundation for an 
increasing use in folk medicine, comparable to 
garden cress {Lepidium sativum L.), which is 
not only a well-known vegetable but also much 
used as a medicinal plant with proven pharma-
cological activities. 
Major references Jonsell, 1975; Neuwinger, 
2000; von Koenen, 2001. 
Other references du Toit, 1998; Jonsell, 
1982a; Jonsell, 1982b; Jonsell, 2000; Marais, 
1970. 
Authors R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
LEPIDIUM DIDYMUM L. 
Protologue Mant. pi.: 92 (1767). 
Family Brassicaceae (Cruciferae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 32 
Synonyms Coronopus didymus (L.) Sm. 
(1800). 
Vernacular names Lesser swine-cress (En). 
Corne de cerf didyme, cressonnette (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Lepi-
dium didymum originates from South America, 
but has become an almost cosmopolitan weed. 
It occurs scattered in East and southern Africa, 
where it has been recorded from Ethiopia, 
Kenya, Tanzania, Namibia, Zimbabwe and 
South Africa, and from the Indian Ocean is-
lands. Lepidium didymum is still expanding its 
distribution area. 
Uses In Mauritius Lepidium didymum is 
credited with stimulant, tonic and antiscorbu-
tic properties. A decoction of the whole plant is 
drunk to treat headache, and a leaf poultice is 
applied externally for the same purpose. The 
decoction is used internally to treat fever. In 
India the plant is valued in traditional medi-
cine as a treatment for allergies and wounds. 
In Argentina Lepidium didymum is used as an 
expectorant, antiscorbutic, digestive and febri-
fuge, and to treat cancer, gangrene and haem-
orrhoids. The plant is eaten as a vegetable in 
South America. 
Production and international trade In local 
markets in South America (e.g. Argentina) 
dried aerial parts of Lepidium didymum are 
traded as a drug. 
Properties Phytochemical screening of 
Lepidium didymum showed the presence of 
flavonoids, saponins and tannins. The bioactive 
flavonoid chrysoeriol and its glycoside chryso-
eriol-6-0-acetyl-4'-ß-D-glucoside have been 
isolated. These compounds have free radical-
scavenging and antioxidant properties. The 
sterol ß-sitosterol has been isolated from the 
petroleum ether extract; it has hypocholester-
olaemic activity. The seeds contain erucic acid 
and glucosinolate. 
Tests with rats and mice in India showed 
wound-healing, anti-inflammatory, anti-
allergic, antipyretic, hypoglycaemic and hepa-
toprotective activities of Lepidium didymum 
extracts. 
Cows may produce off-flavoured milk when 
they have been fed with grass mixed with 
Lepidium didymum. It has been suggested that 
this is caused by the inhibitory actions of ben-
zyl isothiocyanate present in the plant on mi-
crobial and/or enzymatic activities in the ru-
men of the cows. 
Botany Small annual or short-lived peren-
nial herb, with an offensive smell; stems creep-
ing or ascending, up to 40 cm long, usually 
strongly branched, finely hairy. Leaves alter-
nate; stipules absent; first leaves in a rosette, 
bipinnate, later ones pinnately cleft, 1.5-3 cm 
x 0.5—1 cm, with lanceolate to elliptical, entire 
to deeply incised lobes, glabrous. Inflorescence 
a leaf-opposed raceme up to 5 cm long. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 4-merous, minute, greenish; 
pedicel 2-3 mm long; sepals elliptical, 0.5-1 
mm long; petals shorter than sepals, very nar-
row, often reduced to small scales; stamens 
usually 2; ovary superior, flat, notched, 2-
celled, with sessile stigma. Fruit a heart-
shaped, flattened silique 1.5 mm x 2-2.5 mm, 
362 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
notched, wrinkled, divided into 2 ellipsoid 1-
seeded halves. Seeds 1-1.5 mm long, finely 
ret iculate, orange to reddish brown. Seedling 
with epigeal germination; hypocotyl 5-16 m m 
long, epicotyl absent; cotyledons lanceolate, 
leafy. 
Lepidium comprises about 200 species and is 
dis t r ibuted worldwide. In tropical Africa about 
10 species are found. In most of the l i tera ture , 
Lepidium didymum is included in Coronopus, a 
genus of about 10 species which belongs to 
Lepidium according to recent morphological as 
well as molecular s tudies . 
After germination, Lepidium didymum p lants 
develop rapidly. They often complete the i r life 
cycle within a few months . 
E c o l o g y Lepidium didymum occurs on road-
sides, open grassland, forest clearings and as a 
weed in fields, in Eas t Africa a t 1350-2800 m 
al t i tude, in Madagascar a t 1000-2000 m, bu t 
elsewhere in tropical Africa occasionally also a t 
lower a l t i tudes . It prefers bare , not too dry 
soils. 
M a n a g e m e n t In some regions Lepidium 
didymum is considered a serious weed, e.g. in 
wheat , potato, pea, carrot and onion in India 
and in onion in Brazil, bu t in Africa it does not 
seem to be causing problems yet. It is a host of 
several pathogens t h a t a t tack crops, e.g. cu-
cumber mosaic virus , the fungi Sclerotinia mi-
nor and Xanthomonas campestris and fungi 
causing powdery mildew, the nematodes 
Meloidogyne javanica and Rotylenchulus reni-
formis, and cotton bollworm (Helicoverpa ar-
migera). 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s and b r e e d i n g Being an 
extremely widespread weed, Lepidium didy-
mum is not th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s In te res t ing pharmacological 
propert ies have been demons t ra ted for 
Lepidium didymum, bu t it is still poorly known 
and little used in tropical Africa. In view of the 
common use of the p lan t in t radi t ional medi-
cine in South America and India and i ts in-
creasing spread as a weed in Africa, more re-
search a t ten t ion seems justified. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Gurib-Fakim, Guého & 
Bissoondoyal, 1995; Lujan & Barboza, 1999; 
M a n t e n a et al., 2005; P rabhaka r , Sr inivasan & 
Rao Padma , 2002. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Al-Shehbaz & Mummen-
hoff, 2002; De Ruiz et a l , 1994; Freyre et al., 
2000; Jonsell , 1982b; Jonsell, 2000; Mishra et 
al., 2003; Shimoda et al., 2000. 
A u t h o r s R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
LlMACIOPSIS LOANGENSIS Engl . 
P r o t o l o g u e Bot. J a h r b . Syst. 26: 414 (1899). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Lima-
ciopsis loangensis occurs from Cameroon and 
the Centra l African Republic south to Gabon, 
Congo and DR Congo. 
U s e s A decoction of the tuber is given to 
children agains t convulsions. In Gabon a tuber 
decoction is t aken with a little sal t agains t 
gonorrhoea. A decoction of the leaves or twigs 
is d runk to t rea t stomach-ache. 
P r o p e r t i e s About 20 alkaloids have been 
isolated from var ious p a r t s of Limaciopsis 
loangensis; t es t s for flavonoids, saponines, tan-
nins and quinones have been negative. Per 100 
g dry ma t t e r the roots contain about 1.5 g alka-
loids, the s tems 0.3 g, the leaves 0.02 g, 
whereas the fruits contain no alkaloids. The 
alkaloids belong to t he groups character is t ic of 
Menispermaceae: bisbenzylisoquinolines, apor-
phines and protoberberines. I so te t randr ine 
accounts for about 90% of the alkaloids, and 
minor alkaloids a re cycleanine, nor-2-
isote t randr ine , N-oxy-isotetrandrine, lirio-
denine, 8-oxy-palmatine, thalrugoside, thal-
rugosamine and berbamine. I so te t randr ine is 
active agains t ca ta r rh , and its role in the mito-
chondrial respira tory chain is being investi-
gated. 
B o t a n y Dioecious twining liana; tuber 50-60 
cm in diameter; s tem up to 8 cm in diameter , 
ha i ry when young. Leaves a r ranged spirally, 
simple and entire; s t ipules absent; petiole 3—5 
cm long, swollen and bent a t apex, reddish 
brown hairy; blade elliptical to ovate-elliptical, 
10-19 cm x 3-10 cm, base rounded or slightly 
cuneate , apex rounded wi th very short mucro, 
glabrous, leathery, palmately and pinnately 
veined with la te ra l veins in 3 -5 pairs , promi-
nen t on both sides. Male inflorescence a pani-
cle, single or grouped, 2-12 cm long, hairy, 
bear ing many small flower heads , brac ts lin-
ear, c. 1 mm long; female inflorescence a ra-
ceme. Flowers unisexual ; pedicel 3 -5 m m long, 
hairy; bracteoles 2 - 3 , 2 -4 mm long; sepals 9— 
10, 3 outer ones linear-oblong to oblong, 2-2.5 
mm x 1-1.5 mm, inner ones larger; peta ls 6, c. 
1 mm long, somewhat fleshy, hairy; male flow-
ers wi th s t amens 6(—9) in 2(-3) whorls, free, 
f i laments 1-1.5 m m long; female flowers with 
superior ovary of 3-4 free carpels, silky hairy, 
brownish black. Fru i t composed of up to 3 
drupelets c. 2 cm x 2.5 cm x 1.5 cm, smooth, 
orange, shiny; stone spirally twisted, bony. 
LOESENERA 363 
Seeds linear, 1.5-2.5 cm x c. 0.5 cm. 
Limaciopsis comprises a single species. 
Ecology Limaciopsis loangensis occurs in 
the undergrowth of rainforest, including secon-
dary forest, and in fringing forest and forest 
relics in the savanna. 
Genetic resources and breeding Lima-
ciopsis loangensis seems fairly common in pri-
mary and secondary forest and in forest rem-
nants. There are no signs that it is in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects From the isolated alkaloids in 
Limaciopsis loangensis, isotetrandrine occurs 
in large amounts and further research seems 
warranted to assess its potential. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Cave et al., 1979; Fang, Zhang, & 
Ku, 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Troupin, 1951. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
LOESENERA KALANTHA Harms 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. II-IV Nachtr. 1: 197 (1897). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
Origin and geographic distribution Loe-
senera kalantha is only known from Liberia 
and Côte d'Ivoire. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf decoction is 
commonly taken to treat syphilis and some-
times also to treat leprosy. It is also used to 
treat rheumatic arthritis. The wood is used in 
local house building. Formerly Loesenera 
kalantha played an important role in witch-
craft. 
Production and international trade Leaves 
of Loesenera kalantha have been imported from 
Liberia into Côte d'Ivoire for medicinal pur-
poses. No details are available on quantities 
traded. 
Properties Nothing appears to have been 
published on the pharmacology of Loesenera 
kalantha to date. The pinkish brown heart-
wood is not clearly demarcated from the whit-
ish sapwood. The wood is moderately heavy 
and moderately hard. It is tough and strong, 
but not durable. It is easy to work and finishes 
smoothly. 
Botany Medium-sized to fairly large tree up 
to 30 m tall; bole up to 70 cm in diameter, 
straight and cylindrical, base with short, thick 
root swellings; bark smooth, grey, finely flaky. 
Leaves alternate, paripinnate with 3-4 pairs of 
opposite leaflets, the end pair the largest; 
petiolule twisted with gland at the top on lower 
side; leaflets oblong to lanceolate, 6—8 cm long, 
base asymmetrical, apex acute to acuminate, 
rusty hairy below. Inflorescence a terminal, 
unbranched raceme up to 18 cm long. Flowers 
bisexual, zygomorphic; sepals 4, imbricate in 
bud, reddish brown; 3 petals well developed, 
clawed, cherry-red, 2 petals small, pinkish; 
stamens 10, free; ovary superior, stipitate. 
Fruit a broadly oblong, flattened pod c. 17 cm x 
7 cm, oblique at base, apex acuminate, dehis-
cent, woody, pendulous, pale brown hairy, 1-2-
seeded. Seeds 3-5 cm long. 
Loesenera comprises 4 species, restricted to 
rain forest from Liberia to Gabon. Loesenera 
walkeri (A.Chev.) J.Léonard is endemic to Ga-
bon. Its wood is used locally in construction, 
but is not of interest for large-scale exploita-
tion. The bark is used to construct bathtubs in 
which patients with backache or kidney prob-
lems can take a bath in capsicum pepper solu-
tion. 
In experiments in Côte d'Ivoire, seedlings of 
Loesenera kalantha reached a height of 4-5 m 
and a diameter of 20-30 cm in 15 years. 
Ecology Loesenera kalantha occurs in 
swamp forest, along creeks and in depressions 
that are inundated during the rainy season. In 
eastern Liberia it forms gregarious stands. 
Genetic resources and breeding The 
natural range of Loesenera kalantha extends 
over only 315 km and it is on the IUCN Red 
List as vulnerable in both Liberia and Côte 
d'Ivoire. In Côte d'Ivoire Loesenera kalantha is 
rare. In the past it was protected by supersti-
tion and because of the role it played in witch-
craft. Erosion of traditional values could bring 
about more intensive exploitation and eventu-
ally cause extinction of the species. 
Prospects In-situ and ex-situ conservation 
of Loesenera kalantha are very urgently re-
quired. In view of the local medicinal uses, it is 
surprising that no pharmacological research 
has been undertaken. Pharmacological investi-
gations, especially of the leaves, could yield 
rewarding results. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Holmgren 
et al., 2004; Keay, Hoyle & Duvigneaud, 1958; 
Kerharo & Bouquet, 1950. 
Other references Aké Assi, 2001; Au-
bréville, 1968; Cooper & Record, 1931; Nor-
mand & Paquis, 1976; Raponda-Walker & Sil-
lans, 1961; Voorhoeve, 1965. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
364 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
LYCIUM SHAWII Roem. & Schult. 
Protologue Syst. veg. 4: 693 (1819). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24 
Origin and geographic distribution Lycium 
shawii is distributed from Sudan and Ethiopia 
south through Kenya and Tanzania to Malawi, 
Zambia, Botswana and Zimbabwe. It also oc-
curs in South Africa, the Mediterranean re-
gion, the Middle East and western India. 
Uses In Tanzania the roots of Lycium shawii 
are boiled and the decoction is used to treat 
sores in the mouth; in Somalia, Kenya and 
Tanzania it is used to treat coughs. The decoc-
tion is applied externally to relieve backache 
and to wash polio patients, and administered 
internally to cure tick fever in livestock. An 
infusion of leaves and roots is drunk to induce 
vomiting in case of tapeworm infection. Leaves 
are used to treat constipation and stomach-
ache. In Saudi Arabia and Mediterranean 
countries similar medicinal uses have been 
reported. The salty leaves are much liked by 
livestock. The leaves are eaten as a vegetable 
after chopping and cooking, either alone or 
mixed with other green vegetables. The Cha-
rnus and Turkana people of Kenya use the 
branches for fencing. 
Properties Aqueous stem and leaf extracts 
showed low cytotoxicity to melanoma cell lines 
and low antiplasmodial activity. An extract of 
the aerial parts exhibited persistent hypogly-
caemic effects in alloxan-induced diabetic rats. 
The extract induced wheat rootlet elongation in 
a root growth inhibition test, but the reason 
needs to be elucidated. 
The crude protein content of the aerial parts is 
about 17%. 
Botany, Erect to spreading, much-branched 
shrub, sometimes scandent, up to 2.5(-3) m 
tall, very spiny with axillary spines 5-10(-15) 
mm long; stems slightly zigzag, robust, gla-
brous, branches curving, greyish white. Leaves 
in fascicles of 2-6, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 2—5 mm long; blade obovate to 
lanceolate, 2-3.5 cm x c. 1 cm, base cuneate, 
apex acute to rounded, glabrous or with short 
glandular hairs, glossy. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous; pedicel 6-15 mm long, pendu-
lous; calyx tubular, 3-5 mm long, lobes trian-
gular, c. 5 mm long, erect; corolla narrowly 
tubular, 12-16 mm long, lobes ovate-oblong, 3— 
4 mm long, creamy white to pale mauve with 
purple venation; stamens unequal, inserted 
above the middle of the corolla tube, filaments 
3-9 mm long, 3 included, 2 slightly exserted; 
nectary red; ovary superior, globose, 1.5-2 mm 
long, style 10-12 mm long, stigma obtuse, 2-
lobed. Fruit a globose or slightly obovoid berry 
3-5 mm in diameter, red, many-seeded. Seeds 
ovate in outline, 2 mm x 1.5 mm, flattened, 
brown. 
Lycium comprises about 90 species and is 
found mainly in warm temperate areas, the 
largest number of species occurring in the New 
World and about 35 in mainland Africa. Ly-
cium shawii has long been regarded as a form 
of Lycium europaeum L., but in recent flora 
treatments for tropical Africa, all specimens 
collected south of Sudan are placed in Lycium 
shawii. The 2 species can mainly be distin-
guished by the calyx, which is cup-shaped, c. 2 
mm long and with unequal teeth in Lycium 
europaeum and tubular, 3-5 mm long and with 
equal teeth in Lycium shawii. 
Several other Lycium spp. are medicinally used 
in southern Africa and Madagascar. In Na-
mibia the roots of young shrubs of Lycium oxy-
carpum Dunal are used against backache, dis-
eases of the male genitals, painful and exces-
sive menstruation, diarrhoea in children and 
as a purgative. In Botswana the smoke of the 
burnt roots of Lycium cinereum Thunb. is used 
as an analgesic for painful eyes. A decoction of 
the roots is taken to treat kidney pain. Reports 
on the properties of the fruit are contradictory, 
poisonous as well as edible. In Namibia the 
branches are used to make impenetrable barri-
ers around gardens and kraals. Dried, pow-
dered plant parts have a pleasant smell and 
are used as a perfume. Lycium mascarenense 
A.M.Venter & A.J.Scott from southern Mozam-
bique, coastal South Africa and Madagascar is 
medicinally used in Madagascar. The aerial 
parts are commonly used in a medicine to treat 
Parkinson's disease. The fruits are considered 
poisonous; birds that eat them die. 
Ecology Lycium shawii occurs in dry to 
relatively moist areas, from hilly country to the 
edge of floodplains and riverbanks, also in 
mixed woodland, wooded grassland and culti-
vated areas, and along roads, on clayey and 
loamy, even saline soils. In southern Africa it 
occurs up to 2100 m altitude. 
Management For medicinal use and as a 
vegetable, Lycium shawii is exclusively har-
vested from the wild. When planted as hedges 
either stem cuttings or seeds can be used. In 
Kuwait, tissue culture technology was devel-
oped of certain genotypes of Lycium shawii 
because of their potential for use in urban 
LYCOPODIELLA 365 
landscaping and in desert revegetation. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though widespread, Lycium shawii is not com-
mon within its area of distribution. In tropical 
Africa there are no threats reported, but in the 
Sinai Desert and in Jordan the species is 
threatened by its unsustainable use. In the 
wild Lycium species hybridize frequently, offer-
ing opportunities for breeders. 
Prospects The lack of knowledge of the 
chemistry of Lycium shawii makes it difficult 
to judge its potential. It will probably remain a 
locally important multi-purpose species. 
Major references Abdalla et al., 1995; Gon-
calves, 2005; Neuwinger, 2000; Ruffo, Birnie & 
Tengnäs, 2002; Sathiyamoorthy et a l , 1999. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Boiteau, 
Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; Boulos, 
2000b; Heine & Heine, 1988a; Heine & Heine, 
1988b; Rahman et a l , 2004; SEPASAL, 2007b; 
Shabana et al., 1990; Van Damme & Van den 
Eynden, 2000; Venter & Scott, 1999. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
LYCOPODIELLA CEENUA (L.) Pic.Serm. 
Protologue Webbia 23: 166 (1968). 
Family Lycopodiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 312 
Synonyms Lycopodium cernuum L. (1753), 
Palhinhaea cernua (L.) Vase. & Franco (1967). 
Vernacular names Stag-horn moss, mon-
key's paws, nodding club-moss (En). Lycopode 
ornamental, fougère décorative (Fr). Enxofre 
vegetal, licopódio brasileiro, palma de Sào 
Joâo, pinheirinho do campo (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Lyco-
podiella cernua is found throughout the tropics 
and subtropics, extending to Japan, the Azores 
and New Zealand. It occurs throughout conti-
nental Africa, Madagascar and the Mascarene 
Islands, except in the driest regions. 
Uses In Rwanda the whole plant is crushed 
and applied as a dressing to wounds. In DR 
Congo the plant is used as a flea repellent. In 
Madagascar a decoction of the plant is used as 
a tonic and in a mixture with Tristemma mau-
ritianum J.F.Gmel. to treat neuralgia and hy-
pertension. The whole plant is used to prepare 
a tea that is drunk to treat stomach ulcers. In 
tropical America and Asia it also has several 
applications in traditional medicine. In South-
East Asia a decoction of the whole plant is used 
externally as a lotion to treat beri-beri, coughs 
and asthma, and in embrocations to treat skin 
eruptions and abscesses. In tropical America it 
is used as a diuretic, and to treat gout, arthritic 
swellings, skin irritations, gonorrhoea, leuco-
rrhoea and dysentery. A traditional Chinese 
medicine is prepared from Lycopodiella cernua 
plants by ultrafiltration. It is administered to 
treat rheumatism, hepatitis and dysentery, 
and applied externally to bruises, burns and 
scalds. In Micronesia Lycopodiella cernua is 
used as a cockroach repellent. It is also used to 
stuff cushions as a kapok substitute. In Gabon 
the leaves are used to filter palm wine. Lyco-
podiella cernua is widely grown as an orna-
mental, both indoors and outdoors. It is also 
used in floral decoration, for making wreaths 
and baskets. 
Properties Phytochemical investigations of 
Lycopodiella cernua showed the presence of 
alkaloids, such as cernuine and lycocernuine, 
the flavonoids apigenin and apigenin-7-
glucoside, the triterpene serratenediol and, as 
in many other Lycopodiaceae, a high concen-
tration of aluminium (up to 12.5% of ash). 
Tests with rats showed that injection with a 
traditional Chinese medicine prepared from 
Lycopodiella cernua is effective against ex-
perimental silicosis, not only as a prophylactic 
but also to treat the disease. 
Botany Terrestrial herb with creeping main 
stem of indefinite length, rooting at long inter-
vals; erect shoots distant, somewhat resem-
bling little pine trees, up to 100 cm tall, basal 
part simple, distal part with numerous almost 
opposite, highly compound, spreading 
branches, ultimate branches nodding to pendu-
lous. Leaves arranged spirally, linear-subulate, 
2-3(-5) mm x 0.1-0.3 mm, base broadly decur-
rent, apex sharply pointed, margin entire, pale 
yellowish or brownish, thick but soft, changing 
gradually from patent-reflexed and rather dis-
tant on the shoot axis to falcately ascending 
and closely approximate on the ultimate 
branches. Cone-like structures producing 
spores terminal on the branches, sessile, pend-
ing, ovoid to ellipsoid, 3-15(-25) mm x 1.5-3(-
5) mm; sporophylls ovate to deltoid, c. 2 mm x 
1 mm, margins coarsely and irregularly 
slashed, yellowish or greenish; sporangium 
globose, opening with very unequal valves, 
concealed by the sporophyll base. Spores glo-
bose, with a 3-pronged scar, slightly wrinkled. 
Lycopodiella cernua has been placed in the 
genus Palhinhaea on the basis of phytochemi-
cal characteristics. However, it is currently 
accepted that this genus should be treated as a 
section of Lycopodiella, i.e. sect. Campylo-
366 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Lycopodiella cernua - 1, part of a spore-
producing plant; 2, part of a branch; 3, apical 
part of a spore-producing branch; 4, sporophyll 
with sporangium. 
Source: PROSEA 
stachys. At least 40 varieties have been described 
within Lycopodiella cernua, most of which are 
hardly distinguishable. Lycopodiella cernua 
may produce spores throughout the year, but 
may also spend the dry season as buried stem 
tips while the rest of the plant dies. 
Ecology Lycopodiella cernua occurs along 
forest fringes, in young secondary forest, often 
in swamp margins, in grassland (including wet 
grassland), along roadsides and railways, on 
moist cliff-faces, hillsides and mountain slopes, 
up to 2400 m altitude. Locally it is abundant, 
sometimes as a weed. In southern Africa it is 
not found in areas with less than 600 mm an-
nual rainfall. It is apparently fire resistant. 
Management Lycopodiella cernua can be 
propagated by layering of growing tips. Har-
vesting is done from wild populations when the 
need arises. Fresh stems and branches are tied 
up into bundles and brought to the market for 
sale. 
Genetic resources and breeding Lycopo-
diella cernua is probably the world's most 
abundant and widespread club-moss, and is 
therefore not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects More research on the pharmacol-
ogical activities of Lycopodiella cernua is desir-
able, considering its applications in traditional 
medicine in many parts of the world and the 
fact that other species of Lycopodiaceae have 
medicinal uses. Since this club-moss is in great 
demand in floriculture, research on its cultiva-
tion warrants more attention. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; He et al., 
1998; Jacobsen, 1983; Ma & Gang, 2004; 
Schelpe, 1970. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Alston, 1959; Hegnauer, 1986; Lawalrée, 1989; 
Markham, Moore & Given, 1983; Novy, 1997; 
Perry, 1980; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 1961; 
Tardieu-Blot, 1971b; Yamada, 1999. 
Sources of illustration Wulijarni-Soetjipto 
& de Winter, 2003. 
Authors R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
LYCOPODIUM CLAVATUM L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 1101 (1753). 
Family Lycopodiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 68, 102, 136 
Vernacular names Staghorn clubmoss, 
common clubmoss, ground pine, running pine 
(En). Lycopode à massue (Fr). Licopódio chifre 
de veado (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution In con-
tinental Africa Lycopodium clavatum is found 
from Nigeria east to Ethiopia and south to 
South Africa. It is also indigenous in the Indian 
Ocean Islands. It is found in all continents 
except Australia and is most common in boreal 
regions. 
Uses In many countries throughout the 
Lycopodium clavatum - wild 
L Y C O P O D I U M 367 
world Lycopodium clavatum is used as a me-
dicinal plant. In southern Nigeria a decoction 
of young leaves is applied externally to wounds 
and ulcers. Sun-dried, pulverized leaves are 
mixed with plantain and milk, and the mixture 
is given in small doses to children to cure diar-
rhoea and dysentery. In eastern DR Congo the 
plant is used to repel insects. In Rwanda an 
extract of the aerial parts is drunk to cure dys-
entery and malaria. In Madagascar the whole 
plant is grilled with sugarcane and banana 
skins and applied to cracked lips to promote 
healing. In Lesotho the whole dried plant is 
pulverized and smoked as a cure for headache. 
In New Guinea and in the Philippines the 
whole plant is chewed to induce vomiting after 
food poisoning or acute stomach pain. North-
American Indians apply the aerial parts as a 
remedy for stiff joints. In traditional European 
medicine it has been used as a diuretic in oe-
dema, as a strong medicine to cure diarrhoea 
and dysentery, to suppress spasms and hydro-
phobia, to treat gout and scurvy, as a tonic and 
as a wound powder. It was also applied against 
affections of the urinary tract and inflamma-
tions of the bladder or kidneys. 
The spores traded as 'lycopodium seed', 'pulver-
ized lycopodium', 'vegetable sulphur' or 'sporae 
lycopodii', have been used for centuries as a 
styptic and as a dusting powder in various skin 
diseases such as eczema and erysipelas and for 
chafed skin, to prevent pills from sticking to-
gether and for metal-casting moulds. The ae-
rial parts are still a popular medicine in phyto-
therapy, and used to alleviate anxiety, antici-
patory fears, apprehension, over-sensitivity 
and inability to adapt to new surroundings. 
They are also used to treat constipation, bloat-
ing, digestive upset, heartburn, migraine, dry-
ness of mucous membranes, dry wrinkled skin, 
sallow complexion and a plethora of other in-
conveniences. 
Lycopodium clavatum is one of the ingredients 
of a remedy to alleviate jet lag. It is used as a 
feed additive for cows to improve their consti-
tution and as a cure for anaemia with jaundice 
and for dogs suffering from fleas. The spores 
are used as a reference in pollen traps used to 
monitor pollen in the air to establish hay-fever 
risks. Sporopollenin, the outer cover of the 
spores has been found to be a suitable solid 
support for peptide synthesis. It is stable to 
chloromethylation and to standard deblocking 
procedures and its constant mesh size, ready 
commercial availability and constant molecular 
structure give it important practical advan-
tages over synthetic resins. Lycopodium clava-
tum has been used for sifting milk and other 
liquids and is used as ornamental e.g. for deco-
rations and garlands. The stems are woven 
into mats and the whole plant is used as a 
mordant in dyeing. 
Production and international trade Trade 
statistics on Lycopodium clavatum are rare. 
China, Nepal, eastern Europe and former So-
viet Republics are sources in international 
trade. In the early 1990s Nepal exported 40 t of 
the crude herb per year. The wholesale market 
price per kg spores in early 2001 was US$ 110, 
and US$ 28 per kg cut and sifted plant mate-
rial. In some areas, such as western Europe, 
Lycopodium clavatum has declined in abun-
dance too much to allow collecting. 
Properties The aerial parts contain dihy-
drocaffeic acid, which has a blood pressure 
lowering effect in animals, as well as alkaloids 
such as lycopodine, chinoline, clavatine, clava-
toxine and annotinine, which all cause an in-
crease in blood pressure. Lycopodine also 
stimulates the peristaltic movements of the 
intestine; in in-vivo tests with rats, lycopodine 
causes contraction of the uterus. Furthermore, 
the aerial parts contain derivatives of cinna-
monic acid and flavonoids; the ash contains 
3.5-12.5% aluminium. A methanol extract 
showed strong prolyl-endopeptidase-inhibiting 
activity and is expected to have activity against 
loss of memory. 
The spores contain about 50% greenish yellow 
acidic oil, 3% sugar, 1-4% ash and a trace of a 
volatile alkaloid. The spores are highly in-
flammable because of the oil, which contains 
80-86% decyl-isopropyl acrylic acid, 3—5% glyc-
erine and solid fatty acids (mainly myristic 
acid). Other analyses showed a neutral oil, 
8.2% glycerine, 5.3% protein and no alkaloids. 
In several pharmacopoeias Lycopodium clava-
tum spores form a pharmacologically indiffer-
ent, fine, pale yellow, very mobile, inodorous 
and tasteless powder. The powder should be 
free from pollen, starch, sand and other impu-
rities. When ignited with free access to air, the 
spores should not leave more than 5% ash. The 
spores are strongly water repellent. Lyco-
podium clavatum spores used as dusting pow-
der can cause asthma and other allergy prob-
lems (itchy skin, eye and nose problems) when 
used over a long period. The powder is safe for 
consumers who are exposed to small amounts, 
but hepatotoxic effects have been observed. 
When the spores enter surgical wounds a le-
sion may develop months or even years later. 
368 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Description Herb with creeping main stem, 
rooting at long intervals, much branched, usu-
ally up to 1.5 m long and 2-4 mm in diameter 
(excluding the leaves); erect shoots up to 60(— 
80) cm long, dichotomously branched. Leaves 
arranged spirally or apparently in rows, linear-
lanceolate, 4—7 mm x 0.5—1 mm, apex narrowly 
acute to attenuate, with translucent hair-point 
2-4 mm long, margin indistinctly toothed to 
entire, midrib distinct. Cone-like structures 
producing spores terminal on branches, erect, 
cylindrical, 1-8 cm x 4-6 mm, 1-6 together; 
sporophylls ovate, 1.5-3.5(-5) mm x c. 1 mm, 
appressed, imbricate, apex elongated, with a 
1.5—4 mm long spreading hair-point, margins 
irregularly toothed; sporangium globose to kid-
ney-shaped, c. 1 mm x 1.5 mm, bright ochre-
ous. Spores globose, with a 3-radiate scar, re-
ticulate, bright yellow. 
Other botanical information Lycopodium 
comprises about 40 species. Formerly many 
more species were included in Lycopodium, but 
most of these have been separated into the 
Lycopodium clavatum - 1, habit; 2, leaf from 
inner side; 3, leaf from outer side; 4, sporophyll 
from outer side; 5, sporophyll with sporangium; 
6, sporophyll with open sporangium; 7, spores. 
Source: PROSEA 
genera Huperzia and Lycopodiella. Lycopodium 
clavatum is very variable, and there is a nearly 
continuous series of forms from compact plants 
with parallel branches and firm, imbricate 
leaves to amply branched plants with diverging 
branches and soft, spreading leaves. The for-
mer are typical for cold and exposed habitats, 
the latter for warm and sheltered locations. 
Several Huperzia species have medicinal uses 
in Madagascar. Huperzia phlegmaria (L.) 
Rothm. (synonym: Lycopodium phlegmaria L.), 
an epiphytic herb with pendant stems found in 
forests in large parts of tropical Africa, tropical 
Asia, Australia and New Zealand, Huperzia 
stricta (Baker) Tardieu (synonym: Lycopodium 
strictum Baker), an endemic terrestrial herb 
from Madagascar, Huperzia megastachya 
(Baker) Tardieu (synonym: Lycopodium mega-
stachyum Baker), an endemic epiphytic herb 
from Madagascar, and Huperzia obtusifolia 
(Sw.) Rothm. (synonym: Lycopodium obtusi-
folium Sw.), an epiphytic herb from Madagas-
car and Réunion all share several vernacular 
names in Madagascar. The dried plant is 
smoked and the fresh leaves are used in an 
infusion as a tonic or fortifier. The infusion is 
also given to dancers, wrestlers, fighting cocks 
and bulls. Since cannabis (Cannabis sativa L.) 
is an illegal drug in Madagascar, the Huperzia 
species are much sought after as a substitute. 
Growth and development The spores of 
Lycopodium clavatum remain dormant for 3-8 
years. During this period they settle in the soil 
at a depth of 3-10 cm and this, combined with 
a relatively thick spore wall, may retard ger-
mination considerably. When spores are ex-
posed to sulfuric acid, germination takes only 2 
months. The subterranean prothallus develops 
slowly and reaches sexual maturity after 6-15 
years and may live for 20 years. It is top-
shaped, differentiated into various tissues and 
lives in close symbiosis with a fungus, possibly 
a species of Pythium. Without the fungus, the 
development of the gametophyte stops at an 
early, few-celled stage. Once the sporophyte 
has established, it can spread rapidly by the 
long creeping stems. If competition with higher 
growing plants is not strong, it is long-lived 
and slowly forms large colonies. 
Ecology Lycopodium clavatum is found in 
cool, wet climates where it prefers open habi-
tats such as mountain sides, moors and heaths, 
clearings and road cuttings in cloud forest. In 
the tropics it grows in highland areas above 
1300 m altitude. It is often found as one of the 
pioneers on bare soil of road embankments and 
MACARANGA 369 
recently burned patches, frequently accompa-
nied by ferns. 
Propagation and planting Lycopodium cla-
vatum is usually propagated by division of the 
main stem. The long juvenile phase of the 
prothalli make propagation by spores virtually 
impossible. Lycopodium clavatum is difficult to 
transplant but once established it may grow 
vigorously. A well-draining potting mix is rec-
ommended. 
No successful mass production method either 
by traditional cultivation or by tissue culture 
has been developed for any Lycopodium spe-
cies. 
Diseases and pests The fungus Lepto-
sphaeria crepini has been recorded on Lyco-
podium clavatum; it blackens the sporophylls 
with abundant fruiting bodies. 
Harvesting Collectors cut the spore-
producing tops from the plants, and the spore 
powder is obtained by shaking the tops and 
sifting out the other matter. The annual yield 
is rather variable, depending on spore produc-
tion. 
Genetic resources Lycopodium clavatum is 
extremely widespread, but in some areas it is 
threatened with extinction. 
Prospects At present Lycopodium clavatum 
is utilized for various purposes. Research is 
being carried out to elucidate the value of the 
many pharmacological claims. Specially prom-
ising is the application of alkaloids in the 
treatment of Alzheimer's disease and in in-
creasing efficiency of learning and memorizing. 
Cultivation would be desirable, both for the 
quality of the crude herb and spores and for its 
protection. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Cullinan et 
a l , 1993; de Winter, 2003; Ma & Gang, 2004; 
May, 1978; Verdcourt, 2005. 
Other references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Debray, Jacquemin & 
Razafindrambao, 1971; Lawalrée, 1989; Neu-
winger, 2000; Pichi Sermolli, 1983; Rwangabo, 
1993; Schelpe, 1970; Tardieu-Blot, 1964; Tar-
dieu-Blot, 1971a; Tardieu-Blot, 1971b; Tezuka 
et al., 1999; Tulp & Bohlin, 2005; Watt & 
Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962; Yamada, 1999. 
Sources of illustration de Winter, 2003. 
Authors C. Zimudzi & C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 15(2): Cryptogams: Ferns 
and fern allies. 
MACARANGA HETEROPHYLLA (Müll.Arg.) 
Müll.Arg. 
Protologue A.DC, Prodr. 15(2.2): 993 
(1866). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Maca-
ranga heterophylla occurs from Senegal east to 
Cameroon. 
Uses Various parts of the plant are used as a 
purgative. In southern Senegal a root decoction 
is taken to treat amenorrhoea, and also as an 
abortifacient. In Sierra Leone a decoction of 
young leaves is taken to treat gonorrhoea. In 
Côte d'Ivoire a bark decoction is taken and 
used in a bath to treat cough. The plant is used 
to treat snakebites. 
The ash from the burnt stem and branches is 
used as vegetable salt. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 
10 m tall; twigs and stem covered with stout, 
woody spines; stem sap yellowish orange, ge-
latinous. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules 
lanceolate to ovate, 2.5—4 cm long, brown, ap-
pressed hairy; petiole 10-20 cm long; blade 
digitately 3-7-lobed, rarely not lobed, 13—32 cm 
in diameter, base rounded to shallowly cordate, 
apex long acuminate, margins toothed, gla-
brous above, sparingly short-hairy on the veins 
beneath. Male inflorescence an axillary, many-
flowered panicle 15-30 cm long; female inflo-
rescence an axillary, spike-like raceme or nar-
row, sparsely branched panicle up to 14 cm 
long. Flowers unisexual, petals absent, disk 
absent; male flowers almost sessile, calyx lobes 
3, tiny, white, tinged pink, reddish hairy out-
side, stamens 3, free, minute; female flowers 
with pedicel up to 1 mm long, extending in 
fruit, calyx tiny, ovary superior, glandular, 2-
celled, style 1, small. Fruit a rounded 2-lobed 
drupe 10-20 mm in diameter, pink to red, cov-
ered with small yellow glands, 2-seeded. Seeds 
almost globose, dull black. 
Macaranga comprises about 280 species, of 
which about 30 are native to tropical continen-
tal Africa and about 15 to Madagascar and the 
Indian Ocean islands. Several other West-
African Macaranga species are medicinally 
used in West Africa. In Côte d'Ivoire the 
crushed leaves of Macaranga beillei Prain, 
together with the crushed aerial parts of Scle-
ria boivinii Steud. and vegetable salt, are 
wrapped in leaves of Thaumatococcus daniellii 
(Bennet) Benth., and the decoction is drunk to 
treat cough. In Sierra Leone an infusion of 
ground leaves of Macaranga heudelotii Baill. 
370 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
with lemon juice is drunk to treat gonorrhoea. 
In Ghana a leaf infusion is taken to treat diar-
rhoea. 
Ecology Macaranga heterophylla occurs in 
secondary forest in wet localities and riverine 
forest. It is a pioneer species in forest gaps. 
Genetic resources and breeding Maca-
ranga heterophylla is not threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Macaranga heterophylla will 
probably remain of local importance as a me-
dicinal plant, unless research into the chemis-
try and pharmacology offers new possibilities. 
Major references Berhaut, 1975a; Burkill, 
1994; Neuwinger, 2000; Stäuble, 1986. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Keay, 1958a; MacFoy & Sama, 1983. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MACARANGA MONANDRA Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 2: 337 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Maca-
ranga monandra occurs from southern Nigeria 
east to Uganda and south to Tanzania and 
Angola. 
Uses In Gabon a decoction of the stem bark 
is taken as a galactagogue. In Congo the decoc-
tion, together with the bark of Pentaclethra 
eetveldeana De Wild. & T.Durand, is taken by 
women to treat sterility. A bark decoction is 
drunk to treat dyspnoea. A large amount of 
bark decoction is drunk in case of threatened 
abortion. A twig bark decoction is taken to 
treat intercostal neuralgia. 
In DR Congo Macaranga monandra is consid-
ered a good food plant for different species of 
edible caterpillars. The wood is considered a 
good firewood. 
Properties Hexane and ethyl acetate frac-
tions of the methanol extract of the stem bark 
showed growth inhibition of different plant 
fungi: Colletotrichum acutatum, Colletotrichum 
fragariae, Colletotrichum gloeosporioides, 
Fusarium oxysporum, Botrytis cinerea, Pho-
mopsis obscurans and Phomopsis viticola. Two 
active clerodane-type diterpenes were isolated: 
kolavenic acid and 2-oxo-kolavenic acid. These 
2 compounds showed moderate growth inhibi-
tion of Phomopsis viticola and Botrytis cinerea. 
Isolated from other plants, these compounds 
also showed cytotoxic and antibacterial activi-
ties. 
Botany Dioecious, much-branched medium-
sized tree up to 25 m tall, with bushy crown, 
usually with a spiny bole; spines sparse, up to 
7.5 cm long, blunt; young shoots, petioles and 
inflorescences densely hairy. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules linear-lanceolate, 5-7 mm 
long, soon falling; petiole 4-10 cm long; blade 
ovate, oblong-ovate to elliptical-oblong, (5 - ) l l -
16(-20) cm x (3-)6-10(-12) cm, base rounded, 
cuneate or truncate to shallowly cordate with 2 
basal glands, apex acuminate, margins 
coarsely toothed, softly hairy above, later gla-
brescent, densely and minutely yellowish glan-
dular-punctate and shortly hairy on the main 
veins beneath. Male inflorescence an axillary, 
many-flowered panicle 3—9 cm long, bracts up 
to 1 cm long; female inflorescence an axillary, 
few-flowered raceme (2-)3—5.5 cm long, bracts 
up to 1 cm long. Flowers unisexual, petals ab-
sent, disk absent; male flowers almost sessile, 
calyx lobes 3, broadly ovate, c. 0.5 mm long, 
pale greenish brown to brownish white, sta-
mens usually 2, fused at base, minute; female 
flowers with pedicel up to 1 mm long, extend-
ing to 1-2 cm in fruit, calyx cup-shaped, c. 1 
mm long, splitting into 3 lobes, ovary superior, 
1.5-2 mm long, densely yellowish glandular, 2-
celled, stigma sessile, recurved, c. 1 mm long. 
Fruit a transversely ovoid drupe 6—7 mm x 8-9 
mm, densely yellowish glandular, becoming 
blackish when ripe, sometimes late dehiscent, 
stigma persistent, 1-seeded. Seed almost glo-
bose, 5-6 mm long, rough, dull, brownish to 
blackish. 
Macaranga comprises about 280 species, of 
which about 30 are native to tropical continen-
tal Africa and about 15 to Madagascar and the 
Indian Ocean islands. Several other Maca-
ranga species occurring in Central Africa are 
medicinally used. In Congo, leaf sap of Maca-
ranga angolensis (Müll.Arg.) Müll.Arg. is 
rubbed on painful spots, sores and wounds, or a 
vapour bath with the leaf decoction is taken to 
treat bronchitis. In Gabon a bark infusion is 
drunk to treat hypermenorrhoea and dys-
menorrhoea. In DR Congo a stem bark decoc-
tion of Macaranga saccifera Pax together with 
salt is taken to treat headache. The large 
leaves are used to wrap seeds and tobacco for 
storage purposes. 
Ecology Macaranga monandra occurs in 
secondary forest and is common in riverine, 
lakeside and swamp-edge forest, from sea-level 
up to 1500 m altitude. It is a fast-growing, 
light-demanding pioneer species of forest gaps. 
Management Macaranga monandra can be 
grown from seeds and cuttings. It is the main 
MACARANGA 371 
competitor of Aucoumea klaineana Pierre in 
forest gaps as it grows slightly faster. 
Genet ic resources and breeding Maca-
ranga monandra is relatively widespread and a 
fast-growing pioneer species of forest gaps. It is 
therefore not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The stem bark of Macaranga 
monandra has several gynaecological applica-
tions. Kolavenic acid and 2-oxo-kolavenic acid, 
isolated from the stem bark, show antifungal 
activity against plant fungi. However, nothing 
is known about the pharmacological activity of 
Macaranga monandra against human patho-
gens. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Neuwinger, 
2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Salah et a l , 2003. 
Other references Bourobou Bourobou et 
al., 1996; Doucet, Otimbo & Boubady, 2004; 
Latham, 2004; Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MACARANGA SPINOSA Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Flora 47: 466 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Mkalanga, mbawa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Maca-
ranga spinosa occurs from Liberia east to 
Uganda and south to Burundi, Tanzania and 
Angola. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire the plant is used in the 
treatment of dysentery and cough. In Congo 
leaf sap or bark sap is drunk, rubbed in or used 
in a vapour bath to treat lung complaints (in-
cluding bronchitis, cough and asthma), head-
ache, feverish stiffness, rheumatism, liver 
complaints and stomach-ache. A bark decoction 
is gargled or used as a mouth wash to treat 
toothache, stomatitis and aphthae. A macera-
tion of the crushed leaves is taken by women to 
treat amenorrhoea. The root ash is inhaled to 
treat haemorrhoids. 
The wood is used for construction of house 
posts, stools and spoons, as firewood and to 
make charcoal. The tree is planted for shade in 
home gardens. In Cameroon potters sprinkle 
an extract from the crushed stem bark on pots 
that come from the fire and are still red hot, to 
make them waterproof. 
Properties In a preliminary analysis, 
saponins, steroids and terpenes have been iso-
lated from the stem bark. A water extract of 
the stem bark contains procyanidins, of which 
the pyrolysis products have waterproofing 
properties. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 
10(-20) m tall, with a spiny bole; spines 10-20 
cm long, directed downwards, simple or forked, 
woody; twigs often spiny, young shoots densely 
softly hairy. Leaves alternate, simple and en-
tire; stipules linear-lanceolate, 5-7 mm long, 
soon falling; petiole 1-5 cm long, widened at 
base; blade elliptical, elliptical-oblong to ellipti-
cal-oblanceolate, 5-13 cm x 3-6.5 cm, base 
rounded to shallowly cordate with 2 basal 
glands, apex acute to acuminate, softly hairy 
above, later glabrescent, glandular-punctate 
beneath. Inflorescence an axillary panicle 3 -
6.5 cm long; bracts triangular, small. Flowers 
unisexual, petals absent, disk absent; male 
flowers almost sessile, calyx lobes 3, ovate, up 
to 0.5 mm long, creamy white, stamens 3, free, 
minute; female flowers with pedicel up to 1 mm 
long, extending to c. 5 mm in fruit, calyx cup-
shaped, c. 0.5 mm long, splitting into 3 unequal 
lobes, ovary superior, c. 1 mm long, densely 
glandular, 2-celled, style 1, stigma recurved, c. 
1 mm long. Fruit a transversely ovoid drupe c. 
3 mm x 4 mm, densely glandular, sometimes 
late dehiscent, stigma persistent, c. 3 mm long, 
1-seeded. Seed almost globose, c. 2.5 mm long, 
rough, dull, brownish. 
Macaranga comprises about 280 species, of 
which about 30 are native to tropical continen-
tal Africa and about 15 to Madagascar and the 
Indian Ocean islands. Several Macaranga spe-
cies endemic to Madagascar are also used med-
icinally. The aromatic stem bark of Macaranga 
cuspidata Boivin ex Baill. is crushed on insect 
bites. The wood is used to make poles, which 
are suitable for humid soils as they do not rot. 
A stem bark infusion of Macaranga echino-
carpa Baker is taken to treat malaria. The 
plant is also used to treat certain diseases of 
pigs. The wood of large-stemmed trees is used 
to make boats. Fresh leafy twigs of Macaranga 
myriolepida Baker are ground and applied to 
burns as a dressing. Young branches are made 
into whistles. Also of this species, the wood of 
large-stemmed trees is used to make boats. A 
stem bark infusion of Macaranga ribesioides 
Baker is taken to treat venereal diseases. A 
leaf decoction of Macaranga sphaerophylla 
Baker is taken to treat rheumatism, sciatica 
and lumbar pain. 
Ecology Macaranga spinosa occurs along 
edges of primary forest and in secondary forest, 
often on soils with a high groundwater table, 
from sea-level up to 1200 m altitude. In the 
forest-savanna transition zone in littoral 
Congo, it is one of the pioneer species involved 
372 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
in forest expansion. 
Genetic resources and breeding Maca-
ranga spinosa has a large area of distribution 
and also occurs in secondary forest. It is there-
fore probably not threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects In Congo Macaranga spinosa has 
many local medicinal uses, but virtually noth-
ing is known concerning its chemistry or 
pharmacology. More research is therefore 
needed to evaluate its potential. 
Major references Bouquet, 1969; Burkill, 
1994; Diallo, Vanhaelen & Gosselain, 1995; 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Chifundera, 2001; Favier, 
de Namur & Dubois, 2004; Lovett et al., 2006; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Randriambelona, 2002. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MAESOBOTRYA FLORIBUNDA Benth. 
Protologue Hook.f., Icon. pi. 13: t. 1296 
(1879). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution Mae-
sobotrya floribunda occurs from Cameroon and 
the Central African Republic south to DR 
Congo and Zambia. 
Uses In DR Congo the leaves are rubbed on 
the skin to treat prickly heat. 
In Gabon the young leaves provide a sour pot-
herb. In DR Congo the wood is used to make 
house posts and kitchen utensils. Birds will not 
eat the fruits. 
Proper t ies The picrotoxane sesquiterpenoid 
picrotoximaesin was isolated from a methanol 
extract of the seeds. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 
8(—12) m tall, with drooping branches; bark 
greyish brown, longitudinally grooved; twigs 
angular, yellowish short-hairy. Leaves alter-
nate, simple; stipules linear-lanceolate, 2.5-4 
mm long, short-hairy, soon falling; petiole up to 
7 cm long; blade elliptical to oblong-
oblanceolate, 4-18 cm x 2.5-7 cm, base cuneate 
to rounded, apex shortly acuminate, distantly 
shallowly glandular-toothed in upper part, 
glabrous or short-hairy. Inflorescence a slender 
axillary or cauliflorous raceme up to 10 cm 
long, solitary or up to 4 together. Flowers uni-
sexual, 5-merous, petals absent; male flowers 
with pedicel 1—1.5 mm long, jointed, calyx lobes 
triangular, c. 1 mm long, creamy yellow, sta-
mens c. 1.5 mm long, free, disk glands fleshy; 
female flowers with pedicel 1-2 mm long, calyx 
lobes ovate, c. 1 mm long, greenish cream, disk 
c. 1.5 mm in diameter, ovary superior, ovoid-
ellipsoid, c. 1.5 mm long, densely short-hairy, 
2-celled, styles 2, fused at base, c. 0.5 mm long, 
persistent, stigma papillose. Fruit an ellipsoid 
capsule 5-6 mm x 4.5-5 mm, late dehiscent, 
smooth, sparingly short-hairy, green to reddish 
or purplish, 1-seeded by abortion. Seed ellip-
soid, c. 6 mm x 3.5 mm, purplish grey to bluish. 
Maesobotrya comprises 18 species, which all 
occur in tropical Africa. Several other Mae-
sobotrya species are also used medicinally in 
the region. In Congo a paste of pounded fruits 
of the Central African Maesobotrya cordulata 
J.Léonard is applied to treat psoriasis. Pulver-
ized leaves are applied to wounds to heal them 
and are applied to scarifications to treat oe-
dema. In Congo a bark decoction of Maesobo-
trya vermeulenii (De Wild.) J.Léonard is drunk 
and taken in baths to treat leprosy. 
Ecology Maesobotrya floribunda occurs 
mainly in gallery forest, often in open, season-
ally inundated localities, from sea-level up to 
1000 m altitude. It mainly grows on sandy 
loam, enriched with clay or organic material. 
Genetic resources and b reed ing Mae-
sobotrya floribunda is fairly common in its area 
of distribution and is therefore not likely to be 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Maesobotrya floribunda is not 
much used medicinally, and will probably re-
main of local importance only. 
Major references Kalanda & Bolamba, 
1994; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Tane et al., 1996; 
Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003; Yamada, 1999. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Burkill, 
1994; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MALLOTUS OPPOSITIFOLIUS (Geiseler) 
Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Linnaea 34: 194 (1865). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacula r names Arbre de kisse kisse 
(Fr). Mchacha, mtundutundu, mgendahamwe 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mallo-
tus oppositifolius is widely distributed and oc-
curs from Senegal east to Ethiopia and south to 
Angola and Mozambique, and also in Madagas-
car. 
Uses In West Africa most plant parts, but 
MALLOTUS 373 
Mallotus oppositifolius - wild 
especially the leaves, are commonly used for 
medicinal purposes. A leaf or stem bark infu-
sion is taken to expel tapeworms and to treat 
diarrhoea. The crushed or chewed fresh leaves, 
sometimes mixed with butter, are put on cuts 
and sores as a haemostatic and antibacterial, 
and on skin eruptions and rashes for fast heal-
ing. They are also applied to burns to calm 
pain. A steam bath with the leaves is taken to 
treat headache, epilepsy or mental illness. Leaf 
sap is used as nose drops or eye drops and the 
head is massaged with the pulped leaves to 
treat headache. The crushed leaves or leaf sap 
are applied to aching teeth and inflamed eyes. 
The ground leaves in salted water are applied 
to snakebites and the extract is also drunk for 
this purpose. Crushed leaves or a leaf infusion 
are applied to treat urinary infections, venereal 
diseases, malaria, leprosy, chickenpox and fe-
male sterility. A leaf and fruit infusion is taken 
to treat dysentery and diarrhoea, or the leaves 
are added to food. A leaf and root decoction is 
drunk to treat anaemia and general fatigue. A 
root and leaf paste is applied to treat convul-
sions, stomach-ache and chest pains. An infu-
sion of the roots together with the seeds of 
Aframomum melegueta K.Schum. is taken as 
an enema to treat lumbago. In eastern Africa a 
root decoction is taken as an aphrodisiac. A 
root decoction and leaf sap are taken to treat 
pneumonia, vomiting and chest pain. The seeds 
are considered poisonous. 
Mallotus oppositifolius is commonly browsed 
by cattle. The wood is also used as firewood 
and to make tool handles or yam stakes. The 
thinner stems or the bark are sometimes used 
as binding material. The twigs are commonly 
used as chew sticks. 
Properties Preliminary phytochemical 
screening revealed the presence of flavonoids, 
saponins, tannins, cardenolides (cardiac gly-
cosides), anthocyanins and possibly also alka-
loids and anthraquinones. The leaves contain a 
higher concentration of these compounds than 
the roots. 
Different leaf, root and stem bark extracts 
showed significant antibacterial activity 
against Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia 
coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Bacillus 
subtilis in vitro. The aqueous leaf extract 
showed significant activity against Shigella 
dysenteriae Al-induced diarrhoea in rats. The 
extract was not toxic. Aqueous and ethanol 
extracts of dried leaves showed significant an-
tifungal activity in vitro against Aspergillus 
flavus, Candida albicans, Microsporum audou-
inii, Pénicillium sp. and Trichoderma sp. A 
methanolic leaf extract showed moderate anti-
trypanosomal and anthelminthic activity in 
vitro, but low antiplasmodial activity. Crude 
methanolic leaf and root extracts showed sig-
nificant antioxidant and anti-inflammatory 
activities in tests with rats. 
The digestibility of the leaves of Mallotus op-
positifolius by West African dwarf sheep was 
68%, and the leaves were considered suitable 
as an alternative and supplementary browse 
feed. 
Description Dioecious shrub or small tree 
up to 6(-13) m tall; young shoots densely stel-
late-hairy, older twigs almost glabrous, often 
purplish-brown. Leaves opposite, simple; peti-
ole long and short in each pair, 2.5-11 cm long 
when long and 0.5-2 cm long when short, 
slightly thickened at both ends; stipules tiny, 
soon falling; blade broadly ovate to oblong-
ovate, 3-18(-21) cm x 2-13 cm, unequal in size 
in each pair, base shallowly cordate to rounded 
or truncate, with 4 disk-shaped glands, apex 
acuminate, margins almost entire to more or 
less deeply toothed or lobed, 3-veined from the 
base, sparingly stellate-hairy to almost gla-
brous, sparingly gland-dotted, also with simple 
hairs beneath. Inflorescence a terminal or axil-
lary raceme; male inflorescence up to 10(-15) 
cm long, female one up to 10(-18.5) cm long; 
bracts 0.5-1.5 mm long, triangular, each 1-5-
flowered. Flowers unisexual, fragrant, petals 
absent; male flowers with jointed pedicel 3-7 
mm long, sepals 3-4, elliptical, c. 2 mm long, 
strongly reflexed, pale yellow-green, disk ab-
sent, stamens numerous, filaments c. 2 mm 
long, free, greenish white; female flowers with 
374 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Mallotus oppositifolius - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
part of male inflorescence; 3, part of infructes-
cence. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
pedicel 2-3 mm long, extending to 2(—5) cm in 
fruit, calyx lobes 3-5(—6), ovate to lanceolate, c. 
2 mm long, united at the base, recurved, green, 
ovary superior, shallowly 3-lobed, c. 1 mm in 
diameter, densely short-hairy and covered with 
yellow glands, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 1.5 mm long, 
free, plumose. Fruit a deeply 3-lobed capsule 
5—7 mm x 7-9 mm, short-hairy and gland-
dotted, 3-seeded. Seeds almost globose, 3.5-4 
mm x c. 3 mm, smooth, shiny, greyish olive-
brown. 
Other botanical information Mallotus 
comprises about 135 species, which all occur in 
the Old World tropics, mainly in Asia and Oce-
ania. Only few species occur in tropical Africa: 
2 in continental Africa and 4 in Madagascar, of 
which 3 are endemic. The seeds of Mallotus 
baillonianus Müll.Arg. (synonym: Deuteromal-
lotus acuminatus (Baill.) Pax. & K.Hoffm.) 
from Madagascar, cause numbness when 
chewed. The fruits are eaten to treat malaria. 
A decoction of the aerial parts was taken as an 
ordeal poison. The wood is used as firewood 
and to make poles for enclosures. 
Growth and development Mallotus op-
positifolius is mainly pollinated by different 
species of bees and butterflies. 
Ecology Mallotus oppositifolius occurs in 
dry secondary forest undergrowth, forest edges 
and associated bushland or thickets, also along 
rivers, from sea-level up to 1650 m altitude. In 
Nigeria it is a weed in rice fields. 
Propagation and planting Mallotus op-
positifolius is mainly propagated by seed, al-
though vegetative propagation may be possible 
as well, in view of its easy growth. 
Management Mallotus oppositifolius can be 
coppiced and pollarded. It has a high growth 
rate compared to other commonly used browse 
plants. It is deep-rooting and has a root:shoot 
ratio of 2:1. It has an extensive system of fine 
roots, indicating its potential for use in agro-
forestry and land management. In West Africa 
it is grown in and around cassava fields to re-
duce the impact of animals that feed on the 
leaves, as they prefer Mallotus oppositifolius 
leaves. Regular weeding is necessary. 
Diseases and pests Mallotus oppositifolius 
is one of the major food plants for the grass-
hopper Zonocerus variegatus, and a host of 
Lepidopterous species, including Endoclita 
malabaricus. 
Handling after harvest The harvested 
leaves are usually used fresh, whereas the 
roots are usually dried, pounded and kept in a 
pot for later use. The stems or the twigs are 
chewed fresh, or dried for later use. 
Genetic resources Mallotus oppositifolius 
is very common in its large distribution area, 
and not in danger of genetic erosion. Small 
germplasm collections are maintained in the 
United Kingdom and South Africa. 
Prospects Mallotus oppositifolius leaves 
and stem bark have several interesting local 
medicinal uses, including analgesic, antibacte-
rial, anthelminthic and haemostatic uses. Al-
though antibacterial and anti-inflammatory 
activities have been demonstrated in in-vitro 
tests, more research is needed to evaluate its 
potential as a medicinal plant. 
Major references Adekunle & Ikumapayi, 
2006; Atindehou et al., 2002; Burkill, 1994; 
Chukwujekwu, Van Staden & Smith, 2005; 
Farombi, 2003; Farombi, Ogundipe & Moody, 
2001; Kamgang et al., 2006; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Okpekon et a l , 2004; Okwu & Ekeke, 2003. 
Other references Adjah, 1979; Adjanohoun 
et al., 1989; Aschfalk et al., 2000; Boiteau, 
Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; Bokdam & 
Droogers, 1975; Chhabra, Mahunnah & Mshiu, 
1990; Govaerts, Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 
2000; Irvine, 1961; Le Gall et al., 2003; Lovett 
et al., 2006; McPherson, 1995; Meregini & 
MAPROUNEA 375 
Nzegbule, 2000; Novy, 1997; Pax & Hoffmann, 
1914; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Rasoanaivo, Petit-
jean & Conan, 1993; Twum-Boateng, 2003. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
A u t h o r s D.M. Mosango 
M A L L O T U S S U B U L A T U S Mül l .Arg . 
P r o t o l o g u e Linnaea 34: 192 (1865). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Mallo-
tus subulatus occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
Cameroon and south to DR Congo. 
U s e s In Ghana an infusion of t he roots to-
gether with the seeds of Aframomum me-
legueta K.Schum. is t aken as an enema to t rea t 
lumbago. In Nigeria the roots, leaves and fruits 
are ground and t aken in wate r to t r ea t dysen-
tery. Wet leaves are pulped and applied to 
wounds as a styptic. The ground seeds in water 
are t a k e n to t rea t stomach-ache. In Gabon the 
head is massaged with the pulp or macerat ion 
of young leaves to t r e a t headache and nervous 
break-down. In Congo the ba rk sap is rubbed 
onto local scarifications in case of pain in the 
side and lumbago. 
In southern Nigeria the Igbo people apply the 
powdered seeds to t he faces of young men and 
girls as a mask. 
P r o p e r t i e s Pre l iminary tes ts revealed 
t races of alkaloids in the roots, and abundan t 
saponins and little t ann in in the s tem bark and 
roots. 
B o t a n y Dioecious shrub or small t ree up to 5 
m tall; twigs stel late hairy. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; s t ipules subulate , 6—8 mm 
long, persis tent ; petiole 1—5.5 cm long; blade 
oblong to ovate, 10-18 cm x 7.5-10 cm, base 
rounded, apex acute to acuminate , glabrous. 
Inflorescence an axillary raceme up to 5 cm 
long. Flowers unisexual , regular, petals absent , 
disk absent , pedicel short; male flowers in 
small fascicles, wi th obovoid calyx, 3-4-lobed, 
cream, s t amens 40-50, free; female flowers 
solitary on inflorescence axis, with 3 recurved 
sepals, densely stel late hairy, cream, ovary 
superior, globose, 3-lobed, 3-celled, rough, 
s t igmas 3, sessile, densely papillose, spreading. 
Frui t a 3-lobed capsule 12—16 mm in diameter , 
covered with slightly hooked brist les, 3-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, c. 5 m m in diameter , smooth. 
Mallotus comprises about 135 species, which 
all occur in t he Old World tropics, mainly in 
Asia and Oceania. Only few species occur in 
tropical Africa: 2 in continental Africa and 4 in 
Madagascar , of which 3 are endemic. 
E c o l o g y Mallotus subulatus occurs in ever-
green lowland forest. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Mallotus 
subulatus is a t least locally common and does 
not seem under th rea t of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Unless chemical and pharmacol-
ogical research shows in teres t ing resul ts , Mal-
lotus subulatus will r emain of local importance 
only as a medicinal plant . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Brown, Hutchinson & 
Prain, 1909-1913; Burkill, 1994; Irvine, 1961. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Keay, 1958a; Neuwinger, 
2000; Sillans, 1953. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
MAPROUNEAAFRICANA Müll.Arg. 
P r o t o l o g u e A D C , Prodr. 15(2): 1191 (1866). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Magic nut , redskin 
bush (En). Mburabu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ma-
prounea africana occurs from Benin eas t to 
Tanzania and south to Angola, Namibia (Ca-
privi Strip), Botswana, Zimbabwe and Mozam-
bique. 
U s e s Maprounea africana is widely known 
for i ts purgat ive propert ies. A macera te of root 
ba rk is t aken as a purgat ive in l imited doses, 
large amounts being lethal . A root decoction is 
d runk to t r e a t schistosomiasis, venereal dis-
eases, leprosy, amoebic dysentery and syphilis. 
In Gabon prepara t ions of the roots, ba rk and 
leaves a re used as an emetic and diuretic. In 
Congo both s tem and root ba rks , laced with 
Maprounea africana - wild 
376 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
honey or sugar-cane juice, are chewed to treat 
constipation, ascites and generalized oedema, 
intestinal worms, female sterility and irregular 
menstrual cycle. They are also used as a vagi-
nal douche to treat uteritis and vaginitis, or 
the rolled-up leaves may be placed as a vaginal 
suppository for the same purpose. An ointment 
made from powdered bark in palm oil is ap-
plied externally to leprous sores and smallpox 
sores and to skin infections. In DR Congo the 
leaves or root bark are chewed and the bitter 
pulp is swallowed to treat stomach complaints 
and colic. A root decoction is applied to the eyes 
to treat infections and the sap is applied to 
circumcision wounds. Chewed or chopped 
leaves are applied to decaying teeth to treat 
toothache. The leaves are used in a preparation 
to treat epilepsy. In Tanzania a preparation of 
the young twigs is taken to relieve constipa-
tion. Sap of young leaves is drunk or pulverized 
leaves mixed with white clay are eaten as a 
remedy for respiratory diseases in children. In 
Mozambique a root bark macerate is taken to 
treat malaria. 
In southern Africa the leaves are browsed by 
goats and the wood is used as firewood. In DR 
Congo the twigs are used as a toothbrush. 
Production and international trade Ma-
prounea root bark, stem bark and leaves are 
collected and traded locally in market places. 
Reliable production figures are not available 
because wild plants are mainly harvested for 
home consumption and sold at local markets. 
Properties The root bark contains the pen-
tacyclic triterpenes maprounic acid, maprounic 
acid acetate and several derivatives, of which 
lß-hydroxyaleuritolic acid 3-p-hydroxybenzoate 
showed significant activity against P-388 can-
cer cells in vitro, whereas several other deriva-
tives exhibited potent inhibitory activity 
against HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. The com-
pounds were not cytotoxic to cultured mammal-
ian cells. 
The ethanolic root bark extract showed potent 
glucose-lowering properties when given orally 
to mice. This activity was caused by the daph-
nane-type diterpenoid maprouneacin. 
The acetone extract of the root bark showed 
high toxicity to mice. 
Crude methanolic root bark extracts demon-
strated a marked antibacterial activity against 
Klebsiella pneumoniae, Staphylococcus aureus 
and Streptococcus mutans and also significant 
antifungal activity against Aspergillus niger, 
Candida albicans and Microsporum gypseum. 
The extracts also showed significant anti-
amoebic activity in vitro. The ethanolic leaf 
extract induced hypothermia and prolonged the 
sleeping time when administered orally to 
mice. It also significantly delayed the onset of 
induced clonic convulsions, but had no signifi-
cant effects on induced generalized convulsions 
or on limbic status epilepticus. Organic root 
bark extracts also contained the cyclobutenic 
diterpene bershacolone, koumbalones A and B 
with a casbane ring system, and oxygenated 
tetracyclic triterpenes of the cucurbitacin type. 
Descript ion Monoecious, much-branched 
deciduous shrub or small tree up to 8(—10) m 
tall, with pendent branches; bark corky, deeply 
fissured, grey or pale to dark brown; twigs red-
dish brown. Leaves alternate, simple and en-
tire; stipules ovate, c. 1 mm long; petiole 0.5-3 
cm long, red; blade ovate or elliptical-ovate to 
ovate-lanceolate, 1.5-8 cm x (l-)2-4(-5) cm, 
base cuneate, rounded or cordate, apex obtuse 
to rounded, glabrous, pinnately veined with 8-
11 pairs of yellow lateral veins. Inflorescence a 
terminal raceme up to 2 cm long, on short lat-
eral shoots, with male flowers in an apical, 
globose to ovoid, yellowish or reddish head 3-8 
mm in diameter and 1-3 female flowers at 
Maprounea africana - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
inflorescence; 3, infructescence; 4, seeds. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
MAPROUNEA 377 
base, green; bracts c. 1 mm long. Flowers uni-
sexual, petals absent; male flowers with pedicel 
up to 1 mm long, calyx lobes 2-3, c. 1 mm long, 
acute, stamens (1—)2(—3), fused into a staminal 
column c. 2 mm long; female flowers with pedi-
cel 3-5 mm long, extending to 2(—3) cm long in 
fruit, calyx lobes 3-6, c. 1 mm long, ovary supe-
rior, ovoid, c. 1 mm in diameter, 3(-5)-celled, 
smooth, styles 2-3, 1-1.5 mm long, fused at 
base, reflexed at apex, persistent. Fruit a de-
pressed, slightly 3(-5)-lobed capsule 8-12 mm 
x 14-16 mm, smooth, dull green, tinged red-
dish, later bright red or brown red, 3-5-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, 7-9 mm x 6-7 mm, usually 
smooth, greenish black, caruncle 6-7 mm long, 
the 2 lobes covering up to half the seed, orange 
or bright red. 
Other botanical information Maprounea 
comprises 4 species, 2 of which occur in tropical 
Africa and 2 in South America. In Central Af-
rica Maprounea africana and Maprounea 
membranacea Pax & K.Hoffm. are similarly 
used as medicinal plants. 
Ecology Maprounea africana is relatively 
common in savanna and open, deciduous for-
est, usually on well-drained or dry sandy soils, 
and also occurs on lakeshore and coastal 
dunes, on escarpments, rocky hillsides and in 
floodplain grassland, from sea-level up to 1600 
m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Maprounea 
africana regenerates profusely by seed. Seed 
used in cultivation should be freshly extracted 
from the fruit as viability declines rapidly 
when seed is stored. Rains must follow germi-
nation to ensure seedling survival. Plantations 
can be established by direct sowing or by using 
nursery-raised seedlings. Propagation by stem 
cuttings is probably feasible as well. 
Management Maprounea africana is fast 
growing and requires little or no management 
once established. It can be coppiced and pol-
larded. 
Harvesting Root bark, stem bark and leaves 
are only collected from the wild. 
Genetic resources Neither germplasm 
collections nor breeding programmes are 
known for Maprounea africana. Since it is 
widespread and rather common, it is not liable 
to genetic erosion. 
Prospects Maprounea africana is regarded 
as an important medicinal plant species by the 
populations using it, and it seems underex-
ploited. Considering the many medicinal pur-
poses for which it is used, there is enormous 
scope for future research and further phyto-
chemical and pharmacological investigations 
are warranted, especially on the anti-HIV ac-
tivities of the pentacyclic triterpenes. However, 
large-scale cultivation for its root and stem 
bark is not expected. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Carney et 
al., 1999; Chilufya & Tengnäs, 1996; Jung et 
a l , 2000; Muanza et al., 1994; Neuwinger, 
2000; N'Gouemo, Nguemby & Baldy, 1994; 
Pengsuparp et al., 1995; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; 
Tona et a l , 2000. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Bernart et al., 1993; Beutler et al., 
1995; Bouquet, 1969; Chaudhuri et a l , 1995; 
Chhabra, Mahunnah & Mshiu, 1990; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Disengomoka & Delaveau, 
1983; Kambu et al., 1989; Kashman et al., 
1994; Latham, 2005; Léonard, 1962; Pengsu-
parp et a l , 1994; Sandberg & Cronlund, 1982; 
Tona et al., 1998; Wani et al., 1983; Watt & 
Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Sources of illustration Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Authors A. Maroyi 
MAPROUNEA MEMBRANACEA Pax & K.Hoffm. 
Protologue in H.G.A. Engler, Pflanzenr. IV, 
147, 5 (Heft 52): 178 (1912). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Ma-
prounea membranacea occurs from Nigeria 
east to the southern part of the Central African 
Republic and DR Congo and south to Angola. 
Uses In Congo and northern DR Congo 
pieces of root bark or stem bark, laced with 
honey or sugar, are used as a violent purgative 
to treat constipation, ascites and generalised 
oedema, intestinal worms, female sterility and 
an irregular menstrual cycle. A cold water 
maceration of bark scrapings is given to consti-
pated babies. In Gabon the dried powdered 
leaves are used to cicatrise wounds, especially 
circumcision wounds. In Congo a bark infusion 
is used as a vaginal douche to treat vaginitis 
and problems of the uterus, and rolled-up 
leaves or leaf pulp may be placed as a vaginal 
suppository for the same purpose. Externally, 
an ointment of the powdered bark in palm oil is 
applied to treat leprosy, smallpox, scabies and 
other skin infections. In northern DR Congo a 
leaf decoction is used to wash infected eyes. A 
root decoction is drunk to treat syphilis. In 
Gabon the bruised young stems are laid in 
houses to repel cockroaches. 
378 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
In Gabon the wood is used to make mor ta rs . 
P r o p e r t i e s The s tem bark contains small 
amoun t s of pentacyclic t r i te rpenes and deriva-
tives, which do not seem to have biological ac-
tivity. The stem bark also contains cucurbi-
tacin A and derivatives, di terpenes, phorbol 
es ters of the daphnane type, of which several 
exhibited potent inhibitory activity against 
HIV-1 reverse t ranscr ip tase . 
B o t a n y Monoecious or sometimes dioecious 
small to medium-sized t ree up to 25 m tall; bole 
up to 30(-50) cm in diameter ; ba rk longitudi-
nally fissured, p inkish grey. Leaves a l te rna te , 
simple and entire; st ipules ovate, c. 0.5 mm 
long; petiole 0.5-2 cm long; blade elliptical to 
ovate, 2.5-10 cm x 1.5-5 cm, base unequal , one 
side cuneate and other side cordate, apex 
rounded, glabrous with sparse g landular dots, 
p innate ly veined with 6-10 pai rs of la tera l 
veins. Inflorescence a t e rmina l raceme up to 
3.5 cm long, on short la tera l shoots, with male 
flowers in an apical, oblong, compact, reddish 
spike, 4 -9 m m x 3-6 mm and 1-5 female flow-
ers a t base, green; bracts up to 1.5 mm long. 
Flowers unisexual , peta ls absent; male flowers 
wi th pedicel 1-1.5 m m long, calyx lobes 2 - 3 , c. 
0.5 mm long, red, s t amens 2, fused into a sta-
minal column 1-1.5 mm long, white; female 
flowers with pedicel 0 .5-1 cm long, extending 
to 3 cm long in fruit, calyx lobes 3, c. 1 mm 
long, ovary superior, ovoid, c. 1.5 mm in diame-
ter, 3(-4)-celled, smooth, styles 3, fused a t 
base, reflexed a t apex, persis tent . Fru i t a glo-
bose capsule 5-7 mm in diameter , smooth, 
green, la ter red or brown, 3-seeded. Seeds ob-
long, 4.5-5.5 mm x 3.5-4 mm, usual ly smooth, 
black, caruncle 2 -3 mm long, the 2 lobes cover-
ing up to half the seed, orange or br ight red. 
Maprounea comprises 4 species, 2 of which 
occur in tropical Africa and 2 in South Amer-
ica. 
E c o l o g y Maprounea membranacea occurs in 
periodically inunda ted forest, wet forest and 
secondary forest on dry soil, a t low al t i tudes . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Maprou-
nea membranacea is common in its a rea of dis-
t r ibut ion and therefore not th rea t ened by ge-
netic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s The s tem bark and root ba rk of 
Maprounea membranacea have ant ibacter ia l 
and anthelmint ic uses , bu t no research has 
been done to identify the compounds responsi-
ble for these activities, or the i r pharmacologi-
cal propert ies. The pentacyclic t r i te rpenes iso-
lated show in teres t ing ant i-HIV activity, which 
meri ts further research. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Beutler et al., 1995; 
Burkill, 1994; Léonard, 1962; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Beutler et al., 1989; Par is 
& Tessier, 1972; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 
1961; Tessier, 1975; Tessier & Paris , 1978. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
M A R E Y A M I C R A N T H A (Benth . ) Mül l .Arg . 
P r o t o l o g u e A . D C , Prodr. 15(2): 792 (1866). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
S y n o n y m s Mareya spicata Baill. (1860). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Number one (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mareya 
micrantha occurs from Guinea eas t to Camer-
oon and south to DR Congo. 
U s e s The leaves and fruits are very bi t ter 
and poisonous, causing drast ic purging when 
eaten. A leaf decoction or leaf sap is widely 
known as a violent purgat ive and abortifacient. 
Even when diluted, a decoction of fresh leaves 
is never given to p regnan t women, children or 
old persons. A leaf decoction is mainly used to 
t r ea t diseases which require drast ic action, 
such as tapeworm infections, gonorrhoea and 
leprosy. In Sierra Leone, however, a decoction 
of dried leaves is given to children as a worm 
t r ea tmen t . Burn t leaves mixed with clay are 
applied to scabies and measles . A leaf decoction 
or fermented leaves with rum and coconut are 
t aken to t r ea t malar ia , cough and general 
weakness . A leaf infusion is t aken as an anal-
gesic to t r ea t headache and stomach-ache; ex-
ternal ly a pas te of t he leaves is applied to frac-
tures , stiffness, sprains , sores and ulcers in-
cluding guinea-worm sores, lumbago, kidney-
pain or rheumat ic pa ins . The powdered roots 
are applied to snakebi tes and st ings of venom-
ous animals . The pounded ba rk mixed with 
whi te clay is applied to t r e a t r iver bl indness, 
and a leaf decoction is t aken internal ly for the 
same purpose. 
The n a m e 'number one' is an indication of the 
dangerous toxicity of the plant . The fruits were 
formerly used as ordeal poison; an overdose 
will cause complete exhaust ion by purging. 
The s tems of Mareya micrantha a re commonly 
used as yam stakes . In Guinea it is cult ivated 
as a hedge plant . 
P r o p e r t i e s Pre l iminary analysis of the 
leaves showed the presence of an th raqu inone 
glycosides and cucurbitacin-like substances . 
Aqueous leaf extracts suppressed cardiac con-
tracti l i ty of isolated frog and ra t hea r t s in a 
concentrat ion-dependent way. In another tes t 
MARGARITARIA 379 
an aqueous leaf extract elicited concentration-
dependent contractions of the longitudinal 
muscle of isolated guinea-pig ileum. Leaf ex-
tracts caused hypotension in dogs, and a root 
extract caused paralysis of the respiratory cen-
tre in rats. The methanol and hot and cold 
aqueous extracts of the leaves showed antibac-
terial activity against Enterobacter aerogenes, 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens, Bacillus subtilis, 
Clostridium sporogenes, Escherichia coli and 
Staphylococcus aureus. Ethanolic leaf extracts 
showed low antiplasmodial activity against a 
chloroquine-resistant strain of Plasmodium 
falciparum and no anti-amoebic activity in 
vitro. The extract showed considerable cytotox-
icity to mammalian cells. 
The wood is white, soft and perishable. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 8(-12) m tall; twigs short-hairy. Leaves al-
ternate, simple; stipules small, triangular, soon 
falling; petiole 0.5-7.5 cm long; blade ovate, 
ovate-oblong to oblanceolate, (5-)10-25 cm x 
2-9 cm, base cuneate, apex shortly acuminate, 
slightly toothed in upper part, glabrous or 
slightly short-hairy. Inflorescence a slender 
axillary raceme up to 25(—40) cm long with 
male flowers in clusters in upper part and fe-
male flowers solitary or accompanied by sev-
eral male flowers in lower part. Flowers uni-
sexual, petals absent; male flowers with pedicel 
1.5-2.5 mm long, calyx splitting into 3-4 lobes, 
c. 1.2 mm long, obtuse, green, stamens 10—20(-
24), longer than calyx lobes, free; female flow-
ers almost sessile, sepals 3-5, c. 1 mm long, 
imbricate, greenish, disk flattened, lobed, 
ovary superior, ovoid, short-hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, fused at base, recurved, papillose. 
Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 3-4 mm in diameter, 
slightly depressed above, short-hairy, pale 
brown to reddish, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 2 
mm in diameter, smooth, brownish. 
Mareya comprises 3—4 species, which mainly 
occur in West and Central Africa. Mareya bre-
vipes Pax, a shrub occurring in Central Africa 
and Uganda, is also used medicinally. In Ga-
bon the seeds are eaten as a strong purgative. 
Mareya congolensis (J.Léonard) J.Léonard is 
endemic in DR Congo. The bark is chewed as a 
purgative. 
Ecology Mareya micrantha occurs in pri-
mary and secondary forest, from sea-level up to 
500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Mareya 
micrantha is a common shrub throughout its 
distribution area and is therefore not threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Mareya micrantha has many 
medicinal uses despite its toxicity, and the 
pharmacological tests show interesting activi-
ties. Not much is known about its chemistry 
though, and it seems worthwhile to identify the 
compounds responsible for the activities. 
Major references Abo et al., 2000; Brown, 
Hutchinson & Prain, 1909-1913; Burkill, 1994; 
MacFoy & Cline, 1990; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Awohee, 1987; Guédé-
Guina et al., 1995; Keita et al., 1995; Léonard, 
1996b; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 1961; Tes-
sier & Paris, 1978; Tsai et al., 1995; Zirihi et 
al., 2005. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MARGARITARIA ANOMALA (Baill.) Fosberg 
Protologue Kew Bull. 33(2): 185 (1978). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 26 
Synonyms Phyllanthus erythroxyloides 
Müll.Arg (1866). 
Vernacular names Bois chenille (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Marga-
ritaria anomala occurs in Comoros, Madagas-
car, Aldabra (Seychelles) and Mauritius. 
Uses In Madagascar a bitter root decoction 
is considered the best medicine to treat impo-
tence. It is also taken to treat chronic constipa-
tion. 
The fruits are edible. The wood is hard and 
used to make tool handles and peddles. The 
twigs are used to make baskets. 
Botany Dioecious, deciduous glabrous shrub 
or small tree up to 6 m tall; bark scaly or de-
taching in strips, brown. Leaves alternate to 
whorled at the end of branches, simple and 
entire; stipules oblong-lanceolate, 2.5-5 mm 
long, brown, soon falling; petiole up to 6(-10) 
mm long; blade elliptical to obovate or spoon-
shaped, (2-)3-6(-10) cm x 1.5-4(-6) cm, base 
cuneate, apex rounded to emarginate, with 
distant shallow glandular teeth in upper part, 
glabrous or short-hairy. Male inflorescence an 
axillary cluster, few-flowered; female flowers 
solitary or sometimes paired at the end of 
young branches. Flowers unisexual, petals ab-
sent; male flowers with pedicel 3-6 mm long, 
sepals 4, ovate, rounded, 2 outer ones 1-2 mm 
long, 2 inner ones 1.5-2.5 mm long, greenish, 
stamens 4, c. 1.5 mm long, free, disk annular; 
female flowers with pedicel 5—15(-20) mm long, 
sepals 4, ovate to oblong, 1.5-2.5 mm long, 
380 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
yellowish green, disk annular, 1—2 mm in di-
ameter, ovary superior, ovoid, 2(-3)-celled, 
styles 3, free or fused at base, up to 1.5 mm 
long, stigma 2-fid, branches drooping. Fruit an 
almost globose or laterally compressed capsule 
or drupe 6-8 mm in diameter, indéhiscent or 
irregularly dehiscent, smooth, blue-greenish, 
up to 4-seeded. Seeds plano-convex to 
trigonous-lens-shaped, 3.5-5.5 mm long, fleshy, 
bluish. 
Margaritaria consists of 13-14 species, and is 
pantropical. It was formerly included in Phyl-
lanthus and discussion continues as to whether 
it is distinct or not. Another Margaritaria spe-
cies is also used medicinally in Madagascar. A 
root decoction of Margaritaria decaryana 
(Leandri) G.L.Webster (synonym: Phyllanthus 
decaryanus Leandri) is drunk as a stimulant 
and aphrodisiac, and to treat impotence and 
senility. 
Ecology Margaritaria anomala occurs in 
bushland and deciduous forest, from sea-level 
up to 1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Margari-
taria anomala is probably not common in its 
distribution area. It is rare and endangered in 
Mauritius, and a multiplication program has 
started there. 
Prospects Margaritaria anomala will 
probably remain of local importance only, 
unless pharmacological tests can prove the 
stimulant activities of the roots. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Webster, 1979. 
Other references Neuwinger, 2000; Schatz, 
2001. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MEINECKIA PAXII Brunei ex Radcl.-Sm. 
Protologue Kew Bull. 52: 174 (1997). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Synonyms Zimmermannia capillipes Pax 
(1910). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mei-
neckia paxii is endemic to the Usambara moun-
tains in north-eastern Tanzania. 
Uses A root decoction is drunk as an 
anthelmintic and to treat stomach-ache. The 
wood is white and rather soft and is used as 
firewood. 
Meineckia paxii is suitable as a shade tree and 
ornamental. 
Botany Monoecious or sometimes dioecious, 
glabrous, evergreen shrub to much-branched, 
small tree up to 7.5 m tall; twigs pale grey to 
grey-green. Leaves alternate, simple and en-
tire; stipules broadly ovate, (3—)5—6 mm long, 
acuminate, soon falling to fairly persistent; 
petiole up to 12(—17) mm long, grooved above; 
blade elliptical to elliptical-oblong, 6-18 cm x 
3-7.5 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex acute 
to acuminate, pinnately veined with 8-10 pairs 
of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary 2 -
many-flowered fascicle when male, female 
flowers solitary. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, 
regular; sepals obovate to obovate-oblong, 4-6 
mm x 2-5 mm, rounded, pale green with dark 
green veins, petals absent, disk annular to 
slightly lobed, 3-5 mm in diameter, yellow; 
male flowers with slender pedicel 4—8 mm long, 
stamens 5, free, 2.5-3.5 mm long; female flow-
ers with pedicel 2-4 cm long, extending in fruit 
to 5.5 cm, ovary superior, rounded, up to 2 mm 
long, 3-celled, styles 3, fused at base, 1.5—2 mm 
long, spreading-recurved, apex slightly broad-
ened. Fruit a slightly 3-lobed capsule c. 1 cm x 
1.5 cm, smooth, pale green, up to 6-seeded. 
Meineckia comprises about 30 species and oc-
curs in tropical America, Africa and Asia. 
Ecology Meineckia paxii occurs in moist 
evergreen submontane forest, at (200-)900-
1100 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Meineckia 
paxii is uncommon in its small area of distribu-
tion and included in the IUCN Red List as vul-
nerable. 
Prospects Nothing is known concerning the 
chemistry and pharmacology of Meineckia 
paxii, and as the species has a small distribu-
tion area, it will remain of local importance 
only. 
Major references Kokwaro, 1993; Lovett et 
al., 2006b; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other references Lovett & Clarke, 1998. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
MlCRODESMlS KEAYANA J.Léonard 
Protologue Bull. Jard. Bot. Etat 31: 180 
(1961). 
Family Pandaceae 
Vernacular names Sonoufoko (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mi-
crodesmis keayana occurs from Senegal east to 
south-western Nigeria. 
Uses The stem bark, leaves and roots have 
numerous medicinal uses throughout the dis-
tribution area of Microdesmis keayana; they 
MICRODESMIS 381 
are similar to the uses of the closely related 
species Microdesmis puberula Hook.f. ex 
Planch. Leaf sap or crushed and burnt twigs or 
roots are applied to snakebites or to wounds to 
stop bleeding and to heal them. Leaf sap, some-
times together with twig sap, is commonly 
taken orally or applied as an enema to treat 
diarrhoea. 
In Sierra Leone a paste made from pounded 
leaves together with those of Desmodium ad-
scendens (Sw.) DC. is mixed with white clay 
and applied to scabies. The leaves, cooked with 
chicken, are given to treat palpitations. In Li-
beria a leaf infusion is taken to induce men-
struation and as an abortifacient. In Côte 
d'Ivoire crushed leaves together with those of 
Mareya micrantha (Benth.) Miill.Arg. are used 
as a local massage to treat general body pain, 
painful kidneys or ribs, or overall fatigue. The 
Gouro people use the leafy twigs as a major 
component of a medicinal wash used for the 
daily care of newborn babies in order to pre-
vent dermatological and intestinal affections 
and excessive weight loss. Ground leaves, 
sometimes with Capsicum fruits, or a leaf de-
coction are rubbed on the abdomen or taken 
orally to treat colic, chest complaints, fatigue, 
pain in the side, kidney pain and feverish stiff-
ness. A decoction made from the leaves or leafy 
twigs or ground young leaves is used as a 
steam bath or wash to treat rheumatism or 
migraine. The leaf sap is applied as nose drops 
to treat epilepsy and convulsions. A decoction 
of the whole plant is taken as an emmenagogue 
and to treat dysentery. In Côte d'Ivoire and 
Ghana ground twig bark is rubbed on the body 
and a macerate of leafy twigs and roots is ap-
plied in the form of an enema as an aphrodi-
siac. A root infusion or decoction of the whole 
plant taken orally is also considered to be an 
aphrodisiac. The leaves are an ingredient of 
poison antidotes. In Ghana a root decoction is 
drunk to treat venereal diseases. Leaf and bark 
pulp are applied to sprains and burns. Boiled 
fruits are applied to tumours. The fruit is 
chewed to prevent ulcers. Root bark scrapings 
with leaves of Piper guineense Schumach. & 
Thonn. in water are applied to the breasts to 
treat mastitis. In Togo mental disorders are 
treated with a decoction of leaves and roots of 
Microdesmis keayana and Newbouldia laevis 
Seem, ex Bureau orally and by bathing. In Si-
erra Leone the leaves are one of the ingredi-
ents of an embrocation used to heal bone frac-
tures in cattle. 
The stems are used to make fishing gear and 
spring traps because of their strength and re-
silience, and the wood to make handles and 
implements. The plant is commonly browsed by 
goats and cattle. In Ghana and Nigeria the 
twigs are used as chew sticks. The thin flexible 
branches are used as ties for fastening roof 
thatch. In Côte d'Ivoire coastal villages grow 
Microdesmis keayana as a shade tree and for 
making village palisades. The fruits are some-
times eaten in Sierra Leone. 
Properties Three trihydroxycinnamoyl-
spermidines were isolated from a methanolic 
root extract of Microdesmis keayana (collected 
near Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire) and were named 
keayanidines A, B and C. Two other com-
pounds were isolated from a hydromethanolic 
root extract: xanthoquininamide (6-hydroxy-
quinoline-4-carboxamide) and keayanine, a 
spermine derivative. 
The aqueous and methanolic root extracts have 
hypotensive and vasorelaxing properties in 
tests when using normotensive rabbits in vivo 
and aorta strips of guinea pigs in vitro, respec-
tively. Both extracts also showed strong anti-
oxidant activity. A dichloromethane extract 
from the leaves showed significant antiplasmo-
dial activity in vitro against a chloroquine-
resistant strain of Plasmodium falciparum. 
Different plant extracts did not show signifi-
cant antitrypanosomal or anthelmintic activi-
ties in vitro. 
The wood is brown, hard, flexible, of fine struc-
ture and is easily worked, taking a lustrous 
polish. 
Botany Dioecious shrub up to 3(-6) m tall; 
twigs densely short-hairy. Leaves alternate, 
distichous, simple; stipules linear, persistent; 
petiole 4-12 mm long; blade elliptical-oblong to 
ovate-lanceolate or ovate, 5-12(-18) cm x 2—5(-
7) cm, base asymmetrical, cuneate to rounded, 
apex acute to acuminate, margin finely 
toothed, shiny above, short-hairy on the midrib 
above. Inflorescence an axillary fascicle, male 
fascicle 5-many-flowered, female fascicle l -3 ( -
5)-flowered; bracts minute. Flowers unisexual, 
5-merous, regular; calyx c. 2 mm long, lobes 
ovate, c. 1.5 mm long, short-hairy, green; petals 
almost circular to ovate-oblong, c. 3 mm x 2 -
2.5 mm, spreading, short-hairy in upper half, 
pink to orange; male flowers with pedicel 3-4 
mm long, filaments c. 1 mm long, fleshy, fused 
to the pistillode, reddish orange, pistillode 2 -
2.5 mm long, reddish orange; female flower 
with pedicel 3-4 mm long, enlarging to 5-10 
mm in fruit, short-hairy, ovary superior, ellip-
soid, c. 1 mm long, (2-)3-celled, densely short-
382 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
hairy, styles 2-3, c. 1 mm long, white. Fruit an 
ovoid drupe 4.5-6 mm x 5-8 mm, smooth when 
fresh, later wrinkled, hard, shiny, red, (l-)2-3-
seeded. Seeds hroadly ovate, flattened, curved. 
Seedling with epigeal germination. 
Microdesmis comprises about 11 species, 2 of 
which occur in Asia and the others in tropical 
Africa. Microdesmis keayana and Microdesmis 
puberula are morphologically nearly similar, 
their medicinal uses are largely overlapping 
and they might well belong to the same species. 
The distribution area of Microdesmis puberula 
links up with that of Microdesmis keayana, 
from Nigeria east to Central Africa and 
Uganda. 
Ecology Microdesmis keayana is common in 
the undergrowth of damp secondary forest, and 
also occurs on firm soil in primary rainforest. It 
is tolerant to bush fire. 
Genetic resources and breeding Mi-
crodesmis keayana is a common undergrowth 
species, and therefore not at risk of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Several spermidine derivatives 
have been isolated from Microdesmis keayana; 
they deserve further pharmacological analysis. 
As Microdesmis keayana and Microdesmis pu-
berula resemble each other morphologically 
and in their medicinal uses, taxonomical stud-
ies are warranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Cunning-
ham, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; Vonthron-
Sénécheau et al., 2003; Zambie et al., 2006b. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Aké Assi, 
1980; Atindehou et al., 2002; Atindehou et al., 
2004; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006; Léonard, 
1961; Sofowora, 1982; Tchouto, 2004; Zambie et 
al., 2007; Zambie et a l , 2006a. 
Authors N.S. Alvarez Cruz 
MICRODESMIS PUBERULA Hook.f. ex Planch. 
Protologue Hook.f., Icon. pi. 8: t. 758 
(1848). 
Family Pandaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 30 
Synonyms Microdesmis zenkeri Pax (1897). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mi-
crodesmis puberula occurs from eastern Nige-
ria east to DR Congo and Uganda. 
Uses The stem bark, leaves and roots have 
numerous medicinal uses throughout the dis-
tribution area of Microdesmis puberula; they 
are similar to the uses of the closely related 
species Microdesmis keayana J.Léonard. Leaf 
Microdesmis puberula - wild 
sap, or crushed and burnt twigs and roots are 
applied to snakebites or to scarifications. Leaf 
sap, sometimes together with twig sap, is 
commonly taken orally or applied as an enema 
to treat diarrhoea. It is rather mild and thus 
prescribed for pregnant women and young 
children. Leaf and stem sap or an infusion of 
them, sometimes combined with other plants, 
is commonly taken to treat stomach-ache, in-
testinal worms and genital problems such as 
menstrual complaints, sterility, miscarriage, 
loss of virility and venereal diseases. Leaf and 
stem sap, or a leaf or stem infusion is also ex-
ternally applied to treat skin problems such as 
eczema, scabies, burns, circumcision wounds, 
abscesses and sores from gonorrhoea. 
In Central Africa pregnant women drink a bev-
erage made of macerated leaves, sometimes 
mixed with salt and onions, to ease delivery. In 
Nigeria a leaf decoction is taken to treat acute 
spleen pain. In Cameroon the Baka pygmies 
use leaf sap as nose drops to treat malaria and 
cough and as eye drops to treat blurred vision. 
In the Central African Republic the Lissongo 
people drink a leaf decoction and rub the 
breasts with crushed leaves to calm mastitis. 
Legs from newborn babies are also rubbed with 
crushed leaves to encourage rapid stand-up 
and walking. The Monzombo people massage 
the head with leaves, mixed with leaves of sev-
eral other plants, to treat fever. Heated leaves 
are used in massage to relieve backache. Ash 
from burnt stems mixed with salt and palm oil 
is massaged into scarifications on the hip in 
case of limping. The Fang people of Gabon 
wash the head with macerated leaves to calm 
severe headache. In Congo leaves are pounded 
MICRODESMIS 383 
in water and the liquid is drunk to prevent 
fainting. Chopped up young leaves are eaten to 
treat a sore throat and colds. Leaf sap is used 
as ear drops to treat ear infections. The leaves 
are put in vapour baths to treat rheumatism. 
Crushed leaves and twigs are applied on glan-
dular swellings, and the roots or pounded 
young leaves mixed with the juice of sugar 
cane are considered to be aphrodisiac. In DR 
Congo the Efe and Mbuti pygmies rub burnt 
and powdered bark and wood into incisions on 
the side of the body to treat rib pain. The 
pounded stem is mixed with salt and rubbed on 
scarifications to treat pneumonia. Ash of burnt 
roots mixed with palm oil is rubbed into scari-
fications to treat renal pain and severe head-
ache. In Rwanda and Burundi grated roots are 
mixed with cornflour and eaten to cure gonor-
rhoea. The grated root is also applied on 
wounds and hernia. The boiled fruits are ap-
plied to tumours. Pounded fruits mixed with 
Capsicum fruits are eaten by the Baka pygmies 
to calm cough. Seeds are eaten to provide 
strength. 
Most pygmy groups consume the leaves as a 
vegetable. The fruits are sometimes eaten, al-
though they are laxative. In Nigeria Microdes-
mis puberula is a common browse species of 
goats and cattle. In DR Congo the Efe and 
Mbuti pygmies use the flexible stem as fishing 
rods. Young shoots are used by the Aka, Baka 
and Mbuti pygmies for hut building, and also 
to make snare hooks and harps. Older stems 
provide hard wooden stakes for yam support, 
digging sticks and hooks to attach hunting nets 
in the undergrowth. The wood is widely used to 
make chairs, spring traps, handles and imple-
ments. In south-eastern Nigeria the wood is 
made into a type of guitar. In DR Congo, 
Rwanda and Burundi, the older stems are 
made into arrows and bed frames. The twigs 
serve as chew sticks. 
In many African societies Microdesmis pu-
berula has magical uses. The vapour from 
burned leaves is believed to chase bad spirits 
from houses. The plant is reputedly deep-
rooted and the Baka and Aka pygmies there-
fore use it as a magical protection against 
semi-wild yam tubers being robbed in the for-
est. In DR Congo the plant is used in concoc-
tions to improve one's luck. 
Properties In preliminary tests, traces of 
alkaloids were detected in stems and roots, but 
no further chemical or pharmacological analy-
ses have been carried out. As a fodder shrub, 
Microdesmis puberula shows a high content of 
crude protein, 23-33%, and compares favoura-
bly with Leucaena and Gliricidia (22%). Analy-
sis of the air-dry leaves shows the following 
results: dry matter 93%, crude protein 25.8%, 
ash 4.8%, crude fibre 19.9%, ether extract 
6.3%, nitrogen-free extract 36.1%, acid-
detergent fibre 21.3%, neutral-detergent fibre 
46.5%, hemi-cellulose 25.2%, tannin 0.9%, 
phytin 25.2 mg/g, HCN 1.86 mg/g. 
In different feeding experiments with broiler 
chickens using up to 10% Microdesmis pu-
berula leaves in the meal, contradictory results 
were observed. When the leaves were used in 
laying hen diets, no significant differences 
were observed in body weight, egg shell thick-
ness, yolk index and albumin index with up to 
15% inclusion of Microdesmis puberula leaf 
meal. The intensity of the egg yolk coloration 
increased with increasing levels of the leaf 
meal in the diets. In a feeding experiment with 
dwarf goats, feeding mixed forages with a 
maximum of 25% Microdesmis puberula leaves 
led to an increase in the growth rate of goats. 
The wood is brown, hard and flexible; it works 
easily and takes a lustrous polish. 
Description Dioecious shrub up to 6 m tall, 
sometimes small tree up to 15 m tall; stem up 
to 8 cm in diameter; twigs usually densely 
short-hairy. Leaves alternate, distichous, sim-
ple; stipules linear, up to 4 mm long, persis-
tent; petiole 4-12 mm long; blade elliptical-
oblong to ovate-lanceolate or ovate, 5-15(-20) 
cm x 2-6(-9) cm, base asymmetrical, cuneate 
to rounded, apex acute to acuminate, margin 
finely toothed to almost entire, shiny above, 
short-hairy on the midrib above. Inflorescence 
an axillary fascicle, male fascicle 5-many-
flowered, female fascicle l-3(-5)-flowered; 
bracts minute. Flowers unisexual, 5-merous, 
regular; calyx c. 2 mm long, lobes ovate, c. 1.5 
mm long, short-hairy, green; petals almost 
circular to ovate-oblong, c. 3 mm x 2—2.5 mm, 
spreading, short-hairy in upper half, pink to 
orange; male flowers with pedicel 3-9 mm long, 
filaments c. 1 mm long, fleshy, fused to the 
pistillode, pistillode 2-2.5 mm long, reddish 
orange; female flowers with pedicel 3-4 mm 
long, enlarging to 5-10 mm in fruit, short-
hairy, ovary superior, ellipsoid, c. 1 mm long, 
2(-3)-celled, sparsely to densely short-hairy, 
styles 2, c. 1 mm long, white. Fruit an ovoid 
drupe 10-12 mm x 9-11 mm, smooth when 
fresh, later wrinkled, hard, shiny, red, (l-)2-
seeded. Seeds broadly ovate, flattened, curved. 
Seedling with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Microdesmis 
384 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Microdesmis puberula - 1, branch with male 
flowers; 2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
comprises about 11 species, 2 of which occur in 
Asia and the others in tropical Africa. Mi-
crodesmis puberula and Microdesmis keayana 
are morphologically nearly similar, their me-
dicinal uses are largely overlapping and they 
might well belong to the same species. The 
distribution area of Microdesmis keayana links 
up with that of Microdesmis puberula, from 
Nigeria west to Senegal. 
Microdesmis haumaniana J.Léonard occurs 
from Cameroon south to Angola. In Congo 
ground fresh leaves, sometimes mixed with the 
rhizome of ginger, are applied as an enema to 
treat haemorrhoids. Plant sap is taken to treat 
gastrointestinal disorders including colic and 
diarrhoea, ovarian complaints and gonorrhoea. 
Leaf sap is used as ear drops to treat otitis. A 
vapour bath with boiled leaf sap is taken to 
treat rheumatism. The stems are made into 
bows. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (TAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth ring boundaries indis-
tinct or absent. Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
9: vessels exclusively solitary (90% or more); 
12: solitary vessel outline angular; 14: scalari-
form perforation plates; 17: scalariform perfo-
ration plates with 20-40 bars; 18: scalariform 
perforation plates with > 40 bars; 21: interves-
sel pits opposite; (24: intervessel pits minute (< 
4 urn)); 25: intervessel pits small (4-7 um); 30: 
vessel-ray pits with distinct borders; similar to 
intervessel pits in size and shape throughout 
the ray cell; 41: mean tangential diameter of 
vessel lumina 50-100 urn; 48: 20-40 vessels 
per square millimetre. Tracheids and fibres: 
60: vascular/vasicentric tracheids present; (61: 
fibres with simple to minutely bordered pits); 
(62: fibres with distinctly bordered pits); (63: 
fibre pits common in both radial and tangential 
walls); 66: non-septate fibres present; 70: fibres 
very thick-walled. Axial parenchyma: 76: axial 
parenchyma diffuse; 77: axial parenchyma dif-
fuse-in-aggregates; 78: axial parenchyma 
scanty paratracheal; 91: two cells per paren-
chyma strand; 92: four (3-4) cells per paren-
chyma strand; 93: eight (5-8) cells per paren-
chyma strand; 94: over eight cells per paren-
chyma strand. Rays: 98: larger rays commonly 
4- to 10-seriate; 102: ray height > 1 mm; 107: 
body ray cells procumbent with mostly 2-4 
rows of upright and/or square marginal cells; 
(108: body ray cells procumbent with over 4 
rows of upright and/or square marginal cells); 
110: sheath cells present; 115: 4—12 rays per 
mm. Mineral inclusions: 136: prismatic crystals 
present; 137: prismatic crystals in upright 
and/or square ray cells; 138: prismatic crystals 
in procumbent ray cells; 142: prismatic crystals 
in chambered axial parenchyma cells. 
(P. Ng'andwe, H. Beeckman & P.E. Gasson) 
Growth and development When Microdes-
mis puberula is cut, it resprouts profusely from 
the base. 
Ecology Microdesmis puberula occurs in 
primary and secondary forest and at forest 
edges, also in fallow land, from sea-level up to 
1100 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Microdesmis 
puberula may germinate massively in fallow 
land. Seed dispersal is ensured mainly by 
monkeys. 
Diseases and pests Male inflorescences are 
sometimes galled and become panicle-like; 
male flowers can be deformed into scabs. 
Genetic resources As a common under-
growth species, Microdesmis puberula is not at 
risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Despite the extensive use of Mi-
crodesmis puberula as a medicinal plant, vir-
tually nothing is known about its chemical 
MOSTUEA 385 
composition or pharmacology, and research is 
war ran ted . Recent exper iments to evaluate the 
effect of supplement ing diets of chickens with 
Microdesmis puberula leaves showed contra-
dictory resul ts , possibly due to cer ta in chemical 
compounds. As Microdesmis puberula and Mi-
crodesmis keayana resemble each other mor-
phologically and in their medicinal uses , taxo-
nomical s tudies are war ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Betti , 2004; Bouquet & Debray, 
1974; Car ter & Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; Esonu, 
Azubuike & Ukwu, 2004; Hawthorne & Jong-
kind, 2006; Neuwinger, 2000; Robyns, 1958; 
Umoh et al., 2004; Villiers, 1975. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Abbiw, 1990; Adjanohoun 
et al., 1989; Adjanohoun et al., 1986; Adjano-
houn et a l , 1984; Bouquet, 1969; Burkill , 1997; 
Dounias, 1993; Esonu et al., 2004; Esonu et al., 
2002; Esonu et a l , 2003; Govaerts, Frodin & 
Radcliffe-Smith, 2000; InsideWood, undated; 
Léonard, 1961; Lewis, 1980; Motte, 1980; Oka-
for & Ham, 1999; Okoli et al., 2001; Terash ima 
& Ichikawa, 2003. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Car ter & Radcliffe-
Smith, 1988. 
A u t h o r s E. Dounias 
MlCROSTACHYS CHAMAELEA (L.) Mül l . Arg. 
P r o t o l o g u e Linnaea 32: 95 (1863). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2re = 34, 68 
S y n o n y m s Sebastiania chamaelea (L.) 
Müll.Arg. (1866). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Creeping sebast iania 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Micro-
stachys chamaelea occurs from G h a n a east to 
the Centra l African Republic. It also occurs in 
tropical Asia and Austra l ia . 
U s e s In Benin a decoction of the leafy s tems 
is used as a ba th to relieve tee th ing pain in 
babies. In India such a decoction t aken with 
bu t t e r is considered a tonic, and is applied to 
the head as a t r e a t m e n t for vertigo. The plant 
sap is as t r ingent and t a k e n to t r ea t syphilis 
and diarrhoea. 
B o t a n y Monoecious, erect to sprawling an-
nua l to perennia l herb or shrub up to 0.5(— 1) m 
tall with slender s tems. Leaves a l te rna te , sim-
ple, a lmost sessile; s t ipules ovate, small; blade 
linear-lanceolate, 3-6 cm x c. 8 mm, base 
cuneate , apex obtuse, marg ins finely toothed, 
short -hairy beneath . Inflorescence a small, 
t e rmina l or leaf-opposed spike, most flowers 
male with 1—2 female flowers at base; bracts 
with 2 large glands at base. Flowers unisexual , 
regular, sessile, sepals 3, ovate, greenish yel-
low, petals absent , disk absent; male flowers 
with 3 free, shortly exserted s tamens ; female 
flowers with superior ovary, glabrous, 3-celled, 
styles 3, free. Fru i t a 3-lobed capsule c. 6 mm 
long, with 2 lines of stiff ha i r s on each lobe, 3-
seeded. Seeds ellipsoid-oblong, c. 4 mm long, 
smooth, blackish or grey. 
Microstachys comprises about 15 species and 
occurs in the tropics and subtropics, mainly in 
South America; 4 species occur in tropical Af-
rica. Microstachys was formerly included in 
Sebastiania, which now comprises about 75 
species in the New World tropics. The African 
specimens of Microstachys chamaelea a re 
r a t h e r uniform and have larger leaves, fruits 
and seeds t h a n the Asian and Aus t ra l ian 
specimens. 
E c o l o g y Microstachys chamaelea occurs in 
gallery forest, s avanna and fallow land, often 
on sandy soils, a t low al t i tudes . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Micro-
stachys chamaelea is widespread and occurs in 
anthropogenic hab i ta t s . It is therefore not 
likely to be th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Microstachys chamaelea h a s only 
few uses and nothing is known about its prop-
ert ies . It will therefore probably remain of local 
importance only. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Brown, Hutchinson & Pra in , 1909-1913; Esser, 
1998; van Weizen, 2003. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Burkill, 1994. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
MOSTUEA BATESII B a k e r 
P r o t o l o g u e Oliv., Fl. trop. Afr. 4(1): 506 
(1903). 
F a m i l y Loganiaceae (APG: Gelsemiaceae) 
S y n o n y m s Mostuea stimulans A.Chev. 
(1946). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mos-
tuea batesii occurs from Cameroon and the 
Cent ra l African Republic south to Gabon and 
DR Congo. 
U s e s In Gabon the grated root is used to 
dispel sleep or as an aphrodisiac with similar 
action to t h a t of Tabernanthe iboga Baill. It is 
consumed alone or mixed with Tabernanthe 
iboga; extended use may lead to cerebral trou-
bles. In the Cent ra l African Republic a root 
386 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
decoction is taken as an anthelminthic by chil-
dren. 
Properties Mostuea batesii contains 0.06% 
indole alkaloids in the leafy stems, 0.15% in 
the roots and 0.33% in the root bark. The root 
bark alkaloids are related to sempervirin and 
gelsemine. Subcutaneously administered root-
bark extract had a mean lethal dose of 0.25 
g/kg in mice, and death was preceded by a 
phase of hyperexcitability. In anaesthetized 
dogs, an intravenous dose of up to 0.10 g/kg 
produced hypotension followed by hyperten-
sion. A short phase of tachyardia and hyper-
pnoea was succeeded by cardiac and respira-
tory depression. A higher dose only produced 
hypotension. 
Botany Small shrub up to 1.5 m tall; twigs 
hairy when young, later glabrescent. Leaves 
opposite, simple; stipules hairy outside; petiole 
0.5-8 mm long, hairy; blade elliptical, oblong-
elliptical to oblong-ovate, 0.5-6.5 cm x 0.5-2.5 
cm, base obliquely cuneate to rounded, apex 
acute, obtuse or rounded, often apiculate, mar-
gins entire or obscurely wavy-toothed, hairy on 
both sides. Inflorescence a terminal, sessile 
cyme on lateral branches, 1-3-flowered. Flow-
ers bisexual, slightly zygomorphic, 5-merous, 
heterodistylous, almost sessile; sepals fused at 
base, ovate-lanceolate to ovate-linear, 2.5-6 
mm long, apex awl-shaped, hairy outside; co-
rolla white with yellow base, tube funnel-
shaped 7-11 mm long, outside hairy in upper 
part, glabrous in lower part, inside glabrous 
except near the insertion of the stamens, lobes 
1.5-3 mm long; stamens free, included or ex-
serted; ovary superior, ovoid, 0.5—1 mm long, at 
apex with some hairs, 2-celled, style simple, 
shorter or longer than the stamens. Fruit a 2-
lobed capsule 5.5-8 mm x 11—13 mm, hairy, 
medium brown, 4-valved, 2-4-seeded. Seeds 
plano-convex, obliquely ovate-orbicular, 5-7 
mm x 4-6 mm, pale brown. 
Mostuea comprises 7 species in Africa and 
Madagascar and 1 in northern South America. 
Ecology Mostuea batesii occurs in secondary 
rainforest, from sea-level up to 750 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though the natural distribution of Mostuea 
batesii is restricted, it seems not to be in dan-
ger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects The active ingredients of Mostuea 
batesii are unknown. As related species contain 
interesting indole alkaloids with antitumour 
activity, more research into the chemical com-
position and pharmacological activities of the 
compounds of Mostuea batesii seems war-
ranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; De Smet, 
1996; Gassita et al. (Editors), 1982; Leeuwen-
berg, 1961a; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neu-
winger, 1998; Onochie & Leeuwenberg, 1963; 
Raponda-Walker, 1953; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961; Sillans, 1953. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
MOSTUEA BRUNONIS Didr. 
Protologue Vidensk. Meddel. Dansk Na-
turhist. Foren. Kjobenhavn 1853: 87 (1854). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gelsemiaceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 20 
Origin and geographic distribution Mos-
tuea brunonis occurs from Ghana east to Kenya 
and south to Angola and Mozambique. It also 
occurs in Madagascar. 
Uses In the Central African Republic a root 
decoction or infusion is taken to treat colds, 
hypermenorrhoea, kidney troubles and as an 
aphrodisiac. A bath is taken with a root decoc-
tion to treat yellow fever. Young leaves are 
taken in food to treat stomach complaints and 
a twig decoction is taken to treat distended 
stomach in children. In Tanzania the root is 
chewed to treat stomach-ache. A root decoction 
or grated fresh root is taken as vermifuge. The 
grated root is also used to treat snakebites and 
it is applied as dressing to treat wounds. In 
Madagascar an infusion of twigs and leaves is 
taken to treat general pain, including intesti-
nal pain and colitis, and dysentery. In DR 
Congo the root bark is used as ingredient of 
arrow poison. 
Properties Mostuea brunonis contains sev-
eral indole alkaloids. The stems and leaves 
contain gelsemicine, mostueine and some re-
lated compounds. The roots contain semper-
virin and the quinoline-based alkaloid campto-
thecin. Camptothecin and its derivatives are 
candidate chemotherapy drugs to treat breast 
and colon cancers, malignant melanoma, small-
cell lung cancer and leukaemia. Its use in agri-
cultural fungicides has been patented in China. 
Whole plant extracts of Mostuea brunonis con-
tain 20-O-ß-glucopyranosyl camptothecin and 
some related compounds, as well as the moder-
ately cytotoxic alkaloids deoxypumiloside and 
strictosamide. 20-O-ß-glucopyranosyl campto-
thecin is more soluble in alcohol and water 
than camptothecin, and may have value as a 
drug that could be more readily formulated 
MOSTUEA 387 
than camptothecin. 
Botany Much branched shrub, undershrub, 
or occasionally liana up to 7 m tall; stems erect 
or overhanging, with spreading branches; twigs 
near the apex variously hairy or glabrous. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
membranous, triangular; petiole 0.5-8 mm 
long; blade oblong-ovate, ovate-elliptical or 
elliptical, 0.5-15(-28) cm x 0.5-8(-13) cm, base 
cuneate, apex acuminate, variously hairy or 
glabrous, often with domatia beneath in the 
angles of some lateral veins. Inflorescence a lax 
to headlike axillary or terminal cyme, usually 
on a short lateral branch, 1-many-flowered, 
variously hairy. Flowers bisexual, slightly zy-
gomorphic, 5-merous, heterodistylous; sepals 
fused to up to half of their length, ovate, ovate-
lanceolate to ovate-linear, 1-5 mm x 0.5-1 mm, 
apex acute, hairy or glabrous outside; corolla 
white, lilac or pink, mostly with a yellow or 
orange base and throat, sometimes entirely 
yellow, orange or red, or red with yellow, tube 
funnel-shaped 5-13 mm long, glabrous outside, 
lobes 1-5 mm long; stamens free, included or 
slightly exserted; ovary superior, ovoid, 1—1.5 
mm x 0.5-1 mm, glabrous or appressed hairy 
near the apex, 2-celled, style simple, shorter or 
longer than the stamens. Fruit a 2-lobed cap-
sule 4—7(—13) mm x 8-14 mm, glabrous or 
hairy, dull, medium to dark brown when dry, 4-
valved, 2-4-seeded. Seeds plano-convex, 
obliquely ovate-orbicular, c. 10 mm x 6 mm x 
2.5 mm, pale brown. 
Mostuea comprises 7 species in Africa and 
Madagascar and 1 in northern South America. 
Ecology Mostuea brunonis occurs in gallery 
or rainforest, also in secondary forest, from 
sea-level up to 1100 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Mostuea 
brunonis is widely distributed and hence not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The active ingredients of Mostuea 
brunonis found so far (camptothecin and de-
rivatives) have interesting antitumour activity. 
More research into the chemical composition of 
the plant and pharmacological activities of the 
compounds seems warranted. 
Major references Dai et al., 1999; De Smet, 
1996; Leeuwenberg, 1961a; Leeuwenberg, 
1980; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bouquet, 1972; Burkill, 
1995; Haerdi, 1964; Lorence & Nessier, 2004; 
Neuwinger, 1998; Onanga, 1983; Onochie & 
Leeuwenberg, 1963; Raponda-Walker & Sil-
lans, 1961; Sillans, 1953; Vergiat, 1970. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
MOSTUEA HIRSUTA (T.Anderson ex Benth. & 
Hook.f) Baill. ex Baker 
Protologue Oliv., Fl. trop. Afr. 4(1): 509 
(1903). 
Family Loganiaceae (APG: Gelsemiaceae) 
Chromosome number 2rc = 20 
Synonyms Mostuea gabonica Baill. (1880). 
Origin and geographic distribution Mos-
tuea hirsuta occurs from Senegal east to Sudan 
and south through Central Africa to Angola. 
Uses In Senegal Mostuea hirsuta is taken as 
an analgesic. In Cameroon ground young 
leaves are used as a dressing to treat initial 
stages of leprosy. In the Central African Re-
public a root infusion is taken to treat colds. In 
Gabon and Congo grated roots are used to dis-
pel sleep or as an aphrodisiac with similar ac-
tion to that of Tabernanthe iboga Baill. It is 
consumed alone or mixed with Tabernanthe 
iboga; extended use may lead to cerebral trou-
bles. In Congo leaf or root sap is taken to treat 
pain; leaf pulp is massaged on painful areas 
caused by pulmonary infections, abdominal 
pains and umbilical hernia in infants. A root 
infusion is taken to treat rheumatism. In DR 
Congo leaf sap is applied to treat pain caused 
by caries. 
In the Central African Republic the roots are 
used as an ingredient of arrow poison. The 
branches of Mostuea hirsuta are used as 
brooms. 
Properties Mostuea hirsuta contains indole 
alkaloids, probably sempervirin and gelsemine 
or closely related compounds. Extracts of 
Mostuea hirsuta have analgesic properties, 
lower heart action and stimulate respiration in 
low dosage; high dosage can cause death by 
paralysis of respiration. 
Botany Shrub or undershrub, sometimes 
slightly scandent, up to 2 m tall; stems erect or 
decumbent, branched; twigs hairy when young, 
later glabrescent, dark brown. Leaves opposite, 
simple; stipules triangular to ovate-elliptical, 
outside hairy; petiole 0.5-2.5 mm long, hairy; 
blade obliquely ovate, ovate-elliptical or ellipti-
cal, 1-8 cm x 0.5-4.5 cm, base obliquely 
rounded, apex acuminate, margins entire or 
obscurely wavy, hairy on both sides. Inflores-
cence a congested terminal cyme on a short 
lateral branch, 3-6-flowered; peduncle (l-)2— 
4(—7) mm long, at apex with 2 large bracts. 
Flowers bisexual, slightly zygomorphic, 5-
merous, heterodistylous; sepals fused to up to 
half of their length, ovate-lanceolate to lanceo-
late, 1-5.5 mm long; corolla white, sometimes 
388 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
pale yellow or yellow striped at the base, tube 
funnel-shaped, 7-16 mm long, lobes 3-5 mm x 
3-5 mm; stamens free, included or exserted; 
ovary superior, ovoid, 1-1.5 mm long, glabrous 
or minutely hairy, usually with stiff erect hairs 
at the apex, 2-celled, style simple, shorter or 
longer than the stamens. Fruit a broadly or-
bicular to broadly obcordate capsule 6-8 mm x 
8-12 mm, base obtuse, apex truncate, refuse 
and mucronate or 2-lobed, glabrous, yellow to 
dark brown, 4-valved, 2-4-seeded. Seeds plano-
convex, obliquely ovate-orbicular, 6-7 mm x 4— 
5 mm, pale brown. 
Mostuea comprises 7 species in Africa and 
Madagascar and 1 in northern South America. 
Ecology Mostuea hirsuta occurs in open 
localities in rainforest or secondary forest, gal-
lery forest or savanna, sometimes in moist lo-
calities, from sea-level up to 1000 m altitude. It 
is resistant to bush fires. 
Genetic resources and breeding Mostuea 
hirsuta is widely distributed and hence not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects The active ingredients of Mostuea 
hirsuta are largely unknown. As related spe-
cies contain interesting indole alkaloids with 
antitumour activity, more research into the 
chemical composition of the plant and pharma-
cological activities of the compounds of 
Mostuea hirsuta seems warranted. 
Major references De Smet, 1996; Gassita 
et al. (Editors), 1982; Kerharo & Adam, 1974; 
Leeuwenberg, 1961a; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Leeuwenberg, 1980; 
Neuwinger, 1998; Ngavoura, 1990; Oliver-
Bever, 1982; Onochie & Leeuwenberg, 1963; 
Raponda-Walker, 1953; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
MOTANDRA GUINEENSIS (Thonn.) A.DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 8: 423 (1844). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Motan-
dra guineensis is widespread in Africa, occur-
ring from Sierra Leone and Mali east to Sudan 
and Uganda, and south to Angola. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire leaf sap of Motandra 
guineensis is applied to the eyes to treat eye 
infections, as a mouthwash or massage to the 
gums to treat toothache or instilled in the nose 
in case of fainting, headache or to calm insan-
ity. The initial response is irritation of the mu-
cous membranes, followed by sedation. Bark 
sap is used as an enema to calm stomach-ache 
in women that have just given birth. In Sierra 
Leone the hollow stem is cut into short lengths, 
which are threaded as beads. 
Properties An ethanol extract of Motandra 
guineensis leaves was tested in vitro for anti-
bacterial and antifungal activities, but did not 
show a significant effect. 
Botany Climbing shrub or liana up to 40 m 
long, with white latex; stem up to 10 cm in 
diameter; bark brown, smooth, later longitudi-
nally fissured; branches pale brown, with small 
orange-brown lenticels. Leaves opposite, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole 3.5-10(-13) 
mm long, glabrescent or rusty brown-hairy, 
with stalked glands near apex; blade elliptical 
to oblong-obovate, 3.5-14 cm x 1.5-4.5 cm, 
base rounded, apex acuminate, with tufts of 
pale brown hairs in axils of lateral veins. Inflo-
rescence a terminal panicle, 2.5-15.5 cm x 1.5-
7(-9) cm, rusty brown hairy, but glabrescent, 
many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, fragrant; pedicel 1-5 mm long; sepals 
triangular, 1-2 mm long; corolla white to 
greenish white, tube obconical, 2.5-4 mm long, 
urn-shaped at base, inside with tufts of hairs 
Motandra guineensis 
flower; 3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
1, flowering twig; 2, 
OCHROSIA 389 
1-2 mm from the base, lobes narrowly ovate to 
narrowly obovate, 2.5-7 mm long; stamens 
inserted at base of the corolla tube, apex of 
anthers with tuft of hairs; ovary half-inferior, 
2-celled, style very short, pistil head with long 
appendages. Fruit composed of 2 spreading 
follicles, 4-18 cm x 1-3.5 cm, tapering to the 
tip, opening by longitudinal slits, dark green 
with dense rusty brown hairs, longitudinally 
winged, many-seeded. Seeds c. 18 mm x 9 mm, 
with tuft of hairs 30-80 mm long at apex; coty-
ledons broadly ovate, leafy. 
Motandra comprises 3 species, which all occur 
in continental tropical Africa. It is related to 
Baissea and Oncinotis. Motandra guineensis is 
the most widely distributed species whereas 
Motandra lujaei De Wild. & T.Durand and 
Motandra poecilophylla Wernham are re-
stricted to the more humid rainforest of west-
ern Central Africa. In DR Congo the bark sap 
of Motandra lujaei is taken to treat cough. The 
long stem is used for making snares and as 
binding material. 
Motandra guineensis flowers towards the end 
of the dry and the beginning of the rainy sea-
son. Fruits mature during the dry season. 
Ecology Motandra guineensis occurs in open 
or secondary deciduous forest, gallery forest 
and in secondary regrowth. It grows on sand, 
clay and rocky outcrops, from sea-level up to 
1200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Motan-
dra guineensis is widespread, also in more or 
less disturbed habitats, and does not appear to 
be threatened. 
Prospects Because of the varying medicinal 
uses of the leaf sap, Motandra guineensis de-
serves research attention. 
Major references Bouquet & Debray, 1974; 
Burkill, 1985; de Kruif, 1984; Kerharo & Bou-
quet, 1950. 
Other references Atindehou et al., 2002; 
Omino, 2002; Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors M.J. Boone 
OCHROSIA BORBONICA J.F.Gmel. 
Protologue Syst. nat. 2: 439 (1791). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Vernacular names Bois jaune, quinquina 
du pays (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ochro-
sia borbonica is endemic to the Mascarene Is-
Ochrosia borbonica - wild 
lands (Réunion and Mauritius). 
Uses In Réunion a small piece of the bark is 
boiled and the decoction is sweetened with 
honey and is drunk to treat loss of appetite, 
hypotension and constipation, and to reduce 
fever, e.g. in case of malaria. The bark soaked 
in wine is taken daily to purify the blood; the 
bark soaked in rum or water is taken before 
meals to reduce stomach cramps. In Mauritius 
the bark boiled with leaves is taken to treat 
fever. It is also widely taken as a tonic and 
stomachic and is applied against stomach 
cramps, as a bath or drink. It is also used 
against childhood eczema, locally known as 
'tambave'. 
The wood was formerly used as timber for 
making household utensils. 
Production and international trade Ochro-
sia borbonica is used at a local scale only, and 
because it has become rare, it is no longer 
traded much. 
Properties Research on active constituents 
in Ochrosia has focused on anticancer com-
pounds following the isolation of the indole 
alkaloids ellipticine, elliptinine, 9-methoxy-
ellipticine and isoreserpiline from the Asian 
Ochrosia elliptica Labill. Many Ochrosia spp. 
have since been subject to investigation of their 
alkaloid content, and the production of ellip-
ticine in in-vitro grown callus from Ochrosia 
elliptica has been successful. 
The bark of Ochrosia borbonica is rich in indole 
alkaloids and contains mainly ellipticine, 9-
methoxy-ellipticine, reserpiline and isoreser-
piline. Ellipticine and 9-methoxy-ellipticine 
show antitumour properties, but also disturb 
biological membranes, which makes their utili-
390 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
zation in medicines impossible. 
Semisynthetic derivatives show higher activi-
ties against cancer cells and are less toxic. So 
far, only one ellipticine derivative, celiptium" 
(N-methyl-9-hydroxy-ellipticine, as acetate 
salt) has been introduced onto the market for 
treatment of metastatic breast cancer. This 
drug also shows significant activity against 
several leukaemia and melanoma cell lines. 
Ellipticine derivatives and analogues are also 
reversible non-competitive inhibitors of choli-
nesterases and interact with muscarine recep-
tors. The ellipticine derivative hydroxy-methyl-
ellipticine shows strong antiviral activities and 
is being extensively screened in clinical anti-
Aids treatments. 
Description Small tree up to 15 m tall, gla-
brous, except for the fringed sepals, with white 
latex; bole up to 40 cm in diameter; bark dark 
grey, fissured; branches with ring-shaped leaf 
scars. Leaves in whorls of 4, simple and entire; 
petiole 1-3.5 cm long, widened into a stipule at 
base; blade obovate to elliptical, 3-25 cm x 1.5-
5 cm, base decurrent into the petiole, apex 
rounded, refuse, obtuse or acute, pinnately 
veined with numerous lateral veins at right 
angles to the midrib. Inflorescence a terminal 
Ochrosia borbonica - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
cyme, but often seemingly axillary, many-
flowered; peduncle 2-12 cm long; bracts scale-
like. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fra-
grant, sessile; sepals free, ovate, 2.5-3 mm 
long, thick, subtended by a sepal-like bracteole; 
corolla tube 7.5-10 mm long, cylindrical, 
slightly widened around the stamens, white 
with pink or red throat, lobes elliptical, 6-13 
mm x 3-7 mm, apex rounded, spreading; sta-
mens inserted 5-7 mm from the base of the 
corolla tube, included, filaments short; ovary 
superior, consisting of 2 carpels fused at base, 
style 2.5-4 mm long, split at base, ending in a 
conical pistil head. Fruit consisting of (l-)2 
free ellipsoid drupes, 3.5-4.5 cm x 2—3 cm, 
apex rounded or apiculate, indéhiscent, 
smooth, with 2 lateral ridges, mesocarp fibrous, 
each drupe 1—2-seeded. Seeds elliptical, flat-
tened, 1.5-2.5 cm long, winged. 
Other botanical information Ochrosia 
comprises about 30 species from the Mascarene 
Islands and Seychelles to South-East Asia, the 
Pacific and northern Australia. New Caledonia 
is particularly rich in endemic species. Ochro-
sia belongs to the tribe Rauvolfieae, together 
with the well-known genus Rauvolfia. 
Growth and development Ochrosia bor-
bonica flowers almost throughout the year, 
with a peak in January and February. Fruits 
are mainly observed from November to Febru-
ary. The fruits float with their thick fibrous 
mesocarp and are dispersed by sea currents. 
Likewise, the seeds float because of cavities in 
the endocarp. The seeds germinate readily 
when washed ashore. Natural regeneration of 
Ochrosia borbonica is very slow. It is also often 
not more than a shrub in the semi-arid vegeta-
tion. 
Ecology Ochrosia borbonica occurs in forest, 
up to 1250 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Ochrosia bor-
bonica can be propagated by seed or by cut-
tings. In Mauritius attempts are being made at 
propagating Ochrosia borbonica by ripe-wood 
cuttings, and plantlets are present in nurseries 
of the Ministry of Agriculture. 
Genetic resources In Mauritius and Réun-
ion, Ochrosia borbonica has become rare be-
cause of habitat loss and destructive harvest-
ing of the bark. It is now confined to remnants 
of forest and the risk of genetic erosion and 
extinction is very real for this species. It is 
classified as endangered on the IUCN Red List. 
Although Ochrosia borbonica is officially pro-
tected, pieces of bark collected from the wild 
can still be found on markets in Réunion. 
OCHROSIA 391 
Prospects The indole alkaloids isolated 
from Ochrosia borbonica possess interesting 
anti-cancer and anti-viral activities. This po-
tential can only be realized if the future of the 
species is secured. 
Major references Bruneton, 1995; Gurib-
Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Gurib-Fakim, Guého 
& Bissoondoyal, 1995; Lavergne, 2001; Leeu-
wenberg, 1988a; Leeuwenberg & Rudjiman, 
2005; Matte et a l , 2002; van Valkenburg & 
Hendrian, 2001. 
Other references Aubert & Picot, 2005; 
Bisset, 1988b; Chénieux, Ramawat & Rideau, 
1988; Lavergne & Vera, 1989; Loupy, 1987; 
Moinet-Hedin et a l , 2000; Rouillard & Guého, 
2000; Svoboda, Poore & Montfort, 1968. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1988a. 
Authors A. Gurib-Fakim 
OCHROSIA OPPOSITIFOLIA (Lam.) K.Schum. 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. 4(2): 156 (1895). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Ochrosia parviflora (Forst.f.) 
G.Don (1837). 
Vernacular names Bois chauve-souris (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Ochro-
sia oppositifolia is widely distributed on the 
coasts of the islands throughout South-East 
Asia and the Pacific. In Africa it is restricted to 
the Seychelles. 
Uses In the Seychelles a bitter bark decoc-
tion is taken to purify the blood, as an appe-
tizer, purgative and carminative, and in high 
doses as an abortifacient. A leaf decoction is 
used to wash the abdomen of women after 
childbirth. Ochrosia oppositifolia has similar 
uses in South-East Asia. The wood was for-
merly used for construction. 
Properties Research on active constituents 
in Ochrosia has focused on anticancer com-
pounds following the isolation of the indole 
alkaloids ellipticine, elliptinine, 9-methoxy-
ellipticine and isoreserpiline from the Asian 
Ochrosia elliptica Labill. Many Ochrosia spp. 
have since been subject to investigation of their 
alkaloid content. 
The main compounds present in the bark of 
Ochrosia oppositifolia are reserpiline, isoreser-
piline and ochropposine. Numerous other in-
dole alkaloids have been recorded in the bark, 
including epi-rauvanine, bleekerine, ochroppos-
inine, reserpinine and isoreserpinine, but no 
ellipticine or derivatives. The principal con-
stituent of the leaves is isoreserpiline, with 10-
hydroxy-apparicine and 10-methoxy-apparicine 
as minor compounds. 
The wood is yellowish white and hard. 
Botany Small to medium-sized tree up to 25 
m tall, glabrous except for the corolla tube in-
side, with white latex; bole up to 50 cm in di-
ameter; bark pale grey, rough; branches with 
ring-shaped leaf scars. Leaves in whorls of 4, 
sometimes opposite near the inflorescence, 
simple and entire; petiole 1-6.5 cm long, not 
widened into a stipule at base; blade obovate to 
elliptical, 8-35 cm x 3-15 cm, base decurrent 
into the petiole, apex rounded, retuse or ob-
tuse, pinnately veined with numerous lateral 
veins at right angles to the midrib. Inflores-
cence a terminal cyme, but often seemingly 
axillary, many-flowered; peduncle 2-14 cm 
long; lower bracts leafy, broadly ovate, others 
scale- or sepal-like. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
5-merous, almost sessile; sepals connate at 
base, ovate, 1-2 mm long, thick; corolla creamy 
to white, tube 4-10 mm long, cylindrical, 
slightly widened around the stamens, lobes 
elliptical, 5-9 mm x 2-3 mm, apex rounded, 
spreading; stamens inserted c. 2 mm below the 
mouth of the corolla tube, included, sessile; 
ovary superior, consisting of 2 free carpels, 
style 1-4.5 mm long, ending in an ovoid pistil 
head, with a basal ring and a 2-lobed apex. 
Fruit consisting of 2 free ovoid to ellipsoid 
drupes 5—8 cm x 3-5.5 cm, apex rounded or 
apiculate, indéhiscent, smooth, mesocarp fi-
brous, each drupe 1-2-seeded. Seeds elliptical, 
flattened, 1.5-2.5 cm long, winged. 
Ochrosia comprises about 30 species and oc-
curs from the Mascarene Islands and Sey-
chelles to South-East Asia, the Pacific and 
northern Australia. New Caledonia is particu-
larly rich in endemic species. Ochrosia belongs 
to the tribe Rauvolfieae, together with the well-
known genus Rauvolfia. 
The fruits float with their thick fibrous meso-
carp and are dispersed by sea currents. Ochro-
sia oppositifolia fruits planted without removal 
of the pulp germinate poorly and only after 
about 8 months. 
Ecology Ochrosia oppositifolia occurs in 
coastal forest, bush or open localities, only oc-
casionally far inland, often on limestone, up to 
100 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding The 
widespread natural distribution of Ochrosia 
oppositifolia and its tolerance of disturbed 
habitats limit the risk of genetic erosion. In the 
392 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Seychelles, it h a s become ra re because of 
overharvest ing of the bark, but it is still rela-
tively abundan t on some of the outer is lands. 
P r o s p e c t s Several indole alkaloids isolated 
from Ochrosia species show interes t ing anti-
cancer activity, especially ellipticine and de-
rivatives of it. So far, no ellipticine-based alka-
loids have been isolated from Ochrosia opposi-
tifolia, and the species is therefore likely to 
remain of local importance only. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
2004; Leeuwenberg, 1988a; Pheube-Locou et 
a l , 1972; van Valkenburg & Hendr ian , 2001. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1983a; 
Pr iedmann, 1994. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
OKOUBAKA AUBREVILLEI Pe l legr . & Nor-
m a n d 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. Soc. Bot. France 93: 139 
(1946). 
F a m i l y Santa laceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Okou-
baka aubrevillei occurs from Sierra Leone east 
to Cameroon and DR Congo. 
U s e s In West Africa Okoubaka aubrevillei 
bark is widely used as a medicine. Skin prob-
lems, including those caused by syphilis and 
leprosy, are t rea ted by washing with, or bath-
ing in a macera te or infusion of the ba rk in 
water . Externa l application of ba rk prepara-
tions is also pract ised to counteract poisoning. 
Bark macera te is d runk to cure tachycardia 
and is t aken as a vapour ba th or as nose drops 
to cure oedema. In a compress it is used to dis-
perse haema tomas . 
Okoubaka aubrevillei - wild 
In the Western world the ba rk is used in phy-
totherapeut ic medicine. Its main applications 
are for s tomach upse ts caused by poisoning and 
to boost the system in cases of t i redness , de-
pression and allergies. The bark is used as a 
fish poison. In southern Nigeria Okoubaka 
aubrevillei is an impor tan t t ree in religious 
ceremonies. 
The wood is somet imes used for construction or 
as firewood. 
Product ion and international trade The 
ba rk of Okoubaka aubrevillei is t raded 
throughout the coastal countries of West Af-
rica. In local marke t s it was sold in 2005 for 
about US$ 20 per kg. In view of the widespread 
use in the Western world, in ternat ional t r ade 
mus t be considerable, bu t s tat is t ics a re lack-
ing. 
P r o p e r t i e s From the bark , 6 different cate-
chins have been isolated, including (+)-catechin 
and (+)-gallocatechin, as well as ß-sitosterol 
and st igmasterol . The ba rk has antimicrobial 
and immunos t imula t ing propert ies t h a t are 
a t t r ibuted to phenolic compounds. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Monoecious, deciduous, me-
dium-sized t ree up to 30 m tall; bole cylindri-
cal, s t ra ight , up to 80 cm in diameter ; bark 
surface coarse, greyish brown to reddish 
brown; branches horizontal , branchle ts slightly 
grooved, densely hairy. Leaves a l t e rna te to 
almost opposite, simple and entire; st ipules 
absent; petiole 3-15 mm long, 2-ribbed; blade 
ovate to oblong, 7.5-15 cm x 3.5-6 cm, base 
rounded to slightly cordate, apex acuminate , 
dark green, with 3-5 pai rs of la te ra l veins, 
densely hai ry when young. Inflorescence a 
panicle on older branches , up to 20 cm long. 
Flowers unisexual , 5-merous, regular , sessile, 
green; male flowers with t r i angu la r petals , c. 
2.5 m m x 2.5 mm, short-hairy, s t amens c. 0.5 
m m long, disk cup-shaped, lobed, ovary with 
abortive ovules, style c. 1 mm long, s t igma 4-
pointed; female flowers slightly larger t h a n 
male flowers, s t amens sterile, disk cup-shaped, 
prominent ly lobed, ha i ry on upper margin, 
ovary superior, 4-celled, style c. 1 m m long, 
s t igma 4-lobed. Frui t an ellipsoid drupe up to 9 
cm long, glabrous, green tu rn ing yellow, 1-
seeded. Seed ellipsoid, c. 7 cm x 4.5 cm, longi-
tudinal ly ridged. Seedling with hypogeal ger-
mination. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Okoubaka 
comprises 2 species and is restr icted to tropical 
Africa. It is now generally accepted t h a t it be-
longs to Santalaceae, bu t it was formerly 
placed in the families Octoknemaceae and Ola-
OKOUBAKA 393 
Okoubaka aubrevillei - 1, leafy twig; 2, inflo-
rescence; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
caceae. Two varieties are distinguished in Okou-
baka aubrevillei: var. aubrevillei and var. gla-
brescentifolia J.Léonard, the latter known from 
DR Congo, where it is rare. Okoubaka michel-
sonii J.Léonard & Troupin also occurs in DR 
Congo and is poorly known. It is distinguished 
from Okoubaka aubrevillei by its glabrous 
branchlets and disk, shorter inflorescence and 
smaller fruits. The bark is taken as a febrifuge 
and tonic. 
Growth and development Okoubaka au-
brevillei is a hemi-parasite. Within 6 months 
after germination, when nutrient reserves in 
the seed become depleted, the roots attach 
themselves to those of nearby plants by means 
of haustoria. However, one year after germina-
tion no differences were found in growth and 
foliar nutrient concentrations between plants 
grown with and without hosts. The hosts, how-
ever, showed increased mortality or reduced 
growth. Hence, the apparent benefit which 
Okoubaka aubrevillei gains from the parasitic 
association is killing potential competitors for 
water, light and nutrients. The only tree spe-
cies surviving close to Okoubaka aubrevillei are 
Myrianthus arboreus P.Beauv. and Musanga 
cecropioides R.Br. Tree development is in ac-
cordance with Mangenot's architectural model: 
the trunk is formed by superposition of renewal 
shoots from lateral buds; the new shoot is ini-
tially orthotropic but later becomes pla-
giotropic; the phyllotaxy is spiral in the 
orthotropic parts, distichous in the plagiotropic 
parts. This architecture is often found in climb-
ing forest species, but is extremely rare in tree 
species. 
Ecology Okoubaka aubrevillei is usually 
found in forest on rocky hills. It is usually soli-
tary but there are reports from Côte d'Ivoire 
and Ghana that it is found in pure stands. 
Propagation and planting Multiplication 
of Okoubaka aubrevillei is best done by seed. 
Germination rates of 60-100% have been re-
corded. Natural regeneration is poor as fruits 
and seeds are eaten by porcupines. 
Management In DR Congo attempts have 
been made to cultivate Okoubaka aubrevillei. 
After germination, seedlings were transplanted 
in rows 4 m apart, at a distance of 2 m within 
the row. Between the rows Millettia laurentii 
De Wild, was planted. After about 10 years 
54% of the plants had survived and had 
reached an average height of 4.2 m and a 
maximum height of 8.6 m. Millettia laurentii 
did perform well for the first 6 years, but then 
started dying. 
Harvesting In Nigeria special rituals are 
performed before the bark of Okoubaka aubre-
villei is removed. A wooden tool is traditionally 
used for the removal of the bark and under no 
circumstances is a metal implement used. 
Genetic resources Okoubaka aubrevillei is 
considered vulnerable. It is apparently rare 
throughout its range and the high demand for 
bark justifies close monitoring of its exploita-
tion. Its poor natural regeneration is a further 
reason for concern. 
Prospects Study of the genetic diversity and 
the population biology of Okoubaka aubrevillei 
could form the basis for measures to protect 
natural stands and appropriate management. 
Assessment of the extent of damage done to the 
tree by harvesting the bark is needed to be able 
to specify the need for management strategies 
and conservation measures. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Cunning-
ham, 1993; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006; 
Keay, 1989; Léonard, 1947; Veenendaal et al., 
1996; Villiers, 1973a; Wagner, Kreutzkamp & 
Jurcic, 1985. 
Other references Aubréville, 1959b; Bou-
394 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
quet & Debray, 1974; FAO, 1986; Halle, 1987; 
Halle, Oldeman & Tomlinson, 1978; Kerharo & 
Bouquet, 1950; Léonard & Troupin, 1950; 
Louis & Léonard, 1948; Maundu, Kariuki & 
Eyog-Matig, 2004; NACGRAB, 2004; Normand, 
1950; Razali Yusuf, 1999b. 
Sources of illustration Halle, 1987; Louis 
& Léonard, 1948. 
Authors D.O. Ladipo, A.A. Adebisi & C.H. 
Bosch 
ONCINOTIS GLABRATA (Baill.) Stapf ex Hiern 
Protologue Cat. afr. pi. 1(3): 674 (1898). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Oncinotis glandulosa Stapf 
(1902). 
Origin and geographic distribution Oncino-
tis glabrata is widespread in West and Central 
Africa, from Guinea east to Uganda and west-
ern Tanzania, and south from Cameroon to 
Angola. 
Uses In Cameroon and Equatorial Guinea 
the latex of the grated bark of Oncinotis 
glabrata is sprinkled into yaws sores to cure 
them. The plant is of distinct decorative value. 
The stems are used as bowstrings in southern 
Nigeria. 
Properties No chemical data are recorded 
for Oncinotis glabrata. In several other Oncino-
tis species polyamine alkaloids of the sper-
midine type have been found. Spermidine de-
rivatives show structural similarities to spider 
and wasp toxins, which are potent inhibitors of 
glutamate receptors in the central nervous 
system. 
Botany Climbing shrub or liana up to 50 m 
long, with milky latex; stem up to 12 cm in 
diameter; bark smooth, later longitudinally 
fissured, greyish brown, with large pale brown 
lenticels. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 5-25 mm long, gla-
brous, upper side with small triangular glands 
up to 1 mm long; blade elliptical to ovate, up to 
15.5 cm x 7.5 cm, base cuneate, apex acumi-
nate, papery to leathery, glabrous, with small 
domatia in axils of lateral veins. Inflorescence 
an axillary or terminal panicle, 4—12.5 cm x 2— 
5 cm, many-flowered, rusty brown hairy but 
glabrescent; bracts ovate to triangular. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 2-5 mm 
long; sepals ovate, 1.5—3.5 mm long; corolla 
yellow to greenish yellow, tube urn-shaped, 3-5 
mm long, lobes triangular, 2-6 mm long, 
spreading, with a belt of hairs inside the tube 
just below the insertion of the stamens; sta-
mens inserted at the base of the tube, fila-
ments short; ovary half-inferior, 2-celled, style 
very short, pistil head at apex with 2 append-
ages. Fruit composed of 2 spreading, spindle-
shaped follicles 10-30 cm long, pendulous, 
opening by longitudinal slits, longitudinally 
winged, many-seeded. Seeds 5-25 mm long, 
smooth, with tuft of hairs 10-75 mm long at 
apex; cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Oncinotis comprises 7 species, 6 occurring in 
continental Africa and 1 in Madagascar. It is 
related to Baissea and Motandra. The West 
African Oncinotis nitida Benth. is used in Côte 
d'Ivoire to prevent abortion. From the stem 
bark the spermidine derivative oncinotine has 
been isolated as the major alkaloid. The bark 
decoction of the Central and East African On-
cinotis hirta Oliv, is applied in Gabon to 
wounds to promote healing. In the Central 
African Republic root bark, stem bark and 
seeds of different Oncinotis spp. are added to 
arrow poison and have the reputation of being 
extremely effective. Oncinotis gracilis Stapf is 
a decorative climber in West and Central Af-
rica, and in Ghana the stems are used for bow-
strings. 
Ecology Oncinotis glabrata occurs in rain-
forest, swamp forest, secondary deciduous for-
est and gallery forest. It grows on clay and 
rocky outcrops, from sea-level up to 2200 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Oncino-
tis glabrata is widespread and it does not ap-
pear to be threatened. 
Prospects Very little information is avail-
able on Oncinotis including Oncinotis glabrata. 
More research on the phytochemistry and 
pharmacological properties is needed before 
their prospects as medicinal plants can be 
judged. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Dalziel, 
1937; Irvine, 1961; de Kruif, 1985; Neuwinger, 
1996. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Bouquet & 
Debray, 1974; Popaj, Guggisberg & Hesse, 
2000; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 1961. 
Authors M.J. Boone 
OSYRIDICARPOS SCHIMPERIANUS (Höchst, ex 
A.Rich.) A.DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 14(2): 635 (1857). 
Family Santalaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Osyri-
PACHYELASMA 395 
dicarpos schimperianus is distributed from 
Eritrea south to South Africa. 
Uses The Samburu people of northern 
Kenya drink a root decoction to cure malaria. 
To reduce excessive swelling of the breasts the 
roots are soaked in water, which is then drunk. 
In South Africa leaves and stems are traded by 
traditional medicine sellers, but the use ap-
pears to be undocumented. 
Botany Hemiparasitic shrub, scrambling up 
to 5 m high, straggling; branches ribbed, gla-
brous to coarse-hairy. Leaves alternate, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-4 mm 
long; blade elliptical, 0.5-5 cm x 2.5-15 mm, 
base cuneate, apex acute, dark green, 3-veined 
at base. Inflorescence a terminal panicle or 
raceme 3-30 cm long, 10-30-flowered; bracts 
leaf-like. Flowers bisexual, 5-merous, regular, 
sessile; perianth white, pale yellow or greenish, 
ribbed, tube cylindrical, 3-7 mm long, lobes 
spreading, ovate, acute; stamens free, with 
filament up to 1.5 mm long and anthers up to 1 
mm long; ovary superior, 5-ribbed, style up to 8 
mm long, stigma 2-5-lobed. Fruit a globose 
drupe up to 6 mm in diameter, crowned with 
persistent perianth, turning creamy-white, 1-
seeded. 
Osyridicarpos comprises a single species. Re-
cently, phylogenetic research has confirmed a 
close relationship between Osyridicarpos and 
Thesium. 
Ecology Osyridicarpos schimperianus oc-
curs mainly in upland dry, evergreen forest 
and bushland, at 900-2400 m altitude, and less 
often in more humid forests, along rivers and 
in deciduous woodland. 
Management Harvesting of Osyridicarpos 
schimperianus is exclusively from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Osyridi-
carpos schimperianus is fairly widespread; it is 
not uncommon, not heavily utilized and thus 
not likely to be threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Research on the ethnobotany and 
properties of Osyridicarpos schimperianus is 
still needed to be able to assess its potential as 
a medicinal plant. 
Major references Bussmann, 2006; Polhill, 
2005. 
Other references Arnold et al., 2002; Cun-
ningham, 1993; Hutchings et al., 1996; Miller, 
1989; Nickrent & Malécot, 2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
PACHYELASMA TESSMANNII (Harms) Harms 
Protologue Bot, Jahrb. Syst. 49: 430 (1913). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae). 
Synonyms Stachyothyrsus tessmannii 
Harms (1910). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pachye-
lasma tessmannii occurs from southern Nigeria 
east to the Central African Republic, and south 
to Gabon and DR Congo. 
Uses In Cameroon the fruit of Pachyelasma 
tessmannii is used to cure diarrhoea and as an 
abortifacient. For the latter either an extract of 
the ground fruits is administered as an enema 
or the macerated fruits are added to water and 
the patient takes a bath in the solution. In 
Gabon and DR Congo the fruits, seeds and 
bark are used as fish poison and the species is 
reported as one of the most effective fish poi-
sons of Central Africa. 
The tree is used for timber to a limited extent. 
The gigantic dimensions of fully-grown trees 
make felling and transport hazardous and con-
version work difficult with the usual equip-
ment. As a result such giant trees have gener-
ally been left standing in commercial timber 
operations. The timber is known in trade as 
'mekogho', 'eyek' or 'faux tali'. The wood is 
suitable for heavy construction, boat building, 
vehicle bodies, furniture and cabinet work, 
joinery, sporting goods and implements, inte-
rior trim, toys and novelties, and turnery. It is 
particularly suitable for very thin veneer. 
Properties The methanol extract of the root 
bark of Pachyelasma tessmannii exhibits mol-
luscicidal properties. Four triterpene saponins, 
pachyelasides A-D, have been isolated from 
the root bark, and each of them showed mol-
luscicidal properties. 
The heartwood is reddish brown and usually 
distinctly demarcated from the whitish pink 
sapwood, which is up to 10 cm wide. The 
heartwood is heavy and hard. The grain is of-
ten interlocked or wavy, texture coarse. At 12% 
moisture content the density is 810-900 kg/m3. 
The rates of shrinkage are high; quarter-
cutting of the logs is recommended. The wood 
saws well, but strength is required. It is diffi-
cult to machine and plane. The use of a filler is 
required to produce a smooth finish, but a filler 
is not easily applied. The nailing and screwing 
properties are good. The wood is durable and 
only rarely attacked by termites and marine 
borers, but attack by pinhole borers may occur. 
The sapwood is moderately resistant to im-
396 MÉDICINAL PLANTS l 
pregnation with preservatives, the heartwood 
resistant. 
The timber of Pachyelasma tessmannii can be 
confused with that of 'tali' (Erythrophleum 
ivorense A.Chev.). 
Botany Very large tree up to 60 m tall; bole 
straight and cylindrical, up to 250 cm in di-
ameter; with buttresses; bark rough, greyish; 
crown dome-shaped. Leaves alternate, bipin-
nately compound with 2-5 pairs of opposite or 
rarely alternate pinnae, up to 35 cm long; stip-
ules lanceolate-linear, soon falling; petiole 2-7 
cm long, rachis 5-15 cm long; leaflets alter-
nate, 9-14 per pinna, oblong to oblong-
lanceolate, 4-11 cm x 1.5-3.5 cm, base asym-
metrical, cuneate to obtuse, apex obtuse, 
rounded or notched. Inflorescence an axillary 
or terminal panicle consisting of spike-like 
racemes up to 18 cm long. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous, malodorous; pedicel 2—3 mm 
long; sepals c. 2 mm x 2 mm, yellowish green; 
petals narrowly obovate, up to 6 mm x 3 mm, 
cherry-red with yellow base; stamens 10, free, 
c. 4 mm long; ovary superior, long woolly hairy, 
1-celled, style cylindrical, c. 3 mm long. Fruit a 
linear-oblong or oblong-lanceolate, flattened 
pod, 15-35 cm x 3-4 cm, sutures thickened, 
indéhiscent, thickly woody, pendulous, black, 
10-18-seeded. Seeds ovoid, compressed, c. 20 
mm x 9 mm x 6 mm. 
Pachyelasma comprises a single species and is 
closely related to Erythrophleum. 
Ecology Pachyelasma tessmannii occurs in 
primary rainforest. 
Genetic resources and breeding Pachye-
lasma tessmannii is widely distributed and not 
very sought after for timber. Hence no major 
threats of genetic erosion are envisaged al-
though large-scale habitat destruction could 
have a negative impact. 
Prospects The recent isolation of novel 
saponins from the root bark of Pachyelasma 
tessmannii will undoubtedly fuel interest in its 
pharmacology and as the fruits have the widest 
application in folk medicine, research should 
also target the fruits. 
Major references Bolza & Keating, 1972; 
Burkill, 1995; Nihei et al., 2005b; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Wilks & Issembé, 
2000. 
Other references Aubréville, 1968; Betti, 
2002; Bruneau et al., 2001; Collardet, 1976; de 
Saint-Aubin, 1963; Keay, Hoyle & Duvigneaud, 
1958; Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2004; 
Wilczek et a l , 1952. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
PAROPSIA BRAZZEANA Baill. 
Protologue Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 
611 (1886). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Parop-
sia brazzeana occurs from Cameroon and the 
Central African Republic south to Angola, the 
Caprivi strip of Namibia, Botswana and Zim-
babwe. 
Uses In Congo a bark decoction is used as a 
vapour bath and leaf sap is drunk to treat 
rheumatism, whereas leaf pulp is rubbed on 
the painful area. In DR Congo a root-bark de-
coction is taken orally to treat amoebic dysen-
tery. In Zimbabwe a root extract is taken orally 
to treat gonorrhoea and it is also used as a 
mouthwash to treat toothache. The fruit juice 
is taken to treat headache and is used as nose 
drops to cure infections in the nose. 
Properties An aqueous root-bark extract of 
Paropsia brazzeana showed significant anti-
bacterial, anti-amoebic and antispasmodic ac-
tivities. The plant contains flavones, tannins, 
saponins and hydrocyanic acid. 
Botany Many-stemmed shrub up to 4 m tall; 
stem up to 5 cm in diameter; young branches 
brownish hairy. Leaves alternate, more or less 
in 2 rows, simple; stipules soon falling; petiole 
thick, (3-)5-7 mm long; blade oblong-elliptical 
to ovate-oblong, (3-)6-10(-13) cm x (1.5-)2.5-
6(-7.5) cm, base broadly cuneate to rounded, 
apex acute to acuminate, margin with acute 
teeth, leathery, glandular, initially softly 
brownish hairy on both surfaces, glabrescent 
above when older. Inflorescence an axillary 
fascicle, 1—3(-5)-flowered; bracts c. 2 mm long, 
ovate. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel up to 5 mm long, brownish hairy; sepals 
oblong, 10—12 mm x (3-)4-5 mm, greenish 
white, brownish hairy outside, minutely hairy 
inside; petals oblong, narrower than the sepals 
but with the same length, white, hairy outside; 
corona consisting of c. 3 mm long threads ar-
ranged in 5 bundles fused at the base, glabrous 
below and hairy towards the apex; stamens 
exserted, filaments c. 5 mm long, anthers c. 2 
mm long; ovary superior, rusty-hairy, styles 
usually 3, c. 1 mm long. Fruit a globose to ovoid 
capsule 1.5-2 cm x 1-2 cm, rusty hairy, 6-7-
seeded. Seeds ovoid, c. 8 mm x 4 mm, com-
pressed, brown with gelatinous orange aril. 
Paropsia comprises 12 species, 5 of which occur 
in mainland tropical Africa, 6 in Madagascar 
and 1 in South-East Asia. 
Ecology Paropsia brazzeana occurs in wood-
PASSIFLORA 397 
land, fringing forest, gallery forest and secon-
dary forest, and thickets on sandy or clay soils 
up to 1100(-1600) m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Paropsia 
brazzeana is widespread and there are no indi-
cations that it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Paropsia brazzeana has shown 
antibacterial, anti-amoebic and antispasmodic 
activities, but more research is needed to as-
sess the chemical compounds and pharmacol-
ogical possibilities. 
Major references Bouquet, 1969; Fernan-
des & Fernandes, 1978; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Sleumer & Bamps, 1976; Sleumer, 1970. 
Other references Tona et al., 1999; Tona et 
a l , 1998; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
PAROPSIA GREWIOIDES Welw. ex Mast. 
Protologue Oliv., Fl. trop. Afr. 2: 505 
(1871). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Parop-
sia grewioides occurs from Cameroon south to 
Angola, and in Tanzania and Mozambique. 
Uses In Congo a bark decoction is used as a 
vapour bath, leaf sap is drunk to treat rheuma-
tism, and leaf pulp is rubbed on the painful 
area. In DR Congo pulverized leaves of Parop-
sia grewioides mixed with those of Utricularia 
inflexa Forssk. are rubbed into scarifications 
on the chest or a decoction is used as a rectal 
wash to treat respiratory diseases in children. 
Properties Paropsia grewioides contains 
flavones, tannins, saponins and hydrocyanic 
acid. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 12(-20) m 
tall; bole up to 30 cm in diameter; young 
branches with dense, short, brown hairs. 
Leaves alternate, more or less in 2 rows, sim-
ple; stipules lanceolate, up to 2 mm long, soon 
falling; petiole slender, 4-8 mm long, yellowish 
hairy; blade oblong to elliptical-oblong, (3.5-
)5.5-ll(-13) cm x (2-)2.5-4(-7) cm, base 
cuneate, apex slightly acuminate to acute, 
margin finely toothed, papery to leathery, gla-
brescent. Flowers usually solitary in leaf axils, 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 1—2(-3) cm 
long; sepals lanceolate-oblong to oblong, (6-
)10-14(-25) mm x 3-5(-10) mm, brownish 
hairy outside, greyish hairy inside; petals nar-
rower and slightly shorter than sepals, green-
ish yellow or creamy; corona consisting of 3-4 
mm long hairy threads; stamens exserted, 
filaments 6-10 mm long, anthers 2.5-3.5 mm 
long; ovary superior, with stipe up to 1.5 mm 
long, globose to ovoid, hairy, styles usually 3, 
slender, 2-3 mm long, hairy. Fruit a globose to 
ovoid capsule 1.5—3 cm x 1.5—2.5 cm, usually 
hairy. Seeds ovoid, compressed, 5-7 mm long, 
testa hard, grooved and pitted, with aril. 
Paropsia comprises 12 species, 5 of which occur 
in mainland tropical Africa, 6 in Madagascar 
and 1 in South-East Asia. In Tanzania and 
Mozambique Paropsia grewioides plants have 
larger flowers and smaller fruits in comparison 
with plants from Central Africa. They have 
been distinguished as var. orientalis Sleumer. 
Paropsia guineensis Oliv, occurs from Ghana 
east to Uganda and south to Cabinda (Angola); 
in Congo the bark is used in the same way as 
that of Paropsia grewioides, to treat rheuma-
tism. 
Ecology Paropsia grewioides occurs in semi-
deciduous forest, littoral forest and dry forest, 
also in secondary forest and thickets. 
Genetic resources and breeding Paropsia 
grewioides is widespread and there is no indi-
cation that it is threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects More research is needed to assess 
the pharmacological possibilities of Paropsia 
grewioides. 
Major references Bouquet, 1969; de Wilde, 
1975; Neuwinger, 2000; Sleumer, 1970; 
Sleumer & Bamps, 1976. 
Other references Burkill, 1997; Disengo-
moka & Delaveau, 1983; Disengomoka, De-
laveau & Sengele, 1983; Tona et a l , 1999; Tona 
et al., 1998. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
P A S S I F L O R A S U B E R O S A L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 958 (1753). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 12, 24, 36 
Vernacular names Corky passionflower, 
corkystem passionflower, devil's pumpkin, in-
digo berry, wild passionfruit (En). Grenadille, 
passiflore (Fr). Maracujâ (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Passi-
flora suberosa originates from tropical America 
and is a locally established weed in many 
tropical countries. In Africa it occurs in Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania, South Africa, and also 
in the Indian Ocean islands. 
Uses In Mauritius a leaf decoction is applied 
externally to treat urticaria and itch. A root 
decoction is taken to induce menstruation and 
398 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
to t r e a t hyster ia . On Rodrigues a decoction of 
the p lan t mixed with ei ther a pinch of sal t or 
wi th a decoction of young leaves of Momordica 
charantia L. is t a k e n to t r ea t indigestion. 
P r o p e r t i e s The aerial pa r t s of Passiflora 
suberosa contain simple indole alkaloids, tan-
nins , coumarines, sterols, terpenes and the 
cyanogenic glycosides passisuberosin and epi-
passisuberosin. The fruits contain several an-
thocyanins. 
B o t a n y Perennia l herbaceous climber, gla-
brous or hairy; s tem up to 6 m long, angular , 
corky when older, purpl ish. Leaves a l te rna te , 
usual ly deeply 3-lobed; st ipules l inear, 5-8 mm 
long; petiole 1-2.5 cm long, wi th 2 opposed 
wart- l ike glands a t the middle; blade circular 
to ovate or oblong in outline, 4—10 cm x 4 -14 
cm, t he cent ra l lobe largest , base rounded or 
cordate, apex acute. Flowers in leaf axils, 1-2 
together with a simple tendri l 3-12 cm long, 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 1-2 cm in diame-
ter, pale greenish yellow; pedicel 1-2 cm long, 
jointed about half way; h y p a n t h i u m saucer-
shaped, 3-5 m m wide; sepals ovate to lanceo-
late, 5-10 m m long, obtuse; pe ta ls absent; co-
rona th reads in 2 series, 2 -6 m m long, yellow 
with purple base; disk annu la r , androgyno-
phore 2 -4 m m long; s t amens free, f i laments 2 -
3 m m long, a n t h e r s 1—2 m m long; ovary supe-
rior, globose to ellipsoid, 1—2 mm in diameter , 
glabrous, 1-celled, styles 3, 2 - 3 mm long. Fru i t 
an almost globose berry 1-1.5 cm in diameter , 
glabrous, purple-black, many-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, 3-4 mm long, wrinkled. 
Passiflora comprises about 400 species, most of 
t h e m in tropical and subtropical America, bu t 
about 20 in Asia and Austra l ia . Passiflora is 
not indigenous in Africa, bu t several species 
have been introduced, mostly for the i r edible 
fruits. Passiflora suberosa is a var iable species 
and may include several cryptic species; it 
needs revision. 
E c o l o g y Passiflora suberosa is na tura l ized 
in grassland, shrub land, open dry forest, road-
sides and dis turbed shady localities, from sea-
level up to 2500 m al t i tude. It is an aggressive 
weed, which may smother the n a t u r a l vegeta-
tion. The seeds a re dispersed by fruit-eating 
birds. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s and b r e e d i n g Passi-
flora suberosa is considered an invasive weed 
e.g. in South Africa where it is listed as harm-
ful, and as such it is subject to eradication 
practices and not protection measures . 
P r o s p e c t s Passiflora suberosa is only locally 
used for medicinal purposes, and will r emain of 
lit t le importance unless pharmacological re-
search shows other possibilities. It is subject to 
research because of i ts resis tance aga ins t p lant 
viruses a n d fungi t h a t a t t ack Passiflora edulis 
Sims. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1983b; 
de Wilde, 1975; Dhawan, Dhawan & Sharma , 
2004; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 
1997; Monteiro et al., 2000; Porter-Utley, 2003. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Fischer et al., 2005; Gu-
r ib-Fakim et al., 1994; Gur ib-Fakim et al., 
1993; KMoy et a l , 1997; Spencer & Seigler, 
1987. 
A u t h o r s A. de Ruijter 
PELTOPHORUM AFRICANUM Sond. 
P r o t o l o g u e L innaea 23: 35 (1850). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r In - 26 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s African wat t le , African 
false wat t le , Rhodesian black watt le , African 
blackwood, weeping wat t le (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pelto-
phorum africanum is nat ive from southern DR 
Congo to South Africa and Swaziland. It is 
cul t ivated in Kenya, Tanzania , Madagascar , 
Aus t ra l ia and the Uni ted Sta tes . 
U s e s Both the ba rk and roots of Peltopho-
rum africanum a re used medicinally in t radi-
t ional African medicine. 
Throughout southern Africa, ba rk and root 
decoctions a re applied for the t r e a t m e n t of 
wounds, venereal diseases, toothache and 
t aken internal ly as an anthelmint ic . They are 
also gargled to t r e a t a sore throa t . In Zim-
Peltophorum africanum - wild 
PELTOPHORUM 399 
babwe they are taken internally as general 
tonics. 
A decoction of the bark provides a cure for colic 
and other stomach disorders, for fever and a 
sore liver; it induces vomiting and is said to 
clean the liver and relieve pain. The fresh bark 
is also chewed to relieve abdominal pain. The 
steam from a hot decoction is applied against 
painful eyes. 
In Namibia an infusion of the roots is an effec-
tive remedy for heavy, painful kicking of the 
foetus in pregnant women, but it is only ap-
plied if the problem lasts for at least 2-3 days. 
The infusion furthermore stops heavy bleeding 
on giving birth and is used for treating cough 
with blood and tuberculosis. The crushed bark 
in water is rubbed into the coats of pets to keep 
away fleas and maggots. In Zimbabwe, root 
decoctions and infusions are taken to treat 
nausea and chest pain and for blood purifica-
tion. The Zulu people boil the roots with those 
of Bridelia cathartica G.Bertol. and Ochna sp. 
and drink the mixture to cure infertility. The 
boiled roots are applied as an enema to treat 
backache. 
The wood is used for carving, turning, making 
furniture, grinding blocks, wooden buckets, 
tool handles and wagons. It is not suitable for 
fence poles or buildings as it is not borer-proof. 
The wood is widely used as fuel. Peltophorum 
africanum is a good source of bee forage. It is a 
very good garden, avenue and shade tree and is 
particularly beautiful when in flower. It is also 
popular as a bonsai tree. The pods are favoured 
by cattle and the pods and young leaves are 
browsed by goats; it is an important fodder 
plant during the dry season. 
Production and international trade The 
trade in Peltophorum africanum bark is poorly 
documented and only locally important. In 
north-eastern South Africa the bark is in high 
demand and is traded for c. US$ 9/kg. 
Properties The bark of Peltophorum afri-
canum contains bergenin, an isocoumarin 
which inhibits DNA topoisomerase II, has 
hepatoprotective activity, anti-arrhythmic ef-
fects of the coronary artery and an inhibitory 
effect on the growth of the bloodstream form of 
Trypanosoma brucei. The bergenin derivatives 
coumaroylbergenin and norbergerin have been 
isolated as well. The seed contains a potent 
proteinase inhibitor (trypsin and ct-chymotryp-
sin), which has not yet been characterized. 
An aqueous extract of Peltophorum africanum 
roots reduced the magnitude of rabbit jejunum 
contractions. The effect was blocked by propa-
nolol, suggesting an action on the ß-adrenergic 
receptors. Both ethanolic and aqueous extracts 
of roots and bark showed inhibition in vitro of 
the gram-negative bacteria Salmonella typhi, 
Shigella sonnei, Escherichia coli, Campylobac-
ter jejuni and Aeromonas hydrophila. The 
ethanol extract of the bark showed strong mol-
luscicidal activity against the snail Biom-
phalaria alexandrina, a host of schistosomiases 
(causing bilharzia). An oxidized gallotannin 
isolated from the stem bark of Peltophorum 
africanum was shown to have strong activity 
against HIV-1 reverse transcriptase and inte-
grase in an enzyme cell-free system. 
Browse (leaves and twigs) contains 7% crude 
protein and its digestibility coefficient is low 
(0.37). The tannin content in the leaves in-
creases in response to grazing damage. The 
heartwood is reddish to dark brown and dis-
tinctly demarcated from the dirty white to pale 
brown sapwood. It is heavy, with a density of 
about 900 kg/m3 at 12% moisture content. The 
grain is commonly interlocked, texture fine. 
The wood works fairly easily, takes a good pol-
ish and produces a smooth finish. 
Description Small tree, up to 9(-15) m tall, 
often branching from near the base; bark 
rough, longitudinally fissured; young twigs 
rusty hairy. Leaves alternate, bipinnate with 
4-9 pairs of pinnae, hairy, deciduous; stipules 
Peltophorum africanum - 1, flowering branch; 
2, flower; 3, fruiting branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
400 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
up to 1.5 cm long, linear-subulate with up to 7 
alternate appendages; petiole 0.5—2(—3) cm 
long, rachis up to 16 cm long; leaflets c. 8-22 
pairs per pinna, oblong or linear-oblong, up to 
12 mm x 4.5 mm, base asymmetric, apex 
rounded, mucronate. Inflorescence an erect, 
terminal or axillary raceme up to 24 cm long; 
peduncle velvety hairy, reddish. Flowers bisex-
ual, zygomorphic, 5-merous, showy; pedicel 
reddish hairy, 3-10 mm long; calyx with tube c. 
2 mm long, lobes reflexed, 4-7 mm x 2.5-4 mm; 
petals obtriangular-spatulate with short claw, 
10-14(-17) mm long, yellow; stamens 10, free, 
8-13 mm long; ovary superior, rusty pubescent, 
1-celled, stigma broadly peltate. Fruit a flat, 
elliptical, indéhiscent pod, 4-10 cm x 1.5-2 cm, 
base and tip acuminate, winged along both 
margins, thinly woody, pendulous, 1-2-seeded, 
bulging at the position of the seeds. Seeds 
ovoid, compressed, c. 1 cm x 5 mm x 1.5 mm. 
Other botanical information Peltophorum 
comprises about 15 species, all native to tropi-
cal regions with Peltophorum africanum the 
only species indigenous to Africa. It is most 
closely related to Bussea, which differs in its 
thickly woody, dehiscent fruits. 
The 'weeping' in the vernacular names of Pel-
tophorum africanum refers to a phenomenon 
that occurs in spring just before the first rains: 
moisture drips from the branches of some of 
these trees. It is caused by nymphs of small 
frog-hoppers or spittle-bugs, Ptyelus grossa, 
which suck up the sap of the trees and excrete 
almost pure water, which drips to the ground. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: (1: growth ring boundaries dis-
tinct); (2: growth ring boundaries indistinct or 
absent). Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 13: 
simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel pits 
alternate; 23: shape of alternate pits polygonal; 
25: intervessel pits small (4-7 (im); 29: ves-
tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pits with distinct bor-
ders; similar to intervessel pits in size and 
shape throughout the ray cell; (41: mean tan-
gential diameter of vessel lumina 50-100 |im); 
42: mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
100-200 um; 47: 5-20 vessels per square mil-
limetre; 58: gums and other deposits in heart-
wood vessels. Tracheids and fibres: 61: fibres 
with simple to minutely bordered pits; 65: sep-
tate fibres present; 66: non-septate fibres pre-
sent; 69: fibres thin- to thick-walled. Axial pa-
renchyma: 80: axial parenchyma aliform; 81: 
axial parenchyma lozenge-aliform; (82: axial 
parenchyma winged-aliform); 83: axial paren-
chyma confluent; 89: axial parenchyma in 
marginal or in seemingly marginal bands; 91: 
two cells per parenchyma strand; 92: four (3-4) 
cells per parenchyma strand. Rays: 97: ray 
width 1-3 cells; 104: all ray cells procumbent; 
115: 4-12 rays per mm. Mineral inclusions: 
136: prismatic crystals present; 142: prismatic 
crystals in chambered axial parenchyma cells. 
(D. Louppe, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
Growth and development The initial 
growth rate of Peltophorum africanum is 1-1.5 
m per year. Flowering is from September-April 
and fruits develop from February-June in 
southern Africa. Fruits may persist for a long 
time. The flowers are visited by bees. Peltopho-
rum africanum does not fix nitrogen. 
Ecology Peltophorum africanum has a wide 
distribution in the warmer, lower and drier 
regions of southern Africa with an annual rain-
fall of 300-900 mm, at 300-2050 m altitude. It 
is most common in open savanna woodland, 
with temperatures varying from -6°C to 44°C, 
with an average of 23°C. Night temperatures of 
-9°C will cause branches of older plants to 
freeze back, but plants will regrow. Peltopho-
rum africanum shows a definite preference for 
deep sandy or sandy-loam soils, and is encoun-
tered on very poor, acidic, sandy, loamy to 
gravelly soil derived from sandstone, quartzite 
or shale and is also found on shallow soils on 
norite, granite and latérite. In Zimbabwe it is 
often found on mine dumps and its dominance 
in the vegetation is taken as an indication of a 
high level of arsenic in the soil; indirectly this 
may indicate the presence of gold. 
Propagation and planting The storage 
behaviour of the seed is orthodox. Viability is 
maintained after 3 years of hermetic storage at 
room temperature. The 1000-seed weight is 
300-800 g. Fresh seed should be soaked over-
night in hot water, after which it is sown in a 
mixture of river sand and compost (5:1) and 
kept moist. The seeds take 3-10 days to germi-
nate and the germination percentage is usually 
high. Young plants transplant readily, are 
fairly fast growing, but need protection from 
frost for 2-3 years although they withstand 
slight frost. 
Management Peltophorum africanum is 
easy to grow. The root system is not aggressive. 
After cutting the tree coppices readily. In-
creased cutting height has a strong positive 
effect on the number of new shoots. 
Diseases and pests The larvae of the moths 
Aurivillius arata and Alpenus investigatorum 
(synonym: Diacrisia investigatorum) feed on 
PENIANTHUS 401 
the leaves of Peltophorum africanum. The lar-
vae of several Charaxes butterflies also feed on 
the leaves. 
Genetic resources Peltophorum africanum 
does not appear to be endangered in its native 
range. Several genebanks hold seed, but the 
variation in the species has not been studied. 
Prospects Interest of phytochemists in Pel-
tophorum africanum will probably persist, be-
cause the bark and root extracts show interest-
ing pharmacological activities, but only a few 
active compounds have as yet been isolated. 
The tree also has a future as an ornamental, 
but as a browse species it is of very limited 
value because the quality and digestibility is 
low. Its tolerance to adverse soil conditions 
makes it a candidate for reclaiming denuded 
sites such as abandoned mines and mine 
dumps. 
Major references Bessong et al., 2005 
Coates Palgrave, 1983; Ellis, 2003; Leng, 1997 
Obi et al., 2003; Palmer & Pitman, 1972-1974 
Ross, 1977; van Wyk, 1972-1974. 
Other references Aganga, Kiazolu & 
Tsopito, 1994; Amusan et a l , 2002; Evans et 
al., 1985; Gelfand et al., 1985; Grace et al., 
2002; InsideWood, undated; Joubert, 1981; 
LCSV, 2004; Leger, 1997; Mebe & Makuhunga, 
1992; Mlambo & Munjeri, 1998; Molgaard et 
al., 2001; Setshogo & Venter, 2003; Shackleton, 
2000; Steenkamp, 2003; van Wyk & Gericke, 
2000; Wild, 1974; World Agroforestry Centre, 
undated. 
Sources of illustration Ross, 1977. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
PENIANTHUS LONGIFOLIUS Miers 
Protologue Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. ser. 3, 13: 
124 (1864). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 26 
Vernacular names Ovoung grandes feuilles 
(Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Penian-
thus longifolius occurs in tropical Africa, from 
Nigeria and Cameroon south to Cabinda (An-
gola) and east to eastern DR Congo. 
Uses Throughout its distribution area, Peni-
anthus longifolius is used as an aphrodisiac, 
the root and root bark being considered espe-
cially powerful. To cure sexual weakness, pul-
verized root is taken with Aframomum me-
legueta (Roscoe) K.Schum., a ripe banana in 
palm oil or pineapple wine, according to taste. 
Penianthus longifolius - wild 
A piece of fresh root may be chewed for the 
same purpose. Pulverized and macerated root, 
alone or with sugar-cane juice, is taken as an 
emetic, anthelmintic and against colic. Root 
gratings or powdered bark mixed with water, 
or sometimes leaf pulp are applied as a dress-
ing to mature abscesses and moistened root is 
applied on infected wounds and nails affected 
by whitlow. Root sap or bark sap is used as ear 
drops to cure purulent ear troubles and deaf-
ness. In DR Congo pounded leaves are inserted 
into the ears to cure otitis. Root sap is also 
taken to treat coughs. 
Bark sap is also widely used as an ingredient of 
arrow poisons for several kinds of game. Root 
bark ground with palm oil is applied to feet as 
a dressing to fight sand fleas. The leaves are 
eaten to treat hernia. 
In Gabon and DR Congo the stem of Penian-
thus longifolius is used to make arrows and the 
leathery leaves are used as arrow-feathers, 
whereas the root is an important component of 
several arrow poisons. In Congo the root is 
sometimes used to lure fish into fish traps. The 
very hard wood is occasionally used as timber. 
Production and international trade Dried 
bark and roots of Penianthus longifolius are 
sold in local markets throughout its area of 
distribution. 
Properties Although Penianthus longifolius 
has many medicinal uses, its chemical and 
pharmaceutical properties have hardly been 
investigated. The aqueous leaf extract contains 
carbohydrates, proteins, tannins, saponins, 
alkaloids, steroidal aglycones and glycosides. 
The root and stem contain up to 1% alkaloids, 
the leaves only traces. 
402 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
The aqueous leaf extract has shown a purga-
tive effect on guinea-pig ileum in vitro. 
Adulterations and substitutes Other spe-
cies of Penianthus are also widely used for 
similar medicinal purposes, especially as an 
aphrodisiac and for local treatment of infec-
tions. 
Description Dioecious shrub or small tree, 
up to 3(-4.5) m tall, sparsely branched, gla-
brous except the flowers. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, simple and entire; stipules absent; peti-
ole 3.5-12(-24) cm long, more or less angular, 
shallowly grooved lengthwise, swollen at both 
ends; blade obovate to elliptical or oblong-
elliptical, 15-34(-40) cm x 6-15(-18) cm, base 
rounded to cuneate, apex long-acuminate, 
leathery, pinnately veined with 8—12(-16) pairs 
of looping lateral veins. Inflorescence a 10-15-
flowered, globose head, borne on branches; 
peduncle 4-l l(-17) mm long, enlarging in 
fruit, short-hairy; bracts up to 1 mm long. 
Flowers unisexual, regular; male flowers ses-
sile, tepals 6—7(—8), in 2 whorls of 3(-4) tepals 
each, outer tepals triangular to oblong, 0.7-
2.5(-3.5) mm long, short-hairy outside, inner 
tepals oblong to obovate, (1.5-)2-3(-3.5) mm 
Penianthus longifolius - 1, branch with male 
inflorescences; 2, infructescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
long, stamens (3—)5—6, in 2 whorls, erect, 1.5-
2(-3) mm long; female flowers sessile or with 
pedicel up to 4 mm long, enlarging in fruit, 
tepals 4-7, in 1-2 whorls, triangular to oblong 
or circular, glabrous, outer tepals, when pre-
sent, c. 1.5 mm long, inner tepals 2-3 mm long, 
staminodes 6(-7), in 2 whorls, flattened, ellip-
soid to circular or club-shaped, up to 1 mm 
long, ovary superior, consisting of 3 densely 
short-hairy carpels 1.5-2 mm x 1-1.5 mm, 
stigma 2-fid, strongly lobed. Fruit composed of 
1-3 drupes, each drupe ellipsoid, (1.5-)2-3(-
3.5) cm x 1—2 cm, leathery, nearly glabrous, 
yellowish orange to orange at maturity, 1-
seeded. Seed ellipsoid, 2-2.5 cm long. Seedling 
with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Penianthus 
comprises 4 species and is restricted to humid 
tropical Africa. 
Ecology Penianthus longifolius occurs in the 
understorey of rainforest, on riversides and in 
gallery forest, often in deep shade of high for-
est, up to 1000 m altitude. It also occurs on 
fallow land and in secondary forest. In Camer-
oon it is sometimes a weed in plantations. The 
plant thrives under a moist equatorial climate, 
with a mean minimum temperature of 20°C 
and a mean maximum temperature of 29°C. 
The mean annual rainfall in its area of distri-
bution is about 1800 mm. The soil ranges from 
sandy to rocky. 
Propagation and planting Penianthus 
longifolius is only propagated by stones. For 
planting, scarification of the stone probably 
promotes germination, as is the case for Peni-
anthus zenkeri (Engl.) Diels. The seeds are 
then sown in polythene bags or in seed beds. 
Management Penianthus longifolius is 
rarely cultivated. In Cameroon it is usually 
weeded when found in crop fields. 
Harvesting The leaves and bark are col-
lected from the plant when needed and the 
roots are dug up, usually after rain. 
Handling after harvest The collected ma-
terial is dried in the sun and kept in wrappers 
or pounded, powdered and made in balls for 
later use. 
Genetic resources Penianthus longifolius 
is fairly common in its distribution area, but in 
Nigeria it is reported as threatened due to 
overexploitation for medicinal purposes. 
Prospects So far, no attempts have been 
made to cultivate Penianthus longifolius for 
medicinal purposes. As the plant is widely 
used, it is recommended that local communities 
be encouraged to plant Penianthus longifolius 
PENIANTHUS 403 
in home gardens. Very few studies have been 
done on the chemical compounds or the phar-
macological activities of Penianthus longifolius, 
and there is an urgent need to carry out such 
studies. The conservation status also needs 
attention. 
Major references Akah et al., 2001; Bur-
kill, 1997; Dekker, 1983; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Oliver-Bever, 1986; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Troupin, 1951; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Amponsah et al., 2002; Dalziel, 
1937; de Wet, 2005; Kimpouni, 1999; Pauwels, 
1993; Sarumi et a l , 1996; Terashima & Ichi-
kawa, 2003; Vergiat, 1970. 
Sources of illustration Dekker, 1983; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
PENIANTHUS PATULINERVIS Hutch. & Dal-
ziel 
Protologue Fl. W. trop. Afr. 1(1): 74 (1927). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Chromosome number In = 26 
Synonyms Penianthus zenkeri auct. non 
(Engl.) Diels. 
Origin and geographic distribution Penian-
thus patulinervis occurs from Sierra Leone east 
to Ghana. It is occasionally cultivated in Côte 
d'Ivoire. 
Uses The root, bark and twigs of Penianthus 
patulinervis are used to prepare aphrodisiac 
potions, whereas roots and twigs are also 
chewed or sucked for this purpose. The root 
bark applied as an enema is also a sexual 
stimulant. Roots and twigs are used in decoc-
tion to treat infections and venereal diseases, 
and are chewed for dental care. Twigs are 
chewed to treat cough. In Côte d'Ivoire the leaf 
pulp is applied to the nails to treat whitlow. In 
Ghana a dressing prepared from the bark or 
root shavings is applied to heal wounds, ab-
scesses and boils. 
Properties From the stems and roots the 
alkaloid berberine, the protoberberine alka-
loids dehydrodiscretine, jatrorrhizine, pal-
matine and pseudopalmatine, and the apor-
phine alkaloid magnoflorine were isolated, 
several of which have shown pharmacological 
properties. Other alkaloids identified include 
menispermine and feruloyltyramine. Berberine 
has been tested in animal models for activity in 
the treatment of diabetes, cardiac arrhythmia, 
leukaemia and in prostate cancer cell lines. 
Jatrorrhizine has antiplasmodial activity. The 
plant is also rich in terpenoids, including the 
triterpenes ß-amyrin and 2a,3ß-dihydroxy-
olean-12-ene, the sterol 20-hydroxyecdysone, 
and the diterpenes columbin, isocolumbin and 
peniankerine. 
Botany Dioecious, evergreen, small shrub 
up to l(-2) m tall, usually with a single stem, 
glabrous except flowers. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, simple and entire; stipules absent; peti-
ole l-6.5(-8.5) cm long, channelled above, 
swollen at both ends; blade elliptical to 
oblanceolate, 15-23(-32) cm x 4-10(-13) cm, 
base cuneate, apex long-acuminate, thinly 
leathery, pinnately veined with 9-15 pairs of 
looping lateral veins. Inflorescence a 3-7-
flowered, globose head, borne on the stems; 
peduncle 3.5-10 mm long, enlarging in fruit, 
short-hairy; bracts tiny. Flowers unisexual, 
regular; male flowers sessile, tepals in 3 whorls 
of 3-4, outer ones triangular to oblong, 0.5-2 
mm long, short-hairy outside, tepals of inner 
whorls oblong to obovate, (l-)1.5-3.5(-4) mm 
long, tepaloid staminodes 6(—8) in 2 whorls, c. 2 
mm long, each more or less enveloping a sta-
men, stamens 3—6(—7) in 2 whorls, 2.5-4.5 mm 
long, spreading; female flowers with pedicel c. 
0.5 mm long, enlarging in fruit, tepals 8, more 
or less in 3 whorls, 2 outer ones narrowly tri-
angular, c. 1 mm long, short-hairy outside, 
inner tepals oblong to obovate, 1.5-2.5 mm 
long, tepaloid staminodes 6 in 2 whorls, widely 
triangular, c. 1.5 mm long, stamen-like stami-
nodes club-shaped, c. 0.5 mm long, ovary supe-
rior, consisting of 3 glabrous carpels, stigma 
large, sessile, bifid, each half 2-lobed. Fruit 
composed of 1—3 drupes, each drupe obovoid to 
ellipsoid, 2-3.5(-4) cm x 1-1.5 mm, glabrous, 
yellow to orange or red at maturity, 1-seeded. 
Seed ovoid to ellipsoid, 2-2.5(-3) cm long. Seed-
ling with epigeal germination. 
Penianthus comprises 4 species and is re-
stricted to humid tropical Africa. Penianthus 
patulinervis was formerly included in Penian-
thus zenkeri, but their areas of distribution and 
morphology are clearly separate; the former 
occurs in West Africa, the latter in eastern 
Nigeria and Central Africa. Penianthus 
patulinervis has fewer-flowered heads, almost 
sessile flowers and shorter petioles than Peni-
anthus zenkeri. 
Ecology Penianthus patulinervis occurs in 
dense rainforest, also in secondary forest, from 
sea-level up to 200 m altitude. It is often found 
on sandy soil and in humid or marshy places. 
404 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Management Propagation is by stones; 
scarifying the stone promotes germination. 
Genetic resources and breeding Penian-
thus patulinervis has a fairly wide distribution 
and there are no immediate threats to its ge-
netic diversity, although continuing habitat 
destruction is a cause of concern. 
Prospects The widespread use of Penian-
thus species, including Penianthus patuliner-
vis, and their chemical properties call for more 
pharmacological research. Domestication and 
commercial production are recommended as 
demand is high and natural stands will con-
tinue to decline. 
Major references Achenbach & Hemrich, 
1991; Burkill, 1997; Cheek et al., 2004; Dekker, 
1983; Keay & Troupin, 1954. 
Other references Amponsah et al., 2002; de 
Wet, 2005; Duah et a l , 1981; Duah et al., 1983; 
Irvine, 1961; Kryn & Fobes, 1959; Tane et al., 
1997. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
PENIANTHUS ZENKERI (Engl.) Diels 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzern-. IV, 94: 101 
(1910). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Heptacyclum zenkeri Engl. 
(1899). 
Origin and geographic distribution Penian-
thus zenkeri occurs in Nigeria and Cameroon 
and possibly also in DR Congo. 
Uses Preparations of the roots of Penianthus 
zenkeri are used to treat male sexual impo-
tence, cough and wounds. The roots and twigs 
are used as an aphrodisiac and in the treat-
ment of local infections and venereal diseases. 
In Cameroon a bitter root decoction is em-
ployed as a vermifuge. A dressing made from 
the leaves is applied to the nails to treat whit-
low. 
Properties Several pharmacologically active 
terpenoids, protoberberine alkaloids and apor-
phine alkaloids have been isolated from Peni-
anthus spp., but no chemical analyses have 
been done on Penianthus zenkeri; the analyses 
effected so far relate to the West African Peni-
anthus patulinervis Hutch. & Dalziel. 
Botany Dioecious, evergreen shrub to small 
tree up to 6 m tall, glabrous except the flowers. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 10-25(-27) cm long, 
flattened above, swollen at both ends; blade 
elliptical to oblanceolate, 24-41 cm x 8-15 cm, 
base cuneate to obtuse, apex long-acuminate, 
leathery, pinnately veined with 11-19(-21) 
pairs of looping lateral veins. Inflorescence an 
umbel, often on older branches, 10-20-
flowered; peduncle 4.5-8(-12.5) mm long, 
enlarging in fruit, sparingly short-hairy; bracts 
tiny. Flowers unisexual, regular; pedicel 3-7 
mm long, enlarging in fruit; male flowers with 
7-8 pale yellowish tepals in 3 whorls, 1-2 outer 
ones triangular, 0.5-1 mm long, short-hairy 
outside, tepals of middle whorl 3, oblong to 
obovate, 1.5-2.5(-3) mm long, tepals of inner 
whorl 3, oblong to obovate, 2.5-3.5 mm long, 
staminodes 6(-8) in 2 whorls, elliptical to ob-
long, c. 2 mm long, stamens 6(-7) in 2 whorls, 
(2-)2.5-3 mm long; female flowers with 7-8 
greenish tepals in 3 whorls, 1-2 outer ones 
narrowly triangular, 0.5-1 mm long, sparsely 
short-hairy outside, tepals of middle whorl 3, 
oblong to obovate, 2-2.5 mm long, spreading, 
tepals of inner whorl 3, oblong to obovate, 2-3 
mm long, tepaloid staminodes 6 in 2 whorls, 
elliptical to obovate, 1.5-2 mm long, stamen-
like staminodes 6 in 2 whorls, narrowly trian-
gular, 1-1.5 mm long, ovary superior, consist-
ing of 3 carpels c. 2 mm long, stigma large, 
sessile, slightly bifid, strongly lobed. Fruit 
composed of 1-3 drupes, each drupe ellipsoid, 
2-4 cm x 1-2 cm, yellow to orange, 1-seeded. 
Seed ellipsoid, 2-3 cm x c. 1 cm. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Penianthus comprises 4 species and is re-
stricted to humid tropical Africa. Penianthus 
patulinervis was formerly included in Penian-
thus zenkeri, but their areas of distribution and 
morphology are clearly separate; the former 
occurs in West Africa and the latter occurs in 
eastern Nigeria and Cameroon. Penianthus 
zenkeri has many-flowered umbels, pedicellate 
flowers and longer petioles than Penianthus 
patulinervis. 
Ecology Penianthus zenkeri occurs in rain-
forest undergrowth, occasionally also in semi-
deciduous forest, at 300—700 m altitude. 
Management The stone is used for plant-
ing, and its scarification promotes germination. 
Twigs and roots are collected from the wild 
when required. 
Genetic resources and breeding The area 
of distribution of Penianthus zenkeri is rather 
small, its habitat is under pressure and high 
prices are paid for its products in the market. 
It is not listed in the IUCN Red List of threat-
ened species, but its diversity should be 
guarded to ensure sustainable future supplies. 
Prospects Penianthus zenkeri is widely used 
PENTADIPLANDRA 405 
in traditional medicine, but its chemistry and 
pharmacology have not been investigated. Re-
search is therefore warranted. 
Major references Dekker, 1983; Cheek et 
a l , 2004. 
Other references Achenbach & Hemrich, 
1991; Burkill, 1997; Troupin, 1951. 
Authors A.T. Tchinda 
PENTADIPLANDRA BRAZZEANA Baill. 
Protologue Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 
611 (1886). 
Family Pentadiplandraceae 
Vernacular names 1'Oubli (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Penta-
diplandra brazzeana occurs from Nigeria east 
to the Central African Republic and south to 
DR Congo and Angola. 
Uses The roots taste like horseradish and 
are used throughout Central Africa against 
several problems related to giving birth. The 
root bark is one of more than 20 constituents of 
the yellow, slimy 'nkui' sauce made by the 
Bamileke people of Cameroon; this sauce is 
given to mothers who have just given birth, to 
stimulate milk production. Among the Mezime 
people of Cameroon a root decoction is given 
orally or applied as an enema to facilitate the 
expulsion of the placenta; it also helps in re-
ducing pain caused by hernia. In the Central 
African Republic a tuber decoction is said to 
prevent haemorrhages after parturition. The 
fresh root is pulped, or the dry root pounded 
and mixed with palm oil, to make an ointment 
for topical application to prevent infections of 
the navel in newborn babies. Because the plant 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana - wild 
is vesicant, the duration of treatment must be 
limited to avoid blistering. 
The crushed root or root bark is applied or an 
infusion drunk to soothe chest pain, toothache, 
lumbago, rheumatism and haemorrhoids. Pow-
der of dried root bark is applied to scarifica-
tions to treat intercostal and abdominal pains. 
In Nigeria the crushed root is used to treat 
several skin infections and in south-western 
Cameroon a leaf decoction is used to wash the 
skin against scabies. In Cameroon and DR 
Congo the macerated roots, alone or mixed 
with other ingredients, are taken orally or ap-
plied as an enema against malaria. In Camer-
oon the Mezime people take a decoction of the 
root bark as an aphrodisiac. In the Central 
African Republic Capsicum pepper is added to 
macerated roots to prepare a drink that 
soothes cough. In Congo pulped roots are ap-
plied externally against itch and as an antisep-
tic, and to treat wounds, sores, ulcers and fu-
runcles. A decoction of the bark mixed with 
bark and roots of other plants is taken against 
stiffness or weakness of the limbs and back. 
Roots and tubers are also commonly used in 
the treatment of intestinal problems such as 
dysentery, colic, urethritis, gonorrhoea and 
other uro-genital infections. The Monzombo 
people in Cameroon drink a decoction of the 
tuber, as well as the juice from macerated 
roots, mixed with pounded leaves as an 
anthelmintic. The roots of Pentadiplandra 
brazzeana also have laxative, purgative and 
cathartic properties, and are applied to the 
abdomen to treat oedema. A root decoction is 
taken to treat pneumonia and serious bronchi-
tis, but administration to pregnant women is 
avoided owing to risk of miscarriage. It may 
even be used to induce abortion. Together with 
leaves of Kalanchoe crenata (Andrews) Haw., a 
root preparation is used as nose drops to stop 
epileptic crises. 
The roots smell of aspirin and are hung over 
the doorway or are placed inside the roof to 
keep away snakes. 
The red pulp of the fruits is eaten as a snack, 
or sometimes used to sweeten maize porridge. 
The protein brazzein, originally extracted from 
the fruit pulp, is being developed into a low-
calorie sweetener for the food industry. The 
powdered root bark is said to be an ingredient 
of the cheap but dangerous 'African whiskey in 
sachets'. The fruit is used as fish poison. The 
root is reportedly occasionally eaten as a vege-
table. 
Production and international trade Com-
406 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mercial interest in brazzein is strong. The 
technology to extract the protein from the fruit 
pulp as well as technologies to produce 
brazzein by transferring the gene coding for 
brazzein into other organisms have been pat-
ented, without the intention of benefit sharing. 
The roots of Pentadiplandra brazzeana are sold 
for medicinal purposes in local markets. In 
2006 pieces of root of c. 15 cm long were sold in 
the main markets of DR Congo for US$ 0.22-
0.45. Dried roots are also sold via internet. A 
company from Cameroon sells a syrup of the 
root in the Congo Basin. 
Properties An extremely sweet crude pro-
tein, named pentadin, was isolated from the 
fruits; in the 1990s the purified protein was 
isolated and called brazzein. Its temporal pro-
file closely resembles that of sucrose, but de-
velops somewhat more slowly and lasts longer. 
It is very thermo-stable and its sweetness pro-
file does not diminish after incubation at 100°C 
for 4 hours. It is also stable over a wide pH-
range and is the most water-soluble protein 
sweetener discovered so far. Brazzein is re-
ported to be between 500 and 2000 times 
sweeter than sucrose depending on the method 
of measuring. However, in early 2008 brazzein 
had not yet been granted GRAS (generally rec-
ognized as safe) status in the United States nor 
has been granted permission for use in foods in 
the European Union. The gene encoding for 
brazzein has been transferred to the bacteria 
Escherichia coli and Lactococcus lactis and to 
maize. Bacterial production systems for 
brazzein have been developed. Mutants and 
sections of brazzein have been discovered with 
sweet-taste properties superior to those of the 
natural protein. 
Phytochemical analyses of the root have led to 
the isolation of urea derivatives including sul-
phur-containing compounds. The carbamates 
(thiouretanes) methyl N-benzylthiocarbamate, 
methyl N-methoxybenzylthiocarbamate and 
ethyl N-methoxybenzylthiocarbamate have 
shown antibacterial properties in vitro against 
Staphylococcus aureus, Escherichia coli, Kleb-
siella pneumoniae and Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa, and against the yeast Candida albicans. 
Other compounds isolated include isopropyl N-
methoxybenzylthiocarbamate, dibenzylurea, di-
benzylthiourea and methylated derivatives. 
The root is also rich in glucosinolates and is 
believed to contribute to the revitalizing of 
collagen and to restore skin tonicity. 
Crude extracts of tubers have revealed moder-
ately strong antiplasmodial activity in vitro, 
but were not as effective as chloroquine. An 
aqueous extract of the root given to rats in-
creased the weight of their testes and prostate 
and also their testosterone levels. 
Adulterations and substitutes If brazzein 
or any of its derivatives are admitted as a 
sweetener in the food industry, they will com-
pete with other protein and non-protein sweet-
eners and with sugars. 
Description Monoecious shrub up to 5 m 
tall or liana up to 20 m long; root system a 
branched complex of bulging roots in shrubs to 
a large, fleshy tuber in lianas, branches gla-
brous. Leaves alternate, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 0.5-1 cm long; blade 
elliptical to oblanceolate, 5-15 cm x 1.5—5 cm, 
base cuneate, apex acuminate, glabrous, upper 
surface dull or shining dark green, lower sur-
face dull dark green, pinnately veined with 5— 
11 pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axil-
lary or terminal raceme; peduncle up to 16 cm 
long. Flowers unisexual or bisexual, regular, 5-
merous; pedicel 1-2 cm long; sepals free, ellip-
tical to lanceolate, 0.5-1 cm long, green with 
violet margin; petals free, lanceolate to 
oblanceolate, 2-2.5 cm long, base widened and 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana - 1, flowering branch; 
2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
PEPEROMIA 407 
with conspicuous scale, apex acute, white to 
yellowish; androgynophore present, stout; sta-
mens 10-13, free, filaments c. 6 mm long, thin, 
in female flowers rudimentary; ovary superior, 
4-5-celled, style short, with 5-lobed stigma, in 
male flowers ovary rudimentary. Fruit a glo-
bose berry 3.5-5 cm in diameter, red or mottled 
grey, pulp pink, many-seeded. Seeds kidney-
shaped. 
Other botanical information Pentadi-
plandra comprises a single species, and is the 
only genus in the family Pentadiplandraceae. 
Most recent analyses of floral development and 
anatomy conclude that Pentadiplandra repre-
sents a relict genus in a separate family at the 
evolutionary base of the Brassicales, with a 
strong affinity with the American Tovaria 
(Tovariaceae). It is also quite distinct on the 
basis of its chemotaxonomy. 
Growth and development When Penta-
diplandra brazzeana grows as a shrub it has 
an extended and ramified root system; when it 
grows as a liana, it has a single, fleshy tuber. 
Flowering starts in January and continues for 
several months; fruit production is low and 
spread out until September. Shrubby plants 
seem to have a shorter but more condensed 
fruiting season, with a peak in June-July. Un-
consumed fruits rot on the plant, without fal-
ling. They serve as temporary nesting sites to 
arboreal ants. 
Ecology Pentadiplandra brazzeana is com-
mon in upland primary forest dominated by 
Scorodophleus zenkeri Harms, and also com-
monly occurs on river banks and in secondary 
forest. In Cameroon, the plant is mainly found 
in forest edges bordering savanna. It is no-
where gregarious. 
Propagation and planting Seed dispersal 
is facilitated by the contrast between the ex-
treme sweetness of the pulp of the fruit and the 
unpleasant bitter taste of seeds, provoking 
consumers to spit out the seeds. In natural 
habitats, squirrels, monkeys and apes contrib-
ute to the distribution of the seed; in the vicin-
ity of human habitation, distribution by chil-
dren into secondary habitats is common. 
Natural vegetative reproduction from portions 
of tubers seems unlikely as tubers and roots 
are buried too deeply, but it is incidentally en-
couraged by the harvesting of the roots and 
tubers for medicinal purposes. 
Harvesting Tubers, roots, leaves and fruits 
are gathered from the wild. It is likely that the 
collection of the roots and tubers is often de-
structive for the plant. 
Handling after harvest The sweet layer of 
pulp surrounding seeds is sucked fresh. The 
roots and tubers are dried before commerciali-
zation, but are locally used fresh immediately 
after collection. 
Genetic resources Pentadiplandra brazzea-
na is widespread and common, also in secon-
dary forest. Although harvesting for medicinal 
purposes is often destructive, there are no indi-
cations that the species is under threat of ge-
netic erosion. No collections of germplasm, e.g. 
to conserve the variation in brazzein content or 
composition, are known to exist. 
Prospects Prospects of sweet protein pro-
duction have completely overshadowed the 
many medicinal uses of the roots and tubers of 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana, which indicate that 
the pharmacological properties should be fur-
ther explored. 
Lastly, the patents have problematic implica-
tions since they ignore any possible benefit 
sharing with the West and Central African 
peoples who have been using the fruits for 
their sweetness for centuries. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Hladik & 
Hladik, 1988; Keay, 1958b; Ming & Hellekant, 
1994; Ming, Hellekant & Zhong, 1996; Neu-
winger, 2000; Ronse de Craene, 2002; Tsopmo 
et al., 1999; van der Wel et a l , 1988; Villiers, 
1973b. 
Other references Assadi-Porter et al., 
2005; Assadi-Porter et al., 2000; Assadi-Porter, 
Aceti & Markley, 2000; Caldwell et al., 1998; El 
Migirab, Berger & Jabot, 1977; Eyog Matig et 
al. (Editors), 2006; Izawa et al., 1996; Jin et al., 
2003; Kamtchouing et al., 2002; Latham, 2004; 
Ngamga, 2005; Tancredi et al., 2004; Temussi, 
2002; Walters & Hellekant, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Villiers, 1973b. 
Authors E. Dounias 
PEPEROMIA PELLUCIDA (L.) Kunth 
Protologue Humb., Bonpl. & Kunth, Nov. 
gen. sp. 1: 64 (1816). 
Family Piperaceae 
Chromosome number 2n — 44 
Vernacular names Pepper elder, shiny 
bush, cow foot, rabbit ear (En). Pépéromia, 
herbe à couleuvre, cresson, salade soda, salade 
soldat, herbe à couresse (Fr). Erva de jabuti, 
coraçâozinho, lingua de sapo, erva de vidro 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pepero-
mia pellucida is native to tropical Central and 
408 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Peperomia pellucida - naturalized 
South America. It is now widely distributed 
throughout the tropics and is often naturalized 
as a weed and occasionally cultivated. In Africa 
it occurs from Senegal east to Eritrea and So-
malia, and south to Angola, Zambia, Zimbabwe 
and Mozambique. It also occurs in Madagascar 
and Réunion. 
Uses Peperomia pellucida is widely used 
medicinally throughout the tropics, also in 
tropical Africa. The aerial parts are applied 
against abdominal pain, abscesses, acne, 
rheumatic pain, gout, headache, kidney-
problems, cardiac arrhythmia and fatigue. 
There are also reports of its use in the treat-
ment of measles, smallpox, mental disorders 
and female sterility. In Nigeria and DR Congo 
it is used as an ingredient of an infusion for 
treating convulsions. In Sierra Leone, DR 
Congo, and also in the Philippines, the warmed 
leaves are applied to sores and boils. In Nigeria 
the leaves are applied as a poultice to treat 
breast cancer. In DR Congo an infusion of the 
plant or a maceration, mixed with salt and 
palm oil, is taken against cough. Worldwide, 
and especially in Brazil and China, the plant is 
used to cure furuncles, conjunctivitis and skin 
sores. In Surinam a solution of the fresh juice 
of stem and leaves is used against conjunctivi-
tis. The leaves are used in a decoction to treat 
cough, fever and common cold, and are eaten 
fresh to treat headache, sore throat and kidney 
and prostate problems, and also against high 
blood pressure. In the Philippines a decoction 
or infusion of the plant is taken to treat rheu-
matic pain, gout and kidney troubles, and ap-
plied externally as a rinse against complexion 
problems. 
In many parts of the tropics the plant is used 
as a condiment, and eaten as a spicy leafy 
vegetable, cooked or in salads. In Africa it is 
occasionally cultivated for this purpose. It is 
sometimes grown as an ornamental container 
plant. 
Production and international trade Pepe-
romia pellucida is sold for medicinal purposes 
and as a vegetable in local markets only. 
Properties The essential oil from the aerial 
parts contains as major compounds dillapiole 
(40%) and trans-caryophyllene (10.7%), and 
smaller amounts of apiole, the related com-
pound safrole (5-hydroxy-3,4-methylenedioxy-
allylbenzene), carotol, farnesene, germacrene-
D, bicyclogermacrene, acacetin, nerolidol and 
octyl-acetate. Extracts of the aerial parts of the 
plant yielded very complex compounds, includ-
ing peperomins A, B, C and E, pellucidin A, 
flavonoids, secolignans, tetrahydrofuran lig-
nans, a methoxylated dihydronaphthalenone, 
sesamin and isoswertisin. The aerial parts also 
contain ß-caryophyllene and caryophyllene-
oxide. 
The secolignans and peperomin E showed 
growth inhibitory effects on several cancer cell 
lines. The whole plant and extracts from it are 
reported to have significant analgesic, antibac-
terial, antifungal and anti-inflammatory activi-
ties and they are used to lower cholesterol lev-
els, against proteinuria and as a diuretic. 
Apiole has pectoral and antispasmodic actions. 
A methanol extract of the aerial parts given 
orally has shown a significant analgesic effect 
on acetic-acid-induced writhing in rats and 
mice. A water extract of the aerial parts given 
orally exhibited significant anti-inflammatory 
activity in the carrageenin test in rats and 
mice. The crude plant extract and methanol 
extract were found to exhibit good levels of 
broad-spectrum antibacterial activity in vitro. 
Peperomia pellucida showed low toxicity (LDso 
= 5000 mg/kg). 
The nutritional composition of the fresh leaves 
per 100 g is: water 92 g, energy 105 k j (25 
kcal), protein 0.5 g, fat 0.3 g, carbohydrate 5.9 
g, Ca 124 mg, P 34 mg, Fe 3.2 mg, ß-carotene 
2.5 mg, thiamine 0.03 mg, riboflavin 0.07 mg, 
niacin 0.6 mg, ascorbic acid 10 mg (Leung, W.-
T.W., Butrum, R.R. & Chang, F.H., 1972). 
Adulterations and substitutes Talinum 
trianguläre (Jacq.) Willd. and Talinum panicu-
latum (Jacq.) Gaertn. are used more commonly 
than Peperomia pellucida as a succulent vege-
table; their taste is similar. 
Description Fleshy annual herb up to 30(-
PEPEROMIA 409 
60) cm tall, glabrous; stems many, initially 
erect, becoming decumbent, rooting at nodes. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole up to 1.5(-2) cm long; 
blade elliptical-ovate to broadly ovate or almost 
triangular, 2-3.5 cm x 2-3.5 cm, base rounded 
to truncate, apex acute, thin, palmately 5-7-
veined. Inflorescence a lax terminal or leaf-
opposed spike up to 6.5 cm long; bracts 
rounded, up to 0.5 mm long. Flowers bisexual, 
sessile; perianth absent; stamens 2, filaments 
short, anthers oblong, tiny; ovary superior, 
rounded-ovoid, c. 0.5 mm in diameter, 1-celled, 
stigma 1, sessile. Fruit a globose drupe 0.5—1 
mm in diameter, blackish brown to orange, 
sticky, papillate, 1-seeded. 
Other botanical information Peperomia is 
a very large genus, and estimates of the num-
ber of species range from about 400 to over 
1000. Tropical and subtropical Central and 
South America are richest in species. In tropi-
cal Africa about 17 species occur, in Madagas-
car 7 endemic species. Peperomia pellucida is 
variable; many impoverished specimens, grow-
ing under unfavourable conditions, have been 
described as separate species. 
Peperomia pellucida - 1, flowering plant; 2, part 
of infructescence. 
Source: PROSEA 
Several other Peperomia species are medici-
nally used in tropical Africa. Peperomia abys-
sinica Miq. occurs from Ethiopia south to Ma-
lawi. In Kenya the liquid from the soaked root 
is given to pregnant women to treat malaria. 
Peperomia molleri CDC. occurs from Ghana 
east to Kenya and south to Zimbabwe. In DR 
Congo a leaf infusion is drunk and a leaf mac-
eration is applied to the head to treat mental 
illness. Peperomia tetraphylla (G.Forst.) Hook. 
& Arn., which is pantropical and occurs 
throughout nearly all tropical Africa, is used 
medicinally in Asia, as a tonic and to treat kid-
ney disorders. 
Growth and development Peperomia pel-
lucida is short-lived, but its lifespan can exceed 
one year. It sets seed abundantly. Seed is 
probably dispersed by rain wash and more 
widely by man through contaminated soil. 
Seedlings emerge about 15 days after sowing 
and develop naturally during the rainy season. 
In cultivation, growth is very fast and stems 
may reach a length of 60 cm 100 days after 
transplanting. Inflorescences appear 4-6 weeks 
after transplanting. 
Ecology Peperomia pellucida is common in 
disturbed localities and is a widespread weed 
of cultivated fields and gardens. It grows in 
moist shady places, near houses, along paths 
and roads, on seasonally flooded river banks 
and on wooded rocky hillsides, up to 1100 m 
altitude. It is particularly common on damp 
hard surfaces such as walls, roofs and steep 
gullies. It may also grow as an epiphyte on 
fallen and dead tree trunks. It requires a 
minimum temperature of 10°C and prefers soil 
rich in organic matter. 
Propagation and planting Propagation is 
mostly by seed, but is also possible by stem, 
leaf and leaf-bud cuttings. 
Management Peperomia pellucida is some-
times left during weeding operations as a 
ground cover to smother more harmful weeds. 
It is cultivated as a medicinal plant in south-
ern China, Thailand, the Philippines and tropi-
cal America; in West Africa also as a vegetable. 
It may be grown as a container plant in well-
drained pots filled with soil containing plenty 
of organic matter. 
Diseases and pests Poor drainage may 
cause root rot. Cucumber mosaic virus (CMV) 
may cause ringspot, manifested by distorted 
leaves with chlorotic or necrotic rings. The only 
treatment is to destroy infected material. The 
plant is a host of mealy bugs. The leaves are 
often eaten by slugs. 
410 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Harvesting Peperomia pellucida is har-
vested from the wild or from home gardens 
whenever needed. The plant has a strong mus-
tard-like odour and pulling it can cause 
asthma-like symptoms. 
Yield Wild populations are so abundant dur-
ing rainy seasons that they mostly provide the 
necessary quantities. No quantitative data on 
yield are available. 
Handling after harvest Plant material is 
used fresh, or can be dried, powdered and kept 
for later use. 
Genetic resources Peperomia pellucida is 
widely distributed and common throughout the 
tropics. Collection of leaves for food or medici-
nal purposes does not affect its genetic diver-
sity as it is a weedy plant, which produces 
many seeds. 
Prospects Because Peperomia pellucida is 
very widely used for medicinal purposes and 
because it contains a range of complex bioac-
tive compounds, research into its pharmacol-
ogical properties deserves more attention. Its 
use as an easily collected or cultivated spicy 
vegetable justifies research into possibilities for 
its domestication. Its great genetic diversity 
and wide ecological adaptability may make 
selection of cultivars and development of ap-
propriate crop husbandry measures relatively 
easy. 
Major references Adegoke, Akinsaya & 
Naqvi, 1968; Arrigoni-Blank et al., 2002; Ar-
rigoni-Blank et a l , 2004; Burkill, 1997; Diniz, 
1997; Immelman, 2000; Khan & Omoloso, 
2002; Kiew, 1999; Neuwinger, 2000; Pousset, 
1989. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Aziba et a l , 2001; Bayma et al., 
2000; da Silva et al., 1999; Düll, 1973; Heine & 
Heine, 1988b; Keay, 1954b; Kerharo & Adam, 
1974; Kokwaro, 1993; Leung, Butrum & 
Chang, 1972; Moreira et al., 1999; Oliver-
Bever, 1986; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 1961; 
Sofowora, 1996; van der Zon & Grubben, 1976; 
Wanke et al., 2006; Wome, 1985; Xu et al., 
2006. 
Sources of illustration Kiew, 1999. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
PERICHASMA LAETIFICATA Miers 
Protologue Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. ser. 3. 18: 
22 (1866). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Stephania laetificata (Miers) 
Benth. (1867). 
Origin and geographic distribution Peri-
chasma laetificata occurs from south-eastern 
Nigeria east to Uganda and south to DR Congo 
and Angola. 
Uses In Congo the leaf sap is applied to 
scarifications made in the forehead to cure very 
severe migraine. A maceration of the leaves is 
drunk to treat snakebites and a piece of stem is 
tied round the ankle to prevent snakebites. 
Stems are also made into girdles and bracelets 
for ankles and wrists for infants to assist them 
in walking. In the Central African Republic 
water with local salt in which leaves have been 
crushed is given to babies against constipation. 
The roots are considered edible. 
Botany Dioecious liana with slender, ribbed, 
woody stem up to 5 m long, with stiff brown 
hairs and a tuberous rhizome. Leaves alter-
nate, simple; stipules absent; petiole stout, 9-
12 cm long, ribbed, base swollen and twisted; 
blade peltate, petiole inserted 4-4.5 cm from 
the base, ovate, 12.5-22 cm x 13-16 cm, base 
rounded, apex acute, margin wavy, papery, 
hairy below, glabrous above, palmately veined 
with (8-)9 veins, the 5 central ones most 
prominent. Inflorescence a large, much-
branched, axillary panicle up to 50 cm long, 4 
or more together, hairy or glabrous; female 
inflorescence smaller than male one, up to 20 
cm long; bracts c. 2 mm long, long-hairy. Flow-
ers unisexual; pedicel 1—1.5 mm long, thick; 
male flowers with 6 sepals in 2 whorls, free, 
obovate, inner ones 1.5—2 mm long, apex ob-
tuse, with 1 prominent vein, petals 3, free, an-
gular obovate, c. 0.5 mm long, apex rounded, 
with 1 prominent vein, stamens 6, merged into 
a staminal column up to 0.5 mm long; female 
flowers with 3 ovate to obovate sepals 1—1.5 
mm long, hairy outside, petals 3, almost kid-
ney-shaped, 0.5-1 mm x c. 0.5 mm, ovary supe-
rior, ovoid, up to 1 mm long, hairy to glabrous. 
Fruit an almost globose yellow drupe, 8-12 mm 
x 7—9 mm, hairy when immature, later gla-
brous, with 2 ridges, 1-seeded. Seed 6-9 mm 
long. 
Perichasma comprises 2 species, both in tropi-
cal Africa. It is closely related to Stephania and 
differs mainly in its vegetative characters. 
Ecology Perichasma laetificata occurs in 
rainforest, fringing forest, fallow fields and 
clearings, from sea-level up to 900 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Because 
Perichasma laetificata is widespread and also 
occurs in secondary vegetation, there are no 
indications that it is in danger of genetic ero-
PETCHIA 411 
Prospects Too little is known about the uses 
and properties of Perichasma laetificata to as-
sess its potential or prospects. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Kundu & 
Guha, 1977; Neuwinger, 2000; Troupin, 1951; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Motte, 
1980. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
PERRIERA MADAGASCARIENSIS Courchet 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Bot. France 52: 281 
(1905). 
Family Simaroubaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Perri-
era madagascariensis is endemic to western 
Madagascar. 
Uses The stem bark of Perriera madagas-
cariensis is used as a tonic and against fever. 
Both bark and seeds are very bitter and were 
formerly used to treat amoebiasis and oedema. 
The roots and fruits are considered toxic. The 
wood is occasionally used for light construction 
in house building. 
Properties Two major alkaloids were iso-
lated from Perriera madagascariensis. From 
stems and root bark 4,7-dimethoxy-l-vinyl-ß-
carboline was isolated and a dimeric alkaloid, 
biogenetically related to the ß-carboline, kiron-
drin, was isolated from the root bark. Kiron-
drin has been used to treat amoebiasis and is 
found to be cytotoxic. 
The 4-substituted ß-carbolines inhibit Ca2+ 
influx and interleukin-2 (IL-2) production, and 
some are well suited for preventing and treat-
ing immune disorders. Use and production of 4-
substituted ß-carbolines are patented. 
The wood has a coarse texture, is hard, light-
weight and yellowish. 
Botany Medium-sized tree up to 30 m tall; 
outer bark grey, deeply longitudinally cracked, 
inner bark thick, yellow. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, imparipinnately compound with 1-5 
pairs of leaflets, often clustered at end of 
branches; stipules absent; rachis 4-23 cm long, 
densely hairy when young, slightly channelled 
at base; leaflets oblong to oblanceolate, up to 7 
cm x 2.5 cm, base cuneate or rounded, apex 
rounded, shortly acuminate, often with 3-5 
small, translucent glands, leathery, pinnately 
veined with 12-15 pairs of lateral veins almost 
perpendicular to midrib. Inflorescence an axil-
lary panicle as long as the leaves or slightly 
longer, hairy. Flowers male or bisexual, regu-
lar, 5(—6)-merous; pedicel up to 5 mm long; 
calyx deeply lobed; petals free, c. 5 mm long, 
hairy; stamens 10(-12); ovary superior, consist-
ing of 2-3 carpels. Fruit an ovoid drupe c. 5 cm 
long, becoming pale yellow when ripe. 
Perriera is endemic to Madagascar and com-
prises 2 species. 
Ecology Perriera madagascariensis occurs 
in dry deciduous forest from sea-level up to 500 
m altitude, often on sandy soil. 
Genetic resources and breeding Perriera 
madagascariensis is considered near threat-
ened even though it was still abundant in the 
region around Morondava in 1961. 
Prospects The main interest in Perriera 
madagascariensis will remain its medicinal 
and pharmacological properties. Its rareness 
precludes its wider commercial use as timber. 
Major references Guéneau, Bedel & Thiel, 
1970-1975; Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; 
Krebs et a l , 1997; Perrier de la Bâthie, 1950. 
Other references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Bourguignon-Zylber & 
Polonsky, 1970; Capuron, 1961; Lounasmaa & 
Tolvanen, 2000; Pari et al., 2000; Schatz, 2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
PETCHIA MADAGASCARIENSIS (A.DC.) Leeu-
wenb. 
Protologue Wageningen Agric. Univ. Pap. 
97(2): 71 (1997). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Alyxia madagascariensis A.DC. 
(1844), Cabucala madagascariensis (A.DC.) 
Pichon (1948). 
Origin and geographic distribution Petchia 
madagascariensis is endemic to Madagascar. 
Uses In Madagascar a leaf decoction of 
Petchia madagascariensis is drunk to cure 
stomach-ache, gonorrhoea, rheumatism, gout 
and alopecia. It is also taken as a tonic, diu-
retic, vermifuge and for the treatment of dis-
eases of the spinal nerves. The crushed leaves 
are applied to insect stings. A decoction of the 
stem bark is taken against malaria. A decoc-
tion of the aerial parts is drunk as an ordeal 
poison. The leaves and stem bark are used as a 
bitter ingredient for the production of rum. The 
fruit pulp is sweet and edible. 
Properties The root bark of Petchia mada-
gascariensis contains the alkaloids reserpine, 
cabucine and cabucinine. Yohimbine has also 
been isolated; it has aphrodisiac properties. 
412 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Reserpine is considered the first modern drug 
for the t r ea tmen t of hypertension. It is a sym-
patolytic agent acting directly on the periph-
eral and central nerve te rmina ls . Reserpine 
h a s impor tan t side effects, notably depression, 
peptic ulcer, and hypersensi t ivi ty to the alka-
loid. Cabucine, a methoxyheteroyohimbine 
derivative, also h a s sympatolytic activity, bu t 
with minimal side effects. 
B o t a n y Shrub or small t ree up to 10 m tall, 
with whi te latex; bole up to 25 cm in diameter ; 
ba rk smooth, often t ransversely fissured, pale 
grey and dark brown. Leaves in whorls of 3-4 
or opposite, simple and entire; st ipules absent; 
petiole 1-15 m m long; blade elliptical, up to 
23.5 cm x 10.5 cm, base cuneate , apex acumi-
na te to rounded, leathery, la teral veins 
s t ra ight , in 15-20 pairs , marg ins revolute. In-
florescence a t e rmina l cyme, often several to-
gether, few- to many-flowered, lax; peduncle 
2 .5-6 cm long; bracts as long as the sepals. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 2— 
11 mm long; sepals ovate, 1—3 mm long; corolla 
tube 8-25 m m x 1-3 mm, pale green or pale 
yellow, with a ha i ry belt below insert ion of 
s t amens , lobes ovate to elliptical, 3-15 m m 
long, creamy to yellow; s t amens inser ted in the 
upper pa r t of the corolla tube, f i laments short; 
ovary superior, consisting of 2 separa te carpels, 
style slender, pistil head small . F ru i t consist-
ing of 2 follicles, cylindrical, each follicle com-
posed of 1-13 drupes , orange, each drupe con-
ta in ing a single seed. 
Petchia comprises 8 species: 5 are endemic to 
Madagascar , one to Madagascar and Comoros, 
one to Cameroon and one to Sri Lanka . Petchia 
madagascariensis is a variable species. The 
s tem ba rk and root ba rk of Petchia cryptophle-
bia (Baker) Leeuwenb. are applied in Mada-
gascar agains t hal lucinat ions, malar ia and 
hypertension, and a re also used as an aphrodi-
siac. The leaves contain cabucine and 2 oxin-
dole alkaloids, as well as some flavonoids. 
Petchia erythrocarpa (Vatke) Leeuwenb. is 
endemic to t he Comoros and Madagascar . In 
Madagascar a ba rk decoction is d runk to cure 
viral hepat i t i s , malar ia , s tomach-ache and di-
ar rhoea . The ba rk is used as a b i t te r ingredient 
of alcoholic beverages tradit ionally d runk dur-
ing circumcision ceremonies as a symbol for 
virility, and considered strongly aphrodisiac. 
The crushed leaves are applied to skin infec-
tions, and a decoction is t aken to t rea t hyper-
tension and stomach-ache. The root, bark s tem 
ba rk and leaves contain the alkaloids reser-
pine, cabucine, cabucinine, a k u a m m i n e and 
vincorine (cabuamine). 
E c o l o g y Petchia madagascariensis occurs in 
humid evergreen forest, mostly nea r the coast. 
It grows up to 600 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Petchia 
madagascariensis and Petchia erythrocarpa a re 
fairly common and not th rea tened by genetic 
erosion. Petchia cryptophlebia occurs only in 
the rainforest a rea of Madagascar , which is 
seriously threa tened , and the species h a s al-
most stopped regenerat ing. Thus , measures 
should be t aken to ensure na tu ra l regenerat ion 
so t h a t the genetic basis s tays sound. 
P r o s p e c t s Some of the alkaloids present in 
Petchia madagascariensis and re la ted species 
have found their way into modern medicine. 
Therefore, it may be rewarding to do more re-
search on the alkaloids of Petchia species. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Douzoua et al., 1974; 
Leeuwenberg, 1997a; Perne t & Meyer, 1957; 
Rasoanaivo et al., 1999. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Andr iamanga , 1995; Boi-
t eau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1993; Douzoua et al., 
1972; Groebel, Lenoir & Pernet , 1970; Gurib-
Fak im & Brendler, 2004; Laivao, 1999; Man-
sour et al., 1974; Rajerison, 1999; Ramananja-
nahary , 2002; Rasoanaivo et al., 2001a. 
A u t h o r s M.J. Boone 
PETIVERIA ALLIACEA L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pi. 1: 342 (1753). 
F a m i l y Phytolaccaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 34, 72 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Guinea-hen weed, 
Congo root, gully root, pipi root, garlic weed, 
skunk root (En). Herbe aux poules, douvant-
douvant (Fr). Mucura, anamu, erva de tipi, 
guine (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Petive-
ria alliacea is indigenous to tropical America, 
and h a s been introduced in West Africa and 
India. It is locally na tura l ized in Benin and 
Nigeria. 
U s e s In Benin a leaf macerat ion of Petiveria 
alliacea is applied to the belly to induce con-
t ract ions in case of difficult delivery, and the 
liquid from the leaves is instilled as nose or eye 
drops to cure violent headache and as nose 
drops to cure sinusit is . A ba th or vapour ba th 
with a leaf decoction is t aken in case of oe-
dema. A leaf decoction is applied to abscesses. 
In Nigeria, Yoruba medicine men use the 
whole p lan t in r i tua l ceremonies. 
PETIVERIA 413 
Petiveria alliacea - naturalized 
In tropical America Petiveria alliacea is widely 
used as medicine. The head is washed in water 
with mashed leaves to treat headache and to 
induce labour. A leaf decoction is applied ex-
ternally as an analgesic against muscular pain 
and to treat skin diseases. An infusion of 
pounded bark is drunk to treat colic, rheuma-
tism, cancer, syphilis, colds, fever, bronchitis 
and asthma. The grated roots soaked in sugar 
cane alcohol or a root decoction are taken to 
treat rheumatism, venereal diseases and intes-
tinal worms, and as an antispasmodic, su-
dorific and diuretic for urinary tract infections. 
The pounded root mixed with lemon is applied 
to snakebites. In Cuba the juice of the leaves or 
whole plant is applied to treat skin problems, 
arthritis and toothache, and is taken to treat 
diabetes. Colombians chew the leaves to coat 
their teeth and prevent caries. A decoction of 
the whole plant is taken to treat diabetes, can-
cer, abortion, oedema and as a blood purifier. 
In Brazil the leaves are used as an insecticide. 
The plant is also widely used for magical pur-
poses. 
Milk of cattle that have eaten Petiveria alliacea 
smells of garlic. 
Production and international trade Cap-
sules or tablets with powdered Petiveria alli-
acea leaves are traded under the name 'anamu' 
or 'mapurite' through Internet and are used to 
treat a variety of diseases. The powder costs 
US$ 16-25 per 500 g. Several countries in 
tropical America supply this plant but statis-
tics of the volumes of exports are not available. 
In general the plant is collected from the forest 
and sold in local markets. 
Proper t ies Many biologically active com-
pounds have been isolated from all parts of 
Petiveria alliacea, the most important ones 
being sulphur compounds, but also flavonoids, 
triterpenes and steroids. The main volatile 
constituents obtained from the pentane extract 
of the roots are benzaldehyde (48.3%), diben-
zyl-disulfide (23.3%), dibenzyl-trisulfide (9.4%) 
and stilbene (8.1%). The main compounds 
found in the inflorescences are benzaldehyde 
(54.8%), benzyl-thiol (20.3%) and dibenzyl-
disulfide (18.0%). These sulphur-containing 
compounds are similar to the odour compounds 
in garlic and onion, but in the latter they have 
alkyl instead of benzyl parts. 
Water, methanol and ethanol extracts of the 
whole plant have been shown to slow the 
growth of leukaemia cells and several other 
strains of cancerous tumour cells in vitro. The 
water extracts were toxic to leukaemia, lym-
phoma and several other cancer cell lines. The 
compounds responsible for these activities are 
dibenzyl-trisulfide, benzaldehyde, the ben-
zopyran astilbin, and coumarin. 
In both in-vivo and in-vitro studies, water ex-
tracts of the whole plant were found to stimu-
late the immune system (production of lympho-
cytes, interferon and several interleukins). The 
hexane and cyclohexane extracts of leaves and 
stems increased the phagocytotic index of hu-
man granulocytes. One of the active immuno-
modulatory compounds present in the extracts 
was dibenzyl-trisulfide. 
A crude extract of the whole plant has shown a 
protective effect on the blood cells of mice in-
fected with the pathogenic bacterium Listeria 
monocytogenes. Root extracts showed signifi-
cant anti-inflammatory effects in rats and mice 
using various models, as well as a significant 
pain-relieving effect in rats. Some extracts also 
showed cyclooxygenäse-1 (COX-1) inhibitory 
actions. 
Methanol extracts of the seeds caused uterine 
contractions in rats. Other studies, using etha-
nolic, aqueous and chloroform fractions of leaf 
extracts, showed inhibitory activities on intes-
tinal secretion and motility, as well as signifi-
cant antihistamine activity in vitro, although 
less potent than the commercial anti-allergy 
drug disodiumcromoglycate. A preliminary test 
with extracts from leaves and stem powder 
showed a substantial decrease of blood sugar 
concentration in mice. 
Many clinical reports and studies confirm that 
the extracts of the aerial parts and roots have 
significant broad-spectrum antimicrobial prop-
erties in vitro and in vivo against numerous 
414 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
strains of bacteria, viruses, protozoa, fungi and 
yeast. The crude water extracts perform in a 
similar way to the alcohol extracts. A total of 
18 organosulphur compounds from the roots 
have been tested for their antibacterial and 
antifungal activities. The thiosulfinates, trisul-
fides and benzylsulfinic acid were observed to 
be the most active compounds, with the benzyl-
containing thiosulfinates exhibiting the broad-
est spectrum of antimicrobial activity. The la-
chrymatory principle from fresh roots is (Z)-
thiobenzaldehyde S-oxide, which also has anti-
bacterial and antifungal activities. The leaf 
extract and dibenzyl-trisulfide, isolated from 
the roots, showed significant acaricidal activity 
against the tick Boophilus microplus when 
topically applied, and this activity is in general 
higher than commercial acaricides such as di-
methoate, lindane and carbaryl. Dibenzyl-
trisulfide was also highly toxic to adult sweet 
potato weevil (Cylas formicarius elegantulus) 
and adult coffee borer beetle (Hypothenemus 
hampei). The leaf extract showed significant 
antifeedant activity in the grasshopper Zonoce-
rus variegatus, as well as allelopathic activity 
on germinating seeds. Methyl-benzyl-sulfonic 
anhydride is an artificial transformation prod-
uct of dibenzyl trisulfide, and was found to be 
much more effective than the commercial 
agents isoniazid and ampicillin in inhibiting 
the growth of Bacillus subtilis and Pseudomo-
nas fluorescens and more effective against the 
fungus Cladosporium cucumerinum than keto-
conazole or nystatin. Dibenzyl-trisulfide itself 
was inactive on Bacillus subtilis and showed 
little inhibitory activity on the fungus 
Cladosporium cucumerinum. The methanol 
and dichloromethanol leaf extracts showed 
allelopathic activity on the germination of 
seeds of several crop plants in vitro, but not in 
the soil. 
Caution should be taken if Petiveria alliacea is 
fed to animals on a regular basis as this may 
cause adverse reactions. The plant can accu-
mulate nitrates and has caused nitrate poison-
ing in cattle. 
Description Erect herb or undershrub up to 
1 m tall, with garlic smell; stems thin, angular, 
shortly hairy when young, later glabrous. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
linear, 1.5-2 mm long; petiole 0.5-1.5 cm long; 
blade elliptical to ovate or oblong, 5-15(-20) cm 
x 2—5(—8) cm, base cuneate, apex acute to long-
acuminate, glabrous to sparingly shortly hairy. 
Inflorescence a terminal or axillary, slender, 
nodding raceme 10-30(-40) cm long, some-
Petiveria alliacea - 1, flowering branch; 2, flower; 
3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
times branched; bracts 1.5—2.5 mm long. Flow-
ers bisexual, zygomorphic, 4-merous; pedicel 2— 
3 mm long; sepals free, oblong, 3—4 mm long, 
rounded, greenish or white to pink; petals ab-
sent; stamens 4-8, irregularly inserted, fila-
ments c. 2 mm long; ovary superior, oblong, 
shortly hairy, with 4 hooks, 1-celled, stigma 
sessile, lateral. Fruit a narrowly oblong achene 
6-8 mm long, striate, apex 2-lobed, with re-
curved hooks, 1-seeded. 
Other botanical information Petiveria 
comprises a single species and belongs to the 
tribe Rivineae. 
Growth and development Petiveria alli-
acea flowers twice a year in South America. 
Seeds are wind dispersed. 
Ecology In its native area of distribution 
Petiveria alliacea occurs in humid forest and 
open disturbed areas, from sea-level up to 1500 
altitude. In West Africa it is found in forest 
edges and disturbed localities near habitations. 
Propagation and planting Petiveria alli-
acea is only propagated by seeds. Seed germi-
nates easily. In some countries in Central 
America it is propagated in nurseries and then 
PHYLLANTHUS 415 
transplanted to the field. 
Management Petiveria alliacea is planted 
in home gardens and agroforestry systems. The 
only known large-scale plantation is in Darién, 
Panama. 
Harvesting Petiveria alliacea is usually 
collected from the forest when the plants are 
not full grown. The majority of the plants that 
are commercialized come from the forest or 
from home gardens. 
Handling after harvest In local markets 
Petiveria alliacea is traded fresh immediately 
after harvest. Plants can also be dried in the 
shade and stored in sacs until they are sold. 
Genetic resources In tropical America 
Petiveria alliacea is a common plant in forest 
undergrowth and ruderal areas, and is not at 
risk of genetic erosion. In Colombia a small 
germplasm collection has been made. 
Prospects Petiveria alliacea has multiple 
medicinal uses, many of which are confirmed 
by pharmacological research. As the species 
has a real potential for commercialization on 
the international market, more efforts are 
needed for better characterization of the plant, 
to establish adequate management and to se-
lect cultivars that are rich in active com-
pounds, productive and easily grown. It also 
needs to be established if there are chemical 
differences between plants with different mor-
phologies. Although Petiveria alliacea has a 
restricted distribution in tropical Africa, it cer-
tainly has potential to be grown commercially 
there. 
Major references Arevalo, 1994; Diaz, 2003; 
Fountoura et al., 2005; Gomes et al., 2005; 
Kim, Kubec & Musah, 2006; Lopes Martins et 
al., 2002; Perez & Rosa, 2005; Ruffa et al., 
2002a; Stoffers, 1968; Taylor, 2006. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Akoègninou, van der Burg & van der Maesen, 
2006; Ayehoun et al., 1998; Bassi et al., 1997; 
Benevides et al., 2001; Berger et a l , 1998; 
Burkill, 1997; Caceres et al., 1998; Johnson, 
Williams & Roberts, 1997; Kubec, Kim & 
Musah, 2003; Lores & Cires Pujol, 1990; Olu-
wole & Bolarinwa, 1998; Perez et a l , 2005; 
Queiroz, Quadros & Santos, 2000; Ruffa et al., 
2002b; Weber, Steffen & Siegers, 1998; Wil-
liams et al., 1997; Williams et al., 2003; Zoghbi, 
Andrade & Maia, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Adjanohoun et al., 
1989. 
Authors J.C. Alegre & M. Clavo 
PHYLLANTHUS AMARUS Schumach. & Thonn. 
Protologue Schumach., Beskr. Guin. pl.: 
421 (1827). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2n - 26, 52 
Synonyms Phyllanthus niruri auct. non L. 
Vernacular names Black catnip, carry me 
seed, child pick-a-back, gale of wind, Gulf leaf 
flower, hurricane weed, shatterstone, stone 
breaker (En). Herbe au chagrin, petit tamarin 
blanc (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus amarus originates from tropical Amer-
ica and has spread as a weed throughout the 
tropics and subtropics. In tropical Africa it 
occurs in most countries. It also occurs 
throughout the Indian Ocean islands. 
Uses Phyllanthus amarus is widely used as 
a medicinal plant. An infusion is considered a 
good tonic, diuretic and antipyretic. A decoction 
of the aerial parts or only of the leaves is taken 
to treat gonorrhoea, diarrhoea, dysentery, 
stomach-ache, pain in the sides, haemorrhoids 
and absence of menstruation or female steril-
ity. A suppository of the leaf paste is applied to 
the vagina to treat absence of menstruation 
and polyps. Leaf sap, mixed with palm oil or 
not, is applied as ear drops to treat otitis and 
applied to abscesses, sores and wounds. 
In Côte d'Ivoire a plant decoction is taken to 
facilitate childbirth, to treat oedema and pain 
caused by fever or a sore throat. In Mali a leaf 
decoction is drunk to treat jaundice. In Benin a 
decoction of leafy twigs is drunk to treat palpi-
tations. A root decoction, mixed with other 
plants or not, is taken to treat colic and rectal 
Phyllanthus amarus - naturalized 
416 MEDICINAL PLANTS l 
prolapse. A decoction of leafy twigs, mixed with 
other plants, is drunk to treat cough. Leaves 
mixed with crushed nuts of Cola acuminata 
(P.Beauv.) Schott & Endl. and water is applied 
to shingles. A decoction of the aerial parts is 
drunk to treat candidosis, and sap is applied 
locally. In Congo and DR Congo the plant sap 
is drunk to treat diabetes and tachycardia. 
Ripe fruit is eaten as an anthelmintic. In 
Kenya a cold leaf maceration is drunk to treat 
stomach-ache. A plant decoction is drunk to 
induce vomiting. In Uganda ground aerial 
parts are applied to snakebites; the ground 
material in water is also drunk to treat poison-
ing by snakebites. In the Indian Ocean islands 
a leaf or plant decoction is taken to treat diar-
rhoea and abdominal pain and externally ap-
plied to treat skin problems. An infusion of the 
stem and leaves is used as eye drops to treat 
eye infections. 
Throughout the American and Asiatic tropics 
the medicinal uses are similar as cited for 
tropical Africa. Furthermore, Phyllanthus 
amarus, as well as several other closely resem-
bling species, are widely in use as folk medi-
cine in treatment of liver related troubles. 
Phyllanthus amarus is said to have sand-
binding properties. In West Africa it is used in 
medico-magical ceremonies. 
Production and international trade Recent 
research results have increased the demand for 
Phyllanthus amarus in international markets. 
According to a survey conducted in India, in 
2004-2005 there was a demand of almost 3000 
t of fresh Phyllanthus plants, including Phyl-
lanthus amarus. The annual growth rate is 
estimated at about 10%, and as such Phyllan-
thus amarus has a bright future. 
In South-East Asia Phyllanthus amarus is 
sometimes cultivated on a small scale and sold 
on local markets. 
Properties The following chemical constitu-
ents have been isolated from Phyllanthus ama-
rus: lignans (e.g. phyllanthin, hypophyllanthin, 
phyltetralin, nirtetralin, niranthin), ellagitan-
nins (phyllanthusiin D, amariinic acid, elaeo-
carpusin, repandusinic acid A and geraniinic 
acid B), flavonoids (quercetin-3-O-glucosides), 
tannins (geraniin, amariin, gallocatechin, cori-
lagin and 1,6-digalloylglucopyranoside), alka-
loids of the quinolizidine type (phyllantine (= 
methoxy-securinine), securinine, norsecur-
inine, isobubbialine, epibubbialine), phenolic 
compounds (gallic acid, ellagic acid, dotriacon-
tanyl docosanoate, triacontanol, oleanolic acid 
and ursolic acid) and a chroman derivative 
(4,4,8-trimethoxy chroman). The alkaloid phyl-
lanthine must not be confused with the lignan 
phyllanthin. The leaves were found to contain 
the highest amounts of phyllanthin (0.7%) as 
compared to the whole plant: phyllanthin 
(0.4%), hypophyllanthin (1.2%), gallic acid 
(0.4%) and ellagic acid (0.2%). 
Phyllanthus amarus extracts were found to 
significantly inhibit DNA polymerase of the 
hepatitis B virus and other hepatitis-DNA-
viruses, such as the woodchuck hepatitis virus, 
together with in-vitro activity against the en-
zyme reverse-transcriptase of retroviruses. The 
activity of the extracts in test animals as well 
as in clinical studies was controversial: both 
success and failure have been reported. Callus 
induced from Phyllanthus amarus showed less 
activity against viral DNA polymerase and 
reverse transcriptase than extracts from field-
grown plants. In a clinical trial, a plant extract 
had a remarkable effect for chronic viral hepa-
titis B in recovery of liver function and inhibi-
tion of the replication of hepatitis B virus. 
Phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin have protec-
tive activity in rat hepatocytes against cytotox-
icity induced by CCU and galactosamine, and it 
has been suggested that phyllanthin is respon-
sible for antigenotoxic effects reported for the 
extracts. However, phyllanthin has also been 
reported to be toxic to the nervous system and 
liver. A crude extract given orally to rats 
showed significant liver regenerative effects 
against alcohol-induced liver cell injury. An 
ethanolic extract administered orally to mice 
possessed a potent protective effect against 
aflatoxin B-1-induced hepatic damage. A crude 
aqueous extract of in-vitro cultured roots 
caused a dose-dependent reduction of bovine 
viral diarrhoea virus with no cytotoxic effect. 
In another test, extracts of in-vitro grown hairy 
or adventitious roots showed about 85% inacti-
vation of hepatitis B virus surface antigen. A 
chroman derivative, 4,4,8-trimethoxy chroman, 
isolated from the dichloromethane fraction, 
exhibited very little in-vitro cytotoxicity. 
Phyllanthus amarus aqueous extracts show 
potent anticarcinogenic activity against devel-
opment of different tumour types. Administra-
tion of the extract after tumour development 
increased survival of rats and mice up to 1 
year. An alcoholic extract was found to signifi-
cantly reduce cytochrome P450 enzymes both 
in vitro as well as in vivo when orally adminis-
tered to mice. A hexane extract, the lignans-
rich fraction and the lignans nirtetralin, niran-
thin and phyllanthin exerted cytotoxic effects 
PHYLLANTHUS 417 
in 2 human leukaemia cell lines, as well as 
multidrug resistance reversing properties, 
mainly due to their ability to synergize with 
the action of conventional chemotherapeutics. 
An ethanolic extract showed significant pre-
ventive effect against benign prostatic hyper-
plasia in rats. 
Aqueous and alcohol-based extracts potently 
inhibit HIV-1 replication in human cell lines. A 
gallotannin enriched fraction showed enhanced 
activity, and the purified gallotannins geraniin 
and corilagin were most active. A concentra-
tion-dependent inhibition of HIV-1 reverse 
transcriptase and protease could be demon-
strated in vitro. A potent anti-HIV activity was 
also demonstrated in blood of volunteers who 
had ingested the plant material. A 50% metha-
nol extract, a water extract, as well as isolated 
corilagin and brevifolin carboxylic acid have 
demonstrated strong ß-glucuronidase inhibi-
tory action. However, phyllanthin and hy-
pophyllanthin were ineffective. 
Fresh plant material and a methanol extract 
showed strong antioxidant activity in various 
antioxidant assays. A correlation between the 
antioxidant activity and total phenolic content 
was observed. Drying of the plant material 
caused a significant reduction in antioxidant 
properties. On the other hand, boiling water 
extracts exhibited significantly stronger anti-
oxidant potentials even from dried plant mate-
rial due to greater solubility of compounds, 
breakdown of cellular constituents as well as 
hydrolysis of tannins. A whole plant extract 
showed significant radioprotective activity 
when given orally to mice, by decreasing the 
damage to intestinal cells, decreasing the lipid 
peroxidation levels, decreasing the percentage 
of chromosomal aberrations and by elevating 
the antioxidant enzymes in the intestine, blood 
and liver. 
Methanol and aqueous extracts inhibited all 
the phases of inflammation in standardized 
tests in rats. A hydroalcoholic extract, given 
intraperitoneally to rats, exhibited pronounced 
antinociception. Given orally, the extract was 
less potent. The hexane extract, the lignan-rich 
fraction and the lignans phyltetralin, 
nirtetralin and niranthin, but not hypophyllan-
thin or phyllanthin, inhibited carrageenan-
induced rat paw oedema and neutrophil influx. 
Furthermore, niranthin exhibited anti-
inflammatory and anti-allodynic activities. An 
ethanol and a hexane extract showed signifi-
cant anti-inflammatory potential in vitro and 
in vivo in mice. 
Aqueous and methanolic extracts of the aerial 
parts showed antidiabetic activity in mice, rats 
and rabbits. However, a 1-week treatment with 
the aqueous extract was incapable of lowering 
blood glucose in untreated non-insulin depend-
ent diabetic patients. Oleanolic acid, ursolic 
acid and lupeol isolated from this fraction were 
shown to inhibit a-amylase. 
An aqueous crude extract caused varying de-
grees of declining fertility when given orally to 
male mice. An alcohol extract of the whole 
plant showed significant contraceptive effects 
in female mice at a dose of 100 mg/kg body 
weight, when given orally for 30 days. 
The antidiarrhoeal and gastrointestinal protec-
tive potentials of aqueous extract of Phyllan-
thus amarus leaves were investigated in mice. 
An aqueous extract delayed the onset of castor 
oil-induced diarrhoea in mice. In another ex-
periment with rats, a whole plant extract re-
duced digestive tract motility and delayed gas-
tric emptying, whereas it caused relaxation of 
isolated rat fundus and ileum. 
Methanolic extracts of leaves, roots and fruits 
showed significant concentration-dependent 
antibacterial activity in vitro against a range of 
gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria; leaf 
extracts showed the highest activity. A chloro-
form fraction of the aerial parts showed a sig-
nificant inhibitory effect against the dermato-
phytic fungus Microsporum gypseum and 
against the yeast Candida albicans. 
Norsecurinine, isolated from the aerial parts, 
showed significant activity against spore ger-
mination of the crop fungi Alternaria brassicae, 
Alternaria solani, Curvularia pennisetti, Erysi-
pele pisi and Helminthosporium frumentacei 
under glasshouse conditions. 
Chloroform and ethanolic extracts of the aerial 
parts and roots showed significant larvicidal 
activity against Anopheles stephensi larvae. An 
ethanolic root extract possessed significant 
activity against Tribolium castaneum, a pest of 
stored grain. 
Fresh leaves from Phyllanthus amarus plants 
of Nigerian origin were found to contain high 
levels of Mn (465 ppm), Cu (21.8 ppm), Zn (75.1 
ppm), and NO3 (7,200 ppm). Varying propor-
tions of Fe, Mg, K, Ca and Na were found. The 
levels of several toxic compounds are high 
enough to constitute a threat to animals con-
suming them and the use of the leaves for me-
dicinal purposes should also be monitored. 
Adulterations and substitutes In India a 
herbal medicine called 'Bhumyamlaki' is sold 
which may be pure Phyllanthus amarus or 
418 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
pure Phyllanthus maderaspatensis L. or a mix-
ture with Phyllanthus fraternus G.L.Webster. 
It is marketed as a medicine especially for liver 
troubles. 
Description Monoecious, annual, erect, 
glabrous herb up to 60 cm tall, reddish; 
branchlets flattened, often slightly winged and 
sparsely hairy. Leaves alternate, distichous 
and crowded along lateral branchlets, simple 
and entire, sessile; stipules ovate-lanceolate to 
lanceolate; blade oblong to elliptical-oblong, 7— 
12(-20) mm x 3-6(-9) mm, base obtuse to 
rounded and slightly unequal, apex rounded, 
often pointed. Flowers 1-2 in the axils of 
leaves, unisexual, pale green, often flushed red 
male flowers at the base of branches, other leaf 
axils with 1 female flower and 1 male flower 
pedicel c. 1 mm long; perianth lobes 5(-6), 0.5-
1 mm long; male flowers with 5-lobed disk 
stamens 3, filaments fused, anthers free; fe 
male flowers with cup-shaped, 5-lobed disk 
ovary superior, ovoid, warty, 3-celled, styles 3 
free, shallowly 2-fid at apex. Fruit an obtusely 
Phyllanthus amarus - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
stem leaf and stipules; 3, part of flowering 
branchlet; 4, male flower; 5, female flower; 6, 
fruit; 7, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
3-lobed capsule 2-2.5 mm in diameter, smooth, 
hanging, 6-seeded. Seeds c. 1 mm long, with 
transverse ridges. 
Other botanical information Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in mainland tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and other Indian 
Ocean islands. A subgeneric classification of 
Phyllanthus is in preparation. 
Until 20 years ago taxonomists placed a num-
ber of species, including Phyllanthus amarus, 
under Phyllanthus niruri L. Where the name 
Phyllanthus niruri has been applied in older 
literature to African or Asian specimens, usu-
ally Phyllanthus amarus is intended, but some-
times also Phyllanthus debilis Klein ex Willd., 
Phyllanthus fraternus G.L.Webster, Phyllan-
thus maderaspatensis L. or Phyllanthus rotun-
difolius Klein ex Willd. Specimens of true Phyl-
lanthus niruri have actually never been con-
firmed from outside the Americas. 
Growth and development The branching 
pattern of Phyllanthus amarus is 'phyl-
lanthoid', i.e. the spiralled leaves on the main 
axes are strongly reduced to 'cataphylls', which 
subtend a deciduous branchlet with distichous 
leaves, the branchlet resembling a compound 
leaf. 
Ecology Phyllanthus amarus occurs in open 
localities, waste ground, grassy scrub vegeta-
tion and dry deciduous forest, usually on hu-
mid, sandy soils, from sea-level up to 1000 m 
altitude. It is reported as a troublesome weed 
in pulses, soya bean, groundnut, cereals, sugar 
cane, cassava, taro, sesame, sunflower and 
cotton. 
Propagation and planting Seed requires 
light to germinate. Germination is often less 
than 50%; germination of freshly harvested 
seeds is slower than that of older seeds. Scari-
fication by immersion in water at 30°C for 2 
hours rendered seeds inviable. Seeds dried to 
8% moisture content and treated with turmeric 
rhizome powder under ambient conditions 
maintained viability for up to 6 months; un-
treated seeds stored poorly. 
In-vitro propagation can be done by culturing 
shoot tips, and less successfully by nodal and 
internodal segments. 
Management In India Phyllanthus amarus 
is grown as a medicinal crop. The crop duration 
is 100-300 days. Seeds are mixed with sand 
and the mixture is broadcast in the field. 
Sandy loam and black soils with pH 7.5-8 are 
considered best. The cultivar 'Navyakrit' has 
PHYLLANTHUS 419 
been developed, which has a high yield of plant 
material and a high yield of active constitu-
ents. About 7.5-10 kg seed/ha is used, and a 
plant population of 282,500 plants/ha is main-
tained. The plants are raised without irrigation. 
One or 2 weedings are considered sufficient. 
Farm manure is applied as an organic fertil-
izer. Plant height, leaf area index, dry matter 
production and yield of the lignans phyllanthin 
and hypophyllanthin were highest in a field 
experiment with Phyllanthus amarus treated 
with poultry manure, the biofertilizer Azo-
spirillum and phosphate-solubilizing bacteria. 
Phyllanthus amarus grown in greenhouses at 
15CC showed much less inhibitory activity on 
DNA polymerase of woodchuck hepatitis virus 
than when grown at 25°C. 
Diseases and pests In India the commer-
cial cultivation of Phyllanthus amarus has led 
to the outbreak of stem blight caused by Cory-
nespora cassiicola. Phytoplasma-induced yel-
lowing, small leaf development, proliferation of 
axillary shoots and overall retarded growth of 
infected plants were found in experimental 
fields in 1999-2000. 
Yield In India the mutant Phyllanthus ama-
rus line 'CIM-Jeevan', produced by y-radiation, 
showed a yield of 1-1.2 kg/m2 fresh plant mate-
rial, compared with about 0.8 kg/m2 of the con-
trol. 'CIM-Jeevan' also produced a higher phyl-
lanthin (0.7-0.8%) and hypophyllanthin (0.3-
0.4%) yield than the control (0.3-0.4% and 0 .1-
0.2%, respectively). The cultivar 'Navyakrit' 
yields about 1 t/ha dry plants at the end of the 
rainy season. Each plant yields 20-25 g seed. 
Under experimental conditions in Florida, 6-7-
month-old plants reached an average dry 
weight of about 40 g/plant. 
Handling after harvest Plants are up-
rooted and dried in the shade. 
Genetic resources Phyllanthus amarus is 
widespread and common throughout its distri-
bution area and is therefore not threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Breeding Although several cultivars have 
been developed with higher yield and higher 
concentration of active compounds, more breed-
ing efforts are needed to increase crop yield 
under different field conditions. 
Prospects Phyllanthus amarus is widely 
used in local medicine in Africa and Asia. A 
wealth of research findings have shown inter-
esting antiviral, anti-HIV, anti-inflammatory, 
antioxidant, antibacterial and antidiabetic 
activities. More research is needed though, 
especially well-controlled clinical trials, to 
evaluate the extracts and the individual com-
pounds. More research is needed as well to 
improve cultivation methods. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Kassuya et 
a l , 2006; Khatoon et a l , 2006; Lim & Murti-
jaya, 2007; Naaz, Javed & Abdin, 2007; Neu-
winger, 2000; Pramyothin et a l , 2007; Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1996a; Unander, Webster & 
Blumberg, 1991; van Holthoon, 1999. 
Other references Adedapo et al., 2003; 
Adeneye, Amole & Adeneye, 2006; Ajaiyeoba & 
Kingston, 2006; Bhattacharyya & Bhatta-
charya, 2004; Chattopadhyay, Agrawal & 
Garg, 2006; Chezhiyan, Saraswathy & Vasu-
mathi, 2003; Gupta et al., 2003a; Kumar & 
Kuttan, 2006; Leelarasamee et al., 1990; Leite 
et al., 2006; Mahat & Patil, 2007; Mazumder, 
Mahato & Mazumder, 2006; Notka, Meier & 
Wagner, 2004; Odetola & Akojenu, 2000; Ono-
cha et a l , 2003b; Raphael, Sabu & Kuttan, 
2002; Revathi, Vanangamudi & Sasthri, 2003; 
Sripanidkulchai et al., 2002; Unander, Webster 
& Blumberg, 1995; Wang et a l , 2001. 
Sources of illustration van Holthoon, 
1999. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
PHYLLANTHUS CASTICUM Willemet 
Protologue Ann. Bot. (Usteri) 18: 55 (1796). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Vernacular names Leaf-flower (En). Bois 
caustique, bois castique, caustique rouge, bois 
de demoiselle (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus casticum occurs throughout the Indian 
Phyllanthus casticum - wild 
420 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Ocean islands. 
Uses In the traditional medicine of the is-
lands of the Indian Ocean a twig, stem bark or 
powdered wood decoction is considered astrin-
gent and taken to treat severe diarrhoea, dys-
entery, amoebic dysentery, colic, ulcers and 
infections of the urogenital tract. Powdered 
bark and the pulp of the fresh branches or 
crushed young leaves are applied as a poultice 
to treat wounds, abscesses, eczema and syphi-
litic ulcers. A twig decoction is gargled to treat 
a sore throat, toothache and infections in the 
mouth. A leaf decoction is drunk to treat 
asthma. In Madagascar a root decoction is 
taken to treat tiredness after severe diarrhoea, 
and also to treat nervous depressions and im-
potence. Crushed roots are applied to furuncles 
and abscesses. Root powder is applied to the 
forehead of children suffering from dizziness 
and fainting. A leaf decoction is used to mas-
sage swollen limbs. In Réunion a plant infusion 
is taken to induce menstruation in cases of 
irregular menstruation as well as for treatment 
of haemorrhoids and gastric ulcers. In Rodri-
gues and the Seychelles a decoction of the 
branches and leaves is taken as a refreshing 
drink. 
The fruits are edible and have a sour taste; 
they are also slightly antipyretic. They are 
used to make an alcoholic drink of inferior 
quality. The leaves are sometimes used for 
dyeing basketry and cloth, but the colours are 
not stable. The twigs are used as disinfecting 
toothbrushes. In Madagascar the flexible 
branches are used in wickerwork and fishing 
nets. 
Properties The bark contains proanthocya-
nidol, saponosides and traces of terpenes, the 
leaves contain polyphenols, flavonoids, proan-
thocyanidol, steroids, 2-deoxysugars, phyllan-
thin, hypophyllanthin and traces of alkaloids. 
The flavonoids quercetin-3-O-ß-D-glucopyrano-
syl(l-4)-a-L-rhamnopyranoside and 3,5,7,4'-tetra-
hydroxyflavone were isolated from the aerial 
parts. The roots contain the alkaloids secur-
inine and allosecurinine. 
Description Monoecious shrub or small tree 
up to 5 m tall; trunk up to 15 cm in diameter; 
bark brownish grey; twigs sparsely or densely 
hairy. Leaves alternate, distichous and 
crowded along lateral twigs, simple and entire, 
glabrous; stipules oblong, up to 1.5 mm long, 
fringed, persistent; petiole c. 1 mm long; blade 
oblong, 7—25 mm x 3-12 mm, base unequal, 
rounded, apex acute or obtuse and pointed. 
Inflorescence a small fascicle in leaf axils, male 
-..X ' 
Phyllanthus casticum - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruiting branchlet; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
flowers c. 4 together, female flowers 1-2, usu-
ally only male or female flowers present at a 
time. Flowers unisexual, regular, dark red; 
pedicel thin, 1-5 mm long, enlarging in fruit; 
perianth lobes 5(-6), elliptical; male flowers 
with perianth lobes 1.5-2 mm long, hardly 
opening, disk with 5 free lobes, stamens 5, 3 
stamens completely fused, 2 almost free, an-
thers exserted; female flowers with perianth 
lobes c. 1 mm long, spreading, disk 5-lobed, 
ovary superior, ovoid, 3-celled, styles 3, mostly 
fused, deeply bifid at apex. Fruit a fleshy, glo-
bose berry 6-9 mm in diameter, green chang-
ing to red then black, 6-seeded. Seeds 
trigonous, 1.5-2 mm x c. 1.5 mm, orange, 
smooth. 
Other botanical information Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in mainland tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. 
Several other Phyllanthus spp. in Madagascar 
have similar uses as Phyllanthus casticum. 
Crushed leaves of Phyllanthus betsileanus 
Leandri, Phyllanthus isalensis Leandri, Phyl-
PHYLLANTHUS 421 
lanthus madagascariensis Müll.Arg. and Phyl-
lanthus seyrigii Leandri are applied to eczema 
and wounds. A leaf decoction is applied as lo-
tion or taken in baths to reduce oedema caused 
by sprains. Scraped stem bark is applied as a 
poultice to abscesses and wounds. Root powder 
is applied to the forehead of children suffering 
from dizziness and fainting. A root decoction is 
taken to treat syphilis. A root decoction of 
Phyllanthus mantsakariva Leandri, Phyllan-
thus fuscoluridus Müll.Arg., Phyllanthus de-
cipiens (Baill.) Müll.Arg. and Phyllanthus sey-
rigii is considered stimulant and is drunk to 
improve endurance during hard physical work 
or as an aphrodisiac, and also to treat impo-
tence and tiredness after prolonged diarrhoea. 
Twigs of Phyllanthus seyrigii are used as den-
tal sticks. The crushed roots of Phyllanthus 
fuscoluridus and Phyllanthus decipiens are 
applied as a poultice to abscesses and furun-
cles. A root decoction is also taken to treat a 
nervous depression. A leaf decoction of Phyl-
lanthus decipiens is taken to treat malaria. A 
twig or stem bark decoction of Phyllanthus 
madagascariensis, Phyllanthus seyrigii and 
Phyllanthus fuscoluridus is furthermore taken 
to treat colic, amoebic dysentery and persistent 
diarrhoea. The flexible branches are used to 
make large fishing nets and baskets. The fruits 
are edible and have a sour taste; they are used 
to make an alcoholic drink of low quality. The 
roots are used as a low quality dye for baskets. 
Growth and development Phyllanthus 
casticum flowers from August to October and 
fruits from November to January. 
Ecology Phyllanthus casticum occurs in dry 
deciduous savanna and on sandy soils, also 
along roads, from sea-level up to 1600 m alti-
tude. 
Handling after harvest All harvested 
plant parts are used fresh or dried and stored 
for future use. 
Genetic resources Although Phyllanthus 
casticum is relatively common in Madagascar, 
it is less common in other Indian Ocean is-
lands. 
Prospects Phyllanthus casticum has many 
interesting medicinal uses, but very little 
chemical and pharmacological information is 
available. Additional research is therefore rec-
ommended. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Coode, 1982; Gurib-Fakim 
& Brendler, 2004; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bis-
soondoyal, 1996; Rasoanaivo et al., 1992; 
Unander, Webster & Blumberg, 1990. 
Other references Andriamihaja, 1986; An-
drianaivoravelona, 2004; Boiteau, 1986; Gurib-
Fakim et al., 1994; Gurib-Fakim et al., 1996; 
Laivao, 1999; Lavergne, 2001; Rabearivelo, 
1986; Randriamahavorisoa, 1993; Rasoanaivo 
et al., 1999; Razafindrazaka, 1991; Unander, 
Webster & Blumberg, 1991. 
Sources of illustration Coode, 1982. 
Authors N.S. Alvarez Cruz 
PHYLLANTHUS ENGLERI Pax 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenw. Ost-Afrikas 
C: 236 (1895). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Vernacular names Spurred phyllanthus 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus engleri is distributed in Tanzania, Ma-
lawi, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Mozambique and 
South Africa. 
Uses In the Tabora region of Tanzania a cold 
water extract of the powdered roots is taken to 
treat epilepsy. The leaves and fruits are 
chewed as a cure for cough and stomach-ache; 
chewing the fruit also cures constipation. A 
root decoction is taken as a remedy for bilhar-
zia, gonorrhoea, stomach-ache, chest pain and 
menstrual cramps. In Zambia a cold root bark 
infusion mixed with food is taken as a cough 
remedy. Leaves are chewed to treat indigestion 
and constipation. 
The fruits are edible and eaten raw when 
picked young or mature. The taste is acidic and 
the smell is said to be unpleasant, but never-
theless the fruits are much liked. The fruit 
juice is mixed with lemon and onions and the 
mixture is consumed as an appetizer. In Tan-
zania the fruits are sold in urban markets. 
Livestock browses on the plants which resist 
grazing very well. The wood is used as firewood 
and to make utensils, and the stems are used 
as poles. In Zambia the twigs are used as 
toothbrushes. 
Properties Smoking the roots can lead to 
unconsciousness or death and the use of the 
roots as a suicide poison has been reported 
from Tanzania, Zambia and Zimbabwe. Alcohol 
extracts of the roots are highly toxic to rodents, 
and stem bark and roots are poisonous to sheep 
and cattle. Contradicting views exist on the 
toxicity of the above-ground parts. 
The root bark contains the triterpenoid phyl-
lanthol. Ethanol extracts of the root show high 
422 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
toxicity agains t br ine shr imps (LC00 of 0.47 
|ig/ml). Exper iments with rodents have not 
confirmed the toxicity of the smoke but the 
extract was highly toxic (lethal in t ravenous 
and oral doses 0.32 mg/kg and 0.07 g/kg, re-
spectively). Symptoms are a slower and irregu-
lar hear tbea t , followed by convulsions. 
B o t a n y Dioecious glabrous shrub or small 
t ree up to 4.5 m tall; t r u n k up to 15 cm in di-
ameter ; ba rk smooth, grey; b ranches long, 
stout, covered wi th prickly conical cushions. 
Leaves a l te rna te , distichous, simple and entire, 
glabrous; s t ipules lanceolate or linear-
lanceolate, 1-2 mm long; petiole 1-3 mm long; 
blade elliptical to ovate-orbicular, 1.5-3 cm x 
1-2 cm, base rounded to cuneate , apex rounded 
or t runca te and pointed. Inflorescence a small 
axil lary fascicle, c. 4-flowered. Flowers unisex-
ual , regular , white; male flowers with pedicel c. 
1 m m long, pe r i an th lobes (4—)5, ovate, 1—2 mm 
long, disk with 5 free lobes; female flowers wi th 
superior ovary, styles free, c. 1 mm long, 
s t igma filiform, 2-fid. Fru i t a fleshy, globose or 
3-lobed berry 2.5-3(-4) cm in diameter , pale 
yellow-green, smooth, pulp spongy, 6-seeded. 
Seeds trigonous, c. 1 cm long, purpl ish brown 
blotched ches tnut brown and yellowish brown, 
dull, smooth. 
Phyllanthus is a large genus comprising about 
750 species in tropical and subtropical regions, 
with about 150 species in main land tropical 
Africa and about 60 in Madagascar and the 
Indian Ocean is lands. A subgeneric classifica-
tion of Phyllanthus is in prepara t ion . 
Phyllanthus polyanthus Pax (synonyms: Phyl-
lanthus delpyanus Hutch., Phyllanthus cedreli-
folius Verd.) is very similar to Phyllanthus 
engleri, bu t differs in having acumina te or 
acute leaves and smaller fruits and seeds. The 
2 species hybridize. In coastal Kenya and Tan-
zania the Digo people use a root decoction of 
Phyllanthus polyanthus to cure sexually 
t r ansmi t t ed diseases. In Gabon a decoction of 
ba rk and fruit is d runk to cure cough. In Congo 
the Bokiba people use the ba rk as a vomit in-
ducer and for t r e a t m e n t of general oedemas. 
Phyllanthol , phyl lanthone and d a m m a r a n e -
type t r i te rpene saponins have been isolated 
from the s tem bark . 
E c o l o g y Phyllanthus engleri occurs in dry 
deciduous woodland, including Colopho-
spermum and Acacia bushland, often on ter-
mite mounds, a t 300—1850 m al t i tude. 
M a n a g e m e n t The fruits have a long shelf 
life and can be stored in the shade for about 3 
months . Harves t ing the fruits is done in Tan-
zania from April till August and in Zimbabwe 
mainly in J u n e and July. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g As Phyl-
lanthus engleri is widespread and relatively 
common, it is not th rea t ened by genetic ero-
sion. 
P r o s p e c t s Increased in teres t in Phyllanthus 
engleri and the closely related Phyllanthus 
polyanthus is likely since the recent identifica-
tion of a number of t r i terpenoids . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Ndlebe, Crouch & Mul-
holland, 2008; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Ruffo, 
Birnie & Tengnäs , 2002; Unander , Webster & 
Blumberg, 1990. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Alberman & Kipping, 
1951; Coates Palgrave, 1983; Kokwaro, 1993; 
Mbwambo, 2000; Moshi et al., 2006; Msangi , 
Otsyina & Kusekwa, 2004; Verdcourt & 
Trump, 1969. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
P H Y L L A N T H U S F R A T E R N U S G .L .Webs te r 
P r o t o l o g u e Contr. Gray Herb . 176: 53 
(1955). 
F a m i l y Euphorbiaceae (AGP: Phyl lantha-
ceae) 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 24 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Gripe weed (En). Herbe 
du chagrin, herbe au chagrin (Fr). Erva pou-
binha, erva pombinha (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus fraternus is a pantropical weed and 
probably originates from Pak i s t an and wes tern 
India. In tropical Africa it occurs from Cape 
Verde east to Somalia and south to South Af-
rica, except in the most humid regions. 
Phyllanthus fraternus - naturalized 
PHYLLANTHUS 423 
U s e s In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf decoction is 
d runk to facilitate childbirth, and against oe-
dema, costal pain and fever. In Ghana a plant 
extract is reported to be strongly diuretic and 
t aken to allay spasms, such as griping in dys-
entery, and the plant is also used as a laxative 
and to t r ea t gonorrhoea and malar ia . It is ex-
ternal ly applied to t rea t skin infections. In 
Sudan the leaves are given agains t dysentery. 
In Réunion the plant is also used agains t gon-
orrhoea, dropsy and diarrhoea. 
In India Phyllanthus fraternus, in a mixture 
with other Phyllanthus spp., is sold in a herbal 
medicine called 'Bhumyamlaki ' , which is 
widely used agains t jaundice and is considered 
acrid, carminat ive, cooling and useful in the 
t r e a t m e n t of thirs t , bronchitis, a s thma , lep-
rosy, anaemia , venereal diseases, problems of 
the genito-urinary tract , anur ia , biliousness 
and hiccups. The fruits a re used in the t reat-
ment of ulcers, wounds, sores, scabies, ring-
worm and other skin problems. Fresh roots are 
t aken agains t jaundice, and crushed with milk 
as a galactagogue. A decoction of roots and 
leaves is used to t r e a t malar ia . The p lan t sap is 
applied to t r ea t bruises, sores and ulcers, and 
mixed with oil agains t ophtha lmia and con-
junctivit is . Powdered roots and leaves are 
made into a poultice wi th rice-water to t r ea t 
oedema and ulcers. 
Phyllanthus fraternus is browsed by all live-
stock. In Eas t Africa, India and Indonesia a 
black dye is obtained from the s tem and leaves, 
which is used to dye cotton and can also be 
used as an ink. 
Product ion and international trade Al-
though p lan t mater ia l of Phyllanthus fraternus 
is exported from India, the re are no da ta on 
amounts and value. 
P r o p e r t i e s The l ignans phyl lanthin and 
hypophyl lanthin have been isolated from the 
leaves, bu t some reports indicate t h a t this may 
be due to confusion with Phyllanthus amarus. 
The leaves also contain the l ignans n i ran th in , 
n i r te t ra l in and phyl te t ra l in . Other compounds 
isolated from the p lan t include a lkamides (2,4-
octadienamide and 2,4-decadienamide), a qui-
nolizidine alkaloid (norsecurinine), the flavone 
tricin, t r i terpenoids (friedelin, epifriedelinol, 
kokoonol and sorghumol), the te t ra terpenoid 
phyl lanthusone, and waxes (octacosane, te t ra-
cosyl alcohol, tricosyl alcohol). Some of the al-
cohols a re also present as esters , e.g. phyl-
lanterpenyl es ter and pentacosanyl ester . An 
alcohol extract of t he root contained the seco-
sterols phyllanthosterol , phyllanthosecosteryl 
ester, phyl lanthost igmasterol and frater-
nusterol . The seed oil contains ricinoleic acid, 
linoleic acid and linolenic acid. 
The two isolated a lkamides possessed moder-
ate ant iplasmodial activity in vitro. An aque-
ous extract of the p lan t showed protection 
agains t the effect of chronic alcohol consump-
tion on the liver in rabbi ts . The decrease in 
cytochrome content of the cells was par t ly un-
done by the extract . Ra ts were adminis tered 
allyl alcohol to cause oxidative s t ress in liver 
cells. The extract showed a beneficial effect on 
mitochondria of the cells. An aqueous e thanol 
extract of the dried plant showed protection of 
the liver agains t the effects of arsenic trioxide 
in chickens. 
An aqueous alcohol extract exhibited pro-
nounced antinociception in ra t s . Given orally, 
the extract was less potent t h a n when given 
intraperi toneal ly. 
A root extract of p lan ts from Sudan showed 
high toxicity to Bulinus and Biomphalaria 
snails, bu t the p lan t extracts a re also poison-
ous to frogs and fish. 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s In India a 
herbal medicine called 'Bhumyamlaki ' is sold, 
which may be pure Phyllanthus amarus 
Schumach. & Thonn. or pure Phyllanthus 
maderaspatensis L. or a mixture with Phyllan-
thus fraternus. It is marke ted as a medicine 
especially for liver troubles. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Monoecious, annua l herb up to 
45(-60) cm tall, glabrous to short-hairy; verti-
cal shoots angular , pale brown, la tera l shoots 
up to 10 cm long. Leaves a l te rna te , distichous, 
a lmost sessile; st ipules c. 1 m m long, l inear-
lanceolate, whit ish; blade elliptical-oblong, 5 -
13 mm x 2 - 5 mm, base cuneate to rounded, 
apex obtuse or rounded, glabrous, with 4 - 7 
pai rs of la tera l veins. Flowers in the axils of 
leaves, male flowers ( l - ) 3 per axil a t the base 
of branches , other leaf axils usual ly with 1 fe-
male flower. Flowers unisexual ; pedicel c. 0.5 
mm long; male flowers wi th 6 per ian th lobes, 
obovate-orbicular, c. 0.5 m m long, in 2 whorls, 
t rans lucent , disk glands 6, free, flattened, sta-
mens 3, f i laments fused; female flowers wi th 6 
per ian th lobes c. 1 mm long, the outer ones 
oblong-lanceolate, the inner ones oblong to 
oblanceolate, white , disk c. 0.5 mm across, 
fringed, ovary superior, c. 0.5 mm in diameter , 
3-celled, styles 3, c. 0.5 mm long. Frui t a 3-
lobed nearly globose capsule c. 1 mm x 1.5 mm, 
smooth, yellowish, 6-seeded. Seeds c. 1 mm 
long, segmented, yellowish brown, one side 
wi th dark brown tubercles, wi th concentric 
424 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
I 'i. 
\*t - ~\ 
\. -_ 4 \i i 
?*.» i h,i ^ .Y /y 
-, ** 
Phyllanthus fraternus - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
ridges on the other side. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in main land tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and other Indian 
Ocean is lands. A subgeneric classification of 
Phyllanthus is in prepara t ion . Unt i l about 20 
years ago taxonomists placed a number of spe-
cies, including Phyllanthus fraternus, unde r 
Phyllanthus niruri L. Where the n a m e Phyl-
lanthus niruri h a s been applied in older li tera-
tu re to African or Asian specimens, usual ly 
Phyllanthus amarus is intended, bu t some-
t imes also Phyllanthus debilis Klein ex Willd., 
Phyllanthus fraternus, Phyllanthus maderas-
patensis L. or Phyllanthus rotundifolius Klein 
ex Willd. Specimens of t rue Phyllanthus niruri 
have actually never been confirmed from out-
side the Americas. In pharmacological li tera-
tu re the confusion between Phyllanthus frater-
nus and Phyllanthus amarus still persis ts . 
Several other annua l or short-lived perennial 
Phyllanthus spp. have medicinal uses in tropi-
cal Africa. Phyllanthus leucanthus Pax occurs 
from eas te rn DR Congo and Kenya south to 
Botswana and Mozambique. In no r the rn Tan-
zania root sap is given to babies to speed up 
the de tachment of the umbilical cord. Phyllan-
thus leucocalyx Hutch, occurs in Kenya, 
Uganda, Tanzan ia and Mozambique. In Kenya 
and Tanzania a leaf infusion is d runk to get 
relief from childbirth pains and a decoction of 
the whole plant is d runk to cure stomach-ache 
and as an emetic. 
Phyllanthus odontadenius Müll.Arg. (synonym: 
Phyllanthus bequaertii Robyns & Lawalrée) 
occurs from Guinea Bissau through the coastal 
countries of West Africa to Congo and from 
Rwanda, Kenya and Uganda south to southern 
Africa. In Ghana the leaves are ea ten to cure 
hiccups. In Rwanda a s tem extract is used to 
t r ea t d iarrhoea and cholera. Alcohol extracts of 
leaves and s tems reduced castor oil-induced 
diarrhoea in mice. A wa te r extract of the whole 
p lan t inhibited DNA polymerase of hepadnavi-
rus . Phyllanthus pentandrus Schumach. & 
Thonn. h a s a similar distr ibution as Phyllan-
thus odontadenius, bu t occurs also in the Sahe-
lian zone from Senegal east to Sudan . In Sene-
gal a p lan t decoction is d runk and used for 
ba th ing as a cure for syphilis. A root decoction 
is d runk to t r ea t female sterility. In Niger a 
decoction of the shoots is given as a tonic to 
nurs ing mothers . In Nigeria a decoction of the 
whole p lan t is d runk to t rea t earache or the 
ashes of the plant a re dissolved in wa te r and 
used as ear drops. The dried leaves, mixed with 
but ter , are applied to boils and dislocated 
limbs. In West Africa the leaves are used in a 
protective dressing with insecticidal propert ies 
for wounds in livestock. Phyllanthus pentan-
drus is ea ten by all livestock. 
Phyllanthus rotundifolius Klein ex Willd. 
(synonym: Phyllanthus aspericaulis Pax) is 
fairly widespread in dry West and Cent ra l Af-
rica, in Eas t Africa and also in Asia bu t r a r e in 
large pa r t s of i ts distr ibution area . In Kenya 
the sap from pounded leaves is applied to 
wounds. From West Africa it is reported t h a t 
catt le refuse to eat it, whereas in Kenya p lants 
are reported to be browsed by camels, cattle, 
donkeys, goats and sheep. 
E c o l o g y Phyllanthus fraternus occurs in 
deciduous woodland, on mud-flats and shady 
damp ground in bushland, on te rmi te mounds, 
in grassland, on rocks and sandy soils and on 
gravelly p la teau soils, from sea-level up to 1800 
m al t i tude. It is a widespread weed. It tolerates 
dry conditions bu t does not survive in water-
logged conditions. 
PHYLLANTHUS 425 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no indications that Phyllanthus fraternus is 
at risk of genetic erosion. Small germplasm 
collections exist in India. 
Prospects The widespread medicinal use of 
Phyllanthus fraternus warrants further phar-
macological research. Proper identification of 
research material and a thorough screening of 
earlier work is essential. Because of its very 
wide distribution, the possible variability of its 
chemical constituents also needs attention. 
Major references Gupta & Ali, 2003; Par-
rotta, 2001; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Sittie et 
al., 1998; Unander, Webster & Blumberg, 1991. 
Other references Bâ, 1994; Ahmed, Al 
Howiriny & Mathew, 2002; Gupta & Ali, 1999; 
Habib-ur-Rahman et al., 2004; Keay, 1958a; 
Khatoon et al., 2006; Maïkere-Faniyo et al., 
1989; Oudhia & Pal, 2001; Oudhia, 
Shrivastava & Tripathi, 1996; Padma & Setty, 
1999; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Rajasubramaniam 
& Pardha Saradhi, 1997; Santos et al., 2000; 
Sharma & Singh, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Radcliffe-Smith, 
1986. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
PHYLLANTHUS MADERASPATENSIS L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 982 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2re = 26, 52 
Vernacular names Seaside laurel, canoe 
weed (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus maderaspatensis is widespread in 
tropical Africa and the Indian Ocean islands. It 
occurs throughout the Old World tropics and 
subtropics. 
Uses The plant sap and leaf decoction are 
credited with emetic and purgative activities. 
In Tanzania the whole plant is pounded and 
the solution applied to scabies. A root decoction 
is taken to cure constipation, diarrhoea, lack of 
appetite, intestinal pain, menstrual problems, 
gastrointestinal disorders, testicular swelling, 
chest complaints and snakebites. Gastrointes-
tinal trouble in infants is treated by giving 
them a root decoction of Phyllanthus maderas-
patensis and Chamaecrista mimosoides (L.) 
Greene. Plant sap is used as nose drops to treat 
toothache. Ground leaves are rubbed on the 
skin with lemon juice as treatment for rheuma-
tism. In Niger the plant is used as an aphrodi-
Phyllanthus maderaspatensis - wild 
siac. In Somalia Phyllanthus maderaspatensis 
is considered poisonous. 
In India Phyllanthus maderaspatensis is 
widely medicinally used to treat headache, 
bronchitis, earache and ophthalmia. Powder 
from dried plant material mixed with milk is 
drunk to treat jaundice. 
In Kenya smoke from the burning plants is 
used to kill caterpillars in maize. Cattle will 
browse Phyllanthus maderaspatensis but only 
when green. 
Production and international trade Phyl-
lanthus maderaspatensis is of subsistence 
value in most parts of Africa; the plants are 
traded locally in market places. Commercial 
value is attributable to industrially produced 
pharmaceutical products for which different 
plant parts are harvested from naturally occur-
ring plants. 
Properties Extracts of the above-ground 
parts of Phyllanthus maderaspatensis were 
found to contain resins, steroids, triterpenoids, 
alkaloids, phenolic compounds, tannins and 
saponins, but no glycosides. The plant also 
contains the lignans phyllanthin and hypophyl-
lantin, which are responsible for hepatoprotec-
tive a c t i v e , but in low concentrations. 
Butanol, ethanol and water extracts of the 
whole plant were found to bind hepatitis B 
virus and E antigens. The n-hexane extract 
was found to have pronounced hepatoprotective 
activity and showed antioxidant activity and 
stimulation of bile production. The antioxidant 
activity is attributed to the phenolic com-
pounds. The results of tests in mice clearly 
indicated that an ethanol extract has a protec-
tive effect against adriamycin-induced toxicity 
426 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and it also showed an antioxidant effect. 
Phyllanthus maderaspatensis has shown anti-
bacterial and antifungal activities. The seeds 
have confirmed laxative, carminative and diu-
retic properties. Many of the medicinal uses of 
Phyllanthus maderaspatensis are related to the 
astringent action of tannins. Though short-
term effects may be beneficial, the frequent 
systemic use of tannins might be dangerous, 
because of their antinutrient effects. 
A clear deep yellow oil can be extracted from 
the seeds; it contains myristic, palmitic, 
stearic, oleic and linolenic acids and ß-
sitosterol. The defatted seed cake contains a 
fibrous mucilage which can be hydrolyzed to 
galactose, arabinose, rhamnose and aldobionic 
acid. 
Adulterations and substitutes In India a 
herbal medicine called 'Bhumyamlaki' is sold 
which may be pure Phyllanthus amarus 
Schumach. & Thonn., or pure Phyllanthus 
maderaspatensis, or a mixture with Phyllan-
thus fraternus G.L.Webster. It is marketed as a 
medicine especially for liver troubles. 
Description Monoecious, annual or peren-
nial, erect to spreading, unbranched to much 
Phyllanthus maderaspatensis - 1, flowering 
branch; 2, male flower; 3, female flower; 4, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
branched, glabrous herb up to 90(-120) cm tall; 
branches angular, red- or brown-tinged. Leaves 
arranged spirally, simple and entire; stipules 
asymmetrical triangular-lanceolate, up to 4 
mm long, persistent; petiole c. 1 mm long; 
blade linear to oblanceolate, 10-30 mm x 2-7 
mm, base cuneate to rounded, apex acute to 
rounded. Inflorescence a small axillary fascicle; 
female flowers solitary near the base of the 
branch, 1-4 male flowers and 1 female flower 
together towards the end of the branch. Flow-
ers unisexual, regular; perianth lobes 6, in 2 
whorls, disk with 6 free glands; male flowers 
with pedicel up to 1 mm long, perianth lobes 
elliptical, c. 1 mm long, stamens 3, c. 1 mm 
long, filaments fused, anthers exserted; female 
flowers with pedicel c. 2 mm long, perianth 
lobes c. 2 mm long, ovary superior, ovoid, 3-
celled, styles 3, free, bifid at apex. Fruit a glo-
bose capsule, flattened at both ends, c. 3 mm in 
diameter, shiny greenish with red tinge, 6-
seeded. Seeds trigonous, c. 1.5 mm long, dark 
brown, shiny. 
Other botanical information Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in mainland tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. A subgeneric classification of Phyllan-
thus is in preparation. Phyllanthus maderas-
patensis is a variable species and several varie-
ties have been recognized. 
A few other Phyllanthus spp. have the same 
branching pattern with all stems and branches 
similar; 2 of them are also used medicinally. 
Phyllanthus beillei Hutch, (synonym: Phyllan-
thus welwitschianus Müll.Arg. var. beillei 
(Hutch.) A.R.-Sm.) occurs from Guinea east to 
Kenya and Tanzania and throughout southern 
Africa. A root decoction is taken as an aphrodi-
siac in Kenya. Phyllanthus welwitschianus 
Müll.Arg. occurs in southern Africa; in Angola 
the leaves are used for wound dressing. 
Growth and development Plants may 
flower 3 months after germination of the seed. 
Ecology Phyllanthus maderaspatensis oc-
curs in deciduous woodland, wooded savanna 
and grassland, on beaches and dunes, and also 
along streams and ponds, in cultivated and 
disturbed localities, from sea-level up to 1400 
m altitude. It grows on a wide variety of soils, 
usually on heavy clay and alluvial soils of low-
altitude river valleys, on river banks and in 
flood plains. Outside tropical Africa, Phyllan-
thus maderaspatensis is often considered a 
weed. It shows a marked preference for cal-
PHYLLANTHUS 427 
careous sites in humid tropical areas. 
Propagation and planting Seeds of Phyl-
lanthus maderaspatensis require light to ger-
minate. Germination rates increase linearly 
with temperature from 15-35°C and decline 
from 36°C. Below 15°C and above 40°C, germi-
nation is very poor. Germination is poor under 
moisture stress. Phyllanthus maderaspatensis 
is generally grown from seed, but vegetative 
propagation by budding, grafting, cutting and 
root sprouting is possible. 
Management No information is available 
about cultivation methods of Phyllanthus 
maderaspatensis; it is rarely cultivated. All 
plant parts are probably only collected from the 
wild. Mature plants are fast growing and re-
quire little or no management once established. 
Genetic resources Neither germplasm 
collections nor breeding programmes are 
known for Phyllanthus maderaspatensis. Since 
it is widespread and rather common, it is not 
liable to genetic erosion. 
Prospects Phyllanthus maderaspatensis 
seems under-exploited, but it will probably 
continue to be regarded as an important me-
dicinal plant species. There is no commercial 
seed production, although this aspect deserves 
more attention given the ease of propagation. 
Considering the many medicinal uses, there is 
a large scope for future research and further 
phytochemical and pharmacological investiga-
tions are warranted. A number of compounds 
may provide interesting leads for pharmacol-
ogical evaluation and therefore merit further 
research. Phyllanthus maderaspatensis de-
serves to be part of germplasm collection. 
Major references Bommu et al., 2008; 
Burkill, 1994; Khatoon et al., 2006; Neuwinger, 
2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Unander, Webster 
& Blumberg, 1990. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1993; 
Asha et al., 2004; Brunei, 1987; Calixto et a l , 
1998; CSIR, 1959; Kumaran & Karunakaran, 
2007; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Rizk, 1987; Saa-
dou, 1993; Srivastava et al., 2008; Unander, 
1991; van Holthoon, 1999. 
Sources of illustration Radcliffe-Smith, 
1986. 
Authors A. Maroyi 
PHYLLANTHUS MUELLERIANUS (Kuntze) Exell 
Protologue Cat. vase. pi. S. Tomé: 290 
(1944). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number In - 26, 52 
Synonyms Phyllanthus floribundus (Baill.) 
MülLArg. (1863). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus muellerianus occurs from Senegal and 
Guinea Bissau east to Sudan and Kenya and 
south to northern Angola and northern Mo-
zambique. 
Uses Phyllanthus muellerianus is widely 
used to treat intestinal troubles. An infusion of 
the young shoots is taken to treat severe dys-
entery. In Sierra Leone a leaf decoction is 
taken to treat constipation. In Ghana and Ni-
geria cooked roots, sometimes with maize meal 
or other plants, are taken to treat severe dys-
entery. In Congo powdered roasted roots with 
palm oil are taken to treat stomach problems 
and as an anti-emetic. In Tanzania roots are 
pounded in water and the liquid is drunk to 
treat diarrhoea. Boiled roots are also applied as 
enema to treat stomach-ache. 
In West Africa leaf sap or sap from the thick 
hollow stem is applied as eye drops to treat 
pain in the eyes, eye infections or to remove a 
foreign body. In Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina 
Faso twigs are sucked to prevent toothache. 
Powdered roots are used as a snuff and a bark 
decoction is taken to treat a sore throat, cough, 
pneumonia and enlarged glands. Pulped leafy 
twigs are rubbed on the body to treat paralysis. 
In Nigeria a root bark decoction is taken as an 
alterative and to treat fever. A twig and root 
Phyllanthus muellerianus - wild 
428 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
decoction is t aken to t r ea t jaundice and ure-
th ra l discharges. In the Central African Repub-
lic fresh root bark is crushed and macerated in 
wate r or palm wine, and the liquid d runk as an 
aphrodisiac. In Gabon roasted powdered twigs 
a re ea ten with plant ash to t r ea t dysmenor-
rhoea. In DR Congo dried bark powder is 
sniffed to t r ea t colds and sinusit is . A root ba rk 
decoction is applied to swellings and is d runk 
to t r ea t gonorrhoea. Stem ash is applied to 
scarifications to t rea t r heuma t i sm and inter-
costal pain. In Tanzania a root decoction is 
t aken to t r ea t ha rd abscesses; powdered dried 
roots and s tem bark are sprinkled on wounds 
as a dressing. 
Throughout West Africa pounded leaves a re 
applied as wound dressing. In Côte d'Ivoire the 
leaves are eaten, together with young leaves of 
Funtumia elastica (Preuss) Stapf, to improve 
male fertility. In Ghana and Nigeria leaves 
boiled with palm fruit are given to women after 
delivery as a general tonic. In Cameroon a 
macerat ion of the leaves and roots is used to 
wash the body to t r e a t r a sh wi th fever in chil-
dren. In DR Congo a leaf decoction is t aken to 
t r ea t anaemia and also used as a mouthwash 
to t r ea t toothache. A leaf extract is used as a 
b a t h and a vapour b a t h to t r ea t venereal dis-
eases. Cooked leaves are applied to the gums to 
t r ea t toothache. A flower infusion is cooling 
and gently aperient . 
The fruits are edible and slightly acidic. In 
Sierra Leone and Nigeria the sap from the hol-
low branches is considered potable. In Cameroon 
the ba rk is sometimes added to pa lm wine to 
render it strongly intoxicating. In Kenya the 
s tems are considered excellent firewood; 
branches thicker t h a n 15 cm become hollow 
and are less used. In Eas t Africa the brown dye 
from the ba rk is used to dye m a t s and fishing 
lines. From the whole p lan t a black dye is ob-
ta ined used to colour fibres. In Zambia the 
wood is used for rafters and other construction 
work. It is also used to make fish t r aps and 
basketry . The leaves are used as fodder. In 
Sierra Leone and Nigeria leaves are sometimes 
cooked with food or in soup as a seasoning. In 
Nigeria twigs are used as chew-sticks after 
removal of the spines. Fru i t pulp is used as a 
ha i r fixative. In Gabon Phyllanthus muelleri-
anus is used in magic to lift taboos. 
P r o p e r t i e s A prel iminary phytochemical 
screening of the leaves and s tem bark showed 
the presence of t ann ins , flavonoids, saponins, 
alkaloids and an th raqu inones . From the s tem 
bark the t r i terpenoids 22ß-hydroxyfriedel-ene 
and lß,22ß-dihydroxyfriedelin were isolated. 
A leaf extract showed moderate ant iplasmodial 
activity (ICso = 9.4 |J.g/ml) and low cytotoxicity 
in m a m m a l i a n cell l ines. Both the aqueous and 
methanol extracts of the leaves and s tem bark 
showed high ant ibacter ia l activity against 
Staphylococcus aureus and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa. The activity of the extracts was 
relatively stable a t high t empera tu res and was 
enhanced a t low pH. In another tes t a chloro-
form extract showed high antifungal activity 
agains t Candida albicans and ant ibacter ia l 
activity agains t Escherichia coli. 
A crude aqueous extract orally adminis te red to 
r a t s caused significant changes in haemato-
logical and biochemical pa ramete r s , which are 
used as indices of toxicosis. 
An aqueous leaf extract was found to induce 
behavioural sedation in young chicks resul t ing 
in decreased locomotor activity as well as peck-
ing behaviour. The extract also relaxed rabbi t 
and ra t ilea. At doses ranging from 5-30 
mg/kg, the extract produced a dose-dependent 
r ise in blood p ressure in cats . The extract also 
produced a significant analgesia in mice and 
was found to possess dose-dependent anti-
inf lammatory propert ies . 
The dry fruit contains per g: 77 mg water , 9.7 
mg protein, 4.3 mg fat, 62.7 mg sugar, 21 mg 
fibres, 500 mg Ca, 200 mg P and 15 mg Fe. It 
has an energetic value of 1228 k J (294 kcal). 
D e s c r i p t i o n Monoecious, glabrous, strag-
gling or climbing shrub or small t ree up to 12 
m tall; branches spreading or pendulous, ma in 
branches stout, angular , reddish tinged, 
branchle ts 15-20(-25) cm long, wi th several 
short axillary shoots; branch basis t ransformed 
into a pair of spines c. 4 mm long, purpl ish 
brown. Leaves a l te rna te , distichous along lat-
eral twigs, simple, glabrous; s t ipules lanceo-
late, c. 2 mm long, acuminate ; petiole 3-5 mm 
long; blade ovate, elliptical-ovate to ovate-
lanceolate, 3-9 cm x 2—4.5 cm, base cuneate to 
rounded, apex acute to obtuse, wi th 10-14 
pairs of la tera l veins. Inflorescence a false ra-
ceme on short axil lary shoots, 2 -6 cm long, 
solitary or several together, wi th flowers in 
clusters having 2—3 male flowers and 1 female 
flower in each cluster. Flowers unisexual ; peri-
a n t h lobes 5, elliptical, c. 1 mm long, rounded, 
greenish whi te or greenish yellow; male flowers 
wi th pedicel c. 1.5 m m long, disk glands 5, free, 
minute ly warted, fleshy, s t amens 5, free, un-
equal, an the r s very small; female flowers with 
stout pedicel c. 1 m m long, disk glands 5, free 
or fused, knobbly, fleshy, ovary superior, ellip-
PHYLLANTHUS 429 
Phyllanthus muellerianus - 1, flowering branch; 
2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
soid, warty, 4-5-celled, styles 4-5, free, c. 0.5 
mm long, 2-fid at apex. Fruit a fleshy, nearly 
globose capsule 3-4 mm in diameter, usually 
smooth, green, becoming red, later black, 6-
seeded. Seeds angular, c. 1 mm long, with faint 
ridges, bright reddish brown or yellowish 
brown. 
Other botanical information Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in mainland tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. A subgeneric classification of Phyllan-
thus is in preparation. 
Several other Phyllanthus spp. with a similar 
growth form as Phyllanthus muellerianus are 
medicinally used in tropical Africa. Phyllan-
thus kaessneri Hutch, occurs in DR Congo, 
Kenya, Tanzania and Zambia. In Kenya the 
plant is used in a mixture as a cough medicine. 
Phyllanthus ovalifolius Forrsk. (synonym: 
Phyllanthus guineensis Pax) occurs from 
Ethiopia south to Angola, Zimbabwe and Mo-
zambique; it possibly also occurs in Nigeria and 
Cameroon. In Kenya a plant decoction is drunk 
and used as a vapour bath to treat corneal ul-
cers. In Malawi a root and bark infusion is 
used to bathe sore eyes. In Uganda a leaf de-
coction is taken in the treatment of measles; 
the leaves, mixed with butter, are applied to 
the skin for the same purpose. A root decoction 
is drunk to treat cough. Phyllanthus sepialis 
Miill.Arg. occurs from Sudan and Ethiopia 
south to Tanzania. In Kenya boiled roots are 
given to pregnant women as a tonic. The wood 
is used for house construction and as firewood; 
sticks are used as toothbrushes. Phyllanthus 
ovalifolius and Phyllanthus sepialis are much 
appreciated as a browse plant by sheep and 
goats. 
Growth and development Phyllanthus 
muellerianus flowers at the end of the dry sea-
son, shortly after new leaves have formed. 
Ecology Phyllanthus muellerianus occurs in 
riverine forest and wooded grassland, on deep 
and well-drained soils, from sea-level up to 
1600 m altitude. In Nigeria Phyllanthus muel-
lerianus is reported as a weed of rice fields. 
Propagation and planting Phyllanthus 
muellerianus can be propagated through seeds 
and stem cuttings. 
Management Phyllanthus muellerianus can 
be coppiced. 
Harvesting Young shoots are harvested at 
the beginning of the rainy season; leaves, stem 
bark and roots can be harvested throughout 
the year, although it is easier to harvest the 
roots during the rainy season. 
Handling after harvest Harvested plant 
parts are used fresh or are dried, as a whole or 
powdered, for future use. 
Genetic resources Phyllanthus muelleri-
anus is fairly common in its area of distribu-
tion and there are no signs of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Phyllanthus muellerianus has 
many local medicinal uses, especially to treat 
intestinal problems, against body pain and as 
an antiseptic. Preliminary pharmacological 
analyses confirm these uses, although virtually 
nothing is known concerning the compounds 
responsible for these activities. More research 
is therefore warranted. 
Major references Anuka et al., 2005; Ar-
bonnier, 2004; Burkill, 1994; Chilufya & 
Tengnäs, 1996; Doughari & Sunday, 2008; 
Malaisse, 1997; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1987. 
Other references Adedapo, Abatan & Olo-
runsogo, 2007; Adesida, Girgis & Taylor, 1972; 
430 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 1979; Hamill et al., 
2003; Heine & Heine, 1988a; Kiptot, 2007; 
Koné et al., 2004; Lorougnon Guédé & Aké 
Assi, 1989; Nacro & Millogo-Rasolodimbi, 1993 
Onocha et al., 2003b; Oppong-Anane, 2001 
Ssegawa & Kasenene, 2007; Tra Bi et a l , 1999 
Zirihi et al., 2005. 
Sources of illustration Keay, 1958a. 
Authors K.D. Ben-Bala 
PHYLLANTHUS NIRUROIDES Müll.Arg. 
Protologue Journ. Bot. 2: 331 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 26 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus niruroides occurs from Guinea Bissau 
and Guinea east to Nigeria and Sào Tomé. It is 
not clear whether it also occurs in mainland 
Central Africa. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire and Burkina Faso a 
decoction of the whole plant is given as a diu-
retic and purgative in the treatment of jaun-
dice. With Capsicum pepper added, it is used 
as a wash or an enema to reduce menstrual 
pain. The plant sap is mixed with lemon juice 
and drunk to ease delivery. The strained juice 
of the pulped plant is given orally to treat in-
fant bronchitis, and is applied as ear drops to 
ease pain caused by otitis. It is one of several 
plants that was macerated and sprinkled on 
smallpox pustules. In Ghana the whole plant is 
used in the treatment of malaria. 
Properties Niruroidine, a norsecurinine-
type alkaloid has been isolated from the leaves 
of Phyllanthus niruroides collected in DR 
Congo, but the presence of Phyllanthus niru-
roides in DR Congo has not yet been confirmed 
by botanists. 
Botany Monoecious, annual, erect, glabrous 
herb up to 25 cm tall, few-branched. Leaves 
alternate, distichous and crowded along lateral 
twigs, simple and entire; stipules lanceolate, 
reddish, 0.5-2 mm long; petiole c. 0.5 mm long; 
blade oblong, 2.5-12.5 mm x 1.5-4.5 mm, base 
rounded, apex obtuse. Flowers axillary, male 
flowers 2-3 per axil at the base of branches, 
female flowers solitary towards apex of 
branches. Flowers unisexual, pale green; peri-
anth lobes 5; male flowers with pedicel c. 0.5 
mm long, stamens 3, filaments fused; female 
flowers with pedicel 1.5-2.5 mm long, disk cup-
shaped, 5-lobed, ovary superior, ovoid, warty, 
3-celled, styles 3, free, deeply 2-fid at apex. 
Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 2-3 mm in diameter, 
hanging, up to 6-seeded. Seeds c. 1 mm long, 
with 13-16 transverse ridges. 
Phyllanthus is a large genus comprising about 
750 species in tropical and subtropical regions, 
with about 150 species in mainland tropical 
Africa and about 60 in Madagascar and the 
Indian Ocean islands. As the annual herbs in 
Phyllanthus are morphologically close, it is not 
easy to identify them correctly and as a result 
there is a lot of confusion. Records of Phyllan-
thus niruroides for eastern and southern Africa 
most probably refer to Phyllanthus taylorianus 
J.E.Brunei ex Radcl.-Sm. Several other West 
and Central African Phyllanthus species are 
used medicinally. Phyllanthus sublanatus Schu-
mach. & Thonn. is an annual herb distributed 
from Guinea east to Nigeria. In Benin a decoc-
tion of fresh leaves is applied externally to cure 
skin rash, a decoction of the whole plant is 
drunk to treat bleeding gums and diarrhoea, 
and pulverized, roasted, leafy twigs are swal-
lowed to stop vomiting. Phyllanthus diandrus 
Pax is a poorly known shrub from Cameroon, 
Gabon and Congo. A leaf decoction is drunk to 
correct a rapid and irregular heartbeat. Phyl-
lanthus profusus N.E.Br, is a shrub occurring 
from Guinea east to Ghana. Sap from the cut 
stems is used as eye drops to treat sore eyes. 
The fruit is edible. Phyllanthus profusus is 
mentioned in the IUCN Red List of threatened 
species as vulnerable due to habitat loss. 
Ecology Phyllanthus niruroides occurs in 
wet grassland in deciduous woodland. It also 
occurs on waste ground and in disturbed locali-
ties, from 900-1500(-2300) m altitude. As a 
weed it is especially frequent in sorghum on 
dark brown, heavy soils. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Phyl-
lanthus niruroides is common, also as a weed, 
there is no concern about genetic erosion. 
Prospects For a good understanding of the 
prospects of Phyllanthus niruroides and re-
lated species an unambiguous taxonomical 
classification is required, especially for West 
and Central Africa. Such a classification is 
needed as a basis for meaningful pharmacol-
ogical and phytochemical investigations. 
Major references Brunei, 1987; Kerharo & 
Bouquet, 1950; Unander, Webster & Blumberg, 
1991. 
Other references Babady-Bila, Gedris & 
Herz, 1996; Burkill, 1994; Keay, 1958a; Köhler 
et al., 2002; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1996b; Stäuble, 1986. 
Authors N.S. Alvarez Cruz 
PHYLLANTHUS 431 
PHYLLANTHUS NUMMULARIIFOLIUS Poir. 
Protologue Encycl. 5: 302 (1804). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number re = 13 
Synonyms Phyllanthus capillaris Schumach. 
& Thonn. (1827), Phyllanthus stuhlmannii Pax 
(1895). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus nummulariifolius occurs throughout 
tropical Africa, except in the drier parts of the 
Sahel region and southern Africa. It also occurs 
throughout the Indian Ocean islands, as well 
as in South Africa and Egypt. 
Uses In Kenya a decoction of the plant is 
taken as an emetic and the crushed roots are 
taken against stomach-ache. The Kipsigi peo-
ple of Kenya eat the boiled fruits against intes-
tinal worms. The Haya people of Tanzania ap-
ply the leaves to suppurative swellings on the 
legs and to other inflammations. The Shambaa 
people use the leaves to treat asthma. In 
Uganda an infusion of the leaves is given to 
babies against colic and powdered leaves are 
sprinkled on wounds. An infusion of leaves and 
bark is taken against premature ejaculation 
and to treat morning sickness in early preg-
nancy. In Burundi a mixture of leaf sap of sev-
eral plants, including Phyllanthus nummulari-
ifolius, is used as eye drops, or a decoction of 
the leafy stems of a similar selection of plants 
is applied as an enema against eye diseases 
including cataract. The leaves are also used in 
mixture with other plants to treat general 
weakness, especially in pregnant women, diar-
rhoea and cough. Powdered leaves diluted with 
water are taken against chest problems. Leafy 
stems are applied against haemorrhoids. In the 
Comoros a decoction of the whole plant is 
drunk against high blood pressure in pregnant 
woman and oedema. 
In Ethiopia the plant is used as an anthelmin-
tic for horses. 
Properties In a test in DR Congo aqueous 
and alcoholic extracts of Phyllanthus nummu-
lariifolius showed strong activity against the 
snails Biomphalaria pfeifferi and Lymnaea 
natalensis, both intermediate hosts of schisto-
somiasis and fascioliasis parasites. 
Botany Monoecious or dioecious erect or 
semi-scandent, annual or perennial herb or 
weak-stemmed sparingly branched shrub up to 
50(-300) cm tall; stem often reddish at base, 
variously hairy with multicellular hairs; lateral 
leafy shoots (5—)10—15(-25) cm long. Leaves 
alternate, distichous, simple and entire; stip-
ules linear-lanceolate, 1—1.5 mm long; petiole 
0.5—1 mm long; blade almost orbicular to 
obovate or elliptical, 2-25 mm x 1-15 mm, 
usually glabrous, with 4-12 pairs of lateral 
veins. Inflorescence a fascicle in the upper leaf 
axils of lateral shoots, composed of a few male 
flowers and 1 female flower. Flowers unisexual, 
regular, 5(-6)-merous; perianth lobes c. 1 mm 
long; male flowers with pedicel 5—6 mm long, 
perianth lobes almost orbicular to obovate, 
cream-coloured or whitish with a green midrib, 
sometimes pink-tinged, disk glands 5, minute, 
free, stamens 5, free; female flowers with pedi-
cel (5-) 7-20 mm long, perianth lobes elliptical-
ovate, yellowish green, often reddish- or 
brownish-tinged, disk c. 1 mm in diameter, flat, 
ovary superior, depressed globose, c. 1 mm in 
diameter, smooth, 3-celled, styles 3, free, c. 0.5 
mm long, 2-fid at apex. Fruit a depressed glo-
bose 3-lobed fleshy berry, c. 1 mm x 2 mm, 
smooth, pale green, sometimes reddish-tinged, 
6-seeded. Seeds c. 1 mm x 0.5 mm, trigonous, 
pale brown, with 10-12 rows of minute tuber-
cles on one side and 9—10 concentric rows of 
tubercles on the other side. 
Phyllanthus is a large genus comprising about 
750 species in tropical and subtropical regions, 
with about 150 species in mainland tropical 
Africa and about 60 in Madagascar and the 
Indian Ocean islands. 
Several other shrubby Phyllanthus spp. have 
medicinal uses in East and southern Africa. 
Phyllanthus fischeri Pax occurs from Ethiopia 
south to Tanzania. In Kenya the Nandi people 
take a fruit decoction to treat roundworms. In 
Tanzania a root decoction, mixed with roots of 
other plant species, is drunk to treat threat-
ened abortion, female sterility and general 
malaise. Phyllanthus fischeri is considered a 
good forage for all livestock. The twigs are used 
as toothbrush. Phyllanthus hutchinsonianus 
S.Moore occurs in Tanzania, Zimbabwe and 
Mozambique. In Tanzania the bitter leaves are 
eaten by women after childbirth as a stomach 
medicine. Phyllanthus sacleuxii Radcl.-Sm. 
(synonym: Phyllanthus mittenianus Hutch.) 
occurs in montane woodland of Kenya and 
Tanzania. In Kenya a leaf decoction is drunk to 
treat diarrhoea. Leaf sap is used as ear drops 
to treat otitis. It is listed as rare in Kenya on 
the IUCN Red List of threatened plants. Phyl-
lanthus somalensis Hutch, occurs in Somalia 
and northern Kenya. In Somalia a root decoc-
tion is drunk to cure blood in the urine, includ-
ing schistosomiasis. A root decoction or mac-
432 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
eration is taken to treat bilharzia. In Kenya 
the leaves are suspected of poisoning livestock. 
An ethanol extract of the roots showed antibac-
terial activity in vitro. Phyllanthus volkensii 
Engl, occurs in Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. 
In Uganda a leaf infusion is drunk to treat 
headache. 
Ecology Phyllanthus nummulariifolius oc-
curs in dense riverine forest, woodland, forest 
edges and grassland, often in seasonally wet 
and disturbed localities, but also in shallow 
pockets of soil on granite inselbergs in Acacia-
Commiphora vegetation, up to 2100 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Phyllan-
thus nummulariifolius has a very wide area of 
distribution and there are no signs that its 
genetic variability is diminishing. 
Prospects Phyllanthus nummulariifolius 
has many uses in local medicine, but virtually 
nothing is known concerning its chemistry and 
pharmacology. Therefore, more research is 
needed to evaluate its properties. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Keay, 1958a; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; 
Unander, Webster & Blumberg, 1991. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1982; Andrianaivoravelona, 2004; Baerts 
& Lehmann, 2008c; Chifundera, Baluku & 
Mashimango, 1993; Hamill et al., 2000; Heine 
& Heine, 1988b; Kokwaro, 1993; Macleod, 1998; 
Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003; Yamada, 1999. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
PHYLLANTHUS RETICULATUS Poir. 
Protologue Encycl. 5: 298 (1804). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 26 
Synonyms Kirganelia reticulata (Poir.) 
Baill. (1858). 
Vernacular names Potato plant, potato 
smell, seaside laurel (En). Mwino, mfuungozi, 
mkasiri, mchunguchungu, mviongozi, mzizima 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus reticulatus is widespread in the Old 
World tropics, from tropical Africa to India, 
China and South-East Asia, and south to 
Queensland (northern Australia). It has been 
introduced into the West Indies. It occurs 
throughout tropical Africa, except in the most 
humid, equatorial areas, and also in Egypt and 
northern South Africa. 
Uses The Asante people in Ghana give a 
Phyllanthus reticulatus - wild 
soup made of Phyllanthus reticulatus leaves 
boiled with palm oil to women after childbirth. 
Sap from the stem is used as eye drops to cure 
conjunctivitis and soreness. In southern Africa 
powdered leaves are topically applied to sores, 
including venereal sores, burns, suppurations 
and chafes. In Tanzania crushed leaves are 
rubbed on the body of malaria patients. In Su-
dan and southern Africa the leaves and bark 
are reputed to be diuretic and cooling. In Zan-
zibar the plant is considered a remedy for 
anaemia and intestinal haemorrhage. Sap from 
pounded roots is used as ear drops to treat ear 
infections. Powdered root is sprinkled on in-
fected wounds and chancre. A decoction of the 
roots is drunk against dysmenorrhoea and to 
increase fertility. It is also taken to treat ab-
scesses, general pain or spasms, and is used as 
a purgative and as part of treatment against 
hookworm. The Sukuma people of Tanzania 
drink water mixed with the pounded roots 
against headache. Leaves and roots also enter 
in a treatment of paralysis. In Tanzania the 
fruit and root are used for criminal poisoning. 
In India the powdered leaves are pounded with 
cubebs {Piper cubeba L.) and camphor into tab-
lets for sucking against bleeding gums; the 
leaves are also used in the treatment of diabe-
tes. In the Philippines leaves are applied lo-
cally against pinworms. A root decoction is 
taken against gonorrhoea and other venereal 
diseases and also against diarrhoea accompa-
nied by mild anal bleeding. In the Malaysia the 
stem and leaves are rubbed on the chest 
against asthma; a leaf decoction is drunk to 
treat a sore throat, against snakebites, mental 
problems and diarrhoea. 
PHYLLANTHUS 433 
The foliage and young shoots are hrowsed by 
all livestock, e.g. in Kenya and Tanzania. The 
fruits are edible. They are traded in Freetown 
(Sierra Leone) as sour grapes and are occa-
sionally eaten in East Africa, but probably only 
as an emergency food. 
In Sudan and East Africa a red or black dye is 
obtained from the fruit, bark and roots; it is 
used for tanning and dyeing fishing lines and 
nets. In Angola a mixture of crushed leaves 
and black mud is used traditionally to dye 
cloth. In Indonesia a decoction of stems and 
leaves is used for dyeing cotton black. It was 
also used as a mordant. In India the root is 
reported to produce a red dye. In the Philip-
pines a black ink is prepared from the ripe 
fruits. The Swahili name 'mwino' suggests a 
similar use in East Africa. Stems are used in 
Nigeria as roof binders. Twigs are widely used 
as chew sticks. The wood is suitable for local 
construction and as firewood or tinder; it pro-
duces charcoal of good quality. In Tanzania it 
is used to make flails for threshing, utensils 
and other small objects and was formerly used 
in fire-drills. 
Production and international trade Phyl-
lanthus reticulatus is of subsistence value in 
most parts of Africa, and root bark, stem bark 
and leaves are collected and traded in local 
markets. Production figures are not available. 
Properties Phyllanthus reticulatus contains 
tannins, which are partly responsible for its 
medicinal and dyeing properties. A number of 
triterpenoids have been isolated from the 
stems and leaves, including sitosterol, friedelin 
and betulinic acid. The stem bark contains 
pentacosane, 21-a-hydroxyfriedelan-3-one, tarax-
erol and lupene-24-diol. 
Petroleumether and ethanol extracts of the 
leaves showed hypoglycaemic effects in al-
loxan-induced diabetic mice. An ethanolic ex-
tract of the stem bark showed in-vitro antiviral 
properties against polio and measles viruses, 
and antitumour activity. In Kenya extracts of 
the leaves showed promising antiplasmodial 
activity against chloroquine-resistant and -
sensitive malaria parasites. 
Phyllanthus reticulatus has been a test plant in 
trials to remove heavy metals from contami-
nated soil. Although it was effective, Pluchea 
indica (L.) Less, performed significantly better. 
The wood is fairly hard and tough, and greyish 
white to reddish. 
Description Monoecious, deciduous, much-
branched shrub or small tree up to 5(—10) m 
tall; bole up to 25 cm in diameter; bark pale 
Phyllanthus reticulatus - flowering branch. 
Source: PROSEA 
reddish brown, longitudinally fissured; 
branches slender, spreading and drooping al-
most to the ground, pale grey or brownish 
white, lateral leafy shoots up to 25 cm long. 
Leaves alternate, distichous, simple and entire; 
stipules linear to narrowly lanceolate, 1-1.5 
mm long, pale brown; petiole 1-4 mm long; 
blade elliptical to ovate-oblong or nearly or-
bicular, 1-5 cm x 0.5-3 cm, base cuneate to 
rounded or truncate, apex acute or notched, 
usually glabrous, pinnately veined with 7-13 
pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence a fascicle 
on lateral shoots, with 1 female and several 
male flowers per fascicle, or female flowers 
solitary in upper leaf axils. Flowers unisexual, 
regular, 5(-6)-merous, fragrant; perianth lobes 
elliptical-ovate to obovate-orbicular, c. 2 mm x 
1—2 mm, glabrous or short-hairy outside, white 
with a green or yellowish green median stipe, 
sometimes tinged pinkish to purplish; male 
flowers with pedicel 2-4 mm long, disk glands 
5(-6), free, stamens 5(-6), usually free, c. 1.5 
mm long; female flowers with shorter and 
stouter pedicels, disk c. 1 mm in diameter, 5-
lobed, ovary superior, almost globose, 1—1.5 
mm in diameter, 3—4(—many)-celled, smooth, 
styles 3-8, free, apex shortly 2-fid. Fruit a de-
pressed globose, fleshy berry 3-5 mm x 4-6 
mm, 3-many-lobed, smooth, green turning 
434 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
reddish purple or bluish black, 6-many-seeded. 
Seeds irregularly ovoid-trigonous, 2-2.5 mm 
long, minutely ridged, shiny, reddish brown. 
Other botanical information Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in mainland tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
islands. 
Growth and development In the Sahel 
region flowering occurs towards the end of the 
dry season, shortly after the plants have come 
into leaf, and continues during the rainy sea-
son. In Sudan Phyllanthus reticulatus flowers 
in March-October and fruits in October-
December. In southern Africa it is reported to 
flower before or when coming into leaf, mainly 
in September-October, but flowering may start 
as early as July. The flowers have a very char-
acteristic smell of potatoes. 
Ecology Phyllanthus reticulatus occurs in 
rainforest and mixed deciduous forest, miombo 
woodland, on river banks, in forest fringes, 
mostly on deep moist soil. It is also found in 
littoral scrub and dune vegetation and occa-
sionally on termite mounds. It often forms 
thickets, e.g. in floodplain grassland. Phyllan-
thus reticulatus can become an invasive weed 
of cultivated land. 
Management In Africa Phyllanthus reticu-
latus only occurs in the wild, but in India it is 
occasionally also cultivated. It can be coppiced. 
Genetic resources Phyllanthus reticulatus 
is common and widespread; it is therefore not 
in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects The numerous medicinal uses of 
Phyllanthus reticulatus warrant much more 
detailed studies of its chemical and pharmacol-
ogical properties. The dye and tannin proper-
ties also deserve attention. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2004; Indi & 
Chinta, 2007; Jain et a l , 1998; Neuwinger, 
2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1996a; van Holthoon, 1999; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Calixto et al., 1998; 
Chhabra, Uiso & Mshiu, 1984; Diallo et al., 
2002; d'Oliveira Feijào, 1961; El Amin, 1990; 
Grace et a l , 2002; Hedberg et al., 1983a; Jain 
& Nagpal, 2002; Khan, 2001; Kumar et al., 
2008; Lam et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2006a; Omu-
lokoli, Khan & Chhabra, 1997; Samantaray, 
Rout & Das, 1999; Sampanpanish et al., 2007; 
Unander, Webster & Blumberg, 1990. 
Sources of illustration Phuphathana-
phong, 1991. 
Authors A. Maroyi 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
PHYLLANTHUS URINARIA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 2: 982 (1753). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 26, 48, 52 
Vernacular names Common leaf-flower, 
shatterstone, chamber bitter (En). Kikilé, petit 
tamarin rouge, curanellie rouge, urinaire de 
Malabar (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyl-
lanthus urinaria is probably native to Asia and 
has spread as a weed throughout the tropics. It 
also occurs in tropical Africa and the Indian 
Ocean islands, but it is not common there. 
Uses Sap of leafy twigs or a twig decoction is 
drunk in Côte d'Ivoire and DR Congo to treat 
pain in the side. In Côte d'Ivoire and Nigeria a 
paste of fresh crushed leaves and kaolin in 
water is drunk and applied to the body to treat 
convulsions, colic, constipation and urethral 
discharges. In Nigeria a plant decoction is 
drunk and plant ash in water is applied as ear 
drops to treat earache. The bitter leaves are 
eaten to treat hiccup and cough. In DR Congo a 
decoction of young shoots or roots is taken to 
treat dysentery, malaria and typhoid fever. A 
decoction of the whole plant is taken to fight 
jaundice and gonorrhoea and is topically ap-
plied as a poultice to treat skin problems such 
as ulcers, sores, swelling and itch. In Madagas-
car, Réunion and Mauritius a plant decoction is 
drunk as a diuretic and purgative to treat diar-
Phyllanthus urinaria - naturalized 
PHYLLANTHUS 435 
rhoea, painful urination, syphilis and liver 
problems, and also to treat fever. In Madagas-
car a stem or leaf infusion is taken to treat 
asthma and bronchitis and is externally ap-
plied to treat parasitic skin diseases. In Rodri-
gues a leaf infusion is taken to treat cough. 
Worldwide, Phyllanthus urinaria is used as a 
diuretic and purgative to treat a wide variety 
of uro-genital disorders, diarrhoea and diabe-
tes, as a bitter tonic and to treat fever, includ-
ing malaria. In Asia extracts are also widely 
used against hepatitis B infections. Externally, 
crushed plant parts or an infusion are applied 
to treat ulcers, sores and tumours. In India the 
crushed plant is used as fish poison. 
Production and international trade Dried 
Phyllanthus urinaria plant parts or extracts 
are sold on the internet. Dried herbs are sold at 
US$ 70 (2.3 kg) to US$ 1100 (22.7 kg). Seeds 
are sold at US$ 3 (60 seeds) to US$ 40 (1000 
seeds). 
Properties The chemical composition and 
pharmacology of Phyllanthus urinaria have 
been subject to many investigations. The fol-
lowing chemical constituents have been found: 
lignans (e.g. phyllanthin, phyltetralin, hy-
pophyllanthin, urinatetralin, dextrobuschernin, 
5-demethyoxynirathin and urinaligran), ellagi-
tannins (e.g. corilagin, geraniin, hippomanin A, 
phyllanthusin F and G, repandinin B and phyl-
lanthusiin U), terpenoids (e.g. ß-amyrin, lupeol 
acetate and ß-sitosterol), flavonoids (quercetin, 
astragalin, quercitrin, rhamnocitrin, isoquer-
citrin, kaempferol, daucosterol, triacontanol 
and rutin), phenolic compounds (e.g. caffeic 
acid, ellagic acid, gallic acid, methylester dehy-
drochebulic acid, methyl brevifolincarboxylate, 
hexacosanoic acid, brevifolin, brevifolin carboxylic 
acid, pyrogallol, n-octadecane, methylgallate, 
trimethyl-3,4-dehydrochebulate, 1,3,4,6-tetra-O-
galloyl-ß-d-glucose) and waxes (montanoic acid 
methyl ester, triacontanol). 
Phyllanthus urinaria has been found to inhibit 
in-vitro DNA polymerase of the hepatitis B 
virus and other hepatitis-DNA-viruses, such as 
the woodchuck hepatitis virus. Aqueous ex-
tracts have significant antiviral effects and a 
protective effect on liver cells. It was found 
that ellagic acid, isolated from the plant, 
showed significant antihepatotoxic activity. 
Triacontanol showed hepatoprotective proper-
ties, e.g. against galactosamine-induced cyto-
toxicity in rat hepatocytes. The lignan phyllan-
thin showed protective activity in rat hepato-
cytes against cytotoxicity induced by CCU and 
galactosamine. However, phyllanthin has also 
been reported to be toxic to the nervous system 
and liver. In a double-blind placebo-controlled 
study of Phyllanthus urinaria for the treat-
ment of chronic hepatitis B no delayed virologi-
cal or biochemical response was shown at 24 
weeks after the cessation of treatment. An ace-
tone extract was found to suppress herpes sim-
plex virus (HSV). Several bioactive compounds 
were isolated from the extract. Hippomanin A 
and geraniin were found to inhibit only HSV-2 
and 1,3,4,6-tetra-O-galloyl-ß-d-glucose only 
HSV-1. Derivatives of corilagin showed inhibi-
tory activity against Epstein-Barr virus DNA 
polymerase. 
A water extract of Phyllanthus urinaria in-
duced apoptosis and significantly decreased the 
number of Lewis lung carcinoma cells and hu-
man myeloid leukaemia cells (HL-60 cells) in a 
dose- and time-dependent manner. It did not 
exert any cytotoxic effect on normal cells. The 
oral administration of an aqueous alcohol ex-
tract to mice caused significant inhibition of 
tumour development, without toxic effects. 
A plant extract containing corilagin showed 
significant anti-thrombosis activity in rats in a 
dose-dependent manner due to its inhibition of 
platelet-neutrophil adhesion. It did not cause 
serious bleeding side effect as compared with 
aspirin or urokinase. Corilagin, however, had 
no influence on rabbit platelet aggregation. 
A methanol extract showed significant antioxi-
dant activity in vitro. A correlation between 
the antioxidant activity and several phenolic 
compounds, ellagitannins and flavonoids, was 
observed. Extracts of Phyllanthus urinaria also 
showed cardioprotective in vitro and antidia-
betic effects in streptozotocin-induced diabetic 
rats. An aqueous alcoholic extract of stems, 
leaves and roots caused graded contraction in 
guinea-pig trachea and urinary bladder. It also 
exhibited potent and long-lasting antinocicep-
tive activity in several pain models in mice, 
especially when given orally. Gallic acid ethyl 
ester, isolated from the aerial parts, produced 
dose-dependent and pronounced systemic, spi-
nal and supraspinal antinociception in mice. 
An aqueous extract showed significant in-vitro 
antiplasmodial activity against a chloroquine-
resistant Plasmodium falciparum strain. The 
n-hexane fraction of an aqueous alcohol extract 
from leaves, stems and roots exhibited antibac-
terial activity against Escherichia coli, Proteus 
vulgaris, Salmonella typhimurium, Shigella 
flexneri, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Vibrio para-
haemolyticus and Staphylococcus aureus. 
Callus culture and root culture protocols were 
436 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
developed using single node explants , bu t cal-
lus extracts showed less activity against viral 
DNA polymerase and reverse t ranscr ip tase 
t h a n extracts from field-grown p lan ts . The 
compounds ß-sitosterol, glochidonol and glochi-
done were isolated from the callus extracts . 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s Phyllan-
thus urinaria is similarly medicinally used as 
Phyllanthus amarus Schumach. & Thonn. and 
Phyllanthus fraternus G.L.Webster. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Monoecious, annua l or short-
lived perennial herb, erect or sprawling, up to 
60 cm tall, reddish; branchle ts (3- )5-13 cm 
long, flattened, often slightly winged and 
sparsely hairy. Leaves a l te rna te , distichous 
and crowded along la tera l branchle ts , simple, 
glabrous, sessile; s t ipules ovate to lanceolate, 
long-acuminate, those of ma in s tems with auri-
cles a t base; blade oblong to elliptical-oblong, 
7-12(-20) m m x 3-6(-9) mm, base cuneate to 
rounded and slightly unequal , apex rounded, 
often pointed, marg ins finely toothed. Flowers 
1-2 in the axils of leaves, male flowers towards 
the apex of branchlets , female flowers a t the 
basa l pa r t of branchle ts , unisexual , regular, 6-
merous; pedicel c. 1 mm long; male flowers 
wi th obovate pe r i an th lobes c. 1 m m long, disk 
lobes 6, s t amens 3, f i laments fused, an the r s 
Phyllanthus urinaria - 1, plant habit; 2, fruit; 
3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
free; female flowers with t r iangular-ovate peri-
a n t h lobes c. 1 mm long, disk cup-shaped, 
ovary superior, ovoid, warty, 3-celled, styles 
fused a t base into a t r i angu la r plate , 2-fid a t 
apex. Frui t a globular capsule 2-2.5 mm in 
diameter , usual ly warty, hanging, 6-seeded. 
Seeds c. 1 mm long, with sharp t ransverse 
ridges. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Phyllanthus 
is a large genus comprising about 750 species 
in tropical and subtropical regions, with about 
150 species in main land tropical Africa and 
about 60 in Madagascar and the Indian Ocean 
is lands. 
Phyllanthus urinaria is highly variable. Sev-
eral other Phyllanthus spp. indigenous to the 
Indian Ocean is lands have similar medicinal 
uses as Phyllanthus urinaria. A decoction of 
t he leafy twigs of Phyllanthus lanceolatus 
Poir., a ra re species from Maur i t ius , and of 
Phyllanthus phillyreifolius Poir., an endan-
gered species from Réunion and Maur i t ius , is 
t aken as a diuretic and to t rea t diarrhoea. A 
leaf or s tem bark decoction is t aken as a diu-
retic to t rea t venereal diseases and pain caused 
by kidney stones. An infusion of the young 
leaves of Phyllanthus pervilleanus (Bail.) 
Müll.Arg., from Comoros and Madagascar , is 
considered a s trong diuretic. 
Phyllanthus angavensis (Leandri) Leandr i oc-
curs in south-western Madagascar . A s tem 
bark decoction is t aken to t rea t pers is tent diar-
rhoea and amoebic dysentery. A root decoction 
of Phyllanthus melleri Müll.Arg., from central 
and eas te rn Madagascar , is d runk to t r ea t fa-
tigue, d iarrhoea and amoebic dysentery. Root 
powder or the crushed roots are applied to ab-
scesses and ulcers. The small fruits a re edible 
and made into a low-quality alcoholic drink. 
The roots give a low-quality dye for baske ts . 
The branches are used in wickerwork. A root 
decoction of Phyllanthus mocquerysianus 
A.DC. from eas te rn Madagascar is d runk to 
t r ea t malar ia . Phyllanthus tenellus Roxb. oc-
curs na tu ra l ly in Tanzania , Mozambique, the 
Indian Ocean is lands and Yemen and h a s been 
introduced in several countries of the Old and 
New tropics. In Madagascar prepara t ions of 
the leaves and s tem are t aken to t rea t a s thma , 
bronchit is and parasi t ic skin diseases. A bark 
extract is t aken as an as t r ingent and a plant 
extract to t r ea t Menorrhagia. A decoction of the 
whole p lan t is used to t r ea t fever in children. 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t The branching 
pa t t e rn of Phyllanthus urinaria is 'phyllan-
thoid', i.e. t he spirally a r ranged leaves on the 
P H Y S A L I S 437 
main axes are strongly reduced to so-called 
'cataphylls', which subtend deciduous branchlets 
with distichous leaves, the branchle ts resem-
bling a compound leaf. Flowering and fruiting 
may occur throughout the year if enough wate r 
is available. Seeds are dispersed by wate r and 
animals . 
E c o l o g y Phyllanthus urinaria is a common 
weed of waste places, clearings, gardens and 
along pa ths , bu t is also found in evergreen for-
est. It grows on well-drained, fertile, sandy 
soils, sometimes on l imestone, often in humid 
localities or even in marshy ground, up to 1500 
m al t i tude. It prefers full sun, bu t may grow 
under par t ia l shade. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Phyllanthus 
urinaria is a prolific seed producer. The seeds 
can remain dormant for an extended period of 
t ime. They germinate massively dur ing the 
ra iny season and the seedlings are very fast 
growing. Seed requires light to germinate . A 
germinat ion ra te of up to 80% was observed a t 
t empera tu res of 25—35°C, but germinat ion was 
poor a t 20°C or 40°C. Germinat ion of seed is 
also poor under mois ture s t ress conditions. 
Stratification significantly improved the ger-
minat ion of the seeds. 
M a n a g e m e n t In exper iments in the United 
Sta tes soil fertility and soil mois ture affected 
morphology and yield of Phyllanthus urinaria, 
with p lan ts being more branched and with a 
higher dry weight unde r favourable conditions. 
Differences in soil fertility and soil mois ture 
generally did not affect t he in-vitro inhibitory 
activity on woodchuck virus DNA polymerase. 
Phyllanthus urinaria shows a marked prefer-
ence for calcareous sites in humid tropical ar-
eas . In China, warm, well-drained sandy soils 
and fertilization with N and K are recom-
mended for cultivation. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s In Indian rice fields 
Phyllanthus urinaria is a host of the rice root-
knot nematode (Meloidogyne graminicola). 
H a r v e s t i n g Phyllanthus urinaria is usual ly 
harves ted from the wild. The plant is often 
uprooted, bu t sometimes only aer ial pa r t s are 
collected. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The harvested plant 
mater ia l is usual ly washed and used fresh, bu t 
it may also be dried and kept in a dry place for 
future use. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Phyllanthus urinaria is 
a widespread weedy species and is not threat -
ened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Pharmacological research of Phyl-
lanthus urinaria h a s shown in teres t ing anti-
tumour , antiviral , antioxidant, ant i thrombosis 
and antinociceptive activities, and further re-
search is meri ted. More research is wa r r an t ed 
concerning' i ts husbandry and growth condi-
tions for opt imal production of active com-
pounds. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1994; Coode, 
1982; Fang, Rao & Tzeng, 2008; Huang et a l , 
2006; Kang et al., 2006; Lee et al., 2006b; Liao, 
Chang & Koo, 2006; Neuwinger, 2000; Yang et 
al., 2007a; Yang et al., 2007b. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1982; Bharal i , Tabassum & Azad, 2003; 
Ca tapan et al., 2002; Chan et al., 2003; Chula-
rojmontri et al., 2005; Cruz et al., 1994; Gurib-
Fakim & Brendler, 2004; Higashino et al., 
1992; Hout et a l , 2006; Lavergne, 2001; Pau-
lino et a l , 1999; Santos et a l , 1999; Shen et al., 
2008; Shen et al., 2003; van Holthoon, 1999; 
Ueda et al., 1999; Unander , Webster & Blum-
berg, 1991; Wang et al., 1995; Xu et al., 2007; 
Zhou et a l , 1997. 
S o u r c e s of i l l u s t r a t i o n Radcliffe-Smith, 
1986. 
A u t h o r s D.M. Mosango 
PHYSALIS ANGULATA L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pl. 1: 183 (1753). 
F a m i l y Solanaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 48 
S y n o n y m s Physalis minima L. (1753). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Gooseberry, hogweed, 
balloon cherry, angular winter cherry, cut-leaf 
ground cherry (En). Coqueret, coqueret 
anguleux (Fr). Alquequenje amarelo, balâo 
raj ado, joâ de capote, camapu (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Physa-
lis angulata is nat ive to tropical America, and 
is now dis tr ibuted pantropically as a weed. In 
tropical Africa it occurs in most countries. 
U s e s The leaves are analgesic and used ex-
ternal ly throughout tropical Africa to t r ea t 
skin a i lments such as itch, smallpox pustules , 
whitlow lesions, infected scarification wounds 
and rheumat ic pain, and to relieve muscular 
stiffness and pain. The leaves a re also applied 
to Guinea worm sores, killing the worms and 
easing extraction. In Côte d'Ivoire sleeping 
sickness is t rea ted with a mixture of leaves of 
Physalis angulata and Anchomanes difformis 
(Blume) Engl. A lotion prepared from the 
leaves is applied to t r ea t ophtha lmia in chil-
dren. Leaves are ea ten or applied as an enema 
to cure stomach-ache, colic, l i thiasis and anu-
438 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Physalis angulata - naturalized 
ria, and are added to palm wine to cure fever 
and to calm attacks of asthma, vomiting and 
diarrhoea. 
In Central and South America Physalis angu-
lata is also widely used as a medicinal plant. It 
is used to treat malaria, toothache, liver ail-
ments including hepatitis, rheumatism, and is 
considered a diuretic and relaxant. Plant infu-
sions are taken to treat gonorrhoea, indiges-
tion, nephritis and fever. 
In South-East Asia an infusion of the aerial 
parts, including the fruits, is taken to cure di-
gestive and intestinal problems, and is exter-
nally applied to treat various skin problems 
such as sores, boils and cuts. In Papua New 
Guinea a leaf decoction is drunk to treat con-
stipation. The sap of the leaves mixed in water 
is taken as an abortifacient, although the use 
of the leaves to treat sterility is also men-
tioned. 
In tropical Africa the fruit is eaten as a snack, 
but eating too many fruits may cause dizziness. 
The leaves are eaten as a salad, although the 
taste is bitter. In larger quantities the plant is 
poisonous to cattle and sheep, and it gives the 
meat a musk-like smell. 
Properties The aerial parts of Physalis 
angulata contain several steroidal lactones 
belonging to the physaline and withanolide 
types: physalins A—I, physagulin A—G, withan-
gulatin A and withanolide T. They further con-
tain several vitasteroids, e.g. vamonolide. The 
pyrrolidine alkaloid phygrine (bis-hygrine) was 
isolated from the roots and aerial parts. The 
physalins B and F were found to inhibit the 
growth of several types of human leukaemia 
cells in vitro and physalin F showed cytotoxic-
ity in vitro on 5 other human cancer cell lines. 
In addition, physalin F had an antitumour 
effect in mice in vivo. In vitro withangulatin A 
was found to be a topoisomerase II inhibitor 
and a cytotoxin. In tests on rats and mice, vi-
tanolides (isolated from aerial parts) and hy-
peroside (quercetin-3-O-galactoside; from the 
leaves) were confirmed to have anti-
inflammatory activity. Extracts of Physalis 
angulata have proven effectiveness against 
both human African sleeping sickness (Try-
panosoma brucei rhodesiense) and Chagas' 
disease (Trypanosoma cruzi). They also have 
an inhibitory effect against several strains of 
Neisseria gonorrhoeae and molluscicidal prop-
erties (Biomphalaria tenagophila). 
Adulterations and substitutes Some So-
lanum spp. are used in a similar way as Physa-
lis angulata to cure digestive and intestinal 
problems, including stomach-ache and diar-
rhoea, and for various skin problems such as 
sores, boils and cuts. Several other Physalis 
spp. are also employed to treat fever, malaria, 
headache and rheumatism. Several other So-
lanaceae also contain steroidal lactones of the 
physaline and withanolide types, e.g. Withania 
and Nicandra. 
Description Annual herb up to 100 cm tall, 
with procumbent or prostrate stem, glabrous or 
with a few short appressed hairs; stems 
sharply angled, hollow. Leaves arranged spi-
rally, simple; stipules absent; petiole 2-11 cm 
long; blade ovate to lanceolate, 4-15 cm x 2.5-
10 cm, base cuneate, apex obtuse, margin ir-
regularly toothed or entire. Flowers axillary, 
solitary, erect or nodding, bisexual, regular, 5-
merous; pedicel 6—12 mm long, elongated in 
fruit up to 22 mm; calyx campanulate, 5-lobed, 
3—5 mm long, angled or ribbed, in fruit 2-4 cm 
long; corolla campanulate, 5-10 mm long, pale 
yellow with or without 5 dark spots; stamens 
inserted near the base of the corolla tube, fila-
ments 1.5-5 mm long, anthers pale blue; ovary 
superior, 2-celled, style filiform, stigma head-
shaped. Fruit a globose berry 10-16 mm in 
diameter, yellow, viscid, many-seeded, enclosed 
in the persistent, inflated bladdery calyx. Seeds 
kidney-shaped, 1.5-2 mm x 1—1.5 mm. Seed-
lings with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Physalis 
comprises about 90 species, all but one being 
native to tropical and temperate America. The 
species are variable and taxonomically confus-
ing, and no comprehensive study of the genus 
exists. Physalis is closely related to Margaran-
thus and Nicandra. Physalis minima L. is a 
PHYSALIS 439 
Physalis angulata - 1, plant habit; 2, flower in 
front view; 3, flower in side view; 4, fruit with 
calyx partly removed; 5, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
synonym of Physalis angulata, but in Africa 
the name Physalis minima has been misap-
plied to specimens of Physalis lagascae Roem. 
& Schult, and Physalis ixocarpa Brot. Physalis 
angulata is very similar to the American Phy-
salis philadelphica Lam. of which a larger-
fruited, cultivated type ('Japanese gooseberry' 
or 'tomatillo') and a smaller-fruited, wild type 
exist. Physalis philadelphica has been culti-
vated in southern Africa for its edible fruits 
and is locally naturalized. 
Growth and development When free of 
stress Physalis angulata can grow to 80-100 
cm tall before flowering, but where growing 
under stress flowering may start when the 
plants are 25-30 cm tall. It is cross-pollinated. 
Plants raised from seed may start flowering 
after 6 weeks, and fruits are ripe 6 weeks later. 
Ecology Physalis angulata grows best in 
moist, fertile soils, is tolerant of partial shade 
and occurs widely as a weed of crops and pas-
tures, and in waste areas. It can be found up to 
3000 m altitude. Light frost does not kill it. At 
high temperatures the plants do not develop 
well. 
Propagation and planting Physalis angu-
lata can be easily propagated by seed. Shallow 
sowing and alternating temperatures, e.g. 10 
hours at 21°C and 14 hours at 30°C, will give 
best germination results. 
Management Although Physalis angulata is 
reported to be cultivated occasionally, both for 
its edible fruits and for medicinal use, optimal 
cultivation techniques are not documented. 
Diseases and pests Physalis angulata is 
sensitive to many fungal diseases and is a host 
of the causal agent of tomato bacterial spot 
Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria. Phy-
salis angulata hosts viruses found in tobacco, 
potato, okra, capsicum pepper, beans and sev-
eral other crops, as well as physalis mottle 
virus (PhyMV), and also several root-knot 
nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.) 
Yield In a field test in Indonesia, the maxi-
mum number of fruits per plant was about 130, 
and the number of seeds per fruit was 130 at 
most. 
Handling after harvest The fruits will 
keep for 3 months if stored in their calyx under 
dry conditions. 
Genetic resources Physalis angulata is 
widespread as a pantropical weed and is not 
liable to genetic erosion. Large collections of 
Physalis, including Physalis angulata, are kept 
in Mexico, Guatemala, Germany and the Neth-
erlands. 
Prospects The steroidal lactones of the phy-
saline and withanolide types isolated from 
Physalis angulata show very interesting activi-
ties, e.g. in the field of tumour inhibition. More 
research on their toxicity toward non-
malignant cells is, however, needed to fully 
evaluate their possibilities as lead compounds 
in cancer research. A taxonomie monograph of 
Physalis will contribute to botany and other 
areas of research that currently publish re-
search results under wrong or doubtful names. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Chiang et 
a l , 1992; Chiang, Jaw & Chen, 1992; Damu et 
a l , 2007; Goncalves, 2005; Jarvis, C, 2007; 
Slamet Sutanti Budi Rahayu, 2001b; Whitson 
& Manos, 2005. 
Other references Abe et al., 2006; Adjano-
houn et al., 1989; Akoègninou, van der Burg & 
van der Maesen, 2006; D'Arcy & Rakotozafy, 
1994; dos Santos et a l , 2003; Edeoga, Okwu & 
Mbaebie, 2005; Elkhalifa, Ibrahim & Elghazali, 
2006; Freiburghaus et al., 1996a; Geissler et 
al., 2002; Heine & Heine, 1988a; Neuwinger, 
2000; QingPing et al., 2007; Raju, Reddy & 
440 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Rajarao, 2007. 
Sources of illustration Slamet Sutanti 
Budi Rahayu, 2001b. 
Authors F.S. Mairura 
Based on PROSEA 12(2): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 2. 
PHYSALIS LAGASCAE Roem. & Schult. 
Protologue Syst. veg. 4: 679 (1819). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24 
Synonyms Physalis micrantha Link (1821), 
Physalis minima auct. non L. 
Origin and geographic distribution Physa-
lis lagascae is native to tropical America, and 
now distributed pantropically as a weed. In 
tropical Africa it occurs in most countries. 
Uses Leaves are used externally to treat 
yaws and measles. Pain in the joints is relieved 
by rubbing or dressing them with pounded 
leaves. The leaves are also applied to Guinea 
worm sores, killing the worms and easing ex-
traction. Leaf sap is taken orally to treat tonsil-
litis, jaundice, angina pectoris, tachycardia and 
stomach-ache, and as an anthelmintic. The 
ground leaves are used in the treatment of 
abdominal and vaginal pain and are taken as a 
cold infusion shortly before childbirth to help 
expel the placenta. The whole plant mashed up 
and added to palm wine is taken to cure fever. 
In Ethiopia and Kenya the leaves are boiled 
and eaten as a vegetable. The fruits are edible 
and are eaten raw. 
Properties The leaf sap of Physalis lagascae 
is very bitter and haemostatic. Chemical and 
pharmacological work done on the species has 
been published under the name Physalis mi-
nima and cannot be distinguished from that 
done on other species of Physalis for which this 
name has been used. In view of the medicinal 
uses, it is probable that Physalis lagascae con-
tains steroidal lactones belonging to the phy-
saline and withanolide types: physalins, phy-
sagulins, withangulatins, withanolides; it may 
further contain vitasteroids. 
Botany Annual herb up to 100 cm tall, with 
erect, decumbent or prostrate stem, hairy with 
simple, multicellular hairs 1-4 mm long and 
minute hairs, also with sessile glands. Leaves 
arranged spirally or opposite, simple and en-
tire; stipules absent; petiole 0.5-4.5(-8) cm 
long, slightly winged; blade ovate to lanceolate, 
1.5-7.5(-10.5) cm x l-4.5(-7.5) cm, base 
cuneate, apex acuminate to obtuse. Flowers 
axillary, solitary, erect or nodding, bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous; pedicel 2—5(-9) mm long, 
elongated in fruit up to 10 mm; calyx campanu-
late, 5-lobed, 2-3.5 mm long, angled to ribbed, 
in fruit 1-2 cm long; corolla campanulate, 4-5 
mm long, greenish yellow, yellow, white or 
greenish cream, with or without purplish 
marks or blotches; stamens inserted near the 
base of the corolla tube, filaments 1.5-3 mm 
long, anthers yellowish; ovary superior, 2-
celled, style filiform, stigma head-shaped. Fruit 
a globose berry 6-10 mm in diameter, greenish 
yellow, pale yellow or yellow, viscid, many-
seeded, enclosed in the persistent, inflated 
bladdery calyx. Seeds round or ovate in outline, 
sometimes kidney-shaped, c. 2 mm x 1.5 mm. 
Physalis comprises about 90 species, all but 
one being native to tropical and temperate 
America. The species are variable and taxo-
nomically confusing, and no comprehensive 
study of the genus exists. In tropical Africa the 
name Physalis minima has often been misap-
plied to Physalis lagascae. 
Ecology Physalis lagascae is a common 
weed and also occurs on disturbed ground, es-
pecially in seasonally dry areas. 
Management Cultivation of Physalis lagas-
cae is reported for its edible fruits and leaves 
as well as for medicinal use, but details on op-
timal cultivation techniques are not recorded. 
Genetic resources and breeding Physalis 
lagascae is widespread as a weed and thus not 
liable to genetic erosion. Large collections of 
Physalis, including Physalis lagascae, are kept 
in Mexico, Guatemala, Germany and the Neth-
erlands. 
Prospects The steroidal lactones of the phy-
saline and withanolide types isolated from 
Physalis spp. show very interesting activities, 
e.g. in the field of tumour inhibition. More re-
search on their toxicity toward non-malignant 
cells is, however, needed to fully evaluate their 
possibilities as lead compounds in cancer re-
search. A taxonomie monograph of Physalis 
will contribute to botany and other areas of 
research that currently publish research re-
sults under wrong or doubtful names. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Goncalves, 
2005; Raju, Reddy & Rajarao, 2007; Tabuti, 
2007; Whitson & Manos, 2005. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Geissler et a l , 2002; Hamill et al., 2003; Neu-
winger, 2000; Tabuti, Lye & Dhillion, 2003; 
Yamada, 1999. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
PHYTOLACCA 441 
PHYTOLACCA AMERICANA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 441 (1753). 
Family Phytolaccaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 36 
Synonyms Phytolacca decandra L. (1763). 
Vernacular names Pokeweed, poke, ink-
berry, common pokeberry, red ink plant, poke 
root (En). Phytolaque, raisin d'Amérique, tein-
turier (Fr). Capa rosa, tintureira, uva de Ame-
rica, uva de macaco (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyto-
lacca americana originates from southern and 
eastern North America and Mexico and has 
been introduced into South America, Europe, 
Africa and Asia. In Africa its occurrence is 
documented in Cape Verde, Liberia, DR Congo, 
Réunion, Mauritius, South Africa and Swazi-
land. It has probably been introduced into 
other countries of tropical Africa as well, but 
documentation is lacking. 
Uses In Réunion and Mauritius the pow-
dered roots are applied to haemorrhoids. The 
crushed roots in alcohol are externally applied 
to rheumatic pains. The fruits and aerial parts 
have emetic and intestinal worm-expelling 
properties. In South Africa the root extract is 
taken to treat lung diseases. All plant parts, 
but especially the roots, are poisonous when 
taken fresh and in quantity. Symptoms of poi-
soning are burning of mouth and throat, sali-
vation, severe stomach irritation, vomiting, 
bloody diarrhoea, spasms and convulsions; 
death may result from ingestion. 
In the United States and Europe different 
plant parts are widely used to treat haemor-
rhoids, rheumatism, inflammations, skin dis-
eases including skin parasites and cancer, gen-
Phytolacca americana - naturalized 
eral pain (fruit, roots), swellings, wounds and 
ulcers (leaves). The root extract is taken as an 
abortifacient and to treat sore throat and ton-
sillitis. The powdered roots are applied in a 
poultice to treat cancer. The fruit and seed 
extract is taken as a purgative, emetic, and to 
treat venereal diseases, scurvy and snakebites. 
In Cape Verde the fruits are used as food color-
ant, but the toxic substances must be removed 
first. In the United States and Europe the 
fruits have been used in traditional textile dye-
ing. They provide the red pigment 'Phytolacca 
red', but fruits are not permitted as a food dye, 
e.g. in Germany. The fruits were formerly used 
to reinforce the red colour of wine. In Réunion 
and Mauritius the young shoots are thoroughly 
cooked and eaten as a vegetable. This use is 
also widespread in the United States. Phyto-
lacca americana is planted as an ornamental in 
temperate climates. 
Production and international trade Al-
though much research is currently being done 
on different compounds of Phytolacca ameri-
cana, no quantitative information is available 
on production and trade of these compounds. In 
human and veterinary herbal medicine the root 
tincture is sold as an emetic. 
Properties The leaves, fruits and roots con-
tain several saponins (triterpenoid glycosides), 
i.e. phytolaccosides and esculentosides, with 
phytolaccosides B, E and G as main com-
pounds. The anti-inflammatory activity of the 
roots has been attributed to the phytolacco-
sides and esculentosides. Phytolaccosides cause 
haemolysis of red blood cells. Phytolaccoside B 
prevents genetic modification of plants via 
Agrobacterium tumefaciens. It acts as a genu-
ine plant transformation inhibitor, having nei-
ther anti-agrobacterial nor phytotoxic activity. 
The roots, fruits and leaves contain several 
lectins, mitogenic-acting cysteine-rich glycopro-
teines, also known as pokeweed mitogens 
(PWMs) and pokeweed antiviral proteins 
(PAPs). The mitogens have a stimulating effect 
on the immune system, especially on the prolif-
eration of T- and B-lymphocytes, and play an 
important role in fundamental leukocyte re-
search. For several decades, PWMs have been 
investigated as a therapeutic agent for cancer 
treatment in animal models. PAPs represent a 
group of ribosome-inactivating proteins (RIPs). 
They are N-glycosidases that catalytically re-
move a specific adenine residue from ribosomal 
RNA. They not only inactivate both eukaryotic 
and prokaryotic protein synthesis, but also 
inhibit the mechanical transmission of viruses. 
442 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
They have potent antiviral activity against 
many plant and animal viruses, including T-
cell leukaemia virus, lymphoma virus, as well 
as human immunodeficiency viruses. PAPs 
show unique clinical potential to become the 
active ingredient of an antivirus drug because 
of their potent in-vivo anti-HIV activity and 
non-interference with in-vivo sperm functions. 
Some PAPs (PAFPs) also exhibit a broad spec-
trum of antifungal activity, including inhibi-
tion of certain saprophytic fungi and some 
plant pathogens. 
The saponins and lectins are responsible for 
the toxicity of the plant, especially of the roots 
and seeds. Lethal poisoning of horses caused by 
eating the roots has been reported. The roots 
also have hypotensive properties; they contain 
the hypotensive compounds histamine and y-
aminobutyric acid. When ingested, leaves typi-
cally produce severe gastro-enteritis, charac-
terized by intense vomiting and frothy diar-
rhoea. Aerial parts have been found to have 
antigalactagogic effects in cattle. Toxicity tests 
from extracts of the roots and fruits showed 
that only ripe fruits have significant mollus-
cicidal properties, and are not toxic to other 
organisms at recommended doses. The metha-
nol extract of dried seeds contains several an-
tihepatotoxic neolignans, of which americanin 
A showed significant anti-inflammatory activ-
ity with very weak toxicity in tests with rats. 
a-Spinasterol has been isolated from the chlo-
roform extract of the roots, shows anti-
inflammatory properties, acts as an an-
timutagen and has therapeutic potential to 
modulate the development and progression of 
diabetic nephropathy. 
The fruits contain the red pigment phytolac-
canin, which is identical to betanine, commer-
cially extracted from beetroot (Beta vulgaris 
L.). 
Several phytolaccosides have been isolated 
from callus mass derived from the stems and 
roots. 
Description Climbing or scrambling, semi-
succulent, reddish herb up to 3.5 m tall, gla-
brous, with a fleshy taproot becoming very 
large. Leaves alternate, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 2-6 cm long; blade 
lanceolate to elliptical or ovate, 14-22 cm x 6-
12 cm, base rounded, often asymmetrical, apex 
acute. Inflorescence an erect, axillary raceme 
up to 30 cm long, many-flowered; bracts up to 3 
mm long, lanceolate. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
5-merous, sweet-scented; pedicel up to 12 mm 
long, pink; sepals c. 2 mm long, rounded, whit-
Phytolacca americana - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
root; 3, flower; 4, fruit; 5, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
ish to pinkish; petals absent; stamens c. 10, 
free, filaments c. 2 mm long; ovary superior, 
consisting of c. 10 carpels, united or with free 
apices, styles connected, c. 1 mm long, stigmas 
linear. Fruit consisting of fused 1-seeded ber-
ries, smooth or sometimes ribbed, up to 6—8(— 
10) mm in diameter, ripening purplish black. 
Seeds kidney-shaped, laterally flattened, 3-4 
mm long. 
Other botanical information Phytolacca 
comprises about 25 species, most of which are 
native to the tropical and subtropical regions of 
South and Central America, with a few species 
in Africa, Madagascar and Asia. Other Phyto-
lacca species with united carpels are Phyto-
lacca octandra L. (inkberry, dyeberry) and Phy-
tolacca dioica L. (belhambra tree, pokeberry 
tree), both originating from South America and 
now pantropical. In Africa Phytolacca octandra 
occurs in Nigeria, Kenya, Zimbabwe, Mozam-
bique and South Africa. In South Africa the 
leaves are applied to septic wounds. A root 
maceration is drunk to treat lung ailments. 
Pulverized roots are taken as an emetic and 
applied externally to treat snakebites. Young 
PHYTOLACCA 443 
sprouts and leaves can be used as a vegetable. 
The roots contain triterpenoid saponins and 
lectins. Phytolacca dioica has been introduced 
in the drier regions of tropical Africa, and oc-
curs in Cape Verde, Mali, Namibia, Botswana, 
Zimbabwe and South Africa. The leaves are 
eaten as a purgative. The fruit is poisonous. It 
is grown as an ornamental, roadside and shade 
tree. The leaves and seeds contain several ribo-
some-inactivating proteins (RIPs). The leaves 
are used in dying wool. 
Growth and development Phytolacca 
americana has a lifespan of 3-10 years. It 
flowers in spring or at the beginning of the 
rainy season. Fruits develop 2-3 months later. 
Fruit set is usually high, suggesting a high 
degree of selfing. In North America the relative 
density of the plants in a population increases 
with decreasing soil pH and decreasing content 
of available phosphate. The seeds are dispersed 
by birds. 
Ecology Phytolacca americana occurs in 
sunny anthropogenic localities, such as dis-
turbed forest, forest margins, roadsides, river 
banks, fallow land and waste places at low 
altitudes. It prefers humus-rich and acidic soil 
in well-drained to moist habitats. It tolerates 
short periods of drought. 
Propagation and planting Phytolacca 
americana is propagated by seed or stem cut-
tings. Prior to sowing, the fruits should be 
soaked in water for 48 hours to permit seed 
extraction. The seeds are sown in pots with 
humus-rich soil and regularly watered. Germi-
nation of unstratified seeds is generally high 
(about 80%), but may vary greatly both within 
as well as between plants. After one year, the 
seedlings can be transplanted into the field or 
in larger pots. 
Mass multiplication is done by non-woody stem 
cuttings. It is advantageous to dip the end of 
the cutting in rooting powder or a rooting solu-
tion, plant in a slightly acid soil medium and to 
water regularly. After 6—8 weeks rooted cut-
tings can be planted in the field, usually at a 
spacing of 1-3 m x 2-3 m. 
Management Regular watering and weed-
ing are important until the crop is established. 
Diseases and pests In Africa diseases and 
pests have not been reported for Phytolacca 
americana. However, it is an alternative host 
to a number of viral diseases, including mosaic, 
ringspot and yellow viruses that affect Amaryl-
lidaceae, Liliaceae and Solanaceae. In Italy 
wilt and die-back symptoms were observed on 
plants cultivated for ornamental purposes 
caused by Phytophthora nicotianae. 
Harvesting Very young, green leaves and 
sprouts are harvested in early spring for use as 
a vegetable. Roots are harvested at the end of 
the fruiting season. 
Handling after harvest The harvested 
plant parts are usually used fresh. 
Genetic resources Phytolacca americana is 
a common herb in its natural distribution area 
and therefore not threatened by genetic ero-
sion. A number of ornamental cultivars of Phy-
tolacca americana have been selected for their 
larger infructescences. 
Prospects Phytolacca americana has an 
interesting chemistry as it contains glycopro-
teins and molluscicidal saponins. The first 
category includes compounds that have a 
stimulating effect on the immune system, play 
an important role in fundamental leukocyte 
research, and have potent antiviral activity, 
offering possibilities for future antiviral medi-
cine development. Phytolacca americana is also 
an attractive ornamental plant. 
Major references Aldea & Allen Gil, 2005; 
Balle, 1951; D'Cruz, Waurzyniak & Uckun, 
2004; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 
1997; Jeong et al., 2004; Nowicke, 1968; Watt 
& Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Belisario Maccaroni & 
Corazza, 2003; Bonness et al., 1994; Burkill, 
1997; Clark, Appleton & Drewes, 1997; Di 
Maro et al., 1999; Fukuyama et al., 1992; Kang 
et al., 1997; Kanzaki et al., 1999; Kino et a l , 
1995; Kobayashi et al., 1995; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Razali Yusuf, 1999a; Shao et a l , 1999; Tachi-
bana et a l , 1996; Takahasi et a l , 2003; van 
Wyk, van Heerden & van Oudtshoorn, 2002; 
Yamaguchi, Mori & Funatsu, 1996; Yang et al., 
2006a. 
Sources of illustration Walter, 1909. 
Authors G. Aweke 
P H Y T O L A C C A D O D E C A N D R A L ' H é r . 
Protologue Stirp. nov. 6: 143, pi. 69 (1791). 
Family Phytolaccaceae 
Chromosome number ïn — 36 
Vernacular names Endod, soap berry, Afri-
can soap berry (En). Phytolaque, endod (Fr). 
Fitolaca, endod (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Phyto-
lacca dodecandra is native to sub-Saharan 
Africa and Madagascar. It has been introduced 
in Asia and tropical America. 
Uses In Central and East Africa and Mada-
444 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Phytolacca dodecandra - wild 
gascar various parts of Phytolacca dodecandra 
are widely used as a medicine for numerous 
ailments, despite the toxicity of the plant. An 
extract of the roots, leaves, fruits and seeds is 
taken as a purgative for humans and animals, 
as an anthelmintic and to treat oedema and 
intestinal problems such as diarrhoea and ab-
dominal pain, as a laxative, emetic, sudorific 
and diuretic. The leaf sap, and sometimes the 
crushed roots and fruits, are applied to wounds 
and skin ailments such as ringworm, scabies, 
eczema, psoriasis, leprosy, boils and vitiligo; 
the sap is cicatrizing and haemostatic and 
causes a burning sensation on the skin. In DR 
Congo the fresh, dried or powdered leaves are 
used for the same purposes. An infusion of the 
fruit or roots is taken orally and the young 
leaves and shoots are chewed to induce abor-
tion. A large lump of butter is taken to stop 
further contractions. An infusion of the fruit or 
the root decoction is also widely taken to treat 
venereal diseases, bilharzia, rabies, malaria, 
sore throat and other respiratory problems, 
rheumatic pain, jaundice, as well as anthrax 
and leeches in animals. In southern Nigeria 
the leaf decoction is given to newborn babies as 
a gentle laxative. In Central Africa the mashed 
leaves are eaten with banana as a stimulant 
and tonic, especially after childbirth. In Congo 
the'leaf sap i's used" as eye drops to cure con-
junctivitis and river blindness. In Rwanda leaf 
sap is used as ear drops to treat otitis. In DR 
Congo the boiled leaves with chicken are given 
to children with asthma and tuberculosis. In 
East Africa ground leaves are applied to tu-
mours; the root decoction is also drunk to cause 
vomiting as treatment of enlarged glands. In 
Tanzania macerated leaves or root bark are 
used to treat epilepsy. In Madagascar a decoc-
tion of the aerial parts is applied to treat 
haemorrhoids. In South Africa the root infu-
sion is taken to treat infertility. In Uganda and 
DR Congo certain cattle tribes use the plant to 
increase milk production of cows. 
The fruits, when dried, powdered and mixed 
with water, yield a foaming detergent, tradi-
tionally used in Ethiopia, Somalia and Uganda 
for washing clothes, and also to wash the body. 
Soap has also been made from the ashes of 
burnt plants in southern Nigeria, or from the 
fresh leaves in Angola. 
In Ethiopia and Zimbabwe unripe fruits are 
widely applied to control bilharzia-transmitting 
snails, as they contain molluscicidal saponins. 
It is a cheaper and less toxic product than syn-
thetic molluscicides. In East Africa the pounded 
plant is also used as a poison to catch fish. 
There is considerable difference in opinion 
about the edibility of the leaves. In Côte 
d'Ivoire and southern Nigeria a sauce or soup 
is prepared from the young shoots and young 
leaves, and in DR Congo the leaves are cooked 
as a vegetable. In eastern and southern Africa 
the whole plant is considered poisonous, and it 
is said to have caused accidental death of peo-
ple eating the leaves as a vegetable. In West 
Africa and Ethiopia the leaves are considered 
edible for cattle and goats, whereas in most of 
eastern and southern Africa they are consid-
ered poisonous. In Gabon the fruits are eaten. 
In East Africa the stems are used as ties in the 
construction of huts and fences. The fruits 
yield a red dye and the leaves a yellow dye. In 
Zimbabwe the most common use of the fruits is 
to colour the floor in houses. In Ethiopia Phyto-
lacca dodecandra is planted as a hedge, and 
the leaf or fruit extract is sometimes added to 
drinks and foods as a stimulant, and to curdle 
milk. The plant is usually not used as firewood, 
as the smoke is believed to reduce the male 
sexual ability. 
Production and international trade Small 
plantations of Phytolacca dodecandra exist in 
Ethiopia, Zambia, Zimbabwe and Swaziland, 
and in Ethiopia the fruits are commonly sold in 
the market for washing clothes. 
Properties The leaves, fruits and roots con-
tain numerous saponins (triterpenoid gly-
cosides). These compounds cause haemolysis of 
red blood cells. The aglycones of the glycosides 
are mainly composed of oleanolic acid (66%), 
bayogenin (15%), hederogenin (9%), and 2-
hydroxyoleanolic acid (6.5%). On a dry weight 
PHYTOLACCA 445 
basis the fruit pulp contains 25% saponins, and 
the non-saponin fraction contains a lipid frac-
tion (palmitic acid, oleic acid, stearic acid and a 
non saponifiable bright orange, waxy material), 
sugars, starches, pectins and gums and a water 
insoluble fraction. The saponins have become 
important as they have strong molluscicidal 
activity against a range of water snails, and 
are readily soluble in water and easy to isolate. 
These properties are useful in the destruction 
of these snails, including vectors of human 
diseases such as bilharzia (schistosomiasis), 
which is caused by parasitic Schistosoma 
worms. However, the saponins are not active 
against the egg clusters of the snails. The ac-
tive saponins have oleanolic acid as the agly-
con, the 3 most important being oleanogly-
cotoxin A, lemmatoxin and lemmatoxin-C. The 
saponins in the fruit pulp are not molluscicidal, 
but become active after hydrolytic removal of 
one of the sugars. The hydrolytic enzyme is 
contained in the seed and to secure contact 
between saponins and enzyme and ensure the 
release of the molluscicidal saponins it is im-
portant to finely crush the fruits before soaking 
them in water. Green unripe fruits contain 
more active saponins than ripe ones. 
Eating fruits or leaves may cause acute poison-
ing resulting in nausea, bloody diarrhoea, in-
tense congestion of the stomach and intestines, 
vomiting, weakness, weak and irregular pulse, 
dilated pupils, swelling of the mucous mem-
brane in the mouth and stupor; death may 
occur within a few days. Although the solutions 
of crushed fruits kill a range of aquatic life 
forms, including small fish, leeches, mosquito 
larvae, other stages of the bilharzia life-cycle 
(miracidia and cercariae), zebra mussels and 
tadpoles, the active ingredients are easily bio-
degradable and are eliminated from the water 
within 48 hours. Insect larvae and tadpoles are 
not affected at the concentrations that kill fish 
and snails. The molluscicidal potency remains 
stable over a wide range of pH (5-9), in the 
presence of various concentrations of organic 
and inorganic matter and also after irradiation 
with ultraviolet light. In acute mammalian 
toxicity tests the fruit extracts were classified 
as either non-toxic or slightly toxic, except for 
the eye, in which they can cause severe irri-
tancy. Eye protection is therefore recom-
mended during fruit crushing and handling of 
dry powders. Ecotoxicity tests indicated that 
the crushed fruits are no more toxic than cur-
rently recommended synthetic molluscicides. 
Toxicological studies also showed that the fruit 
extracts do not have mutagenic or carcinogenic 
properties. 
The roots contain saponins of the phytolacco-
side or esculentoside types. These compounds 
showed anti-inflammatory activity. The aque-
ous extract from the roots showed fungicidal 
activity against Trichophyton mentagrophytes. 
Hydroalcoholic extracts of the aerial parts 
showed significant activity against Staphylo-
coccus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Histoplasma capsulatum var. farciminosum, 
which causes epizootic lymphangitis. The leaf 
extract showed moderate activity against Cox-
sackie virus in vitro. Butanol extracts of the 
fruits inhibit the growth of Trichomonas 
vaginalis, but fermented fruits were inactive. 
Butanol extracts of the fruits showed sperma-
tocidal properties in vitro and blastocidal activ-
ity when injected directly into the uterus of 
rabbits. Oral administration of a water extract 
of the aerial parts did not show a significant 
effect on reproduction in mice. 
The leaves and stems produce the antiviral 
protein dodecandrin, which is a ribosome-
inactivating protein (RIP), similar to pokeweed 
antiviral protein (PAP), isolated from Phyto-
lacca americana L. 
Application of the fruit and leaf extract re-
duced the levels of damage caused by larvae of 
the maize stalk borer (Busseola fusca), but 2 
applications were not sufficient to provide 
complete protection of maize against second 
generation larvae. 
Studies with callus and cell suspension cul-
tures of Phytolacca dodecandra have estab-
lished that significant amounts of triterpenoid 
saponins are produced and retained intracellu-
larly by these cultures. These cultures also 
produce dodecandrin. 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
other plant species contain saponins with mol-
luscicidal activity, including Sapindus 
saponaria L. and Crossopteryx febrifuga 
(G.Don) Benth., but the compounds responsible 
for the activity are often potent fish poisons 
and harmful to the environment. 
Description Climbing or scrambling dio-
ecious, semi-succulent shrub, sometimes a li-
ana with stems up to 10(-20) m long, with a 
taproot; trunk sometimes up to 35 cm in di-
ameter; stems usually glabrous. Leaves alter-
nate, simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 
1-4 cm long; blade ovate to broadly elliptical, 
3—14 cm x 1.5-9.5 cm, base rounded to slightly 
decurrent into the petiole, apex acute to 
rounded, mucronate, glabrous to shortly hairy. 
446 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Phytolacca dodecandra - 1, leafy branch with 
male inflorescence; 2, male flower; 3, female 
flower; 4, fruit; 5, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
Inflorescence an axillary or terminal raceme 5— 
30 cm long, many-flowered, axis hairy; bracts 
up to 2.5 mm long, shortly hairy. Flowers func-
tionally unisexual, 5-merous, sweet-scented; 
pedicel 2—8 mm long; male flowers with nar-
rowly oblong, c. 2.5 mm long, reflexed, whitish 
to yellowish green sepals, petals absent, sta-
mens 10-20 in 2 whorls, free, filaments 3-7 
mm long, ovary usually rudimentary; female 
flowers with oblong to ovate, c. 2.5 mm long, 
reflexed sepals, accrescent in fruit, turning 
yellow to red, petals absent, stamens 8-12, 
rudimentary, ovary superior, consisting of (4— 
)5 free, ovoid carpels, styles 1-2 mm long, 
curved, stigmas linear. Fruit consisting of (4—) 5 
1-seeded berries fused at base, up to 15 mm in 
diameter, fleshy, remains of style pointing 
outwards at apex, ripening orange or purplish 
red. Seeds kidney-shaped, laterally flattened, 
2-4 mm long, shiny black. 
Other botanical information Phytolacca 
comprises about 25 species, most of which are 
native to the tropical and subtropical regions of 
South and Central America, with a few species 
in Africa and Asia. Phytolacca dodecandra 
shows extreme morphological variability in leaf 
hairiness, plant size and growth form. 
Another medicinally used Phytolacca species 
with partly free carpels is Phytolacca heptan-
dra Retz., occurring in Zimbabwe and South 
Africa. The Xhosa people in South Africa con-
sider the plant very poisonous. A leaf or root 
extract is commonly drunk as a purgative and 
emetic. A leaf paste in beer or pulverized root 
in water is drunk to treat venereal diseases in 
men. A root decoction is used as an enema to 
treat enlarged prostate glands. Small amounts 
of plant pulp are taken as an emetic and ap-
plied externally to snakebites. A root macera-
tion is drunk to treat chest pain and delirium. 
The root is used as bait to kill crows, jackals 
and stray dogs. In Zimbabwe the plant is also 
used as a purgative. Lung ailments in cattle 
are treated by letting them drink a root mac-
eration. The fruit is edible. 
Growth and development In Ethiopia 
Phytolacca dodecandra flowers and fruits 
throughout the year, but with a peak during 
the dry season, from October to April. How-
ever, in some parts of Ethiopia it fruits twice a 
year, in December-February and in June—July. 
Pollination is effected by insects such as ants, 
flies and spider wasps. The fruits are often 
eaten by birds and monkeys, which disperse 
the seed. 
It is reported that the female flowers open later 
than the male flowers. A well-established plant 
has only a few but long roots that reach great 
depths. 
Ecology Phytolacca dodecandra occurs in 
forest, forest margins, riparian forest, thickets, 
wetter bushland, in fences along cultivated 
land and around houses, on mountain slopes 
and in open fields, at (0-)1500-3000 m alti-
tude. The plants grow best under direct 
sunlight in humid, weakly acidic soils that 
contain high levels of organic matter, in areas 
with an annual rainfall of about 1400 mm and 
a distinct dry period. In areas with high 
évapotranspiration, especially at lower eleva-
tions (below 1500 m) partial shade should be 
available so that the plants do not burn and 
wilt. Full shade substantially lowers both fruit 
yield and saponin concentration. 
Propagation and planting Propagation of 
Phytoloacca dodecandra is by seed or by cut-
tings. Seed propagation results in equal 
chances of producing male and female plants, 
and plants start flowering 2 years after sowing. 
PHYTOLACCA 447 
Germination can be improved by scarification 
with sand. Fruits can be stored for up to one 
year without loss of viability, but after 4 years 
of storage, germination declines by 14%. 
Propagation by seed is only appropriate for 
selection purposes. Seed of Phytolacca dode-
candra takes about 14 days to germinate. 
Clonal propagation is possible through non-
woody cuttings with 2-3 nodes taken from the 
top or middle part of the plant. Rooting occurs 
with or without application of plant growth 
regulators. Rooted cuttings flower after about 6 
months. Tissue culture has been successful for 
propagation, but the plants take about 18 
months to flower. Procedures for routine mi-
cropropagation by shoot tip and nodal culture 
have been developed. 
In Ethiopia six-week-old cuttings are trans-
planted in the field in holes of 60 cm x 60 cm, 
in a mixture of soil and manure or peat, at the 
beginning of the rainy season. Survival of 
transplants depends on availability of water for 
irrigation during the first and possibly during 
the second dry season, control of pests, 
évapotranspiration and soil salinity. 
Management Plantations of Phytolacca 
dodecandra must be shaded in the first weeks 
after planting. Occasional watering and weed-
ing are important until the crop has become 
established. For large-scale cultivation, plants 
should be spaced 2 m between rows and 1-2 m 
between plants. For each 10 female plants 1 
male plant must be planted to ensure pollina-
tion. Annual pruning is necessary to maintain 
size and shape and to obtain maximum yield. 
Without pruning the plants become a tangled 
mass and the fruits are difficult to harvest. 
Pruning is done by removing the long horizon-
tal branches and shortening erect branches. 
Intercropping with annual crops is possible 
because the plant develops few and deep tap-
roots and does not compete much with annual 
crops for moisture and plant nutrients. 
In a field test the best growth and the highest 
fruit yield were obtained with plants grown in 
full sunlight, under irrigation and with appli-
cation of cattle manure. Irrigation was benefi-
cial to fruit yield but reduced the saponin con-
centration; however, irrigation is beneficial for 
the total saponin yield. Addition of manure 
significantly increased growth and fruit yield, 
but the saponin concentration was lower. The 
combination of cattle manure and irrigation 
resulted in the highest total saponin yield. 
Diseases and pests Phytolacca dodecandra 
is attacked by the larva of different stem- and 
leafminers (Gitona spp.), which bore through 
the stem and leaves into the phloem and tun-
nel in a spiral downwards, leaving a hollow 
sprout which is easily broken, killing the young 
shoots. Wilting of young shoots and abortion of 
inflorescences and fruits are symptoms of in-
festation. The insects can be chemically con-
trolled by spraying insecticides. Some plants 
seem to have some natural resistance to the 
miner; the hairiness of the plant, the presence 
of raphid crystals in the tissue or the saponin 
content might contribute to this resistance. 
Nematodes are also a problem and can infest 
entire plantations, after which a new planta-
tion site needs to be found. 
Harvesting The fruits of Phytolacca dode-
candra are harvested when full grown, but still 
green, because the saponin content is then 
highest. Also, ripe fruits are hard to harvest as 
they fall from the plant and are eaten by birds. 
Complete fruit bunches are collected manually. 
Yield Annual fruit yield increases with the 
age of the plant up to about 15 years, with the 
greatest increase occurring between the first 
and third year. 
In Ethiopia several highly molluscicidal and 
productive cultivars have been selected, and 
agronomic trials have been effected in eastern 
and southern Africa. In a field trial in Ethiopia 
different cultivars yielded between 1050 kg/ha 
to 2750 kg/ha of dried fruits, with a saponin 
content of 20-25%. The yield of dry fruits can 
increase to 3000 kg/ha 4 years after planting, 
slowly rising to a maximum of about 4000 
kg/ha. The content of saponins varies season-
ally: fruits harvested during the dry season 
just before the onset of the rains have the 
highest content. 
Handling after harvest The harvested 
fruits must be dried immediately after collec-
tion in the open under shade or in the sun. 
Whole and powdered fruits can be stored at 
room temperature for up to 4 years without 
losing potency. Crushed fresh fruits or solu-
tions prepared from them lose their potency 
within a few days. While grinding the dried 
fruits care should be taken protect the eyes 
from the irritating dust. 
There are 2 ways of applying the fruits for 
snail control. The first is to make a slurry of 
the dried and ground fruits in water. Shortly 
before application the solution is diluted with 
river water and administered by siphoning the 
liquid into the river from a barrel. The rivers 
are treated when the water level is low and the 
snails are concentrated in relatively small ar-
448 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
eas. The second way is to extract the active 
principles only. This method is sui table for 
larger water bodies such as lakes, where focal 
application of the molluscicide is required and 
sprayers have to be used. In order to avoid 
blockage of the spray nozzle, an extract h a s to 
be prepared. The best resul ts are obtained by 
soaking the dried and powdered fruits over-
night and using butanol to make the extract . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Phytolacca dodecandra 
is widespread in Africa and is unlikely to be 
liable to genetic erosion. A major t h rea t is the 
loss of hab i ta t s due to increasing demand for 
agr icul tural land. In Ethiopia most populat ions 
of Phytolacca dodecandra d isappeared dur ing 
the severe droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. 
Surviving populat ions are now almost exclu-
sively confined to protected a reas . It is impor-
t a n t to preserve the genetic var iat ion of the 
remain ing plants . 
In Ethiopia, germplasm collections of Phyto-
lacca dodecandra a re main ta ined a t the Insti-
tu t e of Pathobiology and the Ethiopian P lan t 
Genetic Resources Centre in Addis Ababa. 
B r e e d i n g Among 500 different accessions 
from Ethiopia, 3 s t ra ins - E3 , E17 and E44 -
have been selected for exceptional growth, mol-
luscicidal potency, yield and res is tance to in-
sect pests and drought . Based on the colour of 
the fruits, two types of p lan ts can be distin-
guished in Ethiopia: 'Arabe' wi th pinkish to red 
fruits, and 'Ahiyo', with yellowish green fruits. 
The first type h a s a h igher saponin content 
t h a n the la t te r one. 
A breeding p rogramme needs to be launched to 
obtain cult ivars with high fruit and saponin 
yields, pest res is tance and the ability to grow 
under the agro-ecological conditions of the low-
lands . 
P r o s p e c t s Phytolacca dodecandra fruits 
have great potent ia l as a molluscicide. Agro-
nomic studies to select cult ivars with high fruit 
and saponin yields and pest res is tance have 
been effected, bu t more research is needed to 
find ways of making the fruits serve as a sup-
p lement or subs t i tu te for o ther detergents . 
Socio-economic research is needed to evaluate 
t he use of the fruits for local schistosomiasis 
control. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Adams et al., 1989; Bon-
ness et al., 1994; Esser, Semagn & Wolde Yo-
hannes , 2003; J ansen , 1981; Lugt, 1986; 
Ndamba et al., 1996; Neuwinger , 2000; 
Nowicke, 1968; Tadeg et al., 2005; Wolde Yo-
hannes , Esser & Semagn, 1999. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Abebe et al., 2005; Bek-
ele-Tesemma, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1993; Burkill , 
1997; Chishimba, Lingumbwanga & Chongo, 
1999; Demeke, Hughes & Lee, 1992; Getahun , 
1976; Johns , Kokwaro & Kimanani , 1990; 
Kambu et al., 1989; Lamber t et a l , 1991; 
Lemma, Heyneman & Silangwa, 1984; Mak-
hubu, L e m m a & Heyneman, 1987; Molgaard et 
a l , 2000; Murengezi , 1993; Ndamba, Lemmich 
& Molgaard, 1994; Polhill, 1971; Razali Yusuf, 
1999a; Semagn, Stedje & Bjornstad, 2004; 
Yimtubezinash, Ge tahun & Chryssanthou, 
2005. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Polhill, 1971. 
A u t h o r s C. Zimudzi 
PlCRALlMA NITIDA (Stapf) T . D u r a n d & 
H . D u r a n d 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. J a rd . Bot. Brux. 2: 338 
(1910). 
F a m i l y Apocynaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 22 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Obéro, demouain à gros 
fruits, ebam (Fr). Lute te- lumene (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Picra-
lima nitida occurs from Côte d'Ivoire eas t to 
Uganda a n d south to DR Congo and Cabinda 
(Angola). 
U s e s Throughout i ts distr ibution area the 
seeds, ba rk and roots of Picralima nitida have 
a reputa t ion as a febrifuge and remedy for ma-
laria. They are also extensively used for pain 
relief and to t rea t chest and s tomach problems, 
pneumonia and in tes t ina l worms. Usually, the 
seeds or ba rk are crushed or chewed and eaten 
for th is purpose, or a decoction from the roots, 
seeds or ba rk is drunk. 
Picralima nitida - wild 
PlCRALIMA 449 
In Côte d'Ivoire, Benin and Nigeria a bark or 
root decoction is t aken against jaundice, and a 
leaf decoction is t aken by mouth or used as a 
lotion agains t measles . The intensely bi t ter 
seeds are crushed and ea ten with lemon juice 
to t r ea t hernia , vomiting or diarrhoea. The 
crushed seeds are applied to abscesses. A pas te 
of pulverized seeds and shea bu t t e r is rubbed 
on the abdomen to t r ea t leucorrhoea in women. 
In Ghana a decoction of the seeds is employed 
as an enema and analgesic. The seeds are 
chewed as a tonic and s t imulant . Dry leaves 
are boiled in wate r and t aken to t r e a t guinea 
worm. In Cameroon a fruit decoction is t aken 
to cure cough or typhoid fever; in DR Congo the 
ba rk is used similarly. In Gabon people from 
the Pahouin tribe chew a little of the fruit and 
ba rk to allay hunger while on long marches in 
the bush . The bi t ter ba rk is boiled with sugar 
and the decoction is d runk agains t food poison-
ing or venereal diseases. In Congo a ba rk de-
coction is t aken as a purgat ive or to t rea t her-
nia, and with other p lants to relieve gonor-
rhoea. In southern Cameroon and Congo, a 
ba rk decoction is d runk to cure steril i ty in 
men. Leaf sap is dripped into the ear to t rea t 
otitis. The crushed seeds, roots or fruit pulp are 
also ingredients for arrow poison. In Ghana 
and DR Congo, i m m a t u r e fruits are pounded 
and th rown in the wa te r as a fish poison. 
The wood, called ebam in t rade , is used to 
make a variety of small utensi ls , e.g. paddles, 
shut t les for weaving, dolls, combs, walking 
sticks, pestles and mor tars , incense holders, 
bows and arrows, spade handles or spoons. 
Spoons or dippers are also made of the ha rd 
shell of the fruit. 
Product ion and international trade The 
dried powdered seeds of Picralima nitida a re 
encapsulated and marke ted in Ghana under 
the b rand n a m e 'Picap capsules ' for the t reat-
ment of diarrhoea and various types of pain. In 
Cameroon the seeds, bark and fruits a re com-
monly sold in local marke t s . In 2002, the mar-
ket price was about 2400 Fcfa (about US$ 5) for 
550 g seed and bark. 
P r o p e r t i e s The s tem bark, fruit and seeds 
of Picralima nitida contain as major com-
pounds the indole alkaloids akuammine , 
akuammic ine (s trychnan class), akuammid ine 
and akuammil ine (both corynanthean class), 
akuammig ine and the very similar alstonine, 
pseudo-akuammigine and picraline. The seeds 
are par t icular ly rich in alkaloids (3.5—4.8%); 
akuammine is the principal alkaloid of the 
ma tu re seeds, while minor alkaloids are pseudo-
akuammicine , picranit ine, picrat idine (N-me-
thylpicraline), eburnamine (desacetylpicraline) 
and desacetylakuammil ine (rhazimol). The root 
bark contains akuammigine , akuammicine , 
picracine and desacetylpicraline, and the 
leaves akuammine , akuammigine , picraphyl-
line and melinonine A. The s tem bark also con-
ta ins picracine. 
Akuammine has s trong sympathomimet ic and 
local analgesic activities; i ts effects are compa-
rable to t h a t of cocaine. It causes marked and 
las t ing hypotension in dogs, without affecting 
respirat ion. In higher doses it causes a s t rong 
inhibitory effect on in tes t inal peristal t ic move-
ments . At such doses it also has hypertensive 
activity with a weaker, bu t longer last ing effect 
t h a n yohimbine. 
Akuammigine shows clear sympatholytic activ-
ity and antagonizes the effect of adrenal ine on 
the hear t , vessels and regulatory centre of the 
circulation system. Akuammidine has hypoten-
sive, skeletal muscle re laxant and local analge-
sic activities. I ts local analgesic activity is 
about 3 t imes as potent as cocaine. It acts se-
lectively as a sympatholytic, unaccompanied by 
parasympatholyt ic effects. It inhibits the irri-
tabili ty of the sympathet ic nervous system and 
opposes akuammine . Pseudo-akuammigine acts 
as an indirect reversible and competitive para-
sympathomimetic . In low doses it excites and 
in high doses it inhibits the centra l nervous 
system, respirat ion, contraction of the skeletal 
muscles and contraction of t he smooth muscles. 
It increases hexobarbital- induced sleeping t ime 
and has local analgesic, anti- inflammatory, 
cholinesterase-inhibit ing and hypotensive ac-
tivities. Pericine and pericalline, only present 
in cell suspension cul tures of Picralima nitida, 
showed in vitro opium-antagonis t activity. 
In tes ts wi th mice, a ls tonine h a s shown ant ip-
sychotic effects in the t r ea tmen t of schizophre-
nia, wi thout some of the side effects of the 
commonly used drug clozapine. Alstonine ap-
pears to lack the proconvulsant propert ies of 
clozapine. 
Extracts of the seeds have analgesic activities 
comparable to those of morphine in r a t s . It was 
demonst ra ted t h a t the alkaloids akuammidine , 
akuammine , pseudo-akuammigine and akuam-
micine possess varying degrees of agonist and 
antagonis t activities a t opioid receptors in vi-
tro. Akuammigine showed little or no efficacy 
in the opioid bioassays. As the analgesic ac-
tions are mediated via interact ion with opioid 
receptors, the potential for causing addiction 
and dependence should also be invest igated. 
450 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
The seed extracts showed also significant anti-
inf lammatory activities in several r a t models. 
The extracts of roots, s tem bark and fruit r ind 
showed highly significant inhibitory effects in 
vitro agains t Plasmodium falciparum, includ-
ing chloroquine-resistant s t ra ins , even in low 
concentrat ions. The dichloromethane extract of 
the fruit r ind was the most active. The ant ima-
larial activity is also present in the seeds and 
leaves, but a t a lower level. Akuammine 
showed weak an t imalar ia l activity against 
chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium s t ra ins . The 
basic fraction of the methanol extract of the 
s tem bark exhibited significant antimicrobial 
activity agains t a wide range of gram-positive 
bacter ia and fungi, bu t limited activity against 
gram-negat ive bacteria . The basic fraction had 
a similar min imum inhibitory concentrat ion 
(MIC) for Staphylococcus aureus as the control 
d rug ampicillin, and lower MIC values agains t 
Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus niger t h a n 
those of tiaconazole. In clinical t r ials , a cream 
formulation of the methanol extract of the s tem 
bark of Picralima nitida exhibited impressive 
effectiveness aga ins t skin conditions of pityria-
sis versicolor, t inea pedis interdigi tal is (ath-
lete's foot), t inea capitis (ringworm of the 
head), and t inea corporis (ringworm of the 
body). A methanol extract of the s tem bark was 
also found to be active aga ins t a visceral 
Leishmania isolate a t concentrat ions of 50 
ug/ml or less. A hot wate r extract of the s tem 
ba rk had a significant effect agains t Trypano-
soma brucei, which was statist ically compara-
ble to t h a t of d iminazene ace tura te (Berenil), 
commonly used in the t r ea tmen t of sleeping 
sickness. Bark and seed extracts caused hypo-
glycaemia in both normal and alloxan-induced 
diabetic rabbi ts by a mechanism independent 
of the availabili ty of insulin from pancreat ic ß-
cells. The seed extract exhibited faster hypo-
glycaemic activity t h a n the s t anda rd drug 
tolbutamide. Acute toxicity tes ts in r a t s 
showed a dose-dependent acute in t raper i toneal 
toxicity. 
The wood is pale yellow, ha rd and elastic, and 
polishes and finishes well. 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s In Camer-
oon the s tem bark of Alstonia boonei De Wild, 
is used by several t radi t ional hea le rs for t reat-
ing typhoid fever, jaundice and malar ia , and is 
most often used as a subs t i tu te for Picralima 
nitida. The leaves and ba rk of Thomandersia 
hensii De Wild. & T.Durand, the leaves and 
roots of Mangifera indica L. and the roots of 
Carica papaya L. are sometimes used as anti-
malar ia l drugs and febrifuge as a subs t i tu te for 
Picralima nitida. Similar indole alkaloids are 
found in Tabernaemontana species. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Shrub or t ree up to 35 m tall, 
with white latex in all pa r t s , glabrous; bole up 
to 60 cm in diameter; ba rk hard, bri t t le , pale to 
dark greyish black or brown, smooth to slightly 
rough or finely striped. Leaves opposite, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-2 cm 
long; blade elliptical to oblong, (5-) 10-26 cm x 
2 -13 cm, base cuneate , apex abrupt ly acumi-
nate , thickly papery to thinly leathery, pin-
nately veined with 14-23 pai rs of la tera l veins. 
Inflorescence a te rmina l or sometimes axillary, 
compound, umbel-like cyme 6-10 cm long, 10— 
35-flowered; peduncle 2 -35 mm long, with 3 
p r imary branches ; bracts very small . Flowers 
bisexual, regular , 5-merous, f ragrant or not, 
open dur ing the day; pedicel 2 -20 mm long; 
sepals almost free, imbricate, broadly ovate to 
almost orbicular, 5-7 mm long; corolla with 
fleshy cylindrical tube 25-45 mm long, ha i ry 
inside and narrowed below the inser t ion of the 
s tamens , often greenish, lobes ovate, 14—30 
mm x 6-10 mm, apex obtuse, spreading or 
erect, white to yellow; s t amens inser ted above 
the middle of the corolla tube, included, an-
thers ovate, 3-4 m m long; ovary superior, con-
sist ing of 2 separa te carpels, uni ted a t the ex-
Picralima nitida - 1, flowering branch; 2, leafy 
branch; 3, flower from above. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
PICRALIMA 451 
t reme base by a disk-like thickening, style 
slender, 5-7 mm long, pistil head with an ob-
long basal par t and a filiform stigmoid apex up 
to 1.5 m m long. Fru i t s consisting of 2 free obo-
void to ellipsoid follicles 11-20 cm long, 
smooth, apex rounded, yellow to orange, 2-
valved, several- to many-seeded. Seeds 
obliquely ovate, obovate to oblong, flattened, 
2.5—4.5 cm long, smooth, brown to orange, em-
bedded in soft whi te to orange pulp . Seedling 
with epigeal germination; cotyledons ovate to 
obovate or oblong, 10-13 m m long, base 
slightly cordate to rounded, apex obtuse to 
rounded. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Picralima 
comprises a single species and is restr icted to 
Africa. It is re lated to Hunteria and Pleiocarpa. 
A n a t o m y Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth r ings: 2: growth r ing boundar ies indis-
tinct or absent . Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
9: vessels exclusively solitary (90% or more); 
13: simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel 
pits a l te rna te ; 23?: shape of a l t e rna te pits po-
lygonal; 25: intervessel pi ts small (4-7 urn); 29: 
ves tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pits wi th distinct 
borders; s imilar to intervessel pits in size and 
shape throughout the ray cell; (40: mean tan-
gential d iameter of vessel lumina < 50 um); 41 : 
mean tangent ia l d iameter of vessel lumina 5 0 -
100 am; 48: 20-40 vessels per square millime-
tre. Tracheids and fibres: (61: fibres with sim-
ple to minute ly bordered pits); 62: fibres with 
distinctly bordered pits; 66: non-septate fibres 
present ; (69: fibres thin- to thick-walled); 70: 
fibres very thick-walled. Axial parenchyma: 76: 
axial pa renchyma diffuse; 77: axial paren-
chyma diffuse-in-aggregates; 78: axial paren-
chyma scanty para t rachea l ; 93: eight (5-8) 
cells per pa renchyma s t rand; 94: over eight 
cells per parenchyma s t rand . Rays: (97: ray 
width 1-3 cells); (98: larger rays commonly 4-
to 10-seriate); 108: body ray cells procumbent 
with over 4 rows of upr ight and/or square mar-
ginal cells; 115: 4 -12 rays per mm; 116: > 12 
rays per mm. 
(M. Thiam, P. Dét ienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Trees growing 
a t the same location generally have the same 
height and are probably of the same age. 
Young p lan ts have a high competition capacity. 
Picralima nitida can be found flowering and 
fruiting throughout the year. The flowers are 
visited by insects dur ing sunny days. Fru i t s of 
Picralima nitida a re ea ten by e lephants , which 
disperse t he seeds. 
E c o l o g y Picralima nitida is an unders torey 
t ree in rainforest, also in ma tu re secondary 
forest and semi-deciduous forest along river 
banks , up to 900 m al t i tude. 
P r o p a g a t i o n and p l a n t i n g There are 
about 300-400 Picralima seeds/kg. 
H a r v e s t i n g Seeds, ba rk and other p lan t 
pa r t s of Picralima nitida in tended for t r ade or 
for local medicinal use are collected from wild 
p lan ts . 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t Picralima nitida 
seeds can be dried and stored for 0.5-2 years 
without loss of pharmacological activity. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Picralima nitida is a 
common species of the African forest zone, and 
is not th rea tened by genetic erosion. However, 
in some areas with a high h u m a n population 
pressure , the species has become scarce be-
cause of i ts use as medicinal p lan t or t imber . 
P r o s p e c t s The specific indole alkaloids from 
Picralima nitida have very in teres t ing proper-
ties, which have only par t ly been evaluated in 
tests , including some clinical t r ia ls . Extracts 
from different pa r t s of Picralima nitida showed 
a marked activity agains t malar ia ; a k u a m m i n e 
and alstonine were shown to be the most active 
alkaloids. These alkaloids may represent an 
entirely new an t imala r ia l chemotype with pos-
sible advantages over existing drugs. More 
research is needed to confirm these findings. It 
h a s also been demons t ra ted t h a t Picralima 
nitida has a broad activity for t rea t ing para-
sitic diseases, which lends credibility for i ts use 
agains t diarrhoea, gonorrhoea and in tes t inal 
worms. In clinical t r ials , the methanol extract 
of the s tem bark exhibited impressive effec-
t iveness agains t different skin diseases. More 
work, however, is required to develop the ex-
t rac t into a clinically useful antimicrobial and 
antifungal agent . 
Akuammidine, akuammine, pseudo-akuammigine 
and akuammicine are opioid compounds, hav-
ing significant analgesic activities. The mecha-
nism of action and the potent ia l for causing 
addiction and dependence should be investi-
gated, as well as the toxicity. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1985; Corbett et 
al., 1996; Ezeamuzie et al., 1994; Fakeye, Itiola 
& Odelola, 2000; François et al., 1996; Iwu & 
Klayman, 1992; Menzies et al., 1998; Neu-
winger, 1996; Omino, 1996; Ramirez & Garcia-
Ribio, 2003. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Adjanohoun et al., 1996; 
Aguwa et al., 2001; Ansa-Asamoah & Ampofo, 
1986; Arens et al., 1982; Betti , 2002; Betti , 
2004; CE-FAO, 1999; Duwiejua et al., 1995; 
452 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Duwiejua, Woode & Obiri, 2002; Endress et al., 
1996; Fakeye et al., 2004a; Fakeye et al., 
2004b; InsideWood, undated; Inya-Agha, 1999; 
Iwu et al., 1992; Kapadia, Angerhofer & Ansa-
Asamoah, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; Normand & 
Paquis , 1976; Obiri, 1997; Wosu & Ibe, 1989. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Omino, 1996. 
A u t h o r s N. Nyunaï & N. Njifutié 
PlERREODENDRON AFRICANUM (Hook.f.) 
Little 
P r o t o l o g u e Phytologia 3: 156 (1949). 
F a m i l y Simaroubaceae 
S y n o n y m s Mannia africana Hook.f. (1862), 
Pierreodendron kerstingii (Engl.) Litt le (1949), 
Quassia grandifolia (Engl.) Noot. (1962). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pier-
reodendron africanum occurs from Côte 
d'Ivoire east to DR Congo and south to Angola. 
U s e s Throughout i ts distr ibution area Pier-
reodendron africanum is used as an insecticide 
and ra t poison. In Nigeria the fruits are 
pounded, mixed wi th boiled yam and palm oil 
and used as a bai t to kill r a t s . Whole seeds 
with salt added are equally efficient a t killing 
r a t s . The fruit peel and leaves are used as a 
tonic and the seed oil as a lotion aga ins t lice. 
P r o p e r t i e s The s tem bark of Pierreoden-
dron africanum contains quassinoids with 
antineoplast ic propert ies, e.g. dehydroai lanthi-
none and glaucarubinone. The main quassinoid 
compound is glaucarubin. The s tem bark also 
contains indole alkaloids, canthine-6-one alka-
loids, which have ant icancer and antimicrobial 
propert ies. 
An alcohol extract of the s tem bark showed 
significant activity in vivo agains t leukaemia of 
mice and h u m a n throa t cancer cells in vitro. 
Oral application of a chloroform extract of 
s tems and roots showed good resul ts agains t 
av ian malar ia in poultry. 
B o t a n y Monoecious, s t raggling t ree up to 30 
m tall; ba rk rough with square scales. Leaves 
a l te rna te , in tufts a t ends of branches , up to 1 
m long, impar ip innate ly compound with 5-15 
pai rs of leaflets; st ipules absent ; petiolules c. 4 
mm long; leaflets a lmost opposite, ent i re , 
lanceolate to elliptical, 8-30 cm x 3-9 cm, base 
rounded, asymmetrical , very shortly and 
abrupt ly acuminate and often thickened a t 
apex, leathery, slightly hai ry in young leaves. 
Inflorescence a thyrse up to 40 cm long. Flow-
ers unisexual or bisexual, regular , 5-merous; 
calyx lobes c. 1.5 m m long; petals free, oblong, 
0 .5-1 cm long, red; s t amens 10-15(-18), free; 
ovary superior, consisting of 5 free carpels. 
Fru i t an oblong-ellipsoid drupe, c. 7 cm x 4.5 
cm, yellow, fibrous, woody, 1-seeded. 
Pierreodendron comprises a single species. 
Pierreodendron kerstingii (Engl.) Little was 
dist inguished mainly based on the number of 
s tamens , but it is now considered a synonym of 
Pierreodendron africanum. However, taxo-
nomie studies of th is poorly known genus are 
needed because the existence of cryptic species 
has been suggested on the basis of the 
s t rangely versati le habi ta t . 
E c o l o g y Pierreodendron africanum occurs in 
wet evergreen and dry deciduous forest, with 
comparat ively few t rees in in te rmedia te types 
of forest. 
M a n a g e m e n t The s tem bark and fruits of 
Pierreodendron africanum are harves ted from 
the wild. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Pier-
reodendron africanum is widely dis t r ibuted bu t 
ra re throughout i ts range and therefore it is 
considered vulnerable to genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s The an t i tumour propert ies of 
Pierreodendron africanum will continue to at-
t rac t a t ten t ion of pharmacologists . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 2000; Guo et al., 
2005; Kenfack et a l , 2007; Kupchan & Lacadie, 
1975; Vanhaelen-Fas t ré , R. et al., 1990. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Adomou, 2005; Ampofo & 
Wate rman , 1985; Gilbert, 1958; Hawthorne & 
Jongkind, 2006; Neuwinger , 2000; Nooteboom, 
1962; Polonsky, J., 1973; Valeriote et a l , 1998. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
P I P E R C A P E N S E L.f. 
P r o t o l o g u e Suppl. pi.: 90 (1782). 
F a m i l y Piperaceae 
S y n o n y m s Piper emirnense Baker (1878). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Wild pepper (En). 
Poivrier du Cap (Fr). Fia boba pequena (Po). 
Mdeka (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Piper 
capense occurs from Guinea eas t to Ethiopia 
and south to Angola, Mozambique and South 
Africa. I ts presence in West Africa is poorly 
documented. It also occurs in t he Ind ian Ocean 
is lands. 
U s e s Leaf prepara t ions are widely used to 
t r ea t abdominal disorders, kwashiorkor, bacte-
rial skin infections and polio. A wate r extract 
of the leaves and s tems is given as an enema to 
women a few days after delivery to remove the 
PIPER 453 
Piper capense - wild 
afterbirth. In Cameroon the aerial parts are 
used to treat epileptic attacks. In Madagascar 
a leaf infusion is considered one of the best 
remedies to treat bilious fever and haematuria. 
An ointment made from the root is applied to 
the soles of the feet to treat paralysis of pa-
tients suffering from cerebral bleeding. A 
sweetened root infusion or seed extract is 
taken against cough. A root infusion is also 
taken as an anthelminthic. The raw or cooked 
root is eaten as an aphrodisiac tonic. The bark 
is an ingredient of infusions given to treat ste-
rility. Pulverized bark mixed with Vaseline is 
applied on wounds and against vaginal dis-
charge, while a bark maceration is drunk to 
treat sore mouth and throat, chest complaints 
and venereal diseases. An infusion of the fruit 
in water or brandy is taken to treat stomach, 
heart and kidney problems and flatulence; it 
causes sweating and sleepiness. The fruits are 
taken in East Africa as a cough medicine, in 
South Africa as a vermifuge and diuretic, and 
in DR Congo as a vermifuge and stomachic. 
Piper capense also enters in herbal mixtures 
used in veterinary medicine, e.g. against rectal 
collapse, gastro-enteritis, hernia, anaplasmosis 
and rabies. In southern Tanzania the leaves 
are applied to swollen legs of cattle. 
The fruits have been used as a spice in Ethio-
pia, Tanzania and South Africa because of 
their clove-like pungent-spicy flavour. In Tan-
zania the leaves are used as a forage. 
Production and international trade Piper 
capense is only traded locally. 
Properties Fresh leaves of Piper capense 
from Cameroon contain about 0.2% essential 
oil and the seeds 1.4%. Both essential oils are 
rich in monoterpene hydrocarbons and contain 
mainly oc-pinene, ß-pinene, camphene and sa-
binene. In an in-vitro test, the antifungal prop-
erties of the essential oils were weak. Aerial 
parts of plants from Sâo Tomé contained 
mainly monoterpene and sesquiterpene hydro-
carbons, including a-pinene, ß-pinene, ben-
zenepropanoic acid-ethyl ester, ß-caryophyllene 
and smaller amounts of limonene, ß-
phellandrene, linalool, germacrene-D, (E)-
nerolidol and y-muurolene. From the roots the 
sesquiterpene capentin and several neo-lignans 
have been isolated. A crude root extract 
showed significant antibacterial activity 
against Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus 
pyogenes and Corynebacterium xerosis in vitro. 
The above-ground parts of the plant, which are 
a common food of wild animals, contain 88% 
water and 12% dry matter; the latter contains 
per 100 g: crude protein 6 g, neutral detergent 
fibre 51 g, acid detergent fibre 34 g, acid deter-
gent lignin 8 g, water soluble carbohydrates 12 
g-
Description Aromatic, evergreen shrub or 
sometimes liana from a tuberous rootstock, up 
to 3 m tall or with trailing stems 4(-5) m long; 
stems terete, weak, greenish, glabrous to long-
Piper capense - 1, flowering twig; 2, infructes-
cence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
454 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
hairy at swollen nodes of 3 cm in diameter. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
lanceolate, 1-1.5 cm long, adnate to petiole and 
enclosing the stem, soon falling; petiole 0.5—5(— 
8.5) cm long, grooved above near base, glabrous 
or hairy; blade broadly ovate to elliptical, 5-18 
cm x 2.5—15 cm, base cuneate, rounded or 
slightly cordate, slightly asymmetrical, apex 
acuminate, dark green above, pale green or 
greyish to glaucous below, glabrous or hairy 
below, palmately veined with (3—)5—11 veins, 3 
median ones reaching the apex. Inflorescence a 
solitary terminal or leaf-opposed spike, creamy 
white; peduncle 1-5 cm long, glabrous, rachis 
2.5-8.5(-10) cm long. Flowers minute, bisexual 
or male in separate spikes, or male and bisex-
ual flowers on one spike with male flowers to-
wards the base, sessile; perianth absent; sta-
mens 2-3; ovary superior, ovoid, 1-celled, with 
short style and 2 recurved stigmas. Fruit a 
globose-ovoid drupe 2—4 mm long, sessile, 1-
seeded. Seed brown, shiny. 
Other botanical information Estimates of 
the number of species included in Piper range 
from 1400 to more than 2000; about 15 species 
are native or naturalized in tropical Africa. In 
Piper capense 2 varieties are recognized: var. 
capense, which occurs throughout the distribu-
tion area of the species, and var. brachyrhachis 
(C.H.Wright) Verde, which occurs from south-
western Tanzania to Zambia. Var. brachyrha-
chis differs in more densely hairy leaves and 
shoots, and in shorter spikes (up to 2 cm long). 
Piper capense is closely related to the Asian 
Piper nigrum L. (black pepper). 
Growth and development In southern 
Africa Piper capense flowers from August to 
February and fruits from October to June. It 
may flower throughout the year when enough 
water is available. 
Ecology Piper capense occurs in the under-
storey of evergreen rainforest, swamp forest 
and moist riverine forest, but also in mixed 
bamboo forest, scrub and thicket vegetation 
near streams, from sea-level up to 2500 m alti-
tude. 
Propagation and planting Piper capense 
is mainly propagated by seeds, although stem 
cuttings can be planted successfully as well. 
Management Piper capense is not culti-
vated, but collected from the forest when re-
quired. 
Genetic resources Piper capense has a 
wide area of distribution and is not in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Piper capense is likely to remain 
important in traditional medicine. Its wide-
spread and common use in traditional medicine 
warrants further research to fully evaluate its 
potential. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Diniz, 1997; 
Green & Wiemer, 1991; Immelman, 2000; Mar-
tins et al., 1998; Neuwinger, 2000; Rothman et 
al., 2006. 
Other references Balagizi Karhagomba & 
Ntumba Kayembe, 1998; Balle, 1948; Boiteau, 
Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; Chen, Green 
& Wiemer, 1992; Chifundera, 1998; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Gilbert, 2000b; Green, Galinis 
& Wiemer, 1991; Keay, 1954b; Latham, 2007; 
Noumi & Fozi, 2003; Ntezurubanza & Ayo-
bangira, 1987; Obi et al., 2002; Reilly et al., 
1992; Van Puyvelde et al., 1985; Verdcourt, 
1996; Verger, 1995; Yamada, 1999. 
Sources of illustration Immelman, 2000. 
Authors C. Zimudzi 
PIPER UMBELLATUM L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 30 (1753). 
Family Piperaceae 
Chromosome number In - 24, 26, 28 
Synonyms Piper subpeltatum Willd. (1797), 
Pothomorphe subpeltata (Willd.) Miq. (1840), 
Pothomorphe umbellata (L.) Miq. (1840). 
Vernacular names Cow-foot leaf (En). Bois 
d'anisette, grand baume (Fr). Algodàozinho do 
campo, pariparoba (Po). Mtunda ya mbwa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Piper 
umbellatum originates from tropical America, 
and has been introduced and widely natural-
ized throughout the tropics, including 
mainland tropical Africa and the Indian Ocean 
Islands. In mainland Africa it occurs from 
Guinea and Sierra Leone east to Ethiopia and 
south to Angola and Mozambique. 
Uses In tropical Africa and elsewhere in the 
tropics the leaves of Piper umbellatum are 
widely used as an emollient, vulnerary and 
antiseptic. They are employed in poultices on 
swellings, boils and burns; the juice is taken as 
an emmenagogue, galactagogue and diuretic, 
or used as ear drops against earache. A decoc-
tion of the leaves or roots is taken to relieve 
jaundice, malaria, urinary and kidney prob-
lems, syphilis and gonorrhoea, leucorrhoea, 
menstrual problems and stomach-ache, and is 
also applied on wounds and inflamed tumours. 
The root is considered stimulant, diuretic and 
to promote the flow of bile. A root decoction is 
used as a powerful digestive and as a treat-
PIPER 455 
Piper umbellatum - naturalized 
ment for dyspepsia, constipation and stomach-
ache. Throughout Africa, the leaves are used in 
massages for migraine and other forms of 
headache, and in decoction as a wash for fever-
ish children. In Liberia an infusion of young 
ground leaves is taken to treat severe colic. In 
Côte d'Ivoire and Central Africa the aerial 
parts are commonly given to women to regulate 
menses and prevent abortion; as an enema the 
crushed leaves are applied to treat rectal 
prolapse. In Ghana the leaf pulp or roots are 
macerated in alcohol and taken to treat rheu-
matism. In Cameroon a leaf decoction is given 
to treat hypertension and toothache. The plant 
is used to expel tapeworms, e.g. in Guinea, 
whereas in DR Congo the leaves are considered 
a vermifuge. In the Central African Republic 
pounded twigs and seeds mixed with salt are 
taken against intestinal worms and in Congo 
suppositories of the leaves are given against 
pinworms. In Madagascar the leaves are ap-
plied in friction to relieve rheumatic pain. In 
Brazil Piper umbellatum is much used in baths 
to subdue oedema and uterine complaints. In 
Peninsular Malaysia the fruits are chewed 
with betel leaves {Piper betle L.) to treat cough. 
In the Philippines the juice of the leaves is 
applied in the eyes against conjunctivitis. In 
Indo-China the leaves and fruits are used to 
treat pain in the kidneys, oedema, anaemia 
and colic. In south-western Côte d'Ivoire, 
South-East Asia and South America Piper um-
bellatum is an ingredient of an arrow poison. 
In Ghana the plant is said to attract fish and is 
used in bait mixtures in game traps. It is a 
fetish for many peoples, e.g. in Gabon, where it 
is used for provoking compassion. 
In many parts of the tropics the young leaves 
and inflorescences are eaten raw, steamed or 
boiled as a vegetable or condiment with fish or 
meat and rice. In Sierra Leone the leaves are a 
favourite leafy vegetable, eaten slightly cooked 
or minced with fish or meat. The Temne people 
use the basal part of the stem, which some-
times has a thick and corky bark, as a condi-
ment with rice or palm oil sauce. In the Central 
African Republic the stem-pith and the inflo-
rescence enter in the preparation of a muci-
laginous condiment. In tropical Asia the sweet, 
ripe fruits are eaten as a delicacy. 
Production and international trade Piper 
umbellatum is only traded locally. 
Properties The essential oil from the aerial 
parts of Piper umbellatum has a high content 
of ß-pinene (27%), a-pinene (18%), (E)-nerolidol 
(12%) and ß-caryophyllene (10%). Other com-
pounds found include safrole, germacrene-D, ß-
cadinene, 5-cadinene and bicyclogermacrene. 
The roots and aerial parts contain 4-
nerolidylcatechol, a powerful antioxidant with 
chemopreventative potential. This may explain 
the traditional use of Piper umbellatum in the 
treatment of skin cancer. In mice 4-
nerolidylcatechol inhibits the effect of the 
myotoxic phospholipase venoms of several 
lancehead vipers {Bothrops spp.); however, the 
protective effect is slow, while the venoms act 
very fast. Therefore, 4-nerolidylcatechol is not 
a candidate antivenom, but may provide a lead 
structure to develop novel inhibitors. 
A methanol extract of the leaves showed sig-
nificant anti-malarial activity against Plasmo-
dium falciparum in vitro. Subsequently, a 
crude ethanol extract of the leaves of Piper 
umbellatum was administered orally and sub-
cutaneously to Plasmodium berghei-infected 
mice, and showed strong antimalarial activity, 
significantly reducing the level of parasites in a 
dose-dependent manner. An aqueous extract of 
the aerial parts administered intraperitoneally 
to rats caused a decrease in watchfulness for 
48 hours, together with a fall of body tempera-
ture, a decrease of spontaneous motor activity 
and an increase of analgesic activity. A water-
ethanol extract showed anti-inflammatory and 
analgesic effects in mouse and rat models. 
The acrid compounds of the leaves and roots 
are irritant in high doses and cause severe 
inflammation of the gastrointestinal tract. 
They cause burning, salivation, stomatitis, 
vomiting, severe abdominal pain and diar-
rhoea. 
Description Perennial herb or scrambling 
456 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Piper umbellatum 
and stamens. 
Source: PROSEA 
1, flowering stem; 2, pistil 
shrub up to 4 m tall, much-branched from near 
the base; stems from a woody rootstock, succu-
lent, ribbed, rooting at the nodes. Leaves alter-
nate, simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 
6.5-30 cm long, sheathing basally; blade al-
most circular to kidney-shaped, 5-36(-40) cm x 
4.5—37(-42) cm, base deeply cordate, apex 
shortly acuminate to rounded, fairly thin, dark 
green above, greyish underneath, glandular 
black punctate, sparsely to densely hairy on 
the veins above and below, palmately veined 
with 11-15 veins. Inflorescence an axillary or 
leaf-opposed spike 5.5-15 cm long, 2-8 together 
in false umbels; peduncle 3-12 cm long; bracts 
on peduncle narrow, 6-8 mm long, white, cadu-
cous, floral bracts triangular to rounded, up to 
1 mm wide, margins hairy, white, cream or 
yellow. Flowers minute, bisexual, sessile; peri-
anth absent; stamens 2; ovary superior, 1-
celled, stigmas 3. Fruit a 3-angled fleshy drupe 
0.5—1 mm x c. 0.5 mm, brownish, 1-seeded. 
Seed globose, minute. 
Other botanical information Estimates of 
the number of species included in Piper range 
from 1400 to more than 2000; about 15 species 
are native or naturalized in tropical Africa. 
Most species are primarily used as a spice, but 
also have medicinal uses. The leaves and stems 
of Piper sylvestre Lam., which occurs in India, 
Sri Lanka and the Indian Ocean islands, are 
chewed in Madagascar to make the teeth 
blackish or reddish, to protect them from car-
ies. A leaf infusion is taken to prevent epileptic 
attacks. The fruits are used as a condiment. In 
Mauritius tea made from the leaves is taken to 
treat fever and haematuria, and as a diuretic 
and depurative. 
Growth and development Piper umbella-
tum may flower throughout the year when 
enough water is available. 
Ecology Piper umbellatum occurs in the 
undergrowth of evergreen rainforest, but also 
in clearings and on river banks; it always oc-
curs in damp localities, up to 1800(-2100) m 
altitude. It is a common weed of plantations; in 
cacao farms in Ghana and in oil-palm planta-
tions in Cameroon it can be troublesome. 
Propagation and planting Piper umbella-
tum is propagated by seed. The seeds show 
dormancy, which can be broken by direct 
sunlight. 
Management Piper umbellatum is only oc-
casionally cultivated, mostly in home gardens. 
Production methods of 4-nerolidylcatechol 
based on in-vitro cultivation of parts of Piper 
umbellatum are being developed. 
Harvesting The leaves, fruits and roots of 
Piper umbellatum are harvested whenever 
needed, usually from the wild. 
Handling after harvest Piper umbellatum 
is mainly used fresh. 
Genetic resources Piper umbellatum is 
very widely distributed and not in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects 4-Nerolidylcatechol is an anti-
oxidant with several promising pharmacologi-
cal activities. It may also provide information 
leads for effective antivenoms to treat viper 
bites. Its widespread and common use in tradi-
tional medicine warrants further research to 
fully evaluate its potential as an analgesic and 
wound-healing plant, and also its antimalarial 
properties. 
Major references Desmarchelier et al., 
1997; Diniz, 1997; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bis-
soondoyal, 1997; Neuwinger, 2000; Nunez et 
al., 2005; Perazzo et al., 2005; Pino et al., 2005; 
Ropke et al., 2006; Schmelzer, 2001; Verdcourt, 
1996. 
Other references Adami et al., 1998; Agbor 
et al., 2005; Balle, 1948; Bioka & Abena, 1990; 
Boiteau, Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; Gil-
bert, 2000b; Gurib-Fakim, 1994; Gurib-Fakim 
PLAGIOSTYLES 457 
et al., 1993; Hammer & Johns, 1993; Keay, 
1954b; Kijjoa et al., 1980; Luz eta a l , 1999; 
Martins et al., 1998; Morton, 1981; Najib Nik a 
Rahman et al., 1999; Neuwinger, 1996; Noumi, 
Houngue & Lontsi, 1999; Viana, Tavares & 
Mattos, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Schmelzer, 2001. 
Authors M. Domis & L.P.A. Oyen 
Based on PROSEA 12(2): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 2. 
PlSONIA LANCEOLATA (Poir.) Choisy 
Protologue DC, Prodr. 13: 442 (1849). 
Family Nyctaginaceae 
Synonyms Pisonia calpidia Steud. (1841). 
Vernacular names Bois carotte, bois de joli 
cœur, bois mapou, mapou (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pisonia 
lanceolata is endemic to Mauritius and Reun-
ion. 
Uses A leaf poultice of Pisonia lanceolata 
mixed with salt and wrapped in the leaves of 
Ricinus communis L. or Terminalia catappa L. 
is used to treat poisonous fish bites. The leaves 
are also used in the treatment of syphilis, 
chronic gastro-enteritis and childhood eczema, 
or as an astringent and depurative. The young 
sprouts are eaten as a cooked vegetable and 
taste like cabbage. 
Properties The leaves and stems of Pisonia 
lanceolata contain alkaloids, phenols, tannins, 
coumarins, sterols, terpenes and traces of 
saponins. 
Botany Small tree up to 8 m tall, with thick 
and short bole. Leaves alternate, opposite, or in 
whorls at the top of the branchlets, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 0.5-3 cm long; 
blade ovate, obovate to elliptical, sometimes 
almost circular, 5-18 cm x 2—8 cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex acute to obtuse, pa-
pery to leathery, lateral veins almost invisible. 
Inflorescence an axillary or terminal umbel-
like panicle, 3-13 cm long, with reddish short 
hairs or almost glabrous, many-flowered; 
bracts absent or inconspicuous; peduncle 3—8 
cm long. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
scented; pedicel short; perianth funnel-shaped, 
6-8 mm long, lobes triangular to ovate, 2-3.5 
mm long, curved at apex, with small, triangu-
lar lobes between the other lobes, pink; male 
flowers with 9-13 included stamens and rudi-
mentary ovary; female flowers slightly smaller 
than male flowers, with superior, ovoid, 1-
celled ovary, style included, stigma papillose 
and mushroom-shaped, staminodes c. 10, 
shorter than the style. Fruit an achene en-
closed by the thickened lower part of perianth 
(anthocarp), anthocarp obconical, 4-6 cm long, 
5-ribbed, with glandular hairs, 1-seeded. Seed 
oblong, with a deep longitudinal furrow. 
Pisonia comprises about 35 species, of which 
about 20 occur in tropical America, 1 is pan-
tropical (Pisonia aculeata L.), and the other 
species occur in the Old World tropics, from the 
Indian Ocean islands to South-East Asia and 
Oceania. Pisonia aculeata, occurring through-
out tropical Africa, is listed officially in Mex-
ico's Pharmacopoeia and is used as medicinal 
plant in the Philippines, Thailand and India. 
In Africa, the only recorded medicinal use is in 
Côte d'Ivoire, where the juice from the leaves is 
used as drops against earache. 
Ecology Pisonia lanceolata occurs in the 
remains of natural forest, in rocky localities, in 
the mountains or along rivers and lakes. 
Genetic resources and breeding The 
natural distribution of Pisonia lanceolata is 
restricted and it is considered vulnerable. In 
Mauritius in situ conservation is taking place 
in several national parks. 
Prospects Because of the widespread me-
dicinal use of several Pisonia species in Asia, 
more research into the chemical composition 
and pharmacological activities of the com-
pounds of Pisonia lanceolata seems warranted. 
Major references Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
2004; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 
1996; Philcox & Coode, 1994. 
Other references Cavaco, 1954; Schmelzer 
& Bunyapraphatsara, 2001; Tra Bi, Kouamé & 
Traoré, 2005. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
PLAGIOSTYLES AFRICANA (Miill.Ajg.) Prain 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1912: 
107 (1912). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Plagio-
styles africana occurs from Nigeria to Gabon 
and DR Congo. 
Uses Throughout Central Africa, a bark de-
coction is drunk to treat pulmonary complaints 
and feverish stiffness. In Gabon a wood decoc-
tion is taken to promote milk production in 
nursing mothers. A decoction of the fresh 
leaves is drunk to treat constipation. Crushed 
fresh leaves are applied to burns. In Congo sap 
from the inner bark or leaves is drunk as a 
458 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
purgative to expel intestinal worms in children. 
A leaf maceration is drunk to treat stomach 
spasms and heartburn. Pulverized bark with 
kaolin and palm oil is rubbed onto painful ar-
eas to treat side and kidney pain, headache 
and rheumatism. Plant sap is applied as eye 
drops to treat filariasis and conjunctivitis, and 
pounded leaves are applied to snakebites, sca-
bies and areas of itch. Twig sap is given in wa-
ter as a tranquilizer in case of fits of insanity, 
and is also used as a wash. In DR Congo a 
maceration of the inner bark is inserted into 
the ear to treat earache and deafness. In Ga-
bon pounded leaves are used as fish poison. 
Throughout Central Africa the plant, especially 
the bark, is widely used in charms and reli-
gious rituals. 
The wood is yellowish white and is used in 
Gabon to make spoons, combs and hair pins. It 
is suitable for flooring, poles, piles, joinery, 
interior trim, furniture, cabinet work, vehicle 
bodies, sporting goods, toys, novelties, boxes, 
crates, carving, turnery, veneer and plywood. 
Properties The stem bark of Plagiostyles 
africana contains phorbol esters. An aqueous 
stem bark extract showed antifungal activity 
against several human and plant pathogens. A 
methanol extract of the stem bark showed sig-
nificant antimicrobial activity against several 
Gram-positive bacteria, but not against Gram-
negative bacteria. 
The heartwood is greyish brown, often with 
attractive dark veins and lustrous. It is more or 
less distinctly demarcated from the pale yel-
low, very wide sapwood. The grain is straight, 
texture fine but often uneven. 
The wood is heavy, with a density of about 910 
kg/m3 at 12% moisture content. It should be air 
dried slowly and carefully to avoid excessive 
splitting and warping. The rates of shrinkage 
are high, from green to oven dry 5.8% radial 
and 12.1% tangential. At 12% moisture con-
tent, the modulus of rupture is 192 N/mm2, 
modulus of elasticity 16,660 N/mm2, compres-
sion parallel to grain 85 N/mm2, shear 13.5 
N/mm2, cleavage 27.5 N/mm2 and Chalais-
Meudon hardness 7.1. 
The wood saws and works well considering its 
density, with both hand and machine tools. It 
can be planed to a smooth surface and takes a 
high polish. The nailing and screwing proper-
ties are good. The wood is suitable for peeling 
and slicing. It is moderately durable and sus-
ceptible to Lyctus attack. 
Botany Dioecious, glabrous shrub or small 
to medium-sized tree up to 25 m tall; bole up to 
80 cm in diameter, branchless for up to 12 m; 
bark surface brown, smooth, often with patches 
of horizontal ridges, with whitish latex. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules small; petiole 0.5— 
4(-5) cm long; blade elliptical to lanceolate, 8-
20(-25) cm x 2.5—9(—10) cm, base cuneate, apex 
acuminate, margins undulate to shallowly 
toothed, shiny, pinnately veined with 7-10 
pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary 
raceme or panicle; male inflorescence 1-11 cm 
long, female inflorescence 1.5-3.5 cm long; pe-
duncle reddish; bracts broadly ovate, c. 1 mm 
long. Flowers unisexual, petals absent; male 
flowers with pedicel 3-9(-12) mm long, calyx 
lobes 5-8, broadly ovate, up to 1 mm long, sta-
mens 15-32, c. 1.5 mm long; female flowers 
with pedicel 1-2 mm long, enlarging to 5—10(— 
15) mm in fruit, calyx lobes 5, unequal, broadly 
ovate, up to 1 mm long, ovary superior, ellip-
soid, c. 3 mm long, l(-2)-celled, stigma almost 
sessile, thickened. Fruit a transversely oblong 
drupe c. 1.5 cm x 2.5 cm x 1.5 cm, glabrous, 
maturing red, finally black, l(-2)-seeded. Seed 
transversely oblong, c. 1 cm x 2 cm x 1.5 cm. 
Seedling with epigeal germination. 
In Gabon the fruits ripen in October-
December. They are sweet and eaten by chim-
panzees and gorillas, which may disperse the 
seeds. 
Plagiostyles comprises a single species. It is 
markedly similar to the South-East Asian ge-
nus Pimelodendron. 
Ecology Plagiostyles africana occurs in rain-
forest, commonly in secondary forest. 
Management In many regions within its 
distribution area, Plagiostyles africana is quite 
common, e.g. in forest near Edéa (Cameroon) 
the average density of stems with a diameter of 
more than 15 cm is 0.5 per ha, with an average 
wood volume of 0.75 m3/ha, and in Gabon the 
average wood volume is 2.1 m3/ha. 
Genetic resources and breeding Plagio-
styles africana is relatively frequent in its area 
of distribution and therefore not likely to be 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Plagiostyles africana is com-
monly used as a medicinal plant, but apart 
from some encouraging antifungal and antibac-
terial activities of the stem bark, not much is 
known on the chemistry or pharmacology. 
More research is therefore warranted to evalu-
ate its potential to develop lead compounds for 
the pharmaceutical industry. Although the 
wood is generally not highly valued, Plagio-
styles africana may have prospects for sustain-
able harvesting from natural forest, but re-
PLANTAGO 459 
search on ecology, regeneration and growth 
rate is needed. 
Major references Bolza & Keating, 1972; 
Burkill, 1994; Gangoue Pieboji et al., 2006; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Takahashi, 1978. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Beutler, Alvarado Lindner & 
McCloud, 1996; Bouquet, 1969; de Saint-Aubin, 
1963; Gassita et al. (Editors), 1982; Laine et 
al., 1985; Léonard, 1962; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961; Vivien & Fauré, 1985; Wilks & 
Issembé, 2000. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer & R.H.M.J. Lem-
mens 
PLANTAGO LANCEOLATA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 113 (1753). 
Family Plantaginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 12, 18, 24 
Vernacular names Ribwort (plantain), rib 
grass, small plantain, narrow-leaved plantain 
(En). Plantain, herbe Caroline, plantain lancéo-
lé, herbe-à-cinq-côtes (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Origi-
nally from Europe and northern and central 
Asia, Plantago lanceolata is now cosmopolitan. 
In Africa it occurs mainly in the eastern and 
southern parts, including South Africa. It is 
common in Mauritius and Rodrigues. 
Uses In temperate regions, Plantago lanceo-
lata has largely the same traditional uses as 
Plantago major L.. The leaves are used as a 
diuretic and astringent, and to treat wounds, 
insect stings, sunburn, skin diseases, eye irri-
tation and inflammation of mouth and throat. 
An infusion acts as a general detoxifier of the 
Plantago lanceolata - wild 
body, and is taken to treat colds, cough, 
hoarseness, asthma, emphysema, bronchitis, 
fevers, gastritis, ulcers, bladder problems, kid-
ney stones, intestinal complaints, irregular 
menstrual flow, hypertension, rheumatism and 
hay fever. An infusion of the dried seeds is ap-
plied as a soothing eye lotion, taken as a 
treatment for diarrhoea and dysentery or for 
intestinal worms in children. In modern phyto-
therapy the leaves are used in cough syrups to 
alleviate irritation. Macerates, fluid extracts, 
syrups and juice from the fresh plant are all 
used for treating inflammation of the mouth 
and throat, and externally for inflamed skin. 
In tropical Africa the uses in traditional medi-
cine are largely the same. In Mauritius a tinc-
ture made from the mashed leaves in alcohol is 
applied to aching teeth caused by caries. The 
crushed leaves are applied as a poultice on 
wounds to stop bleeding. A leaf decoction or 
infusion is used to wash the eyes to treat eye 
infection. A tea made from the whole plant is 
taken against nausea and is used as a mouth 
wash for aphthae. It is also used to wash parts 
of the body to treat rheumatic pains. In Nige-
ria, the whole plants, including the seeds, are 
used to treat intestinal problems such as gas-
tritis, gastro-enteritis, and salmonellosis, and 
many respiratory problems. In Ethiopia Plan-
tago lanceolata is one of the 10 most used tae-
nicidal herbs in local medicine, either as an 
infusion or in alcoholic beverages. The roots 
are traditionally used to treat fertility prob-
lems. 
The seed mucilage is an excellent thickener 
used in cosmetics (e.g. in lotions and hair wave 
sets) and as a stabilizer in the ice-cream indus-
try. It is also used in the preparation of choco-
late. The seeds can be used as a source of a 
low-cost gelling agent for tissue culture. The 
quality is comparable to that of agar, but at 
about 10% of the cost. Plantago lanceolata is 
currently being marketed as a stop smoking 
aid in the United Kingdom, as it is said that it 
causes an aversion to tobacco. In the United 
States Plantago major has been patented and 
marketed for the same purpose. Leaves are 
edible and sometimes eaten as vegetable. Plan-
tago lanceolata is occasionally grown as a fod-
der crop and considered to be of better quality 
than Plantago major. 
Production and international trade For 
Africa, no information on production or trade of 
Plantago lanceolata is known and general in-
formation on production and trade is scarce. In 
the United Kingdom Plantago lanceolata is 
460 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cultivated for medicinal purposes, and it is also 
imported from Bulgaria, Russia, former Yugo-
slavia, Hungary and Poland. Prices in 2004 
were US$ 10.50/kg for dried material wholesale 
and US$ 58/kg for retail. 
Properties A range of pharmacological ac-
tivities has been found in tests with Plantago 
lanceolata extracts, including weak antibiotic, 
wound healing, anti-inflammatory, anti-
ulcerogenic, laxative, analgesic, antioxidant 
and immunomodulatory activities. Biologically 
active compounds include polysaccharides, 
caffeic acid derivatives, flavonoids, iridoid gly-
cosides and terpenoids. 
The saccharides galacturonic acid, galactose, 
arabinose, rhamnose, glucose, xylose, as well 
as a pectic polysaccharide, a galactoarabin and 
a galactan have been isolated from the leaves. 
Extraction of the seeds in cold water yields a 
polysaccharide, which contains uronic acid, 
pentosans, methyl pentosan, and an oil. The 
seeds owe their laxative properties to the very 
hydrophilic polysaccharides. They absorb much 
water and form a gel that increases stool bulk, 
stimulates peristalsis and facilitates bowel 
movements. The effect has been confirmed by 
several clinical studies. The mucilage can also 
be used as supportive therapy in diarrhoea, 
because the transit period of the bowel con-
tents is extended. 
The leaves, seeds and roots contain caffeic acid 
and derivatives such as chlorogenic acid, neo-
chlorogenic acid, plantamajoside, acteoside 
(verbascoside), syringic acid and vanillic acid. 
Plantamajoside showed anti-inflammatory 
activity in tests with mice, and some antibacte-
rial activity. Both plantamajoside and acteo-
side have anti-oxidant activity and are DPPH 
(2,2-diphenyl-l-picrylhydrazyl) radical scaven-
gers. Acteoside has antibacterial, antihyper-
tensive, immunosuppressant and analgesic 
activities. 
Among the flavonoids isolated are apigenin-7-
O-monoglucoside, apigenin-6,8-diglucoside and 
luteolin-7-O-ß-glucoside. The methanol extract 
of the plant showed no cytotoxic activity 
against a human tumour cell line of renal ade-
nocarcinoma, but did show total inhibition of 
breast adenocarcinoma and melanoma growth 
in culture. 
Plantago lanceolata leaves also contain iridoid 
glycosides (1.9-2.4%) such as aucubin, catalpol 
and asperuloside. Aucubin showed anti-
inflammatory and hepatoprotective activities 
in tests with mice, spasmolytic activity in tests 
with rats, and antiviral activity against hepati-
tis B virus. Aucubigenin, the aglycone of aucu-
bin, has antimicrobial activity. Two cultivars of 
Plantago lanceolata from Spain showed a 
strong increase in aucubin and acteoside con-
centrations in the leaves during the growing 
season. 
In Ethiopia tests of the toxicity and therapeutic 
activities of Plantago lanceolata leaves as a 
taenicidal medicine in mice showed moderate 
toxicity and low taenicidal activity. The antim-
icrobial action is moderate. The roots were 
tested for uterotonic and anti-implantation 
activities in mice, but showed low activity. 
Description Small perennial herb up to 
60(-100) cm tall, with a thick rhizome and fi-
brous roots. Leaves in a dense rosette, ar-
ranged spirally; stipules absent; petiole up to 
as long as the blade; blade linear-lanceolate to 
narrowly ovate or spatulate, (2-)10-20(-40) cm 
x l-3(-7) cm, base tapering into the petiole, 
apex acute to acuminate, both surfaces gla-
brous or appressed pubescent to villous, mar-
gins entire or shallowly dentate, veins 3-5, 
distinct, parallel. Inflorescence a short spike 
0.5-5(-10) cm long, very densely flowered, pe-
duncle 10-60(-100) cm long, grooved, silky 
hairy; bracts ovate, 2.5-4(-7) mm long. Flowers 
Plantago lanceolata - 1, flowering plant; 2, 
flower; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
PLANTAGO 461 
usually bisexual, regular, 4-merous, sessile, 
brownish white; sepals rounded-ovate, 2.5-3.5 
mm long, the lower pair joined; corolla c. 3 mm 
long, lobes ovate, 2-2.5 mm long; stamens in-
serted on the corolla lobes, exserted, anthers 
almost white; ovary superior, 2-4-celled, style 
1, about twice as long as the flower. Fruit a 
circumscissile, ellipsoid capsule 3-5 mm long, 
(l-)2-3-seeded. Seeds oblong-ellipsoid, 2.5-3 
mm long, yellow-brown to dark brown, muci-
laginous when wet. Seedling with epigeal ger-
mination. 
Other botanical information Plantago 
comprises nearly 270 species and is cosmopoli-
tan, but mostly temperate in distribution. 
Plantago lanceolata is extremely variable, but 
much of the variation reflects differences in 
habitat (e.g. hairy plants in more dry habitats). 
The leaves tend to be upright and more linear-
lanceolate when the surrounding cover is tall. 
In grazed areas, its habit is prostrate and the 
leaves are more ovate. 
Growth and development In tropical cli-
mates, Plantago lanceolata may flower all year 
round, with a life cycle that may be accom-
plished in 6 weeks. In temperate regions, the 
plants overwinter below the ground in open 
areas, or as small rosettes if more cover is pre-
sent. The longevity of Plantago lanceolata var-
ies with the region and the disturbance of the 
site. Individual plants have been known to 
persist for at least 12 years. Old plants develop 
a thick rhizome producing new aerial shoots, 
which leads to clumping. 
In general, Plantago lanceolata seems to be a 
strict outbreeder although other studies state 
that it is self-fertile. Genetic studies revealed 
that several sexual forms exist in Plantago 
lanceolata: bisexual plants with long anthers 
and viable pollen, bisexual plants with short 
anthers and pollen with poor viability and fe-
male plants with rudimentary stamens. 
Seed production is highest in open, cultivated 
land, and least in mowed or grazed areas. The 
seeds are ripe 2-3 weeks after fertilization. 
They readily adhere to animals or people, 
which promotes dispersal. They can also be 
transported by water. 
Ecology Plantago lanceolata occurs in dis-
turbed areas. It is a very common weed of cul-
tivated areas and roadsides, as well as open 
woodland and grassland. Plantago lanceolata is 
more drought resistant than Plantago major, 
but is less tolerant to water-logging; it does not 
tolerate saline soil. 
Propagation and planting Plantago lan-
ceolata can be multiplied by seeds or vegeta-
tively. The seeds have a dormancy period of 
one to several months, which can be broken by 
dry storage at 5°C for several weeks or 20°C for 
several months. Germination is best for 1-6-
year-old seeds and at temperatures of 25-30°C. 
Nitrate stimulates germination of Plantago 
lanceolata. 
Management Pure stands of Plantago 
lanceolata respond well to fertilizer, but in 
mixed pastures N-fertilizer will increase com-
petition from other plants. Its root system can 
exploit deeper soil layers than most other pas-
ture plants. In mixed pastures Plantago 
lanceolata establishes quickly and is preferen-
tially grazed, which may lead to its disappear-
ance from the sward. The inflorescences are 
avoided by grazing animals. 
Diseases and pests Seedling mortality of 
Plantago lanceolata is common, and is due to a 
complex of fungal species interacting with 
abiotic factors. Stalk disease is caused by the 
fungus Phomopsis subordinaria. Plantago 
lanceolata is a host of Meloidogyne nematodes. 
Harvesting Care should be taken when 
collecting Plantago lanceolata from the wild for 
medicinal purposes, since plants may contain 
high concentrations of heavy metals such as 
lead and cadmium where they grow along 
roads. 
Yield The forage yield of special cultivars 
has reached up to 20 t/ha in New Zealand. 
Handling after harvest The drying tem-
perature affects the content of the active com-
pounds of the plant material. The concentra-
tions of the active compounds steadily decrease 
in the initial stages of drying both under natu-
ral climatic conditions and at 60°C. 
Genetic resources Plantago lanceolata is 
common and extremely widespread and not 
threatened by genetic erosion. Several small 
genebank collections exist, especially in South 
America and Europe. 
Breeding Improved pasture cultivars have 
been bred in New Zealand; they include 'Grass-
land Lancelot' and 'Ceres Tonic'. 
Prospects The uses of Plantago lanceolata 
orally to treat digestive and bronchial disor-
ders, and topically to treat skin disorders and 
eye infections are very widespread. Recent 
research seems to substantiate traditional 
uses, although information is far from com-
plete. Related species with similar uses are 
more easily and widely cultivated, e.g. Plan-
tago afra L. and Plantago ovata Forssk. (ispa-
ghul), which are cultivated in India for medici-
462 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
nal purposes. 
Major references Bruneton, 1995; Desta, 
1994; Desta, 1995; Fons et al., 1998; Holm et 
al., 1977; Lilis Pangemanan, 1999; Suomi et 
al., 2002; Tamura & Nishibe, 2002. 
Other references Baerts & Lehmann, 
2002d; Bisset, 1994; Bräutigam & Franz, 1985; 
Calabozo, Barber & Polo, 2001; Ebrahimzadeh, 
Mirmasumi & Tabatabaei, 1997; Fleming (Edi-
tor), 1998; Galvez et al., 2003; Glen, 1998; Guil-
Guerrero, 2001; Gurib-Fakim et al., 1994; 
Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1997; 
Lehmann, 1988; Lisowski, Malaisse & Sy-
moens, 1972; Murai, Tamayama & Nishibe, 
1995; Nostro et al., 2000; Rumball, 1997; 
Samuelsen, 2000; Sharma, Koul & Koul, 1992; 
Verdcourt, 1971; Wegener & Kraft, 1999. 
Sources of illustration Holm et al., 1977. 
Authors A. Gurib-Fakim 
PLANTAGO MAJOR L. 
Protologue Sp. pl. 1: 112 (1753). 
Family Plantaginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 12, 24 
Vernacular names Greater plantain, large 
plantain, common plantain, waybread (En). 
Gros plantain, plantain (Fr). Tanchagem-maior 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Plan-
tago major originated in Europe but has be-
come cosmopolitan. It is essentially temperate 
in its distribution. In the tropics Plantago ma-
jor is most common in mountainous regions. In 
Africa it is most common in southern Africa, 
including South Africa. 
Uses The leaves of Plantago major are used 
almost worldwide as a diuretic and astringent, 
and to treat wounds, insect stings, sunburn, 
skin diseases, eye irritation and inflammation 
of mouth and throat. In modern phytotherapy 
they are used to alleviate irritation in catarrh 
of the upper respiratory tract. Macerates, ex-
tracts, syrups and fresh juice are applied for 
these purposes. The roots are considered as-
tringent and febrifuge, and used in decoction to 
treat cough. The seeds are considered demul-
cent, stimulant, diuretic and tonic, and are 
mainly used as a remedy for dysentery and 
diarrhoea. 
In tropical Africa Plantago major is commonly 
used in traditional medicine for the same pur-
poses. In the Seychelles, Réunion and Mauri-
tius leaf infusions or decoctions are used to 
treat conjunctivitis, toothache, gingivitis, nau-
Plantago major - wild 
sea, asthma, constipation, rheumatic and in-
testinal pains and gout, and crushed leaves are 
applied externally to wounds, eczema and skin 
infections, and are put into the ear to treat 
earache. The sap of the plant in vinegar is 
taken as a vermifuge. In Cape Verde a leaf 
infusion, together with the leaves of Jatropha 
curcas L., is applied to infections and ab-
scesses. In Ethiopia the leaves are used to treat 
stomach-ache, eye diseases and toothache, and 
the leaf sap is taken as a tonic and astringent. 
In South Africa the leaf juice is used against 
earache and to treat eye irritation, and a root 
decoction to treat diarrhoea. The leaves are 
used to treat malaria in Tanzania and South 
Africa. 
The seed mucilage is an excellent thickener 
used in cosmetics (e.g. in lotions and hair wave 
sets) and as a stabilizer in the ice-cream indus-
try. It is also used in the preparation of choco-
late. The seeds can be used as a low-cost gel-
ling agent for tissue culture. The quality is 
comparable to that of agar at only about 10% of 
its cost. 
Young leaves and immature peduncles are 
used as a vegetable, cooked or in salads. The 
seeds have a nutty flavour and can be added to 
foods or ground into flour. The seed oil has an 
agreeable odour and taste. In the United States 
boiled seeds are used as birdfeed, and Plantago 
major plants are sometimes marketed as or-
namentals. In Europe whole mature spikes are 
fed to birds. 
Production and international trade For 
Africa, no information on production or trade of 
Plantago major is known. General information 
on production and trade is very incomplete. In 
PLANTAGO 463 
the United Kingdom, Turkey and India, Plan-
tago major is cultivated for medicinal purposes, 
while countries like China and Romania import 
dried plants for medicinal purposes. Romania 
bought dry plant material at US$ 500-600/ton 
in 2002, while the United Kingdom sells dried 
material at US$ 8—11.50/kg for trade with a 
retail price of US$ 54/kg. In the 1970s Plantago 
major was collected on a large scale from the 
wild in Russia for medicinal trade. 
Properties A range of pharmacological ac-
tivities has been found in tests with Plantago 
major, including wound healing, anti-
inflammatory, anti-oxidant, antibiotic, immu-
nomodulatory, diuretic and anti-ulcerogenic 
activities. Active compounds include polysac-
charides, lipids, caffeic acid derivatives, flavon-
oids, iridoid glycosides and terpenoids. 
Aqueous extracts exhibited dual immunomodu-
latory effects by enhancing lymphocyte prolif-
eration and by secretion of interferon-y at low 
concentrations (<50 ng/ml), but this effect was 
inhibited at high concentrations (>50 ug/ml). A 
decoction of dried leaves showed moderate diu-
retic activity when tested on rats. Ethanol and 
methanol extracts showed significant in-vitro 
activity against a wide variety of bacteria and 
fungi. Leaf extracts were also active against 
Giardia duodenalis trophozoites and the nema-
tode Ditylenchus dipsaci, a pest of garlic. 
The saccharides galacturonic acid, galactose, 
arabinose, rhamnose, glucose, xylose, as well 
as a pectic polysaccharide, a galactoarabin and 
a galactan have been isolated from the leaves. 
Together these are referred to as 'plantaglucid', 
which has been used to treat ulcers. Plantaglu-
cid reduced the development of peptic ulcers in 
rats and reduced inflammatory oedema, with-
out toxic effects even after prolonged admini-
stration. A highly esterified pectic polysaccha-
ride (PMII) activated human monocytes in vi-
tro to increase production of tumour necrosis 
factor a (TNF a) and also had prophylactic 
activity against Streptococcus pneumoniae in 
mice. The seeds contain mucilaginous matter 
consisting of hydrophilic polysaccharides, 
mainly in the seed coat. The polysaccharides 
have variable amounts of xylose, arabinose, 
galacturonic acid and glucuronic acid as main 
components. They swell in contact with water 
and form mucilage with high viscosity, which 
increases stool bulk, stimulates peristalsis and 
facilitates bowel movements. 
A number of fatty acids have been isolated 
from the seed oil, of which oleic acid (37.5%) 
and linoleic acid (25.5%) are the main compo-
nents. From fresh leaves 0.2% lipids were iso-
lated, with palmitic acid and stearic acid as 
main components and smaller amounts of 
oleanolic acid and ursolic acid. The latter 2 
compounds showed hepatoprotective, antitu-
mour and antihyperlipidemic effects, whereas 
ursolic acid exhibited also anti-inflammatory 
activity. 
The caffeic acid derivatives plantamajoside and 
acteoside (verbascoside) have been isolated 
from Plantago major. Plantamajoside showed 
anti-inflammatory activity in tests with mice, 
and some antibacterial activity. Acteoside has 
antibacterial, immunosuppressant, analgesic 
and antihypertensive effects. Both plantama-
joside and acteoside have anti-oxidant activity 
and are DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-l-picrylhydrazyl) 
radical scavengers. 
Among the flavonoids isolated are baicalein, 
hispidulin, plantaginin and scutellarein. These 
have free radical scavenging activity and in-
hibit lipid peroxidation, and the first 3 are anti-
oxidants. Baicalein has anti-inflammatory, anti-
allergic and hepatoprotective activities, it 
showed inhibition of human and rat cancer cell 
lines, and it is a HIV-reverse transcriptase 
inhibitor in vitro. Hispidulin also showed anti-
inflammatory activitiy and is an inhibitor of 5-
lipoxygenase, whereas scutellarein has anti-
allergic and HIV-reverse transcriptase inhibit-
ing activities. The glucosides luteolin-7-gluco-
side and homoplantaginin are also potent in-
hibitors of HIV-reverse transcriptase. A metha-
nol extract of Plantago major, containing luteo-
lin-7-O-ß-glucoside, showed growth inhibition 
of human breast adenocarcinoma and mela-
noma cell lines. 
Aucubin is one of the major iridoid glycosides 
isolated from Plantago major; the content in 
dried leaves can be up to 1.3%. It showed anti-
inflammatory and hepatoprotective activities 
in tests with mice, spasmolytic properties in 
rats, and antiviral activity against hepatitis B 
virus. The aglycone of aucubin, aucubigenin, 
has antimicrobial activity against bacteria and 
fungi. 
The leaves have been used as a vegetable, and 
are rich in vitamins A, C and K, as well as cal-
cium. The leaves taste saline, bitterish and 
acrid. The roots are saline and sweetish to 
taste. 
In the United States, Plantago major has been 
patented as a natural smoking deterrent prod-
uct called CIG-NO (available in spray, capsules 
or drops), which contains no nicotine and is not 
addictive. Exact cause and effect relationships 
464 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
are not yet fully understood. 
Description Small perennial herb up to 
30(—70) cm tall, with numerous fibrous and 
whitish roots. Leaves in one or few basal ro-
settes, arranged spirally; stipules absent; peti-
ole usually as long as the blade; blade ovate to 
elliptical, (1.5-)5-30(-40) cm x (0.5-)3-10(-15) 
cm, base abruptly narrowed into petiole, apex 
rounded, both surfaces glabrous or pubescent, 
margins entire or irregularly dentate, veins 3— 
5, distinct, parallel. Inflorescence a spike 5— 
20(—35) cm long, densely to rather laxly flow-
ered; peduncle 5—15(—25) cm long; bracts ovate, 
1-2.5 mm long, acute. Flowers minute, usually 
bisexual, regular, 4-merous, sessile, greenish or 
yellowish white; sepals broadly elliptical to 
rounded, 1.5-2 mm long, keeled; corolla 2-4 
mm long, lobes elliptical-ovate, c. 1 mm long, 
acute or obtuse; stamens inserted on the co-
rolla lobes, exserted, anthers conspicuous; 
ovary superior, 2-4-celled, style 1 with a stout 
pilose stigma, protruding. Fruit a circumscis-
sile capsule 2-4 mm long, (4—)6-34-seeded. 
Seeds ellipsoid or ellipsoid-trigonous, 1-1.5 mm 
long, dark brown to dull black, mucilaginous 
when wet. Seedling with epigeal germination; 
cotyledons sessile or shortly petiolate, sheathed 
at base; hypocotyl elongate, epicotyl absent. 
Plantago major - 1, fruiting plant; 2, inflores-
cence; 3, flower; 4, dehisced fruit; 5, seeds. 
Source: PROSEA 
Other botanical information Plantago 
comprises nearly 270 species and is cosmopoli-
tan, but mostly temperate in distribution. 
Plantago major is a variable species in which 
several subspecies and varieties have been 
described, but these are connected by a series 
of intermediates. At higher altitudes the leaves 
tend to be more lanceolate and more pubescent, 
while the spikes tend to be more compact. 
Growth and development In the tropics 
Plantago major may flower all year round, with 
a life cycle that may be accomplished in 6 
weeks. In temperate regions the plants over-
winter below ground in open areas, or as small 
rosettes if more cover is present. Self-
pollination is common, but the flowers can also 
be wind-pollinated. A seed production per plant 
of 14,000-20,000 seeds/year has been reported. 
Seeds readily adhere to animals or people 
through their mucilaginous seed coat which 
promotes dispersal. They can also be trans-
ported by water. Plantago major may live up to 
15 years under natural conditions and 5-8 
years in cultivation in Turkmenistan. 
Ecology Plantago major occurs mainly in 
disturbed areas. Because of its tough leaves 
appressed to the ground, it is well-adapted to 
withstand trampling by livestock and humans. 
Plantago major can tolerate more water-
logging and compacted soils than Plantago 
lanceolata L., and is found along roadsides, in 
gardens and open grassland, but also in wet 
and muddy localities. Once Plantago major has 
become established, it can become a noxious 
weed, as is the case in sugarcane fields in the 
Mascarene Islands. Plantago major is grown in 
India on medium to poor sandy soils but 
thrives best in well-drained loamy soils. 
Propagation and planting The seeds can 
remain viable for up to 60 years in the soil. 
They have a dormancy period of one to several 
months, which can be broken by dry storage at 
5°C for several weeks or at 20°C for several 
months. Germination is best at temperatures 
of 25-30°C, and a long photoperiod (16 hours). 
An efficient micropropagation protocol for 
Plantago major has been described, culturing 
shoot tips on a modified Murashige and Skoog 
medium. 
Diseases and pests Plantago major acts as 
a reservoir for several viruses, such as potato 
virus Y (PVY) and cucumber mosaic virus 
(CMV), and also for bacterial leaf blight of rice 
(Xanthomonas oryzae). 
Harvesting Care should be taken when 
collecting Plantago major from the wild for 
PLANTAGO 465 
medicinal purposes, since plants may contain 
high concentrations of heavy metals such as 
lead and cadmium where they grow along 
roads. 
Yield A field trial with the Ukrainian culti-
var 'Poltavskii' yielded 170 g/plant of fresh 
leaves; maximum seed yield/plant was 25 g, 
with a 1000-seed weight of 0.24 g. Leaf yield in 
1986-87 was 5.2 t/ha. In Chile, a field trial 
showed that high plant densities of up to 200.000 
plants/ha had no effect on dry matter yield. 
Genetic resources Plantago major is com-
mon and extremely widespread and not threat-
ened by genetic erosion. Several small gene-
bank collections exist, especially in South 
America and Europe. Selections for ornamental 
purposes are marketed in the United States. 
Prospects The uses of Plantago major orally 
to treat digestive and bronchial disorders, and 
topically to treat skin disorders and eye infec-
tions are very widespread. Recent research 
seems to substantiate traditional uses, al-
though information is far from complete. Re-
lated species with similar uses are more easily 
and widely cultivated, e.g. Plantago afra L. and 
Plantago ovata Forssk. (ispaghul), which are 
cultivated in India for medicinal purposes. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1983b; 
Chiang et al., 2003a; Chiang et al., 2003b; 
Galvez et a l , 2003; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & 
Bissoondoyal, 1997; Holm et a l , 1977; Lilis 
Pangemanan, 1999; Nunez-Guillen et al., 1997 
Samuelsen, 2000; Than et al., 1996. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1983a. 
Candia & Edgardo, 2000; Ebrahimzadeh, Mir-
masumi & Tabatabaei, 1997; Glen, 1998: 
Gurib-Fakim et al., 1993; Gurib-Fakim et al., 
1994; Hutchings et a l , 1996; Insunza & 
Valenzuela, 1995; Jansen, 1981; Lavergne & 
Véra, 1989; Lehmann, 1988; Lisowski, Mal-
aisse & Symoens, 1972; Mederos et al., 1998; 
Pinto Basto, 1996; Rouillard & Guého, 2000; 
Verdcourt, 1971; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962; Weenen et al., 1990. 
Sources of illustration Lilis Pangemanan, 
1999. 
Authors A. Gurib-Fakim 
PLANTAGO PALMATA Hook.f. 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc, Bot. 6:19 (1861). 
Family Plantaginaceae 
Chromosome number In = 24 
Origin and geographic distribution Plan-
tago palmata is indigenous in tropical Africa, 
where it occurs from Bioko (Equatorial Guinea) 
and Cameroon east to Ethiopia and Kenya, and 
south to Zimbabwe. 
Uses In the eastern part of DR Congo, the 
sap of the leaves in water is externally applied 
to treat conjunctivitis and haemorrhoids, and 
internally against diarrhoea and vaginal 
prolapse. An infusion of the leaves or pounded 
roots in milk is taken to treat intestinal prob-
lems. Pounded leaves and inflorescences are 
applied to burns and skin diseases. The Nyindu 
people of DR Congo use the pounded leaves, 
mixed with honey, against heart problems. A 
grilled leaf is applied to aching joints. In Bu-
rundi the leaves are used in the treatment of 
oedema, threatening miscarriage, nausea dur-
ing pregnancy and intestinal problems such as 
diarrhoea. In East Africa the leaves are macer-
ated in banana beer, which is taken to treat 
hepatic diseases. In Rwanda the leaves are 
used internally for similar diseases and to ex-
pel intestinal worms and externally to treat 
breast infection. In eastern Congo the macer-
ated leaves are given to young goats against 
cocciniosis, a protozoan intestinal disease. 
Plantago palmata is well-liked by cattle in 
East Africa. The petioles are used for plaiting 
contrasting colours into baskets. 
Properties The aerial parts of Plantago 
palmata contain the caffeic acid derivatives 
plantamajoside and acteoside (verbascoside), as 
well as the iridoid glycosides aucubin, geni-
posidic acid, epiloganic acid, arborescoside and 
gardoside. Plantamajoside has an inhibitory 
effect on arachidonic acid-induced mouse ear 
oedema (anti-inflammatory activity), and in-
hibitory effect on 5-lipoxygenase, 15-lipoxygenase, 
and cAMP phosphodiesterase. It also has some 
antibacterial activity. Both plantamajoside and 
acteoside have antioxidant activity and are 
DPPH (2,2-diphenyl-l-picrylhydrazyl) radical 
scavengers. Aucubin shows anti-inflammatory, 
spasmolytic, antidote and hepatoprotective 
activities as well as antiviral activity against 
hepatitis B. 
The leaves, fruits and roots of Plantago pal-
mata have been tested for antibacterial, anti-
fungal and antiviral properties. There was no 
antibacterial activity, but all parts, especially 
the roots, expressed antifungal activity against 
Microsporum canum and Trichophyton men-
tagrophytes, while the leaves had moderate 
activity against the Coxsackie virus. 
Botany Small perennial herb up to 40 cm 
tall, glabrescent to hairy, with short, stout rhi-
zome and numerous whitish roots. Leaves in a 
466 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
basal rosette, a r ranged spirally; petiole 5-25 
cm long; blade ovate or rounded, distinctly 
palmately lobed, 5-12 cm x 3-10 cm, base cor-
date, apex acute or rounded, with 3-5 distinct 
paral lel veins. Inflorescence a dense spike 1— 
11 (-17) cm long; peduncle 5-30 cm long; bracts 
2-2 .5 m m long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 4-
merous, sessile, whi te to greenish-white; sepals 
2 .5-3 m m long, keeled; corolla 3 mm long; 
ovary superior, style scarcely exceeding the 
corolla. Fru i t a globose capsule 3-4 mm long, 2-
seeded. 
Plantago comprises nearly 270 species and is 
cosmopolitan, bu t mainly t empera te in distri-
bution. Like Plantago major L., Plantago pal-
mata belongs to the section Plantago. Another 
species of this section is Plantago tanalensis 
Baker, which is endemic to Madagascar and 
used as a medicine for whooping-cough and 
tooth-ache. 
E c o l o g y Plantago palmata occurs on dis-
turbed sites, along roadsides, in openings of 
sub-montane forest, grass land or (less often) as 
a weed of p lanta t ions and gardens . In Eas t 
Africa, it is most often found in bamboo and 
Juniperus forest, often along s t r eams or on 
boggy ground, a t 1200-2400 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Plantago 
palmata is quite common in its n a t u r a l habi-
tat , and does not seem to be th rea t ened by ge-
netic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Plantago palmata is quite exten-
sively used as a medicinal p lan t in Centra l 
Africa. It contains, like Plantago major and 
Plantago lanceolata L., caffeic acid derivatives 
and iridoid glycosides, which have shown 
pharmacological activities support ing the uses 
in t radi t ional medicine. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Baerts & Lehmann, 2002e; 
Burkill , 1997; Ronsted et al., 2003; Vlietinck et 
al., 1995. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Andriamihaja, 1988; Hep-
per, 1963a; Kokwaro, 1993; Lehmann , 1988; 
Lisowski, Malaisse & Symoens, 1972; Neu-
winger, 2000; Samuelsen, 2000; Verdcourt, 
1971; Yamada, 1999. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
PLATYCLADUS ORIENTALIS (L.) F r a n c o 
P r o t o l o g u e Por tugal iae Acta Biol., Sér. B, 
Sist. Jul io Henriques: 33 (1949). 
F a m i l y Cupressaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n — 22 
S y n o n y m s Thuja orientalis L. (1753), Biota 
orientalis (L.) Endl. (1847). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Chinese arbor-vitae, 
biota, eas te rn thuja (En). Cyprès chinois, t huya 
de Chine (Fr). Biota da China, tu ia da China 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution The 
na tu r a l distr ibution of Platycladus orientalis is 
obscured by its long history of cultivation in 
large pa r t s of Asia. It is assumed to have origi-
na ted from nor thern and nor th-eas te rn China, 
Korea and Siberia. I ts distr ibution has ex-
tended to J apan , Taiwan and Centra l Asia, and 
it is locally na tura l ized in Indo-China. It has 
been cult ivated in Europe since the first half of 
t he 18 t h century. In cooler a reas of tropical Af-
rica it h a s been planted primari ly as an orna-
menta l . 
U s e s In Réunion the main use of Platycladus 
orientalis is as an an t i rheumat ic . The cones are 
crushed and soaked in alcohol for 2 - 3 days. 
Painful joints are rubbed with the extract . 
Small b ranches are used to make a t ea which is 
d runk to overcome varicose veins, haemor-
rhoids and menopausa l problems. They are 
used to improve the circulation, to br ing down 
fever and to t r ea t gastric ulcers. In Maur i t ius 
tea from branches and leaves is used to cure 
th roa t inflammation, fever and influenza. 
In t radi t ional Chinese medicine t he leaves are 
credited with bi t ter stomachic, refrigerant, 
as t r ingent , diuretic, tonic and ant ipyret ic 
propert ies . A decoction or the juice of the 
leaves has been used to relieve all k inds of 
bleeding, gastric ulcers, gonorrhoea and colds. 
The seeds are prescribed as a sedative, t ran-
quillizer, ant i tuss ive and haemostat ic . In Indo-
China the ground leaves are used as an emme-
nagogue and ant i tussive, the seeds as a tonic, 
sedative, t ranquil l izer and aphrodisiac. A de-
coction of the twigs is prescribed to t r ea t dys-
entery, skin affections and cough. 
In Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South Africa 
Platycladus orientalis is grown as an ornamen-
ta l and h a s no documented medicinal uses . The 
essential oils extracted from leaves, cones and 
wood are impor tan t in body care products used 
in the Western world. 
Product ion and international trade Dried 
herbal mater ia l s of Platycladus orientalis are 
t raded from Asia. Retai l prices in 2001 
amounted to US$ 7 for 500 g dried leaves, US$ 
8.7 for 100 g of extract granules of leafy pa r t s 
and US$ 12 for 100 g of extract granules of 
charred leafy par t s . Essent ia l oils from leaves, 
cones and wood a re also t r aded internat ional ly . 
P r o p e r t i e s The leaves and cones of Platy-
PLATYCLADUS 467 
cladus orientalis contain an essential oil with 
high amounts of a-pinene, sabinene, 3-carene, 
limonene and cedrol. In Egyptian material the 
highest yield was obtained from fresh cones. 
Pinusolide, a labdane-type diterpene, and 
pinusolidic acid were isolated from leaf ex-
tracts. Pinusolide is a potent platelet-
activating-factor (PAF) antagonist. The results 
of tests on mice suggest that pinusolide may 
prove of therapeutic value in the treatment of 
hypotension and pinusolide analogues may 
provide the possibility of new PAF specific an-
tagonists. Pinusolidic acid has similar activity. 
Chronic oral administration of the seed extract 
to mice improved impaired memory acquisition 
and disturbed memory retention in a dose-
dependent way. Other proven effects of leaf 
extracts include the haemostatic properties, in-
vitro and in-vivo antitumour activity and an 
activity similar to that of vitamin K. In an an-
tibacterial screening the aqueous leaf extract 
inhibited the growth of gram-positive bacteria, 
and significantly inhibited aflatoxin production 
of Aspergillus parasiticus on products such as 
rice, wheat, maize and groundnut. Methanol 
Platycladus orientalis -
detail of shoot. 
Source: PROSEA 
1, twig with cones; 2, 
extracts of leaves and cones inhibited the 
growth of Candida albicans. Immunosuppres-
sant activity was observed in mice fed with a 
diet containing 10% seed oil. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small to me-
dium-sized tree up to 20 m tall, in cultivation 
often forming multiple stems; bark thin, red-
dish brown, peeling in thin longitudinal strips; 
branches ascending. Leaves decussately oppo-
site, scale-like, those of finer lateral sprays c. 2 
mm long, tightly appressed. Male cones termi-
nal, 2-3 mm long; female cones axillary, ob-
long, 20-25 mm x 10-18 mm, with 6-10 fleshy 
scales, with a recurved horn below the tip of 
each scale, central 4 scales fertile with 2(—3) 
seeds. Seeds ovoid, flattened, 5-7 mm x 3-4 
mm, wingless. 
Platycladus comprises only one species and is 
closely related to Thuja. It can easily be distin-
guished by the vertical arrangement of its 
sprays of foliage, which lack odour when 
crushed, the strongly hooked cone scales and 
its wingless seeds. 
Ecology In Asia Platycladus orientalis usu-
ally grows on steep rocky hillsides and cliffs. 
This explains the success of plantings on poor, 
excessively drained soils, as well as the success 
of smaller cultivars in rock and succulent gar-
dens. Platycladus orientalis is also tolerant of 
soils with a high pH. It prefers full sun but is 
tolerant of partial shade. 
Management Platycladus orientalis can be 
raised easily from cuttings and seed. Cultivars 
are best raised from cuttings, but side-veneer 
grafting is possible as well. 
Growth of seedlings is enhanced by NPK 
10:20:10 application. This markedly increases 
stem diameter growth. A high level of P in 
NPK mixtures increases root length and the 
number of branches. The fresh and dry weight 
of leaves greatly increases with increasing N 
and P levels. 
After harvesting the leafy parts can be dried 
and stored for future use. The seeds are ob-
tained by opening the dried cones and used 
fresh. The essential oil from leaves and cones 
can be extracted by steam distillation. 
Genetic resources and breeding Platy-
cladus orientalis has a large area of distribu-
tion and is widely cultivated, and is therefore 
not at risk of genetic erosion. 
Numerous cultivars are registered in horticul-
tural trade, ranging from dwarf types to trees, 
types with needle-like leaves when young, 
golden green or slightly variegated types or 
with filamentous branches. 
468 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Prospects The potential for cultivation of 
Platycladus orientalis in tropical Africa is best 
at higher elevations with a cooler climate. 
Pinusolide shows interesting activity in rela-
tion to hypertension and PAF-antagonism. 
Although more research will be needed, the 
compound or its (semi-) synthetic analogues 
may have potential in future medicinal re-
search. 
Major references Aggarwal, 2001; Gurib-
Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1996; Lavergne 
& Vera, 1989; Morgan, 1999; Poynton, 1966. 
Other references Chen, Lin & Namba, 
1987; Da Graça Silva, 1983; Ezzat, 2001; Far-
jon, 1998; Hassanzadeh et al., 2001; Kim et al., 
1999; Lai et al., 1994; Nishiyama, Chu & Saito, 
1995; Singh & Sinha, 1986; Yang & Han, 1998. 
Sources of illustration Aggarwal, 2001. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(2): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 2. 
PLEIOCARPA MUTICA Benth. 
Protologue Hook.f., Icon. pi. 12: 71, t. 1181 
(1876). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Vernacular names Arbre huileux (fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pleio-
carpa mutica occurs in West and Central Af-
rica, from Sierra Leone to Ghana, and from 
eastern Nigeria to Gabon. It has been collected 
once in northern Congo. 
Uses In Sierra Leone, ground bark is rubbed 
on the body against fever. People from the Agni 
tribe in Côte d'Ivoire drink a decoction of the 
Pleiocarpa mutica - wild 
grated bark to treat stomach pains, and a simi-
lar preparation is used by people of the Ebrié 
tribe against oedema of the legs. A decoction of 
the root bark is used against kidney diseases 
and malaria. In Ghana the roots are taken in 
decoction as a febrifuge, antimalarial and to 
treat jaundice and convulsions. The ground 
bark in palm wine is taken as a laxative. 
The wood is used to make combs, canoe pad-
dles, pestles, weaving shuttles, plane-blocks, 
hooks for hunting nets and various other small 
objects. 
Production and international trade Prod-
ucts from Pleiocarpa mutica are not traded 
internationally, but are a valuable commodity 
at local markets. 
Properties A number of indole alkaloids 
have been isolated from the roots and bark of 
Pleiocarpa mutica. The roots contain pleio-
carpine (pleiocine), kopsinine, pleiocarpamine, 
eburnamine (desacetylpicraline) and the 
dimeric pleiomutinine. These 5 alkaloids were 
tested against Plasmodium falciparum in vitro 
but only pleiomutinine was found to have sig-
nificant activity, although at a lower level than 
the standard drug chloroquine diphosphate, 
pleiocarpine was inactive against malaria 
parasites in vitro, but moderately active in vivo 
against Plasmodium berghei in mice. The 
methanolic root extract showed no toxicity in 
the brine shrimp lethality test. 
Kopsinine has hepatoprotective activity 
against CCL-toxicity in mice, and it was found 
to shorten the barbital-induced sleeping time 
in mice. Eburnamine shows some sympath-
omimetic properties and a strong and lasting 
hypotensive action. Other alkaloids isolated 
from the bark are eburnamonine and the 
dimeric pleiocarpinine (pleiocinine) and 
pleiomutine. Eburnamonine has the same 
pharmacological effect as strychnine and is 
useful as a cerebrovascular agent. It is a stimu-
lant of the central nervous system, and seems 
to have a positive effect on the general blood 
circulation. 
The wood is hard, heavy, close-grained, tough 
and yellow. 
Adulterations and substitutes Leaves of 
Ageratum conyzoides L. (Asteraceae) or Lan-
tana camara L. (Verbenaceae) are used as sub-
stitutes for Pleiocarpa mutica decoctions in 
Cameroon, as a febrifuge. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 7.5 m 
tall, rarely a climbing shrub with stems up to 9 
m long; trunk 1.5—5 cm in diameter; bark 
smooth, dark brown to pale grey. Leaves oppo-
PLEIOCAEPA 469 
Pleiocarpa mutica - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
infructescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
site, sometimes in whorls of 3, simple and en-
tire; stipules absent; petiole 5-15 mm long; 
blade elliptical, oblong or ovate, 5—20(-30) cm x 
2-8(-11.5) cm, base obtuse or cuneate, apex 
acuminate, glabrous, pinnately veined with 9— 
12 pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence an axil-
lary cluster, 1.5-2.5 cm x 2-3 cm, about 10(— 
35)-flowered; bracts very small. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous, very fragrant, sessile; 
sepals ovate or elliptical, 1.5-2 mm long, free 
or connate at base, apex obtuse; corolla tube 
almost cylindrical, 11—22 mm x 1—3 mm, wid-
ened around the anthers, with a belt of hairs 
2.5-6 mm wide inside just below the insertion 
of the stamens, lobes ovate, elliptical to nar-
rowly oblong, (5—)6—13 mm long, apex rounded 
or obtuse, spreading, recurved later, white; 
stamens inserted just below the top of the co-
rolla tube, included, 1-2 mm long, anthers nar-
rowly ovate to oblong, yellow with red stripes; 
ovary superior, almost globose, consisting of 5 
separate carpels united at base by a disk-like 
thickening, style 9-18 mm long, pistil head 
oblong to ellipsoid, 0.5-1 mm long, white. Fruit 
consisting of 5 obovoid to globose or ellipsoid 
follicles, 13.5-20 mm long, apex pointed, yellow 
to bright orange, slightly wrinkled to finely 
warted, 1-seeded. Seed globose to oblong, 7.5-
12 mm long, brown. 
Other botanical information Pleiocarpa 
comprises about 5 species and is confined to 
mainland tropical Africa. It is related to 
Hunteria and Picralima. Pleiocarpa pycnantha 
(K.Schum.) Stapf is also used in traditional 
medicine, but its use as a timber is more im-
portant. 
A cold infusion of the bark of Pleiocarpa ros-
trata Benth. (synonym: Pleiocarpa talbotii 
Wernham) from the rain forest of Nigeria, 
Cameroon and Gabon is used in Cameroon 
against stomach-ache. Several alkaloids have 
been isolated from the bark: talbotine, talpin-
ine, talcarpine and 16-epi-affinine. Talpinine 
and 16-epi-affinine were also isolated from the 
root bark. 
Growth and development Pleiocarpa mu-
tica can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year. 
Ecology Pleiocarpa mutica occurs in dense 
primary or secondary forest in swampy areas 
or along river banks, on sandy soil or limestone 
outcrops, up to 600 m altitude. 
Harvesting The bark, roots and leaves of 
Pleiocarpa mutica are harvested whenever the 
need arises. 
Handling after harvest The root or stem 
bark and leaves may be dried in the sun for 
several days, after which they can be stored for 
later use. 
Genetic resources Pleiocarpa mutica does 
not yet seem threatened by genetic erosion 
because it is widespread and locally common. 
Prospects Pleiocarpa mutica is locally well 
appreciated as a medicinal plant. Further stud-
ies are needed to elucidate the specific phar-
macological activities of the active components, 
especially pleiomutinine and pleiocarpine, and 
to determine whether the other alkaloids and 
the crude extracts have in vivo antimalarial 
activities. Pleiocarpa mutica has clusters of 
white, sweet-scented flowers which make it 
ornamental and worthy of cultivation. 
Major references Addae-Kyereme et al., 
2001; Bouquet & Debray, 1974; Naranjo et al., 
1972; Omino, 1996. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Burkill, 
1985; Dalziel, 1937; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Omino, 1996. 
Authors N. Nyunaï 
470 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
PLEIOCERAS BARTERI Baill. 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 759 
(1888). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Origin and geographic distribution Pleio-
ceras barteri occurs from Sierra Leone to Cam-
eroon and the Central African Republic. 
Uses The bark and, more frequently, the 
seeds are used in Côte d'Ivoire as an emmena-
gogue. In Nigeria, the fruits are used similarly. 
A strong dose is abortifacient and careless us-
age may cause death. Nevertheless it is taken 
by women once or twice a month during late 
pregnancy to induce the turning down of the 
head of the baby. The bark crushed together 
with the fruit of Ricinodendron heudelotii 
(Baill.) Pierre ex Heckel is applied to boils in 
the groin to hasten maturation. A plaster of 
leaves is applied against rheumatism and the 
fruit pericarp, prepared as an ointment, is used 
to treat nosebleed. In Nigeria, Pleioceras bar-
teri is also used in traditional medicine to treat 
malaria. The ash of dried and burnt whole 
plants is applied against burns. 
Production and international trade Pleio-
ceras barteri is collected from the wild and 
traded locally. 
Properties Pleioceras barteri contains alka-
loids, saponins, tannins and flavonoids. The 
seeds are the most toxic part of the plant with 
total alkaloids amounting to 0.3%. The fruit 
wall contains 0.1% and the root bark 0.01% 
alkaloids. From the leaves, 0.6% ursolic acid 
has been isolated; this compound has anti-
infective properties. 
Pleioceras barteri shows antibacterial activity 
against gram-positive bacteria. The methanol 
extract is active against several pathogenic 
bacteria, with Bacillus subtilis being most sus-
ceptible. The extracts showed limited activity 
against fungi. The stem, stem bark, root bark, 
seed and fruit extracts showed abortifacient 
properties and depressant or stimulant effects 
on the central nervous system in rats. 
Secondary amines (including alkylamine, di-
methylamine, diethylamine and ethylaniline) 
have been isolated from the roots of Pleioceras 
barteri. The use of this plant could thus result 
in the accumulation of amines in the body, 
which could lead to the formation of carcino-
genic nitrosamines. 
Botany Shrub, small liana or small tree up 
to 4 m tall, with white latex in bark and leaves; 
bark dark brown; branchlets terete, hairy. 
Pleioceras barteri - 1, flowering twig; 2, flower; 
3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 2-5 mm long, hairy; blade nar-
rowly ovate or obovate, 5-9 cm x 2—7 cm, base 
rounded or cuneate, apex acuminate, sparsely 
hairy to glabrous above, hairy on the main 
veins beneath. Inflorescence a lax terminal 
panicle, 5—14 cm long, many-flowered; bracts 
small; peduncle 1-4 cm long, sparsely hairy. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 5 -
10 mm long, hairy; sepals 1-2 mm long, con-
nate at base, calyx persistent in fruit; corolla 
tube 2-3 mm x 2-3 mm, lobes elliptical, 3-5 
mm long, apex rounded, ciliate, dark red or 
violet, apex of lobes yellow, inside with up to 7 
bright yellow appendages, 4 appendages 
broom-like, 2-5 mm long with 3-4 branches, 
central appendage oblong, 2-3 mm long, with 2 
narrowly oblong lobes, 2 appendages filiform to 
oblong, 0.5-1.5 mm long, or absent or fused 
with appendages of neighbouring lobe; stamens 
inserted just below the corolla mouth, exserted, 
covered by the corolla appendages, base of an-
thers sagittate, apex acuminate; ovary supe-
rior, almost globose, consisting of 2 free car-
pels, styles fused except at the base, slender, 
PLUMBAGO 471 
2—5 mm long, pistil-head small, almost cylin-
drical, covered by the anthers and inside with 
triangular swellings of the connectives adnate 
to the clavuncula. Fruit consisting of 2 linear 
almost free follicles, 25-65 cm long, spreading, 
pendulous, dark green, glabrous, dehiscent 
with a longitudinal slit, many-seeded. Seeds 
linear to very narrowly oblong, 13-27 mm long, 
finely grooved, pale yellow, with a dense 3-7 
cm long tuft of hairs at apex. 
Pleioceras comprises 5 species, all occurring in 
tropical continental Africa. It is closely related 
to Wrightia. Pleioceras barteri flowers through-
out the year. 
Ecology Pleioceras barteri occurs in forest, 
bush or open localities, mostly near the coast, 
up to 500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Pleio-
ceras barteri is widespread mainly in the west-
ern Africa coastal regions and does not seem to 
be in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Not much is known of the phar-
macological properties of Pleioceras barteri, 
although it has some interesting uses in tradi-
tional médecine. The strong abortifacient effect 
of the seeds warrants further investigation, as 
do the antibacterial activities. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Agbedahunsi, Oloke & Aladesanmi, 1993; 
Aladesanmi, Sofowora & Leary, 1986; Barink, 
1983; Uhegbu & Maduagwu, 1995. 
Other references Bisset, 1983; Burkill, 
1985; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
PLESIATROPHA CARPINIFOLIA (Pax) Breteler 
Protologue Adansonia, sér. 3, 27(2): 329 
(2005). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Mildbraedia carpinifolia (Pax) 
Hutch. (1912). 
Vernacular names Mtapatapa, mtapatapa 
mkufu, mchunga ng'ombe (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Plesia-
tropha carpinifolia occurs in Kenya, Uganda, 
Tanzania and Mozambique. 
Uses In Kenya root powder is taken to treat 
chest complaints. 
Botany Dioecious, much-branched, ever-
green shrub or small tree up to 5(—9) m tall; 
twigs stellate-hairy, pale grey-brown. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules linear, up to 9(-17) 
mm long, soon falling; petiole l-3(-5) cm long, 
stellate-hairy; blade oblanceolate-oblong to 
elliptical-oblong, 3-12(-20) cm x 2-5(- l l ) cm, 
base rounded to shallowly cordate, apex acu-
minate, margins almost entire to shallowly or 
sharply toothed, especially in the upper half, 
membranous to papery, stellate-hairy, pin-
nately veined with 6-8 pairs of lateral veins. 
Inflorescence an axillary cyme; peduncle up to 
7(-13) cm long, stellate-hairy; bracts linear, up 
to 1 cm long. Flowers unisexual, regular, 5-
merous; pedicel up to 4 mm long; male flowers 
with broadly ovate sepals c. 2.5 mm long, pet-
als broadly ovate to almost round, c. 3 mm 
long, greenish white or yellow-green, stamens 
14-17; female flowers with broadly ovate se-
pals c. 3.5 mm long, petals broadly ovate to 
almost round, c. 4 mm long, ovary superior, 
almost globose, 1.5 mm in diameter, stellate-
hairy, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 2.5 mm long, bifid 
towards apex. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 7 mm 
x 10 mm, stellate-hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid 
to almost globose, c. 6 mm x 5 mm, mottled 
purplish brown and grey. 
Plesiatropha comprises 3 species, which all 
occur in tropical Africa. In Côte d'Ivoire a leaf 
decoction of Plesiatropha paniculata (Pax) Bre-
teler (synonym: Mildbraedia paniculata Pax), 
occurring from Liberia to DR Congo, is taken 
orally or as a bath to treat serious cases of 
jaundice. 
Ecology Plesiatropha carpinifolia occurs in 
forest and forest edges, coastal woodland and 
riverine and secondary vegetation, from sea-
level up to 1700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Plesia-
tropha carpinifolia has a relatively large area 
of distribution and there are no signs that it is 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Plesiatropha carpinifolia is little 
used in local medicine and nothing is known 
concerning its chemistry and pharmacology. 
Therefore it is likely that it will remain of local 
importance only. 
Major references Breteler, 2005; Kokwaro, 
1993; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other references Atindehou et al., 2002; 
Burkill, 1994. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
PLUMBAGO APHYLLA Bojer ex Boiss. 
Protologue DC, Prodr. 12: 694 (1848). 
Family Plumbaginaceae 
Vernacular names Balai sur terre (Fr). 
472 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Origin and geographic distribution Plum-
bago aphylla occurs in Madagascar, the Alda-
bra Islands (Seychelles) and in Tanzania on a 
small island a few kilometres off the coast. 
Uses In Madagascar a decoction of the whole 
plant of Plumbago aphylla is taken to treat 
diarrhoea and infections of the mouth and ap-
plied as an eyewash in case of cataract. A root 
decoction is taken as an analgesic and anti-
spasmodic. A decoction of the aerial parts is 
used for a massage in case of dislocation. 
Plumbago aphylla is sold at the medicinal herb 
market of Antananarivo, Madagascar. 
Properties The active ingredient of Plum-
bago aphylla is a naphthoquinone, probably 
plumbagin. The aerial parts tested positive for 
alkaloids and saponins. An extract of the aerial 
parts was active against cercariae of Schisto-
soma mansoni. 
Botany Slender shrub up to 1 m tall, with 
taproot; stems erect or ascending, few-
branched, glabrous, with numerous fine longi-
tudinal ridges, pale yellow-green, rooting at the 
nodes. Leaves alternate, simple and entire, 
soon disappearing except on sterile shoots, only 
the petiole bases remaining as brown scales; 
stipules absent; petiole short, winged; blade 
obovate, 5—15 mm x 5-6(-10) mm, apex acute, 
mucronate, leathery, glandular. Inflorescence a 
terminal raceme, sometimes paniculate, 2-6 
cm long, many-flowered; bracts ovate to lanceo-
late, small, hairy inside; peduncle 7—15 cm 
long, with short white hairs. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous; pedicel up to 1 mm long; 
calyx tubular, 6—7(—9) mm x 3 mm, 5-toothed, 
slightly ribbed, with stalked glands and short 
white hairs; corolla tube 10-13 mm long, lobes 
obovate, 6 mm long, mucronate, spreading or 
not, white; stamens free, included; ovary supe-
rior, 1-celled, style filiform, stigma lobes 5. 
Fruit an oblong, membranous capsule up to 7 
mm long, enclosed in the persistent calyx, tar-
dily dehiscent, 1-seeded. Seed oblong, c. 6 mm 
long, slightly flattened, dark brown or black. 
Plumbago comprises about 25 species and oc-
curs almost throughout the world. In tropical 
Africa about 10 species are found. 
Ecology Plumbago aphylla occurs mostly on 
the coast on coral rock and is probably depend-
ent on bird guano there. It also occurs on vol-
canic soil. 
Genetic resources and breeding Plum-
bago aphylla is restricted to coastal habitats in 
Madagascar and some other Indian Ocean is-
lands and may be in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of the pharmacologically 
interesting compounds found in other Plum-
bago species, further research into the bio-
active substances of Plumbago aphylla might 
be worthwhile. 
Major references Debray, Jacquemin & 
Razafindrambao, 1971; Gurib-Fakim & 
Brendler, 2004; Peltier, 1981; Wilmot-Dear, 
1976. 
Other references Fosberg, 1974; Kokwaro, 
1993; Rakotozafy, 1997; van Steenis, 1949; 
Wood, 1970. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
PLUMBAGO AURICULATA Lam. 
Protologue Encycl. 2: 270 (1786). 
Family Plumbaginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14, 16 
Synonyms Plumbago capensis Thunb. 
(1794). 
Vernacular names Blue plumbago, Cape 
leadwort, Cape plumbago, skyflower (En). Den-
telaire du Cap (Fr). Plumbago azul (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Plum-
bago auriculata is native to South Africa and 
introduced as an ornamental into most tropical 
and subtropical countries. 
Uses In southern Africa a decoction of the 
aerial parts or roots of Plumbago auriculata is 
taken to treat blackwater fever. A root infusion 
is taken as an emetic. Root powder is put on 
warts to make them disappear and is also used 
as snuff to relieve headache. The powdered, 
roasted root is rubbed into scarifications over 
fractures to promote healing, and is rubbed on 
the body to cure stitch. These treatments are 
not without danger if large areas are rubbed in, 
as death by irritation has been recorded. The 
root extract also acts as a styptic in scrofula. 
Plumbago auriculata is grown in gardens 
throughout the tropics as an ornamental and 
as a hedge or live fence; in temperate regions it 
is grown as a pot plant or greenhouse plant. 
Several cultivars with flowers in different 
shades of blue exist, as well as a white cultivar. 
In East Africa the flowers and leaves of Plum-
bago auriculata are used as a dye for textiles: 
beige, lemon, yellow (if combined with alum) or 
gold (if combined with chrome). The sap of the 
roots is grey-blue, and is used for tattoos. Poul-
try and sheep readily eat the leaves, but poi-
soning has been recorded. 
Production and international trade Plum-
bago auriculata is produced commercially and 
traded as an ornamental throughout the world. 
PLUMBAGO 473 
Properties All parts of Plumbago auricu-
lata contain the naphthoquinone plumbagin (2-
methyl juglone), which blisters the skin. Plum-
bagin possesses a variety of pharmacological 
activities, i.e. antimicrobial, anticancer, car-
diotonic and antifertility actions. It has insecti-
cidal properties as an antifeedant and as a 
moulting inhibitor. Plumbagin is also a yellow 
pigment, occurring in a colourless combined 
form in the plant and is liberated by acid 
treatment. Plumbago auriculata contains an 
antifungal protein that inhibits spore germina-
tion in Macrophominaphaseolina. 
Botany Perennial herb or small shrub up to 
2(-3) m tall; stems erect, trailing or climbing, 
diffusely branched. Leaves alternate, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole short with 
large, amplexicaul auricles at base; blade 
obovate, elliptical, oblanceolate or spatulate, 
2.5-9 cm x 2-6 cm, base long attenuate, apex 
acute or obtuse, mucronate, pale yellowish-
green. Inflorescence a compact terminal spike 
or raceme, many-flowered, up to 10(-15) cm 
long; bracts lanceolate, small; peduncle 1-6 cm 
long, densely hairy. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
5-merous; pedicel 0-1 mm long; calyx tubular, 
10-12 mm long, 5-ribbed, with sparse short 
hairs and stalked glands on the upper part; 
corolla tube cylindrical, 2-3(-4) cm long, lobes 
broadly obovate, 10-15 mm long, spreading, 
usually pale blue, sometimes darker blue or 
white; stamens free, exserted; ovary superior, 
1-celled, style filiform, stigma lobes elongated. 
Fruit an oblong, membranous capsule up to 8 
mm long, tapering to the apex, enclosed in the 
persistent calyx, dehiscent, 1-seeded. Seed ob-
long, c. 7 mm long, slightly flattened, dark 
brown or black. 
Plumbago comprises about 25 species and oc-
curs almost throughout the world. In tropical 
Africa about 10 species can be found. Plumbago 
auriculata flowers all year round, except if the 
temperature drops below 10°C. The flowers 
attract large numbers of butterflies. 
Ecology Plumbago auriculata prefers fer-
tile, well-drained, slightly acidic, sandy soils in 
sunny localities and is drought resistant once 
established. It grows best in regions with a 
pronounced dry season. It can withstand some 
frost; even if killed to the ground, it usually 
recovers quickly. Plumbago auriculata is salt 
tolerant. 
Management Plumbago auriculata is 
propagated by seed, division of older plants, 
rooted suckers or semi-ripe cuttings. The seeds 
are sown in seedling trays in a light soil, after 
which the soil needs to remain moist. The 
plants are often pruned to form low hedges or 
borders and are sometimes trained as climbers 
on arches. Periodic heavy pruning and bright 
sunlight induce prolific flowering. In temperate 
regions, Plumbago auriculata can be grown in 
containers, and kept in a nursery during win-
ter. 
Genetic resources and breeding Plum-
bago auriculata is widely cultivated and there 
is no risk of genetic erosion. Several ornamen-
tal cultivars are available, e.g. 'Imperial Blue', 
'Royal Cape' with deep blue flowers, 'Blue 
Dark' with dark blue flowers and 'Alba' with 
white flowers. 
Prospects Plumbagin possesses various 
interesting pharmacological activities, but be-
cause of its toxicity the use of Plumbago auri-
culata in traditional medicine is not without 
risk. Decoctions of plant parts from Plumbago 
auriculata in local medicine should therefore 
be taken with caution. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Hind-
marsh, 1982; Dyer, 1963; Neuwinger, 2000; 
van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn & Gericke, 1997. 
Other references Elgorashi et al., 2002; 
Kubo, Uchida, & Kloeke, 1983; Modhumita et 
al., 2002; Pharkphoom Panichayupakaranant 
& Supinya Tawtrakul, 2002; Smith, 2005; van 
Steenis, 1949; Vickery, 1983a; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962; Whistler, 2000; Wilmot-Dear, 
1976. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
PLUMBAGO INDICA L. 
Protologue Herb, amb.: 24 (1754). 
Family Plumbaginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 14 
Synonyms Plumbago rosea L. (1762). 
Vernacular names Indian leadwort, rose-
coloured leadwort, scarlet leadwort (En). 
Plumbago de flor vermelha (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Plum-
bago indica originates from India and South-
East Asia, where it is widely used as a medici-
nal plant. It is cultivated as an ornamental 
throughout the tropics and in temperate re-
gions in greenhouses. In tropical Africa, Plum-
bago indica is cultivated, sometimes as a me-
dicinal plant, in countries with large popula-
tions of Indian immigrants: Kenya, Tanzania, 
Zimbabwe, Mozambique and Madagascar. 
Uses In eastern Africa, Plumbago indica is 
used medicinally in a similar way by the In-
474 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
dian population as it is traditionally used in 
India itself, where many households keep some 
plants in their backyard. Especially the root 
has many uses: it is acrid, vesicant, alterative, 
digestive, stimulant and a powerful abortifa-
cient and oral contraceptive. High doses are 
dangerous and may cause death. An infusion of 
the roots is taken to treat dyspepsia, colic, 
cough and bronchitis. A liniment made from 
bruised root mixed with a little vegetable oil is 
used as a rubefacient to treat rheumatism and 
headache. The milky juice of the leaves is ap-
plied on the skin in treatment of scabies, ring-
worm and haemorrhoids. 
Plumbago indica is commonly planted as an 
ornamental garden plant. 
Production and international trade Plum-
bago indica root is an important ingredient in 
herbal mixtures used in Ayurvedic medicine 
(originating from India) and traded as such. 
Properties The root of Plumbago indica 
contains the naphthoquinone plumbagin (2-
methyl juglone). Other compounds isolated 
from the aerial parts include 6-hydroxyplumba-
gin, plumbaginol (a flavonol), leucodelphinidin 
and steroids (e.g. ß-sitosterol, stigmasterol, 
campesterol). Plumbagin possesses several 
pharmacological activities i.e. antimicrobial, 
anticancer, cardiotonic and antifertility ac-
tions. It is also a powerful irritant. In small 
doses, the compound is a sudorific and it stimu-
lates the central nervous system; large doses 
may cause death from respiratory failure and 
paralysis. Plumbagin has shown anti-implan-
tation and abortifacient activities in rats. Be-
cause of its toxicity, the use of plumbagin in 
traditional medicine is a dangerous practice. 
In-vitro tests showed that Plumbago indica 
contains one or more antimutagens. At low 
doses, plumbagin showed significant tumour 
inhibitory effects against Ehrlich ascites carci-
noma in mice. The ethanol extract of the leaves 
is active against herpes simplex virus type 1 
(HSV-1). 
Botany Perennial herb or small shrub up to 
2 m tall; stems erect, trailing or climbing, sim-
ple or branched from the base, sometimes root-
ing at the nodes. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole short, auricles 
absent; blade narrowly ovate to elliptical-ovate, 
5—15 cm x 2-8 cm, base rounded to obtuse, 
apex acute, papery. Inflorescence an elongated 
spike or raceme, many-flowered, 10-30 cm 
long, glabrous; bracts ovate, 2-3 mm long, apex 
acuminate; peduncle 2-10 cm long. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 0-1 mm 
Plumbago indica - 1, plant habit; 2, roots; 3, 
flower. 
Source: PROSEA 
long; calyx tubular, 8-9 mm long, glandular, 
red; corolla tube 2.5-4.5 cm long, lobes obovate, 
1.5-3 cm in diameter, apex rounded, mucro-
nate, purple to red; stamens free, exserted; 
ovary superior, ellipsoid-ovoid, 1-celled, style 
filiform, stigma lobes 5. 
Plumbago comprises about 25 species and oc-
curs almost everywhere throughout the world. 
In tropical Africa about 10 species can be 
found. Plumbago indica can be found flowering 
throughout the year. Fruits have never been 
found. 
Ecology Plumbago indica thrives very well 
at temperatures of 25-35°C. It prefers rich, 
moist and well-drained soils, with a pH of 5.5-
6, whereas a pH below 5 or above 7 may lead to 
stunted growth. When escaped, it occurs in 
(former) anthropogenic localities and aban-
doned farmland. 
Management Plumbago indica can be mass 
produced using in vitro clonal production of 
nodal expiants, callus cultures, cell suspension 
cultures or root cultures. The roots of the 
plants produced this way have a significantly 
higher percentage of plumbagin than control 
plants. 
In India tests on root yield of Plumbago indica 
PLUMBAGO 475 
showed an optimum harvesting stage between 
12 and 18 months after planting in the field. 
Plumbago indica is a short-day plant and 
needs a prolonged dark period treatment in the 
temperate zone in order to produce compact 
plants and flowers. Successful plant regenera-
tion through micropropagation using different 
growth media is practised. 
Genetic resources and breeding Plum-
bago indica is a common ornamental in the 
tropics and therefore not threatened. As fruits 
are not known for this species, it is only vege-
tatively propagated, indicating that the genetic 
variability might be small. 
Prospects Plumbago indica roots contain 
high levels of plumbagin. The cultivation and 
extraction methods deserve more attention 
from research and extension. Besides, Plum-
bago indica is also an interesting ornamental 
plant, and it could be grown on a much wider 
scale in Africa using micropropagation or vege-
tative propagation. 
Major references Devi, Solomon & Sha-
rada, 1999; Komaraiah et al., 2004; Valsaraj et 
al., 1997; van Steenis, 1949; Wongsatit Chua-
kul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Prom-
jit Saralamp, 1999c. 
Other references Akanitapichat et al., 
2002; Burkill, 1997; Das & Rout, 2002; Ko-
maraiah et al., 2002; Komaraiah et a l , 2003; 
Menon, Amma & Nybe, 2001a; Rajwani, Prabhu 
& Desai, 2001; Rojanapo, Tepsuwan & Siri-
pong, 1990; Satheeshkumar & Seeni, 2003. 
Sources of illustration Wongsatit Chua-
kul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Prom-
jit Saralamp, 1999c. 
Authors J.M. Okeyo 
PLUMBAGO ZEYLANICA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 151 (1753). 
Family Plumbaginaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 28 
Vernacular names Ceylon leadwort, wild 
leadwort, wild white plumbago (En). Dente-
laire de Ceylan (Fr). Joelho de cabra, kadinga 
puna (Po). Mwambula (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Plum-
bago zeylanica occurs throughout the tropics 
and subtropics. It possibly originates from 
South-East Asia, from where it may have been 
distributed as a medicinal plant and ornamen-
tal. It occurs throughout most of tropical Af-
rica. 
Uses Plumbago zeylanica is very popular 
Plumbago zeylanica - planted and naturalized 
throughout Africa and Asia as a remedy for 
skin diseases, infections and intestinal worms, 
especially leprosy, scabies, ringworm, dermati-
tis, acne, sores, ulcers of the leg, haemorrhoids 
and hookworm. All parts of the plant are used, 
but the root is considered to have the highest 
activity. In West Africa the root, or the leaves 
crushed with lemon juice, are used as a 
counter-irritant and vesicant. The pulped roots 
or aerial parts are inserted into the vagina as 
an abortifacient. This is a dangerous practice 
as it sometimes results in death. In Nigeria the 
roots pounded with vegetable oil are applied to 
rheumatic swellings. In Ethiopia powdered 
bark, root or leaves are used to treat gonor-
rhoea, syphilis, tuberculosis, rheumatic pain, 
swellings and wounds. In DR Congo and Gabon 
the pounded root is applied to treat itch. In 
East Africa pounded roots are applied to swol-
len legs. In Zambia a root'decoction with boiled 
milk is swallowed to treat inflammation in the 
mouth, throat and chest. In southern Africa a 
paste of the root in vinegar, milk and water is 
used to treat influenza and blackwater fever. 
Plumbago zeylanica root cooked with meat in 
soup is eaten in Zimbabwe as an aphrodisiac, 
and it also helps digestion. A root infusion is 
taken orally to treat shortness of breath. In 
Madagascar the roots are applied as a vesicant, 
while in Mauritius and Rodrigues a root decoc-
tion is used to treat diarrhoea and dyspepsia. 
A paste of powdered root or the root sap is used 
for tattooing by different tribes in eastern Af-
rica. The paste or sap causes blisters and the 
new skin has a darker colour. The long white 
inflorescence of Plumbago zeylanica makes it 
attractive as an ornamental. Despite the plant 
476 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
being poisonous, it is readily eaten by goats 
and sheep in West Africa. 
Production and international trade In Af-
rica Plumbago zeylanica is only locally used. 
Herbalists collect the plants from the wild or 
cultivate them in their backyard for personal 
use and to supply the local markets. Plumbago 
zeylanica is sometimes cultivated and traded 
as ornamental. Plumbago zeylanica products 
are traded worldwide as Ayurvedic and homeo-
pathic medicine. 
Properties The root and leaves of Plumbago 
zeylanica contain the naphthoquinone plum-
bagin. Other compounds that have been iso-
lated are mainly plumbagin-derivatives, bi-
plumbagin-derivatives and coumarins. 
Plumbagin possesses several pharmacological 
activities, e.g. antimicrobial, antiplasmodial, 
anticancer and antifertility actions. It is also a 
powerful irritant. In small doses, it is a su-
dorific and stimulates the central nervous sys-
tem; large doses may cause death from respira-
tory failure and paralysis. Plumbagin showed 
anti-implantation and abortifacient activities 
in rats and produced testicular lesions and 
testis-weight reduction in dogs. Because of its 
toxicity, the use of plumbagin in traditional 
medicine is a dangerous practice, and casual-
ties have been recorded. In low concentrations, 
plumbagin has an antimitotic activity compa-
rable to that of colchicine. In larger doses, it 
also has nucleotoxic and cytotoxic effects. 
Plumbagin significantly suppresses growth of 
several tumour cell lines in vitro and in vivo in 
mice, especially in combination with gamma-
irradiation. 
Plumbagin has shown antibacterial activity 
against both gram-positive (e.g. Staphylococ-
cus, Streptococcus, Pneumococcus spp.) and 
gram-negative (e.g. Salmonella, Neisseria) 
bacteria, whereas it is also active against cer-
tain yeasts and fungi (Candida, Trichophyton, 
Epidermophyton and Microsporum spp.) and 
protozoa (Leishmania). It has been found to 
prevent Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus 
aureus developing resistance to antibiotics. 
Plumbagin also has strong antifeedant and 
moulting inhibiting effects on insects and has 
nematicidal and acaricidal activities. 
An ethanolic extract of Plumbago zeylanica 
stems inhibited immediate allergic reactions in 
tests with mice and rats. The ethanol extract of 
the root showed significant antioxidant activi-
ties in vitro. It also caused significant hyper-
glycaemia in rats. 
Adulterations and substitutes At present, 
the most exploited source of plumbagin is the 
root of Plumbago spp., but the compound also 
occurs in Drosera spp. 
Description Straggling shrub up to 3 m tall; 
stems erect, trailing or climbing, wiry, diffusely 
branched, glabrous, with prominent longitudi-
nal ridges and often with white waxy dots. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 0-5 mm long with small auri-
cles present in young leaves; blade ovate, 
ovate-lanceolate, elliptical or oblong, 2.5-13 cm 
x 1-6 cm, base cuneate, apex acute, acuminate 
or obtuse, with white waxy dots underneath. 
Inflorescence a terminal raceme, 6-30 cm long, 
sometimes paniculate, many-flowered; bracts 
ovate to lanceolate, 3-7 mm long; peduncle 1— 
1.5 cm long, with prominent sessile glands. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, sweet-
scented; pedicel 1-2 mm long; calyx tubular, 7— 
11 mm long, 5-ribbed, with stalked glands 
along ribs, lobes up to 1.5 mm long; corolla 
tube 15-30 mm long, lobes oblong to ovate, 5 -
12 mm long, spreading, mucronate, white; 
stamens free, included; ovary superior, 1-
celled, style filiform, with 5 elongated stigma 
lobes. Fruit an oblong capsule 7.5—8 mm long, 
apex acute with 5 furrows, 1-seeded. Seed ob-
long, 5-6 mm long, reddish brown to dark 
brown. 
Plumbago zeylanica - flowering branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
PLUMBAGO 477 
Other botanical information Plumbago 
comprises about 25 species and occurs almost 
throughout the world. In tropical Africa about 
10 species can be found. The sap of Plumbago 
spp. causes discoloration of the skin resembling 
the colour of lead, from which the Latin name 
Plumbago and the popular name leadwort are 
derived. Plumbago dawei Rolfe occurs natu-
rally in East Africa from Ethiopia to Tanzania 
and in Madagascar. It is a laxly branched, 
creeping or scandent herb or shrub. In Mada-
gascar a leaf decoction of the leaves is drunk as 
a purgative, and a root decoction is taken to 
treat bacterial infections of urethra and blad-
der. 
Growth and development Plumbago zey-
lanica flowers throughout the year. The flowers 
are produced in profusion on the shoots of the 
current year, and are insect pollinated. The 
fruits are easily dispersed by animals because 
of the sticky glands on the persistent calyx. 
Ecology Plumbago zeylanica occurs in de-
ciduous woodland, savanna and scrubland, 
often near rivers and on lake margins or on 
termite mounds, from sea-level up to 2000 m 
altitude. 
Propagation and planting Plumbago zey-
lanica can be propagated by seeds, rooted 
shoots from the base of the plant or by semi-
ripe cuttings, treated with a growth hormone. 
Germination is almost 100% if both ends of the 
seed are cut before sowing. Seeds germinate in 
21-30 days at 21°C. After 3 months storage, 
germination decreased to 40%. In Assam, India 
sowing Plumbago zeylanica seeds in a nursery 
and transplanting into the field at a density of 
60 x 60 cm has given good results. Plumbago 
zeylanica can be mass-produced using in vitro 
cultivation of nodal expiants, axillary buds, 
leaf or root expiants and callus cultures. The 
roots of the plants produced this way have a 
significantly higher content of plumbagin than 
control plants, and there is potential for com-
mercial cultivation. 
Management Plumbago zeylanica needs full 
sun to partial shade with intermediate to warm 
temperatures. The plants needs a slightly 
acidic potting mix. The plants are kept moist 
for optimum growth and flower production. 
They are fertilized weekly, which also helps 
flower production. After flowering, the plants 
should be cut back to keep them growing vigor-
ously. 
Diseases and pests Plumbago zeylanica 
contains plumbagin, a natural insect an-
tifeedant and growth inhibitor and is quite 
resistant to insect pests. 
Yield The yield of plumbagin from the root is 
variable, with an average of 4%. In Indian ex-
periments, the largest and heaviest roots were 
obtained from 12-18-month-old plants grown 
in loamy soils, but in Assam the highest yield 
(7 t dry root/ha) was obtained when plants 
were harvested when 3 years old. 
Handling after harvest Leaf poultices of 
Plumbago zeylanica can be dried and stored for 
several weeks only, before they lose their vesi-
cant properties. Dried roots contain less plum-
bagin and show less activity than fresh ones. 
Plumbagin is obtained from the roots by steam 
distillation and shaking the distillate with 
ether. Fine, bright orange tufts of plumbagin 
crystals are obtained after evaporating the 
ether. The crystals have a peculiar odour and a 
very acrid taste. 
Genetic resources Plumbago zeylanica has 
a wide distribution and is not in danger of ge-
netic erosion. No germplasm collections or 
breeding programmes are known to exist. 
Prospects Plumbago zeylanica is widely 
used for its medicinal properties in Africa, and 
many uses are being confirmed by scientific 
research. Although plumbagin may have me-
dicinal potential, e.g. for its antimicrobial and 
antitumour activity, the use of plumbagin or 
plumbagin-containing plant material as medi-
cine for humans is dangerous because of the 
high toxicity. Plumbagin may have potential as 
a compound in synthetic insecticides. 
Major references Abebe & Hagos, 1991; 
Beg & Ahmad, 2000; Bopaiah & Pradhan, 
2001; Burkill, 1997; Dhar & Rao, 1995; Neu-
winger, 2000; Nguyen et al., 2004; Ram, Bhak-
shu & Raju, 2004; Verma, 2002; Wongsatit 
Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & 
Promjit Saralamp, 1999c. 
Other references Ahmad, 2000-2001; Dai 
et al., 2004; Gelfand et al., 1985; Gurib-Fakim 
et al., 1993; Heine & Heine, 1988a; Kanjilal et 
al., 2004; Karnick, Tiwari & Majumber, 1982; 
Kavimani et al., 1996; Kini et al., 1997; Kumar 
& Banerji, 2002; Lemma et al., 2002; Lin, Yang 
& Chou, 2003; Menon, Amma & Nybe, 2001a; 
Menon, Amma & Nybe, 2001b; Olagunju, Ka-
zeem & Oyedapo, 2000; Pernet & Meyer, 1957; 
Rout, 2002; Tilak, Adhikari, & Devesagayam, 
2004; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962; Wilmot-
Dear, 1976. 
Sources of illustration Hepper, 1963b. 
Authors Y. Mungwini 
478 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
PSEUDOLACHNOSTYLIS MAPROUNEIFOLIA Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 28: 20 (1899). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Vernacular names Kudu berry, duiker 
berry (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pseu-
dolaehnostylis maprouneifolia occurs from DR 
Congo and Tanzania south throughout south-
ern Africa including northern South Africa. 
Uses In East Africa a root decoction is taken 
as a purgative to treat stomach-ache and ab-
dominal problems. In Tanzania the roots and 
bark mixed with poisonous insects are burned 
and the ashes applied to incisions as a cure for 
tumours. The leaves pounded together with 
leaves, bark and roots of pigeon pea {Cajanus 
cajan (L.) Millsp.) in water are used as ear 
drops to treat earache. In southern Africa the 
smoke of burning roots is inhaled to treat 
pneumonia. The pulverized bark mixed in por-
ridge is taken to treat pneumonia, tuberculosis 
and aenemia. A bark extract is drunk or dried 
powdered root mixed in porridge is taken to 
treat diarrhoea, dysentery and as an aphrodi-
siac. In Zambia the pulp of peeled roots is ap-
plied to leprous sores. In Zimbabwe the leaves 
are boiled and the strained liquid is rubbed 
into incisions on the side to treat pain in the 
side. A leaf decoction is taken to treat cough 
and fever. A root infusion is taken to treat ab-
dominal pain, gonorrhoea and female sterility. 
A bark infusion is taken to treat dizziness and 
vomiting. Dried, pulverized root is sniffed to 
treat nosebleed and headache. It is sprinkled 
on fresh wounds to heal them. An infusion of 
leaves and roots is given to cattle to threat 
haematuria. 
The wood is used to make toys, joinery, turnery 
and handicrafts, and is also used as firewood 
and to make charcoal. The fruits are edible. 
The leaves and fruit are used as fodder. In 
Zambia Pseudolachnostylis maprouneifolia is a 
popular host plant of edible caterpillars. In 
Malawi the tree enters into religious ceremo-
nies. 
Properties No information is available con-
cerning the phytochemistry and pharmacology. 
The wood is moderately heavy, with an even 
texture. 
The fresh fruit pulp contains per 100 g: water 
60 g, energy 35 kJ (147 kcal), protein 3.3 g, fat 
1.8 g, carbohydrate 33.5 g, cellulose 8 g, Ca 
0.03 g, Mg 0.05 g, P 0.04 g, Fe 2.7 mg, Zn 2.6 
mg, riboflavin 0.06 mg, niacin 1.09 mg. 
Botany Dioecious, deciduous small tree up 
to 10(-18)m tall; bole straight, branchless for c. 
3.5 m; bark smooth, becoming transversely 
fissured and flaking, dark grey to blackish; 
crown compact and rounded, or lax with droop-
ing branches; twigs glabrous to densely hairy. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
lanceolate, 3-5 mm long, soon falling; petiole 
2-10 mm long; blade broadly ovate to elliptical-
ovate, 1.5-10(-12.5) cm x 1-6 cm, base cuneate 
to shallowly cordate, apex obtuse to rounded, 
glabrous or short-hairy, pinnately veined with 
6-12 pairs of lateral veins, orange-red before 
falling. Inflorescence an axillary cyme; bracts 
up to 3 mm long; male inflorescence up to 2 cm 
long; female inflorescence up to 4 cm long. 
Flowers unisexual, regular; sepals 5(-6), ovate 
to elliptical, 3-5 mm x 1-3 mm, obtuse, gla-
brous to sparingly short-hairy, yellowish green; 
petals absent; disk c. 2 mm in diameter, pink-
ish; male flowers sessile, stamens 5-7, stami-
nal column 1-2 mm long; female flowers with 
1.5-2 mm long pedicel, ovary superior, ovoid, c. 
1.5 mm x 1 mm, 3-celled, smooth, densely 
short-hairy to glabrous, styles 3, 1.5-2 cm long, 
fused at base, stigmas 2-fid. Fruit an ovoid to 
rounded drupe-like capsule 1.5-2 cm long, 
scarcely 2—4-lobed, tardily septicidally dehis-
cent, glabrous, yellowish green, yellow or pink-
ish green, 3-seeded by abortion. Seeds ellip-
soid-ovoid, c. 7 mm x 5 mm long, slightly shiny, 
pale brown streaked with dark brown. 
Pseudolachnostylis comprises a single species, 
but up to 6 species have been recognized in the 
past, which are distinguished as varieties in 
recent treatments. Pseudolachnostylis maprou-
neifolia flowers from July to December, fruits 
remain long on the tree. 
Ecology Pseudolachnostylis maprouneifolia 
occurs in mixed deciduous woodland, wooded 
grassland and riverine vegetation, usually on 
sandy soils, but also on rocky outcrops and 
disturbed soils near cultivation, at 200—1600 m 
altitude. Mature trees are moderately fire re-
sistant. 
Management Seeds can be stored for later 
use; the germination rate is increased when 
seeds are soaked in hot water and allowed to 
cool for 24 hours before sowing. The plants can 
be pruned and coppiced. 
Genetic resources and breeding Pseu-
dolachnostylis maprouneifolia is common in its 
area of distribution and not threatened by ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Pseudolachnostylis maprouneifo-
lia has many interesting medicinal uses, e.g. 
PYCNOCOMA 479 
against different infectious ailments. However, 
no phytochemical or pharmacological research 
has been done so far, and it would be worth-
while evaluating the different plant parts for 
their activities. 
Major references Chilufya & Tengnäs, 
1996; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; 
Williamson, 1955. 
Other references Chinemana et al., 1985; 
Coates Palgrave, 1983; Oliveira, 1974; Kok-
waro, 1993. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
PYCNOBOTRYA NITIDA Benth. 
Protologue Hook.f., Icon. pi. 12: 72, t. 1183 
(1876). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Pycnobotrya multiflora K.Schum. 
ex Stapf (1902). 
Origin and geographic distribution Pycno-
botrya nitida occurs in West and Central Af-
rica, from Nigeria to the Central African Re-
public and DR Congo. 
Uses In Congo the leaves of Pycnobotrya 
nitida axe eaten with other food to treat chest 
infections and the latex is taken to treat 
haematuria, diarrhoea and dysentery. These 
treatments are supplemented by wearing a 
cord made from the bark of Pycnobotrya nitida 
and Haumantia sp. round the neck or chest. 
Leaves are also eaten either as a vegetable or 
to treat bronchitis. Fibre obtained from the 
bark is used to make cords, e.g. for crossbows. 
Properties There is no information on the 
chemical composition of Pycnobotrya nitida 
except that it contains steroids and terpenes. 
Botany Large liana, up to 40 m long, with 
white latex, turning pale yellow; stem up to 12 
cm in diameter; bark dark brown, smooth; 
branches terete, dark red-brown. Leaves oppo-
site or in whorls of 3, simple and entire; stip-
ules absent; petiole 3—7 mm long, inserted on 
distinct leaf cushions; blade narrowly elliptical, 
8-15 cm x 2-5 cm, base cuneate, apex obtuse 
or acuminate, leathery, glossy, dotted with 
many black glands, pinnately veined with 
many straight, parallel, inconspicuous lateral 
veins. Inflorescence an axillary or terminal 
panicle 3-15 cm x 2-20 cm, first ramifications 
lax, others congested, rusty-hairy; peduncle 1— 
5 cm long; bracts ovate to narrowly elliptical, 
up to 6 mm long. Flowers bisexual, regular but 
with the sepals unequal, 5-merous, fragrant; 
pedicel 1-3 mm long; sepals free or nearly so, 
ovate, c. 1 mm long, apex obtuse, ciliate; corolla 
tube campanulate, 1-2 mm long, lobes oblong, 
3—5(—7) mm long, with obtuse apex, upcurved 
at the left side, contorted and overlapping to 
the left, spreading, dark pink, usually turning 
paler at anthesis, with or without pale yellow 
throat; stamens inserted near the base of the 
corolla tube, included, anthers narrowly trian-
gular, with auricles at base, apex acuminate; 
ovary superior, almost globose, consisting of 2 
free carpels; styles fused, very short, stigma 
conical, bifid. Fruit composed of two free, 
obliquely elliptical, laterally compressed folli-
cles 5-7 cm long, widely spreading, 2-valved, 
1-4-seeded. Seeds flattened, obliquely oblong, 
4-6 cm long, surrounded by a papery wing, 
transparent except for the margins. 
Pycnobotrya comprises a single species and 
seems related to the American genus Aspi-
dosperma. 
Ecology Pycnobotrya nitida occurs in forest, 
often on river banks, at low altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding Because 
it is widespread and in several regions com-
mon, Pycnobotrya nitida does not seem to be 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Pycnobotrya nitida will remain a 
medicinal plant of only local importance. In-
formation is needed on its pharmacological 
properties and phytochemistry. Its value as a 
vegetable deserves further research. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Neuwinger, 
2000; van der Ploeg, 1983. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
PYCNOCOMA MACROPHYLLA Benth. 
Protologue Hook., Niger FL: 508 (1849). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Pycno-
coma macrophylla is native from Sierra Leone 
and Liberia eastwards to Gabon and DR 
Congo. 
Uses All parts of Pycnocoma macrophylla 
are strongly purgative. Root bark, the most 
widely used plant part throughout West Africa, 
is not administered to children in Côte d'Ivoire 
because of its strong purgative action. In 
Ghana the stem bark is ground, mixed with 
water and lemon juice and drunk as an emetic. 
It is also used as a fish poison. 
Properties Highly active protein kinase C-
agonizing compounds were isolated from the 
leaves and identified as esters of the diterpe-
480 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
noid 11,18-dehydro-phorbol and of 4,12-
dideoxy-16-hydroxy-phorbol. These phorbol 
derivatives stimulated the central nervous 
system by markedly inhibiting amphetamine-
induced locomotor activity in mice. A root ex-
tract exhibited antitumour activity in the P388 
lymphocytic leukaemia test; scopoletin was 
found to be partly responsible for this effect. 
Botany Monoecious shrub up to 3 m tall; 
stems glabrous. Leaves alternate, clustered 
towards end of branches, simple; stipules fal-
ling early; petiole up to 1 cm long, glabrous; 
blade oblanceolate, 25-60 cm x 5-14 cm, base 
rounded to cordate, apex acuminate, margins 
entire, toothed or rarely lobed, glabrous, with 
16-22 pairs of lateral veins, small pustules 
below and paired glands at lower surface to-
wards the base. Inflorescence an axillary, soli-
tary raceme 11-20 cm long with flowers in 
clusters of usually 3 male flowers and 1 termi-
nal female flower; peduncle glabrous to densely 
short-hairy; bracts ovate, 4-8 mm long. Flow-
ers unisexual, regular, with strong, repellent 
smell; petals absent; male flowers with pedicel 
1.5-2.5 cm long, calyx lobes c. 6 mm long, sta-
mens many, free, anthers small; female flowers 
with pedicel 2-7 mm long, calyx lobes 6-9 mm 
long, ovary superior, 2-3 mm in diameter, 
slightly 3-lobed, densely short-hairy, 3-celled, 
styles 3, fused below. Fruit a 3-lobed, 6-horned 
capsule c. 2 cm in diameter, glabrous to 
densely short-hairy, 3-seeded. Seeds globose, c. 
13 mm in diameter, smooth, brown. 
The growth of Pycnocoma macrophylla follows 
Corner's architectural model implying that 
vegetative growth of a single meristem pro-
duces a single unbranched axis with lateral 
inflorescences. 
Pycnocoma comprises about 18 species, all in 
tropical Africa. About 10 occur in DR Congo, 
several with a very localized distribution. 
Pycnocoma angustifolia Prain occurs in Sierra 
Leone, Liberia, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Nige-
ria and Pycnocoma cornuta Müll.Arg. occurs in 
Ghana and Nigeria. In Ghana intermediates 
between Pycnocoma macrophylla and these two 
species occur, indicating that they could well 
belong to a single species. Their medicinal uses 
are similar to those of Pycnocoma macrophylla. 
Pycnocoma chevalieri Beille occurs in gallery 
forest in the Central African Republic, north-
ern DR Congo, Sudan and Uganda. In DR 
Congo ground roots are added to wine and the 
mixture is drunk as an emetic. They are also 
eaten with palm nuts or rice as a purgative. In 
the Central African Republic the leaves are 
used as a cure for diabetes. Pycnocoma lit-
toralis Pax is a vulnerable species restricted to 
the coastal belt of southern Kenya and north-
ern Tanzania. In Tanzania a root decoction is 
drunk to expel a retained placenta. Pycnocoma 
minor Müll.Arg. occurs in Equatorial Guinea 
and Gabon. In Gabon the macerated roots are 
added to wine and the mixture is drunk as a 
diuretic. A root extract of Pycnocoma thonneri 
Pax, endemic to DR Congo, is drunk as an 
abortifacient, purgative and anthelmintic. Root 
scrapings are eaten to cure stomach-ache and 
to kill internal parasites. Root powder or leaf 
sap is applied as eye drops to stop convulsions 
in children. Root scrapings are applied as a 
dressing to counteract inflammation in the 
knee. 
Ecology Pycnocoma macrophylla occurs in 
the undergrowth of forests. In DR Congo it is 
restricted to 500-750 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Pycno-
coma macrophylla is widespread and not under 
serious threat. 
Prospects More chemical and pharmacol-
ogical research is needed to evaluate the poten-
tial of Pycnocoma macrophylla. 
Major references Hawthorne & Jongkind, 
2006; Léonard, 1996a. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Apema et al., 2007; Bergquist, Obianwu 
& Wickberg, 1989; Halle, Oldeman & 
Tomlinson, 1978; Hulstaert, 1966; Léonard, 
1996c; Neuwinger, 2004; Vergiat, 1970. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
R A U V O L F I A CAFFRA Sond. 
Protologue Linnaea 23: 77 (1850). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 44 
Synonyms Rauvolfia macrophylla Stapf 
(1894). 
Vernacular names Quinine tree (En). 
Mseswe, msesawe, mwembe mwitu, mkufi 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Rau-
volfia caffra occurs from Togo east to southern 
Sudan, Uganda and Kenya and south through 
Central and East Africa to eastern South Af-
rica. 
Uses In East Africa the bark is commonly 
used in local medicine. The crushed bark is 
applied against measles or itching rash. A bark 
decoction is taken as an astringent, purgative 
or emetic to treat fever, swellings, rheumatism, 
RAUVOLFIA 481 
Rauvolfia caffra - wild 
hepatitis, pneumonia, abdominal pain and as a 
tranquilizer. A piece of bark is chewed to cure 
cough and toothache. Dried pulverized leaves 
are sniffed to cure headache. A root decoction is 
taken to treat fever, swollen legs, insomnia and 
palpitation of the heart. The root is used for 
treating insomnia and insecurity. A root or 
bark decoction cooked in porridge is applied to 
hardened abscesses, whereas the powdered 
unopened inflorescences are applied to sores. A 
stem or root bark decoction is taken to treat 
internal parasites, such as roundworm and 
tapeworm. Root sap, mixed with honey, is ap-
plied to fractures. In Tanzania a root decoction 
is taken to treat abdominal pain, constipation 
and irregular periods or hypertension. The 
vapour of a bark decoction is inhaled to treat 
epilepsy and eye diseases. In Zambia stem bark 
is used to treat venereal diseases. In Zimbabwe 
the sap of pounded fruits is used as ear drops 
to cure earache. In South Africa a decoction of 
the bark is taken as a tranquilizer for hysteria, 
and to treat insomnia. 
In the Arusha and Kilimanjaro districts of 
Tanzania the root extract and ground stem 
bark are added to a local beer made from cook-
ing bananas to add a bitter flavour and in-
crease the alcohol percentage of the drink. The 
wood is suitable for making fruit boxes, kitchen 
furniture and shelving. Household utensils and 
drums are sometimes carved from it. In Kenya 
poles are used in hut building and for making 
bee hives. Rauvolfia caffra is used as a shade 
tree in coffee plantations, and is an important 
species in bee keeping in Tanzania due to its 
multitude of flowers. The tree is a good source 
of fuel wood. The thickened latex is used as a 
bird lime in Kenya. The bark contains a fibre 
which is used in Cameroon and Gabon to make 
bow strings and cords. Rauvolfia caffra is a 
decorative fast-growing tree for sheltered gar-
dens. It is planted as an ornamental shade tree 
in southern Africa. 
Proper t ies Rauvolfia caffra contains a large 
number of indole alkaloids. The total alkaloid 
content of young root bark is 3%, with as major 
components ajmaline (1.25%) and serpentine 
(1.09%), followed by ajmalicine (0.16%), reser-
pine (0.08%), reserpinine (0.02%) and reser-
piline (0.01%). The principal alkaloids from the 
stem bark are ajmaline, norajmaline, ajma-
licinine, ajmalicine, and geissoschizol. The 
principal alkaloids isolated from the leaves are 
from the less common indolenine type (raucaf-
frinoline, perakine and vomilenine) and from 
the peraksine type (peraksine and dihydrop-
eraksine). The seeds yielded 0.012% alkaloids, 
comprising mainly yohimbine and related com-
pounds, and normacusine B. Five of the Rau-
volfia alkaloids are used in Western medicine: 
reserpine, reserpinine, deserpidine, ajmalicine 
and ajmaline. Reserpine, now no longer widely 
used, is a well-known antihypertensive, antip-
sychotic and sedative, although an important 
side effect is depression. Reserpinine and de-
serpidine are reserpine analogues. Both alka-
loids have the same effects as reserpine, and 
can be used to treat the same conditions, but 
their side effects are reported to be less pro-
nounced. Ajmalicine is an a-adrenergic block-
ing spasmolytic which, at high doses, reverses 
the effects of adrenaline, and moderates the 
activity of the vasomotor centres, especially in 
the brain stem. It causes an increase of the 
blood flow to the brain. Ajmalicine is mainly 
used in products that treat the psychological 
and behavioural problems associated with se-
nility, as well as stroke and head injuries. 
Ajmaline is an anti-arrhythmic, which sub-
stantially decreases the rate of depolarization 
of atrial and ventricular cells. Its toxicity has 
limited its uses and it is mainly prescribed 
against rapid irregular cardiac beat, and some 
other cardiac dysfunctions. Because of its toxic-
ity it is no longer marketed in several coun-
tries. 
The root extract showed antibacterial activity 
against Enterobacter cloacae in vitro, but was 
not active against a range of other human 
pathogens. The stem bark extract showed anti-
bacterial activity against Staphylococcus 
aureus in vitro. The root extract showed low to 
moderate activity against Plasmodium falcipa-
482 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
rum in vitro. 
The wood is yellowish-white, soft and moder-
ately light weight (density about 540 kg/m3 at 
15% moisture content). 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s Commer-
cially, Rauvolfia alkaloids are obtained from 
Rauvolfia vomitoria Afzel. and to a lesser ex-
ten t from Rauvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex 
Kurz. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Medium-sized to fairly large 
t ree up to 40 m tall; bole up to 1 m in diameter ; 
ba rk grey to brown, smooth or rough and corky, 
fissured; branchle ts often 4-5-angular or 4—5-
winged, with conspicuous leaf scars . Leaves in 
whorls of 3-6, crowded a t the top of branches , 
simple and entire; st ipules absent ; petiole up to 
6 cm long; blade narrowly elliptical to narrowly 
obovate, 2-50(-70) cm x l -15( -20) cm, base 
decurrent into the petiole, apex acute, gla-
brous. Inflorescence a congested cyme, in ter-
minal whorls of 1-4, many-flowered; peduncle 
1.5-13.5 cm long, glabrous. Flowers bisexual, 
regular , 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel up to 2 m m 
long; sepals fused a t base, unequal , ovate, 0 . 5 -
1.5 m m long; corolla tube cylindrical, 3-5.5 mm 
long, glabrous outside, inside glabrous in the 
Rauvolfia caffra 
flower; 3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
1, flowering branch; 2, 
basal 1.5-4.5 mm, then shortly hai ry to the 
mouth and hai ry a t the base of t he lobes inside, 
lobes ovate to obovate, 0.5-1.5 mm long, white, 
greenish white or yellowish white; s t amens 
inser ted a t 2-4 mm above the corolla base, 
included; ovary superior, globose to obovate, 
composed of 2 par t ly fused or free carpels, style 
0.5-3 mm long, pistil head cylindrical with a 
basal collar and a stigmoid apex. Frui t a glo-
bose to ellipsoid drupe 5-20 m m long when 1 
carpel developed, obcordate, 2-lobed, 10-30 mm 
long when both carpels developed, da rk red, 1— 
2-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 7 -13 m m long, later-
ally compressed. 
O t h e r b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Rauvolfia is 
a pantropical genus of about 60 species, of 
which 7 occur in cont inental Africa, 2 in Mada-
gascar, and 1 in Madagascar and the Comoros. 
Rauvolfia mombasiana Stapf occurs in Kenya, 
Tanzan ia and Mozambique, mainly along the 
coast. A decoction from the root or sometimes 
from the ba rk is t aken to t r ea t malar ia , vene-
real diseases, a s thma , tuberculosis, s tomach 
complaints and skin problems. The ground 
leaves are applied to breas t abscesses. Dried 
grated root bark mixed with coconut oil is ap-
plied external ly to t r e a t scabies. Root powder 
mixed wi th porridge is t a k e n to t r ea t constipa-
tion and abdominal pain. In Kenya and Tanza-
nia the grated root or s tem bark is used with 
cassava flour as a r a t poison. It is also used as 
a suicide poison. Rauvolfia mombasiana con-
ta ins s imilar alkaloids to those of Rauvolfia 
vomitoria Afzel. Rauvolfia volkensii (K.Schum.) 
Stapf is an endemic of nor th-eas te rn Tanzania . 
I ts root and ba rk a re locally t aken in infusion 
to t r e a t snakebi tes , gonorrhoea and to increase 
lactation in nurs ing mothers . The principal 
alkaloids in the roots are reserpil ine (0.15%) 
and ajmaline (0.08%); the reserpine content in 
the roots is very low. 
A n a t o m y Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth r ings: 2: growth r ing boundar ies indis-
t inct or absent . Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
9: vessels exclusively solitary (90% or more); 
13: simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel 
pi ts a l te rna te ; 25: intervessel pits small (4-7 
|im); (26: intervessel pi ts medium (7-10 |im)); 
29: ves tured pits; 30: vessel-ray pi ts wi th dis-
t inct borders; s imilar to intervessel pi ts in size 
and shape throughout the ray cell; 41 : mean 
tangent ia l d iameter of vessel lumina 50—100 
Mm; 42: mean tangent ia l d iameter of vessel 
lumina 100-200 urn; 48: 20-40 vessels per 
square mil l imetre. Tracheids and fibres: 62: 
RAUVOLFIA 483 
fibres with distinctly bordered pits; 63: fibre 
pits common in both radial and tangential 
walls; 66: non-septate fibres present; 69: fibres 
thin- to thick-walled; (70: fibres very thick-
walled). Axial parenchyma: 76: axial paren-
chyma diffuse; 77: axial parenchyma diffuse-in-
aggregates; 92: four (3—4) cells per parenchyma 
strand; 93: eight (5-8) cells per parenchyma 
strand. Rays: 98: larger rays commonly 4- to 
10-seriate; 106: body ray cells procumbent with 
one row of upright and/or square marginal 
cells; 107: body ray cells procumbent with 
mostly 2-4 rows of upright and/or square mar-
ginal cells; (114: < 4 rays per mm); 115: 4-12 
rays per mm. Mineral inclusions: 136: pris-
matic crystals present; 137: prismatic crystals 
in upright and/or square ray cells; 140: pris-
matic crystals in chambered upright and/or 
square ray cells; 154: more than one crystal of 
about the same size per cell or chamber. 
(M. Thiam, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
Growth and development In Tanzania 
Rauvolfia caffra flowers during the long rainy 
season, extending into the dry season up to the 
onset of the short rainy season; fruit ripens 
during the dry season extending into the short 
rainy season up to the long dry season. 
When established, the plants have a fast 
growth rate, up to 1.5 m/year. Rauvolfia caffra 
needs shade when young; old trees, however, 
do not tolerate shade. 
Ecology Rauvolfia caffra occurs in rainfor-
est, riverine forest, montane forest and old 
secondary forest, from sea-level up to 2500 m 
altitude. It is frost-sensitive. It appears to pre-
fer fairly fertile soils that are well drained. It 
grows on loamy sands to sandy clay-loam soils. 
When growing away from rivers and streams it 
is always associated with the availability of 
ground water. 
Propagation and planting Rauvolfia caf-
fra regenerates by seed, cuttings and suckers. 
The number of seeds/kg is 4500-5000. Before 
sowing, the fruit pulp is removed by washing 
the seeds in water. The seeds are sown in seed-
ling trays filled with a mixture of river sand 
and compost (1:1), and covered with a thin 
layer of sand or left on the surface. Germina-
tion is fast and reaches up to 80% after two 
weeks. The seedlings are transplanted into 
nursery bags when they reach the 3-leaf stage 
and are 25-30 cm tall. They need regular wa-
tering for the first 3 months after transplant-
ing into the field. Seeds retain viability only for 
a short period of about 1 month at room tem-
perature, although other sources mention that 
seed germinates even after staying on the for-
est floor for a long time. 
Vegetative propagation of Rauvolfia caffra 
from leaf expiants in vitro is successful. 
Management Rauvolfia caffra can be cop-
piced or pollarded. Trees should not be grown 
near houses, as some parts may be toxic to 
children and livestock. Its large size and inva-
sive root system make it unsuitable for smaller 
gardens. 
Harvesting Roots may be harvested annu-
ally in a non-destructive way by cutting them 
10 cm from the taproot. All plant parts are 
harvested whenever the need arises. 
Handling after harvest The stem bark or 
roots of Rauvolfia caffra can be used fresh or 
dried and powdered and stored in a closed con-
tainer for later use. The leaves are usually 
used fresh. 
Genetic resources Rauvolfia caffra is rela-
tively common throughout its distribution area, 
and not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Rauvolfia caffra has multiple 
uses in local medicine. More research is needed 
to validate these uses. As the quantity of 
pharmacologically interesting compounds is 
lower than in Rauvolfia vomitoria, Rauvolfia 
caffra has no future for large-scale exploita-
tion. Its prospects as a shade tree in agrofor-
estry systems in East Africa, especially high-
land systems with coffee and banana, are 
promising, although its invasive root system 
requires further study. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; FAO, 1986; 
Iwu, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; van Dilst & Leeu-
wenberg, 1991; van Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
Other references Akinloye & Court, 1981; 
Amer & Court, 1981; Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Hines & Eckman, 1993; Höft, Verpoorte & 
Beck, 1998a; InsideWood, undated; Iwu & 
Court, 1979; Iwu & Court, 1978; Iwu & Court, 
1980; Madati et al., 1977; Mbuya et a l , 1994; 
Nasser & Court, 1983a; Nasser & Court, 
1983b; Nasser & Court, 1984; Omino, 2002; 
Omino & Kokwaro, 1993; Tshikalange, Meyer 
& Hussein, 2005; Upadhyay et a l , 1992; World 
Agroforestry Centre, undated; Zirihi et al., 
2005. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors N.P. Mollel 
484 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
RAUVOLFIA MANNII Stapf 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1894: 
21 (1894). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22, 44 
Synonyms Rauvolfia obscura K.Schum. 
(1895), Rauvolfia rosea K.Schum. (1895), Rau-
volfia cumminsii Stapf (1902). 
Origin and geographic distribution Rau-
volfia mannii occurs from Liberia east to 
Kenya and south to northern Angola and Ma-
lawi. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire and DR Congo dried or 
fresh pulverized roots in palm wine or water 
are taken to treat gastro-intestinal disorders, 
poisoning, jaundice, gonorrhoea or female ste-
rility. The root powder is applied to wounds to 
improve healing. Root powder, fruit pulp or 
pulped seeds are rubbed on the head to kill lice 
and to other parts of the body to kill skin para-
sites. Bark sap is applied to the eyes to treat 
epilepsy. In Nigeria the bark in gin is taken as 
a general tonic. In DR Congo a root decoction is 
taken to treat fever and diabetes. As a gargle, 
it is used to treat dental caries. In Kenya the 
boiled root mixed with fat is rubbed on the 
body of a person suffering from itch and pim-
ples. In Kenya and DR Congo the roots are 
used as an arrow poison supplement. 
Properties The roots of Rauvolfia mannii 
contain the indole alkaloids reserpine and 
ajmaline, whereas ajmalicine (5-yohimbine), 
reserpiline, serpentine and alstonine occur as 
minor components. Vincamajine has been iso-
lated as major component of the leaves. Ex-
tracts from the roots are highly toxic. Reser-
pine is hypotensive, reducing heart beat; it is 
sedative and tranquilizing. Reserpiline is hy-
potensive. Ajmalicine is a coronary and periph-
eral vasodilator. 
An extract from the root caused skeletal mus-
cle relaxation in rats following intraperitoneal 
administration. In another experiment a root 
extract showed in-vitro antibacterial and anti-
amoebic activities against a range of human 
pathogens, and also antispasmodic activity. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 8 m tall; 
bark greenish- to grey-brown, scaly. Leaves in 
whorls of 3—6, crowded at the top of branches, 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole up to 
2.5 cm long; blade ovate to obovate or elliptical, 
2.5-28 cm x 0.5-10.5 cm, base cuneate, apex 
acuminate. Inflorescence a terminal or pseudo-
axillary, lax to congested cyme, 3-50-flowered; 
peduncle up to 6 cm long, glabrous. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 
1-8 mm long; sepals fused at base, unequal, 
ovate to narrowly elliptical, 0.5-3 mm long; 
corolla tube cylindrical, 2.5-10.5 mm long, 
widening at the insertion of the stamens, green 
to white or yellowish-white, often with pink or 
red stripes, glabrous outside, short hairy at 
base inside, lobes axe-shaped to elliptical or 
ovate, 1-3.5 mm long, white to pink or red-
brown, or yellow; stamens inserted at 2-8 mm 
above the corolla base, included or exserted; 
ovary superior, globose to oblong or ovoid, com-
posed of 2 partly fused or free carpels, style 1-6 
mm long, pistil head cylindrical with a basal 
collar and a stigmoid apex. Fruit an obcordate 
drupe 5—12 mm long, laterally compressed, 
when only 1 carpel developed ellipsoid or ovoid, 
red, 1-2-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 4—11 mm long, 
laterally compressed. 
Rauvolfia is a pantropical genus of about 60 
species, of which 7 occur in continental Africa, 
2 in Madagascar, and 1 in Madagascar and 
Comoros. Rauvolfia mannii can be found flow-
ering and fruiting throughout the year. 
Ecology Rauvolfia mannii occurs in rainfor-
est, riverine forest and old secondary forest, 
from sea-level up to 2500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Rau-
volfia mannii is relatively common in its area 
of distribution and therefore not likely to be 
endangered by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Rauvolfia mannii contains simi-
lar pharmacological compounds to those found 
in other Rauvolfia species, but the quantities 
are not known. More research is needed to 
evaluate the possible future of Rauvolfia man-
nii as a source of pharmacologically important 
alkaloids. If the alkaloid quantities are low, the 
species will remain of local importance only. 
Major references Harris, Stewart & Court, 
1968; Iwu & Court, 1977; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Neuwinger, 2000; van Dilst & Leeuwenberg, 
1991. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Burkill, 1985; Eno & Itam, 2001; 
Omino & Kokwaro, 1993; Patel et a l , 1965; 
Ruppert, Ma & Stockigt, 2005; Sandberg & 
Cronlund, 1982; Timmins & Court, 1975; Tona 
et al., 1999. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
R A U V O L F I A 485 
RAUVOLFIA MEDIA Pichon 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Bot. France 94: 36 
(1947). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Rauvolfia confertiflora Pichon 
(1947). 
Origin and geographic distribution Rau-
volfia media is endemic to Madagascar and 
Comoros. 
Uses The bark of young twigs and the leaves 
are crushed and applied to the eyes to cure 
viral conjunctivitis. The crushed roots or a de-
coction of the roots and bark, mixed with food, 
are used to poison dogs with rabies and also 
pest animals. The latex can be used as glue for 
small utensils. 
Production and international trade The 
bark and roots are exported to Europe for the 
pharmaceutical industry. Between 1986 and 
1995, about 16.5 t/year were exported. 
Properties All parts are very bitter and are 
considered very toxic. The bark and roots con-
tain several monomeric indole alkaloids, of 
which reserpiline is pharmacologically active. 
It has sympatholytic and hypotensive proper-
ties, with no noticeable depressant effects on 
the central nervous system. In comparison 
with reserpine, which is present in other Rau-
volfia spp., reserpiline does not induce the for-
mation of gastric ulcers, has no laxative effects 
and lacks other side effects. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 10(-15) m 
tall; bark grey or pale brownish-grey, smooth. 
Leaves in whorls of 4-7, crowded at the top of 
branches, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 0.5-1.5 mc long; blade ovate or elliptical 
to narrowly oblong, 1-18 cm x 0.5-8.5 cm, base 
cuneate, apex obtuse. Inflorescence a terminal, 
lax to congested cyme; peduncle 1.5-5.5 cm 
long, hairy to glabrous. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 1-4 mm long; 
sepals fused at base, unequal, ovate to nar-
rowly oblong, c. 2 mm long; corolla tube cylin-
drical, 3-6 mm long, widening at the insertion 
of the stamens, slightly narrowed at the 
mouth, lobes axe-shaped, 1.5-2.5 mm long, 
shortly hairy or glabrous on both sides, white 
to dull yellow; stamens inserted at 2.5-4.5 mm 
above the corolla base, barely included or ex-
serted; ovary superior, globose, oblong to ovoid, 
composed of 2 partly fused carpels, style 1-4 
mm long, pistil head cylindrical with a basal 
collar and a stigmoid apex. Fruit an obcordate 
to ovoid or subglobose drupe 6-10 mm long, 
laterally compressed, 1—2-seeded. Seeds ellip-
soid, 4-10 mm long, laterally compressed. 
Rauvolfia is a pantropical genus of about 60 
species, of which 7 occur in continental Africa, 
2 in Madagascar, and 1 in Madagascar and the 
Comoros. The 2 other Rauvolfia species present 
in Madagascar are confined to the northern 
region. The roots of Rauvolfia obtusiflora 
A.DC. are used as a fish poison, whereas the 
aerial parts in decoction were formerly used as 
an ordeal poison. The roots are rich in indole 
alkaloids, but do not contain reserpine. A de-
coction of the aerial parts of Rauvolfia 
capuronii Markgr. was formerly taken as or-
deal poison. Rauvolfia media flowers from Sep-
tember to December and fruits from November 
to February. Young leaves appear just before or 
with the flowers. 
Ecology Rauvolfia media occurs in dry for-
est and savanna, from sea-level up to 800 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Because 
of the rapid destruction of the forests in which 
it occurs and harvesting for local use and ex-
port, Rauvolfia media may become rare and 
locally threatened. 
Prospects More research is needed to iden-
tify the pharmacologically active alkaloids in 
the different plant parts. The exploitation of 
Rauvolfia media as well as the decline of its 
natural habitat have caused the species to be-
come rare, and unless it is domesticated and 
planted, the exploitation will come to a halt. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Markgraf, 1976; van Dilst 
& Leeuwenberg, 1991. 
Other references Andriatsiferana, 1997; 
Kan et al., 1986; Neuwinger, 1996; Rasoanaivo, 
Petitjean & Conan, 1993. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
RAUVOLFIA VOMITORIA Afzel. 
Protologue Stirp. Guinea med.: 1 (1817). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2re = 22, 66 
Vernacular names Poison devil's pepper, 
African snakeroot, African serpent wood, swiz-
zle stick (En). Berenquete (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Rau-
volfia vomitoria occurs from Senegal east to 
Uganda and Tanzania and south to DR Congo 
and Angola. It is cultivated in many parts of 
the tropics and subtropics. 
Uses In the entire distribution area of Rau-
volfia vomitoria a root decoction, root macerate 
486 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Rauvolfia vomitoria - wild 
or powdered root in water is taken to treat di-
arrhoea, rheumatism, jaundice, venereal dis-
eases and snakebites. Root products are also 
widely taken to treat hypertension, and as a 
sedative to calm people with epilepsy, and peo-
ple who are psychotic or mentally ill; they are 
also used to wash children with colic or fever. 
Externally, macerated or powdered root or 
sometimes pulped fruit are applied to a range 
of skin problems, such as rash, pimples, 
chicken pox, wounds, scabies, psoriasis, lep-
rosy, haemorrhoids, head lice and parasitic 
skin diseases. A root decoction is used as a 
mouth wash against gingivitis or thrush. The 
stem bark or leaves are also used for these 
purposes, but to a lesser extent. The stem bark, 
leaf decoction and latex of young twigs are 
widely used as purgative or emetic. 
In Guinea the root maceration is applied to 
tumours. In Liberia a bark infusion is taken to 
cure fever. A leaf infusion is rubbed in against 
yaws. Dried or fresh pulverized roots in palm 
wine or oil are taken to treat female sterility. A 
root decoction is used in massages and baths to 
treat rheumatism, tiredness and rachitis. In 
Togo pulverized root bark in brandy is taken to 
treat tuberculosis. In Cameroon a decoction of 
powdered roots is taken to treat diabetes and 
malaria. In the Central African Republic a root 
decoction is taken to treat hernia. In Côte 
d'Ivoire leaf sap is rubbed between the toes to 
treat infections caused by humidity. A leaf 
maceration is used for bathing children with 
fever. In Gabon chopped and boiled leaves 
mixed with fat are applied to the skin to cure 
rheumatism and sprains. A mixture of pulver-
ized root or leaf sap with plant oil or lemon 
juice is applied to the hair to stop hair loss. In 
Nigeria the root and leaves in decoction are 
taken to treat indigestion, as a tonic, and as 
abortifacient. In Equatorial Guinea the latex is 
used for cicatrization of wounds. 
In the Central African Republic the roots of 
Rauvolfia vomitoria, alone or together with 
seeds of Strophanthus gratus (Wall. & Hook.) 
Franch., are pounded to a paste, which serves 
as arrow poison. In DR Congo the roots are a 
common additive to Periploca nigrescens Afzel. 
hunting poison. In Equatorial Guinea the root 
scrapings are mixed with cassava meal and put 
in bait as a rat poison. In West Africa the root 
is considered aphrodisiac when taken in palm 
wine. 
Rauvolfia vomitoria is widely planted as an 
ornamental in West Africa, as a shade tree for 
cacao and coffee and as a support for vanilla. It 
is also grown as a live fence. The young twigs 
with a whorl of branches at the end are used as 
mixers for drinks. Larger branches are simi-
larly used to stir the indigo mixture in dyeing 
pits. The wood is of little economic importance, 
although the heartwood is fairly hard; small 
kitchen utensils are made from it, and it is 
used as a substitute for boxwood. It is also used 
as firewood. A yellow dye is produced from the 
bark. 
Production and international trade In the 
1970s the stem bark and root bark of Rauvolfia 
vomitoria were collected from West and Cen-
tral Africa, and nearly 200 t of reserpine were 
sold in total, mainly in tablet form for use in 
human medicines. Reserpine was also widely 
added as a sedative to animal feed. Nowadays, 
reserpine is still widely sold through the inter-
net, mainly in India and the United States. 
Properties Rauvolfia vomitoria contains a 
large number of indole alkaloids, between 40 
and 80. Most occur in very small amounts and 
several are disputed. Most alkaloids occur in 
an unstable complex, and seasonal variation is 
present as well. Leaves contain 0.03-0.8% total 
alkaloids, stem bark about 0.6%, roots 0.15-
0.2% and root bark 1.5-2%. 
The alkaloids of Rauvolfia vomitoria can be 
grouped into 5 main types: (1) yohimbine and 
derivatives, including reserpine and deser-
pidine (11-demethoxyreserpine); (2) the het-
eroyohimbine type, including ajmalicine (raub-
asine), reserpinine (rescinnamine) and reser-
piline; (3) sarpagane derivatives, including 
sarpagine (raupine); (4) the dihydro-indole 
type, including ajmaline; (5) the anhydronium 
bases, including alstonine, serpentine and ser-
RAUVOLFIA 487 
penticine. Other groups include the oxindoles 
and pseudoindoxyls. Serpentinine is the only 
dimeric yohimbin-related alkaloid isolated so 
far. 
In the root bark reserpiline is the major com-
ponent, followed by reserpine, reserpinine and 
ajmaline. In the stem bark reserpiline is also 
the major component, with small amounts of 
isoreserpiline and yohimbine. The leaves were 
found to contain mainly geissoschizol, but no 
reserpine, reserpinine or ajmaline. The alka-
loids in the leaves comprised about 41% het-
eroyohimbines and 52% oxindoles. The unripe 
fruit contains several alkaloids, but they are 
absent in the ripe fruits. 
Of the Rauvolfia alkaloids, 5 are used in medi-
cine: reserpine, reserpinine, deserpidine, ajma-
licine and ajmaline. There are several patented 
methods for the extraction of the main compo-
nent reserpine. Furthermore, several simple 
and accurate methods have been developed to 
identify Rauvolfia alkaloids, e.g. reserpine, 
serpentine and ajmaline. 
Reserpine is a well-known antihypertensive, 
antipsychotic and sedative. It is a sym-
patholytic agent acting indirectly on the pe-
ripheral and central nerve terminals. It im-
pairs the storage of biogenic amines resulting 
in depletion of norepinephrine, dopamine, and 
serotonin. Depletion of norepinephrine induces 
a lasting drop in blood pressure. Contra-
indications for using reserpine are depression, 
peptic ulcer, and hypersensitivity to the alka-
loid. Side effects of the medication include 
drowsiness, nasal congestion, salivary and gas-
tric hypersecretion, paradoxical anxiety, de-
pression and retention of water and Na+. Over-
dose may cause respiratory depression, slowed 
heartbeat, hypotension, confusion, tremors, 
convulsions and gastro-intestinal distress. Re-
serpine has been shown to enhance the hypo-
glycaemic effect of insulin and the hypergly-
caemic effect of adrenalin, and has inhibited 
the physiological hyperglycaemic response in 
diabetic patients. Because of the necessary 
high doses and the resulting dangerous side 
effects, reserpine lost its importance as a medi-
cine. It is only used in low doses for mild to 
moderately severe high blood pressure, often 
together with ajmalicine. Reserpinine and de-
serpidine are reserpine analogues. Both alka-
loids have the same effects as reserpine, and 
can be used to treat the same conditions, while 
their side effects are reported to be less pro-
nounced. Reserpiline is marked sympatholytic 
and hypotensive with no noticeable depressant 
effects on the central nervous system and no 
sedative properties. It also lacks most of the 
side effects of reserpine and its analogues. 
Ajmalicine is an a-adrenergic blocking spasmo-
lytic which, at high doses, moderates the activ-
ity of the vasomotor centres, especially in the 
brain stem causing an increase of the blood 
flow to the brain. It is mainly used in products 
that treat the psychological and behavioural 
problems associated with senility, stroke and 
head injuries. Ajmaline is an anti-arrhythmic, 
which substantially decreases the rate of depo-
larization of atrial and ventricular cells. Its 
toxicity has limited its uses and it is mainly 
prescribed against rapid irregular cardiac beat. 
Because of its toxicity it is no longer marketed 
in several countries. Several other Rauvolfia 
alkaloids have hypotensive or sedative activi-
ties, but most are less effective. 
An ethanolic leaf extract of Rauvolfia vomitoria 
showed a reduction in blood sugar levels of 
normal and alloxan-induced diabetic rabbits, 
comparable to that of tolbutamide. A root de-
coction did not have any adverse effect on the 
oestrous cycle, fertilization or implantation, 
and did not show foetotoxicity or hormone-
induced infertility in a laboratory test with 
rats. A root bark extract showed antibacterial 
activity in vitro against several human patho-
gens. 
The wood is white, reddening with age; the 
heartwood is fairly hard. 
Adulterations and substitutes The Indian 
Rauvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex Kurz was 
formerly the main source of reserpine, but has 
been replaced to a large extent by Rauvolfia 
vomitoria. The roots of Catharanthus roseus 
(L.) G.Don are the main source of ajmalicine 
for the pharmaceutical industry. 
Description Shrub or medium-sized tree up 
to 20(-40) m tall; bole up to 80 cm in diameter; 
bark pale to dark grey-brown or dark brown, 
smooth or fissured. Leaves in whorls of 3-5, 
crowded at the top of branches, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 0.5-3.5 cm long; 
blade elliptical to narrowly elliptical, 2.5-27 cm 
x 2-9 cm, base cuneate, apex acuminate, gla-
brous. Inflorescence a lax to congested cyme in 
terminal whorls of 1-4, 15-450-flowered; pe-
duncle 1.5-8.5 cm long, shortly hairy. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 
1-4.5 mm long; sepals fused at base, unequal, 
ovate, 1—2 mm long; corolla tube cylindrical, 6— 
10(-12) mm long, constricted below the inser-
tion of the stamens, slightly narrowed at the 
mouth, glabrous outside with 3 hairy belts in-
488 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
»* 'S ' 
"•/ / 
Rauvolfia vomitoria - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
part of stem bark; 3, flower; 4, fruits. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
side, greenish, lobes axe-shaped, 1—2 mm long, 
white, yellow or creamy; stamens inserted at 
4.5-7 mm above the corolla base, included; 
ovary superior, globose to oblong or ovoid, com-
posed of 2 partly fused carpels, usually only 1 
developing into fruit, style 2.5-5 mm long, pis-
til head cylindrical with a basal collar and a 
stigmoid apex. Fruit a globose to ovoid or ellip-
soid drupe 8-14 mm long, orange or red, 1-
seeded. Seed ellipsoid, 6—8 mm long, laterally 
compressed. 
Other botanical information Rauvolfia is 
a pantropical genus of about 60 species, of 
which 7 occur in continental Africa, 2 in Mada-
gascar, and 1 in Madagascar and Comoros. 
Rauvolfia vomitoria has flowers of 2 different 
shapes: slender, small flowers and robust flow-
ers. The slender flowers occur, as far as veri-
fied, on diploid plants, while the robust flowers 
occur on hexaploid plants. Both flower types 
occur throughout the area of distribution, al-
though the large-flowered type is not known 
from East Africa. The root bark of diploid 
plants contains less reserpine than that of 
hexaploids. 
Rauvolfia serpentina was introduced from In-
dia into West Africa. In Nigeria a root infusion 
is taken to treat snakebites. The root has been 
used in Ayurvedic medicine in India since an-
cient times to treat snakebites, mental diseases 
and epilepsy, and is still important in local 
medicine and in alkaloid production. 
Growth and development Rauvolfia vomi-
toria can be found flowering and fruiting al-
most throughout the year, but sometimes not 
and usually less abundantly during the rainy 
season. 
Ramification in Rauvolfia is determined by the 
leaves in whorls; branches terminate in 2-5 
branchlets or inflorescences developing in the 
axils of the leaves. This results in an umbellate 
ramification and a candelabra-shaped habit. 
The flowers are pollinated by insects such as 
small bees and flies, and the fruits are dis-
persed by birds. 
Ecology Rauvolfia vomitoria occurs in bush 
vegetation, gallery forest, secondary vegetation 
where fallow periods are long, and along road-
sides, from sea-level up to 1600 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Rauvolfia vo-
mitoria is usually propagated by seed, al-
though stem and root cuttings can also be used. 
Wild seedlings can be successfully transplanted 
and cultivated. For sowing, fruits are collected 
when ripe and dried. The seeds lose their vi-
ability quickly, and need to be sown within 6 
months after ripening. In Ghana tests with 
vegetative propagation of root and shoot cut-
tings in vitro have been moderately successful. 
Management Rauvolfia vomitoria can be 
coppiced or pollarded. 
Diseases and pests Rauvolfia vomitoria is 
a host of the pathogen causing collar crack of 
cacao. 
Harvesting Roots may be harvested annu-
ally in a non-destructive way by cutting them 
10 cm from the taproot. All plant parts are 
harvested whenever the need arises. In Ghana 
dry season samples were found to contain a 
higher content of alkaloids than wet season 
samples. 
Handling after harvest The stem bark or 
roots of Rauvolfia vomitoria can be used fresh 
or dried and powdered for later use. 
Genetic resources Rauvolfia vomitoria is 
widely distributed throughout its distribution 
area, but it is possibly endangered in several 
countries, e.g. in Ghana, due to overharvesting. 
Prospects The use of reserpine has declined 
RHIGIOCARYA 489 
significantly in recent decades in Western 
countries because of its strong side effects and 
the availability of more effective alternatives. 
In developing countries, products based on 
Rauvolfia are still in demand owing to their 
easy availability and comparatively low prices, 
but it is expected that they will gradually be 
replaced by safer alternatives. Continued re-
search might reveal new possibilities for reser-
pine and related compounds. 
Major references Burkill, 1985; Iwu, 1993; 
Neuwinger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; Oduro, 
2000; van Dilst & Leeuwenberg, 1991. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Aké Assi et al., 1985; Bedu-Addo, 
1993; Bruneton, 1999; Burkill, 2000; Dasi, 
2004; Duez et al., 1986; Duez et al., 1987; Ka-
landa, Ataholo & Ilumbe, 1995; Latham, 2004; 
Muanza, Dangala & Mpay, 1993; Nkongme-
neck et al., 2000; Nwodo et al., 2003; Terashi-
ma & Ichikawa, 2003; World Agroforestry Cen-
tre (ICRAF), undated. 
Sources of illustration van Dilst & Leeu-
wenberg, 1991. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
RHIGIOCARYA RACEMIFERA Miers 
Protologue Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist., ser. 3, 14: 
101 (1864). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24 
Origin and geographic distribution Rhigio-
carya racemifera occurs from Sierra Leone east 
to DR Congo and south to Cabinda (Angola). 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire and southern Burkina 
Faso Rhigiocarya racemifera is well known for 
its antineuralgic and aphrodisiac properties: 
leaf sap is applied as eye drops or nose drops, 
or powdered leaves are instilled into the nose 
against neuralgia and headache. A decoction of 
finely ground seeds, leafy twigs or roots is 
drunk or used as a wash or enema as an aph-
rodisiac. For sexual vigour, men eat a few 
seeds or ingest the powder directly or mixed 
with palm wine. Pulped leaves are topically 
applied to wounds as a haemostatic. In Côte 
d'Ivoire vapours of a leaf decoction are inhaled 
to treat dizziness. In Sierra Leone the root is 
scraped and put in palm wine obtained from 
Raphia spp. In southern Sierra Leone, Liberia 
and Nigeria a leaf infusion is drunk against 
mild stomach-ache and to treat diarrhoea, 
acute gastrointestinal pain, bloody diarrhoea 
and spasmodic dysmenorrhoea. The plant is 
Rhigiocarya racemifera - wild 
also used against sleeplessness. The Mendes 
people of Sierra Leone prepare a snake repel-
lent from the pulped stem, with clay and water; 
the mixture is rubbed onto the body. 
Toothpicks are made from stems. Glue from 
the fruit pulp is used in crafting and as bird-
lime. 
Properties The roots of Rhigiocarya race-
mifera contain the morphinandienone alkaloid 
O-methylflavinantine (sebiferine), as well as 
the oxoaporphine alkaloid liriodenine (sper-
matheridine), the protoberberine alkaloid pal-
matine and the aporphine alkaloids menisper-
ine (N-methylisocorydine) and magnoflorine. 
O-methylflavinantine exhibits a morphine-like 
antinociceptive activity. Liriodenine showed 
cytotoxicity against human nasopharyngeal 
carcinoma cells in vitro and against several 
plant viruses. Menisperine iodide caused hy-
potension in anaesthetized dogs, blocked neu-
ral transmission and, at high doses, blocked 
neuromuscular transmission in dogs and rab-
bits. Menisperine chloride caused apnea, car-
diac failure and increased excitability in rab-
bits. 
Aqueous leaf extracts contain saponins, tan-
nins and glycosides. They showed significant 
anti-ulcer activities in experiments with mice 
and rats with stomach ulcers induced by sev-
eral drugs. The extracts also reduced gastroin-
testinal motility. Antispasmodic effects of the 
leaf extract were studied on isolated guinea-pig 
ileum, rabbit jejunum and rat uterus; the ex-
tract markedly reduced the contractions in-
duced by acetylcholine, histamine and nicotine. 
The aqueous leaf extract did not show signifi-
cant antimicrobial activity against several hu-
490 MEDICINAL PI.ANTS 1 
man pathogens. An ethanolic leaf extract did 
not show cytotoxicity against mammalian cells 
in vitro. The LDr,o of the aqueous leaf extract 
intraperitoneally in mice was 142 mg/kg body 
weight, and death was caused by massive cere-
bral haemorrhage. 
Rhigiocarya racemifera is listed in patent ap-
plications relating to materials and methods 
for modulating expression of nucleic acid se-
quences such as those encoding polypeptides 
involved in the biosynthesis of alkaloids. 
Description Large, dioecious liana, gla-
brous; stems longitudinally ribbed, green, turn-
ing grey then brown, at base 3-5 cm in diame-
ter with suberous comb-like projections about 1 
cm long. Leaves arranged spirally, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 7-16 cm long, 
base sharply bent, twisted; blade broadly ovate 
to nearly orbicular, 7-30 cm x 6-25 cm, base 
deeply cordate, apex abruptly acuminate, 
membranous or papery, palmately veined with 
5-7 basal veins, with blackish glandular spots 
at the vein junctions. Inflorescence borne just 
Rhigiocarya racemifera - 1, part of stem with 
male inflorescence; 2, part of stem with in-
fructescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
above the leaf axil; male inflorescence a false 
raceme or panicle 10-25 cm long, with 1-3-
flowered cymes; female inflorescence a false 
raceme 10-20 cm long, with 1 (-3)-flowered 
cymes. Flowers unisexual, regular, small, 
greenish white or yellowish green; sepals 6, the 
outer ones almost triangular c. 1 mm long, 
inner ones broadly elliptical, 2-2.5mm long; 
petals 6, lanceolate, 1-1.5 mm long, somewhat 
fleshy, apex notched; male flowers with pedicel 
1-2.5 mm long, stamens 6, outer ones free near 
apex, inner ones completely fused, c. 1.5 mm 
long; female flowers with pedicel 1-2 mm long, 
up to 1 cm in fruit, staminodes 6, ovary supe-
rior, composed of 3 free carpels c. 1.5 mm long. 
Fruit composed of 3 drupes, each drupe ovoid-
ellipsoid, up to 2 cm x 1.5 cm, green to purple-
black, with very sticky latex, stone 1—1.5 cm x 
c. 1 cm, one face covered with spines, 1-seeded. 
Seed compressed ellipsoid, c. 12 mm x 8 mm x 
6 mm. Seedling with epigeal germination; hy-
pocotyl 5-7 cm long, smooth, epicotyl very 
short, glandular; cotyledons leaf-like, ovate-
triangular, 28-32 mm x 12-16 mm. 
Other botanical information Rhigiocarya 
comprises 2 species both occurring in tropical 
Africa. It is related to Kolobopetalum, Limacia 
and Tinospora. Rhigiocarya peltata J.Miège is 
endemic to Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire, where it 
is medicinally used. 
Growth and development Flowering of 
Rhigiocarya racemifera occurs from November-
March and sometimes in June-July; fruit ma-
tures in the dry season, in Cameroon in 
March-April and October. 
Ecology Rhigiocarya racemifera occurs in 
humid dense, evergreen or semi-deciduous 
forest, also in forest edges and in secondary 
forest, up to 800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources Rhigiocarya racemifera 
has a wide distribution and grows often abun-
dantly in its native habitat, e.g. on Mount 
Cameroon. There are no indications that it is 
under threat of genetic erosion, except where 
its habitat is in strong decline. 
Prospects In view of its medicinal uses and 
chemical and pharmacological analyses, more 
research is warranted on Rhigiocarya racemi-
fera to evaluate its importance. 
Major references Aguwa, 1985; Aguwa, 
1986; Dwuma-Badu et al., 1980b; Keay & 
Troupin, 1954; Neuwinger, 2000; Troupin, 
1962. 
Other references Apuya, Bobzin & Park, 
2007; Bongers, Parren & Traoré (Editors), 
2005; Cable & Cheek, 1998; de Koning, 1983; 
SACOGLOTTIS 491 
de Wet, 2005; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006; 
Lauridsen, 2003; Noamesi & Gyang, 1980; 
Oliver-Bever, 1983a; Ortiz, Kellogg & Van Der 
Werff, 2007; Tackie et al., 1974; Zirihi et al., 
2005. 
Sources of illustration Miège, J., 1955. 
Authors E. Thompson 
SACOGLOTTIS GABONENSIS (Baill.) Urb. 
Protologue Mart., Fl. bras. 12(2): 449 
(1877). 
Family Humiriaceae 
Vernacular names Bitterbark tree, cherry 
mahogony (En). Bidou (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Sa-
coglottis gabonensis occurs from Senegal and 
Gambia east to the Central African Republic 
and south to Angola. 
Uses Infusions of the stem bark of Sacoglot-
tis gabonensis are commonly taken to treat 
fever, diarrhoea, gonorrhoea and abdominal 
pain, and sometimes they are used to treat 
hypertension and diabetes. In coastal Camer-
oon the Kola pygmies and Mvae people use a 
decoction of the crushed bark mixed with 
leaves of Dioscorea minutiflora Engl, as a rec-
tal enema to treat acute abdominal pain. In 
Congo a decoction of the stem bark is used to 
cure difficult cases of dermatitis. In Sierra 
Leone a bark decoction is used to treat stom-
ach-ache and it also used as a spice in food to 
induce heat in nursing and pregnant mothers. 
In coastal Côte d'Ivoire the diluted stem sap is 
used in hipbaths to promote muscle tone in 
women after childbirth. In Gabon an extract of 
the stem bark is drunk as an emetic. In Sene-
Sacoglottis gabonensis - wild 
gal and Congo a stem bark decoction is mixed 
with other plants and added to bath water to 
treat ovarian troubles, vaginal infections and 
children with fever. 
Stem bark is used as a palm wine additive, as 
it is claimed to prolong the shelf life of the 
wine, add potency, reduce foaming and impart 
a bitter taste. It is reported to have aphrodisiac 
properties. The bark is used as a fish poison. 
The wood of Sacoglottis gabonensis is widely, 
though locally, used for house and bridge con-
struction, flooring, interior trim, joinery, mine 
props, electricity poles, shipbuilding, vehicle 
bodies, furniture, cabinet work, railway sleep-
ers, toys, novelties, turnery and pattern mak-
ing. In Liberia and Nigeria, it is used to make 
canoes and in Gabon for the ribs of boats. The 
wood is a good firewood and produces a valu-
able charcoal. 
The fruit is edible, sweet and tastes like ba-
nana bread. It is mainly eaten by children and 
can be used to make an alcoholic drink. In 
coastal Cameroon the seeds are grilled and 
eaten by pygmies. The sweetness of the resin 
stored in the cavities of the stone is much 
sought by bees. 
Production and international trade Stem 
bark is sold for medicinal purposes in local 
markets. Quantities traded are unknown. Tim-
ber of Sacoglottis gabonensis is known in the 
international trade as 'ozouga', but volumes 
traded are small. 
Properties Bergenin, an isocoumarin, was 
identified as the main active compound of the 
stem bark extract of Sacoglottis gabonensis. 
The stem bark extract is reported to have 
hepatoprotective properties. Both the extract 
and bergenin reduced the rate of formation of 
intermediates of the lipid peroxidation path-
way (lipid hydroperoxide aldehydes, carbonyls) 
as well as complementing the primary anti-
oxidant enzymes catalase and superoxide dis-
mutase during 2,4-DNPH-induced membrane 
lipid peroxidation in rat liver and red blood 
cells. In vivo in rats, bergenin protects against 
2,4-DNPH-induced hepatotoxicity and toxicity 
to red blood cells. However, in another experi-
ment, a stem bark extract given orally to rats 
showed hepatotoxicity even at low doses. Ber-
genin also protects stored vegetable oils 
against peroxidative deterioration over a pe-
riod of time. A stem bark extract added to 
drinking water of rats increased prothrombin 
and thrombin levels of blood plasma. 
Further analyses of stem bark extract have 
shown tannins in appreciable amounts with a 
492 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
trace of saponins. They have also revealed the 
presence of 2 cis/trans isomers of lignans (ca-
lopiptine and galgravine) which may play a 
role in cancer prevention. 
The alcohol content of palm wine from Raphia 
hookeri G.Mann & H.Wendl. with stem bark 
added became almost twice as high as that of 
untreated palm wine. It was found that the 
ethanol tolerance and osmotolerance of the 
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae were enhanced 
by the bark extract, whereas flocculation and 
invertase activity were reduced. 
The endocarp contains 54% oil of unknown 
composition. 
The heartwood is brown to purplish red and 
rather indistinctly demarcated from the nar-
row sapwood. The grain is straight or wavy, 
texture fine and even. 
The wood is heavy, with a density of 870-920 
kg/m3 at 12% moisture content. It should be air 
dried slowly and with care to avoid serious 
checking and warping. The rates of shrinkage 
are high, from green to oven dry 5.8% radial 
and 10.0% tangential. Once dry, the wood is 
fairly stable in service. 
At 12% moisture content, the modulus of rup-
ture is 114-233 N/mm2, modulus of elasticity 
13,330-18,520 N/mm2, compression parallel to 
grain 72-104 N/mm2, shear 10-13 N/mm2, 
cleavage 22-22.5 N/mm, Janka side hardness 
9065-11,005 N and Janka end hardness 12,495 
N. 
Considering its high density and hardness, the 
wood is not difficult to saw and work. It is diffi-
cult to nail and screw, but the holding power is 
good. The finishing and gluing properties are 
satisfactory, but the wood is not suited for ve-
neer and plywood production. It is durable, 
being resistant to fungal and insect attacks. 
Adulterations and substitutes Bergenin 
is commercially extracted from Ardisia and 
Bergenia spp. (Siberian tea and marlberry 
bush) and is used as a weight-loss product, e.g. 
in body building, and in Chinese medicine to 
increase body heat. 
Description Large, evergreen tree up to 40 
m tall; bole branchless for up to 20 m but often 
branching low, often crooked, knotty and 
deeply fluted, up to 180(-450) cm in diameter, 
with buttresses up to 2.5 m high; bark in young 
trees fairly smooth with horizontal lenticels, in 
old trees brown to dark brown, very scaly; 
crown very large, wide-spreading, heavily 
branched, rounded and fairly open. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules c. 1 mm long, early 
falling; petiole 6—10 mm long; blade ovate to 
Sacoglottis gabonensis - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achrnad Satiri Nur-
haman 
elliptical or oblong, 6-15 cm x 2.5-6 cm, base 
cuneate, apex acuminate, margin crenate, pin-
nately veined with 6-12 pairs of lateral veins. 
Inflorescence a short axillary cyme up to 5 cm 
long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel 0.5-1.5 mm long, jointed at base; sepals 
c. 1.5 mm long, hairy outside; petals free, lin-
ear, c. 7 mm long, hairy outside, white; sta-
mens 10, fused at base, 5 longer stamens c. 5 
mm long, 5 shorter ones c. 3.5 mm long; ovary 
superior, ovoid, 5-celled, glabrous, style 
grooved, c. 4 mm long. Fruit an ellipsoid to 
globose drupe 3—4 cm x 2.5-3.5 cm, smooth, 
green to yellow; stone with 10 grooves and 
many resinous cavities, 1-3-seeded. Seeds ob-
long, c. 15 mm x 3 mm. Seedling with epigeal 
germination; hypocotyl 6-9 cm long, epicotyl c. 
2 cm long; cotyledons leafy, ovate, c. 1.5 cm x 
0.5 cm; first 2 leaves opposite. 
Other botanical information Sacoglottis 
comprises 9 species, which all occur in South 
America except Sacoglottis gabonensis, which 
is considered to be closely related to Sacoglottis 
amazonica Mart, from South America and the 
Caribbean. The fruits of Sacoglottis amazonica 
are eaten in Venezuela to cure diarrhoea. The 
S A C O G L O T T I S 493 
t imber is valued for heavy construction in 
Venezuela and Brazil. 
Sacoglottis gabonensis may have evolved from 
seeds, which arrived on the West African coast 
from South America, being one of the most 
i l lustrat ive cases of dispersal by wate r from 
South America to Africa. The resin-filled 
chambers of the stone make it float in wate r 
and seeds remain viable for up to 4 years . 
A n a t o m y Wood-anatomical description (LAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth r ing boundar ies indis-
tinct or absent . Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
9: vessels exclusively solitary (90% or more); 
14: scalariform perforation plates; 16: scalari-
form perforation pla tes with 10-20 bars ; 22: 
intervessel pi ts a l te rna te ; (23: shape of alter-
na te pi ts polygonal); 25: intervessel pits small 
(4-7 urn); 26: intervessel pits medium (7-10 
urn); 30: vessel-ray pits with distinct borders; 
s imilar to intervessel pits in size and shape 
throughout the ray cell; 42: mean tangent ia l 
d iameter of vessel lumina 100-200 um; 47: 5 -
20 vessels per square mill imetre; 56: tyloses 
common. Tracheids and fibres: (60: vascu-
lar/vasicentric t racheids present); 62: fibres 
with distinctly bordered pits; 63: fibre pits 
common in both radial and tangent ia l walls; 
66: non-septate fibres present; 70: fibres very 
thick-walled. Axial parenchyma: 77: axial pa-
renchyma diffuse-in-aggregates; 78: axial pa-
renchyma scanty para t rachea l ; (84: axial pa-
renchyma uni la tera l para t racheal ) ; (92: four 
(3-4) cells per pa renchyma s t rand); 93: eight 
(5-8) cells per pa renchyma s t rand; (94: over 
eight cells per pa renchyma s t rand) . Rays: 97: 
ray width 1-3 cells; (100: rays with multiseri-
a te portion(s) as wide as uniser ia te portions); 
(107: body ray cells procumbent wi th mostly 2 -
4 rows of upr ight and/or square marg ina l cells); 
108: body ray cells procumbent with over 4 
rows of upr ight and/or square margina l cells; 
(109: rays wi th procumbent , square and up-
r ight cells mixed throughout the ray); 115: 4— 
12 rays per mm. Mineral inclusions: 136: pris-
mat ic crystals present ; 142: pr ismat ic crystals 
in chambered axial pa renchyma cells. 
(L.N. Banak, H. Beeckman & P.E. Gasson) 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t In Liberia flow-
ering of Sacoglottis gabonensis occurs from 
December-March . The fruits are a favourite 
food of e lephants and mandri l ls , and are 
adapted for dispersal by e lephants . The fruits 
develop slowly over the dry season, r ipening in 
September-December in Liberia and remain-
ing dull green. They fall to the ground when 
ripe and develop a s trong yeasty smell. Like 
Lophira alata Banks ex P.Gaer tn . and Au-
coumea klaineana Pierre, Sacoglottis gabonen-
sis is able to establish in the edges of moist 
s avanna and it is common in younger forest 
types. It can dominate this habi ta t , since its 
branches form huge arches, suppress ing vege-
ta t ion unde r them, hence cooling annua l sa-
vanna fires, which might otherwise scorch 
the i r t runk . Early colonizers have low, round 
canopies and branch low down, but la ter gen-
erat ions grow tal ler and branch higher to es-
cape from the shadow. Young t rees close to the 
savanna edge often have mult iple t r u n k s be-
cause they have coppiced after being broken by 
e lephants which feed on their leaves and bark . 
E c o l o g y Sacoglottis gabonensis occurs in 
evergreen forest, on river banks , along lagoons, 
on forest and savanna edges and in secondary 
forest. It is one of the dominant t rees in the 
coastal rainforests of West and Centra l Africa 
and is par t icular ly abundan t in Cameroon (as-
sociated with Lophira alata) and in Gabon (as-
sociated with Aucoumea klaineana). It is usu-
ally found in small pockets, bu t occasionally in 
quite large and almost pure s tands . 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Na tu ra l propa-
gation of Sacoglottis gabonensis is only by seed. 
Na tu ra l regenerat ion is not very abundan t as 
many seeds are damaged by insects. The 
weight of 100 stones is 560-1000 g. Seeds may 
t ake 4 months to germinate . 
M a n a g e m e n t Sacoglottis gabonensis is less 
desirable for commercial forestry as the large 
crown suppresses regenerat ion of more valu-
able t imber species. After cut t ing the tree, the 
s t ump coppices vigorously. Poisoning the t ree 
is difficult because of the fluted and ingrown 
bark, which h inders the application of the toxic 
substance. 
H a r v e s t i n g The s tem ba rk and wood of Sa-
coglottis gabonensis is harves ted from the wild. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The bark of Sa-
coglottis gabonensis is generally sold in mar-
kets in sheets or rolls for use as an addit ive to 
pa lm wine or as a medicine, less frequently as 
a powder for emetic use. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Sacoglottis gabonensis 
is widespread and locally common, and there-
fore not th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s The s tem bark extracts of Sa-
coglottis gabonensis and i ts main isolated com-
pound bergenin have in teres t ing hepatoprotec-
tive and anti-oxidant propert ies, but more re-
search is needed to evaluate its potent ial as a 
lead drug. I ts use to increase alcohol content in 
494 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
palm wine deserves more research attention, 
as does information concerning health risks. 
Sacoglottis gabonensis plays an important role 
in the succession in and regeneration of natu-
ral forests. As a widespread and often common 
species it is important in the local economy as 
a timber and for firewood and charcoal produc-
tion. Because of the poor shape of the bole, 
commercial exploitation of the timber for in-
ternational trade is limited. Selection for bole 
shape and research into proper management 
practices could lead to better shaped boles with 
higher commercial value in the timber trade. 
Major references Badré, 1972; Burkill, 
1994; Irvine, 1961; Maduka, Okoye & Mah-
mood, 2004; Siepel, Poorter & Hawthorne, 
2004; Takahashi, 1978; Voorhoeve, 1965; White 
& Abernathy, 1997. 
Other references Cuatrecasas, J., 1961; 
Ekouya & Itoua, 2005; Ezeronye, Elijah & 
Ojimelukwe, 2005; Gassita et al. (Editors), 
1982; Hawthorne, 1995; Hoshino, 1985; In-
sideWood, undated; Liben, 1970; Maduka, 
2005; Maduka, Okoye & Eje, 2002; Maduka, 
Uhwache & Okoye, 2003; Madusolumuo & 
Okoye, 1993; Ojimelukwe, 2001; Okoye & 
Ohaeri, 1995; Raponda-Walker & Sillans, 1961; 
Renner, 2004; Udosen & Ojong, 1998. 
Sources of illustration Voorhoeve, 1965. 
Authors E. Dounias 
SAMBUCUS NIGRA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 269 (1753). 
Family Caprifoliaceae (APG: Adoxaceae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 36 
Vernacular names Elderberry, black elder, 
elder, bore tree (En). Sureau, grand sureau, 
sureau noir (Fr). Sabugueiro-negro (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Sam-
bucus nigra occurs in temperate to tropical 
regions in Europe, Western Asia, northern 
Africa, North America and Central America. It 
is introduced in tropical Africa as a medicinal 
and ornamental plant, and is cultivated and 
naturalized in and around towns and villages 
in e.g. Ghana, Gabon, DR Congo, Rwanda, Bu-
rundi, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania and 
Angola. 
Uses Sambucus nigra is used throughout its 
distribution area as a medicinal plant and or-
namental. In Gabon the flowers are used in 
preparations as an emollient and calming skin 
ointment, and to stimulate sweating. 
Outside Africa, various parts of Sambucus ni-
gra have long been used in traditional medi-
cine as a diaphoretic, diuretic, astringent, laxa-
tive and emetic. Currently, extracts of the 
fruits are used primarily as antiviral agents in 
cases of colds, influenza and Herpes virus in-
fection. 
The inner bark is diuretic, a strong purgative 
and in large doses emetic. It is used in the 
treatment of constipation and arthritic condi-
tions. An emollient ointment is made from the 
green inner bark. The fresh or dry leaves are 
purgative, but cause nausea more easily than 
the bark. They are also diaphoretic, diuretic, 
expectorant and haemostatic. An ointment 
made from the leaves is emollient and is used 
in the treatment of bruises, sprains and 
wounds. An infusion of the fresh flowers is 
mildly astringent and a gentle stimulant. It is 
mainly used as a basis for eye and skin lotions. 
The dried flowers are diaphoretic, diuretic, 
expectorant, galactagogue and pectoral. An 
infusion is very effective in the treatment of 
chest complaints, as a tonic and blood cleanser, 
and is also used to bathe inflamed eyes and to 
poultice burns and wounds. The fruit is depu-
rative, weakly diaphoretic and gently laxative. 
A tea made from the dried fruits is taken to 
treat colic and diarrhoea. The pith of young 
stems is used in treating burns and scalds. The 
leaves rubbed on the skin are used as an insect 
repellent. They can be made into insecticidal 
and fungicidal sprays. 
The fruits are widely used for making wine, 
brandy, jams or pies. They are best not eaten 
raw as they are mildly poisonous, causing vom-
iting, particularly if eaten unripe. The mild 
cyanide toxicity is destroyed by cooking. The 
flowers are crisp and somewhat juicy, they 
have an aromatic smell and flavour and are 
delicious raw as a refreshing snack. The flow-
ers are used to add a muscatel flavour to 
stewed fruits, jellies and jams, and are an in-
gredient of fritters. They are often used to 
make a sparkling wine. A sweet tea is made 
from the dried flowers. 
Sambucus nigra is an excellent pioneer species 
for re-establishing woodlands in temperate 
regions. The bark of older branches and the 
root have been used as an ingredient in dyeing 
black. A green dye is obtained from the leaves 
when alum is used as a mordant. The fruits 
yield various shades of blue and purple dyes. 
They have also been used as a black hair dye. 
The blue colouring matter from the fruit can be 
used as a litmus. It turns green in an alkaline 
solution and red in an acid solution. The pith of 
SAMBUCUS 495 
young branches pushes out easily and the hol-
low stems thus made have been used as pipes 
for blowing air into a fire. They can also be 
made into flutes. The pith of the stems is used 
in the slicing of samples for viewing under a 
microscope. The wood is white and fine-
textured. It is easily cut and polishes well. It is 
used for making skewers, mathematical in-
struments and toys. Sambucus nigra is widely 
planted as an ornamental; in Africa it is 
mainly cultivated in hedges. 
Production and international trade Sam-
bucus nigra is planted only occasionally in 
tropical Africa and is not traded there. 
Properties The fruit contains several con-
stituents responsible for its pharmacological 
activity. Among these are the flavonoids 
quercetin, kaempferol and rutin, the antho-
cyanins cyanidin-3-glucoside and cyanidin-3-
sambubioside, the haemagglutinin protein 
Sambucus nigra agglutinin III (SNA-Ill), 
cyanogenic glycosides including sambunigrin, 
and viburnic acid, ellagic acid and ursolic acid. 
The flowers contain flavonoids (up to 3%) com-
posed mainly of flavonol glycosides (astragalin, 
hyperoside, isoquercitrin, and rutin up to 1.9%) 
and free aglycones (quercetin and kaempferol), 
phenolic compounds (about 3% chlorogenic 
acid), triterpenes (about 1%) including a- and 
ß-amyrin, triterpene acids (mainly ursolic and 
oleanolic acid), sterols and volatile oils. 
In several clinical and in vitro studies, Sambu-
col®, a syrup containing 38% standardized 
fruit extract, was shown to neutralize and re-
duce the infectivity of influenza viruses A and 
B, HIV strains and clinical isolates, and Her-
pes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1) strains and 
clinical isolates. This syrup also shows im-
mune-modulating activity, by increasing sig-
nificantly the production of several cytokines, 
e.g. tumour necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), and in-
terleukins. 
The anthocyanins from the fruits possess anti-
oxidant properties. A water extract of the flow-
ers increased glucose uptake, glucose oxida-
tion, and glycogenesis in rat abdominal muscle. 
The flower extract incubated with rat pancre-
atic cells also had a dose-dependent stimula-
tory effect on insulin secretion. 
Botany Deciduous shrub up to 4(-6) m tall, 
with unpleasant smell; main root vertical, 
spreading horizontally by stolons; stems up to 
15 cm in diameter. Leaves opposite, imparipin-
nately compound, petiolate; leaflets 5—11(—15), 
narrowly elliptical, 5-9(-l l) cm x 2-3(-4) cm, 
base cuneate to obtuse, apex acuminate, mar-
gin toothed. Inflorescence a large terminal um-
bel-like panicle, up to 20 cm in diameter. Flow-
ers bisexual, 5-merous, regular, white, sweet-
scented; pedicel 0-10 mm long, shortly hairy; 
calyx fused to the ovary, lobes minute; corolla 
lobes almost free, oblong-ovate, 3-4 mm long, 
radiate; stamens alternating with the corolla 
lobes; ovary half-inferior, 5-celled, stigma ses-
sile, 5-lobed. Fruit a globose, fleshy, berry-like 
drupe 4-7 mm long, green, purple to black 
when ripe, with 3-5 1-seeded pyrenes. 
Sambucus comprises 9 species. Most species 
occur in the temperate and subtropical regions 
of the northern hemisphere, 2 occur in South 
America, 1 in the mountain region of East Af-
rica (Sambucus ebulus L. (synonym: Sambucus 
africana Standi.)) and 2 in eastern Australia. 
In Sambucus nigra 6 subspecies are recog-
nized, and notably the variable subspecies 
canadensis (L.) R.Bolli (synonyms: Sambucus 
canadensis L., Sambucus mexicana Presl ex 
DC.) invades tropical regions, and is natural-
ized here and there. It is most probably this 
subspecies which is naturalized in tropical Af-
rica. It hardly fruits here, probably due to a 
lack of stratification of the seeds. In most re-
cent taxonomie publications, subspecies cana-
densis is treated at species level, as Sambucus 
canadensis. The flowers of Sambucus nigra are 
pollinated by flies and the seeds are dispersed 
by the defecation of birds and mammals. 
Ecology Sambucus nigra occurs in hedge-
rows, shrubland, open forest, roadsides, waste 
places and on disturbed soils. 
Management Sambucus nigra is propa-
gated by seed or stolons. Seed is best sown as 
soon as it is ripe at the start of the cold season, 
so it can germinate at the start of the warm 
season. Stored seed can be sown at the start of 
the warm season but will probably germinate 
better if it is given 2 months cold stratification 
first. The seedlings can be transplanted into 
individual pots when they are large enough to 
handle. If good growth is made, the young 
plants can be placed in their permanent posi-
tions during the warm season. 
Sambucus species are notably resistant to 
honey fungus, Armillaria sp. 
Genetic resources and breeding Sambu-
cus nigra mainly reproduces through stolons in 
tropical Africa. The genetic diversity in each 
introduction site is probably low, as the species 
does not produce much seed in tropical cli-
mates. As Sambucus nigra is a widely dis-
persed species in the northern hemisphere, it is 
not threatened by genetic erosion. There are no 
496 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
large germplasm collections. In Europe there 
exist some fruit cultivars with big fruits, and 
some ornamental cultivars with dissected or 
variegated leaves. 
Prospects Sambucus nigra has been intro-
duced in tropical Africa as a medicinal and 
ornamental plant. As it not really adapted to 
the tropical climate, it probably will remain of 
little importance. 
Major references Bolli, 1994; Ensermu 
Kelbessa, 2003; Lawalrée, 1982; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Zakay-Rones et a l , 
2004. 
Other references Barak et al., 2002; Bitsch 
et al., 2004; Burkill, 2000; Gray, Abdel-Wahab 
& Flatt, 2000; Launert, 1981; Thorne Research, 
2005; Verdcourt, 1968; Yamada, 1999; Youdim, 
Martin & Joseph, 2000. 
Authors F.S. Mairura 
SCHIZOZYGIA COFFAEOIDES Baill . 
Protologue Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 
752 (1888). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Vernacular names Mpelepele, mwango, 
mtonga mwitu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Schizo-
zygia coffaeoides occurs from DR Congo east to 
Somalia, Kenya and Tanzania, and south to 
Malawi, Angola and Mozambique and also in 
Comoros. 
Uses In Kenya the pounded or grated root of 
Schizozygia coffaeoides mixed with coconut oil 
is applied to sores. A root infusion is taken 
against dizziness. Inflamed eyes are treated by 
exposing them to steam from boiled leaves, 
while ringworm-infected skin is washed with 
an aqueous leaf extract. 
Properties Five schizozyganes have been 
isolated from the root bark and leaves of 
Schizozygia coffaeoides; these are hexacyclic N-
acyl indole alkaloids, with schizozygine and 
isoschizogaline as main compounds. Schizozy-
ganes have so far not been found elsewhere in 
the Apocynaceae, but they are related to cer-
tain alkaloids which occur in Hunteria and 
Aspidosperma. Leaf extracts show significant 
fungistatic activity against the dermatophytic 
fungi Trichophyton mentagrophytes and Micro-
sporum gypseum, and also against Candida 
albicans and a phytopathogenic fungus, Clado-
sporium cucumerinum, indicating a broad 
spectrum of antifungal activity. In further tests 
with fungi and bacteria, it was shown that 7,8-
dehydro-19ß-hydroxyschizozygine was the most 
active antifungal compound, and isoschizoga-
line the only active antibacterial compound. 
The fruits of Schizozygia coffaeoides are re-
ported to be poisonous. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 4(—8) m 
tall, with white latex, repeatedly dichoto-
mously branched; bark rough, brown, lenticels 
pale. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stip-
ules absent; petiole 0.5-10 mm long; blade 
obovate, up to 25 cm x 11 cm, base cuneate, 
apex acuminate, glabrous, pinnately veined 
with lateral veins conspicuous. Inflorescence a 
congested cyme, 2 together in forks of 
branches, 7-15 mm long; peduncle up to 3 mm 
long; bracts narrowly oblong, 3-5 mm long. 
Flowers bisexual, 5-merous, regular, fragrant; 
pedicel 2-3 mm long; sepals free, elliptical, 
imbricate, 3—6 mm long, apex acute or acumi-
nate; corolla creamy-yellow, tube cylindrical or 
urn-shaped, 4-5 mm long, shortly hairy around 
the stamens, lobes obliquely obovate to nearly 
hook-shaped, curved to the right, 2-4 mm long, 
in bud overlapping to right; stamens inserted 
in the upper part of the corolla tube, anthers 
sessile, triangular, introrse; ovary superior, 
composed of 2 free rounded carpels, style slen-
der, pistil head with basal cylindrical part and 
a 2-lobed stigma. Fruit composed of 2 ellipsoid 
almost free follicles, 7-15 mm x 3-5 mm, later-
ally compressed, irregularly striate, glabrous, 
yellow to orange, dehiscent, each follicle 1-
seeded. Seeds obliquely ellipsoid, 5-6 mm long, 
with a deep groove in the middle and shallowly 
grooved at the other side, with minute warts, 
surrounded by a thin pulpy red to orange aril. 
Seedling with epigeal germination; cotyledons 
ovate, rounded at base and apex. 
Schizozygia comprises a single species and 
belongs to the tribe Tabernaemontanae. 
Schizozygia coffaeoides can be found flowering 
and fruiting throughout the year. 
Ecology Schizozygia coffaeoides occurs in 
moist forest and riverine forest. It grows on 
sandy or loamy soils, up to 1500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Schizo-
zygia coffaeoides is fairly widespread and it 
does not appear to be threatened. 
Prospects Work is progressing on the puri-
fication of active antifungal and antibacterial 
compounds in Schizozygia coffaeoides. 
Major references Barink, 1983; Kariba, 
Houghton & Yenesew, 2002; Kariba, Siboe & 
Dossaji, 2001; Omino, 2002; Omino & Kok-
waro, 1993. 
SCHWENCKIA 497 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Beentje, 1994; Hajicek, 
Ta imr & Budesinsky, 1998; Kokwaro, 1993; 
Timberlake, Golding & Clarke, 2004. 
A u t h o r s M.J. Boone 
S C H L E C H T E R I N A M I T O S T E M M A T O I D E S 
H a r m s 
P r o t o l o g u e Bot. J a h r b . Syst. 33: 148 (1902). 
F a m i l y Passifloraceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Schlech-
terina mitostemmatoides occurs in south-east-
ern Kenya, Tanzania , Mozambique and north-
eas te rn South Africa. 
U s e s In Tanzania a root decoction and leaf 
sap a re t aken to t rea t malar ia , and the root 
decoction also as an aphrodisiac. In Mozam-
bique a decoction of the leaves mixed with 
those of Hymenocardia ulmoides Oliv, is t aken 
before meals to t r ea t heavy menst rua t ion . In 
Kenya and Mozambique the s tem is used as a 
tying mater ia l . 
P r o p e r t i e s Leaves and leaf callus cul tures 
of Schlechterina mitostemmatoides contain 
cyanogenic glycosides. 
B o t a n y Small l iana or scandent shrub up to 
3 m tall, with axillary, up to 14 cm long ten-
drils; old s tems corky, shoots often with lenti-
cels. Leaves a l te rna te , simple to pinnately 
lobed; st ipules t r i angu la r to l inear, c. 0.5 mm 
long, soon falling; petiole 4—12 mm long; blade 
elliptical to lanceolate or l inear-lanceolate, 3— 
13 cm x 1-5 cm, base cuneate , apex acute to 
acuminate , margin ent i re or toothed; leaves on 
saplings or juvenile shoots often l inear and 
pinnately lobed, those of flowering branches 
often elliptical and ent i re to toothed. Inflores-
cence an axillary fascicle, 1-3-flowered; bracts 
almost t r iangular , 0.5—1 mm long. Flowers 
bisexual, regular , whitish, glabrous; pedicel up 
to 2.5 cm long, jointed; sepals 3-4, free, ellipti-
cal to oblong, 6-11 mm x 3-6 mm, obtuse; pet-
als 2-4 , free, elliptical to oblong, 5-10 mm 
long, obtuse; corona composed of t h reads fused 
at the base into a tube 0.5—2 mm long, free 
pa r t s of t h reads 4 -6 mm long; s t amens 6-8 , 
with f i laments 6-10 mm long, fused a t base; 
ovary superior, ellipsoid-oblong, 2-2.5 mm 
long, apex narrowed into style 1.5-2 mm long, 
s t igma 3-4-lobed, flattened. Frui t a stalked 
oblong-ellipsoid capsule c. 5 cm long, 3-4 
valved, leathery, many-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid, 
flattened, c. 7 m m long, enveloped by an aril. 
Schlechterina comprises a single species and is 
character ized by i ts leaves of different shapes . 
In Mozambique Schlechterina mitostemma-
toides flowers from October to February. 
E c o l o g y Schlechterina mitostemmatoides 
occurs in lowland dry, evergreen and riverine 
forest and coastal bush land from sea-level up 
to 700 m al t i tude. It occurs on sandy and on 
black soils. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Al-
though Schlechterina mitostemmatoides is lo-
cally common in Kenya, Tanzania and Mozam-
bique, it h a s a r a t h e r l imited area of distr ibu-
tion and is considered an endangered species in 
nor the rn KwaZulu-Natal . Some caution would 
be needed in case of increased use of th is spe-
cies. 
P r o s p e c t s The use of Schlechterina mito-
stemmatoides appears to be limited and it will 
probably remain this way. Because of the wide 
medicinal use of other Passifloraceae species 
containing cyanogenic compounds, more re-
search into the chemical composition and 
pharmacological activities of Schlechterina 
mitostemmatoides seems war ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Fe rnandes & Fernandes , 
1978; Jäger , McAlister & van Staden, 1995; 
Maite, 1994. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Beentje, 1994; de Wilde, 
1975; Pakia & Cooke, 2003a. 
A u t h o r s A. de Ruijter 
SCHWENCKIA AMERICANA L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Gen. pi. ed. 6: 577 (1764). 
F a m i l y Solanaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Schwen-
ckia americana is nat ive to Centra l and South 
America, bu t it has spread to tropical Africa 
and India as a weed. In tropical Africa it was 
restr icted to West and Centra l Africa, bu t in 
recent decades it has also reached Eas t and 
southern Africa. 
U s e s The aerial pa r t s are widely valued in 
West Africa to t rea t diseases of babies and 
small children. A leaf decoction is given to 
p regnan t women when the foetus develops too 
slowly and is t aken by breast-feeding women to 
prevent d iarrhoea of the baby. The roots a re 
chewed to cure respi ra tory diseases in children. 
A root decoction is given to babies as a purga-
tive. 
An infusion of the aer ia l pa r t s is used as a 
mouth wash to cure infections such as aph thae . 
The plant sap or a decoction of the whole p lan t 
is applied as eye drops and nose drops to t r ea t 
headache, s inusi t is and conjunctivitis. In dif-
498 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ferent preparations the crushed whole plant, 
alone or combined with other plants, is exter-
nally applied to relieve intercostal pain or pain 
caused by swellings, rheumatism, arthritis, 
stomach problems, hernia and gonorrhoea; it is 
also applied as an anthelmintic. The crushed 
leafy stems are applied to the skin against 
measles and chickenpox. A poultice made of the 
leaves is applied to whitlow and athlete's foot. 
Powder from leafy twigs is inhaled to cure con-
vulsions with fever. A decoction of the whole 
plant is drunk to cure cough, asthma and weak 
lungs, and as a purgative in cases of poisoning. 
A leaf decoction is drunk and applied exter-
nally to bring fever down and to cure oedema. 
In Ghana and DR Congo a leaf infusion is 
taken to treat female sterility. A root decoction 
is taken as a laxative. In India both fresh and 
dried leaves are used as an anthelmintic. The 
whole plant is pounded to pulp for use as an 
effective fish poison. Roots and stems are used 
as chewing sticks for cleaning the teeth. 
Properties Preliminary research in the 
1960s resulted in the detection of a glycoside, 
schwenckioside, traces of alkaloids and sapo-
genins, the latter with cardiotonic activity. A 
water extract of the leaves showed low antim-
icrobial activity against Proteus mirabilis and 
Staphylococcus aureus, but no inhibition of 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Escherichia coli. 
Botany Annual or short-living perennial 
herb, erect or ascending and spreading, up to 
70(—100) cm tall; stem grooved, glabrous but 
young parts sometimes with curved hairs. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole up to 8 mm long; blade 
ovate to obovate, up to 4 cm x 2 cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex acute to rounded, 
almost glabrous to densely short-hairy. Inflo-
rescence a lax, terminal panicle, many-
flowered; peduncle 2-12 cm long, slightly 
longer in fruit. Flowers bisexual, slightly zy-
gomorphic; pedicel 2-4 mm long, erect or 
curved; calyx tubular, 2—4 mm long, 4—5-lobed, 
lobes acute to acuminate; corolla narrowly tu-
bular, 6-8 mm long, white, greenish yellow, 
pale blue to purplish, lobes unequal, up to 0.5 
mm long; stamens 2, attached to corolla tube, 
filaments 0.5-3 mm long, staminodes 3, resem-
bling filaments; ovary superior, ellipsoid, 1-2 
mm long, style 3—6 mm long, stigma small, 
exserted. Fruit a globose or ovoid capsule 3.5-
4.5 mm x 2.5-4.5 mm, pale brown, dehiscent, 
many-seeded. Seeds prismatic, 0.5—1 mm long, 
black or reddish. Seedling with epigeal germi-
nation. 
Schwenckia americana - 1, plant habit; 2, 
flower; 3, fruit; 4, dehisced fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
Schwenckia comprises about 22 species, all 
native to tropical America. Schwenckia ameri-
cana is the only species that has spread to 
other continents. The orthographic variation 
'Schwenkia' is very common in the literature. 
Ecology Schwenckia americana is a weed in 
fields, woodland and disturbed localities, up to 
1100 m altitude. 
Management Schwenckia americana can by 
propagated by seed or cuttings; it is only har-
vested from the wild. 
Genetic resources and breeding Schwen-
ckia americana is widespread and common in 
anthropogenic habitats and not in danger of 
genetic erosion. There are a few samples in 
gene banks. 
Prospects Better knowledge of the pharma-
cological properties of Schwenckia americana is 
needed for a proper assessment of its medicinal 
value in the future. 
Major references Aké-Assi, Guinko & Aya-
Lazare, 1991; Burkill, 2000; Goncalves, 2005; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Nkounkou-Loumpangou et 
al., 2005. 
Other references Adamu et al., 2005; Ad-
janohoun et al., 1989; Adjanohoun et al., 1985; 
SECURINEGA 499 
Audu, 1995; CAB International, 2004; Her-
mans, Akoègninou & van der Maesen, 2004; 
Hodouto, 1990; Iwu, 1993; Kibungo Kembelo, 
2004; Latham, 2004. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SCLEROCROTON CORNUTUS (Pax) Kruijt & 
Roebers 
Protologue Biblioth. Bot. 146: 20 (1996). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Sapium cornutum Pax (1894). 
Origin and geographic distribution Sclero-
croton cornutus occurs from Cameroon and the 
Central African Republic south to Angola and 
Zambia. 
Uses In the Central African Republic a bark 
decoction is drunk to treat hernia. In DR Congo 
the root bark, crushed in water, is taken to 
facilitate childbirth, as it contracts the uterine 
muscles. A leaf decoction is taken to treat fe-
male sterility, cough and river blindness. 
Crushed leaves are applied to insect bites and 
snakebites. A bark decoction is used as a 
mouthwash to treat toothache, scurvy and 
stomatitis. It is externally applied to sore feet, 
skin diseases and drunk as a purgative and 
anthelminthic. Leaf sap is used as eye drops to 
treat filariasis. 
In DR Congo the wood is made into charcoal. 
Edible caterpillars (Lobobunaea phaedusa) 
feed on the leaves. 
Properties Extracts from the root bark con-
tain toxic tetracyclic triterpenic cucurbitacins. 
Botany Monoecious, glabrous shrub up to 4 
m tall. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules lin-
ear, 3-5 mm long, soon falling; petiole 2-10 
mm long, channeled above; blade elliptical, 
elliptical-oblong to elliptical-ovate, 2.5-10(-15) 
cm x i_4(_5) cm, base cuneate to rounded or 
truncate, with 1-2 glands, apex acute to acu-
minate, margin shallowly toothed. Inflores-
cence an erect, terminal or leaf-opposed, spike-
like raceme up to 10(-16) cm long, with all 
flowers male or with 1-2 female flowers at 
base; bracts of male flowers with 2 basal 
glands. Flowers unisexual, regular, petals ab-
sent, disk absent; male flowers with pedicel c. 
1.5 mm long, sepals 3, broadly ovate, c. 1 mm 
long, irregularly toothed, greenish yellow, sta-
mens 2-3, free, very short; female flowers with 
pedicel 3-5 mm long, extending in fruit to 1.5-
2 cm, sepals 3, triangular, c. 1 mm long, alter-
nating with deltoid glands, greenish yellow, 
ovary superior, c. 2 mm long, 3-lobed, each lobe 
with 2 prickle-shaped appendages 2 mm long, 
3-celled, styles 3, 7-8 mm long, fused at base, 
coiled. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 1—1.5 cm x 1.5-2 
cm, each lobe with 2 prickle-shaped append-
ages 4-5 mm long, green, hard, turning red-
dish or blackish, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid-
ellipsoid, 6-7 mm long, smooth, shiny, pale 
grey mottled blackish. 
Sclerocroton comprises 6 species, 5 of which 
occur in continental Africa and 1 in Madagas-
car. It was formerly included in Sapium. In 
southern Africa a root decoction of Sclerocroton 
integerrimus Höchst, (synonym: Sapium inte-
gerrimum (Höchst.) J.Léonard) is used as a 
mouthwash to treat toothache. The fruits were 
formerly used to make a black ink and are used 
for tanning. The wood is heavy, hard and dura-
ble and is used to make attractive furniture. 
Ecology Sclerocroton cornutus occurs in 
rainforest, secondary forest and open wood-
land, especially on sandy soils, but also on 
rocky hill slopes. It prefers well-drained soils. 
Management Sclerocroton cornutus cop-
pices well. 
Genetic resources and breeding Sclero-
croton cornutus is common in the forest zone of 
Central Africa and does not seem to be threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Sclerocroton cornutus has a 
range of medicinal uses in local medicine in 
Central Africa, but very little is known about 
its properties. More research is therefore war-
ranted. In DR Congo it is considered an inter-
esting species for reforestation purposes. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Kruijt, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1996a; Tessier & Paris, 1978. 
Other references Coates Palgrave, 1983; 
Latham, 2005; Léonard, 1962; Nkounkou-
Loumpangou et al., 2005; Palmer & Pitman, 
1972-1974; Paris & Tessier, 1972. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
SECURINEGA CAPURONII Leandri 
Protologue Mém. Inst. Sei. Madagascar, 
sér. B, Biol. Vég. 8: 235 (1957). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Origin and geographic distribution Secu-
rinega capuronii is endemic to south-western 
Madagascar. 
Uses A stem bark decoction is taken to treat 
500 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
chronic bronchitis and cough, and a leaf decoc-
tion is taken to treat malaria. A decoction of 
the twig bark is taken to treat diarrhoea. 
The pinkish wood is soft and elastic and is used 
to make railway sleepers. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 4 
m tall; bark reddish to grey; young branches 
shortly hairy. Leaves alternate, simple and 
entire; stipules oblong to obovate, c. 2 mm long, 
deciduous; petiole up to 2 mm long; blade 
obovate, c. 15 mm x 7 mm, base cuneate to 
rounded, apex rounded, papery, glabrous. In-
florescence an axillary fascicle, 6-10-flowered 
in male plants, few-flowered in female plants; 
bracts 1-3 mm long, brown. Flowers unisexual, 
regular, 5-merous, small; sepals c. 1.5 mm 
long, slightly unequal, ciliate; petals absent; 
male flowers sessile, stamens 7-8, free, ex-
serted, filaments 1.5-2 mm long, rudimentary 
ovary ending in ciliate style; female flowers 
with pedicel 1-3 mm long, ovary superior, 
ovoid, 3-celled, style c. 1 mm long, branching 
into 3 stigmas, each 2-lobed, spread horizon-
tally. Fruit a slightly 3-lobed capsule, reddish 
brown to yellowish brown, up to 6-seeded. 
Securinega capuronii flowers in September. 
Securinega comprises 5 species in Madagascar 
and the Mascarene islands. Several other Se-
curinega species have similar medicinal uses to 
those of Securinega capuronii. A stem bark 
decoction of Securinega antsingyensis Leandri 
or Securinega seyrigii Leandri is taken to treat 
severe diarrhoea with fever. The wood of Secu-
rinega seyrigii is hard and heavy but easily 
workable, and used for boat and house con-
struction. 
Ecology Securinega capuronii is common in 
bushland at low to medium altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding As Se-
curinega capuronii is relatively common in its 
distribution area, it is probably not threatened. 
Prospects The bark of Securinega capuronii 
and related species is used to treat severe diar-
rhoea. As no chemical or pharmacological re-
search has been done, it is strongly recom-
mended that the pharmacology of this species 
be investigated. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Debray, Jacquemin & Ra-
zafindrambao, 1971; Leandri, 1958. 
Other references Neuwinger, 2000; Rako-
tovao, 1984a; Rakotovao, 1984b; Ralantonirina, 
1993; Wurdack et a l , 2004. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
SENNA ALATA (L.) Roxb. 
Protologue Fl. ind. ed. 1832, 2: 349 (1832). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n — 28 
Synonyms Cassia alata L. (1753). 
Vernacular names Ringworm bush, craw-
craw plant, seven golden candlesticks, Christ-
mas candle, king of the forest (En). Dartrier, 
casse ailée, plante des cros-cros, buisson de la 
gale, quatre épingles (Fr). Dartial, cortalinde, 
café beirào, fedegoso, fedegosâo (Po). Upupu wa 
mwitu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
alata is native to South America, but has been 
planted widely for medicinal and ornamental 
purposes and is now pantropical. In many 
countries, including most countries of tropical 
Africa, it has become naturalized and is often 
considered a weed. 
Uses The main medicinal uses of Senna 
alata are as a laxative or purgative and in the 
treatment of skin problems. For laxative pur-
poses usually a decoction of the leaves is 
drunk, and less often the flowers, roots or the 
stem are used. Skin problems treated with 
Senna alata include ringworm, favus and other 
mycoses, impetigo, syphilis sores, psoriasis, 
herpes, chronic lichen planus, scabies, rash and 
itching. Skin problems are most often treated 
by applying leaf sap or by rubbing fresh leaves 
on the skin. Other ailments treated in tropical 
Africa with Senna alata include stomach pain 
during pregnancy, dysentery, haemorrhoids, 
blood in the urine (schistosomiasis, gonor-
rhoea), convulsions, heart failure, oedema, 
jaundice, headache, hernia, one-sided weak-
Senna alata -planted 
SENNA 501 
ness or paralysis. A strong decoction made of 
dried leaves is used as an abortifacient. In vet-
erinary medicine too, a range of skin problems 
in livestock is treated with leaf decoctions. 
Such decoctions are also used against external 
parasites such as mites and ticks. 
In India leaf decoctions are used as an expecto-
rant in bronchitis and dyspnoea, as an astrin-
gent, a mouthwash and a wash in cases of ec-
zema. Decoctions of the wood are used to treat 
liver problems, urticaria, rhinitis and loss of 
appetite caused by gastro-intestinal problems. 
The seeds are a source of gum. The young pods 
are eaten as a vegetable, but only in small 
quantities. Toasted leaves are sometimes used 
as a coffee substitute. Senna alata can become 
a weed in pastures; it is not eaten by livestock 
and is reported to be poisonous, especially for 
goats. The bark is used as fish poison and for 
tanning leather. The roots and the bark are 
reported to be used for tattooing. Senna alata 
is widely appreciated as a garden ornamental 
and bee forage. 
Production and international trade In In-
dia Senna alata is cultivated for export pur-
poses, e.g. to Japan, but no trade statistics are 
available. 
Properties From the leaves of Senna alata 
a number of anthraquinone derivatives have 
been isolated, such as aloe-emodin, chrysopha-
nol, isochrysophanol and rhein, as well as the 
alkaloid tyramine and the common steroid ß-
sitosterol. Crude leaf extracts have shown an-
tibacterial activity against a range of bacteria, 
e.g. against Dermatophilus congolensis, which 
causes a serious skin condition in cattle. Anti-
fungal properties (e.g. against Pityriasis versi-
color in humans) and antitumour activity have 
been confirmed by tests. The bark of Senna 
alata contains tannins. The petals contain an-
thraquinones, glycosides, steroids, tannins and 
volatile oil. Extracts of the petals have bacteri-
cidal activity against gram-positive bacteria 
but not against gram-negative bacteria. 
Emodin and chrysophanol can be produced in 
vitro by using root cultures of Senna alata. 
Adulterations and substitutes Anthra-
quinone glycosides are also found in other spe-
cies of Senna, Cassia and Aloe and are used for 
their laxative and purgative properties as well. 
Description Shrub up to 2(-5) m tall. 
Leaves arranged spirally, paripinnately com-
pound with 8-20 pairs of leaflets; stipules tri-
angular, 7-10 mm long; petiole 2—3 cm long; 
leaflets oblong-elliptical, 5-15 cm x 3-7 cm, 
base and apex obtuse, mucronate, hairy on 
Senna alata - 1, leaf; 2, inflorescence; 3, fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
midrib, veins and margin. Inflorescence an 
erect, terminal raceme 20-50 cm long, many-
flowered; bracts elliptical, orange, enclosing 
flower buds. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-
merous; sepals oblong, 10-20 mm x 6-7 mm, 
orange-yellow; petals ovate-orbicular, 16—24 
mm x 10-15 mm, bright yellow; stamens 10, 
the 2 lower ones largest with filaments 4 mm 
long and anthers 12-13 mm long, 5 medium-
sized, 3 short and rudimentary; ovary superior, 
woolly, recurved, style slender, short. Fruit a 
winged pod 10-15 cm x 1.5-8 cm, wings 4—8 
mm large, black, glabrous, dehiscent, up to 50-
seeded. Seeds quadrangular, flattened, 7—8 mm 
x 5—8 mm, shiny. 
Other botanical information Until the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, but was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
Chamaecrista with about 250 species and 
Senna with about 270 species. Senna is very 
similar to Cassia, but is distinguished from it 
by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens which 
are short and straight, and the pedicels which 
have no bracteoles. 
Senna leandrii (Ghesq.) Du Puy is an endemic 
shrub or small tree of Madagascar, where the 
502 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
bark is chewed to relieve dental pain. 
Growth and development Senna alata has 
Scarrone's architectural model: an indetermi-
nate trunk with tiers of orthotropic branches, 
which branch sympodially because they have 
terminal inflorescences. Senna alata is fast 
growing, short-lived and produces flowers and 
fruits throughout the year. Ants often live in 
association with Senna alata. 
Ecology Although Senna alata has a wide 
ecological amplitude, preferred habitats are 
disturbed, rather open vegetations such as 
roadsides, river banks, rain forest edges, lake 
shores, margins of ponds and ditches, in open 
forest, orchards and around villages. Senna 
alata is found up to 1400(-2100) m altitude, 
but is most abundant at lower elevations. It is 
reported to tolerate an annual rainfall of 600-
4300 mm and average yearly temperatures of 
15-30°C. It is very tender to frost. It grows 
well on both heavy and sandy, acid to slightly 
alkaline, well-drained soils. 
Propagation and planting Senna alata is 
propagated by seed or cuttings. Soaking the 
seeds overnight before sowing improves germi-
nation. 
Management When Senna alata is grown 
as an ornamental, cutting back hard after 
flowering is recommended. It produces the nic-
est flower display in the year after it is pruned. 
Diseases and pests Senna alata is a host of 
the common spiral nematode (Helicotylenchus 
dihystera) and the root lesion nematode (Praty-
lenchus loosi). 
Harvesting The leaves of Senna alata are 
harvested when needed. The active constitu-
ents are probably most abundant prior to flow-
ering, at which time the leaves are preferably 
collected. 
Handling after harvest After harvesting 
Senna alata leaves may be dried and stored in 
containers until needed. More often, however, 
leaves are used fresh. 
Genetic resources Senna alata is widely 
found wild and cultivated throughout the trop-
ics and is neither endangered nor liable to ge-
netic erosion. There are some accessions in 
genebanks. 
Breeding Even within populations, there is 
a large variation in anthraquinone content in 
the leaves of Senna alata, which allows for 
selection. No selection or breeding for medici-
nal use has been documented. 
Prospects As Senna alata has various me-
dicinal properties, ornamental value and is a 
true multipurpose plant, it will continue to be 
widely planted and used. The antibacterial, 
antifungal and antitumour properties seem to 
justify more research. Leaf extracts might be 
useful in the treatment of opportunistic skin 
infections in AIDS patients. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2004; ILDIS, 
2005; Neuwinger, 2000; Owoyale, Olatunji & 
Oguntoye, 2005; Ross, 2003; Toruan-Purba, 
1999b. 
Other references Adedayo et al., 2001; 
Akoègninou, van der Burg & van der Maesen, 
2006; Ali-Emmanuel et al., 2003; Berhaut, 
1975b; Boampong, 1992; Burkill, 1995; Chat-
siriwej, Wungsintaweekul & Panichayu-
pakaranant, 2006; Irwin & Barneby, 1982b; 
Lock, 1990; Luckow, 1996; Nacro & Millogo-
Rasolodimbi, 1993; Pieme et al., 2006; Yagi, El 
Tigani & Adam, 1998. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
SENNA ALEXANDRINA Mill. 
Protologue Gard. diet. ed. 8: Senna No 1 
(1768). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 28, 56 
Synonyms Cassia senna L. (1753), Cassia 
angustifolia Vahl (1790), Cassia acutifolia De-
lile (1813). 
Vernacular names Senna, Aden senna, 
Alexandrian senna, Indian senna, narrow-
leaved senna, Nubian senna, Khartoum senna, 
true senna (En). Séné, séné vrai, séné 
d'Egypte, cassier, séné grandes feuilles (Fr). 
Sene, cassia, senna, cène (Po). Msahala (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
alexandrina occurs naturally from Mali east-
wards to Somalia and Kenya. It is also native 
in Asia from the Arabian Peninsula to India 
and Sri Lanka. In Mozambique it was probably 
introduced a long time ago and it has also been 
introduced in a number of Central Asian and 
Mediterranean countries, the Caribbean and 
Mexico. Commercial cultivation takes place in 
India, Sudan, Egypt, Pakistan, China and Ko-
rea. 
Uses Leaves and pods of Senna alexandrina 
have been used as a laxative and purgative 
since ancient times and the trade dates back to 
at least the 9th century A.D. In the Western 
SENNA 503 
Senna alexandrina - wild and planted 
world Senna alexandrina was included in most 
pharmacopoeias under the names 'Senna 
folium' and 'Senna fructus'. The plant is also 
important in traditional Indian and Chinese 
medicine. In Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia and 
Kenya both leaves and pods are used as a pur-
gative. In Sudan a decoction of the pods is 
drunk to get rid of intestinal worms and to cure 
difficulties in breathing. The infusion of the 
pods is recommended as a purgative for preg-
nant women and also to suppress fever. An 
infusion of the leaves is drunk to overcome 
flatulence and convulsions and to stop nose-
bleeds. 
In Ethiopia the wood is used to make farm 
tools. The shrubs are grazed by camels and 
goats in Somalia. However, in Sudan Senna 
alexandrina tends to dominate vegetation in 
heavily grazed areas, which indicates that it is 
not readily eaten by livestock. In Ethiopia the 
species is recommended for soil conservation. 
Production and international trade India 
is the world's largest producer and exporter of 
leaves and pods of Senna alexandrina. It ex-
ported 5000-7000 t of leaves and pods annually 
around 1990, mainly to Germany, the United 
Sates, Japan, the Netherlands, France, Swit-
zerland and the United Kingdom. In 2003 an 
amount of 9700 t of leaves alone was exported. 
Annual figures for exports from Sudan vary 
from 700-7740 t of leaves and pods. In 1992 
the price at the port of import was US$ 1600 
per t for pods from India and US$ 1200 per t 
for pods from Sudan. The price of leaves was 
about 50% lower than that of pods. 
Properties The active constituents of the 
leaves and the wall of the pods are essentially 
the same and consist of 2-5% anthraquinone 
derivatives and related dianthrone glycosides 
on dry weight basis. The dried drug contains 
mainly sennosides A and B, together with 
small quantities of related compounds. The 
sennosides are little resorbed in the small in-
testine but once in the colon, they are hydro-
lyzed by the bacterial flora and the an-
thraquinones formed are reduced to form the 
active anthrones, which are responsible for the 
laxative activity as they stimulate peristalsis. 
Pharmaceutical grade leaves must contain 5.5-
8.0% sennoside B, whereas pods must contain 
at least 2.2% ('Tinnevelly senna') to 3.4% ('Al-
exandrian senna') sennoside B. 
Much medical research has been published, 
especially on the use of Senna alexandrina as a 
laxative and on its possible health risks. No 
carcinogenic effects of prolonged use have been 
found in tests with rats, but even so it should 
only be used for occasional constipation, as 
prolonged use can lead to chronic ulcerative 
colitis. Use of the drug is contraindicated in 
case of intestinal obstruction and acute intesti-
nal inflammation. Use for children under 12 
years of age and pregnant or lactating women 
must be discouraged. The use of preparations 
for weight reduction is dangerous. 
Ethanol extracts of leaves of Senna alexan-
drina show inhibitory activity against Bacillus 
cereus, Staphylococcus aureus and Staphylo-
coccus epidermidis, but not against gram-
negative bacteria. 
Adulterations and substitutes As a pur-
gative Senna alexandrina is often substituted 
for other Senna species and by Cassia and Aloe 
species. Adulteration of commercial products 
used to be common and profitable, but import-
ing countries nowadays have tight rules and 
controls. Up to 90% adulteration with Senna 
auriculata (L.) Roxb. ('avaram') has been re-
corded, and Senna italica Mill. ('Senegal 
senna') was also commonly used. In many Afri-
can countries commercial preparations are 
imported. 
Description Deciduous shrub up to 3 m tall. 
Leaves arranged spirally, paripinnately com-
pound with 4-10 pairs of leaflets; stipules lin-
ear to narrowly triangular, 1.5-5 cm long, 
acute, persistent; petiole 1-8 cm long; leaflets 
lanceolate or narrowly elliptical to elliptical, 2 -
6.5 cm x 0.5-1.5 cm, base cuneate, unequal, 
apex rounded to obtuse, mucronate, shortly 
hairy on both sides. Inflorescence an erect, 
axillary raceme 5-30 cm long, 20-30-flowered; 
bracts elliptical to obovate, c. 1 cm long. Flow-
504 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Senna alexandrina - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
infructescence. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
ers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-merous; sepals c. 
1 cm long, rounded at apex; petals unequal, 
(oblong-)obovate, 1.5-3 cm long, yellow or or-
ange-yellow; stamens 10, the 2 lower ones larg-
est, 5 medium-sized, 3 short and sterile; ovary 
superior, woolly, recurved, style short. Fruit a 
flattened, slightly curved to almost straight, 
oblong pod 4-7 cm x 1.5-2.5 cm, transversely 
partitioned, tardily dehiscent by 2 valves, 9— 
16-seeded. Seeds oblong or oblong-ovate, com-
pressed, 8—9 mm x 4-5 mm, with a small ar-
éole on each face. 
Other botanical information Until the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, but was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
Chamaecrista with about 250 species and 
Senna with about 270 species. Senna is very 
similar to Cassia, but is distinguished from it 
by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens which 
are short and straight, and the pedicels which 
have no bracteoles. 
Two varieties are distinguished in Senna alex-
andrina: var. obtusata (Brenan) Lock, re-
stricted to Eritrea, Ethiopia, Somalia and 
northern Kenya, and var. alexandrina, which 
is the more widespread variety. The distinction 
made in trade between Indian or Tinnevelly 
senna from India and Nubian or Alexandrian 
senna from Sudan has no taxonomie basis. 
Several other East African Senna species have 
medicinal uses similar to those of Senna alex-
andrina, but are of local importance only. In 
Somalia many share the same vernacular 
name 'jalelo'. Senna holosericea (Fresen.) 
Greuter occurs in Sudan, Eritrea, Ethiopia, 
Djibouti and Somalia and extends eastwards to 
India. The pods and leaves are used in Ethio-
pia as a laxative. The pods and leaves of Senna 
hookeriana Batka (synonyms: Cassia adenensis 
Benth., Cassia somalensis Serrato) from Soma-
lia and Socotra are used as a laxative in Soma-
lia. Senna baccarinii (Chiov.) Lock of southern 
and eastern Ethiopia, Somalia and northern 
Kenya is similarly used as the previous species, 
and twigs are used as toothbrush. It is also 
grown as an ornamental. Senna longiracemosa 
(Vatke) Lock is native to Ethiopia, Somalia, 
Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania and the roots are 
used by Somali people and the Samburu people 
of Kenya as a remedy for malaria. Roots are 
pounded and boiled and the filtrate is drunk 
with milk. 
Growth and development Senna alexan-
drina can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year. It does not form root nod-
ules and does not fix nitrogen. 
Ecology In tropical Africa Senna alexan-
drina occurs in semi-desert scrub and grass-
land particularly in valley bottoms, flood plains 
and on river banks, and is often associated 
with Acacia spp. It occurs from sea-level up to 
1300 m altitude. Germination is hampered by 
salinity but older plants are salt-tolerant. 
Senna alexandrina does not tolerate continu-
ous waterlogging or heavy irrigation. 
Propagation and planting Senna alexan-
drina is usually established by broadcasting 
treated seed at rates of 15-25 kg/ha. Untreated 
seed has a poor germination rate. Treatment of 
the seed with sulphuric acid is more effective 
in breaking dormancy than methanol, boiling 
water, or incision of the testa. The weight of 
1000 seeds is about 30 g. 
Management In India Senna alexandrina is 
mostly grown as a rainfed crop or as a second 
crop after rice. In rice fields it germinates on 
residual moisture and can be irrigated. Before 
the canopy closes one or two weedings are nec-
essary. The first flower stalks that appear are 
cut, which induces branching and increases the 
sennoside content of the leaves. Senna alexan-
SENNA 505 
drina is mostly grown as an annual crop, but 
can be left standing to produce for another 2-3 
years. 
Harvesting Two crops per year are har-
vested in Sudan, the more abundant one after 
the rains in September, the other one in April. 
In India leaves are stripped or picked about 3 
months after sowing. The second and third 
harvest follow after 4-6 weeks. At the third 
harvest the pods are harvested as well. 
Yield Yields of Senna alexandrina vary con-
siderably depending on the soil and water con-
ditions. In India the average annual yield is 
about 700 kg of leaves and 100 kg of pods per 
ha under rainfed conditions. Under irrigation 
the yield of leaves and pods is about 1400 kg/ha 
and 150 kg/ha, respectively. Although the sen-
noside content is higher when plants are under 
stress, moderate irrigation and fertilization 
pay off through increased leaf and total sen-
noside yields. 
Handling after harves t In Sudan the har-
vested plants are placed on rocks until thor-
oughly dry and are subsequently stripped of 
the leaves. The leaves curl when drying and 
are loosely packed. In India the leaves are 
dried on a clean floor indoors or under shade. 
The leaves are spread thinly and stirred regu-
larly to promote uniform drying. The leaves are 
packed into bales after drying, using a hydrau-
lic press. Good leaves are fresh and bright yel-
lowish green, with a faint and peculiar odour 
like green tea and a mucilaginous, sweetish, 
slightly bitter taste. The pods are tied in 
bunches and hung in well-ventilated sheds to 
dry for 10-12 days. After threshing the seeds 
are separated from the pods. The pod material 
is usually packed in boxes. The leaves and pods 
retain their medicinal value for years if stored 
at low temperature and humidity, but should 
be powdered only as needed, because the pow-
der tends to absorb moisture, become mouldy 
and lose value. 
Genetic resources Although Senna alex-
andrina is harvested in Sudan from the wild in 
considerable quantities, this is not considered a 
threat to its genetic diversity in the country. 
The Central Institute of Medicinal and Aro-
matic Plants in Lucknow, India, holds a con-
siderable number of Indian genotypes. The 
regional variation within the species is poorly 
captured in collections. 
Breeding Selection in Senna alexandrina 
for a high number of branches offers opportuni-
ties to improve the dry leaf yield per plant. 
Prospects The multitude of trade names of 
Senna alexandrina and a poor understanding 
of taxonomie classification and changing no-
menclature lead to confusion. The opportuni-
ties for expansion of commercial cultivation in 
tropical Africa deserve to be looked into. 
Major references ABC, 2000; Bekele-
Tesemma, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1993; Hostett-
mann et al., 2000; Iqbal, 1993; Kapur & Atal, 
1982; Luckow, 1996; Marshall, 1998; Serrato 
Valenti, 1971. 
Other references Akoègninou, van der 
Burg & van der Maesen, 2006; Al Helal et al., 
1989; Alemayehu et al., 1993; Ali, 1973; Al-
Yahya et al., 1987; Brenan, 1958; El-Kamali & 
Khalid, 1998; Elojuba, Abere & Adelusi, 1999; 
Hussain & Tobji, 1997; Irwin & Barneby, 
1982b; Kokwaro, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Singh, Tiwari & Dubey, 2003. 
Sources of illustration Serrato Valenti, 
1971. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SENNA DIDYMOBOTRYA (Fresen.) H.S.Irwin 
& Barneby 
Protologue Mem. New York Bot. Garden 
35: 467 (1982). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number In = 28 
Synonyms Cassia didymobotrya Fresen. 
(1839), Cassia nairobensis L.H.Bailey (1941). 
Vernacular names Candle bush, peanut-
butter cassia, popcorn senna, wild senna, can-
delabra tree (En). Séné africain (Fr). Mwinu 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
didymobotrya is native to tropical Africa where 
it is found from Congo east to Ethiopia and 
south to Namibia, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. 
It has been introduced as an ornamental plant 
into many tropical countries including the Co-
moros, Madagascar, Mauritius and South Af-
rica. It was originally introduced into tropical 
Asia and America as a fodder, green manure 
and cover crop, but is now mainly cultivated as 
an ornamental. 
Uses Senna didymobotrya is widely used as 
a medicinal plant, especially in East Africa, 
where a decoction or infusion from the leaves, 
stems and roots is drunk as a laxative and 
purgative for the treatment of abdominal 
pains, while in large quantities it is taken as 
an emetic. In Uganda, Rwanda and Burundi it 
is also taken to expel intestinal worms and to 
506 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Senna didymobotrya - wild and planted 
treat ringworm. The concoction may make the 
patient weak and if this happens the patient 
should drink milk. When treating children, 
young leaves are cooked in banana leaves and 
given orally. In Kenya and Uganda an infusion 
made from the roots is drunk to treat diar-
rhoea. 
In DR Congo, Rwanda, Burundi, Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania a root decoction is drunk 
for the treatment of malaria, other fevers and 
jaundice. The powder of the root or leaf mixed 
in water or a decoction of the fresh parts is 
taken to treat abscesses of the skeletal muscles 
and venereal diseases. The plant is also indi-
cated for the treatment of fungal and bacterial 
infections, hypertension, haemorrhoids, sickle 
cell anaemia, and a range of women's diseases, 
such as inflammation of the fallopian tubes, 
fibroids and backache, to stimulate lactation, 
and to induce uterine contractions and abor-
tion. 
Senna didymobotrya, like other Senna species, 
is poisonous. Decoctions from all plant parts 
can cause violent vomiting and diarrhoea and 
may be fatal. It is recommended that pregnant 
women and children take a small dose. The 
leaves and roots are also used as fish poison. 
Senna didymobotrya is also widely used for the 
treatment of livestock diseases. A decoction 
made from the leaves, either alone or in mix-
tures, is used to treat external parasites, e.g. 
ticks. In Kenya the leaves and young stems are 
pounded to a pulp and applied to the skin to 
treat skin diseases. The leaf sap in water is 
given to drink to treat diarrhoea, dysentery, 
and taken as a diuretic, laxative, and emetic. A 
decoction made from the roots is used as an 
antidote for poisoning, to expel a retained pla-
centa, and to treat East Coast fever and black-
leg. 
The ash of burnt twigs is used to coat the in-
side of gourds that are to be used for storing 
milk, as it is said to improve digestibility and 
palatability. The milk can be kept in them for 
over a year. 
The wood is used for making handicrafts, and 
is also used as firewood. The leaves are used as 
mulch or green manure. Senna didymobotrya 
is sometimes planted as a shade tree in tea 
plantations. Flowers, bark, leaves and pods can 
be used as a colorant for fibres and give a wide 
range of colours (yellow, orange, red). The bark 
is used in leather making for dehairing and 
tanning. The leaves are used to ripen bananas 
by wrapping them around the bunch. The hot 
ashes are used to clean beer vessels. Senna 
didymobotrya is widely grown as an ornamen-
tal plant. 
Properties A number of anthraquinone 
derivatives have been isolated from the leaves 
and pods, e.g. emodin, chrysophanol, physcion 
and knipholone. Other compounds isolated 
from the leaves are aloe-emodin, rhein and 
small quantities of dianthrone emodin, dian-
throne aloe-emodin, sennoside B, C and D, 
catechinic tannins, flavonoids and aloe-emodin 
B-glucoside. The seed contains 4% oil, 24% 
protein and 6% ash. 
The anthraquinone derivatives are little re-
sorbed in the small intestine but once in the 
colon, they are hydrolyzed by the bacterial 
flora and the anthraquinones formed are re-
duced to form the active anthrones, which are 
responsible for the laxative activity as they 
stimulate peristalsis. Anthraquinones such as 
emodin also inhibit ion transport across colon 
cells, contributing to the laxative effect. An-
thraquinones exhibit other biological effects 
including diuresis, vasorelaxation, and induc-
tion of muscular contractions, antioxidant 
properties as well as antibacterial and antifun-
gal activities. Emodin is known to be a feeding 
deterrent against a wide range of organisms. 
Methanolic plant extracts reduced contractions 
induced by acetylcholine in isolated guinea pig 
trachea rings. This decrease was more than 
half of the relaxation induced by theophylline, 
a standard drug used in therapy for respiratory 
diseases. This property may be important for 
bronchodilatation in asthma treatment. The 
root and stem bark extracts inhibited growth of 
Giardia lamblia in in-vitro tests but were not 
lethal to this protozoan parasite that causes 
SENNA 507 
infection of the gastrointestinal tract. 
The bioactivity of the plant against malaria is 
low, although it is fever-suppressing. 
The smell of Senna didymobotrya, especially 
when in flower or when bruised, has been de-
scribed as 'mice', 'wet dogs', 'peanut butter' or 
'burnt popcorn', and bees are repelled by the 
smell. 
Adulterations and substitutes As a pur-
gative Senna didymobotrya is often substituted 
for other Senna species and by Cassia and Aloe 
species. 
Description Deciduous shrub or small tree 
up to 4.5(-9) m tall. Leaves arranged spirally, 
paripinnately compound with 8-18 pairs of 
leaflets; stipules broadly ovate-cordate, 1-2.5 
cm x c. 1 cm, acuminate, persistent; petiole 1-8 
cm long; leaflets oblong-elliptical, 2-6 cm x 
0.5-2.5 cm, mostly rounded to obtuse at apex, 
mucronate, shortly hairy on both sides. Inflo-
rescence an erect, axillary raceme 10-50 cm 
long, 20-30-flowered; bracts 1-2.5 cm long. 
Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-merous; se-
pals oblong-obovate, up to 1.5 cm long; petals 
Senna didymobotrya - 1, flowering and fruiting 
branch; 2, stipule; 3, side view of flower; 4, 
flower in longitudinal section; 5, seed. 
Source: PROSEA 
unequal, oblong to obovate, 1.5-3 cm long, yel-
low; stamens 10, the 2 lower ones largest and 
fertile, 8 sterile; ovary superior, woolly, re-
curved, style slender, bent. Fruit a flattened, 
oblong pod 8-12 cm x 1.5-2.5 cm, transversely 
partitioned, dehiscent by 2 valves, 9—16-
seeded. Seeds oblong, compressed, c. 8 mm x 4 -
5 mm, with a distinct aréole on each face. 
Other botanical information Until the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, but was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
Chamaecrista with about 250 species and 
Senna with about 270 species. Senna is very 
similar to Cassia, but is distinguished from it 
by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens which 
are short and straight, and the pedicels which 
have no bracteoles. The hairiness of Senna 
didymobotrya varies a good deal in length and 
density, and the bracts and stipules are vari-
able in size. However, there seems no reason 
for recognizing subspecific taxa. 
Growth and development Senna didy-
mobotrya flowers profusely twice a year in the 
tropics. It is a cross-fertilizer, but also self-
compatible. Reports on nodulation are contra-
dictory. When grown as a fallow crop, it ap-
peared to enrich the topsoil with considerable 
amounts of nitrogen, but it was not clear where 
this came from. Senna didymobotrya stimu-
lates the germination of witchweed (Striga) 
seeds although it is not a host. When incorpo-
rated in the rotation it can effectively decrease 
the infestation. 
Ecology Senna didymobotrya is common in 
deciduous bushland, along lake shores, 
streams, rivers and other damp localities, in 
grassland and woodland, from sea-level up to 
2500 m altitude. Sometimes it is found in old 
plantations and in hedges near buildings. In 
South Africa it has become invasive in grass-
land, coastal scrub, woodland, roadsides, 
wasteland and on river banks. It tolerates light 
frost. 
Propagation and planting Senna didy-
mobotrya is propagated by seed and by cut-
tings. Seed germinates easily, but requires 
soaking in water for 24 hours because it exhib-
its some dormancy due to its hard seed coat. 
Dormancy can also be overcome by mechanical 
scarification and immersion in concentrated 
sulphuric acid or boiling water. Experiments 
with treated seed gave 75-85% germination, 
but the germination rate of untreated seeds is 
15-20%. The seeds can germinate both in light 
and dark conditions and over a wide range of 
508 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
t empera tu res ; however, the opt imum germina-
tion t empera tu re is 20-25°C and the germina-
tion r a t e is very low at 10°C. 
Seeds can be dried wi thout damage to mois ture 
contents t h a t a re much lower t h a n normally 
achieved in na tu re . Over a wide range of stor-
age environments , the i r longevity increases 
with reductions in both mois ture content and 
t empera tu re . The weight of 1000 air-dry seeds 
is 36-75 g. 
M a n a g e m e n t Senna didymobotrya is a good 
shade t ree in tea in a reas where Erythrina spp. 
a re unsui table . As such it is spaced a t about 5 
m x 5 m. Young s tems are t ender and should 
be s taked. 
D i s e a s e s a n d p e s t s Senna didymobotrya is 
hard ly a t tacked by pests and diseases. It is a 
host of coffee mealy bug (Planococcus kenyae) 
t h a t affects a wide range of crops. 
H a r v e s t i n g Senna didymobotrya can be 
lopped for green m a n u r e several t imes per 
year, preferably when flowering, as a t this 
stage nu t r i en t contents of the leaves is highest . 
Yield The fresh leafy branches of Senna 
didymobotrya contain about 0.7% of N. A typi-
cal cut of 5 t /ha t hus yields about 35 kg N. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s There is a small number 
of accessions of Senna didymobotrya in germ-
plasm collections. As it is widespread, the spe-
cies is not th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s The pharmacological benefits of 
us ing Senna didymobotrya as a crude herbal 
medicine are outweighed by its potent ial toxic-
ity. However, herba l extracts prepared under 
carefully controlled manufac tur ing set t ings 
have potential . The use as a green manure , 
cover crop and shade t ree has never been im-
por tan t in Africa, bu t could increase. Its ability 
to induce germinat ion of Striga seeds makes it 
a potent ial t r ap crop for inclusion in rotat ion 
wi th grain crops. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Alemayehu, Hailu & 
Abegaz, 1996; Brenan, 1967; Gacheru & Rao, 
2005; Izhaki, 2002; Kamatenesi -Mugisha , 
2004; Katende , Birnie & Tengnäs , 1995; Neu-
winger, 2000; Okello-Onen et a l , 2004; Su-
narno, 1997; World Agroforestry Centre, un-
dated. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s den Biggelaar & 
Murei thi , 2000; Geissler et a l , 2002; Gessler et 
al., 1995; Hedberg et al., 1982; Hindmarsh , 
1982; Johns et al., 1995; Kasonia, 1995; Kok-
waro, 1993; Lindsay & Hepper, 1978; Masinde, 
1996; Minja, 1994a; Muregi et al., 2004; 
Murengezi , 1993; Rambuda & Johnson, 2004; 
Schlage et al., 2000; Tabut i , Lye & Dhillion, 
2003; Teketay, 1996; Thulin, 1989; Van Puy-
velde, 1988. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion Sunarno, 1997. 
A u t h o r s J .R.S. Tabut i 
S E N N A I T A L I C A M i l l . 
P r o t o l o g u e Garden diet. ed. 8: Senna n. 2 
(1768). 
F a m i l y Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r n — 7, 14 
S y n o n y m s Cassia italica (Mill.) Spreng. 
(1800), Cassia obovata Collad. (1816). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Senegal senna, I ta l ian 
senna, Tripoli senna, Port Royal senna, Jamai -
ca senna, Aleppo senna, eland's pea, wild sen-
na, dog senna (En). Séné du Sénégal (Fr). Sene 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
italica is a nat ive of many African countries 
from Cape Verde east to Somalia and south to 
South Africa. In Benin it is only recorded as a 
cult ivated plant . It is also nat ive in Asia, from 
the Middle Eas t th rough Iraq, I ran, Pak i s t an 
and India to Sri Lanka , and has been intro-
duced and is na tura l ized in the Caribbean and 
Venezuela. 
U s e s Throughout i ts range the leaves, pods 
and m a t u r e seeds of Senna italica a re used as 
a purgat ive . They are taken , usual ly as a de-
coction or macerat ion, to cure s tomach com-
plaints , fever, jaundice, venereal diseases and 
biliousness, as an abortifacient and agains t 
in tes t ina l worms. The leaves, e i ther fresh or 
dried and pulverized, a re used as a dressing for 
skin problems such as b u r n s and ulcers. A tea 
Senna italica - wild and planted 
SENNA 509 
made from the flowers is used as a purgative 
and to induce labour. A maceration of the roots 
is taken to cure colic and influenza, and boiled 
roots are used as a wound dressing. A root in-
fusion is used as eye drops for sore eyes. The 
roots also enter in treatments of indigestion, 
liver complaints, gall bladder disorders, nau-
sea, vomiting and dysmenorrhoea. In Malawi a 
root infusion is given to infants to cure diar-
rhoea. 
Reports on the value of Senna italica as a 
browse are contradictory. In East Africa it 
seems to be eaten by most livestock, whereas in 
West Africa livestock seems to avoid it. Al-
though mature seeds have a purging activity, 
young seeds are eaten as a snack or as a vege-
table in the Sahel region. The seeds are 
smoked in Mauritania. The leaves, traded as 
'neutral henna' or 'blonde henna', are used as a 
hair conditioner to make the hair glossy. It 
may impart a yellowish colour rather than a 
reddish one. 
Production and international trade Both 
dried leaves and pods of Senna italica are 
traded locally as a purgative. Dried, powdered 
leaves for use as a hair conditioner are nowa-
days traded internationally. The origin of this 
product is Sudan, Egypt or India. 
Properties From leaves and pods of Senna 
italica a number of anthraquinones have been 
isolated, which are responsible for the purga-
tive effect: aloe emodin, chrysophanol, rhein, 
sennosides and their aglucons sennidins. 
Chrysophanol is also the active ingredient of 
'neutral henna'. The anthraquinone content of 
the leaves ranges from 1.1-3.8% on a dry 
weight basis. The pods have a lower an-
thraquinone content than the leaves. Leaves 
further contain flavonoids (quercetin, 
kaempferol and apigenin) and steroids (stig-
masterol, a-amyrin and ß-sitosterol). 
An ethanol extract of the whole plant has anti-
inflammatory and antipyretic properties. 1,5-
dihydroxy-3-methoxy-7-methylanthraquinone, 
isolated from Senna italica, showed activity 
against several gram-positive and gram-
negative bacteria, as well as anticarcinogenic 
activity in vitro. 
Toxicity tests on goats and rabbits fed with 
foliage proved negative. Rats and chicks fed 
with seeds at 10% of their intake showed 
symptoms of toxicity, but did not die during the 
6-week test period. Feeding chicks with seeds 
at 2% of their intake promoted growth. The 
seeds yield a water soluble gum (about 20% of 
dry matter), mainly composed of D-galactose 
and D-mannose. 
Adulterations and substitutes Anthra-
quinone glycosides, including sennosides, are 
also found in other species of Senna, Cassia 
and Aloe and are used for their laxative and 
purgative properties as well. Senna italica is 
popular as a substitute for Senna alexandrina 
Mill., but is considered inferior. 
Description Deciduous, perennial herb or 
small shrub up to 60 cm tall, often with pros-
trate stems. Leaves arranged spirally, paripin-
nately compound with 4—6 pairs of leaflets; 
stipules narrowly triangular to ovate-
triangular, 3-9 mm long, early deflexed, some-
what persistent; petiole 1.5—2.5 cm long; leaf-
lets oblong-obovate or narrowly elliptical to 
elliptical, 1-6.5 cm x 0.5—1.5 cm, base cuneate, 
unequal, apex rounded to obtuse, shortly hairy 
on both sides. Inflorescence an erect, axillary 
raceme 2-25 cm long, up to 20-flowered; bracts 
rhombic to ovate, shortly pointed, up to 5 mm 
long. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-merous; 
sepals unequal, oblong-elliptical, up to 1 cm 
long, obtuse at apex; petals obovate, up to 13 
mm long, yellow; stamens 10, the 2 lower ones 
largest, 5 medium-sized, 3 short and sterile; 
ovary superior, with short, stiff hairs, style up 
to 6 mm long. Fruit a flattened, oblong pod 2.5-
Senna italica - 1, flowering branch; 2, fruiting 
branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
510 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
6 cm x 1.5-2 cm, with a ridge running along 
the middle of each valve, tip upcurved, dehis-
cent by 2 valves, many-seeded. Seeds oblong-
ovate, compressed, 6-7.5 mm x 1.5-2.5 mm, 
with a small aréole on each face. 
Other botanical information Until the 
early 1980s, Cassia was considered a very large 
genus of about 550 species, but was then split 
into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 30 species, 
Chamaecrista with about 250 species and 
Senna with about 270 species. Senna is very 
similar to Cassia, but is distinguished from it 
by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens which 
are short and straight, and the pedicels which 
have no bracteoles. 
In Senna italica 3 subspecies are distinguished 
based on the size of the inflorescence and the 
length of the petiole. Subsp. italica is found in 
West Africa, North Africa, Sudan, the Horn of 
Africa and from Yemen to north-western India. 
This subspecies is naturalized in parts of South 
America. Subsp. micrantha (Brenan) Lock is 
found from southern Ethiopia and Somalia 
southwards to Namibia, Botswana, Zimbabwe 
and Mozambique. This subspecies is also found 
in most of India. Subsp. arachoides (Burch.) 
Lock is restricted to Namibia, Botswana and 
South Africa. 
Senna truncata (Brenan) Lock, restricted to 
Ethiopia and Somalia, is used as a purgative. 
Either seeds are eaten or an infusion of the 
leaves is drunk. Like Senna italica, the pods 
have a ridge, but the pods are curved and the 
leaves have spreading, not appressed, hairs. 
Confusion of Senna italica with Senna alexan-
drina Mill, is widespread, but both leaves and 
pods are readily distinguishable as the former 
species has wider leaflets and the pods are 
without ridge. 
Growth and development In experiments, 
the growth of Senna italica was enhanced by 
inoculation with a mixture of vesicular arbus-
cular mycorrhizal (VAM) inoculum. It does not 
produce root nodules. Flowering usually takes 
place during the rainy season, but in moist 
conditions flowers appear throughout the year. 
Ecology Senna italica is found in grassland 
of the drier regions of tropical Africa, from sea-
level up to 1850 m altitude. It is often found 
close to streams and in disturbed habitats such 
as roadsides and waste places. 
Propagation and planting Senna italica is 
easily propagated by seed. Seed treatment by 
soaking overnight or abrasion with sand im-
proves germination. Sowing in pockets at 5 
seeds per pocket at 75 cm distance within and 
between rows and thinning to 3 plants per 
pocket is recommended. 
Management Husbandry practices for 
Senna italica aim at high leaf yields combined 
with a high sennoside content. Production of 
fruits is avoided as their sennoside content is 
low. Weeding is necessary once or twice in the 
early stage of the crop. Twenty days after sow-
ing pruning of the main stem to 20 cm will 
promote the formation of branches. Application 
of mineral fertilizer was found to be uneconom-
ical in Burkina Faso. Topdressing with farm-
yard manure after each harvest gave consider-
able increases in leaf and sennoside yield. In 
the second year a single weeding should be 
done early in the growing season. The economic 
life of the crop is 3 years at the most. The crop 
can be rejuvenated by natural regeneration. 
Diseases and pests Senna italica is a host 
of the root lesion nematode (Pratylenchus pene-
trans). In perennial cultivation serious attacks 
by termites have been observed. 
Harvesting Senna italica should be har-
vested early in the morning as the sennoside 
content drops in the course of the day. Harvest-
ing by cutting branches is recommended for the 
first harvest, but leaves may also be stripped 
from the branches. Stripping the leaflets re-
quires more labour than cutting, but this is 
outweighed by labour saving during process-
ing. Cutting should be at a height of about 20 
cm to allow for adequate regrowth. Cutting 
higher results in a lower leaf yield, but better 
regrowth and higher yields in consecutive har-
vests. The first harvest can be done in the year 
of establishment towards the end of the rainy 
season. In consecutive years 2-3 harvests per 
year can be realized. 
Yield The highest yields of Senna italica 
leaflets in Burkina Faso were obtained in the 
year after establishment with 1300 and 940 
kg/ha for the first and second cut, respectively. 
Handling after harvest If whole branches 
of Senna italica are harvested they are dried as 
such when it is the first crop, so that the high-
est possible sennoside content is obtained. In 
consecutive crops leaflets are stripped before 
drying. Leaflets should be dried in the shade at 
temperatures of 20-40°C. When dry, they are 
packed in compressed bales of about 200 kg. 
Genetic resources A few collections of 
Senna italica are held in gene banks in Israel, 
the United Kingdom and Namibia. As the spe-
cies is widespread and common, there is no 
threat of genetic erosion. It would be worth-
while, however, collecting local selections 
SENNA 511 
whenever encountered. 
Breeding Selection and breeding of Senna 
italica have not been attempted, but in view of 
the wide variation would be worthwhile if 
commercial production is envisaged. 
Prospects Senna italica is not likely to re-
gain its position in international trade, as this 
has been taken over by Senna alexandrina. 
However, for producing a mild laxative for do-
mestic markets in semi-arid regions it does 
hold promise. The variation of Senna italica in 
medicinal uses, toxicity and contents of active 
compounds is not understood. Linking the 
variation to subspecies, growth stage and cli-
matic and edaphic factors may help obtain a 
better understanding and a more rational use. 
Extreme caution is required when adopting 
medicinal uses of Senna italica from elsewhere. 
Major references Brenan, 1967; Irwin & 
Barneby, 1982b; Lardinois et al., 1987; Lock, 
1990; SEPASAL, 2006c; Southon et a l , 1994. 
Other references Agwa, 2000; Al-Araidh, 
Al-Tufail & Al-Jammaz, 2004; Ali et a l , 1999b; 
Bakhiet & Adam, 1996; Dame et al., 1985; El-
Molla, 2000; El Sayed et al., 1992; Hifny Saber, 
Balbaa & Awad, 1962; Inngjerdongen et al., 
2004; Jain et al., 1997; Kazmi et al., 1994; 
Mabberley, 1981; Ross, 1977; Serrato Valenti, 
1971; Vidigal, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Serrato Valenti, 
1971. 
Authors J.M. Okeyo & C.H. Bosch 
SENNA PETERSIANA (Bolle) Lock 
Protologue Kew Buil. 43(2): 340 (1988). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 28 
Synonyms Cassia petersiana Bolle (1861). 
Vernacular names Dwarf cassia, eared 
cassia, monkey pod (En). Mbaraka, mpinga-
waume (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
petersiana occurs from Cameroon east to 
Ethiopia and south to South Africa. It has been 
introduced in several Indian Ocean islands and 
is widely naturalized in Madagascar. 
Uses Senna petersiana is widely used as a 
purgative to treat constipation, stomach-ache 
and intestinal worms by drinking an infusion 
or decoction of the roots, or less often, by using 
fresh leaves. In southern Africa medicinal uses 
include the treatment of malaria, schistosomi-
asis, gonorrhoea and syphilis. In southern Af-
rica the sweet fruit pulp is eaten raw by chil-
dren and in Malawi the pods are soaked, boiled 
and eaten as a gruel. In Mozambique the seeds 
and fruits are made into an alcoholic drink. In 
Zambia and probably elsewhere, the wood is 
used as firewood. 
Properties The active constituents of 
leaves, bark, roots and pods of Senna petersi-
ana are anthraquinone glycosides. These com-
pounds are responsible for the purgative activ-
ity. The seeds contain the flavone luteolin. The 
ethanol extract of the seeds and luteolin were 
tested for antiviral activity and showed some 
activity at the highest non-toxic concentra-
tions; luteolin also showed antibacterial activ-
ity. The methanol and water extract of the 
leaves showed some schistosomicidal activity in 
vitro. Both leaves and roots have shown anti-
malarial activity in vitro. 
Anthraquinone glycosides are also found in 
other species of Senna, Cassia and Aloe and 
these are also used for their laxative and pur-
gative properties. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 12 m tall. 
Leaves arranged spirally, paripinnately com-
pound, with 4-10(-13) pairs of leaflets; stipules 
kidney-shaped, 1-2.5 cm long, acuminate, per-
sistent; petiole up to 4 cm long; leaflets lanceo-
late or ovate-lanceolate, 3—10 cm x 1-4 cm, 
apex acuminate, variably hairy. Inflorescence 
an erect, terminal or axillary panicle 15—20 cm 
long, many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, zygo-
morphic, 5-merous; sepals unequal, up to 6 mm 
long, rounded at apex; petals unequal, obovate, 
1.5-3 cm long, bright yellow; stamens 10, 3 
long, 4 medium-sized and 3 rudimentary; ovary 
superior. Fruit a somewhat compressed, linear 
pod 12-25 cm x 1—1.5 cm, indéhiscent, sutures 
transversely cracked, many-seeded. Seeds 
compressed, ovoid to orbicular, 5-7 mm x 4-6 
mm, with an olive-coloured aréole. 
Until the early 1980s, Cassia was considered a 
very large genus of about 550 species, but was 
then split into 3 genera: Cassia s.S. with about 
30 species, Chamaecrista with about 250 spe-
cies and Senna with about 270 species. Senna 
is very similar to Cassia, but is distinguished 
from it by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens 
which are short and straight, and the pedicels 
which have no bracteoles. Senna petersiana is 
very variable and in East Africa 3 types can be 
distinguished that are geographically sepa-
rated and differ by their hairiness. In southern 
Africa intermediates between the 3 types occur 
and therefore a formal distinction between 
them is not justified. 
512 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Ecology Senna petersiana occurs at the 
margins of rainforest, in riverine forest, de-
ciduous woodland, coastal evergreen bushland 
and wooded grassland up to 2500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding In view 
of its wide distribution Senna petersiana is not 
considered threatened. In areas where the 
roots and bark are intensively used, monitoring 
of the populations is recommended. It will be 
worthwhile to try to link the medicinal uses to 
the variation in morphology, as there are no 
recorded medicinal uses in Ethiopia, few in 
Kenya and Tanzania, but many in southern 
Africa. 
Prospects Senna petersiana will remain 
locally important as a purgative, but has many 
substitutes. More research into its potential as 
an anti-malaria and anti-bilharzia medicine is 
recommended. 
Major references Brenan, 1967; Clarkson 
et al., 2004; Coates Palgrave, 1983; Neuwinger, 
2000; Tshikalange, Meyer & Hussein, 2005. 
Other references Coetzee et al., 2000; 
Connelly et al., 1996; Gelfand et al., 1985; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Sparg, van Staden & Jäger, 
2000; Steenkamp, 2003; Storrs, 1979; Thulin, 
1989; Williamson, 1955. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SENNA PODOCARPA (Guill. & Perr.) Lock 
Protologue Kew Bull. 43(2): 340 (1988). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 28 
Synonyms Cassia podocarpa Guill. & Perr. 
(1832). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
podocarpa is distributed from Senegal and 
Gambia in the west to Nigeria in the east and 
is also reported from Bioko (Equatorial Guinea) 
and Sào Tomé. 
Uses Senna podocarpa leaves are exten-
sively used against gonorrhoea, for their pur-
gative properties, as a guinea-worm expellent 
and as sore-healing remedy. A paste of 
pounded leaves is applied to the skin to treat 
problems such as guinea-worm sores. The 
leaves, reduced to ash, are mixed with shea 
butter (Vitellaria paradoxa C.F.Gaertn.) and 
applied externally to relieve arthritis and 
rheumatic pains. Pods are used in the treat-
ment of skin diseases such as eczema, scabies 
and ringworm. The extract of the pods is taken 
as a purgative and has been shown to be as 
good as commercial 'Senna' made from the 
leaves or pods of Senna alexandrina Mill. The 
root is purgative as well and in decoction it is 
used as a stomachic and diuretic and is specifi-
cally used to cure oedema and gonorrhoea. The 
root contains a dark dye that is used as a body 
paint. 
Properties The leaves and pods of Senna 
podocarpa contain rhein, chrysophanol, emodin 
and other combined and free anthraquinones. 
In vitro, leaf extracts inhibited the multiplica-
tion of herpes simplex virus type HSV-1, 
whereas they were ineffective against African 
swine virus. 
Toxic effects of extracts of leaves and pods may 
result from prolonged intake of high doses, but 
with moderate use the extracts are not consid-
ered harmful. Extra caution is needed in case 
of treatment of children and pregnant women. 
Repeated administration of different doses of 
leaf extract of Senna podocarpa caused tissue 
degenerative changes in the liver and kidneys 
of rats. 
Botany Shrub up to 5 m tall. Leaves ar-
ranged spirally, paripinnately compound with 
3-5 pairs of leaflets; stipules swollen at the 
base, 7—9 mm long, acute, persistent; petiole 2 -
4 cm long; leaflets elliptical, 5-12 cm x 3-7 cm, 
base asymmetrical, apex rounded, mucronate, 
glabrous on both sides. Inflorescence an erect, 
terminal raceme 20-30 cm long, 20-30-
flowered; bracts elliptical, enclosing flower 
buds. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-
merous; sepals greenish yellow; petals 1.5-3 
cm long, yellow; stamens 10, the 2 lower ones 
largest, 5 medium-sized, 3 short and rudimen-
tary; ovary superior, woolly, recurved, style 
short. Fruit a flattened, oblong pod 4-11 cm x 
1-1.5 cm, base and tip acuminate, with trans-
verse ridges, indéhiscent, 12-25 seeded. 
Until the early 1980s, Cassia was considered a 
very large genus of about 550 species, but was 
then split into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 
30 species, Chamaecrista with about 250 spe-
cies and Senna with about 270 species. Senna 
is very similar to Cassia, but is distinguished 
from it by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens, 
which are short and straight, and the pedicels, 
which have no bracteoles. 
Ecology Senna podocarpa occurs in humid 
localities and at the margin of gallery forest. In 
forest areas it is often common in anthropo-
genic habitats such as old farmland. 
Management Anthraquinone glycosides in 
Senna podocarpa reach their highest level dur-
ing the dry season and drop during the rainy 
SENNA 513 
season. This can be taken into account when 
deciding on the time of harvesting. 
Genetic resources and breeding Senna 
podocarpa is widespread and occurs in anthro-
pogenic habitats so no threats of genetic ero-
sion are envisaged. It is not present in germ-
plasm collections. 
Prospects In the wetter parts of West Africa 
Senna podocarpa is the most important me-
dicinal Senna and will probably remain so. 
Research has been done, notably in Nigeria, to 
verify whether Senna podocarpa could serve as 
a source of raw material for the local industrial 
production of laxatives. As results are positive, 
this may be taken up in the near future. 
Major references Berhaut, 1975b; Elojuba, 
Abere & Adelusi, 1999; Neuwinger, 2000; Silva 
et al., 1996. 
Other references Abo & Adeyemi, 2002; 
Adjanohoun et a l , 1989; Akanmu et al., 2005; 
Burkill, 1995; Inngjerdongen et al., 2004; Keay, 
Hoyle & Duvigneaud, 1958; Sequeira, 1994; 
Rai, 1988; Silva et a l , 1997a; Silva et a l , 1997b. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SENNA SINGUEANA (Delile) Lock 
Protologue Kew Buil. 43(2): 340 (1988). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Synonyms Cassia singueana Delile (1826), 
Cassia goratensis Fresen. (1839). 
Vernacular names Winter cassia, sticky 
pod, scrambled egg (En). Pintcheira do mato 
(Po). Mbaraka, mkundekunde (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
singueana occurs throughout mainland tropical 
Africa and is probably only absent from Gabon, 
Djibouti and Somalia. In the Indian Ocean 
islands it is only on record for the Comoros. 
Uses Senna singueana has many medicinal 
uses throughout Africa. A hot water infusion of 
the leaves is drunk and the warm leaves are 
applied as a compress to treat fever. The leaf 
sap is drunk to cure malaria. The leaves in 
decoction or infusion or as dried powder are 
applied to wounds caused by leprosy and syphi-
lis. An infusion of the leaves is applied as eye 
drops to cure conjunctivitis. Extracts of the 
stem bark are taken to cure stomach com-
plaints. Like the leaves, the stem bark is used 
to treat skin disorders and malaria. An infu-
sion of the flowers is used as an eye lotion. The 
fruit pulp soaked in water and cooked with a 
staple food is eaten by lactating women as it is 
considered lactogenic. The roots are used to 
treat venereal diseases, stomach complaints 
and as a purgative. The roots are also used to 
cure impotence caused by diabetes. The ash of 
burnt roots is eaten mixed with porridge to 
cure abdominal pain. Leaves, stem and root 
bark are used as an anthelminthic and to treat 
bilharzia. 
As an ornamental Senna singueana is spec-
tacular, with flowers appearing before the on-
set of the rains, but it is only used for this pur-
pose in its native range. The leaves are eaten 
as a cooked vegetable in Malawi and Tanzania, 
but elsewhere they are considered poisonous. 
The stem bark is used as a dye for textile in 
Ethiopia and Zambia and for tanning hides in 
large parts of East Africa. The fruits are used 
in Sudan for tanning skins. Bananas are 
wrapped in the leaves to speed ripening. The 
foliage is browsed by livestock. The wood is 
useful as firewood, and also for hut building, 
small furniture and carvings. The root fibres 
are used in hairpieces. 
Properties From the roots 4 tetrahydroan-
thracene derivatives, singueanol-I and -II, 
torosachrysone and germichrysone, were iso-
lated as well as the pentacyclic triterpene lu-
peol and steroids (campesterol, ß-sitosterol and 
stigmasterol). The anthracene derivatives 
showed significant activity against several 
gram-positive bacteria in vitro and showed 
antispasmodic activity in isolated guinea pig 
colon. Extracts of the root bark have also 
shown significant analgesic, antipyretic, 
anthelminthic and antiplasmodial activity. The 
leaves have anthelminthic and antiviral prop-
erties, but no significant antibacterial activity. 
The stem bark contains tannins and is astrin-
gent. The leaves contain tannins, but a recent 
study indicated that digestibility is quite good 
and not constrained by the presence of tannins. 
In grazing land with ample Senna singueana 
shrubs the intake by cattle appeared to be very 
low, so another anti-feedant factor is likely 
involved. The leaves contain the flavonoid leu-
copelargonidin, which has dyeing properties. 
The wood is pale brown. 
Botany Deciduous shrub or small tree up to 
15 m tall. Leaves arranged spirally, paripin-
nately compound with 5-12 pairs of leaflets; 
stipules linear-lanceolate, acuminate, soon 
falling; leaflets elliptical, oblong-elliptical to 
obovate-elliptical, 2.5-6.5 cm x 1.5-3 cm, un-
equal at base, mostly rounded or notched at 
apex, glabrous to hairy on both sides. Inflores-
cence a stalked, terminal raceme up to 15 cm 
514 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
long, 6-many-flowered; bracts 9-27 mm long. 
Flowers bisexual or female, zygomorphic, 5-
merous; sepals oblong-obovate, up to 14 mm 
long; petals unequal, oblong to obovate, 1.5-3 
cm long, yellow; stamens 10, the 3 lower ones 
largest and fertile, 7 sterile; ovary superior, c. 2 
cm long, stipitate, down-curved. Fruit a cylin-
drical to slightly compressed, straight or 
slightly twisted, oblong pod 5-25 cm x 0.5-1 
cm, slightly constricted between the seeds, 
indéhiscent, apex rounded and shortly pointed, 
8—25-seeded. Seeds compressed, round, 5—6 
mm in diameter, with a small aréole on each 
face. 
Senna singueana often flowers when still leaf-
less. It is susceptible to fire, although the thick 
bark gives some protection. It is often associ-
ated with insects like ants and carpenter bees, 
and the sticky pods are frequently visited by 
flies. It does not produce root nodules, hence 
does not fix nitrogen. 
Until the early 1980s, Cassia was considered a 
very large genus of about 550 species, but was 
then split into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 
30 species, Chamaecrista with about 250 spe-
cies and Senna with about 270 species. Senna 
is very similar to Cassia, but is distinguished 
from it by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens 
which are short and straight, and the pedicels 
which have no bracteoles. 
Ecology Senna singueana occurs in thickets, 
woodland, savanna and dry evergreen forest, 
often on termite mounds, from sea-level up to 
2250 m altitude. It is found in areas with an 
annual rainfall of 500-1000 mm. 
Management Senna singueana is propa-
gated by seedlings, including Wildlings, and is 
quick growing. Dry seed stored in an airtight 
container remains viable for at least 3 years. 
Seed germinates in about 9 days with an aver-
age germination rate of 78%. 
If a tree with a straight stem is required, pro-
tection against browsing animals is needed. 
Trees can be coppiced. 
Genetic resources and breeding Senna 
singueana is widespread and common in most 
of its range. In Namibia, where the roots are 
harvested for medicinal use, it has become rare 
and needs conservation. 
Prospects Although Senna singueana has 
numerous medicinal uses, research into its 
pharmacology has been scarce and restricted to 
the root bark. Because of their many medicinal 
uses, research into the properties of the leaves 
is warranted. The leaves are a more sustain-
able source of medicine than root or stem bark. 
The morphological variation in the species in 
connection to its uses and variation in phyto-
chemistry needs further research. 
Major references Adzu et al., 2003; Brenan, 
1967; Burkill, 1995; Endo & Naoki, 1980; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bein et al., 1996; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Kehlet & Hansen, 2004; Kok-
waro, 1993; Kudi & Myint, 1999; Moshi & 
Mbwambo, 2002; Mutasa, Khan & Jewere, 
1990; SEPASAL, 2006d; Williamson, 1955; 
World Agroforestry Centre (ICRAF), undated. 
Authors V. Kawanga & C.H. Bosch 
SENNA SOPHERA (L.) Roxb. 
Protologue Fl. ind., ed. 1832, 2: 347 (1832). 
Family Caesalpiniaceae (Leguminosae -
Caesalpinioideae) 
Chromosome number 2n = 28 
Synonyms Cassia sophera L. (1753). 
Vernacular names Pepper-leaved senna, 
senna, African senna (En). Cassia coromande-
liana (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Senna 
sophera originates from tropical America, but 
is now pantropical. It occurs throughout tropi-
cal Africa, being common in West Africa, but in 
East Africa and Madagascar it is probably rare. 
Uses In West Africa a leaf infusion is drunk 
to treat fever and malaria. In the Comoros a 
decoction of the leaves is used as an eye-bath to 
cure conjunctivitis. A decoction of the roots is 
drunk to relieve painful menstruation and is 
given to children to stimulate their nervous 
system. In Indonesia extracts of all plant parts 
are used to treat epilepsy. In the Philippines 
the seeds are used to treat fever. In India the 
juice of the leaves is applied against ringworm, 
while it is also employed as an expectorant, 
anthelminthic and as a remedy for rheumatic 
and inflammatory fevers. In addition to these 
applications, in Thailand the leaves are used 
for wound healing and as an antipyretic. 
Powdered dry leaves are traditionally used in 
Ghana to control insect pests of stored grain 
and pulses. Planting Senna sophera in guard 
rows in vegetable crops has been shown to re-
duce the damage caused by the giant African 
land snail (Achatina fulica). The young leaves 
are eaten as a vegetable in Madagascar. The 
seeds and roasted leaves serve as a coffee sub-
stitute. Senna sophera is widely grown as an 
ornamental. 
Properties Senna sophera has been re-
SHIRAKIOPSIS 515 
ported to contain anthraquinones, including 
chrysophanol and emodin. 
Dried leaves have insect repellent and insecti-
cidal properties and give some control of stor-
age pests, especially of cowpea weevil (Calloso-
bruchus maculatus) and the lesser grain weevil 
(Sitophilus oryzae). Senna sophera, Senna oc-
cidentalis (L.) Link, Senna tora (L.) Roxb. and 
Chamaecrista mimosoides (L.) Greene are used 
medicinally almost without distinction. 
Botany Erect shrub up to 2(-3) m tall, al-
most glabrous. Leaves arranged spirally, pari-
pinnately compound with 4-10 pairs of leaflets; 
stipules broadly triangular, early caducous; 
petiole 3-5 cm long, with a gland 5-10 mm 
above the petiole joint, rachis up to 11 cm long, 
without glands; leaflets lanceolate, 2-7 cm x 1-
2 cm, upper leaflets largest, base rounded, apex 
acute to acuminate. Inflorescence an axillary 
corymb up to 2.5 cm long, 1-4-flowered. Flow-
ers bisexual, zygomorphic, 5-merous; sepals 
ovate, 5—8 mm long, thinly hairy outside; pet-
als obovate, 10-14 mm x 6-8 mm, yellow; sta-
mens 10, 2 longer stamens with filaments 5-7 
mm long and anthers 5—6 mm long, 4 shorter 
stamens with filaments 2 mm long and anthers 
5 mm long, 4 staminodes; ovary superior, 
hairy, style thin, glabrous. Fruit a compressed 
pod 6-10 cm x 0.5-1 cm, 30-40-seeded. Seeds 
compressed, ovoid to rounded, 3—4 mm long. 
Until the early 1980s, Cassia was considered a 
very large genus of about 550 species, but was 
then split into 3 genera: Cassia s.s. with about 
30 species, Chamaecrista with about 250 spe-
cies and Senna with about 270 species. Senna 
is very similar to Cassia, but is distinguished 
from it by the possession of 3 adaxial stamens, 
which are short and straight, and the pedicels, 
which have no bracteoles. Senna sophera is 
closely related to Senna occidentalis (L.)Link. 
The two are often confused, but the pods of the 
latter are circular in cross-section, not com-
pressed, and have 2 rows of seeds. Records of 
Senna sophera at higher altitudes, e.g. in 
Rwanda and Uganda, are doubtful and may 
refer to Senna occidentalis. 
Senna sophera flowers throughout the year, 
most abundantly after rains. 
Ecology Senna sophera occurs in secondary 
habitats such as roadsides and waste places at 
lower elevations. 
Management Senna sophera is sometimes a 
weed and is a host of bean common mosaic 
necrosis virus (BCMNV), Javanese root knot 
nematode (Meloidogyne javanica) and bean 
flower thrips (Megalurothrips sjostedti) and 
some monitoring is indicated in fields where 
pulse crops are grown. 
Genetic resources and breeding Senna 
sophera is widely found in and outside Africa, 
and is neither endangered nor liable to genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Senna sophera is a truely multi-
purpose plant, with its various medicinal prop-
erties and ornamental value. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; ILDIS, 
2005; Irwin & Barneby, 1982a; Neuwinger, 
2000; Toruan-Purba, 1999b. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1982; Alemayehu, Abegaz & Kraus, 1998; 
Beimain et a l , 2001; Decary, 1946; Kestenholz, 
2001; Luckow, 1996; Raut & Barker, 2002; 
Sengooba et a l , 1997. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
SHIRAKIOPSIS ELLIPTICA (Höchst.) Esser 
Protologue Kew Bull. 56: 1018 (2001). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Synonyms Sapium ellipticum (Höchst.) Pax 
& KHoffm. (1912), Shirakia elliptica (Höchst.) 
Kruijt (1996). 
Origin and geographic distribution Shira-
kiopsis elliptica occurs from Senegal east to 
Ethiopia and Kenya, and south to South Africa. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire and Congo Shira-
kiopsis elliptica is considered very poisonous 
and a very drastic purgative. A decoction of the 
leafy twigs is only occasionally taken orally to 
treat leprosy and ascites, in a similar way as 
extracts of Excoecaria grahamii Stapf. Exter-
Shirakiopsis elliptica - wild 
516 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
nally, the extract is applied against Guinea 
worm sores. A leaf decoction is taken to treat 
elephantiasis. A leaf extract is applied to ab-
dominal swellings and used as eye drops to 
treat eye diseases. In Tanzania the Shambaa 
people apply a paste made from powdered 
dried twigs with water to wounds infested with 
maggots. Leaf preparations are applied to treat 
pain in the chest, shoulders, back and head. In 
the Central African Republic the Lissongo peo-
ple use a bark decoction as a mouthwash to 
treat stomatitis and scurvy. In DR Congo a 
bark decoction is used as a strong enema to 
treat abdominal pain. A stem bark infusion is 
taken to treat scabies and eczema. In Burundi 
a leaf or stem bark decoction is taken to treat 
anaemia and persistent headache, and also as 
an emetic. The bark latex is added to arrow 
poison based on Acokanthera schimperi (A.DC.) 
Schweinf. A root decoction is drunk to mature 
abscesses. The pulped roots in water are taken 
as a cure for stammering. The leaf or root juice 
is taken to treat fever, cough and colds; a leaf 
or root bark decoction or infusion is taken to 
treat colic. A decoction of leaves or roots, or the 
ash is applied to rheumatic parts of the body. 
In Kenya a root decoction is taken to treat 
cough. In Uganda crushed leaves and roots are 
applied to mumps. A root decoction is laxative 
and drunk to cure malaria and intestinal 
worms. In Zambia the grated roots are boiled 
and applied as a hot poultice on enlarged 
spleen in small children. 
The sweet fruits are eaten in Nigeria and Tan-
zania. As the latex of the plant is considered 
poisonous, the consumption of the fruits merits 
caution. The white wood is tough. It is used for 
construction purposes, but not for roofs as it is 
not durable and easily damaged by borers and 
fungi. It is also used to make tool handles, farm 
implements, maize storage huts, mortars, 
spoons, bowls, cups and drums, and as fire-
wood and to make charcoal. The leaves are rich 
in protein and are used as fodder for livestock, 
especially in East Africa. Shirakiopsis elliptica 
is occasionally used as shade tree and orna-
mental. In DR Congo an edible mushroom 
grows from the rotting trunk. The latex from 
the young twigs is sticky and caustic. It is used 
as bird lime and to create body markings. 
Properties Almost nothing is known con-
cerning the chemistry and pharmacology of 
Shirakiopsis elliptica. Preliminary tests on 
whole plants showed the presence of tannins 
and alkaloids. Crude bark extracts showed 
moderate bactericidal activity in vitro against 
Campylobacter jejuni. 
The fruits contain carotenes and ascorbic acid. 
Description Monoecious, much-branched 
shrub or small tree up to 15(-40) m tall; bole 
up to 100 cm in diameter, branchless for up to 
12 m, often fluted; bark surface pale brown, 
reddish to almost black, smooth to rough, inner 
bark dirty yellow to orange or brown; young 
twigs sparsely hairy, soon glabrous, with milky 
latex. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules trian-
gular-ovate, c. 2.5 mm long, soon falling; peti-
ole up to 1.5 cm long, channeled above; blade 
elliptical, elliptical-oblong to oblanceolate, 4-17 
cm x 1.5-7.5 cm, base cuneate to rounded with 
2-4 glands, apex rounded to acute or acumi-
nate, margin shallowly toothed, glossy and 
dark green above, reddish brown when young, 
turning red on falling, glabrous or sparsely 
hairy on veins beneath. Inflorescence an axil-
lary or terminal spike-like raceme on lateral 
shoots, up to 12 cm long, with numerous male 
flowers and 1-3 female flowers at base. Flow-
ers unisexual, regular, petals absent, disk ab-
sent; male flowers with pedicel 1-1.5 mm long, 
sepals 2-3, broadly ovate, c. 0.5 mm long, pale 
green, stamens 2(—3), free, shortly exserted; 
female flowers with pedicel 1.5—4 mm long, 
extending in fruit to 1-2 cm, sepals 2-3, trian-
gular-ovate, 1—1.5 mm long, yellowish, ovary 
superior, 2-lobed, c. 1.5 mm long, smooth, 2-
celled, styles 2(-4), 2-3 mm long, fused at base, 
coiled, green, persistent. Fruit a 2-lobed and 
laterally compressed drupe 8-15 mm x 6-8 
mm, topped by the styles, smooth, green, turn-
ing yellowish then purple or black, slightly 
fleshy, 2-seeded. Seeds ellipsoid to almost glo-
bose, 5-5.5 mm in diameter, smooth, yellowish 
brown. 
Other botanical information Shirakiopsis 
belongs to the tribe Hippomaneae and com-
prises 6 species, 3 in South-East Asia and 3 in 
tropical Africa. It is based on species formerly 
included in Sapium and later transferred to 
Shirakia. A few African Shirakia spp. were 
found to be congeneric with the Asian 
Shirakiopsis species. The African species 
mainly differ from the Asian ones in usually 
having much smaller and 2-celled fruits. 
Shirakiopsis aubrevillei (Leandri) Esser (syno-
nyms: Sapium aubrevillei Leandri, Shirakia 
aubrevillei (Leandri) Kruijt) occurs from Sierra 
Leone to Ghana. It is listed as vulnerable in 
the IUCN Red List of threatened species, be-
cause of habitat loss. A root decoction is taken 
in Côte d'Ivoire as an aphrodisiac. The third 
African species, Shirakiopsis trilocularis (Pax 
SMEATHMANNIA 517 
& K.Hoffm.) Esser is endemic to Kenya and 
also listed as vulnerable in the IUCN Red List 
of threatened species. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth ring boundaries indis-
tinct or absent. Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
13: simple perforation plates; 22: intervessel 
pits alternate; (23: shape of alternate pits po-
lygonal); 27: intervessel pits large (> 10 urn); 
30: vessel-ray pits with distinct borders; simi-
lar to intervessel pits in size and shape 
throughout the ray cell; 31: vessel-ray pits with 
much reduced borders to apparently simple: 
pits rounded or angular; 41: mean tangential 
diameter of vessel lumina 50-100 urn; 42: 
mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
100-200 um; 46: < 5 vessels per square milli-
metre; (56: tyloses common). Tracheids and 
fibres: 61: fibres with simple to minutely bor-
dered pits; 66: non-septate fibres present; (68: 
fibres very thin-walled); 69: fibres thin- to 
thick-walled. Axial parenchyma: 76: axial pa-
renchyma diffuse; 77: axial parenchyma dif-
fuse-in-aggregates; 78: axial parenchyma 
scanty paratracheal; 93: eight (5-8) cells per 
parenchyma strand. Rays: 96: rays exclusively 
uniseriate; 105: all ray cells upright and/or 
square; 109: rays with procumbent, square and 
upright cells mixed throughout the ray; 115: 4— 
12 rays per mm; 116: > 12 rays per mm. Min-
eral inclusions: 159: silica bodies present; 160: 
silica bodies in ray cells. 
(D. Louppe, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
Growth and development In the Sahel 
region Shirakiopsis elliptica flowers at the be-
ginning of the dry season; in East Africa it 
flowers in April and May and fruits from July 
to September. 
Ecology Shirakiopsis elliptica occurs in sa-
vanna and secondary open forest, evergreen 
forest, fringing forest and swamp forest, from 
sea-level up to 2200 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Shirakiopsis 
elliptica can be multiplied by Wildlings and 
seed. The ripe fruits are collected and cracked 
to release the seeds. The seed is sown directly 
in the field as transplanting is difficult; pre-
treatment is not necessary. The seeds can be 
stored for a long period in a container in a cool 
and dry room without loss of viability. 
Management Shirakiopsis elliptica can be 
managed by coppicing, pollarding and lopping. 
Diseases and pests The seeds in the fruits 
of Shirakiopsis elliptica are often damaged by 
insects. The fruits are sometimes galled. 
Genetic resources Shirakiopsis elliptica 
has a scattered, irregular distribution in tropi-
cal Africa, and has become rare in some areas 
as a result of habitat degradation, but there 
are no indications that it is threatened by ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Despite its toxicity, Shirakiopsis 
elliptica has numerous local medicinal uses 
throughout its distribution area. As virtually 
nothing is known concerning its chemistry and 
pharmacology, research seems warranted to 
evaluate its potential. More research needs to 
be effected as well concerning the toxicity or 
palatability of the fruits, as its consumption by 
humans could be hazardous. 
Major references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Burkill, 1994; Esser, 2001; Katende, 
Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Lovett et al., 2006; 
Maundu & Tengnäs, 2005; Neuwinger, 1998; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; 
Udoessien & Ifon, 1992. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2002; Inside-
Wood, undated; Léonard, 1962; Roothaert, 
2000; Sekatuba et al., 2004; Tan et a l , 2006; 
Yamada, 1999. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
SMEATHMANNIA PUBESCENS Sol. ex R.Br. 
Protologue Trans. Linn. Soc. 13: 221 (1821). 
Family Passifloraceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Smeath-
mannia pubescens occurs in the forest zone 
from Guinea-Bissau east to Nigeria. 
Uses In Sierra Leone a bark decoction is 
taken to treat dysentery. In Liberia the inner 
bark is used as a poultice to treat toothache. In 
Côte d'Ivoire the Guère people take the sap 
from crushed leaves to treat acute enteritis. 
The hard and reddish wood of Smeathmannia 
pubescens is used as firewood and to produce 
chew-sticks by splitting. The pulp of the fruits 
is edible, but astringent. 
Properties A mixture of the cyanogenic 
glycosides epitetraphyllin B (volkenin) and 
tetraphyllin B (barterioside) has been isolated 
from a leaf extract. 
Botany Much-branched shrub or small tree 
up to 10 m tall; branches shallowly grooved, 
hairy, purplish. Leaves alternate, simple; stip-
ules minute, soon falling; petiole short, glandu-
lar, with 2 stalked glands on either side; blade 
oblong, 5-8 cm long, base rounded, apex ob-
tuse, margin toothed, leathery, glabrous or 
hairy on both sides. Flowers solitary in leaf 
518 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
axils, bisexual, regular, 5-merous, glabrous, 5— 
7 cm in diameter; pedicel up to 3 cm long, red-
dish hairy; sepals oblong, c. 2.5 cm long, apex 
acute, imbricate, the exposed portions with 
golden-brown or reddish brown silky hairs, the 
covered edges white; petals ovate to oblong, c. 
2.5 cm long, apex obtuse to emarginate, white; 
corona annular; stamens c. 20, fused at base; 
ovary superior, globose to ovoid, 1-celled, 
densely hairy at apex, styles 3-5, filiform, 
stigma large, head-shaped. Fruit an ovoid cap-
sule, leathery, 3-valved. Seeds obovoid, com-
pressed, with hard, pitted testa. 
Smeathmannia comprises 6 species, which all 
occur in West Africa. Smeathmannia laevigata 
Sol. ex R.Br, occurs from Senegal to Sierra 
Leone and is similar to Smeathmannia pubes-
cens. In Sierra Leone a bark decoction of 
Smeathmannia laevigata is taken to treat dys-
entery. In Senegal macerated leaves or a decoc-
tion of leafy stems are used in baths or taken 
orally to treat fever, back pain and headache. A 
decoction of twigs is used externally to treat 
sores and eye troubles. 
Ecology Smeathmannia pubescens occurs in 
fringing and open forest. 
Genetic resources and breeding Smeath-
mannia pubescens is fairly widespread and 
therefore not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Smeathman-
nia pubescens will remain of limited use only. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Keay, 1954a; 
Masters, 1871; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Kerharo, 1971; MacFoy & 
Sama, 1983; Olafsdottir, Andersen & Jaro-
szewski, 1989. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
S O L A N U M A C U L E A T I S S I M U M J a c q . 
Protologue Icon. pi. rar. 1: 5, pi. 41 (1781). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number In = 24 
Synonyms Solanum khasianum C.B.Clarke 
(1883), Solanum angustispinosum De Wild. 
(1914). 
Vernacular names Cockroach berry, love 
apple, devil's apple, soda-apple nightshade 
(En). Pomme d'amour (Fr). Unisca, jurubeba, 
gogoia (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum aculeatissimum is native of Brazil. It 
was introduced in Africa centuries ago and is 
now found throughout tropical Africa, but not 
yet in the Indian Ocean Islands. In Asia it is 
Solanum aculeatissimum - naturalized 
widely spread as well. 
Uses In Liberia and Nigeria a fruit decoction 
of Solanum aculeatissimum is administered as 
an enema to cure constipation. In DR Congo 
warm leaves are ground in water and the ex-
tract is administered as an enema as an aborti-
facient or purgative. In Uganda the fruit sap is 
used as eye drops to treat trachoma and the 
sap of roasted fruits is taken to induce labour. 
The fruits are considered toxic and the plants 
are used in witchcraft. In Kenya the sap from 
the leaves and fruit is applied to warts. In 
South Africa a root decoction is drunk to cure 
back pain and male impotence, a root macera-
tion is drunk to treat snakebites, smoke from 
burning fruits is inhaled to cure toothache and 
the fruit is pressed to the forehead to remedy 
headache and to the skin to cure skin infec-
tions. The root extract is taken as a purgative 
and also to stop flatulence. Roots and fruits 
enter in preparations to treat coughs and dys-
menorrhoea. In China the plant is used to treat 
bronchitis and rheumatism. No cases of poison-
ing of free ranging cattle are reported but 
force-feeding of either ripe or unripe fruits 
leads to death. In Puerto Rico the sliced fruit is 
used as bait for cockroaches. 
In Asia Solanum aculeatissimum is used as 
rootstock for tomato and eggplant. 
Properties Solasonine is the major glycoal-
kaloid in leaves, stems, fruits and seeds of So-
lanum aculeatissimum, and minor alkaloids 
isolated are solamargine, solanine and solaso-
dine. The highest concentration of alkaloids is 
found in the seed (4.4%). Ripe fruits have a 
solasodine content of 2.8-3.8%. Mature fruits 
contain the steroids diosgenin, ß-sitosterol and 
SOLANUM 519 
lanosterol. Roots contain the steroidal saponins 
aculeatiside A and B, which are precursors of 
steroid hormones. The roots contain high 
amounts of solasodine and aculeatiside B (3.8% 
and 3.0% respectively). 
An ethanol extract of the leaves inhibits spore 
germination of the fungal cabbage disease 
black spot (Alternaria brassicicola). Extracts of 
leaves and fruits were shown to have a repel-
lent, but not an insecticidal effect on the cab-
bage aphid (Breuicoryne brassicae). 
In-vitro production of the steroidal saponins is 
of economic interest; it has been extensively 
investigated and protocols have been devel-
oped. 
Description Perennial herb or small shrub 
up to 120(-200) m tall; stems densely covered 
with yellowish, slender prickles up to 18 mm 
long, hairs mostly simple, some hairs stellate. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules absent; peti-
ole 1-9.5 cm long; blade broadly ovate, 2.5-16 
cm x 2.5—19 cm, base unequal, cuneate to cor-
date, apex usually acute, margin coarsely 
toothed or more or less deeply lobed, prickles 
present on main veins. Inflorescence a cyme, 
inserted above the leaf axil, 2-3.5 cm long, 2-7-
Solanum aculeatissimum - 1, flowering shoot; 
2, fruits. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
flowered. Flowers bisexual or functionally 
male, regular, 5(-6)-merous; calyx bell- or cup-
shaped, 4-10 mm in diameter, lobes unequal, 
triangular, acuminate, reflexed; corolla stel-
late, up to 22 mm in diameter, white to mauve 
or purple; stamens alternate with corolla lobes, 
filaments 1-2 mm long, anthers lanceolate, c. 6 
mm long, opening with apical pores; ovary su-
perior, with stalked glands and short hairs 
near base, style glabrous, 6-10 mm long. Fruit 
a globose berry 2-3 cm in diameter, glabrous, 
green marbled white or cream, yellowish when 
ripe, many-seeded. Seeds ovoid, compressed, 
2.5-4.5 mm in diameter, margin thickened. 
Seedling with epigeal germination; cotyledons 
thin, leafy. 
Other botanical information Solanum 
comprises about 1000 species and has a cosmo-
politan distribution, except in boreal, alpine 
and aquatic habitats. About 110 species are 
found in tropical Africa. The principal centre of 
diversity is located in Central and South Amer-
ica, with secondary centres in Africa and Aus-
tralia. Solanum has been subdivided into 7 
subgenera and numerous sections and series. 
The section Acanthophora of the subgenus Lep-
tostemonum, to which Solanum aculeatis-
simum belongs, comprises about 20 species, all 
native to tropical America. The name Solanum 
aculeatissimum is sometimes wrongly applied 
to Solanum capsicoides All., a species native of 
coastal Brazil. Solanum capsicoides is fairly 
widespread in the Caribbean and the fruits are 
used to make juice. It is also introduced in 
tropical Africa as an ornamental. The synonym 
Solanum khasianum is still often used in sci-
entific publications in India, and as such it is 
often misapplied to Solanum viarum Dunal, 
another species of the section Acanthophora. 
Based on their morphology it has been con-
cluded that Solanum aculeatissimum, Solanum 
viarum and Solanum myriacanthum Dunal are 
very closely related and molecular research 
indicates that they belong to a hybrid complex. 
Misidentification of Solanum macrocarpon L. 
(synonym: Solanum dasyphyllum Schumach. & 
Thonn.) is a further source of confusion, proba-
bly in West Africa in particular. 
Growth and development In East Africa 
Solanum aculeatissimum flowers from October 
to February, in DR Congo throughout the year 
and in South Africa from November to March. 
Ecology Solanum aculeatissimum occurs in 
disturbed open vegetation, e.g. in roadsides, 
forest clearings and as a weed in pastures, ag-
ricultural land and forest plantations, from 
520 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
sea-level up to 2400 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Solanum acu-
leatissimum is easily propagated from seed or 
stem cuttings. Shoots can be produced from 
leaf and stem-node explants on Murashige & 
Skoog medium supplemented with cytokinins. 
Management Commercial cultivation of 
Solanum aculeatissimum has not been at-
tempted in tropical Africa. In Asia it is used as 
rootstock for tomato and eggplant, both in tra-
ditional systems and in hydroponics. 
Diseases and pests Solanum aculeatis-
simum is a host of the potato leaf rolling virus 
(PLRV). It is very susceptible to root knot 
nematodes (Meloidogyne spp.). 
Harvesting When grown in Japan as an 
arable crop the dry weight of the roots reached 
a maximum in November and contained more 
than 10% steroid saponins. 
Genetic resources In Brazil the genetic 
diversity of Solanum aculeatissimum should be 
looked into, with regard to the alkaloid content. 
Plants grown in botanic gardens in Europe are 
very uniform and probably descend from a sin-
gle introduction from South Africa. 
Breeding Solanum aculeatissimum is 
highly resistant to Verticillium wilt (Verticil-
Hum dahliaé), a characteristic that is useful to 
introduce in eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) 
and gboma eggplant (Solanum macrocarpon 
L.); crosses of Solanum aculeatissimum with 
these 2 species are sometimes successful, but 
sometimes result in sterile seed. 
Prospects The prospects of cultivating So-
lanum aculeatissimum for the extraction of 
steroidal saponins need further research. A 
major problem in evaluating the potential of 
Solanum aculeatissimum is the enormous con-
fusion in the literature with several other So-
lanum species. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Gbile & 
Adesina, 1988; Goncalves, 2005; Hulstaert, 
1966; Levin, Watson & Bohs, 2005; Nabeta, 
1993; Nee, 1991; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962; Welman, 2003. 
Other references Alconero et al., 1988; 
Bukenya-Ziraba & Carasco, 1999; Hamill et al., 
2000; Heine, 1963; Hsieh et al., 2005; 
Hutchings et al., 1996; Ikenaga et al., 1988; 
Kadkade, 1984; Kadkade, Recinos & Madrid, 
1979; Kamatenesi-Mugisha & Oryem-Origa, 
2007; Lovatto, Goetze & Thome, 2004; Rathore 
& Kamal, 1979; Shale, Stirk & van Staden, 
1999; De Souza-Dias, Costa-Alvaro & Nardin-
Antonio, 1993; Tokarnia, Canella & Do-
bereiner, 1973; Asano et al., 1997; Yamada, 
1999. 
Sources of illustration Agnew & Agnew, 
1994; Welman, 2003. 
Authors M.J. Nicholson 
S O L A N U M C A T O M B E L E N S E P e y r . 
Protologue Sitzungsber. Akad. Wiss. 
Math.-Naturwiss. Wien 38: 576 (1860). 
Family Solanaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum catombelense occurs in southern Africa, 
except Malawi and Zambia. 
Uses In Namibia tea made of the roots of 
Solanum catombelense is drunk or the roots 
are chewed to treat gastro-intestinal disorders. 
The sap of fresh unripe fruits is applied as ar-
row poison. 
Mature fruits are considered edible. Leaves 
and stems are eaten as a vegetable. 
Botany Perennial herb, erect or spreading 
up to 120 cm tall; stems stellate-hairy, sparsely 
covered with prickles. Leaves alternate, simple; 
stipules absent; petiole 1-3 cm long; blade ob-
long, 1.5-8.5 cm x 1-4.5 cm, base rounded or 
cuneate, apex obtuse or rounded, margin entire 
or more or less wavy to few-lobed, prickles of-
ten present on main veins, densely soft-hairy 
on both sides. Inflorescence a cyme, inserted 
above the leaf axil, 2-3.5 cm long, 2-7(-10)-
flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, (4—)5(—6)-
merous; calyx bell- or cup-shaped, densely soft 
hairy, lobes unequal, ovate to linear-lanceolate, 
up to 3.5(-5) mm long, obtuse, recurved; corolla 
rotate to stellate, up to 10 mm in diameter, 
white to purple or violet; stamens alternating 
with corolla lobes, filaments c. 0.5 mm long, 
anthers up to 4.5 mm long, opening with apical 
pores; ovary superior, hairy on upper half, style 
hairy, 4.5-7.5 mm long. Fruit a globose berry 
5-12 mm in diameter, glabrous, yellow, orange, 
red or blackish when ripe, many-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, 2.5-3.5 mm in diameter, pale yellow to 
brown. Seedling with epigeal germination; 
cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Solanum comprises over 1000 species and has 
a cosmopolitan distribution, except in boreal, 
alpine and aquatic habitats. At least 100 spe-
cies are found in tropical Africa. The principal 
centre of diversity is located in Central and 
South America, with secondary centres in Af-
rica and Australia. Solanum has been subdi-
vided into 7 subgenera and numerous sections 
and series. Solanum catombelense has been 
placed in the 'Solanum tomentosum and rela-
SOLANUM 521 
tives' group of the section Oliganthes of subge-
nus Leptostemonum. This group comprises 3 
species and occurs in southern Africa. The 
other species in this group, Solanum burchellii 
Dunal and Solanum tomentosum L., are also 
used medicinally. A root infusion of Solanum 
burchellii is drunk to cure venereal diseases in 
Namibia. Solanum tomentosum is restricted to 
South Africa and a decoction of the roots is 
drunk to cure syphilis. 
The closely related 'Solanum capense and rela-
tives' group comprises about 7 species, all but 
one restricted to southern Africa. Solanum 
glabratum Dunal (synonym: Solanum sepicula 
Dunal) occurs in Ethiopia, Somalia and Saudi 
Arabia. In Ethiopia the roots of Solanum 
glabratum are crushed, mixed with water and 
given as a drink to cattle suffering from an-
thrax. Of the species restricted to southern 
Africa, 3 have documented medicinal uses in 
Namibia: Solanum capense L., Solanum dinteri 
Bitter and Solanum namaquense Dammer. In 
South Africa the pulverized roots of Solanum 
capense are applied for toothache and milk 
boiled with pounded roots is drunk to cure uri-
nary tract problems. Leaf pulp is applied to 
ulcers and leaf sap to inflamed eyes. Squashed 
fruits are applied to warts and skin affected by 
ringworm. The roots of Solanum dinteri are 
taken for stomach complaints, a root decoction 
is drunk to cure venereal diseases and crushed 
roots are applied externally to relieve pain. A 
root decoction of Solanum namaquense is used 
as a purgative and for liver, gall bladder and 
stomach complaints. The roots enter in prepa-
rations to treat venereal diseases, urinary tract 
problems and dysmenorrhoea. Fruits are 
squashed on lips and tongue to treat fever blis-
ters. 
Ecology Solanum catombelense occurs in 
many vegetation types: coastal forest, wood-
land, wooded grassland, along rivers, on rocky 
outcrops and in overgrazed and disturbed lo-
calities, from sea-level up to 1300 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding There is 
no indication that Solanum catombelense is in 
danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Solanum catombelense will 
probably remain of local importance as a me-
dicinal plant. 
Major references Goncalves, 2005; von 
Koenen, 2001; Wondimu, Asfaw & Kelbessa, 
2007. 
Other references Edmonds, Friis & Thulin, 
2006; Leffers, 2003; Peters, O'Brien & Drum-
mond, 1992; Sarg et al , 1995; SEPASAL, 2008m; 
Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962; Whalen, 
1984. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SOLANUM COAGULANS Forssk. 
Protologue Fl. aegypt.-arab.: 47 (1775). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24 
Synonyms Solanum dubium Fresen. (1833), 
Solanum thruppii C.H.Wright (1894). 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum coagulans occurs in Sudan, Eritrea, 
Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Uganda and Tanza-
nia. It is also found in Egypt, Yemen and Saudi 
Arabia. Records for other countries, e.g. China, 
probably refer to other species of Solanum. 
Uses In Kenya the boiled roots of Solanum 
coagulans are taken to avoid a miscarriage. 
Roots are chewed by expectant mothers who 
experience abnormal pain. The dry seeds are 
powdered and applied to wounds as an antisep-
tic. In Sudan the whole plant and fruits are 
pulped and applied to wounds and skin tu-
mours as a dressing. The seeds are taken in 
Ethiopia as a purgative. The fruits are used for 
tanning and for coagulating milk. The plants 
are browsed by cattle, goats, sheep, donkeys 
and camels. 
Botany Erect or spreading perennial herb 
up to 70 cm tall, young parts covered with stel-
late hairs; stems with many straight yellow 
prickles, rarely without. Leaves alternate, 
variable, simple; stipules absent; petiole 1-6 
cm long, with many prickles; blade ovate-
lanceolate, 1-10 cm x 1-5 cm, base unequally 
truncate or slightly cordate, apex rounded, 
entire or lobed, with rounded lobes. Inflores-
cence an axillary 6-10-flowered raceme-like 
cyme. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel 1-1.5 cm long; calyx persistent, lobes 
lanceolate, c. 5 mm long, with many prickles; 
corolla stellate, 1-2 cm in diameter, pale blue-
violet, lobes spreading or reflexed; stamens 
inserted on corolla throat, unequal, 4 anthers c. 
5 mm long, 1 up to 8 mm long, opening by ter-
minal pores; ovary superior, globose, style 
slightly longer than stamens. Fruit a globose 
berry c. 1 cm in diameter, yellow, enclosed in 
enlarged, prickly calyx, many-seeded. Seeds 
ovoid, compressed, shiny black. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Solanum comprises about 1000 species and has 
a cosmopolitan distribution, except in boreal, 
alpine and aquatic habitats. About 110 species 
522 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
are found in tropical Africa. The principal cen-
tre of diversity is located in Central and South 
America, with secondary centres in Africa and 
Australia. Solanum has been subdivided into 7 
subgenera and numerous sections and series; 
Solanum coagulons belongs to subgenus Lep-
tostemonum. Two other East African species 
from this subgenus are used medicinally. 
Solanum mauense Bitter is only known from 
Kenya west of the Rift Valley. The Maasai peo-
ple drink a decoction of the roots as a cure for 
malaria and chest pain. It is also applied as a 
cure for anthrax in both humans and livestock. 
Boiled berries are eaten to cure pneumonia. 
Solanum richardii Dunal is a very variable 
species distributed from DR Congo to East and 
southern Africa and the Indian Ocean Islands. 
In Tanzania a root decoction is drunk as a cure 
for gonorrhoea and as an anti-emetic. 
Ecology Solanum coagulons occurs in road-
sides, waste places and in Acacia-Commiphora 
bushland up to of 1800 m altitude. 
Management In Sudan Solanum coagulons 
is an important reservoir of the tomato yellow 
leaf curl virus (TYLCV), an important viral 
disease in tomato and Capsicum peppers. 
Genetic resources and breeding Solanum 
coagulons is widely distributed in ruderal 
habitats and not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects As no chemical and pharmacol-
ogical analyses of Solanum coagulons have 
been done, meaningful predictions about its 
prospects cannot be made. The different local 
medicinal uses are interesting though and 
warrant research. 
Major references Edmonds, Friis & Thulin, 
2006; El Kheir & Salih, 1980; Graham et al., 
2000; Jaeger & Hepper, 1986. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Daffalla & 
Ahmed, 2005; Glover, Stewart & Gwynne, 
1966; Haerdi, 1964; Heine & Heine, 1988b; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Morgan, 1981; Whalen, 1984. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
S O L A N U M E R I A N T H U M D . D o n 
Protologue Prodr. fl. nepal: 96 (1825). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24 
Synonyms Solanum verbascifolium auct. 
non L. 
Vernacular names Potato tree, tobacco tree, 
tropillo (En). Amourette marron (Fr). Maria 
mole amarga (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Sola-
Solanum erianthum - naturalized 
num erianthum originates from the West In-
dies, Central America and Mexico, but is now a 
widespread weed in the tropics, although 
hardly penetrating South America. It was 
probably introduced from the Caribbean into 
West Africa at the time of the slave trade and 
it is believed to have been introduced into the 
Philippines by the Spanish in the 16th century, 
from where it has spread throughout the 
South-East Asian archipelago and to mainland 
Asia and Australia as a weed. 
Uses In West Africa a leaf decoction of So-
lanum erianthum is taken for its diuretic and 
purgative properties to cure malaria, leprosy 
and venereal diseases and it is also taken to 
stimulate the liver functions. 
In tropical Asia the leaves are considered a 
potent medicine for expelling all impurities 
through the urine, in particular to treat leuco-
rrhoea, and also as an abortifacient. Pounded 
leaves are applied as a poultice to treat haem-
orrhoids and scrofula. Heated leaves are ap-
plied to the forehead against headache. A de-
coction of the leaves is drunk to treat vertigo. A 
decoction of the roots is applied to treat violent 
body pains or to relieve digestive troubles; it is 
also given to treat dysentery, diarrhoea and 
fever. The root bark is used as an antiphlogis-
tic and to treat arthritis. The fruits are an in-
gredient of arrow poison. 
Although the fruits are considered poisonous, 
causing nausea, headache and cramps, in 
South-East Asia they are sometimes eaten 
when cooked. In southern India the fruits are 
prepared as a curry. In the Philippines the 
velvety leaves are used to remove grease from 
dishes. Solanum erianthum is considered suit-
SOLANUM 523 
able as a shade plant for coffee, but in Ghana it 
is considered an undesirable shade plant. In 
the Caribbean Solanum erianthum is planted 
as an ornamental. 
Properties Solanum erianthum contains 
steroidal saponins and free genins as well as 
steroidal alkaloids of the spirosolane group. 
The spirosolanes are structurally similar to 
saponins of the diosgenin type. Important spi-
rosolane alkaloids include solasodine and to-
matidine, which are both found in Solanum 
erianthum. The total alkaloid content of air dry 
leaves and fruits is about 0.4%. The solasodine 
content in fruits from Indian samples was 
0.01-0.70%. Leaf samples from Vietnam con-
tained 0.26% solasodine and 0.05% tomatidine. 
Steroidal alkaloids such as tomatine, solanine 
and chaconine inhibit growth and development 
of a large number of fungi. A flavonoid-rich 
extract of the leaves of Solanum erianthum 
possesses antibacterial and antifungal activity 
against gram-positive bacteria and the fungi 
Aspergillus flavus and Candida albicans. Ster-
oidal alkaloids from Solanum erianthum are 
useful in industry as steroid precursors. So-
lasodine is a nitrogen-containing analogue of 
diosgenin, a compound often used as raw mate-
rial for the production of medicinal steroids. 
The synthetic steroids have three main appli-
cations in medicine: as anti-inflammatory cor-
ticosteroids, as contraceptive steroids and as 
anabolic steroids. An aqueous extract of the 
leaves given orally to mice was effective as a 
prophylactic against malaria, but when admin-
istered 5 days after infection, it failed to sup-
press the malaria parasites. 
Active compounds can be produced in vitro, 
although only in low amounts. Both diosgenin 
and solasodine have been isolated from 6-
month-old callus, established from sterilized 
seeds on Murashige and Skoog's revised me-
dium. Blue light stimulated solasodine synthe-
sis and green light stimulated diosgenin syn-
thesis. 
Adulterations and substitutes Steroidal 
alkaloids (e.g. diosgenin and tigogenin) are also 
found in Dioscorea and Smilax species; these 
are also used as starting material for steroid 
hormone semisynthesis. 
Description Shrub up to 4(-10) m tall; stem 
up to 20 cm in diameter, unarmed, densely 
woolly hairy with soft stellate hairs. Leaves 
alternate, simple; stipules absent; petiole 2—3(-
4) cm long; blade elliptical-ovate, 10-20(-30) 
cm x 3.5—15 cm, base rounded to cuneate, apex 
acute to acuminate, margin entire or slightly 
.^' 
<?L "•> V 
"7v v 
Solanum erianthum - 1, 
flower; 3, infructescence. 
Source: PROSEA 
flowering branch; 2, 
wavy, densely woolly hairy. Inflorescence a 
terminal or axillary compound cyme, 15—25-
flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
calyx campanulate, c. 5 mm long, lobes ovate; 
corolla stellate, c. 1.5 cm in diameter, white; 
stamens alternate with corolla lobes, filaments 
1.5 mm long, glabrous, anthers oblong, c. 4 mm 
long, opening with apical pores; ovary superior, 
almost glabrous, style glabrous. Fruit a globose 
berry 8—12 mm in diameter, short-hairy, dull 
yellow to orange when ripe, many-seeded. 
Seeds ovoid, compressed, 1-2 mm in diameter. 
Seedling with epigeal germination; cotyledons 
thin, leafy. 
Other botanical information Solanum 
comprises about 1000 species and has a cosmo-
politan distribution, except in boreal, alpine 
and aquatic habitats. About 110 species are 
found in tropical Africa. The principal centre of 
diversity is located in Central and South Amer-
ica, with secondary centres in Africa and Aus-
tralia. Solanum has been subdivided into 7 
subgenera and numerous sections and series. 
Solanum erianthum belongs to subgenus Bre-
vantherum, which has another introduced spe-
524 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cies present as a weed and ornamental in 
tropical Africa: Solanum mauritianum Scop. 
Ecology Solanum erianthum occurs in 
sunny localities, in brushwood and roadsides, 
on waste ground and in edges of fields and for-
ests. It is also a weed of gardens and fields at 
low to medium altitudes and prefers a well-
drained soil. In Ghana it is frequently encoun-
tered as one of the pioneer species of degraded 
mining sites. 
Propagation and planting Solanum erian-
thum is easily raised from seed and can also be 
propagated from shoot cuttings and by division 
of rooted shoots. 
Diseases and pests Many Solanum spp., 
including Solanum erianthum, are hosts of dis-
eases and pests that attack economically im-
portant Solanaceae. 
Yield In many Solanum species the steroidal 
alkaloid content and sapogenin content decline 
as the fruit ripens. Leaf alkaloid and sapogenin 
contents also decline with age. In India a 
method has been developed to estimate solaso-
dine content in the leaves 3 months after sow-
ing by estimating their N content. At that 
stage a top dressing or foliar sprays may be 
applied to increase the solasodine yield. In re-
lated species a yield of 45-50 kg of solasodine 
per ha is considered reasonable. 
Handling after harvest The leaves and 
roots can be used fresh or dried and stored in 
airtight containers for later use. 
Genetic resources In its native range in 
Central America Solanum erianthum is locally 
under serious pressure. In view of its weedy 
nature and wide distribution throughout the 
tropics however, the risk of genetic erosion 
seems to be rather limited. 
Breeding The large variation in alkaloid 
content within Solanum erianthum offers pos-
sibilities for selection. However, the alkaloid 
content also varies substantially as a result of 
ecological conditions, drying and storage. 
Prospects Solanum erianthum has poten-
tial for use in reclamation of degraded sites, 
and has medicinal and ornamental value. The 
possibility of its cultivation for extraction of 
steroidal saponins needs further research. 
However, introduction in areas where it does 
not yet occur, should be discouraged as it may 
become a noxious weed. 
Major references Blomqvist, 1997; Blom-
qvist & Nguyen Tien Ban, 1999; Burkill, 2000; 
Makinde, Obih & Jimoh, 1987; Roe, 1972. 
Other references Abbiw, 1990; Adam, 
Huong & Khoi, 1979; Ajasa et a l , 2004; 
Barnabas & Nagarajan, 1988; Everitt, 1977; 
Garland & Barr (Editors), 1998; Jain, Sahoo & 
Vijvergia, 1995; Karikari, 2006; Kaul & Zutshi, 
1982; Nasir, 1985; Neser et al., 1990; Roe, 
1967; Roe, 1968. 
Sources of illustration Blomqvist & 
Nguyen Tien Ban, 1999. 
Authors D.M. Modise & K.K. Mogotsi 
Based on PROSEA 12(1): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. 
S O L A N U M E R Y T H R A C A N T H U M Dunal 
Protologue A.DC, Prodr. 13(1): 201 (1852). 
Family Solanaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum erythracanthum occurs in Madagascar 
and Mayotte. 
Uses The dried leaves of Solanum erythra-
canthum are smoked as a cigarette to treat 
asthma. A leaf decoction is taken as an antidi-
uretic. A root infusion is taken as a sedative. 
The fruit is eaten as an appetizer. 
Solanum erythracanthum is planted as a live 
fence in southern Madagascar. 
Botany Spreading shrub up to 1 m tall, cov-
ered with stellate hairs; stems with many re-
curved prickles 2-5 mm long. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules absent; petiole c. 5 mm long; 
blade ovate, 2-5 cm long, base cuneate, apex 
acute to obtuse, entire or lobed with rounded 
lobes. Inflorescence a (l-)few-flowered fascicle, 
at first terminal, later becoming lateral. Flow-
ers bisexual, regular, (3—)4(-5)-merous; pedicel 
1—3 cm long; calyx c. 4 mm long, persistent, 
lobes c. 1 mm long; corolla stellate, c. 1 cm 
long, violet or purple, lobes lanceolate, c. 3 mm 
long; stamens inserted on corolla throat, fila-
ments very short, anthers 4.5-6 mm long, 
opening by terminal pores; ovary superior, glo-
bose, short-hairy. Fruit a globose berry 4-6 mm 
in diameter, red, many-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 
compressed, 1.5-2 mm long, black. Seedling 
with epigeal germination. 
Solanum comprises about 1000 species and has 
a cosmopolitan distribution, except in boreal, 
alpine and aquatic habitats. About 110 species 
are found in tropical Africa. The principal cen-
tre of diversity is located in Central and South 
America, with secondary centres in Africa and 
Australia. Solanum has been subdivided into 7 
subgenera and numerous sections and series. 
Solanum erythracanthum has been placed in 
the 'Solanum zanzibarense and relatives' group 
of the section Oliganthes of subgenus Lepto-
SOLANUM 525 
stemonum. This group numbers about 12 spe-
cies and occurs from Sudan to South Africa and 
on Madagascar. There are some other medici-
nally used species in this group. 
Solanum hastifolium Höchst, ex Dunal occurs 
from Sudan south to Tanzania. In Kenya a root 
decoction was used to treat children with 
smallpox and a root infusion is drunk against 
abdominal pain, diarrhoea and as a laxative or 
emetic. The Maasai people administer a root 
decoction to cattle as a remedy for anthrax. 
Goats and sheep sometimes browse on it in the 
dry season. 
Solanum taitense Vatke occurs in Kenya, 
Uganda and Tanzania and Solanum zanzi-
barense Vatke is a coastal species occurring 
from Kenya to South Africa. Of both species, 
the roots are chewed and the sap is used as a 
mouthwash against toothache. The Maasai 
people boil the roots of Solanum taitense and 
the resulting liquid is sieved and drunk as a 
cure for arthritis, malaria, typhoid and stom-
ach-ache. 
Ecology Solanum erythracanthum grows in 
disturbed localities, forest margins and road-
sides. 
Genetic resources and breeding Solanum 
erythracanthum occurs throughout Madagas-
car in ruderal habitats and is not threatened 
by genetic erosion. 
Prospects As no chemical and pharmacol-
ogical analyses of Solanum erythracanthum 
have been done, meaningful predictions about 
its prospects cannot be made. The different 
local medicinal uses are interesting though and 
more research seems to be warranted. 
Major references Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1993; Boiteau, Boiteau & Allorge-
Boiteau, 1999; D'Arcy & Rakotozafy, 1994; 
Ranaivoson, 1996. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Decary, 
1946; Heine & Heine, 1988b; Kiringe, 2006; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Levin, Myers & Bohs, 2006; 
Ole-Miaron, 2003; Whalen, 1984. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
S O L A N U M I N C A N U M L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 188 (1753). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 24, 48 
Synonyms Solanum campylacanthum Höchst, 
ex A.Rich. (1851), Solanum bojeri Dunal (1852), 
Solanum delagoense Dunal (1852), Solanum 
panduriforme E.Mey. ex Dunal (1852). 
Vernacular names Thorn apple, grey bitter 
apple, bitter tomato, Sodom's apple (En). Au-
bergine sauvage, pomme de Sodome (Fr). 
Mtunguja, mtunguja-mwitu, mnyanya-mwitu, 
mnyanya-porini, mtua, mtula (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum incanum is distributed throughout con-
tinental Africa, including South Africa. It is 
also found growing wild in Madagascar and 
Mauritius but is probably a recent introduc-
tion, as the fruits are considered edible there. 
It furthermore occurs from the Middle East 
east to India. 
Uses Many of the medicinal uses of Solanum 
incanum are based on its analgesic properties. 
Throughout tropical Africa a sore throat, an-
gina, stomach-ache, colic, headache, painful 
menstruation, liver pain and pain caused by 
onchocerciasis, pleurisy, pneumonia and rheu-
matism are treated with Solanum incanum. 
For these purposes, leaf, root and fruit decoc-
tions are gargled or drunk, roots are chewed 
and sap swallowed, leaf paste, root infusions 
and pounded fruits are applied externally or 
rubbed into scarifications, leaf sap is used for 
washing painful areas, and ash of burnt plants 
is mixed with fat and applied externally. For 
relief of toothache a root infusion is used as 
mouth wash, fruit or root is rubbed on the 
gums or smoke of burning seeds is inhaled. 
Hiccups are suppressed by licking a mixture of 
the ash of burned leaves and salt. 
Another widespread use of Solanum incanum 
is in the treatment of venereal diseases. Root 
powder is mixed with food or rubbed into scari-
fications, root infusions or decoctions are 
drunk, roasted pulverized roots are taken in 
water, leaf decoctions and fruit sap are drunk, 
Solanum incanum - wild and naturalized 
526 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and fruit sap is applied externally. Different 
plant parts are also widely used in the treat-
ment of skin problems, including skin infec-
tions, whitlow, ringworm, burns, sores, rashes, 
wounds, warts, carbuncles, ulcers and benign 
tumours. In Senegal a maceration of the leaves 
is used as an eye bath to cure ophthalmia; in 
Malawi fruit sap is rubbed into scarifications 
around the eye to treat conjunctivitis. In Sene-
gal pounded seeds are mixed with pulped fruits 
to massage aching ears. In Uganda, Tanzania 
and South Africa extracts of leaves or flowers 
are used as ear drops to cure inflammations. 
In Senegal, Kenya, Uganda and Zimbabwe 
different plant parts are used to treat snake-
bites: a decoction of the roots is drunk, roots 
are chewed and sap is swallowed, and young 
chewed leaves or pulped fresh roots are applied 
to the bite wound. 
In Niger, Sudan, Rwanda and Namibia the 
fruits are used as an ingredient of arrow poison 
and in Mozambique of fish poison. In Ethiopia 
fruit sap is mixed with butter and applied to 
cattle to control ticks. 
Selection for larger, less toxic fruits and leaves 
has taken place over time and whereas the 
wild types produce small, bitter and toxic 
fruits, cultivated types are available, especially 
in West Africa, of which the fruits and leaves 
can be safely eaten in soup and as a vegetable. 
Leaves are added to soup to improve the fla-
vour. The large variation in toxicity makes it 
dangerous to transfer specific uses from one 
region to another. 
The fruit and the seed are used in Africa and 
Asia to curdle milk and to make cheese. In 
Ethiopia the boiled fruits are used as soap and 
in tanning leather. 
Properties Solanum incanum contains 
saponin steroids, in particular glycoalkaloids, 
which are found in all parts of the plant, but in 
highest concentrations in the fruit. The main 
glycoalkaloid is solasonine. Other compounds 
isolated from the fruits include the alkaloids 
solasodine and solamargine, and the steroidal 
sapogenins diosgenin and yamogenin. The 
fruits also contain dimethylnitrosamine, a po-
tent carcinogen that is thought to cause the 
high incidence of oesophageal cancer in areas 
of Africa where the fruit sap is used to curdle 
milk. Alkaloids such as solasodine are used 
commercially as precursors for the production 
of steroidal compounds for medicinal use, 
mainly as contraceptives. Flavonoids and 
chlorogenic acid, a phenolic derivative, have 
also been isolated. Solamargine has shown 
promise for treatment of liver, lung and breast 
cancer. 
In in-vitro efficacy tests on ticks (Boophilus 
decoloratus), solamargine resulted in 30—100% 
mortality. An extract of the fruits has caused 
skin cancer in animals. 
A methanol extract of the fruits showed broad-
spectrum antifungal activities. A strong effect 
was observed against the fungus that causes 
athlete's foot, Trichophyton mentagrophytes. 
The water extract of the fruit showed antibac-
terial activity against Bacillus subtilis, Micro-
coccus flavus and Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
the methanol extract against Staphylococcus 
aureus and Micrococcus flavus. The cytotoxicity 
of the methanol extract against human foetal 
liver cells was ICso - 35 |i.g/ml. Extracts of the 
fruit and of the roots, administered daily to 
diabetic rats, lowered blood glucose levels, but 
the fruit extract also reduced food intake, 
whereas the root extract increased food intake 
and caused diarrhoea. Chlorogenic acid has 
antioxidant and insect repellent properties and 
when ingested by insects decreased growth and 
development. 
Adulterations and substitutes The alka-
loids found in Solanum incanum occur in many 
species of subgenus Leptostemonum. Diosgenin 
is mainly obtained from Dioscorea spp., but it 
is also present in most Costus spp. and in the 
seeds of fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum 
L.). 
Description Erect or spreading shrub up to 
3 m tall, occasionally a small tree; stems and 
leaves with stellate hairs and pale yellow to 
brown prickles, up to 1 cm long. Leaves alter-
nate, simple; stipules absent; petiole 0.5-8.5 
cm long; blade almost round to lanceolate, 1-30 
cm x 1—17 cm, base rounded, truncate or cor-
date, often unequal, apex acute or obtuse, mar-
gin entire to pinnately lobed, densely hairy. 
Inflorescence a 2-15(-26)-flowered cyme, in-
serted above the leaf axil. Flowers bisexual or 
functionally male, nodding or pendent, regular, 
(4-)5-7(-9)-merous; pedicel 0.5-4 cm long; 
calyx campanulate, lobes up to 1.5 cm long, 
enlarging and splitting in fruit; corolla cam-
panulate to rotate, 1—4.5 cm in diameter, with 
ovate or broadly triangular lobes, blue, pink, 
purple or violet, rarely white; stamens inserted 
near the base of the corolla tube and alternat-
ing with corolla lobes, filaments short, anthers 
slender; ovary superior, 2(-4)-celled, style up to 
15 mm long, densely hairy. Fruit a globose or 
depressed globose, occasionally ovoid-ellipsoid 
berry 2.5-3.5 cm x 2-3 cm, yellow, orange or 
SOLANUM 527 
Solanum incanum - 1, flowering shoot; 2, fruits. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
brown when ripe, many-seeded. Seeds lentil-
shaped to almost kidney-shaped, up to 3.5 mm 
x 3 mm, pale yellow to brown. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Solanum 
comprises over 1000 species and has a cosmo-
politan distribution, except in boreal, alpine 
and aquatic habitats. At least 100 species are 
found in tropical Africa. The principal centre of 
diversity is located in Central and South Amer-
ica, with secondary centres in Africa and Aus-
tralia. Solanum has been subdivided into 7 
subgenera and numerous sections and series. 
Solanum incanum belongs to subgenus Lepto-
stemonum section Melongena. Solanum in-
canum is considered here as a single polymor-
phic species, whereas some authors distinguish 
4 groups within the species and others consider 
each of these groups a different species. So-
lanum incanum is considered the ancestor of 
eggplant (Solanum melongena L.) and the 2 
species are therefore considered by some as a 
single species. In the ethnobotanical literature 
the distinction of the 4 groups or species is not 
made and therefore can not be used here. 
From Taiwan research findings have been pub-
lished on Solanum incanum, but a misapplica-
tion of the name is apparent. Results refer to 
the indigenous species Solanum undatum 
Lam. (synonym: Solanum cumingii Dunal), a 
species that also is placed in section Melon-
gena, hybridizes freely with the eggplant, and 
also contains solamargine. 
Several other tropical African species of section 
Melongena have medicinal uses. Solanum 
arundo Mattei (synonym: Solanum diplacan-
thum Dammer) occurs in the coastal lowlands 
of Somalia, Kenya and Tanzania. In Somalia, 
the filtrate of the crushed fruits is massaged 
into the skin to treat itch and scabies. Seeds 
are soaked in hot oil, which after cooling is 
applied to aching teeth as an analgesic. In 
Kenya the roots are pounded and soaked in 
water or chewed as a cure for fever. The 
Rendille people of northern Kenya apply fruit 
juice to wounds on the feet of camels. Sheep 
and goats browse the plants. Solanum lin-
naeanum Hepper & P.M.L.Jaeger, the true 
'Sodom apple', is a weed that originates from 
the Mediterranean region and is now wide-
spread throughout tropical Africa. It is used in 
South Africa for its analgesic properties, to 
treat wound infections and to counteract bloat-
ing. In Ethiopia the pounded roots of Solanum 
marginatum L.f. are applied to wounds. The 
roots are chewed and the sap swallowed to cure 
syphilis. Roots and leaves are steeped in water 
and the water is applied to scabies; root pulp is 
given to dogs as a cure for rabies. In Kenya the 
root of Solanum sessilistellatum Bitter is baked 
and chewed as a cure for whitlow. 
Growth and development All parts of 
Solanum incanum contain solasodine, but the 
levels vary widely. The smallest leaves have 
the highest alkaloid concentration. The amount 
of alkaloids in the leaves increases during leaf 
development. Both leaves and roots showed 
alkaloid accumulation with time, although in 
experiments alkaloid levels in the root fell after 
20 weeks. 
Ecology Solanum incanum is common as a 
weed, around houses, in overgrazed grassland 
and in roadsides. It is also found at forest 
edges and in bushland and grassland, from 
sea-level up to 2500 m altitude. It is considered 
an indicator for low-fertility soils. 
Propagation and planting A cultivation 
method commonly used for eggplant can be 
adopted for Solanum incanum as well: seeds 
528 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
are sown in trays or seedbeds, and seedlings 
are transplanted to small pots or bags (8-10 cm 
diameter) 2-3 weeks later when the first leaf 
appears. The seedlings are kept in the nursery 
till they have developed 5-7 leaves and are 
then planted in the open or in a greenhouse at 
a spacing of 50 cm between plants and 1 m 
between rows, preferably in light and well-pre-
pared soil. 
Management No details on cultivation of 
Solanum incanum have been published but 
husbandry as practised for eggplant, African 
eggplant {Solanum aethiopicum L.) and gboma 
eggplant (Solanum macrocarpon L.) can be 
applied selectively. 
Diseases and pests As a crop Solanum 
incanum is unimportant and observations on 
its diseases and pests are lacking. It is a poten-
tial host for a wide range of pests and diseases 
of Solanaceous crops (especially eggplant, to-
mato and Capsicum pepper). It is a major host 
of the papaya fruit fly (Bactrocera papayae). 
Harvesting For medicinal use, harvesting of 
Solanum incanum is done from the wild when-
ever the need arises and fruits are available. 
Genetic resources The genetic variation of 
Solanum incanum, which is of interest for 
breeding and selection, is not well covered in 
germplasm collections; the number of acces-
sions in genebanks is modest. National re-
search institutes in Kenya (e.g. National Gene-
bank of Kenya, KARI, Kikuyu) maintain some 
germplasm as do the University of Nijmegen 
(Netherlands) and the Millennium Seedbank 
(Ardingly, United Kingdom). As Solanum in-
canum is widespread in tropical Africa, there is 
no danger of genetic erosion. 
Breeding For breeding purposes of the 
closely related Solanum melongena, Solanum 
incanum is an important source of genes that 
can be introduced through breeding. Wild spe-
cies of section Melongena offer an extensive 
genepool, especially for resistance to pests and 
diseases. On the other hand the productivity 
and the fruit size of the eggplant offer opportu-
nities for breeding for commercial production of 
steroidal alkaloids of Solanum incanum. 
Prospects An unambiguous taxonomie clas-
sification of the polymorphic Solanum incanum 
and closely related species is needed to be able 
to start detailed ethnobotanical and pharma-
cological studies. Although there seems to be 
potential for commercial production of steroidal 
alkaloids with Solanum incanum, more re-
search is needed. 
Major references Bukenya-Ziraba & Ca-
rasco, 1999; Burkill, 2000; Lester & Daunay, 
2003; Musabayane, Bwititi & Ojewole, 2006; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Shiu et al., 2007. 
Other references Al Fatimi et al., 2007; 
Behera et al., 2006; D'Arcy & Rakotozafy, 1994; 
Dharani, 2002; du Plessis, Nunn & Roach, 
1969; Eltayeb, Al-Ansari & Roddick, 1997; Fu-
kuhara & Kubo, 1991; Hegnauer, 1973; Johns 
et al., 1995; Kambizi & Afolayan, 2001; 
Kirtsova & Korneva, 1999; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Regassa, 2000; Stamp & Osier, 1998; TICAH, 
2006; Welman & Condy, 2003; Whalen, 1984. 
Sources of illustration Heine, 1963. 
Authors E.N. Matu 
S O L A N U M N I G R U M L . 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 186 (1753). 
Family name Solanaceae 
Chromosome number In = 72 
Vernacular names Black nightshade, 
common nightshade, garden nightshade (En). 
Morelle noire, brède martin, herbe à calalou 
(Fr). Erva moura (Po). Suga, mnavu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution The 
exact origin of Solanum nigrum is unknown, 
but it is generally considered to be native to 
Europe and Asia and possibly also Africa. So-
lanum nigrum (hexaploid) is thought to have 
been derived from the tetraploid Solanum vil-
losum Mill, and the diploid Solanum ameri-
canum Mill., but possibly more taxa have been 
involved. It is very well adapted to the Medi-
terranean climate and possibly originated 
there. It has certainly been introduced in 
North America, New Zealand and Australia 
and has not yet been found in South and Cen-
tral America or on the islands of the Pacific 
Ocean. In Africa it is probably widely distrib-
uted, but accurate taxonomie work has yet to 
be carried out in many countries. 
Uses Solanum nigrum has many uses, but 
determination of the true identity of the plants 
called Solanum nigrum in the literature is 
mostly impossible and some of the uses listed 
here may apply to closely related species. 
The medicinal use of Solanum nigrum proba-
bly goes back more than 2000 years. The plants 
are used as an emollient and analgesic to treat 
itch, burns and neuralgic pains, and are also 
considered to be expectorant and laxative. The 
leaves are said to have sedative and healing 
properties and are applied to cuts, ulcers, 
wounds, inflammations and skin diseases. A 
decoction of the leaves is used to treat yaws. 
SOLANUM 529 
The fruit is considered to be a cure for diabetes. 
Diuretic properties are also attributed to the 
plant. An extract of the leaves and stem is used 
for treating dropsy, heart diseases, piles, gon-
orrhoea, fevers, eye diseases and chronic 
enlargement of liver and spleen. In Tanzania 
the roots are eaten to treat stomach-ache. 
The leaves and young shoots of Solanum ni-
grum are probably collected from the wild like 
other Solanum spp. and eaten boiled as a vege-
table. It is recommended that the cooking wa-
ter is refreshed a number of times. However, it 
has been recorded, e.g. in Ethiopia, that the 
leaves taste bitter and are only eaten when 
more tasty vegetables are not available. Fruits 
are said to be poisonous, but there are records 
of fruits being eaten when ripe. Most reports 
state that unripe fruits are particularly poison-
ous. 
Properties When the leaves of Solanum 
nigrum are eaten regularly (several times a 
week) they are said to cause stomach-ache be-
cause of the presence of toxic glyco-alkaloids 
such as solanine (with aglycon solasodine). 
Total alkaloid content of air-dried leaves is 
0.1%. Solanine poisoning can cause vomiting, 
dizziness, mental confusion, loss of speech and 
sometimes blindness. Solanum nigrum also 
contains the sapogenins diosgenin and ti-
gogenin. Unripe berries contain 0.7% solaso-
dine, 0.2% diosgenin and 0.15% tigogenin; 
leaves contain 1.3% tigogenin. 
The powdered aerial parts of Solanum nigrum 
and their methanolic extract significantly re-
duced gastric ulcer formation in rats, and an 
alcoholic fruit extract showed significant inhi-
bition of carrageenin-induced oedema. An alco-
holic leaf extract was active against Staphylo-
coccus aureus and Escherichia coli. Some other 
pharmacological activities include antispas-
modic, hypotensive, hypocholesterolaemic and 
anti-HIV-1 activities, as well as insecticidal 
and molluscicidal activities. 
Botany Annual herb up to 70 cm tall, with 
decumbent or erect stem, glabrous to long-
hairy with simple multicellular hairs, glandu-
lar or not. Leaves arranged spirally, simple; 
stipules absent; petiole 0.5-6.5 cm long, 
slightly winged towards apex; blade ovate to 
lanceolate-rhombic, 2.5-10 cm x 2-7 cm, base 
cuneate, apex obtuse, margin entire to wavy-
toothed. Inflorescence an extra-axillary ra-
ceme-like cyme, 3—12-flowered; peduncle 1-3 
cm long. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
pedicel recurved in fruit; calyx campanulate, 
up to 2.5 mm long with ovate lobes, deflexed or 
Solanum nigrum - 1, flowering stem; 2, opened 
calyx showing pistil; 3, petal and stamens; 4, 
stamen; 5, part of fruiting stem; 6, seed, back 
view; 7, seed, side view. 
Source: PROSEA 
adhering to the base of the mature fruit; corolla 
stellate, 0.5-1 cm in diameter, white with yel-
low-green basal star, lobes 1.5-4 mm long; 
stamens inserted on corolla throat, filaments 
up to 1.5 mm long, anthers up to 2.5 mm long; 
ovary superior, globose to ellipsoid, c. 1 mm in 
diameter. Fruit a globose to ovoid berry 6-10 
mm in diameter, dull purple to blackish or 
sometimes yellow-green, many-seeded. Seeds 
flattened, obovoid, c. 2 mm long, creamy, mi-
nutely pitted. 
Solanum nigrum belongs to the subgenus So-
lanum and section Solanum, together with 
species such as Solanum americanum Mill., 
Solanum florulentum Bitter, Solanum grosse-
dentatum A.Rich., Solanum scabrum Mill., 
Solanum tarderemotum Bitter and Solanum 
villosum Mill. Many of the species in section 
Solanum have been named Solanum nigrum in 
the past and thus references to Solanum ni-
grum in the literature must be interpreted 
with great caution. Research is still needed to 
better understand the species within section 
530 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Solanum and their diversity. Solanum nigrum 
can be divided into 2 subspecies: subsp. nigrum 
(glabrous to slightly hairy with appressed, non-
glandular hairs) and subsp. schultesii (Opiz) 
Wessely (densely hairy with patent, glandular 
hairs). However, the distinction is not every-
where clear. 
Ecology Solanum nigrum often occurs as a 
weed in fields, but also in wasteland, roadsides 
and disturbed localities, in full sunshine or in 
slight shade, from sea-level up to 3000 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Solanum 
nigrum, is variable and widespread and not in 
danger of genetic erosion. A germplasm collec-
tion is available at the Botanical and Experi-
mental Garden of Nijmegen University, Neth-
erlands. 
Prospects Solanum nigrum will remain a 
minor leafy vegetable, particularly of impor-
tance in times of food scarcity. Its toxic compo-
nents do not allow large-scale consumption and 
may make use as a medicinal plant hazardous. 
Major references Blomqvist & Nguyen 
Tien Ban, 1999; Bukenya-Ziraba & Carasco, 
1995; Edmonds & Chweya, 1997; Goncalves, 
2005; Katambo, 2007. 
Other references Bukenya-Ziraba, 1996; 
Bukenya-Ziraba & Carasco, 1999; Bukenya-
Ziraba & Hall, 1988; Debray, Jacquemin & 
Razafindrambao, 1971; Decary, 1946; Ed-
monds, 1977; Edmonds, 1979; Gurib-Fakim, 
Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1997; Nacro & Millogo-
Rasolodimbi, 1993; van Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Blomqvist & 
Nguyen Tien Ban, 1999. 
Authors P.CM. Jansen 
SOLANUM TERMINALE Forssk. 
Protologue Fl. aegypt.-arab. 45 (1775). 
Family Solanaceae 
Synonyms Solanum welwitschii C.H.Wright 
(1894). 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum terminale occurs from Guinea east to 
Ethiopia and south to Angola and South Africa. 
There is a single record from the Comoros. 
Uses In Rwanda a leaf extract is drunk as 
an abortion-inducing drug and in Rwanda and 
Uganda it is drunk to induce labour in child-
birth. In DR Congo a root decoction is filtered 
and applied as an enema as a mild purgative 
for children. In Tanzania a root extract is 
drunk as a stimulant and to induce sweating. 
The fruits are poisonous and have been used in 
the Central African Republic as a criminal poi-
son. 
In eastern DR Congo the stems are used for 
tying in construction of houses and fences. 
Botany Liana up to 15 m long, or straggling 
shrub; young stems hairy, hairs simple or 
branched. Leaves alternate, simple; stipules 
absent; petiole 0.5-4 cm long; blade ovate to 
lanceolate or elliptical, 2-13.5 cm x 1-7 cm, 
base rounded or cuneate, apex acuminate, 
margin entire to wavy, almost glabrous. Inflo-
rescence a terminal cyme, becoming displaced 
laterally, lax to congested, many-flowered. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; calyx bell-
or cup-shaped, 1-3 mm long, soft-hairy, lobes 
triangular to ovate, obtuse, reflexed; corolla 
deeply stellate, 1-2 cm in diameter, blue to 
mauve or purple; stamens alternate with co-
rolla lobes, filaments up to 1.5 mm long, an-
thers elliptical, up to 5 mm long, opening with 
apical pores; ovary superior, c. 1 mm in diame-
ter. Fruit a globose to ellipsoid berry 5-10 mm 
in diameter, glabrous, orange or red to dark 
blue, many-seeded. Seeds obovoid, 2.5-3 mm in 
diameter, pale brown. Seedling with epigeal 
germination; cotyledons thin, leafy. 
Solanum comprises over 1000 species and has 
a cosmopolitan distribution, except in boreal, 
alpine and aquatic habitats. At least 100 spe-
cies are found in tropical Africa. The principal 
centre of diversity is located in Central and 
South America, with secondary centres in Af-
rica and Australia. Solanum has been subdi-
vided into 7 subgenera and numerous sections 
and series. Solanum terminale has been placed 
in the subgenus Solanum, and 4 subspecies 
have been recognized, but in southern Africa 
intermediates between subspecies have been 
found and there is considerable overlap of the 
areas of distribution. In Ethiopia subsp. 
welwitschii (C.H.Wright) Heine is considered 
sufficiently different from the other subspecies 
to reinstate it as a separate species. 
Two endemic species of Madagascar, belonging 
to subgenus Solanum, are also used medici-
nally. Grated bark of Solanum madagas-
cariense Dunal is applied as a plaster to 
wounds and bark sap is applied to bruises. A 
bark decoction of Solanum heinianum D'Arcy 
& Keating is drunk to cure syphilis. 
Ecology Solanum terminale occurs in for-
ests, especially at edges, along streams and in 
rocky localities, at 900-1300 m altitude. It is 
less frequent in high-rainfall woodland. 
Genetic resources and breeding There is 
SOLANUM 531 
no indication that Solanum terminale is in 
danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Solanum terminale will probably 
only remain of local importance as a medicinal 
plant. 
Major references Burkill, 2000; Goncalves, 
2005; Jaeger & Hepper, 1986. 
Other references D'Arcy & Rakotozafy, 
1994; Hulstaert, 1966; Kamatenesi-Mugisha & 
Oryem-Origa, 2007; Kokwaro, 1993; Ralanton-
irina, 1993; Ranaivoson, 1996; Rwangabo, 
1993; Vergiat, 1970; Yamada, 1999. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SOLANUM TETTENSE Klotzsch 
Protologue Peters, Naturw. Reise Mossam-
bique, Vol. 6, Botanik 1: 237 (1861). 
Family Solanaceae 
Synonyms Solanum renschii Vatke (1882), 
Solanum kwebense N.E.Br, ex C.H.Wright 
(1906). 
Origin and geographic distribution So-
lanum tettense occurs from Ethiopia and Soma-
lia south throughout East Africa and southern 
Africa. 
Uses In Kenya a root extract is drunk to 
cure typhus and abdominal pain. In Zimbabwe 
a root extract is drunk or pulverized root is 
mixed with food to cure diarrhoea. The prepa-
ration and use of arrow poison made from the 
roots is practised by bushmen in Namibia. 
Samburu warriors of Kenya used to take the 
plant as a drug. 
Properties The fruit of Solanum tettense 
contains calystegines, which are nortropane 
alkaloids with glycosidase inhibitory activity. 
Calystegine A3 selectively inhibits the rat liver 
ß-glucosidase activity. Calystegines are found 
in many species of the families Convolvulaceae 
and Solanaceae. 
Accidental feeding on Solanum tettense causes 
disorders in cattle (crazy cow syndrome) char-
acterized by epileptic-like attacks. The poison 
acts on the central nervous system and the 
functions of the cerebellum, but does not cause 
fatal poisoning. 
Botany Perennial herb or shrub up to 3(-4) 
m tall; stems with many pale yellow prickles 1— 
5 mm long and stellate hairs. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules absent; petiole 0.5-4 cm long, 
rarely with prickles; blade lanceolate to ovate 
or ovate-elliptical, 1.5-14 cm x 0.5-8 cm, base 
unequal, rounded to cuneate, apex obtuse to 
acute, margin entire to wavy. Inflorescence a 
lateral cyme, few- to many-flowered. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 4-5(-7)-merous; calyx bell-
or cup-shaped, 2.5-6 mm long, lobes lanceolate 
to broadly obovate; corolla rotate, up to 2 cm in 
diameter, blue, violet, purple or rarely white; 
stamens alternate with corolla lobes, filaments 
up to 1.5 mm long, anthers lanceolate, 4 - 7 mm 
long, opening with apical pores; ovary superior, 
up to 1.5 mm in diameter, style 5-11 mm long. 
Fruit a globose, soft berry 5-10 mm in diame-
ter, glabrous, yellowish brown, deep red when 
ripe, many-seeded. Seeds ovoid, compressed, 
2.5-4 mm in diameter, pale yellow or creamy. 
Seedling with epigeal germination; cotyledons 
thin, leafy. 
Solanum comprises about 1000 species and has 
a cosmopolitan distribution, except in boreal, 
alpine and aquatic habitats. About 110 species 
are found in tropical Africa. The principal cen-
tre of diversity is located in Central and South 
America, with secondary centres in Africa and 
Australia. Solanum has been subdivided into 7 
subgenera and numerous sections and series. 
Solanum tettense is a polymorphic species and 
2 varieties are distinguished, based on differ-
ences in hairiness. It is placed in the Solanum 
giganteum group of the section Oliganthes of 
subgenus Leptostemonum, a group of about 10 
species, all of them restricted to sub-Saharan 
Africa. Two other species of this group have 
medicinal uses in tropical Africa. 
Solanum giganteum Jacq. has a disjunct mon-
tane distribution in Africa and is also known 
from tropical Asia, Australia and South Amer-
ica. In East Africa the woolly hairy underside 
of the leaves is used to clean wounds and the 
glabrous upper side is used to dress wounds. 
The fruits are edible but bitter and are used to 
treat throat ulcers and to curdle milk. In 
Uganda powdered dry leaves are added to bath 
water to overcome sleeplessness. In India So-
lanum giganteum is planted as a shade tree. 
Solanum goetzei Dammer occurs from Kenya 
southwards to Zambia and Mozambique. In 
Kenya a hot poultice of pounded leaves is used 
to reduce swellings and to draw out abscesses. 
Solanum somalense Franch. occurs in eastern 
Ethiopia, Somalia and Kenya,. Its classification 
in subgenus Leptostemonum and especially in 
the section Oliganthes is disputed. In Somalia 
the fruit ash is applied to wounds to promote 
healing. 
Ecology Solanum tettense occurs in wood-
land, wooded grassland and thickets. In 
miombo woodland it grows on termite mounds 
and is also found along streams and in rocky 
532 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
areas . It thr ives under both moist and semi-
arid conditions, up to 1600 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s and b r e e d i n g As So-
lanum tettense is widespread and not heavily 
exploited, there appears to be no th rea t of ge-
netic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Solanum tettense does not have 
medicinal uses or propert ies t h a t make it likely 
t h a t i ts importance will develop beyond the 
present local medicinal uses. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Ch inemana et al., 1985; 
Goncalves, 2005; Kokwaro, 1993; Wondimu, 
Asfaw & Kelbessa, 2007. 
O t h e r r e f e r e n c e s Asano et al., 1997; 
Beentje, 1994; Bukenya-Ziraba & Carasco, 
1999; Edmonds, Friis & Thulin, 2006; Gon-
calves, 1996; L e h m a n n & Mihalyi, 1982; Neu-
winger, 1998; Samuelsson et al., 1993; Whalen, 
1984. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
SPHENOCENTRUM JOLLYANUM P i e r r e 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Par is , 
n.s. 1: 77^79 (1898). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r In = 26 
Origin and geographic distribution Sphe-
nocentrum jollyanum occurs from Côte d'Ivoire 
east to Cameroon. 
U s e s Sphenocentrum jollyanum is widely 
used for medicinal purposes. The plant , mainly 
the bark, is used as an emetic and purgat ive, 
especially when poisoning is suspected. The 
root is used as an aphrodisiac tonic for men. 
The sap from chewing sticks made from the 
root is believed to relieve stomach-ache and 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum - wild 
constipation, and to boost appet i te and sexual 
drive. The roots are used as a sweetener; they 
tas te sour, but make food eaten thereaf ter 
t as te sweet. In Côte d'Ivoire the root is pulped 
into a paste , with salt, fruit of manigue t te 
{Aframomum melegueta K.Schum.) and palm 
oil, and the mixture is t aken to t r ea t abdomi-
na l disorders. Pounded roots are t aken to t rea t 
high blood pressure . The boiled or pulped roots 
a re given in d raugh t or enema against epileptic 
fits. In Ghana the pulped roots have been ap-
plied to t r ea t breas t tumours . In Nigeria a de-
coction of the root is applied to dress tropical 
ulcers. A decoction of the leafy twigs is used as 
a wash to stop bleeding of wounds, sores and 
cuts; the wounds are also covered with the 
powdered bark . Ingestion of crushed leaves 
curbs spi t t ing of blood. The fruit is edible and 
is t aken against fatigue. It is sometimes t aken 
with lemon or the fruits of Piper guineense 
Schumach. & Thonn. to cure coughs. 
Product ion and international trade Sphe-
nocentrum jollyanum is sold in local marke t s 
and through the in te rne t as an aphrodisiac. 
P r o p e r t i e s The chemical analyses of 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum showed the presence 
of saponins, t annins , alkaloids, terpenes and 
flavonoids in the s tem bark . The isoquinoline 
alkaloids pa lmat ine , ja t rorrhiz ine , te t rahydro-
ja t ror rh iz ine and columbamine, and some bit-
te r t a s t ing di terpenes were also extracted from 
the plant , as were the inositol-derivative (—)-
viburnitol, the sterols sitosterol, campestrol 
and st igmasterol , and the furanoditerpenes 
columbin, isocolumbin and fibleucin. 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum has shown anti-
oxidant, anti-angiogenic, anti- inflammatory, 
antipyretic, antinociceptive, an t i tumour , anti-
viral, laxative, stomachic, tonic and aphrodi-
siac activities. Invest igat ions on the anti-
oxidant propert ies of methanol extracts of sev-
eral pa r t s of the p lan t revealed t h a t the stem 
bark has the strongest activity, a l though it is 
much lower t h a n t h a t of v i tamin C. The chloro-
form fractions of the extracts had the greates t 
activity. 
To tes t the anti-angiogenic propert ies, a 
methanol extract of the s tem bark was tested 
in hen's eggs. The extract showed a dose-
dependent inhibition of blood-vessel formation. 
The effect of the chloroform fraction was 
strongest , but still much weaker t h a n tha t of 
t he control chemical suramin . Several crude 
extracts from the p lan t were assessed for ant i -
inf lammatory activity using the carrageenan-
induced oedema tes t in r a t s . The methanol 
SPHENOCENTRUM 533 
extract of the fruit showed a higher anti-
inflammatory activity than the root extract. 
The most active fraction of the fruit extracts 
contained the furanoditerpenes columbin, iso-
columbin and fibleucin. Both columbin and a 
flavonoid-rich fraction of the fruit extract 
showed significant anti-inflammatory activi-
ties. Methanol and petroleum-ether extracts of 
the leaves have shown antipyretic and analge-
sic properties in vitro. The potential of Spheno-
centrum jollyanum as an aphrodisiac was con-
firmed in tests with rats. A methanol extract of 
the root given orally caused increased sexual 
activity and increased levels of testosterone in 
male rats. Other sex hormones were much less 
affected. In another test the extract caused a 
similar effect on testosterone levels, but also 
caused decreased sperm counts and lower 
sperm vitality, accompanied by reversible de-
generation of the seminal tubules. 
The hexane and methanol extracts of the leaf 
and root had only slight antiviral activities 
against cowpea aphid-borne mosaic virus 
(CABMV) and cowpea mottle virus (CMeV). 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
Penianthus spp. may be used as substitutes for 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum as they grow in the 
same area. The root and stem bark of these 
species are sold in local markets and are diffi-
cult to differentiate from those of Sphenocen-
trum jollyanum when dried. 
Description Small, evergreen, dioecious 
shrub up to 1.5 m tall, sparingly branched; 
roots bright yellow; stem thinly short-hairy 
when young, later glabrous; bark grey. Leaves 
arranged spirally, but crowded at the end of 
branches, simple; stipules absent; petiole (3—) 
4.5-9(—10) cm long, swollen at both ends, flat-
tened or with a shallow groove above and 2 
shallow lateral grooves; blade entire or shal-
lowly to deeply pinnately lobed, oblong to ellip-
tical or ovate in outline, 15-26 cm x 6-17(-22) 
cm, base cuneate or obtuse, apex long-
acuminate, lobes acute to acuminate, leathery, 
pinnately veined with 8—12 pairs of lateral 
veins. Flowers solitary on older branches or on 
stem between the leaves, unisexual, regular; 
tepals more or less arranged spirally, increas-
ing in size towards the centre, cream-coloured; 
male flowers sessile, tepals 15-21, outer tepals 
triangular to ovate-oblong, short-hairy, inner 
tepals obovate, glabrous outside, 0.5-6.5 mm x 
0.5-4 mm, stamens (13-)16-31, erect, free, 
1.5-2.5 mm long, filaments inflated; female 
flowers sessile or with pedicel up to 4 mm long, 
tepals 9—11, early falling, 2-4 outer tepals tri-
Sphenocentrum jollyanum - 1, branch with 
male flowers; 2, male flower; 3, female flower, 
part of perianth removed; 4, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
angular to circular, c. 1 mm x 1 mm, short-
hairy to glabrous outside, 7 inner tepals 
obovate to oblong, the innermost spoon-shaped, 
(2.5-)3-7 mm x 2-4.5 mm, glabrous outside, 
staminodes up to 14(—17), club-shaped, 1-2 mm 
long, usually falling with the tepals, ovary su-
perior, consisting of (3-)9-12(—15) ovoid carpels 
c. 3 mm x 1.5 mm, densely short-hairy, stigma 
large, sessile, horse-shoe shaped, lobed. Fruit 
composed of 3-12 drupes, each drupe ellipsoid, 
( l l-)18-26 mm x 10-16 mm, yellow to orange 
at maturity, smooth, fleshy, 1-seeded. Seed 
with very thin seed coat; endosperm absent; 
embryo straight, ellipsoid, 15-18 mm x 8-9 
mm. Seedling with plano-convex cotyledons 
remaining inside the stone. 
Other botanical information Sphenocen-
trum belongs to the tribe Peniantheae together 
with Penianthus, but has formerly been classi-
fied in Tinosporeae. Sphenocentrum comprises 
a single species. 
Growth and development On germination 
the seedling does not develop a hypocotyl and 
the cotyledons remain enclosed inside the 
534 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
stone. Young seedlings up to two months old 
show a more or less short-hairy epicotyl, s tem 
and petiole, and some scale-leaves develop on 
the epicotyl. 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum flowers and bears 
fruit e i ther i r regular ly or continuously 
throughout the year. Pollination of flowers is 
done by an t s or other insects, and dispersal of 
seeds occurs over short dis tances only. 
E c o l o g y Sphenocentrum jollyanum occurs 
mainly in the undergrowth of rainforest, often 
in deep shade, also in gallery forest, from sea-
level up to 400 m al t i tude. It occurs in regions 
with a mean min imum t empera tu re of 20°C 
and a m e a n max imum of 29°C. The mean an-
nua l rainfall is 1800 mm or more. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t The different p lant 
pa r t s collected may be dried, powdered and 
kept for la ter use. P lan t mater ia l collected, 
usual ly leaves, is sometimes charred before 
use. To char the leaves, they are thoroughly 
washed, dried and pu t in a closed ea r thenware 
pot or in a large iron saucepan, which is left 
open, and placed on a fire wi thout adding wa-
ter . The leaves are s t i r red occasionally and left 
unt i l completely charred, bu t not burned to 
ash, a s a sh is believed to be ineffective. When 
cooled the mater ia l is powdered and stored in 
a i r t ight containers . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Sphenocentrum jolly-
anum is common in its distr ibution area, bu t 
i ts common use as an aphrodisiac may lead to 
genetic erosion. In Benin and Nigeria the p lan t 
is considered locally vulnerable or even threa t -
ened and in need of protection. Small germ-
plasm collections are main ta ined in Ghana . 
P r o s p e c t s So far, no a t t empt has been made 
to cult ivate Sphenocentrum jollyanum on a 
larger scale for medicinal purposes. To ensure 
sus ta inable production of this widely used me-
dicinal plant , it is recommended tha t hus-
bandry systems be developed and the plant be 
grown in home gardens or on a commercial 
scale. Pharmacological s tudies have shown the 
potent ia l of the p lan t as an anti-oxidant, ant i -
angiogenic, anti- inflammatory, antinociceptive 
and antiviral , and more studies a re war ran t ed 
for drug development with respect to these 
activities. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1997; Dekker, 
1983; Moody, Robert & Hughes , 2002; Moody et 
al., 2005; Muko, Ohiri & Ezugwu, 1998; Nia et 
al., 2004; Oliver-Bever, 1986; Troupin, 1962. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Abbiw, 1996; Adomou, 
2005; Amponsah et a l , 2002; de Wet, 2005; 
Dwuma-Badu et al., 1976b; Egunyomi, Fasola 
& Oladonjoye, 2005; Iwu, 1993; Neuwinger, 
2000; Obio, 2006; Okafor & Harn, 1999; Oke & 
Hamburger , 2002; Raji et al., 2006; Soladoye et 
al., 2005. 
S o u r c e s of i l l u s t r a t i o n Dekker, 1983. 
A u t h o r s D.M. Mosango 
S P I G E L I A A N T H E L M I A L. 
P r o t o l o g u e Sp. pl 1: 149 (1753). 
F a m i l y Loganiaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 32 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Wormgrass , wormbush, 
West Indian pinkroot (En). Brinvillière, herbe 
à vers, herbe à la brinvill iers (Fr). Lombriguei-
ra, pó vermifugo, p imen ta d'âgua, a rapabaca 
(Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Spige-
lia anthelmia originates from tropical and sub-
tropical America, bu t is widely na tura l ized in 
tropical Africa and Indonesia. In Africa it oc-
curs from Senegal eas t to DR Congo and 
Ethiopia. 
U s e s Spigelia anthelmia combats in tes t inal 
worms. Both roots and leaves are anthelmin-
thic. In t he Americas Spigelia anthelmia is 
said to be one of the best vermifuges, and is 
renowned as a medicine agains t spasmodic and 
nervous a t tacks . It is also used to cause t ran-
spiration, while a decoction of the p lan t is ap-
plied agains t t h ru sh and hypertension. In the 
Ge rman homeopathic pharmacopoeia, an ex-
t rac t of the aer ial pa r t s is official as a remedy 
for neuralgic and cardiac disorders. Despite i ts 
relatively recent introduction in Africa, the 
p lan t has found a place in t radi t ional medicine. 
In Benin and Nigeria a decoction of fresh leafy 
Spigelia anthelmia - naturalized 
SPIGELIA 535 
twigs is taken as an anthelmintic. Caution is 
needed not to apply high doses, as these cause 
convulsions. Because of the toxicity of the 
plant, it is essential that immediately after a 
dose is taken to treat worm infections, a strong 
purge is taken as a chaser. Some fatal cases 
have been reported, especially in children. In 
Congo a plant decoction is gargled to treat sore 
throat and plant sap is rubbed into scarifica-
tions to treat chest complaints. 
The fresh plant serves as rat poison and fruit-
ing plants eaten in large quantities are poison-
ous to cattle, causing death 2-3 hours after 
ingestion. However, the intake of sufficient 
other forage, may cancel out the toxic effects. 
Production and international trade On the 
internet, dried Spigelia anthelmia plants cost 
US$ 31/kg, dried roots US$ 62/kg, or US$ 44/kg 
for larger quantities. Seeds are sold at US$ 6 
per 100. 
Properties Spigelia anthelmia contains 
quaternary alkaloids, the major ones being 
spiganthine, ryanodine and structurally re-
lated compounds. The highest concentrations of 
alkaloids are present in the roots and in the 
fruit wall. Spiganthine and ryanodine are the 
main cardioactive principles. The effect is 
characterized by a delay in contraction devel-
opment of the heart muscle. 
Several fractions of an ethanol extract of aerial 
parts were tested in screening tests. Hypoten-
sive and bradycardiac effects in anaesthetized 
cats and rats were observed, as well as contrac-
tions of isolated guinea-pig and rat ileums. An 
intravenously applied infusion of aerial parts 
in rats produced a dose-dependent, prompt, 
more or less short-lasting hypertension or led 
to acute lethal intoxication with signs of cardio-
respiratory depression. An ethyl acetate ex-
tract of aerial parts was shown to induce tonic 
paralysis in vivo; it decreased amplitude of 
twitches and increased tonus of skeletal muscle 
in vitro. Effects of an overdose of Spigelia 
anthelmia medicines in humans include ex-
citement, dizziness, delirium, dilation of the 
pupils, vomiting and convulsions. 
Spiganthine, ryanodine and related compounds 
(e.g. ryanoid diterpenes) demonstrated an-
tifeedant activity against some beetles. In ad-
dition, considerable insecticidal activities were 
observed. An ethyl acetate extract and a 
methanol extract of the aerial parts had a sig-
nificant inhibitory effect on egg hatching and 
larval development of the sheep and goat 
nematode Haemonchus contortus. Anthelmintic 
trials against Nippostrongylus braziliensis in 
rats using the aqueous fraction showed a pro-
gressive decrease in worm count with increas-
ing dose. Crude ethanol extracts of leaves 
showed significant mortality in the tick 
Boophilus microplus. 
Description Annual herb, up to 50(—90) cm 
tall, few-branched at base; stem erect, hollow, 
glabrous. Leaves opposite, with an apical 
pseudo-whorl of 2 decussate pairs, simple and 
entire; stipules united, broad-triangular; peti-
ole up to 1 cm long; blade ovate-oblong to 
ovate-lanceolate, 4-18 cm x 1-6 cm, base ob-
tuse to cuneate, apex acuminate. Inflorescence 
a terminal or axillary spike up to 15 cm long, 
many-flowered; peduncle very short; bracts 
sepal-like. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
sessile; sepals free, slightly unequal, 2—6 mm 
long, pale green; corolla 8—17 mm long, tube 6— 
15 mm long, lobes equal, triangular, 2-2.5 mm 
long, lilac to white, or tube white and lobes 
pale pink, with or without 5 pairs of reddish 
lines inside; stamens inserted just below the 
middle of the corolla tube, included; ovary su-
perior, globose, glabrous, 2-celled, style slightly 
exserted. Fruit a capsule consisting of 2 ellip-
soid parts, 4-5 mm x 5—6 mm, sharp-warty, 
green, lobes dehiscent with 4 valves, a boat-
Spigelia anthelmia - 1, plant habit; 2, flower 
bud; 3, fruit; 4, seeds. 
Source: PROSEA 
536 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
shaped base remain ing in the pers is tent calyx, 
few-seeded. Seeds obliquely ellipsoid or ovoid, 3 
m m x 2 mm, dull brown, warty . 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Spigelia 
comprises about 50 species, all originating from 
tropical America. American wormwood or pink-
root (Spigelia marilandica (L.) L.) h a s orna-
menta l value, having showy flowers with scar-
let red tubes and lobes yellow inside. It was 
collected almost to extinction as a cure for 
roundworms. It is also tradit ionally used to 
protect stored food grains from storage pests . 
G r o w t h a n d d e v e l o p m e n t Spigelia 
anthelmia can be found flowering and fruiting 
throughout the year. The flowers open in the 
afternoon and are self-pollinating. 
E c o l o g y Spigelia anthelmia occurs mainly 
along roadsides, in was te places, arable land, 
gardens , rice fields and on r iverbanks , from 
sea-level up to 600 m al t i tude. 
P r o p a g a t i o n a n d p l a n t i n g Propagat ion is 
by seed, which remain fully viable up to 3 
years , and up to 57% germinat ion was obtained 
after storage for 48 months . Fresh seeds and 
those stored for 6 months show dormancy. 
M a n a g e m e n t As a weed in maize, cowpea, 
millet and sorghum, Spigelia anthelmia can be 
controlled by hand-weeding; some tes ts with 
herbicides (e.g. alachlor) were not successful. 
H a r v e s t i n g P l an t s a re simply pulled up and 
normally used fresh. 
H a n d l i n g after h a r v e s t Dried p lan t pa r t s 
should be stored in a i r t ight containers . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Spigelia anthelmia is 
widely distr ibuted and of a weedy na tu re ; it is 
not th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Spigelia anthelmia will likely 
spread into more African countries and in spite 
of the r isk of poisoning, i ts local use as an 
anthelmint ic will spread as well. Extracts may 
be useful in the control of gas t rointes t inal 
nematodes of sheep and goats. More research 
on the pharmacological activities of the differ-
ent compounds in the leaves, fruits and roots is 
needed, especially on the anthelmint ic and 
cardiac effects. Fu r the r potent ial uses, such as 
in insecticides and acaricides, also need to be 
explored. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1995; Dalziel, 
1937; Leeuwenberg, 1961c; Leeuwenberg, 
1980; Neuwinger, 2000; van Valkenburg, 2003. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Abbiw, 1990; Achenbach 
et al., 1995; Adegoke, Akinsaya & Naqvi, 1968; 
Assis et al., 2003; Bouquet, 1969; Bouquet & 
Debray, 1974; Camurca-Vasconcelos et al., 
2004; Esposito-Avella et a l , 1985; Gonzalez-
Coloma et al., 1999; Hübner et al., 2001; Jege-
de et al., 2006; Wagner et al., 1986. 
S o u r c e s of i l lu s t ra t ion van Valkenburg, 
2003. 
A u t h o r s L.J.G. van der Maesen 
SPIROSPERMUM PENDULIFLORUM DC. 
P r o t o l o g u e Syst. na t . 1: 515 (1817). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Spiro-
spermum penduliflorum is endemic to eas te rn 
Madagascar where it occurs from Ant s i r anana 
in the nor th to Toliara in the south. 
U s e s A leaf decoction is widely d runk to 
t r ea t malar ia , sometimes as an adjuvant to 
chloroquine. The dried and compressed leaves 
are smoked to stop the progress of pulmonary 
tuberculosis and vomiting of blood and an infu-
sion of the leaves is t aken agains t colic. A root 
decoction is t aken as a cholagogue, as a cardiac 
tonic and agains t liver complaints . 
P r o p e r t i e s From the root the clerodane type 
diterpenoid columbin, t he protoberberine-type 
qua te rna ry alkaloid pa lmat ine and the bisben-
zylisoquinoline limacine have been isolated. 
Limacine was tes ted for its effect agains t 
Plasmodium falciparum and a mul t idrug resis-
t a n t leukaemia cell line; it was found to be less 
active t h a n the s t ructural ly related fangchino-
line. 
B o t a n y Dioecious l iana or small, arching 
tree up to 10(-12) m tall; s tem up to 15 cm in 
diameter , da rk brown to blackish. Leaves al-
t e rna te , simple and entire; st ipules absent; 
petiole swollen at apex or a t both ends, bent a t 
apex; blade pel ta te , glossy green, leathery, 
p innate ly veined. Inflorescence an axillary or 
seemingly terminal , much branched, pendulous 
panicle up to 80 cm long, female inflorescence 
fewer-flowered t h a n male one. Flowers yellow-
ish green to whit ish; pedicel pinkish; male 
flowers with 5-6 s tamens ; female flowers with 
superior ovary, composed of 1-9 free carpels. 
Fru i t a cluster of 1-9 large, globose, fleshy 
drupes , reddish pink when mature , with bony 
stone, each drupe 1-seeded. Seeds horseshoe-
shaped. 
Spirospermum comprises a single species. 
However, there are specimens with narrow 
leaves t h a t may represent a second species. 
E c o l o g y Spirospermum penduliflorum oc-
curs in humid forest, up to 500(-1100) m alti-
tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Spiro-
S P O N D I A N T H U S 537 
spermum penduliflorum has a wide distribu-
tion in Madagascar and although the area un-
der rainforest is diminishing rapidly, there are 
no signs that it is in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Unless new pharmacologically 
active compounds are found, Spirospermum 
penduliflorum will probably remain of local 
importance only. 
Major references Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
2004; Neuwinger, 2000; Rasoanaivo, Ratsi-
mamanga-Urverg & Rakoto-Ratsimamanga, 
1995; Ratsimamanga-Urverg et al., 1992; 
Schatz, 2001. 
Other references Boissier et al., 1975; Boi-
teau, Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; Frap-
pier et al., 1996; Missouri Botanical Garden, 
undated; Rasoanaivo et al., 1992; Schüttler & 
Weber, 1972b. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
SPONDIANTHUS PREUSSII Engl. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. 36: 216 (1905). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 26, 52 
Origin and geographic distribution Spon-
dianthus preussii occurs from Guinea east to 
Sudan, and south to Angola and Mozambique. 
Uses All parts of Spondianthus preussii are 
extremely poisonous, and medicinal uses are 
scarce. A strongly diluted leaf decoction is 
sometimes drunk to treat fever. A bark decoc-
tion is used as mouthwash to treat toothache. 
It is also taken to treat stomach-ache and pains 
during pregnancy. A bark maceration is ap-
plied to snakebites. Rice, meat or fish cooked 
with the bark, bark sap or pulverized seeds are 
Spondianthus preussii - wild 
widely used in baits to kill rodents and stray 
dogs. The plant is considered too poisonous to 
use as arrow poison as the poison spreads too 
easily through the meat; however, in Côte 
d'Ivoire it has sometimes been used in hunting' 
elephants. Pulverized twig bark and seeds are 
added to drinks for criminal purposes. The 
bark sap is also used as fish poison. The poi-
sonous leaves are particularly dangerous to 
cattle; the animals may die suddenly several 
hours later without any symptoms. Drying the 
leaves removes the toxicity. In southern Nige-
ria the Yoruba people use the fruit in a cere-
mony to cure certain cough ailments. 
The heartwood is brownish, strongly speckled, 
hard and heavy. The wood is used for construc-
tion and implements. In Uganda the trunk is 
used to make dugout canoes. As the wood is 
dense and slow burning, the charcoal is popu-
lar with blacksmiths in southern Nigeria. 
Production and international trade Stem 
bark of Spondianthus preussi is traded at a 
local level in Nigeria, Cameroon and Gabon, 
where it is commonly in stock in local markets. 
Its main use is as a rodenticide. The price per 
kg of bark is US$ 1.20-1.50. The quantity 
traded is not known. 
Properties The leaves and stem bark con-
tain the extremely hazardous, very toxic and 
volatile monofluoroacetic acid, as well as 
saponins, flavonoids and tannins. From the 
stem bark several toxic tetracyclic triterpenoid 
cucurbitacins were isolated, including cucurbi-
tacin L, A2 and E. From an alcoholic extract of 
the stem bark the lupane-type triterpene 
betulinic acid (3ß-hydroxy-lup-20(29)-en-28-oic 
acid) and several derivatives, as well as oxalic 
acid were isolated. An ethyl acetate extract of 
the stem bark exhibited selective in-vitro anti-
tumour activity against human melanoma. The 
active compound was found to be betulinic acid. 
This compound has a range of biological activi-
ties including in-vivo and in-vitro antitumour 
and antiplasmodial activity, it is not toxic and 
plays an important role in pharmacological 
research. It is commercially extracted from 
Betula pubescens Ehrh. 
Adulterations and substitutes The stem 
bark of Erythrophleum suaveolens (Guill. & 
Perr.) Brenan is sometimes used as a substi-
tute for the stem bark of Spondianthus preus-
sii. 
Description Dioecious medium-sized tree 
up 30(-60) m tall; bole up to 150 cm in diame-
ter, low-branching, with or without stilt-roots; 
bark surface smooth or slightly scaly, dark 
538 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Spondianthus preussii - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
brown, inner bark reddish, exuding red sap. 
Leaves alternate, simple and entire; stipules 
small; petiole 0.5-11.5 cm long; blade elliptical 
to broadly elliptical-ovate, 3-35 cm x 1.5-18 
cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex obtuse to 
acute, glabrous, reddish when young. Inflores-
cence an erect, terminal or axillary panicle up 
to 10 cm long; bracts elliptical-ovate to lanceo-
late, 2-5 mm long. Flowers unisexual, regular, 
5-merous, sepals broadly ovate, c. 1 mm long, 
whitish, pinkish tinged, petals elliptical-ovate, 
c. 0.5 mm long, 2-3-toothed; male flowers al-
most sessile, stamens 1.5 mm long; female 
flowers with pedicel 1-10 mm long, ovary supe-
rior, c. 2 mm long, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 1 mm 
long. Fruit an ovoid to ellipsoid capsule 1.5-2 
cm x 1—1.5 cm, smooth, greenish becoming 
purplish black, 3-seeded. Seeds compressed 
ovoid-ellipsoid, c. 1 cm long, smooth, bright red, 
often remaining attached to the central axis 
after dehiscence. 
Other botanical information Spondian-
thus comprises a single species, in which 2 
widely distributed varieties with different eco-
logical preferences are recognized, var. preussii 
with hairy inflorescences, occurring in humid 
rainforest, swamp forest and lagoon forest at 
low altitudes from Liberia east to DR Congo, 
and var. glaber (Engl.) Engl, with glabrous 
inflorescences, mainly occurring in drier areas, 
often in fringing forest and swamp forest, from 
Guinea east to Sudan and Uganda and south to 
Angola and Mozambique. 
Ecology Spondianthus preussii occurs in 
humid rainforest, riverine forest, swamp forest 
and fringing forest, from sea-level up to 1800 m 
altitude. It prefers sandy-loamy soils and an 
annual rainfall of 1000-1600 mm. 
Propagation and planting Spondianthus 
preussii is propagated by seed. As the number 
of seeds available for propagation is limited, 
work is in progress at CENRAD, Nigeria to 
find good methods of vegetative propagation. 
Harvesting For medicinal purposes, bark is 
harvested in strips or in patches. 
Handling after harvest The bark is thor-
oughly sun-dried before storing in a dry and 
cool place. The bark needs to be checked regu-
larly because it is liable to fungal attack. 
Genetic resources Spondianthus preussii 
is probably liable to genetic erosion in West 
Africa due to deforestation. 
Prospects Spondianthus preussii will re-
main locally important as a source of rodenti-
cide for use in rural and urban environments. 
Much work is being done on the pharmacologi-
cal properties of betulinic acid and derivatives 
from it. Although betulinic acid is not rare in 
plants, further research into the chemical com-
pounds of Spondianthus preussii seems worth-
wile. 
Major references Abo & Kinghorn, 2003; 
Burkill, 1994; Léonard & Nkounkou, 1989; 
Neuwinger, 1998; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1987; Séré et al., 1982. 
Other references Adebisi & Ladipo, 2000; 
Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 1979; Gassita et al. 
(Editors), 1982; Irvine, 1961; Kamgue et a l , 
1979; Lovett et al., 2006; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961; Sandberg et al., 1987; Tessier & 
Paris, 1978. 
Sources of illustration Radcliffe-Smith, 
1987. 
Authors M.O. Soladoye & A.A. Adebisi 
STEPHANIA 539 
STEPHANIA ABYSSINICA (Quart.-Dill. & 
A.Rich.) Walp. 
Protologue Repert. Bot. Syst. 1: 96 (1842). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Stepha-
nia abyssinica occurs from Guinea east to Eri-
trea and south to Angola, Mozambique and 
eastern South Africa. 
Uses The plant sap of Stephania abyssinica 
is taken to treat dysentery, diarrhoea, vomit-
ing, stomach complaints, sexually transmitted 
diseases, and in remedies for menstrual disor-
ders and sterility in women. In Tanzania the 
sap is taken with milk as an emetic to relieve 
chest pain and heart complaints, or adminis-
tered topically to treat eye problems. Pulped 
leaves are applied as a dressing to heal frac-
tures and dislocations. The purgative effects of 
the plant sap are mild and fresh leaves 
pounded with water are even given to children 
for this purpose; it is also used to expel intesti-
nal worms and to cure menorrhagia. In Malawi 
pounded leaves are taken against indigestion. 
A decoction of the leaves and roots used as a 
wash is considered invigorating for pregnant 
women and weak children. Throughout eastern 
Africa a root extract is used in malaria therapy 
and against internal parasites, particularly 
roundworm, threadworm and pinworm. The 
roots are also taken as an aphrodisiac. The root 
sap is an antidote to snakebites, whereas 
crushed leaves are applied to tortoise bites. In 
South Africa the powdered root is taken with 
the leaves of Momordica foetida Schumach. to 
treat abscesses on the skin. An extract of the 
root together with extracts of Catharanthus 
roseus (L.) G.Don and Indigofera arrecta 
Stephania abyssinica - wild 
Höchst, ex A.Rich, is drunk to treat diabetes. 
All parts of the plant are applied as a powder 
to scarifications made in the skin of the painful 
body part, to relieve pain. In Ethiopia an ex-
tract the whole plant is used to cure mastitis in 
cattle. In Uganda Stephania abyssinica is be-
lieved to distract hunting dogs if they eat the 
leaves, and disorientate hunters if they touch 
the plant. 
The stems are used as binding material, e.g. in 
fence constructions and also in basketry. 
Properties Hasubanan and aporphine-type 
alkaloids are the principle phytochemical con-
stituents in Stephania abyssinica. The apor-
phine alkaloids include corydine, crebanine, 
stephanine and stephalagine; also present are 
the oxoaporphine alkaloids dicentrinone and 
oxoxylopine, and hasubanan alkaloids such as 
stephabyssine, stephaboline, stephavanine and 
derivatives. 
Methanol extracts of the leaves and of the roots 
showed significant activity against HIV-1 and 
HIV-2 in vitro, but the cytotoxicity of the ex-
tracts as well as the isolated alkaloids were 
higher than their activity against the viruses. 
An aqueous root decoction was significantly 
active against both chloroquine-sensitive and 
chloroquine-resistant strains of Plasmodium 
falciparum in vitro, with an IC50 of 22.9 ug/ml. 
Methanol extracts of the leaves and stems 
showed antibacterial activity in vitro against 
Neissera gonorrhoea and Shigella dysenteriae. 
Description Dioecious small liana, woody at 
the base; bark of stem thin; branchlets gla-
brous, hairy when young. Leaves arranged 
spirally, simple, peltate; petiole 4-12 cm long; 
blade ovate to broadly ovate, rarely almost 
round, 5—20 cm x 4-13 cm, base rounded, apex 
obtuse to acute, membranous or papery, gla-
brous or hairy, palmately veined with 8—10 
main veins. Inflorescence an axillary, com-
pound false umbel, solitary or 2-4 together; 
peduncle 4-10 cm long with 3-6 branches end-
ing in umbel-like cymes; involucre composed of 
3-5 bracts, soon falling. Flowers unisexual, 
small; petals 3-4, broadly ovate or nearly or-
bicular, c. 1 mm long, cream to reddish; male 
flowers with 6(-8) obovate sepals 1-2.5 mm 
long, purplish, stamens fused into a staminal 
column; female flowers with 3-4 sepals, ovary 
superior, glabrous, style short. Fruit an obo-
void, flattened drupe 5-8 mm in diameter, gla-
brous, yellowish to pinkish green, 1-seeded; 
stone with small prickles or thick tubercles 
arranged in three lines. Seed up to 8 mm long. 
Other botanical information Stephania 
540 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Stephania abyssinica - 1, branch with male 
inflorescences; 2, fruiting branch. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
comprises about 30 species, 25 of them occur-
ring from southern Asia to New Guinea, and 5 
in tropical Africa. Two varieties are recognised 
in Stephania abyssinica: var. abyssinica and 
var. tomentella (Oliv.) Diels, both with a wide 
distribution. Var. abyssinica is nearly glabrous 
whereas various plant parts are hairy in var. 
tomentella. 
Ecology Stephania abyssinica occurs in 
grassland, usually in shady, damp localities, 
but not in rainforest, up to 3500 m altitude. It 
also occurs in abandoned fields, road sides and 
where forest has been destructed by fire. 
Genetic resources Stephania abyssinica is 
widely distributed and no risks of genetic ero-
sion have been reported. 
Prospects Stephania abyssinica has many 
medicinal uses, but little pharmacological re-
search has been done so far. As several other 
species of Stephania are important in pharma-
cology, further research seems warranted. 
Major references Asres et al., 2001; Baerts 
& Lehmann, 2006f; Burkill, 1997; Geyid et al., 
2005; Kokwaro, 1993; Muregi et al., 2004; 
Troupin, 1956; Troupin, 1960. 
Other references Abebe & Hagos, 1991; 
Adegoke, Akinsaya & Naqvi, 1968; Benvenuto, 
1974; Chakraborty et al., 2000; de Wet, 2005; 
Getahun, 1976; Haerdi, 1964; Harjuli, 1980; 
Jansen, 1981; Kakudidi, 2004; Kandé, Philipov 
& Dutschewska, 1994; Kupchan, Liepa & Fu-
jita, 1973; Morris, 1996; van Wyk & Wiechers, 
1974; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962; 
Wrangham & Waterman, 1983. 
Sources of illustration Benvenuto, 1974. 
Authors O.M. Grace & D.G. Fowler 
STEPHANIA DINKLAGEI (Engl.) Diels 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenr. IV, 94: 265 
(1910). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Cissampelos dinklagei Engl. 
(1899). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stepha-
nia dinklagei is widely distributed from Guinea 
east to Uganda and south to DR Congo, Tanza-
nia and Cabinda (Angola). 
Uses In southern Nigeria fresh plant sap is 
mixed with water or maize gruel and other 
ingredients and taken to treat dysentery or 
diarrhoea. In Sierra Leone a fresh infusion of 
young leaves is given to children with stomach-
ache; the infusion is given immediately as it 
thickens on standing. In Ghana a plant extract 
is taken as a cough remedy. The leaves are 
used as an aphrodisiac and to treat impotence 
in men. In Liberia women who wish to become 
pregnant eat the leaves cooked with rice, and 
wrap the tender stem around the hips. A decoc-
tion of the plant is used to induce menstrua-
tion, whereas in Sierra Leone the leaves, stem 
and roots are used to treat profuse menstrua-
tion and complaints following childbirth. The 
stems are taken as a sedative and analgesic. In 
the Central African Republic scrapings of the 
fresh root are applied in a hot poultice to the 
ribs to relieve pain in the sides. The root is also 
used against internal parasites. The seeds are 
used against leprosy. The Temne people of Si-
erra Leone use the pounded stems in the 
preparation of a fish poison. 
Strong rope made from the stem is known in 
Sierra Leone as 'Government rope' owing to its 
official use as such in the past. 
Properties A large number of alkaloids 
have been isolated from Stephania dinklagei, 
including the aporphine alkaloids corydine, 
STILLINGIA 541 
dinklageine, stephalagine, steporphine, roe-
merine, dicentrine and N-methylglaucine, the 
oxoaporphine alkaloids liriodenine (spermath-
eridine), N-methylliriodendronine, atheros-
permidine and oxodicentrine, and the proapor-
phine alkaloid stepharine. Of these, corydine is 
present in the highest concentrations. The an-
thraquinone aloe-emodin has also been iso-
lated. 
An infusion of the roots exhibited antispas-
modic activity in vitro. A methanol extract of 
the leaves and stems demonstrated antiproto-
zoal and cytotoxic properties in vitro. Lirio-
denine and N-methylliriodendronine showed 
significant activity against Leishmania 
donavani, and liriodenine the highest activity 
against Plasmodium falciparum. Aloe-emodin 
was active against Trypanosoma brucei. An 
ethanol extract of the stems showed cytotoxic 
and DNA-damaging properties in a bioassay 
with several strains of yeast. Liriodenine inhib-
ited the growth of all yeast strains tested, but 
did not show DNA-damaging activity, while 
corydine did indicate DNA-damaging proper-
ties. Corydine also has mild sedative properties 
and a depressant effect on the cardiac and res-
piratory systems, and a stimulatory effect on 
the central nervous system. 
Botany Dioecious liana up to 20 m long, 
twining clockwise, sometimes rambling shrub; 
bark of branchlets greyish brown, glabrous. 
Leaves arranged spirally, simple, peltate; peti-
ole 6-12 cm long, glabrous; blade ovate to 
nearly orbicular, 7-15 cm x 7-15 cm, base 
rounded, apex acuminate, margin wavy, mem-
branous to papery, dark green above, pale blu-
ish green below, palmately veined with 8-10 
main veins. Inflorescence a panicle of small 
cymes, generally on leafless branches, rarely 
axillary, solitary or in clusters of 2-4, male 
inflorescence up to 50 cm long, female inflores-
cence smaller; peduncle up to 10 cm long; axes 
glabrous or finely densely hairy; cymes umbel-
like, 2-5 cm long; bracts asymmetrical, up to 
2.5 cm x 1.5 cm. Flowers unisexual, small, 
green or purple; pedicel c. 1 mm long; male 
flowers with 6-8 narrowly obovate, incurved, 
short-hairy sepals, 1-2 mm x 0.5-1 mm, 3 
broadly ovate to obtriangular petals, c. 0.5 mm 
long, stamens fused into a staminal column up 
to 1 mm long. Fruit a broadly obovoid drupe 
with somewhat truncate base, 6-12 mm long, 
green, yellow when ripe, 1-seeded; stone with 4 
prickly ribs, 2 median ones broadened at apex. 
Seed up to 1 cm long, black. 
Stephania comprises about 30 species, 25 of 
them occurring from southern Asia to New 
Guinea, and 5 in tropical Africa. 
Ecology Stephania dinklagei occurs in 
dense humid rainforest and riverine forest, and 
in old clearings, up to 1500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stepha-
nia dinklagei has a wide distribution and there 
are no indications that it is in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Of the alkaloids isolated from 
Stephania dinklagei only corydine and lirio-
denine have undergone pharmacological tests, 
some of them with promising results. Research 
is necessary to evaluate the pharmacological 
activities of the other isolated alkaloids. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Keay & 
Troupin, 1954; Troupin, 1951; Troupin, 1956. 
Other references Akubue, Mittal & Aguwa, 
1983; Camacho et al., 2003; Dwuma-Badu et 
al., 1980b; Gören, Zhou & Kingston, 2003; Iwu, 
1993; Oliver, 1960; Paris & Le Men, 1955; Ver-
giat, 1970. 
Authors O.M. Grace 
STILLINGIA LINEATA (Lam.) Müll.Arg. 
Protologue A.DC, Prodr. 15(2.2): 1157 
(1866). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Tanguin de pays, bois 
de lait (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stillin-
gia lineata occurs in Réunion and Mauritius, 
and also in Fiji, the Philippines, the Lesser 
Sunda Islands and the Moluccas. 
Uses In Mauritius bathing in the decoction 
of the whole plant is recommended as a cure 
for eczema. The leaves are toxic and stupefy-
ing. 
Properties The leaves and stems contain 
phenols, tannins, coumarins, terpenes, sapon-
ins and alkaloids. A dichloromethane extract of 
the leaves showed cytotoxic effects. Extracts 
from Stillingia lineata were among the most 
active against human tumour cell line Co-115 
in in-vitro tests. 
Botany Monoecious shrub or small tree up 
to 12 m tall; bark smooth, covered with leaf-
scars. Leaves alternate, simple, crowded at 
apex of branches; stipules 1—1.5 mm long, 
deeply split, soon falling; petiole 3-17 mm long, 
without glands or with a pair of glands on the 
junction with the blade; blade orbicular to el-
liptical, (4—)7—24 cm x 2-4 cm, base cuneate to 
obtuse, apex acute to rounded to retuse, mar-
542 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
gin entire or toothed with teeth 2-3(-4) mm 
apart, membranous or slightly succulent. Inflo-
rescence a terminal spike 2-13 cm long, lower 
part with up to 12 solitary female flowers, ter-
minal part with male flowers in clusters of up 
to 15 flowers; bracts minute. Flowers unisex-
ual, nearly sessile; pedicel minute; male flow-
ers with tubular perianth with 2 lobes or 
horns, 1 mm long, stamens 2, filaments c. 1 
mm long; female flowers with 3-lobed perianth, 
ovary superior, ovoid, 3-celled, styles 3. Fruit a 
3-lobed capsule 5-6 mm x 7-8 mm, notched, 
dehiscing explosively, remaining thickened, 3-
lobed stalk up to 8 mm in diameter. Seeds ob-
long, 4-5 mm x 3-3.5 mm, grey when dry, pit-
ted, with caruncle. Seedling with epigeal ger-
mination. 
In Stillingia lineata 2 subspecies are distin-
guished. The typical subspecies from Mauritius 
and Réunion has firm to slightly succulent, 
entire leaves with scarcely visible venation and 
no marginal glands, whereas the Asian plants 
are distinguishable by thin leaves with obvious 
serration, venation and glands. 
Stillingia comprises about 30 species, 27 of 
which are Neotropical, ranging from Argentina 
to the United States. Of the 3 species native to 
the Old World, 2 are endemic to Madagascar. 
Ecology Stillingia lineata occurs on 
beaches, but also in forest up to 300 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding In Réun-
ion Stillingia lineata has a protected status, 
but in Mauritius it is not considered threat-
ened. 
Prospects The cytotoxic properties of Stil-
lingia lineata warrant further research. 
Major references Coode, 1982; Esser, 1999; 
Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004. 
Other references Govaerts, Frodin & Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 2000; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & Bis-
soondoyal, 1996; Marston, Décosterd & 
Hostettmann, 1993. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
STROPHANTHUS AMBOENSIS (Schinz) Engl. & 
Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 15; 376 (1892). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Strophanthus intermedins Pax 
(1892). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus amboensis occurs from western DR 
Congo to Angola and Namibia. 
Uses In Angola a decoction of the roots or 
leaves of Strophanthus amboensis is taken 
against rheumatism. The Luvale people use an 
enema of the root to treat venereal diseases. 
The Luchazi people mix the pounded root with 
oil and apply the ointment to treat scabies. In 
Namibia the seeds are used in the preparation 
of arrow poison. 
Properties From the seeds about 10 cardiac 
glycosides (cardenolides) have been isolated of 
which the most important are based on the 
aglycone sarverogenin: mainly intermedioside 
and panstroside, and traces of amboside, lepto-
side, kwangoside and sarveroside. These gly-
cosides are highly toxic. The aglycones sar-
verogenin and sarmentogenin have also been 
isolated. Sarverogenin has also been isolated 
from the root and bark after hydrolysis. Lepto-
side has a weak cardio-stimulant action. 
Cell suspension cultures from the leaves, to 
which digitoxigenin was added, produced 6 
transformation products, e.g. periplogenin. 
Botany Deciduous shrub up to 4 m tall or 
liana up to 20 m long, with clear or white exu-
date, all parts glabrous to hairy; stem up to 20 
cm in diameter; bark pale grey; branches with 
few to many lenticels, pale brown or purple 
brown. Leaves decussately opposite, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole 2-9 mm 
long; blade ovate to broadly ovate, 2-12.5 cm x 
1-6.5 cm, base cuneate, rounded to slightly 
cordate, apex rounded or acuminate, papery or 
thinly leathery, with translucent dots. Inflores-
cence a terminal dichasial cyme, on long or 
short branches or in the forks, lax or congested, 
1-12-flowered; peduncle 0—1 cm long; bracts 
ovate, narrowly ovate or narrowly triangular, 
2-6 mm long, deciduous. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous; pedicel 0.5-2 cm long; se-
pals free, slightly unequal, ovate or obovate, 3— 
11 mm long, obtuse or acute; corolla tube 15-27 
mm long, widening at 15-35% of its length into 
a cylindrical upper part, at the mouth 6-13 
mm wide, short-hairy, orange-yellow turning 
purple via dark red, white-streaked inside, 
corona lobes tongue-shaped, 2.5—7.5 mm long, 
obtuse, fleshy, minutely hairy, pink or violet, 
corolla lobes ovate, gradually narrowing into a 
narrow, spreading tail, lobes including the tail 
25-75 mm long, hairy, reddish violet on the 
right outer side and whitish yellow on the left 
outer side, yellow on the inner side; stamens 
inserted at 5-7.5 mm from the base of the co-
rolla tube, included; ovary half-inferior, 2-
celled, style 5—7.5 mm long, ending in a ring-
like pistil head surrounding the stigma. Fruit 
consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 12—27 cm x 
STROPHANTHUS 543 
1.5-2.5 cm, tapering into a broad and obtuse 
apex, 2-valved, divergent at 180-270°, wall 
thick and hard, many-seeded. Seeds spindle-
shaped, slightly flattened, 8-16 mm x 2-4.5 
mm, densely pubescent, at apex with a long 
beak up to 10 cm long, glabrous in lower half, 
upper half with long hairs up to 7 cm long. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Strophanthus amboensis is a variable species. 
It flowers towards the end of the dry and the 
beginning of the rainy season; flowers appear 
before or with the leaves. Fruits mature at the 
beginning of the dry season. 
Ecology Strophanthus amboensis occurs in 
forest margins, woodland and thorn scrub, of-
ten in rock fissures, at 450-2000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stro-
phanthus amboensis is rather widespread and 
not in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Medicinal use of Strophanthus 
amboensis will be limited to local use in its 
area of distribution, unless further studies on 
the chemical constituents reveal new possibili-
ties. Strophanthus amboensis has unusual and 
beautiful flowers, which makes it an interest-
ing ornamental plant. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; McKenzie, 
2002; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Hoffmann, 2005; Kawa-
guchi, Hirotani & Furuya, 1988; Kawaguchi, 
Hirotani & Furuya, 1989; Omino, 2002; 
Schindler, 1956; van Euw et al., 1951; Wall, 
1955. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STROPHANTHUS BOIVINII Baill. 
Protologue Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 
757 (1888). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Roupellina boivinii (Baill.) 
Pichon (1949). 
Vernacular names Wood shaving flower 
(En). Roupellina (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus boivinii is endemic to Madagascar. It 
is naturalized in Réunion and Mauritius. 
Uses A decoction of the aerial parts is drunk 
to treat gonorrhoea and fever. It is also used to 
poison dogs and pest animals. A bark decoction 
is taken to treat colic and is rubbed in to treat 
wounds and itch. Strophanthus boivinii is 
sometimes sold as a rare ornamental because 
of its striking orange-brown flowers. 
Properties All parts of Strophanthus 
boivinii are considered toxic when ingested. 
Several cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) have 
been isolated from the seeds and leaves. The 
seeds contain mainly glycosides based on the 
aglycone corotoxigenin: milloside, paulioside, 
stroboside, boistroside and christyoside. In 
addition, the gitogenin glycoside strospeside is 
found. The leaves also contain glycosides, with 
paulioside, boistroside, strospeside, madagas-
coside, zettoside and sadleroside as main com-
ponents. Only strospeside is also present in 
other Strophanthus species. 
Botany Deciduous shrub or small tree up to 
5(-12) m tall, sometimes up to 30 m, dichoto-
mously branched with white latex; bole up to 
40 cm in diameter; bark pale grey, flaking. 
Leaves decussately opposite, clustered at the 
apex of branchlets, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 4-15(-20) mm long; blade ellip-
tical or narrowly elliptical to obovate, 2-21 cm 
x 1—6(—8) cm, base cuneate to decurrent, apex 
acute to acuminate, papery, glabrous to shortly 
hairy. Inflorescence a dichasial congested cyme 
in the forks of lateral branches, shortly hairy, 
few- to many-flowered; peduncle 2-7 mm long, 
erect or drooping; bracts ovate, up to 4 mm 
long, scale-like, whitish. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5—merous; pedicel 1.5—3.5 cm long; 
sepals free, narrowly ovate, 1.5-8 mm long, 
acute, shortly hairy; corolla tube 8—22 mm 
long, widening at 25-45% of its length into a 
cylindrical or cup-shaped part, at the mouth 3— 
10 mm wide, short-hairy, yellow or orange fad-
ing to reddish brown, corona lobes scale-like or 
tongue-shaped, 1-3 mm long, obtuse, fleshy, 
yellow, corolla lobes oblong, 7—32 mm long, 
apex rounded, margin undulate or crisped, 
short-hairy, orange turning reddish, with yel-
low margins; stamens inserted at 3-6 mm from 
the base of the corolla tube, included; ovary 
half-inferior, 2-celled, style 3.5-5 mm long, 
ending in a ringlike pistil head surrounding 
the stigma. Fruit consisting of 2 ellipsoid folli-
cles 11-24 cm x 1.5-3 cm, tapering into a nar-
row apex, curved inwards at the tip, 2-valved, 
divergent at an angle of 160-220°, wall thick 
and hard, with lenticels, many-seeded. Seeds 
spindle-shaped, slightly flattened, 11-16 mm 
long, densely hairy, at apex with a long beak 
up to 2.5 cm long, with long hairs in upper 1-2 
cm 3-4.5 cm long. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
544 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Strophanthus boivinii flowers towards the end 
of the dry and the beginning of the rainy sea-
son; flowers appear before or with the leaves. 
Mature fruits are present in the dry season. 
The plant is deciduous in dry regions. It is 
drought tolerant and can be grown both in full 
sun and in shade. It is a compact shrub when 
container-grown, and can be trained into a 
small tree. 
Ecology Strophanthus boivinii occurs in dry 
deciduous forest and thickets, sometimes on 
limestone, from sea-level up to 800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stro-
phanthus boivinii is rather widespread espe-
cially in the western part of Madagascar and is 
not in danger of genetic erosion. It is cultivated 
in botanic gardens in several countries and as 
ornamental. 
Prospects Strophanthus boivinii will re-
main of local use only, unless further research 
of the many cardio-active glycosides reveals 
properties with medicinal potential. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Boiteau & 
Allorge-Boiteau, 1993; Debray, Jacquemin & 
Razafindrambao, 1971; Neuwinger, 2000; Ra-
soanaivo, Petitjean & Conan, 1993. 
Other references Hegnauer, 1964; Mark-
graf, 1976; Pernet & Meyer, 1957; Rüssel, 
Schindler & Reichstein, 1961a; Rüssel, Schind-
ler & Reichstein, 1961b; Schindler & Reich-
stein, 1952a; Schindler & Reichstein, 1952b; 
Schindler & Reichstein, 1952c. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STROPHANTHUS COURMONTII Sacleux ex 
Franch. 
Protologue Journ. Bot. (Morot) 7: 300 
(1893). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Vernacular names Kia ya mamba, mu-
bongwena, mbuba, mtobwe (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus courmontii occurs in east and south-
eastern Africa, from southern Kenya through 
Tanzania, Malawi and eastern Zambia to Zim-
babwe and Mozambique. 
Uses In Tanzania a root decoction is drunk 
to treat rheumatism and also as an aphrodi-
siac. The seeds of Strophanthus courmontii are 
used to make ordeal poison and arrow poison. 
Such poisoned arrows are still used in north-
eastern Tanzania to kill animals that are dam-
aging crops. In Malawi, Zimbabwe and south-
ern Mozambique Strophanthus courmontii is 
used for making arrow poison as are several 
other Strophanthus species. The wood is used 
for making walking sticks. 
Properties From unripe seeds various car-
diac glycosides (cardenolides) have been iso-
lated, i.e. panstroside and sarmentocymarin, 
based on the aglycone sarmentogenin, and sar-
veroside, based on the aglycone sarverogenin. 
From ripe seeds the glycosides intermedioside, 
panstroside, sarmentocymarin and sarveroside 
were isolated. These glycosides are all highly 
toxic. 
Botany Deciduous liana up to 22 m long or 
less often a shrub up to 4 m tall, with white 
latex; stem up to 10 cm in diameter, with corky 
ridges to 5 cm x 2 cm; branches dark grey to 
reddish brown, with compressed corky trian-
gles at the nodes, later growing into ridges. 
Leaves decussately opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 3-11 mm long; blade 
elliptical to ovate or obovate, 2-14 cm x 2.5-6.5 
cm, base rounded to cuneate, apex acute to 
acuminate, thinly papery, glabrous. Inflores-
cence a terminal dichasial cyme, on long or 
short branches or in the forks, almost sessile, 
1-3-flowered; bracts ovate or narrowly ovate, 
1.5-4 mm long, sometimes deciduous. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 
1-7.5 mm long; sepals free, almost equal, 
ovate, 3-10 mm long, acute or apiculate, often 
with pink margins; corolla tube 22-43 mm 
long, widening at 15-35% of its length into a 
cup-shaped upper part, at the mouth 17-35 
mm wide, hairy inside, white turning yellow 
near the base and red turning purple near the 
apex, inside yellow with purple streaks, corona 
lobes subulate with a wide base, 2-6 mm long, 
apex obtuse, fleshy, yellow turning purple via 
red, corolla lobes ovate, 20-57 mm x 10-27 
mm, gradually narrowing into the acute apex, 
white turning yellow, with a violet band on the 
right margin; stamens inserted at 6-12 mm 
from the base of the corolla tube, included, 
anthers acuminate; ovary half-inferior, 2-
celled, style 8.5-16 mm long, ending in a ring-
like pistil head surrounding the minute stigma. 
Fruit consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 12-26 cm 
x 3-4.5 cm, with obtuse apex, 2-valved, diver-
gent at 160-200°, wall thick and hard, gla-
brous, grey- or purplish black, many-seeded. 
Seeds spindle-shaped, slightly flattened, 10-15 
mm long, densely hairy, at the apex with a long 
beak up to 8.5 cm long, glabrous in lower half, 
upper half with long hairs, up to 7 cm long. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
STROPHANTHUS 545 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Strophanthus courmontii flowers towards the 
end of the dry season while leafless, and to a 
lesser extent during the rainy season. Mature 
fruits are present towards the end of the rainy 
season. 
Ecology Strophanthus courmontii occurs in 
gallery forest or riverine thickets, less often in 
forest away from rivers, from sea-level up to 
1400 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stro-
phanthus courmontii is rather widespread in 
eastern and southern Africa and not in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Strophanthus courmontii has so 
far mainly been used for making arrow poison, 
a use which is declining rapidly. Although it 
contains glycosides, its medicinal use will be 
limited and restricted to its area of distribution 
unless further studies reveal new possibilities. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Neuwin-
ger, 1998; Neuwinger, 2000; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Githens, 1948; Haerdi, 
1964; McKenzie, 2002; Omino, 2002. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STROPHANTHUS EMINII Asch. & Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 15: 366, t. 10, 
11 (1892). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Vernacular names Spider tresses, poison 
arrow vine (En). Msungululu, mtondo (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus eminii occurs in south-eastern DR 
Congo, Tanzania and northern Zambia. 
Strophanthus eminii - wild 
Uses In DR Congo and Tanzania the roots 
are used as emetic. The seeds are used in ar-
row poisons. In Tanzania a root infusion is 
applied to skin diseases and wounds, and it is 
taken orally, mostly together with other plants, 
as emetic and anthelmintic, whereas the va-
pours are inhaled against fever. Children are 
bathed in a root decoction to combat fever. 
Young twigs are chewed against the effects of 
snakebites. The soft leaves are sometimes used 
as toilet paper for babies. 
Properties As in many Strophanthus spe-
cies, a complex mixture of cardiac glycosides 
(cardenolides) is present in Strophanthus 
eminii, and the seeds contain the highest con-
centration. The main glycosides isolated from 
the seeds are emicymarin and periplocymarin, 
which have periplogenin as aglycone, cymarin 
with strophanthidin as aglycone, and cymarol 
with strophanthidol as aglycone. Ledienoside, 
with periplogenin as aglycone, has been iso-
lated as a minor compound, and was previously 
found in Strophanthus ledienii Stein. When 
used as an arrow poison, these glycosides cause 
the heart of the prey animal or victim to arrest 
in systole. 
Adulterations and substitutes If the 
seeds of Strophanthus eminii are supplied 
within the fruit, there is no chance of adultera-
tion or substitution, as the fruits are unique 
within the genus, with the characteristic dense 
and long fruit wall protuberances. The seed on 
its own, though, can be confused with many 
other Strophanthus species. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 7 m 
tall or liana up to 10 m long, with clear, white 
or yellow exudate; stem up to 6 cm in diameter; 
bark grey or brown; branches sometimes 
fleshy, sparsely lenticellate, grey or brown. 
Leaves decussately opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 1-10 mm long; blade 
ovate to elliptical, 6-24 cm x 4-18 cm, base 
cuneate or rounded, apex acute to acuminate, 
papery or leathery, densely hairy on both sides. 
Inflorescence a dichasial cyme, axillary on long 
or short leafless branches, congested, 1-12-
flowered; peduncle 0-4 mm long; bracts ovate 
to elliptical, 4-15 mm long. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 1-8 mm 
long; sepals free, ovate or narrowly ovate, 11— 
25 mm long, acute; corolla tube 17-26 mm 
long, widening between 50-75% of its length 
into a cup-shaped upper part, pubescent out-
side, glabrous or short-hairy inside, outside 
pink with white, turning red, inside white, 
turning yellow with red spots and streaks, co-
546 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
' w ï ' 
Strophanthus eminii - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit, one follicle removed; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
rona lobes subulate, 2.5-6.5 mm long, acute or 
obtuse, fleshy, papillose, red or purple, corolla 
lobes ovate, gradually narrowing into a narrow, 
spreading tail, lobes including the tail 94-180 
mm long, hairy outside, glabrous inside, white 
and turning yellow, the tails orange, turning 
red; stamens inserted at 9.5-14 mm from the 
base of the corolla tube, just exserted or just 
included; ovary half-inferior, 2-celled, style 11— 
18 mm long, ending in a ring-like pistil head 
surrounding the minute stigma. Fruit consist-
ing of 2 narrowly ellipsoid follicles 20-38 cm x 
1.5-3 cm, tapering into an obtuse apex or knob, 
2-valved, divergent at 180°, wall thick, densely 
set with 4-18 mm long hairy protuberances, 
many-seeded. Seeds spindle-shaped, 11-24 mm 
x 2.5-5 mm, densely pubescent, at apex with a 
long beak up to 11 cm long, glabrous in lower 
half, upper half with long hairs up to 11 cm 
long. 
Other botanical information Strophan-
thus comprises 38 species, of which 30 occur in 
continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar and 7 in 
Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Several Strophanthus species related to Stro-
phanthus eminii have similar uses. Strophan-
thus holosericeus K.Schum. & Gilg is a decidu-
ous liana from south-eastern DR Congo and 
northern Zambia; its seeds are used as arrow 
poison and ordeal poison. Strophanthus mi-
rabilis Gilg is a small shrub occurring in Soma-
lia and Kenya; the seeds are used as ordeal 
poison and the roots are considered edible 
when cooked. Strophanthus nicholsonii Holmes 
is a shrub occurring in Malawi, Zambia, Zim-
babwe and Mozambique; the seeds are used as 
a hunting poison and ordeal poison. 
Growth and development Strophanthus 
eminii flowers at the end of the dry season and 
the beginning of the rainy season, with the 
flowers appearing before or together with the 
leaves. Mature fruits are found in the dry sea-
son. 
Ecology Strophanthus eminii occurs in de-
ciduous woodland or Acacia-Commiphora bush-
land, especially in rocky localities, at 600-1650 
m altitude. 
Genetic resources As Strophanthus eminii 
is distributed over a fairly large area in com-
mon habitats, it is not threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects If pharmacological interest in 
Strophanthus is revived, it might be worth 
investigating the pharmacological potential of 
Strophanthus eminii, as it is chemically similar 
to better-known species, e.g. Strophanthus 
hispidus DC. and Strophanthus kombe Oliv. 
Because of its beautiful flowers, Strophanthus 
eminii would make an interesting ornamental. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Neuwin-
ger, 1996; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Githens, 
1948; Kokwaro, 1993; Lardon, 1950; Von Euw 
& Reichstein, 1948; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962; Zelnik & Reichstein, 1957. 
Sources of illustration Beentje, 1982. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
STROPHANTHUS GRATUS (Wall. & Hook.) 
Baill. 
Protologue Hist. pi. 10: 171 (1889). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18 
Vernacular names Spider tresses, poison 
arrow vine (En). Strophanthus glabre du Ga-
bon (Fr). Estrofanto (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus gratus occurs in the forest area of 
West Africa and western Central Africa, from 
Senegal east to south-western Central African 
STROPHANTHUS 547 
Strophanthus gratus - wild 
Republic and north-western DR Congo and 
south to Gabon. 
Uses Seeds of Strophanthus gratus are very 
toxic and have been used extensively in the 
preparation of arrow poison throughout its 
distribution area. The seeds are mostly ground 
with the sticky plant juice and the arrow tip is 
dipped into the mixture. In the rainforest area 
of Central Africa, the stem bark or roots are 
used similarly; they are often mixed with other 
plant products, especially the latex of Periploca 
nigrescens Afzel., but also of Rauvolfia spp. 
Game wounded by a poisoned arrow dies 
quickly, and the flesh can be eaten without 
problem, although the flesh immediately sur-
rounding the wound is discarded. The seeds are 
also used as fish poison. In southern Nigeria 
Strophanthus gratus is cultivated by hunters 
for the seeds. 
A leaf and stem decoction is taken in Sierra 
Leone and Côte d'Ivoire to treat gonorrhoea. In 
Ghana a decoction of bark is taken to treat 
weakness, and a leaf paste is applied to snake-
bites. In Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana and Nigeria a 
leaf paste is put onto sores, including guinea 
worm sores. In Nigeria a leaf infusion is taken 
to treat constipation, and is rubbed on the body 
to cure fever. A root decoction is said to be an 
aphrodisiac. 
The glycoside ouabain is extracted from the 
seed ('Semen strophanthi') and used in a num-
ber of pharmaceuticals in several European 
countries, especially in Germany, as a rapid 
cardiac and vascular stimulant. 
In West Africa the plant has many magic uses, 
e.g. as a good luck charm. Strophanthus gratus 
is widely planted in gardens in the tropics and 
in greenhouses in the temperate zones as an 
ornamental. 
Production and international trade Stro-
phanthus gratus is locally cultivated in Nige-
ria, Cameroon and Gabon, mainly for export to 
Europe. In the early 1990s, 2700 t/year of Stro-
phanthus fruit were licensed for export from 
Cameroon; much of this would be Strophan-
thus gratus. 
Properties A large number of cardiac gly-
cosides (cardenolides) have been isolated from 
Strophanthus gratus. The seeds contain the 
highest concentration of glycosides character-
ized by highly oxygenated aglycones. They 
have no smell but are extremely bitter. The 
seeds contain 4-8% of a glycoside mixture with 
predominantly ouabagenin as aglycone: 90-
95% is ouabain (g-strophanthin), followed by 
acolongifloroside K, and strogoside, which has 
strogogenin as aglycone. Minor components 
with different aglycones are sarnovide and 
several sarmentosides. The leaves also contain 
the lignans pinoresinol, 8-hydroxypinoresinol 
and olivil. 
Strophanthus gratus fulfils all conditions for a 
perfect hunting poison: extremely high toxicity, 
fast and sure effect, unusually high concentra-
tions of the active principle in the seeds, and 
very easily water-soluble and thus easily ex-
tracted from the seed. Acolongifloroside K is 
comparable to ouabain in its toxic properties; 
strogoside is less toxic. The sarmentosides are 
highly toxic but because of their very low con-
centration they play only a small role. 
In medicine, ouabain is used as a remedy for 
congestive heart failure, like digitalis gly-
cosides. Congestive heart failure is a disease 
characterized by impaired blood circulation, 
due to a decrease in the force with which the 
heart muscle contracts. Cardiac glycosides 
such as ouabain have a direct cardiotonic ac-
tion on the myocardium, resulting in an in-
crease in the force of contraction. The increased 
contractility is caused by inhibition of the 
membrane-bound enzyme Na+K+ATPase, lead-
ing to an increase in the intracellular stores of 
calcium. When the cardiac glycoside is given to 
a patient suffering from congestive heart fail-
ure, the stroke volume of the heart is in-
creased, causing a more effective emptying of 
the ventricles, and a lowering of the diastolic 
pressure. In higher doses, cardiac glycosides 
have a direct inhibiting action on atrioventricu-
lar conduction together with a decrease of the 
heart rate, and are especially employed in the 
treatment of atrial flutter and atrial fibrilla-
548 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tion. The effects of cardiac glycosides are par-
ticularly dramatic in patients suffering from a 
combination of congestive heart failure and 
atrial fibrillation. When ouabain is applied, its 
actions are of rapid onset, but of short dura-
tion; furthermore, there is little risk of accumu-
lation. It is mainly administered by injection, 
because it is poorly absorbed orally, contrary to 
digitalis glycosides. Its major disadvantage is 
its narrow therapeutic range, which is the 
margin between the therapeutically effective 
and toxic doses. Toxic effects include vomiting 
and convulsions, while larger doses lead to 
cardiac arrest and death, which explains its 
success as arrow poison. Ouabain has recently 
been identified as a steroid hormone in mam-
mals. A remarkable interaction occurs between 
ouabain and reserpine obtained from Rauvolfia 
spp. Pretreatment with reserpine reduces the 
toxicity of ouabain, while simultaneous treat-
ment increases it. This may well explain the 
success of the mixture in hunting poisons. 
Leaves of Strophanthus gratus are a folk medi-
cine against snakebite in Africa. Aqueous leaf 
extracts show a dose-related delay of clotting of 
blood in animals treated with a standardized 
dose of venom of the saw-scaled viper (Echis 
carinatus). This venom causes rapid intra-
arterial clotting of blood, resulting in death in 
small animals, while death in larger animals 
and in man occurs as a result of depletion of 
fibrinogen reserves and internal haemorrhage. 
Preliminary tests found a novel activity for 
ouabain that could prove relevant to the treat-
ment of metastatic prostate cancer. The com-
pound induces programmed cell death in an-
drogen-independent human prostate cancer cell 
lines in vitro. 
Adulterations and substitutes The seeds 
of Strophanthus gratus are often mixed with 
those of Strophanthus hispidus DC; both con-
tain toxic and bio-active glycosides, though in 
different proportions. Ouabain is also found in 
the wood and bark of Acokanthera schimperi 
(A.DC.) Schweinf., a famous arrow-poison plant 
from East Africa. Digitalis glycosides are used 
as a remedy for congestive heart failure, in the 
same way as ouabain. 
Description Liana up to 25 m long or less 
often a shrub, with clear or white exudate; 
stem up to 10 cm in diameter, in older plants 
often with corky ridges; branches with many 
lenticels, dark brown to purplish brown. 
Leaves decussately opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 5-17 mm long; blade 
ovate or elliptical to obovate, 5—18 cm x 2-9 
Strophanthus gratus - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
follicle, with middle section removed; 3, seed, 
with part of beak and tuft of hairs removed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
cm, base rounded or cuneate, apex acuminate, 
margins entire, often somewhat revolute, 
thinly leathery, glabrous. Inflorescence a ter-
minal dichasial cyme, on long or short 
branches or in the forks, congested, few- to 
many-flowered; peduncle 0-6(-15) mm long; 
bracts ovate or triangular, 2-9 mm long. Flow-
ers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedi-
cel 4—13 mm long; sepals free, unequal, obovate 
or broadly obovate, 7-18 mm long, emarginate, 
rounded or apiculate; corolla tube 25-45 mm 
long, widening at 33-55% of its length into a 
cylindrical upper part, at the mouth 13—22 mm 
wide, glabrous outside, papillose or slightly 
scabrid near the apex, white and turning yel-
low near the base outside, reddish or purple 
near the mouth outside, white and red- or pur-
ple-streaked inside, corona lobes 10, subulate 
or narrowly triangular, 5—15 mm long, with 
acute tip, fleshy, hairy or almost glabrous, 
pink, turning purple, corolla lobes orbicular, 
14-35 mm x 15-32 mm, apex emarginate or 
rounded and apiculate, glabrous on both sides, 
STROPHANTHUS 549 
white often with a stripe of purple on the right 
side outside, turning reddish or purple all over, 
white and turning yellow inside; stamens in-
serted at 14-21 mm from the base of the co-
rolla tube, exserted; ovary half-inferior, 2-
celled, style 16-22 mm long, ending in a ring-
like pistil head surrounding the minute stigma. 
Fruit consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 23-41 cm 
x 3—4.5 cm, tapering into a narrow and obtuse 
apex and ending in a large knob, 2-valved, di-
vergent at 180°, wall thick and hard, slightly 
grooved, glabrous, with many lenticels, many-
seeded. Seeds spindle-shaped, 12-20 mm x 
2.5-4.5 mm, glabrous, slightly rough, at apex 
with a long beak up to 6 cm long, in upper 2.5-
4.5 cm with long hairs up to 13 cm long. Seed-
ling with epigeal germination; cotyledons ellip-
tical to obovate, 17-25 mm long, apex rounded. 
Other botanical information Strophan-
thus comprises 38 species, of which 30 occur in 
continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar and 7 in 
Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Only 2 other Strophanthus spp. contain the 
important compound ouabain, Strophanthus 
thollonii Franch. and Strophanthus sarmento-
sus DC, but only traces. 
Growth and development Strophanthus 
gratus possibly flowers throughout the year in 
humid parts of West Africa, but with a peak in 
November-December. In areas with distinct 
dry and rainy seasons, it flowers towards the 
end of the dry season and the beginning of the 
rainy season; fruits are mature in the dry sea-
son. Strophanthus gratus is an obligate cross 
pollinator. Fruit maturation takes about 1 
year. 
Ecology Strophanthus gratus occurs in pri-
mary and secondary moist forest, often at for-
est margins or on river banks, from sea-level 
up to 650 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting The 1000-seed 
weight of Strophanthus gratus is 20-30 g. 
Under glasshouse conditions in temperate cli-
mates ripewood cuttings are rooted in early 
spring in moist sand in a closed case with bot-
tom heat. Strophanthus gratus should prefera-
bly be grown in full light in a fertile, moist but 
well-drained loam rich in organic matter and 
with additional leaf mould. 
Management Domestication of Strophan-
thus gratus is being attempted at the Plante-
cam compound at Mutengene, Cameroon. 
Plants grow subspontaneously around Pygmy 
villages in western Cameroon. Spondias trees 
are sometimes used as support. 
Handling after harvest Before exportation 
the tuft of hair is often removed from the seed. 
However, the preferred method for exporting 
seed is inside the fruit and with the tuft of 
hairs attached, to limit adulteration. For ar-
row-poison use, almost mature fruits are kept 
in a pot until they open. The seeds are then 
cleaned by removing the tuft of hair by stirring 
or burning, and they are roasted to preserve 
their chemical properties by destroying the 
enzyme, which can convert the glycosides into 
biologically inactive compounds when the seeds 
are stored for a long time or become damp. 
Genetic resources Because of its wide dis-
tribution, Strophanthus gratus is not threat-
ened by genetic erosion. No concerted efforts to 
conserve genetic resources or breeding pro-
grammes are known. 
Prospects At present in medicine, cardiac 
glycosides are only applied in special cases, e.g. 
the combination of congestive heart failure and 
atrial fibrillation. In the Western world, the 
drug of choice is in general digoxin (from Digi-
talis lanata Ehrh.), but in acute situations 
ouabain is often preferred. At present ouabain 
is only applied to treat acute congestive heart 
failure combined with atrial fibrillation. Given 
its toxicity it is unlikely that it will become of 
more general use. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Burkill, 
1985; Hendrian, 2001a; Neuwinger, 1996. 
Other references Burkill, 2000; Cowan et 
a l , 2001; Geiger, Weiss & Reichstein, 1967 
Houghton & Skari, 1994; Jäger et al., 1965 
McConkey et al., 2000; Neuwinger, 2000 
Schoner, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Beentje, 1982. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
STROPHANTHUS HISPIDUS DC. 
Protologue Bull. Sei. Soc. Philom. Paris 3: 
123, t. 8 (1802). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18 
Vernacular names Poison arrow vine, 
brown strophanthus, hairy strophanthus (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus hispidus occurs from Senegal east to 
the Central African Republic, DR Congo, 
Uganda and western Tanzania and south to 
northern Angola. 
Uses In the savanna zone of West Africa the 
latex and seeds of Strophanthus hispidus have 
been used mostly to make arrow poison; the 
plant has locally been cultivated for this pur-
550 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Strophanthus hispidus - wild 
pose and for trade, and remnants of small 
plantations still exist. The seeds are usually 
pounded together with other poisonous plant or 
animal parts and the liquid evaporated to ob-
tain a sticky mass. Because of their great toxic-
ity, the seeds are not used in traditional medi-
cine. Decoctions of the roots or sometimes of 
the pulped root bark, stem bark or leaves are 
used externally to treat skin diseases, leprosy 
and ulcers, and internally to treat parasites, 
malaria, dysentery and gonorrhoea. A decoc-
tion of the bark or leaf sap is taken against the 
effects of snakebites. In Guinea the sap from 
crushed leaves or young shoots is applied to 
kill head-lice and other parasites. A decoction 
of the bark is dripped into the eye to treat con-
junctivitis. In Nigeria and Ghana a leaf and 
stem decoction is taken as a laxative or to treat 
fever, and is externally applied to sores. A root 
decoction is taken to treat rheumatic afflic-
tions. In Togo beer with root bark macerate 
and potassium carbonate, sometimes mixed 
with other plants, is taken to treat oedema. 
Nowadays, the glycosides extracted from the 
seeds ('Semen strophanthi') are used in a num-
ber of medicines in several European countries, 
the United States, Argentina and Chili as a 
rapid cardiac and vascular stimulant. 
In south-western Burkina Faso the young 
leaves are made into a tasty sauce, which is 
also restorative. The stems stripped from their 
bark are used in Nigeria for the end pieces of 
reed screens, and for cotton-carding bows. 
Production and international trade Stro-
phanthus seeds are exported to Europe and the 
United States. In Germany the seeds of Stro-
phanthus hispidus are preferred because their 
purity can be tested easily. The British, French 
and Swiss officially favour Strophanthus 
kombe Oliv., while the United States Pharma-
copoeia recognizes both. 
Properties A large number of cardiac gly-
cosides (cardenolides) have been isolated from 
Strophanthus hispidus. These glycosides, col-
lectively called strophanthins, are most abun-
dant in the seed and are responsible for the 
activity in arrow poison as well as cardiac and 
vascular stimulant. In comparison with Digi-
talis cardenolides, they are characterized by 
highly oxygenated aglycones. 
The seeds of Strophanthus hispidus contain 4— 
8% of a glycoside mixture, mainly with stro-
phanthidin as aglycone: cymarin (k-strophan-
thin-oc) and k-strophanthoside (k-strophanthin-y). 
Minor components have as aglycones strophan-
thidol and periplogenin. Used as arrow poison, 
these glycosides cause the heart to arrest in 
systole. The sole official use of Strophanthus 
drugs in medicine is for their influence on the 
circulation, especially in cases of chronic heart 
weakness. As the action is similar to that of 
Digitalis glycosides, although more likely to 
cause digestive disturbances and diarrhoea, 
Strophanthus drugs are often useful as an al-
ternative or adjuvant. Some believe that Stro-
phanthus glycosides have a direct stimulating 
effect upon the kidney and are superior to Digi-
talis glycosides as a diuretic, but the evidence 
in favour of this view is far from convincing. 
While they possess some local anaesthetic 
powers, they are so highly irritant that it is not 
practical to use it for this effect. 
An aqueous leaf extract showed a dose-related 
delay of blood clotting due to the venom of the 
saw-scaled viper (Echis carinatus), thus inhib-
iting the effect of its bite. This venom causes 
rapid intra-arterial clotting of blood, resulting 
in death in small animals, while death in lar-
ger animals and in man occurs due to depletion 
of fibrinogen reserves and internal haemor-
rhage. Extracts of Strophanthus hispidus 
showed significant anti-inflammatory activity 
against acute inflammation. 
The extracts of both the roots and leaves 
showed in-vitro inhibition of the bacteria Es-
cherichia coli, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Neisseria 
gonorrhoeae, Proteus mirabilis, Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus and Strep-
tococcus pyogenes. Strains of the pathogens 
with laboratory induced resistance against 
certain antibiotics were also sensitive to the 
aqueous and ethanolic extracts of Strophan-
thus hispidus. 
STROPHANTHUS 551 
Adulterations and substitutes The seeds 
of Strophanthus sarmentosus DC. are com-
monly used in the savanna zone of West Africa 
for arrow poison, but usually in regions where 
Strophanthus hispidus is rare or absent. In the 
forest regions, Strophanthus gratus (Wall. & 
Hook.) Franch. is preferred over Strophanthus 
hispidus, also because the last species grows 
very high into the trees, where the fruits are 
inaccessible. The Mongo people of DR Congo 
prefer the similarly highly cardiotoxic Peri-
ploca nigrescens Afzel. over Strophanthus spp., 
or use them together to make poison. The seeds 
of Strophanthus hispidus are sometimes adul-
terated with those of several other Strophan-
thus spp., e.g. Strophanthus thollonii Franch. 
or Strophanthus gratus. 
Description Deciduous shrub up to 5 m tall 
or large liana up to 100 m long, with clear, 
reddish or white exudate; stem up to 6 cm in 
diameter; bark dark grey; branches with few to 
many lenticels, dark brown or blackish. Leaves 
decussately opposite or rarely in whorls of 
three, simple and entire; stipules absent; peti-
ole 1—5 mm long; blade ovate or elliptical to 
obovate, 3-15 cm x 1.5-8 cm, base rounded or 
slightly cordate, apex acuminate, sparsely to 
densely stiff-hairy. Inflorescence a terminal 
dichasial cyme, on long or short branches or in 
the forks, lax or congested, 1-70-flowered; pe-
duncle 1-55 mm long; bracts narrowly ovate or 
elliptical, 0.5-3 cm long. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 5-merous; pedicel 0.5-3 cm long; se-
pals free, unequal, ovate to linear, 13-35 mm 
long, acute; corolla tube 11-22 mm long, widen-
ing at 54-66% of its length into a cup-shaped 
upper part, at the mouth 7.5-17 mm wide, 
hairy on both sides except for the base, white 
and turning orange, suffused with red near the 
base, red- or purple-spotted inside, corona lobes 
tongue-shaped, 1-3 mm long, with rounded tip, 
fleshy, minutely hairy or scabrous, yellow, red-
dish or brown-spotted inside, corolla lobes 
ovate, rather abruptly narrowing into the 1 
mm wide pendulous tails, lobes including tails 
15-23 cm long, short hairy on both sides, 
creamy and turning orange on both sides, red-
or brown- spotted inside, tails yellow, greenish 
yellow or reddish; stamens inserted at 7—13 
mm from the base of the corolla tube, included; 
ovary half-inferior, 2-celled, style 7-12 mm 
long, ending in a ringlike pistil head surround-
ing the minute stigma. Fruit consisting of 2 
ellipsoid follicles 25—50 cm x 1.5-2 cm, taper-
ing into a narrow apex and ending in a large 
knob, 2-valved, divergent at 200-260°, wall 
Strophanthus hispidus - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
follicle with middle section removed; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
thick and hard, grooved, hairy or glabrescent, 
many-seeded. Seeds spindle-shaped, 10-18 mm 
x 2-3 mm, densely pubescent, at apex with a 
long beak up to 8 cm long, in upper 2-4.5 cm 
with long hairs up to 8.5 cm long. 
Other botanical information Strophan-
thus comprises 38 species, of which 30 occur in 
continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar and 7 in 
Asia, from India to South-East Asia. Strophan-
thus hispidus is closely related to Strophan-
thus kombe Oliv. Strophanthus mortehanii De 
Wild, is chemically related to Strophanthus 
hispidus; it occurs from Cameroon to Gabon 
and northern DR Congo. In DR Congo the 
crushed seeds are mixed with the latex of Pe-
riploca nigrescens Afzel. and used as an arrow 
poison. Strophanthus parviflorus Franch. oc-
curs in Gabon, Congo and northern DR Congo 
and the seeds are used in Congo to make arrow 
poison. 
Growth and development If pruned regu-
larly, rooted branches will develop in a few 
years into a thick shrub or small tree, produc-
ing more fruits than wild plants. In Ghana 
Strophanthus hispidus is found flowering from 
February to April (rarely to July), and fruiting 
552 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
from January to July. In areas with distinct 
dry and rainy seasons, Strophanthus hispidus 
flowers towards the end of the dry season and 
the beginning of the rainy season; fruits are 
mature in the dry season. 
Ecology Strophanthus hispidus occurs in 
primary and secondary moist forest, or in 
woodland on rocky outcrops or in thickets, from 
sea-level up to 1600 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Strophanthus 
hispidus can be grown from seed or rooted 
branches. In northern Togo, 1-m-long branches 
are stuck in the ground; they root quickly. 
Management Young plants of Strophanthus 
hispidus need careful watering. Protection 
from insects and other animals is necessary. 
Harvesting Fruits of Strophanthus hispidus 
remain closed longer than those of Strophan-
thus sarmentosus, and thus can be harvested 
later, which is an advantage as only ripe seeds 
have maximum activity. 
Handling after harvest For arrow-poison 
use, almost mature fruits are kept in a pot un-
til they open. The seeds are then cleaned by 
removing the tuft of hair by stirring or burn-
ing, and they are roasted to preserve their 
chemical properties by destroying the enzyme, 
which converts the glycosides into biologically 
inactive compounds when the seeds are stored 
for a long time or become damp. 
Genetic resources Because of its wide dis-
tribution and its habitat range Strophanthus 
hispidus is not threatened by genetic erosion. 
No concerted efforts to conserve genetic re-
sources or breeding programmes are known. 
Prospects Strophanthus hispidus is a 
source of compounds that are useful in treating 
heart failure and blood circulation disorders. 
The biotransformation abilities of Strophan-
thus plant cell and tissue cultures may provide 
new, more effective and safer cardiac gly-
cosides useful in the pharmaceutical industry. 
Because of its easy growth and beautiful flow-
ers, Strophanthus hispidus would make an 
interesting ornamental plant. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Burkill, 
1985; Ebana, Madunagu & Etok, 1993; 
Hendrian, 2001a; Neuwinger, 1996; Neu-
winger, 2000. 
Other references Akah & Nwambie, 1994; 
Burkill, 2000; Githens, 1948; Houghton & 
Skari, 1994. 
Sources of illustration Beentje, 1982. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
STROPHANTHUS KOMBE Oliv. 
Protologue Hook.f., Icon. pi. 11: 79, t. 1098 
(1871). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Strophanthus hispidus DC. var. 
kombe (Oliv.) Holmes (1890). 
Vernacular names Kombi (Po). Mchoki 
(Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus kombe occurs naturally in eastern 
and southern Africa, from south-eastern Kenya 
and eastern Tanzania to eastern Namibia (Ca-
privi Strip), Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozam-
bique and northern South Africa. It is not 
planted on a large scale. 
Uses The seeds and roots of Strophanthus 
kombe have been used in the preparation of 
arrow poison since prehistoric times through-
out the species' range. Game wounded by a 
poisoned arrow dies quickly, while the flesh 
can be eaten without ill effect. However, flesh 
immediately surrounding the wound is usually 
discarded. 
Nowadays, the glycoside mixture from the 
seeds ('Semen strophanthi') is used medicinally 
as a heart stimulant. It is used in a number of 
medicines in several European countries for its 
influence on blood circulation, especially in 
cases of chronic heart weakness. The Giriama 
people of coastal Kenya use the leaves to make 
a charm used in a cleansing ritual. 
Production and international trade Al-
though seeds of Strophanthus kombe are ex-
ported from Africa, mainly to Europe, but also 
to the United States and Japan, there are no 
data on amounts and value. 
Properties More than a dozen cardiac gly-
Strophanthus kombe - wild 
STROPHANTHUS 553 
cosides (cardenolides) have been isolated from 
Strophanthus kombe. Compared to Digitalis 
cardenolides, those of Strophanthus kombe are 
characterized by highly oxygenated aglycones. 
The glycosides are most abundant in the seed 
and are responsible for the activity as arrow 
poison and as cardiac and vascular stimulant. 
The seeds contain about 4 g/100 g of a mixture 
of glycosides called strophanthin-K. It is a 
whitish, crystalline powder which is freely 
soluble in water, and is readily hydrolyzed into 
genins and sugars when warmed in acidic con-
ditions. The composition of the mixture varies, 
but has as major component k-strophanthoside 
(k-strophanthin-y). Other glycosides in the mix-
ture, based on the aglycone strophanthidin, are 
cymarin (k-strophanthin-cc), k-strophanthin-ß, 
erysimoside and helveticoside (erysimotoxin). 
Minor components with periplogenin as agly-
cone are periplocymarin, periplocin and emi-
cymarin; minor components with strophanthi-
dol as aglycone are cymarol, k-strophanthol-ß, 
k-strophanthol-y, helveticosol and erysimosol. 
All compounds are highly toxic. The seeds of 
Strophanthus kombe provide the precursor for 
the semi-synthetic compound acetylstrophan-
thidin, which is of clinical interest because of 
its rapid onset of vascular stimulant action 
when administered intravenously. The roots 
and fruits also contain considerable amounts of 
cardiac glycosides, while the leaves contain 
mainly resin. 
k-Strophanthin-ß has a similar effect as oua-
bain (from Strophanthus gratus (Wall. & 
Hook.) Baill.) or Digitalis glycosides and causes 
a positive inotropic effect and electrophysio-
logical changes in the heart by inhibiting the 
membrane-bound Na+-K+-ATPase pump re-
sponsible for Na+-K+ exchange. It should be 
used with great care and under strict medical 
direction because of its strength and narrow 
pharmaceutical range. It may cause intense 
local irritation when administered by hypo-
dermic injection. In urgent cases, the effects 
upon circulation can be obtained almost imme-
diately by means of intravenous injection. It 
has stronger diuretic properties than other 
cardiac glycosides, which is of value in cases 
complicated by oedema, but is also more likely 
to cause digestive disturbances 
Adulterations and substitutes It is likely 
that the seeds of several Strophanthus species 
are sometimes mixed before they are exported. 
Strophanthus courmontii Sacleux ex Franch., 
Strophanthus eminii Asch. & Pax and Stro-
phanthus nicholsonii Holmes, all from more or 
less the same region as Strophanthus kombe, 
have seeds which resemble those of the latter 
and are probably mixed with them in trade. 
Description Deciduous shrub up to 3.5 m 
tall or liana up to 20 m long, with clear, white 
or yellow exudate, roots thick and fleshy, neck-
lace-shaped; stem up to 10 cm in diameter; 
bark reddish brown or grey-brown; branches 
with few to many lenticels, dark brown, dark 
grey or black. Leaves decussately opposite, 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1.5— 
5 mm long; blade ovate or elliptical, less often 
obovate or nearly orbicular, 8-23.5 cm x 5-16.5 
cm, base cuneate, rounded or slightly cordate, 
apex obtuse, acute or acuminate, papery, in 
young leaves densely hairy on both sides, in 
older leaves glabrescent above. Inflorescence a 
rather congested terminal dichasial cyme, on 
short branches or in the forks, 1-12-flowered; 
peduncle 2-14(-25) mm long; bracts linear or 
narrowly obovate, 5-23 mm long. Flowers bi-
sexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 3 -
14(-20) mm long; sepals free, slightly unequal, 
narrowly ovate or linear, 9-20(-27) mm long, 
acute; corolla tube 13-24 mm long, widening at 
45—66% of its length into a cup-shaped upper 
part, at the mouth (6-)8-14 mm wide, densely 
Strophanthus kombe - 1, mature leaf; 2, flower-
ing branch; 3, flower; 4, fruit, one follicle re-
moved; 5, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by M.M. Spitteler 
554 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
hairy outside except for the base, sparsely 
hairy inside except for the base, white turning 
yellow on both sides, red-spotted and -streaked 
inside, corona lobes tongue-shaped, 1-3 mm 
long, rounded, fleshy, minutely hairy, yellow 
and pink-spotted, the pink turning purple, co-
rolla lobes ovate, gradually or rather abruptly 
narrowing into the 1 mm wide pendulous tails, 
lobes including the tail 10—16(—20) cm long, 
hairy except for the inner side of the tails, 
white and turning yellow, tails yellow; stamens 
inserted at 7-12 mm from the base of the co-
rolla tube, included; ovary half-inferior, 2-
celled, style 6.5-13.5 mm long, ending in a 
ringlike pistil head surrounding the minute 
stigma. Fruit consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 
15-47 cm x 1.5—2.5 cm, tapering towards the 
apex and ending in a small or large knob, 2-
valved, divergent at 180°, wall thick and hard, 
densely hairy in young fruits but glabrescent 
when maturing, many-seeded. Seeds spindle-
shaped, 11-21 mm x 2.5—4.5 mm x 1.5 mm, 
densely hairy, at apex with a long beak up to 
10 cm long, glabrous in lower half, upper half 
with long hairs, top including the hairs up to 8 
cm long. Seedling with epigeal germination; 
cotyledons elliptical or ovate, obtuse at apex, 
glabrous; first leaves resembling leaves of ma-
ture plants but usually narrower. 
Other botanical information Strophan-
thus comprises 38 species, of which 30 occur in 
continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar and 7 in 
Asia, from India to South-East Asia. Many of 
these species are used medicinally. Strophan-
thus kombe is closely related to Strophanthus 
hispidus DC. from West and Central Africa, 
which differs in more widely divergent follicles 
and wider outer sepals. 
Growth and development Flowering of 
Strophanthus kombe occurs towards the end of 
the dry season and the beginning of the rainy 
season. Nothing is known about pollinators, 
although flower structure and colouring sug-
gest butterflies. Fruits mature in the dry sea-
son. Seeds are dispersed by wind. 
Ecology Strophanthus kombe occurs in 
coastal forest, gallery forest, riparian thickets 
and woodland, often on inselbergs, from sea-
level up to 1100 m altitude. 
Management Seeds intended for trade are 
usually collected from wild plants. As far as is 
known, Strophanthus kombe is not cultivated 
on a large scale. 
Propagation and planting At the Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew, United Kingdom, semi-
ripe cuttings are taken in April. Cuttings are 
dipped into a rooting hormone and then placed 
in a mist unit in pots containing a coir and 
perlite mix, at a temperature of 25°C and rela-
tive humidity of 80%. When they have rooted, 
after about 4 weeks, they are potted up. 
Handling after harvest In preparing the 
arrow poison, the seeds are pounded to a pulp 
after removal of the tuft of hairs. An adhesive 
is added (e.g. Euphorbia latex or saliva), the 
mixture is sometimes exposed to strong 
sunlight for some hours, and subsequently 
smeared along the point of the arrow. 
Strophanthus seeds should be preserved in 
tightly closed containers, and a few drops of 
chloroform or carbon tetrachloride should be 
added from time to time to prevent insect at-
tack. The drug is extracted with absolute alco-
hol, the oil is removed from the percolate with 
petroleum ether, and the glycosides are subse-
quently converted into strophanthidin by boil-
ing with hydrochloric acid. 
Genetic resources There are no indications 
that Strophanthus kombe is at risk of genetic 
erosion. Large germplasm collections of Stro-
phanthus kombe do not exist. As the glycoside 
concentration differs per population, variability 
studies are needed to evaluate this. 
Prospects Strophanthus kombe is a source 
of compounds that are useful in treating heart 
failure and blood circulation disorders. The use 
of strophanthin-K, k-strophanthin-ß and ace-
tylstrophanthidin is likely to continue, but the 
use of strophanthins as cardiac medicine had 
its peak from 1950 to 1970 and has declined 
since. The biotransformation abilities of Stro-
phanthus plant cell and tissue cultures may 
provide new, more effective and safer cardiac 
glycosides. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Grosa, 
Allegrone & Del Grosso, 2005; Kawaguchi, Hi-
rotani & Furuya, 1993; Neuwinger, 1996. 
Other references Beentje & Cooke, 2000; 
Gelfand et al., 1985; Pakia & Cooke, 2003b; 
van Wyk & Gericke, 2000; Williamson, 1955. 
Sources of illustration Beentje, 1982. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
STROPHANTHUS PETERSIANUS Klotzsch 
Protologue Peters, Naturw. Reise Mossam-
bique 6(1): 276 (1861). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Vernacular names Mvariso (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus petersianus occurs in East and 
STROPHANTHUS 555 
southern Africa, from southern Kenya to Zim-
babwe, Mozambique and eastern South Africa. 
Uses Throughout its distribution area, the 
seeds of Strophanthus petersianus are used to 
make arrow poison. In general poison makers 
do not discriminate between the Strophanthus 
species growing in their area. Strophanthus 
petersianus is used by Zulu herbalists in South 
Africa as a charm against evil. 
Properties From the seeds the cardiac gly-
coside (cardenolide) sarmentocymarin and its 
aglycone sarmentogenin has been isolated. 
Panstroside has been found in seeds from Ma-
lawi. The whole plant gave a positive test for 
haemolysis. 
Botany Deciduous shrub or liana up to 15 m 
long, with white or reddish exudate; stem up to 
10 cm in diameter; bark pale grey; branches 
usually glabrous, with corky flattened triangu-
lar protuberances up to 2.5 cm high at the 
nodes. Leaves decussately opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 2-13 mm long; 
blade elliptical to ovate, 3-11 cm x 1.5-5 cm, 
base cuneate to rounded, apex acuminate, gla-
brous. Inflorescence a terminal dichasial cyme, 
on long or short branches or in the forks, 1-4-
flowered, usually glabrous; peduncle 0-6 mm 
long; bracts linear or narrowly elliptical, 2.5—11 
mm long, deciduous. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 1-7.5 mm long; 
sepals free, unequal, ovate or narrowly ellipti-
cal, 5-21 mm long, acute; corolla tube 15-35 
mm long, widening at 20-40% of its length into 
a cup-shaped upper part, at the mouth 10-30 
mm wide, glabrous outside, short-hairy inside, 
white turning yellow near the base and pur-
plish near the apex of the tube, yellow and 
purple-streaked inside, corona lobes narrowly 
triangular, 6-15 mm long, white, with a purple 
line in the middle, corolla lobes ovate, narrow-
ing into slender pendulous tails, lobes includ-
ing the tail 90-205 mm long, undulate, ma-
roon-violet outside, yellow inside; stamens in-
serted at 6-12 mm from the base of the corolla 
tube, included, acumen on anther 1-4 mm 
long; ovary half-inferior, 2-celled, style 7.5-14.5 
mm long, ending in a ringlike pistil head sur-
rounding the minute stigma. Fruit composed of 
2 ellipsoid follicles 20-37 cm x 2-3.5 cm, taper-
ing into an obtuse apex, 2-valved, divergent at 
an angle of 180°, wall thick and hard, dark 
brown, glabrous, with lenticels, many-seeded. 
Seeds almost spindle-shaped, 10—18 mm long, 
densely pubescent, at apex with a long beak up 
to 12 cm long, glabrous for (20-)35-65 mm, 
upper part with long hairs up to 9 cm long. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Strophanthus petersianus produces flowers and 
leaves towards the end of the dry and the be-
ginning of the rainy season. Mature fruits can 
be found in the dry season. 
Ecology Strophanthus petersianus occurs in 
coastal forest and woodland, often on rocky 
localities, from sea-level up to 1100 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stro-
phanthus petersianus is relatively common in 
East and southern Africa and is not in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Strophanthus petersianus has so 
far mainly been used for making arrow poison 
and this use is declining rapidly. The effects of 
sarmentocymarin on cell-proliferative diseases 
are being studied. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Neuwin-
ger, 1998; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Chandra Singh, 2004; 
Githens, 1948; Omino, 2002. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STROPHANTHUS PREUSSII Engl. & Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 15: 369 (1892). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Vernacular names Spider tresses, poison 
arrow vine (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus preussii occurs in the forest area of 
West and Central Africa, from Sierra Leone 
east to the Central African Republic, and ex-
tending to Uganda and northern Tanzania, and 
south to southern DR Congo and Angola. 
Strophanthus preussii - wild 
556 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire the latex or the young 
leaves crushed in water are applied to treat 
gonorrhoea. A leaf decoction is taken to treat 
post-partum pain in the Central African Re-
public. In DR Congo the latex is put on sores 
and wounds to promote healing. The latex or 
seeds are used in arrow poison mixtures in 
Liberia and DR Congo, but because they are 
less toxic than those of Strophanthus gratus 
(Wall. & Hook.) Baill. and Strophanthus his-
pidus DC, they are of second choice. The stems 
are used to make bows in southern Nigeria. 
The latex has been used for coagulating Fun-
tumia latex in Ghana. In the Central African 
Republic the fibre is used to make fishing lines, 
nets and ropes. In Gabon the young leaves are 
said to be cooked and eaten as a vegetable. 
Strophanthus preussii is sold as an ornamental 
in the United States, because of its strikingly 
beautiful flowers with very long corolla tails. 
The flowering branches are sometimes used as 
cut-flower. 
Properties The seeds of Strophanthus 
preussii are not rich in cardiac glycosides 
(cardenolides); they contain 0.5-1% glycosides. 
The glycosides are mainly based on the agly-
cone periplogenin, with periplocin, periplocy-
marin and emicymarin as main components. 
Small amounts of glycosides based on the agly-
cone strophanthidin are also present. The tox-
icity of the strongly cardio-active periplocin, 
periplocymarin and emicymarin is only slightly 
less than that of ouabain, a well-known com-
pound found in other Strophanthus spp., espe-
cially Strophanthus gratus. 
Description Evergreen liana up to 12 m 
long or less often a shrub up to 5 m tall, with 
clear or white exudate, stem up to 2.5 cm in 
diameter; branches with few to many lenticels, 
reddish to purple-brown. Leaves decussately 
opposite, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 2-9(-14) mm long; blade ovate or ellip-
tical to slightly obovate, 2-18.5 cm x 1.5-7.5 
cm, base cuneate, rounded to rarely slightly 
cordate, apex acuminate, papery or thinly 
leathery, glabrous. Inflorescence a terminal 
dichasial cyme, on long or short branches or in 
the forks, lax, few- to many-flowered; peduncle 
0-24 (-35) mm long; bracts ovate or orbicular 
to obovate, 4-20 mm long, sometimes decidu-
ous. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fra-
grant; pedicel 4-25 mm long; sepals free, un-
equal, ovate to narrowly ovate or linear, 4—25 
mm long, acute or obtuse; corolla tube 12-26 
mm long, widening at 40-66% of its length into 
a cup-shaped upper part, at the mouth 7-17 
Strophanthus preussii - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
fruit, one follicle removed; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
mm wide, minutely hairy except outside near 
the base, white turning reddish orange via 
yellow, outside suffused with pink at the base 
and with red near the apex, inside red-spotted 
and -streaked, corona lobes tongue-shaped, 1— 
2.5 mm long, rounded, fleshy, minutely hairy, 
yellow turning orange, pink- or purple-
streaked, corolla lobes ovate, gradually narrow-
ing into a narrow, spreading tail, lobes includ-
ing the tail 25-75 mm long, minutely hairy 
except for the apex, white and with 3 pink 
lines, the white turning yellow; stamens in-
serted at 8-14.5 mm from the base of the co-
rolla tube, exserted or included; ovary half-
inferior, 2-celled, style 7.5—13.5 mm long, end-
ing in a ringlike pistil head surrounding the 
stigma. Fruit consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 
(13-)15-29 cm x 1-3 cm, tapering into a nar-
row obtuse apex, or with a small or large knob, 
2-valved, divergent at 160-190", wall rather 
thick and hard, slightly or conspicuously 
grooved, glabrous, with many elongated lenti-
cels, many-seeded. Seeds spindle-shaped, 12-
20 mm x 2-3.5 mm, densely hairy, at apex with 
a long beak up to 6 cm long, glabrous for 3-8 
mm in basal part and in upper part with long 
STROPHANTHUS 557 
hairs up to 10 cm long. 
Other botanical information Strophan-
thus comprises 38 species, of which 30 occur in 
continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar and 7 in 
Asia, from India to South-East Asia. Strophan-
thus preussii is related to Strophanthus barteri 
Franch. and Strophanthus gracilis K.Schum. & 
Pax. Strophanthus barteri is a slender liana 
from the forest area of West Africa and western 
Central Africa. In Ghana the stem bark in de-
coction is taken to treat diarrhoea, a use sup-
ported by pharmacological tests. In Côte 
d'Ivoire it is becoming rare because of overhar-
vesting. Strophanthus gracilis occurs from Ni-
geria to Gabon, in coastal and riverine forest. 
The seeds and latex are used in arrow and fish 
poisons. It has a high content of cardiac gly-
cosides. 
Growth and development Strophanthus 
preussii flowers in the dry season and the first 
part of the long rainy season; fruit ripens in 
the dry season. 
Ecology Strophanthus preussii occurs in 
primary and secondary moist forest, gallery 
forest, forest margins and clearings, from sea-
level up to 1400 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Strophanthus 
preussii can be propagated by seed or by soft 
wood cuttings. 
Management Strophanthus preussii grows 
to a shrub 1-2 m tall when potted. It needs to 
be kept at a minimum temperature of 25°C, in 
half-shade. It should be planted in fertile, hu-
mus-rich, well-drained soil, and regularly wa-
tered. A slightly alkaline soil is preferred. 
Strophanthus preussii may drop its leaves in 
the cool, dry season. 
Harvesting The pods need to dry on the 
plant before they are harvested and opened to 
get the seeds. 
Genetic resources Because of its wide dis-
tribution and its habitat range Strophanthus 
preussii is not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Strophanthus preussii will re-
main of local importance only, as it contains 
only low levels of glycosides. As an ornamental 
it is promising. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Burkill, 
1985; Neuwinger, 1996. 
Other references Burkill, 2000; Neu-
winger, 2000; Quarm, 1989; Rosselet & Reich-
stein, 1953. 
Sources of illustration Beentje, 1982. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
STROPHANTHUS SARMENTOSUS DC. 
Protologue Bull. Sei. Soc. Philom. Paris 3: 
123, t. 8, fig. 1 (1802). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 18 
Vernacular names Spider tresses, poison 
arrow vine (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus sarmentosus occurs from Senegal 
east to the Central African Republic, northern 
DR Congo and southern Uganda, and south to 
Angola (Cabinda). 
Uses In West Africa the seed is used to make 
arrow poison, especially in the drier parts 
where Strophanthus hispidus DC. is scarce or 
absent. Strophanthus sarmentosus seeds are 
usually mixed with parts of other plants and 
boiled in water, after which the decoction is 
concentrated into a poisonous syrup in which 
the arrow tips are dipped. The plant enters 
into local medicine throughout West Africa. In 
Senegal a root decoction is taken to treat gon-
orrhoea and leprosy. A macerate of pounded 
roots is taken on an empty stomach to treat 
painful joints and hernia. The powdered roots 
cooked together with the grains of Digitaria 
exilis (Kippist) Stapf are taken to treat flatu-
lence with constipation, without causing pain-
ful purging. In Guinea the crushed seeds are 
applied to the head to kill lice, and in Liberia 
they are applied to scabies. In Côte d'Ivoire a 
leaf decoction is used as an eye drop to treat 
conjunctivitis and trachoma. A decoction of the 
twigs is taken to treat rheumatoid arthritis, 
while the leaf sap is drunk and the bark mac-
erate used as an enema to treat venereal dis-
eases. They are considered diuretic and sooth-
Strophanthus sarmentosus - wild 
558 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ing. A leaf decoction is taken as emetic and to 
treat diarrhoea, whereas a root decoction is 
taken as vermifuge or to restore strength. In 
Senegal and Côte d'Ivoire the latex is applied 
to wounds and sores as a cicatrisant. In Sene-
gal the plant is therefore used in circumcision 
ceremonies. In Benin a leaf decoction mixed 
with other plants is taken as a remedy against 
snakebites. In Congo the stems and leaves are 
used to make steam baths and infusions 
against rheumatism. In the 1950s a seed ex-
tract was used to combat rheumatoid arthritis 
in the United States and Europe. In Nigeria 
the stems are used to make bows and the bark 
to make ropes, hats and mats. 
Production and international trade In the 
early 1950s the fruits of Strophanthus sarmen-
tosus, mixed with those of other Strophanthus 
spp., were collected and exported on a large 
scale from West Africa as raw material for the 
production of cortisone. Since then, easier 
methods of making this compound have been 
found, and collection stopped as quickly as it 
had started. 
Properties The composition of cardiac gly-
cosides (cardenolides) in Strophanthus sarmen-
tosus seeds is very variable. Four chemical 
types are distinguished, based on the weakly 
polar chloroform-soluble glycosides, of which 2 
are widespread. The first type occurs through-
out the distribution area of Strophanthus sar-
mentosus, and its main constituents are the 
sarverogenin glycosides panstroside and sar-
veroside. The second type occurs only in West 
Africa, with main constituents the sarmento-
genin glycosides sarnovide and sarmentocy-
marin. The third type is rare and occurs only in 
southern Mali. Its main constituents are 
musaroside and sarmutoside, which yield the 
aglycone sarmutogenin. The fourth type occurs 
from west Côte d'Ivoire to Sierra Leone and is 
characterized by a very low level of glycosides, 
mainly of the aglycone sarverogenin, with sar-
veroside sometimes replaced by intermedi-
oside. The water-soluble glycosides of the 4 
types are strongly polar and so far 18 have 
been identified. These polar glycosides are 
mainly derivatives of 7 aglycones of different 
oxidation states, with as main compounds sar-
mentoside A, tholloside, sarhamnoloside, lo-
cundioside and bipindoside. The seed also con-
tains traces of ouabain. All other plant parts 
also contain glycosides but except for the latex, 
only in traces. Most of the isolated glycosides 
are highly toxic. 
Sarmentoside A increased the force and rate of 
rabbit heart contractions in vitro; this cardio-
active property was similar to digoxin, a Digi-
talis glycoside. The aglycone sarmentogenin 
was used in the 1950s to manufacture corti-
sone, as it contains a 11-ketocorticosteroid. 
Cortisone was at that time a new medicine for 
arthritis and cardiac rheumatism, and it was 
thought that large amounts were needed to 
treat patients, but it was later found that doses 
needed were much lower. Due to the fame of 
Strophanthus for cortisone production, more 
research into the botany and chemistry was 
done, especially on other corticosteroids and 
sex-hormones. As the concentration of sarmen-
togenin for cortisone production was found to 
be very variable in the seeds of Strophanthus 
sarmentosus, other methods were developed to 
obtain 11-ketocorticosteroids more easily from 
other plant species, e.g. from the sapogenin 
diosgenin from Dioscorea spp., and from heco-
genin from Agave spp. The demand for the seed 
of Strophanthus sarmentosus then collapsed. 
Adulterations and substitutes The seeds 
of Strophanthus hispidus are more commonly 
used in West Africa for arrow poison than 
those of Strophanthus sarmentosus, except in 
the dry regions, where the former is rare or 
absent. In the forest regions, especially east of 
Cameroon, Strophanthus gratus (Wall. & 
Hook.) Franch. is preferred over Strophanthus 
sarmentosus. 
Description Deciduous shrub with long 
trailing stems or liana up to 40 m long, with 
clear or white exudate, stem up to 15 cm in 
diameter; bark pale brown, corky and deeply 
fissured; branches with many lenticels, dark 
brown or reddish brown, with many up to 1 cm 
high corky protuberances. Leaves decussately 
opposite or in whorls of 3, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 2-17(-20) mm long; 
blade elliptical to ovate, 2-15 cm x 1.5-7 cm, 
base rounded to cuneate, apex acuminate, 
margin often undulate or slightly revolute, 
glabrous. Inflorescence a congested terminal 
dichasial cyme, on short branches or less often 
on long branches or in the forks, 1—5(—11)-
flowered; peduncle 0—6(—10) mm long; bracts 
ovate, 4.5-13.5 mm long, sepal-like. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 
2-12 mm long; sepals free, slightly unequal, 
ovate to elliptical, 5-20 mm long, acute; corolla 
tube 15-40 mm long, widening at 22-35% of its 
length into a cup-shaped upper part, at the 
mouth 15-30 mm wide, white and turning yel-
low in the lower part outside, pink and turning 
purple in the upper part outside, white and 
STROPHANTHUS 559 
Strophanthus sarmentosus - 1, flowering branch; 
2, fruit, one follicle removed; 3, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
red- or purple-streaked inside, the white turn-
ing yellow, corona lobes narrowly triangular 
and often undulate, 5-22 mm long, tip acute, 
white, pink-or purple-streaked, the white turn-
ing yellow, corolla lobes ovate, 7-20 mm x 6-18 
mm, gradually or rather abruptly narrowing 
into the 1—2.5 mm wide pendulous tail, lobes 
including the tail 4-14 cm long, white and 
turning yellow on both sides, outside near the 
base pink or purple, tails pale yellow; stamens 
inserted at 7-13.5 mm from the base of the 
corolla tube, included; ovary half-inferior, 2-
celled, style 9-17.5 mm long, ending in a pistil 
head surrounding the minute stigma. Fruit 
consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 10-28 cm x 
1.5-4.5 cm, tapering into a broad and obtuse 
apex, 2-valved, divergent at 180°, wall thick 
and hard, glabrous, slightly grooved, with 
many lenticels, many-seeded. Seeds spindle-
shaped, 8-20 mm x 2-4 mm, densely hairy, at 
apex with a long beak up to 8 cm long, glabrous 
in lower half, upper half with long hairs up to 
10 cm long. 
Other botanical information Strophan-
thus comprises 38 species, of which 30 occur in 
continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar and 7 in 
Asia, from India to South-East Asia. Two va-
rieties of Strophanthus sarmentosus are distin-
guished, the very common var. sarmentosus 
with shortly hairy flowers and the rare var. 
glabriflorus Monach., restricted to Guinea, 
with glabrous flowers. 
Growth and development Strophanthus 
sarmentosus flowers in the dry season, just 
before the leaves expand. Fruits mature in the 
dry season. Cultivated plants have reached 
ages of over 55 years. 
Ecology Strophanthus sarmentosus occurs 
in rain forest, gallery forest and thickets, from 
sea-level up to 1400 m altitude. 
Management Though Strophanthus sar-
mentosus is not cultivated, it is sometimes 
spared when clearing woodland and tended. 
Compared to Strophanthus hispidus, Stro-
phanthus sarmentosus does not grow easily 
from rooted stems, and produces less fruit in 
cultivation than in the wild. 
Harvesting Fruits are harvested before 
maturity, as otherwise they open and the seeds 
disperse. 
Handling after harvest For arrow-poison 
use, the almost mature fruits are kept in a pot 
until they open. The seeds are then cleaned by 
removing the tuft of hair by stirring or burn-
ing, and they are roasted to preserve their 
chemical properties by destroying the enzyme, 
which converts the glycosides into biologically 
inactive compounds when the seeds are stored 
for a long time or become damp. 
Genetic resources Strophanthus sarmento-
sus has a wide distribution, but is not common. 
Although it is represented in botanic gardens 
in both tropical and temperate regions, no con-
certed efforts to conserve genetic resources or 
breeding programmes are known. 
Prospects The medicinal of use of Strophan-
thus sarmentosus will remain limited unless 
further studies on the chemical constituents 
reveal new possibilities. Strophanthus sarmen-
tosus can be grown as an ornamental, as it has 
beautiful flowers, but as propagation is not 
easy, it will probably remain of minor impor-
tance. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Burkill, 
1985; Hegnauer, 1964; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Arbonnier, 2004; Beentje 
& Cooke, 2000; Burkill, 2000; Neuwinger, 
1996; Owonubi & Iwalewa, 1997. 
Sources of illustration Beentje, 1982. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
560 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
STROPHANTHUS SPECIOSUS (N.B.Ward & 
Harv.) Reber 
Protologue Fortschr. (Genf) 3: 299 (1887). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 18 
Vernacular names Common poison rope, 
forest poison rope (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus speciosus occurs in Zimbabwe, South 
Africa and Swaziland. 
Uses Strophanthus speciosus is used to treat 
snakebites in humans and cattle. For humans 
the powdered root is sniffed or the root is 
chewed and the sap is swallowed, while spoon-
fuls of roasted pulverized root are given to cat-
tle. It is possibly also used as an arrow poison 
and for criminal purposes. 
Properties From seeds of Strophanthus 
speciosus the cardiac glycosides (cardenolides) 
strospeside and christyoside have been iso-
lated. Strospeside also occurs in Adenium spp. 
Botany Shrub up to 4 m tall or liana up to 
16 m long, with clear or white exudate; stem up 
to 3 cm in diameter, branching trichotomously; 
branches with rather many lenticels, 
branchlets glabrous. Leaves in whorls of 3, 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 2-12 
mm long; blade narrowly elliptical to slightly 
obovate, 2-11.5 cm x 1—3.5 cm, base decurrent 
into the petiole, apex acute or acuminate, mar-
gin often slightly revolute, papery, glabrous. 
Inflorescence a congested terminal dichasial 
cyme, on long branches or in the trichotomous 
forks, usually glabrous, few- to many-flowered; 
peduncle 3-16(-23) mm long; bracts narrowly 
ovate, 1.5-10.5 mm long, deciduous. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 6-21 mm 
long; sepals slightly unequal, narrowly ovate, 
3-14.5 mm long, acute, with some hairs near 
the apex or hairy all over; corolla tube 9—14 
mm long, widening at 30-50% of its length into 
a cup-shaped upper part, at the mouth 5.5-11 
mm wide, yellow turning orange, outside white 
near the base, inside red streaked, corona lobes 
subulate, 2-5 mm x 1-2 mm, acute or obtuse, 
fleshy, white, corolla lobes ovate, gradually 
narrowing into the 1-1.5 mm wide spreading 
tails, lobes including the tail 19-50 mm long, 
yellow on both sides, with a red spot near the 
base, tails yellow; stamens inserted at 4-6.5 
mm from the base of the corolla tube, included; 
ovary half-inferior, 2-celled, hairy, style 4-5.5 
mm long, ending in a ringlike pistil head sur-
rounding the minute stigma. Fruit consisting 
of 2 ellipsoid follicles (7-)10-22 cm x 1-1.5 cm, 
tapering into a narrow apex, 2-valved, diver-
gent at (60-) 100-230°, wall thick and hard, 
glabrous or densely short-hairy, many-seeded. 
Seeds almost spindle-shaped, slightly flat-
tened, 13-22 mm x 2-4.5 mm, densely hairy, at 
apex with a beak up to 1.5 cm long, glabrous 
for 0-2 mm in basal part, in upper part with 
long hairs up to 4.5 cm long. 
Strophanthus speciosus flowers towards the 
end of the dry and the beginning of the rainy 
season. Mature fruits occur throughout the 
year, with a peak in the dry season. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Some other species are used in southern Africa 
for similar purposes as Strophanthus speciosus. 
The latex of Strophanthus gerrardii Stapf from 
southern Mozambique, north-eastern South 
Africa and Swaziland is used as a spear poison, 
whereas a fruit in decoction is taken to treat 
hysteria. Strophanthus luteolus Codd from 
southern Mozambique and north-eastern South 
Africa has the same uses. 
Ecology Strophanthus speciosus occurs in 
forest, often at margins, at (300-)900-1500(-
1800) m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Like 
most Strophanthus species from the forest, 
Strophanthus speciosus is not common in its 
distribution area, although not in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects In traditional medicine Stro-
phanthus speciosus is only used to treat snake-
bites. It will remain of minor importance, 
unless the effectivity against snake poison is 
confirmed by research. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Neuwin-
ger, 2000; van Wyk, van Heerden & van 
Oudtshoorn, 2002; Watt & Breyer-Brandwijk, 
1962. 
Other references Arnold et al., 2002; 
Schindler & Reichstein, 1952b. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STROPHANTHUS THOLLONII Franch. 
Protologue Journ. Bot. (Morot) 7: 299 
(1893). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus thollonii occurs in south-eastern Ni-
geria, southern Cameroon, the Central African 
Republic and Gabon. 
Uses The Fang people and Bagielli pygmies 
STROPHANTHUS 561 
in Gabon and Cameroon use the crushed or 
boiled seeds to prepare hunting poison. The 
seeds are used alone or together with those of 
Strophanthus gratus (Wall. & Hook.) Baill., or 
as part of a complex recipe of several plants, 
snake heads and mushrooms. 
Properties A large number of cardiac gly-
cosides (cardenolides) have been isolated from 
Strophanthus thollonii. The seeds contain the 
highest concentration. Chemically, the water-
soluble seed glycosides of Strophanthus thollo-
nii are very similar to those of Strophanthus 
sarmentosus DC. The main glycosides isolated 
are based on 3 aglycones and include sarmen-
toside A, tholloside, bipindoside, locundioside 
and sarhamnoloside. They are all highly poi-
sonous. The seeds also contain traces of oua-
bain. 
Botany Evergreen liana up to 20 m long, 
with clear or white exudate in all parts; stem 
up to 5 cm in diameter; bark grey; branches 
with many lenticels, dark maroon-brown or 
blackish. Leaves decussately opposite, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole 2-13 mm 
long; blade narrowly elliptical to obovate, 3 -
17.5 cm x 1-7.5 cm, base cuneate to decurrent, 
apex acute to acuminate, margin slightly revo-
lute, leathery, glabrous. Inflorescence a con-
gested terminal dichasial cyme, on long or 
short branches or in the forks, glabrous, 1—5-
flowered; peduncle 0-4 mm long; bracts ovate 
to narrowly triangular, 1.5-12 mm long, acute, 
early deciduous. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, fragrant; pedicel 2-10 mm long; sepals 
free, unequal, elliptical to narrowly elliptical, 
10-26 mm long, acute; corolla tube 24-38 mm 
long, widening at c. 50% of its length into a 
cylindrical or cup-shaped upper part, at the 
mouth 11-22 mm wide, white turning yellow at 
the base outside, pink and turning purple in 
the upper part outside, white and red- or pur-
ple-streaked inside, the white turning yellow, 
corona lobes narrowly triangular, 10-27 mm x 
2-4 mm, acute, slightly fleshy, sparsely pubes-
cent, pink, turning purple in the centre, with 
white margins and apex, the white turning 
yellow, corolla lobes ovate, 18-41 mm x 10-19 
mm, acute to slightly acuminate, white and 
turning yellow inside, dark pink or purple out-
side; stamens inserted at 15-20 mm from the 
base of the corolla tube, exserted; ovary half-
inferior, 2-celled, style 17-23 mm long, ending 
in a pistil head surrounding the stigma. Fruit 
consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 18-47 cm x 
1.5-2.5 cm, tapering into a narrow apex, 2-
valved, divergent at 140-180°, wall rather thin 
and hard, smooth or slightly grooved, glabrous, 
with lenticels, dark maroon-brown or blackish 
purple, many-seeded. Seeds spindle-shaped, 
15-24 mm x 2-3 mm, densely short-hairy, at 
apex with a beak up to 3.5 cm long, glabrous 
for 1.5-15 mm in basal part, upper part with 
long hairs up to 4 cm long. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Strophanthus thollonii resembles Strophan-
thus gratus (Wall. & Hook.) Baill., but chemi-
cally they are not related at all. They both lack 
the long petal tails, which are characteristic for 
the genus. Strophanthus thollonii flowers all 
year round, with a peak from November to 
January. Mature fruits can be found from De-
cember to January. Seeds are sometimes used 
to adulterate seed of Strophanthus hispidus 
DC. 
Strophanthus gardeniiflorus Gilg is closely 
related to Strophanthus thollonii and is chemi-
cally similar. It is restricted to gallery forest in 
southern DR Congo, northern Zambia and 
eastern Angola at 1000-1500 m altitude. The 
seeds are used for arrow poison. 
Ecology Strophanthus thollonii occurs on 
river banks in moist forest from sea-level up to 
300 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stro-
phanthus thollonii occurs rather dispersed in 
its comparatively small distribution area, and 
is uncommon. Because of overharvesting, it has 
become locally threatened. 
Prospects Strophanthus thollonii has so far 
mainly been used for making arrow poison, but 
this use is declining rapidly. Although it con-
tains several glycosides, its medicinal use will 
remain limited unless further studies reveal 
new possibilities. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Neuwin-
ger, 1996. 
Other references Bisset, 1989a; Brandt, 
Kaufmann & Reichstein, 1966; McKenzie, 
2002; Weiss, Schindler & Reichstein, 1957. 
Authors H.J. Beentje 
STROPHANTHUS WELWITSCHII (Baill.) 
K.Schum. 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. Nachtr. 2: 59 (1900). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Stro-
phanthus welwitschii occurs throughout Cen-
562 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tral Africa and in the western part of southern 
Africa, in DR Congo, eastern Tanzania, Zambia 
and Angola. 
Uses In DR Congo a seed decoction is admin-
istered orally to treat respiratory diseases in 
children. In Angola a root infusion is drunk to 
treat gonorrhoea, but excessive usage is dan-
gerous and can even be fatal. Root powder 
mixed with oil is rubbed in to treat scabies. The 
seeds are used to produce arrow poison. 
Properties The amount of cardiac gly-
cosides (cardenolides) in the seeds varies 
throughout the area of distribution; seeds from 
Zambia are less bitter than those from Angola 
and contain hardly any glycosides. Seeds from 
Angola contain intermedioside, panstroside, 
inertoside and leptoside. All glycosides except 
inertoside are highly toxic. 
Botany Deciduous shrub or small tree up to 
5 m tall or liana up to 8 m long, with clear or 
white exudate; stem up to 10(—40) cm in diame-
ter; bark dark brown or grey; branches with 
many lenticels, branchlets minutely hairy. 
Leaves decussately opposite or rarely in whorls 
of 3 or 4, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 1-5 mm long; blade ovate to narrowly 
elliptical, up to 8.5 cm x 4 cm, base cuneate to 
rounded, apex rounded to acute or acuminate, 
margins undulate or slightly revolute, thinly 
leathery, with a line of translucent dots near 
the midrib. Inflorescence a terminal dichasial 
cyme, on long or short branches or in the forks, 
glabrous or hairy, l-2(-5) flowered; peduncle 
0-6(—17) mm long; bracts linear or narrowly 
ovate, 2-8 mm long, sometimes deciduous. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, fragrant; 
pedicel 3—9(—17) mm long; sepals free, slightly 
unequal, ovate or narrowly ovate, 5-19 mm 
long, acute; corolla tube (13.5-)17-38 mm long, 
widening gradually at 20-40% of its length into 
a cup-shaped upper part, at the mouth (11-) 
15-25(—35) mm wide, white, sometimes suf-
fused with pink near the base, pale or reddish 
purple in the upper part outside, creamy and 
red- or purple-streaked inside, corona lobes 
narrowly triangular, 5-23 mm long, acute, not 
fleshy, red or purple-red, corolla lobes ovate, 
(10-)14-38(-48) mm x (7.5-)10-24(-29) mm, 
acute, spreading or recurved, minutely hairy 
inside, inside white, turning dark pink, outside 
white turning pale pink on left side, pale pur-
ple turning purple-red on the right side; sta-
mens inserted at 5.5-10.5 mm from the base of 
the corolla tube, included; ovary half-inferior, 
2-celled, style 8-15 mm long, ending in a ring-
like pistil head surrounding the minute stigma. 
Fruit consisting of 2 ellipsoid follicles 11-35 cm 
x 1-2.5 cm, long-tapering towards a narrow 
apex and ending in an obtuse tip, 2-valved, 
divergent at an angle of 160-240°, wall thick 
and hard, glabrous, with many lenticels, dark 
brown or purple-brown, many-seeded. Seeds 
spindle-shaped, flattened, 8.5-19.5 mm x 2.5-4 
mm, densely hairy, at apex with a long beak up 
to 11 cm long, glabrous in lower half, upper 
half with long hairs up to 9.5 cm long. 
Strophanthus comprises 38 species, of which 30 
occur in continental Africa, 1 in Madagascar 
and 7 in Asia, from India to South-East Asia. 
Strophanthus welwitschii flowers towards the 
end of the dry and the beginning of the rainy 
season when forming new leaves. Mature fruits 
are present in the dry season. 
Ecology Strophanthus welwitschii occurs in 
woodland, often in rocky localities and gallery 
forest, at 300-1800 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Stro-
phanthus welwitschii is not uncommon in its 
distribution area and not in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Medicinal use of Strophanthus 
welwitschii will remain limited in its area of 
distribution, unless further studies reveal new 
possibilities. 
Major references Beentje, 1982; Neuwin-
ger, 1998; Neuwinger, 2000; Watt & Breyer-
Brandwijk, 1962. 
Other references Disengomoka & De-
laveau, 1983; McKenzie, 2002; Von Euw et al., 
1952. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOPSIS THOUARSII Baill. 
Protologue Bull. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 
456 (1885). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nopsis thouarsii is endemic to Madagascar 
where it occurs from Antsiranana in the north 
to Toamasina in the centre and also in Toliara 
in the south. 
Uses A decoction of the leaves or root bark is 
drunk to treat liver problems, enlarged spleen, 
fever and malaria, sometimes as an adjuvant of 
chloroquine. 
The root yields a bright yellow dye. The 
branches are used to make temporary huts in 
the forest. 
Properties From the leaves the bisbenzyli-
soquinoline alkaloid fangchinoline, the apor-
STRYCHNOS 563 
phine alkaloids isocorydine, liriotulipiferine, N-
methylindcarpine and predicentrine, and the 
morphinan alkaloid sinoacutine were isolated. 
The roots have been shown to contain fangchi-
noline and the related tetrandrine. The stem 
bark yielded the morphinan alkaloid tazopsine. 
In a test with several bisbenzylisoquinoline 
alkaloids, fangchinoline was the most active 
compound tested against chloroquine-resistant 
Plasmodium falciparum and against a mul-
tidrug-resistant lymphoblastic acute leukaemia 
cell line. Fangchinoline also has an antagonis-
tic effect on the antinociceptive properties of 
morphine. 
Tazopsine has shown strong activity against 
Plasmodium falciparum and Plasmodium yoelli. 
The semi-synthetic derivative N-cyclopentyl-
tazopsine combines strong antiplasmodial ac-
tivity with a lower toxicity. Because of its spe-
cific action against the liver form of the para-
site, the risk of resistance developing is consid-
ered small. 
Botany Dioecious, small tree up to 15 m tall; 
bark dark brown and green mottled. Leaves 
simple and entire; petiole distinctly swollen 
and bent at apex; blade lanceolate, base 
cuneate, apex acute, with 3 prominent main 
veins from the base. Inflorescence an erect ra-
ceme, axillary or on older, leafless branches, 
often many together. Flowers unisexual, 3-4-
merous; sepals greenish yellow to pink; petals 
translucent whitish to pink; male flowers with 
5-6 stamens; female flowers with superior 
ovary, composed of free carpels. Fruit a cluster 
of 1—4, flattened globose, somewhat fleshy 
drupes, pale greenish yellow to whitish when 
ripe, each drupe 1-seeded. Seed horseshoe-
shaped. 
Strychnopsis comprises a single species. 
Ecology Strychnopsis thouarsii occurs in 
humid and evergreen forest up to 1150 m alti-
tude. Black lemurs eat the fruits and probably 
disperse the seeds. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nopsis thouarsii is widely used as a traditional 
medicine against malaria. Continued exploita-
tion, combined with the reduction of the areas 
under rainforest in Madagascar, may become a 
threat to its genetic diversity. However, it is 
not yet included in the IUCN Red List. 
Prospects If semi-synthetic tazopsine de-
rivatives are admitted as antimalaria drugs, 
the pressure on natural stands of Strychnopsis 
thouarsii will increase even more. Research 
aiming at the development of propagation and 
management techniques is urgently needed. 
Major references Carraz et al., 2006; Ra-
soanaivo & Ratsimamanga-Urverg, 1994; Ra-
soanaivo, Ratsimamanga-Urverg & Rakoto-
Ratsimamanga, 1995; Ratsimamanga-Urverg 
et al., 1992; Schatz, 2001. 
Other references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Fang, Zhang, & Ku, 2005; 
Frappier et al., 1996; Schatz, undated. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
STRYCHNOS ACULEATA Soler. 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. IV, 2: 40 (1892). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2re = 36, 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos aculeata occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
Uganda and south to Angola and Zambia. 
Uses Strychnos aculeata is widely used for 
medicinal purposes, mainly as an emetic and to 
treat urinary, genital and pulmonary infec-
tions. In Côte d'Ivoire plant sap is rubbed in to 
treat guinea worm infections. An infusion of 
the bark together with the fruit of Piper 
guineense Schumach. & Thonn. is administered 
as an enema and rubbed in to treat gonorrhoea 
and swellings in the genital region. A bark 
decoction is taken and used as an enema to 
treat oedema and scrotal elephantiasis. Fruit 
pulp is rubbed on the head to treat insanity. In 
Ghana ground seeds are used as an enema to 
treat oedema of the abdomen. In Gabon the 
maceration of pulped fruit is taken as an abor-
tifacient. Ground seeds are taken in water as 
an emetic. In Congo a bark decoction is taken 
to treat pulmonary complaints, food poisoning, 
Strychnos aculeata - wild 
564 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
trypanosomiasis and insanity and as an expec-
torant and emetic. Leaf sap is rubbed in and a 
bark decoction is used in vapour baths to treat 
fever fits. The Badala people of DR Congo use 
the crushed leaves to treat pulmonary tubercu-
losis. In Zambia a root decoction is taken to 
treat gonorrhoea and pneumonia. 
In Cameroon the seeds of Strychnos aculeata 
are rubbed into a paste and used as arrow poi-
son. The fruit and a paste from the seed are 
used as fish poison. The fruit is also a common 
soap substitute. In Côte d'Ivoire the large 
spherical fruit cut in half is used to make 
drinking cups and ladles. 
Properties The fruits and especially the 
seeds of Strychnos aculeata are highly poison-
ous. The fruit contains saponins. Indole alka-
loids were only found in the fruit wall, not in 
the seeds. Principal indole alkaloids of the root 
bark are strychnofendlerine and N-acetyl-
strychnosplendine. The stem bark contains 
spermostrychnine, N-acetyl-isostrychnosplendine 
and N-acetyl-O-methylstrychnosplendine, the 
latter being also the main indole alkaloid of the 
fruit. 
N-acetyl-O-methylstrychnosplendine is partly 
responsible for the strong muscle-paralysing 
activity in vitro and in vivo. Spermostrychnine 
causes clonic convulsions, but no tonic convul-
sions in mice. 
Description Large liana up to 100 m long, 
climbing with tendrils in 1—3(—4) pairs; stem 
up to 20(-22) cm in diameter, with prickles 3— 
5(—9) mm long; branchlets dark green and 
shining, with prickles, glabrous. Leaves oppo-
site, simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 
2-12 mm long, glabrous; blade oblong to ellip-
tical, (3-)8-18 cm x (2-)3-8 cm, base cuneate 
to rounded, apex acuminate, glabrous, 3-veined 
from the base. Inflorescence an axillary con-
gested thyrse up to 7 cm long, many-flowered. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; sepals 
fused at base, almost orbicular, up to 2 mm 
long; corolla tube almost cylindrical, up to 3 
mm long, pale green, slightly widened towards 
the throat, lobes triangular to ovate, 1-2 mm 
long, acute, erect, thick, glabrous outside, in-
side with a flat brush of white hairs on the 
lobes, white; stamens inserted at the middle of 
the corolla tube, included; ovary superior, 
ovoid, 1.5-2 mm long, glabrous, 2-celled, 
stigma almost sessile, oblong. Fruit a globose 
berry 10-12 cm in diameter, slightly laterally 
compressed, very hard, greenish yellow to dark 
green, many-seeded. Seeds obliquely ovoid to 
ellipsoid, flattened, 20-35 mm x 16-25 mm x 
Strychnos aculeata - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
tendrils; 3, flower; 4, fruit; 5, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
4-8 mm, hairy, rough, often at one side with a 
raised line. 
Other botanical information Strychnos 
comprises about 200 species: about 60 species 
in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in Africa. 
Strychnos aculeata belongs to the section Acu-
leatae and is the only species in this section. 
The fruits and seeds of Strychnos elaeocarpa 
Gilg ex Leeuwenb. from section Rouhamon, 
Strychnos ternata Gilg ex Leeuwenb. from sec-
tion Spinosae and Strychnos staudtii Gilg from 
section Densiflorae are all used in Cameroon as 
arrow poison and fish poison. Strychnos densi-
flora Baill. and Strychnos lucens Baker also 
belong to section Densiflorae. Strychnos densi-
flora is used in Cameroon as ordeal poison. In 
Tanzania the ground roots of Strychnos lucens 
are taken in food to treat hookworm infections. 
Ecology Strychnos aculeata occurs in rain-
forest, including secondary forest, from sea-
level up to 700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources There are no indications 
that Strychnos aculeata is in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Strychnos aculeata is widely used 
STRYCHNOS 565 
for medicinal purposes. In order to promote its 
sustainable use, research should be done on 
improved methods of harvesting and possibly 
its domestication. More research into the 
pharmacological activities of the compounds of 
Strychnos aculeata seems warranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neuwinger, 
1996; Neuwinger, 2000; Neuwinger, 2004; 
Weeratunga et al., 1984. 
Other references Bisset & Leeuwenberg, 
1968; Bouquet, 1969; Bouquet & Debray, 1974; 
Irvine, 1961; Kerharo & Bouquet, 1950; Mi-
rand et al., 1979; Noumi, 2004; Ohiri, Verpoor-
te & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c; Raponda-
Walker & Sillans, 1961; Rolfsen et al., 1979; 
Tére, 2000; Tra Bi, Kouamé & Traoré, 2005. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1969. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS AFZELII Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 17: 572 (1893). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos afzelii occurs from Senegal east to Nigeria. 
Uses In Senegal the crushed leaves and root 
of Strychnos afzelii together with the crushed 
leaves of Hugonia planchonii Hook.f. are ap-
plied to treat abscesses and swellings. In Si-
erra Leone a decoction of the seeds together 
with leaves of Ocimum sp. or other aromatic 
herbs is taken to promote sweating in case of 
fever attacks. Ground seeds are taken in soup 
to treat stomach-ache. 
All parts of the plant smell like cloves, espe-
cially the twig bark. In Sierra Leone women of 
the Mende people rub the sap from crushed 
leaves, pure or mixed with white clay, on their 
bodies for the fragrance and as an aphrodisiac. 
In Sierra Leone and Côte d'Ivoire the twigs are 
used as chew-sticks. The Temne people of Si-
erra Leone chew the leaves to treat bad breath. 
Chewing makes the lips red, and in Ghana the 
leaves are chewed for this purpose. 
Properties The main indole alkaloids of 
Strychnos afzelii are the dimeric tertiary indole 
alkaloid bisnordihydrotoxiferine and its deriva-
tives bisnordihydrotoxiferine N-oxide and bis-
nordihydrotoxiferine di-N-oxide, the mono-
meric caracurine VII (Wieland-Gumlich alde-
hyde), its acetyl derivative diaboline, the 
dimeric bisquaternary caracurine V and its 
derivative caracurine V N-oxide, the dimeric 
tertiary longicaudatine and its isomer bisnor-
C-alkaloid H. 
Stem bark extracts showed activity against 
several micro-organisms, including some spe-
cies associated with caries. Bisnordihydro-
toxiferine, bisnor-C-alkaloid H and caracurine 
VII showed antimicrobial effects. Bisnordihy-
drotoxiferine, isolated from the root bark of 
Strychnos trinervis (Veil.) Mart., showed a wide 
antimicrobial spectrum against gram-positive 
and gram-negative bacteria, and against fila-
mentous and yeast-like fungi. Preliminary 
studies of this compound also revealed some 
cytotoxic activity in vitro against sarcoma 180 
tumours. Bisnordihydrotoxiferine also showed 
a weak activity in vitro against Plasmodium 
falciparum. 
Botany Large liana up to 50 m long, climb-
ing with solitary tendrils; branchlets medium 
green, yellowish hairy; lateral branches trans-
formed into blunt spines 7-25(-35) mm long. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 1-5 mm long, almost glabrous; 
blade ovate, orbicular, elliptical, obovate or 
oblong, 1-11(-14.5) cm x l-5.5(-6.5) cm, base 
cordate, rounded or cuneate, apex notched or 
rounded to acuminate, sparsely appressed 
hairy when young, later almost glabrous, 3-
veined from the base. Inflorescence an axillary 
congested or lax thyrse 2-5 cm long, few- to 
many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous; sepals fused at base, broadly triangu-
lar to almost orbicular, up to 0.5 mm long; co-
rolla tube up to 1 mm long, lobes narrowly tri-
angular, 1-1.5 mm long, acute, erect, sparsely 
hairy outside, inside with a flat brush of white 
hairs on the lobes, white, creamy or pale yel-
lowish green with slightly darker lobes; sta-
mens inserted at the mouth of the corolla tube, 
included; ovary superior, broadly ovoid, 0.5 mm 
in diameter, glabrous, 2-celled, style very 
short, stigma white, globose. Fruit an obliquely 
ellipsoid, laterally compressed berry 11-16 mm 
x 9-13 mm x 9-11 mm, rather hard, orange, 
l(-2)-seeded. Seed ellipsoid, 10-14 mm x 9-11 
mm x 4—6.5 mm, slightly flattened, glabrous, 
knobbed at one side in the middle. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos afzelii belongs to the section 
Breviflorae. Another spiny species from West 
and northern Central Africa is Strychnos con-
golana Gilg which belongs to section Spinosae. 
In Côte d'Ivoire the leaf pulp is applied to treat 
snakebites. Ground roots of Strychnos congo-
lana and seeds of Aframomum melegueta 
566 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
K.Schum. made into a paste are administered 
as a suppository to treat dysmenorrhoea. The 
paste is also used as an aphrodisiac. 
Ecology Strychnos afzelii occurs on river 
banks or in moist localities in periodically in-
undated rainforest, including secondary forest 
and coastal swamp forest, from sea-level up to 
700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos afzelii is widespread and does not seem to 
be in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Strychnos 
afzelii will remain of limited use only, unless 
more elaborate tests on the antibacterial and 
antifungal activities of the stem bark reveal 
potential for developing phytomedicines. 
Major references Abbiw, 1990; Bisset, 
1970; Leeuwenberg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; 
Ohiri, Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Bouquet & Debray, 1974; Frédérich, Tits 
& Angenot, 2003; Melo et al., 1987; Tra Bi et 
al., 1999; Tra Bi, Kouamé & Traoré, 2005; Ver-
poorte, Groenink & Baerheim Svendsen, 1980; 
Verpoorte et al., 1978. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS ANGOLENSIS Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 17: 571 (1893). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n - 88 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos angolensis occurs from Nigeria east to Tan-
zania, and south to Angola and Mozambique. 
Uses Strychnos angolensis was recorded as 
being used as ordeal poison in the Equateur 
province in DR Congo. In Cameroon the 
branches are used to make arrow shafts. 
Properties The root and stem bark of 
Strychnos angolensis contain at least 15 alka-
loids: gentianine, aspidospermine, akuam-
micine, tubifoline, condylocarpine, akuam-
midine, 16(R)-epi-isositsirikine, 16(S)-epi-
isositsirikine, tubifolidine, normavacurine, 
antirhine (anthirine), strychnofluorine (18-
hydroxy-nor-C-fluorocurarine), flavopereirine, 
caracurine VII-N-oxide (WGA N-oxide) and 
tubotaiwine; the last two are the major compo-
nents. The stem bark also contains the tertiary 
dimeric alkaloid caracurine V. In pharmacol-
ogical screenings of bark extract, convulsive 
effects have been shown in the nonpolar part of 
the tertiary alkaloid fraction, while the polar 
fraction showed a strong muscle-relaxant activ-
ity. Strychnos angolensis has a considerable 
amount of mucilage in the leaves. The fruit 
pulp contains the polyphenol caffeic acid. 
In-vitro tests of leaf and root extracts showed 
moderate antiplasmodial activity against 
Plasmodium falciparum. 
Botany Large liana up to 30 m long, climb-
ing by solitary tendrils or shrub to small tree 
up to 12 m tall; stem up to 20 cm in diameter; 
bark pale brown; branches medium to dark 
brown, branchlets green, ochrous hairy. Leaves 
opposite, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 1-5 mm long, ochrous hairy; blade 
ovate to elliptical, 2-7(-10) cm x l-4(-5) cm, 
base cuneate to rounded, apex obtuse to acute 
or acuminate, glabrous or hairy on the veins 
especially at the base, 3-veined from the base. 
Inflorescence an axillary or sometimes termi-
nal lax thyrse 1-6 cm long, few-flowered; pe-
duncle ochrous hairy. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 4-5-merous; sepals broadly ovate, 0.5-1 
mm long; corolla tube c. 0.5 mm long, lobes 
ovate to triangular, 1.5-2 mm long, acute, 
spreading, outside glabrous or minutely hairy, 
inside hairy at base, white or yellow; stamens 
inserted at the mouth of the corolla tube, just 
exserted; ovary superior, globose or broadly 
ovoid, c. 1 mm in diameter, 2-celled, gradually 
narrowing into the style c. 0.5 mm long, stigma 
head-shaped. Fruit an ellipsoid to globose, 
glaucous berry c. 12 mm x 12-22 mm x 18 mm, 
soft, orange or red, 1-seeded. Seed ellipsoid, 
8.5—15 mm x 6-11 mm x 5-9 mm, smooth, gla-
brous, dark brown, shiny. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos angolensis belongs to the 
section Breviflorae. Also in this section is 
Strychnos malchairii De Wild., which occurs in 
DR Congo; the Mbuti and Efe people use the 
pounded bark to make an arrow poison. The 
ground roots are applied as a paste to treat 
large ulcers. The stems are used to make arrow 
shafts. The flexible stem is also used as rope. 
Ecology Strychnos angolensis occurs in for-
est near river banks and in gallery forest, from 
sea-level up to 1500 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos angolensis is widespread and is not threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects It is likely that Strychnos ango-
lensis will remain of little importance, unless 
further research shows new pharmacological 
activities of the alkaloids. 
Major references Bisset, 1970; Bisset & 
Leeuwenberg, 1968; Bohlin et al., 1979; Leeu-
STRYCHNOS 567 
wenberg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980. 
Other references Bouquet & Fournet, 
1975b; Delaude et al., 1995; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Ohiri, Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c; 
Philippe et al., 2005; Terashima & Ichikawa, 
2003; Terashima, Kalala & Malasi, 1992; Ver-
poorte et al., 1983a. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS BARTERI Soler. 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 17: 556 (1893). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos barteri occurs from Guinea east to Camer-
oon. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire the fruit is used as a 
fish poison. In Nigeria the stems are used to 
make bows. 
Properties Seven indole alkaloids have 
been isolated from Strychnos barteri. The stem 
contains nigritanine, the stem bark and the 
root akagerine, the stem bark and the leaves 
contain 18-dehydro-nigritanine and the leaves 
10-hydroxy-nigritanine, 18-dehydro-10-hydroxy-
nigritanine, oxindole alkaloid I and oxindole 
alkaloid II. Akagerine is a potent convulsant 
agent, although 100 times less active than 
strychnine. 
Botany Large liana, up to 100 m long, climb-
ing with tendrils in 1-3 pairs; stem up to 16 cm 
in diameter; branchlets medium to dark green, 
glabrous. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 4—10 mm long, gla-
brous; blade elliptical to narrowly obovate, 3— 
10(-20) cm x i.5_6(-8) cm, base cuneate to 
rounded or cordate, apex rounded to shortly 
acuminate, leathery, glabrous, 5-veined from 
somewhat above the base. Inflorescence an 
axillary, usually congested thyrse 1-3 cm long, 
several together, few-flowered. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 4-merous; sepals fused at base, 
ovate to orbicular, 1-1.5 mm long; corolla tube 
up to 4.5 mm long, slightly widened at the 
throat, lobes oblong, 2.5-3 mm long, acute, 
recurved, outside glabrous, inside hairy on the 
base of the lobes and on upper part of the tube, 
white; stamens inserted at the mouth of the 
corolla tube, exserted; ovary superior, ovoid, 4— 
6 mm long, glabrous, 2-celled, style 3-5 mm 
long, stigma obscurely 2-lobed. Fruit an 
obliquely ellipsoid or obovoid berry 20—32 mm 
x 16-22 mm x 15-22 mm, wall thin, rather 
hard, orange, 1-several-seeded. Seeds obliquely 
ellipsoid, 13-20 mm x 10-14 mm x 4-10 mm, 
white, at one side with a deep pit, at the other 
with a bulge surrounded by a shallow groove. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos barteri belongs to the section 
Dolichanthae. Several other Strychnos spp. 
from this section are used medicinally. Plant 
extracts of Strychnos gossweileri Excell, a 
small fire resistant savanna shrub, which oc-
curs from Cameroon south to Zambia, are used 
in African folk medicine to treat malaria. The 
plant contains several indole alkaloids, of 
which matadine shows interesting toxic activi-
ties against human cancer cells. An ethyl ace-
tate extract of the root showed significant anti-
malarial activity in vitro. The Mende people of 
Sierra Leone grind the young leaves of Strych-
nos melastomatoides Gilg, a liana from Guinea 
and Sierra Leone, to a paste to treat wounds 
and use the stems as chew-sticks. 
Ecology Strychnos barteri occurs mostly on 
river banks in rainforest, also montane rain-
forest and periodically inundated secondary 
forest, from sea-level up to 1300 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos barteri does not seem to be in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of the pharmacologically 
interesting compounds found in other Strych-
nos species, more research into the chemical 
composition and pharmacological activities of 
the indole alkaloids of Strychnos barteri and 
the other species mentioned seems warranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Ohiri, Verpoor-
te & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c. 
Other references Dassonneville et al., 
1999; Nicoletti, Oguakwa & Messana, 1980; 
Philippe et al., 2005. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS CAMPTONEURA Gilg & Busse 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 36: 93 (1905). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2re = 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos camptoneura occurs from Liberia east to 
the Central African Republic and south to DR 
Congo. 
Uses In Cameroon the bark is eaten or a 
bark maceration in water or palm wine is 
taken to treat lack of sexual strength. In Cam-
eroon and Congo Strychnos camptoneura is 
568 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
used to treat malaria. In Congo tea made from 
the stem bark and sweetened with honey is 
taken to treat stomach-ache, kidney pain and 
hernia. A warm decoction of leaves or bark or 
dry powdered bark is applied to wounds and 
ulcers. In the Central African Republic and in 
Congo the root bark of Strychnos camptoneura 
mixed with plant sap of Periploca nigrescens 
Afzel. and sometimes other plant species, is 
used as an arrow poison. In Liberia and Cam-
eroon the fruit is used as a fish poison and the 
root is used for the same purpose in the Cen-
tral African Republic. 
Properties Strychnos camptoneura is rich 
in alkaloids. Total alkaloid content of the 
leaves is over 2%. At least 10 monomeric indole 
alkaloids have been isolated; the leaves contain 
the vallesiachotamine class tertiary alkaloid 
antirhine, its quaternary base antirhine 
methobromide and the trinitrogenated an-
gustine, which is also present in the stem bark. 
The stem bark also contains the tetracyclic 
akagerine class alkaloid akagerine, its isomer 
kribine, the trinitrogenated camptoneurine, 
the retuline type alkaloid retuline, its deriva-
tive retuline-N-oxide and the ajmalicine type 
alkaloids alstonine and serpentine. Retuline, 
alstonine and serpentine are also present in 
the root bark. 
Stem bark and root bark extracts have strong 
muscle relaxant activity. A crude ethanol root 
extract did not have a significant toxic effect on 
a chloroquine-sensitive strain of Plasmodium 
falciparum. Serpentine, present in large 
amounts in Rauvolfia serpentina (L.) Benth. ex 
Kurz, is known to inhibit topoisomerase II and 
has shown cytotoxic activity against some tu-
mour cell lines, for instance B16 melanoma and 
HeLa carcinoma. Retuline has a significant 
anti-oedematogenic activity in anti-inflamma-
tory tests in rats. Akagerine is a potent convul-
sant agent, but 100 times less active than 
strychnine. Kribine causes clonic and tonic 
convulsions. 
Botany Large liana up to 120 m long, climb-
ing with tendrils in 1-3 pairs; stem up to 25 cm 
in diameter; branchlets shining and dark 
green, glabrous. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 7-17 mm long, 
glabrous; blade elliptical to ovate, 6-22(-31) cm 
x 3-10(-12) cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
acute to shortly acuminate, glabrous, 3-veined 
from the base. Inflorescence an axillary or oc-
casionally terminal solitary lax or congested 
thyrse 4.5-6.5 cm long, few-flowered. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous; sepals fused at 
base, orbicular, up to 3.5 mm long; corolla tube 
campanulate or cylindrical, up to 6 mm long, 
corolla lobes triangular to ovate, 4-6 mm long, 
acute, spreading or recurved, thick, glabrous 
outside, white or yellow, inside with a minutely 
hairy, wavy or 5-lobed corona; stamens in-
serted at the mouth of the corolla tube, in-
cluded; ovary superior, ovoid, 3-4 mm long, 
glabrous, 2-celled, style up to 5.5 mm long, 
stigma head-shaped. Fruit a globose to ellip-
soid or slightly pear-shaped berry 6-20 cm in 
diameter, pale glaucous to yellow, wall thick, 
hard, pulp orange, containing very strong fi-
bres, with 10-many seeds. Seeds obliquely 
orbicular to ovoid, flattened, 25-50 mm x 20-
40 mm x 3-6 mm, glabrous, smooth, with a 
narrow irregular wing 1-6 mm wide. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos camptoneura is the only spe-
cies in section Scyphostrychnos. 
Ecology Strychnos camptoneura occurs in 
rainforest, including secondary forest, up to 
700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos camptoneura is rather widespread and 
does not seem to be threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Strychnos camptoneura will re-
main of limited use only, unless additional 
pharmacological research on the alkaloids re-
veals interesting possibilities for medicine de-
velopment. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neuwinger, 
2000; Ohiri, Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 
1983c. 
Other references Betti, 2003; Bouquet, 
1969; Dassonneville et al., 1999; Frédérich et 
al., 1999; Neuwinger, 1996; Noumi, Amvan 
Zollo & Lontsi, 1998. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS DINKLAGEI Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 28: 121 (1899). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number ïn - 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos dinklagei occurs naturally from Guinea 
east to Ghana. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire a decoction of the wood 
of the roots is used as a mouth wash or for in-
halation in case of mouth infections. A decoc-
tion of stem and root bark is taken to treat 
STRYCHNOS 569 
kidney diseases and it is used as a wash to 
treat palpitations. A decoction of the bark in 
palm oil is applied in small amounts to the 
tongue to treat palpitations, tachycardia and 
other symptoms of heart problems. 
Properties Twelve alkaloids were isolated 
from the stem bark: 2 monoterpene alkaloids 
(gentianine and venoterpine), 8 pyrido-4,3ß-
carbazoles (ellipticine and several derivatives) 
and 2 apparicine derivatives (brafouedine and 
isobrafouedine). The stem bark also contains 
methyl syringate, lirioresinol A and lirioresinol 
B. The leaves contain the monoterpene alka-
loids dinklageine, strychnovoline, gentianine 
and cantleyine. Leaf and bark extracts have 
muscle relaxant and convulsant activities. A 
stem bark extract has strong antimicrobial 
activity against Bacillus subtilis and Staphylo-
coccus aureus. 
Botany Large liana up to 40 m long, climb-
ing with paired tendrils; stem 5—13 cm in di-
ameter; bark pale grey or dark brown and grey-
brown spotted, with large lenticels; branches 
dark brown with lenticels, branchlets medium 
green, often with lenticels. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 2-7 
mm long, minutely hairy or glabrous; blade 
elliptical to narrowly elliptical, usually nar-
rower toward the top of the branchlets, 3—10(— 
13) cm x 2—5(—7) cm, base cuneate or rounded, 
apex acuminate, glabrous, 3-veined from the 
base. Inflorescence a terminal or sometimes 
axillary lax thyrse 1-2 cm long, many-flowered; 
peduncle 6-15 cm long. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, usually 5-merous; sepals broadly ovate, 
0.5-1 mm long; corolla bell-shaped, tube 0.5-1 
mm long, lobes triangular to ovate, 1—2 mm 
long, acute, thick, spreading, outside minutely 
hairy, inside hairy at the base, white or green-
ish white; stamens inserted at the mouth of the 
corolla tube, exserted, anthers orbicular, with 
white hairs; ovary superior, broadly ovoid or 
globose, 0.5-1 mm in diameter, 2-celled, rather 
abruptly narrowed into the style c. 0.5 mm 
long, stigma head-shaped. Fruit an obliquely 
ovoid berry 18-24 mm x 13-16 mm x 10-14 
mm, soft, orange, 1-seeded. Seed elliptical, 15— 
18 mm x 10-12 mm x 5-5.5 mm, rough, with 
thick, short erect hairs. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos dinklagei belongs to the sec-
tion Lanigerae. 
Ecology Strychnos dinklagei occurs in rain-
forest, also in secondary forest, often on river 
banks, from sea-level up to 250 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Al-
though the natural distribution of Strychnos 
dinklagei is restricted, it seems not to be in 
danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Strychnos 
dinklagei will remain of limited use only, 
unless the antibacterial activity of the stem 
bark shows potential in additional tests. 
Major references Bisset, 1970; Bisset & 
Leeuwenberg, 1968; Leeuwenberg, 1969. 
Other references Leeuwenberg, 1980; Mi-
chel et al., 1985; Michel, Tillequin & Koch, 
1986; Michel et al., 1982; Verpoorte et a l , 
1983b. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS FLORIBUNDA Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 17: 566 (1893). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos floribunda occurs from Sierra Leone east to 
the Central African Republic and south to An-
gola. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire a decoction of stem and 
root bark is taken to treat kidney diseases. It is 
also used as a wash to treat palpitations, while 
a decoction of the stem bark in palm oil is ap-
plied in small amounts to the tongue to treat 
palpitations, tachycardia and other symptoms 
of heart disease. A maceration of the root wood 
is taken to treat oedema. 
Properties Strychnos floribunda stem bark 
contains the indole alkaloids bisnordihydro-
toxiferine, akagerine, decussine, rouhamine, 
strychnocarpine, desacetylisoretuline and 
isorosibiline and the common sterols ß-
sitosterol, stigmasterol and campesterol. Bis-
nordihydrotoxiferine is known to exhibit an-
timicrobial activity in vivo and has shown in-
vivo antidiarrhoeal activity in mice. Decussine 
and rouhamine have a pronounced muscle-
relaxant activity. Stem bark extracts of 
Strychnos floribunda have muscle-relaxant and 
convulsive effects and showed antimicrobial 
activity against Bacillus subtilis and Staphylo-
coccus aureus. 
Botany Climbing shrub or liana up to 30 m 
long, climbing with solitary tendrils; stem up to 
13 cm in diameter, branchlets green, glabrous 
or minutely hairy. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole 2-9 mm long, 
glabrous; blade elliptical to ovate, 4-10(-12) cm 
x 1.5-5(-6) cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
570 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
acuminate, glabrous, 3 - or 5-veined from the 
base. Inflorescence an axillary or occasionally 
terminal lax or congested thyrse up to 4.5 cm 
long, few-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
(4-)5-merous; sepals fused at base, triangular 
to ovate, often unequal, up to 1.5 mm long; 
corolla tube cylindrical, up to 1.5 mm long, 
lobes oblong to ovate or triangular, 1.5-3 mm 
long, acute, spreading or recurved, glabrous or 
minutely hairy outside, inside often densely 
hairy, white or greenish white; stamens in-
serted at the mouth of the corolla tube, ex-
serted; ovary superior, globose or ovoid to 
nearly conical, 1-2 mm long, glabrous, 2-celled, 
style up to 4.5 mm long, stigma small, ob-
scurely 2-lobed or head-shaped. Fruit an ellip-
soid berry 14-17 mm in diameter, soft, orange, 
with smooth skin, 1-seeded. Seed slightly flat-
tened, 8-13 mm x 7-10 mm x 5-7 mm, yellow-
ish, densely hairy, smooth. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos floribunda belongs to the 
section Rouhamon. 
Ecology Strychnos floribunda occurs in 
rainforest, including secondary forest, often on 
river banks, from sea-level up to 800 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos floribunda is widespread and does not 
seem to be in danger of genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Strychnos 
floribunda will remain of limited use only, 
unless the antibacterial activity of the stem 
bark shows potential in additional tests. 
Major references Bisset, 1970; Bouquet & 
Debray, 1974; Kerharo & Bouquet, 1950; 
Leeuwenberg, 1969. 
Other references Leeuwenberg, 1980; Ohi-
ri, Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c; 
Verpoorte et al., 1981; Verpoorte et al., 1983b. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS HENNINGSII Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 17: 569 (1893). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Vernacular names Red bitterberry (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos henningsii occurs from DR Congo east to 
Ethiopia and south to Angola and South Africa. 
It also occurs in Madagascar. 
Uses The Maasai and Batemi peoples in 
Tanzania add the plant to milk and meat-based 
soups as a general tonic. In Kenya a decoction 
of the branches in soup is taken to treat rheu-
matism and gynaecological complaints; a root 
decoction is taken to treat chest pain and in-
ternal injuries. A stem decoction is taken to 
treat malaria. In Kenya and Tanzania fresh 
roots are chewed to treat snakebites. In Tan-
zania pounded roots are taken in food to treat 
hookworm infections. In South Africa a bark 
extract is taken in small doses to treat colic, 
stomach-ache, dizziness and as a purgative and 
anthelminthic. The powdered bark in water is 
taken to treat nausea. A bark decoction is 
given to children to treat internal worms and it 
is given to cattle to treat diarrhoea and heart-
water caused by the rickettsial parasite, Cow-
dria ruminantium. In Madagascar the stem 
bark and roots are used to poison rats and 
mice, and sometimes also for criminal pur-
poses. 
In Kenya the wood is used to make arrow 
shafts and poles for building huts and cattle 
enclosures. 
Properties Strychnos henningsii is rich in 
monomeric indole alkaloids of the tsilanine, 
spermostrychnine, diaboline and retuline 
classes. The stem bark contains alkaloids of the 
tsilanine class (holstiine, holstiline and 
rindline), spermostrychnine class, diaboline 
class and retuline class. The leaves and root 
bark contain alkaloids of the tsilanine class, 
retuline class and spermostrychnine class. The 
twigs contain alkaloids of the retuline class. 
Stem bark alkaloids of Strychnos henningsii 
have shown convulsive, hypotensive and car-
diac depressant activities, due to their effect on 
the central nervous system (CNS), and have 
anti-cancer potential. Holstiine and holstiline 
showed weak to moderate antimalarial activity 
against chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium 
falciparum but did not show antiamoebic activ-
ity. Extracts of a mixture of stem and root bark 
showed no muscle-relaxant or convulsive activ-
ity. Some alkaloids isolated from Strychnos 
henningsii demonstrated additional pharma-
cological activities. In-vivo tests showed an 
anti-inflammatory action for retuline on rat 
paw oedema, an analgesic action for isore-
tuline, acetylisoretuline and desacetylisore-
tuline in mice and an antispasmodic action for 
isoretuline and O-acetylisoretuline in guinea-
pigs. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 10(-20) m 
tall, with spreading rounded crown; bole up to 
50 cm in diameter; bark pale grey to pale 
brown, rough; branchlets pale to medium 
brown or yellowish, conspicuously grooved, 
STRYCHNOS 571 
glabrous. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 1-3 mm long, glabrous; 
blade elliptical to oblong or ovate, 2—6(—10) cm 
x l-3(-6) cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
rounded to acuminate, glabrous, 3-veined from 
the base. Inflorescence an axillary and some-
times terminal congested thyrse 1-2 cm long, 
few- to many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, fragrant, sessile; sepals fused at 
base, almost orbicular, up to 1.5 mm long; co-
rolla tube up to 1.5 mm long, lobes triangular 
to ovate, 2—2.5 mm long, acute, spreading, gla-
brous outside, inside usually hairy at the base, 
greenish yellow, creamy or white; stamens 
inserted at the mouth of the corolla tube, just 
exserted; ovary superior, globose or depressed 
globose, 1-1.5 mm long, glabrous, 2-celled, 
style c. 1 mm long, stigma head-shaped. Fruit 
an ellipsoid berry c. 2 cm x 1 cm, yellow, or-
ange or red, 1-seeded. Seed ellipsoid, 8-12 mm 
x 5—7 mm x 5-7 mm, glabrous, minutely pit-
ted, with a deep closed groove at one side. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos henningsii belongs to the 
section Breviflorae. 
Ecology Strychnos henningsii occurs in 
woodland and open forest, from sea-level up to 
2000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos henningsii is widely distributed in a large 
part of Africa and is not in danger of genetic 
erosion, although local overexploitation has 
caused Strychnos henningsii to become rare in 
some regions, e.g. the Machakos District, 
Kenya. 
Prospects Strychnos henningsii contains 
many indole alkaloids and several of them 
show pharmacological activity. Further study 
of the cardiac and anti-cancer potential of the 
alkaloids and the analgesic and anti-
inflammatory properties of the retuline class 
alkaloids seems warranted. 
Major references Kareru et al., 2007; 
Leeuwenberg, 1969; Neuwinger, 2000; Ohiri, 
Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c; Tits et 
al., 1991. 
Other references Bisset, 1970; Boiteau, 
Boiteau & Allorge-Boiteau, 1999; Dold & 
Cocks, 2001; Dold & Cocks, 2002; Hutchings et 
al., 1996; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Massiot et al., 
1991; Njoroge & Bussmann, 2006; Tyiso & 
Bhat, 1998; van Wyk, van Oudtshoorn & Ge-
ricke, 1997. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS ICAJA Baill. 
Protologue Adansonia 12: 368 (1879). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 44 
Vernacular names Curare, strychnos, icaja 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos icaja occurs from Guinea east to the Cen-
tral African Republic and south to Angola. 
Uses Because of its toxicity Strychnos icaja 
is usually administered under the supervision 
of a traditional medicine man, mainly in the 
treatment of skin diseases and chronic and 
persistent malaria. In Ghana an alcoholic ex-
tract of stem bark is taken to treat haemor-
rhoids. In the Central African Republic the 
body is rubbed with a root bark maceration as 
a snake repellent. A very small dose of root 
bark maceration is taken as an abortifacient 
and as an anthelmintic. In Gabon a root decoc-
tion is taken as a diuretic or as an intoxicating 
drink. In Congo a cold infusion of the root in 
palm wine is taken to treat gastrointestinal 
complaints and hernia. In DR Congo ground 
root bark mixed with palm oil is applied to 
treat skin diseases and itch. The ash of burnt 
twigs or roots is rubbed into scarifications of 
the forehead to treat insanity and malaria. A 
maceration of ground roots is used as a rectal 
wash to treat sterility. Throughout Central 
Africa a root or root bark infusion, or more 
rarely a stem bark extract, has been used as 
ordeal poison. Often roots of young plants were 
used, which seem to have a lower toxicity than 
those of mature plants. The root bark is an 
ingredient in arrow poison. In Côte d'Ivoire, 
Nigeria and DR Congo whole plants, root bark 
Strychnos icaja - wild 
572 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and fruits are used as a fish poison. 
Properties The root, stem and leaves con-
tain a mixture of tertiary indole alkaloids of 
which strychnine and pseudostrychnine (12-
hydroxystrychnine) are the principal active 
substances. The roots contain dimeric tertiary 
alkaloids such as bisnordihydrotoxiferine and 
sungucine. They also contain quaternary alka-
loids, such as N-strychninium. Strychnine is 
also the main alkaloid component of the fruits 
and seeds. Strychnine activity enhances epi-
nephrine levels and increases blood pressure. 
The most direct symptoms caused by strych-
nine are violent convulsions. It is applied in 
medicine as a stimulator of the nervous system 
and as a reliable anaesthetic. It is slightly 
soluble in water, but more soluble in alcohol. 
Strychnos icaja could be used as a local source 
either of an extract or of a partially purified 
mixture of strychnine, 12-hydroxystrychnine, 
and other tertiary alkaloids. Sungucine and 
isosungucine exhibit antiplasmodial activities 
but also show cytotoxic effects against human 
cancer cells. Pharmacological experiments have 
shown that the quaternary alkaloid fraction 
has pronounced muscle-relaxant activity. 
Moreover, this fraction has a powerful cardio-
toxic action ending in irreversible cardiac ar-
rest. 
Other alkaloids of the leaves are the monomers 
protostrychnine, genostrychnine and pseu-
dostrychnine, the bisindolic alkaloid strychno-
gucine, and the trimeric indolomonoterpenic 
alkaloid strychnohexamine, which has an-
tiplasmodial activity against Plasmodium fal-
ciparum. 
Strychnogucine and strychnohexamine were 
also isolated from the root bark. 
Saponins, iridoids and phenolic compounds are 
also present in Strychnos icaja, but they 
probably have little activity compared to the 
alkaloids. 
In-vitro production of strychnine and some 
other Strychnos alkaloids is possible. 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
other tropical African plant species such as 
Strophanthus spp. are used as substitutes for 
Strychnos icaja to produce arrow poison. 
Description Large liana up to 100 m long, 
climbing with solitary tendrils; stem up to 15 
cm in diameter; branchlets dark green, gla-
brous. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 4-12 mm long, gla-
brous; blade ovate to elliptical, 5-15(-21) cm x 
2—7(—10) cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
acuminate, glabrous, 3-veined from the base. 
Strychnos icaja - 1, flowering branch; 2, flower; 
3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
Inflorescence an axillary lax thyrse 3-7 cm 
long, few- to many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 4-merous; sepals fused at base, 
broadly ovate to almost orbicular, up to 1 mm 
long; corolla tube up to 1.5 mm long, lobes ob-
long to ovate or triangular, 1.5-2 mm long, 
acute, spreading, glabrous or hairy inside at 
base, greenish yellow or yellowish white; sta-
mens inserted at the mouth of the corolla tube, 
exserted; ovary superior, globose, c. 0.5 mm in 
diameter, glabrous, 2-celled, style 0.5-1 mm 
long, stigma small, head-shaped. Fruit an el-
lipsoid or globose berry c. 2.5 cm x 3 cm, soft, 
dark yellow when ripe, 1-seeded. Seed ellip-
soid, 16-21 mm x 15-20 mm x 9-15 mm, 
woolly hairy. 
Other botanical information Strychnos 
comprises about 200 species: about 60 species 
in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in Africa. 
Strychnos icaja belongs to the section Bre-
viflorae. 
Ecology Strychnos icaja occurs in rainforest 
and secondary forest on lateritic sandy clay 
soils, from sea-level up to 800 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Strychnos icaja 
STRYCHNOS 573 
regenerates from seed and suckers. 
Harvesting The roots are dug up and the 
bark is removed before the root dries out. Har-
vesting the stem bark or the leaves is a more 
sustainable activity. 
Handling after harvest After drying and 
grinding, the material can be subjected to a 
conventional alkaloid extraction procedure. 
Genetic resources There are no indications 
that Strychnos icaja is in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Because of its alkaloid content 
Strychnos icaja is widely used for medicinal 
purposes. In order to promote its sustainable 
use, research should be done on domestication 
and improving its productivity for industrial 
production with respect to local and interna-
tional trade. Research on the antimalarial 
properties of some of the alkaloids seems prom-
ising. 
Major references Bisset, 1970; Bisset & 
Leeuwenberg, 1968; Bisset & Phillipson, 1971; 
Bohlin, 1978; FAO, 1986; Iwu, 1993; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Mshana et a l , 2000; Neuwinger, 
2000; Ohiri, Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 
1983c. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Bisset & Khalil, 1976; Bisset, Das 
& Parello, 1973; Caniato & Puricelli, 2003; 
Frédérich et al., 2003b; Frédérich et a l , 2000a; 
Frédérich et al., 2001; Frédérich, Tits & An-
genot, 2003; Gassita et al. (Editors), 1982; 
Kambu, Coune & Angenot, 1979; Lamotte et 
al., 1979; Philippe et a l , 2004; Philippe et a l , 
2003; Philippe et a l , 2006; Raponda-Walker & 
Sillans, 1961. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1969. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
STRYCHNOS LONGICAUDATA Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 17: 570 (1893). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number In - 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos longicaudata occurs from Côte d'Ivoire east 
to the Central African Republic and south to 
DR Congo. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire unspecified plant parts 
of Strychnos longicaudata are used to treat 
chest-complaints, while in Cameroon they are 
used to treat malaria. The Aka people of the 
Central African Republic take a palm wine 
maceration of twig bark as an aphrodisiac. In 
the Central African Republic Strychnos longi-
caudata is used as an ingredient of arrow poi-
son. 
In DR Congo the Andiri and Teturi people use 
the wood to make arrow-shafts, machete han-
dles and other small implements. 
Properties Preliminary tests of leafy twigs 
from Côte d'Ivoire and leaves and seeds from 
Cameroon showed the presence of the mono-
meric strychnine class indole alkaloids icajine 
and vomicine. The root bark contains the 
dimeric tertiary longicaudatine and its isomer 
bisnor-C-alkaloid H. 
The chloroform fraction of a bark extract 
showed a weak muscle-relaxant effect in mice. 
Although icajine does not have an intrinsic 
antiplasmodial activity, it did reverse chloro-
quine resistance in in-vitro tests and proved to 
be synergistic with mefloquine. In in-vivo tests 
longicaudatine, isolated from Strychnos triner-
vis (Veil.) Mart., was shown to have an anti-
spasmodic effect on artificially induced con-
tractions of guinea-pig ileum and rat uterus. 
Botany Climbing shrub or liana up to 60 m 
long, climbing with solitary tendrils; stem up to 
15 cm in diameter; branchlets medium to dark 
green, glabrous or less often short-hairy. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 2-7 mm long, short-hairy or 
glabrous; blade elliptical, narrowly elliptical to 
ovate, 5.5-14(-17.5) cm x 2-6(-8) cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex acuminate, glabrous 
or with some stiff brown hairs beneath, 3-
veined from the base. Inflorescence an axillary 
or occasionally terminal, solitary, more or less 
congested thyrse up to 4 cm long, many-
flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; 
sepals fused at base, orbicular to broadly 
obovate, up to 1.5 mm long; corolla tube cylin-
drical, up to 2.5 mm long, lobes triangular, 1.5-
2 mm long, acute, almost erect, thick, glabrous 
or sometimes sparsely hairy outside, greenish 
white, white or outside pale green and inside 
white; stamens inserted about halfway in the 
corolla tube, included; ovary superior, globose, 
up to c. 1 mm long, glabrous, 2-celled, style up 
to 1.5 mm long, stigma head-shaped. Fruit an 
ellipsoid berry 14-17 mm in diameter, wall 
thin, soft, smooth, orange or yellow-green, 1-
seeded. Seed ellipsoid to nearly ovoid, flat-
tened, 11-15 mm x 8-12 mm x 3—5 mm, very 
short-hairy. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos longicaudata belongs to sec-
tion Penicillatae. Strychnos tchibangensis 
Pellegr. occurs in Cameroon, the Central Afri-
574 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
can Republic, Gabon and DR Congo and also 
belongs to section Penicillatae. In the Central 
African Republic a bark decoction is taken as 
an anthelmintic; pulverized bark is used for 
cicatrisation of wounds. 
Ecology Strychnos longicaudata occurs in 
moist localities and on river banks in rainfor-
est, including secondary forest, from sea-level 
up to 700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos longicaudata is rather widespread and 
does not seem to be threatened by genetic ero-
sion. 
Prospects Strychnos longicaudata will re-
main of limited use only. The alkaloids which 
have been identified so far are more abundant 
in other Strychnos species. 
Major references Bisset, 1970; Burkill, 
1995; Leeuwenberg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Betti, 2003; Bisset & 
Leeuwenberg, 1968; Bisset & Phillipson, 1971; 
Bouquet & Debray, 1974; de Medeiros, Thomas 
& Mukherjee, 1991; Frédérich et a l , 2000b; 
Ohiri, Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c; 
Terashima & Ichikawa, 2003; Thepenier et al., 
1990; Verpoorte & Bohlin, 1976. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS MOSTUEOIDES Leeuwenb. 
Protologue Meded. Landbouwhogeschool 
69(1): 194 (1969). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos mostueoides is endemic to Madagascar, but 
a somewhat different, more hairy specimen 
that may belong to this species was found in 
DR Congo. 
Uses In Madagascar a decoction of the aerial 
parts is taken to treat malaria. 
Properties From the root bark 8 indole al-
kaloids have been identified: normacusine B, 
caracusine VII, strychnofendlerine, sper-
mostrychnine, strychnobrasiline, deacetyl-
strychnobrasiline, malagashine and mala-
gashanine. Chemically normacusine B belongs 
to the corynanthean class of alkaloids, the 
other compounds belong to the strychnine 
class. Normacusine B is also found in Rau-
uolfia, Tabernaemontana and Vinca spp. It is 
sympatholytic and its hypotensive activity is 
stronger than that of reserpine, which is com-
monly used against high blood pressure. Mala-
gashanine was shown to have promising 
chemosensitizing activity against chloroquine-
resistant strains of the malaria parasite Plas-
modium falciparum. 
Botany Shrub up to 3 m tall, often dichoto-
mously branched; branchlets sparsely hairy or 
glabrous. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; 
stipules absent; petiole 0.5—2 mm long, hairy or 
glabrous; blade ovate, narrowly ovate or ellipti-
cal, 20-70 cm x 9-30 cm, base rounded or 
cuneate, apex long-acuminate, glabrous or 
sparingly hairy on the veins on both sides or 
only beneath, 3-veined from the base. Inflores-
cence a terminal, lax thyrse 1-2 cm long, few-
flowered; peduncle 1-2 cm long. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous; sepals fused at base, 
nearly triangular, c. 1 mm long; corolla tube 
cylindrical, c. 2.5 mm long, lobes oblong, c. 2.5 
mm long, acute, outside glabrous, inside hairy 
at base, white; stamens inserted at the middle 
of the corolla tube, included, anthers oblong, 
with a single hair at the deeply cordate base; 
ovary superior, ovoid, c. 1 mm x 0.5 mm, 2-
celled, stigma sessile, head-shaped. Fruit a 
globose berry 6-8 mm in diameter, 1—2-seeded. 
Seeds elliptical, disk-like, 6-8 mm x 5-7 mm x 
2 mm, rough, testa rather thick. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. 
Ecology Strychnos mostueoides occurs in 
forest near river banks, from sea-level up to 
500(-1000) m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos mostueoides is endemic to Madagascar and 
may easily become endangered by habitat de-
struction. 
Prospects Strychnos mostueoides will re-
main of minor importance in traditional medi-
cine. More research into the chemical composi-
tion and pharmacological activities of the in-
dole alkaloids is needed to evaluate the use in 
traditional medicine. 
Major references Leeuwenberg, 1969; Neu-
winger, 2000; Ramanitrahasimbola et al., 2006; 
Rasoanaivo et al., 2001b; Rasoanaivo et al., 
1992; Saxton, 1993. 
Other references Leeuwenberg, 1980; 
Leeuwenberg, 1984; Rasoanaivo et al., 1991a; 
Rasoanaivo, Ratsimamanga-Urverg & Frap-
pier, 1996. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS 575 
STRYCHNOS MYRTOIDES Gilg & Busse 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 32: 178 (1902). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos myrtoides occurs in south-eastern Tanza-
nia, Mozambique and Madagascar. 
Uses In Madagascar an infusion or decoction 
of Strychnos myrtoides together with chloro-
quine is taken to treat malaria. 
Properties Two major indole alkaloids, 
strychnobrasiline and malagashanine, were 
isolated from the stem bark, as well as 4 minor 
alkaloids: malagashanol, 12-hydroxy-19-epi-
malagashanine, myrtoidine and 11-demethoxy-
myrtoidine. These compounds showed no in-
trinsic antimalarial effect against a chloro-
quine-resistant strain of Plasmodium falcipa-
rum in vitro and in vivo, but significantly en-
hanced the effect of chloroquine. No cytotoxic-
ity was observed. A crude stem-bark extract 
also showed no intrinsic antimalarial effects, 
but significantly enhanced the action of chloro-
quine both in vitro and in vivo against a 
chloroquine-resistant Plasmodium yoelii strain 
in mice. 
Botany Much-branched shrub or small tree 
up to 5 m tall, often dichotomously branched; 
branchlets hairy. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole up to 2 mm long, 
hairy; blade ovate, narrowly ovate to narrowly 
elliptical, obovate or sometimes nearly orbicu-
lar, (0.5-)l-3.5 cm x 0.5-2 cm, base cuneate to 
rounded, apex rounded to acute or acuminate, 
glabrous or sparingly hairy on the veins on 
both sides or only beneath, 3-veined from the 
base. Inflorescence a terminal, lax thyrse 0.5— 
1.5(-2) cm long, few-flowered; peduncle short, 
brown hairy. Flowers bisexual, regular, (4-)5-
merous; sepals fused at base, broadly ovate to 
orbicular, c. 1 cm long; corolla tube bell-shaped 
to nearly cylindrical, 1-2.5 mm long, lobes nar-
rowly triangular, 1-2 cm long, acute, outside 
glabrous or minutely hairy, inside hairy at the 
base, white; stamens inserted at the middle of 
the corolla tube, included, anthers orbicular or 
oblong, hairy at the deeply cordate base; ovary 
superior, ovoid, c. 1 mm x 0.5 mm, 2-celled, 
style up to 0.5 mm long, stigma head-shaped. 
Fruit a globose or flattened berry 8—9 mm in 
diameter, soft, red or orange, 1-seeded. Seed 
elliptical, flattened, disk-like, 8 mm x 7 mm x 
1.5 mm, rough, with thick, short hairs. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos myrtoides belongs to the sec-
tion Penicillatae. Strychnos diplotricha Leeu-
wenb., which is endemic to Madagascar, also 
belongs to this section. It is used as an antima-
larial in north-eastern Madagascar. The root 
bark of Strychnos diplotricha contains indole 
alkaloids that have also been isolated from the 
leaves or stem bark of Strychnos myrtoides. 
Ecology Strychnos myrtoides occurs in 
Brachystegia-wood\ands and open forest, from 
sea-level up to 600 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos myrtoides does not seem to be in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects The importance of Strychnos 
myrtoides as traditional antimalarial medicine 
will probably increase because of its proven 
effect of enhancing the action of chloroquine in 
case of chloroquine-resistance. In view of the 
pharmacologically interesting compounds 
found in other Strychnos species, more re-
search into the chemical composition and 
pharmacological activities of the indole alka-
loids of Strychnos myrtoides seems warranted. 
Major references Leeuwenberg, 1969; Ra-
soanaivo et al., 1994b; Schwikkard & van 
Heerden, 2002. 
Other references Neuwinger, 2000; Rama-
nitrahasimbola et al., 2006; Rasoanaivo et al., 
2001b. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS NUX-VOMICA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 189 (1753). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number In = 24, 44 
Vernacular names Crow fig, nux-vomica 
tree, poison nut, snake-wood, strychnine plant 
(En). Vomiquier, noix vomique, vomique offici-
nale, pomme de voutac (Fr). Noz vomica, cari-
mào (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos nux-vomica originates from India and 
South-East Asia and is introduced and locally 
naturalized in tropical Africa. It is cultivated in 
Ghana and Sudan. 
Uses The medicinal use of Strychnos nux-
vomica in Africa is limited. In Ghana the seeds 
are eaten to treat anaemia. The seed, bark, 
wood and roots have numerous applications in 
traditional medicine in Asia, Europe and the 
United States. In India the fruit is used in both 
the Ayurvedic and Unani systems of medicine 
and is considered acrid, pungent, bitter, poi-
sonous and heating. It is used as an appetizer, 
576 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tonic, astringent, aphrodisiac and antipyretic, 
and it is claimed to cure leucoderma, blood 
diseases, itching, ringworm, piles, ulcers, 
anaemia, jaundice, urinary discharges, joint 
pain, lumbago and weakness of limbs. In 
Europe a description of medicinal use of 
Strychnos nux-vomica dates back as early as 
1540 A.D. It was especially used to treat nerv-
ous disorders and problems of the digestive 
organs and the respiratory system. Nowadays 
it is mainly used in phytotherapy to treat upset 
stomach, abdominal pain, constipation, hang-
over, heartburn, insomnia, circulatory prob-
lems, depression, migraine, nervous conditions, 
problems related to menopause and respiratory 
diseases. 
In India the seeds are used for dying cloth pale 
brown. The seeds are an ingredient of liquors. 
The wood is hard and termite proof and is used 
in manufacturing furniture, cart wheels and 
agricultural implements. The leaves are used 
as a green manure. 
Production and international trade The 
annual production of Strychnos nux-vomica 
seed in India was estimated at 2000 t at the 
beginning of the 1970s. In the period 1965-
1971 the average production of strychnine and 
brucine from Strychnos nux-vomica seeds in 
India was 18,000 kg/year. Most of the alkaloids 
are exported to the United States and Europe. 
Properties All plant parts of Strychnos nux-
vomica contain indole alkaloids, but the seeds 
have the highest concentration. They contain 
1-3% alkaloids, mainly strychnine and its di-
methoxylated derivative brucine. The other 
plant parts contain several other strychnine 
derivatives with a total concentration of up to 
1%: 12-hydroxy-strychnine, 15-hydroxy-strychnine, 
a-colubrine, ß-colubrine, icajine, 11-methoxy-
icajine, novacine, vomicine, pseudostrychnine, 
pseudobrucine, pseudo-a-colubrine, pseudo-ß-
colubrine, N-methyl-sec-pseudo-ß-colubrine, and 
isostrychnine. The bisindole alkaloid longicau-
datine has also been isolated; it has reserpine-
like activity. 
Strychnine is very toxic, and the lethal dose in 
humans may start at about 0.4 mg/kg. It may 
cause anxiety, restlessness, painful convulsions 
of the body, breathing difficulties and even 
death resulting from suffocation or exhaustion. 
In addition, long-term intake of even small 
amounts of strychnine can cause liver damage. 
Strychnine increases blood pressure, and it is 
applied in medicine as a stimulator of the 
nervous system and as a reliable anaesthetic. 
Brucine is about 50—100 times less toxic than 
strychnine. The seed extract exhibits signifi-
cant analgesic, anti-inflammatory, anti-ulcer, 
cytotoxic, antioxidant and uterine stimulant 
activity. The analgesic and anti-inflammatory 
activities are caused by brucine and brucine N-
oxide. 
The analysis of cytotoxic effects of brucine, 
brucine N-oxide, strychnine and isostrychnine 
on human hepatoma cells showed that brucine 
exhibited the strongest toxic effect. 
Galactomannans and galactans are also pre-
sent in the seeds. The seed extract is efficient 
in the coagulation-flocculation of hydrophobic 
colloids (such as a clay suspension), but it is a 
poor flocculent in the case of hydrophilic col-
loids (such as bacteria). The leaves have strong 
allelopathic properties. 
Botany Medium-sized tree up to 25 m tall; 
bole up to 100 cm in diameter; branchlets 
slightly short-hairy. Leaves opposite, simple 
and entire; stipules absent; petiole 5-15 mm 
long; blade orbicular to broadly elliptical or 
ovate, 5-18 cm x 4-13 cm, base rounded to 
cordate, apex shortly acuminate or acute, gla-
brous and shiny above, minutely hairy espe-
cially on veins beneath, 3-5-veined from the 
base. Inflorescence an axillary thyrse 3-7 cm 
long, many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 
5-merous; calyx lobes ovate, outside densely 
hairy; corolla with a slender tube c. 1 cm long, 
abruptly widening at the throat, outside gla-
brous, inside sparsely woolly hairy in lower 
part, lobes narrowly ovate, c. 3 mm long, mar-
gin thickened and minutely hairy, greenish 
white to white; stamens inserted at the mouth 
of the corolla tube, exserted; ovary superior, 
ovoid, glabrous, style up to 1 cm long, stigma 
head-shaped. Fruit a globose berry 2-4(-6) cm 
in diameter, orange, glabrous, 1-4-seeded. 
Seeds lens-shaped to orbicular or ellipsoid, 20-
23 mm x 18-20 mm x c . 4 mm, silky hairs. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos nux-vomica belongs to section 
Strychnos. 
Ecology In its natural habitat Strychnos 
nux-vomica occurs at the edge of dense forest, 
on river banks and along the shore, mainly on 
loamy or loamy-sandy soil, although it also 
occurs on lateritic and clayey loam soils. The 
annual rainfall varies from 1200-3500 mm. 
Management Strychnos nux-vomica regen-
erates from seeds and suckers. Seeds take 70-
120 days to germinate. In India seeds are sown 
in nurseries and seedlings are transplanted to 
the field. Strychnos nux-vomica plants have 
STRYCHNOS 577 
been successfully regenerated from tissue cul-
ture. 
Fruiting starts 10-15 years after planting. 
Fruits are usually gathered from the trees. 
Fallen fruits are considered to be of inferior 
quality. After collecting, seeds are cleaned and 
dried in the sun. Dried seeds can be stored in 
jute bags for a long period without loss of alka-
loid content, but they should be kept in dry 
conditions to prevent deterioration by fungi. 
Seeds are further processed in factories to ob-
tain strychnine and brucine. In traditional 
Chinese medicine, seeds are usually heated in 
oil to reduce their toxicity. This significantly 
reduces the contents of strychnine and brucine 
and increases the amounts of isostrychnine, 
isobrucine, strychnine N-oxide and brucine N— 
oxide. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos nux-vomica is widespread in its original 
area of distribution in India, Indo-China and 
Thailand and is not in danger of genetic ero-
sion. In Africa virtually nothing is known 
about its distribution or genetic variability. 
Prospects The use of Strychnos nux-vomica 
for medicinal purposes has diminished over the 
years. The use of strychnine has been super-
seded because of its high toxicity. Some of the 
other alkaloids may play a role in the develop-
ment of new anti-cancer or anti-malarial drugs. 
More research into the chemical composition 
and pharmacological activities of these com-
pounds seems warranted. In India the seeds 
are still widely used in traditional medicine 
and there is a need to develop high yielding, 
alkaloid-rich cultivars. 
Major references Cai et al., 1998; Iwu, 
1993; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Mshana et al., 2000; 
Purwaningsih, 1999. 
Other references Yin et al., 2003; Bisset, 
1989a; Bisset & Leeuwenberg, 1968; Cai et al., 
1996; Corsaro et al., 1995; Deng et al., 2006; 
Yin et a l , 2003. 
Authors P. Oudhia 
STRYCHNOS PHAEOTRICHA Gilg 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 36: 105 (1905). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos phaeotricha occurs from Ghana east to DR 
Congo. 
Uses In DR Congo the seeds are put into a 
calabash containing embers and the smoke is 
inhaled to treat tuberculosis in children. 
Properties Preliminary chemical analysis 
shows that Strychnos phaeotricha has a low 
alkaloid content. The tertiary indole alkaloids 
of the bark have weak muscle-relaxant and 
convulsant activities. 
Botany Large liana up to 50 m long, climb-
ing with paired tendrils; stem 2-7 cm in di-
ameter; branchlets brown, without lenticels. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 2-4 mm long, with some large 
colleters at the base; blade narrowly obovate to 
narrowly elliptical, (2.5-)5-16.5(-22) cm x 
(1.5-)2.5-8 cm, base cordate, apex acuminate, 
brown hairy, 3-veined from the base. Inflores-
cence a terminal lax thyrse, 5-8 cm long, 
many-flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous; sepals fused at base, linear, 0.5-1 mm 
long; corolla tube 0.5-1 mm long, widening at 
the throat, lobes narrowly oblong, 2.5-4 mm 
long, acute, spreading to reflexed, outside 
brown hairy or sometimes glabrous, inside with 
a hairy gland just above the base, white, cream 
or yellow; stamens inserted at the mouth of the 
corolla tube, exserted, filaments near the base 
with a 2-lobed hairy gland; ovary superior, 
ovoid, 1-1.5 mm x 0.5-1 mm, 2-celled, style 
1.5-2 mm long, stigma head-shaped. Fruit an 
ellipsoid berry 25-30 mm x 18-27 mm x 18-25 
mm, soft, orange, 3-7-seeded. Seeds obliquely 
ovoid to ellipsoid, flattened, 15-23 mm x 10-15 
mm x 3-6 mm, yellowish brown, smooth. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos phaeotricha is the only spe-
cies in the section Phaeotrichae. 
Ecology Strychnos phaeotricha occurs in 
rainforest, including secondary forest, or gal-
lery forest from sea-level up to 700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos phaeotricha does not seem to be in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Strychnos phaeotricha will 
probably remain of local importance as a me-
dicinal plant. 
Major references Bohlin, Ali & Sandberg, 
1974; Disengomoka, Delaveau & Sengele, 1983; 
Leeuwenberg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980. 
Other references Bouquet & Fournet, 
1975a; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS POTATORUM L.f. 
Protologue Suppl. pi.: 148 (1781). 
Family Loganiaceae 
578 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Vernacular names Grape strychnos (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos potatorum occurs from DR Congo and Tan-
zania south to northern South Africa. Strych-
nos potatorum was probably introduced in Asia 
by Arabic traders; it occurs in India, Sri Lanka 
and Myanmar. 
Uses In Tanzania pounded leaves are used 
to treat watering and aching eyes and the va-
pour of a root decoction is inhaled to treat ve-
nereal diseases. In Malawi a leaf decoction is 
taken to treat epilepsy. In Zambia the vapour 
of a root decoction is inhaled to treat colds. In 
Tanzania and Zambia the roots are used as an 
aphrodisiac. In Zimbabwe a decoction of roots 
and leaves is taken to treat cough. In Indian 
traditional medicine Strychnos potatorum 
seeds are used for the treatment of complaints 
of the liver, kidneys and stomach and gonor-
rhoea, leucorrhoea, bronchitis, chronic diar-
rhoea, strangury, kidney and bladder stones, 
diabetes and eye diseases. 
In Zimbabwe, Mozambique and South Africa 
the pounded fruits are used as fish poison, and 
in Zimbabwe crushed bark is also used for this 
purpose. 
In Tanzania and Zambia the wood is used to 
make tool handles. In Asia the seeds are used 
to clear muddy water. 
Properties Strychnos potatorum contains 
many monomeric and dimeric indole alkaloids, 
the root bark being especially rich. 
The monoterpene alkaloid cantleyine, isolated 
from the root bark, showed a relaxing effect on 
isolated tracheal smooth muscles of guinea-pig 
and may be the active ingredients responsible 
for the anticough and anti-asthmatic activity. 
Normacusine B, a monomeric alkaloid of the 
corynanthe class, also found in Rauvolfia, Ta-
bernaemontana and Vinca spp., is sympatho-
lytic and its hypotensive activity is stronger 
than that of reserpine, which is commonly used 
against high blood pressure. In-vitro tested 
ochrolifuanine A, a dimeric alkaloid of the ß-
carboline class, showed significant activity 
against chloroquine sensitive and chloroquine 
resistant Plasmodium falciparum strains. 
The total alkaloidal extracts of the seeds, bark 
and leaves showed strychnine-like activity in 
vivo, had marked hypotensive effect and exhib-
ited a depressant action on isolated heart. In 
in-vivo tests the seed powder and an aqueous 
extract of the seeds prevented ulcer formation 
by decreasing acid secretory activity and in-
creasing the mucin activity in rats. An aqueous 
extract of the seeds also showed significant 
hepatoprotective activity in rats. A methanol 
extract of the seeds had a diuretic effect and an 
antidiarrhoeal activity on castor oil-induced 
diarrhoea in rats. The seeds contain polyelec-
trolytes which can be used as coagulants to 
clarify turbid waters. In laboratory tests, direct 
filtration of turbid surface water with the seeds 
as a coagulant, produced a substantial im-
provement in its aesthetic and microbiological 
quality. The aerial parts also contain ß-
sitosterol, stigmasterol, oleanolic acid and its 
3ß-acetate, triterpenes and the polysaccharide 
mannogalactan. 
The wood is very hard and termite resistant, 
but splits easily and is therefore not suitable 
for carving. 
Botany Deciduous much-branched shrub or 
small or medium-sized tree up to 18 m tall; 
bole up to 100 cm in diameter; branchlets pale 
to dark brown, glabrous, apex modified into a 
spine-like tip 1-3 mm long. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-7 
mm long, glabrous; blade elliptical to ovate, 6-
15 cm x 3-9 cm, base cuneate to rounded, apex 
acute to acuminate, glabrous, 5-veined from 
the base. Inflorescence an axillary lax or con-
gested thyrse 1.5—2.5 cm long. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, (4-)5-merous, appearing before or 
with the young leaves; sepals fused at base, 
ovate to oblong, up to 2.5 mm long; corolla tube 
up to 3.5 mm long, lobes oblong, c. 4.5 mm 
long, acute, spreading, glabrous outside, inside 
with hairs on the base of the lobes, white, 
creamy or yellow; stamens inserted at the 
mouth of the corolla tube, exserted; ovary su-
perior, ovoid or conical, 1-2 mm long, glabrous, 
2-celled, style up to 4.5 mm long, stigma small, 
head-shaped or sometimes obscurely 2-lobed. 
Fruit a globose berry (10-)15-25 mm in diame-
ter, soft, blue-black, pulp purplish, smooth, 
shining, 1-seeded. Seed depressed-globose or 
ellipsoid, 10-13 mm x 9-13 mm x 6-9 mm, 
slightly glossy, with an obscure angular line all 
around, densely silky hairy, smooth. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos potatorum belongs to the 
section Rouhamon. 
Ecology Strychnos potatorum occurs in gal-
lery forest, in Brachystegia-woodland and in 
semi-evergreen bushland, often on river banks 
or on termite hills, from sea-level up to 1600 m 
altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos potatorum is widespread and not in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
STEYCHNOS 579 
Prospects Several alkaloids of Strychnos 
potatorum show promising medicinal activities, 
and more research into the pharmacological 
activities of the compounds seems warranted. 
Major references Bisset, 1970; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Massiot et al., 
1992; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Babu & Chaudhuri, 2005; 
Biswas et a l , 2001; Cavendish, 1999; Clarkson 
et al., 2004; Coates Palgrave, 1983; Gelfand et 
al., 1985; Sanmugapriya & Venkataraman, 
2006; Sanmugapriya & Venkataraman, 2007; 
Zhu et a l , 2005. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS SAMBA P.A.Duvign. 
Protologue Buil. Séanc. Inst. Roy. Col. 
Belg. 19: 216 (1948). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 44 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos samba occurs from Nigeria east to the Cen-
tral African Republic and DR Congo. 
Uses In the Central African Republic the 
root bark of Strychnos samba mixed with other 
plants, including root bark of Penianthus longi-
folius Miers, is used to make arrow poison. In 
Gabon, Congo and DR Congo the root bark has 
been used as ordeal poison. In DR Congo the 
pounded fruit is used as a fish poison. 
Properties The leaves of Strychnos samba 
contain the indolopyridine alkaloid angustine 
and its derivatives angustidine and angusto-
line. Crude leaf and stem bark extracts showed 
a muscle relaxant effect in mice; root bark ex-
tract showed tonic convulsion as well. 
Botany Liana up to 20 m long, climbing 
with paired tendrils; stem up to 5 cm in diame-
ter; branchlets quadrangular, green, glabrous. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stipules 
absent; petiole 5-12 mm long, glabrous; blade 
elliptical, 5-10(-17) cm x 2.5-7(-8.5) cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex acuminate, leathery, 
glabrous, 3-veined from the base. Inflorescence 
an axillary or terminal lax or congested thyrse 
3-10 cm long, few- to many-flowered. Flowers 
bisexual, regular, 5-merous; sepals fused at 
base, ovate, up to 1 mm long; corolla tube c. 1 
mm long, lobes narrowly triangular, 1-1.5 mm 
long, acute, almost erect or spreading, glabrous 
outside, inside hairy on the lobes, greenish; 
stamens inserted at the mouth of the corolla 
tube, exserted; ovary superior, ovoid, c. 1 mm 
long, glabrous, 2-celled, style up to 0.5 mm 
long, stigma head-shaped. Fruit a globose 
berry 17-20 mm in diameter, soft, pale green, 
smooth, 1-seeded. Seed obliquely ovoid, flat-
tened, c. 14 mm x 13 mm x 7 mm, irregularly 
curved, pale brown, short-hairy. 
Strychnos comprises about 200 species: about 
60 species in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in 
Africa. Strychnos samba belongs to the section 
Brevitubae. 
Ecology Strychnos samba occurs in rainfor-
est, including secondary forest, in moist locali-
ties, from sea-level up to 700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Strych-
nos samba does not seem to be in danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Strychnos 
samba will remain of limited use only. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neuwinger, 
1998; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Bisset, 1970; Bisset & 
Leeuwenberg, 1968; Bisset & Phillipson, 1971; 
Bohlin, 1978; Phillipson et al., 1974. 
Authors A. de Ruijter 
STRYCHNOS USAMBARENSIS Gilg ex Engl. 
Protologue Abh. Königl. Preuss. Akad. 
Wiss. Berlin 36 (1894). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Synonyms Strychnos cerasifera Gilg (1895). 
Vernacular names Blue bitterberry, stipe-
fruited strychnos, stipe-fruited monkey orange 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Strych-
nos usambarensis occurs from Guinea east to 
Nigeria, and from Congo east to Kenya and 
Strychnos usambarensis - wild 
580 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
south to South Africa. 
Uses The Banyambo people of Rwanda and 
Tanzania use the root bark and leaves of 
Strychnos usambarensis to produce arrow poi-
son, sometimes in combination with other 
plants. In DR Congo the Nduye people mix the 
powdered root with water and apply this to the 
nostrils of hunting dogs to improve their scent. 
In DR Congo and western Kenya the wood is 
used for house construction. 
Properties Strychnos usambarensis is the 
best investigated African Strychnos species and 
more than 60 indole alkaloids have been iso-
lated from it. The ones that have been identi-
fied so far are predominantly dimeric terpenoid 
indole alkaloids. In addition, the root bark con-
tains tertiary alkaloids and several important 
quaternary alkaloids and anhydronium bases. 
Among these are the retuline class alkaloids C-
dihydrotoxiferine, C-curarine and C-calebassine 
and the monomeric C-fluorocurarine, which are 
also the active principles of calabash curare 
obtained from South American Strychnos spp. 
Strychnos usambarensis root bark also con-
tains the less active afrocurarine, the mono-
meric tetracyclic alkaloid akagerine, the non-
terpenoid alkaloids harmane and melinonine F 
and the monoquaternary alkaloids malindine 
and isomalindine, which belong to the group of 
trinitrogenated alkaloids. Four root alkaloids, 
the dimeric usambarensines, are of the cory-
nanthean class. 
The leaf alkaloids are all of the corynanthean 
class, and belong to the usambarine group and 
the dimeric oxindole group. The main compo-
nent of the leaves is the oxindole strychnofo-
line. Apart from alkaloids also known from 
other plant species, Strychnos usambarensis 
leaves contain some rare alkaloids with 5 ni-
trogen atoms such as strychnopentamine, its 
derivatives chrysopentamine, isostrychnopen-
tamine and the oxindole strychnophylline. 
The muscle paralyzing, curare-like effect of 
Strychnos usambarensis root bark is caused by 
the quaternary alkaloids, which block the exci-
tation of the skeletal muscles. The paralyzing 
effect can be antagonized by acetylcholine. At 
higher doses the alkaloids cause a series of 
side-effects: drop in blood pressure, blocking of 
the vagus nerve, change in cardiac rate and 
frequency of respiration. Malindine also has a 
strong muscle relaxant activity, which is not 
antagonized by acetylcholine and is not of the 
curare type. Akagerine and its derivatives are 
potent convulsant agents, but 100 times less 
active than strychnine. The usambarensines 
have no paralyzing effect on skeletal muscles, 
but do have an atropine-like and spasmolytic 
activity on smooth muscles. Harmane induces 
enrichment of biogene amines such as sero-
tonine in the brain. In small doses it causes 
hallucinations, in high doses convulsions and 
respiratory paralysis. Strychnopentamine and 
5',6'-dihydrousambarensine showed strong 
activity against Plasmodium falciparum in 
vitro, but were inactive against Plasmodium 
berghei in vivo. However, isostrychnopen-
tamine has an interesting antiplasmodial ac-
tivity both in vitro against various chloroquine-
resistant and chloroquine-sensitive strains of 
Plasmodium falciparum and in vivo against 
chloroquine-sensitive strains of rodent-
infecting Plasmodium berghei and Plasmodium 
vinckei. Usambarine, usambarensine and 
18,19-dihydrousambarine were less active 
against Plasmodium falciparum in vitro, but 
highly active against Entamoeba histolytica in 
vitro. Akagerine has only little antiprotozoal 
activity. Usambarensine and 5',6'-dihydrou-
sambarensine are active against the gram-posi-
tive bacteria Staphylococcus aureus, Bacillus 
subtilis and Mycobacterium smegmatis. Har-
mane showed no antimicrobial activity. Many 
of the Strychnos usambarensis alkaloids were 
shown to be markedly toxic to a number of tu-
mour lines. A chloroform extract of the leaves 
of Strychnos usambarensis is active against 
lymphatic leukaemia P-388 in mice in vivo. 
Especially strychnopentamine, chrysopentamine 
and isostrychnopentamine are regarded as 
potential anticancer agents. Curare alkaloids 
have played an important role in reducing the 
risk of anaesthesia, since much smaller 
amounts of anaesthetic are necessary. The 
drugs have made it possible to achieve ade-
quate muscle relaxation for all clinical re-
quirements. Some of the Strychnos alkaloids 
can be synthesized in vitro in tissue cultures, 
but most of the syntheses produce a mixture of 
stereoisomers. 
Adulterations and substitutes Several 
other tropical African plant species such as 
Strychnos icaja Baill., Acokanthera schimperi 
(A.DC.) Schweinf. and Strophanthus spp. are 
used as substitutes for Strychnos usambarensis 
to produce arrow poison. 
Description Large liana up to 70 m long, 
climbing with solitary tendrils, or shrub to 
small tree up to 10(-15) m tall; stem up to 25 
cm in diameter; bark pale or dark grey or grey-
brown with darker patches, smooth, inner bark 
orange; branches with lenticels, usually very 
STRYCHNOS 581 
(^  A 
Strychnos usambarensis - 1, flowering branch; 
2, flower; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
dark brown, often covered with a pale skin 
which splits and peels off, branchlets pale 
brown, glabrous or short-hairy. Leaves oppo-
site, simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 
2-6 mm long, glabrous; blade ovate to ellipti-
cal, 3-8(-16) cm x l-3.5(-7) cm, base cuneate 
to rounded, apex acuminate, 3-5-veined from 
the base. Inflorescence an axillary lax or con-
gested thyrse, solitary or several together, 1— 
2.5 cm long, few-flowered. Flowers bisexual, 
regular, 4-5-merous; sepals fused at base, 
ovate to triangular, up to 1 mm long; corolla 
tube up to 1.5 mm long, lobes oblong to ovate or 
triangular, c. 1 mm long, acute, recurved from 
somewhat below the middle, glabrous or mi-
nutely hairy outside, inside with a ring of hairs 
in the throat, white, yellow or sometimes or-
ange; stamens inserted at the mouth of the 
corolla tube, exserted; ovary superior, ovoid, 
0.5-1 mm long, glabrous, 2-celled, style up to 
1.5 mm long, stigma small, head-shaped or 
sometimes obscurely 2-lobed. Fruit a globose 
berry 1—2 cm in diameter, often laterally com-
pressed, soft, orange or orange-yellow when 
ripe, often glaucous, 1-seeded. Seed depressed-
globose or ellipsoid, 9^12 mm x 7-11 mm x 5-8 
mm, short and densely hairy, smooth. 
Other botanical information Strychnos 
comprises about 200 species: about 60 species 
in Asia, 65 in America and 75 in Africa. 
Strychnos usambarensis belongs to the section 
Rouhamon. Strychnos variabilis De Wild., 
which occurs in Congo and DR Congo, also be-
longs to this section, and contains at least 20 
indole alkaloids. An ethyl acetate and a 
methanolic extract of the root showed signifi-
cant anti-malarial activity in vitro. 
Growth and development Strychnos 
usambarensis is a very adaptable species, vary-
ing in habit from shrub to liana or tree. 
Ecology Strychnos usambarensis occurs in 
lowland and upland rainforest, also in secon-
dary forest, in gallery forest and semi-
evergreen and coastal evergreen bushland from 
sea-level up to 2000 m altitude. 
Harvesting Root bark, stem bark and leaves 
intended for trade are usually collected from 
wild plants. The best time for harvesting is 
after flowering. 
Yield The total alkaloid content of the leaves 
is approximately 1% dry weight. The yield of 
isostrychnopentamine from the leaves is 0.2% 
(w/w). 
Handling after harvest The root bark, 
stem bark or leaves are usually dried for later 
use. 
Genetic resources Strychnos usambarensis 
is widespread and occurs in many habitats; it 
is therefore not likely that it is threatened by 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects Strychnos usambarensis is not 
used for medicinal purposes in Africa because 
of its toxicity. Several of its alkaloids show 
promising anticancer or antimalarial activities, 
and more research into the pharmacological 
activities of the compounds seems warranted. 
Major references Angenot, 1971; Leeuwen-
berg, 1969; Neuwinger, 1996; Ohiri, Verpoorte 
& Baerheim Svendsen, 1983c; Philippe et al., 
2005; Schwikkard & van Heerden, 2002; Ter-
ashima & Ichikawa, 2003. 
Other references Bassleer et al., 1982; 
Bisset & Leeuwenberg, 1968; Bonjean et al., 
1996; Bosch, Bonjoch & Amat, 1996; Frédérich 
et a l , 2003a; Frédérich et a l , 2004a; Frédérich 
et al., 1999b; Frédérich, Tits & Angenot, 1998; 
Frédérich et a l , 2004; Lovett et al., 2006; Mit-
chell, 2004. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1969. 
Authors N.S. Alvarez Cruz 
582 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
SUREGADA ZANZIBARIENSIS Baill. 
Protologue Adansonia 1: 254 (1861). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Woodland suregada 
(En). Mdimu msitu (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Sure-
gada zanzibariensis is distributed in the 
coastal belt from Somalia south to South Africa 
and in Madagascar. 
Uses In Ulanga, Tanzania, a root and stem 
bark extract is drunk to cure ankylostomiasis, 
which is caused by parasitic hookworms. The 
root extract is also drunk to cure gonorrhoea, 
stomach-ache, schistosomiasis, chest pain, 
hernia, pneumonia, chickenpox and as a purga-
tive. The roots are chewed or a root extract is 
drunk to treat snakebites. Ground leaves 
mixed with water are applied externally 
against skin infections and taken in tea or por-
ridge against poliomyelitis. Pulped leaves are 
taken in porridge to cure dysentery and to ex-
pel worms. The roots are used as a medicine by 
the Mijikenda people of Kenya to treat oedema. 
The use of extracts for the treatment of diabe-
tes is aimed at symptoms such as bacterial and 
fungal infections, rather than the diabetes it-
self. 
Properties The leaves contain alkaloids, 
flavonoids, saponins, steroids and tannins. A 
leaf extract of Suregada zanzibariensis showed 
significant activity against chloroquine resis-
tant and sensitive strains of the malaria para-
site Plasmodium falciparum (IC50 = 1.5 jig/ml). 
A leaf extract also showed antifungal activity 
against Candida albicans in vitro. 
Botany Dioecious shrub or small tree up to 
10 m tall; bark grey, smooth, scaling towards 
the base of the bole; branches horizontal. 
Leaves alternate, simple; stipules triangular-
ovate, c. 1 mm long, acute, soon falling; petiole 
3-7 mm long; blade obovate to elliptical-
oblanceolate, 2-13 cm x 1-7 cm, base cuneate 
or rounded, apex abruptly acuminate, margin 
entire or finely and irregularly toothed, leath-
ery, pinnately veined with 5-9 pairs of looping 
lateral veins. Inflorescence an axillary fascicle, 
rarely flowers solitary; bracts minute. Flowers 
unisexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel 1-2 mm 
long, sepals nearly orbicular, 2.5-3 mm x 2-2.5 
mm, with gland outside; petals absent; male 
flowers with usually 14 stamens, filaments 1-2 
mm long; female flowers with 5-angular or 
shallowly 10-lobed disk, ovary superior, ovoid, 
3-celled, c. 1.5 mm in diameter, styles 3 with 2-
fid apex. Fruit a 3-lobed to almost globose cap-
sule 7 mm x 8 mm, smooth, black when ma-
ture, late dehiscent, 3-seeded. Seeds ovoid, 4 
mm x 4 mm, grey when dry and finely pitted. 
Seedling with epigeal germination. 
Suregada comprises about 30 species, all oc-
curring in the Old World tropics; 8 species oc-
cur in continental tropical Africa and 14 in 
Madagascar. Suregada adenophora Baill. and 
Suregada boiviniana Baill. (synonym: Sure-
gada pycnanihera (Pax & K.Hoffm.) Croizat) 
occur throughout Madagascar and are used as 
purgatives; the fresh sap of Suregada decidua 
Radcl.-Sm. from West Madagascar is applied to 
wounds to promote healing. 
Ecology Suregada zanzibariensis occurs 
usually on sandy soils in woodland, riverine 
forest, coastal forest and in salt marshes, from 
sea-level up to 1200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Sure-
gada zanzibariensis is fairly widespread and 
not heavily exploited; hence there are no 
threats at present. 
Prospects The leaves of Suregada zanzi-
bariensis show promise as a cure for malaria. 
Other Suregada species have antipyretic prop-
erties as well, and more pharmacological re-
search is warranted. 
Major references Bhatnagar & Das, 2007; 
Govaerts, Frodin & Radcliffe-Smith, 2000; 
Kokwaro, 1993; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Gilbert, Holmes & Thu-
lin, 1993; Hedberg et al., 1983a; Moshi & 
Mbwambo, 2002; Omulokoli, Khan & Chhabra, 
1997; Pakia & Cooke, 2003b; Radcliffe-Smith, 
1991b; Runyoro et a l , 2006a; Wongsatit Chua-
kul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Ora-
wan Ruangsomboon, 2003. 
Authors OH. Bosch 
SURIANA MARITIMA L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 284 (1753). 
Family Simaroubaceae (APG: Surianaceae) 
Vernacular names Tassel plant, bay cedar, 
Temporana Bay cedar (En). Bois matelot, 
romarin noir (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Suri-
ana maritima occurs in Central and South 
America, Oceania and along the coasts of the 
Indian Ocean. In tropical Africa it occurs in 
coastal Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique and the 
Indian Ocean Islands. 
Uses In Mauritius the aerial parts are used 
as an astringent and to cure dysentery. It is 
SYMPHYTUM 583 
also used as a poultice to treat wounds caused 
by poisonous fish. Elsewhere decoctions of 
leaves and branches are used as a bath to cure 
arthritis, applied externally to clean wounds 
and taken internally to treat rectal bleeding. 
Powdered flowers are used to cure diarrhoea. 
The wood is used in the Virgin Islands to make 
small articles. In southern Florida the plant is 
used as an ornamental, especially for hedges 
and screens. It helps stabilize beaches and 
coastal dunes. 
Properties Suriana maritima is devoid of 
the terpenoid lactones that characterize Sima-
roubaceae. It contains a triterpenoid diol, suri-
anol, as well as ß-sitosterol, the flavonoids ru-
tin and rhamnetin and the flavonol glycoside 
rhamnetin-3-rutinoside. Rutin is used medici-
nally to decrease capillary fragility. Leaf and 
stem contain sterols, terpenes and phenols. 
The flavonoids are thought to be responsible 
for the anti-infective properties. 
The wood is dark red and hard, and polishes 
well. 
Botany Spreading, much-branched, ever-
green shrub up to 3(-7) m tall; stems grey-
green, densely short-hairy, marked with leaf 
scars. Leaves arranged spirally, clustered at 
ends of branches, simple and entire, upright; 
stipules absent; petiole 1-3 mm long; blade 
oblanceolate, 1-4.5 cm x 2-6 mm, base 
cuneate, apex rounded to acute, hairy on both 
sides, glandular hairs present. Inflorescence an 
axillary cyme as long as the leaves, few-
flowered; bracts up to 1 cm long. Flowers bi-
sexual, regular, 5-merous; pedicel up to 8 mm 
long; calyx c. 8 mm long, deeply lobed, glandu-
lar hairy; petals free, oblong to obovate, c. 7 
mm x 5 mm, margins with short hairs, yellow; 
stamens 10, free, 2.5-4.5 mm long; ovary supe-
rior, densely long-hairy, consisting of 5 free 
carpels, styles c. 4 mm long. Fruit composed of 
5 ellipsoid to obovoid drupes, with faces com-
pressed, each c. 3.5 mm x 3 mm, 1-seeded, 
hairy, black. 
Suriana comprises a single species. 
Ecology Suriana maritima is found on coral 
reefs and sandy soil. It is confined to seashores 
above the high-water mark and is often found 
on the landward side of Avicennia mangrove. It 
is tolerant of moderately saline soil and highly 
tolerant of beach conditions including high 
surface heat, drought and wind. 
Management Propagation of Suriana mari-
tima is done by seeds. It is planted for hedges 
at distances of c. 1.5 m. Once established it 
grows well without irrigation, even on well-
drained sandy soils. It responds well to trim-
ming. 
Genetic resources and breeding Suriana 
maritima is widespread and often common, 
and is not threatened by genetic erosion. Ur-
ban development of coastal areas as in Florida 
can have destructive effects on populations of 
Suriana maritima. 
Prospects Suriana maritima can play a role 
in the protection of seashores and in landscap-
ing in tropical coastal areas. Its pharmacologi-
cal properties need further investigation to 
determine its value as a medicinal plant. 
Major references Beentje, 1998; Gurib-
Fakim & Brendler, 2004. 
Other references Coode, 1979; Fernando et 
a l , 1993; Gilman, 1999; Gurib-Fakim, Guého & 
Bissoondoyal, 1997; Mitchell & Geissman, 
1971; Perrier de la Bâthie, 1950; Wild, Phipps 
& Paiva, 1969. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
SYMPHYTUM OFFICINALE L. 
Protologue Sp. pi. 1: 136 (1753). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number In = 24, 40, 48, 56 
Vernacular names Common comfrey, con-
sound, knitbone (En). Grande consoude, oreille 
de vache (Fr). Consolda maior, grande con-
solda, orelhas de asno (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Sym-
phytum officinale originates from Europe, 
where it is widespread, and has been intro-
duced in North America and Asia. It is culti-
vated in several Mediterranean, African and 
Asian countries. In Africa it is cultivated on a 
small scale only, mainly in Madagascar and 
South Africa. 
Uses All parts of Symphytum officinale are 
medicinally used in its area of natural distribu-
tion, and the flowers, leaves and rootstocks are 
official in several European pharmacopoeias. 
Fresh leaves are widely used as a poultice on 
wounds, burns, bruises, sprains, insect bites, 
sore joints, pulled tendons, broken bones and 
irritated skin. Leaf decoctions or infusions 
have been used to treat colds, gum problems, 
rheumatism, arthritis, gout, scrofula, pleuritis, 
leucorrhoea, gastro-intestinal ulcers and as an 
anti-inflammatory, but internal use is now 
discouraged. Fresh rootstocks are commonly 
used for healing wounds and ulcers (including 
gastric ulcers), and flower infusions to treat 
cough and diarrhoea. Medicinal applications in 
584 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Africa are very limited, but the plant is used in 
Madagascar as a pain-killing poultice. In 
Europe and also in Madagascar Symphytum 
officinale is planted together with crops such 
as tomato and potato against bacterial diseases 
(mainly bacterial wilt caused by Ralstonia so-
lanacearum) and insect pests, and as a green 
manure and mulch. The leaves are occasionally 
eaten as a cooked vegetable and fed to live-
stock, but these uses should be discouraged 
because of the presence of toxic pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids. The plant is a well-known ornamen-
tal, and also occasionally used for this purpose 
in Africa. 
Production and international trade Most 
Symphytum officinale is cultivated in Europe 
and the United States, but amounts are not 
known. 
Properties All parts of Symphytum offici-
nale contain allantoin (0.5-1.7%), mucilage 
(29%), triterpene saponins, choline, asparagine, 
tannins (8-9% in the aerial parts, 4-6% in the 
rhizomes), silicic acid (4%), and pyrrolizidine 
alkaloids (0.003-0.2% in the leaves, especially 
the young ones, 0.2-0.6% in the rhizomes). The 
major pyrrolizidine alkaloids are intermedine, 
lycopsamine, 7-acetyllycopsamine and 7-
acetylintermedine. Many pyrrolizidine alka-
loids are toxic and several have been shown to 
be hepatotoxic, pneumotoxic, carcinogenic and 
mutagenic. For this reason it is forbidden by 
law to use Symphytum officinale as an internal 
herbal remedy in many European countries. 
The external application of Symphytum offici-
nale preparations for use in case of contusions, 
strains and spraining is considered safe be-
cause absorption of pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
through the skin is negligible. 
All parts of Symphytum officinale contain al-
lantoin, but the rootstock is richest (up to 
1.7%). Allantoin is known for its healing, sooth-
ing and anti-irritating properties, and is used 
in anti-acne products, sun care products and 
clarifying lotions. 
In a study using patients suffering from acute 
ankle sprains, the percutaneous efficacy of an 
ointment of Symphytum officinale rootstock 
extract was confirmed decisively, reducing pain 
as well as oedema. A crude extract of full-
grown leaves only showed a slight analgesic 
activity in rats, and did not show anti-
inflammatory activity. 
Many pyrrolizidine alkaloids are not palatable 
and livestock avoid eating them if other forages 
are available. There are large differences in 
susceptibility to pyrrolizidine alkaloids in dif-
ferent animals; pigs are most susceptible, fol-
lowed by horses and cattle, goats, and finally 
sheep. 
Botany Perennial, roughly hairy herb up to 
120 cm tall, with fleshy rootstock; stem stout, 
winged, hollow, often branched. Leaves in a 
rosette and alternate on the stems, simple and 
entire; stipules absent; petiole up to 10 cm 
long, stem leaves sessile; blade ovate-
lanceolate to ovate, up to 25 cm x 15 cm, decur-
rent at base into petiole or stem, apex acumi-
nate, pinnately veined. Inflorescence a termi-
nal scorpioid cyme without bracts, many-
flowered. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
pendulous; pedicel 2-6 mm long; calyx with 
lanceolate lobes; corolla with cylindrical tube 
12-18 mm long and small lobes, white to pink 
or purple-violet, with scales at throat; stamens 
inserted at the middle of the corolla tube, fila-
ments short; ovary superior, 4-celled, style 
slender and exserted, stigma head-shaped, 
small. Fruit consisting of 4 ovoid nutlets 5-6 
mm long, glossy dark brown or black, enclosed 
by the calyx. Seedling with epigeal germina-
Symphytum officinale - 1, flowering stem; 2, part 
of opened corolla; 3, fruit enclosed by calyx; 4, 
nutlet. 
Source: PROSEA 
SYNCLISIA 585 
tion; hypocotyl 7-15 mm long, epicotyl absent; 
cotyledons elliptical-oblong, 1-2.5 cm long, 
leafy, shortly stalked. 
Symphytum comprises about 35 species and is 
native to Europe and western Asia. There are 
no indigenous species in tropical Africa. 
Symphytum officinale plants are long lived. 
The flowers are self-incompatible and are 
mainly pollinated by bumble bees. The nutlets 
have a fleshy appendix and are dispersed by 
ants. 
Ecology Symphytum officinale occurs in its 
natural distribution area in damp grassland 
and on river banks. It tolerates most soils ex-
cept the most sandy and dry ones, and grows 
well on heavy clay soils. 
Management Symphytum officinale can be 
propagated by seed, division or through in-vitro 
propagation from root expiants. Optimal plant-
ing distance is 70 cm x 70 cm. It should pref-
erably be planted in open localities or with 
partial shade in a deep, rich soil. Comfrey rust 
(Melampsorella symphyti) is the biggest prob-
lem in cultivation. The infection can be reduced 
by removing the infested leaves. Symphytum 
officinale is a host for the nematode Meloi-
dogyne incognita. The rootstocks should be 
harvested at the beginning or end of the grow-
ing season, when the allantoin levels are high-
est. Yields of dry rootstocks are 5-12 t/ha, de-
pending on soil type. Harvested plant parts are 
used fresh or dried in the shade for future use. 
The rootstocks can also be split down the mid-
dle and dried in an oven at 40-60cC. 
Genetic resources and breeding Symphy-
tum officinale is widespread and common 
throughout its natural distribution area. Sev-
eral cultivars and hybrids with other Symphy-
tum spp. are commercially traded in Europe as 
garden ornamentals. 
Prospects The use of Symphytum officinale 
in phytotherapy should be restricted to exter-
nal applications due to the presence of toxic 
pyrrolizidine alkaloids. The efficacy in the 
treatment of sprains, small wounds and skin 
irritation without adverse effects has been con-
firmed by clinical tests, and for these purposes 
Symphytum officinale deserves wider applica-
tion. The use as a vegetable should be discour-
aged, but the interplanting with crops to re-
duce diseases and pests, as practised locally in 
Madagascar, is interesting and warrants more 
attention from research. 
Major references B.I.M.T.T., 2000; Rahet-
lah, 2002; Schmelzer & Horsten, 2001; van 
Wyk & Gericke, 2000. 
Other references Evreux, 1989; Koll et al., 
2004; Mei et al., 2005; Rajaobelimahefa, 1990; 
Stickel & Seitz, 2000. 
Sources of illustration Schmelzer & Hor-
sten, 2001. 
Authors R.H.M.J. Lemmens 
Based on PROSEA 12(2): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 2. 
SYNCLISIA SCABRIDA Miers ex Oliv. 
Protologue Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. ser. 3, 20: 
171 (1867). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Vernacular names Goat weed (En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Syn-
clisia scabrida occurs from Nigeria east to the 
Central African Republic and south to DR 
Congo and Angola. 
Uses In Nigeria and Cameroon an alcoholic 
leaf decoction is drunk to treat gastric ulcers. 
In Nigeria the root soaked in alcohol or macer-
ated in boiling water is taken to treat malaria, 
to prevent threatened abortion and as a com-
mon medicine to calm patients with mental 
disorders, e.g. psychoses. In Gabon the bitter 
root, sometimes mixed with stem bark of Gar-
cinia klainii Pierre ex Engl., is put in palm 
wine, which is drunk to treat venereal diseases 
and as an aphrodisiac and also to treat pros-
tate problems, asthma and hernia. In Congo 
pregnant women may tie a piece of liana 
around the waist to avoid spontaneous abor-
tion. 
In Gabon a root decoction is used in trial by 
ordeal ceremonies; when it causes constipation 
one is innocent, when it causes diarrhoea, one 
Synclisia scabrida - wild 
586 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
is guilty. 
The root ba rk contains a yellow dye of unre-
corded use. The leaves a re used as protein-rich 
fodder for r uminan t s . 
Product ion and international trade Syn-
clisia scabrida is only t raded in local marke t s . 
P r o p e r t i e s From the s tem the bisbenzyl-
isoquinoline alkaloids cycleanine, cycleanine N-
oxide, norcycleanine, and the related dioxines 
cocsoline and cocsuline have been isolated. The 
leaves contain little alkaloids, bu t contain a 
glycoside, provisionally called scabridoside. 
Cycleanine has also been isolated from the root 
bark, and showed low toxicity in mice (LD50 = 1 
g/kg in t r ape r i tonea l^ ) . In mice and r a t s it re-
duced spontaneous motor activity. In vitro it 
evoked muscle contractions in isolated r a t 
u t e rus t h a t could be blocked by salbutanol , bu t 
not by atropine. 
An ethanol extract of the leaves fed to r a t s 
s imultaneously wi th a high dose of aspir in sig-
nificantly reduced the damage to the g landular 
t issues of the s tomach caused by the aspir in in 
a dose-dependent way. The same extract also 
slowed down the t rans i t r a t e in the small intes-
t ine, while in ra t s , in which the t ransi t ion be-
tween the stomach and the duodenum had 
been blocked, the total s tomach secretion and 
i ts acidity were reduced. These resul ts are in 
line with the t radi t ional use in the t r ea tmen t 
of gastric ulcers. An aqueous extract of the 
leaves showed an t ih i s tamine and anticholiner-
gic activity, bu t no analgesic activity. Aqueous 
and e thanol extracts of t he leaves adminis tered 
to r a t s caused slightly increased motor activity 
and t r ans ien t hyper thermia . The extracts also 
slowed down the coagulation of h u m a n blood. 
Aqueous and e thanol extracts of the leaves 
delayed and shortened the sedative effects of 
apomorphine in chickens, while an ethanol 
extract induced catalepsy in ra t s . 
An aqueous extract of the leaves induced an 
oestrogen-like activity in i m m a t u r e female 
ra t s , increasing the u ter ine weight by about 
70% compared to oestradiol benzoate. 
A hot-ethanol extract of the leaves inhibited 
the growth of Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Staphylococcus aureus. Ethanol , cold wate r 
and hot wate r extracts of the root were tes ted 
for activity agains t s t ra ins of Escherichia coli, 
Salmonella sp., Staphylococcus aureus, Pseu-
domonas aeruginosa, Proteus sp. and Bacillus 
subtilis. The ethanol extract was bactericidal 
agains t 8 of the 10 test organisms. The cold 
wate r extract was bactericidal against s t ra ins 
of Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis and 
bacteriostat ic agains t 5 others , while the hot 
wate r extract was bacteriostat ic agains t only 2 
of t he organisms. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Dioecious l iana with twining 
s tems up to 40 m long, wi th clear sap or some-
t imes whi te latex; ba rk dark brown; s tems with 
long, stiff ha i r s . Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; st ipules absent; petiole 2—4 cm long, 
swollen a t base and apex, reddish hairy; blade 
lanceolate-ovate, 5-12(-20) cm x (4- )7-9 cm, 
base cordate, apex acuminate , upper surface 
thinly hairy, lower surface densely hairy, pin-
nately veined, bu t with 1-2 pairs of basa l veins 
and 4 - 5 pai rs of la te ra l veins. Flowers axillary, 
solitary or in pairs , unisexual ; pedicel slender, 
c. 2 cm long, densely hairy, with 2 minute 
bracts ; sepals 9, 6 outer ones bract-like, linear-
lanceolate, 1-2 mm x 0.5-1 mm, apex acute, 
densely hai ry outside, 3 inner ones linear-
lanceolate, basally merged into an urn-shaped 
tube, 7-8 mm x c. 1.5 mm, fleshy; peta ls 6, c. 
0.5 m m long, rounded, fleshy, glabrous; male 
flowers wi th 6(-9) s t amens , basally fused, 3 
outer ones c. 2 m m long, 3 inner ones c. 3 mm 
long, fi laments s lender a t apex, inner ones 
bending outwards , outer ones bending inwards; 
female flowers with spoon-shaped s taminodes 
c. 3 mm long, ovary superior, composed of 1 5 -
30 lateral ly compressed carpels, with long, stiff 
ha i rs , styles lateral , slender, c. 3 mm long, 
s t igma small, t r iangular . Fru i t composed of a 
dense head of obovoid-ellipsoid drupes 12-17 
mm x 8-9 mm, orange, densely reddish hairy, 
wi th swollen apex, s tone bony, fine-hairy out-
side, 1-seeded. Seed horseshoe-shaped, 1-1.5 
cm long, cotyledons very unequal . 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Synclisia 
comprises a single species. It is closely related 
to Albertisia. 
E c o l o g y Synclisia scabrida occurs in rain-
forest, including secondary forest, a t low and 
medium al t i tudes . 
M a n a g e m e n t P l an t s are only collected from 
the wild. Leaves for fodder can be harves ted a t 
any t ime of the year. Individual leaves or the 
whole l iana are cut and fed fresh or dried. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Synclisia scabrida has a 
wide distr ibution and also occurs in secondary 
vegetation; there are no indications t h a t it is in 
danger of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Synclisia scabrida is an impor-
t a n t medicinal p lant in Central Africa, bu t i ts 
chemical and pharmacological propert ies have 
been insufficiently invest igated. More research 
is therefore war ran ted , especially into i ts ef-
fects on gastric ulcers. 
TABERNAEMONTANA 587 
Major references Obi et al., 2000; Ohiri, 
Verpoorte & Baerheim Svendsen, 1989; Okoli 
& Iroegbu, 2005; Orisakwe et al., 1996b; 
Troupin, 1962; Wambebe et al., 1997. 
Other references Afonne et al., 2000; Akah 
et al., 1998; Feodor, Eric & Osa, 1980; Gassita, 
1968; Gassita et al. (Editors), 1982; Keay & 
Troupin, 1954; Ohiri, Verpoorte & Baerheim 
Svendsen, 1983a; Orisakwe, Afonne & Dioka, 
1997; Orisakwe et al., 1996a; Sokomba et al., 
1986; Wambebe et al., 1982. 
Authors P. Nana & H.S. Foyet 
SYRRHEONEMA FASCICULATUM Miers 
Protologue Ann. Mag. Nat. Hist. ser. 3, 13: 
124 (1864). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Syr-
rheonema fasciculatum occurs from Cameroon 
and Bioko (Equatorial Guinea) east to western 
Uganda and south to DR Congo. 
Uses In Congo the leaf sap is used against 
ophthalmia. 
Botany Dioecious liana up to 20 m long; 
stem up to 2.5 cm in diameter, hairy. Leaves 
alternate, simple and entire; stipules absent; 
petiole 4.5-10 cm long, bent at base and apex, 
densely short-hairy; blade ovate to almost or-
bicular, 5-25 cm x 5-25 cm, base cordate or 
truncate, apex acute to acuminate, thinly 
leathery, densely short-hairy, becoming nearly 
glabrous, palmately veined with 2-3 basal 
veins, prominent on the lower surface. Inflores-
cence an axillary head-like cyme 1-1.5 cm long; 
peduncle 1-2 cm long. Flowers unisexual; male 
flowers with 9-12 sepals, 1.5-2 mm x c. 1 mm, 
whitish, outside densely hairy, inside slightly 
hairy, petals 3-6, elliptical, c. 1.5 mm long, 
somewhat fleshy, apex fringed, stamens 6, c. 
2.5 mm long, fused to halfway, free part of the 
filament thickened. Fruit composed of 3-5 al-
most globose drupes 1.5-2 cm in diameter, base 
truncate, short-hairy; stone hard and brittle, 1-
seeded. Seed 12-17 mm long. 
Syrrheonema comprises 3 species, 2 in Central 
Africa and 1 in West Africa. 
Ecology Syrrheonema fasciculatum occurs 
in rainforest, forest regrowth and fallow land, 
at 1200-1400 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Syr-
rheonema fasciculatum has a wide distribution 
and there are no indications that it is in danger 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects As long as nothing is known 
about the chemical constituents and pharma-
cological properties of Syrrheonema fascicula-
tum, it will remain of local importance only. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Bouquet, 
1969; Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Neuwinger, 2000; 
Troupin, 1951. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
TABERNAEMONTANA COFFEOIDES Bojer ex 
A.DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 8: 370 (1844). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Hazunta coffeoides (Bojer ex 
A.DC.) Pichon (1948); Hazunta modesta (Ba-
ker) Pichon (1948), Hazunta velutina Pichon 
(1948), Hazunta costata Markgr. (1970). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
naemontana coffeoides is endemic to Madagas-
car, Comoros, Mayotte and Seychelles. 
Uses In Madagascar the bitter twig bark of 
Tabernaemontana coffeoides is chewed to com-
bat fatigue and to suppress hunger. A twig or 
bark infusion is reputed to promote weight loss 
as it reduces appetite. The bitter bark is added 
to alcoholic beverages, some of which are used 
during circumcision rituals. The bark was for-
merly used to make string for cloth. In May-
otte, branched twigs were formerly used as an 
oil-lamp support. In the Comoros the wood is 
used as firewood. 
Properties Tabernaemontana coffeoides 
contains mainly monomeric indole alkaloids, 
although some bisindolic alkaloids occur in the 
leaves as well. The root bark contains most 
alkaloids (60 g/kg), followed by the stem bark 
(37 g/kg) and the leaves (22 g/kg). The alka-
loids of the root bark, stem bark and leaves 
consist for up to 50% of vobasine, tabernae-
montanine, dregamine, methuenine and 
silicine (all corynanthean class); small amounts 
of apparicine (pericalline, aspidospermatan 
class) are present. Additionally, the alkaloids 
of the stem bark and root bark contain 12-16% 
of ibogamine (ibogan class). The leaves also 
contain many alkaloids of the plumeran class 
including the pharmacologically active taber-
sonine. They also contain akuammidine and 
normacusine B (both corynanthean class), hey-
neanine (ibogan class) and vincanidine 
(strychnan class). In addition they contain the 
dimeric hazuntiphylline (plumeran-plumeran 
class) and stemmadenine (conynanthean-
plumeran class). 
588 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Dregamine shows convulsant and respiration-
stimulant activities. It also inhibits muscular 
fatigue in the same way as ibogaine from Ta-
bernanthe iboga Baill. It has been used in 
treatments of muscular and nervous asthenia, 
respiratory depression and type III poliovirus 
(HPV-3). Tabernaemontanine has a vasodila-
tory effect and can be used in humans in cases 
of arteriosclerosis, cerebral trauma and circu-
lar irregularities. It shows antibacterial activ-
ity against several human pathogenic bacterial 
strains, and is cytotoxic to human nasopharyn-
geal epidermoid carcinoma cells in vitro, but is 
inactive against P-388 lymphocytic leukaemia 
in mice. Methuenine might be effective in the 
control of cardiac arrhythmias since it mainly 
decreases the excitability of depolarized arte-
rial fibres in frogs. It also showed a noncom-
petitive antagonistic activity against histamine 
and acetylcholine in guinea-pig ileum. Reser-
piline produces hypotension in dogs and cats, 
but it exerts a tranquilizing action as well. It is 
about as potent as reserpine, which is com-
monly used against high blood pressure and it 
lacks the side effects of reserpine. Normacusine 
B is sympatholytic and its hypotensive activity 
is greater than that of reserpine. Akuammidine 
has hypotensive, skeletal-muscle-relaxant and 
local-anaesthetic activities. Its local anaes-
thetic activity is about 3 times as potent as 
cocaine. At low doses, vincanidine stimulates 
spontaneous mobility in mice, but at high doses 
it causes muscular paralysis. It has an emetic 
effect in dogs. It has significant antibacterial 
activity against Staphylococcus spp., Micrococ-
cus spp. and Escherichia coli. Stemmadenine 
increases or decreases blood pressure in vitro 
and in vivo, depending on the conditions of the 
experiment. Tabersonine has about a quarter 
of the hypotensive activity of reserpine, and a 
spasmolytic effect on the smooth muscle of the 
intestine. Apparicine also showed strong activ-
ity against type III poliovirus, as well as sig-
nificant cytotoxicity against P-388 lymphocytic 
leukaemia cell cultures. Apparicine showed 
opioid activity in opiate receptor studies. Vo-
basine exhibited little activity in general 
pharmacological screening tests. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 7(—10) m 
tall, repeatedly dichotomously branched, gla-
brous; trunk up to 10(-20) cm in diameter; 
bark pale brown. Leaves opposite, simple and 
entire; ocrea widened into stipules in axils of 
petioles; petiole 5-25 mm long, slender; blade 
narrowly elliptical to ovate, 2-15 cm x l-5(-7) 
cm, base cuneate, decurrent into the petiole, 
apex acuminate, pinnately veined with 5-15 
pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence a lax 
corymb, 2—11 cm long, usually 2 together in the 
forks of branches, few- to many-flowered; pe-
duncle 1—4.5 cm long, slender. Flowers bisex-
ual, regular, 5-merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 
3-14 mm long; sepals almost free, ovate to sub-
orbicular, 1-3 mm long, rather thick; corolla 
tube cylindrical, 5-15 mm long, pale green, 
slightly widened around the anthers, inside 
hairy or glabrous, lobes obliquely oblong or 
narrowly obovate, 5-13 mm x 1.5-6 mm, undu-
late, spreading, apex rounded, white; stamens 
inserted about halfway the corolla tube, in-
cluded, anthers sessile; ovary superior, ovoid, 
consisting of 2 separate carpels, style slender, 
2-5 mm long, pistil head 1-3 mm long, com-
posed of an obscurely lobed ring, a narrow cyl-
inder and a 2-lobed stigmoid apex. Fruit con-
sisting of 2 separate obliquely ellipsoid follicles, 
1-3 cm long, apex obtuse, acute or acuminate, 
green, 2-valved, 1-10-seeded. Seeds obliquely 
ellipsoid, 5.5-10 mm long, with longitudinal 
grooves, densely covered with small warts, 
brown or dark brown, aril red. 
Tabernaemontana comprises about 110 species 
and is pantropical. About 18 species occur in 
mainland Africa and 15 in Madagascar, of 
which Tabernaemontana coffeoides is most 
widespread. Tabernaemontana coffeoides flow-
ers in Madagascar and the Comoros mainly in 
October-December; in Madagascar, fruiting is 
mainly from December-March. In the Sey-
chelles, flowering and fruiting probably occurs 
throughout the year. 
Tabernaemontana ciliata Pichon occurs in 
northern and north-eastern Madagascar. The 
latex is poisonous and used as a strong purga-
tive. The bark contains the bisindolic 
pandicine. Tabernaemontana retusa (Lam.) 
Palacky is a lowland forest tree of eastern 
Madagascar. The leaves are applied as an 
emollient and against lung conditions. The 
latex is used to prepare bird-lime. The seeds 
contain the pharmacologically active voaphyl-
line, pachysiphine and tabersonine and the 
leaves contain 3-oxovoacangine and voacris-
tine. Heyneanine occurs in the leaves, stem 
bark and root bark, while the root bark also 
contains ibogamine. Voacangine occurs in the 
seeds, leaves and stem bark, while coro-
naridine occurs in the seeds, stem bark and 
root bark. 
Ecology Tabernaemontana coffeoides occurs 
on dunes or rocks, often on limestone, in dry 
forest, bush or savanna, up to 1300 m altitude. 
TABERNAEMONTANA 589 
Genetic resources and breeding Taber-
naemontana coffeoides is not threatened by 
genetic erosion in Madagascar, but it is threat-
ened in the Comoros and to a lesser extent in 
the Seychelles, because of habitat loss. 
Prospects Tabernaemontana coffeoides is 
very rich in pharmacologically interesting in-
dole alkaloids. This warrants more investiga-
tions towards the possible development of Ta-
bernaemontana coffeoides as an important me-
dicinal plant. 
Major references Boiteau, Boiteau & Al-
lorge-Boiteau, 1999; Leeuwenberg, 1991; Neu-
winger, 2000; van Beek et al., 1984b; Zhu et al., 
1990. 
Other references Bui et al., 1979; Bui, Das 
& Potier, 1980; Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004; 
Pascal, 2002; van Beek & van Gessel, 1988. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
TABERNAEMONTANA CRASSA Benth. 
Protologue Hook., Niger FL: 447 (1849). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Conopharyngia crassa (Benth.) 
Stapf (1902), Conopharyngia durissima (Stapf) 
Stapf (1902). 
Vernacular names Adam's apple flower 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
naemontana crassa occurs in humid tropical 
Africa, from Sierra Leone east to the Central 
African Republic and eastern DR Congo, and 
southwards to northern Angola. 
Uses In West Africa pulped leaves and latex 
from the stem and bark of Tabernaemontana 
Tabernaemontana crassa - wild 
crassa have several uses, the main ones being 
as a local anaesthetic, e.g. to treat dislocated 
bones or headache, for the treatment of 
wounds, sores, abscesses and furuncles, and to 
treat dermal infections such as filaria, ring-
worm and fungal infections. The latex is also 
applied as a haemostatic, as it forms a film 
over the wound. It is taken internally as an 
anthelmintic. In Côte d'Ivoire 1-2 drops are 
instilled in the nose to soothe headache, acting 
as a counter-irritant on the nasal mucosae. The 
latex is also used as a sedative to calm fits of 
insanity. A decoction of the leaves is taken as a 
tonic, appetizer and aphrodisiac, while a bark 
decoction is given as enema to treat kidney 
troubles, rheumatism and persistent constipa-
tion. A leaf decoction is also used as a massage 
against rickets in children and to combat fa-
tigue in adults. In Cameroon and the Central 
African Republic a leaf decoction is taken 
against fever. In the Central African Republic 
a drop of latex of the twigs or roots is put in the 
eye to treat conjunctivitis or ophthalmia, in 
spite of its strongly caustic properties. A root or 
stem bark decoction is used for nose drops to 
treat colds or sinusitis, or a vapour bath is 
taken with a leaf decoction. Like many lactifer-
ous plants, the latex is considered to be galac-
tagogue in Congo and DR Congo. In Côte 
d'Ivoire and the Central African Republic the 
latex is an ingredient of an arrow poison. A 
bark decoction is taken in Congo to treat 
haematuria and gonorrhoea. In DR Congo a 
decoction or maceration of the fruit is used as 
an enema to treat testicular swellings. A decoc-
tion of the stem bark is taken to treat diar-
rhoea. 
Large leaves are woven into thatched roofs of 
houses in Gabon in the belief that their bitter 
taste keeps away cockroaches. The wood is 
suitable for general carpentry, plywood and 
boxboards. It is occasionally used in Liberia to 
make rice mortars. The bark latex produces an 
inferior rubber that remains sticky and which 
has been used occasionally. The plant is con-
sidered ornamental, because its flowers are 
showy and sweet scented. The leaves are eaten 
by the cultivated edible tiger snail Achatina 
achatina. 
Production and international trade Pow-
dered bark is traded internationally in herbal 
medicine shops. 
Properties A considerable number of indole 
alkaloids has been identified in the stem bark, 
root bark and seeds of Tabernaemontana 
crassa. Most alkaloids isolated are monomers, 
590 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mainly of the ibogan class, and a few of the 
corynanthean class, asp idospermatan class or 
p lumeran class. The dimeric alkaloids conodur-
ine and conoduramine of the corynanthean-
ibogan-class have been isolated from the root 
ba rk and s tem bark, while the s tem bark also 
contains gabunine. The main monomeric alka-
loids from the s tem bark and root bark are the 
ibogan class alkaloids coronaridine and its 
mono- and di-methoxy derivatives isovoacangine 
and conopharyngine, and the aspidosperma-
tan-class apparicine. The s tem bark contains 
further minor amoun t s of ibogan class alka-
loids, including crassinine, ibogamine and 
coronaridine and derivatives, as well as cory-
n a n t h e a n class alkaloids, including akuam-
midine, perivine, vobasine and derivatives. The 
seeds are also rich in alkaloids, the main being 
the ibogan class coronaridine and coronaridine-
hydroxyindolenine and the p lumeran class 
tabersonine. 
The p lan t is very toxic: a single injected dose of 
the crude ethanol extract of the s tem bark or 
root ba rk killed r a t s in 30 minutes . The extract 
caused dilation of the pupils, decreased motor 
activity and caused muscle relaxation. Several 
laboratory tes ts with guinea pigs or frogs 
showed tha t a hot wa te r extract of the aer ial 
pa r t s had stronger local anaes thet ic activity 
t h a n procaine, which was pr imari ly used in 
dent is t ry before more effective a l ternat ives 
were developed. The ethanolic s tem bark ex-
t ract showed significant activity agains t gram-
positive bacteria, while leaf extract showed 
significant activity agains t amoeba. 
The alkaloids p resen t in major amounts have a 
var ie ty of pharmacological effects. 
Coronaridine and conopharyngine exhibit cen-
t ra l nervous system s t imulan t effects. In regu-
lar doses, conopharyngine h a s hypotensive 
propert ies, causes bradycardia and decreases 
body t empera tu re . High doses of ibogaine, 
ibogamine and voacangine produce convulsions 
and asphyxia. Coronaridine showed diuresis 
and significant hypoglycaemic activity in r a t s . 
In mice it is an effective antiferti l i ty agent be-
cause of its oestrogenic activity. It also has 
leishmanicidal activity. Fur the rmore , ap-
paricine, conopharyngine, coronaridine and 
perivine have local analgaesic activity. The 
monomers apparacine , coronaridine and the 
dimers conodurine and gabunine showed sig-
nificant cytotoxicity against P-388 lymphocytic 
leukaemia cell cul tures. Conoduramine, 
conodurine and apparicine also showed moder-
a te to s t rong ant ibacter ia l activity agains t sev-
eral h u m a n pathogens, while apparicine also 
showed strong activity agains t type III poliovi-
rus (HPV-3). 
The latex is extremely caustic: one drop in the 
eye may cause bl indness. 
The wood is yellowish white, moderately h a rd 
and easy to work, and it finishes smoothly. It is 
not res i s tan t to fungal decay. 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s Indolic 
alkaloids of the classes found in Tabernaemon-
tana a re also found in other Apocynaceae gen-
era, e.g. Alstonia, Cabucala, Catharanthus, 
Hunteria, Ochrosia, Picralima, Rauvolfia, Ta-
bernanthe and Voacanga. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Shrub or small t ree up to 15 m 
tall, glabrous, dichotomously branched; t runk 
up to 30 cm in diameter , large t rees sometimes 
with but t resses ; ba rk pale to dark grey-brown 
or brown, wi th large lenticels. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; ocrea conspicuous, widened 
into st ipules in axils of petioles; petiole 5-25 
mm long; blade broadly to narrowly elliptical, 
10-46 cm x 3—25 cm, base cuneate or rounded, 
apex acuminate to acute, obtuse or rounded, 
leathery, p innate ly veined with 7-17 pai rs of 
la te ra l veins. Inflorescence a corymb 10-30 cm 
long, 2 together in t he forks of the branches , 
r a the r lax to congested, many-flowered; pedun-
cle 3.5—11.5 cm long, r a t h e r robust; bracts 
scale-like to sepal-like, leaving a conspicuous 
scar. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, 
sweet-scented; pedicel 3-20 mm long; sepals 
almost free, orbicular to broadly ovate, 2 .5-8 
mm long, fleshy, ciliate; corolla tube almost 
cylindrical, 3.5—10 cm long, fleshy, pale green, 
twisted a t base, ha i ry inside from 0-10 mm 
below the mouth till the insert ion of t he sta-
mens , th roa t pale yellow, lobes obliquely ellip-
tical, 24 -55 mm x 6-20 mm, with rounded or 
obtuse apex, twisted, undu la te nea r apex, 
spreading and recurved later, whi te to pale 
yellow; s t amens inser ted 8-14 m m from the 
corolla base, included, an the r s sessile, nar-
rowly t r iangular , 9 -13 mm long; ovary supe-
rior, almost cylindrical to ovoid, consisting of 2 
carpels, connate a t t he base, styles fused, 2 -8 
mm long, pistil head almost cylindrical, 3—3.5 
mm long, widened a t the apex into 5 orbicular 
lobes, overtopped by 2 t r i angu la r peaks , wid-
ened a t the base into a ring. Frui t consisting of 
2 separa te obliquely globose follicles 5—12 cm 
in diameter , pale green or glaucous, 2-valved, 
several- to many-seeded. Seeds obliquely ellip-
soid, 8.5-14 mm long, wi th up to 8 longitudinal 
grooves, minutely warty, dark brown, aril 
white . Seedling with epigeal germinat ion. 
TABERNAEMONTANA 591 
Tabernaemontana crassa - 1, flowering branch; 
2, corolla; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
Other botanical information Tabernae-
montana comprises about 110 species and is 
pantropical. About 18 species occur in 
mainland Africa and 15 in Madagascar. It is 
closely related to Voacanga. Along the coast, 
the corolla tube of Tabernaemontana crassa is 
shorter, 35-45 mm long, whereas in other ar-
eas it is 60-100 mm long. Tabernaemontana 
crassa is closely allied to Tabernaemontana 
africana Hook., which can be distinguished by 
its stamens inserted at 25-45 mm from the 
corolla base, wider corolla tube and yellow to 
orange follicles. 
Tabernaemontana stenosiphon Stapf is an en-
demic tree of Sào Tomé. The latex induces vom-
iting and is also used as a purgative. The root 
decoction is a tonic and febrifuge. The tree has 
been planted in Nigeria for the production of 
rubber. 
The liana Tabernaemontana eglandulosa Stapf 
occurs in West and Central Africa. In the Cen-
tral African Republic the leaves or twig bark 
are chewed and the juice swallowed to combat 
migraine. In DR Congo the roots are used to 
treat snakebites. The sap mixed with water 
used as eye drops to cure headache. The 
pounded root is a component of arrow poison. 
The latex was formerly used as an adulterant 
for Hevea rubber. All plant parts contain 
voacangine and coronaridine. The stem bark 
contains conopharyngine and 6-hydroxy-3-
oxocoronaridine. The leaves and twigs contain 
as major components tacamine, tacamonine, 
19-hydroxytacamine and 16-epitacamine (ta-
caman class), and also voaphylline, tubotai-
wine, ibogamine and norfluorocurarine. 
Growth and development Tabernaemon-
tana crassa plants develop according to the 
architectural growth model of Leeuwenberg 
determined by a monopodial orthotropic trunk, 
which ends in a terminal inflorescence. After 
flowering the 2 uppermost axillary buds de-
velop into branches, so that the growth is sym-
podial; the infructescence seems to be axillary. 
Tabernaemontana crassa can be found flower-
ing and fruiting throughout the year. Fruits 
are mature after 1 year. 
Ecology Tabernaemontana crassa occurs 
widely in the understorey of open forest, forest 
clearings or bush, also along the coast, less 
often in gallery forest, from sea-level up to 
2000 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Tabernaemon-
tana crassa can be propagated by seed and 
probably also by semi-ripe cuttings. 
Harvesting The bark of Tabernaemontana 
crassa is stripped from the trunk. Leaves are 
harvested whenever the need arises. 
Genetic resources Tabernaemontana crassa 
has a fairly large area of distribution and is 
therefore not likely to be threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Tabernaemontana crassa con-
tains a large number of indole alkaloids with 
interesting pharmacological activities. The 
alkaloid content is similar to that of Taber-
naemontana pachysiphon, another medicinally 
important species. Although several individual 
alkaloids have been tested for their pharmacol-
ogical activity, more analyses are needed to 
evaluate their importance. 
Major references Leeuwenberg, 1991; Neu-
winger, 1996; van Beek, Verpoorte & Baerheim 
Svendsen, 1984; van Beek, de Smidt & Ver-
poorte, 1985; van Beek et al., 1984b; Zhu et a l , 
1990. 
Other references Agwu & Akah, 1990; 
Betti, 2004; Burkill, 1985; Cooper & Record, 
1931; Din Belle, Tolvanen & Lounasmaa, 1996; 
Neu winger, 2000; Srivastava, Singh & Kul-
shreshtha, 2001; van Beek, 1984; van Beek & 
592 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
van Gessel, 1988. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1991. 
Authors F.S. Mairura & G.H. Schmelzer 
TABERNAEMONTANA ELEGANS Stapf 
Protologue Bull. Mise. Inform. Kew 1894: 
24 (1894). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Conopharyngia elegans (Stapf) 
Stapf (1902). 
Vernacular names Toad tree, low-veld toad 
tree (En). Mkuti, mbombo (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
naemontana elegans occurs in East Africa and 
southeastern Africa, from Somalia south to 
South Africa and Swaziland. 
Uses The seeds, stem bark and roots of Ta-
bernaemontana elegans are used by the 
Wabondei and Wadigo people of Tanzania for 
treating heart diseases. The powdered root 
bark or fruits are used to treat cancer. In 
southern Africa the coagulated latex or pulver-
ized root mixed with vaseline is applied as a 
styptic. A root decoction is applied as a wash 
for wounds and is taken as a remedy for pul-
monary diseases and chest pains. A maceration 
of root ash is drunk to treat tuberculosis and 
stomach-ache. A root maceration acts as a pur-
gative. Burnt root powder mixed with salt and 
water is used as a vaginal wash to treat me-
norrhagia, infertility and venereal diseases. In 
Zimbabwe a root decoction is taken as an aph-
rodisiac. 
The wood is white and easy to work. It is used 
for firewood, and for making spoons, knife and 
sword handles, bows and arrows, building 
poles and pegs for animal traps. The latex is 
tapped for making birdlime or used as a glue 
for arrow heads. In Zimbabwe and Mozam-
bique, the orange, slimy fruit pulp is relished 
by some people. Zulu people put the fruit into 
milk they wish to curdle fast. Tabernaemon-
tana elegans is an unusual, but attractive gar-
den tree with its sweet-smelling flowers and 
unusual fruits covered in brown warts, giving 
it the look of a toad's skin. 
Properties The phytochemically important 
compounds of Tabernaemontana elegans root 
bark are the monomeric indole alkaloids dre-
gamine and tabernaemontanine (corynanthean 
class), and the bisindole alkaloids conodura-
mine and tabernaelegantines (corynanthean-
ibogan class). The tabernaelegantines are rare 
in other Tabernaemontana species, and are 
thus reliable chemotaxonomic markers for 
Tabernaemontana elegans. The main compo-
nents of the aerial parts are dregamine, taber-
naemontanine and vobasine (corynanthean 
class), followed by apparicine (pericalline, as-
pidospermatan class), and tabernaelegantine A 
and B. Minor components are dregaminol, tab-
ernaemontanine (corynanthean class), taber-
naemontaninol (vobasan), 3-hydroxyconodurine 
and tabernaelegantine C and D. The alkaloid 
content of callus cultures is similar to that of 
the whole plant, but the tabernaelegantines 
are absent. The main alkaloid in callus cul-
tures is apparicine, followed by vobasine and 
tabernaemontanine. Minor components include 
3-hydroxycoronaridine (ibogan class) and 3-
hydroxyconodurine. 3-Hydroxyconodurine, 3-
hydroxycoronaridine, conoduramine and ap-
paricine show strong inhibitory activity against 
a range of gram-positive and gram-negative 
bacteria. Dregamine shows convulsant and 
respiration-stimulant activities. It also inhibits 
muscular fatigue in vitro and in vivo compara-
ble to ibogaine from Tabernanthe iboga Baill. It 
has been used in treatments of muscular and 
nervous asthenia, respiratory depression and 
type III poliovirus (HPV-3). Apparicine has 
also shown strong activity against type III po-
liovirus, as well as significant cytotoxicity 
against P-388 lymphocytic leukaemia cell cul-
tures. Apparicine has shown opioid activity in 
opiate receptor studies. Tabernaemontanine 
has a vasodilatory effect and can be used in 
humans in cases of arteriosclerosis, cerebral 
trauma and circular irregularities. It shows 
antibacterial activity against several human 
pathogenic bacterial strains, and is cytotoxic to 
human nasopharyngeal epidermoid carcinoma 
cells in vitro, but is inactive against P-388 
lymphocytic leukaemia in mice. Vobasine ex-
hibited little activity in general pharmacologi-
cal screening tests. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 15 m tall, 
repeatedly dichotomously branched, trunk up 
to 30 cm in diameter, bark longitudinally fis-
sured, corky. Leaves opposite, simple and en-
tire; ocrea widened into stipules in axils of 
petioles; petiole 7-30 mm long; blade elliptical 
or narrowly elliptical, 6-23 cm x 2—8 cm, base 
cuneate or decurrent into the petiole, apex 
acuminate, acute or obtuse. Inflorescence a 
corymb 5-20 cm long, 2 together in the forks of 
the branches, many-flowered; peduncle 1-8.5 
cm long, lax. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 2-6 mm long; 
TABERNAEMONTANA 593 
sepals orbicular to broadly ovate, 1-2.5 mm 
long; corolla tube almost cylindrical, 5-7 mm 
long, lobes obliquely elliptical, slightly falcate, 
8-15 mm long, entire, spreading, white, 
creamy or pale yellow; stamens inserted 2-2.5 
mm above the corolla base, included, anthers 
sessile, narrowly triangular; ovary superior, 
almost globose, consisting of 2 free carpels, 
styles fused, slender, straight, pistil head com-
posed of 2 rings, the upper one grading into the 
slender stigmoid apex. Fruit composed of 2 
separate, obliquely ovoid or ellipsoid follicles 5— 
8 cm long, glaucous or green, with conspicuous 
brown warts, with 3 ridges, dehiscent, many-
seeded. Seeds obliquely ellipsoid, 14-15 mm 
long, with reticulate grooves, papillose, dark 
brown, aril orange. Seedling with epigeal ger-
mination; cotyledons almost orbicular, c. 6 mm 
long, base cordate, apex obtuse. 
Tabernaemontana comprises about 110 species 
and is pantropical. About 18 species occur in 
mainland Africa and 15 in Madagascar. 
Tabernaemontana elegans flowers in Kenya 
from October to May, in Mozambique from 
April to September, and fruits there from July 
to October. In South Africa it flowers from Sep-
tember to March with a peak in November, and 
fruits from February to August. 
Ecology Tabernaemontana elegans occurs in 
bushland, forest on coastal dunes, gallery for-
est or woodland, usually associated with 
Brachystegia spp., up to 1000 m altitude. It is 
semi-frost resistant and can grow in full sun to 
half-shade. It requires a moderate amount of 
water. Because of its corky bark, it is fairly fire 
resistant. 
Genetic resources and breeding Taber-
naemontana elegans is relatively widespread in 
eastern Africa and does not seem to be at risk 
of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Tabernaemontana elegans con-
tains many pharmacologically interesting in-
dole alkaloids and deserves more attention 
from research. 
Major references Leeuwenberg, 1991; Neu-
winger, 2000; van Beek & van Gessel, 1988; 
van Beek et al., 1984b; van der Heijden, 1989. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Coates 
Palgrave, 1983; Graham et al., 2000; Le Roux, 
2005; Lovett, Ruffo & Gereau, 2003; Steen-
kamp, 2003; Zhu et al., 1990. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
TABERNAEMONTANA PACHYSIPHON Stapf 
Protologue Bull. Mise. Inform. Kew 1894: 
22 (1894). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Tabernaemontana angolensis Stapf 
(1894), Tabernaemontana holstii KSchum. (1895). 
Vernacular names Kibombo, muambe (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
naemontana pachysiphon is widely distributed 
in tropical Africa, from Ghana east to southern 
Sudan and Kenya, and south to Malawi, Zam-
bia and Angola. 
Uses The latex of Tabernaemontana pachysi-
phon is generally used as a styptic and is ap-
plied to fresh wounds to prevent infection; it 
forms a film over the wound. The dried and 
powdered leaves are applied to sores and ulcers 
to heal them. Painful breasts of lactating 
women are treated with the latex from the 
petioles or bark. The latex of the fruit is rubbed 
into scarifications to treat lymphatic glandular 
swellings. In East Africa the latex is applied to 
sore eyes. 
A decoction of the root bark is taken in Nigeria 
for the treatment of insanity. In East Africa a 
decoction is used against stomach-ache, consti-
pation, flatulence, headache and as a hypnotic. 
Headache is also treated with a leaf infusion. 
The bark is used as medicine for hypertension. 
In DR Congo a maceration prepared from the 
stem bark is used to wash the body against 
scabies, in Kenya grated roots and crushed 
leaves are also used to treat scabies. The mac-
eration is drunk against headache. The bark 
latex is rubbed locally to relieve cramps. In 
Tanzania a watery fruit extract is used as a 
Tabernaemontana pachysiphon - wild 
594 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
galactagogue for goats. In northeastern Tanza-
nia, the Shambaa people formerly prepared a 
hunting poison from the roots. 
The wood is used to make knife sheaths, han-
dles and combs. Pollarded branches are used 
locally for firewood and to make charcoal. Ta-
bernaemontana pachysiphon has an abundance 
of white latex, which does not coagulate and 
has been used to adulterate Hevea rubber. The 
latex thickens to a birdlime and is also used to 
mend broken pots and calabashes. The bark 
contains fibre, which is used in southern Nige-
ria to make cloth. In Benin small ropes are 
made from the inner bark. The tree is used as a 
shade plant and has ornamental value because 
of its dark green shiny leaves and sweet-
scented white flowers. The pulp of the pounded 
leaves is used to colour hair brown. 
Production and international trade Taber-
naemontana pachysiphon is used at a local 
level only. 
Properties Indole alkaloids are the most 
important compounds of Tabernaemontana 
spp. More than 40 alkaloids have been identi-
fied from Tabernaemontana pachysiphon. The 
main alkaloids present are monomers, al-
though dimeric alkaloids of the corynanthean-
ibogan class are present as well. The main 
dimeric alkaloids of the stem bark and root 
bark are voacorine, conoduramine, conodurine, 
and traces of gabunine. The most important 
monomers found in the root bark are tubotai-
wine and apparicine (aspidospermatan class); 
conopharyngine (ibogan class) is also a major 
component, while ibogaine, ibogamine, voacris-
tine, isovoacangine, coronaridine and 3-
oxocoronaridine (all ibogan class), vobasine, 
perivine and affinine (all corynanthean class) 
occur in small amounts only. Of the stem bark, 
the main constituent is conopharyngine, with 
ibogan class derivatives occurring in small 
amounts. Tubotaiwine is a major constituent 
as well, while apparicine occurs as a minor 
component. Corynanthean class alkaloids occur 
only as minor components. The leaves contain 
apparicine and tubotaiwine, as well as cono-
pharyngine. The fruits contain the dimers 
voacamine (voacanginine) and voacorine, and 
several ibogan class monomers in small 
amounts. The alkaloid composition of the seeds 
is very different, and consists almost exclu-
sively of the plumeran class pachysiphine. 
The various alkaloids in Tabernaemontana 
pachysiphon have a wide range of pharmacol-
ogical activities. Coronaridine, conopharyngine, 
ibogaine, ibogamine, voacangine and voacris-
tine exhibit central nervous system stimulant 
effects. In regular doses, voacangine, ibogaine, 
perivine and conopharyngine have hypotensive 
properties, cause bradycardia and decrease 
body temperature. High doses of ibogaine, 
ibogamine and voacangine produce convulsions 
and asphyxia. Coronaridine showed diuretic 
and hypoglycaemic activities in rats. In mice 
coronaridine is an effective antifertility agent 
because of its oestrogenic activity. It also has 
leishmanicidal activity as has the related 
dimer gabunine. Voacristine prevented preg-
nancy when administered during the pre-
implantation period in rats. It was, however, 
found to possess also significant uterotrophic 
activity. Furthermore, voacangine, cono-
pharyngine, ibogaine, coronaridine, perivine, 
tubotaiwine and apparicine have local analge-
sic activity. Most of the pharmacological work 
on voacorine and voacamine has focused on 
their cardiotonic properties. Voacamine shows 
little tendency to accumulate, and is less toxic 
than cardiac glycosides such as digitoxin. In 
high doses both voacamine and voacorine are 
hypertensive due largely to peripheral vaso-
constriction. Both compounds also have para-
sympatholytic and sympatholytic properties, 
bringing about contraction of smooth muscle 
fibres. Voacorine, voacamine and affinine are 
also central nervous system depressants. At 
higher doses, affinine causes tremor, loss of 
coordination and hypothermia in mice. A cu-
mulative increase of the dose in cats showed 
some toxicity, e.g. bradycardia, respiratory 
depression and cardiac arrhythmia. In experi-
ments with rats and mice parenteral and oral 
administration of voacamine and voacorine 
retarded the growth of transplanted and pri-
mary induced neoplasms. 
At low doses, ibogaine exerts primarily a 
stimulant effect, increasing alertness and re-
ducing fatigue, hunger and thirst. At higher 
doses, the primary effects are hallucinations 
(see Tabernanthe iboga Baill.). Apart from the 
psychological effects, the physical effects in-
clude tremor, light sensitivity, nausea, vomit-
ing, and loss of coordination. Toxic doses pro-
duce convulsions, paralysis and death from 
respiratory arrest although the heart continues 
to beat. Ibogaine is also a potent Cholinesterase 
inhibitor. 
The monomers affinine, apparacine, coro-
naridine and the dimers voacamine, voacorine 
and gabunine showed significant cytotoxicity 
against P-388 lymphocytic leukaemia cell cul-
tures. Conoduramine, conodurine, voacamine, 
TABERNAEMONTANA 595 
affinine and apparicine showed moderate to 
strong antibacterial activity against several 
human pathogens, whereas affinine and ap-
paricine also showed strong activity against 
the type III poliovirus (HPV-3). 
The wood is soft, easy to work and white to 
yellow; it is not durable in the ground. The 
sapwood and heartwood are not differentiated. 
Adulterations and substitutes Indolic 
alkaloids of the classes found in Tabernaemon-
tana are also found in other Apocynaceae gen-
era, e.g. Alstonia, Cabucala, Catharanthus, 
Hunteria, Ochrosia, Picralima, Rauvolfia, Ta-
bernanthe and Voacanga. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 15 m 
tall, glabrous, dichotomously branched; trunk 
up to 40 cm in diameter, without buttresses; 
bark pale brown or grey-brown, longitudinally 
fissured, with large lenticels. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; ocrea conspicuous, widened 
into stipules in axils of petioles; petiole 6—20 
mm long; blade broadly to narrowly elliptical, 
10-50 cm x 5-26 cm, base cuneate, apex acu-
minate to acute, leathery, with scattered min-
ute black dots beneath, pinnately veined with 
7-16 pairs of lateral veins. Inflorescence a 
corymb 8—26 cm long, fairly lax, 2 together in 
the forks of branches, few- to many-flowered, 
Tabernaemontana pachysiphon - 1, flowering 
branch; 2, fruit; 3, seed, aril partly removed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
often flowering twice and then bearing both 
flowers and ripe fruits; peduncle 3-14 cm long, 
rather robust; bracts small and scale-like, leav-
ing a conspicuous scar. Flowers bisexual, regu-
lar, 5-merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 8-22 mm 
long; sepals almost free, orbicular to ovate, 4-7 
mm long, fleshy, ciliate; corolla tube 18-35 mm 
long, 5-angular, fleshy, pale green, hairy inside 
from the insertion of the stamens to the mouth, 
sometimes slightly twisted at the base, lobes 
obliquely elliptical, 14-50 mm x 6-18(-27) mm, 
rounded, undulate, spreading, later recurved, 
white to pale yellow, throat pale yellow; sta-
mens inserted 8-14 mm above the corolla base, 
included, anthers sessile, narrowly triangular, 
9—13 mm long; ovary superior, almost cylindri-
cal, consisting of 2 carpels, connate at base, 
styles fused, slender, 7-10 mm long, pistil head 
3-4.5 mm long, widened at the base into a ring 
and at the apex into 5 orbicular lobes. Fruit 
consisting of 2 free almost globose follicles, 7-
15 cm in diameter, pale green, often dotted, 2-
valved, several- to many-seeded. Seeds 
obliquely ellipsoid, 11-14 mm long, with 6-7 
longitudinal grooves on each side, minutely 
warty, dark brown, aril white. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Tabernae-
montana comprises about 110 species and is 
pantropical. About 18 species occur in 
mainland Africa and 15 in Madagascar. Taber-
naemontana pachysiphon is closely related to 
Tabernaemontana contorta Stapf, which is en-
demic to Cameroon. 
Tabernaemontana brachyantha Stapf occurs in 
western Central Africa. In Cameroon, the 
crushed twigs, mixed with Ocimum sp., are 
taken as a febrifuge, and in southern Ghana 
and Nigeria the bark fibre is made into cloth. 
Several alkaloids have been isolated from it 
that are similar to those in Tabernaemontana 
pachysiphon. Tabernaemontana psorocarpa 
(Pierre ex Stapf) Pichon occurs from Liberia to 
Gabon, and the latex is used in Ghana to treat 
skin infections. The stem bark contains mono-
meric indole alkaloids, most of them rare in the 
genus. The leaves contain a high concentration 
of sweroside, which has strong anti-amoebic 
activity. 
Growth and development Tabernaemon-
tana pachysiphon plants develop according to 
the architectural growth model of Leeuwenberg 
determined by a monopodial orthotropic trunk, 
which ends in a terminal inflorescence. After 
flowering the 2 uppermost axillary buds de-
velop into branches, so that the growth is sym-
596 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
podial; the infructescence seems to be axillary. 
Tabernaemontana pachysiphon can be found 
flowering and fruiting throughout the year. 
There are peaks in flowering in West Africa in 
February-March, in Central Africa in October-
November and in DR Congo also in April. 
Fruits mature in 1 year. 
The contents of the major alkaloids apparicine, 
tubotaiwine and isovoacangine vary with 
provenance, leaf age, shade position of leaves 
in the crown and plant age. Alkaloid content is 
highest in young leaves, and in leaves from 
shaded conditions. 
Ecology Tabernaemontana pachysiphon 
occurs in the understorey of light forest, bush 
or riverine forest, from sea-level up to 2200 m 
altitude. 
Propagation and planting Tabernaemon-
tana pachysiphon can be propagated by seed 
and by semi-ripe cuttings. Soaking the seeds in 
cold water for 24 hours before sowing will has-
ten germination. The seeds germinate best 
when sown as soon as collected. 
Management For firewood production Ta-
bernaemontana pachysiphon can be pollarded. 
Harvesting Roots of Tabernaemontana 
pachysiphon are dug up, bark is stripped from 
the trunk and leaves are harvested whenever 
the need arises. 
Genetic resources Tabernaemontana pa-
chysiphon has a large area of distribution. It 
does not seem to be at risk of genetic erosion. 
Prospects Tabernaemontana pachysiphon 
contains a wide range of indole alkaloids with 
interesting medical properties, e.g. hypoten-
sive, central nervous system stimulating, local 
analgesic or cardiotonic activities. These war-
rant more investigations towards the possible 
development of Tabernaemontana pachysiphon 
as a medicinal plant of importance. 
Major references Ingkaninan et al., 1999; 
Katende, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1991; Neuwinger, 2000; Omino, 2002; van 
Beek et al., 1984b; van Beek & van Gessel, 
1988; Zhu et al., 1990. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Burkill, 
1985; Chifundera, 2001; Höft, Verpoorte & 
Beek, 1998a; Höft, Verpoorte & Beek, 1998b; 
Lovett, 1991a; Lovett, 1991b; Neuwinger, 1996; 
Omino & Kokwaro, 1993; Patel, Thompson & 
Poisson, 1973; van Beek, 1984; van Beek et al., 
1984a; Van der Heijden et al., 1986; van der 
Heijden, 1989. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 1991. 
Authors J. Elia 
TABERNAEMONTANA PERSICARIIFOLIA Jacq. 
Protologue Collectanea 4: 139 (1791), 'Ta-
bernaemontana persicariaefolia'. 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Tabernaemontana mauritiana 
Lam. (1792). 
Vernacular names Bois de lait (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
naemontana persicariifolia is endemic to Réun-
ion and Mauritius. 
Uses A decoction of the stem bark and leaves 
of Tabernaemontana persicariifolia has astrin-
gent properties and is taken to treat gonor-
rhoea and dysentery. It is also taken to expel 
intestinal worms. The bark sap and roots are 
used as fish poison. 
Properties Several indole alkaloids have 
been isolated from Tabernaemontana persicari-
ifolia. The stem bark and root bark contain 
mainly the monomeric indole alkaloids dre-
gamine and vobasine, and also some tubotai-
wine, which occurs in the leaves as well. Dre-
gamine shows convulsant and respiration-
stimulant activities. It also inhibits muscular 
fatigue in vitro and in vivo. It is used in treat-
ments of muscular and nervous asthenia, res-
piratory depression and type III poliovirus 
(HPV-3). Tubotaiwine has local analgesic activ-
ity. Vobasine exhibited little activity in general 
pharmacological screening tests. The bark also 
contains sterols, triterpenes and saponins. 
Botany Shrub or small tree up to 5(-10) m 
tall, dichotomously branched; trunk up to 40 
cm in diameter; bark rough. Leaves opposite, 
simple and entire; ocrea conspicuous, widened 
into stipules in axils of petioles; petiole 5-22 
mm long; blade narrowly elliptical to elliptical, 
4-18 cm x 1-9 cm, base cuneate or rounded, 
apex acute, obtuse or acuminate, leathery, pin-
nately veined with 7-20 pairs of lateral veins. 
Inflorescence a corymb 3-6 cm long, 2 together 
in the forks of the branches, 3-20-flowered, 
rather congested; peduncle 5—25 cm long, 
rather slender. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 3-10 mm long; 
sepals almost free, subtended by 1-2 bracte-
oles, suborbicular to broadly elliptical, 2-3.5 
mm long; corolla tube cylindrical, 9-23 mm 
long, hairy inside from the insertion of the 
stamens to the mouth, slightly twisted at base, 
lobes obliquely elliptical, 9—16 mm x 3-7 mm, 
apex rounded, undulate, spreading, later re-
curved, white to pale yellow; stamens inserted 
2-3 mm below mouth of corolla tube, slightly 
included or slightly exserted, anthers sessile, 
TABERNAEMONTANA 597 
narrowly t r iangular , base sagi t ta te , apex acu-
minate ; ovary superior, ovoid, consisting of 2 
carpels, connate at base, styles fused, slender, 
6—15 m m long, pistil head 0.5—1.5 mm long, 
composed of a fringed basa l ring, an obovoid 
central pa r t and a 2-lobed stigmoid apex. Frui t 
consisting of 2 separa te ovoid follicles 3-6.5 cm 
in diameter , with 2 narrow lateral ridges, apex 
acute or acuminate , 2-valved, green, many-
seeded. Seeds obliquely t r i angu la r or ellipsoid, 
10-11 m m long, with longitudinal grooves, 
papillose, medium brown, aril deep red. 
Tabernaemontana comprises about 110 species 
and is pantropical . About 18 species occur in 
main land Africa and 15 in Madagascar . Taber-
naemontana persicariifolia is the only species 
occurring in the Mascarene Is lands. It flowers 
from December to May with a peak in Febru-
ary to March. Frui ts develop slightly later . 
E c o l o g y Tabernaemontana persicariifolia 
occurs in forest and open, rocky localities, up to 
1200 m al t i tude. In Réunion it is found in rela-
tively dry forest a t low al t i tudes, in Maur i t ius 
in more humid forest a t medium to high alti-
tudes . 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Taber-
naemontana persicariifolia is endemic to Réun-
ion and Maur i t ius and m a y be easily liable to 
genetic erosion with ongoing forest clearings. 
In Réunion it occurs in heterogeneous, rela-
tively dry forest at low al t i tudes, bu t this type 
of forest survives only in few, shel tered locali-
ties. In Maur i t ius , it is still locally fairly com-
mon in humid forest a t medium to high alti-
tudes . 
P r o s p e c t s Lit t le is known about the indole 
alkaloids of Tabernaemontana persicariifolia. 
More research on the pharmacology and phyto-
chemistry is needed to fully evaluate the poten-
tial of th is species. 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 
2004; Kodja, Robène-Soustrade & Figier, 1997; 
Leeuwenberg, 1991; van Beek et al., 1984b. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Lavergne, 2001; Mark-
graf & Boiteau, 1973; Picot et a l , 1974; van 
Beek & van Gessel, 1988. 
A u t h o r s G.H. Schmelzer 
T A B E R N A E M O N T A N A V E N T R I C O S A Höchs t , ex 
A.DC. 
P r o t o l o g u e Prodr. 8: 366 (1844). 
F a m i l y Apocynaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r 2n = 22 
S y n o n y m s Tabernaemontana usambarensis 
K.Schum. ex Engl. (1894). 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Forest toad tree, small-
fruited toad tree (En). Mwambe ziwa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
naemontana ventricosa has a disjunct area of 
distr ibution, occurring in eas tern Nigeria and 
western Cameroon, and from eas te rn DR 
Congo to Kenya and south to Nata l in South 
Africa. 
U s e s The latex of Tabernaemontana ven-
tricosa is applied to wounds and sore eyes to 
promote healing. A ba rk decoction is t aken to 
reduce fever. In Na ta l the seeds, bark and roots 
are used as medicine for nervous problems and 
high blood pressure . The fruits are edible. The 
latex is used for making birdlime. The soft 
whit ish wood is used for mak ing stools, beds 
and knife shea ths and in construction. Taber-
naemontana ventricosa is also suitable for 
p lan t ing in swampy a reas where other species 
fail to survive and it would make an a t t rac t ive 
garden t ree with its sweet-smelling flowers and 
unusua l fruits. 
P r o p e r t i e s The major indole alkaloids ex-
tracted from the s tem bark of Tabernaemon-
tana ventricosa p lan t s cult ivated in a green-
house were 10-hydroxyheyneanine (ibogan 
class) and akuammic ine (s t rychnan class). Mi-
nor amounts of apparicine, tubotaiwine (aspi-
dospermatan class), norfluorocurarine, 
akuammic ine N-4-oxide (s t rychnan class), 16-
epi-isositsirikine (corynanthean class) and 10-
hydroxycoronaridine (ibogan class) were also 
detected. 
Akuammicine showed opioid activity in opiate 
receptor studies. Bark extracts of Tabernae-
montana ventricosa do not show antibacterial , 
antifungal and an t imalar ia l activities in vitro. 
A leaf extract showed significant anti-amoebic 
activity. 
B o t a n y Shrub or small t ree up to 15 m tall, 
glabrous, dichotomously branched; t runk tere te 
up to 30 cm in diameter; ba rk longitudinally 
fissured, often corky. Leaves opposite, simple; 
ocrea widened into st ipules in axils of petioles; 
petiole 3-15 mm long; blade narrowly elliptical, 
4 -27 cm x 1.5-10(-12) cm, base cuneate or 
rounded, apex acuminate , acute or obtuse, 
marg ins wavy, leathery, p innate ly veined with 
7-23 pairs of la te ra l veins. Inflorescence a 
corymb 5-23 cm long, 2 together in the forks of 
the branches , more or less congested, many-
flowered; peduncle 2 -15 cm long, r a t h e r robust . 
Flowers bisexual, regular , 5-merous, sweet-
scented; pedicel 3-10 mm long; sepals orbicular 
to broadly ovate, 3.5-6 mm long, ciliate; corolla 
598 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tube cylindrical to narrowly bottle-shaped, 10— 
27 mm long, inflated at the insertion of the 
stamens, slightly twisted at base, lobes 
obliquely elliptical, 14-32 mm long, undulate, 
spreading and recurved later, white with a pale 
yellow throat and greenish tube; stamens in-
serted 6-8 mm above the corolla base, included 
or slightly exserted, anthers sessile, narrowly 
triangular; ovary superior, broadly ovoid, con-
sisting of 2 free carpels, style slender, pistil 
head widened at the base into a thin ring, 
grading into 5 lateral lobes, overtopped by the 
stigmoid apex. Fruit composed of 2 separate, 
obliquely ellipsoid follicles 6—7(—10) cm in di-
ameter, dark green, with 2 faint lateral ridges, 
smooth, dehiscent, several- to many-seeded. 
Seeds obliquely ellipsoid, 11-23 mm long, with 
longitudinal grooves, minutely warty, dark 
brown, aril orange. Seedling with epigeal ger-
mination. 
Tabernaemontana comprises about 110 species 
and is pantropical. About 18 species occur in 
mainland Africa and 15 in Madagascar. In Ni-
geria and Cameroon Tabernaemontana ven-
tricosa flowers from January to April, in DR 
Congo and Uganda from March to May, and in 
Kenya to South Africa from September to De-
cember. In South Africa, it fruits from June to 
August. 
Ecology Tabernaemontana ventricosa occurs 
in open or secondary forest, gallery forest and 
thickets in woodland, from sea-level to 1850 m 
altitude. It is frost sensitive, prefers shade, and 
requires a moderate amount of water. 
Management Tabernaemontana ventricosa 
can easily be grown from seed and grows rela-
tively fast. 
Genetic resources and breeding Taber-
naemontana ventricosa has a relatively large 
distribution, and is also found in disturbed 
habitats. It is therefore not likely to be threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Little is known about the indole 
alkaloids of Tabernaemontana ventricosa. Be-
cause some of the traditional uses are similar 
to other, better-known Tabernaemontana spp., 
more research on the pharmacology and phyto-
chemistry is needed to fully evaluate the poten-
tial of this species. 
Major references Boudreau et al., 2005; 
Grace et al., 2002; Leeuwenberg, 1991; Schrip-
sema et al., 1986. 
Other references Burkill, 1985; Le Roux, 
2005; Lovett, Ruffo & Gereau, 2003; Neu-
winger, 2000; van Beek et a l , 1984b. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
TABERNANTHE IBOGA Baill. 
Protologue Buil. Mens. Soc. Linn. Paris 1: 
783 (1889). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Vernacular names Iboga, eboka, bitter 
grass, sacred wood, leaf of God (En). Iboga, 
eboka, éboga, eraga, bois sacré, bois amer, 
dibughi (Fr). Dihoa, lihoka (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Taber-
nanthe iboga is distributed naturally in Cen-
tral Africa, from Cameroon east to eastern DR 
Congo and south to central Angola. It was once 
collected in Tanzania. Tabernanthe iboga is 
cultivated in several countries in West Africa, 
e.g. Côte d'Ivoire. 
Uses Tabernanthe iboga is well known in 
Central Africa, as the root is very important in 
the initiation ceremonies of the Bwiti tradition 
in Gabon, which has expanded to southern 
Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea Congo and DR 
Congo. The root bark is eaten whole, or 
crushed and ground, rolled into small balls, 
sometimes mixed with other ingredients; some-
times a decoction of the crushed roots is taken. 
The root is mainly employed as a hallucino-
genic, a catalyst for spiritual discovery, and to 
seek information from ancestors and the spirit 
world, hence 'coming to terms with death'. Af-
ter the initiation ceremony, the initiate is re-
born as an adult in the tribe, having been 
cleansed of illnesses and socio-psychological 
blockages accumulated during childhood. Iboga 
is taken in these ceremonies in large quanti-
ties. Ceremonies are also held for diagnostic or 
therapeutic reasons, and the quantities of 
iboga taken there are in general much lower, 
Tabernanthe iboga - wild 
TABERNANTHE 599 
allowing the participant a certain agility and 
endurance. A root decoction can also be taken 
as a tonic to combat tiredness, hunger and 
thirst when it is necessary to overcome physi-
cal stress, e.g. for hunting or formerly in tribal 
wars. It is also considered aphrodisiac, as is the 
leaf decoction. A root decoction is taken as a 
febrifuge. In DR Congo the decoction is used for 
eye drops to treat conjunctivitis. The pounded 
roots are also used in the curing ceremony 
(called 'zebola') for psychosomatic afflictions. In 
Congo a root macerate in palm wine is taken to 
soothe coughs, and the root decoction is drunk 
to treat urinary infections. In traditional medi-
cine, the latex is taken as an anthelmintic and 
warmed leaves are rubbed on the gums to calm 
toothache, as they have an anaesthetic activity. 
The latex is mixed with Periploca nigrescens 
Afzel. and/or Strophanthus spp. and is used as 
arrow poison. 
In the 1980s iboga became popular in the 
United States and Europe as a non-addictive 
interrupter of drug dependency, but soon 
thereafter it was classified as a hallucinogen 
and dangerous substance in the United States, 
where it is therefore illegal to buy, sell, or pos-
sess it without a licence. Its possession is also 
prohibited in Belgium, Switzerland, Sweden 
and Australia. There has been renewed inter-
est in iboga since the late 1990s. 
Production and international trade The 
roots or root bark of Tabernanthe iboga can be 
found commonly in local markets and pharma-
cies. At present, the market for Tabernanthe 
iboga is increasing because of the use of iboga 
outside Africa for the treatment of addictions 
to tobacco, alcohol and drugs, and also to treat 
psychological disorders. The trade of Tabernan-
the iboga products is most important in Gabon. 
Tabernanthe iboga products, particularly the 
rootbark, are mostly bought and sold by mem-
bers of the Bwiti society and traditional heal-
ers. Statistical information on trade is scarce. 
Powdered iboga root bark was sold on the local 
market of Libreville (Gabon) in 2005 at 5000 
Fcfa (US$ 7.6) for 200 ml, while 1 1 is sold at 
15,000 Fcfa (US$ 22.8). In 2004 a Gabonese 
trader exported root bark to Europe with an 
estimated value of 6 million Fcfa (US$ 9100). 
The roots are imported by several countries, 
e.g. France, Netherlands, Germany, United 
Kingdom, Canada and countries in the Carib-
bean. On internet, prices of powdered root 
ranged in 2005 from US$ 2.35 per g to US$ 1.5 
per g depending on the quantity; prices of pow-
dered root bark ranged from US$ 4.7 per g to 
US$ 2.6 per g also depending on the quantity; 
prices of ibogaine hydrochloride (98% pure) 
range from US$ 150 per g to US$ 300 per g; 
seeds were sold in packages of 5 seeds for US$ 
19. 
Properties The active compounds in the 
root, root bark, stem bark, leaves and seeds of 
Tabernanthe iboga are indole alkaloids. About 
20 have been identified so far; the highest con-
centrations occur in the root bark (5-6%), fol-
lowed by the roots (1-2.5%), stem bark (2%), 
seed (1%) and leaves (0.4-0.8%). Ibogaine 
(ibogan class) is the most important alkaloid 
present in all plant parts except the seeds. 
Ibogaine can be synthesized from nicotinamide 
via a 13- or 14-step process, but the yield is too 
low to be economically attractive. The main 
activities of ibogaine are on the central nervous 
system and on the cardiovascular system. Al-
kaloids structurally similar to ibogaine have 
analogous effects. 
At low doses, ibogaine exerts primarily a 
stimulant effect, increasing alertness and re-
ducing fatigue, hunger and thirst. At higher 
doses, the primary effects are hallucinations, 
with unpleasant possible side effects such as 
anxiety and depression with fear or rage. The 
peak effect is reached 1-3 hours after swallow-
ing the drug; it subsides gradually, ending in 
complete insomnia and lethargy. These effects 
can last for 2-5 days. Apart from the psycho-
logical effects, the physical effects include 
tremor, light sensitivity, nausea and vomiting, 
loss of muscular coordination and prolonged 
and often painful muscle spasms, all in a dose-
dependent way. Toxic doses may produce con-
vulsions, paralysis and death from respiratory 
arrest. Most activities have been tested with 
purified ibogaine, but during initiation cere-
monies powdered root bark is usually taken, 
which is more powerful as it contains a range 
of related alkaloids. Ibogaine is a potent Choli-
nesterase inhibitor, and the root extract is even 
100 times stronger in its inhibitory effect be-
cause of the additional effects of the alkaloids 
tabernanthine, ibogamine and the more dis-
tantly related iboluteine. This property con-
tributes to the anti-fatigue properties of 
ibogaine, and results from an increased sensi-
tivity to adrenaline, bringing about a transient 
excited state of the sympathie nervous system. 
Despite the reputation of iboga as an aphrodi-
siac, ibogaine did not produce a stimulation of 
sexual functions in tests with dogs, cats and 
sheep. Not does ibogaine have a significant 
analgesic effect in mice 
600 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Recent research indicates t h a t ihogaine has a 
novel pharmacological mechanism of action, 
acting strongly on a variety of different recep-
tors in the brain, resul t ing from complex inter-
actions be tween neuro t r ansmi t t e r systems. 
There is no consensus yet on how ibogaine 
works precisely, bu t it is known to inhibit the 
re-uptake of the neuro t ransmi t t e r serotonin, 
which can cause hal lucinat ions. However, the 
suggestion by laymen t h a t ibogaine h a s consid-
erable potent ial in the field of psychotherapy is 
p r ema tu re . Research on animals and h u m a n s 
reveal t h a t ibogaine is converted in t he liver to 
noribogaine, which fills opiate receptors, t hus 
e l iminat ing wi thdrawal symptoms. Ibogaine 
also s t imula tes nicotinic receptors in the cere-
bellum, which contr ibutes to modulat ing t he 
dopamine reward circuit. At h igh doses though, 
ibogaine is toxic as it destroys neurons in the 
cerebellum. 
Research with an imals and anecdotal reports 
of h u m a n s suggest t h a t ibogaine h a s consider-
able potent ial in t rea t ing addictions to heroin, 
cocaine, alcohol, nicotine, caffeine, ampheta-
mine, desoxyephedrine or methadone, or com-
binat ions of these . Several methods to a r res t 
the physiological and psychological aspects of 
dependency on drugs by us ing ibogaine have 
been pa tented in the Uni ted Sta tes . Treat-
men t s a re claimed to be effective for 70-100% 
of the cases. However, the serious side effects 
of ibogaine make its use potential ly harmful 
and addit ional clinical s tudies are needed to 
de termine if and how it can be used safely. The 
side effects of ibogaine are not present in the 
ibogaine congener 18-methoxycoronaridine (18-
MC), nor in the metabolite noribogaine, and 
these compounds t h u s have potent ia l in safe 
and effective t r ea tmen t s . Meanwhile , there are 
some clinics, e.g. in the Caribbean, t h a t offer a 
controlled ibogaine t r ea tment , and in Europe 
illicit t r e a tmen t s a re available wi thout medical 
facilities. In addition, ibogaine and iboga ex-
t rac ts have become available through the 
in ternet . 
A d u l t e r a t i o n s a n d s u b s t i t u t e s Several 
other Apocynaceae genera also contain com-
pounds related to ibogaine, bu t they contain 
ibogaine as a minor compound only, e.g. Ta-
bernaemontana and Voacanga. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Shrub up to 4 m tall, repeat-
edly dichotomously branched, with white latex 
in all par t s , glabrous to hairy; t r u n k up to 10 
cm in diameter; ba rk pale to dark grey, smooth. 
Leaves opposite, simple and entire; st ipules 
absent; petiole 1-13 mm long, with three or 
Tabernanthe iboga - 1, flowering branch; 2, 
opened corolla; 3, fruits; 4, seed. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
more rows of colleters in the axils; b lade nar-
rowly elliptical, elliptical or narrowly obovate, 
2.5-22 cm x 1-10 cm, base slightly cordate to 
cuneate , apex acuminate , pinnately veined 
with 7-20 pairs of la tera l veins. Inflorescence 
an i r regular ly corymb 3-7 cm x 2 -4 cm, 2 to-
gether jus t above the forks of t he branches , 
few- to many-flowered; peduncle 0.5—4.5 cm 
long, fairly slender; brac ts as long as t he se-
pals, sparsely hai ry a t the apex. Flowers bisex-
ual , regular , 5-merous, fragrant; pedicel 2-17 
mm long, thickened a t apex; sepals almost free, 
ovate to t r iangular , 1-3 mm long, apex acumi-
na te , pers is tent in fruit; corolla tube almost 
cylindrical to urn-shaped 5.5-8.5 m m x 1.5-3.5 
mm, contracted a t base, lobes orbicular to 
obliquely ovate, 2.5—6 m m long, with obtuse or 
rounded apex, in bud overlapping to the left, 
undula te , spreading and recurved later, hairy 
inside from the insert ion of the s t amens to the 
mouth, whi te or cream, usual ly with red to 
purple dots or s tr ipes in 5 groups in the throat ; 
s t amens inser ted 2.5-4 mm above the corolla 
base, included, an the r s almost sessile, base 
sagi t ta te ; ovary superior, only basally 2-celled, 
sur rounded by a disk, style slender, pistil head 
composed of a basal ring, an almost globose 
TABERNANTHE 601 
central part with 5 grooves and 2 slender api-
cal lobes. Fruit a globose, ellipsoid or ovoid 
berry 3-6.5 cm long, apex rounded, obtuse, 
acute or acuminate, pendulous, smooth or less 
often bumpy, glabrous, yellow to red, many-
seeded, with the seeds in spongy, white pulp. 
Seeds ellipsoid, 7-10 mm long, brain-like 
deeply indented. Seedling with epigeal germi-
nation, taproot firm, cotyledons leafy, rounded, 
epicotyl 3.5-7.5 cm long, glabrous. 
Other botanical information Tabernanthe 
comprises 2 species, both restricted to Central 
Africa: Tabernanthe iboga and Tabernanthe 
elliptica (Stapf) Leeuwenb. Tabernanthe ellip-
tica occurs in Congo, DR Congo and Angola and 
differs mainly from Tabernanthe iboga in hav-
ing only 4-7 pairs of lateral leaf veins and hav-
ing fruits consisting of 2 separate follicles bear-
ing soft blunt prickles. Of the total alkaloids in 
the root bark (5.6%) and stem bark (2.4%), 
about 80% is ibogaine. The leaves do not con-
tain ibogaine. Hybridization occurs between 
the 2 species, resulting in plants with the car-
pels more or less fused in fruit, without or with 
a few blunt prickles. The fruits of Tabernanthe 
iboga are quite variable; in Gabon plants with 
ovoid fruits are most commonly used in cere-
monies. 
Growth and development The seedling of 
Tabernanthe iboga grows rhythmically, extend-
ing by flushes, becoming about 60 cm tall in 3 
years. The juvenile period lasts 5-6 years. The 
plant develops according to the architectural 
growth model of Leeuwenberg characterized by 
a monopodial orthotropic trunk, which ends in 
a terminal inflorescence. After flowering the 2 
uppermost axillary buds develop into branches, 
so that the growth is sympodial and the in-
fructescence seems to be axillary. Flowering 
and fruiting occurs almost throughout the year, 
but mostly between September and February. 
The fruits take 5-6 months to mature. Taber-
nanthe iboga regenerates well by forming 
shoots from the trunk. 
Ecology Tabernanthe iboga occurs in the 
forest understorey, sometimes in riverine or 
swamp forest or relatively wet savanna, from 
sea-level to 1500 m altitude. In Gabon it is 
dominant in forest along the Atlantic coast, 
between Cocobeach and Ndindi. The seeds are 
dispersed by elephants as they feed on the 
fruit. 
Propagation and planting Propagation of 
Tabernanthe iboga is by fresh seed or by cut-
tings. Germination is slow and irregular, rang-
ing from a few weeks to a few months. Scarifi-
cation prior to sowing increases the germina-
tion rate considerably, although this is rarely 
done in home gardens. After a few months the 
seed coat dries out, making it difficult for the 
seedling to emerge. Seedlings need to be pro-
tected from the sun. They can be transplanted 
to their final location after 2-3 months, when 
the root has become twice as long as the stem. 
Cuttings of about 25 cm long and 1 cm in stem 
diameter root easily in humid soil. These cut-
tings flower already after 4 months. Tabernan-
the iboga can be propagated through tissue 
culture. 
Management Tabernanthe iboga is com-
monly cultivated in home gardens. Once estab-
lished, individual plants grow fast and require 
little maintenance, but need to be protected 
from fire. 
Harvesting In the wild, whole plants of 
Tabernanthe iboga are uprooted to harvest the 
roots. This leads to large-scale destruction of 
natural stands. In home gardens, only a part of 
the roots is harvested. The roots can be har-
vested throughout the year although it is eas-
ier during the rainy season between October 
and May, as the soil is easier to work. Larger 
quantities are mainly collected from wild 
stands. 
Handling after harvest The fresh roots are 
transported in jute bags. They are washed and 
sun-dried for local use or for the market. The 
bark of the root is then separated, and is again 
left to dry in the sun for 7-10 days, after which 
it is pounded and sieved through a coarse 
mesh. The powder is kept dry in bottles. 
Genetic resources No germplasm collec-
tions of Tabernanthe iboga exist, and as large 
quantities of the plants are harvested from the 
wild, it is likely that the genetic diversity will 
be threatened in the near future. Also, an in-
ventory of the morphological variation is 
needed to clarify the diversity within in the 
species, especially in the shape of the fruit. The 
government of Gabon considers iboga a na-
tional patrimony; however, there is no law pro-
tecting it against overexploitation. 
Prospects Tabernanthe iboga is a plant 
with considerable socio-economic importance in 
Gabon and neighbouring parts of Africa be-
cause of its role in the Bwiti tradition, and out-
side Gabon because the root bark or purified 
ibogaine is used in Europe and America in 
treating addictions to drugs, alcohol and smok-
ing. Apart from the need to investigate 
whether ibogaine really does suppress the crav-
ing for drugs, its toxic side-effects need to be 
602 MEDICINAL PL-ANTS 1 
elucidated. Tabernanthe iboga is not yet 
threatened in its natural environment, but as 
most plants are harvested from the wild, and 
whole plants are uprooted, it may become en-
dangered in the near future when demand re-
mains high. More research on cultivation prac-
tices and methods of propagation of superior 
plant types is warranted. Iboga has ornamen-
tal value, especially when in flower and fruit. 
Major references Alper, 2001; Bandarage, 
Kuehne & Glick, 2001; Bisset, 1989b; Erowid, 
1995-2005; Glick, Maisonneuve & Szumlinski, 
2000; Hunter, 1999; Lotsof & Alexander, 2001; 
Neuwinger, 1996; Vastag, 2005; Vonk & Leeu-
wenberg, 1989. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; Alper et al., 1999; Ango Biyoghe, 
2004; Bouquet & Botton, 1962; Bourobou 
Bourobou & Omvono, 2002; Bureau, 2000; 
Goutarel, Gollnhofer & Sillans, 1993; Halle & 
Oldeman, 1970; Krauss, 1996; Leal, de Souza 
& Elisabetsky, 2000; Lotsof, 1995; Luciano, 
1998; Mash et al., 2000; Mazzei, 2002; Moli-
nari, Maisonneuve & Glick, 1996; Neuwinger, 
2000; Ngavoura, 1990; Pawelka & Stöckigt, 
1983; Popik & Skolnick, 1999; Silva et al., 
2004. 
Sources of illustration Vonk & Leeuwen-
berg, 1989. 
Authors H.P. Bourobou Bourobou 
TETRORCHIDIUM DIDYMOSTEMON (Baill.) 
Pax & K.Hoffm. 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenr. IV, 147, 14: 53 
(1919). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Chromosome number n = 33 
Synonyms Tetrorchidium minus (Prain) 
Pax & KHoffm. (1919). 
Vernacular names Arbre à savon du Gabon 
(Fr). Pau branco, pau gamela (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tetror-
chidium didymostemon occurs from Guinea 
Bissau east to Uganda and south to Tanzania 
and Angola. 
Uses Throughout its distribution area the 
latex from the stem bark is used as eye drops 
to treat filariasis, and is also applied to ab-
scesses, leprous sores and glandular swellings. 
Leaf sap is applied to wounds as a haemostatic. 
The leaf sap in water or rum, or a stem bark 
decoction, is commonly taken as a purgative 
and to treat fever. To treat constipation or 
enlarged spleen in babies, leaf sap is applied to 
Tetrorchidium didymostemon - wild 
nipples of nursing mothers or to scarifications. 
A stem bark infusion is rubbed on to rheumatic 
and painful limbs, painful kidneys and to treat 
oedema. In Gabon beaten stem bark is taken as 
a mouth wash to treat toothache. In Congo and 
DR Congo the leaves, crushed together with 
the stem bark of Cola ballayi Cornu ex Hack., 
are applied to broken limbs as an embrocation 
to treat swellings. Young leaves are cut and 
cooked with fish and eaten to treat enlarged 
spleen. Leaf sap or stem bark latex, sometimes 
with banana or in palm wine, is taken to treat 
stomach-ache, gonorrhoea, intestinal worms, 
coughing fits and food poisoning. Bark scrap-
ings are applied as an enema to treat malaria 
and backache. A maceration of the stem bark is 
applied as a wash to treat hernia and urinary 
infections. The twig or root bark latex mixed 
with palm oil is applied as a lotion to treat 
measles. A root decoction is drunk as an 
emetic. The ash from the stem bark or root 
bark mixed with palm oil is applied to kill lice. 
A bark extract is rubbed on the body as a mos-
quito repellent. Bark latex is applied to snake-
bites. A stem bark decoction is drunk as an 
emetic and antidote against Erythrophleum 
suaveolens (Guill. & Perr.) Brenan poisoning in 
ordeal by poison. Cows are given leaf sap with 
salt to increase milk production. 
The wood is used as firewood and for charcoal 
making. The stems are used as poles for mak-
ing huts and sometimes also in carpentry. In 
Gabon the wood is used for plywood produc-
tion. In West Africa the twigs are used as chew 
sticks. In Benin, Gabon and Congo the beaten 
stem bark is used as soap for washing clothes. 
Properties A preliminary screening of the 
TETRORCHIDIUM 603 
leaves and stem bark of Tetrorchidium didy-
mostemon revealed the presence of saponins 
and traces of alkaloids. 
The wood is pinkish, soft to moderately hard 
and perishable. 
Description Dioecious, evergreen, glabrous 
liana, shrub or small tree up to 12 m tall, 
sometimes a medium-sized tree up to 25 m tall, 
with drooping branches; latex usually white, 
sometimes reddish or colourless; bark smooth 
or minutely fissured, brown; twigs slightly zig-
zag, prominently scarred at the nodes. Leaves 
alternate on flowering shoots, opposite on other 
branches; stipules small; petiole 0.5-1 cm long, 
channelled; blade obovate to elliptical-
oblanceolate or elliptical, (4-)7-12(-17) cm x 
(2-)3-6(-8) cm, base cuneate, apex abruptly 
acuminate, margins entire or sometimes shal-
lowly and remotely toothed, firmly papery, 
pinnately veined with 5-9 pairs of lateral 
veins. Inflorescence axillary to leaf-opposed, 
male inflorescence a densely flowered spike 
2.5-8 cm long, female inflorescence a 3-5-
flowered false umbel 1—1.5 cm long; peduncle 
0.5-1 cm long. Flowers unisexual, 3-merous, 
petals absent; male flowers sessile, sepals 
Tetrorchidium didymostemon - 1, branch with 
male inflorescences; 2, part of branch with fe-
male inflorescence; 3, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
broadly ovate, c. 0.7 mm long, minutely 
fringed, greenish yellow, stamens short; female 
flowers with pedicel 2-4 mm long, sepals trian-
gular-ovate, c. 1 mm long, minutely fringed, 
greenish, disk glands petal-like, triangular-
ovate, up to 1 mm long, yellowish green, ovary 
superior, almost globose, 1.5-2 mm in diame-
ter, 3-celled, smooth, styles 3, forming a cap c. 
1 mm in diameter. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule c. 5 
mm x 6 mm, smooth, green becoming brownish 
green, 3-seeded. Seeds compressed ellipsoid, 4 -
5 mm x 3-4 mm, orange-red, pitted. 
Other botanical information Tetrorchi-
dium comprises about 25 species, of which 5 
occur in tropical Africa and the others in tropi-
cal America. Several other Tetrorchidium spp. 
are also used medicinally in Central Africa. In 
Congo bark latex of Tetrorchidium congolense 
J.Léonard, occurring in Gabon, Congo and DR 
Congo, is taken in palm wine to treat diar-
rhoea. Tetrorchidium oppositifolium (Pax) Pax 
6 K.Hoffm. occurs in the forest area of West 
Africa, Cameroon and Gabon. In Liberia a bark 
infusion is taken as a febrifuge. In Gabon bark 
scrapings mixed with palm oil are massaged on 
painful areas caused by rheumatism. A bark 
infusion is used as eye drops to treat eye com-
plaints. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (LAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth ring boundaries indis-
tinct or absent. Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
(12: solitary vessel outline angular); 13: simple 
perforation plates; 22: intervessel pits alter-
nate; (23: shape of alternate pits polygonal); 27: 
intervessel pits large (> 10 um); 30: vessel-ray 
pits with distinct borders; similar to intervessel 
pits in size and shape throughout the ray cell; 
31: vessel-ray pits with much reduced borders 
to apparently simple: pits rounded or angular; 
41: mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
50-100 [ira; 42: mean tangential diameter of 
vessel lumina 100-200 |lm; 47: 5-20 vessels 
per square millimetre. Tracheids and fibres: 
61: fibres with simple to minutely bordered 
pits; (65: septate fibres present); 66: non-
septate fibres present; 68: fibres very thin-
walled; 69: fibres thin- to thick-walled. Axial 
parenchyma: 76: axial parenchyma diffuse; 77 
axial parenchyma diffuse-in-aggregates; 78: 
axial parenchyma scanty paratracheal; 93 
eight (5-8) cells per parenchyma strand; 94 
over eight cells per parenchyma strand. Rays 
97: ray width 1-3 cells; (100: rays with multis-
eriate portion(s) as wide as uniseriate por-
tions); 108: body ray cells procumbent with 
604 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
over 4 rows of upright and/or square marginal 
cells; 116: > 12 rays per mm. Mineral inclu-
sions: (144: druses present); (145: druses in ray 
parenchyma cells); (148: druses in chambered 
cells). 
(D. Louppe, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
Ecology Tetrorchidium didymostemon is 
common in secondary forest, at forest edges or 
along rivers, lakesides and swamps, from sea-
level up to 1700 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting The seeds are 
dispersed by birds that feed on the fruits. 
Harvesting The leaves, stem bark and latex 
of Tetrorchidium didymostemon are harvested 
whenever the need arises. 
Handling after harvest The harvested 
parts are usually used fresh. 
Genetic resources Tetrorchidium didymo-
stemon has a large distribution area and is 
common; therefore it is not threatened by ge-
netic erosion. 
Prospects Tetrorchidium didymostemon has 
many local medicinal uses, but virtually noth-
ing is known concerning the chemical com-
pounds or pharmacology of the plant parts and 
therefore more research is warranted. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; CE-FAO, 
1999; Keay, 1989; Latham, 2004; Masiala, 
2002; Neuwinger, 2000; Radcliffe-Smith, 1987; 
Raponda-Walker, 2005; Toirambe, 1989; 
Wome, 1985. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1988; InsideWood, undated; Léonard, 
1962; Noumi, 2004; Stäuble, 1986; Terashima 
& Ichikawa, 2003; Vivien & Fauré, 1988; Ya-
mada, 1999. 
Sources of illustration Aubréville, 1959a. 
Authors B. Toirambe 
THECACORIS SPATHULIFOLIA (Pax) Leandri 
Protologue Mém. Inst. Sei. Madagascar, 
sér. B, Biol. Vég. 8: 211 (1957). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Synonyms Cyathogyne bussei Pax (1903). 
Origin and geographic distribution The-
cacoris spathulifolia occurs from southern So-
malia south to Mozambique and also in Mada-
gascar. 
Uses In Kenya the roots are soaked in water 
and the resulting liquid is drunk to cure a her-
nia. Fresh roots are chewed and the juice swal-
lowed to treat tonsilitis. A small root is chewed 
and the juice swallowed or roots are boiled for 
half an hour and the warm liquid is drunk to 
treat snakebites. A decoction of the stem bark 
is drunk to treat abdominal pain and gonor-
rhoea. 
Botany Dioecious shrub up to 2 m tall; 
branches straight, often erect and parallel; 
twigs pale greyish brown. Leaves alternate, 
simple and entire, crowded at apex of branches; 
stipules 1.5-2 mm long, triangular-lanceolate, 
brown; petiole 1-3 mm long; blade elliptical to 
obovate, 1-3 cm x 0.5-1 cm, base cuneate, apex 
notched, slightly fleshy, nearly glabrous, pin-
nately veined with 2—3 pairs of lateral veins. 
Inflorescence an axillary, solitary spike, yellow 
hairy, up to 1.5(-3) cm long. Flowers unisexual, 
regular, 5(-6)-merous; petals small or absent; 
male flowers with pedicel l(-2) mm long, se-
pals obovate, c. 1 mm long, hairy, stamens c. 2 
mm long; female flowers with pedicel c. 1 mm 
long, sepals oblong-ovate, fused at base, c. 1 
mm long, ovary superior, almost globose, c. 1 
mm in diameter, 3-celled, styles 1 mm long, 
stigmas red. Fruit a 3-lobed capsule 4-5 mm x 
7-8 mm, nearly glabrous, green, up to 6-
seeded. Seeds pear-shaped, c. 2 mm x 2 mm, 
brown, hilum white, grooved. Seedling with 
epigeal germination. 
Thecacoris comprises about 20 species, all of 
them native to continental Africa and Mada-
gascar. 
Thecacoris lucida (Pax) Hutch, is a shrub or 
small tree found in Gabon, Congo, DR Congo, 
Uganda, Tanzania and Angola. In DR Congo 
the leaf or bark sap is drunk with sugar cane 
juice to cure syphilis. Thecacoris stenopetala 
(Müll.Arg.) Müll.Arg., a West African forest 
species, is used in Sierra Leone to cure tooth-
ache. The root extract of Thecacoris viridis 
(Müll.Arg.) G.L.Webster, occurring from Nige-
ria to DR Congo, is taken in DR Congo to treat 
stomach problems. 
Ecology Thecacoris spathulifolia is found in 
dry evergreen woodland, miombo woodland, 
wooded grassland and thickets, often on sandy 
soil, up to 700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Thecaco-
ris spathulifolia is fairly widespread and 
probably does not face serious threats. 
Prospects Too little is known of Thecacoris 
spathulifolia to judge its prospects. Research 
into its phytochemistry and pharmacology 
would be a first step. 
Major references Kokwaro, 1993; Radcliffe-
Smith, 1996a. 
Other references Bouquet, 1969; Chhabra, 
Mahunnah & Mshiu, 1990; Léonard, 1995; 
THESIUM 605 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
THESIUM VIRIDE A.W.Hill 
Protologue Bull. Misc. Inform. Kew 1910: 
238(1910). 
Family Santalaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution The-
sium viride is distributed from Sierra Leone, 
Mali and Niger east to Sudan. 
Uses In Benin the powdered aerial parts are 
eaten either pure or in a sauce to treat jaun-
dice; a decoction of the branches is drunk for 
the same purpose. 
Properties No chemical or pharmacological 
research on Thesium viride has been done. 
However, cardiac glucosides and quercitrin (a 
flavonoid glycoside) have been isolated from 
other Thesium species. A complicating factor of 
research into the properties is that compounds 
extracted from Thesium may have been pro-
duced by the host plant. Thesinine (a pyrrol-
izidine alkaloid) isolated from Thesium might 
well be an example of transfer from a host. 
Botany Hemi-parasitic subshrub up to 45 
cm tall, with tufts of stems arising from a 
woody rootstock; stems branched, c. 2 mm 
thick, greyish green. Leaves alternate, simple 
and entire, sessile, narrowly ovate to linear, c. 
4 mm x 0.5 mm, apex acuminate. Flowers axil-
lary and terminal, solitary, bisexual, regular, 
(4-)5-merous; bracts ovate to narrowly ovate, c. 
2 mm long, apex acute; perianth tube c. 1 mm 
long, lobes oblong-ovate, c. 1.5 mm long; sta-
mens inserted on perianth tube; ovary supe-
rior, style up to c. 3 mm long. Fruit an ellip-
soid, ridged achene c. 3 mm x 2 mm, reticu-
lately veined, perianth persistent, c. 2 mm 
long. 
Thesium comprises about 300 species, and is 
distributed in Africa and Eurasia. In East Af-
rica about 17 species occur and in southern 
Africa 175. Thesium is parasitic on a wide 
range of plants without evident host specificity. 
However, details are lacking for most of the 
African species. Species are distinguished by 
the minute flowers, which make identification 
difficult. For large parts of Africa treatment of 
the genus in regional floras is only recent or 
not yet published. Hence, many references of 
medicinal use relate to plants that are not 
identified at species level. In Namibia a decoc-
tion of the crushed roots of Thesium lineatum 
L.f. and Thesium lacinulatum A.W.Hill is 
Thesium viride - 1, flowering branch; 2, flower; 
3, young fruits; 4, mature fruit. 
Source: Flore analytique du Bénin 
taken to treat venereal diseases and uterine 
problems. Thesium lineatum has been a subject 
of study because it is responsible for fatal poi-
soning of cattle, sheep and goats. Thesiuside, a 
cardiac glucoside of the bufadienolide type, was 
identified as the active principle in poisoning. 
Ecology Thesium viride occurs in wooded 
savanna, in rocky terrain, along streams and in 
fallow fields at 800-1750 m altitude. It with-
stands regular burning. 
Genetic resources and breeding As The-
sium viride is distributed widely and as there 
are no signs of over-exploitation, no threats to 
its genetic diversity are envisaged. 
Prospects Thesium viride and other The-
sium species, including the African ones, have 
interesting characteristics that have yet to be 
exploited by research. A solid taxonomie foun-
dation for further work is more or less in place. 
Studies into host specificity could yield a better 
understanding of chemical properties and tox-
icity. 
Major references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Lawalrée, 1972; Polhill, 2005; von Koenen, 
2001. 
Other references Akoègninou, van der 
Burg & van der Maesen, 2006; Burkill, 2000; 
606 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Keay & Hepper, 1958; van Heerden, Vleggaar 
& Anderson, 1988; van Wyk, van Heerden & 
van Oudtshoorn, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Akoègninou, van 
der Burg & van der Maesen, 2006. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
THEVETIA PERUVIANA (Pers.) K.Schum. 
Protologue Engl. & Prantl, Nat. Pflanzen-
fam. IV, 2: 159 (1895). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 20 
Synonyms Thevetia nerüfolia Juss. ex 
Steud. (1841), Cascabela thevetia (L.) Lippold 
(1980). 
Vernacular names Yellow oleander, lucky 
nut tree, trumpet flower, milk bush, exile tree, 
be-still tree (En). Laurier jaune des Indes, lau-
rier à fleurs jaunes, chapeau de Napoleon, bois 
à lait (Fr). Loendro amarelo, chapéu de Napo-
leâo (Po). Mbagi (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Theve-
tia peruviana originates from tropical America 
and is widely cultivated throughout the tropics 
as an ornamental, also in tropical Africa. 
Uses Thevetia peruviana is used medicinally 
throughout the tropics in spite of its toxicity. A 
bark or leaf decoction is taken to loosen the 
bowels, as an emetic, and is said to be an effec-
tive cure for intermittent fevers. In Senegal 
water in which leaves and bark were macer-
ated is taken to cure amenorrhoea. In Mali the 
latex is applied to soften corns and calluses. In 
Côte d'Ivoire and Benin the leaf sap is used as 
eye drops and nose drops to cure violent head-
aches; the leaf sap is also dropped in the nos-
Thevetia peruviana - planted 
trils to revive people that have fainted and to 
cure colds. In Kenya the Luo people use water 
in which leaves have been crushed to treat 
colds. The seeds may be used as a purgative. 
The seed oil is applied externally in India to 
treat skin infections. Care should be taken in 
all medical applications, in particular those 
used internally, as toxic doses are only a little 
higher than therapeutic ones. In Benin and 
Uganda an infusion of the roots is taken to 
treat snakebites. In Ghana the leaves in decoc-
tion are taken to treat jaundice, fever and as a 
purgative for intestinal worms. The bark and 
seeds are used to poison rats, and also for 
criminal purposes. In southern Africa and 
Cameroon the seeds are used as an arrow or 
ordeal poison. In India and Sri Lanka, seeds 
have been used for committing suicide or homi-
cide. Other reports state the use of the seeds as 
an abortifacient. The seeds act as a contact 
poison; mashed with a soap solution they are 
used as an insecticide. 
In Ghana and Uganda the wood is used to 
make tool handles and building poles. It is also 
used as fuel. The fruit pulp is sometimes eaten. 
The foliage is not grazed by stock, and the 
plants make a useful live fence. Thevetia peru-
viana is widely planted as an ornamental in 
gardens, and also as a hedge. In cooler climates 
it can be grown in tubs in the glasshouse and 
outdoors in summer. It is also planted for 
shade or for soil conservation. After purifica-
tion, the originally poisonous seed oil is suit-
able for consumption. 
Production and international trade Theve-
tia peruviana is usually cultivated in home 
gardens for use in local medicine and as an 
ornamental. The plants do not enter interna-
tional trade in Africa. 
Properties Most parts of Thevetia peruvi-
ana, including the latex, are highly toxic; the 
seeds most highly so. The active principles are 
cardiac glycosides of the cardenolide type. The 
poison mainly affects the cardiovascular sys-
tem (causing various types of arrhythmia, e.g. 
sinus bradycardia) and the gastro-intestinal 
tract. Vomiting is a common symptom of poi-
soning in about 30% of all cases; ischaemic 
changes (restrictions in the blood supply) occur 
in about 40%, and palpitations in about 10%. 
The most serious and immediate cause leading 
to death is peripheral vascular failure. 
The cardiac glycosides of Thevetia peruviana 
are triosides or monosides, i.e. they contain an 
aglycone unit combined with 3 or 1 sugar moie-
ties, respectively. These aglycones are either 
THEVETIA 607 
digitoxigenin or the related cannogenin or can-
nogenol. The trioside thevetin is the major 
component of the seeds. It is a mixture of cer-
beroside (thevetin B) and thevetin A in a 2:1 
ratio. Monosides isolated from the seeds in-
clude neriifolin, cerberin (2'-0-acetylneriifolin), 
peruvoside (cannogenin-thevioside), ruvoside 
(cannogenol-thevioside) and perubosidic acid 
(perusitin). 
Peruvoside has been investigated most thor-
oughly. Preliminary work on the cardiotonic 
effect showed that it exerts a quick and power-
ful positive inotropic effect in experimental 
animals, comparable to that of ouabain. In 
therapeutic doses, peruvoside produced a fall 
in right atrial pressure, and a rise in the car-
diac output. Furthermore, it was found that 
peruvoside inhibited Na+,K+-ATPase activity 
and that it has a strong competitive inhibition 
on (3H)-ouabain binding to this enzyme. The 
inhibitory effects on the enzyme activity were 
stronger than the positive inotropic effect. 
Large-scale clinical trials have shown that all 
forms of cardiac insufficiency can be success-
fully treated with peruvoside, and compensa-
tion can be maintained during continuous 
therapy in about 85% of the patients. However, 
peruvoside is no longer used in Western medi-
cine because of the difficult dosage, small dif-
ference between therapeutic and toxic dosage, 
and poor bioavailability because of rapid 
breakdown. The use of peruvoside in anti-
herpes drugs has been patented. 
Of the other cardiac glycosides of Thevetia pe-
ruviana, the mixture thevetin is practically 
identical in effect with ouabain, but much less 
potent. It has been effectively used clinically in 
cases of cardiac decompensation, although its 
effective dose is rather close to its toxic dose. 
As a cardiac glycoside, cerberoside (thevetin B) 
is much more potent than thevetin A and the 
related monosides neriifolin and cerberin. 
From the leaves, a range of flavanone gly-
cosides and flavonol glycosides have been iso-
lated, and several of them have shown inhibi-
tory effects against HIV-1 reverse transcrip-
tase and HIV-1 integrase. 
The seed oil has shown strong antibacterial 
activity, especially against Bacillus subtilis 
and Staphylococcus aureus. Different leaf ex-
tracts and seed extracts have shown strong 
antifeedant effects on slugs and insects (includ-
ing termites) when sprayed on crops and also 
significant nematicidal activities. The leaf ex-
tract was also toxic to Rhizoctonia solani. 
The seed contains 57-63% oil, which after puri-
fication consists mainly of oleic acid (60%), 
palmitic acid (16%), stearic acid (11%), lino-
lenic acid (7%) and linoleic acid (5%). The oil 
can be detoxified and could serve as vegetable 
oil for domestic use. 
Adulterations and substitutes Cardiac 
glycosides are present in several other genera 
of Apocynaceae, e.g. Cerbera and Strophanthus. 
Cerberoside (thevetin B) is for instance found 
in Cerbera odollam Gaertn. 
In current medicine, cardiac glycosides are only 
applied in special forms of heart disease. In the 
Western world, the drug of choice is in general 
digoxin from Digitalis lanata Ehrh., or in acute 
situations strophanthins (e.g. ouabain) from 
Strophanthus spp. Although peruvoside has 
similar effects, it does not play a significant 
role in medicine. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 8 m 
tall; branchlets glabrous, with grey bark and 
white latex. Leaves arranged spirally, simple 
and entire, almost sessile; stipules absent; 
blade linear-lanceolate, 6-15 cm x 0.5-1 cm, 
base decurrent into the short petiole, apex 
long-acuminate, leathery, lateral veins obscure. 
Inflorescence a terminal or seemingly axillary 
cyme, few-flowered; bracts small, linear. Flow-
ers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, faintly fra-
Thevetia peruviana - 1, flowering and fruiting 
branch; 2, frontal view of flower. 
Source: PROSEA 
608 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
grant; pedicel 1-2 cm long; sepals ovate, c. 1 
cm long, acute, spreading; corolla tube trum-
pet-shaped, 35-45 cm long, corona lobes small, 
densely pubescent, alternating with the sta-
mens, corolla lobes broadly oblong, c. 3 cm long, 
overlapping, yellow to peachy pink, rarely 
white; stamens inserted near apex of corolla 
tube, included, anthers almost sessile; ovary 
superior, consisting of 2 carpels fused in lower 
half, style long and slender, pistil head consist-
ing of a 5-ridged basal part and a cone-shaped 
apex. Fruit a depressed-globose to turnip-
shaped drupe 3-4 cm in diameter, yellowish 
green, ripening black, 2-4-seeded within the 
stony endocarp. Seeds obovoid, c. 2 cm x 1.5 
cm, flattened. Seedling with epigeal germina-
tion. 
Other botanical information Thevetia 
comprises 8 species and is related to Cerbera, 
which also has spirally arranged leaves and 
drupe-like fruits, but differs in its fruit consist-
ing of 2 free parts. In 1980 it was proposed to 
transfer all Thevetia species except Thevetia 
ahouai (L.) DC. to Cascabela and the name 
Cascabela thevetia (L.) Lippold was published 
for Thevetia peruviana. However, this concept 
has not been generally accepted. 
Growth and development In areas with-
out a seasonal climate Thevetia peruviana 
flowers and fruits throughout the year, but 
with a peak in flowering during the rainy sea-
son. The ripe fruits remain on the plant for a 
long time. The plant coppices well. It shades 
out neighbouring plants and its litter is allelo-
pathic. 
Ecology In its native habitat, Thevetia pe-
ruviana is found in evergreen lowland or ripar-
ian forest, at 50-200 m altitude. It is tolerant 
of drought and moderately tolerant of salt. 
Propagation and planting Thevetia peru-
viana can be propagated by seed or cuttings. 
Cultivars are propagated by semi-ripe cuttings 
of terminal shoots or by stem sections. Seed 
can be stored for up to 3 months before sowing; 
the germination rate is about 80%. There are 
about 300 seeds/kg. In-vitro propagation by 
direct shoot morphogenesis without any inter-
mediate callus phase is also possible. This 
method may be used for mass propagation of 
superior plant material. 
Management Thevetia peruviana is grown 
in full sun or light shade, in fertile, well-
drained loamy soils with additional leaf mould, 
but it will grow in rather poor and dry soils as 
well. The plants are shallow-rooted and should 
be protected from strong winds. Stem tips of 
young plants are pinched out to encourage a 
bushy habit, and established plants are pruned 
to shape and size after flowering or shortly 
before the growing season to induce profuse 
flowering. 
Diseases and pests In Ghana Thevetia pe-
ruviana is the preferred host of the parasitic 
weed Cuscuta sp. Under glass, scale insects, 
mealy bug, red spider mite and aphids may be 
pests. 
Harvesting The plant parts used can be 
harvested whenever the need arises. 
Yield One plant produces 400-800 fruits/year, 
depending on rainfall and plant age. 
Handling after harvest Ripe fruits of 
Thevetia peruviana are sun-dried and split to 
obtain the seeds. 
Genetic resources The widespread cultiva-
tion of Thevetia peruviana as an ornamental 
throughout the tropics minimizes the risk of 
genetic erosion. 
Breeding A selection of ornamental Theve-
tia peruviana with white flowers is traded as 
cv. 'Alba'. 
Prospects As digitalis and ouabain are pre-
ferred to peruvoside in heart medicine, it is 
unlikely that Thevetia peruviana will become 
an important medicinal resource. Because of 
the toxicity of all parts of the plant, its use in 
traditional medicine should be discouraged. Its 
potential as an ornamental is brighter. 
Major references Arbonnier, 2002; Gulati, 
Jain & Srivastava, 2000; Ibiyemi et al., 2002; 
Katende, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg & Rudjiman, 2005; Lippold, 1980; Neu-
winger, 2000; van Valkenburg & Horsten, 
2001. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1989; 
Adjanohoun et a l , 1979; Adjei, 2003; Bose et 
al., 1999; Damiano, Ferraiolo & Baudoin, 2000; 
Geissler et al., 2002; Heloo, 2000; Latham, 
2004; Saxena & Jain, 1990; Tabuti, Lye & Dhil-
lion, 2003; van Wyk, van Heerden & van 
Oudtshoorn, 2002; Ye & Yang, 1990. 
Sources of illustration van Valkenburg & 
Horsten, 2001. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
Based on PROSEA 12(2): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 2. 
TlLIACORA LEONENSIS (Scott-Elliot) Diels 
Protologue Engl, Pflanzenr. IV, 94: 67 (1910). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Tiliacora dinklagei Engl. (1899), 
TlNOSPORA 609 
Tiliacora dielsiana Hutch. & Dalziel (1927). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tili-
acora leonensis occurs in Guinea, Liberia, Côte 
d'Ivoire and Ghana. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire an extract of the aerial 
parts is prescribed against dysentery, alone or 
in combination with leaves of Mallotus opposi-
tifolius (Geiseler) Müll.Arg. Preparations of the 
bark, leaves or root are taken to treat cough, 
amenorrhoea and tachycardia. A paste of dried 
and ground leaves is given as an enema to 
pregnant women to help in the delivery of a 
heavy baby. The crushed leaves are applied to 
wounds. In Ghana a root decoction is taken 
against gastric fever, oedema of the legs and 
anaemia. The root is put in palm wine and 
drunk, or an extract of the aerial parts is 
drunk, in combination with Paullinia pinnata 
L., to improve sexual vigour. 
The stem is used to make chew sticks and as 
tying material. The black fruits are edible. 
Properties The root contains bisbenzyliso-
quinoline alkaloids with curare-like action, 
including dinklacorine, funiferine, tiliacorinine, 
tiliageine and nortiliacorine A. Funiferine and 
nortiliacorine A have weak antimalarial and 
antimicrobial action. The root also contains the 
benzylisoquinoline alkaloid oblongine. In an in-
vitro test the leaves did not show antitrypano-
somal or antiplasmodial activity. 
Botany Dioecious, robust liana; bark grey-
ish, striped; branches sparsely hairy. Leaves 
simple and entire; stipules absent; petiole 1-
1.5 cm long, fine-hairy; blade lanceolate or 
oblanceolate to elliptical, 9-20 cm x 3-7 cm, 
base cuneate, apex acuminate, papery, gla-
brous except for the main vein, pinnately 
veined with 3-4 pairs of lateral veins, very 
prominent below. Inflorescence an axillary, 
many-flowered panicle with flowers in clusters, 
several inflorescences together; peduncle 4-12 
cm long, shorter in female plants, densely 
hairy. Flowers small, unisexual; sepals 9(-12), 
6(—9) outer ones bract-like, triangular to ovate, 
1-2 mm long, 3 inner ones obovate to oblong, 
2.5-6 mm long; petals 6, obovate-oblong, 
slightly fleshy; male flowers with 6-9 stamens 
2-2.5 mm long, filaments fused to the middle; 
female flowers with superior ovary, composed 
of 25-30 carpels. Fruit composed of almost 
sessile, compressed-ovoid drupelets 1.5—2 cm x 
1-1.5 cm, stone compressed oblong, leathery 
but brittle, 1-seeded. 
Tiliacora comprises about 20 species of which 3 
occur in tropical Asia and 17 in Africa; it is in 
need of a taxonomie revision. 
Ecology Tiliacora leonensis occurs in rain-
forest and fringing forest. 
Genet ic resources and b reed ing Tili-
acora leonensis is fairly widespread and rela-
tively common. It is not in danger of genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Tiliacora leonensis will probably 
remain of local importance, mainly as a me-
dicinal plant. 
Major references Atindehou et al., 2004; 
Burkill, 1997; Neuwinger, 2000; Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Dwuma-Badu et al., 1983; Dwuma-Badu 
et al., 1976a; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 2006; 
Oliver-Bever, 1983b; Tackie et al., 1975; Tackie 
et a l , 1976. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
TlNOSPORA BAKIS (A.Rich.) Miers 
Protologue Hook., Niger FL: 215 (1849). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Tino-
spora bakis occurs from Mauritania and Sene-
gal through the Sahel east to Somalia and 
south to Kenya, Uganda and Tanzania. It is 
also reported from Cameroon. 
Uses The woody part of the root has a high 
reputation in West Africa as a diuretic and 
febrifuge. The root is used against various liver 
and gall bladder problems, such as jaundice, 
haematuria, bilious fever and yellow fever. A 
decoction of the root is taken against malaria 
as it is better tolerated than quinine. It is also 
taken against schistosomiasis, as an emmena-
gogue or cholagogue and to stop gonorrhoeal 
discharge. Externally the decoction is applied 
against various skin problems. The leaves are 
similarly used as cholagogue, diuretic and gen-
eral tonic. 
Production and international trade The 
roots of Tinospora bakis are commonly traded 
in local markets, especially in West Africa. 
Properties The root contains alkaloids, in-
cluding the protoberberine type alkaloid pal-
matine, and 2-4% columbin, a diterpenoid fu-
ranolactone. The aqueous extract of the root 
containing the alkaloidal fraction showed mod-
erate activity against a chloroquine-resistant 
strain of Plasmodium falciparum in vitro. A 
syrup made from an aqueous root extract in-
duced a significant increase of biliary secretion 
in rats. Columbin, in small doses, was found to 
increase the secretion of the bile and the 
glands of stomach and intestines; at higher 
610 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
doses it produces greasy degenerat ion of the 
liver. Pa lmat ine shows a s t ronger ant ipyret ic 
effect t h a n a total alkaloid extract in rabbi ts . It 
para lyses the respira tory centre more t h a n 
morphine. It is supposed t h a t the ant ipyret ic 
effect is due, like t h a t of berberine, to paralysis 
of the per ipheral vessels and the resul t ing hea t 
dispersion, and not to its toxicity towards mi-
croorganisms. A lyophilized aqueous root ex-
t rac t showed hepatoprotective activity of r a t 
hepatocytes in vitro after t r e a t m e n t with CCU. 
In mice, the aqueous extract of the root powder 
adminis tered int raper i toneal ly or subcutane-
ously showed LD50 values of 360 mg/kg and 425 
mg/kg, respectively. This extract showed a 
similar inhibition of the contractions of isolated 
ra t duodenum as atropine. 
The root can produce toxic effects, including 
vomiting and depression of t he respiratory 
centre . Toxicity t r ia ls on the total alkaloids 
have shown t h a t 5 mg/kg given orally is not 
toxic for guinea pigs, whereas 100 mg/kg 
causes dea th wi th in 20 minutes , wi thout con-
vulsions. In exper imental hyper the rmia in 
guinea pigs, a root extract lowered the tem-
pera tu re more t h a n did quinine su lphate . 
B o t a n y Dioecious, deciduous l iana up to 10 
m long; ba rk flaking off in orange scales; 
b ranches glabrous, with numerous war ty lenti-
cels. Leaves a l te rna te , simple and entire; peti-
ole 0.5-4(-8) cm long, sparsely hai ry or gla-
brous; blade broadly ovate- t r iangular , 3-5 cm x 
3—5 cm, base cordate, apex acuminate , pale 
green, palmately veined with 5—7 main veins, 
short-hairy or glabrous below. Inflorescence an 
axillary, elongate false raceme up to 12 cm 
long, male inflorescence with 3-7-flowers per 
bract , female one with 1 flower per bract . 
Flowers unisexual , small, yellowish green; 
pedicel 2 -3 m m long; sepals 6 in 2 whorls, 
t rans lucent or membranous , outer sepals 
ovate- tr iangular , 1-1.5 mm x c. 0.5 mm, inner 
sepals 2 .5-4 m m x 2 -3 mm; peta ls 6, 2 - 3 mm x 
1-2 mm, fleshy; male flowers with 6 free sta-
mens 2.5—3 m m long; female flowers with 6 
staminodes, ovary superior, consisting of 3 free 
carpels 1-2 m m long. Frui t consisting of up to 
3 drupes , 6-9 m m x 4 - 5 mm, each 1-seeded. 
Tinospora bakis flowers towards the s t a r t of 
the ra iny season. In nor thern Senegal the 
n a t u r a l regenerat ion is r a t h e r poor. 
Tinospora comprises about 30 species, of which 
about 20 occur in Asia, 7 in cont inental Africa 
and 2 in Madagascar . 
E c o l o g y Tinospora bakis occurs mainly in 
dry a reas in bush land and semi-desert scrub 
vegetation, in thickets in sandy-clayey depres-
sions or on sand dunes, from sea-level up to 
1200 m al t i tude. On Mount Cameroon it occurs 
in forest gaps, in more humid conditions. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Tino-
spora bakis is widespread and locally common. 
There are no signs t h a t it is in danger of ge-
netic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s In view of i ts many medicinal 
uses and pharmacological resul ts so far, fur-
ther chemical and pharmacological screening of 
Tinospora bakis seems war ran ted . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1997; Keay & 
Troupin, 1954; Some et al., 1998; Thioune et 
a l , 2002; Troupin, 1962. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Akpo & Grouzis, 1996; 
Arbonnier, 2000; Diallo Sail et al., 1999; Diallo 
Sail et al., 1997; Fortin, Lô & Maynar t , 1990; 
Neuwinger, 2000; Oliver-Bever, 1986; O u a t t a r a 
et al., 2006; Somé et al., 1996; Zafinindra et al., 
2003. 
A u t h o r s L.P.A. Oyen 
T I N O S P O R A C A F F R A (Miers) T r o u p i n 
P r o t o l o g u e Bull. J a rd . Bot. E t a t 25: 137 
(1955). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
V e r n a c u l a r n a m e s Orange grape creeper 
(En). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tino-
spora caffra occurs from the Cent ra l African 
Republic eas t to Kenya and south to t he Ca-
privi Str ip (Namibia), Botswana, Mozambique 
and eas te rn South Africa. 
U s e s Ju ice from the pounded leaves is ap-
plied to wounds as an antiseptic. In South Af-
rica the s t eam of t he leaves in boiling wa te r is 
inhaled to sooth body pain. The leaves mixed 
with leaves of other p lan ts and sprinkled with 
wate r a re spread th rough the bedroom agains t 
sleeping problems. In South Africa the p lan t is 
used to p repare fish poison. 
B o t a n y Dioecious, briefly deciduous, climb-
ing herb; young s tems glabrous, older s tems 
war ty . Leaves a l te rna te , simple and ent ire , V-
shaped; st ipules absent; petiole 2 .5-15 cm long; 
blade broadly ovate to near ly orbicular, 2.5-14 
cm x 1.5-12.5 cm, base rounded to cordate, 
apex rounded and abrupt ly mucrona te or 
slightly acuminate , glabrous, yellowish green, 
leathery, palmately veined with 5-7 main 
veins. Inflorescence an axillary, elongate false 
raceme, male inflorescence 7—30 cm long, with 
1-4 flowers per bract, sometimes panicle-like, 
TOURNEFORTIA 611 
female inflorescence up to 4(-15) cm long with 
1 flower per bract; bracts linear, up to 1.5 cm 
long. Flowers unisexual, small; male flowers 
with pedicel up to 7 mm long, sepals 6 in 2 
whorls, outer ones triangular to ovate, 0.5-1.5 
mm long, inner ones oblong to oblanceolate, 
1.5-4 mm x 1—1.5 mm, glabrous, petals 6 in 2 
whorls, outer ones 1.5-2.5 mm x 0.5-1 mm, 
inner ones shorter, stamens 3, filaments 1.5-3 
mm long, completely fused; female flowers with 
pedicel up to 2.5 mm long, sepals 6 in 2 whorls, 
outer ones triangular, c. 1 mm long, with 2 
small appendages at base, inner ones elliptical 
to ovate, 2-3 mm x 2-2.5 mm, glabrous, petals 
6 in 2 whorls, linear, 1.5-2 mm x 0.5-1 mm, 
staminodes 6, ovary superior consisting of 3 
free carpels 2-3 mm long, stigma sessile. Fruit 
consisting of 1-3 ovoid drupes c. 10 mm x 6-7 
mm, orange when ripe, glabrous, stone ellip-
soid, with prominent knobs at both ends, 1-
seeded. 
In South Africa Tinospera caffra flowers from 
December-February. 
Tinospora comprises about 30 species, of which 
about 20 occur in Asia, 7 in continental Africa 
and 2 in Madagascar. 
Tinospora fragosa (Verdoorn) Verdoorn & 
Troupin (Moses' staff, marvel creeper) is a 
semisucculent liana, which occurs in northern 
Namibia, northern Botswana, Zimbabwe and 
the dry parts of northern South Africa. An in-
fusion of the leaves and twigs is taken against 
anthrax, whereas the whole plant is fed to cat-
tle for this purpose. Twigs are chewed against 
cough and sore throat. Stems and leaves are 
used in a bath against rheumatism and body 
pain. Tinospora fragosa is an attractive orna-
mental with bright orange-red fruits just when 
the bright green leaves appear. Tinospora ob-
longifolia (Engl.) Troupin is a liana occurring 
in lowland rainforest and coastal evergreen 
bushland in Kenya and Tanzania, including 
Zanzibar. A decoction of the roots or an infu-
sion of the roots in cold water is drunk as a 
purgative. Tinospora tenera Miers is a semi-
succulent liana, which occurs in Tanzania, Mo-
zambique, Swaziland and north-eastern South 
Africa. A leaf extract is drunk against pain in 
the joints and as a sexual tonic for men. A de-
coction of the leaves and roots is drunk or used 
as enema against kidney stones, whereas the 
steam is inhaled to treat influenza. A decoction 
of the leaves is used as a wash against venereal 
sores, steam from the decoction is applied to 
treat skin problems. Hyalosepalum uviforme 
(Baill.) Troupin (synonym: Chasmanthera uvi-
formis Baill.) occurs in northern Madagascar 
and closely resembles Tinospora spp. A decoc-
tion of its stem bark is taken to treat malaria. 
Ecology Tinospora caffra occurs in dense 
humid forest, deciduous bushland, in drier 
areas often on rock outcrops, up to 2000 m alti-
tude. 
Genetic resources and b reed ing Tino-
spora caffra has a wide distribution and there 
are no signs that there is immediate danger of 
genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of its medicinal uses and 
many medicinal uses of related species, chemi-
cal and pharmacological screening of Tinospora 
caffra and other African Tinospora spp. seems 
warranted. 
Major references de Wet, 2005; Kokwaro, 
1993; Neuwinger, 2000; Troupin, 1956; Trou-
pin, 1960. 
Other references de Wet & van Wyk, 2008; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Authors L.P.A. Oyen 
TOURNEFORTIA ACUMINATA DC. 
Protologue Prodr. 9: 520 (1845). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Vernacular names Bois de Laurent-Martin 
(Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tourne-
fortia acuminata is endemic to Réunion. 
Uses The leaves of Tournefortia acuminata 
are considered to have diuretic properties and 
are traditionally used to treat kidney stones in 
Réunion. 
Properties The presence of alkaloids has 
been confirmed by general tests on Tournefor-
tia acuminata but otherwise nothing is known 
of its chemistry. Laboratory tests with leaf 
extracts of Tournefortia acuminata did not 
confirm the diuretic properties claimed in folk 
medicine. Leaf extracts of Tournefortia ar-
gentea L.f. have been proven efficient in coun-
teracting poisoning by Ciguatoxins (produced 
by the dinoflagellate Gambierdiscus toxicus 
and transferred by fish): they counteract the 
neurocellular effects and have beneficial action 
on the gastro-intestinal disturbances. Pyrrol-
izidine alkaloids have been isolated from twigs 
of Tournefortia argentea. Several phenolic 
compounds, including salicylic acid and tourne-
folin A-C, have been isolated from the stems of 
Tournefortia sarmentosa Lam., a species from 
tropical Asia that is widely used medicinally. 
Botany Shrub or small tree; stem with min-
612 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
ute, closely appressed brown or golden hairs or 
glabrous. Leaves alternate, simple and entire; 
blade obovate to elliptical, 12-17 cm x 3.5-7 
cm, acute at base and at apex, with 10-15 pairs 
of veins. Inflorescence a terminal, dichoto-
mously branched, scorpioid cyme. Flowers bi-
sexual, regular, 5-merous, sessile; calyx 1.5-2 
mm long, sparsely hairy; corolla white, tube 
3.5-7 mm long, lobes c. 4 mm wide. Fruit a 
small, white, globose drupe c. 6 mm in diame-
ter, splitting into two 2-seeded parts. 
Tournefortia and related genera are in need of 
revision. Tournefortia comprises about 100 
species, most of them native in America and 
with about 15 species in the Old World, 2 in 
mainland Africa and 4 endemic to the Indian 
Ocean islands. 
The widespread Tournefortia argentea L.f. 
(synonym: Argusia argentea (L.f.) Heine), 'octo-
pus tree', 'veloutier blanc' or 'bois tabac', occurs 
on coastal beaches from Kenya to Mozambique, 
the Indian Ocean islands and through Asia to 
Australia. The leaves are used as a poison an-
tidote in Vietnam and New Caledonia; they are 
eaten raw as a vegetable and smoked like to-
bacco. 
Ecology Tournefortia acuminata is found 
throughout Réunion, but is nowhere abundant. 
It tends to flower in the cyclone season (No-
vember-April). 
Genetic resources and breeding In Reun-
ion Tournefortia acuminata is considered rare 
and vulnerable, and in need of protection. The 
other African Tournefortia species, with the 
exception of Tournefortia argentea, are un-
common and vulnerable as well. 
Prospects Almost nothing is known about 
the phytochemistry and pharmacological prop-
erties of the African Tournefortia species. Re-
search into the chemistry and pharmacology is 
long overdue. However, they are likely to re-
main of limited importance. Survival of the 
vulnerable species should be assured by protec-
tion of their habitats. 
Major references Adsersen & Adsersen, 
1997; Gurib-Fakim & Brendler, 2004. 
Other references Aguilar, 2003b; Diane, 
Förther & Hilger, 2002; Friedmann, 1994; 
Johnston, 1935; Lin et al., 1999; Miller, 2001; 
Riedl, 1997. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
TRAGIA BREVIPES Pax 
Protologue Bot. Jahrb. Syst. 19: 103 (1894). 
Family Euphorbiaceae 
Vernacular names Climbing nettle (En). 
Chavi, weni (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tragia 
brevipes occurs from Ethiopia south to Malawi, 
Zambia and Zimbabwe. It has erroneously been 
reported for Cameroon and Somalia. 
Uses A root decoction is taken in Kenya as a 
purgative, especially for babies and small chil-
dren. The roots are given to women with labour 
pain. Pain caused by rheumatism is treated by 
rubbing the leaves on the painful joints. A leaf 
extract is drunk to cure gonorrhoea, to kill in-
ternal parasites including tapeworm and to 
treat stomach-ache, diarrhoea and gastroen-
teritis. A decoction of roots and leaves is drunk 
to promote conception. Leaves, roots and twigs 
are used to treat polio. The ash of burnt leaves 
is inhaled to cure elephantiasis. 
Properties A methanol extract of the fruits 
has antibacterial activity against Staphylococ-
cus aureus; extracts of leaves, stems and roots 
did not show activity against a panel of bacte-
ria and fungi. An ethanolic leaf extract showed 
significant activity against Entamoeba histo-
lytica. 
Botany Monoecious, straggling, twining, 
scandent or rarely erect shrub up to l(-4.5) m 
tall, with stinging hairs. Leaves alternate, 
simple; stipules linear-lanceolate, up to 7 mm 
long; petiole l-6(-10) cm long; blade ovate or 
ovate-lanceolate, 4—10 cm x 3-7 cm, base cor-
date, apex acuminate, margins toothed, hairy 
beneath with stinging hairs along midrib and 
main veins. Inflorescence a leaf-opposed, rarely 
axillary or lateral raceme, lax-flowered, usually 
with (l-)2(-4) female flowers at base and many 
male flowers higher up; peduncle up to 4 cm 
long. Flowers unisexual; petals and disk ab-
sent; pedicel 0.5-1.5 mm long, extending to 5 
mm in fruit; male flowers with calyx closed in 
bud, splitting in 3(-5) ovate to round lobes, c. 
1.5 mm long, greenish white, stamens (1—)3(— 
5); female flowers with 6 calyx lobes c. 2.5 mm 
long, extending up to 1.5 cm in fruit, ovary 
superior, 3-lobed, 3-celled, styles 3, c. 3.5 mm 
long, broadened at apex. Fruit a 3-lobed cap-
sule c. 9 mm in diameter, short-hairy, dull pale 
brown when ripe, 3-seeded. Seeds globose, c. 4 
mm in diameter, pale grey, mottled brown. 
Tragia comprises about 170 species and occurs 
throughout the tropics, with the majority of 
species in tropical Africa and tropical America. 
TRICHODESMA 613 
In Continental tropical Africa about 55 species 
occur, and in Madagascar about 10. 
Tragia benthamii Baker occurs in West, Cen-
t ra l and southern Africa and is difficult to dis-
t inguish from Tragia brevipes. In West Africa 
the medicinal uses of Tragia benthamii a re 
s imilar to those of Tragia brevipes in eas tern 
Africa, and root extracts are t aken as an abor-
tifacient, to ease child delivery and as a cure 
for gonorrhoea. Tragia preussii Pax occurs in 
Cent ra l Africa. In the Centra l African Republic 
pulped leaves are rubbed on the body to t rea t 
fever and rheumat ic pain; abscesses are 
dressed with boiled leaves. Root sap and root 
powder of the West African Tragia senegalensis 
Müll.Arg. a re t aken to t r e a t insani ty in Togo. 
Leaf sap of the West African Tragia spathulata 
Benth. is applied to cure headache in Ghana . 
Tragia tenuifolia Benth . occurs from West Af-
rica east to Sudan and Rwanda and also in 
Zimbabwe. In Sierra Leone a poultice of the 
leaves is rubbed on the abdomen of a p regnan t 
woman to induce foetal movement and a leaf 
infusion is d runk agains t th rea ten ing abortion. 
Several other Tragia species from Eas t and 
southern Africa also have documented medici-
nal uses. In Tanzania the ash of b u r n t p lan ts of 
Tragia furialis Bojer (synonym: Tragia schef-
fleri Baker) is rubbed into the skin to cure 
headache . In Kenya a p lan t decoction is d runk 
or root powder is applied to snakebi tes . A leaf 
infusion is used as a wash to relieve skin irri ta-
tion caused by st inging ha i r s of p lants . In 
Ethiopia the leaves of Tragia hildebrandtii 
Müll.Arg. a re used to t r ea t u te r ine complaints . 
The ba rk fibre can be made into textile. In 
Zimbabwe the pulverized roots of Tragia 
okanyua Pax are rubbed into the skin to cure 
headache . In Somalia the roots of Tragia 
plukenetii Radcl.-Sm. are used in a cure for 
male impotence. In Kenya the leaves are ea ten 
as a vegetable and the p lants are browsed by 
goats. In Ethiopia a hot wate r extract of the 
roots of Tragia pungens (Forsk.) Müll.Arg. is 
d runk to prevent pregnancy. 
E c o l o g y Tragia brevipes occurs in r iverine 
vegetation, along lake shores, in thickets and 
in high rainfall Brachystegia woodland, from 
sea-level up to 2150 m al t i tude. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g Tragia 
brevipes is widespread and fairly common, and 
is not th rea tened by genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Tragia brevipes will probably 
remain only locally impor tan t as a medicinal 
plant , unless addit ional chemical and pharma-
cological research reveal in teres t ing propert ies . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Boily & Van Puyvelde, 
1986; Burkill , 1994; Neuwinger, 2000; Rad-
cliffe-Smith, 1987. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s Heine & Heine, 1988a; 
Lebbie & Guries, 1995; Murengezi & Sano, 
1993; Vlietinck et al., 1995. 
A u t h o r s C.H. Bosch 
TRICHODESMA AFRICANUM (L.) L e h m . 
P r o t o l o g u e PL Asperif. nucif.: 195 (1818). 
F a m i l y Boraginaceae 
C h r o m o s o m e n u m b e r n = 14 
S y n o n y m s Trichodesma gracile Bat t . & 
Trab. (1911). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tricho-
desma africanum occurs from Cape Verde, 
Maur i t an ia and Senegal eas t to Ethiopia and 
extends into Asia up to India and Afghanistan. 
It is also found in Namibia and South Africa. 
U s e s Leaves of Trichodesma africanum a re 
used as a diuretic in Nigeria and Sudan. In 
Senegal and Nigeria the leaves a re also used to 
t r ea t diarrhoea, and as an emollient, antipy-
retic and anti- inflammatory. An infusion of the 
roots is used to t r ea t hepat i t i s . The plant is an 
excellent fodder for camels, bu t other livestock 
seem to avoid it. 
P r o p e r t i e s The pyrrolizidine alkaloid 
t r ichodesmine and 2 saponins have been iso-
lated from Trichodesma africanum, as well as 
ß-amyrin, ß-methyl oleanate, ß-sitosterol and 
st igmasterol . 
B o t a n y Annua l or short-lived perennia l herb 
up to 80 cm tall, much-branched mainly from 
the base; s tem with rigid tubercle-based prick-
les. Leaves simple and ent ire , lower leaves 
opposite and petiolate, upper leaves a l t e rna te 
and sessile; s t ipules absent; blade ovate to 
ovate-lanceolate, rare ly oblong, up to 10(-12) 
cm x 4(-5) cm, base t runca te , nar rowing to-
wards apex. Inflorescence a lax te rmina l or 
axillary, few-flowered cyme. Flowers bisexual, 
regular , 5-merous; calyx lobes ovate-lanceolate, 
6—8 mm long, enlarging in fruit; corolla blue, 
tube up to 1.5 mm long, lobes 3.5-4.5 mm long; 
s t amens with 1 m m long filaments, an the r s c. 7 
mm long; ovary superior, 4-lobed, up to 2 m m 
in diameter , glabrous. Frui t spli t t ing into 4 
ovoid, smooth, brown nut le t s 4—5 mm in di-
ameter . 
Trichodesma comprises about 45 species and is 
confined to t he Old World. 
E c o l o g y Trichodesma africanum occurs in 
dry grassland, fallow land, stony wadis and 
614 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
sandy desert plains. 
Genetic resources and breeding Tricho-
desma africanum is widespread and is not 
threatened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects Although knowledge on several 
Trichodesma species is considerable, Tricho-
desma africanum deserves further study of its 
pharmacological properties. 
Major references Aguilar, 2003c; Berhaut, 
1974; Boulos, 2000a; Burkill, 1985; Martins, 
1995. 
Other references Friedrich-Holzhammer, 
1967; Neuwinger, 2000; Omar et al., 1983; 
Verdcourt, 1991. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
TRICHODESMA AMBACENSE Welw. 
Protologue Apont: 589 (1859). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Synonyms Trichodesma hockii De Wild. 
(1913). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tricho-
desma ambacense is widespread in East and 
southern Africa. In West Africa it is reported 
only from Nigeria, in Central Africa only from 
Cameroon and south-eastern DR Congo. 
Uses In Zimbabwe the woody rhizome of 
Trichodesma ambacense has multiple medici-
nal uses. It is applied to incisions made in the 
skin to treat backache, headache, painful swell-
ings and syphilitic swelling of glands. For 
swellings caused by oedema, a decoction is ap-
plied as a hot compress. For depressed fon-
tanelle, the crushed rhizome is applied and an 
infusion given to drink. An infusion is drunk to 
dilate the birth canal. Powdered rhizome is 
taken orally to cure bilharzia. In DR Congo the 
leaf ash is applied to corns, and the macerated 
leaves are used to dye white hair black. 
Properties No information is available on 
the phytochemical or pharmacological proper-
ties of Trichodesma ambacense. In other 
Trichodesma spp. with similar medicinal uses 
pyrrolizidine alkaloids appear to be the phar-
macologically or toxicologically active ingredi-
ents. 
Botany Perennial, erect herb up to 50(—70) 
cm tall, usually unbranched. Leaves simple 
and entire, sessile, lower leaves opposite, upper 
leaves subopposite or alternate; stipules ab-
sent; blade ovate to elliptical, oblanceolate or 
linear-oblong, 4-7 cm x 0.5-3 cm, exceptionally 
on sterile shoots up to 16 cm x 5 cm, base 
cuneate to rounded, apex acute or obtuse. In-
florescence terminal, up to 30 cm long, with up 
to 9(-12) branches each with up to 8(—12) flow-
ers. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous; calyx 
lobes ovate, up to 18 mm x 9 mm, enlarging in 
fruit; corolla 17-25 mm long, tube white or 
cream, lobes spreading or reflexed, triangular, 
blue, rarely white. Fruit a single discoid nutlet, 
c. 13 mm x 8 mm. 
In Trichodesma ambacense 2 subspecies are 
recognized: subsp. ambacense has only been 
found in Angola, whereas subsp. hockii (De 
Wild.) Brummitt is found in the rest of the 
range of the species. Trichodesma physaloides 
(Fenzl) A.DC. occurs largely in the same area 
as Trichodesma ambacense, but is absent from 
Nigeria and extends into South Africa. The 
former has glabrous stems and pedicels, 
whereas in the latter these are hairy. Interme-
diates that are thought to be hybrids do occur. 
The woody rootstock of Trichodesma physa-
loides is used in a paste to treat wounds in 
Zimbabwe, and the powdered rootstock mixed 
with beer or porridge as an aphrodisiac in Ma-
lawi. In Tanzania an infusion made of the pe-
duncles is given to calves that suffer from diar-
rhoea. In DR Congo the leaves are rubbed on 
the skin to treat lumbago. Apart from the men-
tion that Trichodesma physaloides contains a 
toxic alkaloid, nothing appears to have been 
published on its properties. 
Ecology Trichodesma ambacense is found in 
grassland and woodland that is subject to an-
nual burning. Its altitudinal range is 600-1500 
m. 
Genetic resources and breeding Tricho-
desma ambacense is widespread and not 
threatened with genetic erosion. 
Prospects In view of its medicinal uses and 
the apparent lack of knowledge on its pharma-
cological properties, Trichodesma ambacense 
and related species deserve more attention in 
research. 
Major references Brummitt, 1982; Gelfand 
et a l , 1985; Taton, 1971. 
Other references Kokwaro, 1993; Verd-
court, 1991. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
TRICHODESMA ZEYLANICUM (Burm.f.) R.Br. 
Protologue Prodr.: 496 (1810). 
Family Boraginaceae 
Chromosome number 2« = 24 
Vernacular names Camel bush, cattle 
bush, northern bluebell (En). Herbe cipaye, 
TRICHODESMA 615 
bourrache sauvage, herbe tourterelle (Fr). 
Msasa mlanda, mwagewage (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tricho-
desma zeylanicum is widespread in the tropics 
and subtropics of the Old World and in Austra-
lia. It occurs throughout tropical Africa, but is 
absent from West Africa. 
Uses In Tanzania green leaves and roots of 
Trichodesma zeylanicum are chewed and ap-
plied as a poultice to wounds, boils and snake-
bites. Roots are chewed or pounded and soaked 
in water, and the infusion is used as a remedy 
for tuberculosis, stomach-ache, poisoning and 
rheumatism. In Malawi both leaves and roots 
are used for treating wounds, the roots also for 
treating diarrhoea. In the Mascarene Islands a 
decoction of the plant is used against fever, 
dysentery and as a diuretic. The powdered root 
is analgesic when applied to wounds. In Zim-
babwe and Comoros powder of dried leaves is 
applied to infected wounds. In Zimbabwe the 
leaves are used to prevent stillbirth. The ash of 
burnt plants enters in prescriptions for cough 
and scabies. In South Africa the plant is used 
as an analgesic and for wound healing. In India 
and Sri Lanka it is used as a snakebite rem-
edy. The seed oil is used for its emollient prop-
erties in Tanzania, India and Pakistan. 
The young leaves and shoots are cooked and 
eaten as a vegetable in Tanzania, Malawi and 
Madagascar. Camels appear to be partial to 
Trichodesma zeylanicum but other livestock 
seem to avoid it. 
Production and international trade The 
seed oil/flower essence of Trichodesma zeylani-
cum is traded on the international market un-
der the name of 'wild borage oil'. The main 
producer is Australia and the main market is 
western Europe. Quantities and value of the 
trade are unknown. 
Properties Pyrrolizidine alkaloids, with 
supinine as the principal component, have been 
isolated from Trichodesma zeylanicum seeds. 
These compounds also occur in other Boragina-
ceae, e.g. Borago officinalis L., Cynoglossum 
spp. and other Trichodesma spp., and this may 
explain similar uses. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids 
can cause fatal liver conditions and several 
Trichodesma spp. have been implicated in poi-
soning of livestock. Ricinoleic acid and cyclo-
propene acid were found in the seed oil. 
Botany Short-lived perennial, less often 
annual herb, up to 1.5(-2) m tall, much-
branched. Leaves simple, lower leaves oppo-
site, upper leaves alternate; stipules absent; 
petiole up to 1 cm long; blade oblong to oblong-
Trichodesma zeylanicum - 1, part of flowering 
plant; 2, flower; 3, fruit in calyx. 
Source: PROSEA 
lanceolate, up to 16 cm x 5 cm, base rounded to 
slightly cordate; narrowing towards apex. In-
florescence a terminal, lax, many-flowered 
cyme; axes densely clothed with spreading 
hairs. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5(-6)-merous; 
calyx lobes ovate-lanceolate, up to 10 mm x 3.5 
mm, truncate at base, enlarged in fruit; corolla 
blue or rarely white with blue margins, with 
dark reddish purple spot on base of each lobe, 
tube 4-5 mm long, lobes up to 4.5 mm x 6 mm; 
stamens sessile; ovary superior, up to 2 mm in 
diameter, 4-lobed, glabrous. Fruit splitting into 
4 ovoid, smooth, brown nutlets c. 5 mm x 2 
mm. 
Trichodesma comprises about 45 species and is 
confined to the Old World. Trichodesma zey-
lanicum and Trichodesma indicum (L.) 
J.E.Smith are closely related and both have 
fruits consisting of 4 smooth nutlets. They can 
be distinguished by the base of the calyx lobes: 
truncate in the former, hastate, sagittate or 
cordate in the latter. Trichodesma indicum is 
considered indigenous in Mauritius, Réunion 
and tropical Asia. It is found along the coast of 
Kenya and Tanzania where it probably has 
been introduced and occurs on sand just above 
616 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
the high-tide mark, in grassland, waste locali-
ties and coconut fields. In the Philippines the 
flowers of Trichodesma indicum are used as a 
sudorific and pectoral, as a substitute for Bo-
rage* officinalis. Trichodesma angustifolia 
Harv. differs from Trichodesma zeylanicum by 
the appressed hairy inflorescence axes and a 
larger corolla. It is found in Namibia, Bot-
swana, Mozambique and South Africa. In Na-
mibia the pulverized root is applied to wounds. 
Ecology Trichodesma zeylanicum is found 
in disturbed ground and waste places, some-
times in woodland. It is often abundant and is 
widely regarded as a serious weed of cultiva-
tion. In Africa it is found up to 1700 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding As 
Trichodesma zeylanicum is widely distributed 
and abundant wherever it occurs, it is not 
threatened. 
Prospects Further research is needed to 
evaluate the traditional medicinal uses of 
Trichodesma zeylanicum and related species. 
As pyrrolizidine alkaloids have serious long-
term toxic effects, these should be included in 
the evaluation as well. 
Major references Aguilar, 2003c; Gurib-
Fakim, Guého & Bissoondoyal, 1995; Martins 
& Brummitt, 1990; Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 
2002; Verdcourt, 1991. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al. (Edi-
tors), 1982; Burkill, 1985; Decary, 1946; Gel-
fand et al., 1985; Haerdi, 1964; Hosamani, 
1994b; Kokwaro, 1993; Martins, 1993; von 
Koenen, 2001; Williamson, 1955. 
Sources of illustration Aguilar, 2003c. 
Authors C.H. Bosch 
Based on PROSEA 12(3): Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 3. 
TRICLISIA DICTYOPHYLLA Diels 
Protologue Engl., Pflanzenr. IV, 94: 70 
(1910). 
Family Menispermaceae 
Synonyms Triclisia gilletii (De Wild.) Sta-
ner (1933). 
Origin and geographic distribution Tri-
clisia dictyophylla occurs from Liberia east to 
the Central African Republic and south to An-
gola and Tanzania. 
Uses In Côte d'Ivoire Triclisia dictyophylla 
root pulp or root sap is rubbed into scarifica-
tions to treat joint pain, epileptic attacks, oe-
dema, venereal diseases and anaemia. Leaf 
juice eases cough and a bark or root decoction 
Triclisia dictyophylla - wild 
is used as a wash to calm palpitations. Pow-
dered stem bark is used in the treatment of 
leprosy. In central DR Congo a decoction of the 
twig bark is widely taken to treat fever and 
malaria, and also to treat diarrhoea, stomach 
problems and purulent catarrh. In south-
eastern DR Congo leaves are suspended from 
the ceiling to help children with breathing 
problems. In Congo a root bark decoction is 
taken against stomach problems and dysen-
tery, convulsive coughing and feverish stiffness 
of the limbs; the root juice is taken to treat 
rheumatism and inflammation of the joints; 
the juice of young leaves is diluted and admin-
istered as a painkiller to patients with mental 
health problems during attacks. In south-
western parts of the Central African Republic, 
the macerated root is taken as an abortifacient 
and emmenagogue. In Tanzania a root decoc-
tion is drunk as a vermifuge, whereas roots are 
taken raw to treat venereal diseases. In 
Ulanga district in south-eastern Tanzania, 
grated roots are taken to treat snakebites and 
expel roundworm. 
In several parts of Central Africa the root, es-
pecially the root bark, is an ingredient of arrow 
poison. 
Properties The characteristic bioactive 
compounds in Triclisia dictyophylla are bis-
benzyl-isoquinoline alkaloids and related di-
oxin alkaloids. From the roots and stems the 
bisbenzyl-isoquinolines phaeanthine, N,N'-
dimethylphaeanthine, tetrandrine and the 
bisbenzyl-isoquinoline dibenzodioxins cocsuline 
(trigilletine) and trigilletimine were isolated. 
The stems also yielded the oxo-isoquinoline O-
methylmoschatoline and the indeno-
T R I C L I S I A 617 
isoquinoline triclisine. Analyses of the leaves 
found the bisbenzyl-isoquinolines stebisimine 
and obamegine (stepholine), the bisbenzyl-
isoquinoline dioxins gilletine and isogilletine-
N-oxide, and the morphinan alkaloid tridictyo-
phylline. 
Although the pharmacological propert ies of 
several Triclisia species containing similar 
alkaloids have been studied, very few studies 
have been done on the pharmacological proper-
ties of Triclisia dictyophylla. A methanol ex-
t rac t of the s tem bark h a s shown strong activ-
ity agains t Plasmodium falciparum in vitro 
and a less strong, bu t significant effect against 
Trypanosoma brucei. N,N'-dimethylphaeanthine 
is the principal toxic compound which showed a 
curare-l ike paralysing action on muscle t issue 
in mice and ra t s . Phaean th ine and cocsuline 
show high inhibitory activities against 
Leishmania spp. and Trypanosoma cruzei. Gil-
letine showed an t imala r ia l activity a t IC50 = 
110 ng/ml agains t Plasmodium sp. in vitro. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Dioecious l iana up to 30 m 
long, or scrambling shrub; s tems up to 10 cm in 
Triclisia dictyophylla - 1, male flowering branch; 
2, fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
diameter; bark greyish, longitudinally striped; 
young branches sparsely short-hairy, becoming 
glabrous. Leaves a l te rna te , simple and entire; 
petiole 10—20 cm long, stout, swollen a t the 
base and apex, slightly hai ry when young; 
blade broadly elliptical to almost circular, up to 
32 cm x 27 cm, base rounded, cordate or almost 
cuneate , apex acuminate , leathery, glabrous, 
pinnately veined, bu t with 1—2 pairs of basa l 
la tera l veins, la tera l veins in 3 -5 pairs , mostly 
looping, secondary and te r t ia ry venation very 
prominent below. Inflorescence an axillary 
panicle of dense to lax cymes, 1-3 cm long; 
peduncle densely hairy. Flowers unisexual; 
pedicel c. 2 m m long, hairy; brac ts c. 0.5 mm 
long; sepals 9-15, densely hairy, pale brown to 
dull orange, 3-9 outer ones ovate, 1—1.5 mm 
long, 3 middle ones ovate, c. 1 mm long, 3 inte-
rior ones elliptical-obovate, 4-4 .5 mm x 2-2.5 
mm; male flowers with 3-6 peta ls c. 0.5 mm 
long, s t amens 3-6, free, c. 5 m m long, fi laments 
slender; female flowers wi thout petals, ovary 
superior, composed of 50-60 densely hai ry car-
pels, styles 1-1.5 mm long, glabrous. Frui t 
composed of many obovoid, f lattened drupes c. 
2.5 cm x 1.5 cm, br ight orange, base rounded, 
apex long-acuminate, recurved, slightly rough; 
stone very hard , 1-seeded. Seed 1-1.5 cm x 1 
cm. 
Other b o t a n i c a l i n f o r m a t i o n Triclisia 
comprises about 20 species, approximately 12 
in main land tropical Africa, 7 in Madagascar 
and 1 in Mayotte . 
Triclisia sacleuxii (Pierre) Diels occurs from 
Congo east to Kenya and south to Angola and 
Mozambique; the root is chewed and the sap 
swallowed to t r ea t kidney problems, sore 
throat , schistosomiasis, in tes t ina l worms and 
venereal diseases, while root scrapings are 
rubbed into topical scarifications to t r ea t 
snakebi tes . The roots contain the bisbenzyl-
isoquinoline alkaloids phaean th ine , 1,2-
dehydroapatel ine, N-methylapatel ine , O-
methylcocsoline and gasabiimine; the s tem 
contains a mixture of N-(4-hydroxyphenethyl) 
ferulamides. A decoction of s tem bark or root 
ba rk of Triclisia macrocarpa (Baill.) Diels from 
Madagascar is d runk agains t malar ia . 
E c o l o g y Triclisia dictyophylla occurs in 
dense, humid lowland to medium-al t i tude for-
est. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s As Triclisia dictyophylla 
occurs in a very wide area , it does not seem to 
be in danger of genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Because Triclisia dictyophylla is 
widely used in t radi t ional medicine and be-
618 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
cause of i ts significant ant iplasmodial activity, 
fur ther pharmacological research is war ran ted . 
The genus Triclisia is in need of a revision. 
M a j o r r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 1997; Mesia et 
al., 2008; Neuwinger, 1998; Troupin, 1956; 
Troupin, 1962. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s de Wet, 2005; Disengo-
moka, Delaveau & Sengele, 1983; Kokwaro, 
1993; Kronlund, Kris t iansson & Sandberg, 
1970; Murebwayire et al., 2006; Neuwinger, 
2000; Owusu et al., 1981; Spiff et al., 1981. 
S o u r c e s of i l l u s t r a t i o n Troupin, 1951. 
A u t h o r s B.J. Pollard 
TRICLISIA PATENS Oliv. 
P r o t o l o g u e FI. t rop. M r . 1: 49 (1868). 
F a m i l y Menispermaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Tri-
clisia patens occurs from Senegal eas t to 
G h a n a and Benin. 
U s e s In Côte d'Ivoire root pulp is rubbed in 
or root sap is rubbed into scarifications to t r ea t 
rheumat i sm, a r thr i t i s , anaemia and sleeping 
sickness. A decoction of the root is d runk to 
t r ea t fever and malar ia . A root decoction is also 
t a k e n as an emmenagogue and abortifacient. A 
leaf or root decoction is used as a wash agains t 
palpi tat ions, as it has a sedative effect on the 
hea r t . Leaf sap h a s a soothing effect on cough. 
A decoction of the s tem is d runk agains t stom-
ach-ache and a decoction of the leaves and 
twigs is drunk, or leaf pulp is rubbed in, to 
t r ea t oedema of the legs. In Sierra Leone a leaf 
decoction is used as a nasa l or ocular instilla-
tion and as a purgat ive or ba the agains t epi-
lepsy. Stem bark is powdered and applied to 
syphilitic sores and leprosy; t he ba rk pulp is 
used a s a purgat ive . Leaf or root juice mixed 
with salt in palm wine is d r u n k against cough 
and bronchial disorders. 
In Sierra Leone the s tems a re made into slings 
used for climbing oil palms, while sections of 
the s tem or parched, scraped roots are added to 
pa lm wine to make it more intoxicating. 
Product ion and international trade Tri-
clisia patens is commonly sold on local mar-
kets . 
P r o p e r t i e s From a methanol extract of 
dried leaves of Triclisia patens the bisbenzyl-
isoquinoline alkaloids phaean th ine , aromoline, 
N,N' -d imethylphaeanthine and pycnamine, 
and the dioxin derivatives of bisbenzyl-
isoquinoline alkaloids cocsuline and trigil-
let imine were isolated. 
A methanol extract of dried leaves showed sig-
nificant antiprotozoal activities against 
Leishmania donovani (ICso = 1.5 u,g/ml) and 
the blood s t ream form of Trypanosoma brucei 
brucei (ICso = 31 ug/ml). Phaean th ine was 
three t imes more active (ICBO= 2.4 p.M/ml) t h a n 
Pentos tam, a s t anda rd drug for the t r e a t m e n t 
of le ishmaniasis , bu t a t th is concentrat ion it is 
reported to be toxic to m a m m a l i a n macro-
phages. In contrast , cocsoline (ICso = 12.3 
^M/ml) was as active as the s t andard drug, and 
was not toxic to macrophages a t this concentra-
tion. 
Both phaean th ine and aromoline showed anti-
protozoal activity agains t Trypanosoma brucei 
bu t less strongly t h a n the s t anda rd drug. 
Crude ethanolic extracts of the wood and bark 
showed significant ant iplasmodial activity, bu t 
no significant anti-amoebic effect. P h a e a n t h i n e 
was effective agains t chloroquine-resistant and 
non-res is tant s t ra ins of Plasmodium, falcipa-
rum in vitro; at t he used concentrat ions the 
alkaloid was found to be non-toxic to mammal -
ian cells. An aqueous extract of the root showed 
ant ispasmodic activity on the respira tory t ract 
and in tes t ina l smooth muscle t i ssue of several 
tes t animals , which suppor ts the use of the root 
agains t bronchial and in tes t inal problems. 
B o t a n y Dioecious l iana up to 12 m long; 
s tem up to 6 cm in diameter; branchle ts pu-
berulous. Leaves a l te rna te , simple and entire; 
st ipules absent; petiole 5-10 cm long; blade 
ovate to elliptical, 10-18 cm x 2-12 cm, base 
cuneate to slightly cordate, apex t r iangular-
acuminate , leathery, pinnately veined with 3-4 
pai rs of la teral veins, of which the lowest pair 
basal , densely short-hairy on main veins below. 
Inflorescence an axillary umbel-like cyme, 2 . 5 -
8 cm x 2-12 cm or a false panicle up to 20 cm 
long; female inflorescence more compact t h a n 
male one; branchle ts and pedicels finely grey 
hairy. Flowers unisexual ; brac ts 2, t iny; sepals 
6-9 , yellow to orange, outer ones very small, 
slightly concave, 1—1.5 m m long, inner ones 
oblong to lanceolate, 2 - 5 m m x 1.5-2 mm, wi th 
recurved apex, all densely short-hairy outside; 
petals 1—3, much reduced or absent; male flow-
ers with 3 s t amens 2-2.5 mm long, free, with 
thick filaments; female flowers with stami-
nodes, ovary superior, composed of 6-40 car-
pels, short-hairy, styles cylindrical. F ru i t com-
posed of ellipsoid, f lattened drupes 1-2.5 cm x 
1-1.5 cm on a stipe 3-5 mm long, short-hairy, 
yellow, stone wrinkled, 1-seeded. Seed with 
endosperm. 
Triclisia comprises about 20 species, approxi-
UAPACA 619 
mately 12 in mainland tropical Africa, 7 in 
Madagascar and 1 in Mayotte. 
Triclisia macrophylla Oliv, has a sketchy dis-
tribution from Sierra Leone to Cameroon and 
Bioko (Equatorial Guinea); a root decoction is 
drunk to treat hernia. It is listed in the IUCN 
Red List as critically endangered because of 
habitat loss. Triclisia subcordata Oliv, occurs 
throughout West and Central Africa, and has 
similar medicinal uses to Triclisia patens. A 
methanolic leaf extract showed significant anti-
ulcer effects in rats. The stems are used as 
rope. The fruits are reported as edible. 
Ecology Triclisia patens occurs in rainforest 
and gallery forest, and is also common in sec-
ondary forest and on fallow land, at low and 
medium altitudes. 
Genetic resources and breeding Triclisia 
patens has a fairly wide distribution and grows 
in both primary and secondary vegetation; 
there are no indications that it is endangered. 
Prospects Triclisia patens has shown strong 
antiprotozoal and antiplasmodial activities and 
is widely used in traditional medicine. Further 
pharmacological research into its uses and 
active compounds is therefore warranted. The 
genus Triclisia is in need of a revision. 
Major references Burkill, 1997; Camacho 
et al., 2002; Keay & Troupin, 1954; Marshall et 
al., 2000; Troupin, 1962. 
Other references Akoègninou, van der 
Burg & van der Maesen, 2006; Asuzu & Anaga, 
1995; Boissier et al., 1963; Camacho et al., 
2003; Dramane & Mahieux, 1986; Dwuma-
Badu et al., 1975b; Hawthorne & Jongkind, 
2006; Hoët et al., 2004a; Neuwinger, 2000; de 
Wet, 2005. 
Authors D.M. Mosango 
UAPACA GUINEENSIS Müll. Arg. 
Protologue Flora 47: 517 (1864). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number 2n — 26 
Vernacular names Sugar plum, red cedar, 
false mahogany, rikio (En). Palétuvier de ri-
vière, palétuvier d'eau douce (Fr). Sambi, cor 
de mogno (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Uapaca 
guineensis occurs from Senegal east to the Cen-
tral African Republic and south to DR Congo 
and Tanzania. It probably also occurs in 
Uganda. 
Uses Especially the roots of Uapaca gui-
Uapaca guineensis - wild 
neensis are widely used medicinally; stem bark, 
leaves and fruits are used to a lesser extent. 
Root preparations are commonly taken as an 
aphrodisiac and to treat male impotence. In 
Sierra Leone a steam bath with the roots is 
used to treat headache. In Côte d'Ivoire a root 
bark preparation is applied to leprous sores 
and taken as a tonic by women who have just 
given birth. In Côte d'Ivoire and Congo a root 
bark decoction is taken orally or as an enema 
to treat oedema and gastro-intestinal prob-
lems. In Gabon a root bark decoction is applied 
in the form of an enema as an emetic; a stem 
bark extract is drunk for the same purpose. 
Powdered root bark is sniffed to treat nasal 
cancer. In Congo and DR Congo a root bark 
decoction is taken to treat female sterility, 
toothache, rheumatism and piles. In Congo a 
root infusion is taken to treat headache caused 
by fever. Painful parts are embrocated with the 
crushed roots to ease the pain. A root infusion 
is taken with sugar cane juice to treat a 
blocked nose and pulmonary afflictions. In Ga-
bon stem bark scrapings mixed with salt are 
rubbed in to treat skin complaints. In DR 
Congo a decoction of leaves, stem bark or root 
bark is taken to treat dysentery, diarrhoea, 
stomach-ache and venereal diseases. Pulped 
leaves with palm oil are applied to furuncles to 
mature them and to relieve migraine and 
rheumatism. They are also massaged onto legs 
of rachitic children to strengthen them. In 
Tanzania a stem bark decoction is taken to 
treat malaria. In Liberia unripe fruits are 
taken as a cough medicine. In northern Nigeria 
the flowers and bark enter into arrow poison 
preparations. 
620 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
The fruits have a sweetish edible pulp which 
can be eaten raw. Its taste resembles that of 
dried prunes or avocado. In Nigeria the pulp is 
made into a refreshing drink. The wood is used 
locally in carpentry and to make planks, rail-
way sleepers, beams, furniture, beds and 
kitchen utensils. Throughout West Africa the 
bole is used to make dugout canoes. The stilt 
roots and branches are suitable for boat ribs. 
The wood produces good firewood and charcoal. 
Young twigs exude a red sticky sap, which 
dries like a gum and is used as a dye, e.g. for 
fishing lines. In Nigeria the large leaves are 
used to wrap kola nuts. The tree is used for 
shade and could be planted in coffee and cocoa 
plantations. It can also be planted to stabilize 
river banks. 
Production and international trade In Li-
beria, Cameroon and DR Congo Uapaca 
guineensis is commercially exploited under its 
trade name 'rikio', but nowadays only at a local 
level. In Liberia the wood has been exported in 
the past as 'false mahogany'. 
Properties An ethanol extract of the wood 
showed moderate antiplasmodial activity in 
vitro. An ethanolic root bark extract and an 
ethanolic stem bark extract did not show sig-
nificant antibacterial or antifungal activity 
against human pathogens in vitro. The wood 
and bark contain much tannin. The sapwood is 
whitish tinged red, and the heartwood red to 
reddish brown. The wood is hard, durable and 
moderately heavy, and when quarter-sawn it 
has an attractive silver grain. It is easy to 
work. 
Description Dioecious, small to medium-
sized, much-branched, evergreen tree up to 
18(-30) m tall; bole fluted, up to 100 cm in di-
ameter, often on rounded stilt roots up to 3 m 
high; bark dark brown to blackish, cracked or 
scaly; crown dense and low branching; 
branches long, slender, almost glabrous, hollow 
when dry, leaf scars conspicuous; terminal bud 
sticky. Leaves alternate, crowded towards the 
end of the branches, simple; stipules linear, c. 
0.5 mm long, soon falling; petiole 1.5—4(—7) cm 
long, jointed at top; blade broadly obovate, (5— 
)9-24 cm x (2-)4-10(-17) cm, base cuneate, 
apex rounded, margins usually wavy, papery, 
with numerous minute glandular raised dots, 
pinnately veined with 5—13 pairs of lateral 
veins. Male inflorescence an axillary globular 
to ovoid head 4-7 mm in diameter, female 
flowers solitary; peduncle of male inflorescence 
1—1.5 cm long, with 2-4 small dispersed bracts; 
involucral bracts 8—10, elliptical to rounded, 1— 
Uapaca guineensis - 1, base of bole; 2, branch 
with male flowers; 3, fruit; 4, stone. 
Redrawn and adapted by Achmad Satiri Nur-
haman 
1.5 cm long, bright yellow, enclosing the flow-
ers in bud. Flowers unisexual, petals absent; 
male flowers sessile, with c. 9 unequal calyx 
lobes, c. 5 lobes oblong, c. 1 mm long, the others 
linear, small, stamens 5, filaments up to 1.5 
mm long, rudimentary ovary c. 1 mm long, 
short-hairy; female flowers with 8-15 mm long 
pedicel, 6 unequal calyx lobes, triangular to 
rounded, 1—1.5 mm long, short-hairy, ovary 
superior, globose, 2.5-3 mm in diameter, 3-
celled, smooth, styles 3, 4-5 mm long, reflexed, 
twice bifid towards apex. Fruit an almost glo-
bose drupe 2-2.5 cm in diameter, warty, gla-
brous, greenish, with 3 stones, usually 1 seed 
per stone. 
Other botanical information Uapaca com-
prises 50-60 species from tropical Africa and 
Madagascar, and is in need of a complete revi-
sion. Many Uapaca spp. are similarly used as 
medicinal plants. The distribution area of Ua-
paca guineensis is not easy to establish as sev-
eral Uapaca species are very similar. The pres-
ence of Uapaca guineensis in the drier parts of 
West Africa is doubtful and local specimens 
possibly belong to Uapaca togoensis Pax. In 
older floras the distribution area of Uapaca 
UAPACA 621 
guineensis extended to southern Africa, but 
nowadays the plants from southern Africa are 
considered to belong to a separate species, Ua-
paca lissopyrena Radcl.-Sm. 
Anatomy Wood-anatomical description (IAWA 
hardwood codes): 
Growth rings: 2: growth ring boundaries indis-
tinct or absent. Vessels: 5: wood diffuse-porous; 
13: simple perforation plates; (14: scalariform 
perforation plates); (15: scalariform perforation 
plates with < 10 bars); 22: intervessel pits al-
ternate; 23: shape of alternate pits polygonal; 
27: intervessel pits large (> 10 um); 31: vessel-
ray pits with much reduced borders to appar-
ently simple: pits rounded or angular; 32: ves-
sel-ray pits with much reduced borders to ap-
parently simple: pits horizontal (scalariform, 
gash-like) to vertical (palisade); 42: mean tan-
gential diameter of vessel lumina 100-200 um; 
43: mean tangential diameter of vessel lumina 
> 200 um; (46: < 5 vessels per square millime-
tre); 47: 5-20 vessels per square millimetre; 
(56: tyloses common). Tracheids and fibres: 61: 
fibres with simple to minutely bordered pits; 
66: non-septate fibres present; (69: fibres thin-
to thick-walled); 70: fibres very thick-walled. 
Axial parenchyma: 76: axial parenchyma dif-
fuse; 77: axial parenchyma diffuse-in-aggre-
gates; 78: axial parenchyma scanty paratra-
cheal; (79: axial parenchyma vasicentric); 92 
four (3—4) cells per parenchyma strand; 93 
eight (5-8) cells per parenchyma strand; 94: 
over eight cells per parenchyma strand. Rays 
98: larger rays commonly 4- to 10-seriate; 102 
ray height > 1 mm; (103: rays of two distinct 
sizes); 108: body ray cells procumbent with 
over 4 rows of upright and/or square marginal 
cells; (109: rays with procumbent, square and 
upright cells mixed throughout the ray); 115: 
4-12 rays per mm. Mineral inclusions: 159: 
silica bodies present; 160: silica bodies in ray 
cells. 
(D. Louppe, P. Détienne & E.A. Wheeler) 
Growth and development In southern 
Cameroon seedlings of Uapaca guineensis are 
found to be fast growing, both in shade or in 
full sun, and even in relatively dry localities. 
They may become 4-5 m tall in 6 years. The 
fruits of Uapaca guineensis are eaten by fruit 
bats, monkeys, chimpanzees and gorillas, 
which may disperse the seeds. The tree grows 
in symbiosis with several ectomycorrhizal 
fungi. 
Ecology Uapaca guineensis occurs in humid 
localities in rainforest and is common along 
river banks, where it sometimes forms pure 
stands. It also occurs in mixed evergreen forest 
and forest margins, in bushland on steep 
slopes, from sea-level up to 1100 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Multiplication 
of Uapaca guineensis is by seed or Wildlings. In 
Tanzania fruits can be collected throughout the 
year with a peak in November—December. The 
seeds must be sown when still fresh, as they do 
not store well. The germination rate is up to 
80%. In DR Congo seed set and germination 
are often poor. 
Management Uapaca guineensis can be 
coppiced and pollarded. It has been planted as 
a forest regeneration tree in Guinea, to provide 
a green corridor for large forest animals. In 
Burundi it has been planted in an arboretum 
as an experiment to stabilize river banks. 
Diseases and pests No diseases are known 
on Uapaca guineensis, but several insects feed 
on the leaves and buds, especially beetles (An-
thribidae, Chrysomelidae and Scolytidae), 
whereas other beetles such as Xylosandrus 
crassiusculus feed on the wood. 
Harvesting All plant parts can be harvested 
whenever the need arises. The root bark can be 
easily harvested from the stilt roots. 
Genetic resources Although Uapaca 
guineensis is much exploited for its wood, it is 
also widespread and locally common and there 
are no signs that it is threatened by genetic 
erosion. 
Prospects Uapaca guineensis is commonly 
used as a medicinal plant against a variety of 
diseases. No phytochemical analyses have been 
effected, and only few pharmacological tests 
have been done. Additional research is recom-
mended so that the active compounds can be 
identified and the potential of these compounds 
can be evaluated. It is also recommended to 
plant Uapaca guineensis along rivers with a 
large difference in water flow to stabilize the 
banks. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Carter & 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; Lubini & Mandango, 
1981; Marshall et a l , 2000; Neuwinger, 2000; 
Ruffo, Birnie & Tengnäs, 2002; Voorhoeve, 
1979. 
Other references Atindehou et al., 2002; 
Betti, 2004; Eyog Matig et al. (Editors), 2006; 
Gassita et al. (Editors), 1982; InsideWood, un-
dated; Katende, Birnie & Tengnäs, 1995; Stäu-
ble, 1986; Vivien & Fauré, 1996. 
Sources of illustration Wilks & Issembé, 
2000; Voorhoeve, 1979. 
Authors M.M. Kitambala 
622 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
UAPACA PALUDOSA Aubrév. & Leandri 
Protologue Bull. Soc. Bot. France 82: 50 
(1935). 
Family Euphorbiaceae (APG: Phyllantha-
ceae) 
Chromosome number ïn — 26 
Vernacular names Rikio des marais (Fr). 
Origin and geographic distribution Uapaca 
paludosa occurs from Guinea east to Uganda 
and Tanzania and south to Cabinda (Angola). 
Uses In Congo a root infusion is taken to 
treat headache caused by fever. Painful parts 
are embrocated with the crushed roots to ease 
the pain. A root infusion is considered expecto-
rant and taken to treat a blocked nose and 
pulmonary afflictions. A root bark or stem bark 
decoction is drunk to treat female sterility, 
dysentery and food-poisoning. It is used as a 
mouth wash to treat toothache, as a vapour 
bath to treat rheumatism and oedema, as an 
enema to treat piles and in baths to strengthen 
rachitic and premature children. Pulped leaves 
or stem bark with palm oil are applied to fu-
runcles to mature them and also to treat mi-
graine and rheumatism. No medicinal uses are 
recorded for West Africa. 
The fruits are edible and taste like avocado. 
The wood is used for general carpentry, boxes 
and kitchen utensils. In Ghana it is considered 
good firewood. 
Properties The ethanolic and dichloro-
methane stem bark extracts showed moderate 
antiplasmodial activity in vitro. 
The sapwood is pinkish white; the heartwood is 
darker and shiny when sawn. 
Botany Dioecious, small to medium-sized, 
much-branched, deciduous tree up to 15(—40) m 
tall; bole fluted, usually on stilt roots up to 4 m 
high; bark surface grey; crown dense and low 
branching; branches fairly robust, twigs red-
dish short-hairy, hollow when dry, leaf scars 
conspicuous. Leaves alternate, crowded to-
wards the end of the branches, simple and en-
tire; stipules lanceolate to ovate-lanceolate, 
(0.5-)l-2 cm long, persistent; petiole (3-)5-9(-
13) cm long, robust; blade obovate to oblanceo-
late, 9-30(-50) cm x 4-17(-25) cm, base 
cuneate to rounded-cuneate, apex rounded, 
papery to leathery, short-hairy on veins, later 
almost glabrous, pinnately veined with 7-15(-
20) pairs of lateral veins. Male inflorescence an 
axillary globular to ovoid head 8—10 mm in 
diameter, female flowers solitary; peduncle of 
male inflorescence 2—3.5 cm long, with 2-3 
small dispersed bracts; involucral bracts 7—10, 
elliptical-oblong to broadly elliptical-ovate, 5-9 
mm x 2-7 mm, strongly concave, outside short-
hairy, pale yellow to yellowish green. Flowers 
unisexual, petals absent; male flowers sessile 
with c. 9 unequal calyx lobes, several lobes 
oblong, c. 1 mm long, the others linear, small, 
stamens 5, filaments up to 2 mm long, rudi-
mentary ovary c. 1 mm long, short-hairy; fe-
male flowers with 1-2 cm long pedicel, 6 un-
equal calyx lobes, triangular to rounded, c. 1 
mm long, densely short-hairy, ovary superior, 
ovoid, 3—4 mm in diameter, densely short-
hairy, 3-celled, smooth, styles 3, 3-4.5 mm 
long, reflexed, 5—6-fid towards apex. Fruit an 
ovoid to globose drupe 2.5-3 cm x 1.5-2 cm, 
slightly rough, sparingly short-hairy, greenish 
becoming brown, with 3(-4) stones, usually 1 
seed per stone. 
Uapaca comprises 50—60 species from tropical 
Africa and Madagascar, and is in need of a 
complete revision. The fruits of Uapaca palu-
dosa are eaten by fruit bats, monkeys, chim-
panzees and gorillas, which may disperse the 
seeds. 
Ecology Uapaca paludosa occurs in swamp 
and lakeside forest, fringing forest and rainfor-
est, on slopes and crests as well as in well-
drained valley bottoms, up to 1400 m altitude. 
It prefers soils of granitic origin. 
Management Uapaca paludosa can be 
propagated by seed and Wildlings. It can be 
pollarded and coppiced. 
Genetic resources and breeding There 
are no signs that Uapaca paludosa is threat-
ened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects In Central Africa Uapaca palu-
dosa has many medicinal uses. The antiplas-
modial activity of the root bark is promising, 
and more research is warranted to elucidate 
the chemical compounds and evaluate the po-
tential of these compounds for future medicine 
development. 
Major references Burkill, 1994; Carter & 
Radcliffe-Smith, 1988; Mbatchi et a l , 2006. 
Other references Vivien & Fauré, 1996. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
USTERIA GUINEENSIS Willd. 
Protologue Sehr. Berlin.Ges. Naturf. Fr. 10: 
55 (1790). 
Family Loganiaceae 
Chromosome number In - 22 
Vernacular names Burodé (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Usteria 
VOACANGA 623 
guineensis occurs from Senegal east to the Cen-
tral African Republic and south to Angola. 
Uses In West Africa a decoction of the fruits 
or roots is taken to treat coughs and common 
cold. Sap of warmed stems is used as ear drops 
to treat earache. In Senegal a twig decoction is 
taken or used as a bath to treat fever in chil-
dren. In Sierra Leone the Mende people rub 
the roots on the forehead, neck and joints to 
treat malaria. In Togo a root decoction is taken 
to treat gonorrhoea. In Liberia the Dan people 
use the leaves as an ingredient of arrow poison. 
In Benin the fruits are used for this purpose. 
In Senegal the stem is used to make ropes for 
beehives. 
Production and international trade Leaves, 
roots, twigs, and fruits of listeria guineensis 
are collected from the wild and traded only 
locally. 
Botany Climbing shrub or liana up to 3(-12) 
m tall; stems glabrous. Leaves opposite, simple 
and entire; stipules reduced to ridges between 
the petioles; petiole 2-15 mm long; blade or-
bicular to oblong-elliptical, 2-15 cm x 2-10 cm, 
base cuneate to rounded, apex acute, obtuse, 
rounded or occasionally acuminate, leathery, 
pinnately veined with 3-6 pairs of lateral 
veins. Inflorescence a terminal dichasial cyme, 
many-flowered; lower bracts leafy, the others 
very small. Flowers bisexual, zygomorphic, 4-
merous; pedicel hairy; sepals connate at the 
base, 3 small, c. 1 mm long, 1 much larger, 6-
10 mm long, hairy outside, pale green, pale 
yellow or creamy; corolla with cylindrical tube 
9-14 mm long, hairy outside, lobes slightly 
unequal, oblong-triangular, acute, mauve, vio-
let, purple or white, often with yellow on the 
lobes; stamen 1, inserted near apex of corolla 
tube, exserted; ovary superior, globose, 2-
celled, glabrous, style filiform, exserted, gla-
brous, stigma minute. Fruit an oblong capsule 
2—6 cm x 1—1.5 cm, dark brown, shining, open-
ing by 2 valves, many-seeded. Seeds flat, 3-5 
mm x 2—3 mm, surrounded by a large mem-
branaceous wing up to 8 mm wide, dark brown. 
listeria comprises a single species. It belongs to 
the tribe Antonieae together with two South 
American genera and one from tropical Asia. 
Ecology Usteria guineensis occurs in secon-
dary forest and thickets, in open localities in 
rainforest and in tree savanna from sea-level 
up to 1200 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding Usteria 
guineensis is widely distributed and hence not 
threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects It seems likely that Usteria 
guineensis will remain of limited use only. 
Major references Burkill, 1995; Leeuwen-
berg, 1963; Leeuwenberg, 1980; Neuwinger, 
1998; Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Adjanohoun et al., 1986; 
Backlund, Oxelman & Bremer, 2000; Kerharo 
& Adam, 1974. 
Authors A. de Run'ter 
VOACANGA AFRICANA Stapf 
Protologue Journ. Linn. Soc, Bot. 30: 87 
(1894). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 22 
Synonyms Voacanga angolensis Stapf ex 
Hiern (1898). 
Vernacular names Small-fruit wild frangi-
pani (En). Voacanga d'Afrique (Fr). Cata gran-
de (Po). 
Origin and geographic distribution Voa-
canga africana is widespread in mainland 
tropical Africa, from Senegal east to Kenya and 
south to Angola, Zimbabwe and Mozambique. 
Uses Different plant parts of Voacanga afri-
cana are used medicinally throughout its dis-
tribution area. The latex or decoctions or infu-
sions of the stem bark, leaves or roots are put 
on wounds, boils and sores, and used to treat 
gonorrhoea, eczema, fungal infections and sca-
bies. They are also taken to treat heart prob-
lems, hypertension and rheumatic afflictions. 
The latex is put in teeth to treat caries or 
dripped in the eye to cure ophthalmia. 
In Senegal a leaf decoction is drunk as a tonic 
and against fatigue. A root decoction is drunk 
three times daily to treat post-partum pains 
Voacanga africana - wild 
624 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
and hernia. In Côte d'Ivoire a decoction of the 
leaves is applied as a wash against diarrhoea, 
put into a hath against oedema, and is used as 
a friction and in a drink in the treatment of 
leprosy. Pulp from the leaves or stem hark is 
applied to soothe convulsions in children and 
the juice is put in the nostrils as a tranquilizer. 
In Cameroon the fruit is used in infusion to 
treat peptic ulcers. In DR Congo the bark in 
decoction is taken against intestinal worms, 
but this is considered a dangerous remedy. An 
infusion of the twigs is applied in bronchitis. A 
paste of the roots is applied to the head to kill 
lice. The dried and powdered roots without the 
outer bark are mixed with porridge and taken 
against kidney troubles and menstruation 
problems in women. In Tanzania the fruit and 
seeds are extracted with cold water and the 
extract taken against internal sores. The seeds 
are also used to treat high blood pressure. The 
root bark of Voacanga species is generally in-
gested to combat fatigue and increase endur-
ance of drummers and hunters and, in higher 
doses, also for magic and religious purposes. 
Pharmaceutical companies in Europe extract 
tabersonine from the seeds, which is readily 
converted into vincamine, a compound widely 
used in medicines for geriatric patients. Seed 
extracts are also used in medicines to treat 
heart diseases, to lower blood pressure and to 
treat cancer. 
In Senegal the fruits are considered edible. In 
West Africa the copious latex has been used for 
adulterating Hevea rubber and children use it 
to make balls to play with. As it is sticky, it is 
used to catch birds. In Zambia and Ghana 
wood is burnt to obtain salt. Voacanga africana 
supplies poles for building purposes but the 
wood is considered inferior. Arrows and knife 
sheaths are made from the branches. In DR 
Congo, the wood is used to make musical in-
struments. The wood is also used for firewood. 
Good fibre can be obtained from the bark and is 
made into rope. In Nigeria, a yarn is made, 
which is mixed with cotton or other fibres to 
make mats. In Tanzania Voacanga africana is 
planted for ornamental purposes because of its 
sweet-scented white flowers. 
Production and international trade There 
is a steady market for Voacanga seeds since 
the 1980s. Several hundred tonnes of seeds of 
Voacanga africana and some other Voacanga 
species, e.g. Voacanga thouarsii Roem. & 
Schult., are exported from Côte d'Ivoire, 
Ghana, Cameroon and DR Congo to pharma-
ceutical companies in France and Germany. 
Export prices from Cameroon in 2004 were (per 
kg): stem bark US$ 14, stem bark powder US$ 
18, roots US$ 14, root powder US$ 18, root 
bark US$ 47, root bark powder US$ 51, seeds 
US$ 6. In the United States, prices of seed or 
root bark taken from the internet in 2005 were: 
30 g seed US$ 20, 30 g root bark US$ 24, 115 g 
root bark US$ 80, 450 g root bark US$ 280, 1 
kg root bark US$ 400. 
Properties Indole alkaloids are by far the 
most important compounds of Voacanga spp. 
Voacanga africana has been studied most ex-
tensively. The total amount of alkaloids in root 
bark is 5-10%, in trunk bark 4-5%, in leaves 
0.3-0.45% and in seeds 1.5-3.5%. The main 
alkaloids of the root bark are corynanthean-
ibogan class dimers, chiefly voacamine, 
voacamidine and voacorine; vobtusine (a rare 
plumeran-plumeran class dimer) has also been 
isolated. Among the monomers found, the 
ibogan class voacangine and voacristine (= 
voacangarine) are the most important con-
stituents; the plumeran class tabersonine has 
also been found. In the stem bark, voacamine 
and congeners predominate; vobtusine has also 
been identified. The leaves contain mainly 
dimeric alkaloids of both the voacamine and 
vobtusine groups; but the monomeric plumeran 
class voaphylline is the main alkaloid. The 
alkaloid composition of the seeds is very differ-
ent, and consists almost exclusively of taber-
sonine. 
The alkaloids show a vast range of pharmacol-
ogical activities. Tabersonine is only slightly 
toxic. It has about a quarter of the hypotensive 
activity of reserpine (which is commonly used 
to treat high blood pressure), and a spasmolytic 
effect on the smooth muscle of the intestine. It 
has no tumour-inhibiting activity. High doses 
of voacangine bring about convulsions and as-
phyxia, but in lower doses voacangine exhibits 
mostly rather moderate central nervous sytem-
stimulant activity. It exhibits some cataleptic 
activity. In regular doses, it has anticonvulsant 
activity, increases hexobarbital sleeping time 
in mice and decreases body temperature. In 
addition, it has local analgesic activity, hy-
potensive properties and causes bradycardia. 
The hydrochloride salt of voacangine has sig-
nificant diuretic activity. 
Most of the pharmacological work on 
voacamine and voacorine has focused on their 
cardiotonic properties. Voacamine shows little 
tendency to accumulate, and is less toxic than 
cardiac glycosides such as digitoxin. Voacamine 
sulphate resembles cardiac glycosides. When 
VOACANGA 625 
tried clinically on patients with chronic cardiac 
insufficiencies of various origins, it caused con-
siderable improvement in their clinical status 
and in haemodynamic parameters, while there 
was little effect on the heart rate. The alkaloid 
was effective both orally and intravenously. In 
high doses both voacamine and voacorine are 
hypertensive, due largely to peripheral vaso-
constriction. These compounds also have para-
sympatholytic and sympatholytic properties, 
bringing about contraction of smooth muscle 
fibres, and they are also central nervous sys-
tem depressants. Voacamine, voacorine and 
voacamidine are all cytotoxic in the P-388 cell 
culture assay. In experiments with rats and 
mice, parenteral and oral administration of 
these compounds slowed the growth of trans-
planted and primary induced neoplasms. Vob-
tusine causes hypotension as a result of pe-
ripheral vasodilatation and a direct depressant 
action on the heart. In moderate doses initial 
agitation is followed by a sedative effect; high 
doses may bring about convulsions and death. 
Vobtusine is of no clinical interest. 
Tabersonine, the major alkaloid from the 
seeds, is readily converted to vincamine and 
vincamine derivatives. Vincamine shows pro-
tective activity and improves performance in 
animal models of cognitive dysfunction pro-
duced experimentally by cerebral ischaemia, 
and by amnesia producing agents. Subse-
quently, vincamine was shown to increase 
cerebral blood flow as a result of cerebral vaso-
dilatation and may also enhance cellular respi-
ration. It has become very popular in Europe 
especially for geriatric patients and for pa-
tients suffering from cerebral arteriosclerosis; 
there is improvement in the EEG and clinical 
status, it ameliorates disturbances of attention, 
memory and mood. 
The aqueous extract of the root bark showed 
antibacterial activity, anti-amoebic activity 
against Entamoeba histolytica and antispas-
modic activity on the guinea-pig ileum. This 
triple action may well explain its traditional 
use as an antidiarrhoeal. The fruit extract con-
tains a compound with cytoprotective and ul-
cer-healing properties. Finally, the stem bark 
was tested for molluscicidal activity on the 
freshwater snail Bulinus globulus, but was 
found to be only moderately effective. 
Leaf-cell suspension cultures of Voacanga afri-
cana, grown for 20 days under standard condi-
tions, yielded 6 alkaloids. Tabersonine, 
lochnericine and minovincinine were the major 
ones. Voafrine A and B, dimers of the 
plumeran-plumeran class not previously de-
tected from nature, were also produced. These 
compounds are of pharmacological interest 
because of they are related to vincaleu-
coblastine (vinblastine). 
The seed oil is a by-product of the commercial 
extraction of tabersonine for vincamine synthe-
sis. The main fatty acids are palmitic (15-
20%), stearic (7-16%), oleic (49-60%) and li-
noleic (15-20%) acid. The oil has cosmetic and 
nutritional value. 
Adulterations and substitutes Plants 
producing alkaloids of the ibogan and bisindole 
type occur in several other Apocynaceae gen-
era, e.g. Catharanthus, Hunteria, Picralima, 
Rauvolfia, Tabernaemontana and Tabernanthe. 
Vincamine is commercially extracted from 
Vinca major L. 
Description Shrub or small tree up to 10(-
25) m tall, repeatedly dichotomously branched, 
glabrous to hairy in all parts; trunk up to 30(-
40) cm in diameter; bark pale grey-brown, 
smooth or shallowly fissured, with some white 
latex. Leaves opposite, simple and entire; stip-
ules absent; petiole 0-2 cm long with a short 
ocrea at base; blade elliptical or narrowly ellip-
tical, 7-42 cm x 3-20 cm, base cuneate or de-
current into the petiole, apex acuminate, pin-
Voacanga africana - 1, leafy branch; 2, inflo-
rescence; 3, fruit; 4, seeds. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
626 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
nately veined with 8-22 pairs of lateral veins. 
Inflorescence a fairly lax cyme, 2 together in 
the forks of branches, usually many-flowered; 
peduncle 6-25 cm long, slender; bracts as long 
as the calyx, ovate, obtuse, deciduous, leaving a 
conspicuous scar. Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-
merous, with bad smell; pedicel 3-20 mm long; 
calyx campanulate, tube 3.5-9 mm long, 
twisted, lobes broadly ovate to oblong, 3.5-8 
mm long, with rounded to truncate or emargi-
nate apex, usually partly recurved, imbricate 
in bud, pale green, deciduous; corolla tube al-
most cylindrical, 7-15 mm long, twisted, lobes 
obovate, narrowly obovate or elliptical, 12-37 
mm x 7-16 mm, rounded, spreading and often 
recurved later, creamy, greenish-creamy, yel-
low or less often white; stamens inserted 2-3 
mm below the corolla mouth, slightly exserted, 
anthers sessile, narrowly triangular, 4-5 mm 
long, base sagittate; ovary superior, consisting 
of 2 carpels connate at base, surrounded by a 
ring-shaped disk, style narrowly obconical, 
split, twisted and curled at the base, pistil head 
1-1.5 mm long, with a thin ring at base and 5 
short lobes, coherent with the anthers. Fruit 
consisting of 2 separate globose follicles, but 
often only one developing, 3-8 cm in diameter, 
green with numerous whitish spots, yellow 
when mature, 2-valved, many-seeded. Seeds 
obliquely ellipsoid, 7—10 mm long, laterally 
with 5 grooves, rough, minutely warty, dark 
brown, aril yellow or orange, pulpy. Seedling 
with epigeal germination. 
Other botanical information Voacanga is 
an Old World genus comprising 12 species, 7 in 
Africa and 5 in Asia. It is closely related to 
Tabernaemontana. The seeds of Tabernaemon-
tana are difficult to distinguish from those of 
Voacanga but are usually larger. 
Voacanga bracteata Stapf occurs in rainforest 
from Sierra Leone to DR Congo. The pulped 
root, latex and juice are used in frictions to 
cure rheumatism. In Gabon the bark is taken 
in decoction in magic and religious rituals. In 
DR Congo the fruit is considered edible. The 
root bark and stem bark have an alkaloid com-
position similar to that of Voacanga africana, 
but lack alkaloids of the plumeran class. The 
seeds, however, contain tabersonine. The 
abundant latex was formerly used in Liberia as 
an adulterant of Hevea rubber. Voacanga cha-
lotiana Pierre ex Stapf occurs in Congo, DR 
Congo and Angola. It enters in a preparation to 
cure hernia in Congo. The stem bark has anti-
fungal properties against pathogens affecting 
humans and plants. 
Growth and development Voacanga afri-
cana plants develop according to the architec-
tural growth model of Leeuwenberg deter-
mined by a monopodial orthotropic trunk, 
which ends in a terminal inflorescence. After 
flowering the 2 uppermost axillary buds de-
velop into branches, so that the growth is sym-
podial. The infructescence seems to be axillary. 
Voacanga africana flowers mainly at the end of 
the dry season. 
Ecology Voacanga africana occurs in the 
understorey of open forest, often secondary 
forest, and in gallery forest in savanna areas. 
It is often gregarious in coastal forest. It occurs 
from sea-level to 1100 m altitude. 
Propagation and planting Voacanga afri-
cana is readily propagated by seed; vegetative 
propagation using cuttings is possible but suc-
cess rates are generally low. It is not frost re-
sistant, but plants will survive if protected for 
the first 3 years. Dry seeds store well under 
cool conditions. Seed storage behaviour is or-
thodox; viability is maintained for more than 3 
years in airtight storage at ambient tempera-
ture with 11-15% humidity. Seeds are pressed 
into seedling trays filled with pure river sand, 
covered with a shallow layer of sand or compost 
and kept moist. Germination starts within 10-
25 days. Soaking the seed overnight may has-
ten germination. Germination is generally good 
but slow, reaching 50% after 4 weeks and 90% 
after 7 weeks. 
Management The fruits, bark and roots of 
Voacanga africana are mainly collected from 
the wild. In south-western Cameroon enrich-
ment planting has been done in a 60 ha plot, 
and a plantation of 100 ha was established in 
1992. 
Harvesting Fruits of Voacanga africana are 
picked from the tree when mature. The follicles 
are opened by hand to release the pulp with 
the seeds. The pulp is gently squashed in water 
to release the seeds, which are dried in the sun. 
Bark should preferably be collected at the end 
of the growing season in view of the higher 
alkaloid content. Roots are simply cleaned to 
obtain the root bark. Careless harvesting, even 
of fruits, often leads to the destruction of the 
tree. 
Handling after harvest Dried seeds are 
pulverized and the powdered material is usu-
ally subjected to extraction for alkaloids by 
standard methods. Other more sophisticated 
methods have been patented. A kg of seed 
yields 25-30 g tabersonine. Trunk bark, after 
being removed in strips, is dried. Patented ex-
VOACANGA 627 
traction procedures have been developed to 
obtain cardioactive components from the bark. 
Genetic resources Destructive harvesting 
methods for the international pharmaceutical 
market cause concern as the species is rapidly 
becoming endangered. The extensive collection 
of fruits to obtain the seeds limits regenera-
tion. The apparent tolerance of Voacanga afri-
cana to disturbed habitats and its quick regen-
eration ability lowers the risk of genetic ero-
sion. Except for some occasional representa-
tions in botanical gardens no germplasm collec-
tions or breeding programmes are known to 
exist. 
Prospects Many of the indole alkaloids 
found in Voacanga africana and related species 
display very distinct and interesting pharma-
cological activities. Some of them have poten-
tial as candidates for lead compounds in the 
development of future medicines. Much re-
search has been done already, but much more 
will be needed in future to fully exploit their 
possibilities. 
The extensive harvesting of fruits and the cut-
ting of trees to gather fruits to fulfil the de-
mand for seeds of large pharmaceutical com-
panies are causing rapid disappearance of 
Voacanga africana from the wild in many re-
gions. Investigation to develop methods of sus-
tainable production (e.g. plantations) is needed 
to counteract this development. In the mean-
time, local authorities should be vigilant in 
stopping the destructive harvesting to preserve 
the species for the future. 
Major references Bisset, 1985a; Bisset, 
1985b; Burkill, 1985; Hendrian, 2001b; Leeu-
wenberg, 1985; Neuwinger, 2000; Tona et al., 
1999; Tona et a l , 1998. 
Other references Adjanohoun & Aké Assi, 
1979; Adjanohoun et al., 1989; Arbonnier, 
2002; Cunningham, 1997; Hedberg et al., 1982; 
Kuster-Laine, 1985; Latham, 2004; Lovett, 
Ruffo & Gereau, 2003; Rafidison et al., 1987; 
Tan & Nyasse, 2002. 
Sources of illustration Leeuwenberg, 
1985. 
Authors A. Maroyi 
VOACANGA THOUARSII Roem. & Schult. 
Protologue Syst. veg. 4: 439 (1819). 
Family Apocynaceae 
Synonyms Orchipeda thouarsii (Roem. & 
Schult.) Baron (1905). 
Vernacular names Wild frangipani (En). 
Voacanga de Thouars (Fr). Mlindaziwa (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution Voa-
canga thouarsii occurs throughout tropical 
Africa, from Senegal eastwards through the 
forest zone to Sudan and Kenya, and south to 
Mozambique and the east coast of South Af-
rica. It also occurs in Madagascar. 
Uses The uses of Voacanga thouarsii are 
similar to those of Voacanga africana Stapf. 
The latex or decoctions or infusions of the stem 
bark, leaves and roots are applied to wounds, 
boils and sores, and are used to treat gonor-
rhoea, eczema, fungal infections and scabies. 
The infusions are also taken to treat heart 
problems, hypertension and rheumatic afflic-
tions. The latex is put in carious teeth as a 
temporary filling. In Tanzania the bark, roots 
and seeds are used as medicine for stomach-
ache, snakebites and high blood pressure. 
The wood is used in Liberia for hut posts and 
in Uganda for tool handles and sheaths for 
knives. The wood is also used as firewood and 
for making charcoal. The latex was formerly 
used to adulterate Hevea rubber. It is used as 
birdlime, e.g. in rice fields in Madagascar and 
as a glue for fastening handles to knife blades 
and to repair baskets. The wood is burnt in 
Sudan and Ghana to produce a salt. The bark 
yields a fibre, which is used for making hunt-
ing nets in East Africa. Voacanga thouarsii is 
planted along watercourses for soil and water 
conservation. 
In France and Germany tabersonine is ex-
tracted from the seed, which is converted into 
vincamine, a compound widely used in Europe 
as a depressant of the central nervous system 
and for the treatment of cerebral vascular dis-
orders in geriatric patients. Seeds are also ex-
ported to be used in medicines to treat heart 
diseases, to lower blood pressure and to treat 
cancer. 
Production and international trade There 
is a steady market for Voacanga thouarsii seed, 
as there is for Voacanga africana. Several 
hundreds of tonnes of Voacanga seed are ex-
ported especially from West Africa, Cameroon 
and Madagascar to pharmaceutical companies 
in France and Germany for processing. 
Properties In pharmacology indole alka-
loids are by far the most important compounds 
of Voacanga spp., including Voacanga thouar-
sii. The main alkaloids of the root bark are 
dimers of the corynanthean-ibogan class dimers, 
chiefly voacamine, but also voacamidine and 
voacorine; vobtusine (a dimer of the plumeran-
plumeran class) is an important alkaloid from 
628 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
the root bark. In the s tem bark, voacamine and 
congeners predominate , while vobtusine is of-
t en also present . Voacangine and voacristine (= 
voacangarine) are also major const i tuents . The 
leaves contain mainly dimeric alkaloids of the 
corynanthean-ibogan and the p lumeran-
p lumeran classes, bu t ibogan monomers , in-
cluding ibogaine and voacangine, are also 
found. The alkaloid composition of the seeds is 
s imilar to other Voacanga species, and consists 
almost exclusively of the plumeran-class taber-
sonine (1.6-1.8%). Voacamine, vobtusine and 
voacangine have hypotensive, cardiotonic and 
sympatholytic activities. The leaves of speci-
mens from Madagascar were shown to contain 
the flavonoid-glycosides ru t in and kaempferol-
3-glucoside. Callus grown in vitro from leaf 
mate r ia l containing 0.9% alkaloids produced 
0.3% alkaloids (0.2% in the t issue and 0 .1% 
excreted into the medium). Tabersonine was 
the only alkaloid isolated from the culture; it 
was not a const i tuent of the leaves. 
The wood is reddish brown, tough and difficult 
to saw. It does not p lane smoothly because of 
picking up of grain. 
B o t a n y Small t ree up to 15(-20) m tall, re-
peatedly dichotomously branched, glabrous to 
short ly hai ry on all pa r t s ; t r u n k up to 40(-80) 
cm in diameter; ba rk pale grey-brown, smooth, 
with some white latex. Leaves opposite, simple 
and entire; ocrea widened into st ipules in the 
axils of petioles; petiole 8-25 mm long; blade 
narrowly obovate, 6 -25 cm x 2 -9 cm, base 
cuneate or decurrent into the petiole, apex 
acuminate , leathery, p innate ly veined with 1 2 -
20 pai rs of la tera l veins. Inflorescence a cyme, 
2 together in the forks of branches , few-
flowered; peduncle 5-14 cm long, stout; brac ts 
ovate, up to 10 m m x 7 mm, apex rounded, 
deciduous. Flowers bisexual, regular , 5-
merous, sweet-scented; pedicel 8-15 mm long; 
calyx campanula te , 10-16 m m long, fleshy, 
lobes broadly ovate, apex rounded, with hya-
line margin , erect, clasping the corolla tube 
and shed together wi th the corolla; corolla tube 
almost cylindrical, 17-23 mm long, twisted, 
lobes broadly obcordate, 19-30 mm x 28 -43 
mm, spreading or recurved, pale green, creamy 
or white; s t amens inser ted 3-4 mm below the 
corolla mouth, exserted for 2—3 mm, an the r s 
sessile, narrowly t r iangular , base sagi t ta te , 
apex acuminate ; ovary superior, consisting of 2 
separa te carpels, sur rounded by a r ing-shaped 
disk, style gradual ly thickened a t apex, pistil 
head 1-1.5 mm long wi th a f imbriate r ing a t 
base. Fru i t consisting of 2 separa te globose 
follicles 4—10 cm in diameter , pale and dark 
green spotted, 2-valved, many-seeded. Seeds 
obliquely ovoid or ellipsoid, 8-10 mm long, 
minutely warty, with shallow grooves, dark 
brown, aril orange, pulpy. Seedling with 
epigeal germinat ion. 
Voacanga is an Old World genus comprising 12 
species, 7 in Africa and 5 in Asia. It is closely 
related to Tabernaemontana. Voacanga 
thouarsii p lan t s develop according to the archi-
tec tura l growth model of Leeuwenberg deter-
mined by a monopodial orthotropic t runk, 
which ends in a te rmina l inflorescence. After 
flowering the 2 uppermost axillary buds de-
velop into branches , so t h a t the growth is sym-
podial; the infructescence seems to be axillary. 
Voacanga thouarsii flowers throughout the 
year. 
E c o l o g y Voacanga thouarsii occurs mostly 
in semi-deciduous forest and savannas , often in 
moist localities, from sea-level up to 600 m 
al t i tude. It easily colonizes dis turbed hab i ta t s . 
M a n a g e m e n t The fruits of Voacanga 
thouarsii a re collected immediately when they 
open, and the seeds are removed from the arils. 
Seeds can be sown directly; soaking overnight 
in cold wate r may h a s t en germinat ion. Since 
the seeds are sticky, they should be stored in a 
medium such as sand. Voacanga thouarsii re-
grows well when coppiced or pollarded. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s a n d b r e e d i n g In West 
Africa destructive harves t ing of the fruits of 
Voacanga thouarsii for the in te rna t ional 
pharmaceut ica l marke t is a cause for concern. 
The extensive collection of fruits to obtain the 
seeds limits regenerat ion. On the other hand, 
the adapta t ion of Voacanga thouarsii to dis-
turbed habi ta t s , its wide distr ibution and its 
quick regenerat ion ability lower the risk of 
genetic erosion. 
P r o s p e c t s Many of the indole alkaloids 
found in Voacanga thouarsii and re la ted spe-
cies display very distinct and in teres t ing 
pharmacological activities. Some of t hem have 
potent ial as candidates for lead compounds in 
the development of future medicines. 
In some regions the extensive harves t ing of 
fruits and the cut t ing of t rees to ga ther fruits 
to fulfil the demand for seeds of large pharma-
ceutical companies a re causing rapid disap-
pearance of Voacanga thouarsii from the wild. 
Domestication and the development of adapted 
agronomic practices are needed to counteract 
this development. In the meant ime, local au-
thori t ies should be vigilant in stopping the 
destructive harves t ing to preserve the species 
WlTHANIA 629 
for the future. 
Major references Bisset, 1985a; Bisset, 
1985b; Hendrian, 2001b; Leeuwenberg, 1985; 
Neuwinger, 2000. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Burkill, 
1985; Cunningham, 1997; Gurib-Fakim & 
Brendler, 2004; Katende, Birnie & Tengnäs, 
1995; Latham, 2004. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
WlTHANIA SOMNIFERA (L.) Dunal 
Protologue DC, Prodr. 13(1): 453 (1852). 
Family Solanaceae 
Chromosome number 2n = 48 
Synonyms Physalis flexuosa L. (1753). 
Vernacular names Ashwagandha, winter 
cherry, Indian ginseng, poison gooseberry (En). 
Coqueret somnifère, poc-poc sauvage, ti-poc-poc 
(Fr). Erva moura sonifera, pontadeira, 
malagueta de galinha, uva caneça (Po). Mte-
mua shamba, mhulapori (Sw). 
Origin and geographic distribution The 
distribution area of Withania somnifera ex-
tends from the Canary Islands and the Medi-
terranean region through Africa, the Middle 
East, India and Sri Lanka to China. It also 
occurs in Australia. In Africa it occurs wild or 
naturalized throughout the drier parts of the 
continent including South Africa and in several 
Indian Ocean islands. Withania somnifera is of 
ancient use; it is mentioned in Ayurvedic lit-
erature as an important medicine, but it is 
difficult to ascertain whether the drug then 
described was Withania somnifera. It is mostly 
collected from wild stands, but in India it has 
been cultivated for centuries, mainly in 
Withania somnifera - wild and naturalized 
Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan. 
. Uses Withania somnifera is more important 
as a drug plant in India than in Africa. In Ay-
urvedic medicine it has been used for centuries 
as a 'rasayana', a group of drugs that improve 
overall physical and mental health and in-
crease longevity and vitality by rejuvenating 
the body. It is also considered narcotic, hyp-
notic, aphrodisiac, liver tonic, purgative and 
diuretic, and is used in the treatment of tuber-
culosis, senile debility, nervousness, rheuma-
tism, furuncles, sores, dropsy, cough and hic-
cup, as well as to induce abortion. An ointment 
is made from the leaves that is applied to 
wounds and bed sores. It is an alternative for 
ginseng (Panax ginseng C.A.Mey.), but its 
mode of action is different. In India a plant 
extract is also applied to the skin as an anti-
dote against cobra poison. 
Although less popular than in India, Withania 
somnifera has many medicinal uses in Africa. 
In Cape Verde an infusion of the leaves is 
taken to purify the blood. Several preparations 
from the plant are diuretic and are used to 
cleanse the body of gonorrhoea. In Ethiopia the 
plant is used in the treatment of cough, asthma 
and epilepsy. In Somalia smoke of the burning 
plant is wafted over patients with slow blood 
circulation. The leaves or roots are pounded 
together with parts of other plants as an abor-
tifacient. The leaves are given as a purgative 
and to treat general body pain. Ash of the 
leaves is rubbed in to treat ulcers and gingivi-
tis. Leaves or decoctions of them are used to 
treat erysipelas and haemorrhoids. Leaf or root 
powder is boiled with fat and applied as an 
ointment on sores, abscesses or smallpox. Leaf 
sap is applied on anthrax pustules, and an-
thrax infected meat is boiled in water to which 
leaves are added. Leaf sap is used as ear drops 
to cure purulent otitis. Leaves or roots are also 
used in preparations to treat poorly healing 
open wounds. In Madagascar a plant infusion 
is used to treat asthma. In Mauritius a poultice 
made from the fresh leaves and roots is applied 
on rheumatic limbs. The plant is also used as a 
tonic, aphrodisiac and to treat skin problems. 
Pounded roots or root powder are used in medi-
cines against ringworm. Root powder mixed 
with milk is drunk as an aphrodisiac. A root 
decoction is drunk to treat dysuria, gonorrhoea 
or upset stomach, while a maceration of the 
roots is given as an enema against gangrenous 
inflammation of the rectum. A decoction of the 
root bark is drunk to treat asthma. Roots are 
used as an abortifacient, which seems to con-
630 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
tradict their use in South Africa to enhance 
fertility in women with a history of miscar-
riages or the use in Somalia to regulate men-
ses. In southern Africa the hypnotic effects of 
an alcoholic extract are used in the treatment 
of alcoholism, tuberculosis and emphysema. In 
Somalia a root decoction is given to children 
with fever and disturbed sleep, e.g. from 
nightmares; rubbing preparations of crushed 
leaves has similar effects. Roasted roots are 
placed around the house to repel snakes and 
scorpions. 
In veterinary medicine in southern Africa, an 
ointment containing green fruits, stems and 
leaves is applied to wounds due to belts and 
saddles. 
Leaves are sometimes eaten by goats and even 
by humans as a vegetable, but there are sev-
eral reports that they are poisonous. The fruits 
are rich in saponins and can be used as a soap 
substitute; they also have an emetic effect. The 
seeds are used to curdle milk to make cheese. 
The leaves have insect repellent properties. 
Production and international trade The 
root of Withania somnifera is in great demand 
in the crude drug market. The annual re-
quirement of the drug in the Indian market 
has been estimated at 9000 t (2004/2005). The 
current farm gate price for the roots in India 
stands at US$ 1.50 per kg. 
Properties Pharmaco-chemical analysis of 
Withania somnifera has revealed a very large 
number of bio-active compounds. Attention was 
first drawn to its alkaloids, including the 
piperidine and pyrrolidine alkaloids anaferine, 
anahygrine, isopelletierine and cuscohygrine, 
and the tropane-alkaloids pseudotropine and 
tropine and derivatives thereof. Currently, 
research attention focuses on ergostane-type 
steroidal lactones, the most important ones 
being withaferin A and a number of withano-
lides (especially withanolide E), witha-
dienolides, withasomniferols and withanone, 
and on the related glycosides called sitoin-
dosides and withanosides. A dimeric 
thiowithanolide, ashwagandhanolide, has been 
isolated from the roots. 
In India an aqueous alcohol extract of the root 
called 'ashwagandha' is widely available as a 
commercial product. Extracts of various plant 
parts and their active compounds have a broad 
spectrum of pharmacological activities, and 
anti-oxidant effects or modulation of oxidative 
processes play a predominant role. Extensive 
research has been done on their effects on 
brain stimulation, heart disease, anxiety and 
stress, Parkinson's disease, snake venom, in-
flammation, immunomodulation and especially 
cancer. 
Withaferin A and sitoindosides VII-X given 
daily to rats increased the levels of the major 
free-radical scavenging enzymes (superoxide 
dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase) in 
a dose dependent manner. An aqueous alcohol 
root extract showed positive cardioprotective 
effects in tests with rats. When studying the 
effect on the liver, a similar protective effect 
was found in the livers of rats treated with a 
toxic overdose of iron. The sitoindosides ex-
tracted from the roots showed significant anti-
depressant and anxiety-relieving properties in 
several rat models. In a test for chronic stress 
in rats, a root extract was compared with an 
extract from Panax ginseng; both extracts had 
a positive effect on several chronic stress symp-
toms, but the Withania somnifera extract did 
not cause the ginseng abuse syndrome, indicat-
ing a different mode of action. Cognition en-
hancing tests of an aqueous ethanol extract 
containing withaferin A and sitoindosides, 
studied in rat and mice models, showed a posi-
tive effect on cholinergic signal transduction in 
the forebrain, which may partly explain its 
cognition-enhancing effect. Mice injected with 
amyloid-ß from plaques of Alzheimer's patients 
showed less degeneration of memory and neu-
rons when simultaneously injected with 
withanoside IV. Chronic administration of 
ashwagandha reversed reserpine-induced and 
scopolamine-induced memory deficits; the ex-
tract also had a consolidating effect on the 
memories of mice administered chronic convul-
sive electroshocks. Ashwagandha furthermore 
reversed or attenuated the catalepsy, tardive 
dyskinesia and toxic effects of 6-
hydroxy dop amine (6-OHDA), which may pro-
vide leads towards treatments for Parkinson's 
disease. Aqueous alcohol extracts of the roots 
showed a positive effect on the cartilage of os-
teoarthritis patients both in vitro and in vivo in 
tests with rats. 
The immunomodulatory effects of withanolides 
have been studied extensively. Enhanced white 
blood cell counts and activity and inhibition of 
delayed-type hypersensitivity are among the 
processes reported. In tests with mice treated 
with drugs that cause bone marrow damage, 
glyco-withanolides, including sitoindosides IX 
and X, caused increased counts of platelets and 
red and white blood cells and increased activity 
of peritoneal macrophages and lysosomal en-
zymes. Administration of ashwagandha also 
WITHANIA 631 
prevented suppression of macrophage motility 
and suppression of the production of inter-
leukin-1 and tumour necrosis factor-cc. 
Aqueous root extracts fed to mice caused lower 
morbidity due to Bordetella pertussis, the 
causal agent of whooping cough, compared to 
the control animals . In another series of t r ials , 
in t raper i toneal adminis t ra t ion of the root ex-
t rac t to mice increased the whi te blood cell 
count, the number of bone marrow cells and 
antibody-forming cells. Delayed hypersensit iv-
ity was prevented in a Mantoux test . 
The propert ies of root extracts of Withania 
somnifera a re very promising in cancer therapy 
and several s tudies indicate t h a t they are cor-
related with the ant ioxidant effects. The ex-
t rac ts not only affect tumour growth bu t also 
have positive adjuvant effects in radia t ion and 
chemo-therapy. In an in-vitro experiment , 
withaferin A inhibited growth in h u m a n cell 
l ines of breast , cent ra l nervous system, colon 
and lung cancer. Another recent s tudy found 
t h a t a chloroform extract of a shwagandha pre-
vented cell proliferation by disrupt ing mitosis 
and inhibi t ing angiogenesis in several models. 
The relation between the ant ioxidant proper-
ties of root extracts and cancer was shown in 
an exper iment with mice with lung tumours 
induced by benzopyrene. The extract reinforced 
the action of the anti-cancer drug paclitaxel; in 
mice t rea ted with benzopyrene and adminis-
tered both the extract and paclitaxel, levels of 
ATPase activity were as low as in un t r ea t ed 
control mice. Increased ATPase levels are an 
indication of oxidative stress associated e.g. 
with cancer. The radiosensit izing effect of the 
root extract and of withaferin A was confirmed 
in several studies, e.g. on fibrosarcoma tu-
mours and on more radio-resis tant melanoma 
tumours in mice. The aqueous alcohol root ex-
t rac t had a positive effect on the immune sys-
tem of normal and tumour-bear ing mice 
t rea ted with mitogens. The extract enhanced 
the proliferation of spleen cells, lymphocytes, 
bone mar row cells and thymocytes in response 
to mitogens. The effects of aqueous leaf ex-
t rac ts on cancer cells have been invest igated 
mainly in vitro. Cul tured osteocarcinoma and 
breas t cancer cells showed reduced prolifera-
tion and symptoms of senescence when t rea ted 
with the extract . When the cells were exposed 
to high oxidative s t ress , they became more 
susceptible to oxidative damage after t rea t -
men t wi th the leaf extract . Withanolides in-
hibit cyclooxygenase enzymes, lipid peroxida-
t ion a n d proliferation of t u m o u r cells, act ing 
through modulation of the activation of nuclear 
t ranscr ipt ion factor kappa-B ( N F - K B ) and NF-
KB-regulated expression of genes t h a t regula te 
cellular proliferation, carcinogenesis, metas ta -
sis and inflammation. 
Addition of root powder to the diet of r a t s has 
shown hypoglycaemic effects in both normal 
and hyperglycaemic animals . A withanolide-
free hydrosoluble fraction from the roots has 
been found to exhibit significant ant i -s t ress 
activity in a dose-related manne r in experi-
men t s with ra t s and mice. Although ashwa-
gandha is used as an aphrodisiac, adding root 
powder to the diet of male r a t s impaired their 
libido and sexual performance. The methanolic 
extract of the roots showed significant antibac-
ter ia l activity agains t a range of bacteria. Oral 
adminis t ra t ion of the extract controlled Sal-
monella infection in mice. Stem bark extracts 
from Kenyan p lan ts were tes ted for the i r activ-
ity agains t Plasmodium falcifarum, b u t t he 
effect was minimal . When s tudying the anti-
snake-venom propert ies of Withania somnifera, 
it was found t h a t a glycoprotein isolated from 
an aqueous extract of the p lan t neutral ized the 
toxic effects of phospholipase A2 from cobra 
venom. However, i ts mode of action may be too 
slow to provide a basis for pharmacological 
developments. 
Side effects of the medicinal use of ashwa-
gandha are rarely reported, bu t a case of thyro-
toxicosis caused by its use was reported in the 
Nether lands . Symptoms disappeared when the 
t r e a t m e n t was stopped. 
D e s c r i p t i o n Evergreen, erect or spreading, 
rare ly decumbent shrub 60-100(-200) cm tall; 
younger pa r t s densely short stellate-hairy; 
roots stout, fleshy, pale brown; s tem woody at 
base, profusely branched. Leaves a l te rna te , 
upper ones usual ly near ly opposite, simple; 
s t ipules absent; petiole 0.5-3.5 cm long, 
shea th ing a t base; blade ovate to obovate, 2 . 5 -
17.5 cm x 1-7 cm, base slightly unequal , obtuse 
to cuneate , apex acute to obtuse, marg ins en-
t ire to s inuate , whit ish stellate-hairy, la ter 
becoming sparsely hairy. Inflorescence an axil-
lary cluster of 2 - 8 flowers. Flowers erect or 
nodding, bisexual, 5-merous, regular, yellowish 
to greenish white; pedicel 2 -5 mm long, ex-
tending to 9 m m in fruit; calyx campanula te , 
tube 3-5.5 mm long, lobes t r i angu la r to near ly 
linear, 1-3 mm long, densely stellate-hairy; 
corolla campanu la te to funnel-shaped, 5-8 m m 
long, hairy, lobes t r iangular , 2—2.5 mm long; 
s t amens inser ted near base of corolla and al-
t e rna t ing wi th t he lobes, scarcely exserted, 
632 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Withania somnifera - 1, flowering and fruiting 
branch; 2, calyx, cut open to show fruit. 
Redrawn and adapted by Iskak Syamsudin 
filaments 2.5-3 mm long, anthers forming a 
cone around the style, up to 1 mm long; disk 
annular; ovary superior, ovoid, 1-2 mm x 0.5— 
1.5 mm, 2-celled, stigma head-shaped. Fruit a 
pendulous, globose berry 5-7 mm in diameter, 
orange to red, many-seeded, enclosed by persis-
tent, membranous to papery calyx 10-24 mm x 
8-17 mm, somewhat 5-angled, brownish. Seeds 
lens-shaped to kidney-shaped, 2-2.5 mm x 1.5— 
2 mm, orange, bright red or pale brown, reticu-
lately wrinkled. Seedling with epigeal germi-
nation. 
Other botanical information Withania 
comprises about 10 species and is indigenous to 
the warm and temperate regions of the Old 
World. It is morphologically and chemically 
related to Physalis. Withania somnifera is the 
only species occurring in Africa. Cultivated 
plants in India differ from wild ones morpho-
logically as well as in the amounts of the vari-
ous chemical constituents present. They have 
been classified in a distinct species, Withania 
ashwagandha Kaul, but they are currently no 
longer considered a separate species. 
Growth and development Flowering oc-
curs throughout the year. Flowers are self-
fertile, but are also visited by bees. 
Ecology Withania somnifera occurs on dis-
turbed soil, along roadsides, in cultivated land, 
on termite mounds in grassland, in open wood-
land and riverine vegetation, from sea-level up 
to 2300 m altitude. It is grown in areas with 
500-750 mm annual rainfall and prefers well-
drained soil; waterlogging is harmful. It grows 
well in sandy loams and stony red clay soils 
with pH 7.5-8. It thrives in full sun, but toler-
ates some shade. 
Propagation and planting Withania som-
nifera is propagated by seed, either sown in a 
nursery or directly in the field. Traditional 
land preparation consists of several ploughings 
and planking to prepare a weed-free seedbed. 
When sown in a nursery, seeds are sown at the 
onset of the rains and the seed requirement is 
(0.5—)2—5 kg/ha. Treatment with a fungicide is 
recommended. Germination starts after 10-12 
days. Seedlings are sufficiently tall after 25-30 
days to be transplanted into the field, normally 
at a spacing of 60 cm x 60 cm. For direct sow-
ing in the field, either in line or broadcasting, 
5-10 kg seed per ha is needed. The sowing 
depth is 1-3 cm. When seedlings have 2-4 
leaves they are thinned to a spacing of about 
15 cm x 15 cm. 
Management In India Withania somnifera 
is grown as an annual. One hand weeding at 
an early stage of the crop is often sufficient. 
Manure or fertilizer is rarely applied as it is 
believed to result in leafy plants with poor root 
quality, but in experiments, moderate applica-
tions of N (50 kg/ha) and P (25 kg/ha) increased 
yields to more than 800 kg/ha and gave thicker 
roots. 
Diseases and pests No serious diseases or 
pests have been reported. Damping off and root 
rot of young plants caused by Fusarium solani 
can be controlled by seed treatment or fungi-
cide application. 
Harvesting In India cultivated plants start 
flowering in December and the crop is ready for 
harvesting in January-March, about 6 months 
after sowing when leaves start to wilt and 
fruits are ripe. Whole plants are uprooted and 
roots are cut from the plant about 2 cm above 
the collar. Fruits are picked by hand. 
Yield A good crop in India yields 650-800 
kg/ha of fresh roots (350-450 kg/ha dry roots), 
but the average is 300-500 kg/ha. The average 
yield of seed is 50-75 kg/ha. 
Handling after harvest Roots are carefully 
cleaned, cut into 7-10 cm long pieces, dried and 
graded. Fruits are also dried and the seeds are 
W R I G H T I A 633 
removed by crushing the dry fruits. 
G e n e t i c r e s o u r c e s Withania somnifera 
occurs na tura l ly or has become natural ized in 
many pa r t s of the tropics. Although it is no-
where common, it is unlikely to be liable to 
genetic erosion. The Regional Research Labo-
ratory of the Indian Council of Agricultural 
Research (ICAR), J a m m u Tawi, India main-
ta ins a collection of germplasm. 
B r e e d i n g Several improved cult ivars have 
been released in India, including 'Rakshita ' , 
Toshi ta ' , 'WS-20' and 'WS-22'. 
P r o s p e c t s With the medicinal potent ial 
presented by Withania somnifera, the pros-
pects for further exploitation look promising. 
Modern research confirms the activity of the 
drug, a l though the information has not yet 
resul ted in registered drugs in ma ins t r eam 
medicine. The efficacy and relative safety of 
this plant , coupled with t he ease of propaga-
tion, seem to w a r r a n t the p lant ing of Withania 
somnifera for medicinal purposes. Nonetheless , 
the s tandardiza t ion of the drug a shwagandha 
needs to be effected so t h a t it can be in tegrated 
in pharmacopeias . 
Major r e f e r e n c e s Burkill , 2000; D'Arcy & 
Rakotozafy, 1994; Gonçalves, 2005; Gurib-
Fak im & Brendler, 2004; Gupta & Rana, 2007; 
Ichikawa et al., 2006; Indian Ins t i tu te of Inte-
grative Medicine, undated; K h a n n a et al., 
2006; Mishra , Singh & Dagenais , 2000; Win-
ters , 2004. 
Other r e f e r e n c e s CSIR, 1976; Dhar et al., 
2006; Diwanay, Chitre & Pa twardhan , 2004; 
Felson & Kim, 2007; Hepper, 1991; J ayapraka -
sam et a l , 2003; Kir ira et a l , 2006; K u m a r et 
a l , 2007; Malik et al., 2007; Mohanty et a l , 
2004; Panchbha i et a l , 2006; Siddiqi, 1978; 
Singh, Chandan & Gupta, 2003; Subbaraju et 
al., 2006; Tiwari , Shah & Tiwari, 2002; 
Tr igunaya t et al., 2007; U m a Devi & Kamath , 
2003; van der Hooft et a l , 2005; Wat t & 
Breyer-Brandwijk, 1962. 
S o u r c e s of i l l u s t r a t i o n Gonçalves, 2005. 
A u t h o r s A. Gurib-Fakim 
W R I G H T I A D E M A R T I N I A N A Chiov. 
P r o t o l o g u e Ann. Bot. Roma 13: 405 (1915). 
F a m i l y Apocynaceae 
Origin and geographic distribution Wri-
ghtia demartiniana occurs in Ethiopia, Soma-
lia, Kenya and nor the rn Tanzania . 
U s e s In Kenya ground roots are boiled and 
the fi l trate is d runk to t r ea t kidney problems. 
Soup made of the fresh roots and chicken is 
ea ten to cure gonorrhoea. Ground twigs in milk 
are t aken as a laxative. Latex is added to goat 
milk to curdle it to make cheese. The ba rk is 
crushed and rubbed on the skin as a perfume. 
The branches are used to make fire by friction. 
The plant is ea ten by camels and sheep, bu t is 
not browsed by goats. 
P r o p e r t i e s The phytochemistry of Wrightia 
demartiniana h a s not been elucidated yet. 
Other Wrightia species contain t r i terpenes . 
B o t a n y Shrub or small t ree up to 5 m tall, 
with white latex; bark black, branches pale 
brown or grey, branchle ts pubescent. Leaves 
opposite, simple and entire; st ipules very 
small; petiole 0.5-2 mm long, shortly hairy; 
blade narrowly elliptical, elliptical or obovate, 
12-5.5 cm x 0.5-2 cm, base cuneate or decur-
ren t into the petiole, apex rounded to obtuse, 
short hairy, papery, la tera l veins obscure. In-
florescence a te rmina l cyme on short la te ra l 
shoots, few-flowered, 1.5-2.5 cm long; peduncle 
1-3 mm long, shortly hairy; bracts sepal-like. 
Flowers bisexual, regular, 5-merous, sweet-
scented; pedicel 4 - 6 m m long, shortly hairy; 
sepals fused a t base, 1.5—3 mm long, erect, 
apex obtuse, shortly hairy outside, inside with 
5 scales as long as sepals; corolla whi te or 
creamy, tube 5—7 m m long, gradual ly narrowed 
towards the throat , shortly hai ry outside, co-
rona 1-1.5 mm long, shortly lobed, undula te , 
corolla lobes oblong, 10-15 m m long, overlap-
ping to the left, spreading, apex rounded, in-
side hairy; s t amens inser ted a t corolla mouth, 
exserted; ovary superior, consisting of 2 free 
carpels, style 2 - 5 mm long, thick, pers is tent , 
ending in a pistil head with a globose basal 
par t , a r ing in the middle and a 2-lobed apical 
par t . Frui t consisting of 2 narrowly ellipsoid 
follicles, uni ted a t the ext reme base, 12-30 cm 
x c. 8 mm, taper ing into a narrow apex, 2-
valved, shortly hairy, grey-green, many-seeded. 
Seeds spindle-shaped, flattened, 19-25 m m 
long, longitudinally ribbed, pale brown, with a 
tuft of dirty whi te ha i r s 3.5-4 cm long. 
Wrightia occurs in the Old World and com-
prises about 25 species, of which 2 in continen-
ta l Africa. The Asian Wrightia arborea 
(Dennst.) Mabb. is cult ivated as an ornamenta l 
in Senegal and Kenya. Wrightia natalensis 
Stapf is a small t ree occurring in Zimbabwe, 
Mozambique, Swaziland and eas te rn South 
Africa. In South Africa the ground roots are 
steeped in wate r and the pulp is applied to 
fontanelles of babies to close them. The root is 
chewed or the root powder is d runk in beer as 
634 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
an aphrodisiac. 
Ecology Wrightia demartiniana occurs in 
dry rocky Acacia and Commiphora bushland, 
at 100-1000 m altitude. 
Genetic resources and breeding As 
Wrightia demartiniana is not uncommon in its 
distribution area, and not much used, it is 
probably not threatened by genetic erosion. 
Prospects Wrightia demartiniana will re-
main of local importance only, unless promis-
ing information on its pharmacological activity 
becomes available. 
Major references Leeuwenberg, 1988b; Neu-
winger, 2000; Omino & Kokwaro, 1993. 
Other references Beentje, 1994; Bisset, 
1988a; Leeuwenberg, 2003. 
Authors G.H. Schmelzer 
635 
Literature 
Aarestrup, J.R., Karam, D. & Fernandes, G.W., 2008. Chromosome number and cytogenetics of 
Euphorbia heterophylla L. Genetics and Molecular Research 7(1): 217-222. 
Abbiw, D.K., 1990. Useful plants of Ghana: West African uses of wild and cultivated plants. Inter-
mediate Technology Publications, London and Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United 
Kingdom. 337 pp. 
Abbiw, D.K., 1996. Misuses and abuses in self-medication with medicinal plants: the case of 
Erythrophleum in Ghana. In: van der Maesen, L.J.G., van der Bürgt, X.M. & van Medenbach de 
Rooy, J.M. (Editors). The biodiversity of African plants. Proceedings of the 14th AETFAT Con-
gress, 22-27 August 1994, Wageningen, Netherlands. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, 
Netherlands, pp. 714-718. 
ABC, 2000. Herbal médecine: expanded Commission E monographs. 
<http://www.herbalgram.org/naturesflavors/ExpandedCommissionE>. Accessed August 2006. 
Abdalla, O.M., Ibrahim, A.E.S., Aboul Ela, M.B., Soliman, A.M. & Ahmed, M.A., 1995. Chemical 
composition of important range plant species in United Arab Emirates. 1. Trees and perennial 
plants. Emirates Journal of Agricultural Sciences 7: 65-86. 
Abe, F. & Talmadge, J.E. (Editors), 2004. Future trends in Aloe therapeutics. Special Issue. Inter-
national Immunopharmacology 4(14): 1723-1935. 
Abe, F. & Yamauchi, T., 1977. Studies on Cerbera part 1: Cardiac glycosides in the seeds, bark and 
leaves of Cerbera manghas. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin Tokyo 25(10): 2744-2748. 
Abe, F., Nagafuji, S., Okawa, M. & Kinjo, J., 2006. Trypanocidal constituents in plants 6: minor 
withanolides from the aerial parts of Physalis angulata. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 
54(8): 1226-1228. 
Abebe, D. & Hagos, E., 1991. Plants as a primary source of drugs in the traditional health practices 
of Ethiopia. In: Engels, J.M.M., Hawkes, J.G. & Worede, M. (Editors). Plant genetic resources of 
Ethiopia. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, pp. 101-113. 
Abebe, D., Urga, K., Debella, A., Ambaye, C. & Dejene, A., 2001. Survey of poisonous plants in 
Southern Ethiopia. Ethiopian Journal of Health Development 15(3): 209-221. 
Abebe, F., Erko, B., Gemetchu, T. & Gundersen, S.G., 2005. Control of Biomphalaria pfeifferi popu-
lation and schistosomiasis transmission in Ethiopia using the soap berry endod (Phytolacca dode-
candra), with special emphasis on application methods. Transaction of the Royal Society of Tropi-
cal Medicine and Hygiene 99(10): 787-794. 
Abegaz, B.M., 2002. Novel phenylanthraquinones, isofuranonaphthoquinones, homoisoflavonoids, 
and biflavonoids from African plants in the genera Bulbine, Scilla, Ledebouria, and Rhus. Phyto-
chemistry Reviews 1: 299-310. 
Abegaz, B.M., Ngadjui, B.T., Bezabih, M. & Mdee, L.K., 1999. Novel natural products from mar-
keted plants of eastern and southern Africa. Pure and Applied Chemistry 71(6): 919-926. 
Abisch, E. & Reichstein, T., 1960. Orientierende chemische Untersuchung einiger Apocynaceen. 
Helvetica Chimica Acta 43(6): 1844-1861. 
Abo, K.A., 1994. Characterisation of ingenol: an inflammatory diterpene from some Nigerian Eu-
phorbia and Elaeophorbia species. African Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 23(2): 161-
163. 
Abo, K.A. & Adeyemi, A.A., 2002. Seasonal accumulation of anthraquinones in leaves of cultivated 
Cassia podocarpa Guill et Perr. African Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 31(2): 171-173. 
Abo, K.A. & Ashidi, J.S., 1999. Antimicrobial screening of Bridelia micrantha, Alchornea cordifolia 
and Boerhavia diffusa. African Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 28(3-4): 167-169. 
Abo, K.A. & Kinghorn, A.D., 2003. Isolation of an anti-tumour terpenoid from stem bark of Spondi-
anthus preussii var. preussii Engl. African Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 32(2): 179-
182. 
Abo, J . - C Aka, K.J., Ehile, E.E. & Guédé-Guina, F., 2000. Effets d'un extrait aqueux brut de Ma-
reya micrantha et de ses différentes fractions sur l'activité mécanique du cœur isolé de rat. Revue 
de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 14: 7-17. 
636 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Aboagye, F.A., Sam, G.H., Massiot, G. & Lavaud, C., 2000. Julocrotine, a glutarimide alkaloid from 
Croton membranaceus. Fitoterapia 71(4): 461-462. 
Abou Shaaban, R.R.A., Al Angari, A.A., El Tahir, K.E.H., Al Khamis, KL & Mirghani, O.M., 1989. 
Comparative hypotensive and respiratory stimulation effects of ripe and unripe fruit mucilage of 
Cordia myxa and Cordia obliqua in guineapigs and rabbits. Phytotherapy Research 3(4): 126-
131. 
Abreu, P.M., Rosa, V.S., Araujo, E.M., Canda, A.B., Kayser, 0., Bindseil, K-U., Siems, K. & See-
mann, A., 1998. Phytochemical analysis and antimicrobial evaluation of Detarium microcarpum 
bark extracts. Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Letters 8(3): 107-109. 
Abreu, P.M., Martins, E.S., Kayser, O., Bindseil, K.-U., Siems, K, Seemann, A. & Frevert, J., 1999. 
Antimicrobial, antitumor and antileishmania screening of medicinal plants from Guinea-Bissau. 
Phytomedicine 6(3): 187-195. 
Abreu, I.C., Marinho, A.S., Paes, A.M., Freire, S.M., Olea, R.S., Borges, M.O. & Borges, A.C., 2003. 
Hypotensive and vasorelaxant effects of ethanolic extract from Jatropha gossypiifolia L. in rats. 
Fitoterapia 74(7-8): 650-657. 
Abu Sayeed, M., Ali, M.A., Bhattacharjee, P.K., Islam, A., Astaq, G.R.M., Khan, M. & Yeasmin, S., 
2005. Biological evaluation of extracts and triterpenoids of Euphorbia hirta. Pakistan Journal of 
Scientific and Industrial Research 48(2): 122-125. 
Abuh, F.Y., Wambebe, C, Rai, P.P. & Sokomba, E.N., 1990. Hypoglycaemic activity of Anthocleista 
vogelii (Planch) aqueous extract in rodents. Phytotherapy Research 4: 20-24. 
Achenbach, H. & Hemrich, H., 1991. . Constituents of tropical medicinal-plants .42. Clerodane-type 
diterpenes and other constituents of Penianthus zenkeri. Phytochemistry 30(6): 1957-1962. 
Achenbach, H., Hübner, H., Vierling, W., Brandt, W. & Reiter, M., 1995. Spiganthine, the cardioac-
tive principle of Spigelia anthelmia. Journal of Natural Products 58: 1092-1096. 
Adam, S.E.I., Al-Redhaiman, K.N. & Al-Qarawi, A.A., 1999. Toxicity of Chrozophora obliqua. Phy-
totherapy Research 13: 630-632. 
Adam, J.G., Echard, N. & Lescot, M., 1972. Plantes médicinales Hausa de 1'Ader. Journal 
d'Agriculture Tropicale et de Botanique Appliquée 19(8-9): 259-399. 
Adam, G., Huong, H.T. & Khoi, N.H., 1979. The constituents of the Vietnamese drug plant So-
lanum verbascifolium L. Planta Medica 36: 238-239. 
Adami, Y.L., Milhous, W., Ribeiro, D.C.T. & Ferreira da Cruz, M.F., 1998. In vitro antimalarial 
activity of crude extracts of Pothomorphe peltata and P. umbellata (Piperaceae). Tropical Medi-
cine Nagasaki 40(2): 91-94. 
Adams, R.P., Neisess, K.R., Parkhurst, R.M., Makhubu, L.P. & Wolde Yohannes, L., 1989. Phyto-
lacca dodecandra (Phytolaccaceae) in Africa. Taxon 38(1): 17-26. 
Adamu, H.M., Abayeh, O.J., Agho, M.O., Abdullahi, A.L., Uba, A., Dukku, H.U. & Wufem, B.M., 
2005. An ethnobotanical survey of Bauchi State herbal plants and their antimicrobial activity. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 99(1): 1—4. 
Addae-Kyereme, J., Croft, S.L., Kendrick, H. & Wright, C.W., 2001. Antiplasmodial activities of 
some Ghanaian plants traditionally used for fever/malaria treatment and of some alkaloids iso-
lated from Pleiocarpa mutica; in vivo antimalarial activity of pleiocarpine. Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 76(1): 99-103. 
Adda-Mensah, G., Muriuki, G., Karanja, G., Wandera, C , Waibel, R. & Achenbach, H., 1992. Con-
stituents of the stem bark and twigs of Croton macrostachyus. Fitoterapia 63(1): 81. 
Adebisi, A.A. & Ladipo, D.O., 2000. Market survey of the barks of forest trees of phytomedicinal 
importance in southern Nigeria. Journal of Tropical Ethnoforestry 3(1): 107—122. 
Adebisi, A.A., Ladipo D.O. & Oyeleke, G.O., 2003. Market survey and price evaluation of some phy-
tomedicinal trees and plants in Southwest Nigeria. CENRAD Development Series. CENRAD, 
Ibadan, Nigeria. 
Adedapo, A.A., Abatan, M.O. & Olorunsogo, O.O., 2004. Toxic effects of some plants in the genus 
Euphorbia on haematological and biochemical parameters of rats. Veterinarski Archiv 74(1): 5 3 -
62. 
Adedapo, A.A., Abatan, M.O. & Olorunsogo, O.O., 2007. Effects of some plants of the spurge family 
on haematological and biochemical parameters in rats. Veterinarski Archiv 77(1): 29-38. 
LITERATURE 637 
Adedapo, A.A., Abatan, M.O., Akinloye, A.K., Idowu, S.O. & Olorunsogo, O.O., 2003. Morphometric 
and histopathological studies on the effects of some chromatographic fractions of Phyllanthus 
amarus and Euphorbia hirta on the male reproductive organs of rats. Journal of Veterinary Sci-
ence 4(2): 181-185. 
Adedapo, A.A., Abatan, M.O., Idowu, S.O. & Olorunsogo, O.O., 2005. Effects of chromatographic 
fractions of Euphorbia hirta on the rat serum biochemistry. African Journal of Biomedical Re-
search 8(3): 185-189. 
Adedayo, O., Anderson, W.A., Moo-Young, M., Snieckus, V., Patil, P.A. & Kolawole, D.O., 2001. 
Phytochemistry and antibacterial activity of Senna alata flower. Pharmaceutical Biology 39(6): 
408-412. 
Adegoke, E.A. & Aio, B., 1986. Abereamines, water-soluble seed alkaloids from Hunteria umbel-
lata. Phytochemistry 25(6): 1461-1468. 
Adegoke, E.A., Akinsaya, A. & Naqvi, H.Z., 1968. Studies of Nigeria medicinal plants: a prelimi-
nary survey of plant alkaloids. Journal of the West African Science Association 13: 13-33. 
Adehan, R., Kpodekon, M., Houenon, J., Ossenti, T.B. & Lebas, F., 1994. Comparative study of 
palatability of twenty three forages used in rabbit breeding: first results. Cahiers Options 
Méditerranéennes 8: 125-129. 
Adekunle, A.A. & Ikumapayi, A.M., 2006. Antifungal property and phytochemical screening of the 
crude extracts of Funtumia elastica and Mallotus oppositifolius. West Indian Medical Journal 
55(4): 219-223. 
Adekunle, A.A. & Okoli, S.O., 2002. Antifungal activity of the crude extracts of Alafia barteri 
Oliver (Apocynaceae) and Chasmanthera dependens Höchst. (Menispermaceae). Hamdard 
Medicus 45(3): 52-56. 
Adeneye, A.A., Amole, O.O. & Adeneye, A.K., 2006. Hypoglycemic and hypocholesterolemic activi-
ties of the aqueous leaf and seed extract of Phyllanthus amarus in mice. Fitoterapia 77(7-8): 
511-514. 
Adesida, G.A., Girgis, P. & Taylor, D.A.H., 1972. Friedelin derivatives from Phyllanthus muelleri-
anus. Phytochemistry 11(2): 851-852. 
Adewunmi, CO., Agbedahunsi, J.M., Adebajo, A.C., Aladesanmi, A.J., Murphy, N. & Wando, J., 
2001. Ethno-veterinary medicine: screening of Nigerian medicinal plants for trypanocidal proper-
ties. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 77: 19-24. 
Adewunmi, CO., Segun, O. & Ashaolu, S.O., 1983. The effect of prolonged administration of low 
concentrations of Bridelia atroviridis methanolic extractive on the development of Bulinus globu-
lus. International Journal of Crude Drug Research 20(3): 101-111. 
Adhami, V.M., Aziz, M.H., Mukhtar, H. & Ahmad, N., 2003. Activation of prodeath Bcl-2 family 
proteins and mitochondrial apoptosis pathway by sanguinarine in immortalized human HaCaT 
keratinocytes. Clinical Cancer Research 9(8): 3176-3182. 
Adjah, CR., 1979. Phytochemical screening of leaves and root bark of an African herb (Mallotus 
oppositifolius). B.Sc. Thesis, Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Cape 
Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. 39 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., 1986. Fiche espèce sur Euphorbia hirta L. (Euphorbiacées). Médecine Tradition-
nelle et Pharmacopée 0(0): 18-28. 
Adjanohoun, E.J. & Aké Assi, L., 1979. Contribution au recensement des plantes médicinales de 
Côte d'Ivoire. Centre National de Floristique, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. 358 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Aké Assi, L., Floret, J.J., Guinko, S., Koumaré, M., Ahyi, M.R.A. & Raynal, J., 
1979. Médecine traditionelle et pharmacopée - Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floris-
tiques au Mali. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 291 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Abel, A., Aké Assi, L., Brown, D., Chetty, K.S., Chong-Seng, L., Eymé, J., Fried-
man, F., Gassita, J.N., Goudoté, E.N., Govinden, P., Keita, A., Koudogbo, B., Lai-Lam, G., Lan-
dreau, D., Lionnet, G. & Soopramanien, A., 1983a. Médecine traditionelle et pharmacopée -
Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques aux Seychelles. Agence de Coopération 
Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 170 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Aké Assi, L., Eymé, J., Gassita, J.N., Goudoté, E., Guého, J., Ip, F.S.L., Jackaria, 
D., Kalachand, S.K.K., Keita, A., Koudogbo, B., Landreau, D., Owadally, A.W. & Soopramanien, 
A., 1983b. Médecine traditionelle et pharmacopée - Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et 
638 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
floristiques à Maurice (Iles Maurice et Rodrigues). Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Techni-
que, Paris, France. 216 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Aké Assi, L., Chibon, P., de Vecchy, H., Duboze, E., Eymé, J., Gassita, J.N., Gou-
dote, E., Guinko, S., Keita, A., Koudogbo, B., Landreau, D., Owadally, A.W. & Soopramanien, A., 
1984. Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques au Gabon. Agence de Coopération 
Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 294 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Ahyi, M.R.A., Aké Assi, L., Dan Dicko, L., Daouda, H., Delmas, M., de Souza, S., 
Garba, M., Guinko, S., Kayonga, A., N'Golo, D., Raynal, J. & Saadou, M., 1985. Médecine tradi-
tionnelle et pharmacopée - Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques au Niger. 
Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 250 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Ahyi, M.R.A., Aké Assi, L., Akpagana, K., Chibon, P., El-Adji, A., Eymé, J., Gar-
ba, M., Gassita, J.N., Gbeassor, M., Goudote, E., Guinko, S., Hodouto, K.K., Houngnon P., Keita, 
A., Keoula, Y., Hodouto, W.P., Issa Lo, Siamevi, K.M. & Taffame, K.K., 1986. Contributions aux 
études ethnobotaniques et floristiques au Togo. Médecine Traditionelle et Pharmacopée. Agence 
de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 671 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Adjakidjè, V., Ahyi, M.R.A., Aké Assi, L., Akoègninou, A., d'Almeida, J., Apovo, 
F., Boukef, K, Chadare, M., Cusset, G., Dramane, K., Eyme, J., Gassita, J.N., Gbaguidi, N., Gou-
dote, E., Guinko, S., Houngnon, P., Lo, L, Keita, A., Kiniffo, H.V., Kone-Bamba, D., Musampa 
Nseyya, A., Saadou, M., Sodogandji, T., De Souza, S., Tchabi, A., Zinsou Dossa, C. & Zohoun, T., 
1989. Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques en République Populaire du Bénin. 
Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 895 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Ahiyi, M.R.A., Aké Assi, L., Dramane, K., Elewude, J.A., Fadoju, S.U., Gbile, 
Z.O., Goudote, E., Johnson, C.L.A., Keita, A., Morakinyo, O., Ojewole, J.A.O., Olatunji, A.O. & So-
fowora, E.A., 1991. Traditional medicine and pharmacopoeia: contribution to ethnobotanical and 
floristic studies in western Nigeria. OUA/ST & RC, Lagos, Nigeria. 420 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Ahyi, M.R.A., Aké Assi, L., Alia, A.M., Amai, CA., Gbile, Z.O., Johnson, C.L.A., 
Kakooko, Z.O., Lutakome, H.K., Morakinyo, 0., Mubiru, N.K., Ogwal-Okeng, J.W. & Sofowora, 
E.A., 1993. Traditional medicine and pharmacopoeia - contribution to ethnobotanical and floristic 
studies in Uganda. Scientific, Technical and Research Commission of the Organization of the Af-
rican Unity (OAU/STRC). 433 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Aboubakar, N., Dramane, K., Ebot, M.E., Ekpere, J.A., Enow-Orock, E.G., Focho, 
D., Gbilé, Z.O., Kamanyi, A., Kamsu, K.J., Keita, A., Mbenkum, T., Mbi, C.N., Mbiele, A.L., 
Mbome, I.L., Mubiru, N.K., Nancy, W.L., Nkongmeneck, B., Satabié, B., Sofowora, A., Tamze, V. 
& Wirmum, C.K., 1996. Contribution to ethnobotanical and floristic studies in Cameroon. 
CSTR/OUA, Cameroon. 641 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Aké Assi, L., Ali Ahmed, Eymé, J., Guinko, S., Kayonga, A., Keita, A. & Lebras, 
M. (Editors), 1982. Médecine traditionelle et pharmacopée - Contribution aux études ethnobota-
niques et floristiques aux Comores. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, 
France. 217 pp. 
Adjanohoun, E.J., Ahyi, A.M.R., Aké Assi, L., Baniakina, J., Chibon, P., Cusset, G., Doulou, V., 
Enzanza, A., Eymé, J., Goudote, E., Keita, A,, Mbemba, C , Mollet, J., Moutsamboté, J.-M., Mpati, 
J. & Sita, P. (Editors), 1988. Médecine traditionnelle et pharmacopée - Contribution aux études 
ethnobotaniques et floristiques en République Populaire du Congo. Agence de Coopération Cultu-
relle et Technique, Paris, France. 606 pp. 
Adjei, R., 2003. A survey of Apocynaceae in ethnomedicinal practices in some locations of southern 
Ghana. B.Sc. Biology Degree Thesis, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of 
Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. 71 pp. 
Adomou, A.C., 2005. Vegetation patterns and environmental gradients in Benin: implications for 
biogeography and conservation. PhD thesis, Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, 
Netherlands. 136 pp. 
Adsersen, A. & Adsersen, H., 1997. Plants from Réunion Island with alleged antihypertensive and 
diuretic effects - an experimental and ethnobotanical evaluation. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
58: 189-206. 
Adzu, B., Abbah, J., Vongtau, H. & Gamaniel, K., 2003. Studies on the use of Cassia singueana in 
malaria ethnopharmacy. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 88(2-3): 261-267. 
LITERATURE 639 
Afonne, O.J., Orisakwe, O.E., Obi, E., Orish, C. & Akumka, D.D., 2000. Some pharmacological 
properties of Synclisia scabrida. 3. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 32: 239-241. 
Afsharypuor, S., Mostajeran, A. & Mokhtary, R., 1995. Variation of scopolamine and atropine in 
different parts of Datura metel during development. Planta Medica 61(4): 383-384. 
Afzal, M., Obuekwe, C, Shuaib, N. & Barakat, H., 2004. Photosynthetic pigment profile of Cordia 
myxa L. and its potential in folklore medicinal application. Journal of Food, Agriculture and En-
vironment 2(2): 114-120. 
Aganga, A.A., Kiazolu, J.S. & Tsopito, CM., 1994. Browse plants as feed resource for ruminants in 
Botswana. 2. Browse in loamy soils and sandveld vegetational zones of Botswana. Bulletin of Ani-
mal Health and Production in Africa 42(3): 235-247. 
Agarwal, R. & Baslas, R.K., 1981. Chemical examination of the aerial parts of Euphorbia thymifo-
lia. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 43(5): 182-183. 
Agbedahunsi, J.M., Oloke, J.K. & Aladesanmi, A.J., 1993. Antimicrobial activity of Pleioceras bar-
teri root extract. Fitoterapia 64(1): 81-82. 
Agbor, G.A., Leopold, T. & Jeanne, N.Y., 2004. The antidiarrhoeal activity of Alchornea cordifolia 
leaf extract. Phytotherapy Research 18(11): 873-876. 
Agbor, G.A., Oben, J.E., Ngogang, J.Y., Xinxing, C. & Vinson, J.A., 2005. Antioxidant capacity of 
some herbs/spices from Cameroon: a comparative study of two methods. Journal of Agricultural 
and Food Chemistry 53(17): 6819-6824. 
Aggarwal, S., 2001. Platycladus orientalis (L.) Franco. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poison-
ous plants 2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 439-441. 
Agharkar, S.P., 1991. Medicinal plants of Bombay presidency. Scientific Publishers, Jodhpur, In-
dia. 250 pp. 
Agnaniet, H., Mounzeo, H., Menut, C, Bessiere, J.M. & Criton, M., 2003. The essential oils of Rino-
rea subintegrifolia O. Ktze and Drypetes gossweileri S. Moore occurring in Gabon. Flavour and 
Fragrance Journal 18(3): 207-210. 
Agnew, A.D.Q. & Agnew, S., 1994. Upland Kenya wild flowers: a flora of the ferns and herbaceous 
flowering plants of upland Kenya. 2nd Edition. East Africa Natural History Society, Nairobi, 
Kenya. 374 pp. 
Agrawal, A., Srivastava, S., Srivastava, J.N. & Srivastava, M.M., 2004. Inhibitory effect of the 
plant Boerhavia diffusa L. against the dermatophytic fungus Microsporum flavum. Journal of 
Environmental Biology 25(3): 307-311. 
Aguilar, N.O., 2001. Cordia dichotoma J.G. Forster. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyaprap-
hatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous 
plants 2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 185-188. 
Aguilar, N.O., 2003a. Coldenia procumbens L. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. 
(Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. Back-
huys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 129-130. 
Aguilar, N.O., 2003b. Tournefortia L. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). 
Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. Backhuys Pub-
lishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 402-404. 
Aguilar, N.O., 2003c. Trichodesma R.Br. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Edi-
tors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. Backhuys 
Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 407-408. 
Aguilar, N.O. & Brink, M., 1999. Aloe L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, 
R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 100-105. 
Aguiyi, J.C., Olorunfemi, P.O. & Igweh, A.C., 1998. Antibacterial activity of Costus afer. Fi-
toterapia 69(3): 272-273. 
Aguwa, C.N., 1985. Gastrointestinal effects of the extracts of Rhigiocarya racemifera (Menisper-
maceae). General Pharmacology: 16(4): 387-390. 
Aguwa, C.N., 1986. Pharmacologic effects of an aqueous extract of Rhigiocarya racemifera. Journal 
of Ethnopharmacology 15(2): 145-151. 
640 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Aguwa, C.N., Ukwe, C.V., Inya-Agha, S.I. & Okonta, J.M., 2001. Antidiabetic effect of Picralima 
nitida aqueous seed extract in experimental rabbit model. Journal of Natural Remedies 1(2): 
135-139. 
Agwa, H.E., 2000. Arbuscular mycorrhizal fungi (glomales) in Egypt. I. A field survey of Arbuscular 
mycorrhizal fungi associated with medicinal plants and effect of inoculation on growth of some 
plants. African Journal of Mycology and Biotechnology 8(3): 1-12. 
Agwada, V., Gorman, A.A., Hesse, M. & Schmid, H„ 1967. Über die Struktur des Callichilins. 125. 
Mitteilung über Alkaloide. Helvetica Chimica Acta 50(7): 1939-1960. 
Agwada, V.C., Naranjo, J., Hesse, M., Schmid, H., Rolland, Y., Kunesch, N., Poisson, J. & Chatter-
jee, A., 1977. Die Struktur des Bisindolalkaloides Amatain (= Grandifolin, Subsessilin). Helvetica 
Chimica Acta 60(8): 2830-2853. 
Agwu, I.E. & Akah, P.A., 1990. Tabernaemontana crassa as a traditional local anaesthetic agent. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 30(1): 115-119. 
Ahiahonu, P.W. & Goodenowe, D.B., 2007. Triterpenoids from leaves of Elaeophorbia drupifera. 
Fitoterapia 78(5): 337-341. 
Ahmad, V.U., 1986. Chemical constituents of Euphorbia granulata. Fitoterapia 57(4): 280. 
Ahmad, I., Ansari, A.A. & Osman, S.M., 1978. Cyanolipids of Boraginaceae seed oils. Chemistry 
and Industry 16: 626-627. 
Ahmad, I., Mehmood, Z., Mohammad, F. & Ahmad, S., 2000-2001. Antimicrobial potency and syn-
ergistic activity of five traditionally used medicinal plants. Journal of Medicinal and Aromatic 
Plant Sciences 22-23: 173-176. 
Ahmed, B., Al Howiriny, T.A. & Mathew, R., 2002. Antihepatotoxic activity of Phyllanthus frater-
nus. Pharmazie 57(12): 855-856. 
Ajaiyeoba, E. & Kingston, D., 2006. Cytotoxicity evaluation and isolation of a chroman derivative 
from Phyllanthus amarus aerial part extract. Pharmaceutical Biology 44(9): 668-671. 
Ajasa, A.M.O., Bello, M.O., Ibrahim, A.O., Ogunwande, I.A. & Olawore, N.O., 2004. Heavy trace 
metals and macronutrients status in herbal plants of Nigeria. Food Chemistry 85(1): 67-71. 
Akah, P.A., 1989. Purgative potentials of Euphorbia heterophylla. Fitoterapia 60(1): 45-48. 
Akah, P.A. & Nwambie, A.I., 1994. Evaluation of Nigerian traditional medicines 1: plants used for 
rheumatic (inflammatory) disorders. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 42(3): 179-182. 
Akah, P.A., Orisakwe, O.E., Gamaniel, K.S. & Shittu, A., 1998. Evaluation of Nigerian traditional 
medicines 2: effects of some Nigerian folk remedies on peptic ulcer. Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 62(2): 123-127. 
Akah, P.A., Nwafor, S.V., Okoli, CO. & Ngwoke, K.G., 2001. Purgative activity of the aqueous leaf 
extract of Penianthus longifolius Miers. Journal of Natural Remedies 1(1): 45—48. 
Akah, P.A., Nwafor, S.V., Okoli, CO. & Egbogha, C.U., 2002. Evaluation of the sedative properties 
of the ethanolic root extract of Cissampelos mucronata. Bollettino chimico-farmaceutico 141: 243-
246. 
Akanitapichat, P., Kurokawa, M., Tewtrakul, S., Pramyothin, P., Sripanidkulchai, B., Shiraki, K. 
& Hattori, M., 2002. Inhibitory activities of Thai medicinal plants against herpes simplex type 1, 
poliovirus type 1, and measles virus. Journal of Traditional Medicines 19(5): 174-180. 
Akanmu, M.A., Iwalewa, E.O., Elujoba, A.A. & Adelusola, K.A., 2005. Toxicity potentials of Senna 
podocarpa (Guill. & Perr.) Lock pods in rodents. African Journal Traditional, Complementary and 
Alternative Medicines 2(3): 274-281. 
Aké Assi, L., 1980. Les plantes et la thérapie de la stérilité des femmes en Côte d'Ivoire. Miscella-
neous Paper No. 19. Landbouwhogeschool, Wageningen, the Netherlands. 
Aké Assi, L., 2001. Flore de la Côte-dTvoire: catalogue systématique, biogéographie et écologie I. 
Boissiera 57: 1-396. 
Aké Assi, L., Abeye, J., Guinko, S., Riguet, R. & Bangavou, X., 1985. Médecine traditionnelle et 
pharmacopée - Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques en République Centrafri-
caine. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 140 pp. 
Aké-Assi, L., Guinko, S. & Aya-Lazare, A., 1991. Plantes utilisées dans la médecine traditionnelle 
en Afrique de l'Ouest. Edition Roche, Basel, Switzerland. 151 pp. 
Akendengué, B. & Louis, A.M., 1994. Medicinal plants used by the Masango people in Gabon. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 41: 193-200. 
LITERATURE 641 
Akhtar, M.S., Khan, Q.M. & Khaliq, T., 1984. Effects of Euphorbia prostrata and Fumaria par-
viflora in normoglycemic and alloxan-treated hyperglycemic rabbits. Planta Medica 50(2): 138-
142. 
Akinloye, B.A. & Court, W.E., 1981. The alkaloids of Rauwolfia volkensii. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 4: 99-109. 
Akoègninou, A., van der Burg, W.J. & van der Maesen, L.J.G. (Editors), 2006. Flore analytique du 
Bénin. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands. 1034 pp. 
Akpalu, D., 1998. An inventory of plants used in wood carvings and other related items in southern 
Ghana. B.Sc. Biology degree thesis, Department of Botany, Faculty of Science, University of Cape 
Coast, Ghana. 31 pp. 
Akpanabiatu, M.I., Igiri, A.O., Eyong, E.U. & Eteng, M.U., 2003. Biochemical and histological ef-
fects of Eleophorbia drupifera leaf extract in Wistar Albino rats. Pharmaceutical Biology 41(2): 
96-99. 
Akpata, M.I. & Miachi, O.E., 2001. Proximate composition and selected functional properties of 
Detarium microcarpum. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 56(4): 297-302. 
Akpo, L.E. & Grouzis, M., 1996. Influence du couvert sur la régénération de quelques espèces li-
gneuses sahéliennes (Nord Sénégal, Afrique occidentale). Webbia 50(2): 247-263. 
Aksoy, A., Dixon, J.M. & Hale, W.H.G., 1998. Biological flora of the British Isles No 199: Capsella 
bursa-pastoris (L.) Medikus (Thlaspi bursa-pastoris L., Bursa bursa-pastoris (L.) Shull, Bursa 
pastoris (L.) Weber). Journal of Ecology 86(1): 171-186. 
Akubue, P.I., Mittal, G.C. & Aguwa, C.N., 1983. Preliminary pharmacological study of some Nige-
rian medicinal plants. 1. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 8: 53-63. 
Al Awadi, F.M., Srikumar, T.S., Anim, J.T. & Khan, I., 2001. Anti-inflammatory effects of Cordia 
myxa fruit on experimentally induced colitis in rats. Nutrition 17(5): 391-396. 
Al Fatimi, M., Wurster, M., Schroder, G. & Lindequist, U., 2007. Antioxidant, antimicrobial and 
cytotoxic activities of selected medicinal plants from Yemen. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
111(3): 657-666. 
Al Helal, A.A., Al Farraj, M.M., El Desoki, R.A. & Al Habashi, I., 1989. Germination response of 
Cassia senna L. seeds to sodium salts and temperature. Journal of the University of Kuwait: Sci-
ence 16(2): 281-287. 
Al Khalil, S., Al Eisawi, D., Sharaf, M. & Schiff, P.L.jr., 1993. Alkaloids of Cocculus pendulus. 
Planta Medica 59(3): 276. 
Al Zanbagi, N.A., Banaja, A.E.A. & Barrett, J., 2000. Molluscicidal activity of some Saudi Arabian 
Euphorbiales against the snail Biomphalaria pfeifferi. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 70(2): 119-
125. 
Al Zanbagi, N.A., Banaja, A.E.A. & Barrett, J., 2002. The histopathology of Euphorbia schimperi-
ana methanol extract on the gut, digestive gland and epidermal layer of Biomphalaria pfeifferi. 
Journal of the Medical Research Institute - Alexandria University 23(2): 25-35. 
Al Zanbagi, N.A, Barrett, J. & Banaja, A.E.A., 2000. On the use of plant-derived compounds (ter-
penoids and phenolics) from Euphorbia schimperiana as a molluscicidal agent for the control of 
schistosomiasis. Journal of the Medical Research Institute - Alexandria University 21(4): 73-78. 
Aladesanmi, A.J., Sofowora, A. & Leary, J.D., 1986. Preliminary biological and phytochemical in-
vestigation of two Nigerian medicinal plants. International Journal of Crude Drug Research 
24(3): 147-153. 
Al-Araidh, I.A., Al-Tufail, M.A. & Al-Jammaz, I.A., 2004. Toxicity of Cassia italica seeds to rats. 
Kuwait Journal of Science and Engineering 31(20): 147-154. 
Alarcon-Aguilara, F.J., Roman-Ramos, R., Perez-Gutierrez, S., Aguilar-Contreras, A., Contreras-
Weber, C.C. & Flores-Saenz., J.L., 1998. Study of the anti-hyperglycemic effect of plants used as 
antidiabetics. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 61: 101-110. 
Alasbahi, R.H., Safiyeva, S. & Craker, L.E., 1999. Antimicrobial activity of some Yemeni medicinal 
plants. Journal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal plants 6(3): 75-83. 
Alberman, K.B. & Kipping, F.B., 1951. Phyllanthol: a new alcohol from the root bark of Phyllan-
thus engleri. Journal of the Chemical Society: 2296-2297. 
Alconero, R., Robinson, R.W., Dicklow, B. & Shail, J., 1988. Verticillium wilt resistance in eggplant, 
related Solanum species, and interspecific hybrids. HortScience 23(2): 388—390. 
642 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Aldea, M. & Allen Gil, S., 2005. Comparative toxicity of pokeweed (Phytolacca americana) extracts 
to invasive snails (Viviparus georgianis) and fathead minnows (Pimephales promelas). Bulletin of 
Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 74(5): 822-829. 
Alemayehu, G., Abegaz, B., Snatzke, G. & Duddeck, H., 1993. Bianthrones from Senna longi-
racemosa. Phytochemistry 32(5): 1273-1277. 
Alemayehu, G., Abegaz, B. & Kraus, W., 1998. A 1,4-anthraquinone-dihydroanthracenone dimer 
from Senna sophera. Phytochemistry 48(4): 699-702. 
Alemayehu, G., Hailu, A. & Abegaz, B.M., 1996. Bianthraquinones from Senna didymobotrya. Phy-
tochemistry 42(5): 1423-1425. 
Ali, S.I., 1973. Caesalpiniaceae. In: Nasir, E. & Ali, S.I. (Editors). Flora of West Pakistan No 54. 
Department of Botany, University of Karachi, Pakistan. 47 pp. 
Ali, A.M., Mackeen, M.M., El-Sharkawy, S.H., Hamid, J., Ismail, H., Ahmad, F.B.H. & Lajis, N.H., 
1996. Antiviral and cytotoxic activities of some plants used in Malaysian indigenous medicine. 
Pertanika Journal of Tropical Agricultural Science 19(2-3): 129-136. 
Ali, M.I.A., Shalaby, N.M.M., Elgamal, M.H.A. & Mousa, A.S.M., 1999a. Antifungal effects of dif-
ferent plant extracts and their major components of selected Aloe species. Phytotherapy Research 
13(5): 401-407. 
Ali, M.S., Azhar, I., Amtul, Z., Ahmad, V.U. & Usmanghani, K., 1999b. Antimicrobial screening of 
some Caesalpiniaceae. Fitoterapia 70(3): 299-304. 
Ali-Emmanuel, N., Moudachirou, M., Akakpo, J.A. & Quetin-Leclercq, J., 2003. Treatment of bo-
vine dermatophilosis with Senna alata, Lantana camara and Mitracarpus scaber leaf extracts. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 86(2): 167-171. 
Almeida, R.N., Navarro, D.S. & Barbosa-Filho, J.M., 2001. Plants with analgesic activity. Phy-
tomedicine 8: 310-322. 
Alper, K.R., 2001. Ibogaine: a review. The alkaloids. Chemistry and Biology 56: 1-38. 
Alper, K.R., Lotsof, H., Frenken, G., Luciano, D. & Bastiaans, J., 1999. Treatment of acute opioid 
withdrawal with ibogaine. The American Journal on Addictions 8: 234-242. 
Al-Shaikh, A.M. & Sablay, Z.M., 2005. Hallucinogenic plant poisoning in children. Saudi Medical 
Journal 26(1): 118-121. 
Al-Shehbaz, I.A. & Mummenhoff, K., 2002. Cardaria, Coronopus, and Stroganowia are united with 
Lepidium (Brassicaceae). Novon 12(1): 5—11. 
Alston, A.H.G., 1959. The ferns and fern-allies of West Tropical Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea 
Governments and Administrations, London, United Kingdom. 89 pp. 
Al-Yahya, M.A., Mossa, J.S., Al-Badr, A.A., Tariq, M. & Al-Meshai, I.A., 1987. Phytochemical and 
biological studies on Saudi medicinal plants: Part 12. A study on Saudi plants of family "Legumi-
nosae". International Journal of Crude Drug Research 25(2): 65-71. 
Amer, M.M.A. & Court, W.E., 1981. Root wood alkaloids of Rauwolfia macrophylla. Planta Medica 
43(1): 94-95. 
Ameri, A., 1999. The effects of cannabinoids on the brain. Progress in Neurobiology 58(4): 315—348. 
Amoako, A., 1991. A preliminary investigation of the anti-asthmatic properties of the ethanolic 
extracts of Bidens pilosa and Boerhavia diffusa. BSc thesis, Department of Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Ku-
masi, Ghana. 44 pp. 
Ampofo, S.A. & Waterman, P.G., 1985. Aurantiamide acetate, quassinoids, and a canthinone from 
the stem bark of Pierreodendron kerstingii. Journal of Natural Products 48(5): 863-864. 
Amponsah, K., Crensil, O.R., Odamtten, G.T. & Ofusohene-Djan, W., 2002. Manual for the propa-
gation and cultivation of medicinal plants of Ghana. Aburi botanical garden, University of 
Ghana, Accra, Ghana. 32 pp. 
Amresh, G., Rao, C.V. & Singh, P.N., 2007. Evaluation of Cissampelos pareira against gastric can-
cer and enzymes associated with carcinogen metabolism. Pharmaceutical Biology 45(8): 595-603. 
Amresh, G., Reddy, G.D., Rao, C.V. & Shirwaikar, A., 2004. Ethnomedical value of Cissampelos 
pareira extract in experimentally induced diarrhoea. Acta Pharmaceutica 54: 27-25. 
Amresh, G., Reddy, G.D., Rao, C.V. & Singh, P.N., 2007. Evaluation of anti-inflammatory activity 
of Cissampelos pareira root in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 110: 526-531. 
Amresh, G., Singh, P.N. & Rao, C.V., 2007. Antinociceptive and antiarthritic activity of Cissampe-
los pareira roots. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 111: 531-536. 
LITERATURE 643 
Amusan, 0., Bhembe, F.N., Mkhatshwa, F.T. & Thwala, E.Z., 1994. Antibacterial activity of An-
nona senegalensis, Andrachne ovalis and Spathodea campanulata against Pseudonomas solane-
cearum. UNISWA Journal of Agriculture 3: 62-66. 
Amusan, O.O.G., Dlamini, P.S., Msonthi, J.D. & Makhubu, L.P., 2002. Some herbal remedies from 
Manzini region of Swaziland. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79: 109-112. 
Amusan, O.O.G., Msonthi, J.D. & Makhubu, L.P., 1995. Molluscicidal activity of Spathodea cam-
panulata, Andrachne ovalis, Phytolacca dodecandra and Hypoxis rooperi. Fitoterapia 66: 113— 
116. 
Anaga, A.O., Njoku C.J., Ekejiuba, E.S., Esiaka, M.N. & Asuzu, I.U., 2004. Investigations of the 
methanolic leaf extract of Costus afer Ker-Gawl for pharmacological activities in vitro and in 
vivo. Phytomedicine 11(2-3): 242-248. 
Anani, K, Hudson, J.B., De Souza, C, Akpagana, K., Tower, G.H.N., Amason, J.T. & Gbeassor, M., 
2000. Investigation of medicinal plants of Togo for antiviral and antimicrobial activities. Pharma-
ceutical Biology 38(1): 40-45. 
Andersen, L., Nielsen, B. & Jaroszewski, J.W., 2000. Synthesis of epimers of L-
cyclopentenylglycine using enzymatic resolution. Chirality 12(9): 665-669. 
Andrews, F.W., 1956. The flowering plants of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan, Volume 3. Buncle, Ar-
broath, United Kingdom. 579 pp. 
Andriamanga, N., 1995. Les plantes médicinales anthelmintiques Malagasy. FOFIFA, DRZV (Di-
rection des Recherches Zootechniques et en Vétérinaires), Antananarivo, Madagascar. 100 pp. 
Andriamihaja, S., 1986. Essai d'inventaire des plantes medicino-dentaires malgaches (Tome I). 
Rapport du Mission Française de Coopération et d'Action Culturelle & Ministère de la Recherche 
Scientifique et Technologique pour le Développement de la République Malagasy. 316 pp. 
Andriamihaja, S., 1988. Essai d'inventaire des plantes medicino-dentaires malgaches, Tome II. 
SME, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 373 pp. 
Andrianaivoravelona, B.A., 2004. Etude systématique de Phyllanthus casticum Willemet et de 
Phyllanthus nummulariifolius Poiret (Euphorbiaceae) à Madagascar. Mémoire pour l'obtention 
du diplôme d'étude approfondie, Département de Biologie et Ecologie végétale, Faculté des Scien-
ces, Université d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 71 pp. 
Andriatsiferana, R., 1997. Valorisation des activités biologiques de la biodiversité végétale: plantes 
médicinales. In: Ministère de l'environnement, Ministère des eaux et forêts, Office National de 
l'Environnement (Editors). Monographie nationale sur la biodiversité. Antananarivo, Madagas-
car, pp. 243-248. 
Angenot, L., 1971. De l'existence en Afrique centrale d'un poison de flèche curarisant issu du 
Strychnos usambarensis Gilg. Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises 9: 353-364. 
Ango Biyoghe, V., 2004. Induction de la callogénèse chez Tabernanthe iboga (Apocynaceae). Rap-
port CAPES, Ecole Normale Supérieure, Libreville, Gabon. 57 pp. 
Aniagu, S.O., Nwinyi, F.C., Akumka, D.D., Ajoku, G.A., Dzarma, S., Izebe, K.S., Ditse, M., Nwane-
ri, P.E.C., Wambebe, C. & Gamaniel, K., 2005. Toxicity studies in rats fed nature cure bitters. Af-
rican Journal of Biotechnology 4(1): 72-78. 
Anonymous, 1997-1998. Fiche espèce sur Jatropha curcas Linn. Revue de Médecines et Pharmaco-
pées Africaines 11-12: 205-222. 
Ansa-Asamoah, R. & Ampofo, A.A., 1986. Analgesic effect of crude extracts of Picralima nitida 
seeds. African Journal of Pharmacology 1: 35-38. 
Antwi, A.S., 1994. Alkaloids of Croton membranaceous. B.Sc. Chemistry degree thesis, Department 
of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. 29 pp. 
Anuka, J.A., Yaro, A.H., Wannang, N.N., Ezenwanne, E.B. & Yakasai, I.A., 2005. Some in vivo and 
in vitro studies of the aqueous leaf extract of Phyllanthus muellerianus (Euphorbiaceae) in labo-
ratory animals. Journal of Pharmacy & Bioresources 2(2): 93-99. 
Anuradha, H., Srikumar, B.N., Rao, B.S.S. & Lakshmana, M., 2008. Euphorbia hirta reverses 
chronic stress-induced anxiety and mediates its action through the GABA(A) receptor benzodi-
azepine receptor-Cl-channel complex. Journal of Neural Transmission 115(1): 35—42. 
Apema, A.K.R., Abeye, J., Salamate, F.M.L. & Mozouloua, D., 2007. Contribution à l'inventaire 
des plantes médicinales utilisées dans le traitement du diabète par les tradipraticiens à Bangui. 
In: Achoundong, G. (Editor). Book of abstracts of the 18th AETFAT Congress, 26 February-2 
March 2007, Yaoundé, Cameroon, p. 94. 
644 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Apuya, N., Bobzin, S.C. & Park, J.-H., 2007. Proteins and regulatory elements for modulating alka-
loid biosynthesis in plants. U.S. Patent Application 20070199090, U.S. Current Class 800/278. 
127 pp. 
Aqil, F., Khan, M.S., Owais, M. & Ahmad, I., 2005. Effect of certain bioactive plant extracts on 
clinical isolates of beta-lactamase producing methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus. Journal 
of Basic Microbiology 45(2): 106-114. 
Arbayah H. Siregar, 1999. Brucea javanica (L.) Merr. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & 
Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 160-163. 
Arbonnier, M., 2000. Arbres, arbustes et lianes des zones sèches d'Afrique de l'Ouest. CIRAD, 
MNHN, UICN. 541 pp. 
Arbonnier, M., 2002. Arbres, arbustes et lianes des zones sèches d'Afrique de l'Ouest. CIRAD, 
MNHN, UICN. 573 pp. 
Arbonnier, M., 2004. Trees, shrubs and lianas of West African dry zones. CIRAD, Margraf Publish-
ers Gmbh, MNHN, Paris, France. 573 pp. 
Arens, H., Borbe, H.O., Ulbrich, B. & Stoeckigt, J., 1982. Detection of pericine, a new central nerv-
ous system active indole alkaloid from Picralima nitida cell suspension culture by opiate receptor 
binding studies. Planta Medica 46(4): 210-214. 
Arévalo, V.G., 1994. Medicina Indigena. Las Plantas Médicinales y su Beneficio en la Salud. Shipi-
bo-Conibo, AIDESEP, Lima, Peru. 354 pp. 
Arisawa, M., Kinghorn, A.D., Cordell, G.A. & Farnsworth, N.R., 1983. Plant anticancer agents. 
XXIV. Alkaloid constituents of Simaba multiflora. Journal of Natural Products 46: 374-378. 
Armbruster, W.S. & Steiner, K.E., 1992. Pollination ecology of four Dalechampia species (Euphor-
biaceae) in northern Natal, South Africa. American Journal of Botany 79(3): 306-313. 
Arnold, H.J. & Gulumian, M., 1984. Pharmacopoeia of traditional medicine in Venda. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 12: 35-74. 
Arnold, T.H., Prentice, CA., Hawker, L.C., Snyman, E.E., Tomalin, M., Crouch, N.R. & Pottas-
Bircher, C, 2002. Medicinal and magical plants of southern Africa: an annotated checklist. Stre-
litzia 13. National Botanical Institute, Pretoria, South Africa. 302 pp. 
Arrigoni-Blank, M., Barros Oliveira, R.L., Santos Mendes, S., de Albuquerque Silva, P., Antoniolli, 
A.R., Carvalho Vilar, J., de Holanda Cavalcanti, S.C. & Blank, A.F., 2002. Seed germination, 
phenology, and antiedematogenic activity of Peperomia pellucida (L.) H.B.K. BMC Pharmacology 
2: 12-19. 
Arrigoni-Blank, M., Dmitrieva, E.G., Franzotti, E.M., Antoniolli, A.R., Andrade, M.R. & Marchiori, 
M., 2004. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic activity of Peperomia pellucida (L.) H.B.K. (Piper-
aceae). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 91: 215-218. 
Asano, N., Kato, A., Matsui, K., Watson, A.A., Nash, R.J., Molyneux, R.J., Hackett, L., Topping, J. 
& Winchester, B., 1997. The effects of calystegines isolated from edible fruits and vegetables on 
mammalian liver glycosidases, Glycobiology 7(8): 1085-1088. 
Aschfalk, A., Steingass, H., Müller, W. & Drochner, W., 2000. Acceptance and digestibility of some 
selected browse feeds with varying tannin content as supplements in sheep nutrition in West Af-
rica. Journal of Veterinary Medicine, Series A, 47(9): 513-524. 
Asha, V.V., Akhila, S., Wills, J.P. & Subramoniam, A., 2004. Further studies on the antihepato-
toxic activity of Phyllanthus maderaspatensis Linn. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 92(1): 67 -
170. 
Asres, K., Bucar, F., Kartnig, T., Witvrouw, M., Pannecouque, C. & De Clercq, E., 2001. Antiviral 
activity against human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) and type 2 (HIV-2) of ethno-
botanically selected Ethiopian medicinal plants. Phytotherapy Research 15(1): 62-69. 
Asres, K., Gibbons, S. & Bucar, F., 2006. Radical scavenging compounds from Ethiopian medicinal 
plants. Ethiopian Pharmaceutical Journal 24(1): 23-30. 
Asres, K., Seyoum, A., Veeresham, C, Bucar, F. & Gibbons, S., 2005. Naturally derived anti-HIV 
agents - review article. Phytotherapy Research 19: 557-581. 
Assadi-Porter, F.M., Abildgaard, F., Blad, H., Cornilescu, C.C. & Markley, J.L., 2005. Brazzein, a 
small, sweet protein: effects of mutations on its structure, dynamics and functional properties. 
Chemical Senses 30 (supplement 1): i90-i91. 
LITERATURE 645 
Assadi-Porter, F.M., Aceti, D.J., Cheng, H. & Markley, J.L., 2000. Efficient production of recombi-
nant brazzein, a small, heat-stable, sweet-tasting protein of plant origin. Archives of Biochemis-
try and Biophysics 376(2): 252-258. 
Assadi-Porter, F.M., Aceti, D.J. & Markley, J.L., 2000. Sweetness determinant sites of brazzein, a 
small, heat-stable, sweet-tasting protein. Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics 376(2): 259-
265. 
Asseleih, L.M.C., Hernandez, O.H. & Sanchez, J.R., 1990. Seasonal variations in the content of 
sennosides in leaves and pods of two Cassia fistula populations. Phytochemistry 29: 3095-3099. 
Assis, L.M., Bevilaqua, CM., Morais, S.M., Vieira, L.S., Costa, C.T. & Souza, J.A., 2003. Ovicidal 
and larvicidal activity in vitro of Spigelia anthelmia Linn, extracts on Haemonchus contortus. 
Veterinary Parasitology 117(1-2): 43-49. 
Asuzu, LU., 2005. A review on Croton penduliflorus seed extract. Recent progress in medicinal 
plants. Stadium Press, Texas, United States. 32 pp. 
Asuzu, LU. & Anaga, A.O., 1995. The antiulcer effect of the methanolic extract of Triclisia subcor-
data leaves in rats. Journal of Herbs, Spices and Medicinal Plants 3(3): 45-53. 
Asuzu, LU. & Chineme, C.N., 1989. Acute toxicity and gastrointestinal irritant effect of Croton 
penduliflorus seed oil in mice. Phytotherapy Research 2(1): 46-50. 
Asuzu, LU. & Chineme, C.N., 2006a. Acute toxicity and gastrointestinal effect of Croton penduliflo-
rus seed oil in mice. Phytotherapy Research 2(1): 46-50. 
Asuzu, LU. & Chineme, C.N., 2006b. Investigations of the cytoprotective effect of the gut stimulat-
ing principle of Croton penduliflorus Hutch, seed oil in rats. Phytotherapy Research 3(1): 33-35. 
Asuzu, LU., Gray, A.I. & Waterman, P.G., 1988. The extraction, isolation and identification of the 
purgative component of Croton penduliflorus seed oil. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 23: 267-
271. 
Asuzu, LU., Shetty, S.N. & Anika, S.M., 1989. Effects of the gut-stimulating principle in Croton 
penduliflorus seed oil on the central nervous system. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 26: 111—119. 
Asuzu, LU., Shetty, S.N. & Anika, S.M., 1990. Effects of chronic oral administration in mice of the 
gut-stimulating crystals of Croton penduliflorus seed oil. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 30(2): 
135-143. 
Atakora, A.G., 2004. Pharmacognostic study of the roots of Croton membranaceus (Euphorbiaceae). 
B.Pharm. degree thesis, Department of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah 
University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. 31 pp. 
Ateufack, G., Nguelefack, T.B., Wabo, H.K., Watcho, P., Tane, P. & Kamanyi, A., 2006. Antiulcer 
effects of the aqueous and organic extracts of the stem bark of Anthocleista vogelii in rats. Phar-
maceutical Biology 44(3): 166-171. 
Atindehou, K.K., Koné, M., Terreaux, C, Traoré, D., Hostettmann, K. & Dosso, M., 2002. Evalua-
tion of the antimicrobial potential of medicinal plants from the Ivory Coast. Phytotherapy Re-
search 16(5): 497-502. 
Atindehou, K.K., Schmid, C, Brun, R., Koné, M.W. & Traoré, D., 2004. Antitrypanosomal and an-
tiplasmodial activity of medicinal plants from Côte d'Ivoire. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 90(2): 
221-227. 
Atiqur Rahman, M., Mossa, J.S., Al-Said, M.S. & Al-Yahya, M.A., 2004. Medicinal plant diversity 
in the flora of Saudi Arabia 1: a report on seven plant families. Fitoterapia 75: 149-161. 
Atiti, A.B., 2004. Encounters with Kenyan succulents. Roots; Botanic Garden Conservation Inter-
national Education Review 1(1): 23-24. 
Atta-ur-Rahman, 1986. Isolation, structural and synthetic studies on the chemical constituents of 
medicinal plants of Pakistan. Pure and Applied Chemistry 58: 663—673. 
Atta-ur-Rahman, Tul Wahab, A., Nawaz, S.A. & Choudhary, I.M., 2004. New Cholinesterase inhib-
iting bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids from Cocculus pendulus. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bul-
letin 52(7): 802-806. 
Aubert, S. & Picot, F., 2005. Bois jaune and tisaneurs: the application of article 8(j) in an overseas 
department. In: Bétard, L., Cegarra, M., Djama, M., Louafi, S., Marchenay, P., Roussel, B. & Ver-
deaux, F. (Editors). Biodiversity and local ecological knowledge in France. INRA, CIRAD, IDDRI, 
IFB, France, pp. 224-228. 
Aubréville, A., 1950. Flore forestière soudano-guinéenne. Société d'Editions Géographiques, Mari-
times et Coloniales, Paris, France. 533 pp. 
646 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Aubréville, A., 1959a. La flore forestière de la Côte d'Ivoire. Deuxième édition révisée. Tome 
deuxième. Publication No 15. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 
341 pp. 
Aubréville, A., 1959b. La flore forestière de la Côte d'Ivoire. Deuxième édition révisée. Tome pre-
mier. Publication No 15. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 369 pp. 
Aubréville, A., 1968. Légumineuses - Caesalpinioidées (Leguminosae - Caesalpinioideae). Flore du 
Gabon. Volume 15. Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France. 362 pp. 
Aubréville, A., 1970. Légumineuses - Césalpinioidées (Leguminosae - Caesalpinioideae). Flore du 
Cameroun. Volume 9. Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France. 339 pp. 
Audu, J., 1995. Studies on the effectiveness of medicinal herbs used as anthelmintics by traditional 
medical practitioners in south of Bauchi State. Journal of Economic and Taxonomie Botany 19(3): 
653-661. 
Augustino, S. & Gillah, P.R., 2005. Medicinal plants in urban districts of Tanzania: plants, gender 
roles and sustainable use. International Forestry Review 7(1): 44-58. 
Avit, J-B.L.F., Pedia, P.L. & Sankaré, Y., 1999. Diversité biologique de la Côte d'Ivoire - Rapport de 
synthèse. Ministère de l'Environnement et de la Forêt, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. 273 pp. 
Aweke, G., 1997. Costaceae. In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, Demissew Sebsebe & Hedberg, I. 
(Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 6. Hydrocharitaceae to Arecaceae. The National 
Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Bot-
any, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 330-332. 
Awohee, D.E., 1987. Purgative drugs of natural origin and preliminary investigation into the 
pharmacognostical characters of the leaves of Mareya micrantha. B.Pharm degree thesis, Faculty 
of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. 94 pp. 
Ayedoun, M.A., Moudachirou, M., Sossou, P.V., Garneau, F.X., Gagnon, H. & Jean, F.I., 1998. Vola-
tile constituents of the root oil of Petiveria alliacea L. from Benin. Journal of Essential Oil Re-
search 10(6): 645-646. 
Ayensu, E.S., 1978. Medicinal plants of West Africa. Reference Publication, Michigan. 330 pp. 
Ayers, S., Zink, D.L., Mohn, K., Staats-Powell, J., Brown, CM., Murphy, T., Brand, R., Pretorius, 
S., Stevenson, D., Thompson, D. & Singh, S.B., 2007. Anthelmintic activity of aporphine alkaloids 
from Cissampelos capensis. Planta Medica 73(3): 296-297. 
Ayisi, N.K. & Nyadedzor, C , 2003. Comparative in vitro effects of AZT and extracts of Ocimum 
gratissimum, Ficus polita, Clausena anisata, Alchornea cordifolia, and Elaeophorbia drupifera 
against HIV-1 and HIV-2 infections. Antiviral Research 58: 25-33. 
Aziba, P.L, Adedeji, A., Ekor, M. & Adeyemi, O., 2001. Analgesic activity of Peperomia pellucida 
aerial parts in mice. Fitoterapia 72: 57—58. 
B.I.M.T.T., 2000. Les avantages de la culture de la consoude. Tantely 4: 6. 
Bâ, A.S., 1994. L'art vétérinaire en milieu traditionnel africain. Agence de Coopération Culturelle 
et Technique (A.C.CT.), Paris, France. 136 pp. 
Babady-Bila, Gedris, T.E. & Herz, W., 1996. Niruroidine, a norsecurinine-type alkaloid from Phyl-
lanthus niruroides. Phytochemistry 41(5): 1441-1443. 
Babeley, G.S. & Kandya, A.K., 1988. On finding out some suitable pretreatments for Cassia fistula 
Linn, seeds. Journal of Tropical Forestry 4(2): 147-154. 
Babu, R. & Chaudhuri, M., 2005. Home water treatment by direct filtration with natural coagu-
lant. Journal of Water and Health 3(1): 27-30. 
Backlund, M., Oxelman, B. & Bremer, B., 2000. Phylogenetic relationships within the Gentianales 
based on ndhF and rbcL sequences, with particular reference to the Loganiaceae. American Jour-
nal of Botany 87(7): 1029-1043. 
Badré, F., 1972. Humiriaceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 14. Muséum National d'Histoire Natu-
relle, Paris, France, pp. 47-50. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2002a. Cassia nigricans. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Database. 
Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude/view_plant?pi=02630> Accessed September 2004. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2002b. Detarium microcarpum. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude/view_plant?pi=04690> Accessed August 2004. 
LITERATURE 647 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2002c. Heliotropium steudneri. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude/view_plant?pi=06760> Accessed April 2004. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2002d. Plantago lanceolata. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Data-
base. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude/view_plant?pi=10120> Accessed June 2004. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2002e. Plantago palmata. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Data-
base. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude/view_plant?pi=10130> Accessed June 2004. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2005a. Aloe buettneri. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Database. 
Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed September 2005. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2005b. Aloe ferox. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Database. Meta-
fro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed September 2005. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2005c. Aloe lateritia/Aloe graminicola. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal 
Plants Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed September 2005. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2005d. Aloe secundiflora. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Data-
base. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed September 2005. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2005e. Aloe volkensii. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Database. 
Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed September 2005. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2005f. Cassia absus. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Database. 
Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude/view_plant?pi=02550> Accessed March 2005. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2006a. Cissampelos mucronata. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed November 2007. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2006b. Cissampelos owariensis. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed November 2007. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2006c. Cissampelos pareira. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Data-
base. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed November 2007. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2006d. Croton sylvaticus. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Data-
base. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed January 2007. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2006e. Kolobopetalum chevalieri. [Internet], Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed February 2008. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2006f. Stephania abyssinica. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants Da-
tabase. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed December 2007. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2008a. Erythrococca bongensis. [Internet] Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed May 2008. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2008b. Euphorbia heterochroma. [Internet]. Prelude Medicinal Plants 
Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed February 2008. 
Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J., 2008c. Phyllanthus nummulariifolius. [Internet] Prelude Medicinal 
Plants Database. Metafro-Infosys, Royal Museum for Central Africa, Tervuren, Belgium 
<http://www.metafro.be/prelude>. Accessed May 2008. 
Bagavathi, R., Sorg, B. & Hecker, E., 1988. Tigliane-type diterpene esters from Synadenium gran-
tii. Planta Medica 54(6): 506-510. 
648 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Bâillon, H., 1886. Histoire des plantes. Volume 12. Librairie Hachette, Paris, France. 
Bakarr, M.I. & Janos, D.P., 1996. Mycorrhizal associations of tropical legume trees in Sierra Leone, 
West Africa. Forest Ecology and Management 89(1-3): 89-92. 
Baker, J.G., 1877., 1877. Liliaceae. In: Baker, J.G. (Editor). Flora of Mauritius and the Seychelles: 
a description of the flowering plants and ferns of those islands. L. Reeve & Co., London, United 
Kingdom, pp. 372-378. 
Bakhiet, A.O. & Adam, S.E.I., 1996. Toxicity to Bovans chicks of Cassia italica seeds. Phytotherapy 
Research 10(2): 156-160. 
Balagizi Karhagomba, I. & Ntumba Kayembe, F., 1998. Plantes utilisées dans le traitement des 
helminthoses gastro-intestinales des petits ruminants dans le groupement d'Irhambi-Katana (Ré-
gion du Bushi, Province du Sud-Kivu, R.D. Congo). Recherches africaines 1: 90-99. 
Balansard, G., Zambie, D., Dumenil, G. & Cremieux, A., 1980. Demonstration of the anti-bacterial 
properties of the latex obtained by tapping the trunks of Alafia multiflora trees. Identification of 
vanillic acid. Plantes Médicinales et Phytotherapie 14(2): 99-104. 
Balde, A.M., Apers, S., de Bruyne, T.E., van den Heuvel, H., Claeys, M., Vlietinck, A.J. & Pieters, 
L.A.C., 2000. Steroids from Harrisonia abyssinica. Planta Medica 66(1): 67-69. 
Balde, A.M., Pieters, L., De Bruyne, T., Geerts, S., Vanden Berghe, D.A. & Vlietinck, A., 1995. Bio-
logical investigations on Harrisonia abyssinica. Phytomedicine 14: 299-302. 
Balle, S., 1948. Piperaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., De Wildeman, E., Germain, R., Gilbert, G., 
Hauman, L., Homes, M., Lebrun, J., Louis, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). Flore 
du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 1. Institut National pour l'Étude 
Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 15—27. 
Balle, S., 1951. Phytolaccaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., Demaret, F., Germain, R., Gilbert, G., 
Hauman, L., Homes, M., Jurion, F., Lebrun, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). Flore 
du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 2. Institut National pour l'Etude 
Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 92-99. 
Baloyi, J.K. & Ferreira, L., 2005. Euphorbia cooperi. [Internet] South African National Biodiversity 
Institute, Cape Town, South Africa, <http://www.plantzafrica.com/planttuv/euphorbcoop.htm> 
Accessed February 2008. 
Bandarage, U.K., Kuehne, M.E. & Glick, S.D., 2001. Chemical synthesis and biological evaluation 
of 18-methoxycoronaridine (18-MC) as a potential anti-addictive agent. Current Medicinal Che-
mistry - Central Nervous Agents 1: 113-123. 
Banderembako, F. & Ntitangirageza, T., 1978. La médecine populaire au Burundi: quelques plan-
tes médicinales. Que vous en semble 35. 20 pp. 
Bani, S., Kaul, A., Khan, B., Gupta, V.K., Satti, N.K., Suri, K.A. & Qazi, G.N., 2007. Anti-arthritic 
activity of a biopolymeric fraction from Euphorbia tirucalli. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
110(1): 92-98. 
Bannon, J.S., Baker, J.B. & Rogers, R.L., 1978. Germination of wild poinsettia, Euphorbia hetero-
phylla. Weed Science 26(3): 221-225. 
Banzouzi, J.-T., Prado, R., Menan, H., Valentin, A., Roumestan, C, Mallie, M., Pelissier, Y. & Bla-
che, Y., 2002. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of extracts of Alchornea cordifolia and identification 
of an active constituent: ellagic acid. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 81: 399-401. 
Baraguey, C, Auvin-Guette, C, Blond, A., Cavelier, F., Lezenven, F., Pousset, J-L. & Bodo, B., 
1998. Isolation, structure and synthesis of chevalierines A, B, and C, cyclic peptides from the la-
tex of Jatropha chevalieri. Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Transactions I: Organic and 
Bio-Organic Chemistry 18: 3033-3039. 
Baraguey, C, Blond, A., Correia, I., Pousset, J.-L., Bodo, B. & Auvin-Guette, C, 2000. Mahafacy-
clin A, a cyclic heptapeptide from Jatropha mahafalensis exhibiting ß-bulge conformation. Tetra-
hedron Letters 41: 325-329. 
Barak, V., Birkenfeld, S., Halperin, T. & Kalickman, I., 2002. The effect of herbal remedies on the 
production of human inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines. Israel Medical Association 
Journal 4: S919-S922. 
Barbiera, L., Falasca, A.L. & Stirpe, F., 1984. Volkensin, the toxin of Adenia volkensii (kilyambati 
plant). Febs Letters 171(2): 277-279. 
LITERATURE 649 
Barink, M.M., 1983. A revision of Pleioceras Baill., Stephanostema K. Schum. and Schizozygia 
Baill. (Apocynaceae). In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 11-13. 
Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 83-7. Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 21-55. 
Barker, C, Dunn, H.C. & Hilditch, T.P., 1950. African drying oils. V. Some Nigerian and Sudanese 
drying oils. Journal of the Society of Chemical Industry, London, Transactions and Communica-
tions 69: 71-75. 
Barnabas, C.G.G. & Nagarajan, S., 1988. Antimicrobial activity of flavonoids of some medicinal 
plants. Fitoterapia 59(6): 508-510. 
Barnes, P., 1998. Herbage yields and quality in four woody forage plants in a subhumid environ-
ment in Ghana. Agroforestry Systems 42(1): 25-32. 
Barri, M.E.S., Onsa, T.O., Elawad, A.A., Elsayed, N.Y., Wasfi, I.A., Bari, E.M.A. & Adam, S.E.I., 
1983. Toxicity of five Sudanese plants to young ruminants. Journal of Comparative Pathology 
93(4): 559-575. 
Bartha, R., 1970. Fodder plants in the Sahel zone of Africa. Weltforum Verlag, München, Germany. 
306 pp. 
Basilevskaia, V., 1969. Plantes médicinales de Guinée. Imprimerie nationale de Guinée, Conakry, 
Guinea. Vol 1. 270 pp. 
Bassi, A.M., Penco, S., Canute, R.A., Muzio, G. & Ferro, M., 1997. Comparative evaluation of cyto-
toxicity and metabolism of four aldehydes in two hepatoma cell lines. Drugs and Chemical Toxi-
cology 20(3): 173-187. 
Bassleer, R., Depauw-Gillet, M.C., Massart, B., Marnette, J.M., Wiliquet, P., Caprasse, M. & An-
genot, L., 1982. Effets de trois alcaloïdes extraits du Strychnos usambarensis sur des cellules can-
céreuses en culture. Planta Medica 45: 123-126. 
Batanouny, K.H., 1999. Wild medicinal plants in Egypt: an inventory to support conservation and 
sustainable use. [Internet] Palm Press, Cairo, Egypt. 207 pp. 
<http://www.iucn.org/places/medoffice/nabp/web/documents/book/chapter3.pdf>. Accessed October 
2006. 
Bationo, B.A., Ouedraogo, S.J. & Guinko, S., 2001. Stratégies de régénération naturelle de Deta-
rium microcarpum Guill. et Perr. dans la forêt classée de Nazinon (Burkina Faso). Fruits 56(4): 
271-285. 
Baumer, M., 1995. Arbres, arbustes et arbrisseaux nourriciers en Afrique occidentale. ENDA & 
CTA, Dakar, Sénégal. 260 pp. 
Bayma, J.C., Arruda, M.S.P., Müller, A.H., Arruda, A.C. & Canto, W.C., 2000. A dimeric ArC2 
compound from Peperomia pellucida. Phytochemistry 55: 779—782. 
Bayne, H.J., 2002. FDA issues final rule banning use of Aloe and Cascara sagrada in OTC drug 
products. HerbalGram 56: 56-59. 
Bebawi, F.F. & Campbell, S.D., 2002. The response of bellyache bush (Jatropha gossypiifolia) 
plants cut off at different heights and seasonal times. Tropical Grasslands 36(2): 65-68. 
Bedu-Addo, K., 1993. Effect of the crude extract of the root of Rauwolfia vomitoria on the reproduc-
tion of female albino rats (Rattus norvegicus). M.Phil, degree thesis, Department of Biological 
Sciences, Faculty of Science, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, 
Ghana. 100 pp. 
Beentje, H.J., 1978. A revision of Callichilia Stapf (Apocynaceae). Mededelingen Landbouwhoge-
school Wageningen 78-7, Wageningen, Netherlands. 32 pp. 
Beentje, H. J., 1982. A monograph on Strophanthus DC. (Apocynaceae). Mededelingen Landbouw-
hogeschool Wageningen 82-4. Wageningen, Netherlands. 191 pp. 
Beentje, H.J., 1994. Kenya trees, shrubs and lianas. National Museums of Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya. 
722 pp. 
Beentje, H. J., 1998. Surianaceae. In: Beentje, H.J. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 4 pp. 
Beentje, H.J. & Cooke, D., 2000. Strophanthus sarmentosus: Apocynaceae. Curtis's Botanical 
Magazine 17(4): 202-207. 
Beg, A.Z. & Ahmad, I., 2000. Effect of Plumbago zeylanica extract and certain curing agents on 
multidrug resistant bacteria of clinical origin. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 
16(8-9): 841-844. 
650 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Begum, S., Usmani, S.B., Siddiqui, B.S. & Siddiqui, S., 1994. Alkaloids from the bark of Holar-
rhena pubescens. Phytochemistry 29(10): 1537-1541. 
Behera, T.K., Sharma, P., Singh, B.K., Kumar, G., Kumar, R., Mohapatra, T. & Singh, N.K., 2006. 
Assessment of genetic diversity and species relationships in eggplant (Solanum melongena L.): 
using stms markers. Scientia Horticulturae 107(4): 352-357. 
Bein, E., Habte, B., Jaber, A., Birnie, A. & Tengnäs, B., 1996. Useful trees and shrubs in Eritrea: 
identification, propagation and management for agricultural and pastoral communities. Techni-
cal Handbook No 12. Regional Soil Conservation Unit, Nairobi, Kenya. 422 pp. 
Bekele-Tesemma, A., 2007. Useful trees and shrubs for Ethiopia: identification, propagation and 
management for 17 agroclimatic zones. Technical Manual No 6. RELMA in ICRAF Project, Nai-
robi, Kenya. 552 pp. 
Bekele-Tesemma, A., Birnie, A. & Tengnäs, B., 1993. Useful trees and shrubs for Ethiopia: identifi-
cation, propagation and management for agricultural and pastoral communities. Technical Hand-
book No 5. Regional Soil Conservation Unit/SIDA, Nairobi, Kenya. 474 pp. 
Belemtougri, R.G., Samate, D.A. & Millogo-Rasolodimby, J., 1995. Sapium grahamii (Stapf) Prain: 
plante cardiotonique. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 9(2): 21-30. 
Belisario, A., Maccaroni, M. & Corazza, L., 2003. First report of wilt and dieback on pokeweed 
(Phytolacca decandra) caused by Phytophthora nicotianae. Plant Disease 87(1): 101. 
Bell, E.A., Fellows, L.E. & Qureshi, M.Y., 1976. 5-Hydroxy-L-tryptophan; taxonomie character and 
chemical defence in Griffonia. Phytochemistry 15(5): 823. 
Belmain, S.R., Neal, G.E., Ray, D.E. & Golob, P., 2001. Insecticidal and vertebrate toxicity associ-
ated with ethnobotanicals used as post-harvest protectants in Ghana. Food and Chemical Toxi-
cology 39(3): 287-291. 
Benevides, P.J.C., Young, M.C.M., Giesbrecht, A.M., Roque, N.F. & Bolzani, V.S., 2001. Antifungal 
polysulphides from Petiveria alliacea L. Phytochemistry 57(5): 743-747. 
Bennett, R.N., Mellon, F.A. & Kroon, P.A., 2004. Screening crucifer seeds as sources of specific in-
tact glucosinolates using ion-pair high-performance liquid chromatography negative ion electros-
pray mass spectrometry. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 52(3): 428-438. 
Bennett, R.N., Mellon, F.A., Rosa, E.A., Perkins, L. & Kroon, P.A., 2004. Profiling glucosinolates, 
flavonoids, alkaloids, and other secondary metabolites in tissues of Azima tetracantha L. (Salva-
doraceae). Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 52(19): 5856-5862. 
Benvenuto, E., 1974. Adumbratio florae aethiopicae. 26 Menispermaceae. Webbia 29: 17-80. 
Benz, B. (Editor), 2001. Résumé des mémoires de stage des étudiants du CNEARC, soutenues en 
2000. Etudes et Travaux No 21. Centre National d'Etudes Agronomiques des Régions Chaudes. 
Montpellier, France. 115 pp. 
Beppu, H., Kawaib, K., Shimpoa, K., Chiharaa, T., Tamaia, L, Idaa, C, Uedaa, M. & Kuzuyaa, H., 
2004. Studies on the components of Aloe arborescens from Japan - monthly variation and differ-
ences due to part and position of the leaf. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 32(9): 783-795. 
Berger, I., Barrientos, A.C., Caceres, A., Hernandez, M., Rastrelli, L., Passreiter, CM. & Kubelka, 
W., 1998. Plants used in Guatemala for the treatment of protozoal infections. II. Activity of ex-
tracts and fractions of five Guatemalan plants against Trypanosoma cruzi. Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 62(2): 107-115. 
Bergquist, K.-E., Obianwu, H. & Wickberg, B., 1989. Isolation and structure determination of a 
novel phorbol derivative in an intramolecular diester macrolide. Journal of the Chemical Society: 
Chemical Communications 1989: 183-184. 
Berhan, A., Asfaw, Z. & Kelbessa, E., 2006. Ethnobotany of plants used as insecticides, repellants 
and antimalarial agents in Jabitehnan district, West Gojjam. Ethiopian Journal of Science 29(1): 
87-92. 
Berhaut, J., 1967. Flore du Sénégal. 2nd edition. Editions Clairafrique, Dakar, Senegal. 485 pp. 
Berhaut, J., 1974. Flore illustrée du Sénégal. Dicotylédones. Volume 2. Balanophoracées à Compo-
sées. Gouvernement du Sénégal, Ministère du Développement Rural et de l'Hydraulique, Direc-
tion des Eaux et Forêts, Dakar, Senegal. 695 pp. 
Berhaut, J., 1975a. Flore illustrée du Sénégal. Dicotylédones. Volume 3. Connaracées à Euphorbia-
cées. Gouvernement du Sénégal, Ministère du Développement Rural et de l'Hydraulique, Direc-
tion des Eaux et Forêts, Dakar, Senegal. 634 pp. 
LITERATURE 651 
Berhaut, J., 1975b. Flore illustrée du Sénégal. Dicotylédones. Volume 4. Ficoidées à Légumineuses. 
Gouvernement du Sénégal, Ministère du Développement Rural et de l'Hydraulique, Direction des 
Eaux et Forêts, Dakar, Senegal. 625 pp. 
Berhaut, J., 1979. Flore illustrée du Sénégal. Dicotylédones. Volume 6. Linacées à Nymphéacées. 
Gouvernement du Sénégal, Ministère du Développement Rural et de l'Hydraulique, Direction des 
Eaux et Forêts, Dakar, Senegal. 636 pp. 
Berkov, S., Zayed, R. & Doncheva, T., 2006. Alkaloid patterns in some varieties of Datura stramo-
nium. Fitoterapia 77(3): 179-182. 
Bernardo, G.Q. & Oliver, N., 2000. Antiseptic and healing properties of indigenous plants from the 
Philippines. PCARRD Highlights '99: 62. 
Bernart, M.W., Kashman, Y., Tischler, M., Cardellina, J.H. & Boyd, M.R., 1993. Bershacolone, an 
unprecedented diterpene cyclobutene from Maprounea africana. Tetrahedron Letters 34(28): 
4461-4464. 
Bernhard, A., 1999. Flower structure, development, and systematics in Passifloraceae and in Aba-
tia (Flacourtiaceae). International Journal of Plant Science 160(1): 135-150. 
Bessong, P.O., Obi, C.L., Andréola, M.L., Rojas, L.B., Pouységu, L., Igumbor, E., Marion Meyer, 
J.J., Quideau, S. & Litvak, S., 2005. Evaluation of selected South African medicinal plants for in-
hibitory properties against human immunodeficiency virus type 1 reverse transcriptase and inte-
grase. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 99: 83-91. 
Bester, S.P., 2004. Adenium multiflorum. South African National Biodiversity Institute, Cape 
Town, South Africa, <http://www.plantzafrica.com/plantab/adeniummultiflor.htm> Accessed 24 
August 2004. 
Betancur-Galvis, L., Checa, J., Marco, J.A. & Estornell, E., 2003. Jatrophane diterpenes from the 
latex of Euphorbia obtusifolia with inhibitory activity on the mammalian mitrochondrial respira-
tory chain. Planta Medica 69: 177-178. 
Betti, J.L., 2002. Medicinal plants sold in Yaoundé markets, Cameroon. African Study Monographs 
23(2): 47-64. 
Betti, J.L., 2003. Plantes utilisées pour soigner le paludisme dans la réserve du Dja, Cameroun. 
Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 17: 121-130. 
Betti, J.L., 2004. An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants among the Baka pygmies in the Dja 
biosphere reserve, Cameroon. African Study Monographs 25(1): 1-27. 
Beutler, J.A., Alvarado Lindner, A.B. & McCloud, T.G., 1996. Further studies on phorbol ester bio-
activity in the Euphorbiaceae. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 83(4): 530-533. 
Beutler, J.A., Alvarado, A.B., McCloud, T.G. & Cragg, G.M., 1989. Distribution of phorbol ester 
bioactivity in the Euphorbiaceae. Phytotherapy Research 3(5): 188-192. 
Beutler, J.A., Kashman, Y., Tischler, M., Cardellina, J.H., Gray, G.N., Currens, M.J., Wall, M.E., 
Wani, M.C. & Boyd, M.R., 1995. A reinvestigation of Maprounea triterpenes. Journal of Natural 
Products 58(7): 1039-1056. 
Bezabih, M. & Abegaz, B.M., 1998. 4'-Demethylknipholone from aerial parts of Bulbine capitata. 
Phytochemistry 48(6): 1071-1073. 
Bezabih, M., Abegaz, B.M., Dufall, K., Croft, K, Skinner-Adams, T. & Davis, T.M.E., 2001. An-
tiplasmodial and anti-oxidant isofuranonaphthoquinones from the roots of Bulbine capitata. 
Planta Medica 67: 340-344. 
Bezabih, M., Motlhagodi, S. & Abegaz, B.M., 1997. Isofuranonaphthoquinones and phenolic and 
knipholone derivatives from the roots of Bulbine capitata. Phytochemistry 46(6): 1063-1067. 
Bhadra, R., Vani, S. & Shanks, J.V., 1993. Production of indole alkaloids by selected hairy root 
lines of Catharanthus roseus. Biotechnology and Bioengineering 41(5): 581-592. 
Bhakuni, D.S. & Joshi, P.P., 1975. Alkaloids of Cocculus pendulus (Forsk.) Diels. Tetrahedron 
60(2): 2575-2579. 
Bhakuni, D.S., Jain, S. & Singh, A.N., 1978. Biosynthesis of cocsulinin. Journal of the Chemical 
Society. Perkin Transactions 1: Organic and Bio-organic Chemistry 4: 380-383. 
Bharali, R., Tabassum, J. & Azad, M.R., 2003. Chemopreventive action of Phyllanthus urinaria 
Linn on DMBA-induced skin carcinogenesis in mice. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 
41(11): 1325-1328. 
Bhatnagar, S. & Das, P., 2007. Antimalarial activity in tropical plants: a review. Journal of Herbs, 
Spices & Medicinal Plants 13(1): 103-132. 
652 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Bhattacharyya, R. & Bhattacharya, S., 2004. Development of a potent in vitro source of Phyllan-
thus amarus roots with pronounced activity against surface antigen of the hepatitis B virus. In 
Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology Plant 40(5): 504-508. 
Bhutani, K.K., Vaid, R.M., Ali, M., Kapoor, R., Soodan, S.R. & Kumar, D., 1990. Steroidal alkaloids 
from Holarrhena antidysenterica. Phytochemistry 29(3): 969-972. 
Bierer, D.E., Gerber, R.E., Jolad, S.D., Ubillas, R.P., Rändle, J., Nauka, E. & Latour, J., 1995. Iso-
lation, structure elucidation, and synthesis of Irlbacholine, l,22-bis[[[2-
(trimethylammonium)ethoxy]-phospinyl]oxy]docosane: a novel antifungal plant metabolite from 
Irlbachia alata and Anthocleista djalonensis. Journal of Organic Chemistry 60: 7022-7026. 
Binutu, O.A. & Cordeil, G.A., 2000. Gallic acid derivatives from Mezoneuron benthamianum 
leaves. Pharmaceutical Biology 38(3): 284-286. 
Bioka, D. & Abena, A., 1990. Profile psychopharmacologique d'un extrait aqueux de Piper umbella-
tum. Encéphale 16(3): 205-208. 
Birdsall, T.C., 1998. 5-Hydroxytryptophan: a clinically-effective serotonin precursor. Alternative 
Medicine Review 3(4): 271-280. 
Birecka, H., DiNolfo, T.E., Martin, W.B. & Fröhlich, M.W., 1984. Polyamines and leaf senescence in 
pyrrolizidine alkaloid-bearing Heliotropium plants. Phytochemistry 23(5): 991-998. 
Bisset, N.G., 1970. The African species of Strychnos. Part I. The ethnobotany. Lloydia 33(2): 201-
243. 
Bisset, N.G., 1981. Phytochemistry of Holarrhena R.Br. Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wage-
ningen 81-2, Wageningen, Netherlands, p. 37. 
Bisset, N.G., 1983. Phytochemistry of Pleioceras and Stephanostema. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. 
(Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 11-13. Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wagenin-
gen 83-7. Wageningen, Netherlands, p. 52. 
Bisset, N.G., 1985a. Phytochemistry and pharmacology of Voacanga species. In: Leeuwenberg, 
A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 15. Agricultural University Wageningen Pa-
pers 85-3. Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 81-113. 
Bisset, N.G., 1985b. Uses of Voacanga species. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions 
of Apocynaceae 15. Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 85-3. Wageningen Agricultural 
University, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 115-122. 
Bisset, N.G., 1988a. Phytochemistry and uses of Wrightia demartiniana and W. natalensis. In: 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 22. Agricultural University 
Wageningen Papers 87-5. p. 54. 
Bisset, N.G., 1988b. Phytochemistry of Ochrosia borbonica and O. oppositifolia. In: Leeuwenberg, 
A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae. Agricultural University Wageningen Papers 
87-5. pp. 59-60. 
Bisset, N.G., 1989a. Arrow and dart poisons. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 25: 1-41. 
Bisset, N.G., 1989b. Tabernanthe: uses, phytochemistry, and pharmacology. In: Leeuwenberg, 
A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 29, 30. Wageningen Agricultural University 
Papers 89-4. Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 19-26. 
Bisset, N.G., 1994. Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals: a handbook for practice on a scientific 
basis. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, USA. 
Bisset, N.G. & Khalil, A.A., 1976. New alkaloids from Strychnos icaja. Phytochemistry 15: 1973-
1976. 
Bisset, N.G. & Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1968. The use of Strychnos species in Central African ordeal 
and arrow poisons. Lloydia 31: 208-222. 
Bisset, N.G. & Phillipson, J.D., 1971. The African species of Strychnos. Part 2. The alkaloids. Lloy-
dia 34(1): 1-60. 
Bisset, N.G., Das, B.C. & Parello, J., 1973. Alkaloids from the leaves of Strychnos icaja Baill. Tet-
rahedron 29: 4137-4148. 
Biswas, S., Murugesan, T., Maiti, K, Ghosh, L., Pal, M. & Saha, B.P., 2001. Study on the diuretic 
activity of Strychnos potatorum Linn, seed extract in albino rats. Phytomedicine 8(6): 469-471. 
Bitsch, I., Janssen, M., Netzel, M., Strass, G. & Frank, T., 2004. Bioavailability of anthocyanidin-3-
glycosides following consumption of elderberry extract and blackcurrant juice. International Jour-
nal of Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics 42: 293-300. 
LITERATURE 653 
Blomley, T. & Mbogo, N., 1992. Use and management of indigenous trees and plants by the people 
of Tharaka, Meru. ICRAF, Nairobi, Kenya. 33 pp. 
Blomqvist, M.M., 1997. Taxonomy and uses of medicinally important species in the genera Datura 
L. and Solanum L. (Solanaceae) in South East Asia. Unpublished MSc. thesis, Department of 
Plant Taxonomy, Wageningen Agricultural University, the Netherlands. 132 pp. 
Blomqvist, M.M. & Nguyen Tien Ban, 1999. Solanum L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. 
& Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 453-460. 
Blomster, R.N., Farnsworth, N.R. & Abraham, D.J., 1967. Catharanthus alkaloids. 10. Isolation of 
lanceine and vinosidine from Catharanthus lanceus roots. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
56(2): 284-286. 
Boampong, J.N., 1992. A preliminary investigation of the anti-asthmatic properties of ethanolic 
root extracts of Alchornea cordifolia and Cassia alata. B.Pharm, degree thesis, Department of 
Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, 
Kumasi, Ghana. 32 pp. 
Bohlin, L., 1978. Some Strychnos alkaloids: their occurrence, structure and biological activity. Acta 
Universitatis Upsaliensis 32, Uppsala, Sweden. 68 pp. 
Bohlin, L., Ali, Y. & Sandberg, F., 1974. Screening of African Strychnos species for convulsant and 
muscle relaxant effects. Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica 11: 233-238. 
Bohlin, L., Rolfsen, W., Ströbom, J. & Verpoorte, R., 1979. Alkaloids and biological activity of 
Strychnos angolensis Gilg. Planta Medica 35: 19-30. 
Boily, Y. & van Puyvelde, L., 1986. Screening of medicinal plants of Rwanda (Central Africa) for 
antimicrobial activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 16: 1-13. 
Boissier, J.R., Bouquet, A., Combes, G., Dumont, C. & Debray, M., 1963. Présence de phaeanthine 
dans une Ménispermacée africaine: Triclisia patens Oliver. Préparation et étude de quelques-uns 
de ses dérivés ammoniums quaternaires. Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises 21: 767-772, 
829-842. 
Boissier, J.R., Combes, G., Pernet, R. & Dumont, C, 1975. Menispermaceae alkaloids of Madagas-
car: Cissampelos pareira, Cyclea madagascariensis, Anisocycla grandidieri, and Spirospermum 
penduliflorum. Lloydia 28(3): 191-198. 
Boiteau, P., 1986. Médecine traditionnelle et pharmacopée. Précis de matière médicale malgache. 
Agence de coopération culturelle et technique, Paris, France. 141 pp. 
Boiteau, P. & Allorge-Boiteau, L., 1993. Plantes médicinales de Madagascar. Agence de Coopéra-
tion Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 135 pp. 
Boiteau, P., Boiteau, M. & Allorge-Boiteau, L., 1999. Dictionnaire des noms malgaches de végé-
taux. 4 Volumes + Index des noms scientifiques avec leurs équivalents malgaches. Editions Al-
zieu, Grenoble, France. 
Bokan, S., 2004. An evaluation of toxins and bioregulators as terrorism and warfare agents. NATO 
Science Series, Series I: Life and Behavioural Sciences 356 (Toxicogenomics and Proteomics): 
147-157. 
Bokdam, J. & Droogers, A.F., 1975. Contribution à l'étude ethnobotanique des Wagenia de Kisan-
gani, Zaïre. Medelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 75(19), Wageningen, Netherlands. 74 
pp. 
Bollen, B., Van Elsacker, L. & Ganzhorn, J.U., 2004. Relations between fruits and disperser as-
semblages in a Malagasy littoral forest: a community-level approach. Journal of Tropical Ecology 
20: 599-612. 
Bolli, R., 1994. Revision of the genus Sambucus. Dissertationes Botanicae 223, Berlin, Stuttgart, 
Germany. 256 pp. 
Bolza, E. & Keating, W.G., 1972. African timbers: the properties, uses and characteristics of 700 
species. Division of Building Research, CSIRO, Melbourne, Australia. 710 pp. 
Bommu, P., Nanjan, C.M.J., Joghee, N.M., Nataraj, S.M. & Bhojraj, S., 2008. Phyllanthus 
maderaspatensis, a dietary supplement for the amelioration of adriamycin-induced toxicity and 
oxidative stress in mice. Journal of Natural Medicine 62(2): 149-154. 
Bond, W., 1983. Dead leaves and fire survival in Southern African tree aloes. Oecologia 58(1): 110— 
114. 
654 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Bongers, F., Par ren , M.P.E. & Traoré, D. (Editors), 2005. Forest climbing p lan ts of West Africa: 
diversity, ecology and management . CABI, Wallingford, Uni ted Kingdom. 273 pp. 
Bonjean, K.A.P.M., De Pauw-Gillet , M.-C.A.J., Quetin-Leclercq, J., Angenot, L. & Bassleer, R.J.B., 
1996. In vitro cytotoxic activity of two potential ant icancer drugs isolated from Strychnos: strych-
nopentamine and usambarens ine . Anticancer Research 16(3A): 1129-1137. 
Bonness, M.S., Ready, M.P., Irvin, J .D. & Mabry, T.J., 1994. Pokeweed ant ivi ra l protein inact ivates 
pokeweed ribosomes: implications for the ant iviral mechanism. P lan t Jou rna l 5(2): 173-183. 
Bopaiah, C.P. & Pradhan , N., 2001. Centra l nervous system s t imulatory action from the root ex-
t ract of Plumbago zeylanica in r a t s . Phyto therapy Research 15(2): 153-156. 
Boppré, M. & Fischer, O.W., 1999. Har lekinschrecken (Orthoptera: Zonocerus) — Schadinsekten der 
besonderen Art. (Zonocerus var iega tus (Orthoptera) - a peculiar type of pest insect). Gesunde 
Pflanzen 51(5): 141-149. 
Borghi, D., Baumer , L., Ballabio, M., Arlandini , E., Crespi-Perellino, N., Minghet t i , A. & Vincieri, 
F.F., 1991. S t ruc ture elucidation of helioscopinolides D and E from Euphorbia calyptra ta cell cul-
tu res . Jou rna l of N a t u r a l Products 54(6): 1503-1508. 
Bosch, J., Bonjoch, J . & Amat , M., 1996. The Strychnos alkaloids. In: Cordell, G.A. (Editor). The 
Alkaloids 48. Academic Press , San Diego, Uni ted Sta tes , pp. 75-189. 
Bose, T.K., Basu, R.K., Biswas, B., De, J.N., Majumdar , B.C. & Dat ta , S., 1999. Cardiovascular 
effects of yellow oleander ingestion. Jou rna l of the Ind ian Medical Association 97(10): 407—410. 
Bossard, E., 1993. Angolan medicinal p lants used also as piscicides and/or soaps. Jou rna l of Ethno-
pharmacology 40: 1-19. 
Bossard, E., 1996. La médecine tradi t ionel le a u Cen t re et à l 'Ouest de l'Angola. Ministér io da Ciên-
cia e da Tecnologia, Ins t i tu to de Investigaçào Cientifico Tropical, Lissabon, Portugal . 531 pp. 
Bost, R., 1961. Pharmacopée malgache. Mémoire de l ' Inst i tut scientifique de Madagascar , série B, 
Tome 10, Fascicule 2: 159-234. 
Boudreau, S., Lawes, M.J., Piper, S.E. & Phad ima , L.J., 2005. Subsistence harves t ing of pole-size 
unders torey species from Ongoye Forest Reserve, South Africa: Species preference, ha rves t inten-
sity, and social correlates. Forest Ecology and Managemen t 216: 149-165. 
Bouillard, L., 1987. Production d'alcaloides par des t issus d 'Holarrhena floribunda (Apocynaceae) 
cultivés in vitro. Bullet in de la Société Royale de Botanique de Belgique 120(2): 135-142. 
Boulos, L., 1983. Medicinal p lan ts of Nor th Africa. Reference Publications Inc., Albonac, Michigan, 
Uni ted Sta tes . 286 pp. 
Boulos, L., 2000a. Flora of Egypt. Volume 2 (Geraniaceae-Boraginaceae). Al H a d a r a Publishing, 
Cairo, Egypt. 352 pp. 
Boulos, L., 2000b. Flora of Egypt. Volume 3 (Verbenaceae-Compositae). Al H a d a r a Publishing, 
Cairo, Egypt. 373 pp. 
Bouquet, A., 1969. Fét icheurs et médecines t radi t ionnel les du Congo (Brazzaville). Mémoires 
ORSTOM No 36. Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Outre-Mer. Par is , France . 282 
pp. 
Bouquet, A., 1972. P lan tes médicinales du Congo-Brazzaville: Uvariopsis, Pau r id i an tha , Diospyros. 
Travaux et Documents de l 'ORSTOM, No 13. Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique 
Outre-Mer. Par is , France . 113 pp. 
Bouquet, A. & Botton, H., 1962. Essai de cul ture du Tabe rnan the iboga Baill. Rappor t ORSTOM, 
Adiopodoumé, Côte d'Ivoire. 3 pp. 
Bouquet, A. & Debray, M., 1974. P lan tes médicinales de la Côte d'Ivoire. Travaux et Documents No 
32. ORSTOM, Par is , France. 231 pp. 
Bouquet, A. & Fournet , A., 1975a. Recherches chimiques prél iminaires sur les p lan tes médicinales 
du Congo-Brazzaville (3ème Note). Fi toterapia 46(4): 175-191 . 
Bouquet, A. & Fournet , A., 1975b. Recherches récentes sur les p lantes médicinales congolaises. 
Fi toterapia 46(6): 243-246. 
Bourguignon-Zylber, N. & Polonsky, J., 1970. Per r i e ra madagascar iens is ba rk and wood. Isolation 
and s t ruc ture of a new indole alkaloid and a new quassinoid compound. Chimica Therapeut ica 
5(6): 396-400. 
Bourobou Bourobou, H. & Omvono, H., 2002. Essai sur la cul ture de Tabe rnan the iboga (Apocyna-
ceae). Rapport Gerpic, Gabon. 24 pp. 
LITERATURE 655 
Bourobou Bourobou, H., Mounzeo, H., Mbatchi, B. & Posso, P., 1996. Quelques plantes galactogè-
nes utilisées par les Bapunu au Gabon. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées africaines 10(1): 
71-78. 
Boussim, I.J., Guinko, S., Tuquet, C. & Salle, G., 2004. Mistletoes of the agroforestry parklands of 
Burkina Faso. Agroforestry Systems 60: 39-49. 
Boyom, F.F., Assembe, E.Z., Zollo, P.H.A., Agnaniet, H., Menut, C. & Bessiere, J.M., 2003a. Aro-
matic plants of tropical central Africa. Part 17. Volatile components from Antidesma laciniatum 
Muell. Arg. var. laciniatum growing in Cameroon. Flavour and Fragrance Journal 18(5): 451-453. 
Boyom, F.F., Ngouana, V., Zollo, P.H., Menut, C, Bessiere, J.M., Gut, J. & Rosenthal, P.J., 2003b. 
Composition and anti-plasmodial activities of essential oils from some Cameroonian medicinal 
plants. Phytochemistry 64(7): 1269-1275. 
Brandt, R., Kaufmann, H. & Reichstein, T., 1966. Nigrescigenin, Identifizierung mit Sarmentosi-
genin A Glykoside und Aglykone. Helvetica Chimica Acta 49: 1844. 
Braun, M., Burgstaller, H., Hamdoun, A.M. & Walter, H., 1991. Common weeds of Central Sudan. 
Margraf, Weikersheim, Germany. 329 pp. 
Bräutigam, M. & Franz, G., 1985. Structural features of Plantago lanceolata mucilage. Planta 
Medica 55(4): 293-297. 
Brenan, J.P.M., 1958. New and noteworthy Cassias from tropical Africa. Kew Bulletin 13(2): 231— 
252. 
Brenan, J.P.M., 1967. Leguminosae, subfamily Caesalpinioideae. In: Milne-Redhead, E. & Polhill, 
R.M. (Editors). Flora of Tropical East Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Ad-
ministrations, London, United Kingdom. 230 pp. 
Breteler, F.J., 1999. Barteria Hook. f. (Passifloraceae) revised. Adansonia séries 3, 21(2): 307-318. 
Breteler, F.J., 2005. Novitates Gabonenses 55. Manuscript names and drawings of the French 
botanist Louis Pierre (1833-1905): a discussion about their validity with some examples of no-
menclatural consequences for the Gabonese flora in particular. Adansonia, Sér. 3, 27(2): 325-335. 
Bringmann, G., Menche, D., Bezabih, M.-T., Abegaz, B.M. & Kaminsky, R., 1999. Antiplasmodial 
activity of knipholone and related natural phenylanthraquinones. Planta Medica 65(8): 757—758. 
Bringmann, G., Rischer, H., Wohlfarth, M. & Schlauer, J., 2000a. Biosynthesis of antidesmone in 
cell cultures of Antidesma membranaceum (Euphorbiaceae): an unprecedented class of glycine-
derived alkaloids. Journal of the American Chemical Society 122(41): 9905-9910. 
Bringmann, G., Schlauer, S., Rischer, H., Wohlfahrt, M., Muehlbacher, J., Buske, A., Porzel, A., 
Schmidt, J. & Adam, G., 2000b. Revised structure of antidesmone, an unusual alkaloid from 
tropical Antidesma plants (Euphorbiaceae). Tetrahedron 56(23): 3691-3695. 
Bringmann, G., Schlauer, S., Rischer, H., Wohlfahrt, M., Haller, R., Bar, S. & Brun, R., 2001. 
Antidesmone, a novel antitrypanosomal alkaloid. Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Letters 
11(2): 47-48. 
Bringmann, G., Menche, D., Brun, R., Msuta, T. & Abegaz, B., 2002. Bulbine-knipholone, a new, 
axially chiral phenylanthraquinone from Bulbine abyssinica (Asphodelaceae): isolation, struc-
tural elucidation, synthesis, and antiplasmodial activity. European Journal of Organic Chemistry 
2002(6): 1107-1111. 
Brisson, R., 1988. Utilisation des plantes par les pygmées Baka: textes pour l'étude de la langue. 
Collège Liberman, Douala, Cameroon. 355 pp. 
Broun, A.F. & Massey, R.E., 1929. Flora of the Sudan. Thomas Murby, London, United Kingdom. 
502 pp. 
Brown, T.T. & Dobs, A.S., 2002. Endocrine effects of marijuana. Journal of Clinical Pharmacology 
42(11 Suppl.): 90S-96S. 
Brown, D.H., Lent, P.C., Trollope, W.S.W. & Palmer. A.R., 2003. Browse selection of black rhinoc-
eros (Diceros bicornis) in two vegetation types of the Eastern Cape Province, South Africa, with 
particular reference to Euphorbiaceae. In: Allsopp, N., Palmer, A.R., Milton, S.J., Kirkman, K.P., 
Kerley, G.I.H., Hurt, C.R. & Brown, C.J. (Editors). Proceedings of the 7th international range-
lands congress 26 July-1 August 2003, Durban, South Africa, pp. 509-512. 
Brown, N.E., Hutchinson, J. & Prain, D., 1909-1913. Euphorbiaceae. In: Thiselton-Dyer, W.T. 
(Editor). Flora of tropical Africa. Volume 6(1). Lovell Reeve & Co., London, United Kingdom, pp. 
441-1020. 
656 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Brummitt, R.K., 1982. A revision of Trichodesma sect. Friedrichsthalia (Fenzl) A.DC. non Brand 
(Boraginaceae). Kew Bulletin 37(3): 429-450. 
Brummitt, R.K., Chikuni, A.C., Lock, J.M. & Polhill, R.M., 2007. Leguminosae, subfamily Caes-
alpinioideae. In: Timberlake, J.R., Pope, G.V., Polhill, R.M. & Martins, E.S. (Editors). Flora Zam-
besiaca. Volume 3, part 2. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 218 pp. 
Bruneau, A., Forest, F., Herendeen, P.S., Klitgaard, B.B. & Lewis, G.P., 2001. Phylogenetic rela-
tionships in the Caesalpinioideae (Leguminosae) as inferred from chloroplast trnL intron se-
quences. Systematic Botany 26(3): 487-514. 
Brunei, J.F., 1987. Sur le genre Phyllanthus L. et quelques genres voisins de la tribu des Phyllan-
theae Dumort (Euphorbiaceae, Phyllantheae) en Afrique intertropicale et à Madagascar. PhD 
thesis, Laboratoire Morphologie expérimentale, Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France. 
472 pp. + Annexes. 
Bruneton, J., 1995. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Technique & Documenta-
tion Lavoisier, Paris, France. 915 pp. 
Bruneton, J., 1999. Pharmacognosy, phytochemistry, medicinal plants. Second Edition. Technique 
& Documentation Lavoisier, Paris, France. 1119 pp. 
Bruyns, P.V., Mapaya, R.J. & Hedderson, T., 2006. A new subgeneric classification for Euphorbia 
(Euphorbiaceae) in southern Africa based on ITS and psbA-trnH sequence data. Taxon 55(2): 
397-420. 
Bui, A.-M., Das, B.C. & Potier, P., 1980. Etude chimiotaxonomique de Hazunta modesta. Phyto-
chemistry 19: 1473-1475. 
Bui, A.-M., Potier, P., Urrea, M., Clastres, A., Laurent, D. & Debray, M.-M., 1979. Etude chimio-
taxonomique de deux espèces nouvelles de Hazunta (Apocynaceae). Phytochemistry 18: 1329-
1331. 
Bukenya-Ziraba, R., 1996. Uses, chromosome number and distribution of Solanum species in 
Uganda. In: van der Maesen, L.J.G., van der Bürgt, X.M. & van Medenbach-de Rooy, J.M. (Edi-
tors). Proceedings 14th AETFAT congress, 22-27 August 1994, Wageningen, Netherlands. Klu-
wer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 33-37. 
Bukenya-Ziraba, R. & Carasco, J.F., 1995. Solanum (Solanaceae) in Uganda. Bothalia 25(1): 43-59. 
Bukenya-Ziraba, R. & Carasco, J.F., 1999. Ethnobotanical aspects of Solanum L. (Solanaceae) in 
Uganda. In: Nee, M., Symon, D.E., Lester, R.N. & Jessop, J.P. (Editors). Solanaceae 4: Advances 
in biology and utilization. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 345-
360. 
Bukenya-Ziraba, R. & Hall, J.B., 1988. Solanum (Solanaceae) in Ghana. Bothalia 18(1): 79-88. 
Bunyapraphatsara, N. & van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H., 1999. Gloriosa superba L. In: de Padua, L.S., 
Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 
12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 289-292. 
Bureau, F., 2000. Etude du Tabernanthe iboga (H.Bn). Utilisation de 1'ibogaine dans le traitement 
des addictions. Thèse de Doctorat, Département de Pharmacie, Université de Poitiers, Poitiers, 
France. 90 pp. 
Burkill, H.M., 1985. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. 2nd Edition. Volume 1, Families A-
D. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 960 pp. 
Burkill, H.M., 1994. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. 2nd Edition. Volume 2, Families E -
I. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 636 pp. 
Burkill, H.M., 1995. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. 2nd Edition. Volume 3, Families J -
L. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 857 pp. 
Burkill, H.M., 1997. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. 2nd Edition. Volume 4, Families M-
R. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 969 pp. 
Burkill, H.M., 2000. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. 2nd Edition. Volume 5, Families S-
Z, Addenda. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 686 pp. 
Burrows, J.E., Burrows, S.M., Loffler, P. & Loffler, L., 2003. Euphorbiaceae. Excoecaria madagas-
cariensis, a first record for the Flora of southern Africa region. Bothalia 33(2): 155-163. 
Buske, A., Schmidt, J., Porzel, A. & Adam, G., 1997. Benzopyranones and ferulic acid derivatives 
from Antidesma membranaceum. Phytochemistry 46(8): 1385-1388. 
LITERATURE 657 
Buske, A., Busemann, S., Muehlbacher, J., Schmidt, J., Porzel, A., Bringmann, G. & Adam, G., 
1999.. Antidesmone, a novel type isoquinoline alkaloid from Antidesma membranaceum (Eu-
phorbiaceae). Tetrahedron 55(4): 1079-1086. 
Buske, A., Schmidt, J., Porzel, A. & Adam, G., 2001. Alkaloidal, megastigmane and lignan gluco-
sides from Antidesma membranaceum (Euphorbiaceae). European Journal of Organic Chemistry 
18: 3537-3543. 
Bussmann, R.W., 2006. Ethnobotany of the Samburu of Mt. Nyiru, South Turkana, Kenya. Journal 
of Ethnobiology & Ethnomedicine 2: 35. 
Buwa, L.V. & Van Staden, J., 2006. Antibacterial and antifungal activity of traditional medicinal 
plants used against venereal diseases in South Africa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 103(1): 
139-142. 
Byavu, N., Henrard, C., Dubois, M. & Malaisse, F., 2000. Phytothérapie traditionnelle des bovins 
dans les élevages de la plaine de la Ruzizi. Biotechnologie, Agronomie, Société et Environnement 
4(3): 135-156. 
CAB International, 2004. Prevention and management of alien invasive species: forging coopera-
tion throughout West Africa. Proceedings of a Workshop held in Accra, Ghana, 9-11 March 2004. 
CAB International, Nairobi, Kenya. 109 pp. 
CAB International, 2007. Crop Protection Compendium. Argemone mexicana. [Internet] 
<http://www.cabicompendium.org/cpc/home.asp>. Accessed January 2007. 
Cable, S. & Cheek, M., 1998. The plants of Mount Cameroon, a conservation checklist. Royal Bo-
tanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 198 pp. 
Caceres, A., Lopez, B., Gonzalez, S., Berger, I., Tada, I. & Maki, J., 1998. Plants used in Guatemala 
for the treatment of protozoal infections. I. Screening of activity to bacteria, fungi and American 
trypanosomes of 13 native plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 62(3): 195-202. 
Cai, B., Nagasawa, T., Kadota, S., Hattori, M., Namba, T. & Kuraishi, Y., 1996. Processing of nux 
vomica. VII. Antinociceptive effects of crude alkaloids from the processed and unprocessed seeds 
of Strychnos nux-vomica in mice. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 19(1): 127-131. 
Cai, B.C., Wang, T.S., Kurokawa, M., Shiraki, K. & Hattori, M., 1998. Cytotoxicities of alkaloids 
from processed and unprocessed seeds of Strychnos nux-vomica. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 
19(5): 425-428. 
Calabozo, B., Barber, D. & Polo, F., 2001. Purification and characterization of the main allergen of 
Plantago lanceolata pollen, Pia 1 1. Clinical and Experimental Allergy 31(2): 322-330. 
Caldwell, J.E., Abildgaard, F., Dzakula, Z., Ming, D., Hellekant, G. & Markley, J.L., 1998. Solution 
structure of the thermostable sweet-tasting protein brazzein. Nature Structural Biology 5: 427-
431. 
Calixto, J.B., Santos, A.R., Cechinel-Filho, V. & Yunes, R.A., 1998. A review of the plants of the 
genus Phyllanthus: their chemistry, pharmacology and therapeutic potential. Medicinal Research 
Reviews 18(4): 225-258. 
Camacho, M.R., Phillipson, J.D., Croft, S.L., Rock, P., Marshall, S.J. & Schiff, P.L.jr., 2002. In vitro 
activity of Triclisia patens and some bisbenzyl-isoquinoline alkaloids against Leishmania dono-
vani and Trypanosoma brucei brucei. Phytotherapy Research 16(6): 432-436 & 602. 
Camacho, M.R., Phillipson, J.D., Croft, S.L., Sous, P.N., Marshall, S.J. & Ghazanfar, S.A., 2003. 
Screening of plant extracts for antiprotozoal and cytotoxic activities. Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 89: 185-191. 
Camurca-Vasconcelos, A.L., Nascimento, N.R., Sousa, CM., Melo, L.M., Morais, S.M., Bevilaqua, 
CM. & Rocha, M.F., 2004. Neuromuscular effects and acute toxicity of an ethyl acetate extract of 
Spigelia anthelmia Linn. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 92(2-3): 257-261. 
Candia, S. & Edgardo, A., 2000. Densidad poblacional y produccion de materia seca del Llanten 
(Plantago major L.). [Plant density and dry matter production of Llanten (Plantago major L.)]. 
Chilian (Chile). 30 pp. 
Caniato, R. & Puricelli, L., 2003. Review: natural antimalarial agents (1995-2001). Critical Re-
views in Plant Sciences 22(1): 79-105. 
Capasso, A., Piacente, S., Tommasi, N.D., Rastrelli, L. & Pizza, C , 2006. The effect of isoquinoline 
alkaloids on opiate withdrawal. Current Medicinal Chemistry 13(7): 807-812. 
Capuron, R., 1961. Contributions à l'étude de la flore forestière de Madagascar, III. Sur quelques 
plantes ayant contribué au peuplement de Madagascar. Adansonia, Série 2, 1(1): 65-92. 
658 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Carballo, M., Mudry, M.D., Larripa, LB., Villamil, E. & d'Aquino, M., 1992. Gentoxic action of an 
aqueous extract of Heliotropium curassavicum var. argentinum. Mutation Research 279: 245-
253. 
Cardy, A.H., Sharp, L. & Little, J., 2001. Burkitt's lymphoma: a review of the epidemiology. Review 
article. Kuwait Medical Journal 33(4): 293-306. 
Carlquist, S., 2002. Wood and bark anatomy of Salvadoraceae: ecology, relationships, histology of 
interxylary phloem. Journal of the Torrey Botanical Society 129(1): 10-20. 
Carney, J.R., Krenisky, J.M., Williamson, R.T., Luo, J., Carlson, T.J., Hsu, V.L. & Moswa, J.L., 
1999. Maprouneacin, a new daphnane diterpenoid with potent antihyperglycemic activity from 
Maprounea africana. Journal of Natural Products 62(2): 345-347. 
Carraz, M., Jossang, A., Franetich, J.F., Siau, A., Ciceron, L., Hannoun, L., Sauerwein, R., Frap-
pier, F., Rasonaivo, P., Snounou, G. & Mazier, D., 2006. A plant-derived morphinan as a novel 
lead compound active against malaria liver stages. PLoS Medicine 3(12): 2392-2402. 
Carrière, M., 1994. Plantes de Guinée à l'usage des éleveurs et des vétérinaires. [Internet] Minis-
tère de de la Coopération & CIRAD-EMVT, Maisons Alfort, France. 235 pp. 
<http://perso.orange.fr/a.i.r.e./guilex.htm>. Accessed December 2006. 
Carrillo-Rosario, T. & Diaz de Ramirez, A., 2005. Actividad antimalârica de extractos crudos de 
plantas en ratones infectados con Plasmodium berghei. Revista de la Facultad de Farmacia (Ve-
nezuela) 47(1): 2-9. 
Carter, S., 1985. Euphorbia candelabrum, a question of validity (Euphorbiaceae). Taxon 34(4): 699-
701. 
Carter, S., 1987. Taxonomie changes in Synadenium (Euphorbiaceae) from East Africa. Kew Bulle-
tin 42(3): 667-671. 
Carter, S., 1994. Aloaceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. Balkema, 
Rotterdam, Netherlands. 60 pp. 
Carter, S., 2001. Aloaceae. In: Pope, G.V. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 12, part 3. Royal Bo-
tanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 48-98. 
Carter, S. & Leach, L.C., 2001. Euphorbiaceae, subfamily Euphorbioideae, tribe Euphorbieae. In: 
Pope, G.V. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 9, part 5. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, 
United Kingdom, pp. 339-465. 
Carter, S. & Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1988. Euphorbiaceae (part 2). In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of 
Tropical East Africa. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands, pp. 409-597. 
Carvalhas, M.L., 1972. Bisjatrorrhizine, a new dimeric protoberberine alkaloid from Jatrorrhiza 
palmata (Lam.) Miers. Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Transactions 1, 1972: 327-330. 
Cassels, B.K., 1985. Analysis of a Maasai arrow poison. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 14(2—3): 
273-281. 
Catalfamo, J.L., Martin Jr, W.B. & Birecka, H., 1982. Accumulation of alkaloids and their necines 
in Heliotropium curassavicum, Heliotropium spathulatum and Heliotropium indicum. Phytoche-
mistry 21(11): 2669-2675. 
Catapan, E., Luis, M., Da Silva, B., Moreno, F.N. & Viana, A.M., 2002. Micropropagation, callus 
and root culture of Phyllanthus urinaria (Euphorbiaceae). Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture 
70(3): 301-309. 
Catley, A. & Mohammed, A.A., 1996. Ethnoveterinary knowledge in Sanaag region, Somaliland 
(Part 11): notes on local methods of treating and preventing livestock disease. Nomadic Peoples 
38: 1-12. 
Cavaco, A., 1954. Nyctaginacées (Nyctaginaceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores (plantes 
vasculaires), familles 66-69. Firmin-Didot et cie., Paris, France. 13 pp. 
Cave, A., Leboeuf, M., Hocquemiller, R., Bouquet, A. & Fournet, A., 1979. Alcaloïdes du Lima-
ciopsis loangensis. Planta Medica 35(1): 31-41. 
Cavendish, W., 1999. The complexity of the commons: environmental resource demands in rural 
Zimbabwe. The Centre for the Study of African Economies Working Paper Series. Working Paper 
92. 52 pp. 
CE-FAO, 1999. Données statistiques des produits forestiers non-ligneux du Cameroun. Rapport 
technique. Programme de partenariat CE-FAO (1998-2001), Rome, Italy. 36 pp. 
LITERATURE 659 
Cepleanu, F., Hamburger, M.O., Sordat, B., Msonthi, J.D., Gupta, M.P., Saadou, M. & Hostett-
mamm, K., 1994. Screening of tropical medicinal plants for molluscicidal, larvicidal, fungicidal 
and cytotoxic activities. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 32: 294-307. 
Cerqueira, L., McKnight, L.S., Rodriguez, S. & Turner, C.E., 1999. Bifurcated method to process 
aloe whole leaf. US Patent 5,925,357. [Internet] <http://www.uspto.gov/patft/index.html>. Ac-
cessed August 2005. 
Chabert, P., Attioua, B. & Brouillard, R., 2006. Croton lobatus, an African medicinal plant: spec-
troscopic and chemical elucidation of its many constituents. Biofactors 27(1—4): 69-78. 
Chakraborty, A. & Brantner, A.H., 1999. Antibacterial steroid alkaloids from the stem bark of 
Holarrhena pubescens. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 68(1-3): 339-344. 
Chakraborty, A., Asres, K, Stipsits, S., Eibl, U. & Brantner, A.H., 2000. Biological properties of 
Stephania abyssinica roots. Pharmaceutical and Pharmacological Letters 10(1): 19-21. 
Challacombe, J.M., Suhrbier, A., Parsons, P.G., Jones, B., Hampson, P., Kavanagh, D., Rainger, 
G.E, Morris, M., Lord, J.M., Le, T.T.T., Hoang Le, D. & Ogbourne, S.M., 2006. Neutrophils are a 
key component of the antitumor efficacy of topical chemotherapy with ingenol-3-angelate. Journal 
of Immunology 177(11): 8123-8132. 
Chambery, A., Di Maro, A., Monti, M.M., Stirpe, F. & Parente, A., 2004. Volkensin from Adenia 
volkensii Harms (kilyambiti plant), a type 2 ribosome-inactivating protein. European Journal of 
Biochemistry 271(1): 108-117. 
Champluvier, D. & Maquet, P., 1988. Liliaceae. In: Troupin, G. (Editor). Flore du Rwanda: Sper-
matophytes. Volume 4. Institut National de Recherche Scientifique, Butare, Rwanda, pp. 20-59. 
Chan, H.L.Y., Sung, J.J.Y., Fong, W.F., Chim, A.M.L., Yung, P.P., Hui, A.Y., Fung, K.P. & Leung, 
P.C., 2003. Double-blinded placebo-controlled study of Phyllanthus urinaria for the treatment of 
chronic hepatitis B. Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 18(3): 339-345. 
Chandan, B.K., Sharma, A.K. & Anand, K.K., 2004. Boerhavia diffusa: study of its hepatoprotec-
tive activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 31(3): 299-307. 
Chandra Singh, U., 2004. Liposomal formulations of digitalis glycosides for treating cell-
proliferative and other diseases. U.S. Patent Application. 21 pp. 
Chang, L.C., Gills, J.J., Bhat, K.P., Luyengi, L., Farnsworth, N.R., Pezzuto, J.M. & Kinghorn, A.D., 
2000. Activity-guided isolation of constituents of Cerbera manghas with antiproliferative and an-
tiestrogenic activities. Bioorganic and Medical Chemistry Letters 10(21): 2431-2434. 
Chang, Y.-C, Hsieh, P.-W., Chang, F.-R., Wu, R.-R., Liaw, C.-C, Lee, K.-H. & Wu, Y.-C, 2003. Two 
new protopines argemexicaines A and B and the anti-HIV alkaloid 6-acetonyldihydrochelerythrine 
from Formosan Argemone mexicana. Planta Medica 69(2): 148-152. 
Chapelle, J.P., 1976. Vogeloside and secologanic acid, secoiridiod glucosides from Anthocleista vo-
gelii. Planta Medica 29(2): 268-274. 
Chase, M.W., Morton, CM. & Kallunki, J.A., 1999. Phylogenetic relationships of Rutaceae: a 
cladistic analysis of the subfamilies using evidence from rbcL and atpB sequence variation. 
American Journal of Botany 86(8): 1191-1199. 
Chatsiriwej, N., Wungsintaweekul, J. & Panichayupakaranant, P., 2006. Anthraquinone produc-
tion in Senna alata root cultures. Pharmaceutical Biology 44(6): 416-420. 
Chattopadhyay, P., Agrawal, S.S. & Garg, A., 2006. Liver regenerative effect of Phyllanthus ama-
rus L. against alcohol induced liver cell injury in partially hepatectomised albino rats. Interna-
tional Journal of Pharmacology 2(4): 426-430. 
Chaturvedi, M., Datta, K. & Pal, M., 1999., 1999. Pollen anomaly: a clue to natural hybridity in 
Argemone (Papaveraceae). Grana 38(6): 339-342. 
Chaudhuri, S.K., Fullas, F., Brown, D.M., Wani, M.C., Wall, M.E., Cai, L., Mar, W., Lee, S.K., Luo, 
Y., Zaw, K., Fong, H.H.S., Pezzuto, J.M. & Kinghorn, D., 1995. Isolation and structural elucida-
tion of pentacyclic triterpenoids from Maprounea africana. Journal of Natural Products 58(1): 1— 
9. 
Chauser-Volfson, E. & Gutterman, Y., 2004. Influences of leaf pruning on the content of the secon-
dary phenolic metabolites barbaloin, aloeresin and aloenin, in the leaves of Aloe arborescens. 
South African Journal of Botany 70(4): 582-586. 
Cheek, M., 2004a. Croton aubrevillei. [Internet] In: IUCN. 2006 Red list of threatened species. 
<http://www.iucnredlist.org>. Accessed on 3 January 2007. 
660 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Cheek, M., 2004b. Drypetes staudtii. [Internet] In: IUCN. 2006 Red list of threatened species. 
<http://www.iucnredlist.org>. Accessed June 2007. 
Cheek, M., Pollard, B.J., Darbyshire, L., Onana, J.M. & Wild. C. (Editors), 2004. The Plants of 
Kupe, Mwanenguba and the Bakossi Mountains: a conservation checklist - with introductory 
chapters on the physical environment, vegetation, endemics, invasives, phytogeography and réfu-
gia, ethnobotany, bryophytes, the macrofungi, the vertebrate fauna, the protected areas system, 
sacred groves and IUCN Red Data species. Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United 
Kingdom. 508 pp. 
Chen, T.B., Green, T.P. & Wiemer, D.F., 1992. Capentin: A novel sesquiterpene from the roots of 
Piper capense. Tetrahedron Letters 33(39): 5673-5676. 
Chen, C.P., Lin, C.C. & Namba, T., 1987. Development of natural crude drug resources from Tai-
wan VI. In-vitro studies of the inhibitory effect on 12 microorganisms. Shoyakugaku Zasshi 41(3): 
215-225. 
Chénieux, J.C., Ramawat, K.G. & Rideau, M., 1988. Ochrosia spp.: in vitro production of ellipticine, 
an antitumour agent. In: Bajaj, Y.P.S. (Editor). Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry. Volume 
4. Medicinal and aromatic plants I. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 448-463. 
Chevalier, A., 1933. Les Euphorbes crassulascentes de l'Ouest et du Centre Africain et leurs usa-
ges. Revue de Botanique Appliquée & d'Agriculture Tropicale 13: 529-570. 
Chevalier, A., 1948. Plantes crassulascentes de l'Ouest africain (Opuntias et Euphorbes). Revue de 
Botanique Appliquée & d'Agriculture Tropicale 28: 344-351. 
Chevalier, A. & Laffitte, M., 1937. Une enquête sur les plantes médicinales de l'Afrique occidentale. 
Revue Internationale de Botanique Appliquée et d'Agriculture Tropicale 27: 165-175. 
Chezhiyan, N., Saraswathy, S. & Vasumathi, R., 2003. Studies on organic manures, biofertilizers 
and plant density on growth, yield and alkaloid content of bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus amarus 
Schum. & Thonn.). South Indian Horticulture 51(1/6): 96-101. 
Chhabra, S.C., Mahunnah, R.L.A. & Mshiu, E.N., 1987. Plants used in traditional medicine in 
eastern Tanzania. 1. Pteridophytes and Angiosperms (Acanthaceae to Canellaceae). Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 21: 253-277. 
Chhabra, S.C., Mahunnah, R.L.A. & Mshiu, E.N., 1990. Plants used in traditional medicine in 
eastern Tanzania. 3. Angiosperms (Euphorbiaceae to Menispermaceae). Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 28: 255-283. 
Chhabra, S.C., Mahunnah, R.L.A. & Mshiu, E.N., 1991. Plants used in traditional medicine in 
eastern Tanzania. 5. Angiosperms (Passifloraceae to Sapindaceae). Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 33: 143-157. 
Chhabra, S.C., Mahunnah, R.L.A. & Mshiu, E.N., 1993. Plants used in traditional medicine in 
eastern Tanzania. 6. Angiosperms (Sapotaceae to Zingiberaceae). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
39: 83-103. 
Chhabra, S.C., Uiso, F.C. & Mshiu, E.N., 1984. Phytochemical screening of Tanzanian medicinal 
plants. I. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 11: 157-179. 
Chiang, H.C., Jaw, S.M., Chen, CF . & Kan, W.S., 1992. Antitumor agent, physalin F from Physalis 
angulata L. Anticancer Research 12(3): 837-843. 
Chiang, L.C., Chiang, W., Chang, M.Y. & Lin, C.C, 2003a. In vitro cytotoxic, antiviral and immu-
nomodulatory effects of Plantago major and Plantago asiatica. American Journal of Chinese 
Medicine 31(2): 225-234. 
Chiang, L.C., Ng, L.T., Chiang, W., Chang, M.Y. & Lin, C.C, 2003b. Immunomodulatory activities 
of flavonoids, monoterpenoids, triterpenoids, iridoid glycosides and phenolic compounds of Plan-
tago species. Planta Media 69(7): 600-604. 
Chiang, H.C., Jaw, S.M. & Chen, P.M., 1992. Inhibitory effects of physalin B and physalin F on 
various human leukemia cells in vitro. Anticancer Research 12(4): 1155-1162. 
Chidume, F.C, Gamaniel, K, Amos, S., Akah, P., Obodozie, O. & Wambebe, C.W., 2001. Pharma-
cological activity of the methanolic extract of Cassia nigricans leaves. Indian Journal of Pharma-
cology 33: 350-356. 
Chifundera, K., 1987. Antivenomous plants used in the Zairean pharmacopoeia. African Study 
Monographs 7: 21-35. 
Chifundera, K., 1998. Livestock diseases and the traditional medicine in the Bushi area, Kivu prov-
ince, Democratic Republic of Congo. African Study Monographs 19(1): 13-33. 
LITERATURE 661 
Chifundera, K., 2001. Contribution to the inventory of medicinal plants from the Bushi area, South 
Kivu Province, Democratic Republic of Congo. Fitoterapia 72: 351-368. 
Chifundera, K., Baluku, B. & Mashimango, B., 1993. Phytochemical screening and molluscicidal 
potency of some Zairean medicinal plants. Pharmacological Research 28(4): 333-340. 
Chilufya, H. & Tengnäs, B., 1996. Agroforestry extension manual for northern Zambia. Regional 
Soil Conservation Unit, Nairobi, Kenya. 120 + 124 pp. 
Chinemana, F., Drummond, R.B., Mavi, S. & de Zoysa, I., 1985. Indigenous plant remedies in Zim-
babwe. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 14: 159-172. 
Chishimba, W.K., Lingumbwanga, E.S. & Chongo, G.M., 1999. In vitro propagation of a tropical 
berry, Phytolacca dodecandra. Journal of Tropical Forest Science 11(1): 316-319. 
Chiu, C.K.-F., Govindan, S.V., Fuchs, P.L., 1994. Synthesis of 15-deoxy-16B-ethoxybruceantin and 
synthetic efforts towards bruceantin. Journal of Organic Chemistry 59: 311-323. 
Chow, J.T.N., Williamson, D.A., Yates, K.M. & Goux, W.J., 2005. Chemical characterization of the 
immunomodulating polysaccharide of Aloe vera L. Carbohydrate Research 340(6): 1131-1142. 
Chudnoff, M., 1980. Tropical timbers of the world. USDA Forest Service, Agricultural Handbook 
No 607, Washington D.C., United States. 826 pp. 
Chukwujekwu, J.C., Van Staden, J. & Smith, P., 2005. Antibacterial, anti-inflammatory and anti-
malarial activities of some Nigerian medicinal plants. South African Journal of Botany 71(3-4): 
316-325. 
Chukwurah, B.K.C., 1997. Antimicrobial activity of Holarrhena floribunda stem bark ethanol ex-
tract. Fitoterapia 68(2): 180-181. 
Chularojmontri, L., Wattanapitayakul, S.K., Herunsalee, A., Charuchongkolwongse, S., Niumsa-
kul, S. & Srichairat, S., 2005. Antioxidative and cardioprotective effects of Phyllanthus urinaria 
L. on doxorubicin-induced cardiotoxicity. Biological and Pharmacological Bulletin 28(7): 1165-
1171. 
Chumsri, P., Sawangsuksakul, P., Sornchai, S. & Tempeam, A., 2000. Bulbil formations from 
plantlets of Gloriosa superba L. Mahidol University Annual Research Abstracts 28: 186. 
CIRAD Forestry Department, 2003. Tali. [Internet] Tropix 5.0. <http://agritrop.cirad.fr>. Accessed 
May 2006. 
CITES, 2003. Review of significant trade: East African Aloes. [Internet] 
<http://www.cites.org/eng/com/PC/14/E-PC14-09-02-02-A4.pdf>. Accessed May 2004. 
Claeson, P. & Samuelsson, G., 1989. Screening of some Somalian medicinal plants for antidiar-
rhoeal effects in mice. Phytotherapy Research 3(5): 180-183. 
Clark, T.E., Appleton, C.C. & Drewes, S.E., 1997. A semi-quantitative approach to the selection of 
appropriate candidate plant molluscicides - a South African application. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 56: 1-13. 
Clarkson, C, Maharaj, V.J., Crouch, N.R., Grace, O.M., Pillay, P., Matsabisa, M.G., Bhagwandin, 
N., Smith, P.J. & Folb, P.I., 2004. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of medicinal plants native to or 
naturalised in South Africa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 92: 177-191. 
Claude, F. & Claude, A.L., 1947. Survey of plants for anti-malarial activity. Lloydia 10: 145-174. 
Clausen, V., Wellendorph, P., Ekpe, P. & Jaroszewski, J.W., 2001. Tetraphyllin B, volkenin and 
cyclopentenylglycine in Androsiphonia adenostegia. Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 29(3): 
317-319. 
CNRE (Centre National de Recherche sur l'Environnement) & ONE (Office National pour 
1'Environnement), 2001. Valorisation des filières potentielles en matière de biodiversité : les plan-
tes médicinales dans la région de la forêt de Mikea. Rapport final des travaux de recherche dans 
la région de Mikea, Tuléar, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 105 pp. 
Coates Palgrave, K., 1983. Trees of southern Africa. 2nd Edition. Struik Publishers, Cape Town, 
South Africa. 959 pp. 
Cocks, M., 1995. The commercialisation of medicinal plants in the eastern Cape. A leaf from the 
Herbarium. Notes from the Selmar Schonland Herbarium, Albany Museum 2: 2-4. 
Cocks, M.L. & Dold, A.P., 2006. Cultural significance of biodiversity: the role of medicinal plants in 
urban African cultural practices in the eastern Cape, South Africa. Journal of Ethnobiology 26(1): 
60-81. 
662 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Codd, L.E., 1963. Apocynaceae. In: Dyer, R.A. & Codd, L.E. (Editors). Flora of southern Africa. 
Volume 26. Botanical Research Institute, Department of Agricultural Technical Services, Preto-
ria, South Africa, pp. 244-296. 
Codd, L.E., 1966. Notes on Boerhavia in Southern Africa. Bothalia 9(1): 113-121. 
Coetzee, J., Mciteka, J., Malan, E. & Ferreira, D., 2000. Structure and synthesis of the first procas-
sinidin dimers based on epicatechin, and gallo- and epigallo-catechin. Phytochemistry 53(7): 795-
804. 
Colasanti, B.K., Craig, CR. & Allara, R.D., 1984. Intraocular pressure, ocular toxicity and neuro-
toxicity after administration of cannabinol or cannabigerol. Experimental Eye Research 39: 251— 
259. 
Collardet, J., 1976. Processing hard-to-process and lesser used species. Unasylva 28 (112/113): 1— 
148. 
Connelly, M.P.E., Fabiano, E., Patel, LH., Kinyanjui, S.M., Mberu, E.K. & Watkins, W.M., 1996. 
Antimalarial activity in crude extracts of Malawian medicinal plants. Annals of Tropical Medi-
cine and Parasitology 90(6): 597-602. 
Conner, J.M., Gray, A.I., Reynolds, T. & Waterman, P.O., 1989. Anthracene and chromone deriva-
tives in the exudate of Aloe rabaiensis. Phytochemistry 28: 3551—3553. 
Conner, J.M., Gray, A.I., Waterman, P.G. & Reynolds, T., 1990. Novel anthrone anthraquinone 
dimers from Aloe elgonica. Journal of Natural Products 53: 1362—1364. 
Coode, M.J.E., 1979. Surianacées. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Julien, H.R. & Marais, W. (Editors). 
Flore des Mascareignes. Families 64-68. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, Mauritius, 
l'Office de la Recherche Scientifique Outre-Mer, Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 
Richmond, United Kingdom. 4 pp. 
Coode, M.J.E., 1982. Euphorbiacées. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Guého, J. & Marais, W. (Editors). 
Flore des Mascareignes. Familles 153-160. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, Mauritius, 
l'Office de la Recherche Scientifique Outre-Mer, Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 
Richmond, United Kingdom. 117 pp. 
Cooper, G.P. & Record, S.J., 1931. The evergreen forests of Liberia. School of Forestry, Yale Uni-
versity, Bulletin 31, New Haven, United States. 153 pp. 
Corallo, A., Savineau, J.P., Tricoche, R. & Foungbe, S., 1991. The uterotonic action of the aqueous 
extract of Bridelia atroviridis in the rat. Fundamental and Clinical Pharmacology 5(4): 319—329. 
Corallo, A., Foungbe, S., Davy, M. & Cohen, Y., 1997. Cardiovascular pharmacology of the aqueous 
extract of the leaves of Bridelia atroviridis Muell. Arg. (Euphorbiaceae) in the rat. Journal of Eth-
nopharmacology 57(3): 189-196. 
Corbett, A.D., Menzies, J.R.W., Macdonald, A., Paterson, S.J. & Duwiejua, M., 1996. The opioid 
activity of akuammine, akuammicine and akuammidine: alkaloids from Picralima nitida (fam. 
Apocynaceae). British Journal of Pharmacology 119: P334 Supplement S. 
Corby, H.D.L., 1974. Systematic implications of nodulation among Rhodesian legumes. Kirkia 9(2): 
301-329. 
Corea, G., Fattorusso, E., Lanzotti, V., Motti, R., Simon, P.-N., Dumontet, C. & Di Pietro, A., 2004. 
Jatrophane diterpenes as modulators of multidrug resistance. Advances of structure-activity rela-
tionships and discovery of the potent lead pepluanin A. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 47(4): 
988-992. 
Corea, G., Fattorusso, E., Lanzotti, V., di Meglio, P., Maffia, P., Grassia, G., Ialenti, A. & Ianaro, 
A., 2005. Discovery and biological evaluation of the novel naturally occurring diterpene 
pepluanone as antiinflammatory agent. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 48(22): 7055-7062. 
Corsaro, M.M., Giudicianni, I., Lanzetta, R., Marciano, CE., Monaco, P. & Parrilli, M., 1995. Poly-
saccharides from seeds of Strychnos species. Phytochemistry 39(6): 1377-1380. 
Cortnummé, J., Wehrenfennig, M. & Horn, W., 1997. Temperaturbehandlung im Lager von Glorio-
sa superba (Liliaceae). Poster, Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gartenbauwissenschaftlichen Gesell-
schaft 1996, Hannover. BDGL-Schriftenreihe 14. p. 138. 
Cos, P., Hermans, N., de Bruyne, T., Apers, S., Sindambiwe, J.B., Vanden Berghe, D.A., Pieters, L. 
& Vlietinck, A.J., 2002. Further evaluation of Rwandan medicinal plant extracts for their antim-
icrobial and antiviral activities. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79: 155—163. 
Cousins, D. & Huffman, M.A., 2002. Medicinal properties in the diet of gorillas: an ethno-
pharmacological evaluation. African Study Monographs 23(2): 65-89. 
LITERATURE 663 
Couteron, P. & Bergeret, A., 1995. Quel avenir pour un territoire pastoral au Nord-Yatenga (Bur-
kina Faso)? Modalités de régulation possibles des systèmes soudano-sahéliens perturbés. Pro-
gramme Environnement du CNRS. Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. 
Cowan, S., Stewart, M., Abbiw, D.K., Latif, Z., Sarker, S.D. & Nash, R.J., 2001. Lignans from Stro-
p h a n t u s gratus. Fitoterapia 72(1): 80-82. 
Creeper, J.H., Mitchell, A.A., Jubb, T.F. & Colegate, S.M., 1999. Pyrrolizidine alkaloid poisoning of 
horses grazing a native heliotrope (Heliotropium ovalifolium). Australian Veterinary Journal 
77(6): 401-402. 
Cremers, G., 1977. Architecture végétative de quelques espèces malgaches du genre Euphorbia L. 
Bulletin du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 47: 55-81. 
Cremers, G., 1978. Etude de deux Euphorbes de Madagascar: Euphorbia enterophora Drake et E. 
stenoclada Bâillon. Adansonia, série 2, 17(3): 343-357. 
Crespi-Perellino, N., Garofano, L., Arlandini, E. & Pinciroli, V., 1996. Identification of new diterpe-
noids from Euphorbia calyptrata cell cultures. Journal of Natural Products 59: 773-776. 
Cribb, P.J. & Leedal, G.P., 1982. The mountain flowers of southern Tanzania: a field guide to the 
common flowers. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 244 pp. 
Cronlund, A., 1976. The botanical and phytochemical differentiation between Erythrophleum 
suaveolens and E. ivorense. Planta Medica 29(2): 123-128. 
Cronlund, A. & Oguakwa, J.U., 1975. Alkaloids from the bark of Erythrophleum couminga. Acta 
Pharmaceutica Suecica 12(5-6): 467-478. 
Croxford, J.L. & Yamamura, T., 2005. Cannabinoids and the immune system: potential for the 
treatment of inflammatory diseases? Journal of Neuroimmunology 166(1-2): 3-18. 
Cruz, A.B., Moretto, E., Cechinel-Filho, V., Niero, R., Montanari, J.L. & Yunes, R.A., 1994. Anti-
bacterial activity of Phyllanthus urinaria. Fitoterapia 65(5): 461-462. 
CSIR, 1959. The wealth of India. A dictionary of Indian raw materials and industrial products. 
Raw materials. Volume 5: H—K. Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, New Delhi, India. 
332 pp. 
CSIR, 1976. The wealth of India. A dictionary of Indian raw materials & industrial products. Raw 
materials. Volume 10: Sp-W. Publications and Information Directorate, Council of Scientific and 
Industrial Research, New Delhi, India. 591 pp. 
Csurhes, S.M., 1999. Bellyache bush (Jatropha gossypiifolia) in Queensland. Pest Status Review 
Series - Land Protection, Department of Natural Resources and Mines, Brisbane, Queensland, 
Australia. 38 pp. 
Cuatrecasas, J., 1961. A taxonomie revision of the Humiriaceae. Contributions from the United 
States National Herbarium 35(2): 25-214. 
Cuendet, M. & Pezzuto, J.M., 2004. Antitumor activity of bruceantin: an old drug with new prom-
ise. Journal of Natural Products 67(2): 269-272. 
Cullinan, P., Cannon, J., Sheril, D. & Newman Taylor, A., 1993. Asthma following occupational 
exposure to Lycopodium clavatum in condom manufacturers. Thorax 48(7): 774—775. 
Cunningham, A.B., 1993. African medicinal plants: setting priorities at the interface between con-
servation and primary healthcare. UNESCO People and Plants Working Paper 1, Paris, France. 
53 pp. 
Cunningham, A.B., 1997. An Africa-wide overview of medicinal plant harvesting, conservation and 
health care. In: Bodeker, G. & Vantomme, P. (Editors). Medicinal plants for forest conservation 
and health care. Non-Wood Forest Products 11, FAO, Rome, Italy. 158 pp. 
Cunningham, A.B. & Schippmann, U., 2000. Griffonia simplicifolia, calling for information on a 
west African medicinal plant in trade. Medicinal Plant Conservation 6: 23-24. 
Cutler, D.F., Brandham, P.E., Carter, S. & Harris, S.J., 1980. Morphological, anatomical, cytologi-
cal and biochemical aspects of evolution in East African shrubby species of Aloe L. (Liliaceae). Bo-
tanical Journal of the Linnean Society 80: 293-317. 
D'Arcy, W.G. & Rakotozafy, A., 1994. Solanaceae. Flore de Madagascar et des Comores (plantes 
vasculaires), famille 176. Imprimerie Officielle, Tananarive, Madagascar. 146 pp. 
D'Cruz, O.J., Waurzyniak, B. & Uckun, F.M., 2004. A 13-week subehronic intravaginal toxicity 
study of pokeweed antiviral protein in mice. Phytomedicine 11(4): 342-351. 
664 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
d'Oliveira Feijào, R., 1960. Elucidârio fïtológico. P l an t a s vulgares de Por tugal continental , insu la r e 
u l t ramar ino . Classificào, nomes vernâculos e aplicaçôes. Volume 1, A - H . Ins t i tu te Botânico de 
Lisboa, Lisbon, Portugal . 472 pp. 
d'Oliveira Feijào, R., 1961. Elucidârio fitológico. P lan ta s vulgares de Por tugal continental , insular e 
u l t ramar ino . Classificào, nomes vernâculos e aplicaçôes. Volume 2, I-O. Institute) Botânico de Li-
sboa, Lisbon, Portugal . 462 pp. 
Da Graça Silva, M., 1983. Cupressaceae. In: Mendes , E.J . (Editor). Flora de Moçambique. No 3. 
Ins t i tu to de Investigaçào Cientifica Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal , pp 41-44 . 
da Silva, M.H.L., Zoghbi, M.G.B., Andrade, E.H.A. & Maia, J .G.S., 1999. The essential oils of Pep-
eromia pellucida Kun th and P. c ircinnata Link var circinnata. Flavour and Fragrance Jou rna l 
14(5): 312-314. 
Daffalla, G. & Ahmed, M., 2005. Sudan. In: Anderson, P.K. & Morales, F.J. (Editors). Whiteflies 
and whitefly-borne viruses: building a knowledge base for global action. CIAT, Cali, Colombia, 
pp. 118-128. 
Dagne, E. & Steglich, W., 1984. Knipholone: a un ique an t raquinone derivative from Kniphofia fo-
liosa. Phytochemistry 23 (8): 1729-1731. 
Dagne, E., Bisrat, D., Viljoen, A. & van Wyk, B.-E., 2000. Chemist ry of Aloe species. Cur ren t Or-
ganic Chemistry 4(10): 1055-1078. 
Dahal , K.R., Utomo, B.I. & Brink, M., 2003. Agave s isa lana Perr ine . In: Brink, M. & Escobin, R.P. 
(Editors). P lan t Resources of South-Eas t Asia No 17. Fibre p lants . Backhuys Publ ishers , Leiden, 
Nether lands , pp. 68 -75 . 
Dahir , A.M., 1999. Salvadoraceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. Volume 2. Angiosper-
mae (Tiliaceae-Apiaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens , Kew, Richmond, Uni ted Kingdom, pp. 1 2 2 -
126. 
Dai, J.R., Hallock, Y.F., Cardellina, J .H. & Boyd, M.R., 1999. 20-O-b-glucopyranosyl camptothecin 
from Mostuea brunonis : a potent ial camptothecin pro-drug with improved solubility. Jou rna l of 
Na tu ra l Products 62(10): 1427-1429. 
Dai, Y., Hou, L.F., Chan, Y.P., Cheng, L. & But, P.H., 2004. Inhibit ion of immedia te allergic reac-
t ions by ethanol extract from Plumbago zeylanica s tems. Biological and Pharmaceut ica l Bullet in 
27(3): 429-432 . 
Dale, LR. & Greenway, P.J., 1961. Kenya t rees and shrubs . Buchanan 's Kenya Es ta tes Limited, 
Nairobi, Kenya. 654 pp. 
Dalziel, J.M., 1937. The useful p lan ts of West Tropical Africa. Crown Agents for Overseas Govern-
men t s and Adminis t ra t ions , London, Uni ted Kingdom. 612 pp. 
Dame, C , Duez, P., Hanocq, M., Lejoly, J., Molle, L. & Zeba, B., 1985. Essai de cul ture du Cassia 
italica au Burk ina Faso: évolution des teneurs en sennosides au cours de la croissance. Tropicul-
t u r a 3: 58-64. 
Damiano, C , Ferraiolo, G. & Baudoin, W.O., 2000. Ornamen ta l p lan t propagat ion in t he tropics. 
FAO Plant Production and Protection Paper 158. 79 pp. 
Damu, A.G., Kuo, P . - C , Su, C.-R., Kuo, T . H . , Chen, T.H., Bastow, K.F., Lee, K.H. & Wu, T.S., 
2007. Isolation, s t ruc tures , and structure-cytotoxic activity relat ionships of withanolides and phy-
sal ins from Physal is angula ta . Jou rna l of Na tu ra l Products 70(7): 1146-1152. 
Das, N. & Chat topadhay, R.N., 2004. Commercial cultivation of Aloe. Na tu ra l Product Radiance 13: 
85-87 . 
Das, M. & Khanna , S.K., 1997. Clinicoepidemiological, toxicological, and safety evaluat ion studies 
on argemone oil. Critical Reviews in Toxicology 27(3): 273-297. 
Das, G. & Rout, G.R., 2002. P lan t regenerat ion through somatic embryogenesis in leaf derived cal-
lus of Plumbago rosea. Biologia P l a n t a r u m 45(2): 299^302. 
Das, Y.T., Bagchi, M., Bagchi, D. & Preuss , H.G., 2004. Safety of 5-hydroxy-L-tryptophan. Toxicol-
ogy Let ters 150(1): 111-122. 
Dasi, K.A., 2004. Chromatographic (TLC) analysis of alkaloids of Rauvolfia vomitoria. B .Pharm, 
degree thesis , Depa r tmen t of Pharmaceut ica l Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy , K.N.U.S.T., Ku-
masi , Ghana . 57 pp. 
Dassonneville, L., Bonjean, K., De Pauw-Gillet , M. -C , Colson, P., Houssier, C , Quetin-Leclercq, J., 
Angenot, L. & Bailly, C , 1999. St imulat ion of topoisomerase I l -mediated DNA cleavage by th ree 
LITERATURE 665 
DNA-intercalating plant alkaloids: cryptolepine, matadine, and serpentine. Biochemistry 38(24): 
7719-7726. 
Datte, J.Y., Traore, A., Offoumou, A.M. & Ziegler, A., 1998. Effects of leaf extract of Caesalpinia 
bonduc (Caesalpiniaceae) on the contractile activity of uterine smooth muscle of pregnant rats. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 60(2): 149-155. 
Davicino, J.G., Pestchanker, M.J. & Giordano, O.S., 1988. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Heliotro-
pium curassavicum. Phytochemistry 27(3): 960-962. 
Davis, C. & Parsons, P., 2002. Growing Milkweed, a plant with prospective anticancer properties. A 
review of the medicinal potential of members of the Euphorbiaceae family. Report for the Rural 
Industries Research and Development Corporation, Kingston, Australia. 17 pp. 
de Boer, H.J., Kool, A., Broberg, A., Mziray, W.R., Hedberg, I. & Levensfors, J.L., 2005. Anti-fungal 
and anti-bacterial activity of some herbal remedies from Tanzania. Journal of Ethnopharmacolo-
gy 96: 461-469. 
de Koning, J., 1983. La forêt de Banco. Part 2: La Flore. Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wa-
geningen 83—1. Wageningen, Netherlands. 921 pp. 
de Kruif, A.P.M., 1981. A revision of Holarrhena R.Br. (Apocynaceae). Mededelingen Landbouwho-
geschool Wageningen 81-2, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 1-36. 
de Kruif, A.P.M., 1984. A revision of Motandra A.DC. (Apocynaceae). In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. 
(Editor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 11-13. Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wagenin-
gen 83-7, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 1-20. 
de Kruif, A.P.M., 1985. A revision of Oncinotis Benth. (Apocynaceae). In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. 
(Ed.). Series of Revisions of Apocynaceae 16-18. Agricultural University Wageningen Papers 85 -
2. Agricultural University Wageningen, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 5-45. 
de Medeiros, C.L.C., Thomas, G. & Mukherjee, R., 1991. The source of CA2+ for the spasmolytic 
actions of longicaudatine, a bisindole alkaloid isolated from Strychnos trinervis (Veil.) Mart. (Lo-
ganiaceae). Phytotherapy Research 5(1): 24-28. 
De Meyer, N., Haemers, A., Mishra, L., Pandey, H.K., Pieters, L.A., Vanden Berghe, D.A. & Vliet-
inck, A.J., 1991. 4-Hydroxy-3-methoxyflavones with potent antipicornavirus activity. Journal of 
Medicinal Chemistry 34: 736-746. 
De Oliveira, A.P. & Nepomuceno, J.C., 2004. Evaluation of genotoxic and antigenotoxic effects of 
avelós (Euphorbia tirucalli) on Drosophila melanogaster. Bioscience Journal 20: 179-186. 
De Ruiz, R.E.L., Fusco, M., Sosa, A. & Ruiz, S.O., 1994. Constituents of Coronopus didymus. Fito-
terapia 65(2): 181-182. 
de Saint-Aubin, G., 1963. La forêt du Gabon. Publication No 21 du Centre Technique Forestier 
Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 208 pp. 
De Smet, P.A.G.M., 1996. Some ethnopharmacological notes on African hallucinogens. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 50: 141-146. 
De Souza-Dias, J.C., Costa-Alvaro, S. & Nardin-Antonio, M., 1993. Potato leafroll virus in solana-
ceous weeds in Brazil explains severe outbreaks of the disease in absence of known potato donor 
sources. Summa Phytopathologica 19(2): 80-85. 
de Wet, H., 2005. An ethnobotanical and chemotaxonomic study of South African Menispermaceae. 
PhD Thesis, Faculty of Science, University of Johannesburg, Johannesburg, South Africa. 450 pp. 
de Wet, H. & van Wyk, B.E., 2008. An ethnobotanical survey of southern African Menispermaceae. 
South African Journal of Botany 74(1): 2-9. 
de Wet, H., Tilney, P.M. & Van Wyk, B.E., 2001. Vegetative morphology and anatomy of Cissampe-
los in South Africa. South African Journal of Botany 68: 181-190. 
de Wet, H., van Heerden, F.R. & van Wyk, B.E., 2004. Alkaloids of Antizoma angustifolia (Menis-
permaceae). Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 32: 1145-1152. 
de Wet, H., van Heerden, F.R. & van Wyk, B.E., 2005. Alkaloids of Antizoma miersiana (Menis-
permaceae). Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 33(8): 799-807. 
de Wet, H., van Heerden, F.R., van Wyk, B.E. & van Zyl, R.L., 2007. Antiplasmodial activity and 
cytotoxicity of Albertisia delagoensis. Fitoterapia 78(6): 420-422. 
de Wijs, J.J., 1975. The distribution of passionfruit ringspot virus in its main hostplants in Ivory 
Coast. European Journal of Plant Pathology 81: 144-148. 
de Wijs, J.J. & Mobach, J.D., 1975. Passionfruit ringspot virus isolated from Adenia lobata in Ivory 
Coast. European Journal of Plant Pathology 81: 152-154. 
666 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
de Wilde, W.J.J.O., 1971. A monograph of the genus Adenia Forsk. (Passifloraceae). Mededelingen 
Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 71-18. Wageningen, Netherlands. 281 pp. 
de Wilde, W.J.J.O., 1973. Revision of Basananthe, formerly Tryphostemma (Passifloraceae). Blu-
mea 21: 327-356. 
de Wilde, W.J.J.O., 1974. Account of Efulensia (Passifloraceae). Blumea 22(1): 31-35. 
de Wilde, W.J.J.O., 1975. Passifloraceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. 
Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United Kingdom. 71 pp. 
de Winter, W.P., 2003. Lycopodium clavatum L. In: de Winter, W.P. & Amoroso, V.B. (Editors). 
Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 15(2): Cryptogams: Ferns and fern allies. Backhuys Pub-
lishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 123-126. 
Debnath, M., Malik, C.P. & Bisen, P.S., 2006. Micropropagation: a tool for the production of high 
quality plant-based medicines. Current Pharmaceutical Biotechnology 7(1): 33-49. 
Debray, M., 1966. Contribution a l'étude du genre Epinetrum (Ménispermacées) E. cordifolium 
Mangenot et Miège et E. mangenotii Guillaumet et Debray de Cote d'Ivoire. Mémoires No 18, 
ORST0M, Paris, France. 74 pp. 
Debray, M., Jacquemin, H. & Razafindrambao, R., 1971. Contribution à l'inventaire des plantes 
médicinales de Madagascar. Travaux et Documents No 8. ORSTOM, Paris, France. 150 pp. 
Debray, M., Plat, M. & Le Men, J., 1966. Alcaloides des Menispermacees africaines Epinetrum 
cordifolium et Epinetrum mangenotii: isolement de la cycleanine, de la nor-cycleanine et de 
l'isochondrodendrine. Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises 24(7-8): 551-558. 
Decary, R., 1946. Plantes et animaux utiles de Madagascar. Annales du Musée Colonial de Mar-
seille, 54e année, 6e série, 4e volume, 1er et dernier fascicule. 234 pp. 
Declerck, M., Smets, P., Smets, J. & Roman, J., 1985. Euphorbia project: renewable energy produc-
tion through the cultivation and processing of semi arid land biomass in Kenya. In: Palz, W., 
Coombs, J. & Hall, D.O. (Editors). Energy from biomass: 3rd E.C. conference, 25-29 March, Ven-
ice, Italy, pp. 310-314. 
Dekker, A.J.F.M., 1983. A revision of the genera Penianthus Miers and Sphenocentrum Pierre 
(Menispermaceae) of West and Central Africa. Bulletin du Jardin Botanique National de Belgi-
que 53(1-2): 17-66. 
Dekker, T.G., Fourie, T.G., Matthee, E., Snycker, F.O. & Ammann, W., 1987. Studies of South Afri-
can medicinal plants. Part 4. Jaherin, a new daphnane diterpene with antimicrobial properties 
from Jatropha zeyheri. South African Journal of Chemistry 40(1): 74-76. 
Dekker, T.G., Fourie, T.G., Matthee, E. & Snyckers, F.O., 1988. A morphinan alkaloid from An-
tizoma angustifolia. Journal of Natural Products 51(3): 584. 
Dekkers, J., Rao, N. & Goh, C.J., 1991. In vitro storage of multiple shoot cultures of gingers at am-
bient temperatures of 24-29°C. Scientia Horticulturae 47(1-2): 157-168. 
Delaude, C, Thepenier, P., Jacquier, M.J., Nuzillard, J.M., Massiot, G. & Le Men-Olivier, L., 1995. 
Alcaloïdes de Strychnos angolensis. Bulletin de la Société Royale des Sciences de Liège 64(4—5): 
243-246. 
Demeke, T., Hughes, H.G. & Lee, C.W., 1992. Propagation of Phytolacca dodecandra (endod) by 
stem cuttings and seed. Tropical Agriculture 69(3): 301-303. 
Demissew Sebsebe & Gilbert, M.G., 1997. Aloaceae. In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, Demissew 
Sebsebe & Hedberg, I. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 6. Hydrocharitaceae to 
Arecaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and De-
partment of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 117-135. 
Demissew Sebsebe & Nordal, I., 1997. Asphodelaceae. In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, Demissew 
Sebsebe & Hedberg, I. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 6. Hydrocharitaceae to 
Arecaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and De-
partment of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 106-116. 
den Biggelaar, C. & Mureithi, W., 2000. Using tree species to treat milk for palatability and pres-
ervation. Intermediate Technology Food Chain 26: 6-7. 
den Outer, R.W. & van Veenendaal, W.L.H., 1981. Wood and bark anatomy of Azima tetracantha 
Lam. (Salvadoraceae) with description of its included phloem. Acta Botanica Neerlandica 30(3): 
199-207. 
Deng, B.-L., Lepoivre, J.A., Lemiere, G., Dommisse, R., Claeys, M., Boers, F. & De Groot, A., 1997. 
A practical synthesis of 3-methoxyflavones. Liebigs Annalen der Chemie 2169-2175. 
LITERATURE 667 
Deng, X., Yin, F., Lu, X., Cai, B. & Yin, W., 2006. The apoptotic effect of brucine from the seed of 
Strychnos nux-vomica on human hepatoma cells is mediated via Bcl-2 and Ca2+ involved mito-
chondrial pathway. Toxicological Sciences 91(1): 59-69. 
Desmarchelier, C, Barros, S., Repetto, M., Ribeiro Latorre, L., Kato, M., Coussio, J. & Ciccia, G., 
1997. 4-Nerolidylcatechol from Pothomorphe spp. scavenges peroxyl radicals and inhibits Fe(II)-
dependant DNA damage. Planta Medica 63(6): 561-563. 
Desta, B., 1994. Ethiopian traditional herbal drugs. Part III: Anti-fertility activity of 70 medicinal 
herbs. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 44(3): 199-209. 
Desta, B., 1995. Ethiopian traditional herbal drugs. Part 1: Studies on the toxicity and therapeutic 
activity of local taenicidal medications. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 45(1): 27-33. 
Dethier, M., Cordier, Y. & Demeyer, K., 1993. Cultivation of Datura species for scopolamine and 
hyoscyamine production in Burundi. Acta Horticulturae 331: 39-48. 
Devi, P.U., Solomon, F.E. & Sharada, A.C., 1999. Plumbagin, a plant naphthoquinone with anti-
tumor and radiomodifying properties. Pharmaceutical Biology 37(3): 231-236. 
DeWolf, G.P., 1956. Notes on cultivated Solanaceae 2: Datura. Baileya 4(1): 13-23. 
Dhar, S.K. & Rao, P.O., 1995. Hormonal profile of plumbagin. Fitoterapia 66(5): 442-446. 
Dhar, R.S., Verma, V., Suri, K.A., Sangwan, R.S., Satti, N.K., Kumar, A., Tuli, R. & Qazi, G.N., 
2006. Phytochemical and genetic analysis in selected chemotypes of Withania somnifera. Phyto-
chemistry 67(20): 2269-2276. 
Dharani, N., 2002. Field guide to common trees and shrubs of East Africa. Struik Publishers, Cape 
Town, South Africa. 320 pp. 
Dharmshaktu, N.S., Prabhakaran, P.K. & Menon, P.K., 1987. Laboratory study on the mosquito 
larvicidal properties of leaf and seed extract of the plant Agave americana. Journal of Tropical 
Medicine & Hygiene 90(2): 79-82. 
Dhawan, K., Dhawan, S. & Sharma, A., 2004. Passiflora: a review update. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 94: 1-23. 
Di Maro, A., Valbonesi, P., Bolognesi, A., Stirpe, F., De Luca, P., Siniscalco Gigliano, G., Gaudio, L., 
Delli Bovi, P., Ferranti, P., Malorni, A. & Parente, A., 1999. Isolation and characterization of four 
type-1 ribosome-inactivating proteins, with polynucleotide:adenosine glycosidase activity, from 
leaves of Phytolacca dioica L. Planta 208(1): 125-131. 
Diabate, M., Munive, A., Miana de Faria, S., Ba, A., Dreyfus, B. & Galiana, A., 2005. Occurrence of 
nodulation in unexplored leguminous trees native to the West African tropical rainforest and in-
oculation response of native species useful in reforestation. New Phytologist 166(1): 231-239. 
Diallo, B., Vanhaelen, M. & Gosselain, O.P., 1995. Plant constituents involved in coating practices 
among traditional African potters. Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences 51(1): 95—97. 
Diallo, D., Sogn, C, Samaké, F.B., Paulsen, B.S., Michaelsen, T. E. & Keita, A., 2002. Wound heal-
ing plants in Mali, the Bamako Region: an ethnobotanical survey and complement fixation of wa-
ter extracts from selected plants. Pharmaceutical Biology 40(2): 117-128. 
Diallo, D., Willcox, M., Flaquet, J., Graz, B. & Sidibe, O., 2005. Decoction of Argemone mexicana is 
clinically effective in uncomplicated falciparum malaria. In: Abstract Book of the International 
Medicine and Health in the Tropics Congress, 11-15 September 2005, Marseille, France. 315 pp. 
Diallo Sail, A., Niang Ndiaye, M., Ndiaye, A.K, Dieng, C. & Faye, B., 1997. Etude de l'effet hepato-
protecteur d'une plante de la pharmacopée sénégalaise: Tinospora bakis (Menispermaceae) à par-
tir d'un modèle in vitro. Dakar Médical 42(1): 15-18. 
Diallo Sali, A., Gueye, M., Sarr, M., N'Diaye, A.K., N'Diaye, M. & Faye, B., 1999. Etude de l'effet et 
du mécanisme d'action des racines de Tinospora bakis sur la sécrétion biliaire à partir de modèles 
in vivo. Dakar Médical 44(2): 211-214. 
Diane, N., Forther, H. & Hilger, H.H., 2002. A systematic analysis of Heliotropium, Tournefortia, 
and allied taxa of the Heliotropiaceae (Boraginales) based on ITSl sequences and morphological 
data. American Journal of Botany 89(2): 287-295. 
Diaz, J.A. (Editor), 2003. Informe técnico, caracterización del mercado colombiano de plantas médi-
cinales y aromâticas. Institute Alexander Von Humboldt - El Ministerio de Ambiente, Vivienda y 
Desarrollo Territorial, Bogota, Colombia. I l l pp. 
Dickson, R.A., Houghton, P.J., Hylands, P.J. & Gibbons, S., 2006., 2006. Antimicrobial, resistance-
modifying effects, antioxidant and free radical scavenging activities of Mezoneuron bentha-
668 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
mianum Baill., Securinega virosa Roxb. & Willd. and Microglossa pyrifolia Lam. Phytotherapy 
Research 20(1): 41-45. 
Diehl, B. & Teichmuller, E.E., 1998. Aloe vera, quality inspection and identification. Agro Food 
Industry Hi-Tech 9: 14-16. 
Dimmitt, M.A. & Hanson, C, 1991. The genus Adenium in cultivation. Part 1: A. obesum and A. 
multiflorum. Cactus and Succulent Journal 63: 223-225. 
Dimmitt, M.A. & Hanson, C, 1992. The genus Adenium in cultivation. Part 2: A. swazicum, A. 
boehmianum and A. oleifolium. Cactus and Succulent Journal 64(3): 110-111. 
Dimova, S., Mugabowindekwe, R., Willems, T., Brewster, M.E., Noppe, M., Ludwig, A., Jorissen, M. 
& Augustijns, P., 2003. Safety-assessment of 3-methoxyquercitin as an antirhinoviral compound 
for nasal application: effect on ciliary beat frequency. Journal of Pharmaceutics 263: 95-103. 
Din Belle, D., Tolvanen, A. & Lounasmaa, M., 1996. Total synthesis of tacamine-type indole alka-
loids of Tabernaemontana eglandulosa. Tetrahedron 52(34): 11361-11378. 
Diniz, M.A., 1997. Piperaceae. In: Pope, G.V. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 9, part 2. Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 24-37. 
Dione, F.G.B., 2001. Etude des facteurs de la germination et de la multiplication végétative chez 
Detarium senegalense Gmel. et Detarium microcarpum Guill. et Perr. Mémoire de DEA, Biologie 
végétale. Université Cheickh Anta Diop, Dakar, Senegal. 63 pp. 
Disengomoka, I. & Delaveau, P., 1983. Medicinal plants used for child's respiratory diseases in 
Zaire. Journal of Ethnopharmaeology 8: 257-264. 
Disengomoka, I., Delaveau, P. & Sengele, K., 1983. Medicinal plants used for child's respiratory 
diseases in Zaire. Part 2. Journal of Ethnopharmaeology 8: 265-277. 
Diwanay, S., Chitre, D. & Patwardhan, B., 2004. Immunoprotection by botanical drugs in cancer 
chemotherapy. Journal of Ethnopharmaeology 90(1): 49-55. 
Diamini, B., 1981. Swaziland Flora: their local names and uses. Ministry of Agriculture and Coop-
eratives, Mbabane, Swaziland. 72 pp. 
Dokosi, O.B., 1998. Herbs of Ghana. Ghana Universities Press, Accra, Ghana. 746 pp. 
Dold, A.P. & Cocks, M.L., 2000. Indigenous plant use of the amaXhosa people on the eastern border 
of the Great Fish River Reserve, Eastern Cape. Annals of the East Cape Museums 1: 26-53. 
Dold, A.P. & Cocks, M.L., 2001. Traditional veterinary medicine in the Alice District of the Eastern 
Cape Province, South Africa. South African Journal of Science 97: 375-379. 
Dold, A.P. & Cocks, M.L., 2002. The trade in medicinal plants in the Eastern Cape Province, South 
Africa. South African Journal of Science 98: 589-597. 
Dorges, B., Heucke, J. & Dance, R., 2003. The palatability of central Australian plant species to 
camels. Technote No 116, Agdex No 468/62, ISSN No 0158-2755. 8 pp. 
Dormon, E.N.A., Van Huis, A., Leuwis, C, Obeng-Ofori, D. & Sakyi-Dawson, O., 2004. Causes of 
low productivity of cocoa in Ghana: farmers' perspectives and insight from research and the socio-
political establishment. Netherlands Journal of Agricultural Science 42(3/4): 237-260. 
dos Santos, J.A.A., Tomassini, T.C.B, Xavier, D.C.D., Ribeiro, I.M., da Silva, M.T.G. & de Morais 
Filho, Z.B., 2003. Molluscicidal activity of Physalis angulata L. extracts and fractions on Biom-
phalaria tenagophila (d'Orbigny, 1835) under laboratory conditions. Memórias do Instituto 
Oswaldo Cruz 98(3): 425-428. 
Doucet, J.L., Otimbo, P.A.N. & Boubady, A.G., 2004. Comment assister la régénération naturelle 
de l'okoumé dans les concessions forestières? Bois et Forêts des Tropiques 279: 59-72. 
Doughari, J.H. & Sunday, D., 2008. Antibacterial activity of Phyllanthus muellerianus. Pharma-
ceutical Biology 46(6): 400-405. 
Dounias, E., 1993. The perception and use of wild yams by the Baka hunter-gatherers in south 
Cameroon rainforest. In: Hladik, CM., Pagezy, H., Linares, O.F., Hladik, A., Semple, A. & Had-
ley, M. (Editors). Tropical forests, people and food. Biocultural interactions and applications to 
development. Unesco-Parthenon, Man and Biosphere serie, Paris, France, pp. 621-632. 
Douzoua, L.L., Debray, M., Bellet, P., Olivier, L. & Le Men, J., 1972. Chemotaxonomic study of the 
Cabucala genus: alkaloids of root barks of C. madagascariensis (A.DC.) Pichon: reserpine, cabu-
cine and cabucinine. Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises 30(3): 199-204. 
Douzoua, L.L., Mansour, M., Debray, M., Le Men-Olivier, L. & Le Men, J., 1974. Alcaloïdes du Ca-
bucala erythrocarpa var. erythrocarpa. Phytochemistry 13: 1994-1995. 
LITERATURE 669 
Dramane, K.L. & Mahieux, B., 1986. Mise en évidence de l'action pharmacodynamique de l'extrait 
aqueux de racine de Triclisia patens (Oliver) chez le rat. le cobaye et le lapin. Plantes médicinales 
et phytothérapie 20(4): 305-312. 
du Plessis, L.S., Nunn, J.R. & Roach, W.A., 1969. Carcinogen in Transkeian Bantu food additive. 
Nature 222: 1198-1199. 
du Puy, D.J., Labat, J.N., Rabevohitra, R., Villiers, J.-F., Bosser, J. & Moat, J., 2002. The Legumi-
nosae of Madagascar. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 750 pp. 
du Toit, P.C.V., 1998. A comparison of the diets selected by merino and dorper sheep on the three 
range types of the Karoo, South Africa. Archivos de Zootecnia 47(177): 21-32. 
Duah, F.K., Owusu, P.D., Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, P.L.jr, 1981. Constituents of West 
African plants. 29. Quaternary alkaloids of Heptacyclum zenkeri. Planta Medica 42: 275-278. 
Duah, F.K., Owusu, P.D., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, P.L.jr, 1983. Dehydrodiscretine, an infrequently 
occurring quaternary protoberberine alkaloid from Heptacyclum zenkeri. Phytochemistry 22(1): 
321-322. 
Duarte, M.C., 1995. Menispermaceae. In: Paiva, J., Martins, E.S., Diniz, M.A., Moreira, I., Gomes, 
I. & Gomes, S. (Editors). Flora de Cabo Verde: Plantas vasculares. No 4. Institute de Investigaçâo 
Cientifica Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal & Institute National de Investigaçâo e Desenvolvimento A-
grârio, Praia, Cape Verde. 8 pp. 
Duarte, N., Lage, H. & Ferreira, M.-J.U., 2008. Three new jatrophane polyesters and antiprolifera-
tive constituents from Euphorbia tuckeyana. Planta Medica 74(1): 61-68. 
Duez, P., Chamart, S., Lejoly, J., Hanocq, M., Zeba, B., Sawadogo, M., Guissou, P. & Molle, L., 
1986. A study of the natural sites and cultural conditions of Rauwolfia vomitoria Afz. in Burkina 
Faso in relation to alkaloid content. Tropicultura 4(3): 100-108. 
Duez, P., Chamart, S., Lejoly, J., Hanocq, M., Zeba, B., Sawadogo, M. & Guissou, P., 1987. Poten-
tialitées d'utilisation rationnelle du Rauvolfia vomitoria en médecine traditionnelle. Médecine 
Traditionnelle et Pharmacopée 1(1): 29-46. 
Duke, J.A., 1983. Croton tiglium L. In: Duke, J.A. (Editor). Handbook of energy crops. [Internet] 
<http://www.hort.purdue.edu/newcrop/duke_energy/Croton_tiglium.html>. Accessed January 
2007. 
Duke, J.A., 1992. Handbook of phytochemical constituents of GRAS herbs and other economic 
plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States. 654 pp. 
Duke, J.A. & duCellier, J.L., 1993. Handbook of alternative cash crops. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
United States. 536 pp. 
Dull, R., 1973. Die Peperomia-Arten Afrikas. Botanische Jahrbücher für Systematik, Pflan-
zengeschichte und Pflanzengeographie 93: 56-129. 
Dumetz, N., 1999. High plant diversity of lowland rainforest vestiges in eastern Madagascar. Bio-
diversity and Conservation 8(2): 273-315. 
Duncan, A.C., Jäger, A.K., & van Staden, J., 1999. Screening of Zulu medicinal plants for angio-
tensin converting enzyme inhibitors. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 68: 63-70. 
Dupont, M.P., Llabrès, G., Delaude, C , Tchissambou, L. & Gastmans, J.P., 1997. Sterolic and 
triterpenoidic constituents of stem bark of Drypetes gossweileri. Planta Medica 63(2): 282-284. 
Duret, S. & Paris, R., 1972. Chimiotaxonomie des polyphenols des Apocynacées. Sur les flavonoides 
et les acides-phenols de quelques Echitoidées (appartenant aux genres Baissea, Echitella, Ne-
rium, et Strophanthus). Plantes Médicinales et Phytothérapie 6(3): 210-215. 
Durrieu de Madron, L., Nasi, R. & Détienne, P., 2000. Accroissements diamétriques de quelques 
essences en forêt dense africaine. Bois et Forêts des Tropiques 263(1): 63—74. 
Duthie, W., 1978. Cavavoa aurea: national tree, nr. 332. Wildlife Society of Southern Africa, 
Umhlanga. 5 pp. 
Duwiejua, M., Obiri, D.D., Zeitlin, I.J. & Waterman, P.G., 1995. Anti-inflammatory activity in ex-
tracts from Picralima nitida (Fam. Apocynaceae). British Journal of Pharmacology 116: P360 
Supplement S. 
Duwiejua, M., Woode, E. & Obiri, D.D., 2002. Pseudo-akuammigine, an alkaloid from Picralima 
nitida seeds, has anti-inflammatory and analgesic actions in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
81: 73-79. 
Dweck, A.C., undated. Producing Aloe barbadensis in the old-fashioned way; a botanic excursion to 
the Dominican Republic. [Internet] 
670 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
<http://www.dweckdata.com/Published_papers/Aloe_barbadensis_gel.pdft>. Accessed August 
2005. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Mingle, CA., Tackie, A.N., Slatkin, D.J., Knapp. J.E. & Schiff, 
P.L.jr., 1975a. Alkaloids of Cissampelos pareira. Phytochemistry 14: 2520-2521. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Tackie, A.N., El Sohly, M.A., Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, 
P.L., 1975b. Trigilletimine: a new bisbenzyl-isoquinoline alkaloid from Triclisia species. Cellular 
and Molecular Life Sciences 31: 1251-1252. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Fiagbe, N.Y., Tackie, A.N., Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, 
P.L.jr., 1976a. Constituents of west African medicinal plants. XV. Dinklacorine, a new biphenyl 
dibenzodioxin alkaloid from Tiliacora dinklagei. Lloydia 39(4): 213-217. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Tackie, A.N., Okarter, T.U., Schiff, P.L., Knapp, J.E. & Slatkin, D.J., 1976b. 
Constituents of West African medicinal plants. XVIII. Constituents of Sphenocentrum jollyanum 
Pierre (Menispermaceae). Phytochemistry 15(12): 2027. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Rexford, O., Ateya, A.M., Slatkin, D.J., Knapp, J.E. & Schiff, 
P.L.jr., 1980a. Constituents of West African medicinal plants. Part 26. Alkaloids of Kolobopeta-
lum auriculatum. Phytochemistry 19(7): 1564-1565. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Withers, S.F., Agyemang, N.O., Ateya, A.M., El-Azizi, M.M., 
Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, P.L.jr., 1980b. Constituents of West African medicinal plants. 
XXVII. Alkaloids of Rhigiocarya racemifera and Stephania dinklagei. Journal of Natural Prod-
ucts 43(1): 123-129. 
Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Dabra, T.T., El-Azizi, M.M., Schiff, P.L.jr., Slatkin, D.J. & Knapp, 
J.E., 1983. Constituents of West African medicinal plants. XXV. Isolation of oblongine from Tili-
acora dinklagei and the synthesis of oblongine and related benzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Journal 
of Natural Products 46(3): 342-349. 
Dyer, R.A., 1963. Plumbaginaceae. In: Dyer, R.A. & Codd, L.E. (Editors). Flora of southern Africa. 
Volume 26. Botanical Research Institute, Department of Agricultural Technical Services, Preto-
ria, South Africa, pp. 15-31. 
Ebana, R.U.B., Madunagu, V.E. & Etok, CA., 1993. Antimicrobial effect of Strophanthus hispidus 
and Secamone afzeli on some pathogenic bacteria and their drug resistant strains. Nigerian Jour-
nal of Botany 6: 27-31. 
Ebenso, I.E. & Okafor, N.M., 2002. Alternative diets for growing Archachatina marginata snails in 
south-eastern Nigeria. Tropical Science 42(3): 144-145. 
Ebi, G.C., 2001. Antimicrobial activities of Alchornea cordifolia. Fitoterapia 72: 69-72. 
Ebrahimzadeh, H., Mirmasumi, M. & Tabatabaei, M.F., 1997. Callus formation and mucilage pro-
duction in leaf and root expiants of four Plantago species. Iranian Journal of Agricultural Sci-
ences 28(3): 87-97. 
Edeoga, H.O. & Ikem, C.I., 2002. Tannins, saponins and calcium oxalate crystals from Nigerian 
species of Boerhavia L. (Nyctaginaceae). South African Journal of Botany 68: 386-388. 
Edeoga, H.O. & Okoli, B.E., 1996. Apomictic behaviour in Costus afer - C. lucanusianus (Costaceae) 
complex in Nigeria. Feddes Repertorium 107(1-2): 75-82. 
Edeoga, H.O. & Okoli, B.E., 1997. Anatomy and systematics in the Costus afer - C lucanusianus 
complex (Costaceae). Acta Phytotaxonomica et Geobotanica 48(2): 151-158. 
Edeoga, H.O., Okwu, D.E. & Mbaebie, B.O., 2005. Phytochemical constituents of some Nigerian 
medicinal plants. African Journal of Biotechnology 4(7): 685-688. 
Edmonds, J.M., 1977. Taxonomie studies on Solanum section Solanum (Maurella). Botanical Jour-
nal of the Linnean Society 75: 141-178. 
Edmonds, J.M., 1979. Biosystematics of Solanum L. section Solanum (Maurella). Botanical Journal 
of the Linnean Society 76: 27-51. 
Edmonds, J.M. & Chweya, J.A., 1997. Black nightshades. Solanum nigrum L. and related species. 
Promoting the conservation and use of underutilized and neglected crops 15. Institute of Plant 
Genetics and Crop Plant Research, Gatersleben, Germany/International Plant Genetic Resources 
Institute, Rome, Italy. 113 pp. 
Edmonds, J.M., Friis, I. & Thulin, M., 2006. Solanaceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. 
Volume 3. Angiospermae (cont.). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, p. 
197-221. 
LITERATURE 671 
Edwards, S. & Tesfaye, Y., 1997. Agavaceae. In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, Demissew Sebsebe 
& Hedberg, I. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 6. Hydrocharitaceae to Arecaceae. 
The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of 
Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 83-85. 
Edwin, J.E., Dubey, S., Gupta, S. & Gupta, V.B., 2007. Hepatoprotective activity of Euphorbia 
hirta Linn. Geobios 34(1): 81-83. 
Eftekhar, F., Yousefzadi, M. & Tafakori, V., 2005. Antimicrobial activity of Datura innoxia and 
Datura stramonium. Fitoterapia 76: 118-120. 
Eggli, U. (Editor), 2002. Illustrated handbook of succulent plants: Dicotyledons. Springer, Berlin, 
Germany. 554 pp. 
Egunyomi, A., Fasola, T.R. & Oladonjoye, O., 2005. Charring medicinal plants: a traditional 
method of preparing phytomedicines in southwestern Nigeria. Ethnobotany Research & Applica-
tions 3: 73-77. 
Ehrenfeld, J., 1976. Reproductive biology of three species of Euphorbia subgenus Chamaesyce (Eu-
phorbiaceae). American Journal of Botany 63(4): 406-413. 
Ehrenfeld, J., 1979. Pollination of three species of Euphorbia subgenus Chamaesyce, with special 
reference to bees. American Midland Naturalist 101(1): 87-98. 
Eke, A.O. & Okereke, O.U., 1996. Seed germination and growth of Eleusine indica and Euphorbia 
heterophylla as influenced by depth of planting and glyphosate. Ghana Journal of Agricultural 
Science 20-23: 77-83. 
Ekouya, A. & Itoua, B.G., 2005. Analyse chimique d'un extrait de Sacoglottis gabonensis (Baill.) 
Urban. Journal de la Société Ouest-Africaine de Chimie 19: 119-129. 
Ekpendu, T.O.E., 2004. Nigerian ethnomedicine and medicinal plant flora: anti-ulcer plants of the 
Benue area of Nigeria. West African Journal of Pharmacology and Drug Research 19: 1-4. 
Ekram, S.A. & Najia, A.A., 2006. Mammal toxicity and mutagenicity assessment of the methanol 
extract of the molluscicidal plant Euphorbia schimperiana. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sci-
ences 9(10): 1911-1916. 
El Amin, E.M., 1989. Habat-el-Mulluk (Croton spp.): a herbal remedy for internal diseases. Indian 
Journal of Applied and Pure Biology 4(2): 107-109. 
El Amin, H.M., 1990. Trees and shrubs of the Sudan. Ithaca Press, Exeter, United Kingdom. 484 
pp. 
El Kheir, Y.M. & Salih, M.H., 1980. Investigation of certain plants used in Sudanese folk medicine. 
Fitoterapia 51: 143-147. 
El Mahy, S.A., 2004. Chemical constituents of Euphorbia prostrata Ait. extract with reference to its 
biological effect on some crops. Bulletin of Faculty of Agriculture, Cairo University 55(4): 645-
659. 
El Mekkawy, S., Meselhy, M.R., Nakamura, N., Hattori, M., Kawahata, T. & Otake, T., 1999. 12-0-
acetylphorbol-13-decanoate potently inhibits cytopathic effects of human immunodeficiency virus 
type 1 (HIV-1), without activation of protein kinase C. Chemical and Pharmacological Bulletin 
47(9): 1346-1347. 
El Mekkawy, S., Meselhy, M.R., Nakamura, N., Hattori, M., Kawahata, T. & Otake, T., 2000. Anti-
HIV-1 phorbol esters from the seeds of Croton tiglium. Phytochemistry 53(4): 457-464. 
El Migirab, S., Berger, Y. & Jabot, J., 1977. Isothiocyanates, thiourées et thiocarbanates isolés de 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana. Phytochemistry 16: 1719-1721. 
El Sayed, M.M., 1993. Isolation of diterpene esters from Synadenium grantii as molluscicidal 
agent. Egyptian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 33(5-6): 819-824. 
El Sayed, N.H., Abu Dooh, A.M., El-Khrisy, S.A.M. & Mabry, T.J., 1992. Flavonoids of Cassia 
italica. Phytochemistry 31(6): 2187. 
El Sheikh, M.O.A., El Hassan, G.M., El Tayeb, A.H., Abdallah, A.A. & Antoun, M.D., 1982. Studies 
on Sudanese medicinal plants III: indigenous Hyoscyamus muticus as possible commercial source 
for hyoscyamine. Planta Medica 45: 116-119. 
El Tahir, A., Satti, G.M.H. & Khalid, S.A., 1999. Antiplasmodial activity of selected Sudanese me-
dicinal plants with emphasis on Maytenus senegalensis (Lam) Exell. Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 64(3): 227-233. 
El-Bahr, M.K. & Ghanem, S.A., 1997. Production of tropane alkaloids in tissue cultures of 
Hyoscyamus muticus. Fitoterapia 68: 423-428. 
672 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Elegami, A.A., Almagboul, A.Z., Orner, M.E.A. & El Tohami, M.S., 2001. Sudanese plants used in 
folkloric medicine: screening for antibacterial activity. Part 10. Fitoterapia 72(7): 810-817. 
Elgorashi, E.E., Taylor, J.L.S., Maes, A., de Kimpe, N., van Staden, J. & Verschaeve, L., 2002. The 
use of plants in traditional medicine: potential genotoxic risks. South African Journal of Botany 
68(3): 408-410. 
Elhag-Eltayeb, A., 2000. Deterrent effects of some botanical products on oviposition of the cowpea 
bruchid Callosobruchus maculatus (F.) (Coleoptera: Bruchidae). International Journal of Pest 
Management 46(2): 109-113. 
Elia, J., 2007. Use of herbarium information in plant conservation strategies: case study concern-
ing a herbarium survey of Euphorbia quinquecostata in Tanzania. In: PROTA, 2007. Information, 
programme, summaries. Second PROTA / CTA International Workshop and Investor's Forum, 
24-26 September, Nairobi, Kenya, pp. 75-76. 
El-Kamali, H.H. & Khalid, S.A., 1998. The most common herbal remedies in Dongola province, 
Northern Sudan. Fitoterapia 69: 118-121. 
Elkhalifa, K.F., Ibrahim, M. & Elghazali, G., 2006. A survey of medicinal uses of Gash Delta vege-
tation, Eastern Sudan. Saudi Journal of Biological Sciences 13(1): 1-6. 
Ellis, R., 2003. Peltophorum africanum Sond. [Internet] Ecoport, FAO, Rome, Italy. 
<http://ecoport.org/perl/ecoport 15.pl?SearchType=entityDisplay&entityId=15820&entityType=&e 
ntityDisplayCategory=&menuStyle=icon>. Accessed September 2004. 
Elmi, A.S., Baerheim Svendsen, A. Scheffer, J.J.C. & Verpoorte, R., 1986. Screening of some Soma-
lian medicinal plants for antimicrobial activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 17: 283-288. 
El-Molla, M.M., 2000. Preparation and characterization of carboxymethyl Cassia obovata gum and 
their utilization in textile printing. Macromolecular Materials and Engineering 282(1): 51-57. 
Elojuba, A.A., Abere, A.T. & Adelusi, S.A., 1999. Laxative activities of Cassia pods sourced from 
Nigeria. Nigerian Journal of Natural Products and Medicine 3: 51-53. 
El-Saadany, S.S., El-Massry, R.A., Labib, S.M. & Sitohy, M.Z.A.D., 1991. The biochemical role and 
hypocholesterolaemic potential of the legume Cassia fistula in hypercholesterolaemic rats. Nah-
rung 35(8): 807-815. 
El-Shazly, A., Abdel-Ail, M., Tei, A. & Wink, M., 1999. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Echium rau-
wolfii and Echium horridum (Boraginaceae). Zeitschrift für Naturforschung C 54(5-6): 295—300. 
Eltayeb, E.A., Al-Ansari, A.S. & Roddick, J.G., 1997. Changes in the steroidal alkaloid solasodine 
during development of Solanum nigrum and Solanum incanum. Phytochemistry 46(3): 489-494. 
Endo, M. & Naoki, H., 1980. Antimicrobial and antispasmodic tetrahydroanthracenes from Cassia 
singueana. Tetrahedron 36(17): 2449-2452. 
Endress, M.E., Hesse, M., Nilsson, S., Guggisberg, A. & Zhu, J.-P., 1990. The systematic position of 
the Holarrheninae (Apocynaceae). Plant Systematics and Evolution 171: 157-185. 
Endress, M.E., Sennblad, B., Nilsson, S., Civeyrel, L., Chase, M.W., Huysmans, S., Grafström, E. & 
Bremer, B., 1996. A phylogenetic analysis of Apocynaceae s.s. and some related taxa in Gentiana-
les: a multidisciplinary approach. Opera Botanica Belgica 7: 59-102. 
Ene Obong, E.E., Nwofia, G.E. & Okunji, CO., 2001. Depressive effects of alcoholic extracts of five 
molluscicidal plants on mitosis. Fitoterapia 62(4): 353-356. 
Engprasert, S., 1995. Isolation, structure elucidation, assay and cytotoxic property of tropolone 
alkaloids from tubers of Gloriosa superba Linn. MSc Thesis, Faculty of Graduate Studies, Mahi-
dol University, Bangkok, Thailand. 
Eniola-Tijani, H. & Fawusi, M.O.A., 1991. Influence of extracts from fresh samples of five tropical 
weeds on seed germination and early seedling development of selected crop species. Ife Journal of 
Agriculture 13(1-2): 38-48. 
Eno, A.E. & Itam, E.H., 1998. Stimulation of autonomic cholinoceptors in the rat uterus by a crude 
extract from Eleophorbia drupifera leaves. Pharmaceutical Biology 36(2): 97-102. 
Eno, A.E. & Itam, E.H., 1999. Hypoglycaemic agents in leaves of Elaeophorbia drupifera. Phyto-
therapy Research 10(8): 680-682. 
Eno, A.E. & Itam, E.H., 2001. Skeletal muscle relaxants in the root extract of Rauvolfia cumminsii. 
Pharmaceutical Biology 39(4): 268-272. 
Eno, A.E. & Owo, O.I., 1999. Cardiovascular effects of an extract from the roots of a shrub Elaeo-
phorbia drupifera. Phytotherapy Research 13(7): 549—554. 
LITERATURE 673 
Eno, A.E., Owo, O.I., Itam, E.H., Ettarh, R.R., Mfem, C.C. & Owu, D.U., 1999. Contraction of the 
isolated guinea pig ileum induced by the crude extract from Elaeophorbia drupifera leaves. 
Global Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences 5(1): 45-51. 
Ensermu Kelbessa, 2003. Caprifoliaceae. In: Hedberg, I., Edwards, S. & Sileshi Nemomissa (Edi-
tors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 4, part 1. Apiaceae to Dipsacaceae. The National 
Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Bot-
any, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 283-284. 
Eriksen, S., Owuor, B., Nyukuri, E. & Orindi, V., 2005. Vulnerability to climate stress: local and 
regional perspectives. Proceedings of 2 workshops January 27-28, 2005, World Agroforestry Cen-
tre, Gigiri, Nairobi & February 14, 2005, KEFRI Research Centre, Kitui. CICERO Report 2006: 
01. Oslo, Norway. 107 pp. 
Dagne, E., Abiy Yenesew, Senait Asmellash, Sebsebe Demissew & Stephen Mavi, 1994. An-
thraquinones, pre-anthraquinones and isoeleutherol in the roots of Aloe species. Phytochemistry 
35(2): 401-406. 
Erowid, 1995-2005. Iboga. [Internet] The vaults of Erowid, California, United States. 
<http://www.erowid.org/plants/iboga/iboga.shtml>. Accessed April 2005. 
Eshun, K. & He, Q., 2004. Aloe vera, a valuable ingredient for the food, pharmaceutical and cos-
metic industries: a review. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 44: 91-96. 
Esonu, B.O., Azubuike, J.C. & Ukwu, H.O., 2004. Evaluation of Microdesmis puberula leaf meal as 
feed ingredient in laying hen diets. International Journal of Poultry Science 3(2): 96-99. 
Esonu, B.O., Iheukwumere, F.C., Emenalom, O.O., Uchegbu, M.C. & Etuk, E.B., 2002. Perform-
ance, nutrient utilisation and organ characteristics of broilers fed Microdesmis puberula leaf 
meal. Livestock Research for Rural Development 14(6): 1-5. 
Esonu, B.O., Iheukwumere, F.C., Iwuji, T.C., Akanu, N. & Nwugo, O.H., 2003. Evaluation of Mi-
crodesmis puberula leaf meal as feed ingredient in broiler starter diets. Nigerian Journal of Ani-
mal Production 30(1-2): 3-8. 
Esonu, B.O., Azubuike, J .C , Emenalom, O.O., Etuk, E.B., Okoli, I.C., Ukwu, H. & Nneji, CS., 
2004. Effect of enzyme supplementation on the performance of broiler finisher fed Microdesmis 
puberula leaf meal. International Journal of Poultry Science 3(2): 112-114. 
Esposito-Avella, M., Brown, P., Tejeira, I., Buitrago, R., Barrios, L., Sanchez, C, Gupta, M.P. & 
Cedeno, J., 1985. Pharmacological screening of Panamanian medicinal plants Part 1. Interna-
tional Journal of Crude Drug Research 23-1: 17-25. 
Esser, H.-J., 1998. New combinations in Microstachys (Euphorbiaceae). Kew Bulletin 53: 955-960. 
Esser, H.-J., 1999. A partial revision of the Hippomaneae (Euphorbiaceae) in Malesia. Blumea 44: 
149-213. 
Esser, H.-J., 2001. New combinations in African Shirakiopsis (Euphorbiaceae). Kew Bulletin 56: 
1017-1018. 
Esser, K.B., Semagn, K. & Wolde Yohannes, L., 2003. Medicinal use and social status of the soap 
berry endod (Phytolacca dodecandra) in Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 85(2-3): 269-
277. 
Evans, F.J. & Kinghorn, A.D., 1977. A comparative phytochemical study of the diterpenes of some 
species of the genera Euphorbia and Elaeophorbia. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 74: 
23-35. 
Evans, F.J. & Schmidt, R.J., 1977. The succulent euphorbias of Nigeria. 2. Aliphatic diterpene es-
ters of the lattices of Euphorbia poissonii Pax and E. unispina. Lloydia 40: 225-229. 
Evans, F.J. & Schmidt, R.J., 1979. The succulent euphorbias of Nigeria. 3. Structure and potency of 
the aromatic ester diterpenes of Euphorbia poissonii Pax. Acta Pharmacologica et Toxicologica 
45(3): 181-191. 
Evans, F.J. & Soper, C.J., 1978. The tigliane, daphnane and ingenane diterpenes. Their chemistry, 
distribution and biological activities. Lloydia 41: 193-233. 
Evans, S.V., Shing, T.K.M., Aplin, R.T., Fellows L.E. & Fleet, G.W.J., 1985. Sulphate ester of 
trans-hydroxypipecolic acid in seeds of Peltophorum. Phytochemistry 24(11): 2593-2596. 
Everitt, J.H., 1977. Native potato tree (Solanum erianthum D.Don) grown as an ornamental. Jour-
nal of the Rio Grande Valley Horticultural Society 31: 145-146. 
Evreux, C, 1989. La grande consoude, Symphytum officinale L., Borraginacées. Thèse de Doctorat 
en Pharmacie, Université Grenoble I, Grenoble, France. 74 pp. 
674 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Exell, A.W., 1960. Fumariaceae. In: Exell, A.W. & Wild, H. (Editors). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 1, 
part 1. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United Kingdom, 
p. 181. 
Eyog Matig, O., Ndoye, O., Kengue, J. & Awono, A. (Editors), 2006. Les fruitiers forestiers comesti-
bles du Cameroun. IPGRI Regional Office for West and Central Africa, Cotonou, Benin. 204 pp. 
Ezeamuzie, I.C., Ojinnaka, M.C., Uzogara, E.O. & Oji, S.E., 1994. Anti-inflammatory, antipyretic 
and anti-malarial activities of a West African medicinal plant - Picralima nitida. African Journal 
of Medicine and Medical Sciences 23(1): 85-90. 
Ezeronye, O.U., Elijah, A.I. & Ojimelukwe, P.C., 2005. Effect of Sacoglottis gabonensis and Alsto-
nia boonei on the fermentation of fresh palm sap by Saccharomyces cerevisiae. Journal of Food 
Technology 3(4): 586-591. 
Ezzat, S.M., 2001. In vitro inhibition of Candida albicans growth by plant extracts and essential 
oils. World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 17(7): 757-759. 
Fabry, W., Okemo, P.O. & Ansorg, R., 1996. Activity of East African medicinal plants against 
Helicobacter pylori. Chemotherapy 42(5): 315-317. 
Facciola, S., 1990. Cornucopia: a source book of edible plants. Kampong Publications, Vista, United 
States. 678 pp. 
Fakeye, T.O., Itiola, O.A. & Odelola, H.A., 2000. Evaluation of the antimicrobial property of the 
stem bark of Picralima nitida (Apocynaceae). Phytotherapy Research 14(5): 368-370. 
Fakeye, T.O., Awe, S.O., Odelola, H.A., Ola-Davies, O.E., Itiola, O.A. & Obajuluwa, T., 2004a. 
Evaluation of valuation of toxicity profile of an alkaloidal fraction of the stem bark of Picralima 
nitida (fam. Apocynaceae). Journal of Herbal Pharmacotherapy 4(3): 37-45. 
Fakeye, T.O., Itiola, O.A., George, A.O. & Odelola, H.A., 2004b. Antimicrobial property of Picralima 
nitida stem bark extract in cream formulations. Pharmaceutical Biology 42(4-5): 274-279. 
Fakunle, C.O. & Ekong, D.E.U., 1978. A new diterpene ester from Euphorbia poisonii. Tetrahedron 
Letters 19(24): 2119-2120. 
Fakunle, CO., Connolly, J.D. & Rycroft, D.S., 1989. A novel penta-ester of 19-hydroxyingol from 
the latex of Euphorbia poisonii. Fitoterapia 60(5): 466—467. 
Falconer, J., 1990. The major significance of'minor' forest products: The local use and value of for-
ests in the West African humid forest zone. Community Forest Note 6, FAO, Rome, Italy. 
Falodun, A. & Agbakwuru, E.O.P., 2004. Phytochemical analysis and laxative activity of the leaf 
extracts of Euphorbia heterophylla L. (Euphorbiaceae). Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Indus-
trial Research 47(5): 345-348. 
Falodun, A., Agbakwuru, E.O.P. & Ukoh, G.C., 2003. Antibacterial activity of Euphorbia hetero-
phylla L. (Family - Euphorbiaceae). Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 46(6): 
471-472. 
Falodun, A., Okunrobo, L.O. & Uzoamaka, N., 2006. Phytochemical screening and anti-
inflammatory evaluation of methanolic and aqueous extracts of Euphorbia heterophylla L. (Eu-
phorbiaceae). African Journal of Biotechnology 5(6): 529-531. 
Fang, S.H., Rao, Y.K. & Tzeng, Y.M., 2008. Anti-oxidant and inflammatory mediator's growth in-
hibitory effects of compounds isolated from Phyllanthus urinaria. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
116: 333-340. 
Fang, L.-H., Zhang, Y.-H. & Ku, B.-S., 2005. Fangchinoline inhibited the antinociceptive effect of 
morphine in mice. Phytomedicine 12(3): 183-188. 
Fangrui, M. & Milford, A.H., 1999. Biodiesel production: a review. Bioresource Technology 70: 1— 
15. 
FAO, 1986. Some medicinal forest plants of Africa and Latin America. FAO Forestry Paper 67. 
Rome, Italy. 252 pp. 
FAO, 2005. FAOSTAT Agriculture Data. [Internet] 
<http://faostat.fao.org/default.aspx?alias=faostat>. Accessed September 2005. 
Farah, M.H., Andersson, R. & Samuelsson, G., 1992. Microdontin A and B: two new aloin deriva-
tives from Aloe microdonta. Planta Medica 58: 88-93. 
Farjon, A., 1998. World checklist and bibliography of conifers. Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, 
United Kingdom. 298 pp. 
LITERATURE 675 
Farnsworth, N.R., Blomster, R.N. & Buckley, J.P., 1967. Catharanthus alkaloids. 13. Antineoplas-
tic and hypotensive activity of alkaloid fractions and certain alkaloids from Catharanthus 
lanceus. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 56(1): 23-27. 
Farnsworth, N.R., Loub, W.D. & Blomster, R.N., 1963. Studies on Catharanthus lanceus (Vinca 
lancea). 1. Isolation of leurisine, perivine, and yohimbine. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 52: 
1114. 
Farnsworth, N.R., Svoboda, G.H. & Blomster, R.N., 1986. Antiviral activity of selected Catharan-
thus alkaloids. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 57(12): 2174-2175. 
Farombi, E.O., 2003. African indigenous plants with chemotherapeutic potentials and biotechno-
logical approach to the production of bioactive prophylactic agents. African Journal of Biotechnol-
ogy 2(12): 662-671. 
Farombi, E.O., Ogundipe, O.O. & Moody, J.O., 2001. Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities 
of Mallotus oppositifolius in model systems. African Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 30: 
213-215. 
Farombi, E.O., Ogundipe, O.O., Uhunwangho, E.S., Adeyanju, M.A. & Moody, J.O., 2003. Antioxi-
dant properties of extracts from Alchornea laxiflora (Benth) Pax and Hoffman. Phytotherapy Re-
search 17(7): 713-716. 
Farooqi, A.A., Kumaraswamy, B.K., Bojappa, K.N., Pusalkar, V.R. & Gupta, R., 1993. Plantations 
of the clinically important Gloriosa superba. Indian Horticulture 37(4): 26-29. 
Farouk, A., Bashir, A.K. & Salih, A.K.M., 1983. Antimicrobial activity of certain Sudanese plants 
used in folkloric medicine. Screening for antibacterial activity. 1. Fitoterapia 54(1): 3-7. 
Farrag-Nawal, F., Abdel-Aziz, E.M., El-Shafae, A.M, Ateya, A.M. & El-Domiaty, M.M., 1996. Pyr-
rolizidine alkaloids of Heliotropium bacciferum Forssk. from Egypt. International Journal of 
Pharmacognosy 34(5): 374-377. 
Fatope, M.O., Zeng, L., Ohayagha, J.E. & McLaughlin, J.L., 1996a. New 19-acetoxyingol diterpenes 
from the latex of Euphorbia poisonii (Euphorbiaceae). Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry 4(10): 
1679-1683. 
Fatope, M.O., Zeng, L., Ohayagha, J.E., Shi, G. & McLaughlin, J.L., 1996b. Selectively cytotoxic 
diterpenes from Euphorbia poisonii. Journal of Medicinal Chemistry 39(4): 1005-1008. 
Favier, C , de Namur, C. & Dubois, M., 2004. Forest progression modes in littoral Congo, Central 
Atlantic Africa. Journal of Biogeography 31: 1445-1461. 
Felson, D.T. & Kim, Y.-J., 2007. The futility of current approaches to chondroprotection. Arthritis 
and Rheumatism 56(5): 1378-1383. 
Feodor, S., Eric, F.V.S. & Osa, N.O., 1980. Cycleanine from Synclisia scabrida: conformational in-
formation from the 1H NMR spectrum at 300 MHz. Phytochemistry 19(8): 1837-1840. 
Fernandes, R. & Fernandes, A., 1978. Passifloraceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. 
Volume 4. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 368-411. 
Fernandez, T.J., Ceniza, E.E. & Amihan, D.N., 1994. Utilization of a weed for infectious Coryza in 
chicken. In: Pest Management Council of the Philippines. Integrated pest management; learning 
from experience: 58. 
Fernando, E.S. & Quinn, C.J., 1995. Picramniaceae, a new family, and a recircumscription of Sima-
roubaceae. Taxon 44(2): 177-181. 
Fernando, R. & Widyaratna, D., 1997. Gloriosa superba L. [Internet] International Programme on 
Chemical Safety (IPCS), Chemical Safety Information from Intergovernmental Organizations, 
INCHEM. <http://www.inchem.org/documents/pims/plant/pim245.htm>. Accessed 27 July 2004. 
Fernando, E.S., Gadek, P.A. & Quinn, C.J., 1995. Simaroubaceae, an artificial construct: evidence 
from rbcL sequence variation. American Journal of Botany 82: 92-103. 
Fernando, E.S., Gadek, P., Crayn, D.M. & Quinn, C.J., 1993. Rosid affinities of Surianaceae: mo-
lecular evidence. Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution 2(4): 344-350. 
Ferreira, M.-J.U., Duarte, A. & Ascenso, J.R., 1996. Antimicrobial activity and phytochemical 
study of Euphorbia tuckeyana. Fitoterapia 67(1): 85-86. 
Ferreira, M.-J.U., Pinto, F.C. & Ascenso, J.R., 2001. Cycloartane triterpenes from Euphorbia tuck-
eyana. Natural Product Letters 15(5): 363-369. 
Ficarra, R., Ficarra, P., Tommasini, S., Calabro, M.L., Ragusa, S., Barbera, R. & Rapisarda, A., 
1995. Leaf extracts of some Cordia species: analgesic and anti-inflammatory activities as well as 
their chromatographic analysis. Farmaco 50(4): 245—256. 
676 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Field, D.V., 1972. The genus Gloriosa. Lilies 1973: 93-95. 
Figueiredo, E., 1996. Euphorbiaceae. In: Paiva, J., Martins, E.S., Diniz, M.A., Moreira, I., Gomes, I. 
& Gomes, S. (Editors). Flora de Cabo Verde: Plantas vasculares. No 54. Institute de Investigaçâo 
Cientifica Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal & Instituto Nacional de Investigaçâo e Desenvolvimento A-
grârio, Praia, Cape Verde. 51 pp. 
Figuière, F., Marnotte, P., Le Bourgeois, T. & Carrara, A., 1998. Clé de détermination de huit espè-
ces du genre Cassia L. (Caesalpiniaceae), adventices d'Afrique de l'Ouest. Agriculture et Dévelop-
pement 19: 28-36. 
Finnie, J.F. & Van Staden, J., 1994. Gloriosa superba L. (Flame Lily): Micropropagation and in 
vitro production of colchicine. In: Bajaj, Y.P.S. (Editor): Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry. 
Volume 26. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants VI. Springer Verlag. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 
London, Paris, Tokyo, pp. 147-166. 
Fischer, I.H., Lourenço, S.A., Martins, M.C., Kimati, H. & Amorim, L., 2005. Selection of resistant 
plants and fungicides for the control of passion fruit stem rot caused by Phytophthora nicotianae. 
Summa Phytopathologica 31(2): 165-172. 
Fleming, T. (Editor), 1998. PDR for herbal medicines. Medical Economics Company, Montvale, New 
Jersey, United States. 1244 pp. 
Fong, K.-L.L., Ho, D.H.W., Carter, C.K.J., Brown, N.S., Benjamin, R.S., Freireich, E.J. & Bodey, 
G.P., 1980. Radioimmunoassay for the detection and quantitation of bruceantin. Analytical Bio-
chemistry 105: 281-286. 
Föns, F., Gargadennec, A., Gueiffier, A., Roussel, J.-L. & Andary, C, 1998. Effects of cinnamic acid 
on polyphenol production in Plantago lanceolata. Phytochemistry 49(3): 697-702. 
Forgacs, P., Buffard, G., Desconclois, J.F., Jehanno, A., Provost, J., Tiberghien, R. & Touche, A., 
1981. Etudes phytochimiques et activités biologiques des plantes endémiques de l'Ile de la Reun-
ion et de l'Ile Maurice (composition chimique, Senecio, Stoebe, Philippia, Claoxylon, Cordemoya, 
Geniostoma, Nuxia, Turraea, Monimia, Tambourissa, Maillardia, Olax, Antirrhoea, Bertiera, Cof-
fea mauritiana, Gaertnera, Psathura, Psychotria). Plantes Médicinales et Phytothérapie 15(2): 
80-91. 
Forman, L.L., 1975. The Menispermaceae of Malesia and adjacent areas. Part 3, the tribe Tri-
clisieae in Asia, the Pacific and Australia. Kew Bulletin 30(1): 77-100. 
Forster, P.I., 1998. Correct names for some cultivated species of Adenium (Apocynaceae). Cactus 
and Succulent Journal 70(4): 199-200. 
Fortin, H., Vigor, C, Lohézic-Le Dévéhat, F., Robin, V., Le Bossé, B., Boustie, J. & Amoros, M., 
2002. In vitro antiviral activity of thirty-six plants from La Réunion Island. Fitoterapia 73: 346-
350. 
Fortin, D., Lô, M. & Maynart, G., 1990. Plantes médicinales du Sahel. END A, Dakar, Senegal & 
CECI, Montréal, Canada. 280 pp. 
Fosberg, F.R., 1974. Miscellaneous notes on the flora of Aldabra and neighbouring islands: III. Kew 
Bulletin 29(2): 253-266. 
Fotie, J., Scott Bohle, D., Leimanis, M.L., Georges, E., Rukunga, G. & Nkengfack, A.E., 2006. Lu-
peol long-chain fatty acid esters with antimalarial activity from Holarrhena floribunda. Journal 
of Natural Products 69: 62-67. 
Foungbe, S., Sawadogo, D. & Declume, C, 1987. Etude expérimentale de l'activité utero-relaxante 
de Alstonia boonei (Apocynacées) et Costus lucanusianus (Zingiberacées) utilisés traditionnelle-
ment comme anti-abortifs en Côte d'Ivoire. Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises 45(5): 373-377. 
Foungbe, S., Kouassi, G., Kablan, J.B. & Marcy, R., 1991. Study of Costus lucanusianus: plant 
juice, fraction combinations and pharmacologie estimation of natural product total activity. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 33(3): 221-226. 
Fontoura, M.C.P., Silva, S.N., Abreu, I.C., Goncalves, J.R.S., Borges, M.O.R. & Borges, A.C.R., 
2005. Effect of Petiveria alliacea L. in the intestinal secretion and motility of rodents. Revista 
Brasileira de Plantas Medicinais 7(2): 37-43. 
Fox, F.W. & Norwood Young, M.E., 1988. Food from the veld: edible wild plants of southern Africa 
botanically identified and described. Delta Books, Craighall, South Africa. 422 pp. 
Francis, J.K., 2003. Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb.: gray nicker bean. [Internet] 
<http://www.fs.fed.us/global/iitf/pdf/>. Accessed January 2006. 
LITERATURE 677 
Francis, G., Edinger, R. & Becker, K., 2005. A concept for simultaneous wasteland reclamation, 
fuel production, and socio-economic development in degraded areas in India: need, potential and 
perspectives of Jatropha plantations. Natural Resources Forum 29: 12-24. 
François, G., Aké Assi, L., Holenz, J. & Bringmann, G., 1996. Constituents of Picralima nitida dis-
play pronounced inhibitory activities against asexual erythrocytic forms of Plasmodium falcipa-
rum in vitro. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 54: 113-117. 
Frappier, F., Jossang, A., Soudon, J., Galvo, F., Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., Saez, J., 
Schrevel, J. & Greffier, P., 1996. Bisbenzylisoquinolines as modulators of chloroquine resistance 
in Plasmodium falciparum and multidrug resistance in tumor cells. Antimicrobial Agents and 
Chemotherapy 1996: 1476-1481. 
Frédérich, M., Tits, M. & Angenot, L., 1998. Qualitative and quantitative evaluation of bisindole 
usambarane alkaloids in Strychnos usambarensis roots by high performance liquid chromatogra-
phy-diode-array. Phytochemical Analysis 9: 63—66. 
Frédérich, M., Tits, M. & Angenot, L., 2003. Indole alkaloids from Strychnos species and their an-
tiplasmodial and cytotoxic activities. Chemistry of Natural Compounds 39(6): 513-519. 
Frédérich, M., Hayette, M.P., Tits, M., De Mol, P. & Angenot, L., 1999. In vitro activities of Strych-
nos alkaloids and extracts against Plasmodium falciparum. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemo-
therapy 43(9): 2328-2331. 
Frédérich, M., De Pauw, M.-C, Llabrès, G., Tits, M., Hayette, M.P., Brandt, V., Penelle, J., De Mol, 
P. & Angenot, L., 2000a. New antimalarial and cytotoxic sungucine derivatives from Strychnos 
icaja roots. Planta Medica 66(3): 262-269. 
Frédérich, M., Hayette, M.P., Tits, M., De Mol, P. & Angenot., L., 2000b. Reversal of chloroquine 
and cefloquine resistance in Plasmodium falciparum by the two monoindole alkaloids icajine and 
isoretuline. Planta Medica 67: 523-527. 
Frédérich, M., De Pauw, M.-C, Prosperi, C, Tits, M., Brandt, V., Penelle, J., Hayette, M.-P., De 
Mol, P. & Angenot, L., 2001. Strychnogucines A and B, two new antiplasmodial bisindole alka-
loids from Strychnos icaja. Journal of Natural Products 64(1): 12-16. 
Frédérich, M., Bentires-Ali, M., Tits, M., Angenot, L., Greimers, R., Gielen, J., Bours, V. & Mer-
ville, M.-P., 2003a. Isostrychnopentamine, an indolomonoterpenic alkaloid from Strychnos usam-
barensis, induces cell cycle arrest and apoptosis in human colon cancer cells. Journal of Pharma-
cology and Experimental Therapeutics 304: 1103-1110. 
Frédérich, M., Bentires-Ali, M., Tits, M., Angenot, L., Heinen, E. & De Pauw-Gillet, M.-C., 2003b. 
Apoptosis induction in human cancer cells by sungucine from Strychnos icaja root. Naunyn-
Schmiedeberg's Archive of Pharmacology 367: 260-265. 
Frédérich, M., Cristino, A., Choi, Y.H., Verpoorte, R., Tits, M., Angenot, L., Prost, E., Nuzillard, J.-
M. & Zèches-Hanrot, M., 2004a. Chrysopentamine, an antiplasmodial anhydronium base from 
Strychnos usambarensis leaves. Planta Medica 70: 72-76. 
Frédérich, M., Tits, M., Goffin, E., Philippe, G., Greffier, P., De Mol, P., Hayette, M.-P. & Angenot, 
L., 2004b. In vitro and in vivo antimalarial properties of isostrychnopentamine, an indolo-
monoterpenic alkaloid from Strychnos usambarensis. Planta Medica 70(6): 520-525. 
Freiburghaus, F., Kaminsky, R., Nkunya, M.H.H. & Brun, R., 1996a. Evaluation of African medici-
nal plants for their in vitro trypanocidal activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 55: 1-11. 
Freiburghaus, F., Ogwal, E.N., Nkunya, M.H.H., Kaminsky, R. & Brun, R., 1996b. In vitro antitry-
panosomal activity of African plants used in traditional medicine in Uganda to treat sleeping 
sickness. Tropical Médecine and International Health 1(6): 765-771. 
Freyre, M.R., Baigorria, CM., Rozycki, V.R., Bernardi, CM. & Charpentier, M., 2000. Végétales 
silvestres sub explotados del Chaco argentino y su potencial como resurso alimenticio. Archivos 
Latinoamericanos de Nutricion 50(4): 394—399. 
Friedman, M., 2004. Analysis of biologically active compounds in potatoes (Solanum tuberosum), 
tomatoes (Lycopersicon esculentum), and jimson weed ( Datura stramonium) seeds. Journal of 
Chromatography 1054(1-2): 143-155. 
Friedmann, F., 1994. Flore des Seychelles: Dicotylédones. Editions de 1'ORSTOM, Paris, France. 
663 pp. 
Friedrich-Holzhammer, M., 1967. Boraginaceae. Prodromus einer Flora von Südwestafrika. No 
120. J. Cramer, Germany. 4 pp. 
678 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Friedrich-Holzhammer, M., 1968. Menispermaceae. Prodromus einer Flora von Südwestafrika. No 
38. J. Cramer, Germany. 4 pp. 
Friis, L, 1992. Forests and forest trees of northeast tropical Africa: their natural habitats and dis-
tribution patterns in Ethiopia, Djibouti and Somalia. Kew Bulletin, Additional Series 15, 
H.M.S.O., London, United Kingdom. 396 pp. 
Frum, Y. & Viljoen, A.M., 2006. In vitro 5-lipoxygenase and anti-oxidant activities of South African 
medicinal plants commonly used topically for skin diseases. Skin Pharmacology and Physiology 
19: 329-335. 
Fukamiya, N., Koano, M., Aratani, T., Negoro, K., Lin, Y.-M. & Lee, K.-H., 1987. Antitumor agents: 
LXXXVII. Cytotoxic antileukemic canthin-6-one alkaloids from Brucea antidysenterica and the 
structure activity relationships of their related derivatives. Planta Medica 53: 140-143. 
Fukuhara, K. & Kubo, I., 1991. Isolation of steroidal glycoalkaloids from Solanum incanum by two 
countercurrent chromatographic methods. Phytochemistry 30(2): 685-687. 
Fukuyama, Y., Hasegawa, T., Toda, M., Kodama, M. & Okazaki, H., 1992. Structures of americanol 
A and isoamericanol A having neurotrophic properties from the seeds of Phytolacca americana. 
Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 40(1): 252-254. 
Fullas, F., Brown, D.M., Wani, M.C., Wall, M.R., Chagwedera, T.E., Farnsworth, N.R., Pezzuto, 
J.M. & Kinghorn, A.D., 1995. Gummiferol, a cytotoxic polyacetylene from the leaves of Adenia 
gummifera. Journal of Natural Products 58(10): 1625-1628. 
Furstenberger, G. & Hecker, E., 1986. On the active principles of the Euphorbiaceae, XII. Highly 
unsaturated irritant diterpene esters from Euphorbia tirucalli originating from Madagascar. 
Journal of Natural Products 49(3): 386-397. 
Furukawa, F., Nishikawa, A., Chihara, T., Shimpo, K., Beppu, H., Kuzuya, H., Lee, I.-S. & Hirose, 
M., 2002. Chemopreventive effects of Aloe arborescens on N-nitrosobis(2-oxopropyl-)amine-
induced pancreatic carcinogenesis in hamsters. Cancer Letters 178(2): 117—122. 
Gachathi, F.N., 1989. Kikuyu botanical dictionary of plant names and uses. AMREF, Nairobi, 
Kenya. 242 pp. 
Gacheru, E. & Rao, M.R., 2005. The potential of planted shrub fallows to combat Striga infestation 
on maize. International Journal of Pest Management 51(2): 91-100. 
Galal, M. & Adam, S., 1988. Experimental Chrozophora plicata poisoning in goats and sheep. Vet-
erinary and Human Toxicology 30(5): 447-452. 
Galvez, M., Martin-Cordero, C, López-Lazaro, M., Cortés, F. & Ayuso, M.J., 2003. Cytotoxic effect 
of Plantago spp. on cancer cell lines. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 88: 125-130. 
Ganapathy, S., Dash, G.K., Subburaju, T. & Suresh, P., 2002. Diuretic, laxative and toxicity stud-
ies of Cocculus hirsutus aerial parts. Fitoterapia 73: 28-31. 
Gangoue Pieboji, J., Pegnyemb, D.E., Niyitegeka, D., Nsangou, A., Eze, N., Minyem, C, Mbing, 
J.N., Ngassam, P., Tih, R.G., Sodengam, B.L. & Bodo, B., 2006. The in-vitro antimicrobial activi-
ties of some medicinal plants from Cameroon. Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 
100(3): 237-243. 
Ganguly, M., Borthakur, M.K., Devi, N. & Mahanta, R., 2007. Antifertility activity of the methano-
lic leaf extract of Cissampelos pareira in female albino mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 111: 
688-691. 
Garcia, S., Araiza, M., Gomez, M. & Heredia, N., 2002. Inhibition of growth, enterotoxin produc-
tion, and spore formation of Clostridium perfringens by extracts of medicinal plants. Journal of 
Food Protection 65(10): 1667-1669. 
Garland, T. & Barr, C. (Editors), 1998. Toxic plants and other natural toxicants. CAB Internatio-
nal, Wallingford, United Kingdom. 585 pp. 
Gasperi-Campani, A., Barbieri, L., Lorenzoni, E., Montanaro, L., Sperti, S., Bonetti, E. & Stirpe, F., 
1978. Modeccin, the toxin of Adenia digitata. Purification, toxicity and inhibition of protein syn-
thesis in vitro. Biochemical Journal 174: 491-496. 
Gassita, J.N., 1968. Recherches sur quelques plantes médicinales du Gabon en particulier sur deux 
Menispermaceae: Synclisia scabrida et Jateorhiza macrantha. Imprimerie Badel, Chateauroux, 
France. 138 pp. 
Gassita, J.N., Nze Ekekang, L., De Vecchy, H., Louis, A.M., Koudogbo, B. & Ekomié, R. (Editors), 
1982. Les plantes médicinales du Gabon. CENAREST, IPHAMETRA, mission ethnobotanique de 
l'ACCT au Gabon, 10-31 juillet 1982. 26 pp. 
LITERATURE 679 
Gaur, A., Singh, A.K., Suri, S.S. & Ramawat, K.G., 1995. Bud culture and regeneration of plantlets 
in Cocculus pendulus, a woody medicinal plant. Gartenbauwissenschaft 60(2): 69-72. 
Gautier, D., 1995. The pole-cutting practice in the Bamileke country (western Cameroon). Agrofor-
estry Systems 31: 21-37. 
Gayar, F.H., Shazli, A.Y. & Abbassy, M.A., 1971. Toxicity of Euphorbia peplus L. (Euphorbiaceae) 
to insects. Zeitschrift für Angewandte Entomologie 68(1): 56-63. 
Gbeassor, M., Kossou, Y., Amegbo, K., de Souza, C., Koumaglo, K. & Denke, A., 1989. Antimalarial 
effects of eight African medicinal plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 25(1): 115-118. 
Gbile, Z.O. & Adesina, S.K., 1988. Nigerian Solanum species of economic importance. Annals of the 
Missouri Botanical Garden 75: 862-865. 
Gbolade, A.A., Olayemi, J.O., Elujoba, A.A., Sofowora, A. & Adesina, S.K., 1992. Factors affecting 
the levels of steroidal sapogenins in Nigerian Agave and Furcraea species. Fitoterapia 63(1): 45 -
48. 
Gebre-Mariam, T., Neubert, R., Schmidt, P.C., Wutzler, P. & Schmidtke, M., 2006. Antiviral activi-
ties of some Ethiopian medicinal plants used for the treatment of dermatological disorders. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 104: 182-187. 
Gedif, T. & Hahn, H.-J., 2003. The use of medicinal plants in self-care in rural central Ethiopia. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 87: 155-161. 
Geiger, U.P., Weiss, E. & Reichstein, T., 1967. Die Cardenolide der Samen von Strophanthus gra-
tus (Wall. & Hook.) Franch. 2. Mitteilung. Glykoside und Aglykone, 284. Mitteilung. Helvetica 
Chimica Acta 50(1): 179-193. 
Geissler, P.W., Harris, S.A., Prince, R.J., Olsen, A., Achieng' Odhiambo, R., Oketch-Rabah, H., 
Madiega, P.A., Andersen, A. & Molgaard, P., 2002. Medicinal plants used by Luo mothers and 
children in Bondo district, Kenya. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 83: 39-54. 
Gelfand, M., Mavi, S., Drummond, R.B. & Ndemera, B., 1985. The traditional medical practitioner 
in Zimbabwe: his principles of practice and pharmacopoeia. Mambo Press, Gweru, Zimbabwe. 411 
pp. 
Gemedo-Dalle, T., Maass, B.L. & Isselstein, J., 2005. Plant biodiversity and ethnobotany of Borana 
pastoralists in southern Oromia, Ethiopia. Economic Botany 59(1): 43-65. 
Gereau, R.E. & Walters, G.M., 2003. Chamaecrista mwangokae (Fabaceae, Caesalpinioideae), a 
new species from the southern highlands of Tanzania. Novon 13(4): 438-442. 
Gessler, M.C., Nkunya, M.H.H., Mwasumbi, L.B., Heinrich, M. & Tanner, M., 1994. Screening 
Tanzanian medicinal plants for antimalarial activity. Acta Tropica 56: 65-77. 
Gessler, M.C., Msuya, D.E., Nkunya, M.H.H., Mwasumbi, L.B., Schär, A., Heinrich, M. & Tanner, 
M., 1995. Traditional healers in Tanzania: the treatment of malaria with plant remedies. Journal 
of Ethnopharmacology 48: 131-144. 
Getahun, A., 1976. Some common medicinal and poisonous plants used in Ethiopian folk medicine. 
Faculty of Science, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia. 63 pp. 
Geyid, A., Abebe, D., Debella, A., Makonnen, Z., Aberra, F., Teka, F., Kebede, T., Urga, K, Yersaw, 
K, Biza, T., Haile Mariam, B. & Guta, M., 2005. Screening of some medicinal plants of Ethiopia 
for their anti-microbial properties and chemical profiles. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 97(3): 
421-427. 
Ghisalberti, E.L., Pennacchio, M. & Alexander, E., 1998. Survey of secondary plant metabolites 
with cardiovascular activity. Pharmaceutical Biology 36(4): 237-279. 
Giday, M., Asfaw, Z., Elmqvist, T. & Woldu, Z., 2003. An ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants 
used by the Zay people in Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 85: 43-52. 
Giday, M., Teklehaymanot, T., Animut, A. & Mekonnen, Y., 2007. Medicinal plants of the Shi-
nasha, Agew-awi and Amhara peoples in northwest Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 110: 
516-525. 
Gilbert, G., 1958. Simaroubaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., Demaret, F., Germain, R., Gilbert, G., 
Hauman, L., Homes, M., Jurion, F., Lebrun, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). Flore 
du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 7. Institut National pour 1'Etude 
Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 119-131. 
Gilbert, M.G., 1990. The true identity of Euphorbia obovalifolia A.Rich. Kew Bulletin 45(1): 195-
1973. 
680 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Gilbert, M.G., 1992. Notes on Tragia, Dalechampia and Clutia (Euphorbiaceae) in Ethiopia and 
Somalia. Nordic Journal of Botany 12(4): 389-401. 
Gilbert, M.G., 1995. Euphorbiaceae. In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse & Hedberg, I. (Editors). Flora 
of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 2, part 2. Canellaceae to Euphorbiaceae. The National Herbar-
ium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Botany, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 265-380. 
Gilbert, M.G., 2000a. Nyctaginaceae. In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, Demissew Sebsebe & Hed-
berg, I. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 2, part 1. Magnoliaceae to Flacour-
tiaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Depart-
ment of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 264-273. 
Gilbert, M.G., 2000b. Piperaceae (including Peperomiaceae). In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, De-
missew Sebsebe & Hedberg, I. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 2, part 1. Magno-
liaceae to Flacourtiaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 59-
64. 
Gilbert, M.G., Holmes, S. & Thulin, M., 1993. Euphorbiaceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of So-
malia. Volume 1. Pteridophyta; Gymnospermae; Angiospermae (Annonaceae-Fabaceae). Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 267-339. 
Gill, L.S., 1992. Ethnomedical uses of plants in Nigeria. University of Benin Press, Benin City, 
Nigeria. 276 pp. 
Gillespie, S.K., Zhang, X.D. & Hersey, P., 2004. Ingenol 3-angelate induces dual modes of cell death 
and differentially regulates tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand-induced 
apoptosis in melanoma. Molecular Cancer Therapy 3: 1651—1658. 
Gillin, F.D., Reiner, D.S. & Suffness, M., 1982. Bruceantin, a potent amoebicide from a plant, 
Brucea antidysenterica. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 22: 342-345. 
Gilman, E.F., 1999. Suriana maritima. Fact Sheet FPS-565. Cooperative Extension Service. Uni-
versity of Florida. United States. 3 pp. 
Gindaba, J., Olsson, M. & Itanna, F., 2004. Nutrient composition and short-term release from Cro-
ton macrostachyus Del. and Millettia ferruginea (Höchst.) Baker leaves. Biology and Fertility of 
Soils 40(6): 393-397. 
Gindaba, J., Rozanov, A. & Negash, L., 2005a. Photosynthetic gas exchange growth and biomass 
allocation of two Eucalyptus and three indigenous tree species of Ethiopia under moisture deficit. 
Forest Ecology and Management 205(1-3): 127-138. 
Gindaba, J., Rozanov, A. & Negash, L., 2005b. Trees on farms and their contribution to soil fertility 
parameters in Badessa, eastern Ethiopia. Biology and Fertility of Soils 42(1): 66-71. 
Giner, J.L., Berkowitz, J.Z. & Andersson, T., 2000. Nonpolar components of the latex of Euphorbia 
peplus. Journal of Natural Products 63(2): 267-269. 
Githens, T.S., 1948. Drug plants of Africa. African Handbooks: 8. University of Pennsylvania Press, 
Lancaster Press, Lancaster, United States. 125 pp. 
Glen, H.F., 1998. FSA contributions 12: Plantaginaceae. Bothalia 28(2): 151-157. 
Glen, H.F. & Hardy, D.S., 2000. Aloaceae: Aloe. In: Germishuizen, G. (Editor). Flora of southern 
Africa. Volume 5, part 1, fascicle 1: first part. National Botanical Institute, Pretoria, South Af-
rica. 167 pp. 
Glick, S., Maisonneuve, I. & Szumlinski, K., 2000. 18-Methoxycoronaridine (18-MC) and ibogaine: 
comparison of antiaddictive efficacy, toxicity, and mechanisms of action. Annals of the New York 
Academy of Science 914: 369-386. 
Glover, P.E., Stewart, J. & Gwynne, M.D., 1966. Masai and Kipsigis notes on East African plants, 
Part III - Medicinal uses of plants. East African Agricultural and Forestry Journal 32(2): 200-
207. 
Goel, R.K., Maiti, R.N., Manickam, M. & Ray, A.B., 1997. Antiulcer activity of naturally occurring 
pyranocoumarin and isocoumarins and their effect on prostanoid synthesis using human colonic 
mucosa. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 35(10): 1080-1083. 
Gohl, B., 1981. Tropical feeds: feed information summaries and nutritive values. FAO, Rome, Italy. 
529 pp. 
LITERATURE 681 
Golob, P., Moss, C, Dales, M., Fidgen, A., Evans, J. & Gudrups, I., 1999. The use of spices and 
medicinals as bioactive protectants for grains. FAO Agricultural Services Bulletin No 137. FAO, 
Rome, Italy. 239 pp. 
Gomes, I., Gomes, S., Vera-Cruz, M.T., Kilian, N., Leyens, T. & Lobin, W., 1995. Plantas endémicas 
e arvores indigenas de Cabo Verde. Instituto Nacional de Investigaçâo e Desenvolvimento Agra-
rio, Praia, Cape Verde. 32 pp. 
Gomes, P.B., Oliveira, M.M.S., Nogueira, C.R.A., Noronha, E.C., Carneiro, L.M.V., Bezerra, J.N.S., 
Neto, A.M., Vasconcelos, S.M.M., Fonteies, M.M.F., Viana, G.S.B. & de Sousa, F.C.F., 2005. Study 
of antinociceptive effect of isolated fractions from Petiveria alliacea L. (tipi) in mice. Biological 
and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 28(1): 42-46. 
Gonçalves, A.E., 1996. Solanum tettense Klotzsch s. 1. (Solanaceae) in the Flora Zambesiaca area. 
Kirkia 16(1): 85-94. 
Gonçalves, A.E., 2002. Solanaceae. In: Martins, E.S., Diniz, M.A., Paiva, J., Gomes, I. & Gomes, S. 
(Editors). Flora de Cabo Verde: Plantas vasculares. No 71. Instituto de Investigaçâo Cientifica 
Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal & Instituto Nacional de Investigaçâo e Desenvolvimento Agrârio, 
Praia, Cape Verde. 71 pp. 
Gonçalves, A.E., 2005. Solanaceae. In: Pope, G.V., Polhill, R.M. & Martins, E.S. (Editors). Flora 
Zambesiaca. Volume 8, part 4. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 124 pp. 
Gondwe, A.T.D., Seigler, D.S. & Dunn, J.E., 1978. Two cyanogenic glucosides, tetraphyllin B and 
epitetraphyllin B, from Adenia volkensii. Phytochemistry 17: 271-274. 
Gonzalez de Mejia, E. & Prisecaru, V.l., 2005. Lectins as bioactive plant proteins: a potential in 
cancer treatment. Critical Reviews in Food Science and Nutrition 45: 425-445. 
Gonzalez-Coloma, A., Gutierrez, C , Hübner, H., Achenbach, H., Terrero, D. & Fraga, B.M., 1999. 
Selective insect antifeedant and toxic action of ryanoid diterpenes. Journal of Agricultural and 
Food Chemistry 47(10): 4419-4424. 
Gopalakrishnan, V., Rao, K.N.V., Loganathan, V., Shanmuganathan, S., Bollu, V.K. & Sharma, 
T.B., 2000. Antimicrobial activity of extracts of Acalypha indica L. Indian Journal of Pharmaceu-
tical Sciences 62(5): 347-350. 
Gören, A.C., Zhou, B.-N. & Kingston, D.G.I., 2003. Cytotoxic and DNA damaging activity of some 
aporphine alkaloids from Stephania dinklagei. Planta Medica 69: 867-868. 
Gorter, G.J.M.A. & Eicker, A., 1987. Additional first records of perfect stages of some powdery mil-
dew fungi in South Africa, including a new species. South African Journal of Botany 53(1): 93-97. 
Goutarel, R., Gollnhofer, O. & Sillans, R., 1993. Pharmacodynamie et applications thérapeutiques 
de 1'iboga et de 1'ibogaine. Psychedelic Monographs and Essays 6: 71-111. 
Govaerts, R., Frodin, D.G. & Radcliffe-Smith, A., 2000. World checklist and bibliography of Eu-
phorbiaceae (with Pandaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 1620 
pp. 
Govindappa, T., Govardhan, L., Jyothy, P.S. & Veerabhadrappa, P.S., 1987. Purification and char-
acterization of acetylcholinesterase isozymes from the latex of Synadenium grantii Hook.f. Indian 
Journal of Biochemistry and Biophysics 24(4): 209-217. 
Goyder, D., 2001. Is Adenium a valid genus? Asklepios 83: 3. 
Grace, O.M., Prendergast, H.D.V., Jäger, A.K. & van Staden, J., 2002. Bark medicines in tradi-
tional healthcare in KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa: an inventory. South African Journal of Botany 
69(3): 301-363. 
Grace, O.M., Prendergast, H.D.V., Jäger, A.K. & Van Staden, J., 2003. The suitability of thin layer 
chromatography for authenticating bark medicines used in South African traditional healthcare. 
South African Journal of Botany 69(2): 1-5. 
Graham, J.G., Quinn, M.L., Fabricant, D.S. & Farnsworth, N.R., 2000. Plants used against cancer 
- an extension of the work of Jonathan Hartwell. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 73(3): 347-377. 
Gray, C , 1995. Cannabis - The therapeutic potential. Pharmaceutical Journal 254: 771-773. 
Gray, A.M., Abdel-Wahab, Y.H. & Flatt, P.R., 2000. The traditional plant treatment, Sambucus 
nigra (elder), exhibits insulin-like and insulin-releasing actions in vitro. Journal of Nutrition 130: 
15-20. 
Green, A.C. & Beardmore, G.L., 1988. Home treatment of skin cancer and solar keratoses. Austral-
asian Journal of Dermatology 29(3): 127-130. 
682 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Green, T.P. & Wiemer, D.F., 1991. Four neolignan ketones from Piper capense. Phytochemistry 
30(11): 3759-3762. 
Green, T.P., Galinis, D.L. & Wiemer, D.F., 1991. Three neolignans from the roots of Piper capense. 
Phytochemistry 30(5): 1649-1652. 
Greenway, P.J., 1941. Dyeing and tanning plants in East Africa. Bulletin of the Imperial Institute 
39: 222-245. 
Grierson, D.S. & Afolayan, A.J., 1999. Antibacterial activity of some indigenous plants used for the 
treatment of wounds in the Eastern Cape, South Africa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 66: 103— 
106. 
Grimm, C, 1999. Evaluation of damage to physic nut (Jatropha curcas) by true bugs. Entomologia 
Experimentalis et Applicata 92: 127-136. 
Grindlay, D. & Reynolds, T., 1986. The Aloe vera phenomenon: a review of the properties and mod-
ern uses of the leaf parenchyma gel. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 16(2-3): 117-151. 
Grinspoon, L., 1995. The hemp plant as a source of medicine. In: Biorohstoff Hanf. Proceedings of 
the symposium, 2-5 March 1995. 2nd edition. Nova-Institut, Köln, Germany, pp. 568-575. 
Groebel, A., Lenoir, D. & Pernet, R., 1970. Ueber ein neues Alkaloid aus Cabucala madagascarien-
sis Pich. Planta Medica 19(1): 1-5. 
Groom, Q.J. & Reynolds, T., 1987. Barbaloin in Aloe species. Planta Medica 53: 345-348. 
Grosa, G., Allegrone, G. & Del Grosso, E., 2005. LC-ESI-MS/MS characterization of strophanthin-
K. Journal of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Analysis 38(1): 79-86. 
Grotenhermen, F. & Russo, E. (Editors), 2002. Cannabis and cannabinoids - pharmacology, toxicol-
ogy, and therapeutic potential. The Haworth Press, New York, United States. 450 pp. 
Grycova, L., Dostal, J. & Marek, R., 2007. Quaternary protoberberine alkaloids. Phytochemistry 
68: 150-175. 
Gschwendt, M. & Hecker, E., 1970. Tumor-promoting compounds from Euphorbia cooperi: di- and 
triesters of 16-hydroxy-12-desoxy-phorbol. Tetrahedron Letters 8: 567-570. 
Gschwendt, M. & Hecker, E., 1971. Tumor promoting di terpenyl fatty-acid esters from Euphorbia 
triangularis and Euphorbia cooperi. Fette, Seifen, Anstrichmittel 73(4): 221-225. 
Gübitz, G.M., Mittelbach, M. & Trabi, M., 1999. Exploitation of the tropical oil seed plant Jatropha 
curcas L. Bioresource Technology 67: 73-82. 
Guédé-Guina, F., Tsai, CS., Smith, M.O., Vangah Manda, M., Washington, B. & Ochillo, R.F., 
1995. The use of isolated functional heart to pharmacologically characterize active ingredients in 
the aqueous extracts of Mareya micrantha. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 45(1): 19-26. 
Guéneau, P., Bedel, J. & Thiel, J., 1970-1975. Bois et essences malgaches. Centre Technique Fo-
restier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 150 pp. 
Guerra dos Santos, M., 1989. The chromosomes of Azima tetracantha (Salvadoraceae). Plant Sys-
tematics and Evolution 168(1-2): 83-86. 
Guilet, D., Guntern, A., löset, J.R., Queiroz, E.F., Ndjoko, K, Foggin, CM. & Hostettmann, K., 
2003. Absolute configuration of a tetrahydrophenanthrene from Heliotropium ovalifolium by LC-
NMR of its Mosher esters. Journal of Natural Products 66(1): 17-20. 
Guil-Guerrero, J.L., 2001. Nutritional composition of Plantago species (P. major L., P. lanceolata 
L., and P. media L.). Ecology of Food and Nutrition 40(5): 481-495. 
Guil-Guerrero, J.L., Garcia-Maroto, F.F. & Gimenez-Gimenez, A., 2001. Fatty acid profiles from 
forty-nine plant species that are potential new sources of -linolenic acid. Journal of the American 
Oil Chemists Society 78: 677-684. 
Guillaumet, J.-L., 1972. Note sur la connaissance du milieu végétal par les nomades de la basse 
vallée du Wabi Shebelle (Ethiopie). Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et de Botanie Appliquée 19(4-
5): 73-89. 
Guinaudeau, H., Bashir, M., Colton, M.D., Freyer, A.J., Shamma, M., Jehan, K., Nilofar, A. & Atta-
ur-Rahman, A., 1987. Bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids from Cocculus pendulus. Phytochemistry 
26(3): 829-832. 
Guissou, J.P., Millogo-Koné, H. & Kaboré, I.Z., 1992. Etude comparative de l'activité pharmacolo-
gique d'Euphorbia hirta L. (Euphorbiaceae) et Holarrhena floribunda G.Don (Apocynaceae) vis-a-
vis d'amibes non pathogènes du genre Amoeba proteus. Médecine d'Afrique Noire 39(5): 358—360. 
Gulati, A., Jain, S.K. & Srivastava, P.S., 2000. Experimental studies on Thevetia neriifolia Juss - a 
review. Indian Journal of Chemistry Section B, Organic including Medicinal 39(11): 808-812. 
LITERATURE 683 
Gundidza, M., 1986. Insecticidal activity of Monadenium lugardae latex. Planta Medica 52(6): 558. 
Gundidza, M., 1990. Action of Monadenium lugardiae latex on guinea-pig ileum. Fitoterapia 61: 
442-444. 
Gundidza, M., 1991. Effect of methanol extract from Monadenium lugardiae on contractile activity 
of guinea-pig ileum. Central African Journal of Medicine 37(5): 141-144. 
Gundidza, M., 1993. Toxicity of Monadenium lugardiae to albino rats. Zimbabwe Science News 
27(4-6): 47. 
Gundidza, M., Sorg, B. & Hecker, E., 1992. A skin irritant phorbol ester from Euphorbia cooperi 
N.E.Br. Central African Journal of Medicine 38(12): 444-447. 
Gundidza, M., Sorg, B. & Hecker, E., 1993. A skin irritant principle from Euphorbia matabelensis 
Pax. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 39(3): 209-212. 
Guntern, A.A., 2003. Phytochemical investigation of plants suspected to cause the floppy trunk 
syndrome of African elephants (Loxodonta africana): Heliotropium ovalifolium Forssk. (Boragina-
ceae) and Blumea gariepina DC. (Asteraceae). PhD thesis, Université de Lausanne, Institut de 
Pharmacognosie et Phytochimie, Lausanne, Switzerland. 244 pp. 
Guntern, A., löset, J.R., Queiroz, E.F., Foggin, CM. & Hostettmann, K, 2001. Quinones from Heli-
otropium ovalifolium. Phytochemistry 58(4): 631-635. 
Guntern, A., löset, J.R., Queiroz, E.F., Sandor, P., Foggin, C.M. & Hostettmann, K., 2003. Helio-
tropamide, a novel oxopyrrolidine-3-carboxamide from Heliotropium ovalifolium. Journal of Natu-
ral Products 66(12): 1550-1553. 
Guo, Z., Vangapandu, S., Sindelar, R.W., Walker, L.A. & Sindelar, R.D., 2005. Biologically active 
quassinoids and their chemistry: potential leads for drug design. Current Medicinal Chemistry 
12(2): 173-190. 
Gupta, J. & Ali, M., 1998. Chemical constituents of Boerhavia diffusa Linn, roots. Indian Journal of 
Chemistry 37B: 912-917. 
Gupta, J. & Ali, M., 1999. Four new seco-sterols of Phyllanthus fraternus roots. Indian Journal of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences 61(2): 90-96. 
Gupta, J. & Ali, M., 2003. Phyllanthus fraternus Webster (synonym P. niruri auct. non Linn.) (Eu-
phorbiaceae). In: Majumdar, D.K., Govil, J.N. & Singh, V.K. (Editors). Recent progress in medici-
nal plants 8. Studium Press, Houston TX, United States, pp. 249-265. 
Gupta, G.L. & Rana, A.C., 2007. Withania somnifera (Ashwagandha): a review. Pharmacognosy 
Reviews 1(1): 129-136. 
Gupta, M., Bagchi, A. & Ray, A.B., 1991. Additional withanolides of Datura metel. Journal of 
Natural Products 54(2): 599-602. 
Gupta, R.S., Dixit, V.P. & Dobhal, M.P., 1990. Antifertility studies of isoquinoline alkaloids with 
special emphasis on structure activity relationship. Fitoterapia 61(1): 67-71. 
Gupta, A.K., Khanuja, S.P.S., Gupta, M.M., Shasany, A.K., Neeraj, J., Verma, R.K., Darokar, M.P., 
Bagchi, G.D. & Kumar, S., 2003a. High herb, phyllanthin and hypophyllanthin yielding variety of 
bhumyamalaki (Phyllanthus amarus): Cim-Jeevan. Journal of Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Sci-
ences 25(3): 743-745. 
Gupta, M., Mazumdar, U.K., Sivahkumar, T., Vamis, M.L.M., Karki, S., Sambathkumar, R. & 
Manikandan, L., 2003b. Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory activities of Acalypha fruticosa. Ni-
gerian Journal of Natural Products and Medicine 7: 25-29. 
Gupta, S., Lalshmi, J., Manjunath, M.N. & Prakash, J., 2005. Analysis of nutrient and antinutrient 
content of underutilized green leafy vegetables. Lebensmittel Wissenschaft und Technologie 38: 
339-345. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., 1994. Constituents of the essential oils from Piper sylvestre growing in Mauri-
tius. Planta Medica 60(4): 376-377. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., 2004. The utilization and conservation of medicinal plants in Mauritius. Herbal-
Gram 64: 34-43. 
Gurib-Fakim, A. & Brendler, T., 2004. Medicinal and aromatic plants of Indian Ocean Islands: 
Madagascar, Comoros, Seychelles and Mascarenes. Medpharm, Stuttgart, Germany. 568 pp. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., Guého, J. & Bissoondoyal, M.D., 1995. Plantes médicinales de Maurice, tome 1. 
Editions de l'Océan Indien, Rose-Hill, Mauritius. 495 pp. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., Guého, J. & Bissoondoyal, M.D., 1996. Plantes médicinales de Maurice, tome 2. 
Editions de l'Océan Indien, Rose-Hill, Mauritius. 532 pp. 
684 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Gurib-Fakim, A., Guého, J. & Bissoondoyal, M.D., 1997. Plantes médicinales de Maurice, tome 3. 
Editions de l'Océan Indien, Rose-Hill, Mauritius. 471 pp. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., Sewraj, M., Guého, J. & Dulloo, E., 1993. Medical ethnobotany of some weeds of 
Mauritius and Rodrigues. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 39(3): 177-185. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., Guého, J., Sewraj, M.D. & Dulloo, E., 1994. Plantes médicinales de l'île Rodri-
gues. Editions de l'Océan Indien, Rose-Hill, Mauritius. 580 pp. 
Gurib-Fakim, A., Sewraj, M.D., Guého, J. & Dulloo, E., 1996. Medicinal plants of Rodrigues. Phar-
maceutical Biology 34(1): 2-14. 
Guru, P.Y., Warhurst, D.C., Harris, A. & Phillipson, J.D., 1983. Antimalarial activity of bruceantin 
in vitro. Annals of Tropical Medicine and Parasitology 77: 433-435. 
Gutterman, Y. & Volfson, C, 2000. Peripheral defence strategy: variation of barbaloin content in 
the succulent leaf parts of Aloe arborescens Miller (Liliaceae). Botanical Journal of the Linnean 
Society 132(4): 385-395. 
Guy, G., Whittle, B.A. & Robson, P.J. (Editors), 2004. The medicinal uses of cannabis and cannabi-
noids. Pharmaceutical Press, London, United Kingdom. 528 pp. 
Haas, W. & Mittelbach, M., 2000. Detoxification experiments with the seed oil from Jatropha cur-
cas L. Industrial Crops and Products 12: 111-118. 
Habib-ur-Rahman, Atta-ur-Rahman, Choudhary, M.I. & Raza, A.R., 2004. Studies on the chemical 
constituents of Phyllanthus fraternus. Journal of the Chemical Society of Pakistan 26(1): 77—81. 
Hadkins, E.S., Bye, R., Brandenburg, W.A. & Jarvis, C.E., 1997. Typification of Linnaean Datura 
names (Solanaceae). Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 125: 295-308. 
Haerdi, F., 1964. Die Eingeborenen-Heilpflanzen des Ulanga-Distriktes Tanganjikas (Ostafrika). 
In: Haerdi, F., Kerharo, J. & Adam, J.G. (Editors). Afrikanische Heilpflanzen / Plantes médicina-
les africaines. Acta Tropica Supplementum 8: 1-278. 
Haevermans, T., 2004. Euphorbia didiereoides. [Internet] In: IUCN. 2007 Red list of threatened 
species, <http://www.iucnredlist.org>. Accessed January 2008. 
Haevermans, T. & Labat, J.-N., 2004. A synoptic revision of the Malagasy endemic Euphorbia per-
villeana group. Systematic Botany 29(1): 118-124. 
Haevermans, T., Hoffmann, P., Lowry II, P.P., Labat, J.-N. & Randrianjohani, E., 2004. Phyloge-
netic analysis of the Madagascan Euphorbia subgenus Lacanthis based on its sequence data. An-
nals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 91: 247-259. 
Hajicek, J., Taimr, J. & Budesinsky, M., 1998. Revised structure of isoschizogamine. Tetrahedron 
Letters 39: 505-508. 
Hall, J.B. & Swaine, M.D., 1981. Distribution and ecology of vascular plants in a tropical rain for-
est: forest vegetation of Ghana. W. Junk Publishers, the Hague, Netherlands. 383 pp. 
Hall, W., Christie, M. & Currow, D., 2005. Cannabinoids and cancer: causation, remediation, and 
palliation. The Lancet Oncology 6(1): 35-42. 
Halle, N., 1987. Okoubaka Pellegrin & Normand is really a genus of Santalaceae. Bulletin du Mu-
séum National d'Histoire Naturelle, 4e série. Section B, Adansonia, 4: 355-363. 
Halle, F. & Oldeman, R.A.A., 1970. Essai sur l'architecture et la dynamique de croissance des ar-
bres tropicaux. Monographie 6. Masson et Cie, Paris, France. 178 pp. 
Halle, F., Oldeman, R.A.A. & Tomlinson, P.B., 1978. Tropical trees and forests: an architectural 
analysis. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany. 441 pp. 
Halvankar, G.B., Varghese, P., Taware, S.P. & Raut, V.M., 2005. Effect of herbicides on weed dy-
namics and yield of soybean. Journal of Maharashtra Agricultural Universities 30(1): 35-37. 
Hamill, F.A., Apio, S., Mubiru, N.K., Bukenya-Ziraba, R., Mosango, M., Maganyi, O.W. & Soejarto, 
D.D., 2003. Traditional herbal drugs of southern Uganda, 2: literature analysis and antimicrobial 
assays. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 84: 57-78. 
Hamill, F.A., Apio, S., Mubiru, N.K., Mosango, M., Bukenya-Ziraba, R., Maganyi, O.W. & Soejarto, 
D.D., 2000. Traditional herbal drugs of southern Uganda, 1. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 70: 
281-300. 
Hammer, M.L.A., 1994. The status and distribution of Catharanthus coriaceus Markgraf (Apocyna-
ceae). Biodiversity and Conservation 3: 501-511. 
Hammer, M.L. & Johns, E.A., 1993. Tapping an Amazonian plethora: four medicinal plants of 
Marajo Island, Para (Brazil). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 40(1): 53-75. 
LITERATURE 685 
Hammiche, V. & Maiza, K., 2006. Traditional medicine in Central Sahara: pharmacopoeia of Tas-
sili N'ajjer. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 105: 358-367. 
Hammond, J.A., Fielding, D. & Bishop, S.C., 1997. Prospects for plant anthelmintics in tropical 
veterinary medicine. Veterinary Research Communications 21(3): 213-228. 
Hampson, P., Chahal, H., Khanim, F., Hayden, R., Mulder, A., Assi, L.K., Bunce, CM. & Lord, 
J.M., 2005. PEP005, a selective small-molecule activator of protein kinase C, has potent antileu-
kemic activity mediated via the delta isoform of PKC. Blood 106(4): 1362-1368. 
Hanna, A.G., Elgamal, M.H.A., Hassan, A.Z., Duddeck, H., Simon, A., Kovâcs, J. & Tóth, G., 1998. 
Complete 1H and 13C signal assignments of 5b-cardenolides isolated from Acokanthera spectabi-
lis Hook.f. Magnetic Resonance in Chemistry 36(12): 936-942. 
Hansel, R., Keller, K, Rimpler, H. & Schneider, G. (Editors), 1993. Hagers Handbuch der Phar-
mazeutishe Praxis. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany. 1209 pp. 
Harborne, J.B., Boulter, D. & Turner, B.L., 1971. Chemotaxonomy of the Leguminosae. Academic 
Press, London, United Kingdom. 612 pp. 
Hargreaves, R., 2002. How many species of Adenium are there? Asklepios 85: 4-6. 
Harjula, R., 1980. Mirau and his practice. A study of the ethnomedicinal repertoire of a Tanzanian 
herbalist. Tri-Med Books, London, United Kingdom. 223 pp. 
Harris, A., Anderson, L.A., Phillipson, J.D. & Brown, R.T., 1985. Canthin-6-one alkaloids from 
Brucea antidysenterica root bark. Planta Medica 51: 151-153. 
Harris, M.J., Stewart, A.F. & Court, W.E., 1968. The assay of Rauwolfia cumminsii by quantitative 
thin-layer chromatography. (African Rauwolfia species-7). Planta Medica 16(2): 217-223. 
Hartmann, T., 1999. Chemical ecology of pyrrolizidine alkaloids. Planta 207(4): 483-495. 
Hartwell, J.L., 1970. Plants used against cancer. A survey. Lloydia 33: 97-194. 
Hasan, H.A.H. & Abdel Mallek, A.Y., 1994. Inhibitory effect of aqueous leaf extracts of some plants 
on growth and aflatoxin production by Aspergillus flavus. Dirasat, Series B, Pure and Applied 
Sciences 21(3): 215-219. 
Hasan, S.Q., Ahmad, I., Sherwani, M.R.K., Ansari, A.A. & Osman, S.M., 1980. Studies on herba-
ceous seed oils. X. Fette, Seifen, Anstrichmittel 82(5): 204-205. 
Hassan, S.M., Dipeolu, O.O. & Malonza, M.M., 1994. Natural attraction of livestock ticks by the 
leaves of a shrub. Tropical Animal Health and Production 26(2): 87-91. 
Hassanali, A., Bentley, M.D., Ole Sitayo, E.N., Njoroge, P.E.W. & Yatagai, M., 1986. Studies on 
limonoid insect antifeedants. Insect Science and its Application 7(4): 495-499. 
Hassanzadeh, M.K., Rahimizadeh, M., Fazly Bazzaz, B.S., Emami, S.A. & Assili, J., 2001. Chemi-
cal and antimicrobial studies of Platycladus orientalis essential oils. Pharmaceutical Biology 
39(5): 388-390. 
Hauschild-Rogat, P., Weiss, E. & Reichstein, T., 1967. Glycosides and aglycons. CCCI. Cardeno-
lides of Acokanthera oppositifolia. 3. Isolation of additional cardenolides and partial structural 
elucidation. Helvetica Chimica Acta 50(8): 2299-2321. 
Hawas, U.W., 2006. Brocchiana carboxylic acid; the analogue of brevifolin carboxylic acid, isolation 
and identification from Chrozophora brocchiana. Planta Medica 72(11). Poster 013. 
Hawthorne, W.D., 1995. Ecological profiles of Ghanaian forest trees. Tropical Forestry Papers 29. 
Oxford Forestry Institute, Department of Plant Sciences, University of Oxford, United Kingdom. 
345 pp. 
Hawthorne, W. & Jongkind, C, 2006. Woody plants of western African forests: a guide to the forest 
trees, shrubs and lianes from Senegal to Ghana. Kew Publishing, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 
United Kingdom. 1023 pp. 
He, L.Z., Huang, Z.H., Wang, H.R., Tu, D.Y. & Mao, Z.F., 1998. Shenjincao (Palhinhaea cernua) 
injection for treatment of experimental silicosis of rats. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 
50(3): 351-354. 
Hebbar, S.S., Harsha, V.H., Shripathi, V. & Hegde, G.R., 2004. Ethnomedicine of Dharwad District 
in Karnataka, India: plants used in oral health care. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 94(2-3): 
261-266. 
Hecker, E., 1977. New toxic, irritant and co-carcinogenic diterpene esters from Euphorbiaceae and 
Thymelaeaceae. Pure and Applied Chemistry 49: 1423-1431. 
Hecker, E. & Schmidt, R., 1974. Phorbolesters - the irritants and carcinogens of Croton tiglium L. 
Progress in the Chemistry of Organic Natural Products 31: 377-467. 
686 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Hedberg, I., 1979. Possibilities and needs for conservation of plant species and vegetation in Africa. 
In Hedberg, I. (Editor). Systematic botany, plant utilization and biosphere conservation. Alm-
quist & Wiksell International, Stockholm, Sweden, pp. 83-104. 
Hedberg, I., Hedberg, O., Madati, P.J., Mshigeni, K.E., Mshiu, E.N. & Samuelsson, G., 1982. In-
ventory of plants used in traditional medicine in Tanzania. I. Plants of the families Acanthaceae-
Cucurbitaceae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 6(1): 29—60. 
Hedberg, I., Hedberg, 0., Madati, P.J., Mshigeni, K.E., Mshiu, E.N. & Samuelsson, G., 1983a. In-
ventory of plants used in traditional medicine in Tanzania. II. Plants of the families Dilleniaceae-
Opaliaceae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 9: 105-128. 
Hedberg, I., Hedberg, 0., Madati, P.J., Mshigeni, K.E., Mshiu, E.N. & Samuelsson, G., 1983b. In-
ventory of plants used in traditional medicine in Tanzania. Part III. Plants of the families Papil-
ionaceae-Vitaceae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 9: 237-260. 
Hegnauer, R., 1964. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Band 3. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, Switzer-
land. 743 pp. 
Hegnauer, R., 1973. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Band 6. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, Switzer-
land. 882 pp. 
Hegnauer, R., 1986. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Band 7. Birkhäuser Verlag, Basel, Switzer-
land. 804 pp. 
Hegnauer, R. & Hegnauer, M., 1994. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Band l i a . Birkhäuser Verlag, 
Basel, Switzerland. 529 pp. 
Hegnauer, R. & Hegnauer, M., 1996. Chemotaxonomie der Pflanzen. Band l lb-1 . Birkhäuser Ver-
lag, Basel, Switzerland. 500 pp. 
Heim, F., Garrigue, E. & Husson, M., 1919. Un nouvel oléagineux de Madagascar: 'le Betratra' 
Jatropha mahafalensis Jum. (Euphorb.). Bulletin de l'Agence Générale des Colonies 12: 679-691. 
Heine, H., 1963. Solanaceae. In: Hepper, F.N. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. Volume 2. 
2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United King-
dom, pp. 325-335. 
Heine, B. & Heine, I., 1988a. Plant concepts and plant use; an ethnobotanical survey of the semi-
arid and arid lands of East Africa. Part 1. Plants of the Charnus (Kenya). Cologne Development 
Studies 6. Breitenbach, Saarbrücken, Germany. 103 pp. 
Heine, B. & Heine, I., 1988b. Plant concepts and plant use; an ethnobotanical survey of the semi-
arid and arid lands of East Africa. Part 3. Rendille plants (Kenya). Cologne Development Studies 
8. Breitenbach, Saarbrücken, Germany. 120 pp. 
Heine, B. & König, C, 1988. Plant concepts and plant use; an ethnobotanical survey of the semi-
arid and arid lands of East Africa. Part 2. Plants of the So (Uganda). Cologne Development Stud-
ies 7. Breitenbach, Saarbrücken, Germany. 140 pp. 
Heller, J., 1996. Physic nut - Jatropha curcas L. Promoting the conservation and use of underuti-
lized and neglected crops 1. IPGRI, Rome, Italy. 66 pp. 
Heloo, P.I.K., 2000. Preliminary studies on the distribution and haustorial anatomy of Cassytha 
filiformis L. and Cuscuta sinensis L. in three coastal regions of Ghana. B.Sc. Biology Degree The-
sis, Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. 32 
pp. 
Hemmers, H., Gülz, P.G. & Marner, F.J., 1988. Triterpenoids in epicuticular waxes of three Euro-
pean Euphorbia species. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung Section C, Biosciences 43(11-12): 799-
805. 
Hemming, C.F. & Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1987. A revision of the Somali species of Jatropha (Euphor-
biaceae). Kew Bulletin 42(1): 103-122. 
Henderson, L., 1987. Barrier plants of southern Africa. Memoirs of the Botanical survey of South 
Africa No 55. 97 pp. 
Hendrian, R., 2001a. Strophanthus DC. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. 
(Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Back-
huys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 519-523. 
Hendrian, R., 2001b. Voacanga Thou. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Edi-
tors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Backhuys 
Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 582-585. 
LITERATURE 687 
Henning, R.K., 2001a. The Jatropha booklet: a guide to the Jatropha system and its dissemination 
in Africa. Bagani, Weissensberg, Germany. 36 pp. 
Henning, R.K., 2001b. The Jatropha system, website concerning all aspects of the use of Jatropha 
curcas L. [Internet] <http://www.jatropha.de/>. Accessed January 2007. 
Hepper, F.N., 1963a. Plantaginaceae. In: Hepper, F.N. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. Vol-
ume 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 306-307. 
Hepper, F.N., 1963b. Plumbaginaceae. In: Hepper, F.N. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. 
Volume 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 305-306. 
Hepper, F.N., 1968. Zingiberaceae. In: Hepper, F.N. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. Volume 
3, part 1. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Overseas Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 69-79. 
Hepper, F.N., 1991. Old world Withania (Solanaceae): a taxonomie review and key to the species. 
In: Hawkes, J.G., Lester, R.N., Nee, M. & Estrada, R.N. (Editors). Solanaceae 3. Taxonomy, 
chemistry, evolution. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 211-227. 
Herbin, G.A. & Robins, P.A., 1968. Studies on plant cuticular waxes: I. The chemotaxonomy of al-
kanes and alkenes of the genus Aloe (Liliaceae). Phytochemistry 7: 239-255. 
Herendeen, P.S. & Zarucchi, J.L., 1990. Validation of Caesalpinia subgenus Mezoneuron (Desf.) 
Vidal and new combinations in Caesalpinia for two species of Mezoneuron from Africa. Annals of 
the Missouri Botanical Garden 77(4): 854-855. 
Hermans, M., Akoègninou, A. & van der Maesen, J., 2004. Medicinal plants used to treat malaria 
in southern Benin. Economic Botany 58 (supplement): S239-S252. 
Hermansson, K., Kenne, L., Rukunga, G.M. & Samuelsson, G., 1990. Isolation and characterization 
of 2-O-beta-D-glucopyranosyl-L-malic acid from Synadenium pereskiifolium. Phytochemistry 
29(2): 513-515. 
Herzog, F., 1994. Multipurpose shade trees in coffee and cocoa plantations in Côte d'Ivoire. Agro-
forestry Systems 27: 259-267. 
Hiermann, A. & Bucar, F., 1994. Influence of some traditional medicinal plants of Senegal on pros-
taglandin biosynthesis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 42(2): 111-116. 
Hifny Saber, A., Balbaa, S.I. & Awad, A.T., 1962. The identification of the anthracene derivatives 
of the leaves and pods of Cassia obovata grown in Egypt. Lloydia 25: 238-240. 
Higashino, H., Suzuki, A., Tanaka, Y. & Pootakhna, K., 1992. Hypoglycemic effects of Siamese 
Momordica charantia and Phyllanthus urinaria extracts in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats. 
Nippon Yakurigaku Zasshi 100(5): 415-421. 
Hilger, H.H. & Bohle, U.-R., 2000. Pontechium: a new genus distinct from Echium and Lobostemon 
(Boraginaceae). Taxon 49: 737-746. 
Hillig, K.W., 2005. A systematic investigation of Cannabis. PhD thesis, Indiana University, Indi-
ana, United States. 165 pp. 
Hindmarsh, L., 1982. A notebook for Kenyan dyers. National Museum of Kenya, Nairobi, Kenya. 
65 pp. 
Hines, D.A. & Eckman, K., 1993. Indigenous multipurpose trees for Tanzania: uses and economic 
benefits for people. FAO Forestry Paper, Rome, Italy. 
Hiremath, S.P., Shrishailappa, B., Swamy, H.K.S., Biradar, J.S. & Badami, S., 1993. Antimicrobial 
activity of various extracts of Acalypha indica (Euphorbiaceae). Indian Journal of Microbiology 
33(1): 75-77. 
Hiremath, S.P., Rudresh, K., Badami, S., Patil, S.B. & Patil, S.R., 1999. Post-coital antifertility 
activity of Acalypha indica L. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 67(3): 253-258. 
Hiruma-Lima, C.A., Gracioso, J.S., Bighitti, E.J.B., Germonsén Robineou, L. & Souza Brito, 
A.R.M., 2000. The juice of fresh leaves of Boerhaavia diffusa L. (Nyctaginaceae) markedly reduces 
pain in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 71: 267—274. 
Hladik, C.-M. & Hladik, A., 1988. Sucres et 'faux sucres' de la forêt equatoriale: évolution et per-
ception des produits sucrés par les populations forestières d'Afrique. Journal d'Agriculture Tradi-
tionnelle et de Botanique Appliquée 35: 51-66. 
Hobson, N.K., Jessop, J.P., Ginn, M.C. & Kelly, J., 1975. Veldplants of southern Africa. Macmillan 
South Africa, Johannesburg, South Africa. 310 pp. 
688 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Hodouto, K.-K., 1990. Etude chimique des p lan tes à flavonoïdes du Togo. Bulletin de Médecine 
Tradit ionnelle et Pharmacopée 4(1): 31-48 . 
Hoët, S., Opperdoes, F., Brun, R. & Quetin-Leclercq, J., 2004a. Na tu ra l products active against 
African t rypanosomes: a step towards new drugs. Na tu ra l Product Reports 21 : 353-364. 
Hoët, S., Opperdoes, F., Brun, R., Adjakidjé, V. & Quetin-Leclercq, J., 2004b. In vitro ant i t rypano-
somal activity of ethnopharmacologically selected Beninese p lants . Jou rna l of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 91 : 37-42. 
Hoffmann, P., 2000. Revision of Andrachne sect. Pseudophyl lan thus (Euphorbiaceae), wi th the 
description of two new species from Madagascar . Adansonia, séries 3, 22: 123-133. 
Hoffmann, L., 2005. Baum des Monats Februar . Wilde Mispel (Vangueria infausa) und Strophan-
thus amboensis . [Internet] Algemeine Zeitung online. Tour ismus Namibia. Windhoek, Namibia . 
<http:/ /www.az.com.na/index.php?page=news/news.php&identifier=1079864137&id=10238> Ac-
cessed October 2005. 
Höft, M.G., Verpoorte, R. & Beck, E., 1998a. Growth and alkaloid pa t t e rns of roots of Tabernae-
m o n t a n a pachysiphon and Rauvolfia mombas iana as influenced by environmental factors. 
Botanica Acta 111(3): 222-230. 
Höft, M.G., Verpoorte, R. & Beck, E., 1998b. Leaf alkaloid contents of Tabe rnaemontana pachysi-
phon as influenced by endogenous and environmenta l factors in the n a t u r a l habi ta t . P l an ta 
Medica 64(2): 148-152. 
Hogberg, P. & Alexander, I.J., 1995. Roles of root symbioses in African woodland and forest: evi-
dence from 15N abundance and foliar analysis . Jou rna l of Ecology 83(2): 217-224. 
Hohmann , J., Günther , G., Vasas , A., Kâlmân, A. & Argay, G., 1999a. Isolation and s t ruc ture revi-
sion of pepluane diterpenoids from Euphorbia peplus. Jou rna l of Na tu ra l Products 62(1): 1 0 7 -
109. 
Hohmann , J., Vasas , A., Günther , G., Dombi, G., Blazsó, G., Falkay, G., Mâ thé I. & Jerkovich, G., 
1999b. J a t r o p h a n e diterpenoids from Euphorbia peplus. Phytochemist ry 51(5): 673-677. 
Hohmann , J., Evanics, F., Berta , L. & Bartok, T., 2000. Diterpenoids from Euphorbia peplus. 
P lan ta Medica 63(3): 291-294. 
Holm, L.G., Plucknet t , D.L., Pancho, J.V. & Herberger , J .P. , 1977. The world's worst weeds. Distri-
bution and biology. Universi ty Press of Hawaii , Honolulu, Uni ted Sta tes . 609 pp. 
Holmgren, M., Poorter, L., Siepel, A., Bongers, F., Buitelaar , M., Châtelain, C., Gautier , L., Haw-
thorne, W.D., Helmink, A.T.F., Jongkind, C.C.H., Os-Breijer, H.J., Wieringa, J . J . & van Zoest, 
A.R., 2004. Ecological profiles of ra re and endemic species. In: Poorter, L., Bongers, F., Kouamé, 
F.N'. & Hawthorne , W.D. (Editors). Biodiversity of West African forests. An ecological a t las of 
woody plant species. CAB Internat ional , Wallingford, Uni ted Kingdom, pp. 101-389. 
Hong, J.I., Kweon, M.H., Ra, K.S., Sung, H.C. & Yang, H.C., 1995. Free radical scavenging activi-
t ies and inhibitory effects on xan th ine oxidase by e thanol extract from Capsella bursa-pastor is . 
Agricul tural Chemist ry and Biotechnology 38(6): 590-595. 
Horn, I. & Steffen, K., 1968. Antifungal activity of radix Colombo [calumba, Ja t ro r rh iza pa lma ta 
root] components. Pharmazeu t i sche Zeitung 113(26): 945-950. 
Horsten, S.F.A.J. & Lemmens , R.H.M.J., 1999. Cissampelos pare i ra L. In: de Padua , L.S., Bun-
yaprapha t sa ra , N. & Lemmens , R.H.M.J. (Editors). P lan t Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). 
Medicinal and poisonous p lan ts 1. Backhuys Publ ishers , Leiden, Nether lands , pp. 205-207. 
Hosamani , K.M., 1994a. A rich source of novel 9-ketooctadec-cis-15-enoic acid from Cassia absus 
seed oil and its possible indus t r ia l uti l ization. Indus t r ia l and Engineer ing Chemist ry Research 
33(4): 1058-1061. 
Hosamani , K.M., 1994b. Ricinoleic and cyclopropene acids in Trichodesma zeylanicum seed oil. 
Phytochemist ry 37(6): 1621-1624. 
Hoshino, J., 1985. Feeding ecology of mandr i l l s (Mandri l lus sphinx) in Campo animal reserve, 
Cameroon. P r ima tes 26(3): 248-273 . 
Hos te t tmann , K., Mars ton, A., Ndjoko, K. & Wolfender, J.L., 2000. The potent ial of African p lants 
as a source of drugs . Cur ren t Organic Chemist ry 4(10): 973-1010. 
Houghton, P.J . & Skari , K.P., 1994. The effect on blood clotting of some West African p lants used 
agains t snakebi te . Jou rna l of Ethnopharmacology 44(2): 99-108 . 
LITERATURE 689 
Hout, S., Chea, A., Bun, S.S., Elias, R., Gasquet, M., Timon-David, P., Balansard, G. & Azas, N., 
2006. Screening of selected indigenous plants of Cambodia for antiplasmodial activity. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 107(1): 12-18. 
Hsieh, T.F., Huang, J.H., Hsieh, L.J., Hu, M.F. & Ko, W.H., 2005. Antifungal effect of plant ex-
tracts on phytopathogenic fungi. Plant Pathology Bulletin 14(1): 59-66. 
Huang, S.T., Yang, R.C., Lee, P.N., Yang, S.H., Liao, S.K., Chen, T.Y. & Pang, J.H.S., 2006. Anti-
tumor and anti-angiogenic effects of Phyllanthus urinaria in mice bearing Lewis lung carcinoma. 
International Immunopharmacology 6(6): 870-879. 
Hübner, H., Vierling, W., Brandt, W., Reiter, M. & Achenbach, H., 2001. Minor constituents of 
Spigelia anthelmia and their cardiac activities. Phytochemistry 57(2): 285-296. 
Hudson, J.B., Anani, K, Lee, M.X., De Souza, C, Arnason, J.T. & Gbeassor, M., 2000. Further in-
vestigations on the antiviral activities of medicinal plants of Togo. Pharmaceutical Biology 38(1): 
46-50. 
Huge, J., 2002. Inventaire des agents pollinisateurs des fleurs et étude de la diversité génétique 
chez Detarium microcarpum Guill. et Perr. au Mali. Mémoire de DEA. University of Gent, Gent, 
Belgium. 112 pp. 
Hulstaert, G., 1966. Notes de Botanique Mongo. Académie Royale des Sciences d'Outre-mer, Classe 
des Sciences Naturelles et Médicales, N.S. 15-3, Bruxelles, Belgium. 213 pp. 
Hunter, D. (Editor), 1999. The ibogaine dossier. [Internet] <http://www.ibogaine.org/index.html>. 
United States. Accessed April 2005. 
Hurskainen, A., 1994. Plant taxonomy of the Parakuyo (Tanzania). Nordic Journal of African Stud-
ies 3(2): 117-158. 
Hussain, F., 1980. Allelopathic effects of Pakistani weeds: Euphorbia granulata Forssk. Oecologia 
45(2): 267-269. 
Hussain, H. & Tobji, R.S., 1997. Antibacterial screening of some Libyan medicinal plants. Fi-
toterapia 68(5): 467-470. 
Hussein, G., Miyashiro, H., Nakamura, N., Hattori, M., Kawahata, T., Otake, T., Kakiuchi, N. & 
Shimotohno, K., 1999. Inhibitory effects of Sudanese plant extracts on HIV-1 replication and 
HIV-1 protease. Phytotherapy Research 13(1): 31-36. 
Hussein, G., Miyashiro, H., Nakamura, N., Hattori, M., Kakiuchi, N. & Shimotohno, K, 2000. In-
hibitory effects of Sudanese medicinal plant extracts on hepatitis C virus (HCV) protease. Phyto-
therapy Research 14: 510—516. 
Hutchings, A., Haxton Scott, A., Lewis, G. & Cunningham, A., 1996. Zulu medicinal plants: an in-
ventory. University of Natal Press, Pietermaritzburg, South Africa. 450 pp. 
Hyde, M. & Wursten, B., 2002. Argemone mexicana L. [Internet ] Flora of Zimbabwe. 
<http://www.zimbabweflora.co.zw/speciesdata/genus.php?genus_id=611>. Accessed January 2007. 
Ibiyemi, S.A., Fadipe, V.O., Akinremi, O.O. & Bako, S.S., 2002. Variation in oil composition of 
Thevetia peruviana Juss. 'Yellow Oleander' fruit seeds. Journal of Applied Sciences & Environ-
mental Management 6(2): 61-65. 
Ibnu Utomo, B., 2001. Caesalpinia L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Edi-
tors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Backhuys 
Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 123-129. 
Ichikawa, M., 1987. A preliminary report on the ethnobotany of the Suiei Dorobo in northern 
Kenya. African Study Monographs, Supplement 7: 1-52. 
Ichikawa, H., Takada, Y., Shishodia, S., Jayaprakasam, B., Nair, M.G. & Aggarwal, B.B., 2006. 
Withanolides potentiate apoptosis, inhibit invasion, and abolish osteoclastogenesis through sup-
pression of nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) activation and NF-kB-regulated gene expression. Molecu-
lar Cancer Therapy 5(6): 1434-1445. 
Idu, M., Ijomah, J.U. & Omonhinmin, A.C., 2002. Histomorphology of the tracheary elements of 
some Fabaceae hardwood. Discovery and Innovation 14(1-2): 46-50. 
Igoli, J.O., Ogaji, O.G., Tor-Anyiin, T.A. & Igoli, N.P., 2005. Traditional medicine practice amongst 
the Igede people of Nigeria. Part 2. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alterna-
tive Medicines 2(2): 134-152. 
Ijah, U.J.J. & Oyebanji, F.O., 2003. Effects of tannins and polyphenols of some medicinal plants on 
bacterial agents of urinary tract infections. Global Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences 9(2): 
193-198. 
690 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Ikenaga, T., Kikuta, S., Itimura, K., Nakashima, K. & Matsubara, T., 1988. Growth and production 
of steroid saponin in Solanum aculeatissimum during one vegetation period. Planta Medica 54: 
140-142. 
Ikram, M. & Haq, I., 1980. Screening of medicinal plants for antimicrobial activity. Part II. Fi-
toterapia 51(6): 281-284. 
Ikram, M., Shati, N. & Zarga, M.A., 1982. Chemical investigation of Cocculus leaeba. Planta 
Medica 45(4): 253-254. 
Ilavarasan, R., Mallika, M. & Venkataraman, S., 2005. Anti-inflammatory and antioxidant activi-
ties of Cassia fistula L. bark extracts. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alter-
native Medicines 2(1): 70-85. 
ILDIS, 2005. World database of Legumes, Version 10,01. International Legume Database & Infor-
mation Service. [Internet] <http://www.ildis.org/>. Accessed September 2006. 
Imamura, K., 2001. Water in the desert: rituals and vital power among the Central Kalahari 
hunter-gatherers. African Study Monographs, Supplement 27: 125-163. 
Immelman, K.L., 2000. FSA contributions 15: Piperaceae. Bothalia 30(1): 25-30. 
Indi, Y.M. & Chinta, S.K., 2007. Application and properties of natural dye on cotton - Phyllanthus 
reticulatus. Colourage 54(8): 62-66. 
Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, undated. Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal. [Internet]. 
Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Indian Institute of Integrative Medicine, Jammu 
Tawi, India. <http://www.herbalnet.org/SHRUBS/withania_somni.asp>. Accessed September 
2007. 
Ingkaninan, K, IJzerman, A.P., Taesotikult, T. & Verpoorte, R., 1999. Isolation of opioid-active 
compounds from Tabernaemontana pachysiphon leaves. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 
51(12): 1441-1446. 
Inngjerdongen, K., Nergârd, CS., Diallo, D., Mounkoro, P.P. & Paulsen, B.S., 2004. An ethno-
pharmacological survey of plants used for wound healing in Dogonland, Mali, West Africa. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 92: 233-244. 
InsideWood, undated. [Internet] <http://insidewood.lib.ncsu.edu/search/>. Accessed May 2007. 
Insunza, B.V. & Valenzuela, A.A., 1995. Control of Ditylenchus dipsaci on garlic (Allium sativum) 
with extracts of medicinal plants from Chile. Nematropica 25(1): 35-41. 
Inya-Agha, S.I., 1999. The hypoglycemic properties of Picralima nitida. Nigerian Journal of Natu-
ral Products and Medicine 3: 66-67. 
Ipou, I.J., 2005. Biologie et écologie d'Euphorbia heterophylla L. (Euphorbiaceae) en culture coton-
nière, au nord de la Côte d'Ivoire. Thèse de doctorat de l'Université de Cocody, Abidjan, Côte 
d'Ivoire. 168 pp. 
Iqbal, M., 1993. International trade in non-wood forest products: An overview. FO: Misc/93/11 -
Working Paper. [Internet] <http://www.fao.Org/docrep/x5326e/x5326e00.htm#Contents>. Accessed 
September 2006. 
Irvine, F.R., 1961. Woody plants of Ghana, with special reference to their uses. Oxford University 
Press, London, United Kingdom. 868 pp. 
Irwin, H.S. & Barneby, R.C., 1982a. The American Cassinae: a synoptical revision of Leguminosae, 
tribe Cassieae, subtribe Cassinae in the New World. Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden 
35(1): 1-454. 
Irwin, H.S. & Barneby, R.C., 1982b. The American Cassinae: a synoptical revision of Leguminosae, 
tribe Cassieae, subtribe Cassinae in the New World. Memoirs of the New York Botanical Garden 
35(2): 455-918. 
Ismail, T.S., Gopalakrishnan, S., Begum, V.H. & Elango, V., 1997. Anti-inflammatory activity of 
Salacia oblonga Wall, and Azima tetracantha Lam. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 56(2): 145-152. 
ITDG & IIRR, 1996. Ethnoveterinary medicine in Kenya. A field manual of traditional animal 
health care practice. Intermediate Technology Development Group and International Institute of 
Rural Reconstruction, Nairobi, Kenya. 226 pp. 
Itokawa, H., Mizuno, K., Ichihara, Y. & Takeya, K., 1987. Isolation and 13C-NMR studies on three 
new furanoditerpenyl glucosides from Jateorhiza columba. Planta Medica 53: 271-273. 
ITTO, 2004. Annual review and assessment of the world timber situation. International Timber 
Trade Organisation. Yokohama, Japan. 255 pp. 
LITERATURE 691 
Ivens, G.W., 1967. East African weeds and their control. Oxford University Press, Nairobi, Kenya. 
244 pp. 
Iwu, M.M., 1993. Handbook of African medicinal plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United 
States. 464 pp. 
Iwu, M.M. & Anyanwu, B.N., 1982. Phytotherapeutic profile of Nigerian herbs 1: anti-
inflammatory and anti-arthritic agents. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 6(3): 263-274. 
Iwu, M.M. & Court, W.E., 1977. Root alkaloids of Rauwolfia cumminsii Stapf. Planta Medica 32(2): 
158-161. 
Iwu, M.M. & Court, W.E., 1978. The alkaloids of Rauwolfia mombasiana leaves. Planta Medica 
33(3): 232-236. 
Iwu, M.M. & Court, W.E., 1979. Alkaloids of Rauwolfia mombasiana stem bark. Planta Medica 
36(3): 208-212. 
Iwu, M.M. & Court, W.E., 1980. The alkaloids of Rauwolfia mombasiana roots. Planta Medica 
38(3): 260-263. 
Iwu, M.M. & Klayman, D.L., 1992. Evaluation of the in vitro antimalarial activity of Picralima 
nitida extracts. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 36(2): 133-135. 
Iwu, M.M., Jackson, J.E., Tally, J.D. & Klayman, D.L., 1992. Evaluation of plant extracts for an-
tileishmanial activity using a mechanism-based radiorespirometricmicrotechnique (RAM). Planta 
Medica 58(5): 436-441. 
Iwu, M.M., Duncan, A.R. & Okunji, CO., 1999. New antimicrobials of plant origin. In: Janick, J. 
(Editor). Perspectives on new crops and new uses. ASHS Press, Alexandria, United States, pp. 
457-462. 
Izawa, H., Ota, M., Kohmura, M. & Ariyoshi, Y., 1996. Synthesis and characterization of the sweet 
protein brazzein. Biopolymers 39(1): 95—101. 
Izhaki, I., 2002. Emodin: a secondary metabolite with multiple ecological functions in higher 
plants. New Phytologist 155: 205-217. 
Jabbar, A. & Khan, G.M.A.S., 1965. Antimicrobial alkaloids from Euphorbia thymifolia. Pakistan 
Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 8(1): 293-294. 
Jacobsen, W.G.B., 1983. The ferns and fern allies of southern Africa. Butterworth Publishers, Dur-
ban/Pretoria, South Africa. 542 pp. 
Jaeger, P.M.L. & Hepper, F.N., 1986. A review of the genus Solanum in Africa. In: D'Arcy, W.G. 
(Editor). Solanaceae: biology and systematics. Columbia University Press, New York, United 
States, pp. 41-55. 
Jafri, S.M.H. & El-Gadi, A., 1982. Euphorbiaceae. In: Jafri, S.M.H. & El-Gadi, A. (Editors). Flora of 
Libya 89. Al Faateh University, Faculty of Science, Department of Botany, Tripoli, Libya. 54 pp. 
Jäger, A.K., 2003. Evaluation of antibacterial activity of traditionally prepared South African 
remedies for infections. South African Journal of Botany 69(4): 595-598. 
Jäger, A.K., Hutchings, A. & van Staden, J., 1996. Screening of Zulu medicinal plants for pros-
taglandin-synthesis inhibitors. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 52: 95-100. 
Jäger, A.K., McAlister, B.G. & van Staden, J., 1995. Cyanogenic glycosides in leaves and callus 
cultures of Schlechterina mitostemmatoides. South African Journal of Botany 61(5): 274-275. 
Jäger, H.H., Schindler, O., Weiss, E. & Reichstein, T., 1965. Die Cardenolide von Strophanthus 
gratus (Wall. & Hook.) Franch. Glykoside und Aglykone, 265. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 
48(1): 202-219. 
Jahan, K., 1988. Isolation and structural studies on Cocculus pendulus. PhD thesis, H.E.J. Insti-
tute of Chemistry, University of Karachi, Pakistan. 145 pp. [Internet] 
<http://prr.hec.gov.pk/Thesis/977.pdf>. Accessed November 2007. 
Jahn, K., Kilian, H.D. & Kraus, L., 1990. Detection of anthranoids from "ganna ganna" (Cassia 
species). Planta Medica 56: 562. 
Jain, S.K., 1991. Dictionary of Indian folk medicine and ethnobotany: a reference manual of man -
plant relationships, ethnic groups and ethnobotanists in India. Vedams Books, New Delhi, India. 
311pp. 
Jain, R. & Nagpal, S., 2002. Chemical constituents of the roots of Kirganelia reticulata. Journal of 
the Indian Chemical Society 79(9): 776-777. 
692 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Jain, S.C., Sahoo, S.L. & Vijvergia, R., 1995. Influence of light on growth and production of steroids 
and glycoalkaloids in Solanum species in vivo and in vitro. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sci-
ences 57(3): 100-101. 
Jain, S.C., Jain, R., Sharma, R.A. & Capasso, F., 1997. Pharmacological investigation of Cassia 
italica. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 58(2): 135-142. 
Jain, S.C., Jain, R., Alam, S. & Arora, R., 1998. Phytochemistry and bioactivity of Kirganelia re-
ticulata. Journal of Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Sciences 20(3): 740-741. 
Jain, A., Katewa, S.S., Chaudhary, B.L. & Galav, P., 2004. Folk herbal medicines used in birth 
control and sexual diseases by tribals of southern Rajasthan, India. Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 90(1): 171-177. 
Jakupovic, J., Morgenstern, T., Bittner, M. & Silva, M., 1998. Diterpenes from Euphorbia peplus. 
Phytochemistry 47(8): 1601-1609. 
Jansen, P.C.M., 1981. Spices, condiments and medicinal plants in Ethiopia, their taxonomy and 
agricultural significance. Agricultural Research Reports 906. Centre for Agricultural Publishing 
and Documentation, Wageningen, Netherlands. 327 pp. 
Jansen, P.C.M. & Mendes, O., 1983. Plantas medicinais, seu uso tradicional em Moçambique. Vo-
lume 1. Gabinete de Estudos de Medicina Tradicional, Ministério da Saude, Maputo, Moçambi-
que. 216 pp. 
Janzen, D.H., 1972. Protection of Barteria (Passifloraceae) by Pachysima ants (Pseudomyrmecinae) 
in a Nigerian rain forest. Ecology 53(5): 885-892. 
Jaroszewski, J.W. & Jensen, B., 1985. Deidaclin and tetraphylin A, epimeric glucosides of 2-
cyclopentenone cyanohydrin, in Adenia globosa ssp. globosa Engl. (Passifloraceae). Crystal struc-
ture of deidaclin tetraacetate. Acta Chemica Scandinavica, series B, 39: 867-875. 
Jarvis, C, 2007. Order out of chaos: Linnean plant names and their types. Linnean Society of Lon-
don, London, United Kingdom. 1016 pp. 
Jaswanth, A., Begum, V.H., Akilandeswari, S., Begum, T.N., Manimaran, S. & Ruckmani, K, 2001. 
Effects of Azima tetracantha on dermal wound healing in rats. Hamdard Medicus 44(3): 13-16. 
Jayaprakasam, B., Zhang, Y.-J., Seeram, N.P. & Nair, M.G., 2003. Growth inhibition of human 
tumor cell lines by withanolides from Withania somnifera leaves. Life Sciences 74(1): 125-132. 
Jayaswal, S.B., 1977. Wrightia tomentosa, a substitute for Holarrhena antidysenterica. Indian 
Journal of Pharmacy 39(2): 37-39. 
Jegede, O.C., Ajanus, I. J.O., Adaudi, A.O. & Agbede, R.I., 2006. Anthelmintic efficacy of extracts of 
Spigelia anthelmia Linn on experimental Nippostrongylus braziliensis in rats. Journal of Veteri-
nary Science 7(3): 229-232. 
Jelager, L., Gurib-Fakim, A. & Adsersen, A., 1998. Antibacterial and antifungal activity of medici-
nal plants of Mauritius. Pharmaceutical Biology 36(3): 153-161. 
Jensen, S.R., 1992. Systematic implications of the distribution of iridoids and other chemical com-
pounds in the Loganiaceae and other families of the Asteridae. Annals of the Missouri Botanical 
Garden 70: 284-302. 
Jensen, S.R. & Schripsema, J., 2002. Chemotaxonomy and pharmacology of Gentianaceae. In: 
Struwe, L. & Albert, V. (Editors). Gentianaceae - Systematics and Natural History. Cambridge 
University Press, United Kingdom, pp. 573—631. 
Jeong, S.I., Kim, K.J., Choi, M.K., Keum, K.S., Lee, S., Ahn, S.H., Back, S.H., Song, J.H., Ju, Y.S., 
Choi, B.K. & Jung, K.Y., 2004. alpha-Spinasterol isolated from the root of Phytolacca americana 
and its pharmacological property on diabetic nephropathy. Planta Medica 70(8): 736-739. 
Jeppe, B., 1969. South African Aloes. Purnell, Cape Town, South Africa. 150 pp. 
Jin, Z., Danilova, V., Assadi-Porter, F.M., Markley, J.L. & Hellekant, G., 2003. Monkey electro-
physiological and human psychophysical responses to mutants of the sweet protein brazzein: de-
lineating brazzein sweetness. Chemical Senses 28: 491-498. 
Johns, T., Faubert, G.M., Kokwaro, J.O., Mahunnah, R.L.A. & Kimanani, E.K., 1995. Anti-giardial 
activity of gastrointestinal remedies of the Luo of East Africa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 46: 
17-23. 
Johns, T., Kokwaro, J.O. & Kimanani, E.K., 1990. Herbal remedies of the Luo of Siaya District, 
Kenya: establishing quantitative criteria for consensus. Economic Botany 44(3): 369-381. 
LITERATURE 693 
Johnson, P.B., Abdurahman, E.M., Tiara, E.A., Abdu Aguye, I. & Hussaini, I.M., 1999. Euphorbia 
hirta leaf extracts increase urine output and electrolytes in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
65(1): 63-69. 
Johnson, L., Williams, L.D. & Roberts, E.V., 1997. An insecticidal and acaricidal polysulfide me-
tabolite from the roots of Petiveria alliacea. Pesticide Science 50(3): 228-232. 
Johnston, I.M., 1935. Studies in the Boraginaceae, XL Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 16(2): 145-
205. 
Johnston, I.M., 1953. Studies in the Boraginaceae, XXV: a revaluation of some genera of the 
Lithospermeae. Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 34(3): 258-299. 
Jolly, C.I. & Mechery, N.R., 1996. Comparative pharmacognostical, physicochemical and antibacte-
rial studies on seeds of Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall, and Wrightia tinctoria R.Br. Indian 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 58(2): 51-54. 
Jones, K., Hughes, J., Hong, M., Jia, Q. & Orndorff, S., 2002. Modulation of melanogenesis by aloe-
sin: a competitive inhibitor of tyrosinase. Pigment Cell Research 15(5): 335. 
Jonsell, B., 1975. Lepidium L. (Cruciferae) in Tropical Africa. Botaniska Notiser 128(1): 20-46. 
Jonsell, B., 1982a. Cruciferae. Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, familles 84-87. Muséum Na-
tional d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 3-32. 
Jonsell, B., 1982b. Cruciferae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands, pp. 15-17. 
Jonsell, B., 2000. Brassicaceae (Cruciferae). In: Edwards, S., Mesfin Tadesse, Demissew Sebsebe & 
Hedberg, I. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 2, part 1. Magnoliaceae to Flacour-
tiaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Depart-
ment of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 121-154. 
Joubert, F.J., 1981. Purification and some properties of a proteinase-inhibitor (DE-1) from Pelto-
phorum africanum (Weeping wattle) seed. Hoppe-Seyler's Zeitschrift für Physiologische Chemie 
362: 1515-1521. 
Jung, M., Lee, S., Kim, H. & Kim, H., 2000. Recent studies on natural products as anti-HIV agents. 
Current Medicinal Chemistry 7(6): 649-661. 
Kabouw, P., Van Weizen, P.C., Baas, P. & Van Heuven, B.J., 2008. Styloid crystals in Claoxylon 
(Euphorbiaceae) and allies (Claoxylinae) with notes on leaf anatomy. Botanical Journal of the 
Linnean Society 156(3): 445-457. 
Kadkade, P.G., 1984. Influence of cultural conditions on glycoalkaloid formation in Solanum acu-
leatissimum tissue cultures. In: Proceedings of the 11th annual meeting, Plant Growth Regulator 
Society of America, Boston, Massachusetts, United States, pp. 79—86. 
Kadkade, P.G., Recinos, J.A. & Madrid, T.R., 1979. Studies on the distribution of glycoalkaloids in 
Solanum aculeatissimum. Planta Medica 37(1): 70-72. 
Kajikawa, M., Yamato, K.T., Fukuzawa, H., Sakai, Y., Uchida, H. & Ohyama, K., 2005. Cloning 
and characterization of cDNA encoding b-amyrin synthase from petroleum plant Euphorbia tiru-
calli L. Phytochemistry 66: 1759-1766. 
Kakudidi, E.K., 2004. Cultural and social uses of plants from and around Kibale National Park, 
Western Uganda. African Journal of Ecology 42: 114—118. 
Kalanda, K. & Bolamba, K., 1994. Contribution à la connaissance des plantes médicinales du Haut 
Zaïre. Les plantes utilisées contre les maladies de la peau à Kisangani. Revue de Médecines et 
Pharmacopées Africaines 8(2): 179-188. 
Kalanda, K., Ataholo, M. & Ilumbe, B., 1995. Contribution à la connaissance des plantes médicina-
les du Haut-Zaïre: plantes antihémorroïdaires de Kisangani. Revue de Médecines et Pharmaco-
pées Africaines 9(1): 51-58. 
Kamal, A., 2001. Studies in the chemical constituents of Andrachne aspera Spreng. (Euphorbia-
ceae). PhD thesis, University of Karachi, Karachi, Pakistan. 175 pp. 
Kamanyi, A., Dongmo, A.B., Salah, M.A., Jatsa, H., Wagner, H., Vierling, W. & Bopelet, M., 2003. 
Endothelium mediated aortic relaxation and blood pressure lowering effect of a procyanidin rich 
fraction of the stembark extracts of Erythrophleum suaveolens. Pharmaceutical Biology 41(1): 
62-67. 
Kamar, M.J., 1994. Natural use of stone and organic mulches for water conservation and en-
hancement of crop yield in semi-arid areas. Advances in Geoecology 27: 163—179. 
694 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Kamara, A.Y., Akobundu, I.O., Sanginga, N. & Jutzi, S.C., 2000. Effect of mulch from 14 selected 
multipurpose trees (MPTs) on growth, nitrogen nutrition and yield of maize (Zea mays L.). Jour-
nal of Agronomy and Crop Science 184: 73-80. 
Kamatenesi-Mugisha, M., 2004. Medicinal plants used in reproductive health care in Western 
Uganda: documentation, phytochemical and bioactivity evaluation. PhD thesis, Makerere Uni-
versity, Kampala, Uganda. 228 pp. 
Kamatenesi-Mugisha, M. & Oryem-Origa, H., 2007. Medicinal plants used to induce labour during 
childbirth in western Uganda. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 109: 1-9. 
Kambewa, B.M.D, Mfitilodze, M.W., Hüttner, K., Wollny, C.B.A. & Phoya, R.K.D., 1999. The use of 
indigenous veterinary remedies in Malawi. In: Mathias, E., Rangnekar, D.V. & McCorkle, CM. 
(Editors). Ethnoveterinary medicine: alternatives for livestock development. Proceedings of an 
International Conference held in Pune, India, on November 4-6, 1997. Volume 1: Selected Pa-
pers. BAIF Development Research Foundation, Pune, India, pp. 60-66. 
Kambizi, L. & Afolayan, A.J., 2001. An ethnobotanical study of plants used for the treatment of 
sexually transmitted diseases (njovhera) in Guruve District, Zimbabwe. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 77: 5-9. 
Kambizi, L., Sultana, N. & Afolayan, A.J., 2004. Bioactive compounds isolated from Aloe ferox: a 
plant traditionally used for the treatment of sexually transmitted infections in the Eastern Cape, 
South Africa. Pharmaceutical Biology 429(8): 636-639. 
Kambu, K., Coune, C. & Angenot, L., 1979. Nouveaux alcaloïdes des racines du Strychnos icaja. 
Planta Medica 37: 161-164. 
Kambu, K., Tona, L., Luki, N., Cimanga, K. & Makuba, W., 1989. Evaluation de l'activité antimi-
crobienne de quelques préparations traditionelles antidiarrheiques utilisées dans la ville de Kins-
hasa - Zaire. Médecine Traditionelle et Pharmacopée 3(1): 15-24. 
Kamgang, R., Kamgne, E.V.P., Fonkoua, M.C., Beng, V.P.N. & Sida, M.B., 2006. Activities of aque-
ous extracts of Mallotus oppositifolius on Shigella dysenteriae Al-induced diarrhoea in rats. 
Clinical and Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 33(1-2): 89-94. 
Kamgang, R., Gonsu Kamga, H., Wafo, P., Mbungi, N.J.A., Pouokam, E.V., Fokam, T.M.A. & 
Fonkoua, M.C., 2007. Activity of aqueous ethanol extract of Euphorbia prostrata Ait. on Shigella 
dysenteriae type 1-induced diarrhea in rats. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 39(5): 240-244. 
Kamgue, R.T., Sylla, O., Pousset, J.L., Laurens, A., Brunet, J.C. & Séré, A., 1979. Isolation and 
characterization of toxic principles from Spondianthus preussii var. glaber Engler. Plantes Médi-
cinales et Phytothérapie 13(4): 252-259. 
Kamtchouing, P., Mbongue, G.Y., Dimo, T. & Boukeng-Jatsa, H., 2002. Evaluation of androgenic 
activity of Zingiber officinale and Pentadiplandra brazzeana in male rats. Asian Journal of An-
drology 4: 299-301. 
Kamuhabwa, A., Nshimo, C. & de Witte, P., 2000. Cytotoxicity of some medicinal plant extracts 
used in Tanzanian traditional medicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 70: 143-149. 
Kan, C , Potier, P., Kan, S.-K., Jokela, R. & Lounasmaa, M., 1986. Indole alkaloids from Rauvolfia 
media. Phytochemistry 25(7): 1783-1784. 
Kan Fan, C, Husson, H.P. & Potier, P., 1976. Plantes Malgaches XVI. La craspidospermine, nouvel 
alcaloide de Craspidospermum verticillatum verticillatum (Apocynaceae). Bulletin de la Société 
Chimique de France 7-8: 1227-1228. 
Kan Fan, C, Das, B.C., Potier, P., Le Men, J. & Boiteau, P., 1968. Plantes Malgaches. I. Etude des 
alcaloides de Craspidospermum verticillatum Boj. ex DC, Apocynacées. Annales Pharmaceuti-
ques Françaises 26(7): 577-582. 
Kan Fan, C, Besselièvre, R., Cave, A., Das, B.C. & Potier, P., 1971. New alkaloids of Craspidos-
permum verticillatum (Apocynaceae): 14-delta-epi-16-vincine. Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires 
des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences, série C, Sciences Chimiques 272(16): 1431-1434. 
Kan Fan, C, Das, B.C., Husson, H.P. & Potier, P., 1974. Plantes malgaches. XV. Alcaloides de 
Craspidospermum verticillatum var. petiolare (Apocynacées): andrangine ou (+)epoxy-14,15-nor-
1-vallesamidine (1). Bulletin de la Société Chimique de France 12: 2839-2841. 
Kandé, K.M., Philipov, S. & Dutschewska, H., 1994. Alkaloids of Stephania abyssinica. Fitoterapia 
65: 90. 
Kanemura, K., 2006. [Hair growth stimulants comprising natural products.] In Japanese. Japan 
Kokai Tokkyo Koho. 3 pp. 
LITERATURE 695 
Kang, J.H., Ryu. Y.S., Kim, D.I., Lee, O.S. & Kim, S.H., 1997. Effect of priming, temperature and 
light quality on germination of pokeweed (Phytolacca americana). Korean Journal of Crop Science 
42(2): 153-159. 
Kang, B.T., Caveness, F.E., Tian, G. & Kolawole, G.O., 1999. Longterm alley cropping with four 
hedgerow species on an Alfisol in southwestern Nigeria - effect on crop performance, soil chemical 
properties and nematode population. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems 54: 145-155. 
Kang, E.H., Kown, T.Y., Oh, G.T., Park, W.F., Park, S.I., Park, S.K. & Lee, Y.I., 2006. The flavon-
oid ellagic acid from a medicinal herb inhibits host immune tolerance induced by the hepatitis B 
virus-e antigen. Antiviral Research 72(2): 100-106. 
Kanjilal, P.B., Jinu Devi, Rumi Kotoky & Singh, R.S., 2004. Production potential of Plumbago zey-
lanica L. under different harvest schedules and crop geometry. Journal of Spices and Aromatic 
Crops 13(2): 140-142. 
Kanmegne, J., Duguma, B., Henrot, J. & Isirimah, N.O., 1999. Soil fertility enhancement by 
planted tree-fallow species in the humid lowlands of Cameroon. Agroforestry Systems 46: 239-
249. 
Kanyinda, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R. & Vanhaelen, M., 1993. A new bisbenzylisoquinoline-N-oxide 
alkaloid from seeds of Anisocycla cymosa. Journal of Natural Products 56(4): 618-620. 
Kanyinda, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R. & Vanhaelen, M., 1995. Benzylisoquinoline alkaloids from 
Anisocycla jollyana leaves. Journal of Natural Products 58(10): 1587-1589. 
Kanyinda, B., Diallo, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R. & Vanhaelen, M., 1989. Benzylisoquinoline alka-
loids from Anisocycla cymosa roots. Planta Medica 55(4): 394. 
Kanyinda, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R., Vanhaelen, M. & Ottinger, R., 1992. Identification by two-
dimensional NMR spectroscopy of two new benzylisoquinoline alkaloids from leaves of Anisocycla 
cymosa. Journal of Natural Products 55(5): 607-612. 
Kanyinda, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R., Vanhaelen, M. & Ottinger, R., 1993. Bisbenzylisoquinoline 
alkaloids from Anisocycla cymosa roots. Journal of Natural Products 56(6): 957—960. 
Kanyinda, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R., Vanhaelen, M. & Ottinger, R., 1996. Two new secobisbenzyli-
soquinoline alkaloids from the leaves of Anisocycla jollyana. Journal of Natural Products 59(5): 
498-500. 
Kanyinda, B., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R., Vanhaelen, M. & Ottinger, R., 1997. Two new isochondoden-
drine-type alkaloids from the roots of Anisocycla jollyana. Journal of Natural Products 60(11): 
1121-1124. 
Kanzaki, H., Kagemori, T., Yamachika, Y., Nitoda, T. & Kawazu, K., 1999. Inhibition of plant 
transformation by phytolaccoside b from Phytolacca americana callus. Bioscience, Biotechnology 
and Biochemistry 63(9): 1657-1659. 
Kaoma, C. & Chiteta, K., 2001. Effect of Euphorbia ingens on Newcastle disease in local chickens. 
Agricultura Tropica et Subtropica 34: 87-91. 
Kapadia, G.J., Angerhofer, C.K. & Ansa-Asamoah, R., 1993. Akuammine: an antimalarial indole-
monoterpene alkaloid of Picralima nitida seeds. Planta Medica 59(6): 565—566. 
Kapingu, M., Mbwambo, Z., Moshi, M.J. & Magadula, J., 2005. Brine shrimp lethality of a glu-
tarimide alkaloid from Croton sylvaticus Höchst. The East and Central African Journal of Phar-
maceutical Sciences 8(1): 3—5. 
Kapnang Jepang, J.R., 1997. Etude de l'effet anti-anémique d'Alchornea cordifolia. Mémoire de 
Maîtrise en Biochimie, Université de Yaoundé, Département de Biochimie, Yaoundé, Cameroon. 
26 pp. 
Kapoor, V.P. & Mukherjee, S., 1969. Galactomannan from Cassia absus seed. 1. Nature of sugars 
present, methylation, and periodate oxidation studies. Canadian Journal of Chemistry 47: 2883. 
Kapur, B.M. & Atal, C.K., 1982. Cultivation and utilization of senna in India. In: Atal, C.K. & Ka-
pur, B.M. (Editors). Cultivation and utilization of medicinal plants. Regional Research Labora-
tory Jammu-Tawi, New Delhi, India, pp. 391-405. 
Karan, M., Bhatnagar, S., Wangtak, P. & Vasisht, K, 2005. Phytochemical and antimalarial stud-
ies on Swertia alata Royle. Acta Horticulturae 675: 139-145. 
Karawya, M.S., Abdel-Wahab, S.M. & Niazi, H.M., 1974. Assay of cardenolides in Acokanthera 
spectabilis. Planta Medica 25(1): 17-21. 
696 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Kareru, P.G.. Kenji, G.M., Gachanja, A.N, Keriko, J.M. & Mungai, G., 2007. Traditional medicines 
among the Embu and Mbeere peoples of Kenya. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary 
and Alternative Medicines 4(1): 75-86. 
Kariba, R.M., Houghton, P.J. & Yenesew, A., 2002. Antimicrobial activities of a new schizozygane 
indoline alkaloid from Schizozygia coffaeoides and the revised structure of isoschizogaline. Jour-
nal of Natural Products 65(4): 566-569. 
Kariba, R.M., Siboe, G.M. & Dossaji, S.F., 2001. In vitro antifungal activity of Schizozygia cof-
faeoides Baill. (Apocynaceae) extracts. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 74: 41-44. 
Karikari, R., 2006. Natural regeneration of indigenous tree species on reclaimed mined land: a case 
study of Anglogold Company Limited, Obuasi. B.Sc. Thesis, Natural Resources Management, De-
partment of Silviculture and Forest Management, Faculty of Renewable Natural Resources, 
Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. 20 pp. 
Karnick, CR., Tiwari, K.C. & Majumber, R., 1982. Cultivation trials, pharmacognosy and ethno-
botanical investigations of Plumbago zeylanica L. (chitraka) of the Indian system of medicine. In-
ternational Journal of Crude Drug Research 20: 193-199. 
Kashman, Y., Bernart, M.W., Tischler, M., Cardellina, J.H. & Boyd, M.R., 1994. Koumbalones A 
and B, new casbane diterpenes from Maprounea africana. Journal of Natural Products 57(3): 
426-430. 
Kasonia, K., 1995. Screening préliminaire d'extraits de plantes utilisées dans les maladies respira-
toires au Kivu (Zaïre) sur trachée isolée de cobaye. Belgian Journal of Botany 128(2): 165-175. 
Kassuya, C.A.L., Silvestre, A., Menezes De Lima, O.Jr, Marotta, D.M., Render, V.L.G. & Calixto, 
J.B., 2006. Antiinflammatory and antiallodynic actions of the lignan niranthin isolated from 
Phyllanthus amarus - evidence for interaction with platelet activating factor receptor. European 
Journal of Pharmacology 546(1-3): 182-188. 
Kasuku, W., Lula, F., Paulus, J., Ngiefu, N. & Kaluila, D., 1999. Contribution à l'inventaire des 
plantes utilisées pour le traitement du paludisme à Kinshasa (R.D.C.). Revue de Médecines et 
Pharmacopées Africaines 13: 95-102. 
Katambo, M.L.M., 2007. A systematic study of African Solanum L. Section Solanum (Solanaceae). 
PhD thesis, Radboud University, Nijmegen, Netherlands. 154 pp. 
Katende, A.B., Birnie, A. & Tengnäs, B., 1995. Useful trees and shrubs for Uganda: identification, 
propagation and management for agricultural and pastoral communities. Technical Handbook 10. 
Regional Soil Conservation Unit, Nairobi, Kenya. 710 pp. 
Kativu, S., 2001. Asphodelaceae. In: Pope, G.V. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 12, part 3. 
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 25-48. 
Kaul, M.K. & Atal, CK., 1983. Studies on Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall. 1. Botany, medico-
ethnobotany and distribution. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 8(3): 349-356. 
Kaul, B.L. & Zutshi, U., 1982. Cultivation of Solanum khasianum Clarke for steroids. In: Atal, C.K. 
& Kapur, B.M. (Editors). Cultivation and utilization of medicinal plants. Regional Research Labo-
ratory Jammu-Tawi, New Delhi, India, pp. 98-106. 
Kavimani, S., Ilango, R., Madheswaran, M., Jayakar, B., Gupta, M. & Majumdar, U.K., 1996. Anti-
tumour activity of plumbagin against Dalton's ascitic lymphoma. Indian Journal of Pharmaceuti-
cal Sciences 58(5): 194-196. 
Kavitha, D., Shilpa, P.N. & Devaraj, S.N., 2003. Antibacterial effect of conessine, an alkaloid from 
Holarrhena antidysenterica, against enteropathogenic Escherichia coli. Biomedicine 23(1-2): 66-
71. 
Kawaguchi, K., Hirotani, M. & Furuya, T., 1988. Biotransformation of digitoxigenin by cell suspen-
sion cultures of Strophanthus amboensis. Phytochemistry 27: 3475-3479. 
Kawaguchi, K., Hirotani, M. & Furuya, T., 1989. Biotransformation of digitoxigenin by cell suspen-
sion cultures of Strophanthus intermedius. Phytochemistry 28: 1093-1097. 
Kawaguchi, K., Hirotani, M. & Furuya, T., 1993. Strophanthus species (members of the dogbane 
family): in vitro culture and the production of cardenolides. In: Bajaj, Y.P.S. (Editor). Biotechnol-
ogy in agriculture and forestry. Volume 21. Medicinal and Aromatic Plants IV. Springer-Verlag, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, Germany, pp. 371-386. 
Kawai, K., Beppu, H., Shimpo, K., Chihara, T., Yamamoto, N., Nagatsu, T., Ueda, H. & Yamada, 
Y., 1998. In vivo effects of Aloe arborescens Miller var. natalensis Berger (Kidachi aloe) on ex-
perimental Tinea pedis in guinea-pig feet. Phytotherapy Research 12: 178-182. 
LITERATURE 697 
Kawukpa, U.U. & Angoyo, M.M., 1994. Plantes utiles chez les Batiabetuwa de l'Ile de Mbie, Kisan-
gani, Zaire. African Study Monographs 15(2): 49-68. 
Kayambazinthu, D., Barany, M., Mumba, R. & Holding-Anyonge, C, 2006. Miombo woodlands and 
HIV/AIDS interactions: Malawi Country Report. Forestry Policy and Institutions Working Paper 
6. FAO, Rome, Italy. 126 pp. 
Kayode, A.E., 1981. The structure of penduliflaworosin, a new furanoid diterpene from Croton pen-
duliflorus. Journal of the Chemical Society, Perkin Transactions 1: Organic and Bio-Organic 
Chemistry 1981(4): 1151-1153. 
Kazmi, M.H., Malik, A., Hameed, S., Akhta, N. & Noor Ali, S., 1994. An anthraquinone derivative 
from Cassia italica. Phytochemistry 36(3): 761-763. 
Keay, R.W.J., 1954a. Passifloraceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. Vol-
ume 1, part 1. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, Lon-
don, United Kingdom, pp. 199-203. 
Keay, R.W.J., 1954b. Piperaceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. Volume 
1, part 1. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 81-84. 
Keay, R.W.J., 1958a. Euphorbiaceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. Vol-
ume 1, part 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, Lon-
don, United Kingdom, pp. 364-423. 
Keay, R.W.J., 1958b. Pentadiplandraceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical Africa. 
Volume 1, part 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, 
London, United Kingdom, pp. 649—651. 
Keay, R.W.J., 1989. Trees of Nigeria. A revised version of Nigerian trees (1960, 1964) by R.W.J. 
Keay, C.F.A. Onochie and D.P. Stanfield. Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 476 pp. 
Keay, R.W.J. & Hepper, F.N., 1958. Santalaceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). Flora of West Tropical 
Africa. Volume 1, part 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administra-
tions, London, United Kingdom, pp. 665-666. 
Keay, R.W.J. & Troupin, G., 1954. Menispermaceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). Flora of West Tropi-
cal Africa. Volume 1, part 1. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Overseas Governments and Admini-
strations, London, United Kingdom, pp. 66—77. 
Keay, R.W.J., Hoyle, A.C. & Duvigneaud, P., 1958. Caesalpiniaceae. In: Keay, R.W.J. (Editor). 
Flora of West Tropical Africa. Volume 1, part 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Govern-
ments and Administrations, London, United Kingdom, pp. 439—484. 
Kehlet, A.B. & Hansen, H.H., 2004. Digestibility of selected Tanzanian browse suspected of con-
taining tannins. Paper presented on the 2004 annual meeting of the Tanzanian Society for Ani-
mal Production (TSAP) in Moshi, Tanzania. [Internet] 
<http://www.husdyr.kvl.dk/htm/hhh/confpubl/annefmalTSAP.pdf>. Accessed October 2006. 
Keita, S.M., Arnason, J.T., Baum, B.R., Maries, R., Camara, F. & Traoré, A.K., 1995. Etude ethno-
pharmacologique traditionnelle de quelques plantes médicinales antihelminthiques de la Répu-
blique de Guinée. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 9(2): 119-134. 
Keita, S.M., Arnason, J.T., Baum, B.R., Maries, R., Camara, F. & Traoré, A.K., 1999. Etude ethno-
pharmacologique traditionnelle de quelques plantes médicinales anthelminthiques de la Haute-
Guinée (République de Guinée). Revue de médecines et pharmacopées africaines 13: 49-64. 
Kellerman, T.S., Coetzer, J.A.W. & Naudé, T.W., 1988. Plant poisonings and mycotoxins of live-
stock in southern Africa. Oxford University Press, Cape Town, South Africa. 243 pp. 
Kenfack, D., Thomas, D.W., Chuyong, G. & Condit, R., 2007. Rarity and abundance in a diverse 
African forest. Biodiversity and Conservation 16: 2045-2074. 
Kerharo, J., 1971. Recherches ethnopharmacognosiques sur les plantes médicinales et toxiques de 
la pharmacopée sénégalaise traditionnelle. Thèse de doctorat d'état, Faculté de Pharmacie, Bor-
deaux, France. 285 pp. 
Kerharo, J. & Adam, J.G., 1974. La pharmacopée sénégalaise traditionnelle. Plantes médicinales et 
toxiques. Vigot & Frères, Paris, France. 1011 pp. 
Kerharo, J. & Bouquet, A., 1950. Plantes médicinales et toxiques de la Côte d'Ivoire - Haute-Volta. 
Vigot Frères, Paris, France. 291 pp. 
Kerharo, J., Guichard, F. & Bouquet, A., 1961. Les végétaux ichtyotoxiques (poisons de pêche). 
Bulletins et Mémoires de l'École Nationale de Médecine et de Pharmacie de Dakar 9: 355-386. 
698 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Kestenholz, C, 2001. Repellent properties of Cassia sophera L. (Caesalpiniaceae) against the rice 
weevil Sitophilus oryzae L. (Coleoptera; Curculionidae) and the bruchid beetle Callosobruchus 
maculatus F. (Coleoptera; Bruchidae). Antenna 25(1): 53-56. 
Khan, P.S.H., 1987. Comparative seed structure of medicinally important Holarrhena anti-
dysenterica (Roth.) A.DC. and its adulterant, Wrightia tinctoria R.Br. (Apocynaceae). Interna-
tional Journal of Crude Drug Research 25(2): 81-86. 
Khan, M.R., 2001. Antibacterial activity of some Tanzanian medicinal plants. Pharmaceutical Biol-
ogy 39(3): 206-212. 
Khan, M.R. & Omoloso, A.D., 2002. Antibacterial activity of Hygrophila stricta and Peperomia pel-
lucida. Fitoterapia 73: 251-254. 
Khan, A.M., Rahman, M. & Nur-e-Kamal, M.S., 1988. Antibacterial activity of Euphorbia thymifo-
lia L. Indian Journal of Medical Research 87: 395-397. 
Khanna, K. & Arora, J.S., 1984. Note on propagation of Cassia fistula (amaltas) by cutting and 
layering. Indian Journal of Horticulture 41(1-2): 137-138. 
Khanna, P.K., Kumar, A., Ahuja, A. & Kaul, M.K., 2006. Multipurpose efficacious medicinal plant 
Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal (Ashwagandha). Journal of Plant Biology 33(3): 185-192. 
Khatoon, S., Raia, V., Rawata, A.K.S. & Mehrotra, S., 2006. Comparative pharmacognostic studies 
of three Phyllanthus species. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 104(1-2): 79-86. 
Khonje, T.L.K., 1998. Soil nitrogen and organic matter contribution by some green manures under 
a maize-based cropping system. BSc thesis, University of Malawi, Bunda College of Agriculture, 
Bunda, Malawi. 25 pp. 
Khumwanich, K., 1999. Effect of crude extract from climbing lily Gloriosa superba Linn, seeds on 
polyploid induction of watermelon Citrullus lanatus Mats & Nakai in vitro. MSc Thesis, Chu-
lalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand. 90 pp. 
Kibungu Kembelo, A.O., 2004. Quelques plantes médicinales du Bas-Congo et leurs usages. DFID, 
London, United Kingdom. 197 pp. 
Kidoy, L., Nygaard, A.M., Andersen, O.M., Pedersen, A.T., Aksnes, D.W. & Kiremire, B.T., 1997. 
Anthocyanins in fruits of Passiflora edulis and P. suberosa. Journal of Food Composition and 
Analysis 10: 49-54. 
Kiew, R., 1999. Peperomia pellucida (L.) Kunth. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lem-
mens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous 
plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 379-381. 
Kihara, F.I., Mathuva, J.M., Kamau, M.G. & Mathenge, G., 2003. Aloe trade in Kenya: Market 
Study Report. Laikipia Wildlife Forum, Nanyuki, Kenya. 64 pp. + Appendices. 
Kijjoa, A., Giesbrecht, A.M., Akisue, M.K., Gottlieb, O.R. & Gottlieb, H.E., 1980. 4-Nerolidyl-
catechol from Potomorphe umbellata. Planta Medica 39(1): 85-87. 
Kilian, H.D., Jahn, K., Kraus, L. & Büttner, D.W., 1990. In vivo and in vitro effects of extracts from 
Cassia aubrevillei in onchocerciasis. Acta Leiden 59(1-2): 365-371. 
Kim, S., Kubec, R. & Musah, R.A., 2006. Antibacterial and antifungal activity of sulfur-containing 
compounds from Petiveria alliacea L. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 104(1-2): 188-192. 
Kim, J.H., Lee, S.J., Han, Y.B., Moon, J.J. & Kim, J.B., 1994. Isolation of isoguanosine from Croton 
tiglium and its antitumor activity. Archives of Pharmacal Research 17(2): 115-118. 
Kim, K.A., Moon, T.C., Lee, S.W., Chung, K.C., Han, B.H. & Chang, H.W., 1999. Pinusolide from 
the leaves of Biota orientalis as potent platelet activating factor antagonist. Planta Medica 65(1): 
39-42. 
Kimpouni, V., 1999. A preliminary market survey of non-wood forest products traded in the Pointe-
Noire markets (Congo-Brazzaville). In: Sunderland, T.C.H., Clark, L.E. & Vantomme, P. (Edi-
tors). The non-wood forest products of central Africa: current research issues and prospects for 
conservation development. FAO, Rome, Italy, pp. 222-228. 
Kinghorn, D., 1980. A major skin-irritant principle from Synadenium grantii. Journal of Pharma-
ceutical Science 69(12): 1446-1447. 
Kini, D.P., Pandey, S., Shenoy, B.D., Singh, U.V., Udupa, N., Umadevi, P., Kamath, R., Nagara-
jkumari, Ramanarayan, K., 1997. Antitumor and antifertility activities of plumbagin controlled 
release formulations. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 35(4): 374-379. 
LITERATURE 699 
Kino, M., Yamaguchi, K., Umekawa, H. & Funatsu, G., 1995. Purification and characterization of 
three mitogenic lectins from the roots of pokeweed (Phytolacca americana). Bioscience, Biotech-
nology and Biochemistry 59(4): 683-688. 
Kinoshita, T., 2000. Chemical studies on the Philippine crude drug calumbihit (seeds of Caes-
alpinia bonduc): the isolation of new cassane diterpenes fused with a,b-butenolide. Chemical & 
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 48(9): 1375-1377. 
Kiptot, E., 2007. Eliciting indigenous knowledge on tree fodder among Maasai pastoralists via a 
multi-method sequencing approach. Agriculture and Human Values 24: 231-243. 
Kiringe, J.W., 2006. A survey of traditional health remedies used by the Maasai of southern Kai-
jiado District, Kenya. Ethnobotany Research & Applications 4: 61-74. 
Kirira, P.O., Rukunga, G.M., Wanyonyi, A.W., Muregi, F.M., Gathirwa, J.W., Muthaura, C.N., 
Omar, S.A., Tolo, F., Mungai, G.M. & Ndiege, I.O., 2006. Anti-plasmodial activity and toxicity of 
extracts of plants used in traditional malaria therapy in Meru and Kilifi districts of Kenya. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 106: 403-407. 
Kirtsova, M.V. & Korneva, E.I., 1999. The results of selection of steroid-containing species of So-
lanum subgenus Archaesolanum. In: Nee, M., Symon, D.E., Lester, R.N. & Jessop, J.P. (Editors). 
Solanaceae 4: Advances in biology and utilization. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, 
United Kingdom, pp. 415-416. 
Kitagawa, I., Ishizu, T., Ohashi, K. & Shibuya, H., 2000. Chirality of natural products: 
hyoscyamine and scopolamine. Journal of the Pharmaceutical Society of Japan 120(10): 1017-
1023. 
Kitula, R.A., 2007. Use of medicinal plants for human health in Udzungwa Mountains Forests: a 
case study of New Dabaga Ulongambi Forest Reserve, Tanzania. Journal of Ethnobiology and 
Ethnomedicine 3: 7. 
Kleinschmidt, B., 2004. South African wild aloe juice enters international market. Fruit Processing 
14(3): 194-198. 
Kluza, J., Baldeyrou, B., Colson, P., Rasoanaivo, P., Frappier, F. & Bailly, C, 2003. Cytotoxicity 
and DNA binding properties of the alkaloid burasaine from Burasaia madagascariensis. Euro-
pean Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 20: 383-391. 
Kobayashi, A., Hagihara, K., Kajiyama, S., Kanzaki, H. & Kawazu, K., 1995. Antifungal com-
pounds induced in the dual culture with Phytolacca americana callus and Botrytis fabae. 
Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, Section C, Biosciences 50(5-6): 398-402. 
Kodja, H., Robène-Soustrade, I. & Figier, J., 1997. Synergistic effect of DFMO and 2,4-D on regen-
eration of Tabernaemontana persicariaefolia Jacq. in vitro. Acta Physiologiae Plantarum 19(3): 
359-366. 
Kodym, A., Grzesowiak, E., Partyka, D., Markcinkowski, A. & Kaczynska-Dyba, E., 2002. Technol-
ogy of eye drops containing aloe (Aloe arborescens Mill.-Liliaceae) and eye drops containing both 
aloe and neomycin sulphate. Acta Polonial Pharmaceutica 59: 181-186. 
Koechlin, J., 1965. Zingiberaceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 4. Muséum National d'Histoire Na-
turelle, Paris, France, pp. 19-95. 
Köhler, I., Jenett-Siems, K., Kraft, C , Siems, K., Abbiw, D., Bienzle, U. & Eich, E., 2002. Herbal 
remedies traditionally used against malaria in Ghana: bioassay-guided fractionation of Mi-
croglossa pyrifolia (Asteraceae). Zeitschrift für Naturforschung 57(11-12): 1022-1027. 
Kohno, H., Maeda, M., Tanino, M., Tsukio, Y., Ueda, N., Wada, K., Sugie, S., Mori, H. & Tanaka, 
T., 2002. A bitter diterpenoid furanolactone columbin from Calumbae Radix inhibits azoxyme-
thane-induced rat colon carcinogenesis. Cancer Letters 183(2): 131-139. 
Kokwaro, J.O., 1993. Medicinal plants of East Africa. 2nd Edition. Kenya Literature Bureau, Nai-
robi, Kenya. 401 pp. 
Koll, R., Buhr, M., Dieter, R., Pabst, H., Predel, H.G., Petrowicz, O., Giannetti, B., Klingenburg, S. 
& Staiger, C, 2004. Efficacy and tolerance of a comfrey root extract (Extr. Rad. Symphyti) in the 
treatment of ankle distorsions: results of a multicenter, randomized, placebo-controlled, double-
blind study. Phytomedicine 11(6): 470-477. 
Komaraiah, P., Amrutha, R.N., Jogeswar, G., Ramakrishna, S.V. & Kishor, P.B.K., 2002. Produc-
tion of plumbagin from hairy root cultures of Plumbago rosea L. Plant Cell Biotechnology and 
Molecular Biology 3(1-2): 65-68. 
700 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Komaraiah, P., Ramakrishna, S.V., Reddanna, P. & Kavi Kishor, P.B., 2003. Enhanced production 
of plumbagin in immobilized cells of Plumbago rosea by elicitation and in situ adsorption. Journal 
of Biotechnology 101(2): 181-187. 
Komaraiah, P., Jogeswar, G., Ramakrishna, S.V. & Kishor, P.B.K., 2004. Acetylsalicylic acid and 
ammonium-induced somatic embryogenesis and enhanced plumbagin production in suspension 
cultures of Plumbago rosea L. In Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology - Plant 40(2): 230-
234. 
Konda, K., Mbembe, B., Bavukinina, N. & Itufa, Y., 1992. Contribution à l'inventaire des plantes 
alimentaires spontanées au Zaïre. Al Biruniya, Revue Marocaine de Pharmacognosie, d'Etude 
Ethnomédicales et de Botanique Appliquée 8(2): 97-109. 
Kondo, Y., Takano, F. & Hojo, H., 1993. Suppression of lipopolysaccharide-induced fulminant hepa-
titis and tumor necrosis factor production by bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids in bacillus Calmette-
Guerin-treated mice. Biochemical Pharmacology 46(10): 1861-1863. 
Koné, W.M., Atindehou, K.K., Terreaux, C , Hostettmann, K., Traoré, D. & Dosso, M., 2004. Tradi-
tional medicine in North Côte d'Ivoire: screening of 50 medicinal plants for antibacterial activity. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 93(1): 43-49. 
Koné, W.M., Kamanzi, A.K., Traoré, D. & Bruno, B., 2005. Anthelmintic activity of medicinal 
plants used in northern Côte d'Ivoire against intestinal helminthiasis. Pharmaceutical Biology 
43(1): 72-78. 
Kossou, D.K., 1992. The sensitivity of wood used for the construction of traditional granaries to 
attack by Prostephanus truncatus (Horn) (Coleoptera: Bostrichidae). Insect Science and its Appli-
cation 13(3): 435-439. 
Koumba Zaou, P., Mapaga, D., Nze Nguema, S. & Deleporte, P., 1998. Croissance de 13 essences de 
bois d'oeuvre plantées en forêt Gabonaise. Bois et Forêts des Tropiques 256(2): 21-32. 
Kouyaté, A.M., 2005. Aspects ethnobotaniques et étude de la variabilité morphologique, biochimi-
que et phénologique de Detarium microcarpum Guill. & Perr. Au Mali. PhD thesis. Faculty of Ag-
riculture and Applied Biological Sciences, University of Gent, Gent, Belgium. 207 pp. 
Kouyaté, A.M., Meyer, A. & van Damme, P., 2002. Perceptions paysannes de Detarium microcar-
pum Guill. et Perr. dans le sud du Mali. Fruits 57(5-6). 14 pp. 
Kraft, C, Jenett-Siems, K., Siems, K., Jakupovic, J., Mavi, S., Bienzle, U. & Eich, E., 2003. In vitro 
antiplasmodial evaluation of medicinal plants from Zimbabwe. Phytotherapy Research 17(2): 
123-128. 
Krauss, S., 1996. Etude botanique, chimique et pharmacologique du Tabernanthe iboga (Bâillon): 
recherche de propriétés antifongiques et antibactériennes. Thèse d'Exercice, Département de 
Pharmacie, Université de Franche Comté, Besançon, France. 122 pp. 
Krebs, H.C. & Ramiarantsoa, H., 1997. Clerodane diterpenes of Croton hovarum. Phytochemistry 
45(2): 379-381. 
Krebs, H.C., Rakotoarimanga, J.V., Rasoanaivo, P., Frappier, F. & Martin, M-T., 1997. Alkaloids of 
Perriera madagascariensis. Journal of Natural Products 60(11): 1183-1185. 
Kren, V., Sedmera, P., Polasek, M., Minghetti, A. & Crespi-Perellino, N., 1996a. Dimerization of 
lysergene by Euphorbia calyptrata cell cultures. Journal of Natural Products 59(6): 609-611. 
Kren, V., Sedmera, P., Prikrylova, V., Minghetti, A., Crespi-Perellino, N., Polasek, M. & Macek, T., 
1996b. Biotransformation of chanoclavine by Euphorbia calyptrata cell culture. Journal of Natu-
ral Products 59(5): 481-484. 
Kronlund, A., Kristiansson, K. & Sandberg, F., 1970. Occurrence of pheanthine and N,N1-
dimethylpheanthine in Triclisia dictyophylla and T. patens. New simple method for estimation of 
muscle relaxant effect. Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica 7(3): 279-284. 
Kruijt, R.C., 1996. A taxonomie monograph of Sapium Jacq., Anomostachys (Baill.) Hurus., Duvi-
gneaudia J. Leonard and Sclerocroton Höchst. (Euphorbiaceae tribe Hippomaneae). Bibliotheca 
Botanica 146. 109 pp. 
Kryn, J.M. & Fobes, E.W., 1959. The woods of Liberia. Report 2159. USDA Forest Service, Forest 
Products Laboratory, Madison, Wisconsin, United States. 147 pp. 
Kubec, R., Kim, S. & Musah, R.A., 2003. The lachrymatory principle of Petiveria alliacea. Phyto-
chemistry 63(1): 37-40. 
LITERATURE 701 
Kubo, I., Uchida, M. & Kloeke, J.A., 1983. An insect ecdysis inhibitor from the African medicinal 
plant, Plumbago capensis (Plumbaginaceae); a naturally occurring chitin synthetase inhibitor. 
Agricultural and Biological Chemistry 47(4): 911-913. 
Kudi, A.C. & Myint, S.H., 1999. Antiviral activity of some Nigerian medicinal plant extracts. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 68: 289-294. 
Kugelman, K., Liu, W.C., Axelrod, M., McBride, T.J. & Rao, K.V., 1976. Indicine-N-oxide: the anti-
tumor principle of Heliotropium indicum. Lloydia 39(2-3): 125-128. 
Kulkarni, R.N., Sreevalli, Y., Baskaran, K. & Kumar, S., 2001. The mechanism and inheritance of 
intraflower self-pollination in self-pollinating variant strains of periwinkle. Plant Breeding 120: 
247-250. 
Kumar, M.S. & Banerji, A., 2002. Growth disruption in Opisina arenosella Walker by plumbagin, a 
natural occurring insect growth regulator. Insect Science and its Application 22(4): 321-323. 
Kumar, K.H.H. & Kuttan, R., 2006. Inhibition of drug metabolizing enzymes (cytochrome P450) in 
vitro as well as in vivo by Phyllanthus amarus Schum. & Thonn. Biological and Pharmaceutical 
Bulletin 29(7): 1310-1313. 
Kumar, R.V. & Swarnkar, G.K., 2003. Rooting response in stem cuttings of Jatropha gossypiifolia. 
Indian Journal of Agroforestry 5(1/2): 131-133. 
Kumar, R., Sharma, K. & Agrawal, V., 2005. In vitro clonal propagation of Holarrhena anti-
dysenterica (L.) Wall, through nodal expiants from mature trees. In Vitro Cellular and Develop-
mental Biology, Plant 41(2): 137-144. 
Kumar, A., Kaul, M.K., Bhan, M.K., Khanna, P.K. & Suri, K.A., 2007. Morphological and chemical 
variation in 25 collections of the Indian medicinal plant, Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal (Solana-
ceae). Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 54(3): 655-660. 
Kumar, S., Kumar, D., Deshmukh, R.R., Lokhande, P.D., More, S.N. & Rangari, V.D., 2008. 
Antidiabetic potential of Phyllanthus reticulatus in alloxan-induced diabetic mice. Fitoterapia 
79(1): 21-23. 
Kumaran, A. & Karunakaran, R.J., 2007. In vitro antioxidant activities of methanol extracts of five 
Phyllanthus species from India. LWT Food Science and Technology 40(2): 344-352. 
Kundu, B.C. & Guha, S., 1977. The genus Perichasma (Menispermaceae). Adansonia 17(2): 221-
234. 
Kupchan, S.M. & Lacadie, J.A., 1975. Dehydroailanthinone, a new antileukemic quassinoid from 
Pierreodendron kerstingii. Journal of Organic Chemistry 40(5): 654-657. 
Kupchan, S.M., Liepa, A.J. & Fujita, T., 1973. New phenolic hasubanan alkaloids from Stephania 
abyssinica. Journal of Organic Chemistry 38: 151. 
Kupchan, S.M., Britton, R.W., Ziegler, M.F. & Sigel, C.W., 1973. Bruceantin, a new potent antileu-
kemic simaroubolide from Brucea antidysenterica. Journal of Organic Chemistry 38: 178-179. 
Kupchan, S.M., Britton, R.W., Lacadie, J.A., Ziegler, M.F. & Sigel, C.W., 1975. The isolation and 
structural elucidation of bruceantin and bruceatinol, new potent antileukemic quassinoids from 
Brucea antidysenterica. Journal of Organic Chemistry 40(5): 648—654. 
Kupchan, S.M., Sigel, C.W., Matz, M.J., Gilmore, C.J. & Bryan, R.F., 1976. Structure and stereo-
chemistry of jatrophone a novel macro cyclic diterpenoid tumor inhibitor. Journal of the American 
Chemical Society 98(8): 2295-2300. 
Kupicha, F.K., 1982. Studies on African Apocynaceae: the genus Acokanthera. Kew Bulletin 37(1): 
41-67. 
Kuria, K.A., De Coster, S., Muriuki, G., Masengo, W., Kibwage, I., Hoogmartens J., Laekeman 
G.M., 2001. Antimalarial activity of Ajuga remota Benth (Labiatae) and Caesalpinia volkensii 
Harms (Caesalpiniaceae): in vitro confirmation of ethnopharmacological use. Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 74(2): 141-148. 
Kuroda, K. & Akao, M., 1977. Inhibitory effect of fumaric acid and dicarboxylic acids on gastric 
ulceration in rats. Archives Internationales de Pharmacodynamie et de Therapie 226(2): 324-330. 
Kuroda, K. & Akao, M., 1980. Reduction by fumaric-acid of side effects of mitomycin C. Biochemical 
Pharmacology 29(20): 2839-2844. 
Kuroda, K. & Kaku, T., 1969. Pharmacological and chemical studies on the alcohol extract of 
Capsella bursa-pastoris. Life Science 8(3): 151-155. 
Kuster-Laine, I., 1985. Contribution à l'étude de trois phanérogames congolaises douées de proprié-
tés antifongiques : Crossopteryx febrifuga (Afzel. ex G. Don) Benth., Rubiacées, Cathormion altis-
702 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
simum (Hook, f.) Hutch et Dandy, Légumineuses-Mimosacées, Voacanga chalotiana Pierre, Apo-
cynacées. Thèse de Doctorat d'Etat, Département de Pharmacie, Université de Besançon, Besan-
çon, France. 64 pp. 
Kuzuya, B., Shimpo, K. & Beppu, H., 2004. Aloe lectins and their activity. In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). 
Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States, pp. 88-110. 
Kwapata, M.B. & Maliro, M.F., 1997. Indigenous vegetables in Malawi: Germplasm collecting and 
improvement of production practices. In: Guarino, L. (Editor). Traditional African vegetables. 
Proceedings of the IPGRI international workshop on genetic resources of traditional vegetables in 
Africa', conservation and use, 29-31 August 1995, ICRAF, Nairobi, Kenya. Promoting the conser-
vation and use of underutilized and neglected crops 16. pp. 132-135. 
Laden, G. & Wrangham, R., 2005. The rise of the hominids as an adaptive shift in fallback foods: 
plant underground storage organs (USOs) and australopith origins. Journal of Human Evolution 
49: 482-498. 
Ladipo, D.O. & Onyeachusim, H.D., 1993. Crop seed protection and soil enrichment using Erythro-
phleum suaveolens. Agroforestry Today 5(1): 13-15. 
Lagnika, L., 2005. Etude phytochimique et activité biologique de substances naturelles isolées de 
plantes béninoises. Thèse en Pharmacognosy, Faculté de Pharmacie, Université Louis Pasteur, 
Strasbourg, France et Université d'Abomey-Calavi, Cotonou, Bénin. 280 pp. 
LaGrone, R.P., 1999. Method of treating humans with disease characterised by high secretion of 
cytokines from macrophage cells, [internet] <http://www.freepatentsonline.com/6407068.html>. 
Accessed August 2006. 
Lai, L.T., Naiki, M., Yoshida, S.H., German, J.B. & Gershwin, M.E., 1994. Dietary Platycladus 
orientalis seed oil suppresses anti-erythrocyte autoantibodies and prolongs survival of NZB mice. 
Clinical Immunology and Immunopathology 71(3): 293-302. 
Lainé, C , Baniakina, J., Vaquette, J., Chaumont, J.P. & Simeray, J., 1985. Antifungal activity of 
the barks of trunks of seven phanerogams from the Congo. Plantes Médicinales et Phytotherapie 
19(2): 75-83. 
Laird, S.A., Leke Awung, G. & Lysinge, R.J., 2007. Cocoa farms in the Mount Cameroon region: 
biological and cultural diversity in local livelihoods. Biodiversity Conservation 16: 2401-2427. 
Laivao, M.O., 1999. Contribution à l'étude de la flore médicinale de Bemaraha et leurs caractéristi-
ques écologiques. Mémoire de DEA, option Ecologie Végétale, Faculté des Sciences, Université 
d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 104 pp. 
Lajide, L., Escoubas, P. & Mizutani, J., 1995. Termite antifeedant activity in Detarium microcar-
pum. Phytochemistry 40: 1101-1104. 
Lam, S.H., Wang, C.Y., Chen, CK. & Lee, S.S., 2007. Chemical investigation of Phyllanthus reticu-
latus by HPLC-SPE-NMR and conventional methods. Phytochemical Analysis 18(3): 251-255. 
Lamabadusuriya, S.P. & Jayantha, U.K., 1994. Acalypha indica induced haemolysis in G6PD defi-
ciency. Ceylon Medical Journal 39(1): 46-47. 
Lambert, J.D.H., Temmink, J.H.M., Marquis, J., Parkhurst, R.M., Lugt, C.B., Lemmich, E., Wolde 
Yohannes, L. & De Savigny, D., 1991. Endod: safety evaluation of a plant molluscicide. Regula-
tory Toxicology and Pharmacology 14(2): 189-201. 
Lambert, M., Stœrk, D., Hansen, S.H. & Jaroszewski, J.W., 2005. HPLC-SPE-NMR hyphenation in 
natural products research: optimization of analysis of Croton membranaceus extract. Magnetic 
Resonance in Chemistry 43(9): 771-775. 
Lambert, N., Baccou, J.C. & Sauvaire, Y., 1988. Screening for diosgenin in rhizomes from 3 Costus 
species (C. deistellii, C. igneus, C. lucanusianus). Planta Medica 54(4): 366-367. 
Lami, N., Kadota, S. & Kikuchi, T., 1991. Constituents of the roots of Boerhaavia diffusa L. 4. Iso-
lation and structure determination of boeravinones D, E, and F. Chemical & Pharmaceutical Bul-
letin 39(7): 1863-1865. 
Lamikanra, A., Ogundaini, A.O. & Ogunbamila, F.O., 1990. Antibacterial constituents of Alchornea 
cordifolia leaves. Phytotherapy Research 4: 198-200. 
Lamotte, J., Dupont, L., Dideberg, O., Kambu, K. & Angenot, L., 1979. Isolation and structure of 
sungucine, a new type of bisindole alkaloid. Tetrahedon Letters 43: 4227-4228. 
Lanhers, M.C., Fleurentin, J., Cabalion, P., Rolland, A., Dorfman, P., Misslin, R. & Pelt, J.M., 
1990. Behavioral effects of Euphorbia hirta L.: sedative and anxiolytic properties. Journal of Eth-
nopharmacology 29(2): 189-198. 
LITERATURE 703 
Lanhers, M.C., Fleurentin, J., Dorfman, P., Mortier, F. & Pelt, J.-M., 1991. Analgesic, antipyretic 
and anti-inflammatory properties of Euphorbia hirta. Planta Medica 57(3): 225-231. 
Lardinois, P., Duez, P., Chamart, S., Lejoly, J., Hanocq, M., Zeba, B., Sawadogo, M. & Molle, L., 
1987. Etude des conditions d'optimalisation d'une culture de Cassia italica Mill, au Burkina Faso 
destinée a la production de sennosides. Médecine Traditionnelle et Pharmacopée 1(1): 5-27. 
Lardon, A., 1950. Die Glycoside der Samen von Strophanthus eminii Asch. & Pax. Glykoside und 
Aglykone, 56. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 33(3): 639-650. 
Latham, P., 2004. Useful plants of Bas-Congo province, Democratic Republic of the Congo. DFID, 
London, United Kingdom. 320 pp. 
Latham, P., 2005. Some honeybee plants of Bas-Congo Province, Democratic Republic of Congo. 
DFID, United Kingdom. 167 pp. 
Latham, P., 2007. Plants visited by bees and other useful plants of Umalila, southern Tanzania. 
Third edition. P.Latham, DFID, United Kingdom. 216 pp. 
Laudadio, C. & Davis, M., 2003. Cardiac glycosides for treating muscle pain and spasm. U.S. Pat-
ent Application US 2003229029. 6 pp. 
Launert, E., 1981. Edible and Medicinal Plants. Hamlyn, London. 
Lauridsen, M., 2003. Isolering og strukturopklaring af alkaloider fra Rhigiocarya racemifera. MSc 
Thesis. Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Lavania, U.C., 1986. Genetic improvement of Egyptian henbane, Hyoscyamus muticus L. through 
induced tetraploidy. Theoretical and Applied Genetics 73: 292-298. 
Lavergne, R., 2001. Le grand livre des tisaneurs et plantes médicinales indigènes de la Réunion. 
Editions Orphie, Chevagny sur Guye, France. 522 pp. 
Lavergne, R. & Véra, R., 1989. Médecine traditionelle et pharmacopée - Contribution aux études 
ethnobotaniques et floristiques à la Réunion. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Pa-
ris, France. 236 pp. 
Lavranos, J., 1995. Aloaceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. Volume 4. Angiospermae 
(Hydrocharitaceae-Pandanaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 
35-42. 
Lawalrée, A., 1972. Santalaceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 14. Muséum National d'Histoire Na-
turelle, Paris, France, pp. 65-71. 
Lawalrée, A., 1982. Caprifoliaceae. In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore d'Afrique centrale. Spermatophy-
tes. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 6 pp. 
Lawalrée, A., 1989. Lycopodiaceae. In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore d'Afrique centrale. Spermatophy-
tes. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 22 pp. 
LCSV, 2004. Reactivity, synthesis and biological activity of plant phenols and polyphenols. [Inter-
net] Laboratory of Plant Products Chemistry (LCSV), Bordeaux 1 University, France. 
<http://www.u-bordeauxl.fr/lcsv/SASN/polyphenols.html>. Accessed September 2004. 
Le Bourgeois, T. & Merlier, H., 1995. Adventrop. Les adventices d'Afrique soudano-sahélienne. 
CIRAD-CA, Montpellier, France. 637 pp. 
le Floc'h, E., Lemordant, D., Lignon, A. & Rezkallah, N., 1985. Pratiques ethnobotaniques des po-
pulations Afars de la moyenne vallée de l'Awash (Ethiopie). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 14: 
283-314. 
Le Gall, P., Djihou, Z., Tchenga, G. & Lomer, C.J., 2003. Diet of Zonocerus variegatus (Linné, 1758) 
(Orth., Acrididae) in cassava fields in Bénin. Journal of Applied Entomology 127(7): 435-440. 
le Grand, A. & Wondergem, P.A., 1987. Les phytotherapies anti-infectueuses de la forêt-savane, 
Sénégal (Afrique occidentale). 1. un inventaire. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 21: 109-125. 
Le Roux, L.-N., 2004. Euphorbia ingens. [Internet] South African National Biodiversity Institute, 
Cape Town, South Africa, <http://www.plantzafrica.com/planttuv/euphorbingen.htm> Accessed 
February 2008. 
Le Roux, L.-N., 2005. Tabernaemontana ventricosa. [Internet] South African National Biodiversity 
Institute, Cape Town, South Africa, <http://www.plantzafrica.com/planttuv/tabervent.htm> Ac-
cessed 22 June 2005. 
Le Roux, L.G. & Robbertse, P.J., 1994. Tuber ontogeny, morphology and vegetative reproduction of 
Gloriosa superba L. South African Journal of Botany 60: 321—324. 
704 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Le Roux, L.G. & Robbertse, P.J., 1997. Aspects relating to seed production in Gloriosa superba L. 
South African Journal of Botany 63(4): 191-197. 
Leach, L.C., 1973. Euphorbia tirucalli: its typification, synonymy and relationships, with notes on 
'Almeidina' and 'Cassoneira'. Kirkia 9: 69-85. 
Leal, M., de Souza, D. & Elisabetsky, E., 2000. Long-lasting ibogaine protection against NDMA-
induced convulsions in mice. Neurochemical Research 25: 1083-1087. 
Leandri, J., 1939. Les Croton de Madagascar et des îles voisines. Annales de l'Institut Botanique-
Géologique Colonial de Marseille 7(1). 100 pp. 
Leandri, J., 1958. Euphorbiacées (Euphorbiaceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores (plantes 
vasculaires), famille 111. Firmin-Didot et cie., Paris, France. 209 pp. 
Leandri, J., 1962. Notes systématiques, phénologiques et autoécologiques sur l'Euphorbia orthocla-
da Bak. Adansonia, Série 2, 2(1): 117-121. 
Lebbie, A.R. & Guries, R.P., 1995. Ethnobotanical value and conservation of sacred groves of the 
Kpaa Mende in Sierra Leone. Economic Botany 49(3): 297-308. 
Lee, S.H., Tanaka, T., Nonaka, G.I. & Nishioka, I., 1990. Hydrolysable tannins from Euphorbia 
thymifolia. Phytochemistry 29(11): 3621-3625. 
Lee, S.H., Park, J.H., Kim, S.Y., Chung, S.R. & Choi, S.U., 1997. Cytotoxic effects of hydrolysable 
tannins from some euphorbia plants on the human tumor cell lines. YakhakHoeji 41(4): 524-529. 
Lee, S.K., Mbwambo, Z.H., Chung, H., Luyengi, L., Gamez, E.J., Mehta, R.G., Kinghorn, A.D. & 
Pezzuto, J.M., 1998. Evaluation of the antioxidant potential of natural products. Combinatorial 
Chemistry and High Throughput Screening 1(1): 35-46. 
Lee, S.K.Y., Li, P.T., Lau, D.T.W., Yung, P.P., Kong, R.Y.C. & Fong, W.F., 2006a. Phylogeny of me-
dicinal Phyllanthus species in China based on nuclear ITS and chloroplast atpB-rbcL sequences 
and multiplex PCR detection assay analysis. Planta Medica 72(8): 721-726. 
Lee, C.Y., Peng, W.H., Cheng, H.Y., Chen, F.N., Lai, M.T. & Chiu, T.H., 2006b. Hepatoprotective 
effect of Phyllanthus in Taiwan on acute liver damage induced by carbon tetrachloride. American 
Journal of Chinese Medicine 34(3): 471-482. 
Leelarasamee, A., Trakulsomboon, S., Maunwongyathi, P., Somanabandhu, A., Pidetcha, P., Ma-
trakool, B., Lebnak, T., Ridthimat, W. & Chandanayingyong, D., 1990. Failure of Phyllanthus 
amarus to eradicate hepatitis B surface antigen from symptomless carriers. Lancet 335(8705): 
1600-1601. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1961a. The Loganiaceae of Africa 2. A revision of Mostuea Didr. Mede-
delingen Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 61-4. Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 1-31. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1961b. The Loganiaceae of Africa. 1. Anthocleista. Acta Botanica Neerlandi-
ca 10: 1-53. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1961c. The Loganiaceae of Africa. 3. Spigelia L. Acta Botanica Neerlandica 
10: 460-465. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1963. The Loganiaceae of Africa 5. Listeria Willd. Acta Botanica Neerlandica 
12: 112-118. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1969. The Loganiaceae of Africa 8. Strychnos 3. Revision of the African spe-
cies with notes on the extra-African. Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 69—1. Wa-
geningen, Netherlands. 316 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Editor), 1980. Angiospermae: Ordnung Gentiales. Fam. Loganiaceae. Die 
natürlichen Pflanzenfamilien. Second Edition. Band 28 b-1. Duncker & Humblot, Berlin, Germa-
ny. 255 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1983. Loganiaceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 7, 
part 1. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 327-374. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1984. Loganiaceae. Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, famille 167. Mu-
séum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France. 107 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1985. Voacanga Thou. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revisions 
of Apocynaceae 15. Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 85-3. Wageningen Agricultural 
University, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 5-80. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1988a. The African species of Ochrosia Juss. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Edi-
tor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 23. Agricultural University Wageningen Papers 87—5. pp. 
45-53. 
LITERATURE 705 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1988b. The African species of Wrightia R.Br. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Edi-
tor). Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 22. Agricultural University Wageningen Papers 87-5. pp. 
33-43. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1991. A revision of Tabernaemontana 1. The Old World species. Royal Bo-
tanic Gardens, Kew, United Kingdom. 223 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1997a. Craspidospermum Boj. ex A. DC, Gonioma E. Mey., Mascarenhasia 
A. DC., Petchia Livera, Plectaneia Thou., and Stephanostegia Baill. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. 
(Editor). Series of Revisions of Apocynaceae 44. Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 97-
2. Wageningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, Netherlands. 124 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1997b. Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 43. Alafia Thouars. Kew Bulletin 
52(4): 769-839. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1999. Series of revisions of Apocynaceae XLVII. The genus Cerbera L. 
Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 98-3. 64 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 2003. Apocynaceae. In: Hedberg, I., Edwards, S. & Sileshi Nemomissa (Edi-
tors). Flora of Ethiopia and Eritrea. Volume 4, part 1. Apiaceae to Dipsacaceae. The National 
Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Bot-
any, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 87-98. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. & Rudjiman, 2005. Apocynacées. In: Autry, J.C., Bosser, J. & Ferguson, I.K. 
(Editors). Flore des Mascareignes. Famille 121-126. Institut de Recherche Scientifique pour le 
Développement, Paris, France, Mauritius Sugar Industry Research Institute, Mauritius & Royal 
Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 31 pp. 
Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., Kupicha, F.K., Barink, M.M., Beentje, H.J., de Kruif, A.P.M., Plaizier, A.C. 
& Zwetsloot, H.J.C., 1985. Apocynaceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 7, 
part 2. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 395-503. 
Leewanich, P., Michihisa, T., Kinzo, M., Subhadhirasakul, S., Takayama, H. & Watanabe, H., 
1996. Behavioral studies of alkaloids extracted from the leaves of Hunteria zeylanica. Biological 
and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 19(3): 394-399. 
Leewanich, P., Tohda, M., Matsumoto, K., Subhadhirasakul, S., Takayama, H., Aimi, N. & Wata-
nabe, H., 1997. Inhibitory effects of corymine, an alkoloidal component from the leaves of Hunte-
ria zeylanica, on glycine receptors expressed in Xenopus oocytes. European Journal of Pharma-
cology 332(3): 321-326. 
Leffers, A., 2003. Gemsbok bean & Kalahari truffle: traditional plant use by Jul'hoansi in North-
Eastern Namibia. Gamsberg Macmillan Publishers, Windhoek, Namibia. 202 pp. 
Leger, S., 1997. The hidden gifts of nature: A description of today's use of plants in West Bush-
manland (Namibia). [Internet] DED, German Development Service, Windhoek, Namibia & Ber-
lin, Germany, <http://www.sigridleger.de/book/>. Accessed April 2003 - March 2006. 
Lehmann, G., 1988. Plantaginaceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 9, part 1. 
Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 9-12. 
Lehmann, A.C. & Mihalyi, L.J., 1982. Aggression, bravery, endurance and drugs: a radical re-
evaluation and analysis of the Masai warrior complex. Ethnology 21(4): 335-347. 
Leistner, O.A., 2000. Seed plants of southern Africa: families and genera. National Botanical Insti-
tute, Pretoria, South Africa. 775 pp. 
Leite, D.F.P., Kassuya, C.A.L., Mazzuco, T.L., Silvestre, A., De Melo, L.V., Rehder, V.L.G., Rum-
janek, V.M. & Calixto, J.B., 2006. The cytotoxic effect and the multidrug resistance reversing ac-
tion of lignans from Phyllanthus amarus. Planta Medica 72(15): 1353-1358. 
Lemke, C, 2005. Monadenium lugardiae. [Internet] Cal's Plant of the Week, University of Okla-
homa, Department of Botany & Microbiology, United States. 
<http://www.plantoftheweek.org/week289.shtml>. Accessed November 2007. 
Lemma, A., Heyneman, D. & Silangwa, S.M. (Editors), 1984. Phytolacca dodecandra (endod). To-
wards controlling transmission of schistosomiasis with the use of a natural product. Final report 
of the international scientific workshop, March 1983, Lusaka, Zambia. Tycooly International Pub-
lications Ltd., Dublin, Ireland. 318 pp. 
Lemma, H., Debella, A., Addis, G., Kunert, O., Geyid, A., Teka, F. & Yersaw, K., 2002. Anti-
bacterial activity of Plumbago zeylanica L. roots on some pneumonia causing pathogens. Ethio-
pian Journal of Science 25(2): 285-294. 
706 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Lemordant, D., 1971. Contribution à l'ethnobotanique éthiopienne 2. Journal d'Agriculture Tropi-
cale et de Botanique Appliquée 18(4-6): 142-179. 
Leng, R.A., 1997. Tree foliage in ruminant nutrition. FAO Animal Production and Health Paper 
139. FAO, Rome, Italy. 100 pp. 
Léonard, J., 1947. Notulae systematicae I. (Moraceae, Opiliaceae, Olacaceae, Octoknemaceae que 
africanae). Bulletin du Jardin Botanique de l'Etat (Bruxelles) 18: 145-153. 
Léonard, J., 1958. Notulae systematicae XXIII. Notes sur diverses Euphorbiacées africaines des 
genres Croton, Crotonogyne, Dalechampia, Grossera et Thecacoris. Bulletin du Jardin Botanique 
de l'Etat (Bruxelles) 28: 111-121. 
Léonard, J., 1959. Notulae systematicae XXVI. Notes sur les espèces africaines continentales des 
genres Sapium P.Br. et Excoecaria L. Bulletin du Jardin Botanique de l'Etat (Bruxelles) 29: 133-
146. 
Léonard, J., 1960. Notulae systematicae XXIX. Révision des Cleistanthus d'Afrique continentale 
(Euphorbiacées). Bulletin du Jardin botanique de l'Etat (Bruxelles) 30: 421-461. 
Léonard, J., 1961. Notulae systematicae XXXI. Révision des espèces africaines de Microdesmis 
(Euphorbiacées). Bulletin du Jardin botanique de l'Etat (Bruxelles) 31: 159-187. 
Léonard, J., 1962. Euphorbiaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., Demaret, F., Germain, R., Gilbert, 
G., Hauman, L., Homes, M., Jurion, F., Lebrun, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). 
Flore du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 8, 1. Institut National pour 
l'Étude Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium. 214 pp. 
Léonard, J., 1988. Révision du genre Antidesma L. (Euphorbiaceae) en Afrique centrale. Bulletin 
du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 58: 3-46. 
Léonard, J., 1995. Euphorbiaceae (deuxième partie). In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore d'Afrique cen-
trale. Spermatophytes. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 115 pp. 
Léonard, J., 1996a. Euphorbiaceae (troisième partie). In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore d'Afrique cen-
trale. Spermatophytes. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 74 pp. 
Léonard, J., 1996b. Révision des espèces zaïroises des genres Mareya Baill. et Mareyopsis Pax & K. 
Hoffm. (Euphorbiaceae). Bulletin du Jardin Botanique national de Belgique 65: 3-22. 
Léonard, J., 1996c. Révision des espèces zaïroises du genre Pycnocoma Benth. (Euphorbiaceae). 
Bulletin du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 65: 37-72. 
Léonard, J. & Nkounkou, J., 1989. Révision du genre Spondianthus Engl. (Euphorbiacée africaine). 
Bulletin du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 59: 133-149. 
Léonard, J. & Troupin, G., 1950. Observations sur le genre Okoubaka Pellegr. & Normand (Octok-
nemaceae). Bulletin du Jardin Botanique de l'Etat (Bruxelles) 20: 11-14. 
Lester, R.N. & Daunay, M.-C, 2003. Diversity of African vegetable Solanum species and its impli-
cations for a better understanding of plant domestication. In: Knupffer, H. & Ochsmann, J. (Edi-
tors). Rudolf Mansfeld and Plant Genetic Resources. Schriften zu Genetischen Ressourcen 22: 
137-152. 
Leung, W.-T.W., Busson, F. & Jardin, C, 1968. Food composition table for use in Africa. FAO, 
Rome, Italy. 306 pp. 
Leung, W.-T.W., Butrum, R.R. & Chang, F.H., 1972. Food composition table for use in East Asia. 
Department of Health, Education and Welfare, Bethesda, United States. 334 pp. 
Levin, G.A. & Simpson, M.G., 1994. Phylogenetic relationships of Didymocistus and Hymenocardia 
(Euphorbiaceae). Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 81(2): 239-244. 
Levin, R.A., Myers, N.R. & Bohs, L., 2006. Phylogenetic relationships among the spiny 'solanums' 
(Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum, Solanaceae). American Journal of Botany 93: 157-169. 
Levin, R.A., Watson, K. & Bohs, L., 2005. A four-gene study of evolutionary relationships in So-
lanum section Acanthophora. American Journal of Botany 92(4): 603-612. 
Levy, P.E. & Regalado, E., 1991. Datura hybrids: clonal micropropagation and hyoscine production 
at low and high altitude cultivation in Ecuador. In: Hawkes, J.G., Lester, R.N., Nee, M. & 
Estrada, R.N. (Editors). Solanaceae 3. Taxonomy, chemistry, evolution. Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 69—74. 
Levy, O., Duez, P., Lejoly, J., Chamart, S., Sawadogo, M. & Hanocq, M., 1990. Cultivation of Holar-
rhena floribunda for conessine production in Burkina Faso. International Journal of Crude Drug 
Research 28(4): 285-295. 
Lewis, W.H., 1980. Plants used as chewing sticks. Journal of Preventative Dentistry 6: 71-73. 
LITERATURE 707 
Li, J., Li, H., Kadota, S., Namba, T., Miyahara, T. & Khan, U.G., 1996. Effects on cultured neonatal 
mouse calvaria of the flavonoids isolated from Boerhavia repens. Journal of Natural Products 
59(11): 1015-1018. 
Liao, C.W., Chang, W.F. & Koo, J., 2006. The efficacy test of protection and treatment of a Phyllan-
thus extract against the chemical-induced liver damage in rat animal-models. Taiwanese Journal 
of Agricultural Chemistry and Food Science 44(6): 370-381. 
Liao, Z., Chen, M., Tan, T., Sun, X. & Tang, K., 2004. Microprogagation of endangered Chinese 
aloe. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture 76: 83-86. 
Liben, L., 1970. Humiriaceae. In: Flore du Congo, du Ruanda et du Burundi. Spermatophytes. Jar-
din botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 4 pp. 
Liengola, LB., 2001. Contribution à l'étude des plantes alimentaires spontanées chez les Turumbu 
et Lokele du District de la Tshopo, Province Orientale, R.D. Congo. Systematics and Geography of 
Plants 71(2): 687-698. 
Luis Pangemanan, 1999. Plantago L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, 
R.H.M. J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 397-403. 
Lim, Y.Y. & Murtijaya, J., 2007. Antioxidant properties of Phyllanthus amarus extracts as affected 
by different drying methods. LWT - Food Science and Technology 40(9): 1664-1669. 
Lin, J., Yan, F., Tang, L. & Chen, F., 2003. Antitumor effects of curcin from seeds of Jatropha cur-
cas. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 24: 241-246. 
Lin, R.C., Hanquet, B. & Lacaille Dubois, M.A., 1996. Aferoside A, a steroidal saponin from Costus 
afer. Phytochemistry 43(3): 665-668. 
Lin, L.C., Yang, L.L. & Chou, C.J., 2003. Cytotoxic naphthoquinones and plumbagic acid glucosides 
from Plumbago zeylanica. Phytochemistry 62(4): 619-622. 
Lin, R. C , Lacaille Dubois, M.A., Hanquet, B., Correia, M. & Chauffert, B., 1997. New diosgenin 
glycosides from Costus afer. Journal of Natural Products 60(11): 1165-1169. 
Lin, Y.L., Tsai, Y.L., Kuo, Y.H., Liu, Y.H. & Shiao, M.S., 1999. Phenolic compounds from Tourne-
fortia sarmentosa. Journal of Natural Products 62(11): 1500-1503. 
Lin, C.C., Cheng, H.Y., Yang, CM. & Lin, T.C., 2002. Antioxidant and antiviral activities of Eu-
phorbia thymifolia L. Journal of Medical Science 9: 656-664. 
Lindsay, R.S. & Hepper, F.N., 1978. Medicinal plants of Marakwet, Kenya. Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 49 pp. 
Lippold, H., 1980. Die Gattungen Thevetia L., Cerbera L. und Cascabela Rafin. (Apocynaceae). 
Feddes Repertorium 91(1-2): 45-55. 
Lisowski, S., Malaisse, F. & Symoens, J.J., 1972. Plantaginaceae. In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore 
d'Afrique centrale. Spermatophytes. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 6 
pp. 
Lock, J.M., 1985. Zingiberaceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 40 pp. 
Lock, J.M., 1990. Cassia sens.lat. (Leguminosae - Caesalpinioideae) in Africa. Kew Bulletin 43(2): 
333-342. 
Lohombo-Ekomba, M.L., Okusa, P.N., Penge, O., Kabongo, C , Choudhary, M.I. & Käsende, O.E., 
2004. Antibacterial, antifungal, antiplasmodial, and cytotoxic activities of Albertisia villosa. Jour-
nal of Ethnopharmacology 93(2-3): 331-335. 
Long Jr, L., Clapp, R.C. & Ettlinger, M.G., 1970. Deidaclin: natural glucoside of cyclopentenone 
cyanohydrin. Journal of the American Chemical Society 92(21): 6378-6379. 
Longanga-Otshudi, A., Foriers, A., Vercruysse, A., Van Zeebroeck, A. & Lauwers, S., 2000. In vitro 
antimicrobial activity of six medicinal plants traditionally used for the treatment of dysentery 
and diarrhoea in Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Phytomedicine 7(2): 167-172. 
Longanga-Otshudi, A., Apers, S., Pieters, L., Claeys, M., Pannecouque, C, De Clerck, E., Van Zee-
brouck, A., Lauwers, S., Frédérich, M. & Foriers, A., 2005. Biologically active bisbenzylisoquino-
line alkaloids of the root bark of Epinetrum villosum. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 102: 89-94. 
Longanga-Otshudi, A., Vercruysse, A. & Foriers, A., 2000. Contribution to the ethnobotanical, phy-
tochemical and pharmacological studies of traditionally used medicinal plants in the treatment of 
dysentery and diarrhoea in Lomela area, Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC). Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 71(3): 411-423. 
708 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Lopes Martins, R.A.B., Pegoraro, D.H., Woisky, R., Penna, S.C. & Sertie, J.A.A., 2002. The anti-
inflammatory and analgesic effects of a crude extract of Petiveria alliacea L. (Phytolaccaceae). 
Phytomedicine 9(3): 245-248. 
Lorence, A. & Nessier, C.L., 2004. Camptothecin, over four decades of surprising findings. Phyto-
chemistry 65(20): 2735-2749. 
Lorenza-Salinas, M., Ogura, T. & Soffchi, L., 2001. Irritant contact dermatitis caused by needle-
like calcium oxalate crystals, raphides, in Agave tequilana among workers in tequila distilleries 
and agave plantations. Contact Dermatitis 44(2): 94. 
Lores, R.I. & Cires Pujol, M., 1990. Petiveria alliaceae L. (anamu). Study of the hypoglycemic ef-
fect. Médecine Interne 28(4): 347-352. 
Lorougnon Guédé, J. & Aké Assi, L., 1989. Lutte contre l'odontalgie chez les Bétés de la région de 
Daloa, Côte d'Ivoire. Bulletin de Médecine Traditionnelle et Pharmacopée 3(1): 85-86. 
Lotfy, H.S. & Abdel Gawad, M.A., 2000. Molluscicidal effect of some local plants against Lymnaea 
cailliaudi. Egyptian Journal of Agricultural Research 78(1): 311-319. 
Lotsof, H.S., 1995. Ibogaine in the treatment of chemical dependence disorders: clinical perspec-
tives. Bulletin of the Multidisciplinary Association of Psychedelic Studies 5: 16—27. 
Lotsof, H.S. & Alexander, N.E., 2001. Case studies of ibogaine treatment: implications for patient 
management strategies. The alkaloids. Chemistry and Biology 56: 293-313. 
Louis, J. & Léonard, J., 1948. Octoknemaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., De Wildeman, E., Ger-
main, R., Gilbert, G., Hauman, L., Homes, M., Lebrun, J., Louis, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Bou-
tique, R. (Editors). Flore du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 1. Insti-
tut National pour l'Étude Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 288-293. 
Lounasmaa, M. & Tolvanen, A., 2000. Simple indole alkaloids and those with a nonrearranged 
monoterpenoid unit. Natural Product Reports 17: 175—191. 
Loupy, M.M., 1987. Contribution à l'étude des plantes médicinales de l'île de La Réunion contenant 
des alcaloïdes: Ochrosia borbonica Gmelin (Apocynaceae), Tabernaemontana mauritiana Poiret 
(Apocynaceae). Thèse d'Exercise, Pharmacie, Université Montpellier I, Montpellier, France. 88 
pp. 
Lovatto, P.B., Goetze, M. & Thomé, G.C.H., 2004. Efeito de extratos de plantas silvestres da familia 
Solanaceae sobre o controle de Brevicoryne brassicae em couve (Brassica oleracea var. acephala). 
Ciência Rural 34(4): 971-978. 
Lovett, J.C., 1991a. Notes on the Baga Forest West Usambara Mountains. East Africa Natural 
History Society Bulletin 21: 28-29. 
Lovett, J.C., 1991b. Notes on the Shume-Magamba Forest of the West Usambara Mountains. East 
Africa Natural History Society Bulletin 21: 27-28. 
Lovett, J. & Clarke, G.P., 1998a. Croton jatrophoides. [Internet] In: IUCN. 2006 Red list of threat-
ened species, <http://www.iucnredlist.org>. Accessed January 2007. 
Lovett, J. & Clarke, G.P., 1998b. Zimmermannia capillipes. [Internet] In: IUCN. 2006 Red list of 
threatened species, <http://www.iucnredlist.org>. Accessed January 2007. 
Lovett, J.C., Ruffo, CK., Gereau, R.E. & Taplin, J.R.D., 2006. Field guide to the moist forest trees 
of Tanzania. [Internet] Centre for Ecology Law and Policy, Environment Department, University 
of York, York, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/res/celp/webpages/projects/ecology/tree%20guide/guide.htm>. Accessed 
March 2006 - February 2007. 
Lovett, J.C., Ruffo, C.K. & Gereau, R.E., 2003. Field guide to the moist forest trees of Tanzania. 
[Internet] Centre for Ecology Law and Policy, Environment Department, University of York, 
York, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.york.ac.uk/res/celp/webpages/projects/ecology/tree%20guide/guide.htm>. Accessed 
March 2004 - June 2005. 
Lubini, A., 1986. Végétation adventice et postculturale de Kisangani et de la Tshopo (Haut-Zaïre). 
Bulletin du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 56(3/4): 315-348. 
Lubini, A. & Mandango, A., 1981. Etude phytosociologique et écologique des forets à Uapaca gui-
neensis dans le nord-est du district forestier central (Zaïre). Bulletin du Jardin Botanique Natio-
nal de Belgique 51(3-4): 231-254. 
Luciano, D., 1998. Observations on treatment with ibogaine. The American Journal on Addiction 
7(1): 89-90. 
LITERATURE 709 
Luckow, M., 1996. The cultivated species of Cassia, Senna and Chamaecrista (Leguminosae). Bai-
leya 23: 195-242. 
Lugt, Ch.B., 1986. Phytolacca dodecandra berries as a means of controlling bilharzia-transmitting 
snails. Bulletin 312, Departement of Agricultural Research, Royal Tropical Institute, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands. 611 pp. 
Lugt, Ch.B. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J., 2003. Cynoglossum L. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poison-
ous plants 3. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 148-150. 
Liu, Y., Murakami, N., Ji, H., Abreu, P. & Zhang, S., 2007. Antimalarial flavonol glycosides from 
Euphorbia hirta. Pharmaceutical Biology 45(4): 278-281. 
Lujan, M.C. & Barboza, G.E., 1999. Contribution to the study of some Argentinian medicinal plants 
and commercial quality control. In: Martino, V., Bandoni, A., Blaak, G. & Capelle, N. (Editors). 
Proceedings of the Second World Congress on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants WOCMAP-2. In-
dustrial processing, standards & regulations, quality control, supply & marketing and economics. 
Mendoza, Argentina, 10-15 November, 1997. Acta Horticulturae 503: 141-154. 
Lukwa, N., Makaza, N., Molgaard, P. & Furu, P., 2001. Perceptions about malaria transmission 
and control using anti-malaria plants in Mola, Kariba, Zimbabwe. Nigerian Journal of Natural 
Products and Medicine 5: 4-7. 
Luoga, E.J., Witkowski, E.T.F. & Balkwill, K., 2004. Regeneration by coppicing (resprouting) of 
miombo (African savanna) trees in relation to land use. Forest Ecology and Management 189: 2 3 -
35. 
Luz, A.I.R., Da Silva, J.D., Zoghbi, M.G.B., Andrade, E.H.A., Da Silva, M.H.L. & Maia, J.G.S., 
1999. Volatile constituents of Brazilian Piperaceae, part 5. The oils of Pothomorphe umbellata 
and P. peltata. Journal of Essential Oil Research 11(4): 479-481. 
Lyder, D.L., Peter, S.R., Tinto, W.F., Bissada, S.M., McLean, S. & Reynolds, W.F., 1998. Minor 
cassane diterpenoids of Caesalpinia bonduc. Journal of Natural Products 61(2): 1462-1465. 
Lynn, K.R. & Clevette-Radford, N.A., 1985. Two proteases from the latex of Elaeophorbia drupif-
era. Phytochemistry 24: 2843-2845. 
Lynn, K.R. & Clevette-Radford, N.A., 1986. Lectins from latices of Euphorbia and Elaeophorbia 
species. Phytochemistry 25(7): 1553-1558. 
Lynn, K.R. & Clevette-Radford, N.A., 1987a. Acid phosphatases from latices of Euphorbiaceae. 
Phytochemistry 26(3): 655-658. 
Lynn, K.R. & Clevette-Radford, N.A., 1987b. Biochemical properties of latices from the Euphor-
biaceae. Phytochemistry 26(4): 939-944. 
Ma, X. & Gang, D.R., 2004. The Lycopodium alkaloids. Natural Product Reports 21(6): 752-772. 
Maas, A., 1991. Inventaire des produits traditionnels contre la diarrhée des petits ruminants. En-
quête dans le département du Mono. Rapport de stage. Direction de la recherche agronomique. 
Projet de recherche appliquée en milieu réel. République du Bénin, Ministère du Développement 
Rural, Cotonou, Benin. 39 pp. 
Mabberley, D.J., 1981. Edward Nathaniel Bancroft's obscure botanical publications and his father's 
plant names. Taxon 30(1): 7-17. 
MacFoy, C.A. & Cline, E.I., 1990. In vitro antibacterial activities of three plants used in traditional 
medicine in Sierra Leone. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 28(3): 323-327. 
MacFoy, C.A. & Sama, A.M., 1983. Medicinal plants in Pujehun district of Sierra Leone. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 8: 215-223. 
Macleod, A., 1998. A review of traditional anthelmintics for equines. M.Sc. Thesis. School of Agri-
cultural and Forest Sciences, University of Wales, Bangor, United Kingdom. 54 pp. 
MacNeil, A., Sumba, O.P., Lutzke, M.L., Moormann, A. & Rochford, R., 2003. Activation of the Ep-
stein-barr virus lytic cycle by the latex of the plant Euphorbia tirucalli. British Journal of Cancer 
88(10): 1566-1569. 
Madati, P. J., Kayani, M.J., Pazi, H.A.M. & Nyamgenda, A.F.D., 1977. Alkaloids of Rauvolfia caffra 
Sond. 1. Phytochemical and toxicological studies. Planta Medica 32(3): 258-267. 
Madubunyi, LI. & Asuzu, LU., 1995. Pharmacological screening of Anthocleista nobilis root bark. 
International Journal of Pharmacognosy 34(1): 28-33. 
Maduka, H.C.C., 2005. The theoretical mechanistic concept of Sacogolottis gabonensis, a Nigerian 
alcoholic beverage additive as an antioxidant protector against hepatotoxicity. [Internet] The 
710 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Internet Journal of Gastroenterology 
3(2).<http://www.ispub.com/ostia/index.php?xmlFilePath=journals/ijge/vol3n2/nigeria.xml>. Ac-
cessed December 2007. 
Maduka, H.C.C., Okoye, Z.S.C. & Eje, A., 2002. The influence of Sacoglottis gabonensis stem bark 
extract and its isolate bergenin, Nigerian alcoholic beverage additives, on the metabolic and hae-
matological side effects of 2,4-dinitrophenyl hydrazine-induced tissue damage. Vascular Pharma-
cology 39(6): 317-324. 
Maduka, H.C.C., Okoye, Z.S.C. & Mahmood, M., 2004. Amino acids and anionic components of Sa-
coglottis gabonensis stem bark extract, a Nigerian alcoholic beverage additive. Journal of Biologi-
cal Sciences 4(1): 55-61. 
Maduka, H.C.C., Uhwache, H.M. & Okoye, Z.S.C, 2003. Comparative study of the antioxidant ef-
fect of Sacoglottis gabonensis stem bark extract, a Nigerian alcoholic beverage additive and vita-
mins C and E on the peroxidative deterioration of some common stored vegetable oils in 
Maiduguri. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 6(3): 202-207. 
Madusolumuo, M. & Okoye, Z.S.C, 1993. Effect of Sacoglottis gabonensis stem bark extract on 
anticoagulant properties of acetylsalicylic acid and acetaminophen. Medical Science Research 
21(19): 719-720. 
Mahajan, V.M., 1983. Antimycotic activity of different chemicals, chaksine iodide and garlic. 
Mykosen 26(2): 94-99. 
Mahat, M.A. & Patil, B.M., 2007. Evaluation of antiinflammatory activity of methanol extract of 
Phyllanthus amarus in experimental animal models. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 
69(1): 33-36. 
Maheu, J. & Husson, M., 1920. Un nouvel oléagineux de Madagascar: le 'Betratra', Jatropha maha-
falensis Jum. (Euphorb.): Etude botanique du fruit et de la graine. Bulletin de l'Agence Générale 
des Colonies 13:14-21. 
Mahmood, N., Pizza, C, Aquino, R., de Tommasi, N., Piacente, S., Colman, S., Burke, A., Hay, A.J. 
& de Tommasi, N., 1993. Inhibition of HIV infection by flavanoids. Antiviral Research 22(2-3): 
189-199. 
Mahmoud, M.A., Khidir, M.O., Khalifa, M.A., Bashir el Amadi, A.M., Musnad, H.A.R. & Mohamed, 
E.T.I., 1995. Sudan: Country Report to the FAO International Technical Conference on Plant Ge-
netic Resources (Leipzig 1996). Khartoum, Sudan. 86 pp. 
Mahunnah, R.L. & Mtotmwema, K., 1985. Ethnobotany of Clutia (Euphorbiaceae) in Tanzania. 
Journal of Economic and Taxonomie Botany 7(3): 505-512. 
Maïkere-Faniyo, R., van Puyvelde, L., Mutwewingabo, A. & Habiyaremye, F.X., 1989. Study of 
Rwandese medicinal plants used in the treatment of diarrhoea. 1. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
26: 101-109. 
Maite, A.L., 1994. An ethnobotanical study of two Passifloraceae species used in traditional medi-
cine in Mozambique. In: Seyani, J.H. & Chikuni, A.C. (Editors). Proceedings of the 8th plenary 
meeting of AETFAT, 2-11 April 1991, Zomba, Malawi. Volume 1. pp. 267-271. 
Majinda, R.R.T., Abegaz, B.M., Bezabih, M., Ngadjui, B.T., Wanjala, C.C.W., Mdee, L.K., Bojase, 
G., Silayo, A., Masesane, I. & Yeboah, S.O., 2001. Recent results from natural product research at 
the University of Botswana. Pure and Applied Chemistry 73(7): 1197-1208. 
Makhubu, L.P., Lemma, A. & Heyneman, D. (Editors), 1987. Endod-2 (Phytolacca dodecandra). 
Report on the Second International Scientific Workshop on Phytolacca dodecandra (Endod), 7-11 
April 1986, Mbabane, Swaziland. Council on International and Public affairs, New York, United 
States. 
Makinde, J.M., Obih, P.O. & Jimoh, A., 1987. Effect of Solanum erianthum aqueous leaf extract on 
Plasmodium berghei berghei in mice. African Journal of Medicine and Medical Sciences 16(4): 
193-196. 
Makkar, H.P.S. & Becker, K., 1999. Nutritional studies on rats and fish (carp Cyprinus carpio) fed 
diets containing unheated and heated Jatropha curcas meal of a non-toxic provenance. Plant 
Foods for Human Nutrition 53: 183-192. 
Makkar, H.P.S., Aderibigbe, A.O. & Becker, K., 1998. Comparative evaluation of non-toxic and 
toxic varieties of Jatropha curcas for chemical composition, digestibility, protein degradability 
and toxic factors. Food Chemistry 62(2): 207-215. 
LITERATURE 711 
Makkar, H.P.S., Becker, K. & Schmook, B., 1998. Edible provenances of Jatropha curcas from 
Quintana Roo state of Mexico and effect of roasting on antinutrient and toxic factors in seeds. 
Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 52: 31-36. 
Makonnen, E. & Hagos, E., 1993. Antispasmodic effect of Bersama abyssinica aqueous extract on 
guinea-pig ileum. Phytotherapy Research 7(2): 211-212. 
Malaisse, F., 1997. Se nourir en foret claire africaine. Approche écologique et nutritionelle. Les 
presses agronomiques de Gembloux, Gembloux, Belgium & CTA, Wageningen, Netherlands. 384 
pp. 
Malan, E., Swinny, E., Ferreira, D. & Steynberg. P., 1996. The structure and synthesis of progui-
bourtinidins from Cassia abbreviata. Phytochemistry 41(4): 1209-1213. 
Malato Beliz, J., 1977. Plants new to Guinea-Bissau. Part 2. Tiliaceae and Euphorbiaceae. Garcia 
De Orta, Serie de Botanica 3(2): 63-66. 
Malik, F., Singh, J., Khajuria, A., Suri, K.A., Satti, N.K., Singh, S., Raul, M.K., Kumar, A., Bhatia, 
A. & Qazi, G.N., 2007. A standardized root extract of Withania somnifera and its major constitu-
ent withanolide-A elicit humoral and cell-mediated immune responses by upregulation of Thl-
dominant polarization in BALB/c mice. Life Sciences 80(16): 1525-1538. 
Mambu, L., Ramanandraibe, V., Martin, M.T., Blond, A., Grellier, P. & Frappier, F., 2002. Con-
stituents of Burasaia madagascariensis: a new clerodane-type diterpene. Planta Medica 68(4): 
377-379. 
Manewa, S.N., 1997. Constituants chimiques du Discoglypremna caloneura (Euphorbiacées). Maî-
trise en Chimie, Université de Yaoundé, Département de Chimie Organique, Yaoundé, Came-
roun. 28 pp. 
Manfouo, R.N., Lontsi, D., Ngounou, F.N., Ngadjui, B.T. & Sondengam, B.L., 2005. Erythrosuav-
ine, a new diterpenic alkaloid from Erythrophleum suaveolens (Guill. & Perr.) Brenan. Bulletin 
of the Chemical Society of Ethiopia 19(1): 69-74. 
Mangenot, G., 1957. Bandeiraea simplicifolia Benth. Icônes Plantarum Africanarum 4, No 79. 4 pp. 
Mani, A. & Al Hinai, M., 1996. Host range and distribution of Meloidogyne incognita and M. 
javanica in the Sultanate of Oman. Nematropica 26(1): 73-79. 
Manickam, K. & Rajappan, K., 1998. Effect of temperature and pH levels on the efficacy of antivi-
ral principles in inhibiting the infection of cowpea by tomato spotted wilt virus. Indian Journal of 
Plant Protection 26(1): 52-55. 
Manickam, K. & Rajappan, K., 1999. Field efficacy of plant extracts and chemicals against green-
gram leaf curl disease. Indian Journal of Virology 15(1): 35-37. 
Mansour, M., Le Men-Olivier, L., Levy, J. & Le Men, J., 1974. Structures de la cabuamine et de la 
vincorine. Phytochemistry 13: 2861-2863. 
Mantena, S.K., Mutalik, S., Srinivasa, H., Subramanian, G.S, Prabhakar, K.R, Reddy, K.R., Srini-
vasan, K.K. & Unnikrishnan, M.K., 2005. Antiallergic, antipyretic, hypoglycemic and hepatopro-
tective effects of aqueous extract of Coronopus didymus Linn. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bul-
letin 28(3): 468-472. 
Manu, T.N. J., 2002. Medicinal plants used in the treatment of sexually transmitted diseases 
(STDS). B.Pharm, thesis, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and 
Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. 63 pp. 
Marais, W., 1970. Cruciferae. In: Codd, L.E., de Winter, B., Killick, D.J.B. & Rycroft, H.B. (Edi-
tors). Flora of southern Africa. Volume 13. Botanical Research Institute, Department of Agricul-
tural Technical Services, Pretoria, South Africa, pp. 1—118. 
Marais, W., 1980a. Crucifères. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Julien, H.R. & Marais, W. (Editors). Flore 
des Mascareignes. Familles 31-50. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, Mauritius, l'Office de 
la Recherche Scientifique Outre-Mer, Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, 
United Kingdom. 25 pp. 
Marais, W., 1980b. Papavéracées. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Julien, H.R. & Marais, W. (Editors). 
Flore des Mascareignes. Familles 31-50. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, Mauritius, 
l'Office de la Recherche Scientifique Outre-Mer, Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 
Richmond, United Kingdom. 5 pp. 
Marais, W. & Coode, M.J.E., 1978. Liliacées. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Julien, H.R. & Marais, W. 
(Editors). Flore des Mascareignes. Familles 177-188. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, 
712 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Mauritius, l'Office de la Recherche Scientifique Outre-Mer, Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gar-
dens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 41 pp. 
Marfori, E.C. & Alejar, A.A., 1993. Alkaloid yield variation in callus cultures derived from different 
plant parts of the white and rosy-purple periwinkle, Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don. Philippine 
Journal of Biotechnology 4(1): 1-8. 
Markgraf, F., 1976. Apocynaceae. Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, famille 169. Muséum Na-
tional d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France. 318 pp. 
Markgraf, F. & Boiteau, P., 1973. Les "bois de lait" des iles Mascareignes. Adansonia 13(2): 241-
248. 
Markham, K.R., Moore, N.A. & Given, D.R., 1983. Phytochemical reappraisal of taxonomie subdivi-
sions of Lycopodium, Pteridophyta, Lycopodiaceae based on flavonoid glycoside distribution. New 
Zealand Journal of Botany 21(2): 113-120. 
Markström, C, 1977. Plantes médicinales congolaises. Mémoire de fin d'études, Upsala, Sweden. 
60 pp. 
Maroyi, A., 1999. Taxonomie studies on the family Colchicaceae in Zimbabwe with emphasis on 
variation in the genus Gloriosa. M.Ph. Thesis, Department of Biological Sciences, Faculty of Sci-
ence, University of Zimbabwe, Harare, Zimbabwe. 117 pp. 
Marshall, N.T., 1998. Searching for a cure: conservation of medicinal wildlife resources in East and 
Southern Africa. TRAFFIC International, Cambridge, United Kingdom. 112 pp. 
Marshall, S.J., Russell, P.F., Wright, C.W., Anderson, M.M., Phillipson, J.D., Kirby, G.C., War-
hurst, D.C. & Schiff, P.L., 1994. In vitro antiplasmodial, antiamoebic, and cytotoxic activities of a 
series of bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 38: 96—103. 
Marshall, S.J., Russell, P.F., Phillipson, J.D., Kirby, G.C., Warhurst, D.C. & Wright, C.W., 2000. 
Antiplasmodial and antiamoebic activities of medicinal plants from Sierra Leone. Phytotherapy 
Research 14: 356-358. 
Marston, A., Décosterd, L.A. & Hostettmann, K., 1993. Cytoinhibitory compounds from higher 
plants. In: Molyneux, R.J. & Colegate, S.M. (Editors). Bioactive natural products: detection, isola-
tion and structural determination. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States, pp. 221-239. 
Marston, A., Zagorski, M.G. & Hostettmann, K., 1988. Antifungal polyphenols from Cordia goetzei 
Gurke. Helvetica Chimica Acta 71: 1210-1219. 
Martins, E.S., 1993. Boraginaceae. Flora de Moçambique. No 112. Institute de Investigaçào Cienti-
fica Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal. 75 pp. 
Martins, E.S., 1995. Boraginaceae. In: Paiva, J., Martins, E.S., Diniz, M.A., Moreira, I., Gomes, I. & 
Gomes, S. (Editors). Flora de Cabo Verde: Plantas vasculares. No 74. Institute de Investigaçào 
Cientifica Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal & Instituto National de Investigaçào e Desenvolvimento Agrâ-
rio, Praia, Cape Verde. 21 pp. 
Martins, E.S. & Brummitt, R.K., 1990. Boraginaceae. In: Launert, E. & Pope, G.V. (Editors). Flora 
Zambesiaca. Volume 7, part 4. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United King-
dom, pp. 59-110. 
Martins, A.P., Salgueiro, L., Vila, R., Tomi, F., Canigueral, S., Casanova, J., Proença Da Cunha, A. 
& Adzet, P., 1998. Essential oils from four Piper species. Phytochemistry 49: 2019-2023. 
Mascolo, N., Izzo, A.A., Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Di Carlo, G., Sautebin, L. & Capasso, F., 2004. 
Healing powers of aloes. In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, Boca Raton, 
Florida, United States, pp. 209-238. 
Mash, D., Kovera, C, Pablo, J., Tyndale, R., Ervin, F., Williams, I., Singleton, E. & Mayor, M., 
2000. Ibogaine: complex pharmakinetics, concerns for safety, and preliminary efficacy measures. 
Neurobiological Mechanisms of Drugs of Abuse 914: 394-401. 
Masiala, M.I., 2002. Ethnophytothérapies des Yombe de la réserve de biosphère de Luki Bas -
Fleuve (R.D.C.). Rapport final UNESCO. 108 pp. 
Masih, S.E. & Singh, B.G., 2005. Studies of fungistatic properties of leaf extract of some plants 
against dermatophytes. Advances in Plant Sciences 18(1): 435-438. 
Masinde, P.S., 1996., 1996. Medicinal plants of the Marachi people of Kenya. In: van der Maesen, 
L.J.G., van der Bürgt, X.M. & van Medenbach de Rooy, J.M. (Editors). The biodiversity of African 
plants. Proceedings of the 14th AETFAT Congress, 22-27 August 1994, Wageningen, Nether-
lands. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht, Netherlands, pp. 747-753. 
LITERATURE 713 
Masood, A. & Ranjan, K.S., 1991. The effect of aqueous plant extracts on growth and anatoxin pro-
duction by Aspergillus flavus. Letters in Applied Microbiology 13(1): 32-34. 
Massing-Bias, L.R., Diouf, A., Daffe, B.M., Faye, B., Temple, R.A. & Lo, I., 1991. Plantes de la 
pharmacopée sénégalaise: etude de l'activité antidiabétique de Chrozophora senegalensis (Lam.) 
A.Juss. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 5(2): 23-27. 
Massiot, G., Thepenier, P., Jacquier, M.J., Henin, J., Le Men-Olivier, L. & Delaude, C, 1991. Alka-
loids from Strychnos henningsii. Phytochemistry 30(10): 3449-3456. 
Massiot, G., Thepenier, P., Jacquier, M.-J., Le Men-Olivier, L. & Delaude, C, 1992. Alkaloids from 
roots of Strychnos potatorum. Phytochemistry 31(8): 2873-2876. 
Masters, M.T., 1871. Passifloreae. In: Oliver, D. (Editor). Flora of tropical Africa. Volume 2. L. 
Reeve & Co, London, United Kingdom, pp. 503-520. 
Matte, G., Morette, C., Hallard, M., Pontiggia, P., Blanquet, D. & Hage, F., 2002. Viral and immu-
nologie follow up of 4 to 9 years of AIDS treatments by quadruple combinations of virostatics in-
cluding integrase inhibitors in short sequences differing by drug rotation. Acta Pharmacologica 
Sinica 23(1): 1-15. 
Matu, E.N. & van Staden, J., 2003. Antibacterial and anti-inflammatory activities of some plants 
used for medicinal purposes in Kenya. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 87: 35-41. 
Maundu, P. & Tengnäs, B. (Editors), 2005. Useful trees and shrubs for Kenya. World Agroforestry 
Centre - East and Central Africa Regional Programme (ICRAF-ECA), Technical Handbook 35, 
Nairobi, Kenya. 484 pp. 
Maundu, P., Kariuki, P. & Eyog-Matig, O., 2004. Threats to medicinal plant species: an African 
perspective. In: Proceedings of the 3rd IUCN World Conservation Congress, held in Bangkok 
Thailand, 17-25 November 2004. [Internet] 
<http://www.iucn.org/congress/2004/documents/outputs/biodiversity-loss/threats-maundu.pdf>. 
Accessed December 2007. 
Maundu, P.M., Ngugi, G.W. & Kabuye, C.H.S., 1999. Traditional food plants of Kenya. Kenya Re-
source Centre for Indigenous Knowledge (KENRIK), Nairobi, Kenya. 270 pp. 
Maundu, P., Berger, D., Saitabau, C, Nasieku, J., Kipelian, M., Mathenge, S., Morimoto, Y. & 
Höft, R., 2001. Ethnobotany of the Loita Maasai. Towards community management of the forest 
of the Lost Child. Experiences from the Loita Ethnobotany Project. UNESCO People and Plants 
Working Paper 8, Paris, France. 34 pp. 
Mauremootoo, J.R. (Editor), 2003. Proceedings of the regional workshop on invasive alien species 
and terrestrial ecosystem rehabilitation for western Indian Ocean island states - sharing experi-
ence, identifying priorities and defining joint action. Indian Ocean Commission Regional Envi-
ronment Programme, 13-17 October 2003, Seychelles. 207 pp. 
Mavar-Manga, H., Brkic, D., Marie, D.E.P. & Quetin-Leclercq, J., 2004. In vivo anti-inflammatory 
activity of Alchornea cordifolia (Schumach. & Thonn.) Mull.Arg. (Euphorbiaceae). Journal of Eth-
nopharmacology 92: 209-214. 
May, L.W., 1978. The economic uses and associated folklore of ferns and fern allies. Botanical Re-
view 44: 491-528. 
Mazumder, A., Mahato, A. & Mazumder, R., 2006. Antimicrobial potentiality of Phyllanthus ama-
rus against drug resistant pathogens. Natural Product Research 20(4): 323-326. 
Mazzei, M.M., 2002. Ibogaine as an anti-addiction drug? [Internet] 
<http://alpha.fdu.edu/psychweb/Voll5/Mazzei.pdf> Fairleigh Dickinson University, Madison, 
United States. Accessed April 2005. 
Mbatchi, S.F., Mbatchi, B., Banzouzi, J.T., Bansimba, T., Nsonde Ntandou, G.F., Ouamba, J.M., 
Berry, A. & Benoit-Vical, F., 2006. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of 18 plants used in Congo 
Brazzaville traditional medicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 104(1-2): 168—174. 
Mbuya, L.P., Msanga, H.P., Ruffo, CK., Birnie, A. & Tengnäs, B., 1994. Useful trees and shrubs for 
Tanzania: identification, propagation and management for agricultural and pastoral communi-
ties. Technical Handbook 6. Regional Soil Conservation Unit/SIDA, Nairobi, Kenya. 542 pp. 
Mbwambo, L., 2000. Species utilisation preferences and resource potential of miombo woodlands: a 
case of selected villages in Tabora, Tanzania. M.Sc. Thesis, University of Stellenbosch, South Af-
rica. 100 pp. 
714 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Mbwambo, Z.H., Lee, S.K., Mshiu, E.N., Pezzuto, J.M. & Kinghorn, A.D., 1996. Constituents from 
the stem wood of Euphorbia quinquecostata with phorbol dibutyrate receptor-binding inhibitory 
activity. Journal of Natural Products 59(11): 1051-1055. 
McConkey, D.J., Lin, Y., Nutt, L.K., Ozel, H.Z. & Newman, R.A., 2000. Cardiac glycosides stimu-
late Ca2+ increases and apoptosis in androgen-independent, metastatic human prostate adeno-
carcinoma cells. Cancer Research 60: 3807-3812. 
McDaniel, R.G., 1985. Field evaluations of Agave in Arizona. Desert Plants 7(2): 57-60. 
McGaw, L.J., Jäger, A.K. & van Staden, J., 1997. Prostaglandin synthesis inhibitory activity in 
Zulu, Xhosa and Sotho medicinal plants. Phytotherapy Research 11(2): 113-117. 
McKenzie, A.G., 2002. The rise and fall of strophanthin. International Congress Series 1242: 95-
100. 
McLaughlin, J. & Garofalo, J., 2002. Desert Rose (Adenium obesum). Fact sheet 71. [Internet] Co-
operative Extension Service, Miami-Dade County/University of Florida, Homestead, United 
States. 5 p. <http://miami-dade.ifas.ufl.edu/pdfs/ornamental/ornamental_publications/desert-
rose.PDF>. Accessed July 2004. 
McPartland, J.M., 1996a. A review of Cannabis diseases. Journal of the International Hemp Asso-
ciation 3(1): 19-23. 
McPartland, J.M., 1996b. Cannabis pests. Journal of the International Hemp Association 3(2): 49, 
52-55. 
McPherson, G., 1995. On Mallotus and Deuteromallotus (Euphorbiaceae) in Madagascar. Bulletin 
du Muséum national d'Histoire naturelle, Paris, séries 4, 17, section B, Adansonia 3-4: 169-173. 
McPherson, G., 2000. Drypetes (Euphorbiaceae) in Madagascar and the Comoro Islands. Adansonia 
séries 3, 22(2): 205-209. 
Mebe, P.P. & Makuhunga, P., 1992. ll-(E)-p-Coumaric acid ester of bergenin from Peltophorum 
africanum. Phytochemistry 31(9): 3286-3287. 
Mederos, S., Martin, C, Navarro, E., & Ayuso, M.J., 1998. Micropropagation of a medicinal plant, 
Plantago major. Biologia Plantarum (Czech Republic) 40(3): 465-468. 
Mehrotra, S., Mishra, K.P., Maurya, R., Srimal, R.C. & Singh, V.K., 2002a. Immunomodulation by 
ethanolic extract of Boerhavia diffusa roots. International Immunopharmacology 2(7): 987-996. 
Mehrotra, S., Singh, V.K., Agarwal, S.S., Maurya, R. & Shrimal, R.C, 2002b. Antilymphoprolifera-
tive activity of ethanolic extract of Boerhavia diffusa roots. Experiments in Molecular Pathology 
72: 236-242. 
Mei, N., Guo, L., Fu, P.P., Heflich, R.H. & Chen, T., 2005. Mutagenicity of comfrey (Symphytum 
officinale) in rat liver. British Journal of Cancer 92(5): 873-875. 
Meinwald, J., 2000. Sex, drugs and violence in the world of insects. [Internet] Science on the Fron-
tiers. Research Corporation, Tucson, United States. 
<http://rescorp.org/Uploads/science.frontier.pdf>. Accessed April 2004. 
Melero, C.P., Medarde, M. & San Feliciano, A., 2000. A short review on cardiotonoc steroids and 
their aminoguanidine analogues. Molecules 5: 51—81. 
Melo, M.F., Santos, CA., Chiappeta, A.A., de Mello, J.F. & Mukherjee, R., 1987. Chemistry and 
pharmacology of a tertiary alkaloid from Strychnos trinervis root bark. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 19(3): 319-325. 
Menon, J.S., Amma, S.P. & Nybe, E.V., 2001a. Analysis of growth and yield in Plumbago spp. Jour-
nal of Tropical Agriculture (India) 39(2): 114-119. 
Menon, J.S., Amma, S.P. & Nybe, E.V., 2001b. Stimulation of seed germination in white flowered 
leadwort (Plumbago zeylanica L.). Journal of Tropical Agriculture (India) 39(2): 180-181. 
Mensah, C, 1991. Phytochemical constituents of Hilleria latifolia. B.Sc. Chemistry degree thesis, 
Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Science, University of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana. 30 
pp. 
Menut, C , Lamaty, G., Bessière, J.M., Seuleiman, A.M., Fendero, P., Maidou, E. & Dénamganai, 
J., 1995. Aromatic plants of tropical Central Africa. XXII. Volatile constituents of Croton aubre-
villei J. Leonard and C zambesicus Muell. Arg. Journal of Essential Oil Research 7(4): 419-422. 
Menzies, J.R.W., Paterson, S.J., Duwiejua, M. & Corbett, A.D., 1998. Opioid activity of alkaloids 
extracted from Picralima nitida (fam. Apocynaceae). European Journal of Pharmacology 350(1): 
101-108. 
LITERATURE 715 
Meregini, A.O.A. & Nzegbule, E.C., 2000. Potentials of Mallotus oppositifolius for agroforestry and 
land management in southeastern Nigeria. Journal of Sustainable Agriculture and the Environ-
ment 2(1): 55-61. 
Mesia, G.K., Tona, G.L., Penge, O., Lusakibanza, M., Nanga, T.M., Cimanga, R.K., Apers, S., van 
Miert, S., Totte, J., Pieters, L. & VTietinck, A.J., 2005. Antimalarial activities and toxicities of 
three plants used as traditional remedies for malaria in the Democratic Republic of Congo: Cro-
ton mubango, Nauclea pobeguinii and Pyrenacantha staudtii. Annals of Tropical Medicine and 
Parasitology 99(4): 345-357. 
Mesia, G.K., Tona, G.L., Nanga, T.H., Cimanga, R.K., Apers, S., Cos, P., Maes, L., Pieters, L. & 
Vlietinck, A.J., 2008. Antiprotozoal and cytotoxic screening of 45 plant extracts from Democratic 
Republic of Congo. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 115(3): 409-415. 
Meyer, A., 2001. Rôle socio-économique et écologique de Detarium microcarpum au sud du Mali. 
Rapport de fin de cycle d'ingénieur. EPFZ, Zürich, Switserland & 1ER, Sikasso, Mali. 49 pp. 
Mgbenka, B.O. & Ejiofor, E.N., 1998. Effects of extracts of dried leaves of Erythrophleum 
suaveolens as anesthetics on clariid catfish. Journal of Applied Aquaculture 8: 73-80. 
Mgbojikwe, L.O. & Okoye, Z.S.C., 2000. Acaricidal efficacy of the aqueous stem bark extract of 
Adenium obesum on the various life stages of cattle ticks. Nigerian Journal of Experimental and 
Applied Biology 2(1): 39-43. 
Michel, S., Tillequin, F. & Koch, M., 1986. Brafouédine et isobrafouédine: nouveaux alcaloïdes indo-
liques mineurs de Strychnos dinklagei. Journal of Natural Products 49(3): 452-455. 
Michel, S., Tillequin, F., Koch, M. & Aké Assi, L., 1982. Alcaloïdes des écorces de tiges de Strychnos 
dinklagei. Journal of Natural Products 45(4): 489. 
Michel, S., Skaltsounis, A.L., Tillequin, F., Koch, M. & Aké Assi, L., 1985. Alcaloïdes des feuilles de 
Strychnos dinklagei. Journal of Natural Products 48(1): 86-92. 
Middleton, E., Kandaswami, C. & Theoharides, T.C., 2000. The effects of plant flavonoids on 
mammalian cells: implications for inflammation, heart disease, and cancer. Pharmacological Re-
views 52: 673-751. 
Miège, J., 1955. Les Rhigiocarya (Menispermacées) de Côte d'Ivoire. Bulletin de 1T.F.A.N., série A, 
17(2): 359-368. 
Mikkelsen, K.S. & Seberg, O., 2001. Morphometric analysis of the Bersama abyssinica Fresen. 
complex (Melianthaceae) in East Africa. Plant Systematics and Evolution 227(3-4): 157-182. 
Mill, S. & Hootelé, C, 2000. Alkaloids of Andrachne aspera. Journal of Natural Products 63(6): 
762-764. 
Miller, A.G., 1989. Santalaceae. In: Hedberg, I. & Edwards, S. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia. Volume 
3. Pittosporaceae to Araliaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis Ababa, 
Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, pp. 379-
383. 
Miller, J.S., 2001. Tournefortia kirkii (I.M.Johnston) J.S.Mill. (Boraginaceae): A new combination 
for a species from Madagascar. Adansonia 23(2): 297-301. 
Miller, J.S., 2003. Classification of Boraginaceae subfam. Ehretioideae: Resurrection of the genus 
Hilsenbergia Tausch ex Meisn. Adansonia 25(2): 151-189. 
Ming, D. & Hellekant, G., 1994. Brazzein, a new high-potency thermostable sweet protein from 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana. FEBS Letters 355: 106-108. 
Ming, D., Hellekant, G. & Zhong, H., 1996. Characterization and chemical modification of brazzein, 
a high potency thermostable sweet protein from Pentadiplandra brazzeana. Acta Botanica Yun-
nanica 18: 123-133. 
Minghetti, A., Crespi-Perellino, N., Garofano, L., Speroni, E. & Vincieri, F.F., 1996. Production of 
diterpenoids by Euphorbia calyptrata cell cultures. Phytochemistry 42(6): 1587-1589. 
Minja, M.M.J., 1994a. Medicinal plants used in promotion of animal health in Tanzania. In: 
Kasonia, K., Ansay, M., Baerts, M. & Lehmann, J. (Editors). Métissages en santé animale de Ma-
dagascar à Haïti. Actes d'un séminaire, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 1993. Presses Universitai-
res de Namur, Namur, Belgium, pp. 335-364. 
Minja, M.M.J., 1994b. Medicinal plants used in promotion of animal health in Tanzania. Revue 
Scientifique et Technique 13(3): 905-925. 
Minja, M.M.J., 1999. The Maasai Wonder Plants. Paper presented at the People & Plants training 
workshop. Tropical Pesticides Training Institute, 15-18 March, Arusha, Tanzania. 
716 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Mirand, C, Delaude, C, Levy, J., Le Men-Olivier, L. & Le Men, J., 1979. Alkaloids of Strychnos 
aculeata Sol. Plantes Médicinales et Phytothérapie 13(2): 84-86. 
Mirghani, M.E.S., Hussein, LH., Dagne, E. & Bekele, T., 1996. A comparative study of seed oils of 
Chrozophora brochiana and Guizotia abyssinica. Bulletin of the Chemical Society of Ethiopia 
10(2): 161-164. 
Misawa, M., Hayashi, M. & Takayama, S., 1983. Production of antineoplastic agents by plant tis-
sue cultures: 1. Induction of callus tissues and detection of the agents in cultured cells. Planta 
Medica 49(2): 115-119. 
Misawa, M., Hayashi, M. & Takayama, S., 1985. Accumulation of antineoplastic agents by plant 
tissue cultures. In: Neumann, K.H., Barz, W. & Reinhard, E. (Editors). Primary and secondary 
metabolism of plant cell cultures. Springer, Berlin, pp. 235-245. 
Mishra, B., Priyadarsini, K.I., Kumar, M.S., Unnikrishnan, M.K. & Mohan, H., 2003. Effect of O-
glycosilation on the antioxidant activity and free radical reactions of a plant flavonoid, chryso-
eriol. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry 11(13): 2677-2685. 
Mishra, L.C., Singh, B.B. & Dagenais, S., 2000. Scientific basis for the therapeutic use of Withania 
somnifera (Ashwagandha): A review. Alternative Medicine Review 5(4): 334-346. 
Misra, H.O., Sharma J.R. & Lal, R.K., 1992. Inheritance of biomass yield and tropane alkaloid con-
tent in Hyoscyamus muticus. Planta Medica 58: 81-83. 
Missouri Botanical Garden, undated. VAST (VAScular Tropicos) nomenclatural database. [Inter-
net] <http://mobot.mobot.org/W3T/Search/vast.html>. Accessed December 2006 - February 2008. 
Mitchell, N., 2004. The exploitation and disturbance history of Kakamega Forest, western Kenya. 
In: Bleher, B. & Dalitz, H. (Editors). BIOTA East Africa Report No. 1, Bielefelder Ökologische 
Beiträge, Band 20. 77 pp. 
Mitchell, R.E. & Geissman, T.A., 1971. Constituents of Suriana maritima. Triterpene diol of novel 
structure and new flavonol glycoside. Phytochemistry 10(7): 1559-1567. 
Mlambo, V. & Munjeri, O., 1998. Characterisation of plant extracts using the innervated rabbit 
jejunum. Thesis. University of Zimbabwe Department of Pharmacy, Harare, Zimbabwe. 
Modhumita, G., Thangamani, D., Manisha, T., Yasodha, R. & Gurumurthi, K., 2002. Purification of 
a 20 KD antifungal protein from Plumbago capensis - a medicinal plant. Journal of Medicinal and 
Aromatic Plant Sciences 24(1): 16-18. 
Mohamed, K.M., 2001. Phenylpropanoid glucosides from Chrozophora obliqua. Phytochemistry 
58(4): 615-618. 
Mohanty, I., Arya, D.S., Dinda, A., Talwar, K.K., Joshi, S. & Gupta, S.K., 2004. Mechanisms of 
cardioprotective effect of Withania somnifera in experimentally induced myocardial infarction. 
Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology 94(4): 184-190. 
Moinet-Hedin, V., Tabka, T., Poulain, L., Godard, T., Lechevrel, M., Saturnino, C, Lancelot, J.-C, 
Le Talaël, J.-Y. & Gauduchon, P., 2000. Biological properties of 5,ll-dimethyl-6H-pyrido[3,2-
bjcarbazoles: a new class of potent antitumor drugs. Anti-Cancer Drug Design 15(2): 109-118. 
Molgaard, P., Chihaka, A., Lemmich, E., Furu, P., Windberg, C , Ingerslev, F. & Hailing Sorensen, 
B., 2000. Biodegradability of the molluscicidal saponins of Phytolacca dodecandra. Regulatory 
Toxicology and Pharmacology 32(3): 248-255. 
Molgaard, P., Nielsen, S.B., Rasmussen, D.E., Drummond, R.B., Makaza, N. & Andreassen, J., 
2001. Anthelmintic screening of Zimbabwean plants traditionally used against schistosomiasis. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 74: 257-264. 
Molinari, H.H., Maisonneuve, I.M. & Glick, S.D., 1996. Ibogaine neurotoxicity: a re-evaluation. 
Brain Research 737: 255-262. 
Monif, T., Malhotra, A.K. & Kapoor, V.P., 1992. Cassia fistula seed galactomannan: potential bind-
ing agent for pharmaceutical formulation. Indian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 54(6): 234-
240. 
Monteiro, A.C.B., Nakazawa, G.T., Mendes, B.M.J. & Rodriguez, A.P.M., 2000. In vitro regenera-
tion of Passiflora suberosa from leaf discs. Scientia Agricola 57(3): 571-573. 
Moody, J.O. & Okwagbe, K.E., 2003. Topical anti-inflammatory activity of Costus afer. Nigerian 
Journal of Natural Products and Medicine 7: 46-48. 
Moody, J.O., Robert, V.A., Connolly, J.D. & Houghton, P.J., 2005. Anti-inflammatory activities of 
the methanol extracts and an isolated furanoditerpene constituent of Sphenocentrum jollyanum 
Pierre (Menispermaceae). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 104(1—2): 87-91. 
LITERATURE 717 
Moody, J.O., Robert, V.A. & Hughes, J.D.A., 2002. Antiviral activities of selected medicinal plants 
II: Effect of extracts of Diospyros bacteri, Diospyros monbutensis and Sphenocentrum jollyanum 
on Cowpea Mosaic viruses. Pharmaceutical Biology 40(5): 342-345. 
Morah, F.N.I., 1988. Tetraphyllin B from Adenia cissampeloides. Phytochemistry 27: 2985-2986. 
Morebise, O., Awe, E.O., Makinde, J.M. & Olajide, O.A., 2001. Evaluation of the anti-inflammatory 
and analgesic properties of Chasmanthera dependens leaf methanol extract. Fitoterapia 72(5): 
497-502. 
Moreira, D.L., de Souza, P.O., Kaplan, M.A.C. & Guimaràes, E.F., 1999. Essential oil analysis of 
four Peperomia species (Piperaceae). Acta Horticulturae 500: 65-69. 
Morgan, W.T.W., 1981. Ethnobotany of the Turkana: use of plants by a pastoral people and their 
livestock in Kenya. Economic Botany 35(1): 96-130. 
Morgan, CS., 1999. Platycladus orientalis: Cupressaceae. Curtis's Botanical Magazine 16(3): 185-
192. 
Morita, H., Matsumoto, K., Takeya, K. & Itokawa, H., 1993a. Azafluoranthene alkaloids from Cis-
sampelos pareira. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 41(7): 1307-1308. 
Morita, H., Matsumoto, K, Takeya, K. & Itokawa, H., 1993b. Conformation of tropolone ring in 
antileukemic tropoloisoquinoline alkaloids. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 41(8): 1478-
1480. 
Morita, H., Matsumoto, K., Takeya, K., Itokawa, H. & Iitaka, Y., 1993c. Structures and solid state 
tautomeric forms of two novel antileukemic tropoloisoquinoline alkaloids, pareirubrines A and B, 
from Cissampelos pareira. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 41(8): 1418—1422. 
Morris, B., 1996. Chewa medical botany. A study of herbalism in southern Malawi. Monographs 
from the International African Institute. LIT Verlag/Transaction, London, United Kingdom. 557 
pp. 
Morton, J.F., 1981. Atlas of medicinal plants of Middle America. Bahamas to Yucatan. Charles C. 
Thomas, Springfield IL, United States. 1420 pp. 
Moshi, M.J. & Mbwambo, Z.H., 2002. Experience of Tanzanian traditional healers in the manage-
ment of non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus. Pharmaceutical Biology 40(7): 552-560. 
Moshi, M.J. & Nagpa, V., 2000. Effect of Caesalpina bonducella seeds on blood glucose in rabbits. 
Pharmaceutical Biology 38(2): 81-86. 
Moshi, M.J., Kapingu, M.C., Uiso, F.C., Mbwambo, Z.H. & Mahunnah, R.L.A., 2000. Some pharma-
cological properties of an aqueous extract of Securinega virosa roots. Pharmaceutical Biology 
38(3): 214-221. 
Moshi, M.J., Cosam, J.C., Mbwambo, Z.H., Kapingu, M. & Nkunya, M.H.H., 2004. Testing beyond 
ethnomedical claims: brine shrimp lethality of some Tanzanian plants. Pharmaceutical Biology 
42(7): 547-551. 
Moshi, M.J., Mbwambo, Z.H., Nondo, R.S.O., Masimba, P.J., Kamuhabwa, A., Kapingu, M.C., 
Thomas, P. & Richard, M., 2006. Evaluation of ethnomedical claims and brine shrimp toxicity of 
some plants used in Tanzania as traditional medicines. African Journal of Traditional, Comple-
mentary and Alternative Medicines 3(3): 48-58. 
Motte, E., 1980. Les plantes chez les Pygmées Aka et les Monzombo de la Lobaye (Centrafrique). 
Société d'Etudes Linguistiques et Anthropologiques de France, Paris, France. 573 pp. 
Moundipa, P.F., Melanie Flore, K.G., Bilong Bilong, CF . & Bruchhaus, L, 2005. In vitro amoebi-
cidal activity of some medicinal plants of the Bamun region (Cameroon). African Journal of Tra-
ditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines 2(2): 113-121. 
Moustapha, A., Mahaman, L., Zeinabou, H., Attikou, A., Bagnou, M. & Daouda, S., 2003. Rapport 
d'activités 2001-2002. Projet Régional AIEA CT RAF/05/48. Lutte contre la désertification dans 
le Sahel. Niamey, Niger. 30 pp. 
Mphinyane, W.N., 2001. Influence of livestock grazing within biospheres under free range and con-
trolled conditions in Botswana. PhD thesis, University of Pretoria, South Africa. [Internet] 
<http://upetd.up.ac.za/thesis/available/etd-09042001-102434/>. Accessed July 2006. 
Mpiana, P.T., Tshibangu, D.S., Shetonde, O.M. & Ngbolua, K.N., 2007. In vitro antidrepanocytary 
activity (anti-sickle cell anemia) of some Congolese plants. Phytomedicine 14(2-3): 192-195. 
Mrinalini, M., Vithayathil, P.J., Raju, S.M. & Ramadoss, CS., 2002. Isolation and characterization 
of proteolytic enzymes from the latex of Synadenium grantii Hook.f. Plant Science 163(1): 131-
139. 
718 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Msangi, R.B., Otsyina, R. & Kusekwa, M.L., 2004. Evaluation of native browse species for fodder 
production and quality in Tabora, Tanzania. In: Rao, M.R. & Kwesiga, F.R. (Editors). Putting re-
search into practice: Proceedings of the Regional Agroforestry Conference on agroforestry impacts 
on livelihoods in southern Africa. International Centre for Research in Agroforestry, Nairobi, 
Kenya, pp. 189-193. 
Mshana, N.R., Abbiw, D.K., Addore-Mensah, I., Ekpere, J.A., Enow-Orock, E.G., Gbile, Z.O., No-
amessi, G.K., Odei, M.A., Odunlami, H., Oteng-Yeboah, A.A., Sarpong, K., Sofowora, A. & Tackie, 
A.N., 2000. Traditional medicine and pharmacopoeia. Contribution to the revision of ethnobotani-
cal and floristic studies in Ghana. Organisation of African Unity / Scientific, Technical and Re-
search Commission. 920 pp. 
Mtengeti, E.J. & Mhelela, A., 2006. Screening of potential indigenous browse species in semi-arid 
central Tanzania: a case of Gairo division, [internet] Livestock Research for Rural Development 
18(8), Article 108. <http://www.cipav.org.co/lrrd/lrrdl8/8/mtenl8108.htm>. Accessed 9 October 
2006. 
Muangman, S., Thippornwong, M. & Tohtong, R., 2005. Anti-metastatic effects of curcusone b, a 
diterpene from Jatropha curcas. In Vivo (Attiki) 19(1): 265—268. 
Muanza, D.N., Dangala, N.L. & Mpay, O., 1993. Zairean medicinal plants as diarrhea remedies 
and their antibacterial activities. African Study Monographs 14(1): 53-63. 
Muanza, D.N., Kim, B.W., Euler, K.L. & Williams, L., 1994. Antibacterial and antifungal activities 
of nine medicinal plants from Zaire. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 32(4): 337-345 
Muanza, D.N., Euler, K.L., Williams, L. & Newman, D.J., 1995. Screening for antitumor anti-HIV 
activities of nine medicinal plants from Zaire. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 33: 98-
106. 
Mucsi, I., Molnar, J., Hohmann, J. & Redei, D., 2001. Cytotoxicities and anti-herpes simplex virus 
activities of diterpenes isolated from Euphorbia species. Planta Medica 67(7): 672-674. 
Muhammad Mansur, 2003. Adenia Forssk. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Edi-
tors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. Backhuys 
Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 35-38. 
Mujumdar, A.M. & Misar, A.V., 2004. Anti-inflammatory activity of Jatropha curcas roots in mice 
and rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 90: 11-15. 
Mujumdar, A.M., Misar, A.V., Salaskar, M.V. & Upadhye, A.S., 2001. Antidiarrhoeal effect of an 
isolated fraction (JC) of Jatropha curcas roots in mice. Journal of Natural Remedies 1(2): 89—93. 
Mukherjee, A.K., Basu, S., Sarkar, N. & Ghosh, A.C., 2001. Advances in cancer therapy with plant 
based natural products. Current Medicinal Chemistry 8: 1467-1486. 
Muko, K.N., Ohiri, P.C. & Ezugwu, CO., 1998. Antipyretic and analgesic activities of Sphenocen-
trum jollyanum. Nigerian Journal of Natural Products and Medicine 2: 52—53. 
Mungantiwar, A.A., Nair, A.M., Shinde, U.A., Dikshit, V.J., Saraf, M.N., Thakur, V.S. & Sainis, 
K.B., 1999. Studies on the immunomodulatory effects of Boerhaavia diffusa alkaloidal fraction. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 65: 125-131. 
Murai, M., Tamayama, Y. & Nishibe, S., 1995. Phenylethanoids in the herb of Plantago lanceolata 
and inhibitory effect on arachidonic acid-induced mouse ear edema. Planta Medica 61(5): 479— 
480. 
Murakami, C, Fukamiya, N., Tamura, S., Okano, M., Bastow, K.F., Tokuda, H., Mukainaka, T., 
Nishino, H. & Lee, K.-H., 2004. Multidrug-resistant cancer cell susceptibility to cytotoxic quassi-
noids, and cancer chemopreventive effects of quassinoids and canthin alkaloids. Bioorganic & 
Medicinal Chemistry 12(18): 4963-4968. 
Murebwayire, S., Diallo, B., Luhmer, M., Vanhaelen-Fastré, R., Vanhaelen, M. & Duez, P., 2006. 
Alkaloids and amides from Triclisia sacleuxii. Fitoterapia 77: 615—617. 
Muregi, F.W., Chhabra, S.C., Njagi, E.N.M., Lang'at Thoruwa, C.C., Njue, W.M., Orago, A.S.S., 
Omar, S.A. & Ndiege, I.O., 2004. Anti-plasmodial activity of some Kenyan medicinal plant ex-
tracts singly and in combination with chloroquine. Phytotherapy Research 18(5): 379-384. 
Murengezi, I., 1993. Etude de l'activité antibacterienne de quelques plantes utilisées en médecine 
traditionnelle rwandaise. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 7(1): 3-10. 
Murengezi, I. & Sano, A., 1993. Medicinal plants used as amoebicidal in Rwanda. In: Natural 
products for development: chemistry, botany and pharmacology. Extended abstracts. NAPRECA 
Symposium on Natural Products, Antananarivo, Madagascar, pp. 87—88. 
LITERATURE 719 
Musabayane, CT., Bwititi, P.T. & Ojewole, J.A.O., 2006. Effects of oral administration of some 
herbal extracts on food consumption and blood glucose levels in normal and streptozotocin-
treated diabetic rats. Methods and Findings in Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology 28(4): 
223-228. 
Musila, W., Kisangau, D. & Muema, J., 2004. Conservation status and use of medicinal plants by 
traditional medical practitioners in Machakos District, Kenya. [Internet] 
<http://www.ed.psu.edu/icik/2004Proceedings/section3-musila-kisangau-muema-withpics.pdf> 
Accessed August 2005. 
Mutasa, S.L. & Kahn, M.R., 1995. Phytochemical investigations on Cassia abbreviata. Fitoterapia 
66(2): 184. 
Mutasa, S.L., Khan, M.R. & Jewere, K., 1990. 7-Methylphyscion and cassiamin A from the root 
hark of Cassia singueana. Planta Medica 56: 244-245. 
Mve-Mba, CE., Menut, C, Bessiere, J.M., Lamaty, G., Ekekang, L.N. & Denamganai, J., 1997. 
Aromatic plants of tropical Central Africa. XXIX. Benzyl isothiocyanate as major constituent of 
bark essential oil of Drypetes gossweileri S. Moore. Journal of Essential Oil Research 9(3): 367-
370. 
N'goran, A., Goli, K., Abdourahamane, S. & Alassane, S., 1995. Côte d'Ivoire: Rapport de pays pour 
la conférence technique internationale de la FAO sur les ressources phytogénétiques. FAO, Abid-
jan, Cote d'Ivoire. 75 pp. 
N'Gouemo, P., Nguemby, B.C. & Baldy, M.M., 1994. Some neuropharmacological effects of an etha-
nolic extract of Maprounea africana in rodents. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 43(3): 161-166. 
Naaz, F., Javed, A. & Abdin, M.Z., 2007. Hepatoprotective effect of ethanolic extract of Phyllanthus 
amarus Schum. et Thonn. on aflatoxin B-1-induced liver damage in mice. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 113(3): 503-509. 
Nabeta, K., 1993. Solanum aculeatissimum Jacq: in vitro culture and the production of secondary 
metabolites. In: Bajaj, Y.P.S. (Editor). Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry. Volume 24. Me-
dicinal and aromatic plants V. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 329-341. 
NACGRAB, 2004. Preliminary investigations into vegetative multiplication of some forest trees of 
phytomedicinal importance in South-West Nigeria. In: Annual Report of the National Centre for 
Genetic Resources and Biotechnology, Ibadan, Nigeria. 85 pp. 
Nacoulma-Ouédraogo, O. & Millogo-Rasolodimby, J., 2002. Les frotte-dents comme produits cosmé-
tiques et médicinaux au Burkina Faso. Etudes de la flore et la végétation de Burkina Faso 7: 49-
54. 
Nacoulma-Ouédraogo, O., Millogo-Rasolodimby, J. & Guinko, S., 1998. Les plantes herbacées dans 
la thérapie des piqûres d'insectes. Revue de médecines et pharmacopées africaines 11-12: 165-
175. 
Nacro, M. & Millogo-Rasolodimbi, J., 1993. Plantes tinctoriales et plantes à tanins du Burkina Fa-
so. Editions ScientifikA, Amiens, France. 152 pp. 
Naderali, E.K., Doyle, P.J. & Williams, G., 2000. Resveratrol induces vasorelaxation of mesenteric 
and uterine arteries from female guinea-pigs. Clinical Science 98: 537-543. 
Naga Rani, M.A., Vijayasekarani, V. & Kameswaran, L., 1991. Central nervous system effects of 
Coldenia procumbens. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 23(4): 261-263. 
Naguib, N.Y. & Aziz, E.E., 2003. Yield and quality of Hyoscyamus muticus L. in relation to some 
fertilizer treatments. Egyptian Journal of Horticulture 30(1/2): 1-17. 
Nahrstedt, A., Hungeling, M. & Petereit, F., 2006. Flavonoids from Acalypha indica. Fitoterapia 
77(6): 484-486. 
Naisbitt, T., James, E.K. & Sprent, J.I., 1992. The evolutionary significance of the legume genus 
Chamaecrista, as determined by nodule structure. New Phytologist 122(3): 487-492. 
Najib Nik a Rahman, N., Furuta, T., Kojima, S., Takane, K. & Ali Mohd, M, 1999. Antimalarial 
activity of extracts of Malaysian medicinal plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 64(3): 249-254. 
Nakamura, N., 2004. Inhibitory effects of some traditional medicines on proliferation of HIV-1 and 
its protease. Yakugaku Zasshi 124(8): 519-529. 
Nammi, S., Boini, M.K., Lodagala, S.D. & Behara, R.B., 2003. The juice of fresh leaves of Catha-
ranthus roseus Linn, reduces blood glucose in normal and alloxan diabetic rabbits. BMC Com-
plementary and Alternative Medicine 3: 1—4. 
720 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Naranjo, J., Pinar, M., Hesse, M. & Schmid, H., 1972. Ueber die Indolalkaloide von Pleiocarpa tal-
botii Wernham. 145. Mitteilung über Alkaloide. Helvetica Chimica Acta 55(3): 752-771. 
Naranjo, J., Hesse, M. & Schmid, H., 1970. Über das Alkaloid Lonicerin aus Callichilia barteri. 
137. Mitteilung über Alkaloide. Helvetica Chimica Acta 53(4): 749-754. 
Nasir, Y.J., 1985. Solanaceae. In: Nasir, E. & Ali, S.I. (Editors). Flora of Pakistan No 168. National 
Herbarium, Pakistan Agricultural Research Council, Islamabad and Department of Botany, Uni-
versity of Karachi, Pakistan. 62 pp. 
Nasser, A.M.A.G. & Court, W.E., 1983a. Alkaloids of Rauwolfia caffra seeds. Planta Medica 47(4): 
242-243. 
Nasser, A.M.A.G. & Court, W.E., 1983b. Leaf alkaloids of Rauwolfia caffra. Phytochemistry 22(10): 
2297-2300. 
Nasser, A.M.A.G. & Court, W.E., 1984. Stem bark alkaloids of Rauvolfia caffra. Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 11(1): 99-117. 
Nawito, M., Ahmed, Y.F., Zayed, S.M. & Hecker, E., 1998. Dietary cancer risk from conditional 
cancerogens in produce of livestock fed on species of spurge (Euphorbiaceae). II. Pathophysiologi-
cal investigations in lactating goats fed on the skin irritant herb Euphorbia peplus and in their 
milk-raised kids. Journal of Cancer Research and Clinical Oncology 124(3-4): 179-185. 
Ndamba, J., Lemmich, E. & Molgaard, P., 1994. Release of molluscicidal saponins from Phytolacca 
dodecandra aqueous berry extracts as influenced by the male plant and the extraction procedure. 
Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 22(3) 249-257. 
Ndamba, J., Robertson, I., Lemmich, E., Chandiwana, S.K., Furu, P. & Molgaard, P., 1996. Berry 
productivity and molluscicidal saponin yield of Phytolacca dodecandra (Phytolaccaceae) under dif-
ferent sunlight, watering and nutrient conditions. Economic Botany 50(2): 151—166. 
Ndlebe, V.J., Crouch, N.R. & Mulholland, D.A., 2008. Triterpenoids from the African tree Phyllan-
thus polyanthus. Phytochemistry Letters 1(1): 11-17. 
Ndouga, M., Mpati, J., Chen Jian, M., Zhou Yuan, P., Bilala, J.P., Sianard, D.F. & Koubemba, 
M.C., 1991. Etude préliminaire de l'activité antibactérienne de quelques plantes médicinales de 
la flore congolaise. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 5(1): 33-42. 
Ndubani, P. & Höjer, B., 1999. Traditional healers and the treatment of sexually transmitted ill-
nesses in rural Zambia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 67: 15-25. 
Ndubani, P., Kelly, P., Farthing, M.J.G. & Wallman, S., 1998. Local understandings of adult diar-
rhoeal disease and its treatment in an area of high HIV-seroprevalence in Zambia. Tropical Medi-
cine & International Health 3(10): 783-787. 
Nechet, K.L., Barreto, R.W. & Mizubuti, E.S.G., 2004. Sphaceloma poinsettiae as a potential bio-
logical control agent for wild poinsettia (Euphorbia heterophylla). Biological Control 30(3): 556-
565. 
Nee, M., 1991. Synopsis of Solanum Section Acanthophora. In: Hawkes, J.G., Lester, R.N., Nee, M. 
& Estrada, R.N. (Editors). Solanaceae 3: Taxonomy, chemistry, evolution. Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 257-266. 
Nel, J.L., Richardson, D.M., Rouget, M., Mgidi, T.N., Mdzeke, N., Le Maitre, D.C., van Wilgen, 
B.W., Schonegevel, L., Henderson L. & Neser, S., 2004. A proposed classification of invasive alien 
plant species in South Africa: towards prioritizing species and areas for management action. 
South African Journal of Science 100: 53—64. 
Neser, S., Zimmermann, H.G., Erb, H.E. & Hoffmann, J.H., 1990. Progress and prospects for the 
biological control of two Solanum weeds in South Africa. In: Proceedings of the 8th international 
symposium on biological control of weeds, pp. 371-381. 
Neuffer, B. & Linde, M., 1999. Capsella bursa-pastoris - colonisation and adaptation: a globe-
trotter conquers the world. In: van Raamsdonk, L.W.D. & den Nijs, J.CM. (Editors). Plant evolu-
tion in man-made habitats. Proceedings of the 7th international symposium of the International 
Organization of Plant Biosystematics, 1-15 August 1998, Amsterdam, Netherlands, pp 49-72. 
Neuwinger, H.D., 1996. African ethnobotany: poisons and drugs. Chapman & Hall, London, United 
Kingdom. 941 pp. 
Neuwinger, H.D., 1998. Afrikanische Arzneipflanzen und Jagdgifte. Chemie, Pharmakologie, Toxi-
kologie. 2nd Edition. Wissenschaftliche Verlagsgesellschaft mbH, Stuttgart, Germany. 960 pp. 
Neuwinger, H.D., 2000. African traditional medicine: a dictionary of plant use and applications. 
Medpharm Scientific, Stuttgart, Germany. 589 pp. 
LITERATURE 721 
Neuwinger, H.D., 2004. Plants used for poison fishing in tropical Africa. Toxicon 44(4): 417-430. 
Newton, L.E., 1992. An annotated and illustrated checklist of the succulent euphorbias of West 
tropical Africa. Euphorbia Journal 8: 112-122. 
Newton, L.E., 1994. Exploitation and conservation of aloes in Kenya. In: Seyani, J.H. & Chikuni, 
A.C. (Editors). Proceedings of the 13th plenary meeting of AETFAT, Zomba, Malawi. Volume 1. 
National Herbarium and Botanic Gardens of Malawi, Zomba, Malawi, pp. 219-222. 
Newton, L.E., 1995. Natural hybrids in the genus Aloe (Aloaceae) in East Africa. Journal of East 
African Natural History 84: 141-145. 
Newton, L.E., 2001. Aloe In: Eggli, U. (Editor). Illustrated handbook of succulent plants: Monocoty-
ledons. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 103-186. 
Newton, L.E., 2004. Aloes in habitat. In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, Florida, United States, pp. 3-14. 
Newton, L.E. & Lavranos, J. J., 1990. Two new aloes from Kenya, with notes on the identity of Aloe 
turkanensis. Cactus and Succulent Journal 62(5): 215-221. 
Newton, D.J. & Vaughan, H., 1996. South Africa's Aloe ferox plant, parts and derivatives industry. 
TRAFFIC East/Southern Africa, Johannesburg, Republic of South Africa. 61 pp. 
Ngamga, D., 2005. Antimalarial secondary metabolites from some Cameroonian medicinal plants. 
African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines 2(2): 177-205. 
Ngavoura, P., 1990. Fiabilité de la médecine traditionnelle dans le monde moderne - "Contribution 
du forestier". Mémoire de fin de cycle, Ecole nationale des eaux et forêts (ENEF), Cap-Estérias, 
Gabon. 115 pp. 
Ngouela, S., Ngoupayo, J., Noiungoue, D.T., Tsamo, E. & Connolly, J.D., 2003. Gossweilone: a new 
podocarpane derivative from the stem bark of Drypetes gossweileri. Bulletin of the Chemical So-
ciety of Ethiopia 17(2): 181-184 
Ngoupayou, J., 2003. Contribution à l'étude phytochimique de deux plantes médicinales du Camer-
oun: Drypetes gossweileri (Euphorbiaceae) et Parkia filicoidea (Mimosaceae). Thèse de doctorat 
3e cycle, Université de Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, Cameroon. 128 pp. 
Nguyen, A.T., Malonne, H., Duez, P., Vanhaelen-Fastre, R., Vanhaelen, M. & Fontaine, J., 2004. 
Cytotoxic constituents from Plumbago zeylanica. Fitoterapia 75(5): 500-504. 
Nguyen Nghia Thin, 1998. Cleistanthus Hook. f. ex Planch. In: Sosef, M.S.M., Hong, L.T. & Prawi-
rohatmodjo, S. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 5(3). Timber trees: Lesser-known 
timbers. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 164-165. 
Nguyen Nghia Thin & Sosef, M.S.M., 1999. Euphorbia L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. 
& Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 263-272. 
Nia, R., Paper, D.H., Essien, E.E., Iyadi, K.C., Bassey, A.I.L., Antai, A.B. & Franz, G., 2004. 
Evaluation of the anti-oxidant and anti-angiogenic effects of Sphenocentrum jollyanum Pierre. 
African Journal of Biomedical Research 7: 129-132. 
Nia, R., Paper, D.H, Franz, G. & Essien, E.E., 2005. Anti-angiogenic, anti-inflammatory and anti-
oxidant potential of an African recipe: Alchornea cordifolia seeds. Acta Horticulturae 678: 91—96. 
Niang, A., 1987. Contribution à l'étude de la pharmacopée traditionnelle Mauritanienne. Thèse 
pour le doctorat en médecine vétérinaire. Ecole nationale de Médecine vétérinaire, Sidi Thabet, 
Tunisie. 156 pp. 
Niber, B.T., 1994. The ability of powders and slurries from ten plant species to protect stored grain 
from attack by Prostephanus truncatus Horn (Coleoptera: Bostrichidae) and Sitophilus oryzae L. 
(Coleoptera: Curculionidae). Journal of Stored Products Research 30(4): 297-301. 
Niber, B.T., Helenius, J. & Varis, A.L., 1992. Toxicity of plant extracts to three storage beetles 
(Coleoptera). Journal of Applied Entomology 113: 202-208. 
Nickrent, D.L. & Malécot, V., 2001. A molecular phylogeny of Santalales. In: Fer, A., Thalouarn, P., 
Joel, D.M., Musselman, L.J., Parker, C. & Verkleij, J.A. [Editors]. Proceedings of the 7th Interna-
tional Parasitic Weed Symposium, Faculté des Sciences, Université de Nantes, Nantes, France, 
pp. 69-74. 
Nicoletti, M., Oguakwa, J.U. & Messana, I., 1980. On the alkaloids of two African Strychnos, 
Strychnos nigritana Bak. and Strychnos barteri Sol. Carbon-13 NMR spectroscopy of nigritanins. 
Fitoterapia 51(3): 131-134. 
722 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Nielsen, P.E., Nish imura , H., Liang, Y. & Calvin, M., 1979. Steroids from Euphorbia and other 
latex-bearing p lants . Phytochemist ry 18: 103-104. 
Nihei, K., Asaka, Y., Mine, Y., Ito, C , Fu rukawa , H., J u Ichi, M. & Kubo, I., 2004. Insect an-
t ifeedants from tropical plants : s t ruc tures of dumnin and dumsenin . Journa l of Agricul tural and 
Food Chemistry 52(11): 3325-3328. 
Nihei, K., Asaka, Y., Mine, Y. & Kubo, I., 2005a. Insect ant i feedants from Croton jatrophoides: 
s t ruc tures of zumketol, zumsenin, and zumsenol. Jou rna l of Na tu ra l Products 68(2): 244-247. 
Nihei, K.I., Ying, B.-P, Murakami , T., Matsuda , H., Hashimoto, M. & Kubo, I., 2005b. Pachy-
elasides A-D, novel molluscicidal t r i te rpene saponins from Pachyelasma tessmanni i . Jou rna l of 
Agricul tural and Food Chemist ry 53(3): 608-613 . 
Nihei, K., Asaka, Y., Mine, Y., Yamada, Y., Iigo, M., Yanagisawa, T. & Kubo, I., 2006. Mus idunin 
and musiduol, insect ant i feedants from Croton jatrophoides. Jou rna l of N a t u r a l Products 69(6): 
975-977. 
Nikiéma, J.B., Djierro, K., Simpore, J., Guissou, LP., Nacoulma-Ouédraogo, O.G. & Bassene, E., 
2004. Contribution à la connaissance des p lan tes médicinales uti l isées par les t radipra t ic iens de 
la ville de Ouagadougou (Burkina Faso), pour la prise en charge des personnes vivant avec le 
VIH/SIDA. Le Pharmac ien d'Afrique 173: 13-15 . 
Nishiyama, N., Chu, P.J . & Saito, H., 1995. Beneficial effects of biota, a t radi t ional Chinese herba l 
medicine, on learning impa i rmen t induced by basal forebrain-lesion in mice. Biological and Phar-
maceutical Bullet in 18(11): 1513-1517. 
Njike, G.N., Watcho, P., Nguelefack, T.B. & Kamanyi , A., 2005. Hypoglycaemic activity of the 
leaves extracts of Bersama engler iana in r a t s . African Jou rna l of Tradit ional , Complementary 
and Alternat ive Medicines 2(3): 215-221 . 
Njoku, O.U., Obioma, U. & Frank , E.U., 1999. Invest igat ion on some nut r i t ional and toxicological 
propert ies of Afzelia africana and Deta r ium microcarpum seed oil. Bollettino Chimico Farmaceu-
tico 138(4): 165-168. 
Njoroge, G.N. & Bussmann, R.W., 2007. E thnotherapeut ic managemen t of skin diseases among the 
Kikuyus of Centra l Kenya. Journa l of Ethnopharmacology 111: 303-307. 
Njoroge, G.N. & Bussmann, R.W., 2006. Diversity and uti l ization of an t imala r ia l e thnophytothera-
peutic remedies among the Kikuyus (Central Kenya). Jou rna l of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedi-
cine 2(1): 8. 
Nkeh, B.C.-A., Njamen, D., Dongmo, B., Wandji, J., Nguelefack, T.B., Wansi , J .D., Kamanyi , A. & 
Fomum, Z.T., 2001. Anti- inflammatory and analgesic propert ies of the s tem ext rakt of Drypetes 
molunduana Pax and Hoffm. (Euphorbiaceae) in r a t s . Pharmaceut ica l and Pharmacological Let-
te r s 11(2): 61 -63 . 
Nkeh, B.C.-A., Njamen, D., Wandji, J., Fomum, Z.T, Dongmo, A., Nguelefack, T.B, Wansi , J .D. & 
Kamanyi , A., 2003. Anti- inflammatory and analgesic effects of drypemolundein A, a sesquiter-
pene lactone from Drypetes molunduana . Pharmaceut ica l Biology 41(1): 26—30. 
Nkongmeneck, B.A., Tsabang, N., Zapfack, L., Nzooh Dongmo, Z., Nguenang, G.M., Lando, G., 
Carlson, T.J. & Keita, A., 2000. Voies de recours thé rapeu t iques du diabète et p lantes uti l isées 
par les diabétiques au Cameroun: cas de Yaoundé et ses environs. Revue de Médecines et Phar-
macopées Africaines 14: 89-98 . 
Nkounkou-Loumpangou, C , Binimbi-Massengo, A., Nzonzi, J., Ouamba, J.M., Abena, A.A. & Dia-
tewa, M., 2005. Inventa i re des p lan tes médicinales uti l isées dans le t r a i t emen t de l'infertilité fé-
minine à Brazzaville. Phyto thérapie 6: 252-259. 
Nkum, M.G., 1997. Determinat ion of t ann in in some Ghana ian P lan ts . B.Sc. Chemist ry degree 
thesis , Faculty of Science, Depar tmen t of Chemistry, Kwame N k r u m a h Universi ty of Science and 
Technology, Kumasi , Ghana . 37 pp. 
Nkurunziza , J .P. , undated . Val idat ing t radi t ional knowledge: Rwanda . In: Shar ing innovative ex-
periences 10: Examples of the development of pharmaceut ica l products from medicinal p lan ts . 
U N D P & TWNSO, Trieste, Italy, pp. 127-134. 
Noamesi , B.K. & Gyang, E.A., 1980. Effects of O-methylflavinantine on the response to coaxial 
s t imulat ion of guinea-pig i leum. P lan ta Medica 38(2): 138-143. 
Noba, K. & Ba, A.T., 1992. Réexamen de la sys témat ique de 3 espèces du genre Boerhavia L. (Nyc-
taginaceae). Webbia 46(2): 327-339. 
LITERATURE 723 
Nooteboom, H.P., 1962. Generic delimitation in Simaroubaceae tribus Simaroubeae and a conspec-
tus of the genus Quassia L. Blumea 11(2): 509-528. 
Normand, D., 1950. Atlas des bois de la Côte d'Ivoire. Tome 1. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, 
Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 148 pp. 
Normand, D., 1955. Atlas des bois de la Côte d'Ivoire. Tome 2. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, 
Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 132 pp. 
Normand, D. & Paquis, J., 1976. Manuel d'identification des bois commerciaux. Tome 2. Afrique 
guinéo-congolaise. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 335 pp. 
Nostro, A., Germano, M.P., D'Angelo, V., Marino, A. & Cannatelli, M.A., 2000. Extraction methods 
and bioautography for evaluation of medicinal plant antimicrobial activity. Letters in Applied Mi-
crobiology 30: 379-384. 
Notka, F., Meier, G. & Wagner, R., 2004. Concerted inhibitory activities of Phyllanthus amarus on 
HIV replication in vitro and ex vivo. Antiviral Research 64(2): 93-102. 
Noumi, E., 2004. Animal and plant poisons and their antidotes in Eseka and Mbalmayo regions, 
Centre Province, Cameroon. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 93: 231-241. 
Noumi, E. & Fozi, F.L., 2003. Ethnomedical botany of epilepsy treatment in Fongo-Tongo village, 
Western Province, Cameroon. Pharmaceutical Biology 41(5): 330-339. 
Noumi, E. & Tchakonang, N.Y.C., 2001. Plants used as abortifacients in Sangmelima region of 
southern Cameroon. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 76: 263-268. 
Noumi, E. & Yomi, A., 2001. Medicinal plants used for intestinal diseases in Mbalmayo Region, 
Central Province, Cameroon. Fitoterapia 72(3): 246-254. 
Noumi, E., Amvan Zollo, P.H. & Lontsi, D., 1998. Aphrodisiac plants used in Cameroon. Fi-
toterapia 69: 125-135. 
Noumi, E., Houngue, F. & Lontsi, D., 1999. Traditional medicines in primary health care: plants 
used for the treatment of hypertension in Bafia, Cameroon. Fitoterapia 70: 134-139. 
Novy, J.W., 1997. Medicinal plants of the eastern region of Madagascar. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 55: 119-126. 
Nowicke, J.W., 1968. Palynotaxonomic study of the Phytolaccaceae. Annals of the Missouri Botani-
cal Garden 55(3): 294-364. 
Nsimba-Lubaki, M., Peumans, W.J. & Carlier, A.R., 1983. Isolation and partial characterisation of 
a lectin from Euphorbia heterophylla seeds. Journal of Biochemistry 215(1): 141-145. 
Ntahomvukiye, D., Hakizimana, A., Nkiliza, J. & van Puyvelde, L., 1984. Dosage de la colchicine 
dans le Gloriosa simplex L. (Liliacées) du Rwanda (Afrique Centrale). Plantes Médicinales et 
Phytothérapie 18(1): 24-27. 
Ntezurubanza, L. & Ayobangira, F.X., 1987. Quelques plantes médicinales et aromatiques recen-
sées au Rwanda. Bulletin Agricole du Rwanda 20(1): 64-70. 
Nunez, V., Castro, V., Murillo, R., Ponce-Soto, L.A., Merfort, I. & Lomonte, B., 2005. Inhibitory 
effects of Piper umbellatum and Piper peltatum extracts towards myotoxic phospholipases A2 
from Bothrops snake venoms: isolation of 4-nerolidylcatechol as active principle. Phytochemistry 
66: 1017-1025. 
Nunez-Guillen, M.E., Da Silva, E.J.A., Souccar, C. & Lapa, L.A.J., 1997. Analgesie and antiin-
flammatory activities of the aqueous extract of Plantago major L. International Journal of Phar-
macognosy 35(2): 99-104. 
Nwafor, S.V. & Akah, P.A., 2003. Effect of methanolic leaf extracts of Cissampelos mucronata 
A.Rich, against indomethacin induced ulcer in rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 41: 
181-183. 
Nwafor, P.A. & Okwuasaba, F.K., 2001a. Contraceptive and estrogenic effect of a methanol extract 
of Cassia nigricans leaves in experimental animals. Pharmaceutical Biology 39(6): 424-428. 
Nwafor, P.A. & Okwuasaba, F.K., 2001b. Effect of methanolic extract of Cassia nigricans leaves on 
rat gastrointestinal tract. Fitoterapia 72(3): 206-214. 
Nwafor, S.V., Akah, P.A., Okoli, CO., Ndu, O.O. & Ichu, E.O., 2002. Uterine relaxant property of 
the ethanolic extract of Cissampelos mucronata. Journal of Natural Remedies 2(1): 59-65. 
Nwodo, N.J, Okide, G.B, Okonta, J.M. & Ebebe, I.M., 2003. Antidiabetic effect of Rauwolfia vomito-
ria ethanolic leaf extract in rabbits. Journal of Tropical Medicinal Plants 4(1): 71-74. 
Nwosu, M.O., 1999. Herbs for mental disorders. Fitoterapia 70: 58-63. 
724 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Nwude, N. & Ibrahim, M.A., 1980. P l an t s used in t radi t ional ve ter inary medical practice in Nige-
ria. Journa l of Veter inary Pharmacology and Therapeut ics 3: 261-273 . 
Nyakabwa, M. & Dibaluka, M., 1990. P lan tes médicinales cultivées dans la zone de Kabondo à Ki-
sangan i (Zaire). African Study Monographs 11(2): 87-99 . 
Nyarko, A.A. & Addy, M.E., 1990. Effect of aqueous extract of Adenia cissampeloides on blood pres-
sure and serum analytes of hyper tensive pa t ien t s . Phyto therapy Research 4: 25-28 . 
Nyasse, B., Nono, J., Sonke, B., Denier, C. & Fontaine , C , 2004. Trypanocidal activity of bergenin, 
the major const i tuent of Flueggea virosa, on Trypanosoma brucei. Pharmaz ie 59(6): 492-494. 
Nyasse, B., Ngantchou, I., Nono, J .-J . & Schneider, B., 2006. Antifilarial activity in vitro of poly-
carpol and 3-O-acetyl aleuritolic acid from Cameroonian medicinal p lan ts aga ins t Onchocerca 
gut turosa . Na tu ra l Products Research 20(4): 391-397. 
Obadoni, B.O. & Ochuko, P.O., 2002. Phytochemical s tudies and comparat ive efficacy of the crude 
extracts of some haemosta t ic p lan t s in Edo and Del ta S ta tes of Nigeria. Global Jou rna l of P u r e 
and Applied Sciences 8(2): 203-208 . 
Obi, E., Emeh, J.K., Orisakwe, O.E., Afonne, O.J., Ilondu, N.A. & Agbasi, P.U., 2000. Invest igat ion 
of the biochemical evidence for t he antiulcerogenic activity of Synclisia scabrida. Ind ian J o u r n a l 
of Pharmacology 32: 381-383 . 
Obi, C L . , Potgieter, N., Randima, L.P., Mavhungu , N.J. , Musie, E., Bessong, P.O., Mabogo, D.E.N., 
& Mashimbye, J., 2002. Antibacter ial activities of five p lan ts against some medically significant 
h u m a n bacter ia . South African J o u r n a l of Science 98(1-2): 25-28 . 
Obi, C L . , Potgieter, N., Bessong, P.O., Masebe, T., Mathebula , H. & Molobela, P., 2003. I n vi tro 
ant ibacter ia l activity of Venda medicinal p lants . South African Jou rna l of Botany 69(2): 199-203. 
Obio, G.I.B., 2006. Reproductive phenology of some indigenous medicinal p lan ts in Omo Biosphere 
Reserve, Nigeria. Botanica L i thuan ia 12(1): 25-29 . 
Obiri, D.D., 1997. Studies on ant i - inf lammatory activity of extracts of seeds of Picral ima nit ida. M. 
P h a r m , degree thesis , Depa r tmen t of Pharmaceut ica l Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame 
N k r u m a h Universi ty of Science and Technology, Kumasi , Ghana . 139 pp. 
Occhiuto, F., Circosta, C. & Costa De Pasquale , R., 1989. Studies on some medicinal p lan ts of 
Senegal: effects on isolated guinea pig ileum. J o u r n a l of Ethnopharmacology 26(2): 205-210. 
Odetola, A.A. & Akojenu, S.M., 2000. Anti-diarrhoeal and gastro- intest inal potent ials of the aque-
ous extract of Phy l l an thus a m a r u s (Euphorbiaceae). African Jou rna l of Medicine and Medical Sci-
ences 29(2): 119-122. 
Odojo, A., Piart , J., Polonsky, J . & Roth, M., 1981. E tude d'effet insecticide de deux quassinoides 
sur des larves de Locusta migrator ia Ret.f. (Lorthoptera, Acrididae). Comptes Rendus Academie 
des Sciences (Paris) Serie C 293: 241-244. 
Oduola, T., Avwioro, O.G. & Ayanniyi, T.B., 2005. Suitabili ty of t he leaf ext ract of J a t r o p h a gos-
sypifolia as a n ant icoagulant for biochemical a n d haematological analyses . African J o u r n a l of 
Biotechnology 4(7): 679 -681 . 
Oduro, A.C., 2000. Survey of t ree species associated with cocoa cultivation in Osino District of 
G h a n a and vegetative propagat ion of th ree of them. M.Phil . Crop Science degree thesis , Depart-
m e n t of Crop Science, School of Agriculture, Univers i ty of Cape Coast, Cape Coast, Ghana . 121 
pp. 
Ogawa, T., Niwa, H. & Yamada , K., 1993. An efficient enantioselective synthesis of indicine N-
oxide, an ant i - tumor pyrrolizidine alkaloid. Te t rahedron 49(8): 1571-1578. 
Ogbobe, O. & Akano, V., 1993. The physico-chemical proper t ies of t he seed a n d seed oil of J a t r o p h a 
gossipifolia. P lan t Foods for H u m a n Nutr i t ion 43(3): 197-200. 
Ogbourne, S.M., Suhrbier , A., Jones , B., Cozzi, S-.J., Boyle, G.M., Morris, M., McAlpine, D., Johns , 
J., Scott, T.M., Suther land , K.P., Gardner , J.M., Le Thuy, T.T., Lenarczyk, A., Aylward, J .H. & 
Parsons , P.G., 2004. Ant i tumor activity of 3-ingenyl angelate : p l a sma m e m b r a n e and mitochon-
drial disruption and necrotic cell death . Cancer Research 64: 2833-2839. 
Ogbulie, J.N., Ogueke, C.C., Okoli, I.C. & Anyanwu, B.N., 2007. Antibacter ial activities and toxico-
logical potent ia ls of crude ethanolic extracts of Euphorbia h i r ta . African J o u r n a l of Biotechnology 
6(13): 1544-1548. 
Oguakwa, J .U. & Cronlund, A., 1976. A new alkaloid from Ery throphleum couminga. Lloydia 39(4): 
248. 
LITERATURE 725 
Ogundipe, O.O., Moody, J.O., Houghton, P.J. & Odelola, H.A., 2001. Bioactive chemical constitu-
ents from Alchornea laxiflora (Benth.) Pax and Hoffman. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 74(3): 
275-280. 
Ogungbamila, F.O. & Samuelsson, G., 1990. Smooth muscle relaxing flavonoids from Alchornea 
cordifolia (leaves). Acta Pharmaceutica Nordica 2: 421-422. 
Ogwal, E.N.K., 1996. Medicinal plants used during ante- and post-natal periods and in early infant 
care in Busoga. In: van der Maesen, L.J.G., van der Bürgt, X.M. & van Medenbach de Rooy, J.M. 
(Editors), 1996. The biodiversity of African plants. Proceedings XIVth AETFAT Congress, 22-27 
August 1994, Wageningen, the Netherlands, pp. 768-770. 
Ohiri, F.C., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1982. Alkaloids from Chasmanthera de-
pendens. Planta Medica 46(4): 228-230. 
Ohiri, F.C., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1983a. Cycleanine N-oxide, a new alkaloid 
from Synclisia scabrida. Planta Medica 47(2): 87-89. 
Ohiri, F.C., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1983b. Tertiary phenolic alkaloids from Chas-
manthera dependens. Planta Medica 49(1): 17-19. 
Ohiri, F.C., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1983c. The African Strychnos species and 
their alkaloids: a review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 9(2-3): 167-223. 
Ohiri, F.C., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1989. Pharmacological studies on Synclisia 
scabrida. Planta Medica 42(6): 42-43. 
Ohnuma, T., Sridkar, K.S., Ratner, L.H. & Holland, J.F., 1982. Phase I study of indicine N-oxide in 
patients with advanced cancer. Cancer Treatment and Report 66(7): 1509-1515. 
Ohto, I., 1984. Symptoms are classified into diagnostic categories: Turkana's view of livestock dis-
eases. African Study Monographs, Supplement 3: 71-93. 
Ojewole, J.O. & Adewunmi, CO., 2000. Hypoglycaemic effects of methanolic leaf extract of Catha-
ranthus roseus (Linn.) G. Don (Apocynaceae) in normal and diabetic mice. Acta Medica et 
Biologica 48(2): 55-58. 
Ojimelukwe, P.C., 2001. Effect of preservation with Saccoglottis gabonensis on the biochemistry 
and sensory attributes of fermenting palm wine. Journal of Food Biochemistry 25(5): 411-424. 
Okafor, J. & Ham, R., 1999. Identification, utilisation et conservation des plantes médicinales dans 
le sud-est du Nigeria. Thèmes de la biodiversité africaine. Le programme d'appui à la biodiversité 
3.8 pp. 
Okano, M., Fukamiya, N., Tagahara, K., Cosentino, M., Lee, T.T.-Y., Morris-Natschke, S. & Lee, 
K.-H., 1996. Anti-HIV activity of quassinoids. Bioorganic and Medicinal Chemistry Letters 6: 
701-706. 
Oke, J.M. & Hamburger, M.O., 2002. Screening of some Nigerian medicinal plants for antioxidant 
activity using 2,2-diphenyl-picryl-hydrazyl radical. African Journal of Biomedical Research 5: 77-
79. 
Okeke, I.N., Ogundaini, A.O., Ogunbamila, F.O. & Lamikanra, A., 1999. Antimicrobial spectrum of 
Alchornea cordifolia leaf extract. Phytotherapy Research 13: 67-69. 
Okello-Onen, J., Kerwegi, S.A., Olila, D., Ssekitto, C.M.B. & Osinde, C, 2004. Participatory 
evaluation and improvement of ethno-veterinary practices for tick control in Lango and Teso 
farming system. Final Technical Report. LIRI, Tororo, Uganda. 20 pp. 
Okemo, P.O. & Mwatha, W.E., 2002. In vitro activity of selected medicinal plant extracts against 
pathogenic bacteria and HIV/AIDS related Mycobacterium spp. Journal of Tropical Microbiology 
1: 29-35. 
Oketch-Rabah, H.A.T., 1996. Leaf compounds in potential plantation species of Aloe in Kenya. 
Journal of Herbs, Spices & Medicinal Plants 4(3): 25-33. 
Oketch-Rabah, H., Dossaji, S.F. & Mberu, E.K., 1999. Antimalarial activity of some Kenyan me-
dicinal plants. Pharmaceutical Biology 37(5): 329-334. 
Okoli, A.S. & Iroegbu, C.U., 2004. Evaluation of extracts of Anthocleista djalonensis, Nauclea lati-
folia and Uvaria afzelii for activity against bacterial isolates from cases of non-gonococcal urethri-
tis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 92: 135-144. 
Okoli, A.S. & Iroegbu, C.U., 2005. In vitro antibacterial activity of Synclisia scabrida whole root 
extracts. African Journal of Biotechnology 4(9): 946-952. 
Okoli, CO., Akah, P.A. & Nwafor, S.V., 2003. Anti-inflammatory activity of plants. Journal of 
Natural Remedies 3(1): 1-30. 
726 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Okoli, I.C., Ebere, CS., Emenalom, O.O., Uchegbu, M.C. & Esonu, B.O., 2001. Indigenous livestock 
paradigms revisited 11. An assessment of the proximate value of most preferred indigenous 
browses of southeastern Nigeria. Tropical Animal Production Investigation 4(2): 99-107. 
Okoli, I.C., Ebere, C.S., Uchegbu, M.C., Udah, A. & Ibeawuchi, I.I., 2003. A survey of the diversity 
of plants utilized for small ruminant feeding in south-eastern Nigeria. Agriculture, Ecosystems & 
Environment 96(1-3): 147-154. 
Okorie, D.A., 1976. A new phthalide and xanthones from Anthocleista djalonensis and Anthocleista 
vogelii. Phytochemistry 15: 1799-1800. 
Okorie, S.U. & Amaechi, E.C., 2003. Effects of roasting and soaking on the proximate composition 
and functional properties of selected tropical legumes. Global Journal of Pure and Applied Sci-
ences 9(2): 177-182. 
Okoye, Z.S.C. & Ohaeri, O.C., 1995. Effect of combined or successive exposure to dietary aflatoxins 
and Sacoglottis gabonensis bark extract on blood coagulation in rats. Medical Science Research 
23(4): 273-274. 
Okpekon, T., Yolou, S., Gleye, C., Roblot, F., Loiseau, P., Bories, C., Grellier, P., Frappier, F., Lau-
rens, A. & Hocquemiller, R., 2004. Antiparasitic activities of medicinal plants used in Ivory 
Coast. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 90: 91-97. 
Oksman-Caldentey, K.-M., Parkkinen, O., Joki, E. & Hiltunen, R., 1989. Increased production of 
tropane alkaloids by conventional and transformed root cultures of Hyoscyamus muticus. Planta 
Medica 55: 682. 
Oksman-Caldentey, K.-M., Vuorela, H., Issenegger, M., Strauss, A. & Hiltunen, R., 1987. Selection 
for high tropane alkaloid content in Hyoscyamus muticus plants. Plant Breeding 99: 318-326. 
Okwu, D.E. & Ekeke, O., 2003. Phytochemical screening and mineral composition of chewing sticks 
in South Eastern Nigeria. Global Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences 9(2): 235-238. 
Olafsdottir, E.S., Andersen, J.V. & Jaroszewski, J.W., 1989. Cyanohydrin glycosides of Passi-
floraceae. Phytochemistry 28(1): 127-132. 
Olagunju, J.A., Kazeem, O.W. & Oyedapo, O.O., 2000. Further studies on the mechanism of carbo-
hydrate intolerance induced in the rat by an ethanolic extract of Plumbago zeylanica. Pharma-
ceutical Biology 38(5): 362-366. 
Ole-Miaron, J.O., 2003. The Maasai ethnodiagnostic skill of livestock diseases: a lead to traditional 
bioprospecting. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 84(1): 79-83. 
Oliveira, J.S., 1974. Valor alimentär de alguns frutos silvestres de Moçambique. Portugaliae Acta 
Biologica, Serie A: Morfologia, Fisiologia, Genetica e Biologia General 13(1-4): 47-62. 
Oliver, B., 1960. Medicinal plants in Nigeria. Nigerian College of Arts, Sciences and Technology, 
Ibadan, Nigeria. 138 pp. 
Oliver-Bever, B., 1982. Medicinal plants in tropical West Africa 1. Plants acting on the cardiovas-
cular system. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 5: 1-71. 
Oliver-Bever, B., 1983a. Medicinal plants in tropical West Africa 2. Plants acting on the nervous 
system. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 7: 1-93. 
Oliver-Bever, B., 1983b. Medicinal plants in tropical West Africa 3. Anti-infection therapy with 
higher plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 9: 1—83. 
Oliver-Bever, B., 1986. Medicinal plants in tropical West Africa. Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom. 375 pp. 
Olivier, G.W.J., Rowan, M.G., Branch, S.K., Mahon, M.F. & Molloy, K.C., 1992. Two esters of sy-
nadenol, a new lathyrane diterpenoid from the latex of Synadenium compactum, Euphorbiaceae: 
a crystal structure analysis. Journal of the Chemical Society Perkin Transactions 10(14): 1831-
1835. 
Olukoya, D.K., Idika, N. & Odugbemi, T., 1993. Antibacterial activity of some medicinal plants 
from Nigeria. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 39: 69-72. 
Oluwemimo, A. & Usifoh, CO., 2001. The anthelmintic activity of Hunteria umbellata K. Schum. 
(Fam. Apocynaceae) extracts. Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 44(5): 286-
290. 
Oluwole, F.S. & Bolarinwa, A.F., 1998. The uterine contractile effect of Petiveria alliacea seeds. 
Fitoterapia 69(1): 3-6. 
Omar, M., DeFeo, J., & Youngken Jr, H.W., 1983. Chemical and toxicity studies of Trichodesma 
africanum L. Journal of Natural Products 46(2): 153-156. 
LITERATURE 727 
Omino, E.A., 1996. A contribution to the leaf anatomy and taxonomy of Apocynaceae in Africa. 
Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 96—1. Wageningen Agricultural University, Wagen-
ingen, Netherlands. 178 pp. 
Omino, E.A., 2002. Apocynaceae (part 1). In: Beentje, H.J. & Ghazanfar, S.A. (Editors). Flora of 
Tropical East Africa. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 116 pp. 
Omino, E.A. & Kokwaro, J.O., 1993. Ethnobotany of Apocynaceae species in Kenya. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 40: 167-180. 
Omolo, O.J., Chhabra, S.C. & Nyagah, G., 1997. Determination of iron content in different parts of 
herbs used traditionally for anaemia treatment in East Africa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 58: 
97-102. 
Omulokoli, E., Khan, B. & Chhabra, S.C, 1997. Antiplasmodial activity of four Kenyan medicinal 
plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 56: 133-137. 
Onabanjo, A.O., John, T.A., Sokale, A.A. & Samuel, O.T., 1990. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory 
effects of Chasmanthera dependens. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 29(1): 24-28. 
Onanga, M., 1983. Alcaloïdes du Mostuea brunonis (Loganiacés): isolement, structure, synthèse. 
Thèse de Doctorat d'Etat, Université Paris 11, Orsay, France. 158 pp. 
O'Neill, M.J., Bray, D.H., Boardman, P., Phillipson, J.D., Warhurst, D.C., Peters, W. & Suffness, 
M., 1986. Plants as sources of antimalarial drugs: in vitro antimalarial activities of some quassi-
noids. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 30: 101-104. 
Onocha, P.A., Okorie, D.A., Connolly, J.D. & Roycroft, D.S., 1995. Monoterpene diol, iridoid gluco-
side and dibenzo-a-pyrone from Anthocleista djalonensis. Phytochemistry 40(4): 1183-1189. 
Onocha, P.A., Okorie, D.A., Connolly, J.D., Krebs, H.C., Meier, B. & Habermehl, G.G., 2003a. Cyto-
toxic activity of the constituents of Anthocleista djalonensis and their derivatives. Nigerian Jour-
nal of Natural Products and Medicine 7: 58-60. 
Onocha, P.A., Opegbemi, A.O., Kadri, A.O., Ajayi, K.M. & Okorie, D.A., 2003b. Antimicrobial 
evaluation of Nigerian Euphorbiaceae plants 1: Phyllanthus amarus and Phyllanthus muelleri-
anus leaf extracts. Nigerian Journal of Natural Products and Medicine 7: 9-12. 
Onochie, C.F.A. & Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1963. Loganiaceae. In: Hepper, F.N. (Editor). Flora of 
West Tropical Africa. Volume 2. 2nd Edition. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Ad-
ministrations, London, United Kingdom, pp. 34—47. 
Onunkwo, G.C., 2006. Formulation of Croton penduliflorus seed into tablet dosage form. Global 
Journal of Medical Sciences 5(1): 29-33. 
Onuorah, E.O., 2001. The efficacy of heartwood extracts of Afzelia africana and Erythrophleum 
suaveolens as wood preservatives. Journal of the Timber Development Association of India 47(1-
2): 10-26. 
Onweluzo, J.C., Vijayalakshmi, M.R., Vijayanand, P. & Eipeson, W.E., 1999. Detarium microcar-
pum polysaccharide as a stabilizer in processed fruit products. Lebensmittel Wissenschaft und 
Technologie 32(8): 521-526. 
Onweluzo, J.C., Leelavathi, K. & Rao, P.H., 1999. Effect of Detarium microcarpum (dm) and Mu-
cuna flagellipes (mf) gums on the quality of white bread. Plant Foods for Human Nutrition 54(2): 
173-182. 
Openshaw, K., 2000. A review of Jatropha curcas, an oil plant of unfulfilled promise. Biomass and 
Bioenergy 19: 1-15. 
Opferkuch, H.J. & Hecker, E., 1982. The active principles of the spurge family Euphorbiaceae 4. 
Skin irritant and tumor promoting di terpene esters from Euphorbia ingens. Journal of Cancer 
Research and Clinical Oncology 103(3): 255-268. 
Opferkuch, H.J., Adolf, W., Sorg, B., Kusumoto, S. & Hecker, E., 1981. The chemistry of ingenol 1. 
Ingenol and some of its derivatives. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, Teil B Anorganische Chemie 
- Organische Chemie 36(7): 878-887. 
Oppong-Anane, K., 2001. Grassland and pasture crops. Country pasture/forage resource profiles. 
[Internet] Ministry of Food & Agriculture, Accra, Ghana. 
<http://www.fao.org/ag/AGP/AGPC/doc/Counprof/Ghana.htm> Accessed May 2008. 
Orisakwe, O.E., Afonne, O.J. & Dioka, C.E., 1997. A papaverine-like activity of Synclisia scabrida 
in folklore medicine in Nigeria. BMSA 8: 1-5. 
Orisakwe, O.E., Afonne, O.J., Dioka, CE., Ufearo, CS. & Ofoefule, S.I., 1996a. Investigation into 
the oestrogen-like activity of Synclisia scabrida. Fitoterapia 67: 469-471. 
728 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Orisakwe, O.E., Afonne, O.J., Dioka, CE., Ufearo, CS., Okpogba, A.N. & Ofoefule, S.I., 1996b. 
Some pharmacological properties of Synclisia scabrida. 2. Indian Journal of Medical Research 
103: 282-284. 
Ortiz, R., Kellogg, E.A. & Van Der Werff, H., 2007. Molecular phylogeny of the moonseed family 
(Menispermaceae): implications for morphological diversification. American Journal of Botany 
94(8): 1425-1438. 
Osadebe, P.O. & Okoye, F.B.C, 2003. Anti-inflammatory effects of crude methanolic extract and 
fractions of Alchornea cordifolia leaves. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 89: 19-24. 
Osei, R.D., 1977. Isolation, characterization and chemical studies of alkaloids of Kolobopetalum 
auriculatum. MSc (Pharmaceutical Chemistry) degree thesis. Department of Pharmaceutical 
Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Ku-
masi, Ghana. 128 pp. 
Osemeobo, G.J. & Ujor, G., 1999. Non-wood forest products In Nigeria. Data collection and analy-
sis for sustainable forest management in ACP countries - Linking national and international ef-
forts. EC-FAO partnership programme. Federal Department of Forestry, Ajuba, Nigeria. 42 pp. 
Osoniyi, O. & Onajobi, F., 2003. Coagulant and anticoagulant activities in Jatropha curcas latex. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 89: 101-105. 
Otsyina, R. & Dery, B.B., 2001. The 10 priority medicinal trees of Shinyanga, Tanzania. Agrofor-
estry Today 12(1): 5-8. 
Ouattara, Y., Sanon, S., Traoré, Y., Mahiou, V., Azas, N. & Sawadogo, L., 2006. Antimalarial activ-
ity of Swartzia madagascariensis Desv. (Leguminosae), Combretum glutinosum Guill. & Perr. 
(Combretaceae) and Tinospora bakis Miers. (Menispermaceae), Burkina Faso medicinal plants. 
African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and Alternative Medicines 3(1): 75-81. 
Oudhia, P. & Pal, A.R., 2001. Rainy season medicinal weed flora in wastelands of Chamranallah 
watershed area at Bagbhera. Journal of Medicinal and Aromatic Plant Sciences 22(4): 444-449. 
Oudhia, P., Shrivastava, G.K. & Tripathi, R.S., 1996. Medicinal weeds of Durg (Madhya Pradesh) 
region. Weed News 3(1-2): 63-66. 
Owolade, O.F., Alabi, B.S., Osikanlu, Y.O.K. & Odeyemi, O.O., 2004. On-farm evaluation of some 
plant extracts as biofungicide and bioinsecticide on cowpea in Southwest Nigeria. Journal of 
Food, Agriculture and Environment 2(2): 237-240. 
Owolade, O.F., Amusa, A.N. & Osikanlu, Y.O.K., 2000. Efficacy of certain indigenous plant extracts 
against seed-borne infection of Fusarium moniliforme on maize (Zea mays L.) in south western 
Nigeria. Cereal Research Communications 28(3): 323-327. 
Owonubi, M.O. & Iwalewa, E.O., 1997. Cardio-activity of sarmentoside-A from Strophanthus sar-
mentosus seeds. Nigerian Journal of Natural Products and Medicine 1: 16—18. 
Owoyale, J.A., Olatunji, G.A. & Oguntoye, S.O., 2005. Antifungal and antibacterial activities of an 
alcoholic extract of Senna alata leaves. Journal of Applied Sciences & Environmental Manage-
ment 9(3): 105-107. 
Owusu, P.D., Slatkin, D.J., Knapp, J.E. & Schiff, P.L.jr., 1981. Constituents of West African me-
dicinal plants. 28. Additional alkaloids of Triclisia gilletti. Journal of Natural Products 44: 61-66. 
Oyewale, A.O., Mika, A. & Peters, F.A., 2002. Phytochemical, cytotoxicity and microbial screening 
of Euphorbia hirta Linn. Global Journal of Pure and Applied Sciences 8(1): 49-55. 
Ozenda, P., 1977. Flore du Sahara. Deuxième édition. Centre National de la Recherche Scientifi-
que, Paris, France. 622 pp. 
Padma, P. & Setty, O.H., 1999. Protective effect of Phyllanthus fraternus against carbon tetrachlo-
ride-induced mitochondrial dysfunction. Life Sciences 64(25): 2411-2417. 
Pais, M., Jarreau, F.X., Fouche, P. & Goutarel, R., 1971. A propos of a falsification of Strophantus 
gratus Franchet seeds. A new alkaloid, alafine, isolated from Alafia sp. seeds and Alafia multi-
flora Stapf (Apocynaceae). Annales Pharmaceutiques Françaises 29(1): 57-62. 
Pakia, M. & Cooke, J.A., 2003a. The ethnobotany of the Midzichenda tribes of the coastal forest 
areas in Kenya: 1. General perspective and non-medicinal plant uses. South African Journal of 
Botany 69(3): 370-381. 
Pakia, M. & Cooke, J.A., 2003b. The ethnobotany of the Midzichenda tribes of the coastal forest 
areas in Kenya: 2. Medicinal plant uses. South African Journal of Botany 69(3): 382-395. 
LITERATURE 729 
Pal, S. & Gupta, I., 1979. Antifungal activity of 'Choti dudhi plant' (Euphorbia prostrata Ait. and 
Euphorbia thymifolia Linn.) against certain dermatophytes. II. In vivo studies in experimentally 
infected animals. Indian Veterinary Journal 56(5): 367-369. 
Palazzino, G., Federici, E., Rasoanaivo, P., Galeffi, C. & Delle Monache, F., 1997. Research on Afri-
can medicinal plants 37. 3,4-seco diterpenes of Croton geayi. Gazzetta Chimica Italiana 127(6): 
311-314. 
Palmer, E. & Pitman, N., 1972-1974. Trees of southern Africa, covering all known indigenous spe-
cies in the Republic of South Africa, South-West Africa, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland. 3 vol-
umes. Balkema, Cape Town, South Africa. 2235 pp. 
Pan, Y., Wang, X. & Hu, X., 2007. Cytotoxic withanolides from the flowers of Datura metel. Journal 
of Natural Products 70(7): 1127-1132. 
Panchbhai, D.M., Bachkar, B.R., Deokar, B.L. & Wankhade, S.G., 2006. Effect of nitrogen and 
phosphorus on root yield and quality of ashawagandha (Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal). Ad-
vances in Plant Science 19(6): 89-92. 
Panda, A.K., Bisaria, V.S., Mishra, S. & Bhojwani, S.S., 1991. Cell Structure of Holarrhena anti-
dysenterica: growth and alkaloid production. Phytochemistry 30(3): 833-836. 
Panda, A.K., Mishra, S. & Bisaria, V.S., 1992. Alkaloid production by plant cell suspension culture 
of Holarrhena antidysenterica: I. Effect of major nutrients. Biotechnology and Bioengineering 
39(10): 1043-1051. 
Pandey, R. & Haseeb, A., 1988. Studies in the toxicity of extracts of certain medicinal plants to 
rootknot nematode Meloidogyne incognita (Kifoid & White) Chitwood. Indian Journal of Plant 
Pathology 6(2): 184-186. 
Pandey, A., Maity, B.R. & Samaddar, K.R., 1996. Antifungal activity of plant latex towards certain 
fungal organisms. Journal of Mycopathological Research 34(1): 35-40. 
Pangalos, M.N., Francis, P.T., Pearson, R.C., Middlemiss, D.N. & Bowen, D.M., 1991. Destruction 
of a sub-population of cortical neurones by suicide transport of volkensin, a lectin from Adenia 
volkensii. Journal of Neuroscience Methods 40(1): 17-29. 
Pari, L. & Amarnath, S.M., 2004a. Antidiabetic effect of Boerhavia diffusa: effect on serum and 
tissue lipids in experimental diabetes. Journal of Medicine and Food 7(4): 472—476. 
Pari, L. & Amarnath, S.M., 2004b. Antidiabetic activity of Boerhavia diffusa L.: effect on hepatic 
key enzymes in experimental diabetes. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 91: 109-113. 
Pari, K., Sundari, C.S., Chandani, S. & Balasubramanian, D., 2000. Beta-Carbolines that accumu-
late in human tissues may serve a protective role against oxidative stress. Journal of Biological 
Chemistry 275(4): 2455-2462. 
Paris, R. & Etchepare, S., 1967. Sur les polyphenols du Cassia sieberiana DC: isolement du 1-
epicatechol et du leucopelargonidol. Annales Pharmaceutiques de France 25(5): 343-346. 
Paris, R. & Le Men, M.J., 1955. Sur un Stephania dA.O.F.: le Stephania dinklagei (Menisperma-
cées). Presse Médicale 63: 427. 
Paris, R.R. & Tessier, A.M., 1972. Présence de substances du groupe des cucurbitacines chez diver-
ses Euphorbiacées toxiques africaines, notamment chez Maprounea membranacea Pax et 
K.Hoffm. Comptes Rendus Hebdomadaires des Séances de FAcadémie des Sciences, Serie D, Sci-
ences Naturelles 274(2): 321-323. 
Paris, M., Bouquet, A. & Paris, R.R., 1969. Biochimie végétale. Sur le bartérioside, nouvel hétéro-
side cyanogénétique des écorces de racine du Barteria fistulosa Mast. Comptes rendus des Séan-
ces de FAcadémie des Sciences, Série D, Sciences naturelles 268(23): 2804-2806. 
Parmar, V.S., Jha, H.N., Gupta, A.K., Prasad, A.K., Gupta, S., Boll, P.M. & Tyagi, O.D., 1992. New 
antibacterial tetratriacontanol derivatives from Agave americana L. Tetrahedron 48(7): 1281-
1284. 
Parrotta, J.A., 2001. Healing plants of peninsular India. CABI Publishing, Wallingford, United 
Kingdom. 917 pp. 
Parry, O. & Matambo, C, 1992. Some pharmacological actions of aloe extracts and Cassia abbre-
viata on rats and mice. Central African Journal of Medicine 38(10): 409-414. 
Parry, O., Mutangadura, N. & Duri, Z.J., 1992. The effects of Cassia abbreviata on rat blood pres-
sure. Central African Journal of Medicine 38(11): 435-438. 
Pascal, O., 2002. Plantes et forêts de Mayotte. Patrimoines Naturels 53. 108 pp. 
730 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Passilongo-Silva, A.C., Pereira De Faria, D.E., Do Espirito Santo-Borges, N.B., De Souza, I.A., Pe-
ters, V.M. & Guerra, M., 2007. Toxicological screening of Euphorbia tirucalli L.: Developmental 
toxicity studies in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 110(1): 154-159. 
Patel, M.B., Thompson, L. & Poisson, J., 1973. Alcaloides de Tabernaemontana brachyantha. Phy-
tochemistry 12: 451-456. 
Patel, M.B., Poisson, J., Pousset, J.L. & Rowson, J.M., 1965. Vincamajine, the major alkaloid of 
leaves of Rauwolfia mannii Stapf. Journal of Pharmacy and Pharmacology 17(5): 323-324. 
Paulino, N., Pizollatti, M.G., Yunes, R.A., Cechinel-Filho, V., Creczynski-Pasa, T.B. & Calixto, J.B., 
1999. The mechanisms underlying the relaxant effect of methyl and ethyl gallates in the guinea 
pig trachea in vitro: contribution of potassium channels. Naunyn Schmiedeberg's Archives of 
Pharmacology 360(3): 331-336. 
Pauwels, L., 1993. Nzayilu N'ti : guide des arbres et arbustes de la région de Kinshasa Brazzaville. 
Scripta Botanica Belgica. Volume 4. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Meise, Belgium. 495 
pp. 
Pawelka, K.H. & Stöckigt, J., 1983. Indole alkaloids from cell suspension cultures of Tabernaemon-
tana divaricata and Tabernanthe iboga. Plant Cell Reports 2: 105. 
Pax, F. & Hoffmann, K., 1914. Deuteromallotus. In: Engler, A. (Editor). Das Pflanzenreich 4, 
147(7): 212-213. 
Pelosi, E., Lubelli, C, Polito, L., Barbieri, L., Bolognesi, A. & Stirpe, F., 2005. Ribosome-
inactivating proteins and other lectins from Adenia (Passifloraceae). Toxicon 46(6): 658-663. 
Peltier, M., 1981. Plumbaginaceae. Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, familles 162-163. 
Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 15-24. 
Pengsuparp, T., Cai, L.N., Fong, H.H.S., Kinghorn, A.D., Pezzuto, J.M., Wani, M.C. & Wall, M.E., 
1994. Pentacyclic triterpenes derived from Maprounea africana are potent inhibitors of HIV-1 re-
verse transcriptase. Journal of Natural Products 57(3): 415-418. 
Pengsuparp, T., Cai, L., Constant, H., Fong, H.H., Lin, L.Z., Kinghorn, A.D., Pezzuto, J.M., Cordell, 
G.A., Ingolfsdottir, K., Wagner, H. & Hughes, S.H., 1995. Mechanistic evaluation of new plant-
derived compounds that inhibit HIV-1 reverse transcriptase. Journal of Natural Products 58(7): 
1024-1031. 
Perazzo, F.F., Souza, G.H.B., Cardoso, L.G.V., Carvalho, J.C.T., Nanayakkara, N.P.D. & Bastos, 
J.K., 2005. Anti-inflammatory and analgesic properties of water-ethanolic extract from Potho-
morphe umbellata (Piperaceae) aerial parts. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 99: 215-220. 
Perez, G. & Rosa, M., 2005. Antiallergic activity of ethanol extract from Petiveria alliacea. Journal 
of Natural Remedies 5(2): 165-169. 
Perez, L.R., Garcia, M.M.R., Vasquez, R.T.R. & Colinas, L.T., 2005. Allelopathic potential of Petiv-
eria alliacea L. Agronomy for Sustainable Development 25(2): 177-182. 
Pernet, R. & Meyer, G., 1957. Pharmacopée de Madagascar. Publications de l'Institut de Recherche 
Scientifique Tananarive-Tsimbazaza. Pierre André Impr., Paris, France. 86 pp. 
Perrier de la Bâthie, H., 1938. Liliacées (Liliaceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores (plantes 
vasculaires), famille 40. Imprimerie Officielle, Tananarive, Madagascar. 147 pp. 
Perrier de la Bâthie, H., 1946. Salvadoracées (Salvadoraceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores 
(plantes vasculaires), famille 118. Imprimerie Officielle, Tananarive, Madagascar. 9 pp. 
Perrier de la Bâthie, H., 1950. Simarubacées (Simarubaceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores 
(plantes vasculaires), familles 104-105. Firmin-Didot et cie., Paris, France. 9 pp. 
Perry, L.M., 1980. Medicinal plants of East and Southeast Asia: attributed properties and uses. 
The MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States and London, United Kingdom. 620 pp. 
Peter, S.R., Tinto, W.F., McLean, S., Reynolds, W.F. & Yu, M., 1997. Bonducellpins A-D, new cas-
sane furanoditerpenes from Caesalpinia bonduc. Journal of Natural Products 60(12): 1462-1465. 
Peter, S.R., Tinto, W.F., McLean, S., Reynolds, W.F. & Yu, M., 1998. Cassane diterpenes from 
Caesalpinia bonducella. Phytochemistry 47(6): 1153-1155. 
Peters, CR., O'Brien, E.M. & Drummond, R.B., 1992. Edible wild plants of sub-saharan Africa. 
Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 239 pp. 
Petroff, G., Doat, J. & Tissot, M., 1967. Caractéristiques papetières de quelques essences tropicales 
de reboisement. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne, France. 166 pp. 
Pharkphoom Panichayupakaranant & Supinya Tawtrakul, 2002. Plumbagin production by root 
cultures of Plumbago rosea. Electronic Journal of Biotechnology 5(3): 228-232. 
LITERATURE 731 
Pheube-Locou, N., Koch, M., Plat, M. & Potier, P., 1972. Plants de Nouvelle-Calédonie. 14. Alcaloï-
des des écorces de tronc d'Ochrosia oppositifolia (Lmk) K.Schum. (Apocynacées). Annales Phar-
maceutiques Françaises 30(12): 821-826. 
Philcox, D., 1997. Euphorbiaceae. In: Dassanayake, M.D. & Clayton, W.D. (Editors). A revised 
handbook of the flora of Ceylon. Volume 11. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands, pp. 80-283. 
Philcox, D. & Coode, M.J.E., 1994. Nyctaginacées. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Guého, J. & Marais, W. 
(Editors). Flore des Mascareignes. Families 136-148. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, 
Mauritius, l'Institut Français de Recherche Scientifique pour le Développement en Coopération 
(ORSTOM), Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 5 pp. 
Philipov, S., Berkov, S. & Doncheva, T.S., 2007. GC-MS survey of Datura stramonium alkaloids. 
Comptes Rendus de lAcademie Bulgare des Sciences 60(3): 239-250. 
Philippe, G., De Mol, P., Zeches-Hanrot, M., Nuzilland, J.M., Tits, M.H., Angenot, L. & Frédérich, 
M., 2003. Indoloterpenic alkaloids from Strychnos icaja roots. Phytochemistry 62(4): 623-629. 
Philippe, G., Angenot, L., Tits, M. & Frédérich, M., 2004. About the toxicity of some Strychnos spe-
cies and their alkaloids. Toxicon 44(4): 405-416. 
Philippe, G., Angenot, L., De Mol, P., Goffm, E., Hayette, M.P., Tits, M. & Frédérich, M., 2005. In 
vitro screening of some Strychnos species for antiplasmodial activity. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 97(3): 535-539. 
Philippe, G., Nguyen, L., Angenot, L., Frédérich, M., Moonen, G., Tits, M. & Rigo, J.-M., 2006. 
Study of the interaction of antiplasmodial strychnine derivatives with the glycine receptor. Euro-
pean Journal of Pharmacology 530(1-2): 15-22. 
Phillipson, J.D., Hemingway, S., Bisset, N.G., Houghton, P. & Shellard, E., 1974. Angustine and 
related alkaloids from species of Mitragyna, Nauclea, Uncaria and Strychnos. Phytochemistry 13: 
973-978. 
Phongpaichit, S., Pujenjob, N., Rukachaisirikul, V. & Ongsakul, M, 2004. Antifungal activity from 
leaf extracts of Cassia alata L., Cassia fistula L. and Cassia tora L. Songklanakarin Journal of 
Science and Technology 26(5): 741-748. 
Phuong, T.T., Na, M.K., Nguyen, H.D., Tran, M.H., Pham, T.K., Tran, V.T., Nguyen, H.N., Nguyen, 
D.T., Sok, D.E. & Bae, K.H., 2006. Antioxidant activities of Vietnamese medicinal plants. Natural 
Product Sciences 12(1): 29-37. 
Phuphathanaphong, L., 1991. Phyllanthus reticulatus Poiret. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Wulijarni-
Soetjipto, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 3. Dye and tannin producing 
plants. Pudoc, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 109-110. 
Pichi Sermolli, R.E.G., 1983. A contribution to the knowledge of the Pteridophyta of Rwanda, Bu-
rundi and Kivu (Zaire). Bulletin du Jardin Botanique National de Belgique 53: 177-284. 
Picot, F., Lallemand, F., Boiteau, P. & Potier, P., 1974. Alcaloides indoliques de Pandaca mauritia-
na. Phytochemistry 13: 660—661. 
Pieme, CA., Penlap, V.N., Nkegoum, B., Taziebou, CL., Tekwu, E.M., Etoa, F.X. & Ngongang, J., 
2006. Evaluation of acute and subacute toxicities of aqueous ethanolic extract of leaves of Senna 
alata (L.) Roxb (Caesalpiniaceae). African Journal of Biotechnology 5(3): 283-289. 
Pieri, F., Arnould Guerin, M.L. & Sefraoui, E.H., 1992. Cardiotonic glycosides from Acokanthera 
spectabilis. Fitoterapia 63(4): 333-336. 
Pieroni, A., Nebel, S., Quave, C, Münz, H. & Heinrich, M., 2002. Ethnopharmacology of liakra: 
traditional weedy vegetables of the Arbëreshë of the Vulture area in southern Italy. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 81: 165-185. 
Pino, J.A., Marbot, R., Fuentes, V., Payo, A., Chao, D. & Herrera, P., 2005. Aromatic plants from 
western Cuba. II. Composition of leaf oil of Potomorphe umbellata (L.) Miq. and Agerantina ha-
vanensis (H.B.K.) R. M. Kinget. Journal of Essential Oil Research 17(5): 572-574. 
Pinto Basto, M.F., 1996. Plantaginaceae. In: Paiva, J., Martins, E.S., Diniz, M.A., Moreira, I., Go-
mes, I. & Gomes, S. (Editors). Flora de Cabo Verde: Plantas vasculares. No 77. Instituto de Inve-
stigaçâo Cientifica Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal & Instituto Nacional de Investigaçào e Desenvolvi-
mento Agrârio, Praia, Cape Verde. 10 pp. 
Plaizier, A.C., 1980. A revision of Adenium Roem. & Schult, and of Diplorhynchus Welw. ex Fie. 
and Hiern (Apocynaceae). Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 80-12. Wageningen, 
Netherlands. 40 pp. 
732 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Plaizier, A.C., 1981. A revision of Catharanthus roseus (L.) G.Don (Apocynaceae). Mededelingen 
Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 81-9, Wageningen, Netherlands. 12 pp. 
Plants for a future, 1996-2002. Capsella bursa-pastoris. [Internet]. Plants for a future - a resource 
centre for edible and other useful plants. Devon, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.ibiblio.org/pfaf/D_search.html>. Accessed 10 June, 2004. 
Plat, M., Koch, M., Bouquet, A., Le Men, J. & Janot, M.M., 1963. Présence d'un hétéroside généra-
teur de gentianine dans l'Anthocleista procera Leprieux ex Bureau (Loganiacées) : monoterpènoï-
des 1. Bulletin de la Société Chimique de France 3917: 1302-1305. 
Polhill, R.M., 1971. Phytolaccaceae. In: Milne-Redhead, E. & Polhill, R.M. (Editors). Flora of Tropi-
cal East Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United 
Kingdom. 5 pp. 
Polhill, R.M., 2005. Santalaceae. In: Beentje, H.J. & Ghazanfar, S.A. (Editors). Flora of Tropical 
East Africa. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 27 pp. 
Polonsky, J., 1973. Quassinoid bitter principles. Fortschritte der Chemie organischer Naturstoffe 
30: 101-150. 
Polygenis-Bigendako, M.-J., 1990. Recherches ethnopharmacognosiques sur les plantes utilisées en 
médecine traditionnelle au Burundi occidental. Thèse de Doctorat en sciences, Université libre de 
Bruxelles, Laboratoire de Botanique systématique et de Phytosociologie, Bruxelles, Belgique. 352 
PP-
Ponsinet, G. & Ourisson, G., 1968. Etudes chimiotaxonomiques dans la famille des Euphorbiacées 
3. Répartition des triterpenes dans les latex d'Euphorbia. Phytochemistry 7: 89—98. 
Popaj, K., Guggisberg, A. & Hesse, M., 2000. Synthetic analogues to the spermidine-spermine alka-
loid tenuilobine. Helvetica Chemica Acta 83(11): 3021-3034. 
Popik, P. & Skolnick, P., 1999. Pharmacology of ibogaine and ibogaine-related alkaloids. The Alka-
loids. Chemistry and Biology 52: 197-231. 
Porter-Utley, K.E., 2003. Revision of Passiflora subgenus Decaloba supersection Cieca (Passi-
floraceae). D. Phil.Thesis, University of Florida, United States. [Internet] 
<http://www.passionflow.co.uk/downloads/porterutley_k.pdf>. Accessed September 2006. 
Poullain, C, 2004. Contribution à l'étude des plantes endémiques et indigènes de la Réunion, re-
cherche d'activités biologiques et de principes actifs dans 75 plantes. Thèse de Doctorat du 3ème 
cycle, option Chimie. Faculté des Sciences et Technologies, Université de La Réunion, Réunion. 
216+ 138 pp. 
Poullain, C, Girard-Valenciennes, E. & Smadja, J., 2004. Plants from Reunion island: evaluation of 
their free radical scavenging and antioxidant activities. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 95: 19-26. 
Pousset, J.L., 1989. Plantes médicinales africaines: utilisations pratiques. ACCT, Paris, France. 
156 pp. 
Powys, A. & Duckworth, L., 2006. Miti ni Mali. A handbook of useful East African medicinal plants 
for people and livestock. DFID, Nairobi, Kenya. 65 pp. 
Poynton, R.J., 1966. Cultivated Gymnosperms (Ginkgoaceae, Araucariaceae, Pinaceae, Taxodi-
aceae, Cupressaceae). In: Codd, L.E., de Winter, B. & Rycroft, H.B. (Editors). Flora of southern 
Africa. Volume 1. Botanical Research Institute, Department of Agricultural Technical Services, 
Pretoria, South Africa, pp. 51-53. 
Prabhakar, K.R., Srinivasan, K.K. & Rao Padma, G.M., 2002. Chemical investigation, anti-
inflammatory and wound healing properties of Coronopus didymus. Pharmaceutical Biology 
40(7): 490-493. 
Prain, D., 1918. The genus Chrozophora. Bulletin of Miscellaneous Information Kew 1918(2-3): 
49-120. 
Pramyothin, P., Ngamtin, C , Poungshompoo, S. & Chaichantipyuth, C, 2007. Hepatoprotective 
activity of Phyllanthus amarus Schum. & Thonn. extract in ethanol treated rats: in vitro and in 
vivo studies. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 114(2): 169-173. 
Prasad, A.K., Kumar, V., Arya, P., Kumar, S., Dabur, R., Singh, N., Chhillar, A.K., Sharma, G.L., 
Ghosh, B., Wengel, J., Olsen, CE. & Parmar, V.S., 2005. Investigations toward new lead com-
pounds from medicinally important plants. Pure and Applied Chemistry 77(1): 25-40. 
Prema, P., 2004. Antimicrobial activity of selected medicinal plants. Journal of Ecobiology 16(5): 
333-337. 
LITERATURE 733 
Premaratna, A., Shadaksharaswamy, M. & Nanjappa, S., 1981. Isolation, purification and proper-
ties of a lectin from the latex of Synadenium grantii. Indian Journal of Biochemistry and Bio-
physics 18(1): 32-35. 
Pu, H.-L., Huang, X., Zhao, J.-H. & Hong, A., 2002. Bergenin is the antiarrhythmic principle of 
Flueggea virosa. Planta Medica 68(4): 372-374. 
Purseglove, J.W., 1968. Tropical Crops. Dicotyledons. Longman, London, United Kingdom. 719 pp. 
Purwaningsih, 1999. Strychnos L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. 
(Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Back-
huys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 467-472. 
Qaiser, M., 1979. Boraginaceae. In: Jafri, S.M.H. & El-Gadi, A. (Editors). Flora of Libya. Volume 
68. Al Faateh University, Faculty of Science, Department of Botany, Tripoli, Libya. 95 pp. 
Qhotsokoane-Lusunzi, M.A. & Karuso, P., 2001. Secondary metabolites from Basotho medicinal 
plants. I. Bulbine narcissifolia. Journal of Natural Products 64: 1368-1372. 
QingPing, H., Lei, M., JieYing, L., FuYuan, H., LiGuang, L. & LiHong, H., 2007. Cytotoxic witha-
nolides from Physalis angulata L. Chemistry and Biodiversity 4(3): 443-449. 
Quarm, I., 1989. Antidiarhoeal properties and some preliminary chemical investigation on the stem 
of Strophanthus barteri. B. Pharm. Degree thesis, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah Uni-
versity of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. 156 pp. 
Queiroz, M.L., Quadros, M.R. & Santos, L.M., 2000. Cytokine profile and natural killer cell activity 
in Listeria monocytogenes infected mice treated orally with Petiveria alliacea extract. Immuno-
pharmacology and Immunotoxicology 22(3): 501-518. 
Rabearivelo, J.P., 1986. Approche des plantes médicinales en odontostomatologies dans la région 
de Toamasina. Thèse pour le diplôme d'état de Docteur en chirurgie dentaire, Université de Ma-
hajanga, Institut d'Odontostomatologie tropicale de Madagascar, Mahajanga, Madagascar. 76 pp. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1973. An account of the genus Cephalocroton Höchst. (Euphorbiaceae). Kew 
Bulletin 28(1): 123-132. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1986. Euphorbiaceae. In: Nasir, E. & Ali, S.I. (Editors). Flora of Pakistan No 
172. National Herbarium, Pakistan Agricultural Research Council, Islamabad and Department of 
Botany, University of Karachi, Pakistan. 170 pp. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1987. Euphorbiaceae (part 1). In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East 
Africa. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 407 pp. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1991a. Notes on African Euphorbiaceae: 26. Erythrococca 5. Kew Bulletin 
46(2): 331-333. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1991b. Notes on Madagascan Euphorbiaceae IV: the genus Suregada in Mada-
gascar and the Comoros. Kew Bulletin 45: 711-726. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1996a. Euphorbiaceae, subfamilies Phyllantoideae, Oldfieldioideae, Acaly-
phoideae, Crotonoideae and Euphorbioideae, tribe Hippomaneae. In: Pope, G.V. (Editor). Flora 
Zambesiaca. Volume 9, part 4. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 1— 
337. 
Radcliffe-Smith, A., 1996b. Notes on African Euphorbiaceae XXX: Phyllanthus (V) & c. Kew Bulle-
tin 51(2): 301-331. 
Radjabi-Nassab, F., Ramiliarison, C , Monneret, C. & Vilkas, E., 1984. Further studies of the glu-
comannan from Aloe vahombe (Liliaceae). 2. Partial hydrolyses and NMR 13C studies. Biochimie 
66(7-8): 563-567. 
Radulovic, N., Mananjarasoa, E., Harinantenaina, L. & Yoshinori, A., 2006. Essential oil composi-
tion of four Croton species from Madagascar and their chemotaxonomy. Biochemical Systematics 
and Ecology 34(8): 648-653. 
Rafidison, P., Baillet, A., Baylocq, D. & Pellerin, F., 1987. Study of Voacanga africana seed oil: 
Etude de l'huile des graines de Voacanga africana. Oléagineux 42(7): 299-302. 
Raha, S. & Roy, S.C., 2001. In vitro plant regeneration in Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall., 
through high-frequency axillary shoot proliferation. In Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology, 
Plant 37(2): 232-236. 
Raha, S. & Roy, S.C., 2003. Efficient plant regeneration in Holarrhena antidysenterica Wall., from 
shoot segment-derived callus. In Vitro Cellular and Developmental Biology, Plant 39(2): 151-155. 
734 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Raharinirina, L., 2006. Contribution à l'étude physico-chimique d'une plante biologiquement ac-
tive, l'Euphorbia orthoclada. Mémoire de DEA de Chimie Physique, Faculté des Sciences, Univer-
sité d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 96 pp. 
Rahetlah, V.B., 2002. Etudes des effets des exudates rauviaires de Symphytum officinale uplandi-
cum (grande consoude) contre le flétrissement bactérien de Lycopersicum esculentum Mill, dû à 
Ralstonia solanacearum E.F. Smith. Mémoire DEA de Biochimie: Option biochimie, biotechnolo-
gies, microbiologie, Faculté des sciences, Université d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 
67 pp. 
Rahman, S., Fukamiya, N., Okano, M., Tagahara, K. & Lee, K.-H., 1997. Anti-tuberculosis activity 
of quassinoids. Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 45: 1527-1529. 
Rahman, M.A., Mossa, J.S., Al-Said, M.S. & Al-Yahya, M.A., 2004. Medicinal plant diversity in the 
flora of Saudi Arabia 1: a report on seven plant families. Fitoterapia 75(2): 149-161. 
Rai, P.P., 1988. Anthraquinone formation in callus cultures of Cassia podocarpa. Journal of Natu-
ral Products 51(3): 492-495. 
Rai, P.P., Wambebe, O.C. & Abuh, F.Y., 1989. Some pharmacological actions of Anthocleista vo-
gelii. Planta Medica 55: 661. 
Raimondo, F.M., Rossitto, M. & Sartoni, G., 1981. Additional records for the flora of Somalia. Web-
bia 35(1): 207-222. 
Raina, A.K. & Gaikwad, B.R., 1987. Chemobotany of Jatropha species in India and further charac-
terisation of'curcas oil'. Journal of the Oil Technologists' Association of India 19(4): 81—85. 
Raina, R. & Gupta, L.M., 1999. Increasing seed yield in glory lily (Gloriosa superba) - experimental 
approaches. Acta Horticulturae 502: 175-179. 
Rajab, M.S., Rugutt, J.K., Fronczek, F.R. & Fischer, N.H., 1997. Structural revision of harrisonin 
and 12b-acetoxyharrisonin, two limonoids from Harrisonia abyssinica. Journal of Natural Prod-
ucts 60(8): 822-825. 
Rajangam, M., 1997. Allelopathic effects of Heliotropium indicum on paddy var. IR-20 and Pon-
mani. Journal of Ecotoxicology and Environmental Monitoring 7(3): 207—209. 
Rajaobelimahefa, L., 1990. La consoude est aussi un insecticide qui élimine les insectes nuisibles 
aux cultures. Matoy 3: 20. 
Rajasekaran, P., Swaminatha, K.R. & Jayapragasm, M., 1989. Biogas production potential of Eu-
phorbia tirucalli L. along with cattle manure. Biological Wastes 30: 75-77. 
Rajasubramaniam, S. & Pardha Saradhi, P., 1997. Rapid multiplication of Phyllanthus fratevnus: 
a plant with anti-hepatitis viral activity. Industrial Crops and Products 6: 35-40. 
Rajerison, R., 1999. Impacts de l'utilisation de quelques plantes médicinales dans la région de Ma-
nongarivo. Mémoire de DEA, option Ecologie Végétale, Faculté des Sciences, Université 
d'Antananarivo, Anatananarivo, Madagascar. 95 pp. 
Rajesh, R., Nataraju, A., Gowda, C.D.R., Frey, B.M., Frey, F.J. & Vishwanath, B.S., 2006. Purifica-
tion and characterization of a 34-kDa, heat stable glycoprotein from Synadenium grantii latex: 
action on human fibrinogen and fibrin clot. Biochimie 88(10): 1313-1322. 
Raji, Y., Fadare, O.O., Adisa, R.A. & Salami, S.A., 2006. Comprehensive assessment of the effect of 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum root extract on male reproductive activity in albino rats. Reproductive 
Medicine and Biology 5(4): 283-292. 
Rajore, S., Sardana, J. & Batra, A., 2002. In vitro cloning of Jatropha curcas L. Journal of Plant 
Biology 29(2): 195-198. 
Raju, V.S., Reddy, CS . & Rajarao, K.G., 2007. The myth of'minima' and 'maxima', the species of 
Physalis in the Indian subcontinent. Acta Phytotaxonomica Sinica 45(2): 239-245. 
Rajwani, L.S., Prabhu, D. & Desai, P.V., 2001. Antimutagenic activity of plumbagin with metabolic 
activation system. Indian Journal of Environment and Toxicology 11(1): 12-15. 
Rakotondravony, D. & Volaharisolo, F., 2000. L'utilisation des produits naturels en protection des 
végétaux à Madagascar: test de plantes toxiques et de produits d'ingestion à actions toxiques ro-
denticides. Symposium national, 29 Juin-3 juillet 1998, Antananarivo, Madagascar, pp. 43-52. 
Rakotonirainy, N., 2004. Etude chimique et microbiologique des huilles essentielles de deux plan-
tes médicinales d'Ifotaka (Fort-Dauphin). Mémoire d'Ingénieur à l'Institut Supérieure Polytech-
nique de Madagascar (ISPM), Antananarivo, Madagascar. 44 pp. 
Rakotovao, G., 1984a. Caractéristiques physiques et technologiques de quelques bois de Madagas-
car. Archives du FOFIFA /CENRADERU 1: 100-112. 
LITERATURE 735 
Rakotovao, G., 1984b. Etat des connaissances actuelles en matières de préservation du bois à Ma-
dagascar. Archives du FOFIFA/CENRADERU 1: 136-150. 
Rakotozafy, J.C., 1997. Activité des extraits de Cedrelopsis grevei, Plumbago aphylla et de Zan-
thoxylum madagascariensis sur les cercaires de Schistosoma mansoni. Mémoire de DEA de 
pharmacologie, Département de Physiologie animale et de Pharmacologie, Faculté des Sciences, 
Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 32 pp. 
Ralaivao, H., 1993. Les maladies et les plantes utilisées dans le fivondronanna d'Ambilobe Andra-
nomamy et Malaipaka. Thèse pour l'obtention du grade de Docteur en médecine (Diplôme d'Etat), 
Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine, Univer-
sité d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 107 pp. 
Ralamboranto, L., Rakotovao, L.H., Le Deaut, J.Y., Chaussoux, D., Salomon, J.C., Fournet, B., 
Montreuil, J., Rakotonirina-Randriambeloma, P.J., Dulat, C. & Coulanges, P., 1982. Immuno-
modulating properties of an extract isolated and partially purified from Aloe Vahombe: study of 
antitumoral properties and contribution to the chemical nature and active principle. Archives de 
l'Institut Pasteur de Madagascar 50(1): 227-256. 
Ralantonirina, D., 1993. Aperçu sur les plantes médicinales dans le sud de Madagascar : étude 
faite sur les adultes dans le périmètre de la réserve spéciale de Beza - Mahafaly. Thèse pour 
l'obtention du grade de Docteur en médecine, Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des Sci-
ences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine, Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 95 pp. 
Ram, A.J., Bhakshu, L.M. & Raju, R.R.V., 2004. In vitro antimicrobial activity of certain medicinal 
plants from Eastern Ghats, India, used for skin diseases. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 90(2-3): 
353-357. 
Ramadan, M.F., Zayed, R. & El Shamy, H., 2007. Screening of bioactive lipids and radical scaveng-
ing potential of some Solanaceae plants. Food Chemistry 103(3): 885-890. 
Raman, A. & Mallam, V., 1994. Enhanced in vitro activity of glucokinase enzyme in the presence of 
extracts of Hunteria umbellata seeds, a traditional Nigerian treatment for diabetes. Journal of 
Pharmacy and Pharmacology 46 (supplement): 1046. 
Raman, M.S, Sultana, N. & Anwar, M.N., 2004. In vitro antimicrobial activity of holarrifine-24ol 
isolated from the stem bark of Holarrhena antidysenterica. International Journal of Agriculture 
and Biology 6(4): 698-700. 
Ramananjanahary, R.H., 2002. Etude éthnobotanique, biologique et écologique de quelques espèces 
anti-diarrhéiques d'Ankarafantsika et d'Antrema. Mémoire de DEA, option Ecologique végétale, 
Faculté des Sciences, Université d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 83 pp. 
Ramanankierana, H., 2000. Régénération in vitro de Catharanthus lanceus. Evaluation de la va-
riation somaclonale. Mémoire de DEA Biochimie, Option Biotechnologie et Microbiologie, Faculté 
des Sciences, Université d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 57 pp. 
Ramanitrahasimbola, D., Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga, S. & Vial, H., 2006. Malagashanine po-
tentiates chloroquine antimalarial activity in drug resistant Plasmodium malaria by modifying 
both its efflux and influx. Molecular and Biochemical Parasitology 146(1): 58—67. 
Ramaswamy, S.V. & Razi, B.A., 1973. Flora of Bangalore District. University of Mysore, Mysore, 
India. 739 pp. 
Ramathal, D.C. & Ngassapa, O.D., 2001. Medicinal plants used by Rwandese traditional healers in 
refugee camps in Tanzania. Pharmaceutical Biology 39(2): 132-137. 
Rambuda, T.D. & Johnson, S.D., 2004. Breeding systems of invasive alien plants in South Africa: 
does Baker's rule apply? Diversity and Distributions 10: 409-416. 
Ramirez, A. & Garcia-Ribio, S., 2003. Current progress in the chemistry and pharmacology of 
akuammiline alkaloids. Current Medicinal Chemistry 10: 1891-1915. 
Ranaivoson, A.J., 1996. Les pathologies et leurs différents traitements dans le fokontany 
d'Analamanga, Soavina, Antananarivo et Atsimondrano. Thèse pour l'obtention du grade de Doc-
teur en médecine, Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de 
Médecine, Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 71 pp. 
Randriamahavorisoa, G., 1993. Etude des maladies et phytothérapie: cas des Tanosy d'Andohahela, 
Fort-Dauphin. Thèse pour l'obtention du Doctorat en Médecine (Diplôme d'Etat), Université 
d'Antananarivo, Anatananarivo, Madagascar. 75 pp. 
Randriamantsoa, R., 1996. Aperçu sur la pratique de la phytothérapie dans le Fonkotany 
d'Ankorona après les 15 ans de fonctionnement de son centre de soins de santé primaires. Thèse 
736 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
pour l'obtention du grade de Docteur en médecine, Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des 
Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine, Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 83 pp. 
Randriamantsoa, L., 2003. Contribution à l'étude physico-chimique d'une plante douée d'une activi-
té diurétique puissante. Mémoire de DEA de Chimie Physique, Faculté des Sciences, Université 
d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 59 pp. 
Randriambelona, 2002. Inventaire des plantes médicinales dans la réserve naturelle intégrale N°l 
Betampona : description, utilisations thérapeutiques et impacts des prélèvements. Mémoire de 
CAPEN, Ecole National Supérieur, Centre d'Etude et de Recherche filière Sciences naturelles, 
Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 85 pp. 
Rani, P. & Khullar, N., 2004. Antimicrobial evaluation of some medicinal plants for their anti-
enteric potential against multi-drug resistant Salmonella typhi. Phytotherapy Research 18(8): 
670-673. 
Rao, R.V.K., Rao, J.V.L.N.S. & Vimaladevi, M., 1979. Phytochemical investigation of Cassia absus 
(roots and leaves). Journal of Natural Products 42(3): 299-300. 
Rao, C.V., Rao, G.M.M., Kartik, R., Sudhakar, M., Mehrotra, S. & Goei, R.K., 2003. Ulcer protective 
effect of Euphorbia hirta extract in rats. Journal of Tropical Medicinal Plants 4(2): 199-205. 
Raphael, K.R., Sabu, M.C. & Kuttan, R., 2002. Hypoglycemic effect of methanol extract of Phyllan-
thus amarus Schum. & Thonn. on alloxan-induced diabetes mellitus in rats and its relation with 
antioxidant potential. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 40(8): 905-909. 
Rapisarda, A., Barbera, R., de Pasquale, A., Ficarra, P., Ficarra, R., Tommasini, S., Calabro, M.L. 
& Ragusa, S., 1992. Cordia francisci, C. martinicensis, C. myxa, C. serratifolia and C. ulmifolia 
leaves as new sources of rutin (rutoside): analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity tested in mice 
and rats. 40th Annual congress on medicinal plant research, 1—5 September 1992, Trieste, Italy. 
Raponda-Walker, A., 1952. Usages pharmaceutiques des plantes spontanées du Gabon, 1. Bulletin 
Institut d'Études Centrafricaines, Nouvelle série 4: 181-186. 
Raponda-Walker, A., 1953. Usages pharmaceutiques des plantes spontanées du Gabon, 2. Bulletin 
Institut d'Études Centrafricaines, Nouvelle série 5: 19-40. 
Raponda-Walker, A., 2005. Rites et croyances des peuples du Gabon. Deuxième édition révisée, 
Editions Raponda-Walker, Libreville, Gabon. 377 pp. 
Raponda-Walker, A. & Sillans, R., 1961. Les plantes utiles du Gabon. Paul Lechevalier, Paris, 
France. 614 pp. 
Rasoanaivo, P., 1990. Rain forests of Madagascar: sources of industrial and medicinal plants. Am-
bio 19(8): 421-424. 
Rasoanaivo, P. & Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., 1992. Plantes médicinales malgaches qui reversent la 
chloroquino-résistance de Plasmodium falciparum. Cahier du CITE nouvelle Serie 2: 29-31. 
Rasoanaivo, P. & Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., 1994. Alkaloids from plants of Madagascar in the 
treatment of drug-resistant Plasmodium malaria. Pure and Applied Chemistry 66(10-11): 2291-
2294. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Petitjean, A. & Conan, J.Y., 1993. Toxic and poisonous plants of Madagascar: an 
ethnopharmacological survey. Fitoterapia 64: 117-129. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S. & Frappier, F., 1996. Récents résultats sur la pharma-
codynamic d'alcaloïdes de Strychnos malgaches. Cahiers Santé 6(4): 249-253. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S. & Rakoto-Ratsimamanga, A., 1995. Isoquinoline alka-
loid constituents of Spirospermum penduliflorum and Strychnopsis thouarsii (Menispermaceae). 
Biochemical Systematics and Ecology 23(6): 679-680. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Galeffi, C, De Vicente, Y. & Nicoletti, M., 1991a. Malagashanine and malagashine, 
two alkaloids of Strychnos mostueoides. Revista Latinoamerica di Quimica 22(1): 32. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., Rakoto-Ratsimamanga, A. & Raharisololalao, A., 1991b. 
Chemical constituents of three Burasaia spp. (Menispermaceae) from Madagascar. Biochemical 
Systematics and Ecology 19(5): 433-437. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Petitjean, A., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S. & Rakoto-Ratsimamanga, A., 1992. Me-
dicinal plants used to treat malaria in Madagascar. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 37: 117-127. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Nicoletti, M., Multari, G., Palazzino, G. & Galeffi, C, 1994a. Secoiridoids and rela-
ted monoterpenes of Anthocleista amplexicaulis. Fitoterapia 65: 38-43. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., Milijaona, R., Rafatro, H., Rakoto-Ratsimamanga, A., 
Galeffi, C. & Nicoletti, M., 1994b. In vitro and in vivo chloroquine-potentiating action of Strych-
LITERATURE 737 
nos myrtoides alkaloids against chloroquine-resistant strains of Plasmodium malaria. Planta 
Medica 60(1): 13-16. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., Ramanitrahasimbolo, D., Rafatro, H. & Rakoto-
Ratsimamanga, A., 1999. Criblage d'extraits de plantes de Madagascar pour recherche d'activité 
antipaludique et d'effet potentialisateur de la chloroquine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 64: 
117-126. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Gallo, F.R., Palazzino, G. & Federici, E., 2001a. 7-Epimer oxidole alkaloids of Ca-
bucala cryptophlebia: their 13C-NMR and CD data. Fitoterapia 72: 588-590. 
Rasoanaivo, P., Palazzino, G., Nicoletti, M. & Galeffi, C, 2001b. The co-occurrence of C(3) epimer 
Nb,C(21)-secocuran alkaloids in Strychnos diplotricha and Strychnos myrtoides. Phytochemistry 
56: 863-867. 
Rasolondraibe, A.B., 2003. The aloes of Madagascar. Ravintsara 1(4): 16-17. 
Rasolondratovo, B., Manjary, F., Rabemanantsoa, C, Rasoanaivo, P. & Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., 
1995. Contribution à l'inventaire des plantes utilisées comme remèdes et charmes dans la région 
sud de Madagascar. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 9(2): 135-145. 
Rastogi, R.P. & Mehrotra, B.N., 1991. Compendium of Indian Medicinal Plants. Volume 2. CDRI, 
Lucknow, New Delhi, India. 
Rathore, A.K. & Kamal, R., 1979. Steroids and steroidal alkaloids of Solanum aculeatissimum. 
Pharmazie 34(4): 250-251. 
Ratompomalala, N., 1983. Contribution à l'étude des blocs auriculo-ventriculaire complets chez 
l'enfant (A propos de 1 cas induit par tambavy). Thèse pour l'obtention du Doctorat en médecine, 
Faculté de médecine, Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 120 pp. 
Ratsimamanga-Urverg, S., Rasoanaivo, P., Ramiaramanana, L., Milijaona, R., Rafatro, H., Verdier, 
F., Rakoto-Ratsimamanga, A. & Le Bras, J., 1992. In vitro antimalarial activity and chloroquine 
potentiating action of two bisbenzylisoquinoline enantiomer alkaloids isolated from Strychnopsis 
thouarsii and Spirospermum penduliflorum. Planta Medica 58(6): 540-543. 
Rauh, W., Loffler, E. & Uhlarz, H., 1969. Observations on some euphorbias from tropical West-
Africa. Cactus & Succulent Journal 41: 210-220. 
Raut, S.K. & Barker, G.M., 2002. Achatina fulica Bowdich and other Achatinidae as pests in tropi-
cal agriculture. In Barker, G.M. (Editor). Molluscs as crop pests. CAB International, Wallingford, 
United Kingdom, pp. 55-114. 
Rauwald, H.W. & Niyonzima, D.D., 1991. A new investigation on constituents of Aloe and Rham-
nus species. XV Homonataloins A and B from Aloe lateritia: isolation, structure and configura-
tional determination of the diastereomers. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung 46c: 177—182. 
Ravelombola, J.L.S., 2004. Etude phytosociologique de la forêt des sept lacs (à Ambohimahavelona) 
et contribution au projet d'écotourisme. Mémoire de diplôme d'étude Approfondie (DEA) en biodi-
versité et Environnement, Département Biologie et Ecologie Végétales, Faculté des Sciences, Uni-
versité de Maninday, Toliara, Madagascar. 84 pp. 
Ravohitraniaina, H., 2003. Contribution à la valorisation de Aloe macroclada de Madagascar en 
cosmétique: cas des produits de soins capillaires. Mémoire de fin d'étude pour l'obtention du di-
plôme d'Ingénieure, Département Industrie agricole et alimentaire, ESSA, Université 
d'Antananarivo, Antananarivo, Madagascar. 87 pp. 
Rawat, A.K.S., Mehrotra, S., Tripathi, S.C. & Shome, U., 1997. Hepatoprotective activity of Boer-
haavia diffusa L. roots - a popular Indian ethnomedicine. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 56: 61— 
66. 
Raymond-Hamet, R., 1952. Influence d'une Euphorbiacée de l'Afrique tropicale: Alchornea flori-
bunda Müll.Arg. sur la réflectivité sino-carotienne et sur l'excitabilité du pneumogastrique. 
Compte Rendu des Séances de la Société de Biologie et ses Filiales 146(21-22): 1672-1674. 
Raymond-Hamet, R., 1954. Sur les effets tensiovasculaires d'une Euphorbiacée africaine, 
FAlchornea floribunda Müll.Arg. Compte Rendue des Séances de la Société de Biologie et ses Fi-
liales 148(7-8): 655-658. 
Razafiarison, C , 1993. Aperçu sur les plantes médicinales dans le sud de Madagascar : étude faite 
sur les enfants dans le périmètre de la réserve spéciale de Beza - Mahafaly. Thèse pour 
l'obtention du grade de Docteur en Médecine, Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des 
Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine, Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 93 pp. 
738 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Razafindramanana, M.E., 1996. Les pathologies et la phytothérapie de la région d'Anjeva-gare. 
Thèse pour l'obtention du grade de Docteur en médecine, Etablissement d'Enseignement Supé-
rieur des Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine Université d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 76 
pp. 
Razafindrazaka, J.M., 1991. Croyances, attitudes et pratiques traditionnelles malgaches devant la 
diarrhée. Thèse pour l'obtention du grade de Docteur en médecine, Etablissement 
d'Enseignement Supérieur des Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine, Université 
d'Antananarivo, Madagascar. 83 pp. 
Razali Yusuf, 1999a. Phytolacca L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, 
R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 392-397. 
Razali Yusuf, 1999b. Santalum album L. In: Oyen, L.P.A. & Dung, N.X. (Editors). Plant Resources 
of South-East Asia No 19. Essential-oil plants. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 
161-167. 
Razanamparany, M.J., 1986. Essai sur la géographie médicale du Faritany de Toliara. Thèse pour 
l'obtention du grade de Docteur en médecine, Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des 
Sciences de la Santé, Faculté de Médecine Université de Madagascar. 143 pp. 
Reanmongkol, W., Matsumoto, K., Watanabe, H., Subhadhirasakul, S., Takayama, H. & Sakai, S., 
1995a. Inhibitory effect of alkaloids extracted from the stem bark of Hunteria zeylanica on 5-
lipoxygenase activity in vitro. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 18(6): 910-912. 
Reanmongkol, W., Subhadhirasakul, S., Kongsang, J., Tanchong, M. & Kitti, J., 1995b. Effects of 
alkoloids extracted from the stem bark of Hunteria zeylanica on acute inflammation in experi-
mental animals. Biological and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 18(1): 33-36. 
Reanmongkol, W., Subhadhirasakul, S., Kongsang, J., Tanchong, M. & Kitti, J., 2000. Analgesic 
and antipyretic activities of N-butanol alkaloids extracted from the stem bark of Hunteria zey-
lanica and its major constituent, strictosidinic acid, in mice. Pharmaceutical Biology 38(1): 68-73. 
Reda, F., 1978. Distribution and accumulation of alkaloids in Catharanthus roseus G.Don during 
development. Pharmazie 33(4): 233-234. 
Reddy, J.S., Rao, P.R. &, Reddy, M.S., 2002. Wound healing effects of Heliotropium indicum, 
Plumbago zeylanica and Acalypha indica in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79(2): 249-251. 
Regassa, A., 2000. The use of herbal preparations for tick control in western Ethiopia. Journal of 
the South-African Veterinary Association 71(4): 240-243. 
Reilly, M.J., Wallis, A.F.A., Lundquist, K. & Sternberg, R., 1992. Stereochemistry of neolignans: a 
revised structure for a neolignan isolated from the roots of Piper capense. Journal of Wood Chem-
istry and Technology 12(4): 471-483. 
Reisman-Berman, O., Kigel, J. & Rubin, B., 1988. Factors involved in the germination of Datura 
ferox and D. stramonium. Phytoparasitica 16(4): 371-372. 
Renner, U., 1963. Hunteriamin, ein neues Alkaloid mit hypotensiver Wirkung aus Hunteria ebur-
nea Pichon. Hoppe-Seyler's Zeitschrift für Physiologische Chemie 331: 105-108. 
Renner, S., 2004. Plant dispersal across the tropical atlantic by wind and sea currents. Interna-
tional Journal of Plant Sciences 165(4 SuppL): S23-S33. 
Resplandy, A., 1958. Sur les alcaloïdes de Burasaia madagascariensis DC. Comptes Rendus heb-
domaires des Séances de l'Académie des Sciences 247: 2428-2431. 
Retief, E. & van Wyk, A.E., 2001. The genus Ehretia (Boraginaceae: Ehretioideae) in southern Af-
rica. Bothalia 31(1): 9-23. 
Revathi, R., Vanangamudi, K. & Sasthri, G., 2003. Effect of seed treatment and storage container 
on seed germination and seedling vigour of keelanelli (Phyllanthus amarus(Schum. & Thonn.). 
Seed Research 31(2): 169-174. 
Reynolds, G.W., 1966. The Aloes of tropical Africa and Madagascar. The Aloes Book Fund, Mba-
bane, Swaziland. 537 pp. 
Reynolds, T., 1985. Observations on the phytochemistry of the Aloe leaf-exudate compounds. Bo-
tanical Journal of the Linnean Society 90: 179-199. 
Reynolds, T., 1986. A contribution to the phytochemistry of the East African tetraploid shrubby 
aloes and their diploid allies. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 92(4): 383-392. 
Reynolds, T., 1996. Chemotaxonomy of Aloe turkanensis and Aloe scabrifolia from Kenya. Bio-
chemical Systematica and Ecology 24(4): 347-352. 
LITERATURE 739 
Reynolds, T., 1997. Comparative chromatographic patterns of leaf exudate components from Aloe 
Section Pachydendron Haw. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 125(1): 45-70. 
Reynolds, T., 2004. Aloe chemistry. In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, 
Boca Raton, Florida, United States, pp. 39-74. 
Reynolds, T. (Editor), 2004. Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States. 
386 pp. 
Reynolds, T. & Dweck, A.C., 1999. Aloe vera leaf gel: a review update. Journal of Ethnopharmacol-
ogy 68: 3-37. 
Reynolds, T. & Nicholls, E., 1986. An examination of phytochemical variation in Aloe elgonica Bul-
lock. Botanical Journal of the Linnean Society 92: 393-397. 
Rhodes, D.G., 1975. A revision of the genus Cissampelos. Phytologia 30: 415-484. 
Richardson, J., Smith, J.E., Mclntyre, M., Thomas, R. & Pilkington, K, 2005. Aloe vera for pre-
venting radiation-induced skin reactions: a systematic literature review. Clinical Oncology 17(6): 
478-484. 
Riche, C. & Pascard Billy, C , 1979. Structure and stereochemistry of indole alkaloids Part 4: struc-
ture of andranginine. Acta Crystallographica Section B. Structural Crystallography and Crystal 
Chemistry 35(3): 666-669. 
Richter, H.G. & Dallwitz, M.J., 2000. Commercial timbers: descriptions, illustrations, identifica-
tion, and information retrieval. [Internet]. Version 18th October 2002. <http://delta-
intkey.com/wood/index.htm>. Accessed May 2006. 
Riedl, H., 1967. Boraginaceae. In: Rechinger, K.H. (Editor) Flora Iranica. Akademische Druck- und 
Verlagsanstalt, Graz, Austria. 281 pp. 
Riedl, H., 1997. Boraginaceae. In: Flora Malesiana, Series 1. Volume 13. Rijksherbarium/ Hortus 
Botanicus, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 43-144. 
Rizk, A.M., 1987. The chemical constituents and economic plants of the Euphorbiaceae. Botanical 
Journal of the Linnean Society 94: 293-326. 
Rizk, A.M., Hammouda, F.M., El-Missiry, M.M., Radwan H.M. & Evans, F.J., 1985. Biologically 
active diterpene esters from Euphorbia peplus. Phytochemistry 24(7): 1605-1606. 
Roberts, M.F., 1994. Brucea spp.: in vitro culture and the production of canthinone alkaloids and 
other secondary metabolites. In: Bajaj, Y.P.S. (Editor). Biotechnology in agriculture and forestry. 
Volume 26. Medicinal and aromatic plants VI. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 21-45. 
Robyns, W., 1958. Pandaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., Demaret, F., Germain, R., Gilbert, G., 
Hauman, L., Homes, M., Jurion, F., Lebrun, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). Flore 
du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 7. Institut National pour 1'Etude 
Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1-4. 
Robyns, A., 1995. Passifloraceae. In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore d'Afrique centrale. Spermatophytes. 
Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 75 pp. 
Roddick, J.G., 1991., 1991. The importance of the Solanaceae in medicine and drug therapy. In: 
Hawkes, J.G., Lester, R.N., Nee, M. & Estrada, R.N. (Editors). Solanaceae 3. Taxonomy, chemis-
try, evolution. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 7-23. 
Rodman, J.E., Karol, K.G., Price, R.A. & Sytsma, K.J., 1996. Molecules, morphology, and Dahl-
gren's expanded order Capparales. Systematic Botany 21(3): 289-307. 
Roe, K.E., 1967. A revision of Solanum Sect. Brevantherum (Solanaceae) in North and Central 
America. Brittonia 19(4): 353-373. 
Roe, K.E., 1968. Solanum verbascifolium L., misidentification and misapplication. Taxon 17(2): 
176-179. 
Roe, K.E., 1972. A revision of Solanum Section Brevantherum (Solanaceae). Brittonia 24(3): 239-
278. 
Rojanapo, W., Tepsuwan, A. & Siripong, P., 1990. Mutagenicity and antimutagenicity of Thai me-
dicinal plants. Basic Life Science 52: 447-452. 
Rolfsen, W., Hakizadeh, Z.M., Sandberg, F. & Stroembom, J., 1979. Pharmacological and phyto-
chemical screening of Strychnos species from Gabon. Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica 16(1): 47-55. 
Rondanelli, R., Guaglio, R., Guarnone, E., Brè, E., Olliaro, P. & Benzi Cipelli, R., 1986a. Cytotoxic 
activity of some alkaloids from Epinetrum delagoense Diels: electron microscopy studies. II. Far-
maco 41(6): 190-196. 
740 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Rondanelli, R., Guaglio, R., Sartirana, E., Zizzi, E., Olliaro, P. & Benzi Cipelli, R., 1986b. Evalua-
tion of the cytotoxic activity of some alkaloids from Epinetrum delagoense Diels. I. Farmaco 41(6): 
185-189. 
Ronse de Craene, L.P., 2002. Floral development and anatomy of Pentadiplandra (Pentadipland-
raceae): a key genus in the identification of floral morphological trends in the core Brassicales. 
Canadian Journal of Botany 80: 443-459. 
Rensted, N., Franzyk, H., Molgaard, P., Jaroszewski, J.W. & Jensen, S.R., 2003. Chemotaxonomy 
and evolution of Plantago L. Plant Systematics and Evolution 242: 63-82. 
Roothaert, R.L., 2000. The potential of indigenous and naturalized fodder trees and shrubs for in-
tensive use in central Kenya. PhD thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands. 168 
pp. 
Ropke, CD., da Silva, V.V., Kera, C.Z., Miranda, D.V., de Almeida, R.L., Sawada, T.C.H. & Barros, 
S.B.M., 2006. In vitro and in vivo inhibition of skin matrix metalloproteinases by Pothomorphe 
umbellata root extract. Photochemistry and Photobiology 82: 439—442. 
Ross, J.H., 1977. Fabaceae, subfamily Caesalpinioideae. In: Ross, J.H. (Editor). Flora of southern 
Africa. Volume 16, part 2. Botanical Research Institute, Department of Agricultural Technical 
Services, Pretoria, South Africa. 142 pp. 
Ross, I.A., 2003. Medicinal plants of the world. Chemical constituents, traditional and modern 
uses. Volume 1. 2nd Edition. Humana Press, Totowa NJ, United States. 489 pp. 
Ross, M.J. & Steyn, G.-J., 2004. Preliminary results on the ichthyocidal properties of Euphorbia 
ingens (Euphorbiaceae). African Journal of Aquatic Science 29(2): 265-269. 
Ross-Craig, S., 1970. Drawings of British plants. Part XXVI. Euphorbiaceae. G. Bell and Sons Ltd, 
London, United Kingdom, pi. 34-47. 
Rosselet, J.P. & Reichstein, T., 1953. Die Glykoside von Strophanthus gracilis K. Schum. et Pax. 2. 
Mitteilung. Odorosid H und Gracilosid. Glykoside und Aglykone. 109. Mitteilung. Helvetica 
Chimica Acta 36(4): 787-801. 
Rothman, J.M., Dierenfeld, E.S., Molina, D.O., Shaw, AV., Hintz, H.D.F. & Pell, A.N., 2006. Nutri-
tional chemistry of foods eaten by gorillas in Bwindi Impenetrable National Park, Uganda. Ame-
rican Journal of Primatology 68: 675-691. 
Rouillard, G. & Guého, J., 1983. Histoire des plantes d'intérêt horticole, médicinale et économique 
à l'Ile Maurice, 8. Euphorbiacées. Revue Agricole et Sucrière de l'Ile de Maurice 62: 93-116. 
Rouillard, G. & Guého, J., 2000. Les plantes et leur histoire à l'Ile Maurice. MSM Printers, Port 
Louis, Mauritius. 752 pp. 
Rout, G.R., 2002. Direct plant regeneration from leaf explants of Plumbago species and its genetic 
fidelity through RAPD markers. Annals of Applied Biology 140(3): 305-313. 
Rowley, G.D., 1983. The Adenium and Pachypodium handbook. Smart & Co. Ltd., Brackley, United 
Kingdom. 95 pp. 
Rowley, G.D., 1997. The berried Aloes: Aloe section Lomatophyllum. Excelsa 17: 59-62. 
Rubanza, C.D.K., Shem, M.N., Otsyina, R., Bakengesa, S.S., Ichinohe, T. & Fujihara, T., 2005. 
Content of phenolic, extractable and bound condensed tannins and their effect on in vitro gas pro-
duction from browse leaves. Journal of Animal and Feed Sciences 14(1): 193—210. 
Ruffa, M.J., Ferraro, G., Wagner, M.L., Calcagno, M.L., Campos, R.H. & Cavallaro, L., 2002a. Cy-
totoxic effect of Argentine medicinal plant extracts on human hepatocellular carcinoma cell line. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79(3): 335-339. 
Ruffa, M.J., Perusina, M., Alfonso, V., Wagner, M.L., Suriano, M., Vicente, C, Campos, R. & Caval-
laro, L., 2002b. Antiviral activity of Petiveria alliacea against the bovine diarrhea virus. Chemo-
therapy 48(3): 144-147. 
Ruffo, C.K., Birnie, A. & Tengnäs, B., 2002. Edible wild plants of Tanzania. Technical Handbook 
No 27. Regional Land Management Unit/ SIDA, Nairobi, Kenya. 766 pp. 
Rugutt, J.K., Rugutt, K.J. & Berner, D.K., 2001. Limonoids from Nigerian Harrisonia abyssinica 
and their activity against Striga hermonthica seeds. Journal of Natural Products 64(11): 1434-
1438. 
Ruhigwa, B.A., Gichuru, M.P., Spencer, D.S.C. & Swennen, R., 1994. Economic analysis of cut-and-
carry, and alley cropping systems of mulch production for plantains in south-eastern Nigeria. 
Agroforestry Systems 26: 131-138. 
LITERATURE 741 
Rumball, B., 1997. Using forage herbs. AgFact 145. [Internet] 
<http://www.agresearch.co.nz/publications/agfacts.asp>. Accessed January 2005. 
Runyoro, D.K.B., Matee, M.I.N., Ngassapa, O.D., Joseph, C.C. & Mbwambo, Z.H., 2006a. Screening 
of Tanzanian medicinal plants for anti-Candida activity. [Internet] BMC Complementary and Al-
ternative Medicine <http://www.biomedcentral.eom/1472-6882/6/ll>. Accessed April 2008. 
Runyoro, D.K.B., Ngassapa, O.D., Matee, M.I.N., Joseph, C.C. & Moshi, M.J., 2006b. Medicinal 
plants used by Tanzanian traditional healers in the management of Candida albicans infections. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 106: 158-165. 
Ruppert, M., Ma, X.-Y. & Stockigt, J., 2005. Alkaloid biosynthesis in Rauvolfia- cDNA: cloning of 
major enzymes of the ajmaline pathway. Current Organic Chemistry 9(15): 1431-1444. 
Rüssel, J. H., Schindler, O. & Reichstein, T., 1961a. Die Cardenolide der Blätter von Roupellina 
boivinii (Baill.) Pichon 1. Mitteilung. Glykoside und Aglykone, 224. Helvetica Chimica Acta 44(5): 
1293-1315. 
Rüssel, J. H., Schindler, O. & Reichstein, T., 1961b. Die Cardenolide der Blätter von Roupellina 
boivinii (Baill.) Pichon 2. Mitteilung. Glykoside und Aglykone, 225. Helvetica Chimica Acta 44(5): 
1315-1330. 
Rwangabo, P.C., 1993. La médecine traditionelle au Rwanda. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et 
Technique (ACCT), Paris, France. 258 pp. 
SA Health Info, 2007. Cissampelos capensis Herba. [Internet] South African Medical Research 
Council, South Africa. 
<http://www.sahealthinfo.org/traditionalmeds/monographs/cissampelos.htm>. Accessed Novem-
ber 2007. 
Saadou, M., 1993. Les plantes médicinales du Niger: premier supplément à l'enquête ethnobotani-
que de 1979. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 7(1): 11-24. 
Sackeyfio, A.C., 1988. Inhibition of adjuvant arthritis in the rat and pinnal inflammation in the 
mouse by an extract of Hymenocardia acida. Phytotherapy Research 2(1): 42—45. 
Sahara Nature, 2008. Euphorbia calyptrata. [Internet] Sahara Nature, France. 
<http://www.sahara-nature.com/plantes.php?aff=nom&plante=euphorbia%20calyptrata>. Acces-
sed March 2008. 
Said, H. & Petitjean, A., 1995. Pharmacopée comorienne: approches ethnobotaniques et chimiques. 
Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 9(1): 79—88. 
Saimo, M.K., Bizimenyera, E.S., Bwanika, A., Ssebuguzi, F., Weny, G. & Lubega, G.W., 2003. Eth-
noveterinary practices in Uganda: use of medicinal plants in treating helminthosis and coccidio-
sis in rural poultry and goats in Uganda. Bulletin of Animal Health and Production in Africa 
51(3): 133-138. 
Salah, M.A., Bedir, E., Toyang, N.J., Khan, I.A., Harries, M.D. & Wedge, D.E., 2003. Antifungal 
clerodane diterpenes from Macaranga monandra (L.) Muell. Arg. (Euphorbiaceae). Journal of Ag-
ricultural and Food Chemistry 51(26): 7607-7610. 
Samantaray, S., Rout, G.R. & Das, P., 1999. Studies on the uptake of heavy metals by various 
plant species on chromite minespoils in sub-tropical regions of India. Environmental Monitoring 
and Assessment 55(3): 389-399. 
Samie, A., Obi, C.L., Bessong, P.O. & Namrita, L., 2005. Activity profiles of fourteen selected me-
dicinal plants from rural Venda communities in South Africa against fifteen clinical bacterial spe-
cies. African Journal of Biotechnology 4(12): 1443—1451. 
Sampanpanish, P., Khaodhiar, S., Pongsapich, W. & Khan, E., 2007. Alternative for chromium 
removal: phytoremediation and biosorption with weed plant species in Thailand. Science Asia 
33(3): 353-362. 
Samuelsen, A.B., 2000. The traditional uses, chemical constituents and biological activities of Plan-
tago major L.: a review. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 71: 1-21. 
Samuelsson, G. (Editor), 1992. Drugs of natural origin, a textbook of pharmacognosy. Swedish 
Pharmaceutical Press, Stockholm, Sweden. 320 pp. 
Samuelsson, G., Farah, M.H., Claeson, P., Hagos, M., Thulin, M., Hedberg, O., Warfa, A.M., Has-
san, A.O., Elmi, A.H., Abdurahman, A.D., Elmi, A.S., Abdi, Y.A. & Alin, M.H., 1992. Inventory of 
plants used in traditional medicine in Somalia. 2. Plants of the families Combretaceae to Labi-
atae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 37: 47—70. 
742 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Samuelsson, G., Farah, M.H., Claeson, P., Hagos, M., Thulin, M., Hedberg, O., Warfa, A.M., Has-
san, A.O., Elmi, A.H., Abdurahman, A.D., Elmi, A.S., Abdi, Y.A. & Alin, M.H., 1993. Inventory of 
plants used in traditional medicine in Somalia. 4. Plants of the families Passifloraceae to Zygo-
phyllaceae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 38: 1-29. 
Samy, R.P., Ignacimuthu, S. & Raja, D.P., 1999. Preliminary screening of ethnomedicinal plants 
from India. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 66(2): 235-240. 
Sandberg, F. & Cronlund, A., 1982. An ethnopharmacological inventory of medicinal and toxic 
plants from equatorial Africa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 5: 187-204. 
Sandberg, F., Perera-Ivarsson, P. & El-Seedi, H.R., 2005. A Swedish collection of medicinal plants 
from Cameroon. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 102: 336-343. 
Sandberg, F., Dutschewska, H., Christov, V. & Spassov, S., 1987. Spondianthus preussii var. glaber 
Engler: pharmacological screening and occurrence of triterpenes. Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica 
24(5): 253-256. 
Sanmugapriya, E. & Venkataraman, S., 2006. Studies on hepatoprotective and antioxidant actions 
of Strychnos potatorum Linn, seeds on CC14-induced acute hepatic injury in experimental rats. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 105(1): 154-160. 
Sanmugapriya, E. & Venkataraman, S., 2007. Antiulcerogenic potential of Strychnos potatorum 
Linn seeds on Aspirin plus pyloric ligation-induced ulcers in experimental rats. Phytomedicine 
14(5): 360-365. 
Sanogo, A.K. & Sanogo, S., 2000. Techniques de récolte des semences forestières. Fiche technique. 
1ER, Sikasso, Mali. 10 pp. 
Santos, A.R., De Campos, R.O., Miguel, O.G., Cechinel-Filho, V., Yunes, R.A. & Calixto, J.B., 1999. 
The involvement of K+ channels and Gi/o protein in the antinociceptive action of the gallic acid 
ethyl ester. European Journal of Pharmacology 379(1): 7-17. 
Santos, A.R., De Campos, R.O., Miguel, O.G., Cechinel-Filho, V., Siani, A.C., Yunes, R.A. & Calixto, 
J.B., 2000. Antinociceptive properties of extracts of new species of plants of the genus Phyllan-
thus (Euphorbiaceae). Journal of Ethnopharmacology 72: 229-238. 
Saravanan, S. & Buvaneswaran, C , 2003. Gloriosa superba L. cultivation in Tamil Nadu. A socio-
economic analysis. Advances in Plant Sciences 16(1): 23—28. 
Sarg, T.M., Glombitza, K.W., Farrag, N.M., Hafez, S.S. & Abbas, F.A., 1995. Steroidal alkaloids 
and saponins of Solanum sepicula (Dun.). Egyptian Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 36: 271-
285. 
Sarin, Y.K., 1982. Indian raw materials for the production of tropane alkaloids. In: Atal, C.K. & 
Kapur, B.M. (Editors). Cultivation and utilization of medicinal plants. Regional Research Labora-
tory Jammu-Tawi, New Delhi, India, pp. 251—258. 
Sarkar, S., 1986. A note on treatment of ringworm caused by T. verrucosum and T. mentagrophytes 
in cattle. Indian Journal of Veterinary Medicine 6(2): 104-105. 
Sarumi, M.B., Ladipo, D.O., Denton, L., Olopade, E.O., Badaru, K. & Ughasoro, C, 1996. Nigeria: 
country report to the FAO international technical conference on plant genetic resources. FAO, 
Ibadan, Nigeria. 108 pp. 
Satheesh, M.A. & Pari, L., 2004. Antioxidant effect of Boerhavia diffusa L. in tissues of alloxan-
induced diabetic rats. Indian Journal of Experimental Biology 42(10): 989-992. 
Satheeshkumar, K. & Seeni, S., 2003. In vitro mass multiplication and production of roots in 
Plumbago rosea. Planta Medica 69(1): 83-86. 
Sathiyamoorthy, P., Lugasi-Evgi, H., Schlesinger, P., Kedar, I., Gopas, J., Pollack, Y. & Golan-
Goldhirsh, A., 1999. Screening for cytotoxic and antimalarial activities in desert plants of the 
Negev and Bedouin market plant products. Pharmaceutical Biology 37(3): 188-195. 
Satish Lele, 2007. Development of the Jatropha cultivation and bio-fuel production system. [Inter-
net] <http://www.svlele.com/jatropha_plant.htm>. Accessed January 2007. 
Sawadogo, L., Houdebine, L.-M., Thibault, J.-F. & Rouau, X., 1988. Mise en évidence d'une activité 
lactogène dans des extraits végétaux. Médecine Traditionelle et Pharmacopée 2(1): 19—30. 
Sawhney, N., Khan, M.R., Ndaalio, G., Nkunya, M.H.H. & Wevers, H., 1979. Studies on the ration-
ale of African traditional medicine 3. Preliminary screening of medicinal plants for anti-fungal 
activity. Pakistan Journal of Scientific and Industrial Research 21(5-6): 193-196. 
Saxena, V.K. & Jain, S.K., 1990. Thevetia peruviana kernel oil: a potential bactericidal agent. Fi-
toterapia 61(4): 348-349. 
LITERATURE 743 
Saxton, J.E., 1993. Recent progress in the chemistry of indole alkaloids and mould metabolites. 
Natural Product Reports 10(6): 349-395. 
Schatz, G.E., 2001. Generic tree flora of Madagascar. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, 
United Kingdom. 477 pp. 
Schatz, G., undated. A catalogue of the vascular plants of Madagascar. [Internet]. Missouri Botani-
cal Garden, St. Louis, United States. <http://www.efloras.org/flora_info.aspx?flora_id=12>. Ac-
cessed February 2008. 
Schelpe, E.A.C.L.E., 1970. Lycopodiaceae. In: Exell, A.W. & Launert, E. (Editors). Flora Zambe-
siaca. Pteridophyta. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom, pp. 15-22. 
Schiff, P.L., 1987. Bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Journal of Natural Products 50: 529-599. 
Schiff, P.L., 1991. Bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids. Journal of Natural Products 54: 645-749. 
Schindler, O., 1956. Die Glykoside der Samen von Strophanthus amboensis (Schinz) Engl, et Pax. 
2. Mitteilung. Glykoside und Aglykone, 157. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 39(1): 64-79. 
Schindler, O. & Reichstein, T., 1952a. Die Glykoside der Samen von Strophanthus boivini Baill. 
Glykoside und Aglykone. Helvetica Chimica Acta 35(3): 673-686. 
Schindler, O. & Reichstein, T., 1952b. Identifizierung von Substanz Nr. 763 aus Strophanthus spe-
ciosus und S. boivinii als Strospesid (Desgluco-digitalinum-verum). Glykoside und Aglykone, 93. 
Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 35(2): 442-446. 
Schindler, O. & Reichstein, T., 1952c. Millosid, Paulinosid, Strobosid und Boistrosid, die Glykoside 
von Strophanthus boivini Baill. Helvetica Chimica Acta 35(3): 730-745. 
Schlage, C, Mabula, C, Mahunnah, R.L.A. & Heinrich, M., 2000. Medicinal plants of the 
Washambaa (Tanzania): documentation and ethnopharmacological evaluation. Plant Biology 2: 
83-92. 
Schüttler, E. & Weber, N., 1972a. Alkaloids of Anisocyclea grandidieri (Menispermaceae). Helve-
tica Chimica Acta 55(6): 2061-2064. 
Schüttler, E. & Weber, N., 1972b. Isolation of columbin and palmatine from Spirospermum pen-
duliflorum. Lloydia 35(2): 181-182. 
Schmelzer, G.H., 2001. Piper umbellatum L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. 
(Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Back-
huys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 428-430. 
Schmelzer, G.H., 2003. Ehretia philippinensis A. DC. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphat-
sara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
3. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 182-183. 
Schmelzer, G.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N., 2001. Pisonia L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poison-
ous plants 2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 432—436. 
Schmelzer, G.H. & Horsten, S.F.A.J., 2001. Symphytum officinale L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. 
& Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and 
poisonous plants 2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 524—528. 
Schmidt, R.J. & Evans, F.J., 1976. A new aromatic ester diterpene from Euphorbia poisonii. Phyto-
chemistry 15(11): 1778-1779. 
Schmidt, R.J. & Evans, F.J., 1977. Candletoxins A and B, two new aromatic esters of 12-deoxy-16-
hydroxy-phorbol, from the irritant latex of Euphoria poisonii Pax. Cellular and Molecular Life 
Sciences 33(9): 1197-1198. 
Schmidt, R.J. & Evans, F.J., 1978. Two minor diterpenes from Euphorbia poisonii latex. Phyto-
chemistry 17(8): 1436-1436. 
Schoner, W., 2002. Endogenous cardiac glycosides, a new class of steroid hormones. European 
Journal of Biochemistry 269: 2440-2448. 
Schripsema, J., Hermans Lokkerbol, A., van der Heijden, R., Verpoorte, R., Baerheim Svendsen, A. 
& van Beek, T.A., 1986. Alkaloids of Tabernaemontana ventricosa. Journal of Natural Products 
49(4): 733-735. 
Schwikkard, S. & van Heerden, F.R., 2002. Antimalarial activity of plant metabolites. Natural 
Product Reports 19: 675-692. 
744 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Scigelova, M., Macek, T., Minghetti, A., Mackova, M., Sedmera, P., Prikrylova, V. & Kren, V., 1995. 
Biotransformation of ergot alkaloids by plant cell cultures with high peroxidise activity. Biotech-
nology Letters 17(11): 1213-1218. 
Scott, A.J., 1982. Hernandiacées. In: Bosser, J., Cadet, T., Guého, J. & Marais, W. (Editors). Flore 
des Mascareignes. Families 153-160. The Sugar Industry Research Institute, Mauritius, l'Office 
de la Recherche Scientifique Outre-Mer, Paris, France & Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, 
United Kingdom. 4 pp. 
Seegeier, C.J.P., 1983. Oil plants in Ethiopia, their taxonomy and agricultural significance. Agri-
cultural Research Reports 921. Pudoc, Wageningen, Netherlands. 368 pp. 
Segelman, A.B. & Farnsworth, N.R., 1974. Catharanthus alkaloids 31: isolation of ajmalicine, peri-
calline, tetrahydroalstonine, vindolinine, and ursolic acid from Catharanthus trichophyllus roots. 
Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 63(9): 1419-1422. 
Seigler, D.S., 1994. Phytochemistry and systematics of the Euphorbiaceae. Annals of the Missouri 
Botanical Garden 81(2): 380-401. 
Sekatuba, J., Kugonza, J., Wafula, D., Musukwe, W. & Okorio, J., 2004. Identification of indige-
nous tree and shrub fodder species in lake Victoria shore region of Uganda. Uganda Journal of 
Agricultural Sciences 9: 372-378. 
Semagn, K., Stedje, B. & Bjornstad, A., 2004. Patterns of phenotypic variation in endod (Phytolacca 
dodecandra) from Ethiopia. African Journal of Biotechnology 3(1): 32-39. 
Sembène, M. & Delobel, A., 1998. Genetic differentiation of groundnut seed-beetle populations in 
Senegal. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 87(2): 171-180. 
Sengooba, T.N., Spence, N.J., Walkey, D.G.A., Allen, D.J. & Femi Lana, A., 1997. The occurrence of 
bean common mosaic necrosis virus in wild and forage legumes in Uganda. Plant Pathology 46(1): 
95-103. 
Senoo, R.E., 1992. Preliminary studies on the larvicidal effects of Adenia cissampeloides (Planch 
ex. Hook) on Laphygma exigua (Hubner). B Sc. thesis, Department of Biological Science, Faculty 
of Science, K.N.U.S.T., Kumasi, Ghana. 45 pp. 
Senthamarai, R., Kavimani, S., Jaykar, B. & Uvarani, M., 2001. Analgesic effects of Coldenia pro-
cumbens Linn. Hamdard Medicus 44(3): 20-23. 
Senthil Kumar, M., Sripriya, R., Vijaya Raghavan, H. & Sehgal, P.K., 2006. Wound healing poten-
tial of Cassia fistula on infected albino rat model. Journal of Surgical Research 131(2): 283-289. 
SEPASAL, 1999. Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid Lands. [Internet] Royal Bo-
tanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed April 2005. 
SEPASAL, 2005. Aloe dichotoma. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed November 2005. 
SEPASAL, 2006a. Cassia fistula. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2006. 
SEPASAL, 2006b. Cassia sieberiana. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2006. 
SEPASAL, 2006c. Senna italica. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed November 2006. 
SEPASAL, 2006d. Senna singueana. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed October 2006. 
SEPASAL, 2007a. Hyoscyamus muticus. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed September 2007. 
SEPASAL, 2007b. Lycium europaeum. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed November 2007. 
LITERATURE 745 
SEPASAL, 2008a. Antizoma angustifolia. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed February 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008b. Euphorbia candelabrum. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and 
Semi-Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United King-
dom. <http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed February 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008c. Euphorbia glanduligera. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and 
Semi-Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United King-
dom. <http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008d. Euphorbia heterophylla. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and 
Semi-Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United King-
dom. <http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008e. Euphorbia inaequilatera. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and 
Semi-Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United King-
dom. <http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008f. Euphorbia ingens. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed February 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008g. Euphorbia matabelensis. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and 
Semi-Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United King-
dom. <http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008h. Euphorbia monteiri. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008i. Euphorbia namibiensis. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008J. Euphorbia subsalsa. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed February 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008k. Euphorbia tirucalli. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-
Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed February 2008. 
SEPASAL, 20081. Euphorbia virosa. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and Semi-Arid 
Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 
<http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed February 2008. 
SEPASAL, 2008m. Solanum catombelense. [Internet] Survey of Economic Plants for Arid and 
Semi-Arid Lands (SEPASAL) database. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United King-
dom. <http://www.rbgkew.org.uk/ceb/sepasal/internet/>. Accessed March 2008. 
Sequeira, V., 1994. Medicinal plants and conservation in Sâo Tomé. Biodiversity and Conservation 
3: 910-926. 
Séré, A., Kamgué, R.T., Aké Assi, L. & Ba, A.C., 1982. Spondianthus preussii Engl. var. preussii, 
plante toxique pour le bétail africain. Extraction et dosage de l'acide monofluoroacétique, principe 
actif. Revue d'Elevage et de Médecine vétérinaire des Pays tropicaux 35(1): 73—82. 
Serrato Valenti, G., 1971. Adumbratio florae Aethiopicae 22. Caesalpiniaceae - gen. Cassia. Webbia 
26(1): 1-99. 
Setshogo, M.P. & Venter, F., 2003. Trees of Botswana: names and distribution. Southern African 
Botanical Diversity Network Report 18. Pretoria, South Africa. 152 pp. 
Setyowati, F.M., 2003. Cocculus DC. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). 
Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. Backhuys Pub-
lishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 125-127. 
Sevestre-Rigouzzo, M., Nef-Campa, C , Ghesquière, A. & Chrestin, H, 1993. Genetic diversity and 
alkaloid production in Catharanthus roseus, C. trichophyllus and their hybrids. Euphytica 66: 
151-159. 
Shabana, M.M., Mirhom, Y.W., Genenah, A.A., Aboutabl, E.A. & Amer, H.A., 1990. Untersuchun-
gen zu wildwachsenden aegyptischen Pflanzen mit potentieller Heilkraft, 9: Hypoglykämische 
746 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Wirkung einiger ausgewählter Pflanzen bei normal nüchternen und alloxandiabetischen Ratten. 
Archiv für experimentelle Veterinärmedizin 44(3): 389-394. 
Shackleton, CM., 2000. Stump size and the number of coppice shoots for selected savanna tree 
species. South African Journal of Botany 66(2): 124-127. 
Shah, S., Sharma, A. & Gupta, M.N., 2004. Extraction of oil of Jatropha curcas L. seed kernels by 
enzyme assisted three phase partitioning. Industrial Crops and Products 20: 275-279. 
Shaista Iqbal, 1993. Extended studies on the chemical constituents of Cocculus hirsutus. PhD the-
sis, H.E.J. Research Institute of Chemistry, University of Karachi, Pakistan. 87 pp. [Internet] 
<http://eprints.hec.gov.pk/822/l/532.html.htm>. Accessed November 2007. 
Shale, T.L., Stirk, W.A. & van Staden, J., 1999. Screening of medicinal plants used in Lesotho for 
anti-bacterial and anti-inflammatory activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 67: 347-354. 
Shao, F., Hu, Z., Xiong, Y.M., Huang, Q.Z., Wang, CG., Zhu, R.H. & Wang, D.C., 1999. A new anti-
fungal peptide from the seeds of Phytolacca americana: characterization, amino acid sequence 
and cDNA cloning. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta 1430(2): 262-268. 
Sharland, R.W., 2006. Trees in the garden: interaction between the wild and agricultural domains 
in practice among the Moru of southern Sudan. [Internet] FAO Corporate Document Repository, 
Rome, Italy. <http://www.fao.org/docrep/U1510E/U1510E0A.htm> Accessed July 2007. 
Sharma, V. & Nathawat, G.S., 1987. Allelopathic effect of Argemone mexicana L. on species of 
Triticum, Brassica, Raphanus and Pennisetum. Current Science (India) 56(9): 427-428. 
Sharma, P. & Singh, G., 2002. A review of plant species used to treat conjunctivitis. Phytotherapy 
Research 16: 1-22. 
Sharma, S.R., Dwivedi, S.K. & Swarup, D., 1997. Hypoglycaemic, antihyperglycaemic and hypolip-
idemic activities of Caesalpinia bonducella seeds in rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 58(1): 
39-44. 
Sharma, N., Koul, P. & Koul, A.K., 1992. Genetic systems of six species of Plantago (Plantagina-
ceae). Plant Systematics and Evolution 181: 1-9. 
Shen, Z.Q., Dong, Z.J., Peng, H. & Liu, J.K., 2003. Modulation of PAI-1 and tPA activity and 
thrombolytic effects of corilagin. Planta Medica 69(12): 1109-1112. 
Shen, B., Yu, J., Wang, S., Chu, E.S., Wong, V.W., Zhou, X., Lin, G., Sung, J.J. & Chan, H.L., 2008. 
Phyllanthus urinaria ameliorates the severity of nutritional steatohepatitis both in vitro and in 
vivo. Hepatology 47(2): 473-483. 
Shimoda, M., Yoshimura, T., Ishikawa, H., Shioya, S., Hayakawa, I. & Osajima, Y., 2000. Off-
flavour in milk from the cows fed with swinecress (Coronopus didymus). Journal of the Faculty of 
Agriculture, Kyushu University 45(1): 189-197. 
Shirwaikar, A., Rajendran, K., Bodla, R. & Kumar, CD., 2004. Neutralization potential of Viper 
russelli russelli (russell's viper) venom by ethanol leaf extract of Acalypha indica. Journal of Eth-
nopharmacology 94(2-3): 267-273. 
Shiu, L.Y., Chang, L.C., Liang, C.H., Huang, Y.S., Sheu, H.M. & Kuo, K.W., 2007. Solamargine 
induces apoptosis and sensitizes breast cancer cells to cisplatin. Food and Chemical Toxicology 
45(11): 2155-2164. 
Shoeb, H.A., El Sayed, M.M., El Askalany, M.A., El Nahas, H.A. & Refai, L.A., 1990. The mollus-
cicidal properties of Synadenium grantii. Assiut Veterinary Medical Journal 23(45): 30-38. 
Shoeb, H.A., El-Eman, M.A. & Osman, N.S., 1982. The molluscicidal activity of Euphorbiaceae 
Euphorbia peplus. Egyptian Journal of Bilharziasis 9(1): 41—54. 
Shook, J.E. & Burks, T.F., 1989. Psychoactive cannabinoids reduce gastrointestinal propulsion and 
motility in rodents. Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 249: 444—449. 
Shrivastava, N. & Padhya, M.A., 1995. 'Punarnavine' profile in the regenerated roots of Boerhaavia 
diffusa L. from leaf segments. Current Science 68(6): 653-656. 
Shukla, S.C. & Das, S.R., 1988. Cure of amoebiasis by seed powder of Cassia fistula. International 
Journal of Crude Drug Research 26(3): 141-144. 
Siddiqi, M.A., 1978. Solanaceae. In: Jaffri, S.M.H. & El-Gadi, A. (Editors). Flora of Libya. Vol. 62. 
Al Faateh University, Tripoli, Libya. 38 pp. 
Siepel, A., Poorter, L. & Hawthorne, W.D., 2004. Ecological profiles of large timber species. In: 
Poorter, L., Bongers, F., Kouamé, F.N. & Hawthorne, W.D. (Editors). Biodiversity of West African 
forests. An ecological atlas of woody plant species. CABI Publishing, CAB International, Walling-
ford, United Kingdom, pp. 391-445. 
LITERATURE 747 
Sillans, R., 1953. Plantes médicinales d'Afrique centrale. Annales pharmaceutiques françaises 11: 
364-383, 456-473. 
Silva, O., Duarte, A., Cabrita, J., Pimentel, M., Diniz, A. & Gomes, E., 1996. Antimicrobial activity 
of Guinea-Bissau traditional remedies. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 50: 55-59. 
Silva, O., Barbosa, S., Diniz, A., Valdeira, M.L. & Gomes, E., 1997a. Plant extracts antiviral activ-
ity against Herpes Simplex Virus type 1 and African Swine Fever Virus. Pharmaceutical Biology 
35(1): 12-16. 
Silva, O., Ferreira, E., Vaz Pato, M. & Gomes, E., 1997b. Guinea-Bissau's plants: in vitro suscepti-
bility studies on Neisseria gonorrhoeae. Pharmaceutic Biology 35: 323-328. 
Silva, R., Levy, J.G.V., Gomes, I., Veiga, J.L. & Alamada, E.O., 1999. Rapport national sur l'état de 
la biodiversité. Premier Rapport. Secretariat Executif pour l'Environnement (SEPA). Ministère 
de l'Agriculture, de l'Alimentation et de l'Environnement. Praia, Cape Verde. 58 pp. 
Silva, E.M., Cirne-Santos, C.C., Frugulhetti, I.C., Galvao-Castro, B., Saraivo, E.M., Kuehne, M.E. 
& Bou-Habib, D.C., 2004. Anti-HIV-1 activity of the Iboga alkaloid congener 18-
methoxycoronaridine. Planta Medica 70(9): 808-812. 
Simào, S.M., Barreiros, E.L., Da Silva, M.F.G.F. & Gottleib, O.R., 1991. Chemogeographical evolu-
tion of quassinoids in Simaroubaceae. Phytochemistry 30: 853—865. 
Simin, K., Khaliq-uz-Zaman, S.M. & Ahmad, V.U., 2001. Antimicrobial activity of seed extracts and 
bondenolide from Caesalpinia bonduc (L.) Roxb. Phytotherapy Research 15(5): 437-440. 
Simonsen, H.T., Nordskjold, J.B., Smitt, U.W., Nyman, U., Pushpangadan, P., Prabhakar, J. & 
Varughese, G., 2001. In vitro screening of Indian medicinal plants for antiplasmodial activity. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 74(2): 195-204. 
Simpson, W.T., 1996. Method to estimate dry-kiln schedules and specific groupings: Tropical and 
temperate hardwoods. Research paper FPL-RP-548, Forest Products Laboratory, Forest Service, 
Department of Agriculture, Madison WI, United States. 57 pp. 
Sinei, K.A. & Mwangi, J.W., 1995. Effect of the tuber of Adenia globosa on isolated rat uterus 
preparation. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 33: 346—347. 
Singh, C.U., 2004. Novel formulations of digitalis glycosides for treating cell-proliferative and other 
diseases. United States Patent Application 20040082521. U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, Al-
exandria VA, United States. 
Singh, A. & Agarwal, R.A., 1988. Possibility of using latex of euphorbiales for snail control. Science 
of the Total Environment 77(2): 231-236. 
Singh, P. & Sinha, K.K., 1986. Inhibition of aflatoxin production on some agricultural commodities 
through aqueous plant extracts. Journal of the Indian Botanical Society 65(1): 30-32. 
Singh, B., Chandan, B.K. & Gupta, K., 2003. Adaptogenic activity of a novel withanolide-free aque-
ous fraction from the roots of Withania somnifera Dun. (Part 2). Phytotherapy Research 17: 531— 
536. 
Singh, B., Sahu, P.M. & Singh, S., 2002. Antimicrobial activity of pyrrolizidine alkaloids from 
Heliotropium subulatum. Fitoterapia 73(2): 153—155. 
Singh S.P., Tiwari, R.K. & Dubey, T., 2003. Correlation and path analysis in Senna (Cassia senna). 
Indian Journal of Genetics and Plant Breeding 63(4): 356. 
Singh, A., Singh, R.G., Singh, R.H., Mishra, N. & Singh, N., 1991. An experimental evaluation of 
possible teratogenic potential in Boerhavia diffusa in albino rats. Planta Medica 57(4): 315-316. 
Singh, U.P., Singh, K.P., Tripathi, V.K. & Pandey, V.B., 1994. Antifungal activity of some naturally 
occurring plant alkaloids. International Journal of Tropical Plant Diseases 12(2): 209-212. 
Singh, S.N., Vats, P., Suri, S., Shyam, R., Kumria, M.M., Ranganathan, S. & Sridharan, K, 2001. 
Effect of an antidiabetic extract of Catharanthus roseus on enzymic activities in streptozotocin 
induced diabetic rats. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 76(3): 269-277. 
Singh, B., Sahu, P.M., Jain, S.C. & Singh, S., 2002. Antineoplastic and antiviral screening of pyr-
rolizidine alkaloids from Heliotropium subulatum. Pharmaceutical Biology 40(8): 581—586. 
Singh, D.A.P., Raman, M., Saradha, V., Jayabharathi, P. & Kumar, V.R.S., 2004. Acaricidal prop-
erty of kuppaimeni (Acalypha indica) against natural Psoroptes cuniculi infestation in broiler 
rabbits. Indian Journal of Animal Sciences 74(10): 1003-1006. 
Singh, S.K., Yadav, R.P., Tiwari, S. & Singh, A., 2005. Toxic effect of stem bark and leaf of Euphor-
bia hirta plant against freshwater vector snail Lymnaea acuminata. Chemosphere 59(2): 263— 
270. 
748 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Singh, G.D., Kaiser, P., Youssouf, M.S., Singh, S., Khajuria, A., Koul, A., Bani, S., Kapahi, B.K., 
Satti, N.K., Suri, K.A. & Johri, R.K., 2006. Inhibition of early and late phase allergic reactions by 
Euphorbia hirta L. Phytotherapy Research 20(4): 316-321. 
Singla, A.K. & Pathak, K., 1989. Anti-inflammatory studies on Euphorbia prostrata. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 27(1-2): 55-61. 
Singla, A.K. & Pathak, K., 1990. Topical antiinflammatory effects of Euphorbia prostrata on carra-
geenan-induced footpad oedema in mice. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 29(3): 291-294. 
Singla, A.K. & Pathak, K., 1991. Constituents of Euphorbia prostrata. Fitoterapia 62(5): 453-454. 
Singthong, J., Ningsanond, S., Cui, S.W. & Goff, H.D., 2005. Extraction and physicochemical char-
acterization of krueo ma noy pectin. Food Hydrocolloids 19: 793-801. 
Siregar, A.H., 2001. Acalypha L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). 
Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Backhuys Pub-
lishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 31-36. 
Sittie, A.A., Lemmich, E., Olsen, CE., Hviid, L. & Brogger Christensen, S., 1998. Alkamides from 
Phyllanthus fraternus. Planta Medica 64: 192-193. 
Sivakumar, G. & Krishnamurthy, K.V., 2000. Micropropagation of Gloriosa superba L., an endan-
gered species of Asia and Africa. Current Science 78(1): 647-659. 
Sivakumar, G. & Krishnamurthy, K.V., 2002. Gloriosa superba L. - a very useful medicinal plant. 
In: Singh, V.K., Govil, J.N., Hashmi, S. & Singh, G. (Editors). Recent progress in medicinal plants 
Volume 7: Ethnomedicine & Pharmacognosy II. Sci-Tech. Publishing LLC, Houston, Texas, USA. 
pp. 465-481. 
Slamet Sutanti Budi Rahayu, 2001a. Boerhavia L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphat-
sara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 
2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 111-116. 
Slamet Sutanti Budi Rahayu, 2001b. Physalis L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphat-
sara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 
2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 423-426. 
Sleumer, H., 1970. Le genre Paropsia Noronha ex Thouars (Passifloraceae). Bulletin du Jardin 
Botanique National de Belgique 40(1): 49-75. 
Sleumer, H. & Bamps, P., 1976. Flacourtiaceae (seconde partie). In: Bamps, P. (Editor). Flore 
d'Afrique centrale. Spermatophytes. Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 
45 pp. 
Small, E., 1995. Hemp. In: Smartt, J. & Simmonds, N.W. (Editors): Evolution of crop plants. 2nd 
edition. Longman, London, United Kingdom, pp. 222-223. 
Smith, A.R., 2005. Plumbago auriculata. [Internet] Flora of North America. 
<http://www.efloras.org/florataxon.aspx?flora_id=l&taxon_id=200017524>. Accessed 18 august 
2005. 
Smith, G.F & de Correia, R.I., 1992. Establishment of Aloe greatheadii var. Davyana from seed for 
use in reclamation trials. Landscape and Urban Planning 23(1): 47-54. 
Smith, R.J. & Evans, F.J., 1980. Skin irritant effects of esters of phorbol and related polyols. Ar-
chives of Toxicology 44: 279-289. 
Smith, G.C., Clegg, M.S., Keen, C.L. & Grivetti, L.E., 1996. Mineral values of selected plant foods 
common to southern Burkina Faso and to Niamey, Niger, West Africa. International Journal of 
Food Science and Nutrition 47(1): 41-53. 
Snoeijer, W., 1996. Catharanthus roseus, the Madagascar periwinkle, a review of its cultivars. Se-
ries of revisions of Apocynaceae 41. Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 96—3, Wagenin-
gen, Netherlands, pp. 47-120. 
Sobti, S.N. & Kaul, B.L., 1982. Cultivation of Datura innoxia and D. metel in India. In: Atal, CK. 
& Kapur, B.M. (Editors). Cultivation and utilization of medicinal plants. Regional Research Labo-
ratory Jammu-Tawi, New Delhi, India, pp. 259-261. 
Sofidiya, M.O., Odukoya, O.A., Familoni, O.B. & Inya-Agha, S.I., 2006. Free radical scavenging 
activity of some Nigerian medicinal plant extracts. Pakistan Journal of Biological Sciences 9(8): 
1438-1441. 
Sofowora, A., 1982. Medicinal plants and traditional medicine in Africa. John Wiley and Sons, 
Chichester, United Kingdom. 274 pp. 
LITERATURE 749 
Sofowora, A., 1996. Plantes médicinales et médecine traditionelle d'Afrique. Karthala, Paris, 
France. 378 pp. 
Sokomba, E., Wambebe, C, Chowdhurry, B.K., Iriah, J., Ogbeide, O.N. & Orkor, D., 1986. Prelimi-
nary phytochemical, pharmacological and antibacterial studies of the alkaloidal extracts of leaves 
of Synclisia scabrida Miers. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 18(2): 173-185. 
Soladoye, M.O., Sonibare, M.A., Nadi, A.O. & Alabi, D.A., 2005. Indiginous angiosperm biodiversity 
of Olabisi Onabanjo University permanent site. African Journal of Biotechnology 4(5): 554-562. 
Solomon, D.J., Kallidass, S. & Vimalan, J., 2005. Isolation, identification and study of antimicro-
bial property of a bioactive compound in an Indian medicinal plant Acalypha indica (Indian net-
tle). World Journal of Microbiology and Biotechnology 21(6-7): 1231-1236. 
Somanadhan, B., Varughese, G., Palpu, P., Sreedharan, R, Gudiksen, L., Wagner-Smitt, U. & Ny-
man, U., 1999. An ethnopharmacological survey for potential angiotensin converting enzyme in-
hibitors from Indian medicinal plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 65: 103-112. 
Somchit, M.N., Mutalib, A.R., Hasmawie, M.R. & Murni, A., 2001. In vitro antifungal and antibac-
terial properties of Euphorbia hirta. Journal of Tropical Medicinal Plants 2(2): 179-182. 
Some, N., Sawadogo, L., Lompo, M., Pousset, J.L. & Guissou, LP., 1996. Evaluation de la toxicité 
générale aiguë d'un extrait aqueux de la poudre des racines de Tinospora bakis (A.Rich.) Miers, 
Menispermaceae. Sciences et Techniques 22(1): 38-46. 
Somé, N., Sawadogo, L., Guissou, LP., Lompo, M. & Pousset, J.L., 1998. Etude des effets pharma-
cologiques de type atropinique des extraits organiques de la poudre des racines de Tinospora ba-
kis (A.Rich.) Miers, Menispermaceae. Sciences et Techniques 23(1): 70-79. 
Songjang, K. & Wimolwattanasarn, P., 2004. Antibacterial acitivity from the latex of Jatropha cur-
cas. Chiang Mai Journal of Science 31(3): 309-312. 
Sosath, S., Ott., H.H. & Hecker, E., 1988. Irritant principles of the spurge family (Euphorbiaceae) 
XIII. Oligocyclic and macrocyclic diterpene esters from latices of some Euphorbia species utilized 
as source plants of honey. Journal of Natural Products 51(6): 1062-1074. 
Sourabie, S., Kabore, Z.I. & Guissou, LP., 1994. Etude comparée de l'activité antibactérienne des 
extraits hydroalcooliques des principes chimiques de Holarrhena floribunda (G.Don) Durand & 
Schinz et de Nauclea latifolia Sm. Médecine d'Afrique Noire 41(3): 181-185. 
Sousek, J., Vavreckova, C, Psotova, J., Ulrichova, J. & Simanek, V., 1999. Antioxidant and antili-
poperoxidant activities of alkaloid and phenolic extracts of eight Fumaria species. Acta Horticul-
turae 501: 239-244. 
Southon, I.W., Bisby, F.A., Buckingham, J. & Harborne, J.B., 1994. Phytochemical dictionary of the 
Leguminosae. Volume 1: Plants and their constituents. Chapman and Hall, London, United King-
dom. 1051 pp. 
Sow, D., Ollivier, B., Viaud, P. & Garcia, J.L., 1989. Mesophilic and thermophilic methane fermen-
tation of Euphorbia tirucalli. MIRCEN Journal of Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology 5: 
547-550. 
Sow, H.D., Koudogbo, B., Dhal, R. & Robin, J.-P., 1994. Drypetes gossweileri S. Moore: isolement 
des triterpènes pentacycliques. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 8(1): 17—21. 
Sowunmi, M.A., 1985. The beginnings of agriculture in West Africa: botanical evidence. Current 
Anthropology 26: 127-129. 
Sparg, S.G., van Staden, J. & Jäger, A.K., 2000. Efficiency of traditionally used South African 
plants against schistosomiasis. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 73(1-2): 209-214. 
Specht, CD. & Stevenson, D.W., 2006. A new phylogeny-based generic classification of Costaceae 
(Zingiberales). Taxon 55(1): 153-163. 
Spencer, K.C. & Seigler, D.S., 1987. Passisuberosin and epipassisuberosin: two cyclopentenoid 
cyanogenic glycosides from Passiflora suberosa. Phytochemistry 26: 1665-1667. 
Speranza, G., Manitto, P., Cassara, P. & Monti, D., 1993. Feralolide, a dihydroisocoumarin from 
cape aloe. Phytochemistry 33(1): 175-178. 
Speranza, G., Morelli, CF., Tubaro, A., Altinier, G., Duri, L. & Manitto, P., 2005. Aloeresin I, an 
anti-inflammatory 5-methylchromone from Cape Aloe. Planta Medica 71: 79-81. 
Speroni, E., Coletti, B., Minghetti, A., Perellino, N.C., Guicciardi, A. & Vincieri, F.F., 1991. Activity 
on the CNS of crude extracts and of some diterpenoids isolated from Euphorbia calyptrata sus-
pended cultures. Planta Medica 57(6): 531-535. 
750 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Spiff, A.I., Zabel, V., Watson, W.H., Zemaitis, M.A., Ateya, A.M., Slatkin, D.J., Knapp, J.E. & 
Schiff, P.L.jr, 1981. Constituents of West African medicinal plants. XXX. Tridictyophylline, a new 
morphinan alkaloid from Triclisia dictyophylla. Journal of Natural Products 44(2): 160-165. 
Sprent, J., 2005. West African legumes: the role of nodulation and nitrogen fixation. New Phytolo-
gist 167: 321-323. 
Sri Hartati, Imastini Dinuriah & Blomqvist, M.M., 1999. Datura L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). 
Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 229-234. 
Sriana Azis, 2003. Hunteria zeylanica (Retz.) Gardner ex Thwaites. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & 
Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poi-
sonous plants 3. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 247-248. 
Srinivas, K., Rao, M.E.B. & Rao, S.S., 2000. Anti-inflammatory activity of Heliotropium indicum 
Linn, and Leucas aspera Spreng. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 32(1): 37-38. 
Sripanidkulchai, B., Tattawasart, U., Laupatarakasem, P., Vinitketkumneun, U., Sripanidkulchai, 
K., Furihata, C. & Matsushima, T., 2002. Antimutagenic and anticarcinogenic effects of Phyllan-
thus amarus. Phytomedicine 9(1): 26-32. 
Srivastava, S., Singh, M.M. & Kulshreshtha, D.K., 2001. A new alkaloid and other anti-
implantation principles from Tabernaemontana heyneana. Planta Medica 67(6): 577-579. 
Srivastava, V., Singh, M., Malasoni, R., Shanker, K., Verma, R.K., Gupta, M.M., Gupta, A.K. & 
Khanuja, S.P.S., 2008. Separation and quantification of lignans in Phyllanthus species by a sim-
ple chiral densitometric method. Journal of Separation Science 31: 47-55. 
Ssegawa, P. & Kasenene, J.M., 2007. Medicinal plant diversity and uses in the Sango bay area, 
southern Uganda. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 113: 521-540. 
Stamp, N.E. & Osier, T.L., 1998. Response of five insect herbivores to multiple allelochemicals un-
der fluctuating temperatures. Entomologia Experimentalis et Applicata 88(1): 81-96. 
Stannard, B.L., 1981. A revision of Kirkia (Simaroubaceae). Kew Bulletin 35: 829-839. 
Stannard, B.L., 1988a. Nyctaginaceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 9, part 
1. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 12-28. 
Stannard, B.L., 1988b. Phytolaccaceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 9, part 
1. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 163-173. 
Stannard, B.L., 2000. Simaroubaceae. In: Beentje, H.J. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 15 pp. 
Stapf, O., 1902-1904. Apocynaceae. In: Thiselton-Dyer, W.T. (Editor). Flora of tropical Africa. Vol-
ume 4(1). Lovell Reeve & Co, London, United Kingdom, pp. 24-231. 
Stäuble, N., 1986. Etude ethnobotanique des Euphorbiacées d'Afrique de l'Ouest. Journal of Eth-
nopharmacology 16: 23-103. 
Steenkamp, V., 2003. Traditional herbal remedies used by South African women for gynaecological 
complaints. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 86: 97-108. 
Steinmann, V.W. & Porter, J.M., 2002. Phylogenetic relationships in Euphorbieae (Euphorbiaceae) 
based on its and ndhF sequence data. Annals of the Missouri Botanical Garden 89(4): 453-490. 
Stickel, F. & Seitz, H.K., 2000. The efficacy and safety of comfrey. Public Health Nutrition 3(4A): 
501-508. 
Stiles, D., 1998. The Mikea hunter-gatherers of southwest Madagascar: ecology and socioeconom-
ics. African Study Monographs 19(3): 127-148. 
Stintzing, F.C., Kammerer, D., Schieber, A., Adama, H., Nacoulma, O.G. & Carle, R., 2004. Beta-
cyanins and phenolic compounds from Amaranthus spinosus L. and Boerhavia erecta L. 
Zeitschrift für Naturforschung - Section C, Biosciences 59(1-2): 1-8. 
Stirpe, F., Barbieri, L., Abbondanza, A., Falasca, A.I., Brown, A.N., Sandvig, K., Olsnes, S. & Pihl, 
A., 1985. Properties of volkensin, a toxic lectin from Adenia volkensii. Journal of Biological Chem-
istry 260(27): 14589-14595. 
Stoffers, A.L., 1968. Phytolaccaceae. In: Pulle, A.A. & Lanjouw, J. (Editors). Flora of Suriname. 
Volume 1, Part 2. Foundation van Eedenfonds, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 209-217. 
Storrs, A.E.G., 1979. Know your trees: some of the common trees found in Zambia. Forest Depart-
ment, Ndola, Zambia. 380 pp. 
LITERATURE 751 
Strickland, F.M. & Pelley, R.P., 2004. Plant saccharides and the prevention of sun-induced cancer. 
In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States. 
pp. 265-310. 
Strickland, R.W., Lambourne, L.J. & Ratcliff, D., 1987., 1987. A rat bioassay for screening tropical 
legume forages and seeds for palatability and toxicity. Australian Journal of Experimental Agri-
culture 27: 45-53. 
Sturm, S. & Stuppner, H., 1998. Analysis of isoquinoline alkaloids in medicinal plants by capillary 
electrophoresis: mass spectrometry. Electrophoresis 19(16—17): 3026-3032. 
Su, B.N., Park, E.J., Mbwambo, Z.H., Santarsiero, B.D., Mesecar, A.D., Fong, H.H.S., Pezzuto, J.M. 
& Kinghorn, D.A., 2002. New chemical constituents of Euphorbia quinquecostata and absolute 
configuration assignment by a convenient Mosher ester procedure carried out in NMR tubes. 
Journal of Natural Products 65(9): 1278-1282. 
Subbaraju, G.V., Vanisree, M., Rao, C.V., Sivaramakrishna, C, Sridhar, P., Jayaprakasam, B. & 
Nair, M.G., 2006. Ashwagandhanolide, a bioactive dimeric thiowithanolide isolated from the roots 
of Withania somnifera. Journal of Natural Products 69(12): 1790-1792. 
Suda, C.N.K. & Giorgini, J.F., 2003. Multiple forms of endo-l,4-b-glucanases in the endosperm of 
Euphorbia heterophylla L. Journal of Experimental Botany 54(390): 2045-2052. 
Sujatha, M. & Prabakaran, A.J., 2003. New ornamental Jatropha hybrids through interspecific 
hybridization. Genetic Resources and Crop Evolution 50: 75-82. 
Sukumaran, D., Parashar, B.D. & Rao, K.M., 1994. Molluscicidal properties of Agave americana 
and Balanites aegyptica. International Journal of Pharmacognosy 32(3): 232-238. 
Sukumaran, D., Parashar, B.D. & Rao, K.M., 1995. Toxicity of Jatropha gossypiifolia and Vaccaria 
pyramidata against freshwater snails vectors of animal schistosomiasis. Fitoterapia 66(5): 393-
398. 
Sunarno, B., 1997. Senna didymobotrya (Fresenius) Irwin & Barneby. In: Faridah Hanum, I. & van 
der Maesen, L.J.G. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 11. Auxiliary plants. Back-
huys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 229-231. 
Suomi, J., Wiedmer, S.K., Jussila, M. & Riekkola, M.L., 2002. Analysis of iridoid glycosides by mi-
cellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography (MECC) and screening of plant samples by partial 
filling (MECC)-electrospray ionization mass spectrometry. Journal of Chromatography 970: 287-
296. 
Suri, K.A., Sawhney, R.S. & Atal, C K , 1975. Pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Cynoglossum lanceola-
tum, C. glochidiatum and Lindelofia angustifolia. Indian Journal of Pharmacy 37(3): 69-70. 
Susiarti, S., Munawaroh, E. & Horsten, S.F.A.J., 1999. Jatropha L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M. J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). 
Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 320-327. 
Sutarno, H. & Rudjiman, 1999. Catharanthus roseus (L.) G. Don. In: de Padua, L.S., Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M. J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). 
Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 185-190. 
Svoboda, G.H., Poore, G.A. & Montfort, M.L., 1968. Alkaloids of Ochrosia maculata Jacq. (Ochrosia 
borbonica Gmel.). Isolation of the alkaloids and study of the antitumor properties of 9-
methoxyellipticine. Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 57(10): 1720—1725. 
Szalai, K., Scholl, L, Förster-Waldl, E., Polito, L., Bolognesi, A., Untersmayr, E., Riemer, A.B., 
Boltz-Nitulescu, G., Stirpe, F. & Jensen-Jarolim, E., 2005. Occupational sensitization to ribo-
some-inactivating proteins in researchers. Clinical and Experimental Allergy 35(10): 1354-1360. 
Tabuti, J.R.S., 2007. Status of non-cultivated food plants in Bulamogi County, Uganda. African 
Journal of Ecology 45(sl): 96-101. 
Tabuti, J.R.S., Dhillion, S.S. & Lye, K.A., 2003. Ethnoveterinary medicines for cattle (Bos indicus) 
in Bulamogi county, Uganda: plant species and mode of use. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 88: 
279-286. 
Tabuti, J.R.S., Lye, K.A. & Dhillion, S.S., 2003. Traditional herbal drugs of Bulamogi, Uganda: 
plants, use and administration. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 88: 19-44. 
Tachibana, Y., Kato, A., Nishiyama, Y., Kawanishi, K., Tobe, H., Juma, F.D., Ogeto, J.O. & 
Mathenge, S.G., 1993. Mitogenic activities in African traditional herbal medicines. Planta Medica 
59(4): 354-358. 
752 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Tachibana, Y., Kato, A., Nishiyama, Y., Ikemi, M., Ohoka, K., Kawanishi, K. & Juma, F.D., 1996. 
Mitogenic activities in African traditional herbal medicines (Part 2). Phytomedicine 2(4): 335-
339. 
Tackie, A.N., Dwuma-Badu, D., Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, P.L. jr., 1974. Constituents of 
West African medicinal plants. 4. O-Methylflavinantine from Rhigiocarya racemifera. Phyto-
chemistry 13(12): 2884-2885. 
Tackie, A.N., Dwuma-Badu, D., Ayim, J.S.K., Dabra, T.T., Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, 
P.L.jr., 1975. Constituents of West African medicinal plants. VII. Alkaloids of Tiliacora dinklagei. 
Lloydia 38(3): 210-212. 
Tackie, A.N., Dwuma-Badu, D., Dabra, T.T., Knapp, J.E., Slatkin, D.J. & Schiff, P.L.jr., 1976. Con-
stituents of West African medicinal plants. V. Tiliageine, a new bisbenzylisoquinoline biphenyl 
alkaloid from Tiliacora dinklagei. Experientia 30(8): 847-348. 
Tadeg, H., Mohammed, E., Asres, K. & Gebre-Mariam, T., 2005. Antimicrobial activities of some 
selected traditional Ethiopian medicinal plants used in the treatment of skin disorders. Journal 
of Ethnopharmacology 100: 168-175. 
Tahir, S.K. & Zimmerman, A.M., 1991. Influence of marihuana on cellular structures and bio-
chemical activities. Pharmacology, Biochemistry and Behavior 40: 617-623. 
Tailfer, Y., 1989. La forêt dense d'Afrique centrale. Identification pratique des principaux arbres. 
Tome 2. CTA, Wageningen, Pays Bas. pp. 465-1271. 
Taïta, P., 2000. La biodiversité des espèces spontanées utilisées dans l'alimentation et la pharma-
copée dans la région de la réserve de biosphère de la Mare aux Hippopotames. In: Actes du Forum 
National de la Recherche Scientifique et des Innovations Technologiques (FRSIT), 3-8 avril 2000, 
Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso. Tome 2. Sécurité alimentaire, pp. 77-95. 
Taiwo, A.O. & Bolanle, A., 2003. The leaf essential oil of Costus afer Ker-Gawl from Nigeria. Fla-
vour and Fragrance Journal 18(4): 309-311. 
Takahashi, A., 1978. Compilation of data on the mechanical properties of foreign woods (part 3) 
Africa. Shimane University, Matsue, Japan, 248 pp. 
Takahasi, H., Yanagi, K., Ueda, M., Nakade, K. & Fukuyama, Y., 2003. Structures of 1,4-
benzodioxane derivatives from the seeds of Phytolacca americana and their neuritogenic activity 
in primary cultured rat cortical neurons. Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 51(12): 1377-
1381. 
Talapatra, B., Goswami, S. & Talapatra, S.K., 1981. Acalyphamide, a new amide and other chemi-
cal constituents of Acalypha indica. Indian Journal of Chemistry section B Organic Chemistry in-
cluding Medicinal Chemistry 20(11): 974-977. 
Taleb, N.O., 2000. Ressources Forestières en Mauritanie. EC/FAO ACP Collecte de données - Rap-
port Technique AFDCA/TR/12 FAO, Rome, Italy. 43 pp. 
Tamboura, H.H., Bayala, B., Lompo, M., Some, N.P., Ouédraogo, S., Guissou, P.I. & Sawadogo, L., 
2004. Effet des extraits aqueux de l'Holarrhena floribunda (G.Don) Durand & Schinz sur l'activité 
androgénique chez le rat. Revue Africaine de Santé et de Productions Animales 2(1): 75—78. 
Tamboura, H.H., Bayala, B., Lompo, M., Guissou, LP. & Sawadogo, L., 2005. Ecological distribu-
tion, morphological characteristics and acute toxicity of aqueous extracts of Holarrhena flori-
bunda (G.Don) Durand & Schinz, Leptadenia hastata (Pers.) Decne and Cassia sieberiana DC. 
used by veterinary healers in Burkina Faso. African Journal of Traditional, Complementary and 
Alternative Medicines 2(1): 13-24. 
Tamura, Y. & Nishibe, S., 2002. Changes in the concentrations of bioactive compounds in plantain 
leaves. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50(9): 2514-2518. 
Tan, P.V. & Nyasse, B., 2002. Anti-ulcer compound from Voacanga africana with possible hista-
mine H12 receptor blocking activity. Phytomedicine 7(6): 509-515. 
Tan, P.V., Boda, M., Sonké, B., Etoa, F.-X. & Nyasse, B., 2006. Susceptibility of Helicobacter and 
Campylobacter to crude extracts prepared from plants used in Cameroonian folk medicine. Phar-
macology Online 3: 877-891. 
Tanaka, T., 1976. Tanaka's cyclopaedia of edible plants of the world. Keigaku Publishing, Tokyo, 
Japan. 924 pp. 
Tanaka, R., Ida, T., Takaoka, Y., Kita, S., Kamisako, W. & Matsunaga, S., 1994. 3,4-seco-oleana-
4(23),18-dien-3-oic acid and other triterpenes from Euphorbia chamaesyce. Phytochemistry 36(1): 
129-132. 
LITERATURE 753 
Tanaka, R., Kasubuchi, K., Kita, S. & Matsunaga, S., 1999. Obtusifoliol and related steroids from 
the whole herb of Euphorbia chamaesyce. Phytochemistry 51(3): 457-463. 
Tanaka, R., Kasubuchi, K, Kita, S., Tokuda, H., Nishino, H. & Matsunaga, S., 2000. Bioactive 
steroids from the whole herb of Euphorbia chamaesyce. Journal of Natural Products 63(1): 99-
103. 
Tanaka, R., Wada, S.-L, Yamada, T. & Yamori, T., 2006. Potent antitumor activity of 3,4-seco-8bH-
ferna-4(23),9(ll)-dien-3-oic acid (EC-2) and 3,4-seco-oleana-4(23),18-dien-3-oic acid (EC-4), evalu-
ated by an in vitro human cancer cell line panel. Planta Medica 72: 1347-1349. 
Tancredi, T., Pastore, A., Salvadori, S., Esposito, V. & Temussi, P.A., 2004. Interaction of sweet 
proteins with their receptor. European Journal of Biochemistry 271: 2231-2240. 
Tane, P., Ayafor, J.F., Farrugia, L.J., Connolly, J.D. & Rycroft, D.S., 1996. Picrotoximaesin, a novel 
picrotoxane sesquiterpenoid from the berries of Maesobotrya floribunda. Natural Product Letters 
9: 39-45. 
Tane, P., Wabo, H.K., Ayafor, J.F. & Sterner, O., 1997. Peniankerine, an 18-norclerodane diterpe-
noid from the stem bark of Penianthus zenkeri. Phytochemistry 46(1): 165-167. 
Tanno, T., 1981. Plant utilization of the Mbuti Pygmies - with special reference to their material 
culture and use of wild vegetable foods. African Study Monographs 1: 1-53. 
Tapondjou, A.L., Miyamoto, T. & Lacaille-Dubois, M.A., 2006. Glucuronide triterpene saponins 
from Bersama engleriana. Phytochemistry 67(19): 2126-2132. 
Tarar, J.L. & Vishwakarma, M., 1995. Chromosome morphology of diploid and tetraploid Gloriosa 
superba Linn. In: Padhye, M.D., Mukherjee, P.K. & Khalatkar, A.S. (Editors). Botany Towards 
2000 A.D. (Prof. V.R. Dnyansagar Commemoration Volume). Vedams Book, New Delhi, India. 
Tardieu-Blot, M.-L., 1964. Lycopodiaceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 3. Muséum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 9-17. 
Tardieu-Blot, M.-L., 1971a. Huperziacées (Huperziaceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, 
familles 13 et 13 bis. Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 15-48. 
Tardieu-Blot, M.-L., 1971b. Lycopodiacées (Lycopodiaceae). Flore de Madagascar et des Comores, 
familles 13 et 13 bis. Muséum National d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 3-13. 
Tatematsu, H., Mori, M., Yang, T.H., Chang, J.J., Lee, T.T. & Lee, K.H., 1991. Cytotoxic principles 
of Securinega virosa: virosecurinine and viroallosecurinine and related derivatives. Journal of 
Pharmaceutical Sciences 80(4): 325-327. 
Taton, A., 1971. Boraginaceae. In: Flore du Congo, du Ruanda et du Burundi. Spermatophytes. 
Jardin botanique national de Belgique, Brussels, Belgium. 82 pp. 
Tawfik, K.M., Sheteawi, S.A. & El-Gawad, Z.A., 2001. Growth and aloin production of Aloe vera 
and Aloe eru under different ecological conditions. Egyptian Journal of Biology 3 (Botany): 149-
159. 
Taylor, L., 2006. Raintree Nutrition, Inc., Carson City, Nevada United States. [Internet] 
<http://www.rain-tree.com/anamu.htm>. Accessed August 2006. 
Tchinda, A.T., Ayele Teshome, Ermias Dagne, Arnold, N. & Wessjohan, L.A., 2006. Squalene and 
amentoflavone from Antidesma laciniatum. Bulletin of the Chemical Society of Ethiopia 2(2): 
325-328. 
Tchissambou, L., Chiaron, A., Riche, C. & Khuong Huu, F., 1990. Crotocorylifuran and crotohau-
manoxide, new diterpenes from Croton haumanianus J.Léonard. Tetrahedron 46(15): 5199—5202. 
Tchouto, M.G.P., 2004. Plant diversity in a Central African rain forest: implications for biodiversity 
conservation in Cameroon. Tropenbos Cameroon Series 7, Tropenbos International, Wageningen, 
Netherlands. 208 pp. 
Teketay, D., 1996. The effect of different pre-sowing seed treatments, temperature and light on the 
germination of five Senna species from Ethiopia. New Forests 11(2): 155-171. 
Teklay, T., Nyberg, G. & Maimer, A., 2006. Effect of organic inputs from agroforestry species and 
urea on crop yield and soil properties at Wondo Genet, Ethiopia. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosys-
tems 75(1-3): 163-173. 
Teklehaymanot, T., Bekele, E., Demissew, S. & Nordal, I., 2004. Isoenzyme analysis of five endemic 
and one widespread Kniphofia species (Asphodelaceae) of Ethiopia. SINET: Ethiopian Journal of 
Science 27(2): 143-152. 
754 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Teklehaymanot, T., Giday, M., Medhin, G. & Mekonnen, Y., 2007. Knowledge and use of medicinal 
plants by people around Debre Libanos monastery in Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
111: 271-283. 
Temussi, P.A., 2002. Why are sweet proteins sweet? Interaction of brazzein, monellin and thau-
matin with the T1R2-T1R3 receptor. FEBS Letters 526: 1-4. 
Terashima, H. & Ichikawa, M., 2003. A comparative ethnobotany of the Mbuti and Efe hunter-
gatherers in the Ituri forest, Democratic Republic of Congo. African Study Monographs 24(1-2): 
1-168. 
Terashima, H., Ichikawa, M. & Sawada, M., 1988. Wild plant utilization of the Balese and the Efe 
of the Ituri Forest, the Republic of Zaire. African Study Monographs, Supplement 8. The Center 
for African Area Studies, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. 78 pp. 
Terashima, H., Kalala, S. & Malasi, N., 1992. Ethnobotany of the Lega in the tropical rain forest of 
Eastern Zaire: part two, zone de Walikale. African Study Monographs, Supplement 19: 1-60. 
Téré, H.G., 2000. Signification des noms vernaculaires des plantes chez les Guérés (Côte d'Ivoire). 
Sempervira No 7. Centre Suisse de Recherches Scientifiques (CSRS), Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. 96 
pp. 
Tessier, A.M., 1975. Etude de quelques Euphorbiacées toxiques africaines: Maprounea africana 
Muell. Arg., Maprounea membranacea Pax et K. Hoffm. et Spondianthus preussii Engl. Thèse 
Pharmacologique, Université de Paris 5, Paris, France. 300 pp. 
Tessier, A.M. & Paris, R.R., 1978. Study of some African toxic Euphorbiaceae containing cucurbi-
tacins. Toxicological European Research 1(5): 329-336. 
Tezuka, Y., Fan, W., Kasimu, R. & Kadota, S., 1999. Screening of crude drug extracts for prolyl 
endopeptidase inhibitory activity. Phytomedicine 6(3): 197-203. 
Than, A., Myint, M.M.S., Myint, W., Myint, T., & The, S.S.H., 1996. Anti-ulcerogenic activity of 
Plantago major Linn. Myanmar Health Sciences Research Journal 8(2): 74-77. 
Thanikaimoni, G., 1986. Evolution of Menispermaceae. Canadian Journal of Botany 64: 3130— 
3133. 
Thepenier, P., Jacquier, M.J., Massiot, G., Le Men-Olivier, L. & Delaude, C, 1990. Alkaloids from 
seeds of Strychnos variabilis and S. longicaudata. Phytochemistry 29(2): 686-687. 
Thioune, O., Sène, CT., Ngom, S., Diop, A.B., Bassène, E., Faye, B. & Lo, L, 2002. Préparation d'un 
sirop a base de racines de Bakis (Tinospora bakis) et évaluation de son activité cholérétique chez 
le rat. Dakar Médical 47(1): 60-63. 
Thirakul, S., 1983. Manuel de dendrologie. Centre National de Développement des Forêts 
(CENADEFOR), Yaoundé, Cameroun. 640 pp. 
Thomas, M.C., Heppner, J.B., Woodruff, R.E., Weems, H.V., Steck, G.J. & Fasulo, T.R., 2005. Medi-
terranean fruit fly, Ceratitis capitata (Wiedemann) (Insecta: Diptera: Tephritidae). [Internet] In-
stitute of Food and Agricultural Sciences, University of Florida, Florida. 
<http://creatures.ifas.ufl.edu>. Accessed May 2007. 
Thorne Research, 2005. Sambucus nigra (elderberry): monograph. Alternative Medicine Review 
10(1): 51-55. 
Thorold, CA., 1975. Diseases of cocoa. Clarendon Press, Oxford, United Kingdom. 433 pp. 
Thulin, M., 1983. Leguminosae of Ethiopia. Opera Botanica 68: 1-223. 
Thulin, M., 1987. Bourreria (Boraginaceae) in tropical Africa. Nordic Journal of Botany 7(4): 413-
417. 
Thulin, M., 1989. Fabaceae (Leguminosae). In: Hedberg, I. & Edwards, S. (Editors). Flora of Ethio-
pia. Volume 3. Pittosporaceae to Araliaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, 
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, 
Sweden, pp. 49-251. 
Thulin, M., 1993a. Fabaceae (Leguminosae). In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. Volume 1. 
Pteridophyta; Gymnospermae; Angiospermae (Annonaceae-Fabaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens, 
Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 341-465. 
Thulin, M., 1993b. Menispermaceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. Volume 1. Pterido-
phyta; Gymnospermae; Angiospermae (Annonaceae-Fabaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 
Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 25-28. 
LITERATURE 755 
Thulin, M., 1993c. Nyctaginaceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. Volume 1. Pterido-
phyta; Gymnospermae; Angiospermae (Annonaceae-Fabaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, 
Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 168-175. 
Thulin, M., 1999. Kirkiaceae. In: Thulin, M. (Editor). Flora of Somalia. Volume 2. Angiospermae 
(Tiliaceae-Apiaceae). Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom, pp. 182—183. 
TICAH, 2006. Using our traditions: a herbal and nutritional guide for Kenyan families. Trust for 
Indigenous Culture and Health, Nairobi, Kenya. 194 pp. 
Tilak, J.C., Adhikari, S. & Devesagayam, T.P., 2004. Antioxidant properties of Plumbago zeylanica, 
an Indian medicinal plants and its active ingredient, plumbagin. Redox Report 9(4): 219-227. 
Timberlake, J.R., 1987. Ethnobotany of the Pokot of Northern Kenya. East African Herbarium, 
Nairobi, Kenya & Centre for Economic Botany, Royal Botanic Gardens Kew, Richmond, United 
Kingdom. 106 pp. 
Timberlake, J., Golding, J. & Clarke, P., 2004. Niassa botanical expedition June 2003. Occasional 
Publications in Biodiversity No 12. Biodiversity Foundation for Africa, Famona, Bulawayo, Zim-
babwe. 43 pp. 
Timmins, P. & Court, W.E., 1975. Leaf alkaloids of Rauwolfia obscura. Planta Medica 27(2): 105-
111. 
Titanji, V.P.K., Ayafor, J.F., Mulufi, J.P. & Mbacham, W.F., 1987. In vitro killing of Onchocerca 
volvulus (Filaroidea) adults and microfilariae by selected Cameroonian medicinal plant extracts. 
Fitoterapia 58(5): 338-339. 
Tits, M., Damas, J., Quetin-Leclercq, J. & Angenot, L., 1991. From ethnobotanical uses of Strych-
nos henningsii to antiinflammatories, analgesics and antispasmodics. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 34(2-3): 261-267. 
Tiwari, G., Shah, P. & Tiwari, J.P., 2002. Effect of sowing method and seed rate on growth and 
yield of ashwagandha (Withania somnifera (L.) Dunal) under rainfed condition. Agricultural Sci-
ence Digest 22(3): 201-202. 
Tiwari, R.D., Srivastava, K.C., Shukla, S. & Bajpai, R.K., 1967. Chemical examination of the fixed 
oil from the seeds of Cordia myxa. Planta Medica 15(3): 240-244. 
Tiwaru, S. & Singh, A., 2005. Alterations in carbohydrate and the protein metabolism of the harm-
ful freshwater snail vector Lymnaea acuminata induced by the Euphorbia tirucalli latex extract. 
Environmental Research 99: 378-386. 
Tizard, LR. & Ramamoorthy, L., 2004. Aloes and the immune system. In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). 
Aloes: the genus Aloe. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States, pp. 311-332. 
Togola, A., Diallo, D., Dembélé, S., Barsett, H. & Paulsen, B.S., 2005. Ethnopharmacological survey 
of different uses of seven medicinal plants from Mali (West Africa) in the regions Doila, Kolokani 
and Siby. Journal of Ethnobiology and Ethnomedicine 1: 7-15. 
Toirambe, B.B., 1989. Les plantes antipaludiques de Kisangani (Haut-Zaïre). Mémoire inédit, Fa-
culté des Sciences, Université de Kisangani, Kisangani, DR Congo. 112 pp. 
Tokarnia, C.H., Canella, C.F.C. & Dobereiner, J., 1973. Intoxicacao experimental em bovinos pelos 
frutos de Solanum aculeatissimum. Pesquisa Agropecuaria Brasileira Veterinaria 8(6): 35-39. 
Tokuoka, T., 2007. Molecular phylogenetic analysis of Euphorbiaceae sensu stricto based on plastid 
and nuclear DNA sequences and ovule and seed character evolution. Journal of Plant Research 
120(4): 511-522. 
Tomlinson, P.B., 1986. The botany of mangroves. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United 
Kingdom. 413 pp. 
Tona, L., Kambu, K., Ngimbi, N., Cimanga, K. & Vlietinck, A.J., 1998. Antiamoebic and phyto-
chemical screening of some Congolese medicinal plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 61(1): 57-
65. 
Tona, L., Kambu, K., Mesia, K., Cimanga, K., Apers, S., De Bruyne, T., Pieters, L., Totte, J. & Vli-
etinck, A.J., 1999. Biological screening of traditional preparations from some medicinal plants 
used as antidiarrhoeal in Kinshasa, Congo. Phytomedicine 6(1): 59-66. 
Tona, L., Kambu, K, Ngimbi, N., Mesia, K., Penge, O., Lusakibanza, M., Cimanga, K., De Bruyne, 
T., Apers, S., Totté, J., Pieters, L. & Vlietinck, A.J., 2000. Antiamoebic and spasmolitic activities 
of extracts from some antidiarroeal traditional preparations used in Kinshasa, Congo. Phy-
tomedicine 7: 31-38. 
756 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Tona, L., Cimanga, R.K., Mesia, K., Musuamba, C.T., De Bruyne, T., Apers, S., Hernans, N., Van 
Miert, S., Pieters, L., Totté, J. & Vlietink, A.J., 2004. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of extracts 
and fractions from seven medicinal plants used in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 93: 27-32. 
Torre, A.R. & Hillcoat, D., 1956. Caesalpinioideae. In: Exell, A.W. & Mendonça, F.A. (Editors). 
Conspectus Florae Angolensis 2(2). Ministerio do Ultramar, Lisbon, Portugal, pp. 162-253. 
Torres-Acosta, A.A., Martinez-Madrid, M., Loveday, D.C. & Silsbee, M.R., 2005. Nopal and Aloe 
vera additions in concrete: electrochemical behavior of the reinforcing steel. Corrosion 2005. 11 
pp. 
Toruan-Purba, A.V., 1999a. Cassia L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, 
R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 181-185. 
Toruan-Purba, A.V., 1999b. Senna Miller. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, 
R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 442-447. 
Tosco, R.B., 2005. La flora endémica de Cabo Verde un Tesoro a conserver. Rincones del Atlantico 
2. 
Tra Bi, F.H., Kouamé, F.N. & Traoré, D., 2005. Utilisation of climbers in two forest reserves in 
West Côte d'Ivoire. In: Bongers, F., Parren, M.P.E. & Traoré, D. (Editors). Forest climbing plants 
of West Africa. Diversity, ecology and management. CABI Publishing, Wallingford, United King-
dom, pp. 167-181. 
Tra Bi, F.H., Kouamé, N.F., Traoré, D. & van der Maesen, L.J.G., 1999. Les lianes dans l'entretien 
bucco-dentaire en Côte d'Ivoire. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 13: 65-70. 
Tran Cong Khanh, 2001a. Argemone mexicana L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphat-
sara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 
2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 82-85. 
Tran Cong Khanh, 2001b. Cerbera L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Edi-
tors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Backhuys 
Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 151-155. 
Tran Dinh Ly, 1998. Cerbera L. In: Sosef, M.S.M., Hong, L.T. & Prawirohatmodjo, S. (Editors). 
Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 5(3). Timber trees: Lesser-known timbers. Backhuys Pub-
lishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 154-156. 
Traoré, A, Datte, Y.J., Offoumou, A.M., Aka, K.J. & Sawadogo, L.L., 1999. Anti-hypertensive ef-
fects of an aqueous extract from Jatropha gossypiifolia (Euphorbiaceae) on the arterial pression 
of mammals. Revue de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 13: 41-48. 
Tredgold, M.H., 1986. Food plants of Zimbabwe. Mambo Press, Gweru, Zimbabwe. 153 pp. 
Trigunayat, A., Raghavendra, M., Singh, R.K., Bhattacharya, A.K. & Acharya, S.B., 2007. Neuro-
protective effect of Withania somnifera (WS) in cerebral ischemia-reperfusion and long-term hy-
poperfusion induced alterations in rats. Journal of Natural Remedies 7(2): 234-246. 
Troupin, G., 1951. Menispermaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., Demaret, F., Germain, R., Gilbert, 
G., Hauman, L., Homes, M., Jurion, F., Lebrun, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). 
Flore du Congo belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 2. Institut National pour 
l'Étude Agronomique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 202-255. 
Troupin, G., 1956. Menispermaceae. In: Turrill, W.B. & Milne-Redhead, E. (Editors). Flora of 
Tropical East Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom. 32 pp. 
Troupin, G., 1960. Menispermaceae. In: Exell, A.W. & Wild, H. (Editors). Flora Zambesiaca. Vol-
ume 1, part 1. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United 
Kingdom, pp. 150-171. 
Troupin, G., 1962. Monographie des Menispermaceae africaines. Mémoires in-8. Académie Royale 
des Sciences d'Outre-Mer, Classe des Sciences Naturelles et Médicales, Nouvelle série 8(2), Brus-
sels, Belgium. 313 pp. 
Troupin, G. & Conçalves, M.L., 1973. Menispermaceae. In: Fernandes, A. (Editor). Flora de Mo-
çambique. No 7. Junta de Investigaçôes do Ultramar, Lisbon, Portugal. 26 pp. 
Tsai, CS., Guédé-Guina, F., Smith, M.O., Vangah Manda, M. & Ochillo, R.F., 1995. Isolation of 
cholinergic active ingredients in aqueous extracts of Mareya micrantha using the longitudinal 
LITERATURE 757 
muscle of isolated guinea-pig ileum as a pharmacological activity marker. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 45(3): 215-222. 
Tshiamala-Tshibangu, N., Gbeli, Essimbi, E.P. & Ndjigba, J.D., 1999. Utilisation des produits fo-
restiers autres que le bois (PFAB) au Cameroun : cas du projet forestier du Mont Koupé. Revue 
de Médecines et Pharmacopées Africaines 13: 19-32. 
Tshibangu, J.N., Chifundera, K., Kaminsky, R., Wright, A.D. & König, G.M., 2002. Screening of 
African medicinal plants for antimicrobial and enzyme inhibitory activity. Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 80: 25-35. 
Tshibangu, J.N., Wright, A.D. & König, G.M., 2003. HPLC isolation of the anti-plasmodially active 
bisbenzylisoquinone alkaloids present in roots of Cissampelos mucronata. Phytochemical Analy-
sis 14: 13-22. 
Tshikalange, T.E., Meyer, J.J.M. & Hussein, A.A., 2005. Antimicrobial activity, toxicity and the 
isolation of a bioactive compound from plants used to treat sexually transmitted diseases. Journal 
of Ethnopharmacology 96(3): 515-519. 
Tsopmo, A., Ngnokam, D., Ngamga, D., Ayafor, J.F. & Sterner, O., 1999. Urea derivatives from 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana. Journal of Natural Products 62: 1435-1436. 
Tulp, M. & Bohlin, L., 2005. Rediscovery of known natural compounds: nuisance or goldmine? Bio-
organic & Medicinal Chemistry 13(17): 5274-5282. 
Turner, CE., Elsohly, M.A. & Boeren, E.G., 1980. Constituents of Cannabis sativa L. 17. A review 
of the natural constituents. Journal of Natural Products 43(2): 169-234. 
Twum-Boateng, M., 2003. Antibacterial properties of Mallotus oppositifolius and Dissotis rotundi-
folia. B.Pharm. Thesis, Department of Pharmaceutics, Faculty of Pharmacy, KNUST, Kumasi, 
Ghana. 43 pp. 
Tyiso, S. & Bhat, R.B., 1998. Medicinal plants used for child welfare in the Transkei region of the 
Eastern Cape (South Africa). Journal of Applied Botany 72(3-4): 92-98. 
Uddin Ahmad, V., Atta-ur-Rahman, Rasheed, T., Habib-ur-Rahman & Khan, A.Q., 1987. Cohirsine, 
a novel isoquinolone alkaloid from Cocculus hirsutus. Tetrahedron 43(24): 5865-5872. 
Uddin Ahmad, V., Mohammad, F.V. & Rasheed, T., 1987. Hirsudiol, a triterpenoid alcohol from 
Cocculus hirsutus. Phytochemistry 26: 793-794. 
Udoessien, E.I. & Ifon, E.T., 1992. Chemical evaluation of the nutritive value of the fruit of Sapium 
ellipticum (Höchst.) Pax. Tropical Science 32(2): 109-113. 
Udosen, E.O. & Ojong, S., 1998. Hepatotoxic activity of Sacoglottis gabonensis in rats. Pharmaceu-
tical Biology 36(5): 368-371. 
Ueda, M., Asano, M., Sawai, Y. & Yamamura, S., 1999. Leaf-movement factors of nyctinastic plant, 
Phyllanthus urinaria L. The universal mechanism for the regulation of nyctinastic leaf-
movement. Tetrahedron 55(18): 5781-5792. 
Uhegbu, F.O. & Maduagwu, E.N., 1995. Occurrence of nitrosatable amines in some Nigerian me-
dicinal plants. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 55(5): 643—649. 
Ukwe, C.V., 2004. Evaluation of the anti-ulcer activity of aqueous stem-bark extract of Hymeno-
cardia acida (family - Euphorbiaceae). Nigerian Journal of Pharmaceutical Research 3(1): 86-90. 
Ulubelen, A., Oksuz, S., Mabry, T.J., Dellamonica, G. & Chopin, J., 1982. C-Glycosylflavonoids 
from Passiflora pittieri, P. alata, P. ambigua and Adenia mannii. Journal of Natural Products 45: 
783. 
Uma Devi, P. & Kamath, R., 2003. Radiosensitizing effect of withaferin A combined with hyper-
thermia on mouse fibrosarcoma and melanoma. Journal of Radiation Research 44: 1-6. 
Umano, K., Nakahara, K., Shoji, A. & Shibamoto, T., 1999. Aroma chemicals isolated and identified 
from leaves of Aloe arborescens Mill. var. natalensis Berger. Journal of Agricultural and Food 
Chemistry 47(9): 3702-3705. 
Umoh, B.I., Okon, B.I., James, I.O. & Jacob, E.S., 2004. Effect of feeding varying levels of Mi-
crodesmis puberula and Alchornea cordifolia on the body size and carcass component of West Af-
rica Goats (WAD). Global Journal of Agricultural Sciences 3(1-2): 45-51. 
Unander, D.W., 1991. Callus induction in Phyllanthus species and inhibition of viral DNA poly-
merase and reverse transcriptase by callus extracts. Plant Cell Reports 10: 461-466. 
Unander, D.W., Webster, G.L. & Blumberg, B.S., 1990. Records of usage or assays in Phyllanthus 
(Euphorbiaceae) 1. Subgenera Isocladus, Kirganella, Cicca and Emblica. Journal of Ethnophar-
macology 30: 233-264. 
758 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Unander, D.W., Webster, G.L. & Blumberg, B.S., 1991. Uses and bioassays in Phyllanthus (Eu-
phorbiaceae): a compilation. 2. The subgenus Phyllanthus. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 34: 97-
133. 
Unander, D.W., Webster, G.L. & Blumberg, B.S., 1995. Usage and bioassays in Phyllanthus (Eu-
phorbiaceae). 4. Clustering of antiviral uses and other effects. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 45: 
1-18. 
Unnikrishnan, M.K., Desai, V.B. & Guruswamy, M.N., 1987. Hypothermic activity of the ethanolic 
extract of the latex of Synadenium grantii. Fitoterapia 58(4): 277-279. 
UNODC (United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime), 1997. Cannabis as an illicit crop: recent de-
velopments in cultivation and product quality; Cannabis as a licit crop: recent developments in 
Europe; Cannabis as an illicit narcotic crop: a review of the global situation of cannabis consump-
tion, trafficking and production; The health effects of cannabis: key issues of policy relevance; 
New trends in illicit cannabis cultivation in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland; The Cannabis sativa L. fingerprint as a tool in forensic investigations; CBN and D9-THC 
concentration ratio as an indicator for the age of stored marijuana samples. [Internet] Bulletin on 
Narcotics, 1997, Issue 1. <http://www.unodc.org/unodc/bulletin/bulletin_1997-01-01_l.html>. Ac-
cessed September 2005. 
United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime (UNODC), 2005. World Drug Report. 2 Volumes. [In-
ternet] <http://www.unodc.org/unodc/world_drug_report.html>. Accessed September 2005. 
Upadhyay, N., Makoveychuk, A.Y., Nikolaeva, L.A. & Batygina, T.B., 1992. Organogenesis and 
somatic embryogenesis in leaf callus culture of Rauwolfia caffra Sond. Journal of Plant Physiol-
ogy 140(2): 218-222. 
Upreti, K.K., Das, M. & Khanna, S.K., 1991. Biochemical toxicology of argemone oil. 1. Effect on 
hepatic cytochrome P-450 and xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes. Journal of Applied Toxicology 
11(3): 203-209. 
Usher, G., 1974. A dictionary of plants used by man. Constable, London, United Kingdom. 619 pp. 
Uzabakiliho, B., Largeau, C. & Casadevall, E., 1987. Latex constituents of Euphorbia candelabrum, 
Euphorbia grantii, Euphorbia tirucalli and Synadenium grantii. Phytochemistry 26(1): 3041-
3046. 
Valadares, M.C., Carrucha, S.G., Accorsi, W. & Queiroz, M.L.S, 2006. Euphorbia tirucalli L. modu-
lates myelopoiesis and enhances the resistance of tumour-bearing mice. International Immuno-
pharmacology 6(2): 294-299. 
Valeriote, F.A., Corbett, T.H., Grieco, P.A., Moher, E.D., Collins, J.L. & Fleck, T.J., 1998. Antican-
cer activity of glaucarubinone analogues. Oncology Research 10(4): 201-208. 
Valsaraj, R., Pushpangadan, P., Smitt, U.W., Adsersen, A. & Nyman, U., 1997. Antimicrobial 
screening of selected medicinal plants from India. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 58(2): 75-83. 
Valverde, J.M, Valero, D., Martinez-Romero, D., Guillen, F., Castillo, S. & Serrano, M., 2005. Novel 
edible coating based on Aloe vera gel to maintain table grape quality and safety. Journal of Agri-
cultural and Food Chemistry 53(20): 7807-7813. 
Vamsidhar, I., Mohammed, A.H, Nataraj, B., Rao, CM. & Mullangi, R., 2000. Antinociceptive ac-
tivity of Euphorbia heterophylla roots. Fitoterapia 71(5): 562—563. 
van Beek, T.A., 1984. Pharmacognostical studies of some Tabernaemontana species. PhD thesis, 
University of Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands. 163 pp. 
van Beek, T.A. & van Gessel, M.A.J.T., 1988. Alkaloids of Tabernaemontana species. In: Pelletier, 
S.W. (Editor). Alkaloids: Chemical and biological perspectives. Vol. 6. Wiley, New York, United 
States, pp. 75-226. 
van Beek, T.A., de Smidt, C. & Verpoorte, R., 1985. Phytochemical investigation of Tabernaemon-
tana crassa. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 14(2-3): 315-318. 
van Beek, T.A., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1984. Alkaloids of Tabernaemontana eg-
landulosa. Tetrahedron 40(4): 737-748. 
van Beek, T.A., Kuijlaars, F.L.C., Thomassen, P.H.A.M., Verpoorte, R. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 
1984a. Antimicrobially active alkaloids from Tabernaemontana pachysiphon. Phytochemistry 
23(8): 1771-1778. 
van Beek, T.A., Verpoorte, R., Baerheim Svendsen, A., Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. & Bisset, N.G., 1984b. 
Tabernaemontana L. (Apocynaceae): a review of its taxonomy, phytochemistry, ethnobotany and 
pharmacology. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 10(1): 1-156. 
LITERATURE 759 
van Bergen, M.A., 1996. Revision of Catharanthus G.Don. Series of revisions of Apocynaceae 41. 
Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 96-3, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 9-46. 
van Dam, N.M., Verpoorte, R. & van der Meijden, E., 1994. Extreme differences in pyrrolizidine 
alkaloid levels between leaves of Cynoglossum officinale L. Phytochemistry 37(4): 1013-1016. 
Van Damme, P., 1990. Reasons for the extreme drought tolerance of Euphorbia tirucalli. In: Scaife, 
A. (Editor). First Congress of the European Society of Agronomy, Paris & European Society of 
Agronomy, Colmar, France. 
Van Damme, P. & Van den Eynden, V., 2000. Succulent and xerophytic plants used by the Topnaar 
of Namibia. Haseltonia 7: 53-62. 
van den Bosch, C.A., 2004. Is endemic Burkitt's lymphoma an alliance between three infections 
and a tumour promoter? Lancet Oncology 5(12): 738-746. 
Van den Eynden, V., Van Damme, P. & de Wolf, J., 1994. Inventaire et modelage de la gestion du 
couvert végétal pérenne dans une zone forestière du sud du Sénégal. Rapport final, Partie C: 
Etude ethnobotanique. University of Gent, Gent, Belgium. I l l pp. 
van der Heijden, R., 1989. Indole alkaloids in cell and tissue cultures of Tabernaemontana species. 
PhD thesis, University of Leiden, Leiden, Netherlands. 184 pp. 
van der Heijden, R., Wijnsma, R., Verpoorte, R., Harkes, P.A.A., Svendsen, A.B. & Baerheim 
Svendsen, A., 1986. The influence of nutrient media, auxins and cytokinins on the initiation of 
alkaloid producing callus on leaf expiants of eight species of Tabernaemontana. Fitoterapia 57(6): 
415-421. 
van der Heijden, R., Jacobs, D.I., Snoeijer, W., Hallard, D. & Verpoorte, R., 2004. The Catharan-
thus alkaloids: pharmacognosy and biotechnology. Current Medicinal Chemistry 11(5): 607—628. 
van der Hooft, CS., Hoekstra, A., de Smet, P.A.G.M. & Stricker, B.H.C., 2005. Thyreotoxicose na 
gebruik van ashwagandha. Nederlands Tijdschrift voor de Geneeskunde 149: 2637-2638. 
van der Ploeg, J., 1983. A revision of Isonema R.Br, and Pycnobotrya Benth. (Apocynaceae). Mede-
delingen Landbouwhogeschool Wageningen 83-4. Wageningen, Netherlands. 20 pp. 
van der Wel, H., Larson, G., Hladik, A., Hladik, C.-M., Hellekant, G. & Glaser, D., 1988. Isolation 
and characterization of pentadin, the sweet principle of Pentadiplandra brazzeana Bâillon. 
Chemical Senses 14(1): 75-79. 
van der Werf, H.M.G., 1994. Crop physiology of fiber hemp (Cannabis sativa L.). PhD thesis, Wa-
geningen Agricultural University, Wageningen, Netherlands. 153 pp. 
van der Zon, A.P.M. & Grubben, G.J.H., 1976. Les légumes-feuilles spontanés et cultivés du Sud-
Dahomey. Communication 65. Département des Recherches Agronomiques, Koninklijk Instituut 
voor de Tropen, Amsterdam, Netherlands. I l l pp. 
van Dilst, F.J.H., 1995. Baissea A.DC. Series of Revisions of Apocynaceae 39. Bulletin du Jardin 
Botanique National de Belgique 64: 89-178. 
van Dilst, F.J.H. & Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1991. Rauvolfia L. in Africa and Madagascar. Series of 
revisions of Apocynaceae 33. Bulletin du Jardin Botanique Nationale de Belgique 61(1—2): 21-69. 
van Duuren, B.L. & Sivak, A., 1968. Tumor-promoting agents from Croton tiglium L. and their 
mode of action. Cancer Research 28(11): 2349-2356. 
van Heerden, F.R., Vleggaar, R. & Anderson, L.A.P., 1988. Structure elucidation of thesiuside, a 
bufadienolide glycoside from Thesium lineatum. South African Journal of Chemistry 41(2): 39— 
41. 
van Holthoon, F.L., 1999. Phyllanthus L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, 
R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 
1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 381-392. 
van Hoof, L., Vanden Berghe, D.A., Hatfield, G.M. & Vlietinck, A.J., 1984. Plant antiviral agents; 
V. 3-methoxyflavones as potent inhibitors of viral-induced block of cell synthesis. Planta Medica 
50: 513-517. 
van Jaarsveld, E. & Forster, P.I., 2001. Asphodelaceae. In: Eggli, U. (Editor). Illustrated handbook 
of succulent plants: Monocotyledons. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Germany, pp. 232-246. 
Van Puyvelde, L., 1988. Contribution to the study of Rwandese medicinal plants. PhD thesis, Lei-
den, Netherlands. 155 pp. 
Van Puyvelde, L., Geiser, I., Rwangabo, P.-C. & Sebikali, B., 1983. Rwandese herbal remedies used 
against gonorrhoea. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 8: 279-286. 
760 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Van Puyvelde, L., Geysen, D., Ayobangira, F.X., Hakizamungu, E., Nshimiyimana, A. & Kalisa, A., 
1985. Screening of medicinal plants of Rwanda for acaricidal activity. Journal of Ethnopharma-
cology 13(2): 209-215. 
van Soest, L.J.M., Mastebroek, H.D. & de Meijer, E.P.M., 1993. Genetic resources and breeding: a 
necessity for the success of industrial crops. Industrial Crops and Products 1: 283-288. 
van Steenis, C.G.G.J., 1949. Plumbaginaceae. In: van Steenis, C.G.G.J. (General Editor). Flora 
Malesiana. Series 1. Vol. 4. Noordhoff-Kolff N.V., Djakarta, Indonesia, pp. 107-112. 
van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H., 2003. Spigelia anthelmia L. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsa-
ra, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. 
Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 379—380. 
van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Hendrian, R., 2001. Ochrosia A.L. Juss. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. 
& Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and 
poisonous plants 2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 386-389. 
van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Horsten, S.F.A.J., 2001. Thevetia peruviana (Pers.) K. Schum. In: van 
Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 
12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 544—546. 
van Weeren, P.R., Morales, J.A., Rodriguez, L.L., Cedeno, H., Villalobos, J. & Poveda, L.J., 1999. 
Mortality supposedly due to intoxication by pyrrolizidine alkaloids from Heliotropium indicum in 
a horse population in Costa Rica: a case report. Veterinary Quarterly 21(2): 59-62. 
van Weizen, P.C., 2003. Microstachys chamaelea (L.) Müll. Arg. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bun-
yapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poison-
ous plants 3. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, p. 301. 
van Weizen, P.C. & Esser, H.J., 2001. Croton L. In: van Valkenburg, J.L.C.H. & Bunyapraphat-
sara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 12(2): Medicinal and poisonous plants 
2. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 198-203. 
van Wyk, P., 1972-1974. Trees of the Kruger National Park. 2 volumes. Purnell, Cape Town, South 
Africa. 597 pp. 
van Wyk, B.E. & Gericke, N., 2000. People's plants: a guide to useful plants of southern Africa. 
Briza Publications, Pretoria, South Africa. 351 pp. 
van Wyk, A.J. & Wiechers, A., 1974. Constitution of a new hasubanan ester-ketal alkaloid from 
Stephania abyssinica. Journal of the South African Chemical Institute 27(2): 95—97. 
van Wyk, B.E., van Heerden, F. & van Oudtshoorn, B., 2002. Poisonous plants of South Africa. 
Briza Publications, Pretoria, South Africa. 288 pp. 
van Wyk, B.E., van Oudtshoorn, B. & Gericke, N., 1997. Medicinal plants of South Africa. Briza 
Publications, Pretoria, South Africa. 304 pp. 
van Zyl, H., Mander, M. & Antrobus, G., 2001. Getting started in the indigenous natural products 
business: a manual for entrepreneurs and development workers. ATRIP Biodiversity Project. 
[Internet] <http://www.econ4env.co.za/archives/ATRIP/ indigenousl.pdf> Accessed October 2005. 
Vanhaelen-Fastré, R., Vanhaelen, M., Diallo, B. & Breyne, H., 1990. Canthin-6-one alkaloids from 
Pierreodendron africanum stem barks. Planta Medica 56(2): 241-242. 
Vastag, B., 2005. Ibogaine therapy: a 'vast, uncontrolled experiment'. Science 308: 345-346. 
Vauquelin, G., De Keyser, J., Kanyinda, B. & Vanhaelen, M., 1989. (±)Tetrahydroanisocycline and 
(±)tetrahydropalmatine binding to Dl and D2 dopaminergic receptors in human putamen. Neuro-
chemistry International 15(3): 321-324. 
Veenendaal, E.M., Abebrese, I.K., Walsh, M.F. & Swaine, M.D., 1996. Root hemiparasitism in a 
West African rainforest tree Okoubaka aubrevillei (Santalaceae). New Phytologist 134(3): 487-
493. 
Velayaudham, K., Rajendran, P., Radhamani, S. & Krishnarajan, J., 2000. Decomposition and ni-
trogen release of Kattavarai (Cassia nigricans Vahl.). Madras Agricultural Journal 86(10-12): 
670-672. 
Venter, A.M. & Scott, A.J., 1999. Lycium mascarenense (Solanaceae), a new species from the Mas-
carene Islands, Madagascar and south-eastern Africa. South African Journal of Botany 65(5-6): 
428-430. 
Venter, F. & Venter, J.-A., 1996. Making the most of indigenous trees. Briza publications, Cape-
town, South Africa. 304 pp. 
LITERATURE 761 
Venturini del Greco, G. & Rademakers, L., 2006. The jatropha energy system: an integrated ap-
proach to decentralized and sustainable energy production at the village level. [Internet] 
Ingegneria senza Frontiere, Gruppo Jatropha, Florence, Italy. 4 pp. 
<http://www.isf.lilik.it/files/jatropha/jes.pdf>. Accessed January 2007. 
Vercauteren, J., Kerharo, J., Morfaux, A.-M., Massiot, G., Le Men-Olivier, L. & Le Men, J., 1980. 
Alcaloides des écorces de tronc et des écorces de racine de l'Hunteria elliotii. Phytochemistry 19: 
1959-1961. 
Verdcourt, B., 1968. Caprifoliaceae. In: Milne-Redhead, E. & Polhill, R.M. (Editors). Flora of Tropi-
cal East Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United 
Kingdom. 4 pp. 
Verdcourt, B., 1971. Plantaginaceae. In: Milne-Redhead, E. & Polhill, R.M. (Editors). Flora of 
Tropical East Africa. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, 
United Kingdom. 7 pp. 
Verdcourt, B., 1989. Melianthaceae. In: Hedberg, I. & Edwards, S. (Editors). Flora of Ethiopia. 
Volume 3. Pittosporaceae to Araliaceae. The National Herbarium, Addis Ababa University, Addis 
Ababa, Ethiopia and Department of Systematic Botany, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
pp. 511-512. 
Verdcourt, B., 1991. Boraginaceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 125 pp. 
Verdcourt, B., 1996. Piperaceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 24 pp. 
Verdcourt, B., 2005. Lycopodiaceae. In: Beentje, H.J. & Ghazanfar, S.A. (Editors). Flora of Tropical 
East Africa. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, Richmond, United Kingdom. 19 pp. 
Verdcourt, B. & Trump, E.C., 1969. Common poisonous plants of East Africa. Collins, London, 
United Kingdom. 254 pp. 
Verdoorn, I.C., 1963. Salvadoraceae. In: Dyer, R.A. & Codd, L.E. (Editors). Flora of southern Africa. 
Volume 26. Botanical Research Institute, Department of Agricultural Technical Services, Preto-
ria, South Africa, pp. 128-134. 
Verger, P.F., 1995. Ewé: The use of plants in Yoruba society. Editoria Schwarcz, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 
744 pp. 
Vergiat, A.M., 1970. Plantes magiques et médicinales des féticheurs de l'Oubangui (Région de Ban-
gui). Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et de Botanique Appliquée 17: 295-339. 
Verma, V. & Lall, S.B., 2000. Effect of leaf and stem extract of Cocculus pendulus on epididymal 
sperm of swiss albino mice. Indian Journal of Environment and Toxicology 10(2): 93-95. 
Verma, P.C., Singh, D., Rahman, L.U., Gupta M.M. & Banerjee, S., 2002. In vitro-studies in Plum-
bago zeylanica: rapid micropropagation and establishment of higher plumbagin yielding hairy 
root cultures. Journal of Plant Physiology 159(5): 547-552. 
Verpoorte, R. & Bohlin, L., 1976. Screening of African Strychnos species for convulsant and muscle-
relaxant effects. Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica 13: 245-250. 
Verpoorte, R., Contin, A. & Memelink, J., 2002. Biotechnology for the production of plant secondary 
metabolites. Phytochemistry Reviews 1: 13-25. 
Verpoorte, R., Groenink, H. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1980. Minor alkaloids and sterols in Strych-
nos afzelii. Planta Medica 38: 388-390. 
Verpoorte, R., Kode, E.W., van Doorne, H. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1978. Antimicrobial effect of 
the alkaloids from Strychnos afzelii Gilg. Planta Medica 33: 237-242. 
Verpoorte, R., Joosse, F.T., Groenink, H. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 1981. Alkaloids from Strychnos 
floribunda. Planta Medica 42: 32-36. 
Verpoorte, R., Bohlin, L., Dwuna-Badu, D., Rolfsen, W. & Strobom, J., 1983a. 11-methoxy-
macusine A. A new quaternary alkaloid from Strychnos angolensis. Journal of Natural Products 
46: 572- 575. 
Verpoorte, R., Van Beek, T.A., Thomassen, P.H.A.M., Aandewiel, J. & Baerheim Svendsen, A., 
1983b. Screening of antimicrobial activity of some plants belonging to the Apocynaceae and Lo-
ganiaceae. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 8(3): 287-302. 
Vethaviyasar, N. & John, D., 1982. 16-anhydro-3-acetyl-gitoxigenin in Adenum obesum. Planta 
Medica 44: 123-124. 
762 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Viana, V.R.C., Tavares, E.S. & Mattos, H., 2000. Propagaçâo "in vitro" de Potomorphe umbellata 
para a obtençâo de clones produtores de 4-nerolidilcatecol. Revista Brasileira de Farmâcia 
81(1/2): 43-47. 
Vickery, A.R., 1983a. Plumbaginaceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 7, part 
1. Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 181-184. 
Vickery, A.R., 1983b. Salvadoraceae. In: Launert, E. (Editor). Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 7, part 1. 
Flora Zambesiaca Managing Committee, London, United Kingdom, pp. 374-380. 
Vidigal, M.P., 2002. Caesalpiniaceae. In: Martins, E.S., Diniz, M.A., Paiva, J., Gomes, I. & Gomes, 
S. (Editors). Flora de Cabo Verde: Plantas vasculares. No 44. Instituto de Investigaçâo Cientifica 
Tropical, Lisbon, Portugal & Instituto Nacional de Investigaçâo e Desenvolvimento Agrârio, 
Praia, Cape Verde. 44 pp. 
Vieux, A.S. & Kabele Ngiefu, C , 1970. Etude de quelques espèces oléagineuses de la République 
Démocratique du Congo. Oléagineux 25: 395-399. 
Vigor, C, Fabre, N., Fourasté, I. & Moulis, C, 2002. Neoclerodane diterpenoids from Croton elute-
ria. Journal of Natural Products 65: 1180-1182. 
Vihan, V.S., Kumar, A. & Arora, N., 2007. In vitro larvicidal activity of various ethnomedicinal 
plants extract on Haemonchus contortus. Indian Journal of Animal Sciences 77: 1219-1223 
Viljoen, A.M., van Wyk, B.-E. & van Heerden, F.R., 1998. Distribution and chemotaxonomic signifi-
cance of flavonoids in Aloe (Asphodelaceae). Plant Systematics and Evolution 211(1-2): 31—42. 
Villiers, J.-F., 1973a. Octoknemaceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 15. Muséum National d'Histoire 
Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 181-192. 
Villiers, J.-F., 1973b. Pentadiplandraceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 15. Muséum National 
d'Histoire Naturelle, Paris, France, pp. 163-167. 
Villiers, J.-F., 1975. Pandaceae. Flore du Cameroun. Volume 19. Muséum National d'Histoire Na-
turelle, Paris, France, pp. 42-58. 
Vivien, J. & Fauré, J.J., 1985. Arbres et forêts denses d'Afrique Centrale. Agence de Coopération 
Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France. 565 pp. 
Vivien, J. & Fauré, J.J., 1988. Fruitiers sauvages du Cameroun. Fruits Paris 43(11): 657-676. 
Vivien, J. & Fauré, J.J., 1996. Fruitiers sauvages d'Afrique. Espèces du Cameroun. Ministère 
Français de la Coopération, Paris, France & CTA, Wageningen, Netherlands. 416 pp. 
Vlietinck, A.J., van Hoof, L., Totté, J., Lasure, A., Vanden Berghe, D.A., Rwangabo, P.C. & Mvu-
kiyumwami, J., 1995. Screening of hundred Rwandese medicinal plants for antimicrobial and an-
tiviral properties. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 46: 31-47. 
Von Euw, J. & Reichstein, T., 1948. Die Glykoside der Samen von Strophanthus nicholsonii Holm. 
Glykoside und Aglykone. 34. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 31(3): 883-892. 
Von Euw, J., Hess, H., Speiser, P. & Reichstein, T., 1951. Die Glycoside von Strophanthus inter-
medius Pax. Glycoside und Aglykone, 82. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 34(6): 1821-1833. 
Von Euw, J., Heitz, G.A.O., Hess, H., Speiser, P. & Reichstein, T., 1952. Glykoside und Aglykone, 
89. Die Glykoside von Strophanthus welwitschii. Helvetica Chimica Acta 35: 152-160. 
von Koenen, E., 2001. Medicinal, poisonous and edible plants in Namibia. Klaus Hess Verlag, Göt-
tingen, Germany. 336 pp. 
von Maydell, H.-J., 1983. Arbres et arbustes du Sahel: leurs caractéristiques et leurs utilisations. 
Schriftenreihe der GTZ 147. Deutsche Gesellschaft für Technische Zusammenarbeit (GTZ) 
GmbH, Eschborn, Germany. 531 pp. 
Vonk, G.J.A. & Leeuwenberg, A.J.M., 1989. A taxonomie revision of the genus Tabernanthe and a 
study of wood anatomy of Tabernanthe iboga. In: Leeuwenberg, A.J.M. (Editor). Series of revi-
sions of Apocynaceae 29, 30. Wageningen Agricultural University Papers 89-4. Wageningen Ag-
ricultural University, Wageningen, Netherlands, pp. 1-18. 
Vonshak, A., Barazani, O., Sathiyamoorthy, P., Shalev, R., Vardy, D. & Golan-Goldhirsh, A., 2003. 
Screening south Indian medicinal plants for antifungal activity against cutaneous pathogens. 
Phytotherapy Research 17(9): 1123-1125. 
Vonthron-Sénécheau, C , Weniger, B., Ouattara, M., Tra Bi, F., Kamenan, A., Lobstein, A., Brun, 
R. & Anton, R., 2003. In vitro antiplasmodial activity and cytotoxicity of ethnobotanically selected 
Ivorian plants. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 87(2-3): 221-225. 
LITERATURE 763 
Voorhoeve, A.G., 1965. Liberian high forest trees. A systematic botanical study of the 75 most im-
portant or frequent high forest trees, with reference to numerous related species. Pudoc, Wagen-
ingen, Netherlands. 416 pp. 
Voorhoeve, A.G., 1979. Liberian high forest trees. A systematic botanical study of the 75 most im-
portant or frequent high forest trees, with reference to numerous related species. Agricultural 
Research Reports 652, 2nd Impression. Centre for Agricultural Publishing and Documentation, 
Wageningen, Netherlands. 416 pp. 
Vrijsen, R., Everaert, L., Van Hoof, L.M., Vlietinck, A.J., Vanden Berghe, D.A. & Boeye, A., 1987. 
The poliovirus-induced shut-off of cellular protein synthesis persists in the presence of 3-
methylquercitin, a flavonoid which blocks viral protein and RNA synthesis. Antiviral Research 7: 
35-42. 
Wada, K., Kurihara, T., Yagi, M., Kobayashi, R., Kaminaga, H., Toi, K. & Haga, M., 1995. Colum-
bin isolated from Calumbae Radix affects the sleeping time of anesthetized mice. Biological and 
Pharmaceutical Bulletin 18(4): 634-636. 
Wagner, H„ Seegert, K, Gupta, M.P., Avella, M.E. & Solis, P., 1986. Cardiotonically active princi-
ples from Spigelia anthelmia. Planta Medica 5: 378-381. 
Wagner, H., Kreutzkamp, B. & Jurcic, K., 1985. Inhaltsstoffe und Pharmakologie der Okoubaka 
aubrevillei-Rinde. Planta Medica 51: 404-407. 
Waigh, R.D., Zerihun, B.M. & Euerby, M.R., 1990. Three diterpenes with a secolabdane skeleton 
from Clutia abyssinica. Phytochemistry 29(9): 2935-2938. 
Waigh, R.D., Zerihun, B.M. & Maitland, D.J., 1991. Ten 5-methylcoumarins from Clutia abys-
sinica. Phytochemistry 30(1): 333-335. 
Waihenya, R.K., Mtambo, M.M., Nkwengulila, G. & Minga, U.M., 2002. Efficacy of crude extract of 
Aloe secundiflora against Salmonella gallinarum in experimentally infected free-range chickens 
in Tanzania. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79(3): 317-323. 
Waihenya, R., Kayser, O., Hagels, H., Zessin, K.H., Mtambo, M. & Nkwengulila, G., 2003. The phy-
tochemical profile and identification of main phenolic compounds from the leaf exudate of Aloe 
secundiflora by high-performance liquid chromatography-mass spectroscopy. Phytochemical 
Analysis 14(2): 83-86. 
Waihenya, R.K., Mtambo, M.M. & Nkwengulila, G., 2002. Evaluation of the efficacy of the crude 
extract of Aloe secundiflora in chickens experimentally infected with Newcastle disease virus. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 79(3): 299-304. 
Waiton, S.R., 1986. Antibiotics and extraction of griffonin from Griffonia simplicifolia. B.Pharm. 
thesis, Faculty of Pharmacy, Kwame Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, 
Ghana. 96 pp. 
Wall, M.E., 1955. Steroidal sapogenins. 25. Survey of plants for steroidal sapogenins and other 
constituents. Journal of the American Pharmacology Association 44(7): 438. 
Wallace, A.P., Marko, K.E., Wisdom, A.P. & Dennis, E., 1990. Comparative clinical studies of three 
plant leaves as sources of protein using albino rats. Journal of the Ghana Science Association 
2(3): 81-87. 
Walter, H., 1909. Phytolaccaceae. In: Engler, A. (Editor). Das Pflanzenreich. Regni vegetabilis con-
spectus. Volume 4 (83). Verlag von Wilhelm Engelmann, Leipzig, Germany. 154 pp. 
Walters, D.E. & Hellekant, G., 2002. Interactions of the sweet protein brazzein with the sweet 
taste receptor. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 54: 10129-10133. 
Wambebe, C , Bodhankar, S., Ogbeide, O.N. & Okor, D.I., 1982. Pharmacological effects of Syn-
clisia scab rida alkaloid B on some isolated muscle preparations. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 
6(3): 255-261. 
Wambebe, C, Gamaniel, K., Akah, P.A., Kapu, A., Samson, A., Orisadipe, A.T. & Okogun, J.I., 
1997. Central and uterotonic effects of cycleanine. Indian Journal of Pharmacology 29(5): 366-
372. 
Wandji, J., Wansi, J.D., Fuendjiep, V., Dagne, E., Mulholland, D.A., Tillequin, F., Fomum, Z.T., 
Sondengam, B.L., Nkeh, B.C.-A. & Njamen, D., 2000. Sesquiterpene lactone and friedelane de-
rivative from Drypetes molunduana. Phytochemistry 54(8): 811-815. 
Wang, M.X., Cheng, H.W., Li, Y.J., Meng, L.M. & Mai, K., 1995. Herbs of the genus Phyllanthus in 
the treatment of chronic hepatitis B: observations with three preparations from different geo-
graphic sites. Journal of Laboratory and Clinical Medicine 126(4): 350-352. 
764 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Wang, X.H., Li, C.Q., Guo, X.B. & Fu, L.C., 2001. A comparative study of Phyllanthus amarus 
compound and interferon in the treatment of chronic viral hepatitis B. Southeast Asian Journal 
of Tropical Medicine and Public Health 32(1): 140-142. 
Wani, M.C., Schaumberg, J.P., Taylor, H.L., Thompson, J.B. & Wall, M.E., 1983. Plant antitumor 
agents, 19. Novel triterpenes from Maprounea africana. Journal of Natural Products 46(4): 537-
543. 
Wanjohi, J.M., Yenesew, A., Midiwo, J.O., Heydenreich, M., Peter, M.G., Dreyer, M., Reichert, M. 
& Bringmann, G., 2005. Three dimeric anthracene derivatives from the fruits of Bulbine abys-
sinica. Tetrahedron 61(10): 2667-2674. 
Wanke, S., Samain, M.-S., Vanderschaeve, L., Mathieu, G., Goetghebeur, P. & Neinhuis, C., 2006. 
Phylogeny of the genus Peperomia (Piperaceae) inferred from the trnK/matK region (cpDNA). 
Plant Biology 8: 93-102. 
Wansi, J.D., Wandje, J., Kamdem, W.A.F., Ndom, J.C., Ngeufa, H.E., Chiozem, D.D., Chi Shirri, J., 
Choudhary, M.I., Tsabang, N., Tillequin, F. & Fomum, Z.T., 2006. Triterpenoids from Drypetes 
chevalieri Beille (Euphorbiaceae). Natural Product Research 20(6): 586-592. 
Warfa, A.M., 1988. Cordia (Boraginaceae) in NE tropical Africa and tropical Arabia. Acta Universi-
tatis Upsaliensis 174, Uppsala, Sweden. 78 pp. 
Waterman, P.G., Ross, J.A.M. & McKey, D.B., 1984. Factors affecting levels of some phenolic com-
pounds, digestibility and nitrogen content of the mature leaves of Barteria fistulosa (Passi-
floraceae). Journal of Chemistry and Ecology 10: 384-401. 
Watt, J.M. & Breyer-Brandwijk, M.G., 1962. The medicinal and poisonous plants of southern and 
eastern Africa. 2nd Edition. E. and S. Livingstone, London, United Kingdom. 1457 pp. 
Weber, N., 1974. Terpenoid and other constituents of Hernandia voyoni and Anthocleista amplexi-
caulis. Phytochemistry 13: 2006-2007. 
Weber, U.S., Steffen, B. & Siegers, C.P., 1998. Antitumor activities of coumarin, 7-hydroxy-
coumarin and its glucuronide in several human tumor cell lines. Research Communications in 
Molecular Pathology and Pharmacology 99(2): 193-206. 
Webster, G.L., 1979. A revision of Margaritaria (Euphorbiaceae). Journal of the Arnold Arboretum 
60: 403-444. 
Webster, G.L., 1984. A revision of Flueggea (Euphorbiaceae). Allertonia 3(4): 259-312. 
Weenen, PL, Nkunya, M.H.H., Bray, D.H., Mwasumbi, L.B., Kinabo, L.S. & Kilimali, V.A.E.B., 
1990. Antimalarial activity of Tanzanian medicinal plants. Planta Medica 56(4): 368-370. 
Weeratunga, G., Goonetileke, A., Rolfsen, W., Bohlin, L. & Sandberg, F., 1984. Alkaloids in Strych-
nos aculeata. Acta Pharmaceutica Suecica 21(2): 135-140. 
Wegener, T. & Kraft, K., 1999. Der Spitzwegerich (Plantago lanceolata L.): Reizlinderung bei In-
fektionen der oberen Atemwege. Wiener Medizinische Wochenschrift 149(8-10): 211-216. 
Weiss, E.K., Schindler, O. & Reichstein, T., 1957. Die Glykoside der Samen von Strophanthus thol-
loni Franch. 2. Mitteilung. Glykoside und Aglykone, 179. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 
40(4): 980-1015. 
Welman, W.G., 2003. The genus Solanum (Solanaceae) in southern Africa: subgenus Leptoste-
monum, the introduced sections Acanthophora and Torva. Bothalia 33(1): 1-18. 
Welman, W.G. & Condy, G., 2003. Solanum delagoense. Flowering Plants of Africa 58: 104-110. 
Weniger, B., Lagnika, L., Vonthron-Sénécheau, C , Adjobimey, T., Gbenou, J., Moudachirou, M., 
Brun, R., Anton, R. & Sanni, A., 2004. Evaluation of ethnobotanically selected Benin medicinal 
plants for their in vitro antiplasmodial activity. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 90: 279-284. 
Whalen, M.D., 1984. Conspectus of species groups in Solanum subgenus Leptostemonum. Gentes 
Herbarum 12(4): 1-282. 
Whistler, W.A., 2000. Tropical ornamentals, a guide. Timber Press, Portland, Oregon, United 
States. 542 pp. 
White, L. & Abernathy, K., 1997. A guide to the vegetation of the Lopé Reserve, Gabon. Wildlife 
Conservation Society, New York, United States. 224 pp. 
Whitehouse, C, 1996. Nyctaginaceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. A.A. 
Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 20 pp. 
Whitehouse, C, 2002. Asphodelaceae. In: Beentje, H.J. & Ghazanfar, S.A. (Editors). Flora of Tropi-
cal East Africa. A.A. Balkema, Rotterdam, Netherlands. 20 pp. 
LITERATURE 765 
Whitson, M. & Manos, P.S., 2005. Untangling Physalis (Solanaceae) from the Physaloids: a two-
gene phylogeny of Physalinae. Systematic Botany 30: 216-230. 
WHO, 1999. WHO Monographs on selected medicinal plants. Vol. 1. [Internet]. WHO, Geneva, 
Switzerland. 295 pp. <http://whqlibdoc.who.int/puhlications/1999/9241545178.pdf>. Accessed 
January 2006. 
Wieland, R.G. & Werger, M.J.A., 1985. Land types and vegetation in the Luuq District of south-
western Somalia. Journal of Tropical Ecology 1(1): 65-87. 
Wiese, W.J. & Joubert, J.P., 2001. Suspected nitrite poisoning in pigs caused by Capsella bursa-
pastoris (L.) Medik. ('herderstassie', shepherd's purse). Journal of the South African Veterinary 
Association 72: 170-171. 
Wilczek, R., Leonard, J., Hauman, L., Hoyle, A.C., Steyaert, R., Gilbert, G. & Boutique, R., 1952. 
Caesalpiniaceae. In: Robyns, W., Staner, P., Demaret, F., Germain, R., Gilbert, G., Hauman, L., 
Homes, M., Jurion, F., Lebrun, J., Vanden Abeele, M. & Boutique, R. (Editors). Flore du Congo 
belge et du Ruanda-Urundi. Spermatophytes. Volume 3. Institut National pour l'Étude Agrono-
mique du Congo belge, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 234-554. 
Wild, H., 1974. Geobotanical anomalies in Rhodesia 4. The vegetation of arsenical soils. Kirkia 9(2): 
243-264. 
Wild, H. & Phipps, J.B., 1963. Simaroubaceae. In: Exell, A.W., Fernandes, A. & Wild, H. (Editors). 
Flora Zambesiaca. Volume 2, part 1. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administra-
tions, London, United Kingdom, pp. 210-220. 
Wild, H., Phipps, B. & Paiva, J., 1969. Simaroubaceae. In: Fernandes, A. (Editor). Flora de Moçam-
bique. No 38. Junta de Investigates do Ultramar, Lisbon, Portugal. 7 pp. 
Wilks, C. & Issembé, Y., 2000. Les arbres de la Guinée Equatoriale: Guide pratique d'identification: 
région continentale. Projet CUREF, Bâta, Guinée Equatoriale. 546 pp. 
Williams, L.A.D., The, T.L., Gardner, M.T., Fletcher, C K , Naravane, A., Gibbs, N. & Fleishhacker, 
R., 1997. Immunomodulatory activities of Petiveria alliaceae L. Phytotherapy Research 11(3): 
251-253. 
Williams, L.A.D., Vasquez, E., Klaiber, L, Kraus, W. & Rosner, H.A., 2003. Sulfonic anhydride de-
rivative from dibenzyl trisulphide with agro-chemical activities. Chemosphere 51(8): 701—706. 
Williamson, J., 1955. Useful plants of Nyasaland. The Government Printer, Zomba, Nyasaland. 
168 pp. 
Wills, S., 1995. The use of cannabis in multiple sclerosis. Pharmaceutical Journal 255: 237-238. 
Wilmot-Dear, CM., 1976. Plumbaginaceae. In: Polhill, R.M. (Editor). Flora of Tropical East Africa. 
Crown Agents for Oversea Governments and Administrations, London, United Kingdom. 12 pp. 
Winters, M., 2004. Ancient medicine, modern use: Withania somnifera and its potential role in 
integrative oncology. Alternative Medicine Review 11(4): 260-277. 
Wirtu, G., Adugna, G., Samuel, T., Kelbessa, E. & Geleto, A., 1999. Aspects of farmers' knowledge, 
attitudes and practices of animal health problems in central Ethiopia. In: Mathias, E., Rangne-
kar, D.V., McCorkle, CM. & Martin, M. (Editors). Ethnoveterinary medicine: alternatives for 
livestock development. Proceedings of an International Conference held in Pune, India, 4-6 No-
vember 1997. 82 pp. BAIF Development Research Foundation, Pune, India, pp. 41-52. 
Wittig, R. & Guinko, S., 1998. Plantes médicinales et leurs usages chez les Mossis de Sampodogo et 
Ouéguédo. Etudes flore et végétation. Burkina Faso 4. Verlag Natur & Wissenschaft, Solingen, 
Germany. 44 pp. 
Wobil, W., 2005. Host plants and communal cocoon characteristics of lepidopteran defoliators of 
Mansonia altissima (Sterculiaceae). BSc thesis, Faculty of Renewable Natural Resources, Kwame 
Nkrumah University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana. 50 pp. 
Wolde Yohannes, L., Esser, K.B. & Semagn, K., 1999. Controlling bilharzia might be as easy as 
growing a plant. Agroforestry Today 11(3-4): 7—9. 
Woldewahid, G., 2003. Habitats and spatial pattern of solitarious desert locusts (Schistocerca gre-
garia Forsk.) on the coastal plain of Sudan. PhD thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, 
Netherlands. 162 pp. 
Wome, B., 1984. Plants used for the treatment of venereal diseases in traditional medicine from 
Kisangani, upper Zaire. Bulletin de la Société Royale de Botanique de Belgique 117(1): 171-180. 
766 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Wome, B., 1985. Recherches ethnopharmacognosiques sur les plantes médicinales utilisées en mé-
decine traditionnelle à Kisangani (Haut-Zaïre). PhD thesis, Faculty of Sciences, University of 
Brussels, Brussels, Belgium. 561 pp. 
Wondimu, T., Asfaw, Z. & Kelbessa, E., 2007. Ethnobotanical study of medicinal plants around 
'Dheeraa' town, Arsi Zone, Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 112: 152-161. 
Wongsatit Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Orawan Ruangsomboon, 2003. Suregada 
Roxb. ex Rottl. In: Lemmens, R.H.M.J. & Bunyapraphatsara, N. (Editors). Plant Resources of 
South-East Asia No 12(3). Medicinal and poisonous plants 3. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Neth-
erlands, pp. 389-391. 
Wongsatit Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Promjit Saralamp, 1999a. Heliotropium L. 
In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of 
South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Neth-
erlands, pp. 292-296. 
Wongsatit Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Promjit Saralamp, 1999b. Holarrhena 
R.Br. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources 
of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, 
Netherlands, pp. 296-298. 
Wongsatit Chuakul, Noppamas Soonthornchareonnon & Promjit Saralamp, 1999c. Plumbago L. In: 
de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-
East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Nether-
lands, pp. 409-413. 
Wood, D., 1970. Tropical African Plants 30. Plumbaginaceae. Plumbago aphylla. Kew Bulletin 
24(2): 351. 
World Agroforestry Centre, undated. Agroforestree Database. [Internet] World Agroforestry Centre 
(ICRAF), Nairobi, Kenya. <http://www.worldagroforestry.org/Sites/TreeDBS/aft.asp>. Accessed 
January 2005 - March 2007. 
Wosu, L.O. & Ibe, C.C., 1989. Use of extracts of Picralima nitida bark in the treatment of experi-
mental trypanosomiasis: a preliminary study. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 25(3): 263-268 
Wrangham, R.W. & Waterman, P.G., 1983. Condensed tannins in fruits eaten by chimpanzees. 
Biotropica 15: 217-222. 
Wube, A.A., Bucar, F., Asres, K, Gibbons, S., Rattray, L. & Croft, S.L., 2005. Antimalarial com-
pounds from Kniphofia foliosa roots. Phytotherapy Research 19(6): 472-476. 
Wulijarni-Soetjipto, N. & de Winter, W.P., 2003. Lycopodiella cernua (L.) Pic. Serm. In: de Winter, 
W.P. & Amoroso, V.B. (Editors). Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 15(2): Cryptogams: Ferns 
and fern allies. Backhuys Publishers, Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 121-123. 
Wulijarni-Soetjipto, N., Subarnas, A., Horsten, S.F.A.J. & Stutterheim, N.C., 1999. Cannabis sa-
tiva L. In: de Padua, L.S., Bunyapraphatsara, N. & Lemmens, R.H.M.J. (Editors). Plant Re-
sources of South-East Asia No 12(1). Medicinal and poisonous plants 1. Backhuys Publishers, 
Leiden, Netherlands, pp. 167—175. 
Wurdack, K.J., Hoffmann, P., Samuel, R., de Bruijn, A., van der Bank, M. & Chase, M.W., 2004. 
Molecular phylogenetic analysis of Phyllanthaceae (Phyllanthoideae pro parte, Euphorbiaceae 
sensu lato) using plastid rbcL DNA sequences. American Journal of Botany 91(11): 1882-1900. 
Xu, S., Li, N., Ning, M.M., Zhou, C.H., Yang, Q.R. & Wang, M.W., 2006. Bioactive compounds from 
Peperomia pellucida. Journal of Natural Products 69(2): 247-250. 
Xu, M., Zha, Z.J., Qin, X.L., Zhang, X.L., Yang, CR. & Zhang, Y.J., 2007. Phenolic antioxidants 
from the whole plant of Phyllanthus urinaria. Chemistry and Biodiversity 4(9): 2246-2252. 
Yadav, R., Srivastava, V.K., Chandra, R. & Singh, A., 2002. Larvicidal activity of latex and stem 
bark of Euphorbia tirucalli plant on the mosquito of Culex quinquefasciatus. Journal of Commu-
nicable Diseases 34: 264-269. 
Yadav, R.P., Singh, D., Singh, S.K. & Singh, A., 2006. Effects of extracts of the bark of the stem of 
Croton tiglium on the metabolism of the freshwater gastropod Lymnaea acuminata. American 
Malacological Bulletin 21(1-2): 87-92. 
Yagi, A., 2004. Bioactivity of Aloe arborescens preparations. In: Reynolds, T. (Editor). Aloes: the 
genus Aloe. CRC Press, Boca Raton, Florida, United States, pp. 333-351. 
LITERATURE 767 
Yagi, S.M., El Tigani, S. & Adam, S.E., 1998. Toxicity of Senna obtusifolia fresh and fermented 
leaves (kawal). Senna alata leaves and some products from Senna alata on rats. Phytotherapy 
Research 12(5): 324-330. 
Yamada, T., 1999. A report of the ethnobotany of the Nyindu in the eastern part of the former Za-
ire. African Study Monographs 20(1): 1-72. 
Yamaguchi, K., Mori, A. & Funatsu, G., 1996. Amino acid sequence and some properties of lectin-D 
from the roots of pokeweed (Phytolacca americana). Bioscience, Biotechnology and Biochemistry 
60(8): 1380-1382. 
Yamauchi, T. & Abe, F., 1990. Cardiac glycosides and pregnanes from Adenium obesum (Studies 
on the constituents of Adenium 1). Chemical and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 38: 669-672. 
Yang, H.O. & Han, B.H., 1998. Pinusolidic acid: a platelet-activating factor inhibitor from Biota 
orientalis. Planta Medica 64(1): 73-74. 
Yang, CM., Cheng, H.Y., Lin, T.C., Chiang, L.C. & Lin, C.C., 2005. Euphorbia thymifolia sup-
presses herpes simplex virus-2 infection by directly inactivating virus infectivity. Clinical and 
Experimental Pharmacology and Physiology 32(5-6): 346-349. 
Yang, J.S., Kim, H.J., Ryu, Y.H., Yun/c.-H., Chung, D.K. & Han, S.H., 2006a. Endotoxin contami-
nation in commercially available pokeweed mitogen contributes to the activation of murine 
macrophages and human dendritic cell maturation. Clinical and Vaccine Immunology 13(3): 309-
313. 
Yang, C.-R., Zhang, Y., Jacob, M.R., Khan, S.I., Zhang, Y.-J. & Li, X.-C, 2006b. Antifungal activity 
of C-27 steroidal saponins. Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy 50(5): 1710-1714. 
Yang, CM., Cheng, H.Y., Lin, T.C., Chiang, L.C. & Lin, C.C., 2007a. Hippomanin A from acetone 
extract of Phyllanthus urinaria inhibited HSV-2 but not HSV-1 infection in vitro. Phytotherapy 
Research 21(12): 1182-1186. 
Yang, CM., Cheng, H.Y., Lin, T.C., Chiang, L.C. & Lin, C.C., 2007b. The in vitro activity of ge-
raniin and 1,3,4,6-tetra-O-galloyl-b-d-glucose isolated from Phyllanthus urinaria against herpes 
simplex virus type 1 and type 2 infection. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 110(3): 555-558. 
Ye, Y.X. & Yang, X.R., 1990. Inhibitory action of peruvoside and neriifolin on sodium potassium 
ATPase. Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 11(6): 491-494. 
Yeboah-Gyan, K. & Oppong-Boachie, K., 2000. The development of simple field based procedures 
for extraction of volatiles from Adenia cissampeloides for subduing African honey bee (Apis melif-
era adansonii). Journal of the Ghana Science Association 2(2): 70-79. 
Yeh, G.Y., Eisenberg, D.M., Kaptchuk, T.J. & Phillips, R.S., 2003. Systematic review of herbs and 
dietary supplements for glycémie control in diabetes. Diabetes Care 26: 1277-1294. 
Yimtubezinash, W., Getahun, A. & Chryssanthou, E., 2005. In vitro activity of Phytolacca dodecan-
dra (Endod) against dermatophytes. Ethiopian Medical Journal 43(1): 31-34. 
Yin, W., Wang, T.-S., Yin, F.-Z. & Cai, B., 2003. Analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties of 
brucine and brucine N-oxide extracted from seeds of Strychnos nux-vomica. Journal of Ethno-
pharmacology 88(2-3): 205-214. 
Yineger, H., Kelbessa, E., Bekele, T. & Lulekal, E., 2007. Ethnoveterinary medicinal plants at Bale 
Mountains national park, Ethiopia. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 112: 55-70. 
Yoshida, T., Namba, O., Chen, L., Liu, Y.Z. & Okuda, T., 1990. Ellagitannin monomers and oli-
gomers from Euphorbia prostrata Ait. and oligomers from Loropetalum chinense Oliv. Chemical 
and Pharmaceutical Bulletin 38(12): 3296-3302. 
Youdim, K.A., Martin, A. & Joseph, J.A., 2000. Incorporation of the elderberry anthocyanins by 
endothelial cells increases protection against oxidative stress. Free Radical Biology and Medicine 
29: 51-60. 
Yousif, G., Iskander, G.M. & Eisa, E.B., 1983. Investigation of the alkaloidal components in the 
Sudan Flora 1. Fitoterapia 54(2): 81-86. 
Youssouf, M.S., Kaiser, P., Tahir, M., Singh, G.D., Singh, S., Shanna, V.K., Satti, N.K., Haque, S.E. 
& Johri, R.K., 2007. Anti-anaphylactic effect of Euphorbia hirta. Fitoterapia 78(7-8): 535-539. 
Yuan, Y.-J., Hu, T.-T. & Yang, Y.-M., 1994. Effects of auxins and cytokinins on formation of Catha-
ranthus roseus G.Don multiple shoots. Plant Cell, Tissue and Organ Culture 37(2): 193-196. 
Zafinindra, L.R., Diatta, W., Dieye, A.M., Nongonierma, R., Faye, B. & Bassene, E., 2003. Effet 
antipyrétiques de l'extrait aqueux et des alcaloides de Tinospora bakis (A. Rich.) Miers (Menis-
permacea) chez le lapin. Dakar Médical 48(1): 29-33. 
768 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Zakay-Rones, Z., Thorn, E., Wollan, T. & Wadstein, J., 2004. Randomized study of the efficacy and 
safety of oral elderberry extract in the treatment of influenza A and B virus infections. Journal of 
International Medicinal Research 32: 132-140. 
Zambie, A., Sahpaz, S., Hennebelle, T., Carato, P. & Bailleul, F., 2006a. Nl,N5,NlO-tris(4-
hydroxycinnamoyl)spermidines from Microdesmis keayana roots. Chemistry and Biodiversity 
3(9): 982-989. 
Zambie, A., Yao, D., Martin-Nizard, F., Sahpaz, S., Offoumou, M., Bordet, R., Duriez. P., Brunet, C. 
& Bailleul, F., 2006b. Vasoactivity and antioxidant properties of Microdesmis keayana roots. 
Journal of Ethnopharmacology 104(1-2): 263-269. 
Zambie, A., Hennebelle, T., Sahpaz, S. & Bailleul, F., 2007. Two new quinoline and tris(4-
hydroxycinnamoyl)spermine derivatives from Microdesmis keayana roots. Chemical and Phar-
macological Bulletin 55(4): 643-645. 
Zayed, R., Wink, M. & El Shamy, H., 2006. In vitro organogenesis and alkaloid accumulation in 
Datura innoxia. Zeitschrift für Naturforschung, Section C, Biosciences 61(7-8): 560-564. 
Zelnik, R. & Reichstein, T., 1957. Die Glykoside der Samen von Strophanthus eminii Asch. & Pax, 
3. Mitteilung. Glykoside und Aglykone, 184. Mitteilung. Helvetica Chimica Acta 40(7): 2110-
2129. 
Zerihun, B., Lockwood, G.B. & Waigh, R.D., 1987a. Flavonoids and a diterpene from Clutia abys-
sinica. Journal of Natural Products 50(2): 322. 
Zerihun, B., Lockwood, G.B. & Waigh, R.D., 1987b. Volatile and non-polar constituents from leaf 
and root of Clutia abyssinica. Fitoterapia 58(3): 192-193. 
Zhang, L.-L., 2005. [Method for manufacturing swertiamarin soft capsule for treating hepatitis.] In 
Chinese. Faming Zhuanli Shenqing Gongkai Shuomingshu. 8 pp. 
Zhou, S., Xu, C, Zhou, N., Huang, Y., Huang, L., Chen, X., Hu, Y. & Liao, Y., 1997. Mechanism of 
protective action of Phyllanthus urinaria L. against injuries of liver cells. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za 
Zhi22(2): 109-111. 
Zhu, J.-P., Guggisberg, A., Kalt-Hadamowsky, M. & Hesse, M., 1990. Chemotaxonomic study of the 
genus Tabernaemontana (Apocynaceae) based on their indole alkaloid content. Plant Systematics 
and Evolution 172: 13-34. 
Zhu, W.M., He, H.P., Fan, L.M., Shen, Y.M., Zhou, J. & Hao, X.J., 2005. Components of stem barks 
of Winchia calophylla A. DC. and their bronchodilator activities. Journal of Integrative Plant Bi-
ology 47(7): 892-896. 
Zhu-Salzman, K, Ahn, J.E., Salzman, R.A., Koiwa, H., Shade, R.E. & Balfe, S., 2003. Fusion of a 
soybean cysteine protease inhibitor and a legume lectin enhances anti-insect activity synergisti-
cally. Agricultural and Forest Entomology 5(4): 317-323. 
Zilimwabagabo, P. & Kanayire, L., 1990. Comparaison de l'activité antibactérienne et antimycoti-
que des plantes utilisées dans le traitement des dermatoses en médecine traditionnelle rwan-
daise. Bulletin de Médecine Traditionnelle et Pharmacopée 4(2): 111-115. 
Zirihi, G.N., Mambu, L., Guédé-Guina, F., Bodo, B. & Grellier, P., 2005. In vitro antiplasmodial 
activity and cytotoxicity of 33 West African plants used for the treatment of malaria. Journal of 
Ethnopharmacology 98: 281-285. 
Zoghbi, M.G.B., Andrade, E.H.A. & Maia, J.G.S., 2002. Volatile constituents from Adenocalymma 
alliaceum Miers and Petiveria alliacea L., two medicinal herbs of the Amazon. Flavour and Fra-
grance Journal 17(2): 133-135. 
Zonneveld, B.J.M., 2002. Genome size analysis of selected species of Aloe (Aloaceae) reveals the 
most primitive species and results in some new combinations. Bradleya 20: 5-12. 
769 
Index of scientific plant names 
Page numbers printed in bold refer to main treatment; page numbers in italics refer to line drawings. 
Abelmoschus esculentus, 106 
Acacia edgeworthii, 278 
Acacia macrostachya, 226 
Acalypha allenii, 28 
Acalypha ambigua, 28 
Acalypha andringitrensis, 25 
Acalypha brachiata, 28 
Acalypha brachystachya, 24 
Acalypha chirindica, 27 
Acalypha ciliata, 21 
Acalypha decaryana, 26 
Acalypha engleri, 22 
Acalypha fruticosa, 21 
Acalypha indica, 23, 24 
Acalypha integrifolia, 25 
Acalypha lanceolata, 24 
Acalypha lyallii, 25 
Acalypha manniana, 27 
Acalypha neptunica, 22 
Acalypha ornata, 26 
Acalypha petiolaris, 28 
Acalypha psilostachya, 27 
Acalypha psilostachya var. glandulosa, 27 
Acalypha racemosa, 27 
Acalypha radula, 26 
Acalypha senensis, 28 
Acalypha spachiana, 26 
Acalypha supera, 24 
Acalypha villicaulis, 28 
Acalypha volkensii, 22 
Acokanthera laevigata, 33 
Acokanthera longiflora, 30 
Acokanthera oblongifolia, 29 
Acokanthera oppositifolia, 30, 3i, 33 
Acokanthera schimperi, 32, 46, 77, 79, 262, 
304, 516, 548, 580 
Acokanthera spectabilis, 29 
Adansonia digitata, 229 
Adenia aculeata, 41 
Adenia bequaertii, 36 
Adenia cissampeloides, 34, 3ff 
Ade^ita digitata, 37, 42 
Adenia dinklagei, 36 
/Icfereia ellenbeckii, 43 
Adenia globosa, 38 
Adenia gracilis, 34 
Adenia guineensis, 34 
Adenia gummifera, 34 
j4de?iia keramanthus, 43 
Adenia lanceolata, 43 
Adenia lobata, 38, 40 
Adenia mannii, 38 
Adenia miegei, 40 
Adenia racemosa, 40 
Adenia repanda, 37 
Adenia rumicifolia, 39 
Adenia schweinfurthii, 39 
Adenia subsessilifolia, 38 
Adenia tricostata, 36 
Adenia venenata, 38 
Adenia volkensii, 41, 4J? 
Adenium boehmianum, 43, 44, 293 
Adenium multiflorum, 45, 48 
Adenium obesum, 44, 45, 46, 47, 79 
Adenium obesum subsp. boehmianum, 43 
Adenium obesum subsp. multiflorum, 45 
Adenium obesum subsp. oleifolium, 49 
Adenium obesum var. multiflorum, 45 
Adenium oleifolium, 49 
Adenium socotranum, 46 
Adenium somalense, 46 
Adenium swazicum, 44, 48 
Aframomum melegueta, 39, 104, 242, 373, 375, 
401, 532, 565 
Agave americana, 49 
Ageratum conyzoides, 468 
Alafia barteri, 51, 51 
Alafia benthamii, 51 
Alafia caudata, 53 
Alafia erythrophthalma, 52 
Alafia fuscata, 53 
Alafia landolphioides, 52 
Alafia lucida, 52 
Alafia multiflora, 53 
Alafia pauciflora, 53 
Alafia perrieri, 53 
Alafia scandens, 52 
Alafia schumannii, 54 
Alafia thouarsii, 53 
Albertisia cordifolia, 54 
Albertisia delagoensis, 55 
Albertisia mangenotii, 55 
Albertisia scandens, 55 
Albertisia undulata, 56 
Albertisia villosa, 56 
Alchornea castaneifolia, 60 
Alchornea cordifolia, 57, 53 
Alchornea floribunda, 60 
Alchornea hirtella, 61 
Alchornea laxiflora, 62 
770 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Alchornea yambuyaensis, 62 
Allium cepa, 58, 123 
Aloe arborescens, 63, 65 
Aloe asperifolia, 74 
Aloe ballyi, 87 
Aloe barbadensis, 82, 85 
Aloe barteri, 65, 66 
Aloe buettneri, 65, 93 
Aloe calidophila, 81 
Aloe camperi, 81 
Aloe candelabrum, 68 
Aloe capitata, 67 
Aloe carolineae, 71 
AZoe chabaudii, 74 
Atoe christianii, 87 
AZoe citrina, 89 
AZoe congolensis, 66 
AZoe cooperi, 76 
AZoe cryptopoda, 89 
AZoe dawei, 77 
AZoe dichotoma, 76 
AZoe divaricata, 67 
AZoe duckeri, 74 
AZoe elgonica, 81 
AZoe era, 81 
AZoe esculenta, 74 
AZoe excelsa, 87 
AZoe /erox, 65, 68, S3, 84 
AZoe flexilifolia, 71 
AZoe globuligemma, 74 
AZoe greatheadii, 76 
AZoe hendrickxii, 74 
AZoe hereroensis, 76 
AZoe kedongensis, 78 
AZoe kilifiensis, 89 
AZoe lateritia, 72, 75, 88, 89 
AZoe lateritia var. graminicola, 73 
AZoe littoralis, 88 
AZoe lomatophylloides, 75 
AZoe macrocarpa, 66 
AZoe macroclada, 67, 68 
AZoe macrosiphon, 80 
AZoe maculata, 69 
AZoe marlothii, 88 
AZoe mayottensis, 75 
AZoe microdonta, 82 
AZoe ngongensis, 78 
AZoe nuttii, 76 
AZoe nyeriensis, 78 
AZoe officinalis, 85 
AZoe ortholopha, 76 
AZoe perryi, 67, 84 
Aloe pulcherrima, 71 
Aloe purpurea, 75 
AZoe rabaiensis, 77 
AZoe rivae, 89 
AZoe ruspoliana, 80 
AZoe saponaria, 69 
AZoe scabrifolia, 71 
AZoe schweinfurthii, 66 
AZoe secundiflora, 78, 73 
AZoe secundiflora var. sobolifera, 80 
AZoe sinkatana, 89 
AZoe swynnertonii, 76 
AZoe turkanensis, 71, 81 
AZoe vahombe, 67 
AZoe vaombe, 67, 68 
AZoe uera, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 78, 79, 82, 54 
AZoe volkensii, 87 
AZoe wilsonii, 71 
AZoe wollastonii, 72, 88 
Alstonia boonei, 450 
Alternanthera pungens, 327 
Alyxia madagascariensis, 411 
Anchomanes difformis, 437 
Andrachne aspera, 89 
Andrachne ovalis, 90 
Androsiphonia adenostegia, 91 
Anisocycla cymosa, 91 
Anisocycla grandidieri, 92 
Anisocycla jolly ana, 92 
Anthocleista amplexicaulis, 92 
Anthocleista djalonensis, 93, 34 
Anthocleista hildebrandtii, 95 
Anthocleista kerstingii, 93 
Anthocleista liebrechtsiana, 95 
Anthocleista madagascariensis, 95 
Anthocleista nobilis, 96, 37 
Anthocleista procera, 96, 98 
Anthocleista rhizophoroides, 95 
Anthocleista schweinfurthii, 94, 99 
Anthocleista vogelii, 100, 202 
Anthostema aubryanum, 102 
Anthostema senegalense, 101 
Antidesma laciniatum, 102 
Antidesma membranaceum, 103 
Antidesma rufescens, 104 
Antidesma venosum, 104 
Antidesma venosum subsp. membranaceum, 103 
Antidesma vogeliana, 104 
Antizoma angolensis, 105 
Antizoma angustifolia, 104 
Antizoma miersiana, 105 
Argemone mexicana, 105, 207 
Argemone ochroleuca, 105, 107 
Argomuellera macrophylla, 108 
Argusia argentea, 612 
Atropa belladonna, 220, 223 
Aucoumea klaineana, 371, 493 
Azadirachta indica, 204, 349 
Azima spinosissima, 109 
Azinia tetracantha, 109, Ü 0 
INDEX OF SCIENTIFIC PLANT NAMES 771 
Baissea axillaris, 111, 111 
Baissea laxiflora, 112 
Baissea leonensis, 111 
Baissea multiflora, 112, 113 
Baissea myrtifolia, 113 
Bandeiraea simplicifolia, 314 
Barteria dewevrei, 114 
Barteria fistulosa, 113 
Barteria nigritana, 114 
Barteria nigritana subsp. fistulosa, 113 
Barteria solida, 114 
Basananthe heterophylla, 115 
Basananthe sandersonii, 114 
Bauhinia kalantha, 115 
Bauhinia urbaniana, 115 
Bersama abyssinica, 116 
Bersama engleriana, 116 
Bersama lucens, 117 
Bersama tysoniana, 117 
5eta vulgaris, 442 
Betula pubescens, 537 
Biota orientalis, 466 
Blighia sapida, 122 
Boerhavia africana, 117 
Boerhavia coccinea, 119, 122 
Boerhavia diffusa, 117, 223, 121, 122, 123 
Boerhavia erecta, 120, 122 
Boerhavia plumbaginea, 187 
Boerhavia repens, 119, 121 
Boophone disticha, 32 
Borago officinalis, 615, 616 
Bourreria lyciacea, 329 
Bourreria petiolaris, 328 
Brachystegia spiciformis, 273 
Bridelia atroviridis, 123, 2.24 
Bridelia brideliifolia, 124 
Bridelia cathartica, 399 
Bridelia ferruginea, 58 
Bridelia pervilleana, 124 
Bridelia ripicola, 124 
Brucea antidysenterica, 125, 22ff 
Brucea guineensis, 126 
Brucea javanica, 126, 127 
Bulbine abyssinica, 127 
Bulbine asphodeloides, 127 
Bulbine capitata, 128 
Bulbine narcissifolia, 128 
Burasaia australis, 129 
Burasaia congesta, 129 
Burasaia gracilis, 129 
Burasaia madagascariensis, 128 
Burasaia nigrescens, 129 
Burkea africana, 251 
Cabucala madagascariensis, 411 
Caesalpinia benthamiana, 129 
Caesalpinia bonduc, 131, 235 
Caesalpinia bonducella, 131 
Caesalpinia crista, 132 
Caesalpinia cucullata, 130 
Caesalpinia decapetala, 132 
Caesalpinia echinata, 132 
Caesalpinia hildebrandtii, 130 
Caesalpinia trothae, 133 
Caesalpinia volkensii, 133 
Caesalpinia welwitschiana, 133 
Cajanus cajan, 478 
Callichilia barteri, 133, 234 
Callichilia subsessilis, 134 
Calotropis procera, 258 
Cannabis indica, 135, 139 
Cannabis sativa, 135, i3S, 368 
Capsella bursa-pastoris, 142, i43 
Capsicum annuum, 39, 53, 327 
Carica papaya, 450 
Carissa schimperi, 32 
Carissa spectabilis, 29 
Cascabela thevetia, 606, 608 
Cassia abbreviata, 144, 245 
Cassia abbreviata subsp. beareana, 145 
Cassia abbreviata subsp. kassneri, 145 
Cassia absus, 162 
Cassia acutifolia, 502 
Cassia adenensis, 504 
Cassia afrofistula, 145 
Cassia alata, 500 
Cassia angolensis, 146 
Cassia angustifolia, 502 
Cassia aubrevillei, 147 
Cassia biensis, 164 
Cassia burttii, 145 
Cassia didymobotrya, 505 
Cassia falcinella, 165 
Cassia fikifiki, 147 
Cassia fistula, 147, 743, 151 
Cassia goratensis, 513 
Cassia italica, 508 
Cassia mannii, 147 
Cassia nairobensis, 505 
Cassia nigricans, 165 
Cassia obovata, 508 
Cassia petersiana, 511 
Cassia podocarpa, 512 
Cassia senna, 502 
Cassia sieberiana, 150, 252 
Cassia singueana, 513 
Cassia somalensis, 504 
Cassia sophera, 514 
Catharanthus coriaceus, 156, 159 
Catharanthus lanceus, 152 
Catharanthus longifolius, 156 
Catharanthus ovalis, 156, 159 
Catharanthus pusillus, 153, 156, 159 
772 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Catharanthus roseus, 153, 156, 159, 487, 539 
Catharanthus trichophyllus, 157, 158 
Cavacoa aurea, 159 
Centella asiatica, 64, 69, 84 
Centroplacus glaucinus, 160 
Cephalocroton mollis, 160 
Cerbera manghas, 161 
Cerbera odollam, 162, 607 
Cerbera venenifera, 161 
Chamaecrista absus, 162, 163 
Chamaecrista biensis, 164 
Chamaecrista falcinella, 165 
Chamaecrista hildebrandtii, 165 
Chamaecrista lateriticola, 165 
Chamaecrista mimosoides, 425, 515 
Chamaecrista nigricans, 165, 267 
Chamaecrista zambesica, 165 
Chamaesyce canescens, 256 
Chamaesyce hirta, 267 
Chamaesyce hypericifolia, 271 
Chamaesyce prostrata, 285 
Chasmanthera dependens, 167, 2£<§, 170 
Chasmanthera uviformis, 611 
Chasmanthera welwitschii, 168, 169 
Chenopodium album, 106 
Chondrodendron tomentosum, 175, 177, 179 
Chromolaena odorata, 305 
Chrozophora brocchiana, 170, 172 
Chrozophora obliqua, 171 
Chrozophora oblongifolia, 171 
Chrozophora plicata, 171 
Chrozophora rottleri, 171 
Chrozophora senegalensis, 172 
Chrozophora tinctoria, 171 
Cissampelos angustifolius, 104 
Cissampelos capensis, 172 
Cissampelos dinklagei, 540 
Cissampelos hirta, 180 
Cissampelos madagascariensis, 178 
Cissampelos mucronata, 174, 2 75, 178 
Cissampelos owariensis, 174, 176, 2 77 
Cissampelos pareira, 173, 174, 175, 176, 177, 
178, 2 79 
Cissampelos pareira var. klotzschii, 180 
Cissampelos pareira var. mucronata, 174 
Cissampelos pareira var. owariensis, 176 
Cissampelos torulosa, 180 
Cissampelos truncata, 180 
Citrullus colocynthis, 258 
Citrus aurantifolia, 91 
Claoxylon hexandrum, 230 
Cleistanthus bipindensis, 180 
Cleistanthus collinus, 181 
Clutia abyssinica, 181, 252 
Clutia angustifolia, 183 
Clutia hirsuta, 183 
Clutia kilimandscharica, 183 
Clutia lanceolata, 183 
Clutia paxii, 183 
Clutia pulchella, 90, 183 
Clutia robusta, 183 
Cocculus hirsutus, 183 
Cocculus leaeba, 184 
Cocculus orbiculatus, 186 
Cocculus pendulus, 184, 2 55 
CoZa acuminata, 416 
CoZa ballayi, 602 
Colchicum autumnale, 155, 311 
Coldenia procumbens, 186, 257 
Colophospermum mopane, 293 
Combretum mucronatum, 100 
Commicarpus fallacissimus, 188 
Commicarpus pentandrus, 188 
Commicarpus plumbagineus, 187 
Commiphora myrrha, 319 
Conopharyngia crassa, 589 
Conopharyngia durissima, 589 
Conopharyngia elegans, 592 
Cordemoya integrifolia, 188 
Cordia africana, 189 
Cordia dewevrei, 190 
Cordia dichotoma, 190 
Cordia goetzei, 190 
Cordia myxa, 189, 290 
Cordia vignei, 190 
Coronopus didymus, 361 
Coscinium fenestratum, 346 
Cosius a/er, 191, 292, 195, 327 
Costus deistelii, 193 
Costus dewevrei, 195 
Costus dubius, 193 
Costus englerianus, 193 
Costus ligularis, 195 
Costus lucanusianus, 193, 194, 295 
Costus phyllocephalus, 195 
Costus schlechten, 193 
Costus speciosus, 192, 194 
Costus spectabilis, 193 
Craspidospermum verticillatum, 196 
Crossopteryx febrifuga, 445 
Croton adabolavensis, 200 
Croton ambanivoulensis, 197 
Croton androiensis, 200 
Croton anisatus, 197 
Croton antanosiensis, 197 
Croton aubrevillei, 197 
Croton barorum, 198 
Croton bathianus, 199 
Croton bemaranus, 209 
Croton bernierus, 212 
Croton boinensis, 197 
Croton catati, 197 
I N D E X O F S C I E N T I F I C PLANT N A M E S 773 
Croton crocodilorum, 199 
Croton decaryi, 199 
Croton dichogamus, 208 
Croton draconopsis, 201 
Croton elaeagni, 200 
Croton eluteria, 207 
Croton geayi, 199 
Croton goudotii, 209 
Croton greveanus, 197 
Croton haumanianus, 200 
Croton hovarum, 210 
Croton humbertii, 197 
Croton isomonensis, 212 
Croton jatrophoides, 201 
Croton jenny anus, 200 
Croton kimosorum, 197 
Croton, lobatus, 202, 202 
Croton macrobuxus, 210 
Croton macrostachyus, 203, 205 
Croton mauritianus, 206 
Croton mayumbensis, 201 
Croton membranaceus, 206 
Croton menyharthii, 207 
Croton meridionalis, 209 
Croton mocquerysii, 210 
Croton mubango, 208 
Croton myriaster, 209 
Croton nigritanus, 211 
Croton nitidulus, 210 
Croton noronhae, 197 
Croton oligandrus, 201 
Croton oxypetalus, 212 
Croton penduliflorus, 210 
Croton perrieri, 199 
Croton polytrichus, 208 
Croton sakamaliensis, 211 
Croton salviformis, 209 
Croton sambiranensis, 210 
Croton scheffleri, 208 
Croton somalensis, 208 
Croton stanneum, 212 
Croton steenkampianus, 208 
Croton sylvaticus, 212, 2 i 5 
Croton talaeporos, 208 
Croton tchibangensis, 201 
Ootore tiglium, 214, 225, 299 
Croton tranomarensis, 209 
Croton trichotomus, 212 
Crotonogyne preussii, 216 
Crotonogyne strigosa, 216 
Cyathogyne bussei, 604 
Cyathula polycephala, 292 
Cynoglossum amabile, 217 
Cynoglossum coeruleum, 216 
Cynoglossum geometricum, 216 
Cynoglossum lanceolatum, 217 
Cynoglossum monophlebium, 217 
Cynoglossum officinale, 217 
Dalechampia clematidifolia, 218 
Dalechampia ipomoeifolia, 217 
Datura fastuosa, 218 
Datura ferox, 224, 225 
Datura inoxia, 220 
Z t o u r a meteZ, 218, 220, 222, 268 
Datura stramonium, 218, 221, 224 
Deidamia clematoides, 237 
Desmodium adscendens, 381 
Detarium macrocarpum, 227 
Detarium microcarpum, 225, 227 
Detarium senegalense, 225, 227 
Deuteromallotus acuminatus, 374 
Dichostemma glaucescens, 228 
Dichrostachys cinerea, 276 
Digitalis lanata, 549, 607 
Digitaria exilis, 557 
Dioscorea minutiflora, 491 
Dioscorea quartiniana, 304 
Diplorhynchus condylocarpon, 229 
Diplorhynchus mossambicensis, 229 
Discoclaoxylon hexandrum, 230 
Discoglypremna caloneura, 231, 232 
Drypetes amoracia, 233 
Drypetes capillipes, 235 
Drypetes chevalieri, 233 
Drypetes gossweileri, 233 
Drypetes ivorensis, 233 
Drypetes klainei, 235 
Drypetes leonensis, 233 
Drypetes madagascariensis, 236 
Drypetes molunduana, 235 
Drypetes natalensis, 235 
Drypetes staudtii, 236 
Echium arenarium, 236 
Echium horridum, 236 
Echium stenosiphon, 236 
Efulensia clematoides, 237 
Ehretia bakeri, 238 
Ehretia coerulea, 237, 238 
Ehretia litoralis, 328 
Ehretia nemoralis, 328 
Ehretia obtusifolia, 237 
Ehretia petiolaris, 328 
Ehretia philippinensis, 237 
Elaeophorbia drupifera, 238, 235, 241 
Elaeophorbia grandifolia, 240 
Epinetrum cordifolium, 54 
Epinetrum delagoense, 55 
Epinetrum villosum, 56 
Erythrococca aculeata, 241 
Erythrococca africana, 242 
Erythrococca anomala, 241 
Erythrococca atrovirens, 243 
774 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Erythrococca bongensis, 242 Euphorbia 
Erythrococca chevalieri, 242 Euphorbia 
Erythrococca fischeri, 243 Euphorbia 
Erythrococca hispiala, 242 Euphorbia 
Erythrococca menyharthii, 243 Euphorbia 
Erythrococca welwitschiana, 242 Euphorbia 
Erythrophleum africanum, 244, 250 Euphorbia 
Erythrophleum couminga, 245 Euphorbia 
Erythrophleum guineense, 249 Euphorbia 
Erythrophleum ivorense, 246, 247, 250, 251, 396 Euphorbia 
Erythrophleum lasianthum, 251 Euphorbia 
Erythrophleum suaveolens, 244, 245, 246, 247, Euphorbia 
248, 249, 251, 537, 602 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia abyssinica, 256 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia acalyphoides, 261 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia aegyptiaca, 258 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia agowensis, 261 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia ampliphylla, 256 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia angustiflora, 293 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia antso, 252 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia baga, 258 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia bakeriana, 253 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia bicompacta, 290 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia bicompacta var . rubra, 290 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia boivinii, 253 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia breviarticulata, 278 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia bussei, 260 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia calyptrata, 253 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia calyptrata var. involucrata, 254 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia candelabrum, 34, 254, 255, 274 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia candelabrum var. bilocularis, 256 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia chamaesyce, 256 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia conspicua, 256, 274 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia convolvuloides, 257, 296 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia convolvuloides var. integrifolia, 258 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia cooperi, 259 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia cornuta, 254 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia crotonoides, 260 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia cuneata, 276 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia cupularis, 282 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia cyathophora, 266, 267 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia cyparissioides, 280 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia damarana, 300 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia decorsei, 276 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia depauperata, 292 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia didiereoides, 261 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia drupifera, 238 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia emirnensis, 262 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia enterophora, 276 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia erythroxyloides, 253 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia espinosa, 277 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia fiha, 276 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia forskalii, 258 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia geniculata, 265 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia glanduligera, 296 Euphorbia 
Euphorbia gossypina, 300 Euphorbia 
grandi, 262 
granulata, 264 
hadramautica, 261 
heterochroma, 278 
heterophylla, 265, 2£6 
heterospina, 278 
/lirta, 267, 270 
hypericifolia, 271 
inaequilatera, 287 
indica, 271, 272 
mgens, 255, 256, 259, 272 
jo;yae, 277 
kaokoensis, 293 
kerstingii, 258 
kilwana, 258 
Zaro, 296 
lugardiae, 274 
magnicapsula, 259 
mainty, 275 
matabelensis, 276 
meridionalis, 303 
ffiüti, 262 
monteiri, 263 
namibiensis, 277 
neoglaucescens, 282 
noxia, 263 
Tryifeae, 259, 260 
obovalifolia, 256 
orthoclada, 262 
paganorum, 277 
pepZus, 278, 250 
pereskiifolia, 281 
pervilleana, 253 
petitiana, 280 
pilulifera, 267 
plagiantha, 276 
poissonii, 283, 302, 303 
polyacantha, 278 
polyantha, 261 
polycnemoides, 296 
primulifolia, 262 
prostrata, 285, 2<S7, 295 
pseudograntii, 288, 253 
pyrifolia, 253 
quadrangularis, 278 
quinquecostata, 290 
radiifera, 277 
reinhartii, 254 
retusa, 254 
robecchii, 291 
sapinii, 284 
schimperiana, 291 
schimperiana var . pubescens, 292 
schimperiana var. velutina, 292 
schinzii, 293 
schizacantha, 303 
INDEX OF SCIENTIFIC PLANT NAMES 775 
Euphorbia scordiifolia, 264 
Euphorbia similis, 272 
Euphorbia somalensis, 263 
Euphorbia spartaria, 300 
Euphorbia subsalsa, 293 
Euphorbia sudanica, 277, 278 
Euphorbia systyloides, 261 
Euphorbia teke, 240, 291 
Euphorbia tenuispinosa, 293 
Euphorbia tetraptera, 253 
Euphorbia thi, 278 
Euphorbia thymifolia, 286, 294, 255 
Euphorbia tirucalli, 255, 296, 255 
Euphorbia tisserantii, 291 
Euphorbia transvaalensis, 263 
Euphorbia triangolensis, 290 
Euphorbia trichophylla, 262 
Euphorbia trigona, 260 
Euphorbia tuckeyana, 257 
Euphorbia ugandensis, 281 
Euphorbia uhligiana, 293 
Euphorbia unispina, 283, 284, 285, 301 
Euphorbia venenifica, 303 
Euphorbia virosa, 293 
Excoecaria benthamiana, 305 
Excoecaria bussei, 305 
Excoecaria grahamii, 303, 504, 515 
Excoecaria guineensis, 304 
Excoecaria madagascariensis, 304 
Excoecaria sylvestris, 304 
Flueggea microcarpa, 305 
Flueggea virosa, 305, 307 
Fockea multiflora, 293 
Fumaria abyssinica, 309 
Fumaria muralis, 308 
Fumaria officinalis, 309 
Funtumia africana, 334 
Funtumia elastica, 428 
Garcinia klainii, 585 
Gliricidia sepium, 316 
Gloriosa abyssinica, 309 
Gloriosa baudii, 309 
Gloriosa carsonii, 309 
Gloriosa minor, 309 
Gloriosa simplex, 309 
Gloriosa superba, 309, 32 1 
Gloriosa virescens, 309 
Gnidia kraussiana, 303 
Griffonia physocarpa, 315 
Griffonia simplicifolia, 314, 3 i5 
Griffonia speciosa, 315 
Griffonia tessmannii, 315 
Grossera macrantha, 316 
Harrisonia abyssinica, 316, 3i<§ 
Harrisonia occidentalis, 316 
Hazunta coffeoides, 587 
Hazunta costata, 587 
Hazunta modesta, 587 
Hazunta velutina, 587 
Hedranthera barteri, 133 
Heliotropium aegyptiacum, 319 
Heliotropium amplexicaule, 321 
Heliotropium bacciferum, 324, 325 
Heliotropium ciliatum, 323 
Heliotropium crispum, 324 
Heliotropium curassavicum, 321, 322 
Heliotropium indicum, 320, 321, 324, 325 
Heliotropium ovalifolium, 322, 323, 325 
Heliotropium pterocarpum, 325 
Heliotropium ramosissimum, 324 
Heliotropium steudneri, 325 
Heliotropium strigosum, 323 
Heliotropium subulatum, 326 
Heliotropium supinum, 324 
Heliotropium undulatum, 324 
Heliotropium zeylanicum, 326 
Heptacyclum zenkeri, 404 
Heywoodia lucens, 159 
Hibiscus fuscus, 243 
Hibiscus sabdariffa, 194 
Hilleria latifolia, 327, 327 
Hilsenbergia lyciacea, 329 
Hilsenbergia nemoralis, 328, 329 
Hilsenbergiapetiolaris, 328 
Holarrhena africana, 329 
Holarrhena antidysenterica, 332 
Holarrhena congolensis, 331, 334 
Holarrhena febrifuga, 332 
Holarrhena floribunda, 329, 330, 334 
Holarrhena pubescens, 331, 332, 334 
Holarrhena wulfsbergii, 329 
Hugonia planchonii, 565 
Hunteria ballayi, 338 
Hunteria congolana, 335, 338 
Hunteria corymbosa, 338 
Hunteria eburnea, 336 
Hunteria elliotii, 336 
Hunteria ghanensis, 338 
Hunteria mayumbensis, 336 
Hunteria simii, 338 
Hunteria umbellata, 336, 337 
Hunteria zeylanica, 338, 335 
Huperzia megastachya, 368 
Huperzia obtusifolia, 368 
Huperzia phlegmaria, 368 
Huperzia striata, 368 
Hyalosepalum uviforme, 611 
Hymenocardia acida, 339, 347 
Hymenocardia acida var. mollis, 342 
Hymenocardia heudelotii, 342 
Hymenocardia ulmoides, 497 
Hyoscyamus falezlez, 342 
776 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Hyoscyamus insanus, 343 
Hyoscyamus muticus, 223, 342, 343 
Hyoscyamus niger, 343 
Indigofera arrecta, 539 
Jateorhiza columba, 345 
Jateorhiza macrantha, 344 
Jateorhiza palmata, 345 
Jateorhiza strigosa, 344 
Jatropha aceroides, 354 
Jatropha aethiopica, 354 
Jatropha afrocurcas, 347 
Jatropha chevalieri, 346 
Jatropha curcas, 298, 347, 350, 355, 462 
Jatropha dichtar, 353 
Jatropha ellenbeckii, 353 
Jatropha erythropoda, 358 
Jatropha glauca, 353 
Jatropha gossypiifolia, 354, 35ff 
Jatropha gossypiifolia var. elegans, 356 
Jatropha hirsuta, 358 
Jatropha kamerunica, 347 
Jatropha lobata, 353 
Jatropha mahafalensis, 350 
Jatropha multifida, 356 
Jatropha nogalensis, 353 
Jatropha parvifolia, 353 
Jatropha pelargoniifolia, 354 
Jatropha podagrica, 356 
Jatropha rivae, 353 
Jatropha spicata, 353 
Jatropha zeyheri, 357 
Jumellea fragrans, 23 
Justicia schimperiana, 203 
Kalanchoe crenata, 405 
Kigelia africana, 344 
Kirganelia reticulata, 432 
Kirkia tenuifolia, 358 
Kniphofia foliosa, 359 
Kniphofia linear ifolia, 359 
Kolobopetalum auriculatum, 360 
Kolobopetalum chevalieri, 360 
Lantana camara, 468 
Launaea cornuta, 178 
Lemna minor, 234 
Lepidium africanum, 360 
Lepidium africanum subsp. divaricatum, 361 
Lepidium didymum, 361 
Lepidium divaricatum, 361 
Lepidium sativum, 361 
Leucaena leucocephala, 315 
Limaciopsis loangensis, 362 
Lochnera rosea, 153 
Loesenera kalantha, 363 
Loesenera walkeri, 363 
Lomatophyllum lomatophylloides, 75 
Lomatophyllum purpureum, 75 
Lophira alata, 247, 314, 493 
Lycium cinereum, 364 
Lycium europaeum, 364 
Lycium mascarenense, 364 
Lycium oxycarpum, 364 
Lycium shawii, 364 
Lycopodiella cernua, 365, 36ff 
Lycopodium cernuum, 365 
Lycopodium clavatum, 366, 36<S 
Lycopodium megastachyum, 368 
Lycopodium obtusifolium, 368 
Lycopodium phlegmaria, 368 
Lycopodium strictum, 368 
Macaranga angolensis, 370 
Macaranga beillei, 369 
Macaranga cuspidata, 371 
Macaranga echinocarpa, 371 
Macaranga heterophylla, 369 
Macaranga heudelotii, 369 
Macaranga monandra, 370 
Macaranga myriolepida, 371 
Macaranga ribesioides, 371 
Macaranga saccifera, 370 
Macaranga sphaerophylla, 371 
Macaranga spinosa, 371 
Maesobotrya cordulata, 372 
Maesobotrya floribunda, 372 
Maesobotrya vermeulenii, 372 
Mallotus baillonianus, 374 
Mallotus oppositifolius, 372, 374, 609 
Mallotus subulatus, 375 
Mangifera indica, 450 
Mannia africana, 452 
Mansonia altissima, 315 
Maprounea africana, 375, 376 
Maprounea membranacea, 377 
Mareya brevipes, 379 
Mareya congolensis, 379 
Mareya micrantha, 378, 381 
Mareya spicata, 378 
Margaritaria anomala, 379 
Margaritaria decaryana, 380 
Medicago sativa, 164 
Meineckia paxii, 380 
Melia azedarach, 305 
Mezoneuron benthamianum, 129 
Microdesmis haumaniana, 384 
Microdesmis keayana, 380, 382, 384, 385 
Microdesmis paniculata, 160 
Microdesmis puberula, 381, 382, 3<S4 
Microdesmis zenkeri, 382 
Microstachys chamaelea, 385 
Mildbraedia carpinifolia, 411 
Mildbraedia paniculata, Ail 
Millettia ferruginea, 204 
Millettia laurentii, 393 
INDEX OF SCIENTIFIC PLANT NAMES 777 
Momordica charantia, 398 
Momordica foetida, 539 
Monadenium lugardiae, 274 
Monodora myristica, 208 
Mostuea batesii, 385 
Mostuea brunonis, 386 
Mostuea gabonica, 387 
Mostuea hirsuta, 387 
Mostuea stimulans, 385 
Motandra guineensis, 388, 388 
Motandra lujaei, 389 
Motandra poecilophylla, 389 
Musanga cecropioides, 393 
Myrianthus arboreus, 329, 393 
Nerium oleander, 48 
Newbouldia laevis, 381 
Nicotiana glutinosa, 270 
Ochrosia borbonica, 389, 330 
Ochrosia elliptica, 389, 391 
Ochrosia oppositifolia, 391 
Ochrosia parviflora, 391 
Okoubaka aubrevillei, 392, 333 
Okoubaka aubrevillei var. glabrescentifolia, 393 
Okoubaka michelsonii, 393 
Oncinotis glabrata, 53, 394 
Oncinotis glandulosa, 394 
Oncinotis gracilis, 394 
Oncinotis hirta, 394 
Oncinotis nitida, 394 
Orchipeda thouarsii, 627 
Osyridicarpos schimperianus, 394 
Pachyelasma tessmannii, 247, 395 
Palhinhaea cernua, 365 
Panax ginseng, 629, 630 
Parkia biglobosa, 152 
Paropsia brazzeana, 396 
Paropsia grewioides, 397 
Paropsia grewioides var. orientalis, 397 
Paropsia guineensis, 397 
Passiflora edulis, 398 
Passiflora suberosa, 397 
Paullinia pinnata, 609 
Peltophorum africanum, 398, 333 
Penianthus longifolius, 401, 402, 579 
Penianthus patulinervis, 403, 404 
Penianthus zenkeri, 402, 403, 404 
Pentaclethra eetveldeana, 370 
Pentadiplandra brazzeana, 234, 405, 406 
Peperomia abyssinica, 409 
Peperomia molleri, 409 
Peperomia pellucida, 407, 403 
Peperomia tetraphylla, 409 
Perichasma laetificata, 410 
Periploca nigrescens, 260, 486, 547, 551, 568, 599 
Perriera madagascariensis, 411 
Petchia cryptophlebia, 412 
Petchia erythrocarpa, 412 
Petchia madagascariensis, 411 
Petiveria alliacea, 412, 424 
Phyllanthus amarus, 415, 4i«S, 423, 424, 426, 436 
Phyllanthus angavensis, 436 
Phyllanthus aspericaulis, 424 
Phyllanthus beillei, 426 
Phyllanthus bequaertii, 424 
Phyllanthus betsileanus, 420 
Phyllanthus capillaris, 431 
Phyllanthus casticum, 419, 420 
Phyllanthus cedrelifolius, 422 
Phyllanthus debilis, 418, 424 
Phyllanthus decaryanus, 380 
Phyllanthus decipiens, 421 
Phyllanthus delpyanus, 422 
Phyllanthus diandrus, 430 
Phyllanthus engleri, 421 
Phyllanthus erythroxyloides, 379 
Phyllanthus fischeri, 431 
Phyllanthus floribundus, 427 
Phyllanthus fraternus, 418, 422, 424, 426, 436 
Phyllanthus fuscoluridus, 421 
Phyllanthus guineensis, 429 
Phyllanthus hutchinsonianus, 431 
Phyllanthus isalensis, 420 
Phyllanthus kaessneri, 429 
Phyllanthus lanceolatus, 436 
Phyllanthus leucanthus, 424 
Phyllanthus leucocalyx, 424 
Phyllanthus madagascariensis, 421 
Phyllanthus maderaspatensis, 418, 423, 424, 
425, 426 
Phyllanthus mantsakariva, 421 
Phyllanthus melleri, 436 
Phyllanthus mittenianus, 431 
Phyllanthus mocquerysianus, 436 
Phyllanthus muellerianus, 427, 423 
Phyllanthus niruri, 415, 418, 424 
Phyllanthus niruroides, 430 
Phyllanthus nummulariifolius, 431 
Phyllanthus odontadenius, 424 
Phyllanthus ovalifolius, 429 
Phyllanthus pentandrus, 424 
Phyllanthus pervilleanus, 436 
Phyllanthus phillyreifolius, 436 
Phyllanthus polyanthus, 422 
Phyllanthus profusus, 430 
Phyllanthus reticulatus, 432, 433 
Phyllanthus rotundifolius, 418, 424 
Phyllanthus sacleuxii, 431 
Phyllanthus sepialis, 429 
Phyllanthus seyrigii, 421 
Phyllanthus somalensis, 431 
Phyllanthus stuhlmannii, 431 
Phyllanthus sublanatus, 430 
778 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Phyllanthus taylorianus, 430 
Phyllanthus tenellus, 436 
Phyllanthus urinaria, 434, 436 
Phyllanthus volkensii, 432 
Phyllanthus welwitschianus, 426 
Phyllanthus welwitschianus var. beillei, 426 
Physalis angulata, 437, 439 
Physalis flexuosa, 629 
Physalis ixocarpa, 439 
Physalis lagascae, 439, 440 
Physalis micrantha, 440 
Physalis minima, 437, 438, 439, 440 
Physalis philadelphica, 439 
Phytolacca americana, 441, 442, 445 
Phytolacca decandra, 441 
Phytolacca dioica, 442, 443 
Phytolacca dodecandra, 443, 446' 
Phytolacca heptandra, 446 
Phytolacca octandra, 442 
Picralima elliotii, 336 
Picralima nitida, 336, 338, 448, 450 
Pierreodendron africanum, 452 
Pierreodendron kerstingii, 452 
Piper betle, 455 
Piper capense, 452, 455 
Piper capense var. brachyrhachis, 454 
Piper cubeba, 432 
Piper emirnense, 452 
Piper guineense, 327, 381, 532, 563 
Piper nigrum, 454 
Piper subpeltatum, 454 
Piper sylvestre, 456 
Piper umbellatum, 454, 456 
Pisonia aculeata, 457 
Pisonia calpidia, 457 
Pisonia lanceolata, 457 
Plagiostyles africana, 457 
Plantago afra, 461, 465 
Plantago lanceolata, 459, 460, 464, 466 
Plantago major, 459, 461, 462, 464, 466 
Plantago ouata, 461, 465 
Plantago palmata, 465 
Plantago tanalensis, 466 
Platycladus orientalis, 466, 467 
Pleiocarpa mutica, 468, 465 
Pleiocarpa pycnantha, 469 
Pleiocarpa rostrata, 469 
Pleiocarpa talbotii, 469 
Pleioceras barteri, 470, 470 
Plesiatropha carpinifolia, 471 
Plesiatropha paniculata, 471 
Pluchea indica, 433 
Plumbago aphylla, 471 
Plumbago auriculata, 472 
Plumbago capensis, 472 
Plumbago dawei, 477 
Plumbago indica, 473, 474 
Plumbago rosea, 473 
Plumbago zeylanica, 475, 476 
Portulaca quadrifida, 274 
Pothomorphe subpeltata, 454 
Pothomorphe umbellata, 454 
Prosopis africana, 58 
Pseudolachnostylis maprouneifolia, 478 
Psidium guajava, 62 
Psorospermum febrifugum, 26 
Psychotria ipecacuanha, 24 
Psychotria peduncularis, 242 
Pycnobotrya multiflora, 479 
Pycnobotrya nitida, 479 
Pycnocoma angustifolia, 480 
Pycnocoma chevalieri, 480 
Pycnocoma cornuta, 480 
Pycnocoma littoralis, 480 
Pycnocoma macrophylla, 479 
Pycnocoma minor, 480 
Pycnocoma thonneri, 480 
Quassia grandifolia, 452 
Raphia hookeri, 492 
Rauvolfia caffra, 480, 4S2 
Rauvolfia capuronii, 485 
Rauvolfia confertiflora, 485 
Rauvolfia cumminsii, 484 
Rauvolfia macrophylla, 480 
Rauvolfia mannii, 484 
Rauvolfia media, 485 
Rauvolfia mombasiana, 482 
Rauvolfia obscura, 484 
Rauvolfia obtusiflora, 485 
Rauvolfia rosea, 484 
Rauvolfia serpentina, 482, 487, 488, 568 
Rauvolfia volkensii, 482 
Rauvolfia vomitoria, 54, 482, 483, 485, 4( 
Rhigiocarya peltata, 490 
Rhigiocarya racemifera, 489, 450 
Ricinocarpus petiolaris, 28 
Ricinodendron heudelotii, 470 
Ricinus communis, 24, 349, 457 
Roupellina boivinii, 543 
Sacoglottis amazonica, 492 
Sacoglottis gabonensis, 491, 452 
Sambucus africana, 495 
Sambucus canadensis, 495 
Sambucus ebulus, 495 
Sambucus mexicana, 495 
Sambucus nigra, 494 
Sambucus nigra subsp. canadensis, 495 
Sapindus saponaria, 445 
Sapium aubrevillei, 516 
Sapium cornutum, 499 
Sapium ellipticum, 515 
Sapium grahamii, 303 
INDEX OF SCIENTIFIC PLANT NAMES 779 
Sapium integerrimum, 499 
Sarcocephalus latifolius, 277 
Schizozygia coffaeoides, 496 
Schlechterina mitostemmatoides, 497 
Schwenckia americana, 497, 498 
Schwenkia americana, 498 
Scleria boivinii, 369 
Sclerocarya birrea, 226 
Sclerocroton cornutus, 499 
Sclerocroton integerrimus, 499 
Scorodophleus zenkeri, 407 
Sebastiania chamaelea, 385 
Securidaca longipedunculata, 306 
Securinega antsingyensis, 500 
Securinega capuronii, 499 
Securinega microcarpa, 305 
Securinega seyrigii, 500 
Securinega virosa, 305 
Senna atoto, 64, 69, 84, 211, 500, 50i 
Senna alexandrina, 151, 502, 504, 509, 510, 511, 
512 
Senna alexandrina var. obtusata, 504 
Senna auriculata, 503 
Senna baccarinii, 504 
Senna didymobotrya, 505, 507 
Senna holosericea, 504 
Senna hookeriana, 504 
Se/ma staZsca, 503, 508, 505 
Senna italica subsp. arachoides, 510 
Senna italica subsp. micrantha, 510 
Senna leandrii, 501 
Senna longiracemosa, 504 
Senna occidentalis, 515 
Senna petersiana, 511 
Senna podocarpa, 151, 512 
Senna singueana, 513 
Senna sophera, 514 
Senna tora, 515 
Senna truncata, 510 
Shirakia aubrevillei, 516 
Shirakia elliptica, 515 
Shirakiopsis aubrevillei, 516 
Shirakiopsis elliptica, 515 
Shirakiopsis trilocularis, 516 
Smeathmannia laevigata, 518 
Smeathmannia pubescens, 517 
Solanum aculeatissimum, 518, 5 i5 
Solanum aethiopicum, 528 
Solanum americanum, 528, 529 
Solanum angustispinosum, 518 
Solanum arundo, 527 
Solanum bojeri, 525 
Solanum burchellii, 521 
Solanum campylacanthum, 525 
Solanum capense, 521 
Solanum capsicoides, 519 
Solanum catombelense, 520 
Solanum coagulons, 521 
Solanum cumingii, 527 
Solanum dasyphyllum, 519 
Solanum delagoense, 525 
Solanum dinteri, 521 
Solanum diplacanthum, 527 
Solanum dubium, 521 
Solanum erianthum, 522, 525 
Solanum erythracanthum, 524 
Solanum florulentum, 529 
Solanum giganteum, 531 
Solanum glabratum, 521 
Solanum goetzei, 531 
Solanum grossedentatum, 529 
Solanum hastifolium, 525 
Solanum heinianum, 530 
Solanum incanum, 72, 525, 527 
Solanum khasianum, 518, 519 
Solanum kwebense, 531 
Solanum linnaeanum, 527 
Solanum macrocarpon, 519, 520, 528 
Solanum madagascariense, 530 
Solanum marginatum, 527 
Solanum mauense, 522 
Solanum mauritianum, 524 
Solanum melongena, 520, 527, 528 
Solanum myriacanthum, 519 
Solanum namaquense, 521 
Solanum nigrum, 528, 525 
Solanum nigrum subsp. schultesii, 530 
Solanum panduriforme, 525 
Solanum renschii, 531 
Solanum richardii, 522, 527 
Solanum scabrum, 529 
Solanum sepicula, 521 
Solanum sessilistellatum, 527 
Solanum somalense, 531 
Solanum taitense, 525 
Solanum tarderemotum, 529 
Solanum terminale, 530 
Solanum terminale subsp. welwitschii, 530 
Solanum tettense, 531 
Solanum thruppii, 521 
Solanum tomentosum, 520, 521 
Solanum undatum, 527 
Solanum verbascifolium, 522 
Solanum viarum, 519 
Solanum villosum, 528, 529 
Solanum welwitschii, 530 
Solanum zanzibarense, 524, 525 
Sphenocentrum jollyanum, 532, 533 
Spigelia anthelmia, 534, 535 
Spigelia marilandica, 536 
Spirospermum penduliflorum, 536 
Spondianthus preussii, 537, 535 
780 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Spondianthus preussii var. glaber, 538 
Stachyothyrsus tessmannii, 395 
Stephania abyssinica, 539, 540 
Stephania abyssinica var. tomentella, 540 
Stephania dinklagei, 540 
Stephania laetificata, 410 
Stillingia lineata, 541 
Strophanthus amboensis, 542 
Strophanthus barteri, 557 
Strophanthus boivinii, 543 
Strophanthus courmontii, 544, 553 
Strophanthus eminii, 46, 545, 54ff, 553 
Strophanthus gardeniiflorus, 561 
Strophanthus gerrardii, 560 
Strophanthus gracilis, 557 
Strophanthus gratus, 31, 247, 250, 486, 546, 54<S, 
551, 553, 556, 558, 561 
Strophanthus hispidus, 546, 548, 549, 55i, 
554, 556, 557, 558, 559, 561 
Strophanthus hispidus var. kombe, 552 
Strophanthus holosericeus, 546 
Strophanthus intermedins, 542 
Strophanthus kombe, 546, 550, 551, 552, 553 
Strophanthus ledienii, 545 
Strophanthus luteolus, 560 
Strophanthus mirabilis, 546 
Strophanthus mortehanii, 551 
Strophanthus nicholsonii, 546, 553 
Strophanthus parviflorus, 551 
Strophanthus petersianus, 554 
Strophanthus preussii, 555, 55£ 
Strophanthus sarmentosus, 549, 551, 552, 557, 
555, 561 
Strophanthus sarmentosus var. glabriflorus, 559 
Strophanthus speciosus, 560 
Strophanthus thollonii, 549, 551, 560 
Strophanthus welwitschii, 561 
Strychnopsis thouarsii, 562 
Strychnos aculeata, 563, 5ff4 
Strychnos afzelii, 565 
Strychnos angolensis, 566 
Strychnos barteri, 567 
Strychnos camptoneura, 567 
Strychnos cerasifera, 579 
Strychnos congolana, 565 
Strychnos densiflora, 564 
Strychnos dinklagei, 568 
Strychnos diplotricha, 575 
Strychnos elaeocarpa, 564 
Strychnos floribunda, 569 
Strychnos gossweileri, 567 
Strychnos henningsii, 570 
Strychnos icaja, 571, 572, 580 
Strychnos longicaudata, 573 
Strychnos lucens, 564 
Strychnos malchairii, 566 
Strychnos melastomatoides, 567 
Strychnos mostueoides, 574 
Strychnos myrtoides, 575 
Strychnos nux-vomica, 575 
Strychnos phaeotricha, 577 
Strychnos potatorum, 577 
Strychnos samba, 579 
Strychnos staudtii, 564 
Strychnos tchibangensis, 573 
Strychnos ternata, 564 
Strychnos trinervis, 565, 573 
Strychnos usambarensis, 579, 5<Si 
Strychnos variabilis, 581 
Suregada adenophora, 582 
Suregada boiviniana, 582 
Suregada decidua, 582 
Suregada pycnanthera, 582 
Suregada zanzibariensis, 582 
Suriana maritima, 582 
Symphytum officinale, 583, 5<S4 
Synadenium angolense, 290 
Synadenium cupulare, 282 
Synadenium glaucescens, 282 
Synadenium grantii, 288, 290 
Synadenium pereskiifolium, 46, 281 
Synclisia scabrida, 585 
Syrrheonema fasciculatum, 587 
Tabernaemontana africana, 591 
Tabernaemontana angolensis, 593 
Tabernaemontana brachyantha, 595 
Tabernaemontana ciliata, 588 
Tabernaemontana coffeoides, 587 
Tabernaemontana contorta, 595 
Tabernaemontana crassa, 589, 55i 
Tabernaemontana eglandulosa, 591 
Tabernaemontana elegans, 592 
Tabernaemontana holstii, 593 
Tabernaemontana mauritiana, 596 
Tabernaemontana pachysiphon, 591, 593, 555 
Tabernaemontana persicariaefolia, 596 
Tabernaemontana persicariifolia, 596 
Tabernaemontana psorocarpa, 595 
Tabernaemontana retusa, 588 
Tabernaemontana stenosiphon, 591 
Tabernaemontana usambarensis, 597 
Tabernaemontana ventricosa, 597 
Tabernanthe elliptica, 601 
Tabernanthe iboga, 60, 61, 385, 387, 588, 592, 
594, 598, ffOO 
Talinum paniculatum, 408 
Talinum trianguläre, 408 
Tephrosia vogelii, 169 
Terminalia catappa, 457 
Terminalia macroptera, 150 
Tetrorchidium congolense, 603 
Tetrorchidium didymostemon, 602, 603 
INDEX OF SCIENTIFIC PLANT NAMES 781 
Tetrorchidium minus, 602 
Tetrorchidium oppositifolium, 603 
Thaumatococcus daniellii, 97, 369 
Thecacoris lucida, 604 
Thecacoris spathulifolia, 604 
Thecacoris stenopetala, 604 
Thecacoris viridis, 604 
Thesium lacinulatum, 605 
Thesium lineatum, 188, 605 
Thesium viride, 605, 605 
Thevetia ahouai, 608 
Thevetia neriifolia, 606 
Thevetia peruviana, 606, 607 
Thomandersia hensii, 450 
Thuja orientalis, 466 
Tiliacora dielsiana, 609 
Tiliacora dinklagei, 608 
Tiliacora leonensis, 608 
Tinospora bakis, 185, 609 
Tinospora caffra, 610 
Tinospora fragosa, 611 
Tinospora tenera, 611 
Tournefortia acuminata, 611 
Tournefortia argentea, 611, 612 
Tournefortia sarmentosa, 611 
Tragia benthamii, 613 
Tragia brevipes, 612 
Tragia furialis, 613 
Tragia hildebrandtii, 613 
Tragia okanyua, 613 
Tragia plukenetii, 613 
Tragia preussii, 613 
Tragia pungens, 613 
Tragia sehe)'fieri, 613 
Tragia senegalensis, 613 
Tragia spathulata, 613 
Tragia tenuifolia, 613 
Trianthema portulacastrum, 119 
Trichodesma africanum, 613 
Trichodesma ambacense, 614 
Trichodesma ambacense subsp. hockii, 614 
Trichodesma angustifolia, 616 
Trichodesma gracile, 613 
Trichodesma hockii, 614 
Trichodesma indicum, 615, 616 
Trichodesma physaloides, 614 
Trichodesma zeylanicum, 614, 615 
Triclisia dictyophylla, 616, 617 
Triclisia gilletii, 616 
Triclisia macrocarpa, 617 
Triclisia macrophylla, 619 
Triclisia patens, 618 
Triclisia sacleuxii, 617 
Triclisia subcordata, 619 
Trigonella foenum-graecum, 186, 192, 526 
Tristemma mauritianum, 365 
Tryphostemma longifolium, 114 
Tylophora indica, 23 
Tylosema fassoglense, 315 
Uapaca guineensis, 619, 650 
Uapaca lissopyrena, 621 
Uapaca paludosa, 622 
Uapaca togoensis, 621 
Usteria guineensis, 622 
Utricularia inflexa, 397 
Vigna radiata, 295 
Vïraca major, 625 
Vinca rosea, 153 
Vitellaria paradoxa, 152, 512 
VïZis vinifera, 342 
Voacanga africana, 623, 625, 633 
Voacanga angolensis, 623 
Vbactrng-a bracteata, 626 
Voacanga chalotiana, 626 
Voacanga thouarsii, 624, 627 
Withania ashwagandha, 632 
Withania somnifera, 629, 635 
Wrightia arborea, 633 
Wrightia demartiniana, 633 
Wrightia natalensis, 633 
Wrightia tinctoria, 334 
Zanthoxylum gilletii, 97 
Zanthoxylum leprieurii, 111 
Zehneria scabra, 173 
Zimmermannia capillipes, 380 
782 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Index of vernacular plant names 
Abuta, 178 
Adam's apple flower, 589 
Aden senna, 502 
African blackwood, 398 
African false wattle, 398 
African laburnum, 150 
African milkbush, 262, 288, 296 
African pepperwort, 360 
African senna, 514 
African serpent wood, 485 
African snakeroot, 485 
African soap berry, 443 
African wattle, 398 
Agarra pinto, 117 
Agave d'Amérique, 49 
Akot, 233 
Alchornée fleurie, 60 
Aleppo senna, 508 
Alexandrian senna, 502 
Algodâozinho do campo, 454 
Almeidinha, 296 
Aloe vera, 82 
Aloé vera, 82 
Aloes, 82 
Aloes, 82 
Aloes arborescent, 63 
Aloés de Barbados, 82 
Aloès du Cap, 68 
Aloès vulgaire, 82 
Alquequenje amarelo, 437 
American agave, 49 
American aloe, 49 
Amourette marron, 522 
Anamu, 412 
Ananas marron, 75 
Angular winter cherry, 437 
Annual poinsettia, 265 
Anthocleista majestueux, 96 
Aranha de emposse, 309 
Arapabaca, 534 
Arbre à fourmis, 113 
Arbre à savon du Gabon, 602 
Arbre chou, 96, 98 
Arbre de djeman, 57 
Arbre de kisse kisse, 372 
Arbre huileux, 468 
Argémone, 105 
Arrow-poison tree, 32 
Ashwagandha, 629 
Assyrian plum, 189 
Asthma herb, 267 
Atieghe, 231 
Aubergine sauvage, 525 
Aveloz, 296 
Azebre vegetal, 82 
Baingou, 316 
Balai sur terre, 471 
Balan des savanes, 305 
Balâo rajado, 437 
Balloon cherry, 437 
Baobâ exotica, 46 
Baobab chacal, 46 
Barbados aloe, 82 
Barbados nut, 347 
Bâton casse, 147 
Bay cedar, 582 
Bee sting bush, 109 
Bellyache bush, 354 
Berenquete, 485 
Be-still tree, 606 
Bidou, 491 
Big-leaved puzzle bush, 237 
Biota, 466 
Biota da China, 466 
Bitter aloe, 68 
Bitter bark, 116 
Bitter grass, 598 
Bitter tomato, 525 
Bitterbark tree, 491 
Black catnip, 415 
Black elder, 494 
Black grain, 162, 165 
Black nightshade, 528 
Blue bitterberry, 579 
Blue plumbago, 472 
Bois à lait, 606 
Bois amer, 598 
Bois carotte, 457 
Bois castique, 419 
Bois caustique, 419 
Bois chauve-souris, 391 
Bois chenille, 379 
Bois d'anisette, 454 
Bois de Charles, 25 
Bois de crève cœur, 25 
Bois de demoiselle, 419 
Bois de joli cœur, 457 
Bois de lait, 541, 596 
Bois de Laurent-Martin, 611 
Bois de perroquet, 188 
Bois de pipe, 328 
Bois jaune, 389 
Bois mapou, 457 
Bois matelot, 582 
Bois pigeon, 188 
Bois queue de rat, 25 
Bois rouge, 249 
Bois sacré, 598 
Bois savon, 189 
Boisa de pastor, 142 
Bonduc, 131 
Bonduc nut, 131 
Bore tree, 494 
Borragem brava, 320 
Bossmé, 233 
Bourrache sauvage, 614 
Bourse à berger, 142 
Bourse à pasteur, 142 
Boursette, 142 
Brède martin, 528 
Bredo de porco, 117 
Brinvillière, 534 
Broad-leaved croton, 203 
Broom creeper, 183 
Brown strophanthus, 549 
Bugi-bugi, 57 
Buisson de la gale, 500 
Bunce, 57 
Burbiaca, 218 
Burodé, 622 
Burra leiteira, 267 
Bush cane, 191 
Bush lime, 241 
Bushman poison, 30, 43 
Butua, 178 
Cabbage palm, 96 
Cabbage tree, 93, 96, 98, 100 
Caca poule, 265 
Cacafistula, 150 
Cadoc, 131 
Cadoque, 131 
Café beirâo, 500 
Calumba, 345 
Camapû, 437 
Camel bush, 614 
Cana fistula, 147, 150 
Cancer weed, 278 
Canchlagua, 271 
Candelabra aloe, 63 
Candelabra tree, 254, 272, 505 
Candelabrum tree, 98 
Candle bush, 505 
Candle plant, 283, 301 
Canéficier, 147 
Cânhamo, 135 
Cannabis, 135 
INDEX OF VERNACULAR PLANT NAMES 783 
Canne d'eau, 194 
Canoe weed, 425 
Capa rosa, 441 
Cape aloe, 68 
Cape leadwort, 472 
Cape peppercress, 360 
Cape plumbago, 472 
Caraguatâ, 82 
Cardo santo, 105 
Carimào, 575 
Carry me seed, 415 
Casse à grappes, 150 
Casse absus, 162 
Casse ailée, 500 
Casse de Sieber, 150 
Casse doux, 147 
Casse du Sénégal, 150 
Casse espagnole, 147 
Casse noircissante, 165 
Casse-flûte, 150 
Câssia, 502 
Cassia coromandeliana, 514 
Câssia fistula, 147 
Cassia officinal, 147 
Cassie, 131 
Cassier, 502 
Cassoneira, 296 
Cata grande, 623 
Cattle bush, 614 
Caustique rouge, 419 
Cène, 502 
Century plant, 49 
Ceylon leadwort, 475 
Chagas velhas, 354 
Chamber bitter, 434, 294 
Chanvre, 135 
Chanvre indien, 135 
Chapeau de Napoleon, 606 
Chapéu de Napoleâo, 606 
Chardon du pays, 105 
Chavi, 612 
Cherry mahogony, 491 
Child pick-a-back, 415 
Chinese arbor-vitae, 466 
Chinese waterberry, 305 
Christmas bush, 57 
Christmas candle, 500 
Clammy cherry, 189 
Climbing lily, 309 
Climbing nettle, 612 
Coastal aloe, 82 
Coat-of-many-colours, 288 
Cockroach berry, 518 
Cœurs-volants, 339 
Colombo, 345 
Colombo do Africa, 345 
Columba, 345 
Common bushweed, 305 
Common clubmoss, 366 
Common comfrey, 583 
Common leaf-flower, 434 
Common nightshade, 528 
Common plantain, 462 
Common poison bush, 30, 32 
Common poison rope, 560 
Common pokeberry, 441 
Common ramping-fumitory, 308 
Common tree euphorbia, 272 
Concombre à chien, 218 
Concombre diable, 218 
Conessi, 332 
Conessi bark, 329 
Congo root, 412 
Consolda maior, 583 
Consound, 583 
Coqueret, 437 
Coqueret anguleux, 437 
Coqueret somnifère, 629 
Cor de mogno, 619 
Coraçâozinho, 407 
Corky passionflower, 397 
Corkystem passionflower, 397 
Corne de cerf didyme, 361 
Cornucopia, 218 
Cortalinde, 500 
Costus, 191 
Cotton-leaved physic nut, 354 
Cow foot, 407 
Cow-foot leaf, 454 
Craw-craw plant, 500 
Creeping lily, 309 
Creeping sebastiania, 385 
Creeping spiderling, 121 
Cresson, 407 
Cressonnette, 361 
Croton, 214 
Croton à feuilles larges, 203 
Croton cathartique, 214 
Croton oil plant, 214 
Crotone, 214 
Crotone tiglio, 214 
Crow fig, 575 
Curaçao aloe, 82 
Curanellie rouge, 434 
Curare, 571 
Cut-leaf ground cherry, 437 
Cyprès chinois, 466 
Dankh,225 
Dartial, 500 
Dartrier, 500 
Datura, 221 
Demouain, 336 
Demouain à gros fruits, 448 
Dentelaire de Ceylan, 475 
Dentelaire du Cap, 472 
Desert rose, 46 
Devil's apple, 221, 518 
Devil's pumpkin, 397 
Devil's trumpet, 221 
Dibughi, 598 
Dihoa, 598 
Djindje pété, 46 
Dog senna, 508 
Douche d'or, 147 
Douvant-douvant, 412 
Dovewood, 57 
Downy thorn apple, 218 
Drumstick tree, 150 
Duiker berry, 478 
Dune poison bush, 29 
Dwarf cassia, 511 
Eared cassia, 511 
Eastern thuja, 466 
Ebam, 448 
Éboga, 598 
Eboka, 598 
Ecorce de conessie, 332 
Egyptian hemp, 342 
Egyptian henbane, 342 
Eland's pea, 508 
Elder, 494 
Elderberry, 494 
Endod, 443 
Enxofre vegetal, 365 
Eraga, 598 
Erect spiderling, 120 
Erva andorinha, 267 
Erva de jabuti, 407 
Erva de Santa Luzia, 267 
Erva de tipi, 412 
Erva de vidro, 407 
Erva do Malabar, 332 
Erva dos bruxos, 221 
Erva moura, 528 
Erva moura sonifera, 629 
Erva pombinha, 422 
Erva poubinha, 422 
Erva tostâo, 117 
Erva-babosa, 82 
Estramonio, 221 
Estrofanto, 546 
Ésula redonda, 278 
Esule ronde, 278 
Euforbia, 296 
Euphorbe à feuilles de thym, 
294 
Euphorbe candélabre, 254 
Euphorbe des jardins, 278 
784 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Euphorbe des vignes, 278 
Euphorbe effilée, 296 
Euphorbe omblette, 278 
Euphorbe petit-figuier, 256 
Euphorbe pilulifère, 267 
Exile t ree , 606 
False l ightning bush, 90 
False mahogany, 619 
False pareira , 178 
False rubber tree, 329 
Faux baobab, 46 
Fedegosâo, 500 
Fedegoso, 320, 500 
Feuille du diable, 221 
Fève d'enfer, 347 
Fever leaf, 123 
Fever nut , 131 
Fever pod, 332 
Fever tree, 212 
Fia boba pequena, 452 
Fia ipqueté, 191 
Fiddler 's spurge, 265 
Figueira do inferno, 221 
Finger euphorbia, 296 
Finger tree, 296 
Fire thorn, 109 
Fitolaca, 443 
Flame lily, 309 
Flor de anjinho, 153 
Flor do poeta, 265 
Forest croton, 212 
Forest fever berry, 212 
Forest fever tree, 203 
Forest ordeal tree, 249 
Forest poison rope, 560 
Forest toad tree, 597 
Fougère décorative, 365 
Four-leaved senna, 162 
Fumâr i a das paredes , 308 
Fumeter re , 308 
Fumete r re des murs , 308 
Galamaluco, 347 
Gale of wind, 415 
Garden nightshade, 528 
Garlic weed, 412 
Gar ra s de tigre, 309 
Gingembre spirale, 191 
Ginger lily, 191 
Glory lily, 309 
Goat weed, 585 
Gogoia, 518 
Golden pipetree, 147 
Golden shower, 147 
Gonasokola, 21 
Gooseberry, 437 
Graceful sandmat , 271 
Graceful spurge, 271 
Grand baume, 454 
Grand pignon d'Inde, 347 
Grand sureau, 494 
Grand tali , 249 
Grande consolda, 583 
Grande consoude, 583 
Grào de maluco, 347 
Grape strychnos, 578 
Grea te r p lanta in , 462 
Green thorn apple, 221 
Grenadille, 397 
Grey bi t ter apple, 525 
Grey leaf heliotrope, 322 
Gripe weed, 422 
Gros planta in , 462 
Gros ricin, 347 
Ground pine, 366 
Ground spurge, 256 
Gui landina seed, 131 
Guine, 412 
Guinea-hen weed, 412 
Gulf leaf flower, 415 
Gulf sandmat , 294 
Gully root, 412 
Hairy s t rophan thus , 549 
Hashish , 135 
Heart-fruit , 339 
Heliotrópio-indiano, 320 
Hemp, 135 
Herbe à calalou, 528 
Herbe à couleuvre, 407 
Herbe à couresse, 407 
Herbe à la brinvilliers, 534 
Herbe à verrues , 320 
Herbe à vers, 534 
Herbe au chagrin, 412, 415, 422 
Herbe Caroline, 459 
Herbe chat te , 23 
Herbe cipaye, 328, 614 
Herbe colique, 271 
Herbe de lait, 278 
Herbe du chagrin, 422 
Herbe du diable, 221 
Herbe papillon, 320 
Herbe tourterelle, 614 
Herbe-à-cinq-côtes, 459 
Hogweed, 437 
Holar rhena , 332 
Holarrhène, 329 
Holar rhène du Sénégal, 329 
Horn-pod tree, 229 
Horseradish tree, 233 
Hurr icane weed, 415 
Iboga, 598 
Icaja, 571 
Hondo, 60 
Impala lily, 45, 46 
Indian acalypha, 23 
Indian aloe, 82 
Indian cherry, 189 
Indian ginseng, 629 
Indian heliotrope, 320 
Indian laburnum, 147 
Indian leadwort, 473 
Indian net t le , 23 
Indian senna, 502 
Indigo berry, 397 
Inimbo, 131 
Inimboja, 131 
Inkberry, 183, 441 
I ta l ian senna, 508 
Jacques marron , 188 
Jamaica senna, 508 
James town weed, 221 
J a p a n e s e poinsett ia, 265 
Jasmine i ro de Africa, 229 
Jasmine i ro de Cazengo, 229 
Ja t ropha , 347 
J e a n Robert, 267 
J imson weed, 221 
Joâ de capote, 437 
Joelho de cabra, 475 
Ju rubeba , 518 
Ju squ i ame d'Egypt, 342 
Kadinga puna , 475 
Khar toum senna, 502 
Kia ya mamba , 544 
Kibombo, 593 
Kidachi aloe, 63 
Kikilé, 434 
Kilyambiti plant , 41 
Kimanja nouchawi, 309 
King of the forest, 500 
Kinyunywa, 288 
Kinywele, 267 
Kisawanyemungo, 265 
Kishiki cha buga, 174, 176, 178 
Kisimamleo, 76 
Kitadali , 267 
Kitapiaroho, 267 
Kiyuyu, 281 
Kiziwa, 267 
Knitbone, 583 
Kombi, 552 
Kran tz aloe, 63 
Kudu berry, 478 
Kurchi bark, 329, 332 
L'Oubli, 405 
Lady's purse , 142 
Lance-leaf periwinkle, 152 
Large planta in , 462 
INDEX OF VERNACULAR PLANT NAMES 785 
Large spotted spurge, 271 
Laurier à fleurs jaunes, 606 
Laurier jaune des Indes, 606 
Leaf of God, 598 
Leaf-flower, 419 
Lecheleche, 271 
Lechosa, 271 
Leitaria, 278 
Lesser candelabra tree, 259 
Lesser forest fever tree, 95 
Lesser swine-cress, 361 
Liane amère, 176 
Liane corde, 176 
Liane étoilée, 112 
Liane patte cheval, 178 
Liane serpent, 176 
Licopódio brasileiro, 365 
Licopódio chifre de veado, 366 
Lightning bush, 181 
Lihoka, 598 
Lim du Gabon, 246 
Lingua de sapo, 407 
Lingua de vaca, 236 
Lis de Malabar, 309 
Lis des impalas, 46 
Lis glorieux, 309 
Lis grimpant, 309 
Lobed croton, 202 
Loendro amarelo, 606 
Lombrigueira, 534 
Long-pod cassia, 144 
Longtail cassia, 144 
Love apple, 518 
Low-veld toad tree, 592 
Lucky nut tree, 606 
Lutete-lumene, 448 
Luzia, 267 
Lycopode à massue, 366 
Lycopode ornamental, 365 
Macarra bubel, 165 
Madagascar periwinkle, 153 
Magic nut, 375 
Malagueta de galinha, 629 
Malangili, 296 
Malnommée, 267 
Mancone, 246, 249 
Mancône, 249 
Mandali, 34 
Mapou, 457 
Maracujä, 397 
Maria mole amarga, 522 
Marihuana, 135 
Mbagi, 606 
Mbangi, 135 
Mbaraka, 144, 511, 513 
Mbaraka mkuu, 249 
Mbawa, 371 
Mbombo, 592 
Mbono, 347 
Mbuba, 544 
Mbunduki, 328 
Mburabu, 375 
Mburuga, 131 
Mchacha, 21, 26, 372 
Mchakaazi, 296 
Mchakati, 26 
Mchekwa, 115 
Mchoki, 552 
Mchorongo, 290 
Mchunga ng'ombe, 471 
Mchunguchungu, 432 
Mckakari, 26 
Mdagu, 46 
Mdaguwande, 46 
Mdeka, 452 
Mdimu msitu, 582 
Mdunga ndewe, 109 
Médecinier rouge, 354 
Médecinier sauvage, 354 
Medicinal aloe, 82 
Médicinier purgatif, 347 
Mediterranean aloe, 82 
Meduro, 147 
Megoza, 45 
Meimendro negro, 342 
Metel, 218 
Métel, 218 
Metel thorn apple, 218 
Mexican poppy, 105 
Mexican thistle, 105 
Mfuungozi, 432 
Mgendahamwe, 372 
Mhulapori, 629 
Milk bush, 606 
Milkweed, 278 
Milky mangrove, 304 
Mjiakhati, 26 
Mkakatika, 144 
Mkalamu, 309 
Mkalanga, 371 
Mkarati, 123 
Mkasiri, 432 
Mkasisi cha mkiwa, 176 
Mkasisi mkiwa, 178 
Mkaumwa, 345 
Mkelekele, 249 
Mkengeti, 34 
Mkidori, 317 
Mkilika, 237 
Mkomwe, 131, 133 
Mkoromando, 317 
Mkufi, 480 
Mkundekunde, 146, 147, 513 
Mkungu maji, 99 
Mkusu, 317 
Mkuti, 592 
Mkwakwara, 117, 120 
Mkwale, 332 
Mkwamba, 305 
Mkwamba maji, 305 
Mkwayakwaya, 117, 121 
Mlagalaga, 176, 178 
Mlalangao, 72, 88 
Mlindaziwa, 627 
Mnamu, 131 
Mnanaha, 218 
Mnaraha, 218 
Mnavu, 528 
Mnawha, 218 
Mnukovunda, 21 
Mnyanya-mwitu, 525 
Mnyanya-porini, 525 
Mole plant, 265 
Monkey pod, 511 
Monkey rope, 34, 183 
Monkey's paws, 365 
Monte au ciel, 320 
Morelle noire, 528 
Mossué, 150 
Mother's heart, 142 
Mountain bush aloe, 63 
Mpaga, 38 
Mpanda-yongoo, 328 
Mpapuradoko, 317 
Mpelepele, 496 
Mpilipili tawa, 109 
Mpingawaume, 511 
Mranaha, 218 
Msahala, 502 
Msamburini, 316 
Msasa mlanda, 614 
Msesawe, 480 
Mseswe, 480 
Mshubili, 76 
Msinduzi, 201, 212 
Msoma, 317 
Msoro, 133 
Msubili, 76 
Msungu, 32 
Msungululu, 545 
Msunguti, 30, 32 
Mswaki ndume, 109 
Mtambuu mwitu, 99 
Mtapatapa, 471 
Mtapatapa mkufu, 471 
Mtata, 116 
Mteja, 305 
Mtemua shamba, 629 
786 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Mti mweupe, 332 
Mtobwe, 544 
Mtogo, 229 
Mtomwu, 254 
Mtondo, 545 
Mtonga mwitu, 496 
Mtongotongo, 254 
Mtovua macho, 296 
Mtua , 525 
Mtula, 525 
Mtumba tu , 203 
Mtunda , 153 
M t u n d a ya mbwa, 454 
Mtundu tundu , 328, 372 
Mtunguja, 525 
Mtunguja bonde, 105 
Mtunguja-mwitu, 525 
Mtungutungi i , 254 
Mtupa , 254 
M t u p a mwitu, 296 
Muambe , 593 
Muave, 249 
Mubango, 208 
Mubongwena, 544 
Mucarâ t i , 244 
Mucura, 412 
Muranha , 218, 222 
Mvariso, 554 
Mviongozi, 432 
Mvundovundo wa chamboni, 
218 
Mwache, 267 
Mwagewage, 614 
Mwambe ziwa, 597 
Mwambula , 475 
Mwango, 496 
Mwangwakwao, 116 
Mwanja, 46 
Mwasi, 296 
Mwavi, 249 
Mwavi dume, 249 
Mwembe mwitu, 480 
Mwino, 432 
Mwinu, 505 
Mzangaya, 150 
Mzangaye, 150 
Mziwaziwa, 103, 267, 338 
Mzizima, 432 
Narrow-leaved p lanta in , 459 
Narrow-leaved senna, 502 
Na ta l hickory, 159 
Needle bush, 109 
Ngole, 39 
Niando, 60 
Nicker nut , 131 
Njinde, 169 
Nodding club-moss, 365 
Nogueira de bonduque, 131 
Noix vomique, 575 
Nor thern bluebell, 614 
Noz vomica, 575 
Nubian senna, 502 
Number one, 378 
Nux-vomica tree, 575 
Obéro, 448 
Octopus plant , 63 
Okhuaba , 233 
Olho de ga to, 131 
Orange grape creeper, 610 
Ordeal plant , 161 
Ordeal t ree, 244, 246 
Oreille de chat te , 23 
Oreille de vache, 583 
Orelha de ra to , 174 
Orelhas de asno, 583 
Ovoung grandes feuilles, 401 
Pago olho de marcaçao, 238 
Palé tuvier d'eau douce, 619 
Palé tuvier de rivière, 619 
Pa lha verde, 221 
Pa lma de Sâo Joào, 365 
Papae um eve, 98 
Papoila mexicana, 105 
Papoula do México, 105 
Pare i ra brava, 178 
Par iparoba, 454 
Passiflore, 397 
P a u branco, 602 
P a u gamela, 602 
Pavot du Mexique, 105 
Pavot épineux, 105 
Peanu t -bu t t e r cassia, 505 
Pencil t ree, 296 
Pépéromia, 407 
Pepper and salt, 142 
Pepper elder, 407 
Pepper-leaved senna, 514 
Pepperweed, 360 
Pervenche de Madagascar, 153 
Pervinca de Madagascar , 153 
Pet i t détar , 225 
Pet i t t a m a r i n blanc, 415 
Pet i t t a m a r i n rouge, 434 
Pet i t trèfle, 285 
Pet i te rougette, 294 
Pet i te teigne noire, 285 
Petroleum plant , 296 
Pet ty spurge, 278 
Physic nut , 347 
Phytolaque, 441, 443 
Piào vermelho, 354 
Pied d'éléphant, 46 
Pig's senna, 162 
Pill-bearing spurge, 267 
P imenta d'âgua, 534 
Pinhao, 347 
Pinhao roxo, 354 
Pinheir inho do campo, 365 
Pink tassle-berry, 103 
Pintcheira do mato, 513 
Pipi root, 412 
Pi teira brava, 49 
Pi te i ra de boi, 49 
Planta in , 459, 462 
P lan ta in lancéolé, 459 
Plante des cros-cros, 500 
Plumbago azul, 472 
Plumbago de flor vermelha, 473 
Pô d'arco, 57 
Pó vermifugo, 534 
Poc-poc sauvage, 629 
Poison arrow vine, 545, 546, 
549, 555, 557 
Poison d'épreuve, 249 
Poison devil's pepper, 485 
Poison gooseberry, 629 
Poison nut , 575 
Poivrier du Cap, 452 
Poke, 441 
Poke root, 441 
Pokeweed, 441 
Pomme d'amour, 518 
Pomme de Sodome, 525 
Pomme de voutac, 575 
Pomme épineuse, 221 
Pomo espinhoso, 221 
Pontadeira , 629 
Popcorn senna, 505 
Port Royal senna, 508 
Potato plant , 432 
Potato smell, 432 
Potato tree, 522 
Pourghère , 347 
Pourghère rouge, 354 
Prickly poppy, 105 
Pros t ra te sandmat , 256, 285 
Pros t ra te spurge, 285 
Pudding-pipe tree, 147 
Purghère , 347 
Purg ing cassia, 147 
Purg ing croton, 214 
Purg ing fistula, 147 
Purg ing nut , 347 
Purguei ra , 347 
Qua t r e épingles, 500 
Quina, 332 
Quinine tree, 480 
Quinquina du pays, 389 
INDEX OF VERNACULAR PLANT NAMES 787 
Rabbit ear, 407 
Radium plant, 278 
Radium weed, 278 
Raisin d'Amérique, 441 
Rattle pouches, 142 
Red aloe, 68 
Red bitterberry, 570 
Red cedar, 619 
Red ears, 304 
Red fig-nut flower, 354 
Red hogweed, 117 
Red hot poker, 359 
Red ink plant, 441 
Red spiderling, 117 
Red water tree, 249 
Redskin bush, 375 
Réveille-matin des vignes, 278 
Rhodesian black wattle, 398 
Rib grass, 459 
Ribwort, 459 
Ricinelle des Indes, 23 
Ricino major, 347 
Rikio, 619 
Rikio des marais, 622 
Ringworm bush, 500 
Romarin noir, 582 
Rosa do deserto, 46 
Rose amère, 153 
Rose du désert, 46 
Rose-coloured leadwort, 473 
Rosette, 285 
Rosy periwinkle, 153 
Rougette, 285 
Roupellina, 543 
Rubber euphorbia, 296 
Rubber hedge euphorbia, 296 
Running pine, 366 
Sabi star, 45 
Sabugueiro-negro, 494 
Sacred wood, 598 
Salade soda, 407 
Salade soldat, 407 
Salta-sebes, 308 
Sambi, 619 
Sandpaper bush, 237 
Sapistan, 189 
Sasswood tree, 246, 249 
Scarlet leadwort, 473 
Scrambled egg, 513 
Sea-mango, 161 
Seaside laurel, 425, 432 
Sebesteira, 189 
Sebesteiro do Sudao, 189 
Sebesten plum, 189 
Sébestier, 189 
Sempre noiva, 153 
Sene, 502, 508 
Séné, 502 
Séné africain, 505 
Séné d'Egypte, 502 
Séné du Sénégal, 508 
Séné grandes feuilles, 502 
Séné vrai, 502 
Senegal senna, 508 
Senna, 502, 514 
Seven golden candlesticks, 500 
Shatterstone, 415, 434 
Shepherd's heart, 142 
Shepherd's purse, 142 
Shiny bush, 407 
Silva da praia, 131 
Simpleleaf bushweed, 305 
Sjambok pod, 144 
Skunk root, 412 
Skyflower, 472 
Small plantain, 459 
Small-fruit wild frangipani, 623 
Small-fruited toad tree, 597 
Smooth-fruited clutia, 181 
Snake climber, 34 
Snakeweed, 267 
Snake-wood, 575 
Snowberry tree, 305 
Soap berry, 443 
Soda-apple nightshade, 518 
Sodom's apple, 525 
Sonoufoko, 380 
South African hickory, 159 
Spider tresses, 545, 546, 555, 
557 
Spiral ginger, 191, 194 
Spreading hogweed, 117 
Spurred phyllanthus, 421 
Staghorn clubmoss, 366 
Stag-horn moss, 365 
Sticky pod, 513 
Stipe-fruited monkey orange, 
579 
Stipe-fruited strychnos, 579 
Stone breaker, 415 
Stramoine, 221 
Stramoine métel, 218 
Stramonium, 221 
Strophanthus glabre du Gabon, 
546 
Strychnine plant, 575 
Strychnos, 571 
Suga, 528 
Sugar plum, 619 
Sureau, 494 
Sureau noir, 494 
Sweet dattock, 225 
Swizzle stick, 485 
Tache de l'œil, 105 
Tali, 246, 249 
Tanchagem-maior, 462 
Tangara, 117 
Tanghin, 161 
Tanguin de pays, 541 
Tar vine, 117, 120 
Tassel plant, 582 
Teinturier, 441 
Tellichery bark, 332 
Temporana Bay cedar, 582 
Thorn apple, 221, 525 
Three-forked euphorbia, 276 
Three-seeded mercury, 23 
Thuya de Chine, 466 
Thyme-leaf spurge, 294 
Ti bois de senteur, 206 
Tintêro, 165 
Tintureira, 441 
Ti-poc-poc, 629 
Tirucalli, 296 
Toad tree, 592 
Tobacco tree, 522 
Torch lily, 359 
Torch plant, 63 
Trailing red spurge, 285 
Transvaal candelabra tree, 259 
Tree euphorbia, 254 
Trevinha, 121 
Tripoli senna, 508 
Trombeta do juizo, 218 
Trombetâo-roxo, 218 
Trompette de la mort, 218 
Tropical sensitive-pea, 162 
Tropillo, 522 
Trovisco, 278 
True aloe, 82 
True senna, 502 
Trumpet flower, 606 
Tuia da China, 466 
Turnsole, 320 
Uapau, 339 
Unguiu, 43 
Unisca, 518 
Upupu wa mwitu, 500 
Urinaire de Malabar, 434 
Uva caneça, 629 
Uva de America, 441 
Uva de macaco, 441 
Velame pó de galinha, 202 
Velvetleaf, 178 
Voacanga d'Afrique, 623 
Voacanga de Thouars, 627 
Vomique officinale, 575 
Vomiquier, 575 
788 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
Wall fumitory, 308 
Wartweed, 278 
Wavy heliotrope, 324 
Waybread, 462 
Weeping wattle, 398 
Weni, 612 
West African hardwood, 123 
West African laburnum, 150 
West Indian aloe, 82 
West Indian pinkroot, 534 
White-berry bush, 305 
Wild cassada, 354 
Wild frangipani, 627 
Wild granadilla, 34, 37 
Wild leadwort, 475 
Wild passionfruit, 397 
Wild pepper, 452 
Wild poinsettia, 265 
Wild rubber, 229 
Wild senna, 505, 508 
Wild white plumbago, 475 
Winged bersama, 116 
Winter cassia, 513 
Winter cherry, 629 
Wintersweet, 29, 30 
Wiza, 267 
Wood shaving flower, 543 
Wood spurge, 256 
Woodland croton, 203 
Woodland suregada, 582 
Wormbush, 534 
Wormgrass, 534 
Yellow oleander, 606 
Yellow thistle, 105 
Yerba golondrina, 271 
Yoruba ironwood, 123 
Youngou, 233 
Yungu, 233 
789 
pROTA 
r lant Resources of Tropical Africa 
Ressources végétales de l'Afrique tropicale 
PROTA in short 
The Plant Resources of Tropical Africa (PROTA) programme was initiated in 2000 
and developed into an international partnership of 11 institutions in 11 countries 
during the Preparatory Phase 2000-2003. Since 19 February 2003, PROTA operates 
as an international foundation domiciled in Wageningen, Netherlands. 
PROTA is a major 'information brokerage and knowledge repatriation' programme. 
The objectives are to bring the 'world literature' on the useful plants of Tropical Af-
rica, now accessible only to the resourceful happy few, into the (African) public do-
main, and contribute to greater awareness and sustained use of the plants, with due 
respect for traditional knowledge and intellectual property rights. PROTA will de-
scribe the estimated 7,000 useful plants during the Implementation Phase 2003-
2015. The information carriers will be freely accessible Web databases 
(www.prota.org), a low-price Handbook and CD-Rom series featuring 16 Commodity 
groups, and Special Products per commodity group for rural development, educa-
tion, research and policy actors (all in English and French). 
PROTA 1: 
PROTA 2: 
PROTA 3 
PROTA 4: 
PROTA 5: 
PROTA 6: 
PROTA 7(1): 
PROTA 8: 
Cereals and pulses (2006) 
Vegetables (2004) 
Dyes and tannins (2005) 
Ornamentals 
Forages 
Fruits 
Timbers 1 (2008) 
Carbohydrates 
PROTA 9: 
PROTA 10: 
PROTA 11(1): 
PROTA 12: 
PROTA 13: 
PROTA 14: 
PROTA 15: 
PROTA 16: 
Auxiliary plants 
Fuel plants 
Medicinal plants 1 (2008) 
Spices and condiments 
Essential oils and exudates 
Vegetable oils (2007) 
Stimulants 
Fibres 
PROTA, P.O.Box 341, 6700 AH Wageningen, Netherlands (www.prota.org) 
790 MEDICINAL PLANTS 1 
TCTA 
partageons les connaissances au profit des communautés rurales 
sharing knowledge, improving rural livelihoods 
CTA in short 
The Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Cooperation (CTA) was established 
in 1983 under the Lomé Convention between the ACP (African, Caribbean and Pa-
cific) Group of States and the European Union Member States. Since 2000, it has 
operated within the framework of the ACP-EC Cotonou Agreement. 
CTA's tasks are to develop and provide services that improve access to information 
for agricultural and rural development, and to strengthen the capacity of ACP coun-
tries to produce, acquire, exchange and utilise information in this area. CTA's pro-
grammes are designed to: provide a wide range of information products and services 
and enhance awareness of relevant information sources; promote the integrated use 
of appropriate communication channels and intensify contacts and information ex-
change (particularly intra-ACP); and develop ACP capacity to generate and manage 
agricultural information and to formulate ICM strategies, including those relevant 
to science and technology. CTA's work incorporates new developments in method-
ologies and cross-cutting issues such as gender and social capital. 
CTA is financed by the European Union. 
CTA, P.O.Box 380, 6700 AJ Wageningen, Netherlands (www.cta.int) 
WEST AFRICA 
1. Cape Verde 
2. Mauritania 
3. Senegal 
4. Gambia 
5. Guinea Bissau 
6. Guinea 
7. Sierra Leone 
8. Liberia 
9. Côte d'Ivoire 
10. Mali 
11. Burkina Faso 
12. Ghana 
13. Togo 
14. Benin 
15. Niger 
16. Nigeria 
CENTRAL AFRICA 
17. Sào Tomé et Principe 
18. Cameroon 
19. Chad 
20. Central African Republic 
21. Equatorial Gi 
22. Gabon 
23. Congo 
linea 
24. Democratic Republic of Congo 
25. Rwanda 
26. Burundi 
EAST AFRICA 
27. Sudan 
28. Eritrea 
29. Ethiopia 
30. Djibouti 
31. Somalia 
32. Kenya 
33. Uganda 
34. Tanzania 
SOUTHERN AFI 
35. Malawi 
36. Zambia 
37. Angola 
38. Namibia 
39. Botswana 
40. Zimbabwe 
41. Mozambique 
INDIAN OCEAN 
ISLANDS 
42. Comoros 
43. Mayotte (Fr) 
44. Madagascar 
45. Seychelles 
46. Réunion (Fr) 
47. Mauritius 
