Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersEdited by:Valentina Echeverria Moran,Bay Pines VA Healthcare System,United StatesReviewed by:Helen Skaltsa,National and Kapodistrian University ofAthens, GreeceFrançois Chassagne,Emory University, United States*Correspondence:Dâmaris Silveiradamaris@unb.brJose Maria Prieto-GarciaJ.M.PrietoGarcia@ljmu.ac.ukMichael Heinrichm.heinrich@ucl.ac.uk†These authors have contributedequally to this workSpecialty section:This article was submitted toEthnopharmacology,a section of the journalFrontiers in PharmacologyReceived: 09 July 2020Accepted: 28 August 2020Published: 23 September 2020Citation:Silveira D, Prieto-Garcia JM, Boylan F,Estrada O, Fonseca-Bazzo YM,Jamal CM, Magalhães PO, Pereira EO,Tomczyk M and Heinrich M (2020)COVID-19: Is There Evidence forthe Use of Herbal Medicines asAdjuvant Symptomatic Therapy?.Front. Pharmacol. 11:581840.doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.581840REVIEWpublished: 23 September 2020doi: 10.3389/fphar.2020.581840COVID-19: Is There Evidence for theUse of Herbal Medicines as AdjuvantSymptomatic Therapy?Dâmaris Silveira1*†, Jose Maria Prieto-Garcia2*†, Fabio Boylan3, Omar Estrada4,Yris Maria Fonseca-Bazzo1, Claudia Masrouah Jamal5, Pérola Oliveira Magalhães1,Edson Oliveira Pereira1, Michal Tomczyk6 and Michael Heinrich7*†1 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Brasilia, Brasilia, Brazil, 2 School of Pharmacy andBiomolecular Sciences, Liverpool John Moores University, Liverpool, United Kingdom, 3 School of Pharmacy andPharmaceutical Sciences and Trinity Biomedical Sciences Institute, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland, 4 Biophysics andBiochemistry Center, Venezuelan Institute of Scientific Research, Caracas, Venezuela, 5 Center of Health Sciences, FederalUniversity of Espirito Santo, Vitória, Brazil, 6 Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University of Bialystok, Bialystok, Poland,7 Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy, School of Pharmacy, University College of London, London, United KingdomBackground: Current recommendations for the self-management of SARS-Cov-2disease (COVID-19) include self-isolation, rest, hydration, and the use of NSAID in caseof high fever only. It is expected that many patients will add other symptomatic/adjuvanttreatments, such as herbal medicines.Aims: To provide a benefits/risks assessment of selected herbal medicines traditionallyindicated for “respiratory diseases”within the current frame of the COVID-19 pandemic asan adjuvant treatment.Method: The plant selection was primarily based on species listed by the WHO and EMA,but some other herbal remedies were considered due to their widespread use in respiratoryconditions. Preclinical and clinical data on their efficacy and safety were collected fromauthoritative sources. The target population were adults with early and mild flu symptomswithout underlying conditions. These were evaluated according to a modified PrOACT-URLmethod with paracetamol, ibuprofen, and codeine as reference drugs. The benefits/risksbalance of the treatments was classified as positive, promising, negative, and unknown.Results: A total of 39 herbal medicines were identified as very likely to appeal to theCOVID-19 patient. According to our method, the benefits/risks assessment of the herbalmedicines was found to be positive in 5 cases (Althaea officinalis, Commiphora molmol,Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hedera helix, and Sambucus nigra), promising in 12 cases (Alliumsativum, Andrographis paniculata, Echinacea angustifolia, Echinacea purpurea,Eucalyptus globulus essential oil, Justicia pectoralis, Magnolia officinalis, Mikaniaglomerata, Pelargonium sidoides, Pimpinella anisum, Salix sp, Zingiber officinale), andunknown for the rest. On the same grounds, only ibuprofen resulted promising, but wecould not find compelling evidence to endorse the use of paracetamol and/or codeine.Conclusions: Our work suggests that several herbal medicines have safety marginssuperior to those of reference drugs and enough levels of evidence to start a clinicalin.org September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 5818401Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersdiscussion about their potential use as adjuvants in the treatment of early/mild common fluin otherwise healthy adults within the context of COVID-19. While these herbal medicineswill not cure or prevent the flu, they may both improve general patient well-being and offerthem an opportunity to personalize the therapeutic approaches.Keywords: herbal medicine, coronavirus (2019-nCoV), COVID-19, benefit/risk assessment, respiratory diseasesINTRODUCTIONThe outbreak of Coronavirus SARS-Cov-2 disease (COVID-19)in Wuhan (China) in late 2019 and its Worldwide spread hascaused hundreds of thousands of deaths so far. As of July 2020,the disease seems to be mostly affecting Europe and theAmericas. Most people infected with the COVID-19 virus willexperience mild to moderate respiratory illness and recoverwithout requiring special treatment. Older people and thosewith underlying medical problems such as cardiovasculardisease, diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer aremore likely to develop serious illness (WHO, 2020a). Teensand adults without underlying medical conditions are asked toself-manage their symptoms in isolation with a minimum ofdrugs (paracetamol, if fever is high) and lifestyle adjustments(increased rest and hydration). However, most of the currentguidelines do not specifically advise on how to treat cough, one ofthe main symptoms, which, apart from being very debilitating,contributes to the spread of the virus.There is not yet any evidence-based specific therapy forCOVID-19, and the real efficacy and safety of current therapeuticapproaches will need further scrutiny when enough multi-siteclinical data become available. The examples of ibuprofen andhydroxychloroquine illustrate how clinical protocols may includeand/or exclude drugs in their therapeutic approaches based onlimited evidence (Kim et al., 2020; Sodhi and Etminan, 2020;Taccone et al., 2020; Torjesen, 2020). Predictably, patients willlargely try to increase their well-being at least by self-administeringcough suppressing medication (natural or not) plus naturalmedication or supplements to combat cold/flu symptoms. Theseare readily accessible both in retail commerce and communitypharmacies. InEurope, there are severalherbalmedicines registeredunder the European Directive 24/2004 for self-prescription (EU,2004). Their labeling establishes that these medicines are indicatedfor the treatment of common cold and flu symptoms based ontraditional use only.Weagree in thatCOVID-19 isnot the commonflu, but theWHO definition is clear in that it is a mild, self-limitingcondition and, therefore, fitting the boundaries of self-prescription,moreover if the patients have not been tested for the virus (WHO,2020a). In that sense, there is a need to clarify the real potential andsafety profile of herbalmedicines to scientifically substantiate futurerecommendations on their benefits and risks of use them.Therefore, the impetus of this work is twofold. First, it intendsto highlight which species may provide a more rationalphytotherapeutic choice to the disease and second to showcasewhich plants can be a clinically compatible option as adjuvanttherapy for the self-management of common cold/flu symptoms byin.org 2otherwise healthy adults within the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.Clinical BackgroundEarly COVID-19 symptoms include fever, dry cough, anddyspnea, among other similar ones to other viral respiratorydiseases such as common flu (Rothan and Byrareddy, 2020).Therefore, the diagnosis of COVID-19 based on anamnesisremains problematic. In general, the incubation period isaround 15 days, but the reported range is 0 to 24 days (Baiet al., 2020). SARS-Cov-2 presents a strong transmission capacity(Zheng et al., 2020). To complicate matters further, there is asignificant number of asymptomatic patients (up to 60%) whounknowingly contribute to the spread of the disease (Gao et al.,2020; Kronbichler et al., 2020).The clinical spectrum of the infection goes from mild upperrespiratory tract illness to the so-called ‘severe acute respiratorysyndrome’: respiratory failure, shock, and multiple organ failure(Bai et al., 2020; Zhou et al., 2020); and may be accompanied byfatigue, headache, diarrhea, and lymphopenia (Rothan andByrareddy, 2020), and high incidence of cardiovascularsymptoms (Zheng et al., 2020). Older people and those withunderlying medical problems such as cardiovascular disease,diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer are morelikely to develop severe illness (WHO, 2020a).The precise pathology of the disease is not yet clear, but seemsto include a systemic pro-inflammatory response, inducinghemodynamic changes and, consequently, a predisposition toischemia and thrombosis (Tang et al., 2020; Zheng et al., 2020;Zhou et al., 2020). A hallmark of the disease is the “cytokinestorm”, a massive cytokine and chemokine release due to anuncontrolled dysregulation of the host immune defense thatcauses loss of function of multiple organs (Catanzaro et al., 2020).Preventative and Therapeutic ApproachesDue to the emergence of the propagation of the disease, HealthSystems have become overloaded, even having sufficient diagnosticcapacity and hospital facilities to handle such an outbreak. In themost vulnerable regions, the COVID-19 epidemic effectivelyparalyzes health systems at the expense of primary health care(Velavan and Meyer, 2020). Some measures, such as lock-down ofcommunities, social distancing, and quarantine-type for thosesuspected to be infected can, at least in part, slow the COVID-19spread (Heymann and Shindo, 2020) and, so, enable the healthsystems to cope. However, these measures are palliative, and peopletend to ignore them after a few days of isolation, mainly those indisadvantaged and vulnerable communities.September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyImportantly, at this stage, we are starting to build up anevidence-base for the best strategy to treat, mitigate, andprevent the diseases. Currently, none of the approaches used isevidence-based.In the worldwide search for a response to the COVID-19pandemic, news about “alternative remedies against COVID”have been disseminated (ANSES, 2020; Nordling, 2020). As ofJuly 2020, the evidence-base for such treatments is often limitedif not non-existent. However, often strong, unsubstantiatedclaims are made about the pros and cons of herbal medicines,which will also result both in false hopes or strong fears of thoseat risk or ill with COVID-19 (Brennen et al., 2020;Guastalegname and Vallone, 2020; Thorp, 2020).While some preparations have been claimed to be specificallyactive, some commonly used medicinal plants are assessed here,especially those on the WHO list of selected medicinal plants, asadjuvant treatments. For example, Hensel et al. (2020), in theirrecent work, state that extracts prepared with Echinacea species(Asteraceae) have an important role with the immune systemdue to their alkylamide interacting with the cannabinoidreceptors (Hensel et al., 2020). Additionally, curcumin, themain constituent in Curcuma longa L. (Zingiberaceae), issuggested as a potential clinical option for the treatment ofSARS-CoV-2 infection, due to its action in several steps of aviral infection such as protease inhibition, cellular signallingpathways modulation, among others (Zahedipour et al., 2020)In another paper (Panyod et al., 2020), 11 medicinal plantswere discussed concerning their in vitro antiviral activity usingdifferent models. Two species (Allium sativum L. and Zingiberofficinale Roscoe) mentioned in this study that had their in vitropotential and immune capacity assessed, were also included inour study. Moreover, in an elegant evidence-based analysis,eighteen phytotherapeutic preparations were mentioned ashaving some role in the clinical management of viralrespiratory diseases, showing different levels of immunologicalresponse (Portella et al., 2020). Four plants mentioned in thatreport [Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench, Glycyrrhiza glabra L.,Sambucus nigra L., and Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi] were alsoincluded in our study.The rationale used in our study was to include, mostly, speciesknown in the Americas and Europe and those already morewidely available for the management of respiratory conditions(Blumenthal, 2003; Edwards et al., 2015; Anheyer et al., 2018;Langeder et al., 2020), mainly regarding the symptoms (cough,pain, fever). We recognize that patients suffering from COVID-19 are likely to seek such herbal medications. Complementingother papers published on medicinal plants and their potential tobe used for COVID-19, we focused on the therapeutic potentialof 39 species, the limitations for their use, and their possible risks.It must be strongly emphasized that this is not an assessment ofany mainline treatment for COVID-19 with such herbalmedicines. The focus is on assessing their potential as adjuvanttherapies to COVID-19. Although the listed herbal drugsincluded herein have been used for a long time, the evidencelevel of their action in the relief of mild respiratory symptomsvaries, and they are pointed out here.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 3The Frame of the Problem• Apart from a handful of antiviral drugs with limited efficacy,there is only symptomatic therapy for influenza.• There is no specific therapy for COVID-19.• There are several herbal medicines recognized by variousHealth Authorities for the treatment of flu, its symptoms, andother respiratory disorders.• Health authorities in Europe and the Americas have warnedthe population against taking any natural/herbal medicines/supplements. They sustain this advice on theoretical potentialeffects on the immune system due to unspecific anti-inflammatory effects in early stages, facilitating the infectionas well as potential immunostimulation, contributing to theaggravation of the “cytokines storm”. As of today, there is noclinical backup for such strong recommendations other thantrying to prevent unspecific herb-drug interactions should thepatient need emergency care.• There is a significant OTC use for these herbal medicines,and a realistic prospect is that patients will self-administerthem to increase their well-being.AimsTo apply a decision-making framework to provide a benefits/risks assessment for selected herbal medicines traditionallyindicated for “respiratory diseases” within the current frame ofthe COVID-19 pandemic.METHODSFor a treatment to be recommended as adjuvant therapy forrespiratory diseases in the context of COVID-19, we heredetermine that the treatment is effective and that its expectedbenefits outweigh its potential risks to patients. Briefly, thisassessment is informed by the body of evidence about eachtreatment’s safety and efficacy retrieved in a literature search. Thisassessment is also informed by a number of other factors, includingthe severity of the underlying condition and how well patients’medical needs are addressed by currently available therapies(“reference drugs”). The decision also reflects current applicablelaws, regulations, and healthcare recommendations, taking intoconsideration the uncertainty associated with COVID-19.Selection of Herbal MedicinesA search was conducted, considering herbal medicines traditionallyused to relieve cold and flu symptoms. The criterion used to limitthe investigation, and to grant minimal evidence of efficacy was thatthe species, linked to the chosen indications, must be listed at least inone of the following organizations: World Health OrganizationMonographs (WHO); European Medicines Agency (EMA);European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy; ANVISA(Brazilian Pharmacopoea, Brazilian Pharmacopoea HerbalMedicines Formulary, Brazilian Pharmacopoea Herbal MedicinesMementum), Ministry of Health of Chile, Ministry of Health ofSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyCuba, Ministry of Health of Colombia, and Government of Canada.Several South American Countries use the Brazilian Pharmacopeiadocuments as a reference, so they are also covered within thissearch. Based on these documents, a list of target species wasprepared to establish a search of clinical evidence for the givenindication. We refer to these as “herbal medicines” as they areendorsed by Scientific and/or Regulatory committees.We also included some species which are not listed inmonographs based on their significant widespread use in theself-management of respiratory diseases. Some of them are alsolinked to food uses. We refer to these as “herbal remedies”.We did not consider species that have given rise to majorsafety concerns (such as Ephedra sp.) and species which are onlyindicated for relieving mucous phlegm. Furthermore, we do notassess multi-herbal preparations.Decision-Making FrameworkTo assist our decision-making and/or the benefits/risksassessment of herbal medicines, we adopted some of theprocedures described in many qualitative or semi-quantitativeguidelines to conduct a benefit-risk assessment (PROTECT,2020). They consist of a step-by-step approach to follow forgood decision-making practice and to increase transparency.Descriptive frameworks are usually general, and most of theFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 4time, reiterate common sense. Our framework is inspired by thePrOACT-URL method (EMA, 2011c).The main decision-making elements that we considered forthis work are:A. Frame the problem. The appearance of early/mild respiratorysymptomsduring the pandemic including fever, cough, catarrh,aches, and pains, nasal congestion, runny nose, sore throat,cough, sneezing (= Condition) in adults otherwise healthy(= Target Population). The patient did not have a test or wasnegative for COVID-19, but continues at risk of infection(= Uncertainty). The patient uses herbal medicines alone orwith drugs (= Treatment, main or adjuvant). The patientexperiences relief of upper respiratory symptoms within 1-2weeks (= Favorable effect). The treatment interferes withhospital/emergency treatment in case of severe acuterespiratory syndrome (Unfavorable effects).B. Set criteria for Favorable/Unfavorable effects. We followed the“General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research andEvaluation of Traditional Medicine-World HealthOrganization” for clinical evidence (WHO, 2000) (Table 1).We agreed on six key criteria for safety (Table 2).C. Consider options to be evaluated against the treatment.Currently available over-the-counter (OTC) medicationsTABLE 1 | Grading criteria for clinical evidence of the treatments.Grade Evidence levels quality/Type of evidence RequirementsHigh Ia Evidence obtained from meta-analysis of randomized controlled trialsIb Evidence obtained from at least one randomized controlled trialRequires at least one randomized controlled trial as part of the body of literature ofoverall good consistency addressing the specific recommendation.Medium IIa Evidence obtained from at least one well-designed controlled studywithout randomizationIIb Evidence obtained from at least one other type of well-designedquasi-experimental studyIII Evidence obtained from well-designed non-experimental descriptivestudies, such as comparative studies, correlation studies, and case-control studiesRequires availability of well-conducted clinical studies with no randomization clinicaltrials on the topic of recommendationLow IV Evidence obtained from expert committee reports or opinions and/orclinical experience of respected authoritiesRequires evidence from expert committee reports or opinions and/or clinicalexperience of respected authorities. Indicates the absence of directly applicablestudies of good qualityAdapted from General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine World Health Organization (WHO, 2000).TABLE 2 | Grading criteria for safety level of the treatments and its evidence.Grade Type of adverse effects Evidence levels quality/Type of evidence*High A. Other/s than those listed below (B-F). May include allergies, contraindication inpregnancy/lactation, children/elderly, GI disturbances, etc.Ia Evidence obtained from pharmacovigilance dataIb Evidence obtained from medically reviewed drugmonographs/Patients information leafletsIc Evidence obtained from clinical trialsMedium B. Reported interactions which may affect cardiovascular and/or platelet functionC. Presence of compounds potentially able to theoretically produce any in the COVID-19context (such as coumarins, salicin, ephedrine, etc.)D. No adverse effects reported but known immunostimulant activitiesII Evidence obtained from case reports or clinical practice/well stablished use.III Preclinical evidence in relevant experimental models.Low E. Reported adverse effects which may affect the respiratory functionF. Reported interactions which may affect emergency treatments (anesthesia, mechanicalventilation, etc.)IV Recommendations from expert committee reports oropinions of respected authorities.*Adapted from General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine World Health Organization (WHO, 2000).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyendorsed by health authorities are non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) (ibuprofen, naproxen, etc.),antipyretics (acetaminophen/paracetamol), and coughmedicines (dextromethorphan, codeine, etc.). They may betaken as monotherapy or alternating therapies. Therefore,one of each category (ibuprofen, paracetamol, and codeine)was chosen to be evaluated based on the same criterion.D. Assess the balance between favorable and unfavorable effectsand the associated uncertainty. All possible combinations ofclinical and safety grades lead to four possible results:“positive”, “promising”, “negative”, and “unknown”. Thelast two categories allowed for the inclusion of twodifferent degrees of uncertainty (Table 3).E. Recommendation. See conclusions.Retrieval of Evidence and GradingIn the second step, we assessed the existing clinical evidence andsafety data of all shortlisted herbal medicines and remediesthrough a bibliographic search, including PubMed, Web OfScience, and other available sources, using the terms “<plantname>” AND cough OR flu OR cold. Also, Cochrane, Drug.com,governmental agencies (EMA, ANSES, and others) were used.All possible combinations of clinical and safety grades lead tofour possible results: “positive”, “promising”, “negative”, and“unknown”. The last two categories allowed for the inclusionof two different degrees of uncertainty. Table 3 shows how theconsensus criteria were translated into a preliminary benefits/risks assessment.We are aware that for many herbal drug preparations,preclinical evidence exists, and this is not considered in thisassessment since it cannot be translated directly into clinicalpractice. However, such estimation might be of relevance tounveil potential mechanisms of action only so in that case thisinformation was included.RESULTSOptions to Be Evaluated Against theCriteriaBased on the defined parameters, three recommended drugs forearly symptoms of COVID-19 - codeine, ibuprofen, andparacetamol - were evaluated.IbuprofenIndications in the context of respiratory conditions. Fever,pain, inflammation.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 5Posology. Up to 2,400 mg a day in doses not bigger than 400mg every 6 h.Preclinical evidence. In vitro and in vivo studies showedevidence of antipyretic and mild analgesic activities (Rainsford, 2015).Clinical evidence. In a review on the effects of non-steroidalanti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for treating pain orrespiratory symptoms (e.g., cough associated with the commoncold), the conclusion was NSAIDs are somewhat effective inrelieving the discomfort caused by cold. However, there is noclear evidence of their effect in easing respiratory symptoms.Therefore, the balance of benefits and risks needs to beconsidered when using NSAIDs for colds (Kim et al., 2013).There is an ongoing clinical trial in the UK with COVID-19patients receiving a liquid ibuprofen formulation on top ofstandard care (ClinicalTrials.gov, 2020). Overall, the clinicalevidence is High.Safety. Side effects of ibuprofen include anemia, decreasedhemoglobin, eosinophilia, hemorrhage, vomiting, andhypertension. Other side effects include upper gastrointestinalhemorrhage, upper gastrointestinal tract ulcers, dizziness, anddyspepsia. A comprehensive list of very common (10% or more)to common (1% to 10%) adverse effects include nausea (up to57%), vomiting (up to 22%), flatulence (up to 16%), diarrhea (upto 10%); epigastric pain, heartburn, abdominal distress,indigestion, dyspepsia, abdominal discomfort, constipation,abdominal cramps/pain, fullness of GI tract, bloating, GIhemorrhage, melena (1% to 10%) (Drugs.Com, 2020a).However, regarding COVID-19 patients, there is not enoughevidence supporting the potential harmful effects (Sodhi andEtminan, 2020). Overall, safety is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Ibuprofen maycause severe cardiovascular thrombotic events, myocardialinfarction, and stroke, which can be fatal. This risk may beincreased in patients with cardiovascular disease or risk factorsfor cardiovascular disease. Ibuprofen is contraindicated for thetreatment of peri-operative pain in the setting of coronary arterybypass graft (CABG) surgery. NSAIDs can also cause anincreased risk of serious gastrointestinal adverse events,especially in the elderly, including bleeding, ulceration, andperforation of the stomach or intestines, which can also befatal (McGettigan and Henry, 2011).Overall assessment. According to well-established use,ibuprofen may be useful in the symptomatic relief of respiratoryconditions by reducing fever and aches. However, there is only arelatively low number of clinical studies, and meta-analyses do notprovide consistent evidence that ibuprofen is effective in reducingsymptoms and duration and prevention of the common cold.Overall, the clinical evidence is High. Ibuprofen may haveantiplatelet activities; its safety may be considered Medium.CodeineIndications in the context of respiratory conditions. Cough.Posology. Up to 360 mg a day in doses not bigger than 60 mgevery 4 h.Preclinical evidence. Some in vitro, ex vivo, and in vivo studiesshow evidence of anti-cough activity (Ohi et al., 2007; Cuiet al., 2019).TABLE 3 | Benefits/Risks Decision Consensus Criteria.Clinical evidence(Table 1)Safety evidence(Table 2)Benefits/risksBalanceHigh High PositiveHigh/Medium Medium PromisingLow High/Medium UnknownHigh/Medium/Low Low NegativeSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyClinical evidence. Although codeine is widely used asantitussive, the clinical evidence supporting this action iscontroversial. A study, involving 91 adults presenting coughassociated with acute upper respiratory tract infection, showedcodeine statistically had the same effect than vehicle (syrup) incontrolling cough (Eccles et al., 1992). Overall, the clinicalevidence is Low.Safety. Commonly reported side effects of codeine includedrowsiness, lightheadedness, dizziness, sedation, shortness ofbreath, nausea, vomiting, sweating, and constipation. Otherpossible effects include bronchospasm, laryngospasm, respiratorydepression; heartbeat irregularities, blood pressure changes,syncope, itching, facial swelling, pruritus, urticaria, histaminerelease; dry mouth, loss of appetite, nausea, vomiting, paralyticileus, toxic megacolon, anorexia, stomach cramps; miosis, blurred ordouble vision; euphoria, dysphoria, unusual dreams, hallucinations,insomnia, anxiety (0.1% to 1%); respiratory arrest, dyspnea;flushing, hypotension, palpitations, circulatory depression, shock,cardiac arrest, circulatory depression, bradycardia, tachycardia,edema (Drugs.com, 2019). Overall, safety is Low.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Death dueto respiratory depression has been reported in children(Friedrichsdorf et al., 2013; Tobias et al., 2016). Moreover, codeinecan lead to opioid misuse, abuse, and addiction (Casati et al., 2012).Overall assessment. According to established use, codeinemay be useful in the symptomatic relief of cough. However,clinical studies and meta-analyses do not provide consistentevidence that codeine is effective in treating cough. Overall, theclinical evidence is Low. Due to the severe side effects, codeinesafety may be considered Low.ParacetamolIndications in the context of respiratory conditions. Fever, pain.Posology. Up to 4 g a day in dose not bigger than 1 g every 6 h.Preclinical evidence. Numerous in vitro and in vivo studiesshow evidence of antipyretic and mild analgesic activities(Graham et al., 2013).Clinical evidence. Paracetamol (acetaminophen) did not showany efficacy in flu, according to a clinical trial involving 80 patients(Jefferies et al., 2016). In a systematic review, the authors concludedthat the data did not provide sufficient evidence to inform practiceregarding the use of acetaminophen for common cold in adults (LiS. et al., 2013). Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Paracetamol (acetaminophen) is hepatotoxic (Athersuchet al., 2018), and several side effects have been reported (Ishitsukaet al., 2020), such as nausea (up to 34%), vomiting (up to 15%);abdominal pain, diarrhea, constipation, dyspepsia and enlargedabdomen (1% to 10%); anemia, postoperative hemorrhage (1% to10%); rash, pruritus (1% to 10%); dyspnea, abnormal breath sounds,pulmonary edema, hypoxia, pleural effusion, stridor, wheezing,coughing (1% to 10%); cardiovascular effects (1% to 10%):peripheral edema, hypertension, hypotension, tachycardia, chestpain; metabolic alterations (1% to 10%): hypokalemia,hyperglycemia; headache, dizziness (1% to 10%). Other sideeffects: dystonia; muscle spasms, trismus (1% to 10%); insomnia,anxiety (1% to 10%); oliguria (1% to 10%); pyrexia, fatigue (1% toFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 610%) (Drugs.com, 2020b). There are reported cases of deaths in flupatients taking paracetamol (Stevenson et al., 2001). Overall, thesafety evidence is Low.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Not indicated incases of liver disease and alcoholism (Drugs.com, 2020b).Overall assessment. According to a well-established use,paracetamol may be useful in the symptomatic relief ofrespiratory conditions by reducing fever and aches (although arelatively low number of clinical studies and meta-analyses donot provide consistent evidence that paracetamol can reducesymptoms and duration), and prevention of the common cold.The clinical evidence may be considered Low or at best Medium.It is known to be hepatotoxic, and a frequent incidence ofrespiratory adverse effects may justify serious concerns and asafety rating of Low.Assess the Relative Importance of theDecision Maker’s Risk Attitude TowardsHerbal SubstanceRisk is inherent to any therapeutic intervention (herbal or not).The level of risk of herbal interventions in adults experiencingcommon flu symptoms without underlying conditions is verylow. According to WHO, COVID-19 is self-limiting and mild inthis segment of the population (WHO, 2020a). However, we tookextra care in integrating current health authorities’ advice withcurrent clinical evidence to emit our assessment.Scientific and Clinical Data of CurrentHerbal Therapy Referred to as Useful toRelieve Symptoms Related to RespiratoryConditions (Cold/Flu)General warning: allergic reactions and gastrointestinal (GI)disturbances are common adverse effects in all medicines andapply to herbal ones. Their use in pregnancy and lactation,babies, children, and the elderly, as well as patients withknown severe conditions, is to be individually assessed by aregistered healthcare professional.The recommendations made here are for medicinal productsregulated by national authorities to ensure their quality andsafety. Other products may be unsafe due to contamination,adulteration, and the presence of naturally occurring toxins inlevels above those permitted.Allium sativum L. - Amaryllidaceae (Bulbs, Powder)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Alliumsativum is indicated for respiratory disease, namely cold andcough (CUBA, 2014; EMA, 2017b), and other symptoms relatedto influenza (BRASIL, 2011). Other related indications of garlicpreparations (fresh, garlic powder) included diaphoretic,antiseptic, bacteriostatic, and antiviral effects. It is also used totreat chronic bronchitis and recurrent upper respiratory tractinfections (EMA, 2017b; El-Saber Batiha et al., 2020b).Traditional indications. Allium sativum has been traditionallyused for alleviation of symptoms of the common cold in adultsand children over 12 years. Indeed, garlic is considered as aSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapytraditional herbal medicinal product used for the relief of coldsymptoms. Moreover, the British Herbal Pharmacopoeiaconsiders that garlic products are indicated for recurrent coldsand whooping cough (BHMA, 1983).Chemical composition. Sulfur compounds (allicin, mercaptan,allyl methyl thiosulphinate, allyl methyl trisulphide, diallyldisulfide, diallyl trisulfide, S-allyl cysteine sulphoxide, andothers), glucosides (sativoside B1, proto-degalactotigonin), aminoacids (alanine, arginine, aspartic acid, asparagine, histidine, proline,alanine, valine), monoterpenoids (citral, geraniol, alfa and beta-phellandrene and other), peptides, minerals, flavonoids, andvitamins (Lanzotti, 2006; Omar and Al-Wabel, 2010). In thepresence of the enzyme alliinase, alliin will be converted to allicin(1 mg alliin to be equivalent to 0.45 mg of allicin). Allicin is also theprecursor of other non-volatile products such as ajoenes or oligo-and polysulphides (ESCOP, 2003a; Kovarovič et al., 2019).Posology (based on traditional uses). Fresh garlic: 2.0–4.0 gaverage daily dosage (EMA, 2017b). However, it is preferable touse a commercial preparation with defined composition and anadequate dose.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been experimentallyproven to have antiviral activity. Among the viruses which are sensitiveto garlic extracts, are the Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV), InfluenzaB virus, Herpes simplex virus type 1, Herpes simplex virus type 2,vesicular stomatitis virus, Parainfluenza virus type 3, Vaccinia virus,and human Rhinovirus type 2 (Tsai et al., 1985; Mikaili et al., 2013).Allicin-containing supplements can prevent attacks by the commoncold virus.Clinical evidence. There is no clinical data to support garlic inthe treatment of upper respiratory infections, only in theprevention and treatment of symptoms of the common cold(Josling, 2001). Regarding the prevention or treatment of thecommon cold, a Cochrane meta-analysis concludes that there isinsufficient clinical evidence (Lissiman et al., 2014); the sole studyretained for the analysis showed fewer days of illness in the garlicgroup compared with the placebo group (Josling, 2001). Anothertrial suggested that consuming the aged garlic extract couldreduce the severity of cold symptoms reported (Nantz et al.,2012). Overall, the clinical evidence is High for cold.Safety. Garlic preparations are generally considered to be safe(EMA, 2016a). However, patients taking anticoagulation and/orantiplatelet therapy should use garlic preparations with cautionbecause they may increase bleeding times (EMA, 2017b). Overall,safety is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Patients shouldavoid concomitant use with anti-platelet drugs.Overall assessment. Although Allium sativum preparationshave been used to relieve cold symptoms since ancient times,there is no evidence this herbal medicine can relieve flu symptoms.Whether it may indirectly provide anti-inflammatory andsoothing effects on the upper respiratory tract remains to beseen. The clinical evidence may be considered High. Eventhough garlic is known to have potential antiplatelet effects,overall, it can be considered presenting Medium safety, due toproducts with less than 0.6% allicin content do not appear to haveany such effects (Scharbert et al., 2007).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 7Althaea officinalis L. - Malvaceae (Roots, Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Althaeaofficinalis is indicated for respiratory disease symptoms,namely dry, irritable coughs, and irritations of oral andpharyngeal mucosa (EMA, 2016c).Chemical composition. Mucilage polysaccharides, such asgalacturonorhamnans (rhamnogalacturonan), arabinans,glucans, arabinoglucans, mainly of acidic polysaccharides;flavonoids (e.g., isoscutellarein, hypolaetin, kaempferol andluteolin derivatives); phenolic acids; coumarin (scopoletin);tannins (ESCOP, 2019; Kianitalaei et al., 2019).Posology (based on traditional uses). 0.5–5.0 g in 150mlofwateras amacerate, three times daily (EMA, 2016c).Marshmallow root’ssyrup is also a commonly used preparation in a daily dose of 2.0-8.0 ml (ESCOP, 2019; Kianitalaei et al., 2019).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease symptom,namely, cough. The aqueous extract of marshmallow rootsinhibited the tracheobronchial smooth muscle contractions inrats in a dose-dependent manner (Alani et al., 2015). Theantitussive effects of oral rhamnogalacturonan (50 mg/kg) wereevaluated against mechanically induced cough reflux in bothsexes of non-anesthetized cats. The polysaccharide significantlyreduced the number of efforts, cough frequency, and intensity ofcough attacks from laryngopharyngeal and tracheobronchialareas (Nosalova et al., 2005). The antitussive effects of oralsyrup and the polysaccharide were tested against mechanicallyinduced cough of non-anesthetized cats in comparison with non-narcotic antitussives (Nosal’ova et al., 1992).Clinical evidence. Althaea officinalis preparations have beentrialed clinically for respiratory disease, and the followingsymptom was evaluated: cough. In a randomized clinical study,63 adults suffering from dry cough associated with angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors ingested 20 drops, three times perday, of either a marshmallow root preparations or a placebo, forfour weeks. The severity of the cough in the marshmallow groupwas significantly reduced (Rouhi and Ganji, 2007). In one clinicaltrial on 822 patients with dry cough associated with pharyngealirritation, the efficacy, tolerability, and satisfaction of A.officinalis root aqueous extract in the form of lozenges andsyrup was evaluated. Althaea officinalis root aqueous extractimproved the symptoms of dry cough within 10 min with verygood tolerability. There were only three minor adverse events inthe syrup group (Fink et al., 2017). Overall, the clinical evidenceis High for cough.Safety. No toxicity was reported at the indicated doses (EMA,2016b). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The absorption ofother drugs taken simultaneously may be retarded due to thepresence of mucilage. As a precautionary measure, allpreparations with A. officinalis should not be taken 30 min to1 h before or after intake of other drugs/minerals/vitamins. Themacerate should be used immediately after preparation(EMA, 2016b).Overall assessment. Althaea officinalis preparations cansuppress cough and diminish irritation through anti-September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyinflammatory and soothing effects on the respiratory tract. Itstraditional use as cold therapy in the context of upper respiratoryconditions is not backed up by robust clinical data, but theevidence allows us to infer a potential use in the relief of earlysymptoms of COVID-19. The clinical evidence may beconsidered High, and as no severe concerns are reported forthis herbal medicine, it can be rated as High safety.Andrographis paniculata (Burm.f.) Nees -Acanthaceae (Leaves, Aerial Parts)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions:Andrographis paniculata is indicated for respiratory disease,namely common cold, influenza type, and other upperrespiratory tract infections, cough, and fever (WHO, 2002). Itis often included in multi-herbal preparations, which are notassessed here [aside from the combination with Eleutherococcussenticosus (Rupr. & Maxim.) Maxim.].Chemical composition. Relevant secondary metabolites arediterpenes like andrographic acid, their glucosides(deoxyandrographolide-19b-D-glucoside) and dimers (bis-andrographolides A, B, C, and D) and labdane diterpenoidslike andrographolide, neoandrographolide; flavonoids(methoxylated flavones, flavanones, chalcones); steroids (b-sitosterol (Koteswara Rao et al., 2004; Akbar, 2011; Dai et al.,2019; Hanh et al., 2020). Andrographolides are considered theactive metabolites and chemical markers of this species.Posology (based on traditional uses). 1–3 g as a decoction,three times daily (WHO, 2002). However, it is preferable to use acommercial preparation with defined composition and anadequate dose.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease, based on amouse-model for influenza (an adapted H1N1 strain PR8A/PR/8/34). Treatment with andrographolide decreased the virusloads and the expression of the inflammatory cytokines. Also,diminished lung pathology and overall survival rate (Ding et al.,2017). Anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory properties ofthe extract of A. paniculata and andrographolide have beenlinked to the increasing proliferation of lymphocytes and theproduction of IL-2 and inhibition of the tumor cell proliferationimmune system (Rajagopal et al., 2003; Kumar et al., 2004). Also,diminished lung pathology and overall survival rate (Ding et al.,2017). Neoandrographolide has in vivo anti-inflammatory effects(Panossian et al., 2002). Andrographolide and a standardizedregistered fixed combination of A. paniculata extract SHA-10and E. senticosus extract SHE-3 showed an in vitro effect on theactivation and proliferation of immune-competent cells as wellon the production of key cytokines and immune activationmarkers (Dai et al., 2019; Kim et al., 2019). A range of anti-inflammatory effects has been reported on diverse disease targetsfor A. paniculata and key constituents (Dai et al., 2019; Kimet al., 2019).Clinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been trialedclinically for cold symptoms. Three systematic reviews pointedto the beneficial effects and safety of Andrographis for relievingsymptoms of acute respiratory tract infections and shorteningFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 8time to the symptom (Kligler et al., 2006; Akbar, 2011). The mostrecent study included 33 randomized controlled trials (RCT)with 7175 patients. The results indicated that compared to usualcare, a shortening of the duration of symptoms including cough,sore throat, and sick leave/time to resolution was observed.Concerns were raised due to the low quality of many studiesand their heterogeneity (Hu et al., 2017; Hu et al., 2018). Overall,the clinical evidence is High for cold and cough.Safety. An assessment report of EMA concludes that while‘there is a clear effect on some CYP isoenzymes, the availableacute, and reproductive toxicity and genotoxicity data supportthe safety of Andrographis’ (EMA, 2014a). On the other hand,the Australian Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA)highlighted the potential risks of severe allergic reactions(TGA, 2015), which, however, seems to be of very limitedclinical concern. There are some preclinical indications ofimmunomodulatory activities of unknown implications for theCOVID-19 cytokines storm. Overall, safety is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Allergic reactionsmay be of concern (TGA, 2015).Overall assessment. Andrographis may be useful in thesymptomatic relief of respiratory symptoms, especially in termsof alleviating the symptoms of uncomplicated upper respiratorytract infections. Its traditional use as cold therapy in the contextof upper respiratory conditions is not backed up by robustclinical data, but the evidences allow to infer a potential use inthe relief of early symptoms of COVID-19. The clinical evidencemay be considered High, and as although no severe concerns arereported, this herbal medicine may exert immunomodulatoryactivities so can be cautiously rated as Medium safety.Commiphora molmol Engle [syn. Commiphoramyrrha (T.Nees) Engl.] and Other Commiphora sp. -Burseraceae (Air-Dried Oleo-Gum Resin Exudate)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Commiphoramolmol is indicated symptoms of respiratory disease, namelymild inflammation of pharyngeal mucosa (WHO, 2007). Otherrelated symptoms are cough, anti-inflammatory (Akbar, 2020);supportive treatment for tonsillitis (WHO, 2007; Barnes et al.,2012; ESCOP, 2014).Chemical composition. Sesquiterpenes (furanoeudesma1,3-diene and lindestrene as the major components) (Marongiuet al., 2005).Posology (based on traditional uses). It is preferable to use acommercial preparation with a defined composition, such as atincture (0.5–5 ml in 150 ml of water for rinsing or gargling threetimes daily) (WHO, 2007).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease.Although C. molmol has been used as a remedy since ancienttimes (Akbar, 2020), so far, only a few studies on anti-inflammatoryor antinociceptive action can be found. An ethanol extract from theresin (at the doses of 100 mg/kg and 200 mg/kg, p.o.) presentedanalgesic and anti-inflammatory activities in mice. In the swellingpaw test, the effect of the extract (100 mg/kg, p.o.) was similar toindomethacin (10 mg/kg, i.p.) (Su et al., 2011).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyClinical evidence. Commiphora molmol preparations have notbeen trialed clinically for respiratorydisease, only for inflammation.A standardized extract of C. molmol (curzerene 17.93%,furanoeudesma-1,3-diene 27.44%, lindestrene 9.08%) wasevaluated about the anti-nociceptive effect. The volunteers (89men and 95 women), presenting headache, fever-dependent pain,joint pain, muscle aches, lower back pain, or menstrual cramps,received extract (200 mg or 400 mg), or placebo, for 20 days.According to this RCT, the extract presented a similar effect to somefrequently used drugs, such as diclofenac, ibuprofen, andparacetamol, although requiring a longer time of use (20 days). Inthe male group, the extract, at the dose of 400 mg, the effect wassignificant against all the symptoms. For the female group, theextractwas effectiveagainst lowbackpainand fever-dependentpainat the doses of 200mg/day. Furthermore, no side effectwas reportedby any of the volunteers (Germano et al., 2017). Overall the clinicalevidence is High for pain associated with fever.Safety. The safety of C. molmol is well established. There areno known safety concerns from non-clinical or clinical data(EMA, 2011d; EMA, 2018b). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Due to a uterinestimulant effect (Vafaei et al., 2020), products containing C.momol resin should be avoided in pregnancy and lactation(EMA, 2011d). The concomitant use of C. molmol withtheophylline or cyclosporine A should be avoided (Al-Jenoobiet al., 2015a; Al-Jenoobi et al., 2015b; EMA, 2018a).Overall assessment. Commiphora molmol preparations seemto have a supportive effect as antinociceptive and thus be usefulin the relief of respiratory symptoms. However, its effect isevident only after a few weeks, thus exceeding the normal,uncomplicated evolution of COVID-19. The clinical evidencemay be considered High. As no severe concerns are reported, thisherbal medicine safety can be rated as High.Cymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf - Poaceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Cymbopogoncitratus is indicated for respiratory infections (CUBA, 2014).Chemical composition. Essential oil (with geranial, neral andmyrcene as the major constituents) (Leclercq et al., 2000; Menutet al., 2000; Pino and Rosado, 2000; Sidibé et al., 2001; Ali et al.,2004; Kanko et al., 2004; Pérez et al., 2006; Rodriguez-Pérez et al.,2006; Brito et al., 2011; Silva et al., 2014; Diop et al., 2017;Soliman et al., 2017; Alam et al., 2018; Silva et al., 2018; BRASIL,2019a); triterpenes (e.g., cymbopogonol; cymbopogone)(Hanson et al., 1976); flavonoids (e.g., luteolin, apigenin,kaempferol) (Cheel et al., 2005; Orrego et al., 2009; Costaet al., 2015a; Costa et al., 2015b); phenolic acids (e.g., caffeic,chlorogenic, ferulic acids and derivatives) (Tapia et al., 2007).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1–2 g of dried leaves (or4–5 g of fresh leaves) in 150 ml, up to three times daily (Carballo,1995; Matos et al., 2001).Preclinical evidence. Cymbopogon citratus has beenexperimentally evaluated for fever. However, the evaluation ofthe antipyretic activity of C. citratus herbal tea in rats (p.o. or i.p.)did not result in body temperature reduction (Carlini et al.,1986). On the other hand, other related experimental effectsinclude the anti-inflammatory potential of this species, mainlyFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 9the essential oil. The essential oil from C. citratus has beenreported to suppress inhibition of TNF-a-induced neutrophiladherence, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS), and otherlipopolysaccharides (LPS)-induced pathways, suppression ofCOX-2 and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha(PPAR-a) (Katsukawa et al., 2010; Francisco et al., 2013).Another experiment (murine model of allergic asthma) showeda standardized hexane extract of C. citratus led to the reductionof inflammatory cells and eosinophils, as well as the expression ofNF-kB/p65, in mice sensitized by Bt-antigen (Machado et al.,2015). Citral, the main substance in C. citratus essential oil,presented antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activity in mice(Quintans-Júnior et al., 2011).Clinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been not trialedclinically for respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidenceis Low.Safety. Some reports considered C. citratus safe with no healthissues from its usage due to the acceptable concentration limit ofthe essential oil compounds (Carlini et al., 1986; Ekpenyonget al., 2015). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. NoneOverall assessment. This herbal medicine is widely used, andalthough its profile fit as safety relief therapy for flu, the anti-inflammatory effect on the respiratory tract of C. citratuspreparations could be useful in the symptomatic relief ofrespiratory disease. The clinical evidence may be consideredLow. As no severe concerns are reported, this herbal medicinesafety can be rated as High.Echinacea sp. (E. angustifolia DC., E. purpurea (L.)Moench and E. pallida (Nutt.) Nutt. - Asteraceae(Aerial Parts, Rootstock)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. This herbalmedicine is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely, those associated with common cold (EMA, 2017c).Echinacea preparations are widely used to ‘prevent colds andother respiratory infections, as immunostimulants and inconditions associated with respiratory discomfort. TheEuropean Medicine Agency (Herbal Medicinal ProductCommittee, HMPC) granted registrations for Echinaceapurpurea (L.) Moench (purple coneflower) for a preventivecontinuous use for maximal ten days, specifically excludingpediatric populations and with autoimmune illnesses as acontraindication (EMA, 2017a).Chemical composition. Alkylamides, polysaccharides. Caffeicacid derivatives serve as marker substances (e.g., echinacoside forE. pallida root; cichoric acid for E. purpurea aerial parts) but arenot considered to be of therapeutic relevance (Edwardset al., 2015).Posology. It is essential to use a commercial preparation withdefined composition and an adequate dose. Preparations thatadminister the extract to the upper respiratory tract (likelozenges) may well be preferable over solid formulations.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been notexperimentally proven for respiratory disease, namely cough,fever, flu, cold (EMA, 2017a). In vitro studies were reportedagainst a range of respiratory viruses but for some preparationsSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyonly at higher concentrations (Pleschka et al., 2009; Hudson andVimalanathan, 2011). The immunomodulatory effects of astandardized extract of Echinacea purpurea, as well as fractionsrich in chicoric acid, polysaccharide, and alkylamide, wereevaluated in rats. Phagocytic activity of alveolar macrophage wasincreased with increasing concentrations of the Echinaceacomponents. Also, a trend of increase in TNF-a and NO release,after in vivo LPS stimulation, by the alveolar macrophages wasobserved. High concentration led to a release of cytokines (such asTNF-a and IFN-g) in rat’s spleen macrophage (Goel et al., 2002).Clinical evidence. Echinacea preparations have been trialedclinically for flu and cold. However, the overall problem with theassessment of the evidence refers to the variability of thepharmaceutical preparations investigated in clinical studies(Linde et al., 2006; Karsch‐Völk et al., 2014; David andCunningham, 2019). Therefore, a large number of clinicalstudies, as well as a range of pharmacodynamics studies, havebeen conducted, overall indicating at best a weak evidence forbenefits for treating colds. Several metanalyses failed to find anyevidence of clear benefits. Still, two RCT reported statisticallysignificant benefits for patients in terms treated with E. purpureaand E. angustifolia preparations of both symptoms and reducedduration of flu or cold (Linde et al., 2006; Karsch‐Völk et al.,2014; David and Cunningham, 2019), thus qualifying for A (Ib).Of note, one study showed no difference between an Echinaceapallida preparation and oseltamivir (Raus ̌ et al., 2015). Overall,the clinical evidence is High for cold and flu.Safety. Echinacea preparations are generally considered to besafe, although some allergic reactions have been recorded (EMA,2017a). Interactions risks seem to be of no therapeutic concern(Modarai et al., 2010). Although French Agency (ANSES)postulated that echinacea, among other herbal medicines,could interfere with the immune response in the context ofCOVID-19 pandemic (ANSES, 2020), at this stage, there is noevidence to support this and, more generally, herbal treatmentsare not known to rigorously block inflammatory processes and tonegatively affect immune responses. Therefore, these concernsseem to be a theoretical postulate which would require furtherevaluation. While there are no clinical signals for interaction withother medications, ANSES’s concerns might be linked totheoretical interaction with immunosuppressants (such asciclosporin and methotrexate) due to an antagonistic effect(Williamson et al., 2013). Overall, safety is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Like all otherproducts discussed here, there is no evidence for specifictherapeutic benefits, and it is important to communicate thisto potential users. The safety concerns listed above need to bekept in mind.Overall assessment: Echinacea sp. may be useful in the reliefof respiratory symptoms by exerting a soothing effect on therespiratory tract. Overall, a relatively large number of clinicalstudies and a series of meta-analyses provide evidence thatEchinacea preparations seem to be efficacious both in thetreatment (reducing symptoms and duration) and preventionof the common cold. The clinical evidence may be consideredHigh except for E. pallida. Although in the COVID-19 context,Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 10caution needs to be taken in order to avoid immunostimulationin complications in later phases of the disease, this herbalmedicine safety can be rated as Medium.Eucalyptus globulus Labill. - Myrtaceae (Leaves,Essential Oil)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Eucalyptusglobulus is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease, namelycough (WHO, 2002; BRASIL, 2011; EMA, 2013a). Other relatedindications include respiratory antiseptic (CHILE, 2010) andexpectorant (COLOMBIA, 2008), due to the presence of 1-8-cineol (Fischer and Dethlefsen, 2013; Salehi et al., 2019b).Chemical composition. Essential oil (1,8-cineol as the majorcomponent); phenolic acids (cafeic, ferulic acid, and derivatives),tannins (gallic and protocatechuic acids), flavonoids (quercetinderivatives) (Dixit et al., 2012; Sonker et al., 2017).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1.5–3 g of dried leaves in150 ml, up to four times daily (EMA, 2013a).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease. Invitro and in vivo studies with leaves extracts, essential oil, and1,8-cineol are supportive for some ethnomedicinal use (Ross,2001; Jun et al., 2013; Brezáni et al., 2018; Dhakad et al., 2018;Galan et al., 2020); for example, the essential oil (300 mg/kg)exerted an anti-inflammatory effect on LPS-induced bronchitisin rats, inhibiting the airway mucin hypersecretion (Luet al., 2004).Clinical evidence. Eucalyptus globulus essential oilpreparations have been trialed clinically for respiratory disease(bronchitis, rhinitis), and the following symptoms wereevaluated: cough and throat irritation. In an aromatherapyexperiment with 48 students diagnosed with allergic rhinitis,eucalyptus reduced coughing, itching sensation in the throat andoral cavity, as well as other symptoms. After four weeks oftreatment, the volunteers related a reduction of the discomfortprovoked by rhinitis (Song and Kim, 2014). An RCT, involving152 volunteers with acute non-purulent rhinosinusitis, wascarried out with 1,8-cineol, the main compound of eucalyptusessential oil (capsules of 200 mg of oil or placebo, three timesdaily). After four and seven days, the cineol group presentedbetter symptoms scores than the control group. Moreover,inflammatory processes, such as bronchitis, pharyngitis,tracheitis, conjunctivitis, were less frequent among the verumgroup (Kehrl et al., 2004). Overall, the clinical evidence isMedium for bronchitis and cough for the essential oil, whilefor the herbal drug is Low.Safety. In traditional doses, there is no report on the toxicityof E. globulus. However, high doses can cause nausea, vomiting,and diarrhea (WHO, 2002). In a preclinical assay of 1,8-cineol inmice, this compound was classified as presenting low toxicity (Xuet al., 2014). However, high doses can cause nausea, vomiting,and diarrhea (WHO, 2002). However, in the cited clinical trial,the essential oil and 1,8-cineol did not present a significant sideeffect. Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The use iscontraindicated for patients with hypersensitivity to the activeSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapysubstance. Moreover, this plant should not be used by childrenunder 30months of age due to 1,8-cineole containing preparations,which can induce laryngospasm (EMA, 2013a). In rats, 1,8-cineolinduced CYP-450 activity and reduced the levels of amphetamine,pentobarbital, andaminopyrine inplasmaorbrain (Jori et al., 1970).Moreover, the usual precautions relevant to essential oils should betaken into account.Overall assessment. Eucalyptus globulus may be useful in therelief of symptoms associated with upper respiratory infection byexerting a soothing effect on the respiratory tract. However, eventhough the extensive use of products containing eucalyptusderivatives, more evidence is need on the impact in therespiratory tract. The clinical evidence may be consideredMedium. Although there are concerns about the eucalyptus useby babies, this herbal medicine safety can be rated as High.Foeniculum vulgare Mill. – Apiaceae (Fruits)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Foeniculumvulgare is indicated for respiratory disease, namely coughassociated with cold and fever (EMA, 2007; WHO, 2007).Chemical composition. Essential oil (trans-anethole,estragole, and limonene as major components) (Singh et al.,2006; Badgujar et al., 2014); stilbenes (e.g., foeniculosides X andXI, cis- and trans-miyabenol) (De Marino et al., 2007);flavonoids (e.g., eriodictyol, quercetin, and derivatives) (Parejoet al., 2004; Faudale et al., 2008); and triterpenes and steroids(e.g., oleanolic acid, 7a-hydroxycampsterol) (Parejo et al., 2004;De Marino et al., 2007; Rather et al., 2016).Posology. 1.5 to 2.5 g in 200 ml of boiling water (brew for15 min) three times daily (EMA, 2007; WHO, 2007).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for cough. The ethanol extract, as well asthe essential oil of F. vulgare presented analgesic and anti-inflammatory activity in rats (Tanira et al., 1996; Özbek, 2005;Him et al., 2008; Araujo et al., 2013; Elizabeth et al., 2014). Theaqueous and ethanolic extract and essential oil of F. vulgare wereevaluated about the myorelaxant activity using isolated guinea-pigtrachea, as a model to bronchodilatory effect. The ethanolic extractand essential oil exert relaxant effects similar to those presented bytheophylline. The aqueous extract, on the other hand, presented acontraction effect. The myorelaxant effect was not due toinhibition of muscarinic and histamine H1 and/or stimulationon b2-adrenergic receptors (Boskabady and Khatami, 2003).Clinical evidence. Foeniculum vulgare has not been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases. Overall, the clinical evidenceis Low.Safety. Although essential oil of F. vulgare presents estragoleas one of the main components, and due to its genotoxiccarcinogenicity, the exposure to this compound should be keptas low as possible (EMA, 2019), in the recommended herbalpreparation and posology, F. vulgare is considered safe. Overall,safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The safety of fennelwas long considered to be of no concern and importantly linkedto the long history of use as a medicine and food. The GermanCommission E lists no risks. In recent years, concerns wereraised related to the content of estragole (methyl chavicol), whichFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 11is known as a potential carcinogen. No clinical reports of fennel’stoxicity are known. The dose and the relevance of some studieswith pure estragole at high doses have been disputed. Overall, theevidence is very limited, and there is no known reason forconcern (Edwards et al., 2015). Administration of differentdoses of fennel essential oil reduced the intensity of oxytocinand PGE2 induced contractions significantly (25 and 50 µg/mlfor oxytocin and 10 and 20 µg/ml for PGE2, respectively) (Ostadet al., 2001). Fennel is a CYP3A4 inhibitor and can interfere inthe metabolism of several drugs (Subehan et al., 2006).Overall assessment. Even though its profile fits as safety relieftherapy for cough in the context of upper respiratory affections,therapeutic benefits are likely to be limited. The clinical evidenceis Low. This herbal medicine safety can be rated as High,although the recommended dosage must be observed.Glycyrrhiza glabra L. - Fabaceae (Roots)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Glycyrrhizaglabra is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease, namely,cough, sore throat (WHO, 1999; EMA, 2012a).Chemical composition. Saponins (e.g., glycyrrhizin);triterpenes (glycyrrhetinic acid); flavonoids (liquiritin,rhamnoliquirilin, liquiritigenin, besides others); coumarins(e.g., licoarylcoumarin); essential oil (Saxena, 2005; Öztürket al., 2017; Frattaruolo et al., 2019; El-Saber Batiha et al., 2020a).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1.5 g of roots in 150 ml,as herbal decoction two times daily (EMA, 2012a).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for cold symptoms. Other relatedexperimental effects are anti-asthma and antiviral. The anti-asthma activity of licorice was proven in sensitized rats. Acrude hydroethanolic extract (100 mg/kg, p.o) exerted a similareffect to prednisolone (10 mg/kg, p.o.) in mast cellsdegranulation (Patel et al., 2017). Glycyrrhizin improved thesurvival time of mice infected with the Influenza virus. Also,inhibited the SARS-related coronavirus proliferation in vitro.Glycyrrhizic acid inhibited the growth of the Influenza virus,inflammatory cytokines, as well as the cytopathic effect of theRespiratory Syncytial Virus (RSV) (Fiore et al., 2008).Clinical evidence. Glycyrrhiza glabra preparations have beentrialed clinically for respiratory disease (asthma). An RTC,involving 36 patients presenting chronic asthma, showed licoricein a dose of 3.5 mg/kg in 200 ml water, three times daily, was ableto improve the pulmonary function’s parameter similarly toprednisolone (0.15 mg/kg) as a single daily dose (Al-Jawad et al.,2012). Overall, the clinical evidence is High for asthma.Safety. Patients affected by hypertension, kidney diseases,liver or cardiovascular disorders, or hypokalemia, should avoidG. glabra (Nazari et al., 2017). On the other hand, licorice iswidely used in food preparation and, therefore, short term usesseem of little concern in otherwise patients with no history ofmajor diseases. Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. In an in vitroexperiment, licorice ethanol extract inhibits CYP3A4 andCYP2D6 (Budzinski et al., 2000; Pandit et al., 2011).Overall assessment. Glycyrrhiza glabra is used for a long timeand can be useful in the relief of respiratory symptoms bySeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyexerting a soothing effect on the respiratory tract. The clinicalevidence can be considered as High. This herbal medicine safetycan be rated as High, although it should be avoided for somerisk groups.Hedera helix L. - Araliaceae (Leaves)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Hedera helixis indicated for some symptoms of respiratory disease, namelyexpectorant (a medicine that helps to bring up phlegm) forproductive (chesty) coughs (EMA, 2015a). Other relatedindications include its actions as antispasmodic and in thetreatment of flu and fever (Bisset, 1994; Blumenthal et al.,1998; Hong et al., 2015; Kruttschnitt et al., 2019).Chemical composition. Flavonoids and other phenolics(Urban, 1958; Trute and Nahrstedt, 1997; Al-Snafi, 2018);polyacetylenes (falcarinol, dehydrofalcarinol) (Bohlmann et al.,1961; Gafner et al., 1989); saponins (Elias et al., 1991; Crespinet al., 1995; Yakovishin and Grishkovets, 2018); and essential oils(b-caryophyllene, germacrene D, limonene, a- and b-pinene,and sabinene as the main components) (Tucker andMaciarello, 1994).Posology. Pharmaceutical preparation with a definedchemical profile and an adequate dose need to be used(EMA, 2015a).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely productive cough (Hong et al., 2015; Pizzorno et al.,2016). Other related experimental effects include acute andchronic bronchitis, asthma, and pneumonia (Hong et al., 2015;Pizzorno et al., 2016). The H. helix extract and isolatedcompounds exerted a spasmolytic effect in isolated guinea-pigileum (Trute et al., 1997).Clinical evidence. Hedera helix preparations have been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases such as bronchial asthma, andimprovement of airway resistance, intrathoracic gas volume, andforced expiratory volume were evaluated (Hofmann et al., 2003;Guo et al., 2006; Holzinger and Chenot, 2011). However, despiteits established traditional use, very few controlled clinical studieshave been published. A randomized, double-blind trial wascarried was conducted with an H. helix standardized extract. Atotal of 181 patients presenting acute cough was treated with 35mg of the extract, three times daily, for 7 days. The group treatedwith ivy extract showed a clinically relevant reduction in coughscore, the severity of symptoms associated with cough, andbronchitis, in comparison with the control group. Thereduction of symptoms occurred in the first 48 h. of treatment.The observed adverse effects were non-serious, mild, or moderateseverity and not related to the treatment (Schaefer et al., 2016). Astudy involving 139 patients having acute bronchitis andproductive cough for at least three days, compared thetreatment using a standardized extract of H. helix andacetylcysteine. No statistically differences were observedbetween the treatments. Moreover, both treatments showed tobe safe and effective in children and adults (Kruttschnitt et al.,2019; Kruttschnitt et al., 2020). Moreover, a review of thetreatment of upper respiratory tract infections identified 10clinical trials, including three controlled trials (one of whichFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 12was placebo-controlled) and 7 non-randomized observationalstudies (Holzinger and Chenot, 2011). Overall, the clinicalevidence is High for bronchitis and the common cold.Safety. Although gastrointestinal reactions (EMA, 2015a) andnausea, vomiting, and diarrhea have been listed among thesymptoms of overdose (Bisset, 1994), and although there mightbe allergic reactions to the saponins, H. helix preparations aregenerally considered to be safe. There was a minimal report ofadverse effects in 10 clinical trials, including three controlledtrials (one of which was placebo-controlled) and 7 non-randomized observational studies (Holzinger and Chenot,2011). Overall, the safety is High, and there are no reports toinfer that the preparations from the plant may interferenegatively with the disease or NSAIDs.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Hedera helixpreparations are contraindicated if the patient presentsdyspnea, fever, or purulent sputum. They should be used withcare in patients suffering from gastritis or gastric ulcers(EMA, 2015a).Overall assessment. Hedera helix preparations could be usefulin the symptomatic relief of respiratory diseases by exerting anexpectorant and anti-inflammatory effect on the respiratorytract. In many countries, licensed preparations are regulatedfor use in children. There is a robust body of clinical evidencethat can be considered as High. This herbal medicine safety canbe rated as High, due to the side effects that had been related onlyin an overdose situation.Justicia pectoralis Jacq. [syn. Dianthera pectoralis(Jacq.) J.F.Gmel.] – Acanthaceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Justiciapectoralis (chambá) is indicated for symptoms of respiratorydisease, as expectorant (BRASIL, 2011) and immunostimulant(CUBA, 2014).Chemical composition. Coumarins (mainly coumarin andumbelliferone); flavonoids (e.g., quercetin, kaempferol,swertisin, and derivatives) (Lino et al., 1997; Oliveira et al.,2000); lignans (e.g., justicidin B) (Joseph et al., 1988).Posology (based on traditional uses). 5 g in 150 ml of water asan infusion (BRASIL, 2011).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely asthma. A standardized hydroalcoholic extract of J.pectoralis presented inhibitory effects on the tracheal smoothmuscle of rats subjected to challenge with ovalbumin (OVA) inan allergen model that reproduces many features of clinicalasthma such as bronchial hyper-reactivity. Administered bygavage to sensitized rats after challenge with saline or OVA, theextract of J. pectoralis decreased the exacerbated responsiveness ofrat trachea caused by the challengewith the sensitizing antigen. Theoral administration of the standardized extract reduced thehyperresponsiveness in OVA-challenged trachea in preparationsstimulated with KCl (potassium chloride) or ACh (acetylcholine).These effects on rat airways are possibly related to its anti-inflammatory activity, as observed by its ability to significantlyinhibit the increase of the levels of TNF-a and IL-1b, pro-inflammatory cytokines, in bronchoalveolar lavage of OVA-September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapychallenged rats. These work findings reinforce the notion that theextract of J. pectoralis possesses potential anti-asthmatic properties(Moura et al., 2017). In another study, the aqueous extract of J.pectoralis was evaluated in sensitized guinea-pig. The crude extractreduced the formation of histamine-inducedwheals.Moreover, theextract was tested on guinea-pig tracheal contraction caused by thecumulative dosing of histamine. Justicia pectoralis reducedhistamine-induced tracheal smooth muscle contractions(Cameron et al., 2015).Clinical evidence. Justicia pectoralis preparations have beentrialed clinically for cough in children only. The efficacy ofchambá syrup at 5% was evaluated in a randomized, double-blindclinical trial, in 114 children presenting cough andother respiratorysymptoms. Chambá syrup was effective in relieving symptoms ofcough, nasal congestion, and rhinorrhea, as well as improving thesleeping capacity of children when compared to placebo(Nascimento, 2018).Overall, the clinical evidence isHigh for cough.Safety. In traditional doses, there is no report about thetoxicity of J. pectoralis, including children.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Due to the presenceof coumarin and derivatives, J. pectoralis use should be avoidedtogether non-steroidal anti-inflammatory or anti-coagulantdrugs (Wittkowsky, 2003). Overall, safety is High.Overall assessment. Justicia pectoralis preparations might beuseful in the symptomatic relief of respiratory disease throughexerting an anti-inflammatory effect on the respiratory tract. Theclinical evidence may be considered High. Even though chambáis known to have potential antiplatelet effects, overall, it can beconsidered presenting Medium safety.Magnolia officinalis Rehder & E.H. Wilson -Magnoliaceae (Bark)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Magnoliaofficinalis is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely cough, fever, and shortness of breath (WHO, 2009).Chemical composition. Biphenyl neolignan derivatives:magnolol (5,5’-diallyl-2,2’-dihydroxy biphenyl) and honokiol(5,3’-diallyl-2,4’-dihydroxy biphenyl); isoquinoline-type alkaloids,the majority of which are aporphine (N-methylcoxylonine, (S)-magnoflorine, magnofficine, (R)-asimilobine, corytuberine,anonaine, liriodenine) and benzylisoquinoline derivatives(magnocurarine, (S)-tembetarine, lotusine, (R)-oblongine,reticuline); essential oil (the major constituents are a-, b-, and g-eudesmol) (Yan et al., 2013; Poivre and Duez, 2017).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3-9 g of crude drug(decoction) daily in divided doses (WHO, 2009).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for asthma. Studies in animals and invitromodels have demonstrated multiple biological properties ofhonokiol, including anti-asthma (through IL4 and IFN-NF-kB)(Hong et al., 2018). Other related symptom studies are anti-histamine (Shin et al. , 2001) and anti-HIV (humanimmunodeficiency viruses) activities (Amblard et al., 2006).Clinical evidence. Magnolia preparations have been trialedclinically for asthma. Preliminary clinical studies showed thebenefits of magnolia for oral health (Campus et al., 2011). In non-Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 13comparative research, as add-on therapy in 148 patients with mildto moderate asthma using inhaled corticosteroids, an extract ofMagnoliae flos had a beneficial effect on asthma control (Park et al.,2012). Overall, the clinical evidence is Medium for asthma.Safety. Magnolol and honokiol are the main ingredients ofmagnolia bark and, therefore, were considered directly relevantto evaluate the safety of the product. Full clinical monitoring,including biochemical and hematological analysis, showed noevidence of toxicity reported in subjects consuming magnoliabark containing supplements at a dose of 750 mg/person/day(approximately 15 and 60 mg/person per day of honokiol andmagnolol respectively) for 42 days (Garrison and Chambliss,2006). According to other studies, safety and toxicity of magnoliabark do not differ notably but may reflect insufficiencies of thesetoxicity studies. Therefore, currently, studies of the mechanismsof toxicity of magnolia bark are insufficient (Luo et al., 2019).However, in the context of COVID-19, magnolol has beenidentified as a potential enhancer of ACE2 expression (ANSES,2020). Overall, the safety of M. oficinalis is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None known.Overall assessment. Magnolia bark has been used in Chineseand Japanese traditional medicines for the treatment of asthma,allergic disease, as well as for the alleviation of headaches,muscular pain, and fever (Forrest, 1995; Lee et al., 2011). AsM. officinalis preparations are not clinically proven to providesymptomatic relief of flu symptoms and its active principle(magnolol) may enhance the entry SARS-CoV-2 virus into thecell, the clinical evidence may be considered Medium and thesafety, in the COVID-19 context, Medium.Malva sylvestris L. – Malvaceae (Leaves)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Malvasylvestris is indicated for respiratory disease, namely oral orpharyngeal irritations and dry cough (BRASIL, 2011;EMA, 2018d).Chemical composition. Mucilages (mainly glucuronic andgalacturonic acids, rhamnose, galactose, fructose, glucose,trehalose); flavonoids (e.g., malvidin, delphinidin, myricetin,apigenin, kaempferol, genistein, and derivatives); tannins(Farina et al., 1995; Paul, 2016); hydroxycinnamic acid andderivatives; benzoic acid and derivatives; monoterpenes(Cutillo et al., 2006).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1.8 g in 150 ml asinfusion or decoction three times daily (EMA, 2018d).Preclinical evidence. Malva sylvestris preparations have beenexperimentally studied for cough. The anti-tussive activity of itsmucilage and isolated rhamnogalacturonan was evaluated in cats.Both substances suppressed the cough reflex and decreased thefrequency of cough, especially in the laryngopharynx area, althoughthe polysaccharide was more active than mucilage (Nosalova et al.,2005). Another study showed anti-inflammatory and analgesicaction through traditional pharmacological in vivo models(Seddighfar et al., 2020). Mucilage seems to be responsible forthe cough suppressive activity of this species (Čapek et al., 1999).Another experimental related activity is anti-inflammatory. Malvasylvestris ethanolic extract presented anti-inflammatory activity inSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapymice through the ear edema model. The extract reduced the levelsof IL-1b in tissue challenged by TPA. Also, the extract and isolatedcompounds inhibited myeloperoxidase activity. Malvidin-3-glucoside presented inhibitory activity similar to dexamethasone(Prudente et al., 2013). The aqueous extract can suppress theexpression of several pro-cytokine genes such as TNF-a, IL-1b,COX-2, iNOS (Mirghiasi et al., 2015).Clinical evidence.Malva sylvestris has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. In traditional doses, there isnoreport about the toxicityofM. sylvestris.However, high dosesmay cause nausea, vomiting anddiarrhea, nervous excitement, and insomnia (BRASIL, 2015a;BRASIL, 2019b). Overall, safety is High.Specific Warnings and precautions of use. In general, mucilagecan alter the absorption of some drugs (BRASIL, 2015a).Overall assessment. Malva sylvestris has been traditionallyused as cough therapy and may be useful in the relief of COVID-19 symptoms through exerting a soothing effect on therespiratory tract. The clinical evidence may be considered Low,but this herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Mikania glomerata Spreng. and M. laevigataSch.Bip. ex Baker Asteraceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Mikaniaglomerata is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely cough, and as expectorant (BRASIL, 2011; BRASIL,2017; BRASIL, 2018).Chemical composition. Essential oil (germacrene D andb-caryophyllene as the major components) (Ueno and Sawaya,2019); coumarins (e.g., coumarin, trans-o-coumaric acid),;phenolic acids (e.g., chlorogenic and caffeoylquinic acids)(Lazzari Almeida et al., 2017); terpenoids and steroids (e.g.,friedelin, ent-kaurenoic acid, ent-kaur-16(17)-en-19-oic acid,ent-beyer-15(16)-en-19-oic acid, ent-15b-benzoyloxykaur16(17)-en-19-oic acid, grandifloric acid, ent-cinnamoylgrandifloric acid,ent-benzoylgrandifloric acid 17-hydroxy-ent-kaur-15(16)-en-19-oic acid, stigmasterol, b-sitosterol) (Veneziani and Oliveira, 1999;Bertolucci et al., 2013).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3 g of dried leaves in150 ml, as an infusion, 2 times daily. However, the use of dosageforms, with defined composition, is recommended.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for cough. The aqueous extract reducedthe contractile effect of histamine on the isolated guinea-pigtrachea and human bronchi (Moura et al., 2002). A fraction ofM.glomerata ethanolic extract was evaluated through an allergicpleurisy model in rats and resulted in the inhibition of leukocyteinfiltration (Fierro et al., 1999).Clinical evidence. Mikania glomerata preparations have beentrialed clinically for one of the related diseases, namely cough.This herbal medicine has been used in Brazil in respiratorydiseases, such as asthma, cough, and throat inflammation (Agraet al., 2008; Brandao et al., 2009). A clinical trial sponsored by theBrazilian government showed that the infusion of M. glomerata(5, 10, and 15 g in 200 ml of water) had an unequivocalbronchodilator action and evident dose-dependent antitussiveFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 14effect (Amaral et al., 2006). A randomized study involving 62patients compared the bronchodilator effect of M. glomeratasyrup and salbutamol inhaler and found M. glomerata syrup didnot present effect (Garcia et al., 2020). However, the overallproblem with this study refers to the differences between theinvestigated pharmaceutical preparations. Overall, the clinicalevidence is High for asthma, but Low for other types of cough.Safety. Some non-clinical studies report its safety. Mikaniaglomerata hydroalcoholic (70%) extract presented LD50 ~ 3000mg/kg and did not produce any biochemical, hematological, andmorphological changes in mice (Santana et al., 2013). Moreover,M. glomerata did not present genotoxicity, mutagenicity,teratogenicity or antifertility activity (Sa et al., 2003; Sá et al.,2006; Barbosa et al., 2012; Fulanetti et al., 2016). Doses abovethose recommended may cause vomiting and diarrhea (Matos,2000; BRASIL, 2011).Mikania glomerata syrup is included in theBrazilian List of Essential Medicines, and so far, there are noreported concerns relating to safety from the point of viewof pharmacovigilance.Specific Warnings and precautions of use. Not to be usedwhile under treatment with NSAIDs. The use may interfere withcoagulation due to the presence of coumarin derivatives (Matos,2000; Wittkowsky, 2003; BRASIL, 2011). Overall, safetyis Medium.Overall assessment. Mikania glomerata is in the list ofessential medicine in Brazil for the symptomatic relief of coughand asthma and has been prescribed for children for several yearswithout a pharmacovigilance report. Preclinical and clinical databack up this indication, although guaco is not clinically proven toprovide relief of flu symptoms. The clinical evidence may beconsidered High. Even though guaco is known to have potentialantiplatelet effects, overall, it can be considered presentingMedium safety.Ocimum gratissimum L. -Lamiaceae (Leaves)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Ocimumgratisssimum is indicated for symptoms of cold, influenza,fever, asthma, bronchitis (WHO, 2002).Chemical composition. Essential oil (eugenol, thymol, and1,8-cineol as the major components) (Prabhu et al., 2009; Mongaet al., 2017); phenolics (quercetin and derivatives, luteolin andderivatives, kaempferol and derivatives, catechin, epi-catechin,cafeic acid); triterpenes (ursolic acid) (Prabhu et al., 2009;BRASIL, 2015b; Siva et al., 2016; Monga et al., 2017).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1-3 g in 150 ml ofboiling water, as an infusion, 3-4 times daily (BRASIL, 2019b).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for cough. An aqueous extract of O.gratissimum was evaluated in OVA-sensitized guinea-pig aboutanti-tussive and anti-asthma activities. The aqueous extract didnot exert effect in pre-convulsive dyspnea; however, reduced in asignificant manner, the volume of tracheal liquid, although it didnot interfere in the fluid viscosity, and reduced in more than 80%the number of cough episodes (Ozolua et al., 2016). Anotherexperimental related activity is anti-inflammatory. The essentialoil of O. gratissimum presented an antinociceptive effect in mice,September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyin evaluation using classical methods (Rabelo et al., 2003; Paula‐Freire et al., 2013). A flavonoid-rich fraction of O. gratissimum,in mice, presented anti-inflammatory activity, reducing thenumber of the leucocytes in the peritoneum, and inhibitediNOS, COX-2 (in the same degree than indomethacin). Also,inhibited LPS-induced NO, IL-1b, and TNF-a production inRAW 264.7 cells (Ajayi et al., 2017).Clinical evidence. Ocimum gratissimum has not been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases. Overall, the clinical evidenceis Low.Safety. In traditional doses, there is no report about thetoxicity of O. gratissimum.Specific Warnings and precautions of use. Due to thepresence of estragole, a naturally occurring genotoxiccarcinogen, O. gratissimum should be used for a short time, inthe recommended posology (EMA, 2005) (see alsoFoeniculum vulgare).Overall assessment. Its traditional use as cough therapy in thecontext of upper respiratory conditions is not backed up byclinical data profile, but its preclinical evidence and safety profilemay allow the potential use in the relief of early symptoms ofCOVID-19. The clinical evidence is Low, and although there aresome concerns about the presence of estragole, in the traditionaldoses, this herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Pelargonium sidoides DC and/or Pelargoniumreniforme Curt. -Geraniaceae (Root)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Pelargoniumsidoides is indicated for the common cold (EMA, 2018c), cough,and bronchitis (COLOMBIA, 2008). Umkaloabo preparationsare available in some European Countries with a full marketingauthorization (e.g., Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Germany, Latvia)or register as a traditional herbal medicinal product (e.g., Austria,Hungary, Italy, The Netherlands, Poland, Spain, Sweden), andare widely used for ‘acute bronchitis’ and other respiratoryinfections’ (EMA, 2018c). Practically all research has beenconducted with the proprietary extract EPs 7630®. The speciesoriginate from Southern Africa, and the term Umkaloabo isclaimed to be a fusion of two terms from Zulu (“Umkuhlune” -coughing and fever; and “Uhlabo” = pain in the chest) (Heinrichet al., 2018).Chemical composition. Relevant key metabolites assumed tobe active are hydrolyzable tannins, (+)-catechin, gallic acid, andmethyl gallate, including some unusual O-galloyl-C-glucosylflavones., scopoletin, 6,8-dihydroxy-5,7-dimethoxycoumarin,5,6,7-trimethoxycoumarin. Other coumarins, as well as,quercetin 3-O-b-D-glucoside, myricetin, and other flavonoidshave been isolated from both species. Pelargonium sidoidesyielded some benzopyranones. Umckalin is only known fromP. sidoides (Maree and Viljoen, 2012); pelargoniins (anellagitannin) and the diterpene reniformin have been identifiedin P. reniforme (Edwards et al., 2015).Posology. Oral drops, tablets, and syrups are most commonlyused (EMA, 2018c). Commercial preparations with regulatedquality, a defined composition, and an adequate dose areavailable on some markets globally.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 15Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for anti-viral activity. The commercialextract EPs 7630® interfered in vitro with the replication ofdifferent respiratory viruses, including human coronavirus(Michaelis et al., 2011), Influenza virus (in vitro and in vivo)(Theisen and Muller, 2012), and Rhinovirus isolated frompatients with severe asthma (Roth et al., 2019). EPs 7630 wasable to stimulate IFN-b in vitro, and gallic acid enhanced theexpression of iNOS and TNF-a (Kolodziej et al., 2003).Clinical evidence. Pelargonium sidoides preparations havebeen trialed clinically for cough. In a randomized, controlledtrial, involving 124 adults presenting acute bronchitis, weretreated with 30 drops of EPs 7630®, for seven days. Thetreated group showed a significant improvement regarding theBronchitis Severity Score (BSS) compared with the placebogroup (Chuchalin et al., 2005). In a Cochrane review, theefficacy of P. sidoides preparations in acute respiratoryinfections in RCT was assessed and indicated that it might beuseful in the alleviation of symptoms of acute rhinosinusitis andthe common cold in adults. However, the authors also raisedconcerns regarding the studies’ quality (Timmer et al., 2013).Similarly, Schapowals’ meta-analyses of randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials concluded that it is useful inthe management of the common cold (Schapowal et al., 2019).Overall, the clinical evidence is High for bronchitis and thecommon cold.Safety. Umkaloabo preparations are generally considered tobe safe, although gastrointestinal discomfort (stomach pain,heartburn, nausea, or diarrhea) might occur with no majorconcerns about interaction risks (Edwards et al., 2015).However, due to the potential immunomodulatory activity,overall, safety is Medium.Specific warnings and precautions of use. As with all otherproducts discussed here, there is no evidence for specifictherapeutic benefits, and it is important to communicate thisto potential users. The safety concerns listed above need to bekept in mind.Overall assessment. Umkaloabo may be useful in thesymptomatic relief of respiratory symptoms through exerting asoothing effect on the respiratory tract. A relatively large numberof clinical studies and a series of meta-analyses provide evidencethat Umkaloabo preparations seem to be efficacious both in thetreatment (reducing symptoms and duration) and prevention ofthe common cold. However, it must be discontinued to avoidimmunostimulation in complications in later phases of thedisease. The clinical evidence is High, and this herbal medicineis considered presenting Medium safety.Pimpinella anisum L. – Apiaceae (Fruits)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Pimpinellaanisum is indicated for cough and fever (WHO, 2009; CHILE,2010) and as antispasmodic (WHO, 2009; CHILE, 2010;BRASIL, 2011).Chemical composition. Essential oil (trans-anethole as themain compound) (Orav et al., 2008); chlorogenic acidderivatives; flavonoids (orientin, vitexin, and others, coumarinSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyderivatives; triterpenes and steroidal compounds (Zobel et al.,1991; Reichling and Galati, 2004; Abdollahi Fard, 2012).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1,5 g of the dried fruitsin 150 ml, as an infusion, three times daily (BRASIL, 2011;Barnes et al., 2012; EMA, 2013b).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for cough. Aqueous and ethanolextracts of P. anisum presented myorelaxant effect in isolatedtracheal chains of guinea-pig. The relaxant effect was similar topromoted by theophylline. Interesting to note that the essentialoil did not present a significant effect (Boskabady and Ramazani-Assari, 2001).Clinical evidence. Pimpinella anisum preparations have beentrialed clinically for asthma. The bronchodilator activity of P.anisum was evaluated in a study involving 50 patients presentingbronchial asthma. The patients ingested tea (2 g in 200 ml ofwater), twice a day for 40 days. All patients presented a reductionof cough episodes after 21 days of treatment (from more than 6episodes/day to none), as well as dyspnea and wheezing. Also, animprovement in the breath-holding time and respiratory ratewas observed (Paheerathan, 2019). Overall, the clinical evidenceis High for asthma-related cough and Low for cough and fever.Safety. In the traditional doses, there is no report about thetoxicity of P. anisum. However, allergic reactions can occur, forexample, rhinoconjunctivitis (Garcıá-González et al., 2002;EMA, 2013b). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The concomitantuse with anti-coagulant drugs should be avoided due to thepresence of coumarins (Dinehart and Henry, 2005).Overall assessment. Its traditional use as cough therapy in thecontext of upper respiratory conditions is not backed up byrobust clinical data profile, but its safety profile allows forpotential use in the relief of early symptoms of COVID-19.The clinical evidence may be considered High. Even though P.anisum has potential antiplatelet effects, overall, it can beconsidered presenting Medium safety.Plantago lanceolata L. – Plantaginaceae (Leaves)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Plantagolanceolata is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely cough, pharyngitis, and fever (CHILE, 2010). Otherindications include as demulcent, to reduce bronchial catarrhand mild inflammation of the pharynx (Blumenthal et al., 1998;ESCOP, 2003b; Wichtl, 2004; Boskabady et al., 2006a).Chemical composition. Carbohydrates (Jiang et al., 2019);flavonoids (apigenin, luteolin and their derivatives) (Haddadianand Zahmatkash, 2014; Ferrazzano et al., 2015); iridoidglycosides (aucubin and catalpol as the main ones) (EMA,2014b; Lotter et al., 2017; Hasan et al., 2018); phenylethanoids(Bahadori et al., 2020); saponins (Wichtl, 2004); tannins (Wichtl,2004; Grigore et al., 2015); and essential oil (amyl vinyl carbinol(E),4(3-oxo-2,6,6-trimethylcyclo-hex-2-en-1-yl)-3-buten-2-ol,6-(3-hydroxy-1-butenyl)-1,5,5-trimethyl-7-oxabicyclo[4,1,0]heptan-3-ol, and benzoic acid as major components) (Fons et al.,1998; Bajer et al., 2016).Posology (based on traditional uses). 2 g of leaves in 150 mlboiling water, two to three times daily; 160-190 mg of powderedFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 16plant coated tablet or lozenges, maximum dose of 1.28 g daily(EMA, 2014b). It is preferable to use a commercial preparationwith a defined composition and an adequate dose (EMA, 2014b).Preclinical evidence. This herbalmedicine has been experimentallyproven for cough. An ethanol extract of P. lanceolata reduces thenumber of coughs provoked by citric acid, in guinea-pig, in a similarway to codeine (Boskabady et al., 2006a). Other experiments showedthat an ethanol extract of this species inhibited the barium-inducedcontraction of guinea-pig isolated trachea (Fleer and Verspohl, 2007).The pharmacological effects described in literature support both theoral and oromucosal traditional use of herbal preparations of P.lanceolata as a demulcent for the symptomatic treatment of oraland pharyngeal mucosa irritation, associated to dry cough (Ortiz deUrbina et al., 1994; Herold et al., 2003; Vigo et al., 2005; Hausmannet al., 2007).Clinical evidence. Plantago lanceolata has not been trialedclinically for respiratory tract disorders. However, there is someevidence in the literature for the traditional internal use of P.lanceolata as a mucilage in the treatment of irritations of oral andpharyngeal mucosa and associated dry cough (Wegener andKraft, 1999). However, data on this clinical assay are scarce.Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Currently, there is a lack of toxicity and clinical safetydata for P. lanceolata, which warrants further investigation forthis plant. However, popular use points to hypersensitivityreactions as the main side effects reported (Ozkol et al., 2012;EMA, 2014b). Overall, the safety is High as there are no reportsto infer that the preparations may interfere with the diseaseor NSAIDs.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The topical use ofthis plant is not recommended (EMA, 2011a; Ozkol et al., 2012;EMA, 2014b). Plantago lanceolata pollen may cause hayfever,especially if the plant is abundant in a region like in manysubtropical regions (Calabozo et al., 2001). Pla 11 has beennamed the main allergen with IgE-binding capacity present inthis plant, although other IgE-binding proteins have also beenidentified (Sousa et al., 2014). Treatment should not exceed oneweek (EMA, 2014b). Minor diarrhea has also been reported(EMA, 2011a).Overall Assessment. Although P. lanceolata is not clinicallyproven to provide symptomatic relief of flu symptoms, there areenough preclinical evidences to allow the use of this herbalmedicine to relieve respiratory symptoms through exerting anexpectorant and anti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidenceis Low, but this herbal medicine is considered presentingHigh safety.Platycodon chinensis (Jacq). A.DC. [syn. Platycodongrandiflorus (Jacq.) A.DC.] – Campanulaceae (Roots)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Platycodonchinensis is indicated for cough (WHO, 1999). Other relatedindications include expectorant (WHO, 1999); upper respiratoryinfections; sore throat (PRC, 1992; Li Y. H. et al., 2013).Chemical composition. Triterpene saponins (2%) (e.g.,platycodigenin; polygalacic acid) ((Fu et al., 2011); steroids (d-stigmasterol, a-spinasterin, betulin) (Wagner H. et al., 2015);essential oil (He et al., 2013).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyPosology (based on traditional uses). 2–9 g in 150 ml as adecoction, daily (Chang and But, 1987).Preclinical evidence. Platycodon chinensis has beenexperimentally proven for cough and fever in mice (Oh et al.,2010; Zhang et al., 2015). An aqueous extract from P. chinensispresented anti-inflammatory activity in rats, in the carrageenanmodel. The extract inhibited the production of cytokines and theexpression of COX-2 (Kim et al., 2006). Platycosides areinhibitors of the production of IL-6, PGD2, LTC4, and b-Hex,therefore presenting potential for allergy symptoms treatment(Oh et al., 2010). Crude platycodin (80 mg/kg, p.o.) presentedexpectorant activity, higher than ammonium chloride, in guinea-pig. The author showed that crude platycodin also presentedanalgesic and antipyretic activities in mice (Lee, 1975). Crudeplatycodin presented anti-histaminic and anticholinergic effectsin guinea-pig, but not presented anti-serotonin or anti-bradykinin effect (Takagi and Lee, 1972). Isolated platycodin Dand D3 presented anti-inflammatory and potential expectorantactivities. In rat and hamster tracheal surface epithelial cells, bothcompounds increased mucin release. Platycodin D3 was mostactive than ATP (mucin secretagogue) and ambroxol (mucolytic)(Shin et al., 2002). A decoction of P. chinensis inhibited cough inmice (Zhang et al., 2015).Clinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been trialedclinically for pneumonia. Two patients presenting pneumoniaewere treated with aqueous extract of P. chinensis andacupuncture. Patients presented improvement in cough, phlegm,and fever. Chest X-ray showed a decrease in lung infiltration (Kimet al., 2001). Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Platycodon chinensis was considered safe in preclinicalevaluation. Platycodins present hemolytic activity; however, asthey are poorly absorbed, the oral ingestion in the suggested dosesseems to be safe (WHO, 1999). In the context of COVID-19,overall, the safety is High, as there are no reports to infer that suchherbal preparations may interfere with the disease or NSAIDs.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Radix Platycodireportedly depresses the central nervous system (CNS) (Lee,1975; WHO, 1989). Therefore, the concomitant use of this herbalmedicine with alcohol or hypnotic and sedative drugs should beavoided. Overall, the safety is Medium, but there are no reportsto infer that such herbal preparations may interfere with thedisease or NSAIDs.Overall assessment. Based on traditional use, preparationscould be useful in respiratory symptoms relief, through exertingan antitussive effect, although it is not backed up by robustclinical data. The clinical evidence is Low, but this herbalmedicine is considered presenting High safety.Polygala senega L. – Polygalaceae (Roots)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Polygalasenega is indicated for cough (WHO, 2002; ESCOP, 2003b).Other related indications include its actions as expectorantbronchitis, emphysema, and catarrh of the upper respiratorytract (Briggs, 1988; WHO, 2002; ESCOP, 2003b; Lacaille-Duboiset al., 2020).Chemical composition. Organic acids (salicylic acid and itsmethyl ester) (Bradley, 1992; COE, 2008); monosaccharidesFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 17(Takiura et al., 1974; Takiura et al., 1975); oligosaccharides(Ikeya et al., 1991; Saitoh et al., 1994); acylated glucosides(Ikeya et al., 1991; Ikeya et al., 1994); triterpene saponins(Tsukitani et al., 1973; Tsukitani and Shoji, 1973; Sakuma andShoji, 1981; Sakuma and Shoji, 1982; Bradley, 1992; Yoshikawaet al., 1995b; Yoshikawa et al., 1995a; Yoshikawa et al., 1996;Wichtl, 2004; COE, 2008; Evans, 2009); essential oils (Sakumaand Shoji, 1982; COE, 2008), flavonoids; coumarins (Lacaille-Dubois et al., 2020); and xanthones (Ikeya et al., 1994).Posology (based on traditional uses). Herbal tea (dried root):0.5–1.0 g three times a day (BHMA, 1983; Bradley, 1992). It ispreferable to use a commercial preparation with a definedcomposition and an adequate dose.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease.However, the expectorant activity of the crude drug is due tothe constituent saponins, which produce local irritation of themucous membranes of the throat and respiratory tract. Thisirritation stimulates an increase in bronchial secretions, therebydiluting the mucus, reducing its viscosity and facilitatingexpectoration (Boyd and Palmer, 1946; Misawa and Yanaura,1980; Reynolds and Parfilt, 1996). Isolated saponins from rootsof this species were able to enhance anti-OVA specific IgG andIgG2a in mice (Katselis et al., 2007).Clinical evidence. Polygala senega preparations have not beentrialed clinically for respiratory diseases. French patentmentioned that a triterpene acid isolated from P. senegapossesses anti-inflammatory action (Mitchell and Rook, 1979).Another French Patent (Tubery P., Fr Demande Patent2,202,683) claimed the fluid extract prepared with P. senegacould reduce the viscosity of phlegm in patients withbronchiectasis (Barnes et al., 2012). However, data on thisclinical trial are limited. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Generally, there is a lack of toxicity data and clinical safetyfor Polygala species. Saponins of this species are usually irritant tothe gastrointestinal mucosa (Mitchell and Rook, 1979), and largedoses of the plant are reported to cause nausea, diarrhea, andvomiting (Foster and Tyler, 1999; WHO, 2002). In the context ofCOVID-19, overall safety is High, as there are no reports to inferthat the preparations may interfere with the disease or NSAIDs.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Due to the lack oftoxicity data and potential risks associated with chronic ingestionof this herbal medicine, the use by patients with gastric ulcer orgastric inflammation should be avoided. Chronic exposure of theintestinal mucosa to saponins may also inhibit active nutrientabsorption (Capasso et al., 2003).Overall assessment. Senega preparations might be useful inthe symptomatic relief of respiratory symptoms through exertingan antitussive effect. Although the clinical evidence is Low, thisherbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Polypodium vulgare L. – Polypodiaceae (Rhizomes)Indication in the context of respiratory conditions. Polypodiumvulgare is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease, namelycough (EMA, 2008c).Chemical composition. Flavonoids (Grzybek, 1976; Karl et al.,1982); hydroxycinnamic acids (caffeic acid 4’-glucoside, 0.6% inSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapythe rhizome) (Jizba and Herout, 1967; Grzybek, 1976);phytoecdysteroids (Arai et al., 1991; Yamada et al., 1992;Marco et al., 1993; Coll et al., 1994; Reixach et al., 1996;Messeguer et al., 1998; Simon et al., 2011); triterpenes (Devyset al., 1969; Robinson et al., 1973; EMA, 2008b).Posology (based on traditional uses). 4–5 g, as a decoction, 3–4 times a day. Not to be taken for more than a week(EMA, 2008c).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease. A hydroalcoholicextract presented a myorelaxant dose-dependent effect in rabbitisolated tracheal preparation. The effect was cholinergic-like(Naz et al., 2016). However, the expectorant and antitussiveeffects of saponins are known (Hostettmann and Marston, 2005),and the saponin in the fresh plant of polypody acts as a coughsuppressant (Høeg, 1984).Clinical evidence. Polypodium vulgare has not been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases. Overall, the clinical evidenceis Low.Safety. Overall, the safety is High as there are no reports toinfer that the preparation from this plant may interfere with thedisease or NSAIDs.Specific warnings and precautions of use. A mild laxativeeffect may happen when this plant is used as expectorant (EMA,2008c). Moreover, due to possible hypotensive and hypnoticeffects, patients should be aware of potential interactions(Ulbricht et al., 2006).Overall assessment. Polypodium vulgare preparations couldbe useful in the relief of the respiratory symptoms, throughexerting an antitussive effect. Although the clinical evidence isLow, this herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Potentilla erecta (L.) Raeusch. – Rosaceae(Rhizomes, Roots)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Potentillaerecta is indicated for cough and symptomatic treatment ofminor inflammations of the oral mucosa (EMA, 2010;ESCOP, 2013).Chemical composition. Hydrolysable tannins (pedunculagin,pentadigalloylglucose, agrimoniin, laevigatin B, tormentillin);condensed tannins/proanthocyanidins ([4,6]-all-trans-bi-(+)-catechin = procyanidin B6, [4,8]-2,3-trans-3,4-cis-bi-(+)-catechin, [4,8]-all-trans-bi-(+)-catechin = procyanidin B3),[6′,6]-all-trans-bi-(+)-catechin, procyanidin B1, procyanidin B2,procyanidin B5, (+)-catechin-[4,8]-(+)-catechin-[4,8]-(+)-catechin, (+)-catechin-[6′,8]-(+)-catechin-[4,8]-(+)-catechin;triterpenoids: 2a,3b-dihydroxyurs-12 -en-28-oic acid b-D-glucopyranosyl ester, 3-epi-pomolic acid 28-O-b-D-glucoside,3b,19a-dihydroxyolean-12-en-28-oic acid b-D-glucopyranosylester , 3b ,19a-dihydroxyurs-12-en-28-oic acid b-D-glucopyranosyl ester, arjunetin, chinovic acid, kaji-ichogoside F1,tormentic acid, tormentoside (Tomczyk and Latté, 2009; Melzigand Böttger, 2020).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1.5–2.0 g per 100 ml ofwater, as an infusion, or 0.8–3.0 g per 100 ml of water, as adecoction. The preparation should be used to rinse the mouthFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 18several times daily (EMA, 2010). It is preferable to use acommercial preparation (e.g., tincture) with a definedcomposition and an adequate dose.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease.However, a moderate antiviral effect against Herpes viridae hasbeen demonstrated for extracts of P. erecta and hydrolyzable andcondensed tannins isolated from this plant. In particular, theantiviral activity against Herpes virus types I and II was reported,as well as the cytotoxic activity against Influenza virus type A2and Cowpox (May, 1978). An agrimoniin-rich ethanolic extractof P. erecta inhibited the NF-kB and formation of IL-6, and PGE2in TNF−a stimulated HaCaT cells (Wölfle et al., 2017). Ananimal test system with mice supported the demonstratedantiviral effects against the Vaccine virus together with aninduction of interferon synthesis (May, 1978; Lund andRimpler, 1985).Clinical evidence. Potentilla erecta has not been trialedclinically for respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidenceis Low.Safety. Due to the limited studies in humans, animal modelsare used as alternatives to evaluate the safety of P. erecta. Acutetoxicity of an aqueous extract of tormentil was assessed inanimals using a single oral dose of 2.5 and 6.8 g/kg. Noapparent toxic effect was observed. Potentilla erecta extractsshould be considered safe for acute toxicity when also appliedto humans (Shushunov et al., 2009).Special warnings and precautions of use. Due to thrombolyticactivity (Melzig and Böttger, 2020), caution should be taken toavoid interaction with thrombolytic drugs. Therefore, safetyis Medium.Overall assessment. Potentilla erecta preparations reportedlyhave relevant anti-viral effects, but the main uses are for buccalsores and inflammation. It is not established that it has a specificeffect on the respiratory tract. The clinical evidence is Low, butthis herbal medicine is considered presenting Medium safety.Primula veris L. - Primulaceae (Roots)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Primulaveris is indicated for some symptoms of respiratory diseases,namely cough (EMA, 2012b).Chemical composition. Saponins (e.g., primulasaponin I,primulasaponin II) (Müller et al., 2006); flavonoids (e.g.,quercetin, luteolin, kaempferol, and isorhamnetin derivatives);phenolic acids (e.g., chlorogenic acid) (Bączek et al., 2017).Posology. 0.2–0.5 g in 150 ml of boiling water, as an infusion,3 times daily (EMA, 2012b). It is preferable to use a commercialpreparation with a defined composition and an adequate dose.Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory diseases.However, a P. veris dry extract presented potential anti-inflammatory activity in vitro, reducing IFN-g, and inhibitedprostaglandin and leukotriene synthesis. Also, inhibited thereplication of human rhinovirus (HRV) and respiratory syncytialvirus (RSV) (Seifert et al., 2012). A hydroalcoholic extract of P. verispresented anti-inflammatory activity in rats in the carrageenan-induced paw edema test (Marchyshyn et al., 2017).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyClinical evidence. Primula veris has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory diseases. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Cases of nausea, vomiting, gastric disturbances, andallergies may occur in doses higher than recommended (EMA,2012b; Ghédira and Goetz, 2017). Overall, safety is High.Special warnings and precautions of use. Concerns wereraised over the concomitant use of P. veris and warfarin(Řehulková, 2001).Overall assessment. Although Primula veris is not clinicallyproven to provide symptomatic relief offlu symptoms, it could beuseful in the relief of the respiratory symptoms through an anti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidence is Low, but this herbalmedicine is considered presenting Medium safety.Salix alba L., Salix sp. – Salicaceae (Cortex)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Salix alba isindicated as antipyretic (BRASIL, 2011; EMA, 2017d); Otherindications are as anti-inflammatory, and in the treatment of theflu and common cold (WHO, 2009).Chemical composition. It is generally standardized to salicin.However, other salicylates, polyphenols, and flavonoids may alsoplay important roles in therapeutic actions (Shara and Stohs,2015). Some components: (+)-catechin, syringin, triandrin,ampelopsin, ethyl-1-hydroxy-6-oxocyclohex-2-enecarboxylatetaxifolin, 3-O-methyltaxifolin, 7-O-methyltaxifolin-3-O-glucoside; p-coumaric, benzoic, p-hydroxybenzoic, p-methoxybenzoic, cinnamic, trans-p-methoxycinnamic, and cis-p-methoxy cinnamic acids (Agnolet et al., 2012).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3 g dry stem barks in150 ml as a decoction, 2–3 times a day (BRASIL, 2011). 1–3 g ofthe stem bark in 150 ml of boiling water three times daily(EMA, 2017d).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for fever. Its efficacy and safety havebeen reported in several studies. Salix alba extract showedsignificant analgesic as well as anti-inflammatory properties inmice and showed more potency than the standard drug aspirin inall the doses tested (Gyawali et al., 2013).Clinical evidence. Salix alba preparations have been trialedclinically for fever and inflammation. A randomized study with210 patients was conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of Salixbark extract for the treatment of low back pain. Patients receivedbark extract orally with 120 mg or 240 mg of salicin or placebo in4-week. In the last week of treatment, 39% of patients were pain-free for the high dose, 21% for the low dose, and 6% for theplacebo (Chrubasik et al., 2000). Another randomized placebo-controlled, double-blind study was conducted involving 78patients with osteoarthritis. Patients received placebo or willowbark extract containing 240 mg salicin per day for 2 weeks. In thewillow bark extract group, the WOMAC pain score was reducedby 14% after 2 weeks, compared with an increase of 2% in theplacebo group. Therefore, Salix extract was well tolerated, withno adverse effects reported (Schmid et al., 2001). Patients (436)with osteoarthritis and rheumatic pain or back pain or bothconditions received by 6-month mono or combination therapywith aqueous Salix extract, opioids, and NSAIDs. The resultsshowed that in conjunction with the use of the Salix extract, theFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 19pain scores were between 33% and 44% of baseline. Druginteractions were not reported (Uehleke et al., 2013). Overall,the level of evidence is High for pain.Safety. Oral administration of a Salix alba ethanol extractwhen administered to female rabbits and rats did not disrupt theestrous cycle, or inhibit ovulation or fertility and was notteratogenic or embryotoxic at a dose of 1.6 ml/kg (WHO,2009). Salix alba ethanol extract (1.6 ml/kg, intragastricadministration, in rats for 13 weeks) had no effect on kidneyfunction, hematological parameters, cholesterol levels, or liverfunction. The results of the histological evaluation showed nopathological changes in the heart, brain, lungs, kidneys, bone,liver, mammary tissue, reproductive organs, intestines, orstomach (WHO, 2009). In mice (both sexes), S. alba ethanolextract presented a median lethal dose range of 28.0–42.0 ml/kg(WHO, 2009). In children can cause a risk of Reye’s syndrome,then it is not recommended (El-Radhi, 2018). Also, the use is notrecommended in patients with hypersensitivity to othernonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. People with asthma(sensibility to salicylates) due to severe reactions (acutebronchospasms) should avoid the use (WHO, 2009).Specific warnings and precautions of use. In the case of treatmentwith anticoagulants, antacids, corticosteroids, or NSAIDs, the use ofsalix should be avoided (EMA, 2017d). Do not use it in people withgastrointestinal disorders and sensitivity to salicylic acid (BRASIL,2011).Overall, due to the antiplatelet effect, in the context ofCOVID-19, the safety should be considered Medium.Overall assessment. Salix alba profile and chemistry fit as ananti-inflammatory and antipyretic therapy in the context of upperrespiratory affections. Therefore, this herbal medicine may beuseful in the symptomatic relief of respiratory symptoms throughexerting an anti-inflammatory and antipyretic effect. The clinicalevidence is High. Due to its antiplatelet effects, this herbal medicineis considered presenting Medium safety in the COVID-19 context.Sambucus nigra L. – Adoxaceae (Dried Flowers)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Sambucusnigra is indicated for fever and inflammation of the respiratorytract (WHO, 2002; BRASIL, 2011). Other indications are torelieve cold and flu symptoms, to alleviate headaches, and asexpectorant (EMA, 2018e; Torabian et al., 2019).Chemical composition. Flavonoids, such as kaempferol,astragalin, quercetin, rutin, isoquercitrin, hyperoside;triterpenes (a- and b-amyrin, ursolic acid, oleanolic acid);sterols (b-sitosterol, campesterol, stigmasterol); phenolic acidsand their corresponding glycosides (chlorogenic, ferulic, caffeicand p-coumaric acids); and essential oil (Sidor and Gramza-Michałowska, 2015).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3–5 g of dried flowers in25 ml as an infusion three times daily. Store in a well-closedcontainer, protected from light (Bradley, 1992). 2–5 g driedflowers in 150 ml as an infusion, 2–3 times a day; 3–6 g driedflowers in 150 ml as a decoction, 2–3 times a day (EMA, 2018e).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for fever. The active constituents inhibitthe biosynthesis of the inflammatory cytokines IL-1a, IL-1b, andtumor necrosis factor-a in human peripheral mononuclear cellsSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyin vitro (Yes ̧ilada et al., 1997; Torabian et al., 2019). Several invitro and in vivo experiments have shown the antiviral effects ofextracts from elderberries, against Influenza virus (Serkedjievaet al., 1990; Zakay-Rones et al., 1995; Krawitz et al., 2011;Kinoshita et al., 2012; Porter and Bode, 2017).Clinical evidence. Sambucus nigra preparations have beentrialed clinically for common cold and flu. Two randomizedstudies with a standardized extract, involving patients presentinginfluenza symptoms and positive reaction for Influenza virustype A or B, showed the reduction of the symptoms after thesecond day of treatment, without significant adverse effects(Zakay-Rones et al., 1995; Zakay-Rones et al., 2004). Inanother randomized study with air travelers, the group using S.nigra presented less cold episodes than the placebo group(Tiralongo et al., 2016). A meta-analysis of randomized clinicalstudies led to the conclusion that S. nigra supplementationreduces upper respiratory symptoms of common cold andinfluenza (Hawkins et al., 2019). Overall, the level of evidenceis High for cold and flu.Safety. No information available on general precautions orconcerning drug interactions; non-teratogenic effects inpregnancy or pediatric use (EMA, 2017c). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None.Overall assessment. Sambucus nigra is traditionally used ascold therapy in the context of upper respiratory conditions andcould be useful in the relief of respiratory symptoms throughexerting anti-inflammatory and antipyretic effects. The clinicalevidence is High, and this herbal medicine is consideredpresenting High safety.Scutellaria baicalensis Georgi – Lamiaceae (Roots)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Scutellariabaicalensis is indicated for fever (WHO, 2007). Other relatedindications are as antiviral and to relieve bronchitis symptoms(WHO, 2007; Zhao et al., 2019).Chemical composition. Flavonoids such as wagonin,baicalcin, and baicalin are the main components (Zobel et al.,1991; Kovács et al., 2004; Reichling and Galati, 2004; AbdollahiFard, 2012); essential oil (Fukuhara et al., 1987); terpenoids andsteroids (e.g., b-caryophyllene, scutebaicalin, b-sitosterol)(Hussein et al., 1996).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1-2 g of dried roots in150 ml of boiling water, as an infusion, three times daily (Barneset al., 2012). 3-9 g of dried roots as infusion or decoction(WHO, 2007).Preclinical evidence. Scutellaria baicalensis has been notexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease.Other related experimental effects include anti-inflammatory.The anti-inflammatory activity was evaluated by in vitro and invivo experiments. Extracts inhibited the production of NO,interleukin (IL)-3, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12p40, IL-17, interferon-inducible protein (IP)-10, keratinocyte-derived chemokine, andvascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) in LPS-induced RAW264.7 cells (Yoon et al., 2009). Moreover, the aqueous extract ofS. baicalensis suppressed LP-induced COX-2 protein expressionin vitro, as well as presented analgesic and anti-inflammatoryactivities in vivo (Lee et al., 2007).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 20Clinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been not trialedclinically for the following symptom: bronchitis, cough, fever, flu,cold. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Some stomach discomfort and diarrhea were observedin patients taking preparation of S. baicalensis (WHO, 2007). In arandomized, double-blind trial, involving 72 healthy subjects,baicalein (100–2,800 mg) was safe and did not present severeadverse effects (Li et al., 2014). There are reports of baicaleinbeing able to stimulate the ACE2 activity, though (ANSES, 2020).Therefore, safety is Medium.Special warnings and precautions of use. Scutellariabaicalensis should not be used in people with spleen andstomach deficiency (Dinehart and Henry, 2005).Overall assessment. Scutellaria baicalensis may be useful inthe relief of respiratory symptoms through the anti-inflammatory activity. The clinical evidence is Low. This herbalmedicine is considered presenting Medium safety.Silybum marianum L. Gaertn. - Asteraceae (Fruits)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Silybummarianum is indicated for symptoms of respiratory disease,namely fever, and catarrh (WHO, 2002).Chemical composition. Flavonolignans such as silymarin,silybin, isosilybin and taxifolin (1.5–3.0%) are the maincomponents reported for S. marianum (Wynn, 1999; Porwalet al., 2019); flavonoids (quercetin derivatives); phenolic acids(chlorogenic, caffeic and ferulic acids) (Lucini et al., 2016;Valková et al., 2020).Posology (based on traditional uses). It is preferable to use acommercial preparation with a defined composition and anadequate dose.Preclinical evidence. Silybum marianum has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease.Silybin, the main flavonolignan from the seed of S. marianum,has demonstrated an anti-inflammatory activity by inhibiting thespontaneous and LPS-stimulated NF-kB activation as well as theproduction of inflammatory cytokines (Corchete, 2008; Giorgiet al., 2012).Clinical evidence. Silybum marianum has not been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases. Overall, the clinical evidenceis Low.Safety. At high doses, mild laxative effect, as well as mildallergic reactions, have been reported (Blumenthal, 2003; Luciniet al., 2016), besides dry mouth, nausea, upset stomach, gastricirritation or headache (EMA, 2016d). A preparation containing7%–8% silymarin appeared to be safe for up to 41 months of use(Corchete, 2008). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None.Overall assessment. Although S. marianum is not clinicallyproven to provide symptomatic relief offlu symptoms, it could beuseful in the relief of respiratory symptoms by exerting asystemic anti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidence is Low.This herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Thymus vulgaris L. - Lamiaceae (Aerial Parts, Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Thymusvulgaris is indicated for productive cough associated with cold,September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapylaryngitis, and tonsilitis (WHO, 1999; CHILE, 2010;EMA, 2013c).Chemical composition. Essential oil (thymol as the majorcomponent); phenolic acids (rosmarinic, ferulic, syringic,coumaric acids), tannins (gallic and protocatechuic acids),flavonoids (luteolin, apigenin, cirsilenol, thymonin, andderivatives, besides others) (Van Den Broucke and Lemli,1983; Kuete, 2017; Salehi et al., 2019a).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1–2 g of dried leaves in150 ml, as an infusion, 3–4 times daily (EMA, 2013c).Preclinical evidence. Thymus vulgaris has not beenexperimentally proven for symptoms of respiratory disease.However, the myorelaxant effect of ethanolic extract andflavonoids from T. vulgaris was evaluated in isolated guinea-pig trachea contracted by acetylcholine. The extract promotedrelaxation, similar to DL-isoprenaline (Van Den Broucke andLemli, 1981). The most active flavonoids were cirsilineol,thymonin, and 8-methylcirsilineol, acting as non-competitiveand non-specific Ca2+ antagonists (Van Den Broucke and Lemli,1983). An evaluation of T. vulgaris essential oil in rats, throughclassic methods, showed that the essential oil presents anti-inflammatory activity. Additional experiments showed thatcarvacrol plays an important role in the activity, with anti-edematogenic and anti-chemotactic action. The inhibition ofchemotaxis was also proven by in vitro experiments. On theother hand, thymol promoted the release of histamine acting asan irritative agent (Fachini-Queiroz et al., 2012). Thehydroethanolic extract of T. vulgaris also presents myorelaxantactivity ex vivo (Meister et al., 1999; Boskabady et al., 2006b). Anaqueous extract of T. vulgaris presented in vitro activity againstHerpes simplex virus type 1 (HSV-1), type 2 (HSV-2), and HSV-1acyclovir-resistant (Nolkemper et al., 2006).Clinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been not trialedclinically, as monodrug, for respiratory disease. Clinicalevaluation of thyme has been carried out as an associationwith another herbal drug, such as P. vulgaris. Overall, theclinical evidence is Low.Safety. In traditional doses, there is no report about thetoxicity of T. vulgaris. However, high doses (around 10 g) areconsidered unsafe due to thymol (Basch et al., 2004). Overall,safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The use iscontraindicated for hypersensitivity to the active substance.Children under 30 months of age should not use this plant dueto thymol containing preparations, which can inducelaryngospasm (WHO, 1999; EMA, 2013c).Overall assessment. Although T. vulgaris is not clinicallyproven to provide symptomatic relief of flu symptoms, it maybe useful in the relief of respiratory symptoms throughspasmolytic and anti-inflammatory effects. The clinicalevidence is Low. This herbal medicine is considered presentingHigh safety.Tilia cordata Mill. – Malvaceae (Flowers)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Tilia cordatais indicated for symptoms of the common cold (CHILE, 2010;EMA, 2012c).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 21Chemical composition. Essential oil (main components arealkanes, such as 6,10,14-trimethyl-2-pentadecanone andtricosane, besides linalool, E-anethole) (Fitsiou et al., 2007;Kowalski et al., 2017); flavonoids (e.g., quercetin, kaempferol,and derivatives; tiliroside), anthocyanins (Negri et al., 2013;Fawzy et al., 2018).Posology. 1.5 g in 150 ml of boiling water, as an infusion, 2–4times daily (CHILE, 2010; EMA, 2012c)Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for the symptoms of respiratory disease.However, procyanidins present in small flowers were evaluatedabout an inflammatory response in human neutrophils in theconcentration ranging from 5 to 20 mM. All compounds wereable to decrease ROS production from f-MLP-stimulatedneutrophils. Most compounds were able to inhibit LPS-inducedIL-8 release. Some trimeric and tetrameric derivativeswere also ableto decrease the production of MIP-1b. A hydromethanolic extractpresented anti-inflammatory and antinociceptive activities in rats,in a similar way than indomethacin and acetylsalicylic acid,respectively (Fawzy et al., 2018).Clinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been not trialedclinically for respiratory diseases. Overall, the level of evidenceis Low.Safety. Overall safety is High, as there are not reports to infer thatthe preparations from the plant may interfere with the disease.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Flavonoids presentin T. cordata exert an anxiolytic effect and can, potentially,interact with serotonergic drugs (Noguerón-Merino et al., 2015).Overall assessment. Tilia cordata is not clinically proven toprovide symptomatic relief of flu symptoms. However, this herbalmedicine may be useful in the relief of respiratory symptomsthrough an anti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidence is Low.This herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Zingiber officinale Roscoe - Zingiberaceae (Rhizome)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Zingiberofficinale is indicated for common cold and cough (COLOMBIA,2008). Its use as anti-asthma (WHO, 1999) and expectorant(BRASIL, 2011) have also been reported.Chemical composition. Zingerone, shogaols, gingerols,paradols, wikstromol, and carinol (Idris et al., 2019). Totalphenolic of 1.02 ± 0.03 mg gallic acid equivalent/L of infusion(Mesquita et al., 2018).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1 g of dried rhizoma in150 ml, 3–4 times daily (BRASIL, 2011; EMA, 2011b).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has beenexperimentally proven for fever (Ueki et al., 2008; Akbar, 2020). Itis described in several preclinical studies report its anti-inflammatory, antipyretic and analgesic properties (Mascoloet al., 1989; El-Abhar et al., 2008; Sepahvand et al., 2010; Ahmedet al., 2011; Darvishzadeh-Mahani et al., 2012; Hsiang et al., 2013;Rashidian et al., 2014). The anti-inflammatory effect of ginger iswell established as in vivo as in vitro models (Thomson et al.,2002; Ali et al., 2008). 6-Shogaol interferes with the inflammatorycascade, inhibitsCOX, and theprostaglandin release (Rehmanetal.,2011). Moreover, 6-gingerol and 6-shogaol present anti-plateletaggregation activity in vitro (Liao et al., 2012).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyClinical evidence. This herbal medicine has been trialedclinically for respiratory diseases. In a randomized study, 32patients with acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)received an enteral diet enriched with ginger or placebo, througha nasogastric tube, during 21 days. On day 5, the patients thatreceived gingerpresented lower serumlevelsof IL-1, IL6, andTNFa,while the level of RBC glutathione presented higher in comparisonwith the placebo group. Moreover, a significant improvement inoxygenation was observed in the ginger group. The same resultswere observed on day 10. The authors described that there was asignificant difference in the duration of mechanical ventilation andin the time expended in the intensive care unit. However,barotrauma, organ failure, and mortality between ginger andplacebo groups were similar (Vahdat Shariatpanahi et al., 2013).Overall, the level of clinical evidence is Medium.Safety. Although regulatory authorities recommend avoidingthe use in pregnancy and lactation (EMA, 2011b), ginger useduring pregnancy was reported as safe in Canadian, Australianand Norwegian women (Portnoi et al., 2003; Willetts et al., 2003;Westfall, 2004; Heitmann et al., 2013). Clinical studies foundginger as effective and safe to prevent pregnancy-associatednausea and vomiting (Borrelli et al., 2005; Ding et al., 2013). Inhuman liver microsomes, the hydroethanolic extract inhibitedCYP2C19 and CYP2D6 (Kim et al., 2012; Gorman et al., 2013).Specific warnings and precautions of use. Stomach upset,eructation, dyspepsia, and nausea have been reported (EMA,2011b). High doses (12–14 g) of ginger may increase the effects ofanticoagulant therapy (Thomson et al., 2002; BRASIL, 2011;BRASIL, 2016). Studies showed the effect of ginger oncytochrome P450 enzyme-mediated drug metabolism, whichcan cause interference on the outcome of the treatment ofsome conventional drugs. Ginger stimulated levels of CYP450and cytochrome b5 in rats (Sambaiah and Srinivasan, 1989). Theuse is contraindicated for people with gallstones, gastricirritation, and high blood pressure (BRASIL, 2011). Overall,safety is Medium due to the potential antiplatelet activity.Overall assessment. Zingiber officinale profile and chemistryfit as an anti-inflammatory therapy in the context of upperrespiratory affections. Therefore, this herbal medicine may beuseful in the relief of respiratory symptoms through exerting ananti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidence is Medium. Thisherbal medicine is considered presenting Medium safety.Herbal Remedies Used to RelieveSymptoms Related to RespiratoryConditions Not Listed By InternationalMonographsSome species, although without the support of officialdocuments, have been widely used to relieve common coldsymptoms, usually as homemade preparations. Some of themare analyzed here, in the COVID-19 context.Citrus limon (L.) Burm. f. – Rutaceae (Fruit)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Citrus limonhas been used to relieve cough, and as expectorant in bronchitis(Papp et al., 2011; Klimek-Szczykutowicz et al., 2020); and asFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 22anti-inflammatory (Parhiz et al., 2015), sore throat (Balogun andAshafa, 2019).Chemical composition. Essential oil (limonene and a-terpineol as major components) (Mahalwal and Ali, 2003);flavonoids (e.g., hesperidin, hesperetin, naringenin) (Abad-Garcıá et al., 2012; Parhiz et al., 2015); phenolic acids (e.g., p-cumaric, ferulic, quinic acids and derivatives) (Abad-Garcıáet al., 2012), coumarins and furanocoumarins; vitamin C(Klimek-Szczykutowicz et al., 2020).Posology. Slices of whole fruit or fresh pericarp, as adecoction, 2–3 times daily; expressed juice (Panizza et al., 2012).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease.Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Citrus limon is an edible fruit, therefore, considered safe,although there may be a risk of minor burns on the skin if in contactwith sun exposure, due to the presence of furanocoumarins(Palazzolo et al., 2013). Overall safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Citrus flavonoidscan exert severe interaction with drugs metabolized by inhibitionof CYP3A4, CYP2C9 (Bailey et al., 1998; Mallhi et al., 2015).Citrus limon presents anti-platelet activity. Therefore, theconcomitant use with anti-platelet drugs should be avoided.Overall assessment. Citrus limon can be useful in the relief ofrespiratory symptoms, especially coughand sore throat.The clinicalevidence isLow.Due to its antiplatelet effects, thisherbalmedicine isconsidered presenting Medium safety in the COVID-19 context.Culcitium canescens H&B. – Asteraceae (Leaves andRoots)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. In Peru andadjoining countries, Culcitium canescens is used to relieve coughand fever (Okuyama et al., 1994). Another related indicationincludes asthma (D’Agostino et al., 1995; Ramirez et al., 2020)Chemical composition. Furanoeremophilanes (e.g., cacalonol,cacalohatine, dehydrocacalohastine) (Abdo et al., 1992;Okuyama et al., 1994); phenolic compounds (e.g., kaempferoland derivatives, quercetin and derivatives, caffeic acid)(D’Agostino et al., 1995); terpenes and steroids (spatulenol,lupeol, damaradienone) (Ramirez et al., 2020).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1–2 g of leaves in 150ml, asan infusion, up to three times daily (Ramirez et al., 2020).Preclinical evidence. Culcitium canescens has not beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease.Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. Little or anything is known about the toxicity of thisplant (Ramirez et al., 2020).Specific warnings and precautions of use. None.Overall assessment. Although Culcitium canescens profile andchemistry fit as an anti-inflammatory therapy in the context ofupper respiratory affections, and preparations are traditionallyused, the lack of knowledge about this species does not allow aclear recommendation for the relief of early symptoms ofCOVID-19. The clinical evidence is Low.September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyLaurus nobilis L. – Lauraceae (Berries/Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Laurusnobilis is used to treat respiratory infections (Chevallier, 1996;Ross, 2001).Chemical composition. Berries: essential oil (b-ocimene and1,8-cineole as the main components); sterols (e.g., b-sitosterol);flavonoids (cyanidin 3-O-glucoside and cyanidin 3-O-rutinoside, as the major anthocyanins) (Kilic et al., 2004; Beisand Dunford, 2006; Abu-Dahab et al., 2014). Leaves: essential oil(1,8-cineole and a-terpinyl acetate as the major compounds)(Fidan et al., 2019). Further phytochemical investigations oflaurel leaves led to the isolation of sesquiterpene lactones,alkaloids, glycosylated flavonoids, and monoterpene andgermacrane alcohols (Dall’Acqua et al., 2009).Posology (based on traditional uses). The only dosageinformation on L. nobilis is given by the AmericanPharmaceutical Association: 1–2 tablespoons leaf/cup waterand 3 times/day or 1–2 drops of essential oil added to honey,or tea (Duke et al., 2002).Preclinical evidence. This species has not been experimentallyproven for respiratory disease. The closest experiment is an invitro study examining SARS-CoV and the effect of severalessential oils. The authors reported that a distilled oil extractedfrom Laurus nobilis berries was an effective virucidal againstSARS-CoV. This essential oil also contained eremanthin anddehydrocostus lactone as minor constituents at 3.65% and 7.57%,respectively. These compounds are somewhat unusual inessential oils, but at least one in vitro study found thatdehydrocostus lactone had activity against the hepatitis B virus,an enveloped DNA virus (Loizzo et al., 2008). The essential oil ofL. nobilis has also been evaluated for its antinociceptive and anti-inflammatory activities in mice and rats. The essential oilexhibited a significant analgesic effect in tail-flick and formalintests, a dose-dependent anti-inflammatory effect in formalin-induced edema, and a moderate sedative effect at the anti-inflammatory doses (Sayyah et al., 2003).Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. There is not enough reliable information about the safetyof taking L. nobilis leaves and berries. As L. nobilis has been used asfood since ancient times, overall, it can be considered safe in therecommended doses. Therefore, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None.Overall assessment. Laurus nobilis profile and chemistry fit as ananti-inflammatory therapy in the context of upper respiratoryaffections. Therefore, this herbal medicine could be useful in therelief of respiratory symptoms through exerting anti-viral and anti-inflammatory effects on the respiratory tract. The clinical evidence isLow. This herbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Lippia graveolens Kunth. – Verbenaceae (Leaves,Aerial Parts)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Lippiagraveolens is used to treat symptoms of respiratory diseases,and as anti-inflammatory (Rastrelli et al., 1998).Chemical composition. Iridoid and secoiridoid glucosides andester derivatives (Rastrelli et al., 1998); essential oil (thymol,Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 23limonene, carvacrol, as the major components) (Compadre et al.,1987; Uribe-Hernández et al., 1992); lipids (esterols) andflavonoids (e.g., pinocembrin, luteolin, apigenin, quercetin andderivatives) (Lin et al., 2007; Arias et al., 2020); rosmarinic acid(Compadre et al., 1987).Posology (based on traditional uses). 1–2 g of dried leaves orstem in 150 ml of water (Dominguez et al., 1989).Preclinical evidence. This species has not been experimentallyproven for respiratory disease. Flavonoid and terpenoid fractionsfrom Lippia genus have demonstrated a significant inhibitoryeffect on ROS and NO production and mitochondrial activity inLPS-induced inflammation in RAW 264.7 macrophage cells.Additionally, these fractions exhibited non-selective inhibitionsagainst the activity of the cyclooxygenases COX-1 and COX-2(Leyva-López et al., 2016).Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. In the United States, the regulatory status “generallyrecognized as safe” has been accorded to Mexican oregano(GRAS 2827). Therefore, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. None.Overall assessment. Lippia graveolens profile and chemistry fitas an anti-inflammatory therapy in the context of upperrespiratory affections. Therefore, this herbal medicine could beuseful in the relief of respiratory symptoms through exerting ananti-inflammatory effect. The clinical evidence is Low. Thisherbal medicine is considered presenting High safety.Nigella sativa L. - Ranunculaceae (Seeds)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Black seedsare globally known as a spice and as such as a food item. InArabic medicine, they have very high status as an herbalmedicine used for a wide range of diseases. In the context ofCOVID-19, the relevant uses are for asthma and in the moregeneral management of inflammatory conditions. In manyArabic countries, black seed is used for asthma and cough,among many other uses, especially for gastrointestinal diseases(like abdominal pain, stomach ache, colic), rheumatism, skindiseases (Lebling and Pepperdine, 2006).Chemical composition. Relevant secondary metabolites in theseed include large quantities of fixed oil (30%–45%; especiallylinoleic and oleic acids), various triterpenoids, includingsaponins; essential oil, with a relatively high concentration ofthymoquinone (2-isopropyl-5-methyl-1,4-benzoquinone),which is also a key therapeutically relevant of the fixed oil,where it can be found in concentrations varying from 3.5 to 8.7mg/g of fixed oil (Lutterodt et al., 2010). Thymoquinone is notfound in relevant concentrations in aqueous preparations.Posology. Capsules containing fatty oil with a defined amountof thymoquinone are likely to be the best option. Herbal teas andother hydrophilic preparations seem less likely to have benefits,and potentially the essential oil may offer some relief.Preclinical evidence. In rats, a chemically not wellcharacterized 50% ethanol extract (1:4) of chopped N. sativaseeds (extraction at room temperature for 72 h) showedameliorating effects on lung inflammation and oxidative stressinduced by lipopolysaccharide. In general, many study focus onSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapythe effects of N. sativa preparations (Yimer et al., 2019), butmostly these are of highly inadequate scientific quality.Clinical evidence. Some small studies demonstrate clinicalbenefits in asthma patients. In a randomized, double-blind,placebo-controlled trial supplementation of standard therapy withsoft gel capsules of cold-pressed N. sativa oil (0.7% thymoquinone)improved asthma control with a trend in pulmonary functionimprovement. Two of the five subscores (impact of asthma onwork, school, or at home and shortness of breath and the overallscore) showed a significant improvement. The other three were notsignificantly improved.At the sametime, a remarkablenormalizationof blood eosinophilia count was observed (Koshak et al., 2017). Therelease of IL-2, IL-6, and PGE2 in T-lymphocytes, as well as IL-6 andPGE2 inmonocytes,were suppressed.Overall, the clinical evidence isMedium for asthma.Safety. As a commonly used food item, it can be considered tobe intrinsically safe. However, this does not apply to thelipophilic extracts discussed above. Here further evidence isessential. Insufficient evidence is available in the context ofuses as an adjuvant medication (Nguyen et al., 2019). Overall,safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. Again, there is noevidence for specific therapeutic benefits, and it is important tocommunicate this to potential users. There is insufficientevidence for use during pregnancy and while breastfeeding.Overall assessment. Black seed may be useful in the relief ofrespiratory symptoms mainly associated with the severe coughexperienced, and it may reduce inflammatory parameters. Theclinical evidence is very limited, focusing on asthma. A particularconcern, in this case, are themanywell-intendedbut very low-qualitystudies and the broad range of claims they try to support,making anyassessmentproblematic.Theclinical evidence isMedium.Thisherbalmedicine is considered presenting High safety.Plectranthus amboinicus Lour. – Lamiaceae (Leaves)Indications in the context of respiratory conditions. Plectranthusamboinicus has been used in asthma and to relieve cold,headache, and fever (Menéndez Castillo and Pavón González,1999; Duke et al., 2002).Chemical composition. Essential oil (thymol and carvacrol asthe major components) (Pino et al., 1990; Arumugam et al.,2016); phenolic compounds (e.g., rosmarinic, caffeic, gallic andp-coumaric acids; quercetin derivatives; luteolin) (Brieskorn andRiedel, 1977b; Arumugam et al., 2016), terpenoids and steroids(e.g., b-sitosterol, a-amyrin, stigmasterol) (Brieskorn and Riedel,1977a; Risch et al., 2012).Posology (based on traditional uses). 3–5 g of fresh leaves in150 ml, as an infusion, up to three times daily (Albornoz, 1993;Matos et al., 2001).Preclinical evidence. This herbal medicine has not beenexperimentally proven for respiratory disease. Aqueous andethanolic extracts of P. amboinicus present in vitro anti-inflammatory activity (Devi and Periyanayagam, 2009;Ravikumar et al., 2009; Janakiraman and Somasundaram, 2014).The active constituents of P. amboinicus present inhibitory effectson pro-inflammatory cytokines TNF-a, IL-6, and IL-1b(Yashaswini and Vasundhara, 2011).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 24Clinical evidence. This species has not been trialed clinicallyfor respiratory disease. Overall, the clinical evidence is Low.Safety. No toxicity reported at the indicated dose (Albornoz,1993; Matos et al., 2001). Overall, safety is High.Specific warnings and precautions of use. The use iscontraindicated for hypersensitivity to the active substance.Children, under 30 months of age, should not use this plant dueto thymol containing preparations, can induce laryngospasm (seeThymus vulgaris).Overall assessment. Plectranthus amboinicus profile andchemistry fit as an anti-inflammatory therapy in the context ofupper respiratory affections and could be useful in the relief ofrespiratory disease through exerting an anti-inflammatory effecton the respiratory tract and in the treatment of fever. The clinicalevidence is Low, but this herbal medicine is consideredpresenting High safety.DiscussionGeneral Discussion About the Position of InternationalHealth Organizations, National Authorities, andProfessional Bodies on the Use of Herbal MedicinesWithin the Context of COVID-19 DiseaseThe use of herbal medicines/food supplements to prevent, treat,mitigate, diagnose, or cure coronavirus disease 2019 has not beenconsistently addressed at a global level. China has been activelyexploring how to integrate traditional Chinese medicine (TCM)into western therapy since the SARS outbreak in 2003. Based onclinical results, the General Office of the National Health, and theOffice of the State Administration of Traditional ChineseMedicineencouraged the integration of herbal TCM and Western medicinein the treatment of respiratory complications in Coronavirusinfections with different prescriptions recommended in differentstages of disease (Leung, 2007). After SARS-CoV-2 diseaseoutbreak, a number of clinical trials with Traditional HerbalMedicines (THM) have been added to the body of evidence withsome favorable findings when compared to standard antiviraltherapy (Langeder et al., 2020; Li et al., 2020; Luo et al., 2020;Rastogi et al., 2020).Therefore, it is not surprising that thousands of TCMpractitioners across China have been working along withregular medical doctors to control the COVID-19 disease. Theclinical data generated from tens of thousands of confirmed casesare being subjected to meta-analyses to ascertain their actualeffectiveness (Li et al., 2020). In the meantime, the Diagnosis andTreatment Protocol of COVID-19 by the National HealthCommission has already advised to integrate TCM in thetreatment of COVID-19 patients to effectively relievesymptoms such as fever, cough, sore throat, myalgia, andfatigue, shorten the course of the disease, reduce theprobability of life-threatening complications (Xu et al., 2020).In India, the Ayurveda Practitioners are following suit byworking on setting clear protocols with a rationale consistent withtheir millenary system. The first line of defense recommended toearly-stage patients consists of the following herbal medicines:Tinospora cordifolia (Willd.) Myers (Menispermaceae), Zingiberofficinale Roscoe (Zingiberaceae), Curcuma longa L.(Zingiberaceae), Ocimum sanctum L. (Lamiaceae), GlycyrrhizaSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyglabra L. (Fabaceae), Adhatoda vasica Ness (Acanthaceae),(Acanthaceae), Andrographis paniculata (Burm.f.) (Acanthaceae),Swertia chirata Buch.-Ham. ex Wall. (Gentianaceae), Moringaoleifera Lam (Moringaceae), Triphala [a mixture of the driedfruits of Emblica officinalis Gaertn. (Phyllanthaceae), Terminaliabellirica (Gaertn.) Roxb. (Combretaceae), and Terminalia chebulaRetz.(Combretaceae)] and Trikatu [a complementary formula toTriphala, including Piper nigrum L. (Piperaceae), Piper longum L.(Piperaceae), andZ.officinale Roscoe] (Rastogi et al., 2020). Clinicalsettings and regulations of research on COVID-19 throughAyurveda, Unani, Siddha, and Homeopathy systems have alreadybeen published by the Indian Ministry of Ayush (INDIA, 2020).However, in Western medicine, we are witnessing quite theopposite. Not only integration of herbal medicine is “out of thequestion” from an emergency clinical point of view, but authoritiesare also reluctant - if not discouraging - the self-prescription of anyproducts other than paracetamol in early stages of the disease. Themedia trying to get answers about the benefits of herbal medicinesturn tomedical expertswhousually cautionagainst theuse ofherbalmedicines in order to avoid any liabilities. Oftentimes, dismissingthe potential of herbal medicines to relieve early COVID-19symptoms is just an uncritical and legalist approach. Aninternational initiative from Brazilian Academic Consortium forIntegrative Health - CABSIn, TCIM Americas Network, and theLatin-American and Caribbean Center on Health SciencesInformation (BIREME/PAHO/WHO) is systematizing theavailable evidence about Traditional, Complementary andIntegrative Medicine (including herbal medicines) potentiallyuseful in the COVID-19 pandemic (Portella et al., 2020).Traditional herbal medicines are poorly or not regulated aslicensed/registered medicines in quite a few countries, includingthe USA, and therefore are considered “food,” precluding anyhigh-level discussion on their potential contributions to humanhealth. Consequently, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration(FDA) considers fraudulent to sell any herbal products withattached claims and has sent warning letters to companiesoffering herbal products such as teas, essential oils, andtinctures claiming to prevent, treat or cure the symptoms ofCOVID-19. It is also encouraging the public to report theunlawful sales of medicinal products on the Internet (FDA,2020). The North American public is receiving advice on theuse of herbal products from dedicated academic groups. One ofthem is the Andrew Weil Center for Integrative Medicine whichrecommends polyphenol-rich plants (chamomille, Chineseskullcap, licorice, onions, apples, tomatoes, oranges, nuts,berries, parsley, celery, turmeric root, and green tea) to reducethe risk of infection (Alschuler et al., 2020), but no detailedassessment is available.In Europe, Traditional Herbal Medicine Products (THMP)are regulated by the EMA as OTC medicinal products for therelief of mild, self-limiting conditions, including flu symptomsand cough. Surprisingly, there is not any overarching officialguidance with respect to the use of THMP in the context of thepandemic. In principle, THMP would not qualify as therapy forCOVID-19 symptoms as it is considered a severe life-threateningcondition. However, this disease is self-limiting in most of theFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 25patients and - in the absence of a positive result in a test –COVID-19 patients are just ‘flu’ patients and, as such, could self-medicate with THMP. Several herbal drugs here reviewed havebeen registered as THMP. EMA stresses in its guidelines tohealthcare professionals to report all “suspected side effects yourpatients experience while infected, regardless of the medicinesintended to treat the disease or pre-existing conditions. Suspectedside effects should be reported even if the medicine is notauthorized for use in COVID-19. When reporting a suspectedside effect in a patient, you should tell us of any other medicinesbeing taken around the same time, including non-prescriptionmedicines, herbal remedies, or contraceptives” (EMA, 2020).We have witnessed how, in different countries, the authoritieshave developed an array of tools both to inform and enforceguidelines: Italian police are acting at retail commerce level byseizing on the spot any products sold under fraudulent claims; theBrazilian Ministry of Health is fighting back any misleading claimswith a dedicated channel inWhatsApp (BRASIL, 2020). The case ofFrance is unique in that its health authorities have provided anextensive and detailed analysis of the potential interactions ofnatural products with either the disease or its clinical treatment(ANSES, 2020). Finally, many other countries lack the resources toeither reach out to the public in this specific matter or enforce anysignificant actions regarding to the sale of such products.The WHO regional office for Africa has issued a statementsupporting scientifically-driven traditional medicine as “a validapproach towards the treatment of the virus, as long as theirefficacy and safety are proven through rigorous clinical trials”(WHO, 2020b), in reaction to a self-proclaimed “COVID-19 herbalcure”promoted at highgovernmental levels inMadagascar under thename COVID Organics (CVO) (BBC, 2020; WHO, 2020b).The potential risks and public impact associated with anyadvice on this disease are huge, and understandably; so,Herbalists associations are more cautious than usual inpromoting herbal medicines in this context. In the UK, theNMHI just encourages its members to “integrate the herbaladvice they provide with any conventional treatment ormanagement strategies that are appropriate for their patients,and to observe the current infection control and managementguidelines formulated by the Department of Health” (NMHI,2020); and the College of Medicine actively recommends dietaryinterventions such as boosting immunity against coronavirus by‘turning’ to antioxidants and polyphenol-rich food (Dixon, 2020).General Discussion About the Efficacy ofReference Drugs and Herbal Medicines inthe Relief of Flu Symptoms in the Contextof COVID-19Despite the massive use of codeine, paracetamol, and ibuprofenfor the relief of respiratory diseases, the clinical body of evidencesupporting their use in flu is very low. These drugs are mostlyused based on medical experience and clinicians are familiar withtheir benefits/risks profiles. These drugs have very commontoxicities and their adverse effects are potentially dangerous inthe context of COVID-19 (Jóźwiak-Bebenista and Nowak, 2014;Drugs.com, 2020a; Drugs.com, 2020b).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyIt is surprising the lack of clinical trials to substantiate the useof both paracetamol and ibuprofen in the treatment of cold/flusymptoms. As noted in previous sections, clinical evidence issomewhat higher for ibuprofen than for paracetamol.General Discussion About the Safety ofReference Drugs and Herbal Medicines inthe Relief of Flu Symptoms in the Contextof COVID-19There is quite a consensus in that the patient may safely chooseto use herbal medicines and food supplements in the preventionof COVID-19. In line with EMA, we advise the patients to keep adiary of the medication (herbal or not) to informmedical doctorsand other health care professionals in case of hospitalizationworsening of the disease.Two types of interactions are important in COVID-19: disease-herbal medicine and herbal medicine-drug interactions. There is acomplicated relationship between the immune system and viralinfections: infection is favored by a weak immune response, whilstcomplications arise from an ‘overreaction’ of the immune systemknown as “cytokines storm”. As a result, health authoritiesdiscourage any therapies modulating the function of immunecells in any of both directions -including anti-inflammatorydrugs- and reserve those to clinical management of advancedstages of COVID-19.To complicate matters further, a significant fraction ofCOVID-19 patients in advance stages may require emergencytreatment consisting of mechanical ventilation under generalanesthesia. It is standard protocol for anesthetists to adviseagainst taking herbal supplements at least 2 to 3 weeks beforesurgery or other procedures requiring anesthesia, due topotential pharmacodynamic and pharmacokinetic interactionswith these procedures (Levy et al., 2017).As a result of all the above, the use of any herbal-basedproducts has been strongly discouraged by medical authorities,even for typical symptoms of the early stages of COVID-19.Patients are asked to rest, take paracetamol - if fever is dangerousonly - and plenty of water. Such “Keep calm and carry on”clinical advice is not realistic and causes dissatisfaction inpatients that are not ready to just ‘sit and suffer’ with theadded distress of the potentially lethal complications. It is allhuman that they will try whatever is offered from alternativemedicinal systems to minimize both symptoms and viral load.Interestingly, there is seldom any mention to anti-tussivemedication, one of the most characteristic symptoms of theCOVID-19 disease, which chiefly contributes to its spread.Available cough medicines range from OTC products such assimple linctus (usually containing citric acid in a water-glycerolbase) and THMP (in Europe) to pharmacy/prescription-onlyopioids such as dextromethorphan or codeine.Potential Drug-COVID-19 InteractionsEarly clinical data on the evolution of COVID-19 patientspointed out to a deleterious influence of ibuprofen andketoprofen even taken as short as 2–4 days during the onset ofthe infection (ANSES, 2020), and prompted French authoritiesFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 26to discourage public to use NSAIDs other than paracetamol.Later data did not clearly substantiate the link between NSAIDsand worsening of the symptoms, so EMA released acommunication clarifying this point and calling for rationaluse of NSAIDs ‘at the lowest effective dose for the shortestpossible period’ (EMA, 2020).The basis for lower use of NSAIDs has been substantiated ontwo lines of thinking: (a) they non-specifically impair theimmune response thus potentially facilitating the viralinfection; (b) some NSAIDs such as ibuprofen, potentiallyincrease the expression of proteins necessary for the entry ofthe virus into the cell. The later includes proteins vimentin(streptococcus) and ACE-2 (coronavirus).Surprisingly, paracetamol counts among its many potentialadverse effects “very common incidence” (1% to 10%) ofdyspnea, abnormal breath sounds, pulmonary edema, hypoxia,pleural effusion, stridor, wheezing, and coughing.Potential Herbal-COVID-19 InteractionsHerbal Medicines Acting as NSAIDs and/orImmunomodulatorsThe French authorities have issued a detailed document warningagainst all herbal medicines with anti-inflammatory andimmunomodulatory activities and discouraging their liberal useif flu symptoms appear, whilst the COVID-19 pandemic is goingon - unless the patient is tested negative (ANSES, 2020).COVID-19 Interactions With Herbs Modulating Host CellProteinsCoronaviruses have spike or surface (S) glycoproteins givingthem their characteristic shape and name. These help the virus toenter the host cell by a receptor-mediated process (Lu et al.,2020). Although they show a complex pattern for receptorrecognition, Angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) isconsidered the main host cell receptor of human pathogeniccoronaviruses. In principle, herbal products down-regulatingACE2 may provide a baseline defense against infection. In thewake of SARS, Taiwanese researchers described emodin as aninhibitor of both S and ACE2 proteins. Emodin is present inmedicinal plants such as Rheum officinale Baill. and Polygonummultiflorum Thunb (Ho et al., 2007).However, some other plant metabolites have been identifiedas potential enhancers of ACE2 expression, including baicalin,tanshinones, magnolol, curcumin, and rosmarinic acid (ANSES,2020). Therefore, French authorities have warned that the use ofScutellaria sp., Magnolia sp., Salvia sp., Curcuma sp., andRosmarinus officinalis L., by COVID-19 patients, needs furtherevaluation (ANSES, 2020).Immunomodulators may both stimulate or suppress theimmune system by inhibiting and/or increasing the synthesisand release of pro-inflammatory mediators, including cytokinesand eicosanoids. There is preclinical evidence of increased IL-1Band/or IL-18 production in infected immune cells by the use ofSambucus nigra L., polysaccharide-rich extracts from medicinalmushrooms, Echinacea angustifolia DC. and Echinacea purpureaL. (Moench.), Larch (Larix sp.) arabinogalactans-rich extracts,September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyand plant extracts or food supplements rich in Vitamin D(Alschuler et al., 2020).COVID-19 Interactions With Herbal Medicines Acting asAntithromboticThe incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE) inhospitalized patients with COVID-19 has been a controversialmatter during the pandemic. Initial studies seemed to pointtowards patients the benefits of VTE prophylaxis in emergencycare. Currently, there is insufficient data to recommend for oragainst the use of thrombolytics or increasing anti-coagulantdoses in hospitalized COVID-19 patients. More epidemiologicstudies with better control for underlying comorbidities,prophylactic anticoagulation, and COVID-19-related therapiesare needed (NIH, 2020).The current recommendation is that anticoagulants/antiplatelet therapy should not be initiated for the preventionof VTE in non-hospitalized patients with COVID-19 unlessthere are other indications. Similarly, modern phytotherapyshould avoid recommending the use of plants withanticoagulant effects as prophylaxis of thromboembolic eventstriggered by COVID-19 disease. Some of the herbal medicineshere reviewed are known to have anti-coagulant activity on topof their beneficial effects upon cold/flu symptoms such as garlic(A. sativum L.) and guaco (M. glomerata Spreng.). Althoughcaution needs to prevail in assessing whether they are providing abenefit that outweighs the potential risks in case the disease getscomplicated. This assessment needs to take into considerationquantitative scientific criteria that, in many times, are lacking. Acase in point is the ‘zero tolerance’ to garlic, despite experimentalevidence showing that an equivalent of 0.6% allicin does notimpair platelet function and does no potentiate platelet-inhibiting drugs (Scharbert et al., 2007).Herb-Drug Interactions in the Context of COVID-19Emergency TreatmentStandard protocols in case of pneumonia contemplate assistedrespiration for long periods, which in turn requires generalanesthesia. Concerns about herb-drug interaction inanaesthesiology have been historically a major driver forobjections to herbal medicine from clinicians. There is asubstantial body of knowledge of how herbal medicines interactwith anesthesia (Levy et al., 2017; AANA, 2020). There is aconsensus among anesthesiologists in advising against any of thefollowing herbal medicines that may be taken for flu symptoms:• Echinacea (Echinacea sp.), because they may (theoretically)increase the risk of liver damage in patients under anesthesia.• Ginkgo (Ginkgo biloba L., Ginkgoaceae), St. John’s wort(Hypericum perforatum L., Hypericaceae), and valerian(Valeriana officinalis L., Caprifoliaceae) because they mayincrease the effects of anesthesia and make it harder to wakeup. They may also cause irregular heart rhythms.• Ginseng (Ginseng sp., Araliaceae), licorice (Glycyrrhizaglabra L.), and milk thistle [Silybum marianum (L.)Gaertn.], because they may cause high blood pressure and arapid heart rate.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 27• Garlic (Allium sativum L., Amaryllidaceae), ginkgo, green tea[Camellia sinensis (L.) Kuntz., Theaceae], feverfew(Tanacetum parthenium L., Asteraceae), ginger (Zingiberofficinale L.) and Saw palmetto [Serenoa repens (W.Bartram) Small, Arecaceae], because they may causeprolonged bleeding.• Garlic, in addition, can increase the effects of some OTC painrelievers.• Ephedra: Several studies and clinical trials have been carriedout to identify drugs that can effectively treat the disease, but,at the moment, the strategies to deal with the infection areonly supportive (Cascella et al., 2020). Two recent reviews toon Chinese Herbal Medicine (CHM) can illustrate this. In thefirst one, the authors presented some CHM formulae used inthe H1N1 outbreak that can be useful to prevent COVID-19(Luo et al., 2020). The other offers guidelines for the treatmentof COVID-19, at different stages, using CHM (Ang et al.,2020a). Among the most cited plant drug, Ephedra plays animportant role. Both indicate a lack of evidence for theefficacy of those CHM preparations. The presence of a fewmedicinal plants such as Ephedra in the suggested guidancefor COVID-19 is a subject of major concerns. AlthoughEphedra, listed in the WHO monographs (WHO, 1999), hasbeen used for the treatment of asthma, cough, cold as well asin the management of weight loss (its primary use as asupplement in the USA), globally regulatory agencies havebanned food supplements and medicines containing theephedra alkaloid ephedrine, due to the serious adverseeffects especially on the cardiovascular and nervous systemand reported deaths (FDA, 2008; EFSA, 2013; EMA, 2015b).Benefits/Risks Assessment of HerbalMedicines Officially Referred as to asUseful to Relieve Symptoms Related toRespiratory ConditionsThere have been a few metanalyses of the impact of herbalmedicines in the treatment of common flu (Wagner L. et al.,2015; Ang et al., 2020b). Here, the analysis of the level of evidencewas done considering COVID-19 and the current knowledgeabout symptoms and mechanisms of action involved in thecoronavirus infection. In order to support the decision, thesame criteria used for three drugs currently used to mitigatethe same symptoms defined here: fever (paracetamol),inflammation (ibuprofen), and cough (codeine) were applied tothe selected herbal medicines.A modified PrOACT-URL approach has been used here as atool for the evaluation of herbal medicines. Based on the definedcriterion and the benefits/risks assessment, thirty-six herbalmedicines, and three conventional drugs were evaluated(Table 4).The potential usefulness of the herbal medicines in themanagement of early symptoms of flu in the context of thecurrent COVID-19 pandemic was compared with the baselinebenefits/risks assessment performed on the reference drugsparacetamol (acetaminophen), ibuprofen and codeine. Thesedrugs resulted not to be backed up by robust clinical evidence,September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840TABLE 4 | Benefits/risks assessment in adult patients without any other conditions suffering early/mild flu symptoms in the context of COVID-19.Overall Benefit Adverse Effects2 Overall Safety Benefits/RisksFeverHigh B-II Mediuma PromisingHigh A-IV High PositiveHigh D-III Medium PromisingHigh A-Ic High PositiveLow A-IV High UnknownHigh D-IV Medium PromisingLow D-IV Medium UnknownHigh D-IV Medium PromisingMedium A-IV High PromisingLow A-IV High UnknownIV Low A-IV High UnknownHigh A-II High PositiveHigh A-Ic High PositiveHigh B-IV Medium PromisingMedium C-III Medium PromisingLow A-IV High UnknownHigh C-IV Medium PromisingIV Low A-IV High UnknownHigh D-IV Medium PromisingIV High C-IV Medium PromisingIV Low A-IV High UnknownLow A-III High UnknownLow A-IV High UnknownLow A-IV High UnknownLow A-III Medium UnknownLow B-III High UnknownIV High C-IV Medium PromisingHigh A-Ic High PositiveIV Low C-III Medium UnknownIV Low A-Icb High UnknownLow A-IV High UnknownLow A-IV High UnknownMedium B-II Medium PromisingMedium B-II Medium PromisingLow E-Ib Low NegativeLow E-Ib Low Negativebert et al., 2007); (b) Chronic administration of products with 7%–8% silymarin content are safeSilveiraetal.COVID-19andEvidence-BasedPhytotherapyFrontiersinPharmacology|www.frontiersin.orgSeptember2020|Volume11|Article58184028Treatment Evidence Levels in Respiratory conditions1Plant Species/Drug Pharmacopoeial name Cold Flu Bronchitis Asthma Cough PainAllium sativum/bulbs, powder Allii sativi bulbus (EMA) IbAlthaea officinalis/roots, leaves Althaeae radix IbAndrographis paniculata/leaves Andrographidis paniculatae folium Ib Ib IbCommiphora molmol/gum Myrrha gummi-resina 1bCymbopogon citratus/leaves Cymbopogonis folium IV IVEchinacea angustifolia/roots Echinaceae angustifoliae radix Ib IbEchinacea pallida/roots Echinaceae pallidae radix IV IVEchinacea purpurea/herb Echinaceae purpureae herba Ib IbEucalyptus globulus/essential oil Eucalypti aetheroleum III IIIEucalyptus globulus/leaves Eucalypti folium IV IVFoeniculum vulgare/fruits Foeniculi amari/dulcis fructus IV IVGlycyrrhiza glabra/roots Liquiritiae radix IbHedera helix/leaves Hederae helicis folium Ib Ib IbJusticia pectoralis/leaves Justicia pectoralis folium IbMagnolia officinalis/bark Magnoliae cortex IIIMalva sylvestris/leaves Malvae sylvestris folium IVMikania glomerata/leaves Mikania glomerata folium Ib IVOcimum gratissimum/leaves Ocimi Sancti folium IV IV IV IVPelargonium sidoides/roots Pelargonii radix Ia Ib IbPimpinella anisum/fruits essential oil Anisi aetheroleum/fructus Ib IVPlantago lanceolata/leaves Plantaginis lanceolatae folium IV IVPlatycodon chinensis/roots Platicodi radix IVPolygala senega/roots Polygalae radix IV IVPolypodium vulgare/rhizome Polypodii rhizoma IVPotentilla erecta/rhizome Tormentillae rhizoma IVPrimula veris/roots Primulae radix IVSalix sp./bark Salicis cortex IV IV IbSambucus nigra/fruits Sambuci fructus Ia IaScutellaria baicalensis/roots Radix Scutellariae IVSilybum marianum/fruits Silybi mariani fructusThymus vulgaris/herb essential oil Thymi herba/aetheroleum IVTilia cordata/flowers Tiliae flos IVZingiber officinale/rhizome Zingiberis rhizoma IV IIa* IV IVIbuprofen – Ia IV IaCodeine – IVParacetamol – IV IV(1) Grading as per Table 1;(2) Codes and Grading as per Table 2;(3) As per Table 3; (a) Products with less than 0.6% allicin content are safe (Scharup to 40 months (Corchete, 2008); (*) Clinical experiment in SARS patients (Vahdat Shariatpanahi et al., 2013).Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyand their safety profile was concerning in some cases. Accordingto this ‘baseline’, five herbal medicines were found as potentiallyvalid candidates in managing early or mild symptoms of cold, fluand bronchitis in the context of COVID-19 as they provide withample safety margins and good evidence for efficacy: Althaeaofficinalis, Commiphora molmol, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hederahelix, and Sambucus nigra. The authors recommend startingtheir integration into clinical advice as adjuvant therapies forrespiratory diseases, even in the context of COVID-19.A second group of twelve herbal medicines is to be consideredas promising candidates, due to their reasonable safety marginsand emerging evidence for efficacy: Allium sativum, Andrographispaniculata, Echinacea angustifolia, Echinacea purpurea,Eucalyptus globulus essential oil, Justicia pectoralis, Magnoliaofficinalis, Mikania glomerata Pelargonium sidoides, Pimpinellaanisum, Salix sp, and Zingiber officinale. The authors recommendthe scientific community to prioritize working on these herbalstowards their full integration into clinical use. These two groupsare, in the opinion of the authors, comparable in terms of safety-and sometimes efficacy- with the three reference drugs currentlyin clinical use for the target symptoms, so these herbal medicinesmay help to mitigate the discomfort in the early stages of thedisease, based on their anti-inflammatory, immunomodulatory,and antitussive properties.The following plants have good evidence for the treatment ofasthma: Glycyrrhiza glabra, Magnolia officinalis, Mikaniaglomerata, and Pimpinella anisum. These plants cannot becandidates to treat respiratory infections but may be safe to useif the asthmatic patient suffers flu symptoms.The rest of herbal medicines (approximately half of theanalyzed herbal medicines) appear to have a good safetyprofile, but simply there is not enough evidence – clinical orpre-clinical – about their action on the target symptoms (cough,fever) or conditions (cold, flu). Therefore, they must becategorized as of ‘unknown’ potential and would need muchmore research to build up the necessary evidence to justify theiruse in the management of flu, let alone in the context ofCOVID-19.Benefits/Risks Assessment of HerbalRemedies Not Covered by InternationalMonographsSeveral food/herbal-based remedies are associated with thetreatment of common cold and flu because they includevitamins (such as lemon juice), aromatic principles withperceived benefits for the upper respiratory system (such asmint, bayleaf), or because they are culturally considered as a“cure-all” (such as Nigella). Some of them are presented to thepublic in a “pharmaceutical forms” (capsules, tablets, syrups),thus looking like a “safe and effective medicinal approach”. Theregulatory status of these products varies from country tocountry, and we advise here that only products that areregulated as (herbal) medicines should be used since this is anessential requirement for a product’s safety.The following herbals and foods were identified by theauthors as falling into this category: Citrus limon, CulcitiumFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 29canescens, Laurus nobilis, Lippia graveolens, and Plectranthusamboinicus. We subjected the evidence for the efficacy and safetyof these plants to the same Benefit/Risks assessment applied tothe “officially recognized” herbal medicines, and the collectedpreclinical, clinical, and safety data are provided.Nigella may be considered as a borderline “promising”treatment example as there is some preliminary clinicalevidence for its relief of cough but it seems to be restricted toasthma patients, so from a physiopathological point of view isnot clear how useful it would be in cold/flu. As for the others,although considered safe, there is simply not enough evidence –clinical or pre-clinical – in relation to their benefits on the targetsymptoms (cough, fever) or conditions (cold, flu).Despite their lack of evidence in the treatment of flu, lemon,bay leaves, mint, and Nigella are deeply ingrained ‘polyvalent’remedies in many cultures all over the World. Therefore, asuccinct discussion on their efficacy and safety in the treatmentof respiratory conditions is essential:• The juice or tea of Citrus limon (L.) Burm.f fruits, alone orassociated with salt, honey or ginger has been used to relievecough and fever related to flu and cold in several traditionalsystems (Papp et al., 2011; Panizza et al., 2012; Sultana et al., 2016;Klimek-Szczykutowicz et al., 2020). However, there is no clinicalevidence of such action in the respiratory tract, although thisspecies is well-known as a rich source of vitamin C (Ye, 2017).• Besides the use as food, the decoction of Laurus nobilis L.dried leaves is taken orally to treat respiratory distress(Chevallier, 1996; Ross, 2001), and the only information onL. nobilis posology is given by the American PharmaceuticalAssociation (Duke et al., 2002). The closest to an applicablestudy is an in vitro study examining SARS-CoV and the effectof several essential oils (Chen et al., 1995). The essential oil ofL. nobilis leaves was also evaluated for its antinociceptive andanti-inflammatory activities in mice and rats (Sayyah et al.,2003). However, the lack of clinical evidence led to concernsabout the use of this species.• Mentha x piperita L. (peppermint) is widely used to treatbronchitis, fever and other respiratory disorders (WHO, 2002;Blumenthal, 2003), although no evidence can be found tocorroborate these actions. The essential oil contains, amongother compounds, menthol, menthone, menthofuran, andpulegone, a well-known hepatotoxin (Engel, 2003), leadingto a deep concern about the use of essential oil (EMA, 2016e).However, peppermint tea usually contains a small amount ofthese compounds, and the normal use rarely led to seriousadverse effects (EMA, 2008a).• Nigella sativa L. (black seeds) is globally known as a spice andas a food item. In Arabic medicine, this species has very highstatus as a herbal medicine used for a wide range of diseases.In the context of COVID-19, the relevant uses are for asthmaand in the more general management of inflammatoryconditions. With regards to respiratory diseases its use canbe traced back at least to Avicenna (ca. 980 – 1037, C.E.), whoindicated it for shortness of breath and for stopping phlegmand Imam Ibn Qayyim Al-Jawziyya (1292–1350 C.E.), whoSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyrecommended it for gasping and hard breathing (Koshaket al., 2018). In many Arabic Countries, “black seed” is usedfor asthma and cough, among many other uses, especially ofgastrointestinal diseases (like abdominal pain, stomach ache,colic), rheumatism, skin diseases and recently use to managediabetes have become popular (Aisa et al., 2019). Some smallstudies demonstrate clinical benefits in asthma patients(Koshak et al., 2017). Although black seed may be useful inthe symptomatic relief of respiratory symptoms, especiallyassociated with the severe asthmatic cough, the clinicalevidence is very limited. A particular concern, in this case,are the many well-intended but very low-quality studies andthe broad range of claims they try to support, making anyassessment problematic.Limitations of the Present WorkThe authors are aware of the limitations of this assessment: first,the body of studies is not large, even for reference drugs, and thisis further complicated by the uncharted territory, which is thecurrent pandemic. Second, the decision-making framework ishere applied to herbal medicines for the first time and wouldneed external validation.The PrOACT-URL method is a valid approach to informdecision-making at high regulatory levels. The way we apply ithere may well attract the critique of experts in the field ofevaluation of the benefits/risks balance for medicines. Wewelcome constructive comments since this is exactly what wepursue: to start a high-level discussion on the potential of herbalmedicines for the management of flu and their safetyimplications during this pandemic. For this, we need to worktowards further adapting decision-making frameworks to bringabout advances in ‘clinical phytotherapy’.We acknowledge that the selection of herbal medicines isgeographically limited and that many other species could havebeen considered. We took a “legalist” approach by only acceptingentries provided by EMA or WHO, and we recognize we hold acollective expertise, especially in European and American herbalmedicines. Nevertheless, the list includes globally-recognized,therapeutically relevant herbs. At the same time, there is, clearly,an emerging body of evidence on specific Asian (oftenmultiherbal) preparations (especially TCM), which also isincluded in this Research Topic of Frontiers in Pharmacology,Sect. Ethnopharmacology, and thus these studies mutuallycomplement each other.CONCLUSIONSA total of 39 herbal medicines were identified as very likely toappeal to COVID-19 patients. According to our method, thebenefits/risks assessment of the herbal medicines was foundpositive in 5 cases, promising in 10 cases, and unknown for therest. On the same basis, only ibuprofen resulted promising, butwe could not find compelling clinical evidence for a positiveFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 30assessment to endorse the adjuvant use of paracetamol and/orcodeine due to their common adverse effects in therespiratory function.Our work suggests that Althaea officinalis, Commiphoramolmol, Glycyrrhiza glabra, Hedera helix, and Sambucus nigrahave safety margins superior to those of reference drugs andenough levels of evidence to merit their potential clinical use asadjuvants in the treatment of early/mild cases of COVID-19.Herbal medicines are not a “magic bullet” to solve theproblems related to flu - let alone COVID-19 or any othercoronavirus - neither can avoid the virus infection but mayalleviate symptoms and potentially improve the generalwellbeing of patients. It requires a careful assessment ofwhether such adjuvant therapies are justified or not. Thenagain, it can only be a suitable therapy at a stage when theseverity of the disease is minor. Overall, we highlighted thepotential of some medicinal plants for the adjuvant managementof early symptoms of flu within the context of COVID-19 inotherwise healthy adults. For an herbal medicine to be amedicine high quality, chemically well-characterized, andpharmacologically well-studied preparations are acceptableonly. Equally, it will be essential that such well-characterizedpreparations are used in all future pharmacological and clinicalstudies (Heinrich et al., 2020).In a broader context, this study also offers a novel approachfor assessing the risks and benefits of using herbal medicines.Since the PrOACT-URL strategy is used here for the first timewith a set of herbal medicines, we want to highlight theopportunities for a rigorous and evidence-based approach willhave in a balanced assessment of such medicines.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSDS Conceptualization of overarching research goals and aims,data/evidence collection, data curation, coordination of theoverall work, formal analysis of study data, preparation,creation and/or presentation of the published work, criticalreview and revision. JP-G: Conceptualization of overarchingresearch goals and aims, development and design of themethodology, visualization/data, formal analysis of study data,preparation, creation and/or presentation of the published work,critical review and revision. FB: Data/evidence collection, formalanalysis of study data, critical review and revision. OE, YF-B, CJ,PM, EP, and MT: Data/evidence collection, formal analysis ofstudy data. MH: Conceptualization of overarching research goalsand aims, data/evidence collection, formal analysis of study data,critical review and revision.FUNDINGCoordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nıv́el Superior,Capes-PrInt (88887468871/2019-00).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyREFERENCESAANA (2020). Herbal Products and Your Anesthesia (American Association ofNurse Anesthetiscs). Available at: https://www.aana.com/patients/herbal-products-and-your-anesthesia (Accessed 07/07/2020 2020).Abad-Garcıá, B., Garmón-Lobato, S., Berrueta, L. A., Gallo, B., and Vicente, F.(2012). On line characterization of 58 phenolic compounds in Citrus fruitjuices from Spanish cultivars by high-performance liquid chromatographywith photodiode-array detection coupled to electrospray ionization triplequadrupole mass spectrometry. Talanta 99, 213–224. doi: 10.1016/j.talanta.2012.05.042Abdo, S., Bernardi, M., Marinoni, G., Mellerio, G., Samaniego, S., Vidarit, G., et al.(1992). Furanoeremophilanes and other constituents from Senecio canescens.Phytochemistry 31, 3937–3941. doi: 10.1016/S0031-9422(00)97558-7Abdollahi Fard, M. (2012). Review of pharmacological properties and chemicalconstituents of Pimpinella anisum. ISRN Pharm. 2012, 510795. doi: 10.5402/2012/510795Abu-Dahab, R., Kasabri, V., and Afifi, F. U. (2014). Evaluation of the Volatile OilComposition and Antiproliferative Activity of Laurus nobilis L.(Lauraceae) onBreast Cancer Cell Line Models. Rec. Nat. Prod. 8, 136–147.Agnolet, S., Wiese, S., Verpoorte, R., and Staerk, D. (2012). Comprehensiveanalysis of commercial willow bark extracts by new technology platform:Combined use of metabolomics, high-performance liquid chromatography–solid-phase extraction–nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy and high-resolution radical scavenging assay. J. Chromat. A 1262, 130–137. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2012.09.013Agra, M. F., Silva, K. N., Basıĺio, I. J. L. D., Freitas, P. F., and Barbosa-Filho, J. M.(2008). Survey of medicinal plants used in the region Northeast of Brazil. Braz.J. Pharmacogn. 18, 472–508. doi: 10.1590/S0102-695X2008000300023Ahmed, K., Shaheen, G., and Asif, H. M. (2011). Zingiber officinale Roscoe(pharmacological activity). J. Med. Plants Res. 5, 344–348. doi: 10.5897/JMPR.9001303Aisa, H. A., Xin, X., and Tang, D. (2019). “Chapter 40 - Nigella sativa: A Medicinaland Edible Plant That Ameliorates Diabetes,” in Bioactive Food as DietaryInterventions for Diabetes, 2nd ed. Eds. R. R. Watson and V. R. Preedy.(London: Academic Press), 629–640. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-813822-9.00040-0Ajayi, A. M., Martins, D. T. O., Balogun, S. O., Oliveira, R. G., Ascêncio, S. D.,Soares, I. M., et al. (2017). Ocimum gratissimum L. leaf flavonoid-rich fractionsuppress LPS-induced inflammatory response in RAW 264.7 macrophages andperitonitis in mice. J. Ethnopharmacol. 204, 169–178. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2017.04.005Akbar, S. (2011). Andrographis paniculata: a review of pharmacological activitiesand clinical effects. Altern. Med. Rev. 16, 66–77.Akbar, S. (2020). Handbook of 200 Medicinal Plants: A Comprehensive Review ofTheir Traditional Medical Uses and Scientific Justifications (Cham: SpringerInternational Publishing). doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-16807-0_74Alam, P. N., Husin, H., Asnawi, T. M., and Adisalamun, (2018). Extraction ofcitral oil from lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus) by steam-water distillationtechnique. IOP Conf. Series: Mater. Sci. Eng. 345, 12022. doi: 10.1088/1757-899X/345/1/012022Alani, B., Zare, M., and Noureddini, M. (2015). Bronchodilatory and B-adrenergiceffects of methanolic and aqueous extracts of Althaea root on isolatedtracheobronchial smooth rat muscle. Adv. Biomol. Res. 4, 78. doi: 10.4103/2277-9175.153905Albornoz, A. (1993). Medicina Tradicional Herbaria (Caracas: InstitutoFarmacoterápico Latino S.A).Ali, M., Sahrawat, I., and Singh, O. (2004). Volatile Constituents of Cymbopogoncitratus (DC.) Stapf. Leaves. J. Essent. Oil-Bear Plants 7, 56–59. doi: 10.1080/0972-060X.2004.10643365Ali, B. H., Blunden, G., Tanira, M. O., and Nemmar, A. (2008). Somephytochemical, pharmacological and toxicological properties of ginger(Zingiber officinale Roscoe): A review of recent research. Food Chem.Toxicol. 46, 409–420. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2007.09.085Al-Jawad, F., Al-Razzuqi, R., Hashim, H., and Al-Bayati, N. (2012). Glycyrrhizaglabra versus Boswellia carterii in chronic bronchial asthma: A comparativestudy of efficacy. Indian J. Allergy Asthma Immunol. 26, 6–8. doi: 10.3923/ijp.2018.1072.1079Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 31Al-Jenoobi, F. I., Ahad, A., Raish, M., Al-Mohizea, A. M., and Alam, M. A. (2015a).Investigating the Potential Effect of Commiphora myrrha on thePharmacokinetics of Theophylline, a Narrow Therapeutic Index Drug. DrugRes. 65, 312–316. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1382032Al-Jenoobi, F. I., Alam, M. A., Al-Mohizea, A. M., Ahad, A., and Raish, M.(2015b). Orally co-administrated oleo-gum resin ofCommiphora myrrhadecreases the bioavailability of cyclosporine A inrats. Pharmazie 70, 549–552. doi: 10.1691/ph.2015.5551Alschuler, L., Weil, A., Horwitz, R., Stamets, P., Chiasson, A. M., Crocker, R., et al.(2020). Integrative considerations during the COVID-19 pandemic. Explore(NY). doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2020.03.007Al-Snafi, A. E. (2018). Pharmacological and therapeutic activities of Hedera helix-A review. IOSR J. Pharm. 8, 41–53.Amaral, A. C. F., Rodrigues, A. G., Ribeiro, J. E. G., DSantos, M. G., and NettoJunior, N. L. (2006). A Fitoterapia no SUS e o Programa de Pesquisas de PlantasMedicinais da Central de Medicamentos (Brasilia: Ministério da Saúde).Amblard, F., Delinsky, D., Arbiser, J. L., and Schinazi, R. F. (2006). Facilepurification of honokiol and its antiviral and cytotoxic properties. J. Med.Chem. 49, 3426–3427. doi: 10.1021/jm060268mAng, L., Lee, H. W., Choi, J. Y., Zhang, J., and Lee, M. S. (2020a). Herbal medicineand pattern identification for treating COVID-19: a rapid review of guidelines.Integr. Med. Res. 9, 100407. doi: 10.1016/j.imr.2020.100407Ang, L., Song, E., Lee, H. W., and Lee, M. S. (2020b). Herbal Medicine for theTreatment of Coronavirus Disease 2019 (COVID-19): A Systematic Reviewand Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials. J. Clin. Med. 9, 1583. doi:10.3390/jcm9051583Anheyer, D., Cramer, H., Lauche, R., Saha, F. J., and Dobos, G. (2018). HerbalMedicine in Children With Respiratory Tract Infection: Systematic Review andMeta-Analysis. Acad. Pediat. 18, 8–19. doi: 10.1016/j.acap.2017.06.006ANSES (2020). “AVIS de l’Agence nationale de sécurité sanitaire de l’alimentation,de l’environnement et du travail relatif à l’évaluation des risques liés à laconsommation de compléments alimentaires contenant des plantes pouvantinterférer avec la réponse immunitaire et inflammatoire associée à l’infectionpar le SARS-Cov-2,” in Saisine n° 2020-SA-0045 (Paris: Agence Nationale deSécurité Sanitaire de l’Alimentation, de l’Environnement et du Travail).Arai, Y., Yamaide, M., Yamazaki, S., and Ageta, H. (1991). Fern constituents:Triterpenoids isolated from Polypodium vulgare, P. fauriei and P. virginianum.Phytochemistry 30, 3369–3377. doi: 10.1016/0031-9422(91)83212-4Araujo, R. O., Souza, I. A., Sena, K. X. F. R., Brondani, D. J., and Solidônio, E. G. (2013).Avaliação biológica de Foeniculum vulgare (Mill.) (Umbelliferae/Apiaceae). Rev.Bras. Plantas Med. 15, 257–263. doi: 10.1590/S1516-05722013000200014Arias, J., Mejıá, J., Córdoba, Y., Martıńez, J. R., Stashenko, E., and del Valle, J. M.(2020). Optimization of flavonoids extraction from Lippia graveolens and Lippiaoriganoides chemotypes with ethanol-modified supercritical CO2 after steamdistillation. Ind. Crop Prod. 146, 112170. doi: 10.1016/j.indcrop.2020.112170Arumugam, G., Swamy, M. K., and Sinniah, U. R. (2016). Plectranthus amboinicus(Lour.) Spreng: botanical, phytochemical, pharmacological and nutritionalsignificance. Molecules 21, 369. doi: 10.3390/molecules21040369Athersuch, T. J., Antoine, D. J., Boobis, A. R., Coen,M., Daly, A. K., Possamai, L., et al.(2018). Paracetamol metabolism, hepatotoxicity, biomarkers and therapeuticinterventions: a perspective. Toxicol. Res. 7, 347–357. doi: 10.1039/c7tx00340dBączek, K., Przybył, J. L., Mirgos, M., Kosakowska, O., Szymborska-Sandhu, I., andWęglarz, Z. (2017). Phenolics in Primula veris L. and P. elatior (L.) Hill RawMaterials. Int. J. Anal. Chem. 2017, 2871579. doi: 10.1155/2017/2871579Badgujar, S. B., Patel, V. V., and Bandivdekar, A. H. (2014). Foeniculum vulgareMill: A Review of Its Botany, Phytochemistry, Pharmacology, ContemporaryApplication, and Toxicology. BioMed. Res. Int. 2014, 842674. doi: 10.1155/2014/842674Bahadori, M. B., Sarikurkcu, C., Kocak, M. S., Calapoglu, M., Uren, M. C., andCeylan, O. (2020). Plantago lanceolata as a source of health-beneficialphytochemicals: Phenolics profile and antioxidant capacity. Food Biosci. 34,100536. doi: 10.1016/j.fbio.2020.100536Bai, Y., Yao, L., Wei, T., Tian, F., Jin, D.-Y., Chen, L., et al. (2020). PresumedAsymptomatic Carrier Transmission of COVID-19. JAMA 323, 1406–1407.doi: 10.1001/jama.2020.2565Bailey, D. G., Malcolm, J., Arnold, O., and Spence, J. D. (1998). Grapefruit juice–drug interactions. Br. J. Clin. Pharmacol. 46, 101–110. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2125.1998.00764.xSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyBajer, T., Janda, V., Bajerová, P., Kremr, D., Eisner, A., and Ventura, K. J. (2016).Chemical composition of essential oils from Plantago lanceolata L. leavesextracted by hydrodistillation. J. Food Sci. Technol. 53, 1576–1584.doi: 10.1007/s13197-015-2083-xBalogun, F. O., and Ashafa, A. O. T. (2019). A Review of Plants Used in SouthAfrican Traditional Medicine for the Management and Treatment ofHypertension. Planta Med. 85, 312–334. doi: 10.1055/a-0801-8771Barbosa, L. C., Morais, M. D., Paula, C. A., Silva Ferreira, M. C., Jordao, A. A.,Andrade e Silva, M. L., et al. (2012). Mikania glomerata Sprengel (Asteraceae)Influences the Mutagenicity Induced by Doxorubicin without Altering LiverLipid Peroxidation or Antioxidant Levels. J. Toxicol. Environ. Health Part A 75,1102–1109. doi: 10.1080/15287394.2012.697842Barnes, J., Anderson, L. A., and Phillipson, J. D. (2012). Fitoterápicos (PortoAlegre: Artmed).Basch, E., Ulbricht, C., Hammerness, P., Bevins, A., and Sollars, D. (2004). Thyme(Thymus vulgaris L.), Thymol. J. Herbal Pharmacother. 4, 49–67. doi: 10.1080/J157v04n01_07BBC (2020). Coronavirus: Caution urged over Madagascar’s "herbal cure" [Online].BBC-com. Available at: https://www.bbc.com/news/world-africa-52374250(Accessed 07 June, 2020).Beis, S. H., and Dunford, N. T. (2006). Supercritical fluid extraction of daphne(Laurus nobilis L.) seed oil. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 83, 953–957. doi: 10.1007/s11746-006-5052-8Bertolucci, S. K. V., Pereira, A. B. D., Pinto, J. E. B. P., Oliveira, A. B., and Braga, F. C.(2013). Isolation and HPLC quantitation of kaurane-type diterpenes and cinnamicacid derivatives of long-term stored leaves of Mikania laevigata and Mikaniaglomerata. Acad. Bras. Ciênc, 85, 473–486. doi: 10.1590/S0001-37652013005000029BHMA (1983). British Herbal Pharmacopoeia (Keighley: British Herbal MedicineAssociation).Bisset, N. G. (1994). Herbal drugs and phytopharmaceuticals: a handbook forpractice on a scientific basis (Stuttgart/Boca Ratón: Medpharm ScientificPublishers/CRC Press).Blumenthal, M., Busse, W. R., Goldberg, A., and Gruenwald, J. (1998). TheComplete German Commission E Monographs., 1998 (Austin: AmericanBotanical Council).Blumenthal, M. (2003). The ABC Clinical Guide to Herbs (Austin: AmericanBotanical Council).Bohlmann, F., Arndt, C., Bornowski, H., and Kleine, K. M. (1961).Polyacetylenverbindungen, I. Über Polyine aus der Familie der Umbelliferen.Chem. Ber. 94, 958–967. doi: 10.1002/cber.19610940412Borrelli, F., Capasso, R., Aviello, G., Pittler, M. H., and Izzo, A. A. (2005).Effectiveness and Safety of Ginger in the Treatment of Pregnancy-InducedNausea and Vomiting. Obstet. Gynecol. 105, 849–856. doi: 10.1097/01.aog.0000177776.71861.f1Boskabady, M. H., and Khatami, A. (2003). Relaxant Effect of Foeniculum vulgareon Isolated Guinea Pig Tracheal Chains. Pharml. Biol. 41, 211–215.doi: 10.1076/phbi.41.3.211.15095Boskabady, M. H., and Ramazani-Assari, M. (2001). Relaxant effect of Pimpinellaanisum on isolated guinea pig tracheal chains and its possible mechanism(s).J. Ethnopharmacol. 74, 83–88. doi: 10.1016/S0378-8741(00)00314-7Boskabady, M. H., Rakhshandah, H., Afiat, M., Aelami, Z., and Amiri, S. (2006a).Antitussive effect of Plantago lanceolata in guinea pigs. Iran J. Med. Sci. 31,143–146.Boskabady, M. H., Aslani, M. R., and Kiani, S. (2006b). Relaxant effect of Thymusvulgaris on guinea-pig tracheal chains and its possible mechanism (s).Phytother. Res. 20, 28–33. doi: 10.1002/ptr.1796Boyd, E. M., and Palmer, M. E. (1946). The effect of quillaia, senega, squill,grindelia, sanguinaria, chionanthus and dioscorea upon the output ofrespiratory tract fluid. Acta Pharmacol. Toxicol. 2, 235–246. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0773.1946.tb02614.xBradley, P. R. (1992). British Herbal Compendium (Bournemouth: British HerbalMedicine Association).Brandao, M. G. L., Cosenza, G. P., Grael, C. F. F., Netto, N. L. Jr., and Monte-Mor,R. L. M. (2009). Traditional uses of American plant species from the 1st editionof Brazilian Official Pharmacopoeia. Braz. J. Pharmacogn. 19, 478–487.doi: 10.1590/S0102-695X2009000300023BRASIL (2011). Formulário de Fitoterápicos da Farmacopeia Brasileira (Brasilia:Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 32BRASIL (2015a). Monografia da espécie Malva sylvestris L. (malva) (Brasilia:Ministério da Saúde).BRASIL (2015b).Monografia da espécie Ocimum gratissimum (alfavaca) (Brasilia:Ministério da Saúde).BRASIL (2016). Memento Fitoterápico - Farmacopeia Brasileira (Brasilia: AgênciaNacional de Vigilância Sanitária).BRASIL (2017). Farmacopeia Brasileira (1o suplemento) (Brasıĺia: Ministério daSaúde. Agência Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária).BRASIL (2018). Formulario Fitoterapico da Farmacopeia Brasileira - 1o Suplemento(Brasilia: Agencia Nacional de Vigilância Sanitária/Ministério da Saúde).BRASIL (2019a). Farmacopeia Brasileira (Brasilia: Agência Nacional de VigilânciaSanitária).BRASIL (2019b). Memento fitoterápico para prática clıńica na AB (Florianópolis:Ministério da Saúde/Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina).BRASIL (2020). Coronavirus fake news. Available at: https://www.saude.gov.br/component/tags/tag/novo-coronavirus-fake-news (Accessed 21 May 2020).Brennen, J. S., Simon, F. M., Howard, P. N., and Nielsen, R. K. (2020). Types, sources,and claims of COVID-19 misinformation. Reuters Institute Study J. 1–13.Brezáni, V., Leláková, V., Hassan, S. T. S., Berchová-Bıḿová, K., Nový, P., Klouček,P., et al. (2018). Anti-Infectivity against Herpes Simplex Virus and SelectedMicrobes and Anti-Inflammatory Activities of Compounds Isolated fromEucalyptus globulus Labill. Viruses 10, 360. doi: 10.3390/v10070360Brieskorn, C. H., and Riedel, W. (1977a). Die Triterpensäuren aus Coleus amboinicusLoureiro. Arch. Pharm. 310, 910–916. doi: 10.1002/ardp.19773101108Brieskorn, C. H., and Riedel, W. (1977b). Flavonoide aus Coleus amboinicus.Planta Med. 31, 308–310. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1097537Briggs, C. (1988). Senega snakeroot: a traditional Canadian herbal medicine. Can.Pharm. J. 121, 199–201.Brito, E. S., Garruti, D. S., Alves, P. B., and Blank, A. F. (2011). Caracterizac ̧ãoOdorıf́era dos Componentes do Óleo Essencial de Capim-Santo (Cymbopogoncitratus (DC.) Stapf., Poaceae) por cromatografia gasosa (CG) - olfatometria(Fortaleza: Embrapa - Agroindustria Tropical).Budzinski, J. W., Foster, B. C., Vandenhoek, S., and Arnason, J. T. (2000). An invitro evaluation of human cytochrome P450 3A4 inhibition by selectedcommercial herbal extracts and tinctures. Phytomed 7, 273–282.doi: 10.1016/S0944-7113(00)80044-6Calabozo, B., Barber, D., and Polo, F. (2001). Purification and characterization ofthe main allergen of Plantago lanceolata pollen, Pla l 1. Clin. Exp. Allergy 31,322–330. doi: 10.1046/j.1365-2222.2001.00985.xCameron, C., Jacob, A. S., Thomas, E. A., and Levy, A. S. (2015). PreliminaryInvestigations of the Anti-asthmatic Properties of the Aqueous Extract ofJusticia pectoralis (Fresh Cut). West Indian Med. J. 64, 320–324. doi: 10.7727/wimj.2014.149Campus, G., Cagetti, M. G., Cocco, F., Sale, S., Sacco, G., Strohmenger, L., et al.(2011). Effect of a sugar-free chewing gum containing magnolia bark extract ondifferent variables related to caries and gingivitis: a randomized controlledintervention trial. Caries Res. 45, 393–399. doi: 10.1159/000330234Capasso, F., Gaginella, T. S., Grandolini, G., and Izzo, A. A. (2003). “Plants and theRespiratory System,” in Phytotherapy (Heidelberg: Springer), 193–216.Čapek, P., Kardosǒvá, A., and Lath, D. (1999). A Neutral Heteropolysaccharidefrom the Flowers of Malva mauritiana L. Chem. Papers 53, 131–136.Carballo, A. (1995). Cálculo de concentración y dosis de las drogas vegetales (SanctiSpiritus: TRAMIL).Carlini, E. A., Contar, J. D. P., Silva-Filho, A. R., Silveira-Filho, N. G., Frochtengarten,M. L., and Bueno, O. F. A. (1986). Pharmacology of lemongrass (Cymbopogoncitratus Stapf). I. Effects of teas prepared from the leaves on laboratory animals.J. Ethnopharmacol. 17, 37–64. doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(86)90072-3Casati, A., Sedefov, R., and Pfeiffer-Gerschel, T. (2012). Misuse of Medicines in theEuropean Union: A Systematic Review of the Literature. Euro. Addict. Res. 18,228–245. doi: 10.1159/000337028Cascella, M., Rajnik, M., Cuomo, A., Dulebohn, S. C., and Di Napoli, R. (2020).Features, Evaluation and Treatment Coronavirus (COVID-19) [Online].(Treasure Island: StatPearls Publishing). Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK554776/.Catanzaro, M., Fagiani, F., Racchi, M., Corsini, E., Govoni, S., and Lanni, C.(2020). Immune response in COVID-19: addressing a pharmacologicalchallenge by targeting pathways triggered by SARS-CoV-2. Signal Transduct.Target Ther. 5, 84. doi: 10.1038/s41392-020-0191-1September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyChang, H. M., and But, P. P. H. (1987). Pharmacology and applications of Chinesemateria medica, Vol. 2 (Singapore: World Scientific Publishing).Cheel, J., Theoduloz, C., Rodrıǵuez, J., and Schmeda-Hirschmann, G. (2005). FreeRadical Scavengers and Antioxidants from Lemongrass (Cymbopogon citratus(DC.) Stapf.). J. Agr. Food Chem. 53, 2511–2517. doi: 10.1021/jf0479766Chen, H.-C., Chou, C.-K., Lee, S.-D., Wang, J.-C., and Yeh, S.-F. (1995). Activecompounds from Saussurea lappa Clarks that suppress hepatitis B virus surfaceantigen gene expression in human hepatoma cells. Antiviral Res. 27, 99–109.doi: 10.1016/0166-3542(94)00083-KChevallier, A. (1996). The Encyclopedia of Medicinal Plants (New York: DKPublishing Inc).CHILE (2010). MHT: traditional herbal medicines: 103 plant species (Santiago delChile: Ministerio de Salud).Chrubasik, S., Eisenberg, E., Balan, E., Weinberger, T., Luzzati, R., and Conradt, C.(2000). Treatment of low back pain exacerbations with willow bark extract: arandomized double-blind study. Am. J. Med. 109, 9–14. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9343(00)00442-3Chuchalin, A. G., Berman, B., and Lehmacher, W. (2005). Treatment of AcuteBronchitis in Adults With a Pelargonium Sidoides Preparation (EPs® 7630): ARandomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Explore 1, 437–445.doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2005.08.009ClinicalTrials.gov (2020). Liberate Trial in COVID-19 (ClinicalTrials.govIdentifier:NCT04334629). Available at: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/show/NCT04334629,[Online]. Bethesda: U.S. National Library of Medicine [Accessed].COE (2008). “Natural Sources of Flavourings. Report No. 3” (Strasbourg: Councilof Europe).Coll, J., Reixach, N., Sánchez-Baeza, F., Casas, J., and Camps, F. (1994). Newecdysteroids from Polypodium vulgare. Tetrahedron 50, 7247–7252.doi: 10.1016/S0040-4020(01)85247-9COLOMBIA (2008). Vademecum Colombiano de Plantas Medicinales (Bogotá:Ministerio de la Protecion Social/Imprenta Nacional Colombiana).Compadre, C. M., Hussain, R. A., Leon, I., and Enrıq́uez, R. G. (1987). Volatileconstituents of Montanoa tomentosa and Lippia graveolens. Planta Med. 53,495–496. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-962781Corchete, P. (2008). “Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn: the Source of Silymarin,” inBioactive Molecules and Medicinal Plants. Eds. K. Ramawat and J. Merillon(Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer). doi: 10.1007/978-3-540-74603-4_6Costa, G., González-Manzano, S., González-Paramás, A., Figueiredo, I. V., Santos-Buelga, C., and Batista, M. T. (2015a). Flavan hetero-dimers in theCymbopogon citratus infusion tannin fraction and their contribution to theantioxidant activity. Food Funct. 6, 932–937. doi: 10.1039/c5fo00042dCosta, G., Nunes, F., Vitorino, C., Sousa, J. J., Figueiredo, I. V., and Batista, M. T.(2015b). Validation of a RP-HPLC method for quantitation of phenoliccompounds in three different extracts from Cymbopogon citratus. Res.J. Med. Plant 9, 331–339. doi: 10.3923/rjmp.2015.331.339Crespin, F., Elias, R., Morice, C., Ollivier, E., and Balansard, G. (1995).Identification of 3-O-b-D-glucopyranosyl-hederagenin from the leaves ofHedera helix. Fitoterapia 66, 447–448.CUBA (2014). Guıá para la prescripción de productos Naturales (La Habana:Ministerio de La Salud/Editorial Ciencias Medicas).Cui, S., Ito, I., Nakaji, H., Iwata, T., Matsumoto, H., Oguma, T., et al. (2019).Induction of airway remodeling and persistent cough by repeated citric acidexposure in a guinea pig cough model. Resp. Physiol. Neurobiol. 263, 1–8.doi: 10.1016/j.resp.2019.02.002Cutillo, F., D’Abrosca, B., DellaGreca, M., Fiorentino, A., and Zarrelli, A. (2006).Terpenoids and phenol derivatives from Malva silvestris. Phytochemistry 67,481–485. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2005.11.023Dai, Y., Chen, S.-R., Chai, L., Zhao, J., Wang, Y., andWang, Y. (2019). Overview ofpharmacological activities of Andrographis paniculata and its majorcompound andrographolide. Crit. Rev. Food Sci. Nutr. 59, S17–S29.doi: 10.1080/10408398.2018.1501657Dall’Acqua, S., Cervellati, R., Speroni, E., Costa, S., Guerra, M. C., Stella, L., et al.(2009). Phytochemical composition and antioxidant activity of Laurus nobilisL. leaf infusion. J. Med. Food 12, 869–876. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2008.0119Darvishzadeh-Mahani, F., Esmaeili-Mahani, S., Komeili, G., Sheibani, V., andZare, L. (2012). Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) prevents the developmentof morphine analgesic tolerance and physical dependence in rats.J. Ethnopharmacol. 141, 901–907. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2012.03.030Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 33David, S., and Cunningham, R. (2019). Echinacea for the prevention and treatment ofupper respiratory tract infections: A systematic review and meta-analysis.Complement Ther. Med. 44, 18–26. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2019.03.011De Marino, S., Gala, F., Borbone, N., Zollo, F., Vitalini, S., Visioli, F., et al. (2007).Phenolic glycosides from Foeniculum vulgare fruit and evaluation ofantioxidative activity. Phytochemistry 68, 1805–1812. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2007.03.029Devi, K. N., and Periyanayagam, K. (2009). In vitro anti-inflammatory activity ofPlectranthus amboinicus (Lour) Spreng by HRBC membrane stabilization. Int.J. Pharm. Sci. 1, 26–29.Devys, M., Alcaide, A., Pinte, F., and Barbier, M. (1969). Pollinastanol dans laFougere Polypodium vulgare L. et la Salsepareille Smilax medica Schlecht etCham. Proc. Acad. Sci. Ser. D 269, 2033–2035.Dhakad, A. K., Pandey, V. V., Beg, S., Rawat, J. M., and Singh, A. (2018).Biological, medicinal and toxicological significance of Eucalyptus leafessential oil: a review. J. Sci. Food Agr. 98, 833–848. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.8600Dinehart, S. M., and Henry, L. (2005). Dietary supplements: altered coagulationand effects on bruising. Dermatol. Surg. 31, 819–826. doi: 10.1111/j.1524-4725.2005.31726Ding, M., Leach, M., and Bradley, H. (2013). The effectiveness and safety of gingerfor pregnancy-induced nausea and vomiting: A systematic review. WomenBirth 26, e26–e30. doi: 10.1016/j.wombi.2012.08.001Ding, Y., Chen, L., Wu, W., Yang, J., Yang, Z., and Liu, S. (2017). Andrographolideinhibits influenza A virus-induced inflammation in a murine model throughNF-kB and JAK-STAT signaling pathway. Microb. Infect. 19, 605–615.doi: 10.1016/j.micinf.2017.08.009Diop, S. M., Guèye, M. T., Ndiaye, I., Diop, M. B., Ndiaye, E. H. B., Thiam, A., et al.(2017). Study of the chemical composition of essential oils and floral waters ofCymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf (Poaceae) from Senegal. Int. J. Biol. Chem.Sci. 11, 1994–1892. doi: 10.4314/ijbcs.v11i4.37Dixit, A., Rohilla, A., and Singh, V. (2012). Eucalyptus globulus: A new perspectivein therapeutics. Int. J. Pharm. Chem. Sci. 1, 2020–2025.Dixon, M. (2020). Boosting immunity against coronavirus: “Now’s the time to turnto antioxidants and polyphenols” (College of Medicine). Available at: https://collegeofmedicine.org.uk/boosting-immunity-against-coronavirus-nows-the-time-to-turn-to-antioxidants-and-polyphenols/ (Accessed 07 June 2020).Dominguez, S. X., Sánchez, H. V., Suárez, M., Baldas, J. H., and del RosarioGonzález, M. A. (1989). Chemical constituents of Lippia graveolens. PlantaMed. 55, 208–209. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-961937D’Agostino, M., Pizza, C., De Simone, F., and Tommasi, N. (1995). Constituents ofCulcitium canescens. Fitoterapia 66, 550–551.Drugs.com (2019). Codeine. Available at: https://www.drugs.com/sfx/codeine-side-effects.html#for-professionals (Accessed 08 June 2020).Drugs.com (2020a). Ibuprofen. Available at: https://www.drugs.com/ppa/ibuprofen.html (Accessed Feb 02, 2020).Drugs.com (2020b). Paracetamol. Available at: https://www.drugs.com/sfx/paracetamol-side-effects.html#for-professionals (Accessed Jan 25, 2020).Duke, J. A., Godwin, M. J., Cellier, D. U. J., and Duke, P. A. K. (2002).Handbook ofMedicinal Herbs (Boca Ratón: CRC Press).Eccles, R., Morris, S., and Jawad, M. (1992). Lack of effect of codeine in thetreatment of cough associated with acute upper respiratory tract infection.J. Clin. Pharm. Ther. 17, 175–180. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2710.1992.tb01289.xEdwards, S., Costa-Rocha, I., Williamson, E. M., and Heinrich, M. (2015).Phytopharmacy – an evidence-based guide to herbal medicines (Chichester:Wiley).EFSA (2013). Scientific Opinion on safety evaluation ofEphedra species for use infood - EFSA Panel on Food Additives and Nutrient Sources added to Food(ANS). EFSA J. 11, 3467. doi: 10.2903/j.efsa.2013.3467Ekpenyong, C. E., Akpan, E., and Nyoh, A. (2015). Ethnopharmacology,phytochemistry, and biological activities of Cymbopogon citratus (DC.)Stapf extracts. Chin. J. Nat. Med. 13, 321–337. doi: 10.1016/s1875-5364(15)30023-6El-Abhar, H. S., Hammad, L. N. A., and Gawad, H. S. A. (2008). Modulating effectof ginger extract on rats with ulcerative colitis. J. Ethnopharmacol. 118, 367–372. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.04.026Elias, R., Lanza, A. M. D., Vidal-Ollivier, E., Balansard, G., Faure, R., andBabadjamian, A. (1991). Triterpenoid saponins from the leaves of Hederahelix. J. Nat. Prod. 54, 98–103. doi: 10.1021/np50073a006September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyElizabeth, A. A., Josephine, G., Muthiah, N. S., and Muniappan, M. (2014).Evaluation of analgesic and anti-inflammatory effect of Foeniculum vulgare.Res. J. Pharm. Biol. Chem. Sci. 5, 658–668.El-Radhi, A. S. (2018). “Fever and Complementary and Alternative Medicine,” inClinical Manual of Fever in Children (Cham: Springer), 253–262. doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-92336-9_1El-Saber Batiha, G., Magdy Beshbishy, A., El-Mleeh, A., M. Abdel-Daim, M., andPrasad Devkota, H. (2020a). Traditional Uses, Bioactive Chemical Constituents,and Pharmacological and Toxicological Activities of Glycyrrhiza glabra L.(Fabaceae). Biomolecules 10, 352. doi: 10.3390/biom10030352El-Saber Batiha, G., Magdy Beshbishy, A., G. Wasef, L., Elewa, Y. H. A., A. Al-Sagan, A., Abd El-Hack, M. E., et al. (2020b). Chemical Constituents andPharmacological Activities of Garlic (Allium sativum L.): A Review. Nutrients12:872. doi: 10.3390/nu12030872EMA (2005). “Public statement on the use of herbal medicinal productscontaining estragole,” in EMEA/HMPC/137212/2005 Committee on HerbalMedicinal Products (HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2007). “Community Herbal Monograph on FoeniculumVulgare MillerSubsp. vulgare Var. vulgare, Fructus,” in EMEA/HMPC/137428/2006 CorrCommittee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). (London: EuropeanMedicines Agency).EMA (2008a). “Assessment report on Mentha x piperitaL., folium,” in EMEA/HMPC/193910/2007 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC).(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2008b). “Assessment report on Polypodium vulgareL., rhizoma,” in EMEA/HMPC/600669/2007 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC).(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2008c) “Community Herbal Monograph on Polypodiumvulgare L.,” inEMEA/HMPC/600668/2007 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products(HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2010). “Community herbal monograph on Potentillaerecta (L.) Raeusch.,rhizoma,” in EMA/HMPC/5513/2010 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products(HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2011a). “Assessment Report on Plantago lanceolataL., folium,” in EMA/HMPC/437859/2010 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC).(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2011b). “Assessment report on Zingiber officinaleRoscoe, rhizoma,” inEMA/HMPC/577856/2010 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency). Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/herbal-report/draft-assessment-report-zingiberis-rhizoma_en.pdf.EMA (2011c). “Benefit-risk methodology project - Workpackage 3 report: Fieldtests,” in EMA/718294/2011. (London: H.M.D.A. Evaluation. EuropeanMedicines Agency).EMA (2011d). “Community herbal monograph on Commiphoramolmol Engler,gummi-resina,” in EMA/HMPC/96911/2010 Committee on Herbal MedicinalProducts (HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2012a). “Community herbal monograph on Glycyrrhiza glabra L. and/orGlycyrrhiza inflata Bat. and/or Glycyrrhiza uralensis Fisch., radix,” in EMA/HMPC/571119/2010 (Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC),European Medicines Agency).EMA (2012b). “Community herbal monograph on Primulaveris L. and/or Primulaelatior (L.) Hill, flos,” inEMA/HMPC/104095/2012 Committee on HerbalMedicinal Products (HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2012c). “Community herbal monograph on Tiliacordata Miller, Tiliaplatyphyllos Scop., Tilia x vulgaris Heyne or their mixtures, flos,” in EMA/HMPC/337066/2011 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(European Medicines Agency).EMA (2013a). “Community herbal monograph on herbalmonograph onEucalyptus globulus Labill., folium,” in EMA/HMPC/892618/201 Committeeon Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) (London: European MedicinesAgency).EMA (2013b). “Community herbal monograph on Pimpinella anisum L., fructus,”in EMA/HMPC/321184/2012 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products(HMPC). (London: European Medicine Agency).EMA (2013c). “Community herbal monograph on Thymusvulgaris L. andThymus zygis L., herba,” in EMA/HMPC/342332/2013 Committee on HerbalMedicinal Products (HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 34EMA (2014a). “Assessment report on Andrographispaniculata Nees, folium,” inEMA/HMPC/320433/2012 Corr Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products(HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2014b). “Community Herbal Monograph on Plantagolanceolata L.,folium,” in EMA/HMPC/437858/2010 Committee on Herbal MedicinalProducts (HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2015a). “European Union herbal monograph onHedera helix L., folium,” inEMA/HMPC/586888/2014 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2015b). “Public statement on prioritisation forassessment of herbalsubstances associated with safety concerns,” in EMA/HMPC/682247/2013Rev. 1 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) (London:European Medicines Agency).EMA (2016a). “Assessment report on Allium sativum L.,bulbus,” in EMA/HMPC/7686/2013 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) ((London:European Medicines Agency).EMA (2016b). “Assessment report on Althaea officinalisL., radix,” in EMA/HMPC/436680/2015 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2016c). “European Union herbal monograph onAlthaea officinalis L.,radix,” in EMA/HMPC/436679/2015 Committee on Herbal MedicinalProducts (HMPC) (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2016d). “European Union herbal monograph onSilybum marianum (L.)Gaertn., fructus,” in EMA/HMPC/294187/2013 Committee on HerbalMedicinal Products (HMPC) (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2016e). “Public statement on the use of herbalmedicinal productscontaining pulegone and menthofuran,” in EMA/HMPC/138386/2005 Rev. 1Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) (London: EuropeanMedicnes Agency).EMA (2017a). “Assessment report on Echinacea purpurea (L.) Moench, radix,” inEMA/HMPC/424584/2016 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2017b). “European Union herbal monograph onAllium sativum L., bulbus,”in EMA/HMPC/7686/2013 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2017c). “European Union herbal monograph onEchinacea purpurea (L.)Moench, radix,” in EMA/HMPC/424583/2016 Committee on Herbal MedicinalProducts (HMPC) (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2017d). “European Union herbal monograph on Salix[various speciesincluding S. purpurea L., S. daphnoides Vill., S. fragilis L.], cortex,” in EMA/HMPC/80630/2016 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2018a). “Addendum to Assessment report onCommiphora molmolEngler*, gummi-resina,” in EMA/HMPC/364552/2018 Committee on HerbalMedicinal Products (HMPC) (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2018b). “Addendum to Assessment report on Commiphora molmolEngler, gummi-resina,” in EMA/HMPC/364552/2018 Committee on HerbalMedicinal Products (HMPC). (LondonEuropean Medicine Agency).EMA (2018c). “Assessment report on Pelargoniumsidoides DC and/orPelargonium reniforme Curt., radix,” in EMA/HMPC/444251/2015Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) (Strasbourg: EuropeanMedicines Agency).EMA (2018d). “European Union herbal monograph on Malvasylvestris L. and/orMalva neglecta Wallr., folium,” in EMA/HMPC/749510/2016 Committee onHerbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2018e). “European Union herbal monograph onSambucus nigra L., flos,” inEMA/HMPC/611512/2016 Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC)(London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2019). “Public statement on the use of herbalmedicinal products containingestragole. 2nd Draft - Rev 1,” in EMA/HMPC/137212/2005 Rev 1 Committee onHerbal Medicinal Products (HMPC). (London: European Medicines Agency).EMA (2020). EMA gives advice on the use of non-steroidal antiinflammatories forCOVID-19 (London: European Medicines Agency). Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/news/ema-gives-advice-use-non-steroidal-anti-inflammatories-covid-19 (Accessed 21 May 2020).Engel, W. (2003). In Vivo Studies on the Metabolism of the MonoterpenePulegone in Humans Using the Metabolism of Ingestion-CorrelatedAmounts (MICA) Approach: Explanation for the Toxicity DifferencesSeptember 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapybetween (S)-(–)- and (R)-(+)-Pulegone. J. Agr. Food Chem. 51, 6589–6597.doi: 10.1021/jf010157qESCOP (2003a). “Allii sativi bulbus, Garlic,” in ESCOP Monographs, 2a ed(Stuttgart: European Scientific Cooperative on Phytotherapy / Thieme).ESCOP (2003b). European Scientific Co-operative on Phytotherapy. ESCOPmonographs (Exeter/Stuttgart/New York: ESCOP/Georg Thieme Verlag/Thieme New York).ESCOP (2013). Tormentillae rhizoma - Tormentil (Exeter: European ScientificCooperative on Phytotherapy).ESCOP (2014). Myrrha - Myrrh (Exeter: European Scientific Cooperative onPhytotherapy).ESCOP (2019). Althaeae radix - Marshmallow Root (Exeter: European ScientificCooperative on Phytotherapy).EU and O.J.O.T.E. Union (2004). “Amending, as regards traditional herbalmedicinal products, Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relatingto medicinal products for human use,” inDIRECTIVE 2004/24/EC (Strasbourg:European Parliament,Council Of The European Union).Evans, W. C. (2009). Trease and Evans. Pharmacognosy (London: WB SaundersCompany).Fachini-Queiroz, F.C.,Kummer,R.,Estevão-Silva,C.F.,Carvalho,M.D.D.B.,Cunha,J. M., Grespan, R., et al. (2012). Effects of Thymol and Carvacrol, Constituents ofThymus vulgaris L. Essential Oil, on the Inflammatory Response. Evid.-BasedComplement Alternat. Med. 2012, 657026. doi: 10.1155/2012/657026Farina, A., Doldo, A., Cotichini, V., Rajevic, M., Quaglia, M. G., Mulinacci, N.,et al. (1995). HPTLC and reflectance mode densitometry of anthocyanins inMalva silvestris L.: a comparison with gradient-elution reversed-phase HPLC.J. Pharm. BioMed. Anal. 14, 203–211. doi: 10.1016/0731-7085(95)01632-5Faudale, M., Viladomat, F., Bastida, J., Poli, F., and Codina, C. (2008). AntioxidantActivity and Phenolic Composition of Wild, Edible, and Medicinal Fennelfrom Different Mediterranean Countries. J. Agri. Food Chem. 56, 1912–1920.doi: 10.1021/jf073083cFawzy, G., Younes, K., Waked, E., and Mahmoud, H. (2018). Anti-inflammatory,Antinociceptive and Nephroprotective activities of Tilia cordata and Isolationof Bioactive Compounds. J. Mat. Environ. Sci. 9, 1908–1914. doi: 10.26872/jmes.2018.9.6.210FDA (2008). “Guidance for Industry - Final Rule Declaring Dietary SupplementsContaining Ephedrine Alkaloids Adulterated Because They Present anUnreasonable Risk,” in FDA-1995-N-0054. Ed. U. S. C.F.F.S.a.A. Nutrition.(Department of Health and Human Services /Food and Drug Administration).FDA (2020). “Fraudulent CoronavirusDisease 2019(COVID-19) Products,” (WashingtonDC: U.S. Food and Drug Administration). Available at https://www.aana.com/patients/herbal-products-and-your-anesthesiahttps://www.fda.gov/consumers/health-fraud-scams/fraudulent-coronavirus-disease-2019-covid-19-products.Ferrazzano, G. F., Cantile, T., Roberto, L., Ingenito, A., Catania, M. R., Roscetto, E.,et al. (2015). Determination of the in vitro and in vivo antimicrobial activity onsalivary Streptococci and Lactobacilli and chemical characterisation of thephenolic content of a Plantago lanceolata infusion. BioMed. Res. Int. 2015,ID 286817. doi: 10.1155/2015/286817Fidan, H., Stefanova, G., Kostova, I., Stankov, S., Damyanova, S., Stoyanova, A.,et al. (2019). Chemical composition and antimicrobial activity of Laurus nobilisL. essential oils from Bulgaria. Molecules 24, 804. doi: 10.3390/molecules24040804Fierro, I. M., Silva, A. C. B., Lopes, C. S., Moura, R. S., and Barja-Fidalgo, C. (1999).Studies on the anti-allergic activity of Mikania glomerata. J. Ethnopharmacol.66, 19–24. doi: 10.1016/s0378-8741(98)00151-2Fink, C., Müller, J., Kelber, O., Nieber, K., and Kraft, K. (2017). Dry coughassociated with pharyngeal irritation: Survey on Althaea officinalis L. PlantaMed. Int. Open 4, We–SL-02. doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1608589Fiore, C., Eisenhut, M., Krausse, R., Ragazzi, E., Pellati, D., Armanini, D., et al.(2008). Antiviral effects of Glycyrrhiza species. Phytother. Res. 22, 141–148. doi:10.1002/ptr.2295Fischer, J., and Dethlefsen, U. (2013). Efficacy of cineole in patients suffering fromacute bronchitis: a placebo-controlled double-blind trial. Cough 9, 25.doi: 10.1186/1745-9974-9-25Fitsiou, L., Tzakou, O., Hancianu, M., and Poiata, A. (2007). Volatile Constituentsand Antimicrobial Activity of Tilia tomentosa Moench and Tilia cordataMiller Oils. J. Essent. Oil Res. 19, 183–185. doi: 10.1080/10412905.2007.9699255Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 35Fleer, H., and Verspohl, E. J. (2007). Antispasmodic activity of an extract fromPlantago lanceolata L. and some isolated compounds. Phytomedicine 14, 409–415. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2006.05.006Fons, F., Rapior, S., Gargadennec, A., Andary, C., and Bessière, J.-M. (1998).Volatile components of Plantago lanceolata (Plantaginaceae). Acta Bot. Gallica145, 265–269. doi: 10.1080/12538078.1998.10516306Forrest, T. (1995). Two thousand years of eating bark:Magnolia officinalis var. bilobaand Eucommia ulmoides in traditional Chinese medicine. Arnoldia 55, 12–18.Foster, S., and Tyler, V. E. (1999). Tyler’s Honest Herbal (New York: TheHawthorn Herbal Press).Francisco, V., Costa, G., Figueirinha, A., Marques, C., Pereira, P., Neves, B. M.,et al. (2013). Anti-inflammatory activity of Cymbopogon citratus leavesinfusion via proteasome and nuclear factor-kB pathway inhibition:Contribution of chlorogenic acid. J. Ethnopharmacol. 148, 126–134.doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.03.077Frattaruolo, L., Carullo, G., Brindisi, M., Mazzotta, S., Bellissimo, L., Rago, V., et al.(2019). Antioxidant and Anti-Inflammatory Activities of Flavanones fromGlycyrrhiza glabra L. (licorice) Leaf Phytocomplexes: Identification ofLicoflavanone as a Modulator of NF-kB/MAPK Pathway. Antioxidants 8,186. doi: 10.3390/antiox8060186Friedrichsdorf, S. J., Nugent, A. P., and Strobl, A. Q. (2013). Codeine-associatedpediatric deaths despite using recommended dosing guidelines: three casereports. J. Opioid Manag. 9, 151–155. doi: 10.5055/jom.2013.0156Fu, W.-W., Fu, J.-N., Zhang, W.-M., Sun, L.-X., Pei, Y.-H., and Liu, P. (2011).Platycoside O, a New Triterpenoid Saponin from the Roots of Platycodongrandiflorum. Molecules 16, 4371–4378. doi: 10.3390/molecules16064371Fukuhara, K., Fujimori, T., Shigematsu, H., and Ohnishi, A. (1987). Essential oil ofScutellaria baicalensis G. Agri. Biol. Chem. 51, 1449–1451. doi: 10.1080/00021369.1987.10868191Fulanetti, F. B., Camargo, G. G. R., Ferro, M. C., and Randazzo-Moura, P. (2016).Toxic effects of the administration of Mikania glomerata Sprengel during thegestational period of hypertensive rats. Open Vet. J. 6, 23–29. doi: 10.4314/ovj.v6i1.4Gafner, F., Reynolds, G. W., and Rodriguez, E. (1989). The diacetylene 11, 12-dehydrofalcarinol from Hedera helix. Phytochemistry 28, 1256–1257.doi: 10.1016/0031-9422(89)80223-7Galan, D. M., Ezeudu, N. E., Garcia, J., Geronimo, C. A., Berry, N. M., andMalcolm, B. J. (2020). Eucalyptol (1,8-cineole): an underutilized ally inrespiratory disorders? J. Essent. Oil Res. 32, 103–110. doi: 10.1080/10412905.2020.1716867Gao, Z., Xu, Y., Sun, C., Wang, X., Guo, Y., Qiu, S., et al. (2020). A SystematicReview of Asymptomatic Infections with COVID-19. J. Microbiol. Immunol.Infect. doi: 10.1016/j.jmii.2020.05.001Garcia, C. G., Leonart, L. P., Lenzi, L., Bertol, G., Gasparetto, J. C., Barros, J. A.,et al. (2020). Evaluation of the Bronchodilator Effect of Guaco Syrup: aRandomized, Double-blind, Crossover Clinical Trial. Braz. J. Pharmacogn.30, 111–117. doi: 10.1007/s43450-020-00006-8Garcıá-González, J. J., Bartolomé-Zavala, B., Fernández-Meléndez, S., Barceló-Muñoz, J. M., Páez, A. M., Carmona-Bueno, M. J., et al. (2002). Occupationalrhinoconjunctivitis and food allergy because of aniseed sensitization. Ann.Allerg. Asthma Immunol. 88, 518–522. doi: 10.1016/S1081-1206(10)62392-7Garrison, R., and Chambliss, W. G. (2006). Effect of a proprietary MagnoliaandPhellodendron extract on weight management: a pilot, double-blind,placebo-controlled clinicaltrial. Altern. Ther. Health Med. 12, 50–55. doi:10.1186/1475-2891-7-11Germano, A., Occhipinti, A., Barbero, F., and Maffei, M. E. (2017). A Pilot Studyon Bioactive Constituents and Analgesic Effects of MyrLiq®, a Commiphoramyrrha Extract with a High Furanodiene Content. BioMed. Res. Int. 2017,3804356. doi: 10.1155/2017/3804356Ghédira, K., and Goetz, P. (2017). Primevère officinale Primula verisL.(Primulaceae). Phytothérapie 15, 240. doi: 10.1007/s10298-017-1154-8Giorgi, V. S. I., Peracoli, M. T. S., Peracoli, J. C., Witkin, S. S., and Bannwart-Castro, C. F. (2012). Silibinin modulates the NF-kb pathway and pro-inflammatory cytokine production by mononuclear cells from preeclampticwomen. J. Reprod. Immunol. 95, 67–72. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2012.06.004Goel, V., Chang, C., Slama, J. V., Barton, R., Bauer, R., Gahler, R., et al. (2002).Echinacea stimulates macrophage function in the lung and spleen of normalrats. J. Nut. Biochem. 13, 487–492. doi: 10.1016/S0955-2863(02)00190-0September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyGorman, G. S., Coward, L., Darby, A., and Rasberry, B. (2013). Inhibition ofprodrugs bysupplements. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 65, 1014–1025. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12055Graham, G. G., Davies, M. J., Day, R. O., Mohamudally, A., and Scott, K. F. (2013).The modern pharmacology of paracetamol: therapeutic actions, mechanism ofaction, metabolism, toxicity and recent pharmacological findings.Inflammopharmacol 21, 201–232. doi: 10.1007/s10787-013-0172-xGrigore, A., Bubueanu, C., Pirvu, L., Ionita, L., and Toba, G. (2015). Plantagolanceolata L. Crops–source of valuable raw material for various industrialapplications. Scient. Papers-Series A Agron. 58, 207–214.Grzybek, J. (1976). Biological and phytochemical investigations on Polypodiumvulgare L, growing in Poland. iII. polyphenolic compounds and free sugars inleaves. Acta Biol. Cracoviensia. Ser. Botanica 19, 69–82.Guastalegname, M., and Vallone, A. (2020). Could chloroquine/hydroxychloroquine be harmful in coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)treatment? Clin. Infect. Dis. 71, 888–889. doi: 10.1093/cid/ciaa321Guo, R., Pittler, M. H., and Ernst, E. (2006). Herbal medicines for the treatment ofCOPD: a systematic review. Eur. Resp. J. 28, 330–338. doi: 10.1183/09031936.06.00119905Gyawali, R., Bhattarai, P., Dhakal, S., Jha, B., Sharma, S., and Poudel, P. N. (2013).Analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties of Salix alba Linn. and Calotropisprocera (Aiton) Dryand. Int. J. Pharm. Biol. Arch. 4, 873–877.Haddadian, K., and Zahmatkash, M. (2014). A review of Plantago plant. IndianJ. Trad. Knowl. 13, 681–685.Hanh, T. T. H., My, N. T. T., Cham, P. T., Quang, T. H., Cuong, N. X., Huong,T. T., et al. (2020). Diterpenoids and Flavonoids from Andrographis paniculata.Chem. Pharm. Bull. 68, 96–99. doi: 10.1248/cpb.c19-00662Hanson, S. W., Crawford, M., Koker, M. E. S., and Menezes, F. A. (1976).Cymbopogonol, a new triterpenoid from Cymbopogon citratus .Phytochemistry 15, 1074–1075. doi: 10.1016/S0031-9422(00)84411-8Hasan, A. K., Ibrahim, S. A., Amani, A. T., and Monther, F. M. (2018).Determination, isolation, and identification of aucubin and verbascoside inthe leaves of Iraqi Plantago lancoleta L. using different detecting methodS. Int.J. Pharm. Phamaceut. Sci. 11, 74–80. doi: 10.22159/ijpps.2019v11i2.30566Hausmann, M., Obermeier, F., Paper, D. H., Balan, K., Dunger, N., Menzel, K., et al.(2007). In vivo treatment with the herbal phenylethanoid acteoside amelioratesintestinal inflammation in dextran sulphate sodium-induced colitis. Clin. Exp.Immunol. 148, 373–381. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2249.2007.03350.xHawkins, J., Baker, C., Cherry, L., and Dunne, E. (2019). Black elderberry(Sambucus nigra) supplementation effectively treats upper respiratorysymptoms: A meta-analysis of randomized, controlled clinical trials. Comp.Ther. Med. 42, 361–365. doi: 10.1016/j.ctim.2018.12.004He, M., Li, Y., Yan, J., Cao, D., and Liang, Y. (2013). Analysis of essential oils andfatty acids from Platycodi Radix using chemometric methods and retentionindices. J. Chrom. Sci. 51, 318–330. doi: 10.1093/chromsci/bms143Heinrich, M., Barnes, J., Prieto-Garcia, J., Gibbons, S., and Williamson, E. M.(2018). Fundamentals of Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy (Edinburgh/London: Churchill Livingston (Elsevier).Heinrich, M., Appendino, G., Efferth, T., Fürst, R., Izzo, A. A., Kayser, O., et al.(2020). Best practice in research – Overcoming common challenges inphytopharmacological research. J. Ethnopharmacol. 246, 112230.doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112230Heitmann, K., Nordeng, H., and Holst, L. (2013). Safety of ginger use inpregnancy: results from a large population-based cohort study. Eur. J. Clin.Pharmacol. 69, 269–277. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1331-5Hensel, A., Bauer, R., Heinrich, M., Spiegler, V., Kayser, O., Hempel, G., et al.(2020). Challenges at the Time of COVID-19: Opportunities and Innovationsin Antivirals from Nature. Planta Med. 86, 659–664. doi: 10.1055/a-1177-4396Herold, A., Cremer, L., Călugaru, A., Tamas ̧, V., Ionescu, F., Manea, S., et al.(2003). Hydroalcoholic plant extracts with anti-inflammatory activity. Roum.Arch. Microbiol. Immunol. 62, 117–129.Heymann, D. L., and Shindo, N. (2020). COVID-19: what is next for public health?Lancet 395, 542–545. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(20)30374-3Him, A., Ozbek, H., Turel, I., and Oner, A. C. (2008). Antinociceptive activity ofalpha-pinene and fenchone. Pharmacologyonline 3, 363–369.Ho, T.-Y., Wu, S.-L., Chen, J.-C., Li, C.-C., and Hsiang, C.-Y. (2007). Emodinblocks the SARS coronavirus spike protein and angiotensin-converting enzyme2 interaction. Antiviral Res. 74, 92–101. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2006.04.014Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 36Høeg, O. A. (1984). Våre medisinske planter: trollskap, tradisjon, og legekunst(Oslo: Det Beste).Hofmann, D., Hecker, M., and Völp, A. (2003). Efficacy of dry extract of ivy leavesin children with bronchial asthma–a review of randomized controlled trials.Phytomedicine 10, 213–220. doi: 10.1078/094471103321659979Holzinger, F., and Chenot, J.-F. (2011). Systematic review of clinical trials assessingthe effectiveness of ivy leaf (Hedera helix) for acute upper respiratory tractinfections. Evid.-Based Complement Alternat. Med. 2011, ID 382789.doi: 10.1155/2011/382789Hong, E.-H., Song, J.-H., Shim, A., Lee, B.-R., Kwon, B.-E., Song, H.-H., et al.(2015). Coadministration of Hedera helix L. extract enabled mice to overcomeinsufficient protection against influenza A/PR/8 virus infection undersuboptimal treatment with oseltamivir. PloS One 10, e0131089. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131089Hong, T., Min, H., Hui, Z., Yuejian, L., Lixing, Y., and Liang, X. Z. (2018). Oraladministration of honokiol attenuatesairway inflammation in asthmatic mousemodel. Pak J. Pharm. Sci. 31, 1279–1284.Hostettmann, K., and Marston, A. (2005). Saponins (Cambridge: CambridgeUniversity Press).Hsiang, C.-Y., Lo, H.-Y., Huang, H.-C., Li, C.-C., Wu, S.-L., and Ho, T.-Y. (2013).Ginger extract and zingerone ameliorated trinitrobenzene sulphonic acid-induced colitis in mice via modulation of nuclear factor-kB activity andinterleukin-1b signalling pathway. Food Chem. 136, 170–177. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2012.07.124Hu, X.-Y., Wu, R.-H., Logue, M., Blondel, C., Lai, L. Y. W., Stuart, B., et al. (2017).Andrographis paniculata (Chuān Xın̄Lián) for symptomatic relief of acuterespiratory tract infections in adults and children: A systematic review andmeta-analysis. PloS One 12 e0181780. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0181780Hu, X.-Y., Wu, R.-H., Logue, M., Blondel, C., Lai, L. Y. W., Stuart, B., et al. (2018).Correction: Andrographis paniculata (Chuān Xın̄ Lián) for symptomatic reliefof acute respiratory tract infections in adults and children: A systematic reviewand meta-analysis. PloS One 13, e0207713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0207713Hudson, J., and Vimalanathan, S. (2011). Echinacea—A source of potent antiviralsfor respiratory virus infections. Pharmaceuticals 4, 1019–1031. doi: 10.3390/ph4071019Hussein, A. A., Marıá, C., Jimeno, M.-L., Rodrıǵuez, B., Bruno, M., Piozzi, F., et al.(1996). A neo-clerodane diterpenoid from Scutellaria baicalensis.Phytochemistry 43, 835–837. doi: 10.1016/0031-9422(96)00380-9Idris, N. A., Yasin, H. M., and Usman, A. (2019). Voltammetric and spectroscopicdetermination of polyphenols and antioxidants in ginger (Zingiber officinaleRoscoe). Heliyon 5, e01717. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e01717Ikeya, Y., Sugama, K., Okada, M., and Mitsuhashi, H. (1991). Four new phenolicglycosides from Polygala tenuifolia. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 39, 2600–2605.doi: 10.1248/cpb.39.2600Ikeya, Y., Sugama, K., and Maruno, M. (1994). Xanthone C-glycoside and acylatedsugar from Polygala tenuifolia. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 42, 2305–2308.doi: 10.1248/cpb.42.2305INDIA (2020). “Notification for undertaking research on Covid-19 throughAyurveda, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy systems,” in L.11011/8/2020/AS(New Delhi: Ministry of Ayush).Ishitsuka, Y., Kondo, Y., and Kadowaki, D. (2020). Toxicological property ofacetaminophen: the dark side of a safe antipyretic/analgesic drug? Biol. Pharm.Bull. 43, 195–206. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b19-00722Janakiraman, D., and Somasundaram, C. (2014). Evaluation of Anti inflammatoryeffect of Plectranthus amboinicus leaf extract-An invitro study. J. Adv. Pharm.Educ. Res. 4, 229–232.Jefferies, S., Braithwaite, I., Walker, S., Weatherall, M., Jennings, L., Luck, M., et al.(2016). Randomized controlled trial of the effect of regular paracetamol oninfluenza infection. Respirology 21, 370–377. doi: 10.1111/resp.12685Jiang, S., Bryant, R. H., Jiao, J., and Tung, R. (2019). Investigation of the water-soluble carbohydrates content of Plantain (Plantago lanceolata L.). New Z. J.Anim. Sci. Prod. 79, 174–176.Jizba, J., and Herout, V. (1967). Plant substances. XXVI. Isolation of constituentsof common polypody rhizomes (Polypodium vulgare L.). Collect Czech Chem.Commun. 32, 2867–2874. doi: 10.1135/cccc19672867Jori, A., Bianchetti, A., Prestini, P. E., and Garattini, S. (1970). Effect of eucalyptol(1,8-cineole) on the metabolism of other drugs in rats and in man. Eur.J. Pharmacol. 9, 362–366. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(70)90236-0September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyJoseph, H., Gleye, J., Moulis, C., Mensah, L. J., Roussakis, C., and Gratas, C. (1988).Justicidin B, a Cytotoxic Principle from Justicia pectoralis. J. Nat. Prod. 51, 599–600. doi: 10.1021/np50057a030Josling, P. (2001). Preventing the common cold with a garlic supplement: adouble-blind, placebo-controlled survey. Adv. Ther. 18, 189–193. doi: 10.1007/bf02850113Jóźwiak-Bebenista, M., and Nowak, J. Z. (2014). Paracetamol: mechanism ofaction, applications and safety concern. Acta Pol. Pharm. 71, 11–23.Jun, Y. S., Kang, P., Min, S. S., Lee, J.-M., Kim, H.-K., and Seol, G. H. (2013). Effectof eucalyptus oil inhalation on pain and inflammatory responses after totalknee replacement: a randomized clinical trial. Evid.-Based ComplementAlternat. Med. 2013, ID 502727. doi: 10.1155/2013/502727Kanko, C., Sawaliho, B. E.-H., Kone, S., Koukoua, G., and N’Guessan, Y. T. (2004).Étude des propriétés physico-chimiques des huiles essentielles de Lippiamultiflora, Cymbopogon citratus, Cymbopogon nardus, Cymbopogongiganteus. C R Chim. 7, 1039–1042. doi: 10.1016/j.crci.2003.12.030Karl, C., Müller, G., and Pedersen, P. A. (1982). A New Catechin Glycoside fromPolypodium vulgare. Z Naturforsch. C 37, 148–151. doi: 10.1515/znc-1982-3-402Karsch-Völk, M., Barrett, B., Kiefer, D., Bauer, R., Ardjomand-Woelkart, K., andLinde, K. (2014). “Echinacea for preventing and treating thecommon cold,” inCochrane Database Syst Rev. Cochrane.org. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd000530.pub2Katselis, G. S., Estrada, A., Gorecki, D. K. J., and Barl, B. (2007). Adjuvant activitiesof saponins from the root of Polygala senega L. Can. J. Physiol. Pharmacol.Ther. 85, 1184–1194. doi: 10.1139/y07-109Katsukawa, M., Nakata, R., Takizawa, Y., Hori, K., Takahashi, S., and Inoue, H.(2010). Citral, a component of lemongrass oil, activates PPARa and g andsuppresses COX-2 expression. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1801, 1214–1220.doi: 10.1016/j.bbalip.2010.07.004Kehrl, W., Sonnemann, U., and Dethlefsen, U. (2004). Therapy for AcuteNonpurulent Rhinosinusitis With Cineole: Results of a Double-Blind,Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial. Laryngoscope 114, 738–742.doi: 10.1097/00005537-200404000-00027Kianitalaei, A., Feyzabadi, Z., Hamedi, S., Qaraaty, M. J., and Apr-Jun, (2019).Althaea officinalis in Traditional Medicine and modern phytotherapy. J. Adv.Pharm. Educ. Res. 9, 154–161.Kilic, A., Hafizoglu, H., Kollmannsberger, H., and Nitz, S. (2004). Volatileconstituents and key odorants in leaves, buds, flowers, and fruits of Laurusnobilis L. J. Agric. Food Chem. 52, 1601–1606. doi: 10.1021/jf0306237Kim, S.-K., Choi, S.-G., Lim, H.-J., Moon, I.-R., Park, H.-S., and Oh, S.-J. (2001).Clinical report on the improvement of the symptoms of pneumonia by theaqueous extract of Platycodon grandiflorum. J. Pharmacopunct. 4, 59–67.doi: 10.3831/KPI.2001.4.3.059Kim, J. Y., Hwang, Y. P., Kim, D. H., HAN, E. H., Chung, Y. C., Roh, S. H., et al.(2006). Inhibitory effect of the saponins derived from roots of Platycodongrandiflorum on carrageenan-induced inflammation. Biosci. Biotechnol.Biochem. 70, 858–864. doi: 10.1271/bbb.70.858Kim, I. S., Kim, S. Y, and Yoo, H. H. (2012). Effects of an aqueous-ethanolic extractof ginger on cytochrome P450 ,enzyme-mediated drug metabolism. Pharmazie67, 1007–1009. doi: 10.1691/ph.2012.2595Kim, S. Y., Chang, Y. J., Cho, H. M., Hwang, Y. W., and Moon, Y. S. (2013). Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs for the common cold. Cochrane DatabaseSyst. Rev. CD006362. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd006362.pub4Kim, N., Lertnimitphun, P., Jiang, Y., Tan, H., Zhou, H., Lu, Y., et al. (2019).Andrographolide inhibits inflammatory responses in LPS-stimulatedmacrophages and murine acute colitis through activating AMPK. Biochem.Pharmacol. 170, 113646. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2019.113646Kim, A. H. J., Sparks, J. A., Liew, J. W., Putman, M. S., Berenbaum, F., and Duarte-García, A., et al. (2020). A Rush to Judgment? Rapid Reporting and Disseminationof Results and Its Consequences Regarding the Use of Hydroxychloroquine forCOVID-19. Ann. Intern. Med. 172, 819–821. doi: 10.7326/M20-1223Kinoshita, E., Hayashi, K., Katayama, H., Hayashi, T., and Obata, A. (2012). Anti-influenza virus effects of elderberry juice and its fractions. Biosci. Biotechnol.Biochem. 76, 1633–1638. doi: 10.1271/bbb.120112Kligler, B., Ulbricht, C., Basch, E., Kirkwood, C. D., Abrams, T. R., Miranda, M.,et al. (2006). Andrographis paniculata for the treatment of upper respiratoryinfection: a systematic review by the natural standard research collaboration.Explore 1, 25–29. doi: 10.1016/j.explore.2005.08.008Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 37Klimek-Szczykutowicz, M., Szopa, A., and Ekiert, H. (2020). Citrus limon (Lemon)Phenomenon—A Review of the Chemistry, Pharmacological Properties,Applications in the Modern Pharmaceutical, Food, and CosmeticsIndustries, and Biotechnological Studies. Plants 9, 119. doi: 10.3390/plants9010119Kolodziej, H., Kayser, O., Radtke, O. A., Kiderlen, A. F., and Koch, E. (2003).Pharmacological profile of extracts of Pelargonium sidoides and theirconstituents. Phytomedicine 10, 18–24. doi: 10.1078/1433-187X-00307Koshak, A., Wei, L., Koshak, E., Wali, S., Alamoudi, O., Demerdash, A., et al.(2017). Nigella sativa Supplementation Improves Asthma Control andBiomarkers: A Randomized, Double-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Trial.Phytother. Res. 31, 403–409. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5761Koshak, A. E., Yousif, N. M., Fiebich, B. L., Koshak, E. A., and Heinrich, M. (2018).Comparative Immunomodulatory Activity of Nigella sativa L. Preparations onProinflammatory Mediators: A Focus on Asthma. Front. Pharmacol. 9, 1075.doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.01075Koteswara Rao, Y., Vimalamma, G., Venkata Rao, C., and Tzeng, Y.-M. (2004).Flavonoids and andrographolides from Andrographis paniculata .Phytochemistry 65, 2317–2321. doi: 10.1016/j.phytochem.2004.05.008Kovács, G., Kuzovkina, I. N., Szoke, E., and Kursinszki, L. (2004). HPLCdetermination of flavonoids in hairy-root cultures of Scutellaria baicalensisGeorgi. Chromatographia 60, S81–S85. doi: 10.1365/s10337-004-0266-0Kovarovič, J., Bystricka, J., Vollmannova, A., Toth, T., and Brindza, J. (2019).Biologically valuable substances in garlic (Allium sativum L.)–A review. J. Cent.Eur. Agr. 20, 292–304. doi: 10.5513/JCEA01/20.1.2304Kowalski, R., Baj, T., Kalwa, K., Kowalska, G., and Sujka, M. (2017). Essential OilComposition of Tilia cordata Flowers. J. Essent. Oil-Bear Plants 20, 1137–1142.doi: 10.1080/0972060X.2017.1359681Krawitz, C., Mraheil, M. A., Stein, M., Imirzalioglu, C., Domann, E., Pleschka, S.,et al. (2011). Inhibitory activity of a standardizedelderberry liquid extractagainst clinically-relevant human respiratory bacterial pathogens andinfluenzaA and B viruses. BMC Complement Altern. Med. 11, 16. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-11-16Kronbichler, A., Kresse, D., Yoon, S., Lee, K. H., Effenberger, M., and Shin, J. I.(2020). Asymptomatic patients as a source of COVID-19 infections: Asystematic review and meta-analysis. Int. J. Infect. Dis. 98, 180–186.doi: 10.1016/j.ijid.2020.06.052Kruttschnitt, E., Zahner, C., Butterweck, V., and Wegener, T. (2019). Assessmentof the effectiveness of Ivy leaf (Hedera helix) Syrup compared to acetylcysteinin adults and children with acute bronchitis. Planta Med. 85, P–409.doi: 10.1055/s-0039-3400120Kruttschnitt, E., Wegener, T., Zahner, C., and Henzen-Bücking, S. (2020).Assessment of the Efficacy and Safety of Ivy Leaf Hedera helix Cough SyrupCompared with Acetylcysteine in Adults and Children with Acute Bronchitis.Evid.-Based Complement Alternat. Med. 2020, 1910656. doi: 10.1155/2020/1910656Kuete, V. (2017). “Thymus vulgaris,” in Medicinal Spices and Vegetables fromAfrica. Ed. V. Kuete (Dschang: University of Dschang/ Academic Press), 599–609. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-809286-6.00028-5Kumar, R. A., Sridevi, K., Kumar, N. V., Nanduri, S., and Rajagopal, S. (2004).Anticancer and immunostimulatory compounds from Andrographispaniculata. J. Ethnopharmacol. 92, 291–295. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2004.03.004Lacaille-Dubois, M.-A., Delaude, C., and Mitaine-Offer, A.-C. (2020). A review onthe phytopharmacological studies of the genus Polygala. J. Ethnopharmacol.249, 112417. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112417Langeder, J., Grienke, U., Chen, Y., Kirchmair, J., Schmidtke, M., and Rollinger,J. M. (2020). Natural products against acute respiratory infections: Strategiesand lessons learned. J. Ethnopharmacol. 248, 112298. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.112298Lanzotti, V. (2006). The analysis of onion and garlic. J. Chromat. A 1112, 3–22.doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2005.12.016Lazzari Almeida, C., Xavier, R. M., Borghi, A. A., Santos, V. F., and Sawaya,A. C. H. F. (2017). Effect of seasonality and growth conditions on the content ofcoumarin, chlorogenic acid and dicaffeoylquinic acids in Mikania laevigataSchultz andMikania glomerata Sprengel (Asteraceae) by UHPLC–MS/MS. Int.J. Mass Spectrom. 418, 162–172. doi: 10.1016/j.ijms.2016.09.016Lebling, R. W., and Pepperdine, D. (2006). Natural Remedies of Arabia (London:Stacey International).September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyLeclercq, P. A., Delgado, H. S., Garcia, J., Hidalgo, J. E., Cerrutti, T., Mestanza, M.,et al. (2000). Aromatic plant oils of the Peruvian Amazon. Part 2: Cymbopogoncitratus (DC) Stapf., Renealmia sp., Hyptis recurvata Poit. and Tynanthuspanurensis (Bur.) Sandw. J. Essent. Oil Res. 12, 14–18. doi: 10.1080/10412905.2000.9712030Lee, J.-K., Song, Y.-K., and Lim, H.-H. (2007). Analgesic and anti-inflammatoryeffect of Scutellaria baicalensis. Korean J. Oriental Med. 28, 124–135.Lee, Y.-J., Lee, Y. M., Lee, C.-K., Jung, J. K., Han, S. B., and Hong, J. T. (2011).Therapeutic applications of compounds in the Magnolia family. Pharmacol.Ther. 130, 157–176. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2011.01.010Lee, E.-B. (1975). Pharmacological activities of crude platycodin. J. Pharm. Soc.Korea 19, 164–176.Leung, P.-C. (2007). The efficacy of Chinese medicine for SARS: a review ofChinese publications after the crisis. Am. J. Chin. Med. 35, 575–581.doi: 10.1142/S0192415X07005077Levy, I., Attias, S., Ben-Arye, E., Goldstein, L., Matter, I., Somri, M., et al. (2017).Perioperative risks of dietary and herbal supplements. World J. Surg. 41, 927–934. doi: 10.1007/s00268-016-3825-2Leyva-López, N., Nair, V., Bang, W. Y., Cisneros-Zevallos, L., and Heredia, J. B.(2016). Protective role of terpenes and polyphenols from three species ofOregano (Lippia graveolens, Lippia palmeri and Hedeoma patens) on thesuppression of lipopolysaccharide-induced inflammation in RAW 264.7macrophage cells. J. Ethnopharmacol. 187, 302–312. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2016.04.051Li, S., Yue, J., Dong, B. R., Yang, M., Lin, X., and Wu, T. (2013). Acetaminophen(paracetamol) for the common coldin adults. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.Cochrane.org. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD008800.pub2Li, Y.-H., Zheng, F.-J., Huang, Y., Zhong, X.-G., and Guo, M.-Z. (2013). Synergisticanti-inflammatory effect of Radix Platycodon in combination with herbs forcleaning-heat and detoxification and its mechanism. Chin. J. Integr. Med. 19,29–35. doi: 10.1007/s11655-011-0763-6Li, M., Shi, A., Pang, H., Xue, W., Li, Y., Cao, G., et al. (2014). Safety, tolerability,and pharmacokinetics of a single ascending dose of baicalein chewable tabletsin healthy subjects. J. Ethnopharmacol. 156, 210–215. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2014.08.031Li, Y., Liu, X., Guo, L., Li, J., Zhong, D., Zhang, Y., et al. (2020). TraditionalChinese herbal medicine for treating novel coronavirus (COVID-19)pneumonia: protocol for a systematic review and meta-analysis. Syst. Rev. 9,1–6. doi: 10.1186/s13643-020-01343-4Liao, Y.-R., Leu, Y.-L., Chan, Y.-Y., Kuo, P.-C., and Wu, T.-S. (2012). Anti-plateletaggregation and vasorelaxing effects of the constituents of the rhizomes ofZingiber officinale. Molecules 17, 8928–8937. doi: 10.3390/molecules17088928Lin, L.-Z., Mukhopadhyay, S., Robbins, R. J., and Harnly, J. M. (2007).Identification and quantification of flavonoids of Mexican oregano (Lippiagraveolens) by LC-DAD-ESI/MS analysis. J. Food Compos. Anal. 20, 361–369.doi: 10.1016/j.jfca.2006.09.005Linde, K., Barrett, B., Bauer, R., Melchart, D., and Woelkart, K. (2006). Echinaceafor preventing and treating thecommon cold. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev.Cochrane.org. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd000530.pub2Lino, C. S., Taveira, M. L., Viana, G. S. B., and Matos, F. J. A. (1997). Analgesic andantiinflammatory activities of Justicia pectoralis Jacq and its main constituents:coumarin and umbelliferone. Phytother. Res. 11, 211–215. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1573(199705)11:3%3C211::AID-PTR72%3E3.0.CO;2-WLissiman, E., Bhasale, A. L., and Cohen, M. (2014). Garlic for the commoncold.Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. Cochrane.org, CD006206. doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd006206.pub4Loizzo, M. R., Saab, A. M., Tundis, R., Statti, G. A., Menichini, F., Lampronti, I.,et al. (2008). Phytochemical Analysis and in vitro Antiviral Activities of theEssential Oils of Seven Lebanon Species. Chem. Biodivers. 5, 461–470.doi: 10.1002/cbdv.200890045Lotter, E., Heilmann, J., Kammerer, D., and Stintzing, F. (2017). Development andvalidation of an HPLC-DAD method for iridoid glycoside screening in freshplant parts from Plantago lanceolata L. Planta Med. Int. Open 4, Mo–PO-188.doi: 10.1055/s-0037-1608235Lu, X.-Q., Tang, F.-D., Wang, Y., Zhao, T., and Bian, R.-L. (2004). Effect ofEucalyptus globulus oil on lipopolysaccharide-induced chronic bronchitis andmucin hypersecretion in rats. J. Chin. Mat. Med. 29, 168–171.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 38Lu, R., Zhao, X., Li, J., Niu, P., Yang, B., Wu, H., et al. (2020). Genomiccharacterisation and epidemiology of 2019 novel coronavirus: implicationsfor virus origins and receptor binding. Lancet 395, 565–574. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30251-8Lucini, L., Kane, D., Pellizzoni, M., Ferrari, A., Trevisi, E., Ruzickova, G., et al.(2016). Phenolic profile and in vitro antioxidant power of different milk thistle[Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn.] cultivars. Ind. Crops Prod. 83, 11–16.doi: 10.1016/j.indcrop.2015.12.023Lund, K., and Rimpler, H. (1985). Tormentillwurzel. Isolierung eines Ellagitanninsund pharmakologisches screening. Dtsch. Apoth. Ztg. 125, 105–108.Luo, H., Wu, H., Yu, X., Zhang, X., Lu, Y., Fan, J., et al. (2019). A review of thephytochemistry and pharmacological activities of Magnolia officinalis cortex.J. Ethnopharmacol. 236, 412–442. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2019.02.041Luo, H., Tang, Q.-L., Shang, Y.-X., Liang, S.-B., Yang, M., Robinson, N., et al.(2020). Can Chinese Medicine Be Used for Prevention of Corona Virus Disease2019 (COVID-19)? A Review of Historical Classics, Research Evidence andCurrent Prevention Programs. Chin. J. Integr. Med. 26, 243–250. doi: 10.1007/s11655-020-3192-6Lutterodt, H., Luther, M., Slavin, M., Yin, J.-J., Parry, J., Gao, J.-M., et al. (2010).Fatty acid profile, thymoquinone content, oxidative stability, and antioxidantproperties of cold-pressed black cumin seed oils. Food Sci. Technol. 43, 1409–1413. doi: 10.1016/j.lwt.2010.04.009Machado, M. S. S., Silva, H. B. F., Rios, R., Oliveira, A. P., Carneiro, N. V. Q., Costa,R. S., et al. (2015). The anti-allergic activity of Cymbopogon citratus ismediated via inhibition of nuclear factor kappa B (Nf-Kb) activation. BMCCompl. Altern. Med. 15, 168. doi: 10.1186/s12906-015-0702-8Mahalwal, V. S., and Ali, M. (2003). Volatile Constituents of the Fruits Peels ofCitrus lemon (Linn) Burm. F. J. Essent. Oil-Bear Plants 6, 31–35. doi: 10.1080/0972-060X.2003.10643325Mallhi, T. H., Sarriff, A., Adnan, A. S., Khan, Y. H., Qadir, M. I., Hamzah, A. A.,et al. (2015). Effect of fruit/vegetable-drug interactions on CYP450, OATP andp-glycoprotein: A systematic review. Trop. J. Pharm. Res. 14, 1927–1935.doi: 10.4314/tjpr.v14i10.27Marchyshyn, S. M., Shostak, L. H., Dakhym, I. S., and Voloshchyk, N. I. (2017).Evaluation of anti-inflammatory action of Primula veris L. Pharma. Innovation6, 241.Marco, M.-P., Sánchez-Baeza, F. J., Camps, F., and Coll, J. (1993).Phytoecdysteroid analysis by high-performance liquid chromatography-thermospray mass spectrometry. J. Chromat. A 641, 81–87. doi: 10.1016/0021-9673(93)83461-ZMaree, J. E., and Viljoen, A. M. (2012). Phytochemical distinction betweenPelargonium sidoides and Pelargonium reniforme—A quality controlperspective. S Afr J. Bot. 82, 83–91. doi: 10.1016/j.sajb.2012.07.007Marongiu, B., Piras, A., Porcedda, S., and Scorciapino, A. (2005). ChemicalComposition of the Essential Oil and Supercritical CO2 Extract ofCommiphora myrrha (Nees) Engl. and of Acorus calamus L. J. Agr. FoodChem. 53, 7939–7943. doi: 10.1021/jf051100xMascolo, N., Jain, R., Jain, S. C., and Capasso, F. (1989). Ethnopharmacologicinvestigation of ginger (Zingiber officinale). J. Ethnopharmacol. 27, 129–140.doi: 10.1016/0378-8741(89)90085-8Matos, F. J. A., Viana, G. S. B., and Bandeira, M. A. M. (2001). Guia FitoterápicoPrograma Estadual de Fitoterapia (Fortaleza: Secretaria de Saúde do Estado doCeará).Matos, F. J. A. (2000). Plantas Medicinais - Guia de Selecã̧o e Emprego de Plantas Usadasem Fitoterapia no Nordeste do Brasil (Fortaleza: Imprensa Universitária - UFC).May, G. (1978). Antivirale Wirkung wässriger Pflanzenextrakte in Gewebekulturen.Arzneim. Forsch. 28, 1–7.McGettigan, P., and Henry, D. (2011). Cardiovascular risk with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: systematic review of population-based controlledobservational studies. PloS Med. 8, e1001098. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1001098Meister, A., Bernhardt, G., Christoffel, V., and Buschauer, A. (1999).Antispasmodic activity of Thymus vulgaris extract on the isolated guinea-pigtrachea: discrimination between drug and ethanol effects. Planta Med. 65, 512–516. doi: 10.1055/s-1999-14006Melzig, M. F., and Böttger, S. (2020). Tormentillae rhizoma–Review for anUnderestimated European Herbal Drug. Planta Med. doi: 10.1055/a-1129-7214September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyMenéndez Castillo, R. A., and Pavón González, V. (1999). Plectranthus amboinicus(Lour.) Spreng. Rev. Cubana Plant Med. 4, 110–115.Menut, C., Bessiére, J. M., Samaté, D., Djibo, A. K., Buchbauer, G., and Schopper,B. (2000). Aromatic Plants of Tropical West Africa. XI. Chemical Composition,Antioxidant and Antiradical Properties of the Essential Oils of ThreeCymbopogon Species from Burkina Faso. J. Essent. Oil Res. 12, 207–212.doi: 10.1080/10412905.2000.9699499Mesquita, M. F., Silva, M., Moncada, M. M., Bernardo, M. A., Silva, M. L., andProença, L. (2018). Effect of a Ginger Infusion in Smokers with ReducedSalivary Flow Rate. Int. J. Clin. Res. Trials 2018, ID 3:IJCRT. doi: 10.15344/2456-8007/2018/121Messeguer, J., Mele, E., Reixach, N., Irurre-Santilari, J., and Casas, J. (1998).“Polypodium vulgare L.(Wood Fern): In vitro cultures and the production ofphytoecdysteroids,” in Biotechnology in Agriculture and Forestry 4. Medicinaland Aromatic Plants X. Ed. Y. P. S. Bajaj (Berlin/ Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag),333–348.Michaelis, M., Doerr, H. W., and Cinatl, J. Jr. (2011). Investigation of the influenceof EPs® 7630, a herbal drug preparation from Pelargonium sidoides, onreplication of a broad panel of respiratory viruses. Phytomedicine 18, 384–386. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2010.09.008Mikaili, P., Maadirad, S., Moloudizargari, M., Aghajanshakeri, S., and Sarahroodi,S. (2013). Therapeutic uses and pharmacological properties of garlic, shallot,and their biologically active compounds. Iran J. Basic Med. Sci. 16, 1031.Mirghiasi, S. M., Akhzari, M., Vassaf, M., Akbari, A., and Baghi, S. M. M. (2015).The Effect of Malva neglecta on the Reduction of Inflammatory Agents inPatients with Osteoarthritis. Mol. Biol. 4, 2. doi: 10.4172/2168-9547.1000135Misawa, M., and Yanaura, S. (1980). Continuous determination of tracheobronchialsecretory activity in dogs. Jpn. J. Pharmacol. 30, 221–229. doi: 10.1254/jjp.30.221Mitchell, J., and Rook, A. (1979). Botanical Dermatology – Plants and PlantProducts Injurious to the Skin (Vancouver: Greengrass).Modarai, M., Yang, M., Suter, A., Kortenkamp, A., and Heinrich, M. (2010).Metabolomic profiling of liquid Echinacea medicinal products with in vitroinhibitory effects on cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Planta Med. 76, 378–385. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1186152Monga, S., Dhanwal, P., Kumar, R., Kumar, A., and Chhokar, V. (2017).Pharmacological and physico-chemical properties of Tulsi (Ocimumgratissimum L.): An updated review. Pharma. Innovation 6, 181–186.Moura, R. S., Costa, S. S., Jansen, J. M., Silva, C. A., Lopes, C. S., Bernardo-Filho,M., et al. (2002). Bronchodilator activity of Mikania glomerata Sprengel onhuman bronchi and guinea-pig trachea. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 54, 249–256.doi: 10.1211/0022357021778277Moura, C. T. M., Batista-Lima, F. J., Brito, T. S., Silva, A. A. V., Ferreira, L. C.,Roque, C. R., et al. (2017). Inhibitory effects of a standardized extract of Justiciapectoralis in an experimental rat model of airway hyper-responsiveness.J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 69, 722–732. doi: 10.1111/jphp.12689Müller, A., Ganzera, M., and Stuppner, H. (2006). Analysis of phenolic glycosidesand saponins in Primula elatior and Primula veris (primula root) by liquidchromatography, evaporative light scattering detection and mass spectrometry.J. Chromat. A 1112, 218–223. doi: 10.1016/j.chroma.2005.10.067Nantz, M. P., Rowe, C. A., Muller, C. E., Creasy, R. A., Stanilka, J. M., and Percival,S. (2012). Supplementation with aged garlic extract improves both NK and gd-T cell function and reduces the severity of cold and flu symptoms: arandomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled nutrition intervention. Clin.Nut. 31, 337–344. doi: 10.1016/j.clnu.2011.11.019Nascimento, W. M. C. (2018). Xarope de chambá (Justicia pectoralis jacq.) notratamento da tosse e sintomas respiratórios: um ensaio clıńico randomizado(Universidade Federal do Ceará: MSc Dissertation).Naz, S. B., Chaudhry, M. A., and Rahaman, M. S. U. (2016). Dual receptorsblocked mechanism arbitrates smooth muscles relaxant effect of Polypodiumvulgare. Bangladesh J. Pharmacol. 11, 414–420. doi: 10.3329/bjp.v11i2.25777Nazari, S., Rameshrad, M., and Hosseinzadeh, H. (2017). Toxicological Effects ofGlycyrrhiza glabra (Licorice): A Review. Phytother. Res. 31, 1635–1650.doi: 10.1002/ptr.5893Negri, G., Santi, D., and Tabach, R. (2013). Flavonol glycosides found inhydroethanolic extracts from Tilia cordata, a species utilized as anxiolytics.Rev. Bras. Plantas Med. 15, 217–224. doi: 10.1590/S1516-05722013000200008Nguyen, T., Talbi, H., Hilali, A., Anthonissen, R., Maes, A., and Verschaeve, L.(2019). In vitro toxicity, genotoxicity and antigenotoxicity of Nigella sativaFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 39extracts from different geographic locations. S Afr J. Bot. 126, 132–141.doi: 10.1016/j.sajb.2019.02.015NIH (2020). In the News: Coronavirus and “Alternative” Treatment (NationalInstitute of Health). Available at: https://www.nccih.nih.gov/health/in-the-news-coronavirus-and-alternative-treatments (Accessed 07 June 2020 2020).NMHI (2020). A statement prepared by the National Institute of Medical Herbalistsabout COVID-19 infection [Online] (National Institute of Medical Herbalists).Available at: https://nimh.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2020/03/Covid1903.pdf.(Accessed 07 June 2020).Noguerón-Merino, M. C., Jiménez-Ferrer, E., Román-Ramos, R., Zamilpa, A.,Tortoriello, J., and Herrera-Ruiz, M. (2015). Interactions of a standardizedflavonoid fraction from Tilia americana with serotoninergic drugs in elevatedplus maze. J. Ethnopharmacol. 164, 319–327. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.01.029Nolkemper, S., Reichling, J., Stintzing, F. C., Carle, R., and Schnitzler, P. (2006).Antiviral Effect of Aqueous Extracts from Species of the Lamiaceae Familyagainst Herpes simplex Virus Type 1 and Type 2 in vitro. Planta Med. 72,1378–1382. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-951719Nordling, L. (2020). Unproven herbal remedy against COVID-19 could fueldrug-resistant malaria, scientists warn, ScienceMag.org [Online]. (Washington:American Association for the Advancement of Science). [Accessed 06 May2020]. doi: 10.1126/science.abc6665Nosalova, G., Sutovska, M., Mokry, J., Kardosova, A., Capek, P., and Khan,M. T. H. (2005). Efficacy of herbal substances according to cough reflex.Minerva Biotechnol. 17, 141–150.Nosal’ova, G., Strapkova, A., Kardosova, A., Capek, P., Zathurecký, L., andBukovská, E. (1992). Antitussive action of extracts and polysaccharides ofmarsh mallow (Althaea officinalis L., var. robusta). Pharmazie 47, 224–226.Oh, Y.-C., Kang, O.-H., Choi, J.-G., Lee, Y.-S., Brice, O.-O., Jung, H. J., et al.(2010). Anti-allergic activity of a platycodon root ethanol extract. Int. J. Mol.Sci. 11, 2746–2758. doi: 10.3390/ijms11072746Ohi, Y., Kato, F., andHaji, A. (2007). Codeine presynaptically inhibits the glutamatergicsynaptic transmission in the nucleus tractus solitarius of the guinea pig.Neuroscience 146, 1425–1433. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.02.052Okuyama, E., Umeyama, K., Ohmori, S., Yamazaki, M., and Satake, M. (1994).Pharmacologically active components from a Peruvian medicinal plant, Huira-Huira (Culcitium canescens H. & B.). Chem. Pharm. Bull. 42, 2183–2186.doi: 10.1248/cpb.42.2183Oliveira, A. F. M., Xavier, H. S., Silva, N. H., and Andrade, L. H. C. (2000).Chromatographic screening of medicinal Acanthaceae: Justicia pectoralis Jacq.and J. gendarussa Burm. Rev. Bras. Plantas Med. 3, 37–41. doi: 10.1590/S0102-695X2010005000049Omar, S. H., and Al-Wabel, N. A. (2010). Organosulfur compounds and possiblemechanism of garlic in cancer. Saudi Pharm. J. 18, 51–58. doi: 10.1016/j.jsps.2009.12.007Orav, A., Raal, A., and Arak, E. L. M. A. (2008). Essential oil composition ofPimpinella anisum L. fruits from various European countries. Nat. Prod. Res.22, 227–232. doi: 10.1080/14786410701424667Orrego, R., Leiva, E., and Cheel, J. (2009). Inhibitory Effect of Three C-glycosylflavonoids from Cymbopogon citratus (Lemongrass) on Human LowDensity Lipoprotein Oxidation. Molecules 14, 3906–3913. doi: 10.3390/molecules14103906Ortiz de Urbina, A. V., Martıń, M. L., Fernández, B., Román, L. S., and Cubillo, L.(1994). In Vitro Antispasmodic Activity of Peracetylated Penstemonoside,Aucubin and Catalpol. Planta Med. 60, 512–515. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-959561Ostad, S. N., Soodi, M., Shariffzadeh, M., Khorshidi, N., and Marzban, H. (2001).The effect of fennel essential oil on uterine contraction as a model fordysmenorrhea, pharmacology and toxicology study. J. Ethnopharmacol. 76,299–304. doi: 10.1016/S0378-8741(01)00249-5Özbek, H. (2005). The anti-inflammatory activity of the Foeniculum vulgare L.essential oil and investigation of its median lethal dose in rats and mice. Int.J. Pharmacol. 1, 329–331. doi: 10.3923/ijp.2005.329.331Ozkol, H. U., Akdeniz, N., Ozkol, H., Bilgili, S. G., and Calka, O. (2012).Development of Phytophotodermatitis in two cases related to Plantagolanceolata. Cut. Ocular Toxicol. 31, 58–60. doi: 10.3109/15569527.2011.584232Ozolua, R. I., Umuso, D. I., Uwaya, D. O., Modugu, A. A., Oghuvwu, S. O., andOlomu, J. (2016). Evaluation of the anti-asthmatic and antitussive effects ofaqueous leaf extract of Ocimum gratissimum in rodents. Med. Arom. Plants 5,ID 100023. doi: 10.4172/2167-0412.1000235September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyÖztürk, M., Altay, V., Hakeem, K. R., and Akçiçek, E. (2017). “PharmacologicalActivities and Phytochemical Constituents,” in Liquorice: From Botany toPhytochemistry (Cham: Springer International Publishing), 45–72.doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-74240-3_7Paheerathan, V. (2019). Therapeutic validity of Pimpinellaannisum on iraippunoei (bronchial asthma). Int. J. Complement Alt. Med. 12, 179–184.doi: 10.15406/ijcam.2019.12.00470Palazzolo, E., Laudicina, V. A., and Germanà, M. A. (2013). Current and potentialuse of citrus essential oils. Curr. Org. Chem. 17, 3042–3049. doi: 10.2174/13852728113179990122Pandit, S., Ponnusankar, S., Bandyopadhyay, A., Ota, S., and Mukherjee, P. K.(2011). Exploring the Possible MetabolismMediated Interaction of Glycyrrhizaglabra Extract with CYP3A4 and CYP2D6. Phytother. Res. 25, 1429–1434.doi: 10.1002/ptr.3426Panizza, S. T., Veiga, R. S., and Almeida, M. C. (2012). Uso tradicional de Plantasmedicinais e fitoterápicos (São Paulo: CONBRAFITO).Panossian, A., Davtyan, T., Gukassyan, N., Gukasova, G., Mamikonyan, G., Gabrielian,E., et al. (2002). Effect of andrographolide and Kan Jang–fixed combination ofextract SHA-10 and extract SHE-3–on proliferation of human lymphocytes,production of cytokines and immune activation markers in the whole blood cellsculture. Phytomedicine 9, 598–605. doi: 10.1078/094471102321616409Panyod, S., Ho, C.-T., and Sheen, L.-Y. (2020). Dietary therapy and herbalmedicine for COVID-19 prevention: A review and perspective. J. Trad.Complement. Med. 10, 420–427. doi: 10.1016/j.jtcme.2020.05.004Papp, N., Bartha, S., Boris, G., and Balogh, L. (2011). Traditional Uses of MedicinalPlants for Respiratory Diseases in Transylvania. Nat. Prod. Comm. 6,1934578X1100601012. doi: 10.1177/1934578x1100601012Parejo, I., Viladomat, F., Bastida, J., Schmeda-Hirschmann, G., Burillo, J., andCodina, C. (2004). Bioguided Isolation and Identification of the NonvolatileAntioxidant Compounds from Fennel (Foeniculum vulgare Mill.) Waste.J. Agr. Food Chem. 52, 1890–1897. doi: 10.1021/jf030717gParhiz, H., Roohbakhsh, A., Soltani, F., Rezaee, R., and Iranshahi, M. (2015).Antioxidant and Anti-Inflammatory Properties of the Citrus FlavonoidsHesperidin and Hesperetin: An Updated Review of their Molecular Mechanismsand Experimental Models. Phytother. Res. 29, 323–331. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5256Park, C. S., Kim, T.-B., Lee, J.-Y., Park, J. Y., Lee, Y. C., Jeong, S. S., et al. (2012).Effects of add-on therapy with NDC-052, an extract from Magnoliae flos, inadult asthmatic patients receiving inhaled corticosteroids. Korean J. Intern.Med. 27, 84–90. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2012.27.1.84Patel, S., Saxena, N., Saxena, R., Arya, N., Saxena, R., and Tharani, M. (2017).Evaluation of anti-asthmatic activity of Glycyrrhiza glabra. Biosci. Biotech. Res.Asia 6, 761–766.Paul, D. (2016). A review on biological activities of common Mallow (Malvasylvestris L.). J. Life Sci. 4, 1–5. doi: 10.6084/m9.figshare.4581202.v1Paula-Freire, L. I. G., Andersen, M. L., Molska, G. R., Köhn, D. O., and Carlini,E. L. A. (2013). Evaluation of the antinociceptive activity of Ocimumgratissimum L. (Lamiaceae) essential oil and its isolated active principles inmice. Phytother. Res. 27, 1220–1224. doi: 10.1002/ptr.4845Pérez, W. R., Avila, L. C., Chacon, Y. S., Mesa, J. E. G., and Munera, M. A. C.(2006). Composición quıḿica del aceite esencial de las hojas de Cymbopogonnardus y Cymbopogon citratus. Momentos Ciencia 3, 44–50.Pino, J. A., and Rosado, A. (2000). Chemical composition of the essential oil ofCymbopogon citratus (DC.) Stapf. From Cuba. J. Essent. Oil Res. 12, 301–302.doi: 10.1080/10412905.2000.9699521Pino, J., Rosado, A., and Borges, P. (1990). Volatile components in the essential oilof wild oregano (Coleus amboinicus Lour.).Nahrung 34, 819–823. doi: 10.1002/food.19900340912Pizzorno, J. E., Murray, M. T., and Joiner-Bey, H. (2016). “7 - Asthma,” in TheClinician’s Handbook of Natural Medicine, 3rd ed. Eds. J. E. Pizzorno, M. T.Murray and H. Joiner-Bey (Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone), 65–81.doi: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-5514-0.00016-6Pleschka, S., Stein, M., Schoop, R., and Hudson, J. B. (2009). Anti-viral propertiesand mode of action of standardized Echinacea purpurea extract against highlypathogenic avian Influenza virus (H5N1, H7N7) and swine-origin H1N1 (S-OIV). Virol. J. 6, 197. doi: 10.1186/1743-422X-6-197Poivre, M., and Duez, P. (2017). Biological activity and toxicity of the Chinese herbMagnolia officinalis Rehder & E. Wilson (Houpo) and its constituents.J. Zhejiang Univ. Sci. B 18, 194–214. doi: 10.1631/jzus.b1600299Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 40Portella, C. F. S., Ghelman, R., Abdala, C. V. M., and Schveitzer, M. C. (2020).Evidence map on the contributions of traditional, complementary andintegrative medicines for health care in times of COVID-19. Integr. Med.Res. 9, 100473. doi: 10.1016/j.imr.2020.100473Porter, R. S., and Bode, R. F. (2017). A review of the antiviral properties of blackelder (Sambucus nigra L.) products. Phytother. Res. 31, 533–554. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5782Portnoi, G., Chng, L.-A., Karimi-Tabesh, L., Koren, G., Tan, M. P., and Einarson,A. (2003). Prospective comparative study of the safety and effectiveness ofginger for the treatment of nausea and vomiting in pregnancy. Am. J. Obstet.Gynecol. 189, 1374–1377. doi: 10.1067/S0002-9378(03)00649-5Porwal, O., Ameen, M. S. M., Anwer, E. T., Uthirapathy, S., Ahamad, J., andTahsin, A. (2019). Silybum marianum (Milk Thistle): Review on Its chemistry,morphology, ethno medical uses, phytochemistry and pharmacologicalactivities. J. Drug Delivery Ther. 9, 199–206. doi: 10.22270/jddt.v9i5.3666Prabhu, K. S., Lobo, R., Shirwaikar, A. A., and Shirwaikar, A. (2009). Ocimumgratissimum: A review of its chemical, pharmacological and ethnomedicinalproperties. Open Complement Med. J. 1, 1–15. doi: 10.2174/1876391X00901010001PRC (1992). Pharmacopoeia of the People’s Republic of China (English ed.)(Guangzhou: Guangdong Science and Technology Press).PROTECT (2020). Pharmacoepidemiological Research on Outcomes of Therapeuticsby a European Consortium. Available at: http://protectbenefitrisk.eu (Accessed09/07/2020 2020).Prudente, A. S., Loddi, A. M. V., Duarte, M. R., Santos, A. R. S., Pochapski, M. T.,Pizzolatti, M. G., et al. (2013). Pre-clinical anti-inflammatory aspects of acuisine and medicinal millennial herb:Malva sylvestris L. Food Cheml. Toxicol.58, 324–331. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2013.04.042Quintans-Júnior, L. J., Guimarães, A. G., Santana, M. T., Araújo, B. E. S., Moreira,F. V., Bonjardim, L. R., et al. (2011). Citral reduces nociceptive andinflammatory response in rodents. Braz. J. Pharmacogn. 21, 497–502.doi: 10.1590/S0102-695X2011005000065Rabelo, M., Souza, E. P., Soares, P. M. G., Miranda, A. V., Matos, F. J. A., andCriddle, D. N. (2003). Antinociceptive properties of the essential oil ofOcimumgratissimum L. (Labiatae) in mice. Braz. J. Med. Biol. Res. 36, 521–524.doi: 10.1590/S0100-879X2003000400016Rainsford, K. D. (2015). “Pharmacology and Toxicology of Ibuprofen,” inIbuprofen. Ed. K. D. Rainsford (Chichester: Wiley Blackwell), 132–236.doi: 10.1002/9781118743614.ch5Rajagopal, S., Kumar, R. A., Deevi, D. S., Satyanarayana, C., and Rajagopalan, R.(2003). Andrographolide, a potential cancer therapeutic agent isolated fromAndrographis paniculata. J. Exp. Ther. Oncol. 3, 147–158. doi: 10.1046/j.1359-4117.2003.01090.xRamirez, J.-K., Velasquez-Arevalo, S., Rodriguez, C. N., and Villarreal-La Torre,V. E. (2020). Culcitium canescens Humb. & Bonpl. (Asteraceae): unarevisiónetnobotánica, etnofarmacológica y fitoquıḿica. Ethnobot. Res. Appl.19, 1–14. doi: 10.32859/era.19.19.1-14Rashidian, A., Mehrzadi, S., Ghannadi, A. R., Mahzooni, P., Sadr, S., andMinaiyan, M. (2014). Protective effect of ginger volatile oil against aceticacid-induced colitis in rats: a light microscopic evaluation. J. Integr. Med. 12,115–120. doi: 10.1016/S2095-4964(14)60011-XRastogi, S., Pandey, D. N., and Singh, R. H. (2020). COVID-19 Pandemic: Apragmatic plan for Ayurveda Intervention. J. Ayurveda Integr. Med. Res.doi: 10.1016/j.jaim.2020.1004.1002Rastrelli, L., Caceres, A., Morales, C., De Simone, F., and Aquino, R. (1998).Iridoids from Lippia graveolens. Phytochemistry 49, 1829–1832. doi: 10.1016/S0031-9422(98)00196-4Rather, M. A., Dar, B. A., Sofi, S. N., Bhat, B. A., and Qurishi, M. A. (2016).Foeniculum vulgare: A comprehensive review of its traditional use,phytochemistry, pharmacology, and safety. Arab J. Chem. 9, S1574–S1583.doi: 10.1016/j.arabjc.2012.04.011Raus,̌ K., Pleschka, S., Klein, P., Schoop, R., and Fisher, P. (2015). Effect of anEchinacea-Based Hot Drink Versus Oseltamivir in Influenza Treatment: ARandomized, Double-Blind, Double-Dummy, Multicenter, NoninferiorityClinical Trial. Curr. Ther. Res. 77, 66–72. doi: 10.1016/j.curtheres.2015.04.001Ravikumar, V. R., Dhanamani, M., and Sudhamani, T. (2009). In-vitro anti-inflammatory activity of aqueous extract of leaves of Plectranthus amboinicus(Lour.) Spreng. Anc. Sci. Life 28, 7.September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapyRehman, R., Akram, M., Akhtar, N., Jabeen, Q., Saeed, T., Shah, S. M. A., et al.(2011). Zingiber officinale Roscoe (pharmacologicalactivity). J. Med. PlantsRes. 5, 344–348. doi: 10.5897/JMPR.9001303Řehulková, O. (2001). Interactions of warfarin. BioMed. Papers 145, 27–38.doi: 10.5507/bp.2001.009Reichling, J., and Galati, E. M. (2004). “Chemical Constituents of the GenusPimpinella,” in Illicium, Pimpinella and Foeniculum. Ed. M. M. Jodral (BocaRaton: CRC Press), 69.Reixach, N., Irurre-Santilari, J., Casas, J., Melé, E., Messeguer, J., and Camps, F.(1996). Biosynthesis of ecdysteroids in in vitro prothalli cultures of Polypodiumvulgare. Phytochemistry 43, 597–602. doi: 10.1016/0031-9422(96)00336-6Reynolds, J. E. F., and Parfilt, K. (1996). Martindale -The extra pharmacopoeia(London: Pharmaceutical Press).Risch, A., Sakinah, A. M. M., and Astuti, S. M. (2012). “Determination of activesubstances in torbangun plant (Coleus amboinicus Lour) by using gaschromatography-mass spectrophotography (GC-MS) and potentialcomponent analysis (PCA) for increasing women milk production,” inProceeding of International Conference on Drug Development of NaturalResources June 30th, vol. 261.Robinson, P. M., Smith, D. L., Safford, R., and Nichols, B. W. (1973). Lipidmetabolism in the fern Polypodium vulgare. Phytochemistry 12, 1377–1381.doi: 10.1016/0031-9422(73)80569-2Rodriguez-Pérez, W., Avila, L. C., Chacon, Y. S., Mesa, J. E. G., and Munera,M. A. C. (2006). Composición quıḿica del aceite esencial de las hojas deCymbopogon nardus y Cymbopogon citratus. Momento Ciencia 3, 44–50.Ross, I. A. (2001). Medicinal Plants of the World: Chemical Constituents,Traditional and Modern Uses (New York: Humana Press Inc).Roth, M., Fang, L., Stolz, D., and Tamm, M. (2019). Pelargonium sidoides radixextract EPs 7630 reduces rhinovirus infection through modulation of viralbinding proteins on human bronchial epithelial cells. PloS One 14, e0210702–e0210702. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0210702Rothan, H. A., and Byrareddy, S. N. (2020). The epidemiology and pathogenesis ofcoronavirus disease (COVID-19) outbreak. J. Autoimmun. 109, 102433.doi: 10.1016/j.jaut.2020.102433Rouhi, H., and Ganji, F. (2007). Effect of Althaea officinalis on cough associatedwith ACE inhibitors. Pakistan J. Nutr. 6, 256–258. doi: 10.3923/pjn.2007.256.258Sa, R. C. S., Leite, M. N., Reporedo, M. M., and Almeida, R. N. (2003). Evaluationof long-term exposure toMikania glomerata (Sprengel) extract on male Wistarrats’ reproductive organs, sperm production and testosterone level.Contraception 67, 327–331. doi: 10.1016/S0010-7824(02)00523-1Sá, R. C. S., Leite, M. N., Peters, V. M., Guerra, M. O., and Almeida, R. N. (2006).Absence of mutagenic effect of Mikania glomerata hydroalcoholic extract onadult wistar rats in vivo. Braz. Arch. Biol. Technol. 49, 599–604. doi: 10.1590/S1516-89132006000500009Saitoh, H., Miyase, T., Ueno, A., Atarashi, K., and Saiki, Y. (1994). Senegoses J-O,oligosaccharide multi-esters from the roots of Polygala senega L. Chem. Pharm.Bull. 42, 641–645. doi: 10.1248/cpb.42.641Sakuma, S., and Shoji, J. (1981). Studies on the constituents of the root of Polygalatenuifolia Willdenow. I. Isolation of saponins and the structures ofonjisaponins G and F. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 29, 2431–2441. doi: 10.1248/cpb.29.2431Sakuma, S., and Shoji, J. (1982). Studies on the constituents of the root of Polygalatenuifolia Willdenow. II. On the structures of onjisaponins A, B and E. Chem.Pharm. Bull. 30, 810–821. doi: 10.1248/cpb.30.810Salehi, B., Abu-Darwish, M. S., Tarawneh, A. H., Cabral, C., Gadetskaya, A. V.,Salgueiro, L., et al. (2019a). Thymus spp. plants - Food applications andphytopharmacy properties. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 85, 287–306.doi: 10.1016/j.tifs.2019.01.020Salehi, B., Sharifi-Rad, J., Quispe, C., Llaique, H., Villalobos, M., Smeriglio, A., et al.(2019b). Insights into Eucalyptus genus chemical constituents, biologicalactivities and health-promoting effects. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 91, 609–624. doi: 10.1016/j.tifs.2019.08.003Sambaiah, K., and Srinivasan, K. (1989). Influence of spices and spice principles onhepatic mixed function oxygenase system in rats. Indian J. Biochem. Biophys.26, 254–258.Santana, L. C. L. R., Brito, M. R. M., Sousa, G. F., and Freitas, R. M. (2013).Propriedades fıśicoquıḿicas eavaliação da toxicidade aguda do extrato etanólicoFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 41padronizado a 70% das folhasde Mikania glomerata (Asteraceae). Rev. Bras.Plantas Medicinais 15, 742–750. doi: 10.1590/S1516-05722013000500015Saxena, S. (2005). Glycyrrhiza glabra: medicine over the millennium. Nat. Prod.Rad. 4, 358–367.Sayyah, M., Saroukhani, G., Peirovi, A., and Kamalinejad, M. (2003). Analgesicand anti-inflammatory activity of the leaf essential oil of Laurus nobilis Linn.Phytother. Res. 17, 733–736. doi: 10.1002/ptr.1197Schaefer, A., Kehr, M., Giannetti, B., Bulitta, M., and Staiger, C. (2016). Arandomized, controlled, double-blind, multi-center trial to evaluate theefficacy and safety of a liquid containing ivy leaves dry extract (EA 575®) vs.placebo in the treatment of adults with acute cough. Pharmazie 71, 504–509.doi: 10.1691/ph.2016.6712Schapowal, A., Dobos, G., Cramer, H., Ong, K. C., Adler, M., Zimmermann, A., et al.(2019). Treatment of signs and symptoms of the commoncold using EPs 7630-results of a meta-analysis. Heliyon 5, e02904. doi: 10.1016/j.heliyon.2019.e02904Scharbert, G., Kalb, M. L., Duris, M., Marschalek, C., and Kozek-Langenecker,S. A. (2007). Garlic at dietary doses does not impair platelet function. Anesth.Analg. 105, 1214–1218. doi: 10.1213/01.ane.0000287253.92211.06Schmid, B., Lüdtke, R., Selbmann, H.-K., Kötter, I., Tschirdewahn, B., Schaffner,W., et al. (2001). Efficacy and tolerability of a standardized willow bark extractin patients with osteoarthritis: randomized placebo-controlled, double blindclinical trial. Phytother. Res. 15, 344–350. doi: 10.1002/ptr.981Seddighfar, M., Mirghazanfari, S. M., and Dadpay, M. (2020). Analgesic and anti-inflammatory properties of hydroalcoholic extracts of Malva sylvestris, Carumcarvi or Medicago sativa, and their combination in a rat model. J. Integr. Med.18, 181–188. doi: 10.1016/j.joim.2020.02.003Seifert, S., Kopeinig, B., Bauer, R., Pahl, A., and Haunschild, J. (2012). In vitro anti-inflammatory and anti-microbial activity of cowslip flowers (Primula veris L.).Planta Med. 78, PD101. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1320459Sepahvand, R., Esmaeili-Mahani, S., Arzi, A., Rasoulian, B., and Abbasnejad, M.(2010). Ginger (Zingiber officinale Roscoe) elicits antinociceptive propertiesand potentiates morphine-induced analgesia in the rat radiant heat tail-flicktest. J. Med. Food 13, 1397–1401. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2010.1043Serkedjieva, J., Manolova, N., Zgórniak-Nowosielska, I., Zawilińska, B., andGrzybek, J. (1990). Antiviral activity of the infusion (SHS-174) from flowersof Sambucus nigra L., aerial parts of Hypericum perforatum L., and roots ofSaponaria officinalis L. against influenza and herpes simplex viruses. Phytother.Res. 4, 97–100. doi: 10.1002/ptr.2650040305Shara, M., and Stohs, S. J. (2015). Efficacy and safety of white willow bark (Salixalba) extracts. Phytother. Res. 29, 1112–1116. doi: 10.1002/ptr.5377Shin, T. Y., Kim, D. K., Chae, B. S., and Lee, E. J. (2001). Antiallergic action ofMagnolia officinalis on immediate hypersensitivity reaction. Arch. Pharm. Res.24, 249–255. doi: 10.1007/bf02978266Shin, C. Y., Lee, W. J., Lee, E. B., Choi, E. Y., and Ko, K. H. (2002). Platycodin Dand D3 Increase Airway Mucin Release in vivo and in vitro in Rats andHamsters. Planta Med. 68, 221–225. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-23130Shushunov, S., Balashov, L., Kravtsova, A., Krasnogorsky, I., Latte, K. P., andVasiliev, A. (2009). Determination of acute toxicity of the aqueous extract ofPotentilla erecta (Tormentil) rhizomes in rats and mice. J. Med. Food 12, 1173–1176. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2008.0281Sidibé, L., Chalchat, J.-C., Garry, R.-P., Lacombe, L., and Harama, M. (2001).Aromatic Plants of Mali (IV): Chemical Composition of Essential Oils ofCymbopogon citratus (DC) Stapf and C. giganteus (Hochst.) Chiov. J. Essent.Oil Res. 13, 110–112. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2008.0281Sidor, A., and Gramza-Michałowska, A. (2015). Advanced research on theantioxidant and health benefit of elderberry (Sambucus nigra) in food – areview. J. Funct. Foods 18, 941–958. doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2014.07.012Silva, F. F. M., Moura, L. F., Barbosa, P. T., Fernandes, A. B. D., Bertini, L. M., andAlves, L. A. (2014). Analysis of chemical composition of the essential oil of holygrass (Cymbopogon citratus) obtained through extractor for water vapor trailwith built with materials of acquisition and easy low cost. Holos 30, 144.doi: 10.15628/holos.2014.1762Silva, L. E., Gonçalves, M. V. S., and Amaral, W. (2018). Chemical compositionand antibacterial activity of Cymbopogon citratus and Cymbopogon flexuosusessential oils. Ciec. e Nat. 40, e2. doi: 10.5902/2179460X27569Simon, A., Ványolós, A., Béni, Z., Dékány, M., Tóth, G., and Báthori, M. (2011).Ecdysteroids from Polypodium vulgare L. Steroids 76, 1419–1424. doi: 10.1016/j.steroids.2011.07.007September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based PhytotherapySingh, G., Maurya, S., de Lampasona, M. P., and Catalan, C. (2006). Chemicalconstituents, antifungal and antioxidative potential of Foeniculum vulgarevolatile oil and its acetone extract. Food Control 17, 745–752. doi: 10.1016/j.foodcont.2005.03.010Siva,M., Shanmugam,K.R., Shanmugam,B.,Venkata, S.G., Ravi, S., Sathyavelu,R.K.,et al. (2016).Ocimum sanctum: a review on the pharmacological properties. Int. J.Basic Clin. Pharmacol. 5, 558–565. doi: 10.18203/2319-2003.ijbcp20161491Sodhi, M., and Etminan, M. (2020). Safety of Ibuprofen in Patients With COVID-19:Causal or Confounded? Chest 158, 55–56. doi: 10.1016/j.chest.2020.03.040Soliman, W. S., Salaheldin, S., and Amer, H. M. (2017). Chemical CompositionEvaluation of Egyptian Lemongrass, Cymbopogon citratus, Essential Oil. Int.J. Sci. Eng. Res. 8, 630–634.Song, M. R., and Kim, E. K. (2014). Effects of eucalyptus aroma therapy on theallergic rhinitis of university students. J. Korean Biol. Nurs. Sci. 16, 300–308.doi: 10.7586/jkbns.2014.16.4.300Sonker, P., Verma, S., and Gupta, P. (2017). To study the pharmacological effectand beneficial effect of Eucalyptus globulus in different types of diseases. Int.J. Res. Pharmacol. Pharmacother. 6, 81–88.Sousa, R., Osório, H., Duque, L., Ribeiro, H., Cruz, A., and Abreu, I. (2014).Identification of Plantago lanceolata pollen allergens using animmunoproteomic approach. J. Invest. Allergol. Clin. Immunol. 24, 177–183.Stevenson, R., MacWalter, R. S., Harmse, J. D., and Wilson, E. (2001). Mortalityduring the Winter Flu Epidemic — Two Cases of Death Associated with Self-Medication. Scottish Med. J. 46, 84–86. doi: 10.1177/003693300104600307Su, S., Wang, T., Duan, J.-A., Zhou, W., Hua, Y.-Q., Tang, Y.-P., et al. (2011). Anti-inflammatory and analgesic activity of different extracts of Commiphoramyrrha. J. Ethnopharmacol. 134, 251–258. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.12.003Subehan, L., Usia, T., Iwata, H., Kadota, S., and Tezuka, Y. (2006). Mechanism-based inhibition of CYP3A4 and CYP2D6 by Indonesian medicinal plants.J. Ethnopharmacol. 105, 449–455. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2005.12.001Sultana, S., Khan, A., Safhi, M. M., and Alhazmi, H. A. (2016). Cough suppressantherbal drugs: A review. Int. J. Pharm. Sci. Invent. 5, 15–28.Taccone, F. S., Gorham, J., Vincent, J.-L., and Alhazmi, H. A. (2020).Hydroxychloroquine in the management ofcritically ill patients withCOVID-19: the need for an evidence base. Lancet Respir. Med. 8, 539–541.doi: 10.1016/S2213-2600(20)30172-7Takagi , K. , and Lee , E. B . (1972) . Pharmacologica l s tudies onPlatycodongrandiflorum A. DC. II. Anti-inflammatory activity of crudeplatycodin, its activities onisolated organs and other pharmacological activities.J. Pharma. Soc. Japan 92, 961–968. doi: 10.1248/yakushi1947.92.8_961Takiura, K., Yamamoto, M., Murata, H., Takai, H., and Honda, S. (1974). Studieson oligosaccharides. XIII.Oligosaccharides in Polygala senega and structures ofglycosyl-1,5-anhydro-D-glucitols (author’s transl). J. Pharma. Soc. Japan 94,998–1003. doi: 10.1248/yakushi1947.92.8_961Takiura, K., Yamamoto, M., Murata, H., Takai, H., Honda, S., and Yuki, H. (1975).Studies on oligosaccharides. XVI. New trisaccharides found in senega radix.J. Pharma. Soc. Japan 95, 166–169. doi: 10.1248/yakushi1947.95.2_166Tang, N., Bai, H., Chen, X., Gong, J., Li, D., and Sun, Z. (2020). Anticoagulant treatmentis associated withdecreased mortality in severe coronavirus disease 2019 patientswith coagulopathy. J. Thromb. Haemost. 18, 1094–1099. doi: 10.1111/jth.14817Tanira, M. O. M., Shah, A. H., Mohsin, A., Ageel, A. M., and Qureshi, S. (1996).Pharmacological and toxicological investigations on Foeniculum vulgare driedfruit extract in experimental animals. Phytother. Res. 10, 33–36. doi: 10.1002/(SICI)1099-1573(199602)10:1%3C33::AID-PTR769%3E3.0.CO;2-LTapia, A., Cheel, J., Theoduloz, C., Rodrıǵuez, J., Schmeda-Hirschmann, G., Gerth,A., et al. (2007). Free Radical Scavengers from Cymbopogon citratus (DC.)Stapf Plants Cultivated in Bioreactors by the Temporary Immersion (TIS)Principle. Z Naturforsch. C J. Biosci. 62, 447. doi: 10.1515/znc-2007-5-620TGA (2015). “Safety review of Andrographis paniculata andanaphylactic /allergicreactions”, Version 1.0, October 2015. (Camberra: Therapeutic GoodsAdministration/ Australian Government).Theisen, L. L., and Muller, C. P. (2012). EPs® 7630 (Umckaloabo®), an extractfrom Pelargonium sidoides roots, exerts anti-influenza virus activity in vitroand in vivo. Antiviral Res. 94, 147–156. doi: 10.1016/j.antiviral.2012.03.006Thomson, M., Al-Qattan, K. K., Al-Sawan, S. M., Alnaqeeb, M. A., Khan, I., andAli, M. (2002). The use of ginger (Zingiber officinale Rosc.) as a potential anti-inflammatory and antithrombotic agent. Prostag. Leukotr. Ess. 67, 475–478.doi: 10.1054/plef.2002.0441Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 42Torjesen, I. (2020). Covid-19:ibuprofen can be used for symptoms, says UKagency, but reasons for change in advice are unclear. BMJ 369, m1555.doi: 10.1136/bmj.m1555Thorp, H. H. (2020). Underpromise, overdeliver. Science 367, 1405–1405.doi: 10.1126/science.abb8492Timmer, A., Guenther, J., Motschall, E., Ruecker, G., Antes, G., and Kern, W. V.(2013). Pelargonium sidoides extract for treating acute respiratorytractinfections. Cochrane Database Syst. Rev. Cochrane.org, CD006323.doi: 10.1002/14651858.cd006323.pub3Tiralongo, E., Wee, S. S., and Lea, R. A. (2016). Elderberry supplementationreduces cold duration and symptoms in air-travellers: a randomized, double-blind placebo-controlled clinical trial. Nutrients 8, 182. doi: 10.3390/nu8040182Tobias, J. D., Green, T. P., and Coté, C. J. (2016). Codeine: Time to Say “No”.Pediatrics 138, e20162396. doi: 10.1542/peds.2016-2396Tomczyk, M., and Latté, K. P. (2009). Potentilla—A review of its phytochemicaland pharmacological profile. J. Ethnopharmacol. 122, 184–204. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.12.022Torabian, G., Valtchev, P., Adil, Q., and Dehghani, F. (2019). Anti-influenzaactivity of elderberry (Sambucus nigra). J. Funct. Foods 54, 353–360.doi: 10.1016/j.jff.2019.01.031Torjesen, I. (2020). Covid-19:ibuprofen can be used for symptoms, says UKagency, but reasons for change in advice are unclear. BMJ 369, m1555. doi:10.1136/bmj.m1555Trute, A., and Nahrstedt, A. (1997). Identification and quantitative analysis ofphenolic compounds from the dry extract of Hedera helix. Planta Med. 63,177–179. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-957639Trute, A., Gross, J., Mutschler, E., and Nahrstedt, A. (1997). In VitroAntispasmodic Compounds of the Dry Extract Obtained from Hedera helix.Planta Med. 63, 125–129. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-957627Tsai, Y., Cole, L. L., Davis, L. E., Lockwood, S. J., Simmons, V., and Wild, G. C.(1985). Antiviral properties of garlic: in vitro effects on influenza B, herpessimplex and coxsackie viruses. Planta Med. 51, 460–461. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-969553Tsukitani, Y., and Shoji, J. (1973). Studies on the constituents of Senegae radix. III.The structures of senegin-III and-IV, saponins from Polygala senega Linne var.latifolia Torry et Gray. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 21, 1564–1574. doi: 10.1248/cpb.21.1564Tsukitani, Y., Kawanishi, S., and Shoji, J. (1973). Studies on the constituents ofSenegae Radix. II. The structure of senegin-II, a saponin from Polygala senegaLinne var. latifolia Torry et Gray. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 21, 791–799. doi: 10.1248/cpb.21.791Tucker, A. O., and Maciarello, M. J. (1994). Essential oil of English ivy, Hederahelix L. ’Hibernica’ . J. Essent. Oil Res. 6, 187–188. doi: 10.1080/10412905.1994.9698352Uehleke, B., Müller, J., Stange, R., Kelber, O., and Melzer, J. (2013). Willow barkextract STW 33-I in the long-term treatment of outpatients with rheumaticpain mainly osteoarthritis or back pain. Phytomedicine 20, 980–984.doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2013.03.023Ueki, S., Miyoshi, M., Shido, O., Hasegawa, J., and Watanabe, T. (2008). Systemicadministration of [6]-gingerol, a pungent constituent of ginger, induceshypothermia in rats via an inhibitory effect on metabolic rate. Eur.J. Pharmacol. 584, 87–92. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2008.01.031Ueno, V. A., and Sawaya, A. C. H. F. (2019). Influence of environmental factors onthe volatile composition of two Brazilian medicinal plants: Mikania laevigataandMikania glomerata.Metabolomics 15, 91. doi: 10.1007/s11306-019-1546-xUlbricht, C., Basch, E., Weissner, W., and Hackman, D. (2006). An evidence-basedsystematic review of herb and supplement interactions by the Natural StandardResearch Collaboration. Expert Opin. Drug Saf. 5, 719–728. doi: 10.1517/14740338.5.5.719Urban, R. (1958). Physiologische Untersuchungen über einige Flavonoide undOxyzimtsäuren: I. Auswahl und Identifizierung der BearbeitetenStoffkomponenten. Planta 52, 47–64. doi: 10.1007/BF01940162Uribe-Hernández, C. J., Hurtado-Ramos, J. B., Olmedo-Arcega, E. R., and Martinez-Sosa, M. A. (1992). The Essential Oil of Lippia graveolens H.B.K. from Jalisco,Mexico. J. Essent. Oil Res. 4, 647–649. doi: 10.1080/10412905.1992.9698152Vafaei, H., Ajdari, S., Hessami, K., Hosseinkhani, A., Foroughinia, L., Asadi, N.,et al. (2020). Efficacy and safety of myrrh in patients with incomplete abortion:September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapya randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled clinical study. BMCComplement Med. Ther. 20, 145. doi: 10.1186/s12906-020-02946-zVahdat Shariatpanahi, Z., Mokhtari, M., Taleban, F. A., Alavi, F., Salehi Surmaghi,M. H., Mehrabi, Y., et al. (2013). Effect of enteral feeding with ginger extract inacute respiratory distress syndrome. J. Crit. Care 28, 217.e211–217.e216.doi: 10.1016/j.jcrc.2012.04.017Valková, V., Ďúranová, H., Bilčıḱová, J., and Habán, M. (2020). Milk thistle(Silybum marianum): a valuable medicinal plant with several therapeuticpurposes. J. Microbiol. Biotechnol. Food Sci. 9, 836–843. doi: 10.15414/jmbfs.2020.9.4.836-843Van Den Broucke, C. O., and Lemli, J. A. (1981). Pharmacological and ChemicalInvestigation of Thyme Liquid Extracts. Planta Med. 41, 129–135. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-971689Van Den Broucke, C. O., and Lemli, J. A. (1983). Spasmolytic activity of theflavonoids from Thymus vulgaris. Pharm. Weekbl. Sci. 5, 9–14. doi: 10.1007/bf01959645Velavan, T. P., and Meyer, C. G. (2020). The COVID-19 epidemic. Trop. Med. Int.Health 25, 278–280. doi: 10.1111/tmi.13383Veneziani, R. C. S., and Oliveira, D. C. R. (1999). Constituents of Mikaniaglomerata Sprengel. Biochem. Syst. Ecol. 27, 99–102. doi: 10.1016/S0305-1978(98)00055-6Vigo, E., Cepeda, A., Gualillo, O., and Perez-Fernandez, R. (2005). In-vitro anti-inflammatory activity of Pinus sylvestris and Plantago lanceolata extracts: effecton inducible NOS, COX-1, COX-2 and their products in J774A.1 murinemacrophages. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 57, 383–391. doi: 10.1211/0022357055605Wagner, H., R., B., Melchart, D., Xiao, P. G., and Staudinger, A. (2015). “RadixPlatycodonis – Jiegeng,” in Chromatographic Fingerprint Analysis of HerbalMedicines, vol. III. Eds. H. Wagner and A. Staudinger (Cham: Springer).Wagner, L., Cramer, H., Klose, P., Lauche, R., Gass, F., Dobos, G., et al. (2015).Herbal Medicine for Cough: a Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.Complement Med. Res. 22, 359–368. doi: 10.1159/000442111Wegener, T., and Kraft, K. (1999). [Plantain (Plantago lanceolata L.): anti-inflammatory action in upper respiratory tract infections]. Wien Med.Wochenschr 149, 211–216.Westfall, R. E. (2004). Use of anti-emetic herbs in pregnancy: women’s choices,and the question of safety and efficacy. Complement Ther. Nurs. Midwifery 10,30–36. doi: 10.1016/S1353-6117(03)00057-XWHO (1989). Medicinal plants in China (Manila: World Health Organization).WHO (1999). Monographs on selected medicinal plants (Geneva: World HealthOrganization).WHO (2000). General Guidelines for Methodologies on Research and Evaluation ofTraditional Medicine (Geneve: World Health Organization).WHO (2002). Monographs on selected medicinal plants 2 (Geneva: World HealthOrganization).WHO (2007). Monographs on selected medicinal plants 3 (Geneva: World HealthOrganization).WHO (2009). Monographs on selected medicinal plants 4 (Geneva: World HealthOrganization).WHO (2020a). What are the symptoms of COVID-19? (World HealthOrganization). Available at: https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/novel-coronavirus-2019/question-and-answers-hub/q-a-detail/q-a-coronaviruses(Accessed 07 June 2020).WHO (2020b). WHO supports scientifically-proven traditional medicine(Brazzaville: World Health Organization -Africa). Available at: https://www.afro.who.int/news/who-supports-scientifically-proven-traditional-medicine?g c l i d =C jwKCA jw xLH3BRApE iwAqX9 a rY 5TWoXdMb eZk o sCA1s63VX6PLIeGYCpKqugbWVnCVdUVG72wP_WkRoCwkkQAvD_BwE(Accessed 18 june 2020).Wichtl, M. (2004). Herbal Drugs and Phytopharmaceuticals. A handbook forpractice on a scientific basis (Stuttgart: Medpharm Scientific Publishers).Willetts, K. E., Ekangaki, A., and Eden, J. A. (2003). Effect of a ginger extract onpregnancy-induced nausea: A randomised controlled trial. Austr. N Z J. Obst.Gynaecol. 43, 139–144. doi: 10.1046/j.0004-8666.2003.00039.xWilliamson, E., Driver, S., and Baxter, K. (2013). Stockley’s Herbal MedicinesInteractions (London: Pharmaceutical Press).Wittkowsky, A. K. (2003). “Warfarin and other coumarin derivatives:pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, and drug interactions,” Semin. Vasc.Med. 3, 221–230.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 43Wölfle, U., Hoffmann, J., Haarhaus, B., Rao Mittapalli, V., and Schempp, C. M.(2017). Anti-inflammatory and vasoconstrictive properties of Potentilla erecta– A traditional medicinal plant from the northern hemisphere.J. Ethnopharmacol. 204, 86–94. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2017.03.058Wynn, S. G. (1999). Silybummarianum (milk thistle). Altern. Med. Rev. 4, 272–274.Xu, J., Hu, Z.-Q., Wang, C., Yin, Z.-Q., Wei, Q., Zhou, L.-J., et al. (2014). Acute andsubacute toxicity study of 1,8-cineole in mice. Int. J. Clin. Exp. Pathol. 7, 1495–1501.Xu, X.-W., Wu, X.-X., Jiang, X.-G., Xu, K.-J., Ying, L.-J., Ma, C.-L., et al. (2020).Clinical findings in a group of patients infected with the 2019 novelcoronavirus (SARS-Cov-2) outside of Wuhan, China: retrospective caseseries. BMJ 368, m606. doi: 10.1136/bmj.m792Yakovishin, L. A., and Grishkovets, V. I. (2018). “Ivy and Licorice TriterpeneGlycosides: Promising Molecular Containers for Some Drugs andBiomolecules,” in Studies in Natural Products Chemistry. Ed. R. Atta Ur(Amsterdam: Elsevier), 351–383. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-64068-0.00011-5Yamada, H., Nishizawa, M., and Katayama, C. (1992). Osladin, a sweet princple ofPolypodium vulgare. Structure revision. Tetrahedron Lett. 33, 4009–4010.doi: 10.1016/0040-4039(92)88086-KYan, R., Wang, W., Guo, J., Liu, H., Zhang, J., and Yang, B. (2013). Studies on theAlkaloids of the Bark ofMagnolia officinalis: Isolation and On-line Analysis byHPLC-ESI-MSn. Molecules 18, 7739–7750. doi: 10.3390/molecules18077739Yashaswini, S., and Vasundhara, M. (2011). Coleus (Plectranthus barbatus)-Amultipurpose medicinal herb. Int. Res. J. Pharm. 2, 47–58.Ye, X. (2017). Phytochemicals in Citrus: Applications in Functional Foods (BocaRatón: CRC Press).Yeşilada, E., Üstün, O., Sezik, E., Takaishi, Y., Ono, Y., and Honda, G. (1997).Inhibitory effects of Turkish folk remedies on inflammatory cytokines:interleukin-1a, interleukin-1b and tumor necrosis factor a. J. Ethnopharmacol.58, 59–73. doi: 10.1016/S0378-8741(97)00076-7Yimer, E. M., Tuem, K. B., Karim, A., Ur-Rehman, N., and Anwar, F. (2019). Nigellasativa L. (Black Cumin): A Promising Natural Remedy for Wide Range of Illnesses.Evid.-Based Complement Alternat. Med. 2019, 1528635. doi: 10.1155/2019/1528635Yoon, S.-B., Lee, Y.-J., Park, S. K., Kim, H.-C., Bae, H., Kim, H. M., et al. (2009).Anti-inflammatory effects of Scutellaria baicalensis water extract on LPS-activated RAW 264.7 macrophages. J. Ethnopharmacol. 125, 286–290.doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2009.06.027Yoshikawa, M., Murakami, T., Ueno, T., Kadoya, M., Matsuda, H., Yamahara, J.,et al. (1995a). Bioactive saponins and glycosides. I. Senegae radix.(1): E-senegasaponins a and b and Z-senegasaponins a and b, their inhibitory effecton alcohol absorption and hypoglycemic activity. Chem. Pharm. Bull. 43, 2115.doi: 10.1248/cpb.43.2115Yoshikawa, M., Murakami, T., Ueno, T., Kadoya, M., Matsuda, H., Yamahara, J.,et al. (1995b). E-senegasaponins A and B, Z-senegasaponins A and B, Z-senegins II and III, new type inhibitors of ethanol absorption in rats fromsenegae radix, the roots of Polygala senega L. var latifolia Torrey et Gray. Chem.Pharm. Bull. 43, 350. doi: 10.1248/cpb.43.350Yoshikawa, M., Murakami, T., Matsuda, H., Ueno, T., Kadoya, M., Yamahara, J.,et al. (1996). Bioactive saponins and glycosides. II. Senegae Radix.(2): Chemicalstructures, hypoglycemic activity, and ethanol absorption-inhibitory effect ofE-senegasaponin c, Z-senegasaponin c, and Z-senegins II, III, and IV. Chem.Pharm. Bull. 44, 1305. doi: 10.1248/cpb.44.1305Zahedipour, F., Hosseini, S. A., Sathyapalan, T., Majeed, M., Jamialahmadi, T., Al-Rasadi, K., et al. (2020). Potential effects of curcumin in the treatmentofCOVID-19 infection. Phytother. Res. 1–10. doi: 10.1002/ptr.6738Zakay-Rones, Z., Varsano, N., Zlotnik, M., Manor, O., Regev, L., Schlesinger, M.,et al. (1995). Inhibition of several strains of influenza virus in vitro andreduction of symptoms by an elderberry extract (Sambucus nigra L.) during anoutbreak of influenza B Panama. J. Altern. Complement Med. Res. 1, 361–369.doi: 10.1089/acm.1995.1.361Zakay-Rones, Z., Thom, E., Wollan, T., and Wadstein, J. (2004). Randomizedstudy of the efficacy and safety of oral elderberry extract in the treatment ofinfluenza A and B virus infections. J. Int. Med. Res. 32, 132–140. doi: 10.1177/147323000403200205Zhang, L., Wang, Y., Yang, D., Zhang, C., Zhang, N., Li, M., et al. (2015). Platycodongrandiflorus – An Ethnopharmacological, phytochemical and pharmacologicalreview. J. Ethnopharmacol. 164, 147–161. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2015.01.052Zhao, T., Tang, H., Xie, L., Zheng, Y., Ma, Z., Sun, Q., et al. (2019). Scutellariabaicalensis Georgi.(Lamiaceae): a review of its traditional uses, botany,September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840Silveira et al. COVID-19 and Evidence-Based Phytotherapyphytochemistry, pharmacology and toxicology. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 71, 1353–1369. doi: 10.1111/jphp.13129Zheng,Y.-Y.,Ma,Y.-T., Zhang, J.-Y., andXie,X. (2020).COVID-19and the cardiovascularsystem.Nat. Rev. Cardiol. 17, 259–260. doi: 10.1038/s41569-020-0360-5Zhou, F., Yu, T., Du, R., Fan, G., Liu, Y., Liu, Z., et al. (2020). Clinical course andrisk factors for mortality of adult inpatients with COVID-19 in Wuhan, China:a retrospective cohort study. Lancet 395, 1054–1062. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(20)30566-3Zobel, A. M., Wang, J., March, R. E., and Brown, S. A. (1991). Identification ofeight coumarins occurring with psoralen, xanthotoxin, and bergapten on leafsurfaces. J. Chem. Ecol. 17, 1859–1870. doi: 10.1007/bf00993733Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org 44Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that the research was conducted in theabsence of any commercial or financial relationships that could be construed as apotential conflict of interest.Copyright © 2020 Silveira, Prieto-Garcia, Boylan, Estrada, Fonseca-Bazzo, Jamal,Magalhães, Pereira, Tomczyk and Heinrich. This is an open-access article distributedunder the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (CC BY). The use,distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original author(s)and the copyright owner(s) are credited and that the original publication in this journal iscited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution orreproduction is permitted which does not comply with these terms.September 2020 | Volume 11 | Article 581840