Cells harbouring multiple centrosomes constantly exhibited abnormal nuclear morphology including the presence of micronuclei.In light of the detrimental consequences caused by aneugenic compounds such as reproductive failure and tumourigenesis, understanding the mechanisms of action as well as routine testing for regulatory purposes is considered to be paramount (Parry et al., 2002) where the development of suitable detection techniques has been a primary drive of research programmes within the European Union (Parry & Sors, 1993; Parry et al., 1996). The in vitro micronucleus assay in combination with kinetochore labelling and chromosome specific centromeric/telomeric probes is a recommended method to screen for aneugens by both theCopy 1 54Y. SharifuddinChapter ICommittee on Mutagenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the Environment (COM) and the European Union Research Group (Parry et al., 2002).M i _______ ^ T i ________ > Single hit-single target (DNA)H | J \M i2 ---- > T l ^ K l Multiple hit-single target (Ion channels)MiT l.lSingle hit-multiple target (Tonoisomerase, tubulins)Multiple hit-multiple target (nuclear membrane, spindles)Fig. 1.21. Comparative interactions between mutagen (M), cellular target (T) and the endpoint being measured (E). The identity o f possible targets are shown in brackets and different molecules from the same mutagen or different targets are denoted by the numbered subscripts. Diagram adopted from Kirsch-Volders et al. (2003).Indirect mechanisms of genotoxicity is the direct interaction of a genotoxin with non-DNA targets leading to genotoxic effects (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003). Furthermore, the existence of biologically meaningful threshold dose-response curves for indirect-acting genotoxins such as aneugens is possible since more than one cellular targets need to be overwhelmed before any significant and observable effects are manifested (Parry et al., 1993; Kirsch- Volders et al., 2002). Since the elucidation of possible threshold is beyond the scope of this thesis, it will not be discussed in depth. However, Kirsch-Volders et al. (2000; 2003) suggested three important aspects in analysing the basis for the existence of threshold namely the number of targets involved, target identity as well as the sensitivity and type of endpoints measured. As depicted in Figure 1.21, a threshold dose-response curve is considered to be absent from a single hit-single target interaction.Copy I 5 51.19 Testing Strategies for Genotoxicity Detection.Y. SharifuddinChapter I1.19.1 Hazard and Risk AssessmentsSince the introduction of the Ames test, various other test systems were developed utilising prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells with each advocated to possess the best ability in detecting carcinogenic agents. Despite this cornucopia of tests, not all o f them could singly, reliably differentiate between carcinogenic and non-carcinogenic analogues of similar chemical structure. There was also no or little guidance and consistency in the experiment designs or acceptance criteria. Furthermore, the number and types of studies required for products registration differs widely between regulating agencies worldwide, which in some cases can be viewed as a subtle form of trade barrier rather than scientific requirements.T oxicitym ech an ism sExposureH azardidentificationR iskassessm entTo detect # To com p reh en d I To p red ict & p reven tFig. 1.22. The elucidation o f mechanism(s) o f toxicity (including genotoxicity) connects hazard detection with risk assessment for human health and permits toxicity prediction and prevention o f detrimental exposure.A plethora of potentially hazardous substances has been detected in the past and the number of new chemicals added to this list is growing steadily. One of the most compelling reasons for improving our detailed comprehension of toxicity mechanisms is that a deeper understanding will allow better data extrapolation and improving risk assessment of potentially genotoxic chemicals for human safety. This does not only apply to pharmacophore in development stage but also chemicals in the work place and in agriculture, pollutants as well as naturally occurring or synthetic hazardous compounds in food or residues in drinking water. The step from the mere detection o f a genotoxic hazard (qualitative aspect) to the final assessment of risk in human populations (quantitative aspect) involves a number o f assessments, estimations and considerations. For a chemical, it is clearly insufficient to introduce a safety margin based on animal data or cell culture experimentations, instead realistic exposure information has to be taken into account.Copy 1 56Y. SharifuddinChapter 1Furthermore, information on genotoxicants' mode of actions is useful in calculating more accurately the risk for humans such as exposure to harmful aneugens (Parry et al., 2002;| Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003).1iiII As illustrated in Figure 1.22, hazard and risk assessment generally involves three main stepsnamely hazard identification and characterisation, exposure assessment and risk I characterisation. For an agent of interest, firstly the possible hazard such as the compound'sinherent properties that may cause adverse health effects upon human exposure are | identified. Subsequently, the qualitative and quantitative responses after exposure are determined taking into account the mode of actions as well as type, duration and route of exposure which are normally established through dose-response adverse effects, if there is any. Exposure assessment is the estimation, measurement or prediction of exposure/intake of the agent of interest by the general population, sub-population or individuals in terms of frequency, duration and severity of exposure. Finally, risk characterisation is the integration of information obtained in order to establish a safe level of exposure.1.19.2 Genotoxicity Testing for Regulatory PurposesThe awareness of this fact prompted the scientific and regulatory communities to pursue the standardisation and harmonisation of protocols and test systems. There are various platforms on which the international experts used to issue guidance such as the International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH) and the International Workshops on Genotoxicity Testing (IWGT) which look into test methods resulting in OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and Development) guidelines and testing strategies. There are also ! advisory panels on national level such as the Committee on Mutagenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the Environment (COM) for the UK. Furthermore, GoodiLaboratory Practice regulations (GLPs) have always been a requirement to guarantee the integrity of non-clinical studies conducted to support regulatory submissions.Changes or damage to the DNA can be manifested in various forms such as gene mutations or chromosomal aberrations. No single test system is capable of detecting all these changes, thus the concept of using a battery of different tests was conceived.Copy 1 57Y. SharifuddinChapter 1Testing strategies for mutation detection should include all three levels of mutation with the aim to assess the possibility of gene mutations, aneugens and clastogens. Since the initiation of genotoxicity testing, there has been a steady and continuous development of a wide variety of test systems employing bacterial, yeast and mammalian cell cultures. Most of the testIj systems have specific endpoints. The Committee on Mutagenicity of Chemicals in Food, Consumer Products and the Environment (COM) is an expert advisory committee responsible in providing advice to the Department of Health and other departments and|j agencies within Her Majesty's government that possess regulatory roles. The Committee| recommends a three-stage testing approach for mutagenic potential. Stage 1 is a battery of invitro screening for potential mutagen involving three test systems. Stage 2 involves in vivo tests in somatic cells and the third stage is activity assessment in germ cells (COM, 2000).The COM guidelines (COM, 2000) will be discussed in this thesis unless otherwise stated.1.19.2.1 In Vitro Assays in Somatic Cells in Stage 1As outlined previously, Stage 1 is the initial screening based on in vitro tests and for most chemicals, three tests are recommended where detection for both aneugenicity and clatogenicity is possible at this point (COM, 2000). These three tests are bacterial test for gene mutation, in vitro metaphase analysis or in vitro micronucleus test and mammalian cell mutation assay. Negative results from these three tests or just two, where small or no human exposure is expected such as industrial intermediates, would provide sufficient data for the assessment of most chemicals. A clearly positive outcome from any of these tests or in cases where equivocal results that cannot be resolved by further in vitro tests, warrants in vivo assessment in Stage 2. Figure 1.23 shows a flow chart for stage 1 testing procedures.1.19.2.2 In Vivo Assays in Somatic Cells in Stage 2Stage 2 is a continuation of mutagenicity assessment to elucidate the potential of genotoxic activity seen in Stage 1 to be manifested in somatic cells in vivo. A malleable strategy is required for in vivo tests taking into consideration the nature of the chemical being investigated, its metabolism information and data obtained in Stage 1. The most suitable test is bone marrow micronucleus assay to measure aneugenicity and clastogenicity unless there is a contradiction to the initial considerations. If the results are negative, further testsCopy 1 58Y. SharifuddinChapter 1involving other tissue(s) are required to provide clear assurance for the absence of in vivo activity for all compounds that was shown to be positive in earlier in vitro studies.Second in vivo test(s) that may be appropriate includes the liver UDS (Unscheduled DNA synthesis) assay, comet assay, 32P-postlabelling assay, covalent DNA binding and assays using transgenic animals. The choice of assay in any circumstances should be justified and | considered on a case-by-case basis taking into account the available information including data from previous tests. Figure 1.24 shows a flow chart for stage 2 testing procedures.1.19.2.3 Testing in Germ Cells in Stage 3.Stage 3 is mutagen assessment in germ cells and requirements for such studies needs careful consideration. Generally, chemicals that have been classified as in vivo somatic cell mutagens will be considered to be both potential genotoxic carcinogens and germ cell mutagens, therefore does not warrant further genotoxic testing. However, in some cases germ cell studies may be undertaken to prove otherwise. A number of assays such as micronuclei induction in spermatocytes and the dominant lethal assay, both for clastogenicity and aneugenicity detection, can be used to determine whether the compound of interest is genotoxic in germ cells. Information on DNA lesions induction can be obtained via various Stage I methods discussed previously. Results on mutation types observed in earlier tests will be crucial when considering the most suitable assay in a particular case and none of the assays mentioned is capable of providing definitive data as to the possibility that the mutations are heritable in future generations. The only methods that allow estimates of such risks to be calculated are the mouse specific locus test and the mouse heritable translocation test. However, this route of action is not practical taking into account the very large number ! of animals required and should only be considered in exceptional circumstances. At the moment there are no routine tests available for elucidating the induction of aneuploidy in progeny of treated animals. Figure 1.25 shows a flow chart for Stage 3 germ cell testing procedure.Copy 1 59Y. SharifuddinChapter 1Flgire 1. STAGE 1: initial screening.START by considering factors relevant to Stags 1 tests such as physico-chemical properties of substance' impurities SAR^Undertake Stage 1 tests1. Bacterial test for gene mutation2. Test for clastogenicity and for indications Of aneugenicity:i) In-v1tf0 metaphase analysis orii) In Vitro micronucleus test*.3. Mammalian coll mutation assay (currently, the preferred choice is the m ouse lymphoma assay)* *Test 3 is not required fcr those substances where there w il be little or no human exposure. * * *A \If a POSITIVE result h obtained in any cne o f the three tests then the substance should be considered as anh-srtr o mutagen.In-vr.o testng v i^l be required.If NEGATIVE results are obtained h al Stage I screening tests consider that sibstance is not mutagenic.Proceed to Stage 2 only where human exposure is expected to be high. or moderate and sustained.If EQUIVOCAL results are obtained consider further h-vitro testing. If this does rot resol.e the si teu ton then h - viuo testing is required) Stage 2).Consider resdts and proceed to Stage 2 (see Fig ir e 2): Assessm ent o f mutagenic hazard In-Vh/O.j - ................Mnm* lie -- tm m a t n ar mmt j n Jtf w tm y ] J pnllw iw O n t >> K tm iX ti w h*Mdbsian wtwim OmampnrrS>>tnm>>>ijmtr)\a>>*** C >> u t r t i t u j n M ) w r H i<< r f l ia |< u >> i} t i [<< m r im << n M ) f C U k |i n r a M u ln M M m U lio<<n ^ (l>>a>>> tr^ it>>n i|ln iy U W /< << m >> . t y a n b --uawpm ijH tct >ewwi Am*.Fig. 1.23. Stage 1 initial screening procedure. Adapted from Guidance on Strategy for Testing o f Chemicals forMutagenicity (COM, 2000).Copy I 6 0Y. SharifuddinChapter IFigure 2. STAGE 2:Strategy for In-VlVO somatic-cell testing/B efore undertaking irv vivo testing review the results o f h-vitro screenhg tests (eg the nature^ of effects seen), avalable irfcrmaticn on the metaboic profle cf the chemical and its stiucture. IfVVlVO testing for mutagenicity in somatic cells is required to ascertain whether mutagenic activity seen in Stage I can be expressed in-vivo and fcr reassurance for sibstances where exposue is expected to be high, cr moderate and sustained *TFIRST TESTIn most rtstances this 'will be on IrwlVO micronuc leers assay fconesmarrow (rodent) or perpherd blood (mouse)} or bone morrow assay for dastogenicity. *1f evidence of aneugwicity from Stage 1 use linetochcre or centromeric staining. )Other tests may be more appropriate, for example fcr shcrt-lived. react roe irv vitro mutagens where assays ining site ofcontacttissue(s) shoiid be considered. In such instanc es see Table I .VIf POSfTh/E consider asln-VlVO / IF NEGATWE endertdee a furthersomatic cell mutagen. test(i) only if the chemical wasclearly positive in a Stage 1w ' r In-vitro test. yIf EQUIVOCAL consider further testing on a cose-by-case basis. This may involve repeating a bcne-marrow (cr m cose peripheral blood) test cr incfertaking a test in another tissue.f SECOND TESTThe choice o f assays fcr mutagenicity testing in tissues other than bcoe- marrow is given h Table I . There is a need to select the most appropriate test(s). on a c ase-by -cose basis. All relevant factors such as results frcm previous tests, and available infcrmaticn cn toxiccfcinetics and metabolism c f the substance, should be considered.IF POSITIVE c IF NEGATIVEIIf EQUIVOCAL reflect on al the orvalable hfcrmibcn and consider if concfieicn c an be reached based cn weight o f evidenc e cr if additional testing is requ'red^ConsiderasiD-VftfO somatic cell mutagen ^ and potential carcinogen and possble germ cel mutagen. Proc eed to Stage 3 (see Figure 3): Assessment of germ cell mutagenicity #when a risk assessment o f heritable effects is r^equrod. ^Consider all the orvaiabfe infcrmaticn with a view to drawing a conclusion that the chemical is not an IfVVl'/O mutagen* jilwt* li tMMiHoliMtc wpiMOifUfc iittixrol Unli inUintWJ*)>MiinirKfTryb<<(ikntyt>>0}myUtic<<yn daxFig. 1.24. Flow chart for Stage 2 in vivo screening procedure. Adapted from Guidance on Strategy for Testingo f Chemicals for Mutagenicity (COM, 2000).Copy I 61Y. SharifuddinChapter IFigure 3. STAGE 3: Strategy for geim cell testing:For most compounds that are recognised as in-vivo somatic cell mutagens no further genotoxicity testing is necessary. This strategy applies only in cases where it is important to consider the potential o f somatic cel mutagens to affect germ cells.Test mutagenicity/genotoxicity to germ cel from the folowing:- Assay for dastogenicity and aneugenisity in mammalian spermatogonia! cells, or spermatocytes, dominant lethal assay or other methods for measuring mutagenicity or DNA damage.The choice o f test should take into account data from earlier mutagenicity tests, and the properties o f the chemical and its toxicokinetics and metabolism7 [ \If POSITIVE chemkal should be f If NEGATIVE consider al the Nc cnsidere<<d as a germ cell available information with a viewmUtagen/aneugen. to drawing the conclusion that thechemical is not a germ cellmutagen.If EQUIVOCAL review a l the avaiable information and consider whether further testing is justified cr whether a conclusion can be reached based on weight o f evidence.In cases where there is strong justification undertake father studies to evaluate risk o f heritable effects (see text for dscussion). )Fig. 1.25. Flow chart for Stage 3 germ cell testing procedure. Adapted from Guidance on Strategy for Testingo f Chemicals for Mutagenicity (COM, 2000).Copy 1 6 22CHAPTER 2PART 1. IN SILICO ASSESSMENT OF GENOTOXICITY AND TOXICITY POTENTIAL OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDEPART 2.