SharifuddinChapter 1Mammalian cells will proliferate only if stimulated by extracellular growth factors secreted by other cells. These operate within the cell through the proto-oncogene signal transduction cascade. If deprived of such signals during Gi, the cell diverts from the cell cycle and enters the so-called Go state. Cells can remain in Go for years before recommencing division.The Go block is imposed by mitosis-suppressor proteins such as the retinoblastoma (Rb) protein encoded by the normal allele of the retinoblastoma gene. These bind to specific regulatory proteins preventing them from stimulating the transcription of genes required for cell proliferation. Extracellular growth factors destroy this by activating Gi-specific cyclin- CDK complexes, which phosphorylate the Rb protein, altering its conformation and causing it to release its bound regulatory proteins. The latter are then free to activate transcription of their target genes and cell proliferation ensues (reviewed by Lodish et al., 1995).The cell cycle is driven by alternating activation and de-activation of key enzymes known as cyclin-dependent protein kinases (CDKs), and their cofactors called cyclins. This is performed by phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation by other phosphokinases and phosphatases, specific cyclin-CDK complexes triggering specific phases of the cycle. At appropriate stages, the same classes of proteins cause the chromosomes to condense, the nuclear envelope to break down and the microtubules of the cytoskeleton to re-organise to form the mitotic spindle.Copy 1 37Y. SharifuddinChapter IGrowth * and normal metabolic roles k mand x: preparation 5 for mitosisDNAreplicationGrowthFig. 1.14. Shows the main stages o f the cell cycle divided into two main parts, the interphase and the mitotic phase. Interphase consists o f G), S and G2 phases whereas the mitotic (M) phase can be further sub-divided into prophase, metaphase, anaphase and telophase. Cytokinesis marks the end o f the cell cycle and produced two genetically identical daughter cells. (Diagram obtained from http://bhs.smuhsd.org).1.14 Cell Cycle Checkpoints and the Integrity of the GenomeDirectly after mitosis, in Gi phase the cell increases in size and initiates necessary RNA synthesis (transcription) and proteins (translation). In subsequent S phase, nuclear DNA is replicated to produce an exact copy o f the genome for the ensuing daughter cells. During G2 , the cells will grow and produce extra proteins to ensure that two viable daughter cells can be formed. The process of RNA and protein syntheses that began in the Gi phase are extended during the S and G2 phases. Finally, during M phase, the chromosomes are organised so that two genetically identical progeny cells can be configured, after which the entire cycle can begin again. Cells can also stop dividing to remain in Go and may stay in this state for a considerable amount of time before starting to divide again or remain in Go permanently until the organism dies (reviewed by Lodish et al., 1995; Purves et al., 1998).In a normal cell cycle, the passage from one phase to another is strictly governed. Although still being debated, genetic evidence that proteins involved in the orderly progression through the cell cycle are also involved in the checkpoint response to DNA damage is accumulating.Copy I3 8Y. SharifuddinChapter 1This connotes that in all cells, these cell cycle checkpoint pathways are active in basal state but they are up-regulated in response to DNA damage. The term checkpoint is defined more upon the transition between phases that is being inhibited by DNA damage at the Gi/S, intra- S and G2/M checkpoints. Although these checkpoints are temporally distinct, they all j response to DNA damage and share many proteins (reviewed by Klug and Cummings, 2005).|The DNA damage responses during any phase of the cell cycle possess the same pattern.After the detection of DNA damage by sensor proteins, signal transducer proteins transmit the signal to effector proteins, which in turn launch a cascade of events that cause cell cycle arrest, DNA repairs, apoptosis and/or activation of damage-induced transcription programs.1.14.1 The Gi/S checkpointThe Gi/S transition is promoted by non-phosphorylated CDC25A protein. The type of DNA damage encountered determines the response pathway of cell cycle arrest. DNA double strand breaks lead to phosphorylation of ATM which in turn phosphorylates Chk2. Singlestrand gaps cause the activation of the ATR, Radl7-RFC and the 9-1-1 complex, resulting in the phosphorylation of Chkl. Thus the phosphorylation of CDC25A by Chkl or Chk2 causes inactivation of this protein by nuclear exclusion and ubiquitin-mediated proteolytic degradation, leading to Gi arrest. ATM and ATR also phosphorylates p53, which leads to stabilisation and accumulation of p53 protein as well as the promotion of p53 transcription factor activity. The target of the transcription factor p53 is p21 , whose role is to inhibit CDK2 activity causing the maintenance of cell cycle arrest. For this reason, p53 is known affectionately as 'the guardian of the genome'.11.14.2 The Intra-S-phase checkpointThere are two pathways mediating this checkpoint. The first pathway, the ATM/ATR- Chk2/Chkl-CDC25A-CDK2 is almost similar to Gi/S checkpoint and is responsible for postponing DNA replication by inhibiting the loading of CDC45 onto chromatin. As a consequent, DNA polymerase-a attach to the pre-replication complexes and prolonging the DNA replication period thus permitting DNA repair to occur.The second pathway involves NBS1 (NBS stands for Nijmegen breakage syndrome, referring to a human disorder characterised by cancer predisposition, chromosomal instability, immunodeficiency, hypersensitivity to ionising radiation and growth impediment) that is phosphorylated by ATM together with Chk2. This activation leads to a cascade involvingCopy 1 39Y. SharifuddinChapter 1Rad50- and Mrel 1-like initial DSB recognition that is not only required in cell cycle arrest but also in repair processes activation.1.14.3 The G2/M checkpoint| When cells confront DNA damage in G2, the G2/M checkpoint halts the cell cycle in order to! restrain the cell from entering mitosis. As in the Gi/S checkpoint, the type of DNA damagedictates the cellular response route; the ATR-Chkl-CDC25 for DNA lesions such as those|I caused by UV light and ATM-Chk2-CDC25 for double-strand breaks. Apart from down-i| regulating CDC25A, both Chkl and Chk2 up-regulate WEE1 via phosphorylation, whichitogether manage CDC2/CyclinB activity. This latter complex augments G2/M transition under normal circumstances and inactivation blocks the cell cycle when damage occurs in G2. The maintenance of this arrest seems to be partly independent of p53/p21, unlike in the Gi/S checkpoint, whereas tumour cells lacking functional p53 still tend to accumulate in G2 after the induction of DNA damage (reviewed by Klug and Cummings, 2005).As the cell cycle checkpoint pathways are predominantly evolved to prevent transferring DNA damage to daughter cells, it is obvious that defects in checkpoint responses can result in genomic instability leading to transformation of normal cells into cancer cells. Indeed, the absence of p53 or ATM causes syndromes featuring cancer susceptibility. In addition, other genes involved in cell cycle checkpoints are related to cancer, most of them also having function in DNA repair. This combination probably makes mutations or deletions more severe where there is less repair and less control.After the successful completion of interphase, mitosis which is the second major stage of the cell cycle will commence. The replicated chromosomes must become condensed to be able to migrate to the opposite poles, which ultimately will become two separate daughter cells. The sequence of events in mitosis is described below with the aid of Figure 1.15 that shows the delicate dance of chromosomes during mitosis.Prophase.Prophase begins immediately after interphase. The chromosomes each consisting of two identical sister chromatids, begin to contract and become visibly condensed within the nucleus. The nucleoli gradually disperse. The centrosomes begin to duplicate, split and subsequently migrate to the opposite sides of the cell and forming the spindle polesCopy 1 40Y. SharifuddinChapter 1(microtubule organising centres, MTOCs). The spindle apparatus of tubulin fibres begins to assemble around the two centrosomes at opposite poles of the cell.Pro-metaphase (late prophase).The nuclear membrane dematerialises and kinetochores develop around the centromeres of | the chromosomes. Tubulin fibres enter the nucleus and assemble, radiating out from the| kinetochores and linking up with those radiating from the centrosomes.I Metaphase.| Tension in the spindle fibres causes the chromosomes to align midway between the spindle poles thus creating the metaphase plate. This alignment facilitates the separation of chromatids.Anaphase.When the chromatids of each chromosome begin to separate, the cells enter anaphase and this is the shortest part of mitosis. The centromeric DNA shared by sister chromatids isduplicated, they separate and are drawn towards the spindle poles. All of the chromosomesbegin to separate at the same time.Telophase.This is the final stage of mitosis and is essentially the reverse of prophase. The separated sister chromatids (now considered to be chromosomes) reach the spindle poles and a nuclear membrane reforms around each group. New nuclear membranes are produced by the endoplasmic reticulum. The spindle fibers depolymerise, condensed chromatin uncoil then diffuses and nucleoli re-appear. Telophase ends when the nuclei of the two resultant daughter cells appear to be in interphase.Copy 1 41Y. SharifuddinChapter /A. prophaseaster ^&m icrotubules (spmdle fibres)centriolesnuclearm em braneB. late prophase (metaphase)chrom atidscentrom ere cytoplasmD. anaphase >x ><centrom ereC. metaphaseI equato rKnuclearm em branefragm enti i Jpole -- -- polesep ara ted chrom atid(c) 2 0 0 6 Merri-am-Webstei^ Inc.E. telophasenuclear ch rom osom e m em t)raneuncoiling re -formingFig. 1.15. The delicate dance o f chromosomes during mitosis can be sub-divided into four main stages. Centrioles are crucial element in centrosome which act as spindle poles pulling sister chromatids in opposite direction. (Diagram obtained from www.britannica.com).Cytokinesis.After a successful completion of karyokinesis, cytokinesis or the physical separation of one cell into two daughter cells marks the end of the cell cycle. This process requires a synchronious operation of the membrane systems, the cytoskeleton and the cell cycle mechanism, which are spatially and temporally controlled in a precise manner. One must point out that cytokinesis actually begins in late anaphase where microtubules have elongated and contact the cortex. The rearrangement also created a region of bundled microtubules between the chromosomes termed the midzone. In early telophase, the cleavage furrow ingresses and as cytokinesis progresses, the cleavage furrow has fully ingressed constricting the midzone effectively forming an intercellular bridge containing a microtubule midbody. When the intercellular bridge is resolved and eventually separates the two daughter cells, cytokinesis and ultimately the cell cycle is completed. Figure 1.16 highlights the progressive part of the cytokinesis process.Copy I4 2Y. SharifuddinChapter 1M i d z o n eFig. 1.16. Different stages o f cytokinesis shown in a progressive manner by schematic and immunoflurescence illustrations, (a) Cell is in a metaphase stage where chromosomes are aligned at the equator (metaphase plate) by the microtubules o f the mitotic spindle, (b) Microtubules have extended and contract the cortex, a region o f bundled microtubules between chromosomes known as the midzone was created after microtubule rearrangement. The cell is in late anaphase and the cleavage furrow components (red) have rallied at the equator, (c) Cell is in early telophase and cleavage furrow continues to ingress, (d) In late telophase, the cleavage furrow has completely ingressed and compacted the midzone producing an intercellular bridge consisting o f microtubule midbody. Cytokinesis is completed when the intercellular bridge is resolved giving rise to two genetically identical daughter cells. (Eggert et a l., 2006)1.15 The Centrosome CycleAt Gi the pair of centrioles associated with each centrosome separate. During S-phase and G2 a new daughter centriole grows at right angles to each old one. The centrosome then splits the beginning of M-phase and the two daughter centrosomes move to opposite spindle poles. This cycle will be discussed in further details in Chapter 4 of this thesis.1.16 DNA Damage Repair MechanismsThere are two processes that enable a cell to cope with the severity of DNA damage it sustains. If the damage is extensive, the cell can initiate apoptosis. However, if the damage is less serious, cells have developed a range of repair processes that restore the DNA to its undamaged state (error-free repair) or to an improved but still altered state (error-prone repair).Copy I4 3! Y. Sharifuddin! Chapter 1DNA damage checkpoints can only prevent the transfer of mutations to daughter cells in the [ presence of an efficient DNA damage repair machinery. Different types of DNA repairpathways have evolved to counter various categories of lesions possible. Important pathways in mammalian cells include base excision repair (BER), nucleotide excision repair (NER), mismatch repair (MMR) and double-strand break (DSB) repair.1.17 Genotoxicants and MutationsWhen xenobiotics are internalised by cells, most of them are metabolised and the resultant metabolites are either retained or excreted. Inside the cell, genotoxicants or their metabolites are capable of directly or indirectly affect the regulation and expression of genes that are j crucial in DNA repair, cell cycle oversight, cell differentiation and/or apoptosis. Somegenotoxicants act directly by forming DNA adducts or inducing chromosomal abnormalities such as chromosome fusion, breakage, deletion, non-disjunction and missegregation. For example, arsenic and nickel are known to cause numerical and structural chromosomel| abnormalities (Hughes, 2002; Kasprzak et a!., 2003). Other genotoxicants may act via non-| genotoxic routes such as causing inflammation, formation of reactive oxygen species,immunosuppression, epigenetic silencing as well as receptor activation such as oestrogen receptor or arylhydrocarbon receptor. Cumulatively, these genotoxic and non-genotoxic mechanisms can change signal-transduction pathways resulting in hypermutability, genomic | instability, failure in cell proliferation control and resistance to apoptosis, which are some ofthe hallmark of cancer cells (reviewed by Hanahan & Weinberg, 2000). Figure 1.17 overleaf provides an overview of genotoxic and non-genotoxic action routes of genotoxicants.A mutation is an alteration that occurs to the structure or quality of the genetic material that could lead to a change in phenotype. Mutations can involve modifications of the nucleotide sequence of a single gene, block of genes or whole chromosomes. Changes in: (1) single genes are the consequence of a point mutation, (2) blocks of genes are generally due to strand breaks; and (3) whole chromosomes are due to aneuploidy.Mutations are permanent changes to nuclear DNA and can be inheritable if germ cells are involved. During cell division, replication errors may arise from damaged bases (e.g. Alkyl- Guanine) resulting in mutation which potentially capable of altering the gene product. TheCopy 1 44Genotoxic mechanisms* DNA adducts* Chromosomal abnormalitiesEpigenetic silencing Receptor activationY. SharifuddinChapter 1occurrence of such errors during replication are usually due to exposure to viruses, chemicals, radiation or even internally during normal biological processes such as meiosis!and hypermutation (reviewed by Griffiths et al., 2004). Although mutations can have | undesirable effects, they are valuable currency in evolution. Deleterious and unfavourable| mutations will be removed from the gene pool via natural selection and those that confer! advantageous adaptation to a species will accumulate in the population. There are also| neutral mutations that accumulate with time but are not deleterious in nature (reviewed byGriffiths et al., 2004). !iIMutations can be categorised into somatic mutations that result in neoplasia (cancer) or cell death and germline mutations, which are inheritable and in some cases such as familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) involving colorectal cancer is attributed to the APC gene mutation, capable of causing somatic mutations in the progeny (reviewed by Klug and Cummings, 2005)Mutations may be genetically sub-divided into different order and those that occur at nucleotide level are micro-mutations whereas those that cause changes at chromosomal level are macro-mutations.1.17.1 Micro-mutationsa) Point mutations:Transitions are exchanges of a purine with another purine (i.e. A<->>G) or a pyrimidine for a pyrimidine (i.e. C<<-*T). Transversions in comparison are less common where a pyrimidine has been exchanged with a purine and vice-versa (e.g. A/G<<->>C/T). There are essentially three kinds of point mutations depending on what the erroneous codon codes for:1) Silent mutations: Changes to the amino sequence but code for the same amino acid, thus no changes in biological homeostasis.2) Mis-sense mutations: Changes to the DNA are manifested by changes in amino acid resulting in protein sequence alteration that have no impact, can be lethal or in some rare occasion lead to gain of function.3) Non-sense mutations: Code for a stop codon that shorten the protein, which may have no effect, leading to a loss or gain of function.Copy 1 46Y. SharifuddinChapter 1b) Insertions:One or more nucleotides added into the DNA that normally formed by transposable elements or errors during replication of repeating components (e.g. tandem repeats).