Thus, p53 status alone may not significantly influence normal centrosome presence since abnormal centrosome number can be seen in tumours with persistent p53 activity (Lingle et al., 2002; D'Assoro et al., 2002; Pihan et al., 2003) suggesting that actors other than the 'guardian of the genome' might be involved.The major cell cycle control mechanism that acts during mitosis is the spindle assembly checkpoint, also known as the mitotic checkpoint which prevents chromosome malsegregation and aneuploidy via inhibition of cell cycle progression into anaphase, until all of the replicated chromosomes have attached to spindle microtubules. Mitotic checkpoint proteins are recruited to kinetochores of unattached chromosomes leading to the generation of an at least partially diffusible signal inhibiting the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C). The APC/C is an E3 ubiquitin ligase that ubiquitinates substrates whose degradation is essential for anaphase inception (securin) and mitotic exitII (cyclin B). Abolition of securin post-ubiquitination releases its binding partner separase,i! whereas simultaneous depletion of cyclin B-dependent CDK1 kinase activity resulting in separase dephosphorylation. Both events cause separase activation, which then cleaves the cohesins that hold replicated chromosomes together and initiates anaphase. Even a single unattached kinetochore can be sufficient to delay anaphase onset (Rieder et al.,1994; Rieder et al., 1995). A weakened mitotic checkpoint where inability to maintain checkpoint signalling process can lead to chromosome loss or non-disjunction concordant with decrease length of arrest. Complete absence of the mitotic checkpoint on the other hand, results in rapid cell-autonamous lethality due to extensive chromosome|iI c deg p y ] 192Y. SharifuddinChapter 4missegregation and the cells die within six divisions (Michel et al., 2004; Kops et al.,2004). Chromosome segregation errors due to microtubules nucleated by multipolar MTOCs cannot be prevented by the mitotic checkpoint if the kinetochores made productive attachment to the spindles.iiii; A large number of gene products are involved in the mitotic checkpoint responsej including but not limited to MAD2, BUB1, BUBR1 and Aurora B. Direct mutation inj any of the essential genes could compromise the checkpoint response. Alterations to the expression levels of these genes, which apparently occur more frequently in comparison to direct mutations, can also jeopardise the mitotic checkpoint. Lower expression of the crucial proteins would result in aneuploidy and chromosome instability, at least in proteins whose accumulation was rate-limiting for checkpoint signalling at individual kinetochores. Indeed, this was shown to be the case for MAD2 and BUBR1 (Michel et al., 2001; Baker et al., 2004). The mechanism by which overexpression of individual checkpoint proteins can elicit aneuploidy is not fully understood yet but has been observed in various human cancers. For example, BUB3 was found to be upregulated in breast (Yuan et al., 2006), gastric (Grabsch et al., 2003) and lung (Miura et al., 2002) cancers respectively. It is not known whether andrographolide is capable of affecting the expression levels of crucial genes involved in checkpoints.Surprisingly, there is no known checkpoint that terminates mitosis in response to abnormal MTOCs accumulation (Sluder et al., 1997). Cells can compensate for having multiple MTOCs by clustering them together to bipolar division with equal or almost equal chromosome segregation (Ring et al., 1982; Brinkley, 2001; Quintyne et al., 2005).| Some V-79 cells were observed to possess an ability to form a pseudo-bipolar MTOCs byi| clustering or aligning multiple centrosomes by a mechanism still to be understood which| structurally mimics the normal bipolar spindle poles and is suspected to segregate chromosomes equally, at least for that particular division. Figure 4.11(B) shows an example of a pseudo-bipolar V-79 cell in comparison to a normal bipolar cell. It is also conceivable that some multipolar spindles can transform to pseudo-bipolar spindles during mitosis but are not devoid of chromosome segregation errors. Centrosomes spatial proximity at the beginning of mitosis may determine the possibility and extent of centrosome clustering, where amplified centrosomes close to each other will be grouped and those widely apart will nucleate microtubules independently. The centrosomeCopy 1 193Y. SharifuddinChapter 4clustering dimension in turn may determine whether chromosome separation process is equal or almost equal. Centrosomal clustering requires the microtubule motor cytoplasmic dynein. In some tumours, it has been speculated that multipolarity is correlated to the overexpression of the spindle protein NuMa and that NuMa interferesi| with dynein localisation to the spindles (Quintyne et al., 2005). Whether these factors contribute to the multipolar spindles observed after DNA damage remains to be established. The size of cells with multinucleated MTOCs were also bigger compared to | normal cells as shown in Figure 4.10, or even those possessing abnormal censtrosome numbers such as tri- and tetrapolar cells as animal cells do not proliferate exponentially ; and thus would not necessitate the evolution of a cell-size checkpoint (Brooks & Shields,1985).An increase in cell number always stems from the balance between cell proliferation and cell death, cell viability assessment performed using trypan-blue exclusion assay revealed that andrographolide caused cellular toxicity in a dose- and time-dependent manner, in agreement with data obtained earlier. There were statistically significant difference in the frequency of non-viable cells between 24- and 48- hour exposure with the latter possess higher percentage of dead cells as shown in Figure 4.3. Furthermore, the frequency of condensed chromatin, which also indicates cell death, accrued with andrographolide concentration and remained similar in the absence of andrographolide 24 hours after the initial insult (Figure 4.21). This observation indicates that cells challenged with andrographolide may not be able to recover from the damage inflicted.tRegardless of whether abnormal centrosome number arise due to overduplication, cytokinesis failure or any other mechanism, they are unlikely to behave merely as an audience to the mitotic dance. A frequent but not inevitable short-term effect of MTOCs multiplication is the formation of multipolar spindle, which can be superseded by a multipolar division producing more than two daughter cells. Undoubtedly, cells that were generated from multipolar division are destined to die due to the lack of essential genes.Thus, in reference to their proliferative potential, cells harbouring multiple MTOCs are expected to be at disadvantage when compared to cells with normal centrosome numbers.On the other hand, multipolar cell divisions are capable of inducing chromosomal instability especially chromosome combination where such occurrence are not onlyCopy 1 194Y. SharifuddinChapter 4compatible with life, it also confers a selective advantage to the surviving but genetically abnormal cell.In the studies conducted, andrographolide was shown to promote centrosome amplification, MTOCs multipolarity and aberrant mitotic cells leading to mitotic aberration. These effects along with cytotoxicity occurred in a dose-dependent manner and may shed more lights into the formation of micronuclei. Hence, andrographolide cellular target(s) may include the mitotic machinery. The presence of aberrant centrosome number might be transferred to daughter cells after division and can affect subsequent mitoses.Copy 1 1955CHAPTER 5ASSESSMENT OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDE'S MUTAGENIC POTENTIAL USING THE H PRT FORWARD MUTATION ASSAYY. SharifuddinChapter 5CHAPTER 5 ASSESSMENT OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDE'S MUTAGENIC POTENTIAL UTILISING THE HPRT FORWARD MUTATION ASSAY5.1 IntroductioniIA reliable and robust assay that is sensitive in detecting mutations in the low dose region of exposure is needed for both the qualitative and quantitative analysis of the dose response relationship of genotoxicants.Usually mutations are detected using mammalian cell test systems with high efficiency. In similarity to the microbial-based test systems, testing on mammalian cells are also rapid and can be conducted at a relatively low cost. The most common assays for gene mutation assessment in mammalian cells depend upon forward mutations that confer resistance to a toxic chemical, in contrast to the Ames test which is based on a reverse mutation principle. Thymidine kinase (TK) and hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferase (HPRT) mutation assays are two examples where forward mutations cause the inactivation of a wild type gene at heterozygous loci (TK*f~) and sex-linked loci (HPRT*). The mammalian forward mutation assays are capable of responding to a wide spectrum of mutagens because any mutation interfering with gene expression confers resistance to the toxic chemical (McGregor et al., 1989; Morris et al., 1994; Domon et al., 2001; Doak et al., 2007).The HPRT forward mutation assay employs hemizygous mammalian HPRT gene to elucidate genetic damage that is manifested as a loss of phenotypic characteristic. In this case it is the loss of cell proliferation in the presence of the lethal analogue 6-thioguanine which is cytotoxic to HPRT* but not to HPRT" mutants. In humans, mutations in the HPRT\gene leads to a neurological condition known as Lesch-Nyan and partial loss leading to gouty arthritis (Gibbs et al., 1990).1 Three appealing features of the mammalian HPRT gene mutation assay that contributed to it being widely used are;Copy I 196j Y. Sharifuddin| Chapter 5I| * The HPRT gene is encoded on the mammalian X-chromosome thus making itiI easier to select for loss of function in mutants in cells derived from males, whichin mammals are heterogametic. On the other hand, in cells from females it could I be due to inactivation of one of the X-chromosome. * Mutations in the same HPRT gene can be compared among cell lines,experimental animals and humans (Chen et al., 2002). * The biochemical selection systems for loss of function for cells that survive in thepresence of 6-thioguanine and/or 8-azoguanine are effectively simple (Caskey &Kruh, 1979).As large losses in the X-chromosome lead to lethality, detection of small changes such as point mutations in the HPRT gene provided valuable insights into possible mechanism of action involved.Further multiple events are required to transform DNA changes into selectable phenotypes after a chemical insult and these are fixation of the mutation and reduction of the preexisting enzyme to a level with no biological activity. Fixation of a mutation needs the initial lesion in the DNA such as strand break or damage to DNA-dependent protein, to be translated into change(s) to the DNA sequence such as point mutation or deletion. In the case of point mutation, the mutated strand must be separated from the wild type strand by cell division resulting in one of the progeny cells no longer able to synthesise active mRNA and/or protein. Point mutations can only occur after the completion of the cell cycle as the lesion affecting the base may be removed or repaired by DNA repair mechanisms and thus such mutation is only relevant in these assays after its incorporation into both strands. For selection, the existing enzyme or mRNA must be reduced either by cell division or ; degradation to non-functional levels, so that the original phenotype can no longer be identified. Figure 5.1 shows the principle of the HPRT point mutation assay.Copy 1 197Y. SharifuddinChapter 55.2 Objective of This StudyIn this study, the potential of andrographolide to induce point mutations in mammalian cells will be examined and determining whether such mutations can occur at concentrations used previously in this thesis as well as other published works. The author employed the HPRT mutation assay in this study because the method was routinely used in the laboratory (Barber et al. 2006, Doak et al., 2007) as compared to the Ames test.Copy 1 198HPRT 11 PR I11M utant purification* Achieved by culturing cells in growth medium with HAT* Endogenous pathway is blocked* Uridine monophosphate in salvage pathway is blocked forcing cells to rely upon HPRT for DNA synthesisE xposure to gen otoxin HPRT cells that survived HAT treatment, were treated with the test compound and subcultured.H P R T m utants selection6-thioguanine, a toxic analogue o f dGTP was employed to select for HPRT' mutants.C ells d ieCells incorporated 6-thioguanine into DNAC ells surv ive Mutants are resistant to 6-thioguanine since it is not incorporated into DNAFig. 5 .1 Shows the main concept o f HPRT point mutation assay.C ells su rvive C ells d ieAble incorporate Inability toG and T into DNA incorporate G andT into DNAHPRTY. SharifuddinChapter 5Copy I 1 9 9Y. SharifuddinChapter 55.3 MATERIALS AND METHODS5.3.1 Thawing Frozen AHH-1 Cells.This procedure was performed as described in Section 3.5.4 of Chapter 3.|5.3.2 Sub-culturing Procedure for AHH-1 Cells.This procedure was performed as described in Section 3.5.5 of Chapter 3.5.3.3 HPRT Forward Mutation in Cultured AHH-1 Cells.5.3.3.1 HPRT mutant purification.The main working principle of mammalian forward mutation assays is the quantification of mutant cells using selective media. Thus the number of mutant cells for each gene such as TK_/' and HPRT' were reduced to decrease the background mutation frequency (MF) by utilising selective growth media that inhibits the endogenous pathway without affecting the salvage pathway, which produces the required dNTP for DNA replication. Cells that are incapable of undergoing the replication process through the salvage pathway (i.e. TK'/_ or HPRT') will ultimately die. Figures 5.2 and 5.3 illustrate the endogenous and salvage pathways.Initially, during the mutant purification procedure, mutant cells (HPRT') were reduced in RPMI 1640 growth medium supplemented with 9% horse serum and 1% L-glutamine.HAT (Hypoxanthine-aminopterin-thymidine) at 50-times strength was added to the growth medium at 1:50 ratio (1 HAT: 50 medium); gassed with 5% CO2 in air and incubated at | 37+-1degC for three consecutive days. Thus endogenous pathway was blocked and onlyallowing DNA synthesis via the salvage pathway during this step.ISubsequently, cells were grown at 5x105 cells per ml for 24 hours in growth medium with HT solution (HAT without aminopterin) added, also at 1:50 ratio. After 24 hours, the cells were washed once by centrifugation at 1500rpm for 8 minutes and grown in normal growth medium for 3-4 days in order to obtain optimum cell numbers suitable for treatment.Copy 1 200Y. SharifuddinChapter 5DihydrofolateNADPDHFR*Am inopteriniiNADPH + HTetrahydrofolate *DHFR: Dihydrofolate reductaseFig. 5.2 Endogenous pathway-direct synthesis o f nucleotides.Uridine monophosphateAminopterin ^GuanineHPRT*Or 1' ------ I Z ^ > dNMP.I............dNTP 1--- DNA6-Thioguanine (Toxic analogue)*HPRT: Hypoxanthine phosphoribosyl transferaseFig. 5.3 Salvage pathway-synthesis from free purines and pyrimidines.5.3.3.2 Treatment procedures.Andrographolide with 98% purity to be used at various concentrations was prepared by dissolving the crystals with DMSO as solvent and administered to AHH-1 cell cultures within two hours of preparation. Fresh stocks were always prepared for each experiment replicates. Flasks containing healthy-looking, evenly distributed cells were selected and labelled according to doses. Less confluent flasks were allocated for negative control and low dose treatments while more confluent flasks were allocated for high dose treatments. Cells seeded at 5x106 cells per ml in 10ml medium were challenged with andrographolideCopy I 201Y. SharifuddinChapter 5at the specified concentrations and cultured for 24 hours at 37+-1degC. Unlike previous studies, the concentrations of andrographolide used in this particular study were slightly different where the higher concentrations of 70 and 90pM were replaced with lower doses of 1 and 5pM of the compound respectively.I| Methylmethanesulfonate (MMS) is a known insecticide and chemotherapeutic agent (Fishbein, 1970) with a high Swain-Scott constant (s>0.83). It is an alkylating agent that is|| often used a model genotoxin and functions via an Sn2 mechanism targeting adducti| generation at the nucleophilic centres such as N-7 of guanine and to a lesser extent the N-3 of adenine, both of which are not mutagenic but caused breaks in DNA (Lawley, 1979;Sega, 1984; Friedberg et al., 1995; IARC 1999). MMS was employed as the positive control for this study and administered to the cells at 4pM final concentration, which was used previously in the laboratory.Following andrographolide exposure, the cells were washed twice by centrifugation at 1200rpm for 5 minutes and re-suspended in fresh growth medium for mutant expression.The phenotypic expression phase for HPRT mutation assay was 14 days incubation, to allow fixation of possible mutations and the degradation of the already expressed HPRT proteins.