Insertions are well known to cause frameshift mutations and modified mRNA splicing, which can both alter the gene product.ij| c) Deletions:I As the name implies, are removal of a single or multiple nucleotides from DNA that can| result in ffameshifts. Unlike point mutations and insertions, deletions are irreversible damageto the DNA (Brown, 2002).1.17.2 Macro-mutationsAs stated before, these types of mutations occur at the physically observable chromosomal level and can be categorised as below.a) Duplications:Duplication is the presence of two adjoining copies of a chromosomal segment and can be either 'direct' or 'inverted'. Duplications may originate by unequal crossing-over in a previous meiosis or as a result of translocation, inversion or presence of an iso-chromosome in a parent. Generally, duplications are more common and cause higher levels of gene dosage but are less detrimental than deletions.b) Deletions:Deletion can arise from two breaks, followed by faulty repair, from unequal crossing-over in a previous meiosis or as a consequence of a translocation in a parent. Deletions of chromosomal regions can be interstitial or terminal. Cri-du-chat syndrome is caused by terminal deletion of the short arm of chromosome 5 and is so-called because the malformed larynxes in the affected babies made them to cry like cats. Sufferers have profound learning disability, low birth weight, low-set ears, epicanthal folds and hypertelorism (widely spaced eyes).Copy 1 47Y. SharifuddinChapter 1c) Inversions:Arise from two chromosomal breaks with end-to-end switching of the intervening segment.If this includes the centromere it is pericentric; if not the inversion is paracentric. The medical significance of inversions lies in their ability to cause chromosomally imbalanced i gametes following crossing-over.I| d) Translocations:A translocation involves exchange of chromosomal material between chromosomes and three types are recognised namely centric fusion (Robertsonian translocation), insertional and reciprocal. Approximately 4% of Down syndrome cases are due to Robertsonian translocation between the long arms of chromosome 21 and any other acrocentric, normally chromosome 14. Sometimes, one parent has a balanced version of the same translocation.e) Isochromosomes:An isochromosome has a deletion of one arm but duplication of the other. In live births, the most prevalent involves the long arm of chromosome X, causing Turner syndrome due to short arm monosomy and long arm trisomy. Most incidents of isochromosomes lead to spontaneous abortion.f) Loss of heterozygosity:A locus (or even loci) where a deletion or other process has converted the locus from heterozygosity to homozygosity. This event can lead to cancers due to loss of tumour suppressor genes (Griffiths et ah, 2004).1.18 AneuploidyAneuploid cells have chromosome numbers that differ from the normal number for the species. In aneuploidy, the deviation is due to one or a small number of chromosomes. For example, in humans where the diploid (2n) number of chromosomes is 46, cells with 45 or 47 would be referred to as aneuploid. Cells can give rise to aneuploidy by: (1) the failure of homologous chromosomes to separate properly (non-disjunction) in meiosis I or mitosis or sister chromatids in meiosis II (Dellarco et al., 1985); or (2) the chromosome(s) do not bind to the spindle during division so that the chromosome(s) is lost to either nucleus. The resultCopy 1 48! Y SharifuddinChapter 1of non-disjunction is that one pole receives both homologous chromosomes or chromatids. Assuming only one chromosome or one pair of chromosomes is involved, the daughter nuclei will have one chromosome too many or one too few (2n +-1). Unlike direct mutagenesis, there are many potential targets for aneuploidy.I|Aneuploidy may arise either on a spontaneous basis or chemically-induced during cell division in somatic and germ cells. Aneugens are chemicals that are capable of inducingianeuploidy or polyploidy. There are many possible targets for aneugens including molecules:* that are crucial part of DNA-containing structures such as centromeres and telomeres. * essential in chromatid attachment and separation including chromatin glue proteinsiand kinetochores. * that are part of the spindle apparatus for example centrioles and tubulins. * that are part of the anaphase promoting complex (APC) or involved in cell cycle control such as cyclins and p53. * indirectly involved in the cell cycle such as calmodulin.Any abnormal putsch to the cellular division by disrupting one or more of its crucial components can be detrimental to chromosome segregation fidelity. There are two classical processes that lead to aneuploidy namely chromosome non-disjunction and chromosome loss. Chromosome non-disjunction occurs when a metaphase chromosome unable to disassociate and both sister chromatids migrate to one of the daughter nuclei (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2002) resulting in one daughter cell gaining a chromosome (e.g. trisomic 2N+1) and the other loses a chromosome (e.g. monosomic 2N-1). Chromosome loss arise due to | chromosome lagging during anaphase for example involving the failure of spindle fibres to attach to a chromosome. Lagging chromosomes are displaced chromosome that usually forms a micronucleus and thus are not part of the daughter nuclei at the end of mitosis. Consequently, one or both of these daughter nuclei are hypoploid, where the chromosome number is less than the normal euploid configuration. Micronuclei formed can be detected cytogenetically.Centrosome amplification may also contribute to aneuploidy where the presence of multipolar microtubule organising centres (MTOCs) pulled chromosomes in different directions resulting in aneuploid progeny with either single, multiple nuclei or evenCopy I 49Y. SharifuddinChapter Imicronuclei (Pihan & Doxsey 1999; Brinkley, 2001) as shown in Figure 1.18 below. Alternatively, aberrant MTOCs may form pseudo-bipolar spindle poles to mute the supernumerary effect but still incapable of maintaining normal chromosome segregation resulting in unequal chromosome numbers and lagging chromosomes, which would later form a micronucleus (Pihan & Doxsey 1999; Brinkley, 2001). The amplified centrosomes will also be transferred to daughter cells and may be involved in further rounds of abnormal mitoses.Normal MitosisoHypoploidH ypcp lodM iu o n u c le u f eH y p o p lo icHypoploiogHypoploidH ypoplo id HypoploidHyperoloic H ype-plad(Multiple nuclei) ++ supem um eraiysupernum erary cen tro so m escen tro som est f iHypoploidHypoploidM icronucleussupernum erarycen tro som esjJ >>H ypoploid(m onosom ic)(trisomic;Centrosom(c); C entrom ere/* Spindle pole ( f* M etaphase chrom osom e . K jnetochofe O M icronudeus/ M icrotubule V, D aughter chrom osom e N ucleus ( ^ O Multiple nucleiFig. 1.18. Frequent factors contributing to chromosomal segregation infidelity that leads to aneuploidy. In (A), chromosomes aligned at the metaphase plate and migrate equally to opposite spindle poles producing two euploid daughter cells. (B) shows the outcome o f mitosis in the presence o f a lagging chromosome which gives rise to a micronucleus. In (C) and (D), anomalous centrosome number presents a segregational putsch to the normal chromosome distribution mechanism causing uneven configuration in daughter cells. In (E), chromosomal non-disjunction generates a hypoploid and hyperploid daughter cells. (Adopted from Yang et a l., 2003).Apart from the two classical processes stated, aneuploidy may also arise via other pathways such as defective centromere division, chromosome replication errors during meiosis and non-conjunction, which is the inability of the homologous chromosomes to achieve a paired state. Some compounds presence in certain concentrations may interact physico-chemically such as lipophilic interaction and in effect disrupt cellular components or processes such as cytokinesis and spindle synthesis. Furthermore, at higher concentrations, cytotoxicity can also induce physico-chemical interactions that may cause non-specific modifications toBLaggingchromosomescSupernumerary centrosomes: multipolar divisionDSupernumerary centrosomes: bipolar divisionCopy I5 0Y. SharifuddinChapter 1cellular division mechanism (Parry et al., 1996). Figure 1.19 also illustrates various routes leading to aneuploidy.Aneuploidy induction through the inhibition of spindle function for example, does not occur via direct interaction between the suspected compound or its active metabolite with DNA but acting on its target receptor(s) such as tubulin in a characteristic dose-dependent manner that may include a threshold level (Aardema et al., 1998). The existence of thresholds for the initiation of chromosome loss and chromosome non-disjunction by spindle inhibitors such as carbendazim, colchicine, mebendazole and nocodazole has been reported (Kirsch-Volders, et a l, 2003).a Aberrant mitosis b Cohesion d efects c Merotelic centromere attachmentd Mitotic checkpoint defects'6NDNA andAberrant cytokinesisvrMultipolar spindle Premature separation Lose at cytokinesis of chromosomeyielding both sister chromatids attached to both poles attached to the same poleBoth sister chromatids delivered to one daughter cell after unstable attachment or mitotic checkpoint defectFig. 1.19. Shows various other routes to aneuploidy. Gains and losses o f chromosomes can occur in several ways as displayed. Aberrant mitosis can be caused by abnormal centrosome number due to centrosome amplification resulting in polyploidisation, centrosome duplication errors and ultimately aberrant cytokinesis. Cohesion deficiency and merotelic attachment, where a kinetochore is attached to microtubules from both poles can also cause chromosome loss. Finally in (d), defects in the mitotic checkpoint where weakened mitotic checkpoint signalling by one or more unattached kinetochores does not produce enough signal level for the 'wait anaphase', preventing anaphase advancement in the presence o f unattached kinetochores. (Adopted from Kops et al., 2005).Polyploidy on the other hand corresponds to an exact multiple of the haploid number of chromosomes (N), for example 3N and are caused by the absence of a functional mitotic spindle and the consequent failure of chromatid migration to the opposite poles. This mitotic slippage or the inability to migrate to spindle poles produced cells that possess 4N and 4CCopy I5 1Y. SharifuddinChapter Iwith C denoting to the haploid DNA contents (Elhajouji et al, 1998). Cytokinesis failure and nuclear fusion in binucleated cells can also lead to polyploidy (Kirsch-Volders et al., 1998).PrometaphaseActive CDK1ActiveAPC/CInactive separase( m Cc ) Checkpoint effectorInactiveAPC/CActive separaseInactive CDK1SEC26S proteosom eiyclm B,Fig. 1.20. Shows the relation between the mitotic checkpoint with different stages o f the cell cycle beginning with prophase and ending with telophase and cytokinesis producing two identical daughter cells. To initiate mitosis, the cell needs the master mitotic kinase, the cyclin-dependent kinase-1 (CDK1) activity that depends on the binding o f cyclin B to CDK1. Separase is a protease that is required to abolish sister- chromatid cohesion at the metaphase-anaphase transition. This enzyme is kept inactive by another protein known as securin (SEC) prior to anaphase. Cohesins which hold sister chromatid together are shown as yellow spheres in the expanded view o f the chromosome. Unattached kinetochores trigger the formation o f the mitotic checkpoint complex (MCC) which prevents CDC20 to activate the anaphase promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C). The attachment o f all sister chromatid pairs to kinetochore mirotubules and their bi-orientation generates congression to the metaphase plate and negatively regulates the mitotic checkpoint signal. Concomitantly, CDC20 is released followed by APC/C activation and leads to polyubiquitination o f anaphase substrates such as securin and cyclin B that is subsequently eliminated by the proteasome. Securin destruction activates separase, which immediately separates the sister chromatids by targeting the cohesion rings that are holding them together. The elimination o f cyclin B also inactivates the master mitotic kinase CDK1-cyclin B, initiating cytokinesis and the mitotic-exit programme. (Adopted from Musacchio & Salmon, 2007).The spindle assembly checkpoint or also known as the mitotic checkpoint prevents chromosome missegregation and aneuploidy by repressing anaphase commencement until allCopy I 5 2Y. SharifuddinChapter 1of the replicated chromosomes are successfully connected to spindle microtubules. Figure 1.20 highlights the relationship between the mitotic checkpoint with cell cycle machinery. However, an impaired mitotic checkpoint response or the inability to sustain mitotic checkpoint signalling, has been observed in human tumour cell lines challenged with microtubule poisons as observed by a decreased percentage of cells in mitosis and/or a reduced length of metaphase arrest.1.18.1 Aneuploidy and Cancer.As mentioned previously, aneuploidy may arise spontaneously or due to chemical induction of chromosome gain or loss during cell division in somatic and germ cells. Aardema et al. (1998) reported that the environment does not possess a major influence on aneuploidy induction based on the similarity of aneuploidy incidence levels found at birth in various evaluations of newborns in different geographical localities. Although various compounds have been examined for their potential aneugenic effects on germ cells, information on carcinogenicity is rather limited for aneugens compared to clastogens and gene mutation inducers (Aardema et al., 1998).Aneuploidy induction may alter the distribution of oncogenes and tumour suppressor genes (Deusberg et al., 2004) where chromosomes containing genes involve in the mitotic process leads to asymmetric segregation of chromosomes, instituting an autocatalytic karyotypic evolution that generates pre-neoplastic and subsequently cancerous cells (Fenech 2002). However, this is currently not a consensus within the scientific community. Some regarded ; aneuploidy to be immaterial to tumourigenesis (Hahn et al., 1999), whereas others have argued it to be a wholly benign side-effect accompanying transformation (Marx, 2002) and yet another school of thought considered aneuploidy to play a contributing role to tumour progression but not tumour inititation (Zimonjic et al., 2001).Cancer cells are not polyploid but aneuploid, which means in addition to alterations in the total chromosome number they also harbour various chromosomal abnormalities such as amplifications and deletions. Thus, comparable to Tolstoy's unhappy families, every aneuploid tumour has its own version of aneuploidy, rendering the quest to determine the role of aneuploidy and in identifying common features shared by aneuploid tumour cells, toCopy 1 53Y. SharifuddinChapter 1be very challenging. This correlation between anueploidy and cancer has been known for decades but the answer as to whether aneuploidy is the contributing factor or just a secondary consequence of transformation still remains an intriguing mystery (Duesberg & Rasnick,2000; Matzke et al., 2003).Even though the relative influence of abnormal chromosome numbers and gene mutations in human cancers is still a focal point of intense debate, aneuploidy is regarded to play a role in tumourigenesis (Fenech 2002). The ubiquity of aneuploidy incidence in human cancer cells cannot be disputed and it is the prominent type of chromosome instability observed in solid tumours in general (Lingle et al., 1998). Aneuploidy is reported to be an early event or present at an early stage in human pre-cancerous neoplasias of the throat, oesophagus, lung, skin, gonads, pancreas and acute leukaemia (Duesberg et al., 2004). Aneuploidy has been used as a screening and prognosis marker for several cancers such as for patients with Barrett's oesophagus (Teodori et al., 1998) and individuals with high risk of developing head and neck squamous cell carcinomas (HNSCC) (Barrera et al., 1998; 1999).Centrosome amplification is almost consistently associated with aneuploidy but is absent in stable diploid cells (Hollander and Fomace, 2002). Numerical centrosome anomaly may be a common cellular response to genotoxic damage or other cellular stress incidents (Sato et al.,2004). The origin of supernumerary centrosomes in response to genotoxic agents such as radiation (Sato et al., 2004) and metals (Holmes et al., 2006) is not known but various possible suspects include temporal disengagement between centrosome duplication and DNA replication cycles combined with the loss of a centrosome-intrinsic mechanism to prevent reduplication, centrosome fragmentation and failure of cytokinesis associated with polyploidisation.