SharifuddinChapter 4Table 4.11 Cell fate o f MCL-5 cells after continuous exposure for five cell cycles to different concentrations o f andrographolide.______________________________________________0 7.05 0.43 0.48 0.0310 12.18* 0.93* 0.65* 0.30*30 11.25* 1.84* 1.03* 0.53*50 10.05* 1.89* 0.91* 0.50**Statistically significant values (p<0.05) against the negative controls.16 14 12 w 10o'6420Fig. 4.26 Graph showing MCL-5 cells at various stages after continuous exposure to andrographolide for five cell cycles (120 hours).Although, generally the numbers were slightly higher when compared to 24- and 48-hour exposure, the percentage of binucleated cells in untreated cultures were also higher possibly due to stress during the culture period. The percentages of trinucleated cells were almost 2% and tetranucleated cells were almost 1% between 30 and 50pM whereas the percentage of multinucleated cells was still less than 1% of the cell population. Again at these concentrations, andrographolide induced a statistically significant number of binucleated cells more than 10% of 4000 cells scored.Table 4.12 Frequency o f necrosis and apoptosis in MCL-5 cells treated for five cell cycles to differentconcentration o f andrographolide.0 13.05 0.7310 24.45 1.0030 33.15* 1.45*50 50.95* 1.30** Denotes statistically significant difference against the negative controls.4 # Mean %Binucleateg Mean %Trinucleate # Mean %Tetranucleate H Mean %Multinucleatei l L L0 10 30 50Andrographolide (pM)Copy I1 8 5Y. SharifuddinChapter 460 50 40Bn0)^ 300)O* * 20 10 0Fig. 4.27 The incidence o f necrosis and apoptosis in MCL-5 cells exposed to andrographolide for five cellcycles (l 20 hours).Again, MCL-5 cells exposed to the longer treatment period of 120 hours (five cell cycles) reproduced the same trend observed previously where andrographolide mainly incited necrotic cell death in a dose-dependent manner, rather than apoptotic response. In all concentrations tested more than 1% of the cells were apoptotic as demonstrated in Table 4.12 and Figure 4.27. Thus, subjecting the cells to longer treatment period did not increase the incidence of cell death. This can be attributed to the dynamics of cell growth and demise, where the values were for the cells scored at that time. Cellular debris and remnants were observed on the microscope slides indicating the presence of cells that died earlier. It is also to be stated the frequency of necrotic and apoptotic cells in the negative control may be related to cell culture stress.# Mean % Apoptotic cells @ Mean % Necrotic cells_ ____ _n0 10 30 50Andrographolide (pM)Copy I1 8 6Y. SharifuddinChapter 44.8 DISCUSSIONChromosomes are segregated by attachment to the highly organised microtubule spindle | that only forms during mitosis, replacing the long monoastral array present in thei! interphase stage. In normally dividing cell, microtubule organising centres (MTOCs) or | centrosomes exist in mirror symmetry at the opposite poles connected by microtubulesIfrom each spindle pole. To this highly symmetrical structure, the duplicated chromatids attached, then are diametric and equally apportioned during anaphase to each daughter cell. Disruption to any actors during this mitotic theatre can lead to dire consequences. Indeed, abnormalities of centrosome integrity and mitotic spindle apparatus may have a role in the initiation of neoplasia (Yuen et al., 2005).The exposure of V-79 cells to andrographolide at various concentrations induced aberrant mitotic division in a dose-response manner and this is the first study, to the best of the author's knowledge, which provided evidence for the propensity of andrographolide to disrupt microtubule organising centres function hence contributing to chromosome segregation abnormalities such as those manifested as micronuclei. The data suggested a direct correlation between aberrant MTOCs number, cell division and mitotic index upon andrographolide challenge, with such an insult inflicted damages that can still be observed even after the removal of the phytochemical.Centrosomes can be indispensable for microtubule polymerisation (Heald et al., 1996; Khodjakov et al., 2000) but are crucial for spindle nucleation and thus affect chromosome segregation process. Centrosomes also influence other key roles governing cell division including cytokinesis initiation and the entry into S-phase of the cell cycle | (Khodjakov et al., 2000; Hinchcliffe et al., 2001; Piel et al., 2001). In the absence of the| centrosome, microtubule polymerisation and chromosome segregation can still occur butI cell division is usually accompanied by defects in cytokinesis and cell cycle progression(Khodjakov & Rieder, 2001). For accurate chromosome separation process, each daughter cell must receive only a single centrosome and this centrosome must replicate only once per cell cycle.Andrographolide caused significant numerical centrosomal abnormality manifested by the presence of the y-tubulin signal in tri-, tetra- and multipolar MTOCs, in a descendingCopy 1 187Y SharifuddinChapter 4jorder of prominence especially between 30 and 50pM doses, with corresponding | significant increases in the mitotic index value. This anomalous number of spindle polesiaffects normal chromosome segregation process due to the presence of multipolar mitotic | spindles. Unequal chromosome segregation leads to aneupoidy and higher doses ofandrographolide increased the proportion of not only cells with tripolar MTOCs but also cells with higher number of centrosomes, suggesting a worse disruption to the | centrosome numeral homeostasis and carries more risks to cellular division process. It is! possible for disruption to normal levels of proteins involved in centriole duplication toicause numeral amplification within one cell cycle consistent with increases in pseudo-1| bipolar and multipolar mitoses frequencies (Duensing et al., 2007). !j Indeed, centrosomal anomaly in cultured mammalian cells is associated with theinduction of multipolar spindles, multipolar division and micronucleation (Ochi 2002).Diazepam for example was shown to induce abnormal anaphases consisted primarily of multipolar spindles and a high frequency of kinetochore-positive micronuclei in binucleated cells (Izzo et al., 1998). A study on centrosome integrity using a mouse model of human breast cancer revealed that 25% of the cells contained micronuclei and approximately 60% harbouring aberrant centrosome numbers (Montagna et al., 2002). Furthermore, the presence of micronuclei was detected only in 7% of cells with normal bipolar MTOCs in contrast to 18% in cells with amplified centrosome numbers (Montagna et al., 2002). The statistically significant dose-dependent elevation in aberrant MTOCs number in V-79 cells subjected to andrographolide for 24 hours is in concordance with the micronuclei frequency induced in AHH-1, MCL-5 and V-79 cell lines as discussed in the previous chapter and assists in the elucidation of possible mechanism involved in micronuclei induction by this phytochemical. The presence of more than two MTOCs affected normal chromosome migration towards opposite spindle I poles since the frequency of aberrant mitotic cells accrued with increased | andrographolide concentrations. The immunofluorescence staining technique employed not only assisted in centrosome numerical aberration assessment but also revealed a direct connection between MTOCs represented by y-tubulin antibody (red in colour) and microtubules (a-tubulin antibody, green in colour), hence lend credence to the notion that andrographolide caused centrosome multiplication as opposed to microtubule disruption and disassociation with the MTOCs.ijjCopy 1 188Y. SharifuddinChapter 4Centrosome duplication is controlled by members of the Aurora/IpII, CDK, NIMA and Polo-like families of cell cycle kinases (Fry et al., 1998; Mayor et al., 1999; Hinchcliffe et al., 1999; Lacey et al. 1999; Mussman et ah, 2000; Meraldi & Nigg, 2001). CDK2 bound to cyclins E or A and involves in stabilising the centrosomal kinase hMpsl ! permitting its maintained association with the centrosome in mice (Fisk et al., 2001) while phosphorylating and dissociating nucleophosmin/B23 (Okuda et al., 2000). During G2, various additional proteins are recruited including members of CDK1 kinases, Aurora and Polo-like families, presumably involves in centrosome maturation (Bailly et al.,1989; Pockwinse et al., 1997; Jackman et al., 2003). In M-phase, nucleophosmin is again present at the spindle poles and associates with the centrosomal organising protein NuMA (Zatsepina et al., 2003). Also at this stage, the tumour suppressor proteins p53,; BRCA1 and TACC are present at the centrosomes (Raff, 2002; Fisk et al., 2002).I Cells with abnormal centrosome number customarily produce multiple MTOCs such astri-, tetra- and multipolar spindles (Fukasawa, 2005). Tripolar MTOCs seems to be more tolerable and frequent in occurrence as shown by the results and they are able to completeIcytokinesis with some daughter cells from this mitosis are viable but aneuploid in status whereas others may not survive due to ruinous karyotypic modifications (Fukasawa,2005). Cells containing more than three spindle poles frequently fail to undergo cytokinesis, subsequently generating either binucleated or arrested as mono-nucleated cells. The results generated showed that the presence of multiple centrosomes were translated into cells with multiple nuclei. V-79 cells challenged with andrographolide for 24 hours exhibited significant frequency of bi-, tri-, tetra- and multinucleated cellsbetween 30 and 70pM doses, which suggest chromosome segregation fidelity wasaffected in the presence of andrographolide.Furthermore, abnormal centrosome number was maintained in the absence of andrographolide, after the initial 24-hours exposure period as illustrated in Figure 4.19.The values remained almost similar and it was expected that should the cells were able to recover, the frequency of cells with abnormal MTOCs would be reduced by cell death but this was not supported by the data obtained and the mechanism(s) involved is not entirely clear. Consequently, the presence of multiple MTOCs lead to abnormal mitoses observed in V-79 cells even after the compound was removed from the growth medium and cellsCopy 1 189Y. SharifuddinChapter 4were subsequently allowed to grow for a further 24 and 48 hours after exposure. Anomalous centrosome number can be transferred to daughter cells after division.After andrographolide removal, the frequency of tri-, tetra- and multinucleated cells were still above the untreated samples. At 10pM of the phytochemical, in comparison to cells subjected to continuous 24-hours treatment (Table 4.7), the percentage of binucleated cells was lower whereas trinucleated cells increased (Table 4.8). The percentages of binucleated cells were also lower than those observed in Table 4.8 but were still significant against the negative controls. This shows that centrosome amplification induced by andrographolide were maintained if not accrued and also affected subsequent cell divisions. However, it is also not distinguishable whether such incidence corresponds to new daughter cells or existing cells that were not able to divide.Evidently, the presence of tripolar MTOCs within a cell is more tolerable than those with four or more centrosomes, hence the frequencies of trinucleated cells were higher than those of tetra- and multinucleated cells. When cells attempt cytokinesis in the presence of abnormal MTOCs number, only one cleavage furrow may prevail due to insufficient new surface area to complete more than one and constantly resulting in two daughter cells containing different chromosome complement (Duesberg & Li, 2003). Division involving three or more daughter cells are produced by multiple cleavage furrows and aneuploid progeny are generated. When comparisons were made between V-79 and MCL-5, the incidence of trinucleated cells were higher in the former than the latter as shown in Tables 4.7 and 4.9 respectively. This explained previous findings that male rats subjected to andrographolide treatment for 48 days exhibited reduced sperm counts, caused necrotic death amongst Sertoli cells and the seminiferous epithelium as well as lumen are consisted of multinucleated cells (Akbarsha & Murugaian, 2000). Mating of andrographolide-treated rats with untreated females counterparts did not produced any offspring (Akbarsha & Murugaian, 2000).The statistically significant increase of mitotic index value connotes an increase of metaphase arrest suggesting a build-up of dividing cells unable to complete mitosis.There is a correlation between DNA repair and the maintenance of normal MTOCs number. Centrosome amplification has been shown to occur during prolonged G2-arrest in Rad51 -deficient cells due to G2-M checkpoint activation by DNA damage (Dodson etCopy 1 190Y. SharifuddinChapter 4al, 2004). Therefore, DNA damages that are usually repaired, will accrued in the presence of defective repair system or genomic injury induced by the detrimental agent that essentially overwhelmed the DNA repair mechanisms, consequently triggering the G2-M transition checkpoint activation leading to mitotic arrest.ij Previous studies showed that andrographolide caused cell cycle arrest at the G0-G1 phase! of the cell cycle concomitant with decrement of cell populations at the G2-M phase in1| human cancer cells (Rajagopal et al., 2003; Satyanarayana et al., 2004). It was furtherrevealed that there was significant elevation of p27Kipl and reduction in CDK4 protein expression levels (Rajagopal et al., 2003; Satyanarayana et al., 2004). However, no changes were recorded in cyclins D1 and B1 levels (Satyanarayana et al., 2004).However, another recent study reported andrographolide induced G2-M arrest with treated HepG2 cells possessing a low level p34cdc2, which is a key cyclin-dependent kinase for G2-M transition (Li et al., 2007). Both the G2 and the mitotic checkpoints possess a restricted capacity in maintaining arrest following cytoskeletal disruptions and DNA damage respectively, which means after a period of time in arrest, cells might progress to the next stage of the cell cycle in an aberrant manner. Adaptation of the G2 and mitotic checkpoints can lead to genomic instability. However, there was no clear pattern in andrographolide effects on cell cycle arrests since different cell lines including cancer cells studied in previous works exhibited a non-specific cell cycle arrest.Centrosome duplication can become temporally detached from the cell cycle allowing multiple centrosomes to materialise in a single cell. Over-duplication is connected with decreased activity of the p53 tumour suppressor pathway, commonly via mutational| inactivation of the TP53 gene (Fukasawa et al., 1996; Carroll et al., 1999). Reduced p531I activity can also be due to over-expression of the p53 inactivating protein MDM2iI (Carroll et al., 1999) or reduced activity of p53 downstream targets, Gadd45 (Hollanderet al., 1999; Wang et al., 1999) and p21Cipl/wafl (Mantel et al., 1999; Tarapore et al,2001a), all of which correlated with centrosome multiplication. The p53 protein localises to centrosomes before and after duplication. It is capable of regulating centrosome replication independent of its role as transcription regulator (Tarapore et al., 2001b) then dissociates from the centrosomes to be stabilised in cytoplasm of cells with mitotic defects leading to Gi arrest in the next cell cycle. Whereas, no mitotic arrest occurred in cells without p53 (Fisk et al., 2002; Raff et al., 2002). Andrographolide was shown to191Y. SharifuddinChapter 4exert its effects independent of a cell's p53 status (Rajagopal et al., 2003). The V-79 cell line used in this study is p53-deficient (Chaung et al., 1997) hence, cells that can escape mitotic arrest, customarily generates tetraploid cells (Lanni & Jacks, 1998). !Loss of normal p53 activity has been shown to permit polyploid cells to proliferate instead of apoptose (Casenghi et al., 1999; Andreassen et al., 2001). It has beenti| suggested that p53 is responsible in coordinating the initiation of centrosome duplication| with DNA replication in addition to its role in preventing centrosome over-duplication. Iniresponse to DNA damage, p53 should activates its target genes including for p21, which in turn binds to and inhibit the CDK2-cyclin E complex. CDK2-cyclin E complex is needed for centrosome duplication but the paradox is centrosome hyperamplification is still observed in p53 positive cells in which p21 would be induced and CDK2-cyclin E activity would be inhibited.