There are fi ve divisions and one offi ce under its Department of Drug Registration, including:Division of - Traditional Chinese MedicineDivision of - PharmaceuticalsDivision of - Biological ProductsDivision of Health Food -Division of General Management -Offi ce for Acceptance of Drug Application. - 406The Department of Drug Registration, Division of Traditional Chinese Medicine has the following tasks:to draft national standards and research guidelines for traditional Chinese medicines, -Chinese crude drugs and prepared slices thereof, and natural medicines;to evaluate and approve new drugs - , drugs with national standards and import products of traditional Chinese medicine preparations, prepared slices of Chinese crude drugs, Chinese crude drugs and natural medicines;to evaluate and approve clinical trials of traditional Chinese medicines; -to approve protected traditional Chinese medicinal products. -The Department of Drug Registration, Division of Pharmaceuticals has the following tasks, among others,to draft national standards and research guidelines of pharmaceuticals; -to evaluate and approve new drugs - , drugs with national standards and import drugs;to evaluate and approve clinical trials of new drugs. -All new medicines must be registered according to the Registration measures. The registration process has three steps: pre-clinical studies, clinical studies, and approval. First, the applicant himself conducts the pre-clinical studies. In order to conduct clinical studies, one must apply to the provincial authorities with the results of the pre-clinical studies. The provincial authorities examine the medicine with assistance from state-sponsored laboratories, and submit their 404 Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pharmaceutical_industry_in_China.405 Medicine Administration Law, Article 69.406 SFDA web page. http://www.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W44993641/index.html.-65-fi ndings to the SFDA. The SFDA conducts further technical tests and decides whether clinical tests will be allowed. If approved, the applicant conducts the clinical studies. The results from these studies, accompanied by product samples, will then be sent to provincial authorities for manufacture approval. The decision of the provincial authorities407 is subjected to fi nal clearance by the SFDA. If approved by the SFDA, the applicant will receive a Certifi cate of New Medicine and a Production Approval Number.408Generic medicines do not require clinical studies unless they are solid oral medicines. In order to register for manufacture approval, the applicant must submit pre-clinical studies and product samples to provincial authorities. The decision of the provincial authorities is subject to fi nal clearance by the SFDA.409Imported medicines, referring to medicines that are not manufactured in China, must already have obtained market approval in the country where they are manufactured. In addition, they must undergo clinical testing and be registered in China similarly to new medicines. If the medicine does not have a Product License in the originating country, it may still be imported if there is a clinical need in China for the medicine in question, and safety and effi cacy are confi rmed by independent trials. Imported medicines receive a Pharmaceutical Import Registration Certifi cate.410According to Article 8 of the Medicine Administration Law, to establish a pharmaceutical producing enterprise, the following requirements must be met: It shall be staffed with legally certifi ed pharmaceutical technical personnel, engineering (1) technical personnel, as well as corresponding skilled workers. It shall have factory premises, facilities and a sanitary environment suitable for the (2) medicines produced. It shall have a unit or competent personnel capable of inspecting the quality of the (3) medicines produced, as well as necessary instruments and equipment. It shall have rules and regulations to ensure the quality of medicines. (4) Besides manufacturing, distribution of medicines is under strict control. The Chinese are striving to erode the serious problems related to counterfeit or fake medicines. A Pharmaceutical Trade License is required for wholesale or retail411 trade of pharmaceuticals. Pharmacies or hospitals may also prepare medicinal preparations, provided that they have a Dispensing Permit for Medical Organisations412. Medicinal preparations made by medical organisations may not be sold on the market413.407 The production license is issued by the pharmaceutical supervisory and administrative department of the province, autonomous region, or municipality directly under the Central government in which the enterprise is located. Medicine Administration Law, Article 7. 408 Medicine Administration Law, Article 31. Tsoi 2007.409 Tsoi 2007.410 Medicine Administration Law, Article 39. Tsoi 2007.411 Medicine Administration Law, Article 14.412 The permit is issued by the pharmaceutical supervisory and administrative departments of the provinces, autonomous regions or municipalities directly under the central government. Medicine Administration Law, Article 23.413 Medicine Administration Law, Article 25.-66-According to the Medicine Administration Law, Article 15, to establish a pharmaceutical trading enterprise, the following requirements must be met: It shall be staffed with legally certifi ed pharmaceutical technical personnel. (1) It shall have business premises, equipment, storage facilities and a sanitary environment (2) suitable for the pharmaceuticals in which it trades. It shall have a quality control agent or personnel suitable for the pharmaceuticals in (3) which it trades. It shall have rules and regulations to ensure the quality of the pharmaceuticals in which (4) it trades.Distribution, retail and trading of medicines are subject to more specifi c criteria given in the Opinion on Strengthening Supervision of Pharmaceuticals and Promoting the Development of a Modern Logistics for Pharmaceuticals. The Opinions provide rules on medicine supply, purchase, inspection, storage, etc.414Hospitals and clinics practicing traditional Chinese medicine must undergo examination and be licensed as a medical institution. Practitioners of traditional medicine are required to pass a qualifying examination and obtain a license through registration.415Medicinal product advertising is also under pre-market control. All advertisements have to be pre-approved by provincial medicine control authorities. This applies to all pharmaceutical advertisements, published through radio, cinematography fi lm, television, newspaper, magazine, periodical and other media. An advertiser shall, when applying for advertisement examination, submit relevant documentation to the offi cials of the place where the enterprise is located416. The offi cials must examine and inspect, prior to publication, the contents of advertisements in accordance with the law. Only advertisements which are examined, approved and given a pharmaceutical advertising registration number may be published.417According to Access China Management Consulting Ltd., the Chinese process of application and approval for imported medicine registration is "very complex". They claim that Chinese pharmaceutical authorities administer and control the process by various and variable administrative measures and regulations with lack of transparency. However, they believe that the ongoing consolidation of the regulations will eventually contribute to a healthier market environment.418 Proprietary data is often submitted as part of a medicine registration application, and some companies have been reluctant to send such sensitive information to China out of concern that their intellectual property might be compromised. According to the US-China Business Council, there has been progress in protecting proprietary data from unfair commercial use.419414 Tsoi 2007.415 Chinese Regulations on Traditional Chinese Medicines. Chapter II.416 The pharmaceutical supervisory and administrative departments of the provinces, autonomous regions, or municipalities directly under the central government. Medicine Administration Law, Article 60.417 Advertising law, Article 34. Medicine Administration Law, Article 60.418 Access China 2007. 419 US-China Business Council 2008.-67-2.3.4.2 Post Market Controls in China2.3.4.2.1 FoodsThe Food Hygiene Law aimed to ensure the supervision system of national food hygiene: the central and regional health executive departments bear the responsibility of supervision420. According to Article 17, the departments in charge of control of food production or marketing of the people's governments at various levels shall strengthen control of food hygiene and oversee the implementation of the Food Hygiene Law. Supervision of food production and marketing is under the responsibility of administrative departments of industry and commerce and the administrative departments of public health421.The new Food Safety Law Implementation Measures contain similar phrases: Local people's governments shall "reinforce food safety supervision"422. Local health authorities shall coordinate the work of various food-related authorities and develop local food safety risk monitoring programs423. The safety monitoring work itself, such as collecting and analysing samples, shall be done by "technical institutions"424.Article 33 of the Chinese Food Hygiene Law listed the functions of food hygiene supervision reasonably precisely:to provide monitoring of, inspection of and technical guidance for food hygiene;"(1) to contribute to the training of personnel for food production and marketing and to (2) supervise the medical examinations of such personnel;to spread knowledge of food hygiene and nutrition, provide appraisals of food hygiene (3) and publicise the existing condition of food hygiene;to conduct hygiene inspections of sites and designs for the construction, extension or (4) renovation of enterprises engaged in food production or marketing and participate in the inspection and acceptance of fi nished projects;to investigate accidents involving food poisoning or food contamination and take (5) appropriate measures of control;to make rounds of inspection and supervision concerning acts in violation of this Law;(6) to determine the responsibility of persons who violate this Law and (7) impose administrative penalties on them according to law; andto take charge of other matters that concern food hygiene supervision. "(8) According to the Food Hygiene Law, the health authorities of the people's governments at county level or above shall appoint food hygiene supervisors. The supervisors shall be qualifi ed specialists certifi ed by the health authorities at the corresponding level. Food h ygiene supervisors shall carry out the tasks assigned to them by the administrative departments for health. It was also interestingly stated in the Food Hygiene Law that "food hygiene supervisors must enforce laws impartially, be devoted to their duties and shall not take advantage of their positions for their own420 Kan - Zhang 2002. 421 Food Hygiene Law, Article 29.422 Food Safety Law Implementation Measures, Article 2.423 Food Safety Law Implementation Measures, Article 5.424 Food Safety Law Implementation Measures, Article 9.-68-benefi t".425The law enforcement department has the right to adopt executive controlling measures. While carrying out their tasks, food hygiene supervisors may obtain information from the producers or marketers of food, request any necessary data, enter the production or marketing premises for the purposes of inspection, and obtain free samples in accordance with regulations. The producers or marketers of food may not turn down such requests nor hold back any information. The food hygiene supervisors shall be obliged to keep confi dential any technical data provided by the producers or marketers.426 The local health authorities may take provisional measures of control towards a producer or marketer of food who is responsible for a food poisoning accident which has already occurred or for which there is evidence of the possibility of it occurring. They can seal up the food and its raw materials. Food proven to be contaminated should be destroyed.427The Novel Food Regulation refers to the supervision articles of the Food Hygiene Law. It states that local authorities shall conduct supervision and inspections on novel foods according to the Food Hygiene Law428. The Ministry of Health shall regularly gather food safety information about novel foods, make timely announcements to the public, and, if necessary, issue early warnings or reassess the novel food that has food safety problems429. The Health Food Regulation similarly refers to the Food Hygiene Law and its post-market control mechanisms. As the Food Safety Law has replaced the Food Hygiene Law, the control mechanisms of the Food Safety Law currently apply. The Ministry of Health and the current authority responsible for health food approvals, the SFDA, have approved thousands of health foods, and their supervision is becoming more complicated430.2.3.4.2.2 MedicinesPost-market control of medicines is under the competence of the SFDA and the local (provincial, municipal etc.) authorities. In order to discover any illegal activities, government offi cials shall organise investigations on medicines, which have been approved for production or import. They are authorised to conduct supervision and inspections over the research, development, production and trade of approved medicines, as well as the medical organisations' use of medicines. The units and individuals concerned shall not refuse to comply. Supervisory and administrative offi cials shall present certifi cate documents while conducting supervision and inspection, and shall not divulge technological and business secrets.431 Also sampling examinations on the quality of medicines may be conducted432. The authorities may take administrative coercive measures including sequestration and banning against pharmaceuticals and other relevant materials, which have been proven to be of possible harm to people's health.Production or import licences shall be revoked if it is discovered that:425 Articles 24 and 35 of the Chinese Food Hygiene Law.426 Article 35.427 Article 37.428 Novel Food Regulation, Article 24.429 Novel Food Regulation, Article 25430 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 263.431 Medicine Administration Law, Article 64.432 Medicine Administration Law, Article 65.-69-curative effects of the medicine are uncertain or poor, -the medicine produces serious adverse reactions, or -for other reasons the medicine is harmful to people's health. -The medicines whose licenses have been revoked shall not be allowed to be produced, imported, sold or used. Those, which have already been produced or imported, shall be destroyed or disposed of under the supervision of the authorities.433Pharmacovigilance activities are under the shared responsibility of operators and the State. A reporting system over any adverse reactions of pharmaceuticals shall be practiced by the State. Medicine manufacturers, traders, and medical institutions shall conduct regular surveys on the quality, curative effects and adverse reactions of the pharmaceuticals they have produced, traded or used. When serious adverse reactions possibly related to the use of the medicines are discovered, they must be promptly reported to the local medicine control authorities and the local health authorities, which will formulate detailed measures to be taken. These measures include cessation of production, sale, and use of the medicine.4342.3.4.3 P enalties Used in China2.3.4.3.1 FoodsIn China, the court system has traditionally not been separated from administration. Cases have been handled as police or administrative issues.435 This remains the case with foodstuff and medicine administration. The administrators are entitled to carry out various executive punishments stipulated in the Foo Safety Law.In the former Food Hygiene Law, there were separate penalty regulations for:whoever causes a food poisoning accident, -whoever causes a serious food poisoning accident, -whoever produces or markets foods without a hygiene licence - ,whoever fails to comply with hygiene requirements, -whoever produces or markets food of which the production or marketing has been -prohibited,whoever produces or markets infant or children's food not conforming to nutrition and -hygiene standards,whoever produces, markets or uses food additives, food contact materials, or disinfectants -not conforming to hygiene standards,whoever produces or markets - a health food without authorisation, or presents fraudulent health claims,whoever fails to comply with the labelling requirements, -whoever works without a personal health certifi cate or uses sick personnel. -433 Medicine Administration Law, Article 42.434 Medicine Administration Law, Article 71.435 Huotari - Seppala 2005, 131.-70-For every breach, withdrawal of contaminated products, confi scation of illegal gains, fi nes, and revocation of licence are possible. The yuan amounts for fi nes set in the Food Hygiene La, rangeg from 1,000 to 50,000 yuan an, ware thus fairly low for large companies, but signifi cant for smaller companies. In the new Food Safety Law, the yuan amounts changed. Currently, fi nes range from 2,000 yuan to ten times the value of the commodity in question. This means there are no maximum fi ne amounts for crimes affecting large volumes of foods. The health authorities of the local people's governments determine the administrative penaltie.. The administrative penalty decision may be appealed to the higher health authority436, or to a people's cour437. If someone does not appeal but neither complies with the decision, the decision can be enforced by a cour438.Punishments are not regulated separately in the Novel Food Regulation or the Health Food Regulation. Instead, they refer to punishments stipulated by the Food Hygiene Law, which has been replaced by the Food Safety Law. For example, manufacturing or operating novel food that is not approved by the Ministry of Health, or using novel food that is not approved by the Ministry of Health as a raw material for food processing, the enterprise was to be penalised by the health administrative department of the people's government at county level or above in accordance with Article 42 of the Food Hygiene Law439. If food was produced under the name of health food when it has not been accepted according to the Health Food Regulation, penalties listed in Article 45 of the Food Hygiene Law appliey440.In addition to administrative penalties, violatingwfood laws may lead to civil responsibility. This means that if someone causes food poisoning or transmission of disease, he must compensate for personal and fi nancial damage.441 Disputes are resolved in mediation, arbitration, and courts. The courts do not have adequate powers to enforce judgments, and coercive means are not preferred in civil cases. Enforcement of judgments is thus uncertain and depends on the local fi nancial interest and relationships of the enforcement authorities to banks that are capable of seizing wages.442For causing a serious food poisoning accident or putting poisonous raw materials in foods, criminal responsibility is also possible443. If health authorities abuse their authority and neglect their duties, disciplinary sanctions follow. Accepting bribes or causing a serious accident may also lead to criminal responsibility of the health authority offi cer444. Violating or threatening 436 This is called applying for consideration. Ultimately, administrative penalties may be appealed to the SFDA. According to the SFDA web page, its Department of Policy and Regulation, Division of Law Enforcement Supervision has the following tasks: - "administrative activities supervision, hearing, administrative reconsideration, response to lawsuit and compensation; - guidance on legal construction and law popularisation and publicising within the food and drug administration system".437 Article 50.1.438 Article 50.3.439 Novel Food Regulation, Article 26.440 Health Food Regulation, Article 29.441 Food Hygiene Law, Article 48.442 Seppanen 2005, 594.443 Food Hygiene Law, Article 39.2.444 Food Hygiene Law, Articles 51 and 52.-71-health authorities leads to criminal responsibility. Otherwise obstructing offi cials will lead to an administrative penalty for disrupting public security445.Civil and criminal cases are handled by people's courts on various levels. Administrative enforcement agencies are not willing to hand over their cases for criminal prosecution, because administrative penalties enhance their own operating budgets446. The autonomy of courts and the enforcement of judgments are by many scholars considered as problematic in China447. The judicial system as a whole is weak and under the control of the Communist Party448. Independence of the judiciary relates to the more general concept of rule of law discussed above.2.3.4.3.2 MedicinesChapter IX of the Medicine Administration Law addresses Legal Responsibility, i.e. penalties.