were of the view that unambiguous defi nitions for foodstuffs and medicinal products should be set, disease risk reduction claims should be allowed on foods, and medicinal claims should be left to medicines.1093The legislative stalemate at European level acted as a stimulus to national authorities to produce quasi-legal 'guidelines' and 'voluntary agreements'. These initiatives were generally regarded as stopgap measures, until legislation was to be adopted at the EU level.1094 For 1089 Coppens et al. 2001, 141.1090 Article 6(1).1091 Article 6(2).1092 Article 2(2).1093 Coppens et al. 2001, 140.1094 EU Food Law August 2001, 11.-196-example Sweden, the UK, and the Netherlands developed their systems for evaluating health claims, and also the Finnish Food Agency provided information on their interpretation of the Food Labelling Directive. This was in the form of Health Claim Guidelines1095 of 2002, a piece of soft law by the Food Agency.The situation from the 1990's to 2006 was that European health claim regulation varied from non-existent legislation implying totally prohibited claims, to non-existent legislation representing widely allowed claims, to allowed but strictly regulated claims. It was considerably more diffi cult to get a functional food product on the market in for example Germany, Italy or Switzerland than it is in the UK or Sweden1096. Hill & Knowlton found in their study concluded in 2000 that the most liberal approach regarding health claims in the EU was in Finland, France and the UK. The most restrictive were Austria, Belgium, Germany, Italy, Luxembourg and Portugal. The rest, i.e. Sweden, Denmark, Holland, Spain, Ireland, and Greece share the middle ground.1097 A marketer needed to get acquainted with the practice in each country. The law on food claims was simultaneously too strong and too weak: prohibiting some important legitimate claims, while tolerating others, which were misleading and unsubstantiated1098.In Finland, the distinction between disease risk reduction and prevention was acknowledged, and all types of health claims were allowed. Disease risk reduction claims were, however, not regulated by the Foodstuffs Act itself but its preparatory materials, supplemented by soft law guidelines. A government's proposition to law of the year 20011099 set the rules on disease risk reduction claims: The health effect must be scientifi cally proven, and the marketer must give information on the importance of total diet, and claim-related information on the composition of the product1100. According to Health Claim Guidelines, the scientifi c evidence to back up the health claim must be on the product as sold. The Economy Committee pointed out that prevention and disease risk reduction are not far apart1101.The explanation concerning disease risk reduction claims was left out of the law itself, as the Finnish government expected a change in the Food Labelling Directive and postponed reforms until the anticipated amendment of the Directive. The Finnish regulators also referred to Codex guidelines and to CIAA proposals.1102 In other words, Finns were confi dent that disease risk reduction claims would be allowed in the EU, but they did not dare change the Foodstuffs Act just yet.In the meantime, the scientifi c consensus underlying health claims for foods was investigated by International Life Science Institute (ILSI) Europe. The conclusion of the EU-funded concerted action of Functional Food Science in Europe, FUFOSE, was the Consensus Document on Scientifi c Concepts in Functional food in Europe. The consensus document focused mainly on scientifi c and technological aspects of functional foods, but also mentioned claims. The ILSI document supported the development of enhanced function claims and disease risk reduction claims.11031095 In Finnish: Terveysvaitteiden valvontaopas. The Guide is only available in Finnish.1096 Food Engineering & Ingredients, October 2001, 18.1097 Hill & Knowlton 2000, 33.1098 Winkler 1998, 192.1099 HE 73/2001: Hallituksen esitys Eduskunnalle laiksi elintarvikelain 6 ja 24 SS:n muuttamisesta.1100 HE 73/2001.1101 Talousvaliokunnan mietinto 9/2001.1102 In the proposition to law, HE 73/2001.1103 Diplock et al. 1999, S24.-197-The ILSI/EU concerted action proposed a scientifi c basis to claims: markers should be classifi ed according to their relationship to the target function or disease endpoint. If evidence is based on functional markers, meaning markers of target function or biological response, a function claim might be justifi ed. If evidence were based on an intermediate endpoint marker of disease, a disease risk reduction claim would be justifi ed. In the latter case, the intermediate endpoint marker would have to be shown to be signifi cantly and consistently modulated by the food product.1104Heasman and Mellentin criticised the ILSI project. They said the scientists should have utilised research evidence from the social science and policy literatures when trying to develop a communication and health claim policy. Heasman and Mellentin claimed that the ILSI project produced outstanding review of the science in relation to functional foods, but in the fi nal consensus document where the authors mapped out a policy and communications strategy for health claims and functional foods, they made a serious omission. They should have used academic research in the areas of communications, social marketing and public health practice, but they acted as though empirical and theoretical work in these areas was non-existent.1105After the FUFOSE program, ILSI Europe and the EU Commission started in 2001 a European network program PASSCLAIM. The aim of this program was to assess the research on functional foods, their health effects and the claims made on them. Scientifi c experts, regulators and industry took part in the program, and the results were presented in 2003. The PASSCLAIM program produced models of utilising clinical nutrition research and communicating the results to consumers.1106Council of Europe1107 also took part in the debate and published in July 2001 a technical document giving Guidelines Concerning Scientifi c Substantiation of Health-Related Claims for Functional Foods. The document was given for debate in the European Parliament. The Council of Europe guidelines divide health-related claims in two: enhance-function claims and reduction of risk of disease claims. According to the paper, both enhanced function claims and disease risk reduction claims can be either generic or product-specifi c. Generic claims are based on a consensus in the scientifi c community regarding a diet-disease relationship. The claim can be used for any product provided that it fulfi ls certain compositional criteria. Product-specifi c claims, on the other hand, imply that the food product per se has certain physiological effects, which are observed when the food product is consumed in realistic amounts.11081104 Diplock et al., S25.1105 Heasman - Mellentin 2001.1106 Salminen - Mykkanen 2002, 34.1107 The Council of Europe is a political organisation, which was founded on 5 May 1949 by ten European countries in order to promote greater unity between its members. It had 47 member states in 2008. The main aims of the organisation are to reinforce democracy, human rights and the rule of law and to develop common responses to political, social, cultural and legal challenges in its member states. The Council of Europe adopts European Conventions and agreements, which create the basis for a common legal space in Europe. Council of Europe web page at: http://www.coe.int/T/e/Com/about_coe/. 1108 Guidelines, 10.-198-According to Council of Europe guidelines, the scientifi c substantiation should be based on all data available (including experimental studies), but it should primarily be based on the results of well-designed human studies with the food or the nutrient, the component or the ingredient in the proposed food. These studies include observational, epidemiological, and, most importantly, nutrition intervention studies. The studies should be conducted according to the generally recognised principles of good practices.1109 This means that Council of Europe suggested a similar system to drug approval.Communication of the health benefi ts to the consumer should inform on the quality of a particular food, but it should also play an education role. This education should concern especially the importance of adequate nutrition and the relationships between diet and well-being and between diet and disease risk.1110 The suggested precise rules on communication of health-related claims were the following:trigger nutrition labelling, -be truthful, unambiguous and understandable, -make clear that the health-related claim applies only to the functional food consumed -in the context of a total dietary pattern,not encourage over-consumption of a given food product to the detriment of others, -include information of the quantity of the functional component or ingredient, -include information on the target group or potentially vulnerable segment of the -population if appropriate,include information on how to consume or use the functional food to obtain the claimed -effect if appropriate.1111Communication of health-related claims should also include the documentation of the scientifi c evidence behind the claims. Such documentation should:refer to the process of scientifi c substantiation and its principles, -be based on, but not misinterpreting or overemphasising, the scientifi c substantiation, -give a clear and truthful summary of the appropriate scientifi c data, -describe how the scientifi c data supporting the health-related claim has been collected -and evaluated,explain the plausibility in terms of scientifi c knowledge, and -indicate where and how the dossier should be available to health professionals and -research scientists.11121109 Guidelines, 9.1110 Guidelines, 15.1111 Guidelines, 15-16.1112 Guidelines, 16.-199-The European Food and Drink Industry, CIAA1113, created its own code of practice on the use of health claims. The code was developed to help manufacturers prepare the documentation necessary for the substantiation of health claims and to establish guidelines for the communication of health claims to consumers. CIAA said that legal framework governing claims was incomplete and infl exible. Regulations were applied differently from one Member State to another, and Codes of Practice existed in some Member States. In order to achieve a level playing fi eld throughout the EU, CIAA believed that the use of a single set of guidelines adhered to by the whole European Food and Drink Industry would contribute to reducing barriers to trade pending clarifi cation or change in the legislation.The CIAA code applied to the use of health claims in labelling, advertisement and promotion of foods without prejudice to specifi c regulations, which exist for certain categories of food. "The code addresses neither nutrition claims, already defi ned by Codex Alimentarius nor dietetic claims as defi ned by EU legislation and Codex Alimentarius nor medical claims." Nutrition and medicinal claims never really were a problem: the problem was health claims, because they are for products that are genuinely something between foods and medicines. Health claim is defi ned as 'any claim establishing a relation between a food or a constituent of that food and health whether it is good health or a condition related to health or disease'.The CIAA code recognised two types of health claims: enhanced-function claims and disease risk reduction claims. These are the same types that were also recognised by the ILSI project and the Council of Europe guidelines.General Principles of the Code are summarised in the following:Communication of health claims should be in line with the - scientifi c substantiation. It should be truthful and must not mislead, exaggerate or deceive either directly or indirectly.The claim should indicate an appropriate amount of intake required in order to obtain -the desired effect.Health claims should be justifi ed in the context of the whole diet and must be applicable -to the amount of food normally consumed.The more specifi c rules on communication are the following:The likely consumer perception of the health claim should be taken into account. -Health claims should be complete, truthful and not misleading. -1113 According to the CIAA (Confederation des Industries Agro-Alimentaires de l'UE, Confederation of the Food and Drink Industries of the EU) they are "the offi cial mouthpiece of the food and drink industry in the European Union on issues common to the whole food and drink industry". They describe their actions as follows: "CIAA is the favoured partner of the EC institutions. CIAA is composed of affi liated national federations, European sector associations and European food and drink companies grouped as an association. CIAA provides expertise within its expert groups and policy committees, which comprise manufacturers from all the countries of the European Union. CIAA establishes policy guidelines, which are aimed at a Community or international audience. CIAA has infl uence over the legislative process of the Community institutions and international organisation and it executes policy guidelines via its secretariat in Brussels." For example the Finnish Food Industry Association (Elintarviketeollisuusliitto) is a member of CIAA.-200-Health claims should only be made for a food as part of a total dietary pattern and -should not encourage over-consumption of a given food to the detriment of others.Health claims should be consistent with the nature and scope of the evidence. -Health claims should not denigrate other foods or imply that other foods cannot -contribute to a healthy diet.There must be no implications that the food for which a claim is made is the only way -to reduce the risk of a disease or illness.Channels other than the label can usefully complement the information on the product. -The more specifi c rules on substantiation are summarised in the following:The collected evidence must show that the consumption of the food can result in the health effect that is claimed:In those cases for which scientifi c consensus exist, - bibliographic evidence will normally be suffi cient.For other claims the extent of the scientifi c evidence required should be determined on -a case by case basis and should include human studies where appropriate.Reliability of evidence denotes it has to beconsistent in itself, -able to meet accepted scientifi c standards of statistical and biological signifi cance, -plausible in terms of the relationship between intervention and results and -provided by several sources including human studies. The totality of the evidence should -be systematically reviewed. Evidence can be derived from peer reviewed scientifi c literature, in vitro studies, animal models, clinical studies, epidemiological studies, or any other relevant studies.The CIAA code refers to the results of the FUFOSE program: The EU Concerted Action on Functional Food Science in Europe requires that claims be based on the establishment and acceptance of either validated markers of improved physiological function or of intermediate endpoint markers of reduced risk of disease.Human studies must be carried out in a representative sample of the population or population group concerned in accordance with good clinical practice. The use of internationally accepted and validated methods and of biological markers is recommended when they exist. They should demonstrate effi cacy with respect to the specifi c physiological effect(s). An effective level and frequency of consumption should be suggested for a food claiming to have a positive effect on health. The effect must be studied over suffi cient time to allow adaptation to occur and should consider confounding factors such as health status at the time of the study, use of medication and/or smoking.The effect must be quantitatively, statistically and biologically signifi cant. The measured effect must be shown to be suffi ciently important to justify the claim. If the composition or manufacturing processes change substantially, or if new scientifi c developments occur, additional checks must be carried out to ensure the continued validity of the claim. It must be shown that the specifi c functional substance(s) is (are) present in the quantity and form needed to justify the claim throughout shelf life when stored under the conditions indicated -201-on the label. A normal or recommended serving size, conditions of use and consumption pattern should be incorporated into an assessment of the relevance of the concerned food with a nutritional intake of the population. Companies are encouraged to have their scientifi c evidence peer-reviewed.The main European Consumer Association, Bureau European Union de Consommateurs (BEUC), was basically against health claims. In its view a single food product is neither healthy nor unhealthy. In contrast, only the diet can be healthy or unhealthy. They said all claims must be presented in the context of a balanced healthy diet. Claims should not be permitted on products that contradict well-established dietary advice, e.g. which contain high quantities of fat, sugar or salt.1114 The requirements for scientifi c documentation and labelling requirements were more or less the same as in Council of Europe and CIAA guidelines.For years, plans to introduce provisions into Community law to govern health claims existed. The Commission's directorate general for health and consumer protection ordered a study from consultancy fi rm Hill & Knowlton in the 90's. Their task was to study the legal situation in Member States relating to nutritional claims, health claims and ethical claims. Also, opinions of different interest groups were studied and based on their fi nding the consultants gave recommendations. The study was performed in the fi rst half of 1999, and the results were given to the Commission in April 2000.According to the Hill & Knowlton study, consumer groups acknowledged the need for health claims, and called for strict legislation to cover:pre-clearance of all claims, -precise substantiation criteria to allow claims to be used (not positive or negative lists), -reinforced post verifi cation systems, -better consumer information about the relationship between diet and health, and -a shift in the burden of proof onto the maker of the claim. - 1115The food industry opinions were the following:EC rules are needed regarding health claims. -New types of health claims should be allowed, and the Food Labelling Directive should -be changed to allow this.Clear criteria for presenting health claims are needed -There should be no system for pre-market approval, but well-defi ned post clearance -verifi cations are in order.1116Food producers considered it a problem that different countries interpret the Food Labelling Directive and its prohibition of medicinal claims differently. This is the usual reason for harmonising an area of law: varying legislation creates restrictions to trade.Majority of offi cial parties and legislators were of the following view:1114 BEUC guidelines 2000, 4-7.1115 Hill & Knowlton 2000, 11.1116 Hill & Knowlton 2000, 12.-202-EC rules regarding health claims are needed, and the Food Labelling Directive should -be changed to allow new types of health claims.The work in Codex could form the basis of allowing new types of claims. -The defi nition of food should be clearer so that drawing the line to medicinal products -would be less complicated.For generic claims, a positive list could be made up.