The term "children", however, is not defi ned in the Regulation. Commission Guidance states that it "should be understood as reaching the end of the growth period", and that "an indicative age limit of 18 years can be mentioned, but this indication does not intend to defi ne children in the frame of the Regulation". "Infants" and "young children", as defi ned in Directives on dietetic foods, are subgroups of "children".1252According to Commission Guidance, the following health claims should be considered as claims referring to children's development and health (and as such, Article 14 claims):"Health claims - solely referring to the development and health of children, and where the scientifi c substantiation is only valid for children. In this case, the scientifi c substantiation consists of data obtained on studies conducted with children." An example of this kind of claim is given: "calcium is good for children's growth".Health claims used on - products intended exclusively to children, like follow- on formula, processed cereal-based foods and baby foods for young children1253.1254The following health claims should be considered function claims (Article 13 claims): "Claims referring to the role of a nutrient or other substance in growth, development and to the functions of the body where the scientifi c substantiation covers the entire life span, or more than the children population group." An example is given: "for children and pregnant women". In this case, the scientifi c substantiation must cover the children population group and the pregnant women population group.12551251 The same information that must be included in a favourable EFSA opinion: (a) the name and address of the applicant; (b) the nutrient or other substance, or the food or the category of food, in respect of which a claim is to be made and its particular characteristics; (c) a proposal for the wording of the health claim, including, as the case may be, the specifi c conditions of use; and (d) where applicable, conditions or restrictions of use of the food and/or an additional statement or warning that should accompany the health claim on the label and in advertising.1252 Scientifi c Committee Claim Guidance 2007, 13-14.1253 These are dietetic foods under Directive 89/398/EEC. It was stated above that the Nutrition and Health Claim Regulation does apply to follow-on-formulae and baby foods, but not to infant formulae. 1254 Scientifi c Committee Claim Guidance 2007, 14.1255 Scientifi c Committee Claim Guidance 2007, 14.-225-5.3.3.5.4 Data Exclusivity of Health ClaimsHealth claims included in the Community lists may be used, in conformity with the conditions applying to them, by any food business operator1256. An important limitation to this rule is the fi ve-year exclusivity of proprietary data: scientifi c data and other information in the application may not be used for the benefi t of a subsequent applicant for a period of fi ve years from the date of authorisation. This applies both to function claims authorised through Article 18 and disease risk reduction claims authorised through Article 14. The conditions for this exclusivity of data are:the scientifi c data and other information (a) has been designated as proprietary by the prior applicant at the time the prior application was made; andthe prior applicant (b) had exclusive right of reference to the proprietary data at the time the prior application was made; andthe health claim could not have been authorised without the submission of the proprietary (c) data by the prior applicant.1257The subsequent applicant may use proprietary data as grounds for his application, if he has agreed with the prior applicant that such data and information may be used. The subsequent applicant can always obtain authorisation for the same claim, if he can do it without reference to the proprietary data of the original applicant. Exclusivity of data might also be ended before the fi ve-year period, if the Commission takes a decision that a claim could be or could have been included in the lists without the proprietary data1258. This means that data protection only blocks competitors in cases where the scientifi c evidence never was and still isn't anywhere else to be found.The fi ve-year exclusivity is regarded as a balance between A) promoting research in health foods and B) avoiding unnecessary repetition of research efforts. Preamble 32 of the Regulation states: "In order to stimulate research and development within the agri-food industry, it is appropriate to protect the investment made by innovators in gathering the information and data supporting an application." The explanation continues: "This protection should however be limited in time in order to avoid the unnecessary repetition of studies and trials, and to facilitate access to claims by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), which rarely have the fi nancial capacity to carry out research activities. "Exclusivity of data to support a health claim is similar to an intellectual property right. Similar limited exclusivity of data has been proposed for the novel foods application process. A functional food sometimes has both novel ingredient(s) and novel health claim(s). It would often be practical to evaluate the safety element (novel food regulation) and the effi cacy element (health claim regulation) in a single procedure. If this kind of evaluation procedure is not created, at least the two procedures will in the future apply the same principles regarding data protection.1256 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 17(5).1257 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 21(1).1258 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 21(2).-226-5.3.3.5.5 Transitional Measures for Nutrition and Health ClaimsAll new products with new claims must be approved according to Articles 13 and 14 of the Regulations and added to Community lists before use. There are transitional measures for products already on the market and for claims already in use. Non-complying foods placed on the market or labelled prior to 1st July 2007 may be marketed until their expiry date, but not later than 31 July 2009.1259 This means no illegal labels can be printed after 1st July 2007, but the old ones can be used for two years.With regard to nutrient profi les, foods may be marketed until twenty-four months following adoption of the relevant nutrient profi les and their conditions of use.1260 As the Commission has until 19 January 2009 to complete the profi les, they will not come into full effect until 2011.Nutrition claims which have been used in a Member State before 1 January 2006 in compliance with national provisions applicable to them and which are not included in the Annex, may continue to be used until 19 January 2010. Single Member States can do this under the responsibility of food business operators and without prejudice to the adoption of safeguard measures.1261 An additional authorisation procedure is created for nutrition claims in the form of pictorial, graphic or symbolic representation, used according to criteria elaborated by national rules. Member States shall communicate such nutrition claims with the applicable national rules and scientifi c data in support of such rules to the Commission by 31 January 2008. The Commission shall, in accordance with the Committee procedure, adopt a Decision concerning the use of such claims. Nutrition claims not authorised under this procedure may continue to be used for twelve months following the adoption of the Decision.1262Health claims other than those referring to the reduction of disease risk and to children's development and health can be made until the adoption of the list, under the responsibility of food business operators and without prejudice to the adoption of safeguard measures by single Member States. The Commission will establish the list by 31 January 2010. This means old function claims can be still be used while all claims referring to disease risk reduction or children's health must be authorised by the Commission.There is an additional authorisation procedure for old health claims. These are health claims that have been used in compliance with national provisions, and been the subject of evaluation and authorisation in a Member State. Member States were to communicate these claims1263 with a report evaluating the scientifi c data in support of the claim to the Commission. After consulting the EFSA, the Commission shall, in accordance with the Committee procedure, adopt a Decision concerning the health claims authorised in the aforesaid manner. Health claims not authorised under this procedure may continue to be used for six months following the adoption of the Decision.1264 Thus the marketers that have already undergone one authorisation procedure will not have to repeat it The Member State will do it on their behalf.Different rules apply to health claims which have been in use but which have not been the subject of evaluation and authorisation in a Member State. Such claims may continue to be 1259 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 28(1).1260 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 28(1).1261 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 28(3).1262 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 28(4).1263 By 31 January 2008.1264 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 28(6).-227-used provided an application was made pursuant to the Regulation before 19 January 2008. Health claims evaluated pursuant to this procedure may continue to be used for six months after a negative decision is given. Marketers saw this as an opportunity to buy extra time if deemed necessary, as it takes time for the EFSA and the Commission to come up with fi nal decisions. Therefore, in reality, old health claims may exist in 2009.The nutrition and health claim Regulation also applies to trade marks and other brand names which may be construed as nutrition or health claims1265. For trade marks, the transitional period is the longest, 15 years. Products bearing trade marks or brand names existing before 1 January 2005 may continue to be marketed until 19 January 20221266. Existing brand names suggesting health benefi ts (such as promises of weight loss) that do not meet the requirements of the Regulation must be phased out and removed from the market.5.3.3.6 Implications of the European Claim LegislationThe claim legislation means, at least in principle, less trouble for those marketers that use established function claims. The Member States, the EFSA and the Commission will draw up the list, after which any marketer can use the claims, provided that the product corresponds to the claim. This means the marketer is still responsible for evaluating whether the established claim applies to a single product.Use of new function claims or disease reduction claims will require specifi c authorisation by the Commission, following scientifi c assessment and verifi cation of the claim by the EFSA. After a claim has been added to the list, other entrepreneurs can use the claim in marketing, unless the claim is based on proprietary data. The 5-year data protection rules might open new market opportunities for the 'claim-owners'. Health claims could be licensed as intellectual property. This means a claim-owner might agree that another marketer can use the claim in return for payment of a fi xed sum or royalties.It will be interesting to see what will be on the fi rst Article 13 list of established claims. Will there, for example, be claims that are verifi ed by long-time Chinese use? According to the European Botanical Forum (EBF), botanicals that rely on evidence of traditional use for health claim substantiation face an uncertain future. This is because the EFSA guidelines fail to acknowledge the traditional use criteria. The EFSA guidance document makes no reference whatsoever to "traditional use" or "history of use" for botanical products in food and food supplements.The question of established claims is rather similar to the question of safety of novel foods, because both pieces of regulation can be discriminatory based on their basic presumptions. Foods are not novel and thus presumed safe, if they have been used in Europe. It might be that health claims are more easily considered established, if European scientists and consumers in a European country have accepted them. Coming from China or America, for example, might cast an extra burden of proof onto the marketer. An 'exotic' product is probably considered novel, and the health claim might also more likely be considered unestablished. In principal, the legal requirements for safety and effi cacy are the same for all the products, and the food business operator is always 1265 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, preamble 4.1266 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 28(2).-228-responsible for the product complying with the law. However, if you are European, you have the advantage of European legislators undertaking some of the work.In the comparison of (functional) foods with herbal medicinal products, European information is considered more valuable than, for example, Asian and American information. A product can be registered as a traditional herbal medicinal product, if it fulfi ls certain other conditions and has been used for 30 years, at least 15 of which were in Europe. Safety and effi cacy of these traditional products are considered adequately proven and they are allowed to access the market. The legislation seems to be based on a basic psychological premise; trust the familiar and be wary of the unfamiliar.Boal suspects that the expense and administration involved in the pre-market assessment process of health claims may prevent some companies from presenting novel claims. But given the great potential of the market, several companies may judge the investment worthwhile. Either way, the new regulation makes the situation much clearer.1267 There is only one route in Europe for presenting health claims; all other health claims are illegal.The CIAA demanded EU-wide interpretative guidelines on the regulation. This is to ensure a level playing fi eld of enforcement authorities and operators and thus guarantee the proper functioning of the internal market.1268 The EFSA has already given its guidance on Article 14 applications. They will also provide guidelines on inclusion of health claims in the Article 13 list which will include claims that are based upon newly developed scientifi c evidence and/or which include a request for the protection of proprietary data. Guidelines are also expected on nutrition profi les.The Regulation as such is not enough: several guidance documents and opinions are needed to resolve how the Regulation is implemented. The role of EFSA soft law and Commission soft law is thus extremely important. The EFSA "strongly advises" the applicants to adhere to their guidelines. In practice, it is the EFSA who decides on the health claim procedures. The Commission will have to rely on the EFSA on scientifi c issues, thus the EFSA has an important role as a non-partial scientifi c assessment body. The Commission can, however, base their decision on "other legitimate factors", not merely the scientifi c opinion from the EFSA. This means there is room for political considerations. This is typical of European food law: it is based on science, but not merely on science. European operators seem to have more faith on the EFSA than on the Commission as regards impartiality.The Regulation poses challenges to post-market supervisory authorities in the Member States. Even though local food control authorities do not need to evaluate the adequacy of the claims (as it is done pre-market at the EU level), they must still be able to ensure that the preconditions for use of the claims are fulfi lled. This refers to the additional information that must accompany the claim and verifi cation of adherence to nutrition profi les that must be fulfi lled.1269 There will still also be illegal nutrition claims, health claims, and also medicinal claims on foods, which the authorities must eradicate1267 Boal 2006. 1268 Review of CIAA Priorities and Objectives for Better RegulationIn light of the Commission proposals to simplify EU legislation. CPT/003/07E-Final Brussels, 28 February 2007 Page 5.1269 Report on health claims used in marketing of foodstuffs in Finland 2007, 25.-229-5.3.4 Chinese Rules on Nutrition and Health Claims5.3.4.1 Names of Health Related productsChina has new legislation that is common to all health related products, including food among other products.1270 This legislation includes:Working Procedure of Examination and Approval on Health Related Products of -Ministry of Public Health;Rule of Evaluation and Examination Committee of Health Related Products of Ministry -of Public Health; andRegulation on - Nomenclature1271 of Health Related Products.Articles of the Procedure discuss the tasks of different authorities1272. The Rule of the Committee also contains procedural rules. The Nomenclature Regulation stipulates substantial rules on names. 'Health related products' refers to food, cosmetics, products related to hygiene and safety of drinking water, disinfectant and disinfecting tools and other products related to human health; which are examined and approved by the Ministry of Public Health according to the following legislation:Food Hygiene Law of the People's republic of China - 1273,Regulation on Hygiene Supervision of Cosmetics, -Regulation on Health Food Administration, -Regulation on Hygiene Administration and Supervision of Drinking Water, -Regulation Administration of Disinfecting, and -Other laws, decrees and regulations. - 1274The Nomenclature Regulation has been enacted to protect the consumer's right to accurate information and is applied to, among other things, health food. . The Committee examines the names of the health related products. The nomenclature of a health related product must meet the following requirements1275:1270 In EU law, there is no legal product safety category between general product safety and food safety. Chinese law on health-related products is here presented in between general product safety and general food safety. In Germany, foodstuffs and cosmetics are governed by the same law. Also in the United States, foodstuffs, cosmetics, and drugs are governed by the same law.1271 This means names.1272 All health related products are evaluated and examined by a committee under the Ministry of Public Health, the composition of which is regulated in the Rule on the Committee. The Ministry also has a Health Related Products Inspection Institute, which undertakes inspections of samples sent by applicants. The basic principle manifested in the rules on the authorities is that openness and impartiality are guaranteed in the application procedure and the acceptation of health related products.1273 Now replaced by the Food Safety Law.1274 Article 2 of the Working Procedure.1275 Nomenclature on health related products, article 4.-230-It must conform to related laws, regulations, decrees and standards,1. It must refl ect the property of product; it must be concise, easily understood, and 2. conform to Chinese convention,The name consists of trademark, model3. 1276, general name, and name of property, in this order.The trademark, model, general name and name of property must meet the following requirements1277:The name must conform to related regulations and adopt a registered trademark.