One might think that small companies, which are often market followers, would have preferred the full regulation approach where they can simply copy the large company. However, we cannot only focus on the followers. The compromise version might be best for all companies as it always rewards the fi rst to market. The compromise approach leaves the copying competitor three different options between which he can choose, based on cost-effi ciency: to duplicate the effort, to agree with (pay for) the fi rst to market, or to wait for 5 years and follow. 4.2.1.8 Safety of Genetically Modifi ed Foods Genetically modifi ed organisms (GMOs) are organisms in which man has altered the genetic material (DNA). The technology that enables this is called "modern biotechnology", "gene technology", "recombinant DNA technology" or "genetic engineering". It allows selected individual genes to be transferred from one organism into another. Genes are today modifi ed primarily to improve crop protection. This is done by transferring bacterium or virus genes that give the plant greater resistance against insects or viruses, or increased tolerance towards herbicides. Under development are plants with improved disease or drought resistance, crops with increased nutrient levels, fi sh species with enhanced growth characteristics and plants 782 If the competitor used the invention at the time of the patent application, he may be granted a licence. If he used it at the time when the application became public, he may be granted a compulsory licence.783 Articles 54, 55, and 57 of the European Patent Convention.784 Here we must mention that some European countries have rules on utility model protection. This "little patent" could be suitable for many food products, but is not available everywhere. -140-or animals producing pharmaceutically important proteins such as vaccines.785 Globally, new GMO foods must go through pre-market safety evaluation.786EU legislation on GMO approval has been in place since the beginning of the 1990s. Between 1991 and 1998, the marketing of 18 GMOs was authorised in the EU by a Commission decision. Then began the so-called moratorium, during which no authorisations were granted due to resistance to the whole idea of GMO food. New EU legislation on GMO foods came into force in 2004. This includes the regulation on genetically modifi ed food and feed787, its implementing regulation788, and the GMO traceability and labelling regulation789. Until April 2004, GMOs were evaluated under novel food legislation. The new regulatory framework on GMOs aimed to address the concerns of EU Member States and EU consumers. It was designed to build confi dence in the authorisation system so that the moratorium could be ended.790The GMO food regulations apply to: GMOs for food use;(a) food containing or consisting of GMOs(b) food produced from or containing ingredients produced from GMOs(c) 791.Food produced "from" a GMO is covered; food produced "with" a GMO is not. The determining criterion is whether or not material derived from the genetically modifi ed source material is present in the food. Processing aids, which are only used during the production process, are not covered by the defi nition, because they are not expected to become an ingredient of the food.792GMO food must not: have adverse effects on human health, animal health or the environment;(a) mislead the consumer;(b) 785 WHO web page. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/.786 According to WHO, the safety assessment of GM foods generally investigates: "(a) direct health effects (toxicity); (b) tendencies to provoke allergic reaction (allergenicity); (c) specifi c components thought to have nutritional or toxic properties; (d) the stability of the inserted gene; (e) nutritional effects associated with genetic modifi cation; and (f) any unintended effects which could result from the gene insertion". http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/.787 Regulation 1829/2003/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modifi ed food and feed.788 Commission Regulation 641/2004/EC of 6 April 2004 on detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation 1829/2003/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the application for the authorisation of new genetically modifi ed food and feed, the notifi cation of existing products and adventitious or technically unavoidable presence of genetically modifi ed material which has benefi ted from a favourable risk evaluation.789 Regulation 1830/2003/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 concerning the traceability and labelling of genetically modifi ed organisms and the traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modifi ed organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC.790 WHO web page. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/.791 Regulation 1829/2003/EC, Article 3.792 Cana - Schliessner 2005. Here we only discuss safety rules of fi nal products. Contained use of GMOs is covered by Directive 90/219/EEC, and deliberate release into the environment of GMOs by Directive 2001/18/EC. -141- differ from the food which it is intended to replace to such an extent that its normal (c) consumption would be nutritionally disadvantageous for the consumer793.There is a single European authorisation procedure that covers both human food and animal feed. Applications are submitted fi rst to the competent authority of the Member State where the product is fi rst to be marketed. The application is then made available to the EFSA, which is responsible for the scientifi c risk assessment. The Commission will draft a proposal for granting or refusing authorisation. The Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health will approve the Commission's proposal. If the Committee does not approve the proposal, the draft Decision is submitted to the Council of Ministers, which can either adopt or reject it. If the Council does not act within three months or does not obtain a qualifi ed majority for the adoption or rejection of the Commission's proposal, the Commission shall adopt the decision.794Foods containing maximum 0.9 percent GMOs795 are excluded from the scope of the EU GMO food regulations, provided that this presence is adventitious or technically unavoidable. GMOs approved so far have been maize and soy derivatives, rapeseed oil and cottonseed oil796. Post market monitoring of GMOs is performed by national food agencies.European consumers remain unenthusiastic about GMO food due to several factors. When GMO foods fi rst came to the European market, the consumers could not see the benefi t of them. The products were not less expensive and did not taste better. The European consumers also distrust risk assessments, as there have been several food safety scandals in Europe particularly in the 1990s797 Generally, consumers tend to accept gene technology in medicine much easier than gene technology in food798. This is related to the basic ideas of foodstuffs and medicines: medicines are used based on a calculation of risks and benefi ts to health. Everyone acknowledges that medicines have side effects. For foods, unfamiliar risks related to one's health are not accepted.The Commission assessment reports of the GMO Regulations 1829/2003/EC and 1830/2003/EC have been published799 but no revision of the Regulations is planned. The CIAA wants the European Commission to recognise that GMO contaminations can occur, despite the efforts of all partners in the food chain. They say discussion on the enforceability of the European GMO regulatory system is necessary.800 According to the WHO, feasibility and methods for post-marketing monitoring of GMO food products are under discussion801.793 Regulation 1829/2003/EC, Article 4.794 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/gmfood/qanda_en.pdf.795 Of the food ingredients considered individually.796 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/authorisation/index_en.htm.797 WHO web page. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/.798 WHO web page. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/.799 Report from the Commission to the Council and the European Parliament on the implementation of Regulation 1830/2003/EC concerning the traceability and labelling of genetically modifi ed organisms and the traceability of food and feed products produced from genetically modifi ed organisms and amending Directive 2001/18/EC. COM(2006) 0197 fi nal. 800 Review of CIAA Priorities and Objectives for Better Regulation In light of the Commission proposals to simplify EU legislation. CPT/003/07E-Final Brussels, 28 February 2007 Page 5.801 WHO web page. http://www.who.int/foodsafety/publications/biotech/20questions/en/.-142-4.2.2. China 4.2.2.1 The Challenge of Food Safety in China Food safety is today a major concern in China. It is important both for Chinese food export and domestic markets802. Food safety efforts are more advanced in the export sector803, and more recently in the domestic sector. According to Calvin et al., "China's efforts are an important case study of a country's striving to elevate standards in its food and agriculture sector to international food safety standards".804 For exported food, the Chinese government has succeeded in arranging a strict regulation system. It is usual that developing countries have, to promote their exports, stricter standards for exported food. The Chinese system was created as a response to bans of Chinese food in foreign countries. The Export-Oriented System monitors food products from exporting companies at every step, from the pesticides and chemicals used on farms to food processing facilities to packaging plants. Exporting food companies must obtain special licences from the Export-Oriented System administration.805 The approach taken resembles the European farm-to-table approach. The reasons for regulating the export industry stricter are: The export industry is easier to regulate because it is smaller than the general food industry. -The export industry is a more motivating target as the exports generate considerable -revenue, and China wants to keep up its international reputation.806 According to Calvin et al, many of China's food safety problems can be traced back to the farm level. It is diffi cult to standardise and monitor production practices of the Chinese food production sector, which is composed of 200 million farm households. Important issues include both chemical and biological hazards. Chinese farmers must rely on heavy use of fertilizers to get production out of intensively cultivated soils. Chinese farmers also use many highly toxic pesticides. Some farmers have scant understanding of correct chemical use. They may harvest immediately after applying a pesticide, which results in excessive residues in the harvested product. Antibiotics are widely used to control disease in livestock, poultry, and aquaculture products. Industrialisation and lax environmental controls have also led to 802 Since the 1990s, China has been an important exporter of food products such as vegetables, apples, shrimp, and poultry. However, China has recently had problems with food export because Chinese food has failed to meet stringent food safety standards in Japan, Europe, and other countries. Also Chinese consumers are more and more interested in food safety because of some domestic food contamination scandals. 803 Chinese food must meet the international food safety standards, and the increased costs of achieving these standards might have an effect on growth of Chinese food exports. Chinese foods have been rejected because of excessive antibiotic residues (EU rejected shrimp 2001, EU and Japan rejected poultry 2001, and EU rejected honey 2002), excessive pesticide residues (Japan rejected frozen spinach in 2002-2003, EU and Japan rejected tea 2002) and parasites (South Korea rejected fermented cabbage in 2005). Calvin et al. 2006, 18. News reports of product rejects compiled by USDA, Economic Research Service.804 Calvin et al. 2006, 17. 805 Li 2005, 30.806 Li 2005, 30.-143-concern about heavy metals in food products. Untreated human and animal waste in fi elds and water raises the risk of microbial contamination.807 The Chinese system of food marketing is another challenge to safety monitoring supervision. Millions of Chinese small food businesses often keep no record of what they buy and sell. In Europe, traceability of foods in the food chain is one of the key principles. Ensuring traceability is more diffi cult when there are millions of growers and buyers dealing with small volumes, as in China.808 The Chinese food companies are now promoting approaches to gain greater vertical control over the food chain.809 The Chinese Government aims at building a food safety system for exports that will establish China's international reputation for producing safe food. China has also been raising domestic food safety standards and implementing inspection and testing systems for consumer products and agricultural commodities. In 2005, offi cials announced plans to update a 1995 law covering consumer food products. In 2006, the Chinese legislature adopted a law that establishes a national framework for building a system that ensures the safety and monitoring of agricultural products. Local governments have also been active in promoting safer food.810 According to Article 70 of the 2009 Food Safety Law, the State Council is responsible for formulating emergency plans for national food safety incidents. The primary actor responsible for preventing the food incident from spreading is naturally the organisation where an incident occurs811. This increased weight on food safety is due to several serious food scandals where dozens of people have died. This has prompted a wave of new regulations and clean-up campaigns from the central government812. The focus on food safety includes harsh punishments for those breaking the laws. For example Zheng Xiaoyu, former head of the State Food and Drug Administration, was sentenced to the death penalty in May 2007 on charges of taking bribes and dereliction of duty813. According to Huang, food safety has improved in recent years thanks to measures taken by the government to enhance supervision. The general situation of food security concerning vegetables, meat, grains, fruits, dairy products, aquatic products and other food is healthier. However, supervision over food security is still weak in suburbs and rural areas, and about 8 percent of domestic food cannot reach the national food safety standards.814 China will need equally severe food safety control for its domestic consumers than it already has in place for exports. The milk scandal of September 2008 shows that China still has a long way to go.807 Calvin et al. 2006, 18.808 Calvin et al. 2006, 18.809 Firms have used a model in which the company leases land and controls production directly, and a model in which they use production contracts with growers that specify chemical use and production methods. Good agricultural practices (GAPs) and use of a type of Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) are promoted. Calvin et al. 2006, 19.810 Calvin et al. 2006, 20.811 Food Safety Law of 2009, Article 71.812 Reuters AlertNet. http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/PEK337799.htm.813 China Today web page. http://www.chinatoday.com/law/a.htm.814 Huang Hai, assistant minister of commerce. July 19 2005. Press conference reported by China Internet Information Centre.-144-4.2.2.2 General Safety Requirements of Foods In China, the Food Hygiene Law of the People's Republic of China815 was enacted for the purpose of ensuring food hygiene, preventing food contamination and harmful substances from injuring human health, safeguarding the health of the people and improving their physical fi tness.816 The Food Hygiene Law was in 2009 replaced by the Food Safety Law. The implementing regulation of the Food Safety Law was also published in 2009. The safety of primary agricultural products is under the Law of the People's Republic of China on Quality of Agricultural Products. The Food Hygiene Law had nine chapters: Chapter One: General provisionsChapter Two: Food hygieneChapter Three: Hygiene of food additivesChapter Four: Hygiene of food contact materialsChapter Five: Formulation of food hygiene standardsChapter Six: Food hygiene controlChapter Seven: Food hygiene supervisionChapter Eight: Legal responsibilityChapter Nine: Supplementary provisions.817 The new Food Safety law has ten Chapters: Chapter One: General ProvisionsChapter Two: Surveillance and Assessment of Food Safety RisksChapter Three: Food Safety StandardsChapter Four: Food Production and TradeChapter Five: Inspection and Testing of FoodChapter Six: Food Import and ExportChapter Seven: Response to Food Safety IncidentsChapter Eight: Supervision and AdministrationChapter Nine: Legal LiabilitiesChapter Ten: Supplementary Provisions The new law is more comprehensive in detailing who is responsible for what, focusing on the critical points where there have been problems in the past. The main structure and content of the two laws are similar, though. We discuss both laws here, as the principles of the former law have been transferred into the new one. According to Article 6 of the Food Hygiene Law of 1995, food shall be non-toxic and harmless, conform to proper nutritive requirements and have appropriate sensory properties such as colour, 815 Passed in the 16th conference of the 8th national congress in Oct.30, 1995, and announced as No.59 Chairman Order, and implemented since the date of announcement.816 Article 1.817 Kan - Zhang 2002.-145-fragrance and taste. According to Article 7, foods intended specially for infants and preschool children shall conform to their specifi c nutritive and hygienic standards promulgated by the administrative department of public health under the State Council. Article 8 of the Food Hygiene Law listed the hygiene requirements for food production and marketing. These were very similar to the ones in the EU hygiene legislation. They included organising clean and tidy food production facilities, the water used, disinfectants, toilets, sewage and garbage, washing hands, clean work clothes. They included also rules on clean tableware, safe storage and transportation, and clean packaging materials. The Chinese hygiene rules are more precise than the European ones and picture the different situation and tradition of food production and marketing. The Chinese hygiene rules are of the type: "measures shall be taken to eliminate fl ies, rodents, cockroaches and other harmful insects and to remove conditions for their propagation". Article 8 of the Food Hygiene Law contained a reference to local, more specifi c norms: "The hygienic requirements for food production or marketing undertaken by food vendors and persons engaged in the food business in urban and rural markets shall be formulated specifi cally according to this Law by the standing committees of the people's congresses in the provinces, autonomous regions, or municipalities directly under the Central Government." This Article has been considered problematic. The delegation of more specifi c food hygiene legislation to local legislators has led to inconsistent standards and confusing licensing requirements818.