Article sites Randall Peerenboom: China's Long March Toward Rule of Law, Cambridge University Press 2002, and Albert Huhg-yee Chen: An Introduction to the Legal System of the People's Republic of China, 1992.-52-legal reform revolves around taking some of the powers away from administrators, who up until now have been the legislators, the executors, and the judges.According to Peerenboom, China's performance on rule of law might be best judged in relation to other countries in its income class322, and China seems to be doing reasonably well by that measure323. In addition, there is also critique on the whole discussion on the rule of law in China. According to Jerome Cohen, the problem with Westerners is that we never go beyond that primitive stage we call the rule of law, and China has always known that law is not enough to govern a society,.324 According to Qingjiang, guanxi (social connections) and mianzi (face) do still affect implementation of laws in China325.We are of the view that the mere existence of laws, even laws of technically high quality, is not a goal in itself and guarantees nothing more than clarity on paper. The content, substance of law, is what matters along with the need to address the requirements of companies and individuals. It is therefore essential that stakeholder voices are heard before making laws, and essential that laws be implemented in practice. Disputes need to be fairly resolved, whether by courts or by other means such as mediation326.2.3.2 Hard law and Administrative Soft LawIn China, there is a similar situation compared to the EU: the issue of legislative competence of central government versus the competence of provinces and cities. In Europe, it is a question of EU laws vs. Member State laws, and in China it is a question of national laws vs. local laws. Also the question of hard law vs. soft law is relevant in China. Various administrative bodies issue regulations and guidelines on food and medicine issues.In China, the Constitution is not an important part of law. and according to Clarke, it does not represent anything, and is perhaps the least important document in the entire legal system327. In reality, the Chinese government does not work in the way described in the Constitution.In theory, the Chinese central government is strong with powerful instruments at its disposal. All the powers of localities stem from the centre328. The central government decides who controls the provinces: It appoints the government top offi cials and the party top offi cials in the provinces. The central government also controls key economic resources like scarce raw materials, government investments, foreign loans and budgetary subsidies. Unity of the nation and thus strong central government is also culturally favoured: the Han majority of people want to see China as one.329 In practice, Chinese localities have been given powers and resources to administer the state economy in those localities. Driven by local interests, local 322 Wealth is highly correlated with good governance indicators, human rights, and other indicators of human well-being.323 Peerenboom 2008 a, 5.324 Cohen according to Jones 2003.325 Guanxi can work both ways: it can either assist in enhancing law enforcement, or be used to avoid compliance of law. Similarly, law enforcement may also be related to the psychological assessment of saving face or losing face of the persons against whom law is enforced. Qingjiang 2002, 301.326 Lichtenstein 2003, 288.327 Clarke 2003, 103.328 Qingjiang 2002, 305.329 Ren 2000, 102-103.-53-leaders have gradually become less obedient to the centre, and centrally promulgated laws are unevenly implemented at local level.330Offi cially, the highest governing body in China is the parliament, the National People's Congress. The amount of representatives has fl uctuated between 2000 and 3500 members. Representatives are chosen by indirect election. Local congresses elect the members of provincial congresses, and provincial congresses elect the members of the national congress. The authorities of the Parliament are extensive. The Parliament enacts the national laws and appoints the prime minister, other ministers, and the president. The NPC also decides on the state economic plans and budgets.331 The role of the parliament has increased in the recent years.The NPC chooses among itself a Standing Committee that convenes the parliament, issues regulations, interprets laws, and oversees government activities. The chairman of the Standing Committee acts as the chairman of the parliament.332 The National Congress, which is led by the prime minister, appoints the members of the State Council, which is the highest executive organ in China, as well as the highest organ of State administration333.The position of the Party has normally been decisive in choosing the members of the State Council334.According to the Constitution, the state and the communist party work together to rule the country. Since the birth of the People's Republic in 1949, the Chinese communist party (Zhongguo gongchandang) has been in a central role in state affairs.335 Offi cially and formally, there are also other parties and citizen organisations in China, but their infl uence is not signifi cant.336 The real locus of central political power in China lies in the leadership of the Communist Party, which exercises power largely through the State Council. The party has inherent authority to make rules about anything. For a number of reasons, it now chooses to make certain rules through the National People's Congress.337The Party has a leading role in central and local government, the army, and economy. Party agencies make decisions and issue them to state agencies for implementation. Party control maintains a broad reach: the division of power between the Party and the State is not defi nitive. In principal, the Party is to effi ciently maintain large issues, but in practice, it also involves itself in smaller issues. The same people work for the state and the party: party representatives have leading positions also in state government.338Below the central level, there are both sectorally defi ned ministries and geographically defi ned provincial authorities.339 Geographically, China is divided into provinces340, 330 Qingjiang 2002, 305.331 Huotari - Seppala 1993, 128-129.332 Huotari - Seppala 1993, 129.333 Offi cial web page of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China. http://english.gov.cn/2008-03/16/content_921792.htm.334 Huotari - Seppala 1993, 130.335 Preamble of the Constitution, see also Amendment 2 of 1993 and Amendment 3 of 1999. Huotari - Seppala, 124.336 Huotari - Seppala 1993, 123.337 Clarke 2003, 111.338 Huotari - Seppala 1993, 124.339 Weixin 1992, 48-49.340 Hebei, Shanxi, Liaoning, Jilin, Heilongjiang, Jiangsu, Zhejiang, Anhui, Fujian, Jiangxi, Shandong, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Guangdong, Hainan, Sichuan, Guizhou, Yunnan, Shaanxi, Gansu, Qinghai, and Taiwan.-54-autonomous regions341, special administrative regions342, and municipalities directly under the central government343. Provinces and autonomous regions are further divided into autonomous prefectures, counties, autonomous counties and cities, and counties are divided into towns and townships.344 Local and provincial legislation is given by local and provincial congresses. According to the Constitution and the 2000 Act of Legislation, the NPC Standing Committee oversees local regulations, and can annul any local regulations contravening the Constitution or national laws345. In practice, however, this responsibility is far from being realised, and a large number of local regulations contravene national laws346. According to Weixin, the Chinese economy is not actually integrated, even though China is a centrally planned economy with one central government and one currency in circulation. There are barriers to the mobility of goods and there is a lack of economic cooperation and specialisation within China. The administrative frontiers are also economic frontiers.347The sectoral planning hierarchy also fragments the market. All sectors within the economy are organised vertically and headed by ministries under the State Council. Ministries include the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Agriculture, and the Ministry of Science and Technology348. The Ministry of Health is the most relevant in regulating foodstuffs and medicines. Also the State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA)349, founded in 2003, has its role in drafting various guidelines related to safety and effi cacy of foodstuffs and medicines350. According to Bian, the SFDA is lacking in authority because it has to co-ordinate among several ministries that have a higher administrative rank351. The SFDA is at the moment directly under the State Council352, but will be transferred under the Ministry of Health in the upcoming government restructure, see below.Regulations that can be enacted by ministries are called guizhang. These regulations tend not to be results of comprehensive planning or strategy. They are rather reactions to problems arisen. Within the areas of food and medicines, several different government agencies have competence to regulate and supervise the entrepreneurs. When giving guizhang regulations, 341 Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, Tibet Autonomous Region, Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, and Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region .342 Hong Kong Special Administrative Region and Macao Special Administrative Region.343 Beijing, Tianjin, Shanghai, and Chongqing.344 Weixin 1992, 47.345 Jian 2003, 506-507.346 Jian 2003, 508.347 Weixin 1992, 47.348 There are altogether 28 Ministries and Commissions under the State Council. In addition, there are at least 36 other organisations and institutions directly under the State Council. These include the Customs, the Bureau of Statistics, and the Intellectual Property Offi ce. Government's offi cial web portal: http://english.gov.cn/links.htm#1. See plans on restructuring the State Council at GOV.cn: Tuesday, 11 March, 2008. http://english.gov.cn/2008-03/11/content_916738.htm.349 The State Food and Drug Administration was founded according to the restructuring plan of the State Council, approved by the First Plenary Session of the 10th National People's Congress, and "the State Council Notice on Government Structuring", No.8.2003. The new authority replaced the former State Drug Administration. http://www.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W43879538/index.html.350 The SFDA has control over foods, medicines, and cosmetics. Its domain is thus similar to that of the FDA in the United States. In Europe, food and medicine administration is divided under two separate agencies at the EU level and also in most EU Member States.351 Bian 2004.352 SFDA web page at: http://www.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W43879538/index.html.-55-administrative organs do not necessarily check whether their guizhang is in agreement with laws or former regulations by the same administrative organ or other administrative organs. Thus, confl ict among guizhang provisions is not rare.353 This is naturally confusing both to regulation targets and those that are supposed to supervise them.Legal and economic integration of China cannot be realised at once due to the participants being separated both geographically and by sectors. The Chinese have created Economic Zones as a type of regional economic experiment.354 The establishment of these zones is to encourage economic cooperation by promoting the division of labour and competition like in the EU.355 These are the fi rst steps towards integration of the Chinese economy. According to Weixin, the successful realisation of regional integration in China requires institutional arrangements similar to those of the EU. Interests of the whole economy and the individual economies need to be coordinated. The decision-making procedures are important in this respect.356According to Article 90 of the Chinese Constitution, "the ministries and commissions issue orders, directives and regulations within the jurisdiction of their respective departments and in accordance with the statutes and the administrative rules and regulations, decisions and orders issued by the State Council". The Ministry of Health has the competence to legislate on the area of foodstuffs and medicines.The SFDA, on the other hand, does not have hard-law legislative power. However, the SFDA's Department of Policy and Regulations, Division of Regulations, has the following tasks:"studying and drafting legislation program and annual plan for food and drug -administration;participating in, and/or organising the drafting of Medicine Administration Laws and -regulations;organising relevant authorities to draft laws and regulations for safety management of -food, health food and cosmeticsorganising and carrying out review, coordination and issue of administrative -provisions;interpretation of the related laws and regulations in accordance with law". - 357This means the SFDA is at the moment involved in both important stages of food and medicine law: preparing and implementing the laws. The SFDA plans and drafts legislation promulgated by the Ministries under the State Council. The Authority also provides its own administrative regulations, and interprets laws and regulations.The division of work between the Ministry of Health and the SFDA will be restructured in the future. According to information on the central government's website in March 2008, China is upgrading the Ministry of Health to better monitor the safety of foodstuffs and medicines. The SFDA will be transferred under the Ministry of Health. The "new MOH" will be authorised to coordinate food safety management, organise investigations into serious food safety incidents, and give "due punishment". The MOH is responsible for the constitution of the national food 353 Bian 2004. 354 Weixin 1992, 88.355 Weixin 1992, 91.356 Weixin 1992, 86.357 SFDA web page. http://www.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W44993659/index.html.-56-and medicine laws. The SFDA, after the reform, is responsible for food sanitation permits, monitoring food businesses, and monitoring the safety of medicines including their research, production, circulation, and use. 358 This means that in the future, the MOH will be giving all the laws on foodstuffs and medicines, not the SFDA. The task of the SFDA will be to more effi ciently monitor the businesses.Above, we have discussed the law-making and administrative rule-making procedures. Finally, we have to note that courts in China often act like legislative bodies in that they make law by issuing interpretations of laws that are binding on the courts. Every year the Supreme People's Court (SPC) issues interpretations, regulations, notices, replies, opinions, and policy statements. Most are binding on the courts; others are highly persuasive and likely to be followed. The 'interpretations' range from general statements to specifi c replies to inquiries from lower courts359, and fi ll in the void left by non-existent or vague laws. The main problem with this distribution of work between the NPC and the SPC is the SPC not adhering to recent process reforms to increase transparency and public participation. The SPC has started to respond to this criticism yet the questions of legislative hierarchy still remain.3602.3.3 Structure of Chinese Food and Medicine Law2.3.3.1 FoodstuffsIn China, food law is given by the NPC, the State Council, or authorities under the State Council. The Food Hygiene Law of 1995 was the fundamental food law in China. Since June 2009, the essential piece of food law has been the Food Safety Law. The Standing Committee of the National People's Congress passed the new Food Safety Law on February 28th 2009, and it came into effect at the beginning of June 2009. Based on the new law and Implementing Measures361, Chinese food law and particularly its implementation and control will be developed. The new law uses Western terminology in promoting safety "from farm to table". Our focus in this study is primarily on the old law, as the existing law is presently more plan than practice.The Food Hygiene Law of 1995 was basically a modern food law similar to the Codex Alimentarius model. According to the Food Hygiene Law, the administrative department of public health under the State Council shall formulate or approve and promulgate the national hygiene standards, hygiene control regulations and inspection procedures for food, food additives, the containers, packaging, utensils and equipment used for food, the detergents and disinfectants used for washing food or utensils and equipment used for food, and the tolerances for contaminants and radioactive substances in food.362Other national food laws were based on the Food Hygiene Law. Examples of Chinese food regulations based on the former Food Hygiene Law and current Food Safety Law are:358 GOV.cn Tuesday, March 11, 2008 . http://english.gov.cn/2008-03/11/content_916856.htm.359 The latter means the Supreme People's Court acts similarly to the European Court of Justice, which can decide how law is to be interpreted in a case that is held by a Member State court.360 Peerenboom 2008 c, 1.361 First Implementing Measures were published in April 2009.362 Food Hygiene Law, Article 14.-57-the Novel Food Regulation -the GMO Food Regulation -the Health Food Regulation -the Food Additive Regulation - 363.For health foods364, there is a national Health Food Regulation by the Ministry of Health, which is the basic law on health foods. In addition, there are over 20 other rules or notifi cations by the Ministry of Health or the State Food and Drug Administration. These include the "Interim Regulations for the Registration of Health Foods", "Provisions for Health Food Labelling", "General Hygiene Requirements for Health Foods" and the "Notifi cation on Preparing for Censoring Health Food Advertisements". 365 For clarity reasons, combining these in one piece of law might be considered in the future.If the State has not formulated standards for a certain food, the people's governments of the provinces, autonomous regions, or municipalities directly under the Central Government may establish local standards for that food and report them to the administrative department of public health under the State Council and the competent standardization administration department under the State Council for the record.366 The 2009 Food Safety Law upholds existing principles of legislative competence. 367. Local standards are plentiful. In Hong Kong, for example, there is an abundance of local food law.