The special provisions concerning the simplifi ed procedure applicable to homeopathic medicinal products are in chapter 2 of the medicinal products directive. Article 14 lists the conditions for the simplifi ed procedure: "Only homeopathic medicinal products which satisfy all of the following conditions may be subject to a special, simplifi ed registration procedure:they are administered orally or externally, -no specifi c therapeutic indication - appears on the labelling of the medicinal product or in any information relating thereto,there is - a suffi cient degree of dilution to guarantee the safety of the medicinal product; in particular, the medicinal product may not contain either more than one part per 10000 of the mother tincture or more than 1/100th of the smallest dose used in allopathy with regard to active substances whose presence in an allopathic medicinal product results in the obligation to submit a doctor's prescription. "From a safety point of view, dilution is the key. Homeopathic products are very weak. The safety requirements for homeopathic medicinal products are the same regardless of whether or not an indication is suggested. According to Finnish agency of medicines917, either the safety must be demonstrated through original studies, or it must be shown on the basis of published literature that the dilution concerned is safe in relation to the method of administration in question. An expert statement on the safety of the product should also be presented. As explained above, believers of homeopathy consider that the effective ingredient is effective even when highly diluted. From the effi cacy point of view, a very critical notion is to be found in article 14.3: No proof of therapeutic effi cacy is required of the homeopathic products registered according to the simplifi ed procedure. Article 15 lists the information needed in the simplifi ed procedure: bibliographical data concerning the product's homeopathic nature, data 915 Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Homeopathy.916 Shang et al. 2005. 917 National Agency for Medicines web page. http://www.nam.fi /english/pharma_industry/herbal_remedy/homeopathic/index.html.-164-on the stability of the product etc.918. According to preamble 23 of the Medicinal Products Directive, "it is desirable in the fi rst instance to provide users of these homeopathic medicinal products with a very clear indication of their homeopathic character and with suffi cient guarantees of their quality and safety". "Guarantees of effi cacy" was left out on purpose. Homeopathic medicinal products, other than those qualifi ed for the simple procedure shall be authorised and labelled in accordance with Articles 8, 10 and 11, i.e. like normal medicines. These are products with therapeutic indications or in a form which may present risks which must be balanced against the desired therapeutic effect919. A Member State may refrain from establishing a special, simplifi ed registration procedure for the homeopathic medicinal products. This means a compromise: countries that do not value homeopathy can keep the products off the market. Countries that trust homeopathy, can allow them to exist via the simplifi ed procedure. The practitioners of homeopathy and other complementary and alternative medicines (CAM) claim that the situation where Member States can make up their own minds creates several problems. Of course they wish their treatments would be recognised everywhere. European countries vary greatly regarding regulation of CAM products and practitioners. In some countries, practitioners can operate freely and products are available to patients. Health insurance providers even reimburse some CAM products. Authorities and doctors in the new Member States are apparently reluctant to accept CAM products.920 The consumer can choose to trust or not to trust homeopathy. The homeopathy business sees the European harmonisation of the legislation on homeopathic medicine in 1992921 as a turning point constituting "offi cial recognition of homeopathic medicine in all EU countries". The supporters claim that, "this Community recognition demonstrates homeopathic medicine's integration into the European medical and pharmaceutical world". 922 The scientifi c grounds for creating the simplifi ed procedure for homeopathic 918 Article 15: "An application for special, simplifi ed registration may cover a series of medicinal products derived from the same homeopathic stock or stocks. The following documents shall be included with the application in order to demonstrate, in particular, the pharmaceutical quality and the batch-to-batch homogeneity of the products concerned: - scientifi c name or other name given in a pharmacopoeia of the homeopathic stock or stocks, together with a statement of the various routes of administration, pharmaceutical forms and degree of dilution to be registered, - dossier describing how the homeopathic stock or stocks is/are obtained and controlled, and justifying its/their homeopathic nature, on the basis of an adequate bibliography, - manufacturing and control fi le for each pharmaceutical form and a description of the method of dilution and potentisation, - manufacturing authorisation for the medicinal product concerned, - copies of any registrations or authorisations obtained for the same medicinal product in other Member States, - one or more specimens or mock-ups of the outer packaging and the immediate packaging of the medicinal products to be registered, - data concerning the stability of the medicinal product. "919 Preamble 25 of the medicinal products directive.920 The European Council for Classical Homeopathy. 31 January 2007. A response to: Communication from the Commission. Consultation regarding Community action on health services, Brussels, 26 September 2006.921 With the adoption of two directives concerning homeopathic medicine for human and veterinary use.922 Boiron Group homeopathy site at: http://www.boiron.com/en/htm/homeopathy-today/homeopathy-regulation.htm.-165-medicines are questionable. The "diffi culty of applying conventional statistical methods relating to clinical trials" is used as a ground for special legislation, but the legislator does not explain this diffi culty. 4.3.2 China In China, there are essentially two different kinds of medicinal products on the market: modern medicines and traditional Chinese medicines. With regard to modern medicines, there are specifi c standards for narcotics, psychotropic substances, toxic drugs for medicinal use, and radioactive medicines923. These will not be discussed here.4.3.2.1 Modern Medicines In the past few years, China has signifi cantly modernised its legislation on medicines, in order to guarantee their safety, effi cacy, and quality. China has simultaneously enhanced intellectual property protection, which is particularly important to the medicine industry.924 The central government authority responsible for medicine control is the State Food and Drug Administration. A new medicine can be put into production only after the SFDA has approved it and issued a registered document of approval925. A new medicine which has completed its clinical tests and been approved after appraisal shall be issued a certifi cate of new medicine by the SFDA926. First, production and sale of fake medicines is prohibited. A fake medicine has any one of the following characteristics: Its components do not comply with State pharmaceutical standards. (1) A non-medical substance is passed off as a medicine, or one medicine is passed off as (2) another.927 A medicine is legally a fake medicine in any of the following cases: Where the use of the medicine has been prohibited by the SFDA;(1) Where the medicine is produced and imported without a legal approval or sold without (2) being inspected according to the law;Where the medicine has deteriorated;(3) Where the medicine has been contaminated;(4) Where the medicine has been produced of medicinal materials without obtaining a (5) registration document of approval for the materials.923 Based on Medicine Administration Law, Article 35.924 Tsoi 2007.925 Medicine Administration Law, Article 31.926 Medicine Administration Law, Article 29.927 Medicine Administration Law, Article 48.-166-Where the indications or the functions marked on the label do not fall within the (6) prescribed scope.928 Second, production and sale of medicines of inferior quality is prohibited. This refers to medicines whose components do not conform to State pharmaceutical standards929. These standards are the "Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China" and the pharmaceutical standards promulgated by the SFDA.930 A medicine shall be handled as medicine of inferior quality also in any of the following cases: An expiry date is not indicated or is altered; or(1) A registration number is not indicated or is altered; or(2) The medicine has passed its expiration date; or(3) The packages and containers which have direct contact with pharmaceuticals have not (4) obtained approval; orThe medicine has been added to presumptuously with colour or preservative additives, (5) spice, disguising odour or supplementary materials; orThe medicine fails to meet the prescribed standards in other respects(6) 931. Import of medicines whose curative effects are uncertain or poor, or which produce adverse reactions or have other harmful effects on people's health is prohibited932. 4.3.2.2. Traditional Chinese Medicines 4.3.2.2.1 What is Traditional Chinese Medicine Traditional Chinese Medicine means a medical science governing the theory and practice of traditional Chinese medicine. It is an ancient Chinese system of medicine that includes meditation, herbal and nutritional therapy, restorative physical exercises and massage, and acupuncture933. Here we are mainly interested in herbal medicines. Herbal medicines and plant-based functional foods have important features in common, but the differences of the legal categories affect strategy on product development and marketing. According to a recent survey, the number of traditional Chinese medicines is close to 13000. Of these, over 11000 are of plant origin; the rest are of animal or mineral origin. This means traditional Chinese medicine often refers to herbal medicine.934 Since the 1920s, traditional Chinese medicines have been investigated in terms of modern medical science. Chemical ingredients and fractions have been isolated from herbs, and their actions studied. Since the 1950s, the Chinese government has paid a lot of attention to the development of traditional Chinese medicine. Colleges focused on the subject have 928 Medicine Administration Law, Article 48.929 Medicine Administration Law, Article 49.930 Medicine Administration Law, Article 32.931 Medicine Administration Law, Article 49.932 Medicine Administration Law, Article 38.933 Spondylitis Association of America. Web page at: http://www.spondylitis.org/patient_resources/glossary.aspx.934 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 1.-167-been established in every province and autonomous region; hospitals and research institutes have been set up at national, provincial, municipal and even county level. New chemical ingredients are isolated. New forms of herbal remedies are instant powders, tablets, injections and capsules.935 Medicines of plant origin form the main part of traditional Chinese medicine. Their species, habitat, collection season, collection method, and storage are thus important factors determining their quality and effi cacy. For example, some plants need to be collected when fl owers are in full bloom, others when fl owers are still in bud. Medicines from fruits are usually collected when the fruits are ripe, medicines from roots in late autumn or spring, and medicines from bark in early summer.936 Herbal medicines are processed before being taken as medicines. Sometimes the purpose of processing is increasing potency, and hence effectiveness. Sometimes it is minimising or eliminating side effects or toxicity. Sometimes processing makes drugs easier to prepare or store. Methods of processing can be divided into physical processing, liquid processing, fi re processing and processing by both water and fi re. Side effects are often reduced by boiling or steaming.937 Diseases are classifi ed into two major categories: cold and hot. Medicines to counteract these diseases are cool, cold, warm or hot. In terms of yin and yang, cool and cold belong to yin, and warm and hot belong to yang. Hot diseases are ones where body temperature, blood pressure, respiratory rate, and saliva secretion are high. Cold diseases are the opposite. Hot diseases are treated with cold medicines and the other way around. Hot or warm drugs stimulate the central nervous system; promote the metabolic system and so on. Cold and cool drugs tranquilise, sedate, and have anti-microbial and anti-infl ammatory actions.938 The taste of a drug is related to its therapeutic capability.939 In terms of safety or toxicity, traditional Chinese medicines can be classifi ed as non-toxic, slightly toxic, moderately toxic and extremely toxic. Even some extremely toxic herbs thus have their medical uses. According to ancient literature, it is stated that no drug is non-toxic if taken in excessive doses or for too long a period of time. When using traditional Chinese medicines, the properties, actions and toxicity are weighed against one another. Medicines are chosen according to the syndrome, and the doctor must look at the situation as a whole. 940 Dosage and method and time of administration are determined simultaneously941. For mild diseases and for children and other weak persons, dosage is smaller942. This approach is similar to Western medicine where it is acknowledged that all medicines have side effects, a risk-benefi t ratio is applied, and appropriate dosage is an integral part of treatment. The biggest difference is that in traditional Chinese medicine, a large part of the information is based on long history of use, not exact clinical trials. When discussing medicine safety, interactions of substances have to be taken into account. This includes medicine-medicine interactions and medicine-food interactions. 935 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 2.936 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 3.937 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 4-5.938 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 5-6.939 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 6.940 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 8.941 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 10-11.942 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 10.-168-In clinical practice, traditional Chinese medical doctors usually prescribe around ten or more herbs to make the best possible mixture in each individual case of symptoms. The medicines in a mixture can be classifi ed into four categories:the principal medicine(s) provides the principal curative action, -the adjuvant medicine(s) strengthens this action and treats secondary symptoms, -the auxiliary or corrective medicine(s) relieves secondary symptoms or tempers the -action of the principal medicine,the conductive medicine(s) directs the action to the right part in the body. - 943 Medicines in a prescription can either reinforce each other, weaken each other, neutralise side effects of each other, counteract each other (resulting in no therapeutic action), or are totally incompatible, where two drugs put together will result in enhanced side effects or toxicity.944 There are lists of counteracting and incompatible medicines available to doctors. There are eighteen incompatible medicaments and nineteen medicaments of mutual restraint. For example, if Radix Veratri Nigri (lilu) is put together with Radix Ginseng, there will be serious side effects. If Radix Ginseng is put together with Faeces Trogopterorum (wulingzhi), Ginseng neutralizes the effect of Trogopterum. The mechanisms of these actions are not clear.945 As there are 11000 medicinal herbs in use, and relatively few are cited in the above-mentioned incompatibility list, it is evident that a lot more research is needed on herbal interactions. There is also a list of herbs that should not be used during pregnancy, as they might harm the foetus or cause abortion. Drugs that are prohibited or should be used with caution during pregnancy are those that have a drastic action or are very toxic. These are for example Flos Genkwa and Radix Euphorbiae Pekinensis. Also, drugs that are very warm or purgative should be avoided.946 There are also guidelines on unwanted medicine-food interactions. Uncooked or cold food is not suitable for a person suffering a cold syndrome. Hot and greasy food is not suitable for persons with a hot syndrome: for example, insomniacs should not ingest chillies. Some medicaments do not work well together with for example Chinese green onion, garlic and radish. Peppermint counteracts turtle fl esh, honey counteracts scallions, and so on.947 4.3.2.2.2 The Law on Traditional Chinese Medicine According to the Chinese Medicine Administration Law948, "the State shall develop both modern and traditional medicines and encourage their role in the prevention and treatment of diseases and in health care". Further, "the State shall protect the resources of wild medicinal resources 943 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 8-9.944 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 9.945 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 9.946 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 9.947 The Essentials of Traditional Chinese Herbal Medicine 2003, 9.948 The Medicine Administration Law of the People's Republic of China, revised at the Twentieth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth National People's Congress on February 28, 2000. The revised law entered into force as of December 1, 2001. -169-and encourage the domestic cultivation of Chinese traditional medicinal crops".949 Traditional medicine is clearly given more weight compared to the European law on medicines. The national Regulations on Traditional Chinese Medicine have been effective as of October 2003950. These Regulations do not specify rules on safety, effi cacy and marketing of traditional medicines. Instead, the Regulations are focused more on attitudes towards and roles of traditional medicine. The objectives of the Regulations include: the development of the science of traditional Chinese medicine, -the promotion of the development of undertakings engaged in traditional Chinese -medicine, andthe protection of public health. - 951 The Regulations apply to institutions and individuals engaged in healthcare involving traditional Chinese medicines, as well as to education, research and international cooperation related to the subject. The objectives of the State are to protect, support, and develop traditional Chinese medicine. The aim is to place equal stress on traditional Chinese medicine and Western medicine and encourage development and integration of both schools.952 The Regulations on Traditional Chinese Medicine do not include criteria on product safety, effi cacy and marketing. Product development, production, marketing, use, supervision, and administration with respect to traditional Chinese medicines must comply with the Medicine Administration Law of the People's Republic of China. It is stated in Article 6, that the preparation of Chinese medicines shall be in accordance with the "Pharmacopoeia of the People's Republic of China", or in accordance with the "Preparation Standards" laid down by the department administering health in that province, autonomous region or municipality under the direct control of the Central Government. Many of the safety problems with traditional Chinese medicines are due to poor quality. This means the plant itself might be safe, but due to heavy metal contamination or adulteration with prescription drugs, the product is dangerous.