Simultaneously to promoting domestic research and development, the Chinese laws have also gradually opened the market to foreign health products and ingredients.1543According to Chinese legislation on health-related products, the name of a product must not be misleading or confuse foodstuffs with medicines. Medicinal claims are allowed for medicinal products only, including traditional Chinese medicines. Medicinal claims are prohibited on foods. For health foods, and only for health foods, health claims are allowed. Among the 27 listed possible health food functions, at least 3 are quite suitable for our purposes. These are:assisting in blood lipids reduction, -assisting in blood sugars reduction, and -alleviating hypertension. -If we have the required scientifi c evidence on our products, we can apply for health food status for our functional food products. The claims on health foods must be truthful, and substantiated through animal tests and/or human trials. The SFDA is responsible for pre-market approval of health foods. Only the listed 27 claims are available. Other health claims are prohibited.There are important restrictions to health food raw materials. There are three categories of raw materials with three lists.List I includes materials that can be used either as foods or medicines (around 90 -substances).List II includes materials that can be used as health food materials (around 110 -substances).1543 Giract China News February 2006. Extract in Functional Ingredients.-285-List III includes materials that are prohibited as health food materials (around 60 -substances).First of all, one can use only 14 different raw materials in one product. This fi gure includes health-promoting materials and not basic food raw materials such as water or sugar. Furthermore, if one uses materials outside list I, one can only use 4 materials altogether. If one uses materials outside lists I and II, one can only use 1 raw material.Hawthorn and barbary wolfberry are on the fi rst list. This means that if we use hawthorn and barbary wolfberry, we can also use 12 other raw materials (that are not on lists 2 or 3). For example, if we want to use hawthorn with one material on the list II, for instance Ginseng fruit, we can use 4 materials altogether. Emblic leaffl ower is not on any of the lists. This means we can use it as health food raw material, but in this case we cannot use other raw materials.6.9 Other Legal Issues to ConsiderWhen using plants as raw materials in functional foods, food supplements or herbal medicines, one has to make sure that it is not a question of endangered species. CITES (the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora) applies here. Practically all countries are parties to CITES. The EU has even stricter rules than CITES on international trade of endangered species.Intellectual property issues are obvious to pharmaceutical companies but they also apply to herbal medicines and functional foods. It is often advisable to protect the functional ingredient by a patent or a utility model, and the names and logos with trademarks. Trademarks have to be registered for every country separately. The cost of trademarks rises with the number countries, the number of product categories, and the time of exclusivity. Sometimes the protection for geographical origin of the food might be relevant. Poor enforcement on intellectual property rights remains a top concern for companies operating in China. It might infl uence research and development plans, and the products or technologies that companies are willing to sell, license, or manufacture in China1544.Contracts form the framework for business. Confi dentiality agreements with international business partners are needed. Sometimes keeping the information secret is a better alternative to disclosing the information in a patent application. Patented ingredients or other property material or knowledge may be commercialized by licensing agreements. With international contracts, the choice of law and the venue for dispute settlement are things to consider.6.10 Final Conclusions for a Functional Food MarketerWhen developing functional foods, legal issues including marketing rules must be considered in early stages of product development. Legislation is not necessarily something that hampers good products from achieving the market but a reminder of issues that a responsible producer would have to consider anyway. A good product is something a consumer can trust. It delivers what it promises. It is up to the manufacturers to know and decide which regulatory category their functional food will fall into. The choice of legal category should be compatible 1544 See US-China Business Council 2008, 12.-286-to the scientifi c proof of effect, and a claim requires a complete and integrated marketing communications plan around it.A product will be classifi ed as medicine in Europe, if one uses medicinal claims such as "prevents heart disease and diabetes". A product will also be classifi ed as medicine, if functional ingredients are present in quantities that cause a pharmacological effect. With plant-based products, one possibility is to consciously sell the product as herbal medicine. Traditional herbal medicines can be sold based on history of use only, without having to prove effi cacy. If sold as food, an innovative product must probably be authorised through novel food procedures. This requires explicit microbiological, nutritional, and toxicological data to be joined in the application. The European defi nition of novel food includes all the plants that are unfamiliar to Europeans, even if used for centuries for example in China or America.As regards marketing in Europe, foods are allowed to bear health claims but not medicinal claims. Functional foods could be sold as dietetic foods, foods that are suitable for certain groups of people, such as for people with celiac disease. Concerning foods with a more general target group, nutrition claims and health claims can be used according to the new European Regulation. A list of established 'function' claims will be published in 2010, after which all new 'function' claims must be authorised separately. Disease risk reduction claims will always have to be authorised separately.According to Seppanen, the false orientalist picture of China as a lawless Confucian society has led to foreign companies neglecting legal planning in China1545. We do not want to do this mistake. In China, foodstuffs and medicines are separated by their functions and claims just as in Europe. Medicines have therapeutic effects, and only medicines are allowed to bear medicinal claims. The health food category is often suitable for a functional food, if it has one of 27 listed functions. Only health foods can bear health claims in China. The health food regulation also covers foods fortifi ed by vitamins and minerals, and vitamin and mineral supplements. The novel food category and the health food category are separate in China: a food cannot be both. This means that if health claims are wanted, both safety and effi cacy of the food are evaluated through the health food procedure. 1545 Seppanen 2005, 584.-287-7 TASKS OF FUTURE LAWIn this chapter, we draw conclusions on the European and Chinese legal systems from a regulator's perspective. The laws on foodstuffs and medicines will constantly have to be re-evaluated and further developed in both the EU and China.7.1 Foodstuffs vs. MedicinesIn China, the foodstuff vs. medicine -issue is actually not an issue. The same product, often a herb, can be sold as food for healthy people and as medicine for sick people. Health foods often comprise of materials that are used in traditional Chinese medicine. The legal difference between health foods and medicines is that health foods have a special health function, but are not for curing a disease.The European legal defi nition of food encompasses products ingested by humans, excluding medicines. This means the food law does not give any clarifi cation to whether a borderline product should be treated as a medicine. We have to look at the defi nition of medicine. The Medicinal Products Directive gives two parts to the defi nition of a medicinal product, by virtue of its presentation and by virtue of its functions. Consequently, a product is legally a medicinal product if it falls within either or both of these parts. This principle has been consistently held and confi rmed by the European Court of Justice. The defi nition of medicinal product was recently changed. It was clarifi ed that medicinal function means pharmacological, physiological or metabolic action1546, whereas according to the Nutrition and Health Claim Regulation, foods might have "benefi cial nutritional or physiological effects"1547. It was also added into the Medicinal Products Directive that all unclear cases are to be regarded as medicines.From the EU defi nitions of food and medicine, it is still not clear whether a functional food could in practice be authorised as a medicine. As described above, the defi nition of medicines is fulfi lled if the product either A) has a medicinal effect or B) uses medicinal claims. There are no other parts to the defi nition. There is no exclusion of foods. It is clear that a according to law, a functional food (as defi ned in chapter 1.3.) could be considered a legal medicinal product or an illegal medicinal product either by its functions or by its presentation. In practice, food-form products are rather classifi ed as foods.1546 Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 1(2).1547 Regulation 1924/2004/EC, preamble 14.-288-The borderline between foodstuffs and medicines remains a problem, as the European Court of Justice has accepted that there can be different interpretations of the defi nition of medicinal products among the Member States. A product can be a food in one Member State and a medicine in another. Herbs in particular are often used both as foodstuffs (food supplements, natural sources of food fl avourings) and as herbal medicines1548. This is one remaining obstacle to free movement of foodstuffs and medicines.In the future, it is possible that:there will be a European law on how to divide products into foodstuffs and medicines, -the categorisation decision will be done by the EFSA, and it will be applicable to the -whole Community.The UK experience with guidelines and procedures for borderline products could be used as guidance in establishing a similar categorisation system at the European level1549. The function and the claim of the product would be evaluated together to determine whether a product is a medicine. If a product contained therapeutic doses of ingredients generally regarded as medicinal and indicative of a medicinal purpose, it would likely be considered a medicine. With regard to presentation, a UK-style list of phrases forbidden in food marketing could be useful to marketers1550. If the division between foodstuffs and medicines is considered necessary, the European defi nitions should be unambiguous.Even if we create effi cient categorisation rules, it will take a lot of the entrepreneurs' and the agencies' energy to determine whether a product is a food or a medicine. The European legislators tried in 2004 to make categorisation easier by establishing the unoffi cial borderline category for "unclear cases", and directing these products under medicine law1551. The diffi culty of defi ning medicines in manner that would clearly exclude foods could also have lead legislators to the conclusion that the categorisation decision should not be decisive. Nutrition and health are closely connected, and science reveals new connections all the time. We might just as well classify all foods as medicines. Our science-based understanding on the relationship between diet and health seems to make it impossible to defi ne medicines in a manner that would clearly exclude foods.Instead of focusing on what is food and what is medicine, legislators should focus on safety and effi cacy of all products. If borderline products do not fi t to the two sets of rules (one for foodstuffs and one for medicines), there are basically two alternatives. Either we create a borderline category or we bring regulation of foodstuffs and medicines closer together. If similar principles are used with foodstuffs and medicines, similar products are treated in similar manner, regardless of the classifi cation decision. This way the classifi cation decision could no longer lead to great injustice.We can already see the regulation of foodstuffs and medicines coming closer together. The novel food legislation and the health claim legislation together are creating a kind of authorisation 1548 Silano et al. 2004, 108.1549 The UK rules on borderline products were discussed above in chapter 3.1550 Including marketing terms like "alleviates", "avoids", "clears", "combats", "controls", "counteracts", "eliminates", "fi ghts", "heals", "help", "protects against", "remedies", "removes", "repairs", "restores", "stops", and "traditionally used for".1551 See Directive 2004/27/EC, Article 2(2), and explanations in preamble 7 of the Directive.-289-procedure for functional foods. Both evaluations (safety and effi cacy) are in the future done by the EFSA. This evaluation is similar to what the EMEA is doing with medicines. Similar principles are used in evaluating plant-based novel foods and herbal medicines.From consumer point of view, the purpose of use of a product is decisive. It is not important whether a product is a food or a medicine but whether it has a health-enhancing function or a medicinal function. There will be products with health effects (weight-loss products, lactose-free, gluten-free products, products for diabetics, products with added or concentrated vitamins, minerals, prebiotic or probiotic acids, fi bre, herbs, sterols and stanols, xylitol, etc. ), and products with medicinal effects (herbal and chemical medicines). The claim will inform the consumer on the purpose of use, and the use of a health claim or a medicinal claim will depend on scientifi cally proven effects of the product. The product form (food vs. pill) should not be legally relevant.Food supplements seem to be a somewhat obscure, suspicious and problematic category for everyone involved: some marketers try to sell the products as medicines, some consumers use food supplements for medicinal purposes, and authorities take the product form as a medicinal message. The legal concept of food in concentrated form does not seem to reach the audience. We suspect this is due to the fact that food supplements in practice always do have special health effects, separating these products from common foods (foods in food form) and bringing them closer to medicines. Instead of what the product is (food vs. medicine), it is interesting what the product does. Some products have health effects and some products medicinal effects.This brings us back to making the distinction between disease risk reduction and disease prevention. It might be impossible to reach a situation where all the stakeholders, including the consumers, understand and agree on these two concepts. Regardless of all the legal determinations, classifi cation rules, and scientifi c criteria, European and Chinese consumers can still use foods for medicinal purposes. This is something the law cannot affect. Consumers can also use spells, rocks, crystals, scents, fl owers, etc. for medicinal purposes. The legislator can give precise criteria for authorising products, but cannot force consumers to trust them, or to distrust something else.7.2 Law on Product Safety7.2.1 Food SafetyFood safety law is complicated with several different factors of safety to consider. Biological hazards like animal diseases must be rigorously fought against. Minimising the amount of harmful chemicals in food is also an important goal. Here we have mainly discussed the particular safety issues of functional foods, which are often related to novelty of the ingredients.The aim of novel food legislation is that previously unknown substances cannot be put to consumers' dinner plates before pre-market scrutiny. Novel food legislation has existed in the EU since 1997 and in China since 1990. China revised its Novel Food Regulation in 2007. Also in Europe, novel food legislation is under reconstruction in order to deal with problems with the current law. In 2008, the Commission has proposed a new Novel Food Regulation. Currently, many companies wish for their products not to be considered novel. They might -290-even be deterred from product development that might result in something considered novel. This is because the novel food process in seen as excessively burdensome and unpredictable. Even if the product is clearly novel, illegal marketing of the novel food is often preferred to making an application.The European food industry has called for a more innovation-friendly regulatory environment. The uncertainty of the legal status of novel products and possible delays in the novel food procedure exacerbate risks and add costs. The current novel food regulation rewards for being the follower to the market rather than the innovator1552. According to Brookes, the time taken for novel food authorisations should be reduced and uncertainties should be minimised. It is fairly easy to agree on these notions. Brookes is also of the view that incentives to encourage innovation should be considered either in form of exclusive access to market or compensation for data provision.1553With reference to the European defi nition of novel food, the issue of plant-based products raised controversy. The defi nition says all food not used in the Community before May 1997 is novel. This means that not only foods that are novel in the sense that they are newly developed are considered novel. Also foods, which have been used for perhaps thousands of years but which have not been used in Europe, are considered novel. The defi nition of novel food is clearly discriminatory and not based on science but instead on practical reasons. It is diffi cult to be aware of all the foods used in the world, so it was considered the most feasible to require documentation on all third country foods.Novel foods must go through the pre-market authorisation procedure, where the marketer must present scientifi c tests and trials, indicating product safety. Foods that are equivalent to previous foods are exempted. This means old foods are presumed safe, and the novel food evaluation is mainly a comparative test. This comparative approach has been chosen because it is fairly diffi cult to prove absolute safety of a novel food, because a novel food often replaces something else in the diet and consists of multiple substances the effects of which are diffi cult to show in animal tests.Third country food producers are understandably not so impressed on the justifi cation behind the defi nition, or the rule that equivalent products are exempted. There have been continuous arguments at the WTO on the European novel food regulation, particularly regarding plant-based products from third countries. With plants, the Commission will have to decide whether 'history of safe food use' in the country of origin could be enough to presume the food safe. This decision will affect farmers in developing countries, and companies willing to introduce plant based products, such as functional foods made of Chinese berries.Also, the Chinese defi nition of novel food is based on local novelty, not global novelty. Everything not traditionally eaten in China is considered novel according to Chinese food law. Each legislator has as its primary task to protect its own citizens. This should not, however, be used as an excuse to create artifi cial barriers to trade.