The Regulations on traditional Chinese medicine also include details on offences and sanctions.449 There are different types of penalty for different types of breaches of the Medicine Administration Law. There are separate penalty regulations for those who:produce or trade in medicines without obtaining a Pharmaceutical Production Licence, -Pharmaceutical Trade License, or Dispensing Permit of Medical Organisations450,445 Food Hygiene Law, Article 53.446 Mertha 2008, 2.447 See Seppanen 2005 on how empirical evidence is missing on these issues.448 Mertha 2008, 2.449 Chapter V.450 "Those who produce or trade in medicines without obtaining a Pharmaceutical Production Licence, Pharmaceutical Trade Licence, or Dispensing Permit of Medical Organisations, shall be placed under ban, have the unlawfully produced and sold medicines and any unlawful income confi scated, and may concurrently be fi ned a sum of money more than two but less than fi ve times the value of the medicines unlawfully made or sold." Article 73. -72-produce and sell fake medicines - 451 or medicines of inferior quality452,453do not comply with the quality control standards for production, trade and research - 454,purchase medicines from enterprises without the Pharmaceutical Production Licence or -Pharmaceutical Trade Licence455,import pharmaceuticals and fail to register at the port - 456,forge, alter, trade, lease or lend licences or pharmaceutical approval certifi cates - 457,provide false certifi cates or samples or receive a licence by cheating - 458,trade in pharmaceuticals and fail to keep purchase records - 459,sell medicines with incomplete label information - 460,give or receive commissions in secret or property interests to/from other enterprises or -physicians during purchase or sale of pharmaceuticals461,451 "Those who produce and sell fake medicines shall have his unlawfully produced or sold medicines and any unlawful income confi scated, and concurrently be fi ned a sum of money more than two but less than fi ve times the value of the medicines unlawfully produced and sold. Those who have an approval certifi cate of pharmaceuticals shall have the certifi cate revoked, and be ordered to suspend production or business operations pending rectifi cation; if the circumstances are serious, the party shall have Pharmaceutical Production Licence, or Pharmaceutical Trade Licence or Dispensing Permit of Medical Organisations revoked." Article 74.452 "Those who produce and sell medicines of inferior quality shall have his unlawfully made and sold medicines and any unlawful income confi scated, and be concurrently fi ned the sum of money more than two but less than three times the value of the medicines unlawfully made or sold; if the circumstances are serious, the party shall be ordered to suspend production or business pending rectifi cation, or have the pharmaceutical approval certifi cate revoked and his Pharmaceutical Production Licence, or Pharmaceutical Trade Licence or Dispensing Permit of Medical Organisations revoked." Article 75.453 "The person-in-charge or personnel directly liable in the enterprise or other unit which produces and sells fake medicines or produces and sells pharmaceuticals of inferior quality shall not be permitted to engage in the production and trade of pharmaceuticals for ten years, if the circumstances are serious. The producers' supplementary materials, packaging materials and production equipment which are used exclusively for producing fake medicines and medicines of inferior quality shall be confi scated." Article 76. "Those who provide facilities including transportation, preservation and storage that have been or should have been aware of the fakery or inferior quality of the pharmaceuticals, shall have the entirety of his income from such transportation, preservation and storage confi scated, and concurrently be fi ned a sum of money more than 50% but less than three times the value of the unlawful income. Those whose acts constitute a crime shall be investigated for criminal liabilities." Article 77.454 "Pharmaceutical producing enterprises, trading enterprises, pharmaceutical non-clinical safety appraisal research institution, and pharmaceutical clinical testing institutions, shall be served a warning and be ordered to amend themselves within a prescribed time limit if they do not carry out the stipulations of the "Quality Control Standard of Pharmaceutical Production," the "Quality Control Standard of Pharmaceutical Trade," the quality control standard of pharmaceutical non-clinical research, and the quality control standard of pharmaceutical clinical testing. Those who do not rectify their mistakes within the prescribed time limit shall be ordered to suspend production and business operations pending rectifi cation, and be concurrently fi ned more than 5000 but less than 20,000 RMB. If the circumstances are serious, they shall have their Pharmaceutical Production Licence, Pharmaceutical Trading Licence or Dispensing Permit of Medical Organisations revoked." Article 79.455 Article 80.456 Article 81.457 Article 82.458 Article 83.459 Article 85.460 Article 86.461 Article 90 and 91.-73-act against regulations on pharmaceutical advertising - 462,are supervisors and issue certifi cates or licences without grounds - 463, or neglect their supervisory duties464, or collect illegal fees465,are inspections agencies and produce false inspection reports - 466,are supervisors or inspectors and participate in production or trade of -pharmaceuticals467.The administrative penalties include revocation of licences, personal ban to engage in pharmaceutical business, confi scation of illegal gains, and fi nes. The amount of the fi ne depends on the volumes of the illegal business. The decision to impose administrative sanctions is made by the pharmaceutical supervisory and administrative departments at or above the county level. The original approval departments shall decide on revocation of licences.468 There is a possibility of appeal to the SFDA.To ensure the marketers take the rules on medicine advertising seriously, the Chinese government has made post-market control methods and punishments more severe. Advertisements with illegal content will be revoked of all advertising approval numbers, and application for advertising approval for the medicine in question will be banned for a year. .In the case of illegal advertisements gravely deceiving and/or misleading consumers by exaggerating the scope of applicability and effects of the medicine, the medicine will be suspended from sale and the marketer ordered to dispel the negative impact of the illegal advertising.469Civil responsibility towards patient consumers is referred to in Article 93 of the Medicine Administration Law: "If pharmaceutical-producing enterprises, trading enterprises or medical organisations act against this law which results in damages to the users of pharmaceuticals, they shall bear liabilities of compensation in conformity with relevant regulations." Chinese law does not require negligence of fault of a manufacturer to give rise to product liability. This means manufacturers are liable if any casual links between a defective pharmaceutical and a loss of a victim are found. Lawyers recommend product liability insurance for manufacturers.470Criminal responsibility is also relevant for several types of breach of the Medicine Administration Law. For example production or sale of unauthorised, false or inferior quality pharmaceuticals471, production of false inspection reports472, and misuse of authority473 may constitute crimes.462 Article 92.463 Article 94.464 Article 97.465 Article 96.466 Article 87.467 Article 95.468 Article 88.469 Hong Kong Trade Development Council web page. http://www.tdctrade.com/alert/cba-e0705g.htm.470 Tsoi 2007.471 Articles 73, 74 and 75.472 Article 87.473 Article 99.-74-2.3.5 NGO Regulation and Self-RegulationThe Chinese government is calling for the participation of consumers, NGOs474, and food companies in establishing food safety standards. In a document submitted to the World Health Organization in 2002, China called for increased participation on the part of "consumers, food industry and other stakeholders". China has focused on increasing consumer awareness by hosting an annual "Food Hygiene Law Education Week" and implementing other educational programs on the importance of sanitary food handling.475 This way some of the responsibility can be shifted onto consumers themselves, and the large numbers of food poisoning incidents they cause can be lowered.The civilian consumer protection group system also plays an important role in Chinese food regulation. Consumer groups, such as the Chinese Consumer Association, obtain licenses from local government authorities to independently regulate and inspect food production facilities and plants. They also hear complaints and comments from consumers and report back to local government offi cials.476 These groups are important in protecting people's rights. In addition, self-regulation by the industry exists: various chambers of commerce recommend their own voluntary standards to food producers. These standards cover many areas of food production. Increasingly food producers are adopting voluntary standards in order to achieve better market success.477The new Food Safety Law urges both the industry organisations and social groups to be more involved. According to Article 7, food industry organisations shall tighten industry self-discipline, and guide producers and traders in complying with the law. In Article 8, the state encourages social and community groups to conduct educational activities concerning food safety laws. Article 8 also urges the media to publicise laws for free, and to monitor acts that violate the law. It is interesting that media is also given responsibility on food safety. There seems to be a trend of shared responsibility that can additionally be noted in the European and American discussions on who is responsible for obesity.Voluntary approaches have been criticised for not being enough, and greater government involvement has been demanded. China must build the capacity to oversee food production within its borders. Several severe food safety scandals have been the result of unsafe or inferior ingredients in processed foods, or chemical and pesticide residues.478 These problems cannot be resolved through self-regulation or consumer awareness only. Food safety must also be a priority of the government, not simply of consumers, their organisations, and the food industry.474 The term "NGO", non-governmental organisation, means organisations outside of state systems, including advocacy organisations, non-profi t service-providing institutions, religious groups, and social welfare organisations. Ma, 2002. 475 Li 2005, 30.476 Li 2005, 30-31.477 Bian 2004478 Li 2005, 30.-75-2.4 Legal Foundations: CommentsIn this chapter, we have discussed the mechanisms in which food and medicine laws are made and implemented in the EU and China, without yet examining substantial rules on safety, effi cacy, and marketing of medicines. Here we comment on some of these general legal issues.2.4.1 Pluralism in Sources of LawA pluralist view of law does not focus on the nation state as the only source of all law. It is acknowledged that the sources of law are varied, and may also be found in:the interaction of states (international law such as WTO and Codex; EU law),-localities within the nation state (local or provincial regulation; state law in federal -systems),shared or collective projects (the internal regulation of corporations; professional self--regulation; contracts), andreligious communities or organisations (for example Torah; canon law; Islamic law), or -minority ethnic groups (traditional law and custom). 479A food company or a medicine company can be seen as part of local, national, and global networks of communities created through laws and contracts. Above, we have discussed hard law, administrative soft law, and self-regulation on various levels. Also, religious rules and traditional customs affect the use of foods and medicines. For example, kosher rules could be seen as soft law, as kosher certifi cates resemble environmental or fair-trade certifi cates. We will not go further into religious rules, even though they are sometimes relevant for developers of functional foods.480Cotterrell links law with community. In a law-and-community perspective, responsibility is the individual's obligation to maintain mutual trust in the community in question. Individuals are usually involved simultaneously in many different communities, where responsibility is formed and judged. Communities are heterogeneous and potentially confl icting. Liability depends on what a reasonable member of a community is expected to know. In practice, the most powerful regulation wins. 481 Even though nation states do not produce all the law, they are in our opinion still the most important decision-makers. Nation states decide whether or not to be part of international agreements, whether or not to delegate legislative power at local level, whether or not to tender factual legislative competence to administrative organs, and whether or not to leave room for self-regulation and give binding effect to it. The decision of how to regulate (on what level, through which instrument, etc.) needs to be a conscious one.479 Cotterrell 2006, 161-162.480 For example: Kosher means pure food by Jewish law. Animals need to be slaughtered in that fashion. Islamic people will not eat blood, alcohol, or pork meat. Blood is also avoided by certain Christian movements. The Orthodox Christian will not eat meat during Lent, the Catholic not on Friday, Hindus will avoid beef in particular, and Buddhists should not eat meat at all. Talouselama 2008.481 Cotterrell 2006, 164.-76-European and Chinese laws have been amended to comply with WTO requirements and, as regards food, the Codex standards482. The EC and China are recipients of international food standards. The GATT Agreement of the WTO is complemented by the TBT agreement and the SPS Agreement. The latter two agreements have similar requirements: non-discrimination (most-favoured nation treatment and national treatment), avoiding unnecessary obstacles to trade, adopting international standards as far as possible, and the transparency of these measures.Both the EC and China are selective recipients of international standards. For example with Codex, standards are taken into account by European legislators and courts483 in so far as they are compatible with EC food safety objectives484. Similarly, China will not adopt all Codex standards, for example, if differing standards are required to protect the health of Chinese citizens, or if there are specifi c issues related to Chinese food industry or supervision485. This means that where Chinese food producers are capable of producing very safe food, or where China is a net import market, the government is inclined to set standards even higher than those of Codex. In areas where China is a net exporting state, China will, to support its exporters, set lower standards.486 Exporters must naturally take into account the standards of the recipient country, which might be either loose or strict.The WTO has many critics. Some observers claim the WTO agreements are too invasive and deny Members sovereignty; others want the agreements to press further. Some trust national governments on issues related to public health and welfare, whereas others view domestic regulation merely as protectionism.487 The two factions claim to have a common goal, which is human well-being. They differ, though, on how best to achieve this goal, either through fl exibility, or consensus. As Rawls states, an ideal market process and an ideal legislative process are different entities. Markets are designed for effi cacy, and law, if possible, for justice.488Wilkinson sees civil society and development as two areas of the important challenges facing the WTO. NGO's critique the WTO for promoting competition between companies and nations leading to suffering of employees and the environment489. Simultaneously, developing countries resist putting environmental and employee rights on the WTO agendas. This opposition stems from the fear that legislation will be used as veiled protectionism, undermining the competitiveness of the South490. The WTO needs to be able to satisfy all its Members in order to develop so that it benefi ts all its Members. Trust is crucial in this vicious circle.482 Kan - Zhang 2002. 483 Codex standards have been referred to by the European Court of Justice. Poli 2004, 616.484 Poli 2004, 616.485 Kan -Zhang 2002.486 Bian 2004.487 Harvard University web page 2004.488 Rawls 1971, 207. 489 Wilkinson 2000, 140.490 Wilkinson 2000, 143.-77-2.4.2 Central vs. Local LawsWhen discussing the actors of food and medicine law, the fi rst question to be addressed relates to the roles of international actors such as the WTO vs. central governments vs. local governments.Globally, the aim of the Word Trade Organization is to facilitate trade. Barriers to trade are considered a hindrance to global economic growth, and therefore agreements such as the GATT agreement, the TBT agreement and the SPS agreement aim to remove these barriers. These global agreements have signifi cant impacts on companies and consumers, as they affect whether or not a product can access a certain market. Although free trade has its opponents, lawyers are not openly critical as they 491are more interested in defi ning the conditions for exceptions to free trade.In what situations should the EU be able to block Chinese functional foods from entering the EU market? And vice versa? When are they unsafe and/or ineffective? As members of the WTO, EU and China would have to show that based on scientifi c risk assessment, the products in question are dangerous to human health. Disagreement on the scientifi c issue would have to be settled by the WTO dispute resolution body. This sets great demands on WTO dispute resolution: it needs to be impartial and transparent, and it needs to be considered just to uphold its legitimacy.According to the law-and-community perspective, international regulation has emerged to express social relations. The desire for a coherent legal order has risen out of collective experience of international communities.492 For example, a signifi cant part of environmental advocacy has been directed at multinational economic institutions rather than through state structures. Thus, the environmental movement has contributed to change within the processes of global governance.493 However, as transnational legal authority depends on power politics, structures in international legal orders are fragile.494 This is the case with the WTO rules: their content depends on the negotiation powers of the WTO members. National rules are purportedly more stable as they are based on structures of democracy, and - at least to some extent - shared values.In Europe, the legislative competences of the EU and its Member States are stipulated by the Treaty establishing the European Community. The principles of proportionality and subsidiarity are particularly discussed and weighed in explanatory memorandums of newer laws. The result is today often the same: European legislation is considered necessary. The simple rationale is that free trade would otherwise suffer. European legislation is also considered to better safeguard public health and consumer rights. In the fi elds of food and medicine law, EU legislation covers progressively more space, and space for Member State law is thus decreasing. Europe-wide industry's self-regulation makes the question of Community competence vs. Member State sovereignty irrelevant. Schepel sees standards as "bottom-up-integration".495 It is important to observe that this kind of integration might have happened even without government interference. The EU has certainly accelerated integration, though.491 For example Joutsamo et al. 2000, Makinen et al.