2006, and Raitio 2006 simply state free trade as a goal.492 Cotterrell 2006, 167.493 O'Brien et al.2000, 158.494 Cotterrell 2006, 167.495 Schepel 2005, 73.-78-Pasa and Benacchio see European consumer law quite positively: "the interventionist policy ... in the area of consumer protection has assumed an important autonomous role, as a social goal of the European Union, and is no longer seen as merely instrumental in the protection of competition"496. Critics argue that EU harmonisation is sometimes used unnecessarily and that Member States could better protect the rights of their citizens. Instead of the subsidiarity principle, the most serious hindrance to the transfer of tasks to the European level might be fear that the EU loses societal legitimacy if it initiates cooperation in areas that the majority of Europeans fi nd are illegitimate497.According to the Chinese constitution, local government has the right to formulate local standards if they do not confl ict with national standards, or when there are no national standards. Local standards have created problems and barriers to trade. The legal development is also towards national harmonisation in China. Central-local tensions have complicated implementation of laws in China. Local offi cials are promoted based on their ability to ensure economic growth and social stability, regardless of whether national laws are violated498. This means incentives for local offi cials should be reshaped if enforcing national laws is seen as a priority.When discussing harmonisation, it is important to notice the difference between minimum and maximum harmonisation. Minimum harmonisation means that local legislators can impose stricter laws if considered necessary to protect their citizens. Maximum harmonisation means full harmonisation in a sense that local legislators cannot deviate from central law in any direction. Maximum harmonisation is often used because it lowers transaction costs for traders. There are obvious problems with maximum harmonisation: it does not serve local variations in society and culture.In creating internal markets, an alternative to harmonisation is mutual recognition. In the EU, this means that Member States are allowed to have their own standards, but if a product is authorised in one country, it cannot be blocked in another. The resulting overall standard might be lower or higher than with harmonisation. Often, harmonisation is considered necessary as regards essential features such as product safety. With regards to other features, harmonisation is not necessary for the creation of an internal market, because mutual recognition applies499.2.4.3 Science vs. PoliticsThe science vs. politics issue relates to the central vs. local issue discussed above. Local actors will not assign competence to global powers unless they trust them Global actors need to be impartial concerning local needs. This introduces politics: politics can be seen as promoting the aims of a certain demographic. Global actors need to make decisions based on common good. They have to avoid favouring the most powerful, the most visible, or the most diffi cult members. With regard to functional foods, this means that law must be based on scientifi c risk assessment. The science vs. politics issue also relates to the hard law vs. soft law issue discussed above. Legislators will not leave competence in private hands unless they trust them to be impartial, and 'science' is seen as objective. In reality, science is always intertwined with politics.496 Pasa - Benacchio 2005, 8.497 Nedergaard 2007, 184.498 Peerenboom 2008 a, 6.499 Joutsamo et al. 2000, 446.-79-The WTO presumes there is some kind of international objective assessment of the scientifi c evidence to be found. Schepel claims that the SPS Agreement of the WTO "transparently and pathetically" elevates Codex standards to the status of scientifi c truth500. In this regard the WTO does not have to make 'political' decisions, which would spark the legitimacy debate. Based on 'scientifi c truth', the WTO resolves the issue of whether a certain precaution is necessary or not.The tasks and goals of European and Chinese food and medicine agencies have been discussed above. In the EU, the science vs. politics issue is recognised as common good/public health competing against the interests of national lobby groups. In China, it has been questioned whether legislative efforts are driven by safety concerns (health) or by trade interests (money). Additionally the role of the SFDA has been scrutinised because of the corruption charges against its offi cials501.When discussing the basic tasks of food and medicine law, the following key questions have emerged, both in drafting the law and interpreting it:the role of the precautionary principle; -the role of other legitimate factors besides science. -Firstly, science does not have a solution to everything. It is easy to declare that laws and agency decisions must make consumer health their primary objective. However, it is not always clear whether a certain chemical is dangerous to a person's health, or whether an herbal substance is effective in preventing a disease. Here we must deal with uncertainty and probabilities. Opinions on necessary precaution vary among scientists and among nations, and need to be continuously discussed.Secondly, food and medicine law cannot even in theory and particularly not in practice be based merely on science502. Other factors such as small business promotion, promotion of local production, employment, human rights and other ethical reasons, etc. might be equally or more relevant. Food and medicine law considers more than just health and consumer protection. However, further discussion is needed on which are acceptable and which are unacceptable "other legitimate factors" besides science. It is accepted that, for example, farmers, businesses, consumers, employees, workers, conservatives, liberals, etc. do not always take the same view. 'Politics' is not necessarily a source of all evil: instead it means that in democratic societies, people and organisations are permitted to have different opinions. These opinions, however, need to be weighed in a manner that legitimate rights of some groups are not suppressed. Once agreed upon, regulations need to be applied in an unbiased manner, both nationally and globally. Clearly, corruption cannot be tolerated.According to Bian, it might be typical in developing countries that trade interests are the governments' foremost concern. As China produces more agricultural products than it needs, its support of exports is very important.503 In the future, the Chinese focus might shift onto 500 Schepel 2005, 222.501 Tsoi 2007.502 In the new European Nutrition and Health Claim Regulation 1924/2004/EC, it is stated (preamble 30), that "In some cases, scientifi c risk assessment alone cannot provide all the information on which a risk management decision should be based. Other legitimate factors relevant to the matter under consideration should therefore be taken into account. "503 Bian 2004.-80-creating more effective national markets. The EU has also been criticised for attaching too much importance to trade. Facilitating exports and imports is important to Europeans, but not as important as guaranteeing the function of the European internal market. After all, the European internal market consists of 27 countries of interest as market areas.Schepel views modern governance as linking the political, the scientifi c, and the economic spheres of life. Standards bodies are an example of such a link: they connect the global marketplace to national politics, scientifi c knowledge to industrial practice, and social custom to law.504 Emotional aspects are part of social customs. Regulations intended to protect human health are often contentious, as people's fears and scientifi c evidence do not always correlate. Here, emotions are seen as obscuring objective science.505 Emotions such as fear, love, hate, or guilt will perpetually encircle science and law.2.4.4 Hard law vs. Soft lawBoth in the EU and in China, and both in regulation of foodstuffs and medicines, the role of regulatory agencies is very important. In Europe, this refers to the EFSA and the EMEA, along with all the Member State agencies. The agencies are involved both in drafting the laws and implementing the laws. In China, administrative organs, such as the ministries and the SFDA, provide regulations that are called guizhang. Some of the most important hard laws, for example the General Food Regulation in the EU and the Food Safety Law in China, are quite basic and general, lacking detail. The details are given by administrative instruments, which can be called soft law. This means that a large part of foodstuff and medicine regulation is given by the administrators, not the legislators and that this is also the part that is particularly relevant from the entrepreneur's perspective.The binding nature of 'guidelines', 'notifi cations', 'procedures', etc. varies. In China, many actors typically have competence over the same issues, but still do not have to take regulations of other actors into account. This leaves regulation targets in an unclear situation regarding which regulations to follow. In Europe, soft law guidelines are typically attached with statements of the type "this is not binding; only the laws are binding". This also leaves entrepreneurs legally insecure: the agencies presume that soft law guidelines are followed, but guidelines can suddenly be abolished or changed, or not be adhered to in individual cases.In China, with both foodstuffs and medicines, one basic law given by the Congress is supplemented by several pieces of legislation given by the Ministry of Health, other ministries, or by the SFDA. Soft law includes all the scientifi c, technical and procedural details. This division of work between the Congress and the various other authorities has meant that a new law is not included in the basic law or any other piece of regulation. Instead, a separate piece of regulation is given on each issue. In the future, soft law on both foodstuffs and medicines might be codifi ed or collated together in China. In Europe, the EMEA has collated the regulatory materials on medicines into volumes combining hard law and soft law materials. This enables entrepreneurs to fully understand the regulations affecting their business. Similar collections could be published by the EU on food law.504 Schepel 2005, 35.505 Harvard University web page 2004.-81-Standards have been discussed above as being something in between the public and the private. Standards are seen as facilitating growth and trade, and also as the answer to calls for better regulation. The European Commission sees standards as a new approach to legislation. As standards gain importance, effective participation in standard-making of all interested parties needs to be guaranteed506. International standards were recently discussed at a WTO Technical Barrier to Trade workshop. It was stressed that during economic crisis, standards should not be used for protectionist purposes, and also that developing countries need to be involved in setting up international standards.507According to Koulu, the area of soft law will likely broaden in the future. Soft law is favoured by actors who produce it because it is fast and inexpensive as there is no need to fi nd a political compromise. The experts can merely draft soft law and publish it. Koulu points out that scientifi c expertise of law-makers will not automatically lead to high quality laws. Calls for better soft regulation have not emerged, although better regulation as regards hard law has received much attention. Soft law is beyond quality control, as the producer of soft law can revert to the fact that soft law is non-binding. Problems of legislative competence, legal coherence, legal interpretation, or legal protections for regulation targets can similarly be avoided.508 Simultaneously, normative terms are used perhaps to make regulation targets overlook the non-binding nature of soft law509.Food and medicine law are typical areas where the above-mentioned reasons for soft law and its related problems apply. Detailed food and medicine law is typically given by experts, not legislators. Soft law is followed in practice, however, there is still not enough scientifi c discussion on competence or soft law quality. Critical evaluation of soft law and its makers is necessary in the fi eld of foodstuffs and medicines. Soft law cannot be ignored merely because it is by defi nition classifi ed as non-binding. Discourse theories defi ne the frameworks for making decisions, for example on law510. In democratic discourse theories, laws are seen as collective decisions for common good, as battle results, or as something in between511.Tuori sees discourse in the civil society necessary both when laws are made and when they are implemented512. Concerning food and medicine law, the civil society consists of companies, consumers, healthcare organisations, etc., whose involvement in law-making is necessary to uphold legitimacy.Sideri sees the current development of law as a move away from "government" to "governance", from the formal legal order to informal ones. There is a shift of attention from representative democratic structures to engagement of citizens in new governance structures, from command and control rules to procedural rules communicating local knowledge, from the sovereign state to the responsible citizen, and from hierarchies to networks.513 Sideri sees "compromise" as a cognitive lens, through which law is to be examined. Laws refl ect 506 The Commission lists NGOs, environment, consumers, SMEs, authorities, and business representatives. Commission Communication on Standards 2004, 9.507 WTO news items 16 and 17 March 2009. Available on WTO home page at: http://www.wto.org/english/news_e/news09_e/tbt_16mar09_e.htm.508 Koulu 2009, 119-120.509 Koulu 2009, 121.510 See Habermas 1992.511 Sassi 2000.512 Tuori 2000, 300.513 Sideri 2007, 2-3.-82-temporary balances, bound to change again, especially in decentralised governance structures where interested parties are engaged in the decision-making process.514 Laws can thus be seen as products of communication between agents and structures515. In the fi eld of foods and medicines, we could see companies as citizens communicating their interests to authorities and the public, and legislators as governors who provide the necessary structures and facilitate this correspondence.According to Schepel, law is in crisis. It cannot answer to the needs of modern, international societies. Like Sideri, Schepel discusses the shift from "government" to "governance". Distinctions between public and private roles and values are becoming fl uid, and the locus of regulating is shifting from the state to other, multiple, locations516. If law and state were one, we could subjugate all private transnational rulemaking under national legal hierarchies stemming from national constitutions. Globalisation and private governance regimes break this mould and we need to redefi ne law itself. Schepel sees law as a coupling between fragmented social discourses517. Law as a product of nation-state politics might be in crisis, particularly if we look at international business. However, there is more to law than harmonising products. National legislation still covers many elements of societies and markets where functional foods are used: healthcare, school lunches, taxes on different products, media.The concept of legal certainty518 might have to be reformulated in the new modes of governance. If law was seen as a temporary compromise between stakeholders, protecting legitimate expectations would mean protecting reliance on the communicative and interest-balancing process of law-making itself, not so much on predictability of legal rules or their implementation. The imperative for legal policy would be co-ordinating public and private rulemaking519: promoting procedural integrity of the regulators, diversifying their membership, and enhancing their knowledge base520.2.4.5 Pre-market vs. Post-market ControlAs their key task, food and medicine control agencies are responsible for pre-market control of foodstuffs and medicines. Pre-market control means deciding, based on scientifi c criteria, whether the products are safe and effective. Pre-market control has always been the dominant regulatory mechanism for medicines, and today it is also often needed for foods. Besides scientifi c assessment of safety and effi cacy, the agencies also decide on the application and authorisation procedure itself, for example on how to draft the applications. Impartiality and 514 Sider 2007, 58.515 Sideri 2007, 126.516 Schepel 2005, 31. Schepel refers to Black, Julia: Decentring Regulation: Understanding the Role of Regulation and Self-Regulation in "Post-Regulatory" World. Current Legal Problems. 2001.517 Schepel 2005, 34.518 Legal certainty forms an important aspect of most legal systems. It operates with sub concepts such as non-retroactivity and legitimate expectations. Protecting legitimate expectations means that good faith is respected: if parties in question fi rmly believe a particular course of action will be followed and it is reasonable for them to do so, they may rely on that expectation. The government can, however, violate their faith if it is necessary in order to protect the public interest. Jason-Lloyd 1997, 6.519 Schepel 2005, 32.520 Schepel 2005, 413.-83-equal treatment of applicants is crucial. This notion was demonstrated in China because a key offi cial of the SFDA was executed for taking bribes. In China, the pre-market control procedures have been accused of being too complex and burdensome. Also the protection of intellectual property has been questionable and made some companies reluctant to apply for product registration in China.Post-market control is also vital. Enhancement of supervision of foodstuffs and medicines is currently foremost on the agenda of the Chinese government. The Chinese aim to enhance product safety, and to promote social harmony and stability. This means, "establishing a coordinated supervision mechanism and upgrading the technical level of inspections and scientifi c testing".521 Also in Europe, enhancing control has been one area of focus.It is an important legal starting point that operators themselves carry the primary responsibility for safety control, both pre-market and post-market. As companies have expertise on their own products, they should also carry the risks associated with their marketing. With foodstuffs, in-house control is often the most important - and sometimes the only - type of control. With medicines, the role of administrators is stronger as all medicines are subjected to pre-market registration. However, the ultimate responsibility always lies with the operators themselves.Penalties are needed for breaking the rules on product safety and marketing. In Europe, penalties have not been used often, and there have been demands that punishments should be harder. The lack of criminal trials is considered a positive phenomenon: the system seems to work if penalties are rarely needed. The authorities have wide powers, but there is still a sense of cooperation in implementing the rules. More than orders, implementation seems to consist of negotiations and persuasion. Sometimes the negotiation approach might in practice be due to the fact that it is cheaper than going to courts.In China, administrative penalties are stipulated rather accurately beforehand in yuan amounts. These administrative penalties are automatic with no room for consideration. Chinese legislators see that this is the best way to guarantee equality. Imposing penalties is thus often administrative work, and the court system is not as relevant as in Europe. This is due to the deep-seated norm against legal proceedings.