This software enabled sequence data to be analysed by assembling DNA sequences, trimming sequences, producing contigs (i.e. overlapping DNA sequences to produce a consensus sequence), and multiple alignments. Default settings were used to produce contigs with an automated vote based conflict resolution. If sequences could not be assembled using the default settings, the minimum alignment read length was reduced from the default 50 bases to 1 base and the alignment stringency was modified from medium to low (as recommended in the CLC user manual). 163 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) was used to input the query DNA sequences, for comparisons with reference DNA barcodes from reference databases for identification (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). DNA databases such as Genbank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank/) and BOLD (http://www.boldsystems.org) were used to search for reference Ocimum sequences, which were then compared with query sequences in CLC. 164 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.6 Results and Discussion 4.6.1 Tulsi Project Interview Results Semi-structured interviews were designed to collect information about the current use and importance of tulsi to individuals who kept the plant. Questions to understand why tulsi was kept, where it was originally from, and why it was important to participants helped to reveal some interesting information. While the interviews were conducted participants were asked for a sample of their tulsi plants, seeds, or any other tulsi products they had. These were then subjected to DNA analysis. Sample Description An opportunity sampling technique was used to recruit participants. Participants known to the researcher who had a tulsi plant were approached and asked if they would take part in this research. They were asked to answer some questions during a short interview (Appendix 8) and provide a sample of their tulsi plant, seeds, or any other tulsi products they had. Participation of one contact led to the recruitment of several others, leading to a snowball effect. Interviews were conducted with people from several locations across Birmingham, Leicester, and London. The awareness of the project raised via the social media Facebook page and the website led to people from Australia and Singapore getting in contact to see if they could take part and have their samples authenticated. Samples were posted and received from Singapore, however due to fungal contamination they were discarded. Although twenty six tulsi samples were collected from participants, not everyone was able to take part in the interview. In total thirteen interviews were conducted with the collection of a tulsi sample for genetic testing. Most of the interviews were conducted face to face; while, some were completed via telephone and samples were then posted to the researcher. All participants were of Indian ethnicity and over 30 years old. There were more female (77%, n=10) than male (23%, n=3) participants in this survey population (Figure 4-8). One participant was of the Sikh faith while all the others were Hindu. Just one participant was born in the UK, whereas most of the others were born either in India (n=8) or Africa (n=4). All of the participants' parents were born in India or Africa. 01234531-40 41-50 51-60 61+AgeNumber of participantsAge and Gender of ParticipantsGenderMaleGenderFemaleFigure 4-8 Participants' Gender and Age Male Female 165 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Analysis of the Interviews Participants were asked a series of questions to establish where they got their tulsi from, what they used it for, and to gather some background information for this research. As a semi-structured interview style was used, it gave the researcher the freedom to ask the questions in an informal conversational manner. Where did you get your Tulsi from? Many participants (54%, n=7) claimed to get their tulsi from their family; seeds and plant cuttings were often passed on from mothers, grandparents, or aunties. Some participants said they got their tulsi from friends (23%, n=3); while others (15%, n=2) said they got their tulsi from the temple (mandir), due to the religious affiliation tulsi plants can always be found in Hindu temples. One participant claimed she got her tulsi from both friends and family. It is common practice to share cuttings and seeds with friends and family. Some participants claimed tulsi seeds and dried material from India and Africa were brought to the UK during visits to family or via post (Figure 4-9). The migration pattern of people from India to the UK and Africa, and then from Africa to the UK can be seen in Figure 4-9; whether or not this impacts the species of tulsi found in the UK will be considered later. India Tanzania Gujarat Punjab Uganda Kenya Figure 4-9 Map of Where Tulsi Samples Were Collected in the UK, and Where Samples Might Have Originally Came From Durban Key:  Transfer of tulsi from India  Transfer of tulsi from Africa Locations in the UK where tulsi samples were collected The map summarises where participants may have got their tulsi from and where samples were collected in the UK. This is based on where participants' families were in India and Africa and where participants or their families lived before migrating to the UK. 166 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra  Do you have any Tulsi seeds? Participants were asked if they had any tulsi seeds to uncover the source of their plants; in addition, the researcher was keen to collect seed samples to grow at the university. The vast majority of participants (77%, n=10) did have seeds; whereas, the others (n=3) said they got their tulsi as a plant or a cutting and did not have any seeds. Some participants claimed the original source for their seeds was either India or Africa. Seeds which had been taken from India to Africa and then to the UK were also identified by one participant (participant B06); she was born and brought up in Uganda but said her mother got her tulsi seeds from her grandmother in India, her mother sent her some seeds in the post when she moved to the UK where she kept her plant for sixteen years before it died. She now has another plant from a friend in Leicester and each year she harvests the seeds and shares them with neighbours, friends, family, and the temple. Do you grow your own Tulsi? This question aimed to establish whether or not people grew their own tulsi plants; as not all the samples obtained were fresh plant material. Twelve participants (92%) said they either did or had tried to grow a tulsi plant, just one participant said she did not grow her own tulsi; participant A14 said, "No I do not grow it personally but my mum and mother-in-law do." Some participants said they had problems propagating the seeds and maintaining a healthy plant. While others claimed they tried to grow a tulsi plant but it did not grow very well here in the UK. For example participant B102 claimed, "In India it is much easier to grow tulsi, but here in the UK it always dries out!" These participants made reference to the size and abundance of the tulsi plants their families grew back in India and Africa. Participants commented on how the environment and climate in the UK was not suitable for growing tulsi. It was also noted that participants claimed Raam tulsi was easier to grow than Shyam tulsi. Those who were able to successfully grow their own tulsi plants said they kept it in a warm place near a radiator, a window to enable plenty of light to get to the plant, or in a porch to mimic a greenhouse. Many participants made reference to how difficult it was to keep tulsi; those who were able to grow and maintain the plant were believed to be very fortunate. 167 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra  Are there any special requirements for storing/ growing/ keeping Tulsi? If so what are they? The significant majority of participants (85%, n=11) claimed there were special growth requirements for ensuring the survival of their tulsi plants; such as participant B105 who said, "The tulsi plant must be very well respected and cared for. You cannot touch it without washing your hands or ladies if it is the time of month." Participants who were able to grow a plant, as well as those who were unable to keep tulsi mentioned several requirements for keeping the plant. Most importantly participants identified the warm and sunny environment required for tulsi to flourish in, which were not ideal in the UK. As the tulsi plant is found predominately in the tropics it is accustomed to warm, humid and sunny climates (Grayer, 2001). In the UK, often the temperature is not optimal for growth of tulsi and during the winter months there are insufficient levels of sunshine. Due to the warm climates in Asia and Africa tulsi grows wild almost anywhere the seeds are sown. The minimum temperature tulsi will survive in is around 18oC; hence, in the UK where temperatures often fall below this minimum requirement, tulsi must be kept indoors or in a greenhouse with the temperature maintained between 18-23 oC. The use of artificial heating sources such as radiators were used to try and keep plants warm, but there was a risk of the plant drying out and dying if kept too close. Participants explained how difficult it was to keep their tulsi plants warm enough, in an area with plenty of light; a window sill in the kitchen appeared to be the most common place to keep tulsi. In India and Africa as the climate is well suited for tulsi to thrive it is often grown in the centre of the courtyard, as it is supposed to bring the family together and be a blessing. Some believe the plant should be kept in the front of the house to welcome the Gods, while others say it should be kept in the centre of the home. Participants had different views about where the tulsi plant should be kept; but, one thing which was consistent was that it should not be moved once placed. The small dark brown seeds should be sown around April-May, covered lightly with finely sieved compost, and not over watered. In theory, the soil will need some extra nourishment as the tulsi begins to flourish, using plant feeds, fertilisers or manure can help the plant grow healthier and stronger (Wagner, 2010). However, participants made specific references to not using fertilisers, chemicals or even plant feeds as they would not be suitable for the holy plant. Participant B02 said, "Tulsi should only be given water as it does not need anything else, it would be disrespectful to pour chemicals and fertilisers onto the goddess". 168 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Traditionally the tulsi plant is idolised as a Goddess, Hindus believe extra affection should be shown to the plant. Special rituals and prayers (poojas) have been conducted for centuries to help the plant thrive. Wagner (2010) describes multiple ways of caring for and worshiping the plant, including: chanting the tulsi Mantras, saying the one hundred and eight sacred names of tulsi, gently kissing the leaves, and thanking the plant for being with you. During the interviews it become apparent that there were several 'terms and conditions' attached to the successful growth and longevity of the plant. It was noted that the plant should not be disturbed in the evening as it sleeps just like humans do, during menstruation women are not supposed to touch the plant as this is a time of impurity, the plant should only be watered or touched after washing your hands, and the plant should not be moved around as this would be classed as being disrespectful to the Goddess. The myth is that tulsi will only grow in fortunate people's homes, ''only the lucky people can grow this plant in their home,' Participant B05. What type of Tulsi is this? Participants were asked to specify the type of tulsi they had. Some participants did not know the type of tulsi they had while others were able to differentiate between the different varieties of tulsi they had or knew of. The two main types of tulsi identified by the research population were Raam and Shyam tulsi (Figure 4-10). Raam tulsi was described as having large bright green leaves; the plant often grew very big and survived the harsh UK climate. On the other hand, Shyam tulsi was known to have smaller, darker green leaves and did not grow as tall as Raam tulsi. Some participants claimed their Shyam tulsi plants dried out during winter but rejuvenated during the summer time, while others said once their plant dried out in winter it never grew back. This suggests the Raam tulsi grown by participants may be a different species which does not require the same growth conditions as the Shyam tulsi. Six of the participants interviewed were not sure about the type of tulsi they had. Raam Tulsi Shyam Tulsi Figure 4-10 Community Raam and Shyam Tulsi Samples Collected During the Interviews Photographs of tulsi plants in participants' homes identified by participants as A -Raam tulsi, B - Shyam tulsi. A B 169 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra  Can you tell me all the different names Tulsi has: With the wide spread use of tulsi across the world there are numerous ways of referring to it. This question was asked to be able to get a better understanding of how to refer to tulsi the correct way. Participants gave a range of names for tulsi including: tulasi, Virinda, tulsi maa, tulsi devi, tulsi rani, Nandani, Laxmi, and sweet basil. Many of the names given to tulsi have a religious connotation. The names given symbolise the religious significance for participants i.e. 'maa' meaning mother, 'rani' translating to queen, and 'devi' referring to goddess. In Hinduism there are 108 names for tulsi; some devote worshipers believe by chanting the 108 names to the plant helps to promote its growth and prosperity. Other common names for tulsi include: holy basil, monk's basil, sacred basil, green tulsi, garden balsam, solasi, sulasi, sursa, thulasi, tulashi, tjlsi, and Virandra (WHO, 2002b; Joshi et al., 2012). In the various states of India the plant is referred to in different ways. The incorrect term or pronunciation could lead to great confusion; as experienced by the research team during field research in India. In areas where Punjabi or Hindi are spoken the word 'tulsi' is used; however, in South India the term tulsi was not recognised but instead it was known as 'thulasi'. Do you keep Tulsi in your home? If so why? All participants interviewed said they kept tulsi in their home; those who struggled to grow the plant said they kept it in their family homes in India and Africa. The main reason of keeping tulsi for 92% of participants (n=12) who were Hindus was the religious significance. Participants claimed the plants growth and presence in the home symbolised luck and it was a blessing to be able to keep it. Participant B15 said, "It is very important if you are Hindu to keep tulsi," while participant B12 claimed, "we keep it in our home for good luck and for religious ceremonies." The importance of having tulsi for offerings to God during poojas was mentioned. Participant B03 described how her mother used to make her take blessings from the tulsi plant kept in the centre of the courtyard, in their home in India, before any exams and important events. Just one Sikh participant (B01) who got her tulsi from a Hindu friend said she kept the plant for the health benefits associated with it. Participant B01 had diabetes and was told to take tulsi leaves in her tea to help reduce her blood glucose levels. 170 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra  Where did you learn about Tulsi? Participants were asked how they had learnt about tulsi to establish where and how this traditional knowledge was being transmitted. The religious and medicinal values associated with the tulsi plant were evidently passed on through generations, as the family appear to be the main source for learning about tulsi, for 62% (n=8) of participants (Figure 4-11). Due to the religious significance of the plant for Hindus, religion has also had a key role in transmitting the knowledge of the benefits of tulsi for three participants. Participants spoke about how the priest (pandit) talked about tulsi during religious ceremonies to explain the importance of the plant which represented the goddess Virinda Tulsi. Participants also shared their knowledge of what the religious significance was and what it meant to them. Some participants (n=2) claimed to have learnt about tulsi from their friends, while discussing natural remedies for various ailments. Participant B02 made reference to having learnt about tulsi during her education in India. Participant B06 talked about her experience with tulsi growing wild in Africa; saying it grew in abundance on the sides of the streets and roads; she said her mum always talked about how important the plant was and felt like it was not being given the correct respect in the wild conditions it was seen in. Does Tulsi have a religious purpose in your life? If so what is it? As 92% of participants were Hindu, the tulsi plant did have a religious significance for them, even for those not actively practicing their religion. The one non-Hindu participant (B01) said, 'I am not Hindu but I still respect the plant as my friend has told me what the plant represents.' Many participants detailed the reasons for worshiping the plant and explained why the plant was referred to as a goddess. Participants mentioned how it was used as offerings as prasad during prayers. The purity of the plant was associated with the numerous healing properties, believed to be Gods cure for all diseases. The leaves placed in the mouth of the deceased were believed to 15%62%23%Where Participants Learnt About TulsiFriendsFamilyReligionFigure 4-11 Where Participants Learnt About Tulsi 171 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra aid the passage to heaven. If the plant grows it is believed to symbolise a blessing and is perceived as being lucky. Due to the religious affiliation of the plant every mandir should have a tulsi plant; this makes it accessible for everyone to get blessings from the tulsi goddess even if they cannot keep a plant at home. Many of the participants who kept tulsi for the religious properties were strict vegetarians and mentioned how the consumption of meat and alcohol should be avoided in the house where tulsi is kept, as it would be disrespectful to the goddess. One participant spoke about her friend who kept a plastic tulsi plant in her home so she always had the presence of the goddess with her, just like with other religious pictures and statues in her personal mandir. What do you use Tulsi for? By asking participants what they used tulsi for, the current use amongst SA communities in the UK could be established. Many participants (n=9) claimed to keep tulsi just for religious purposes.