their healthcare professionals (HCPs). A key discovery was that the vast majority of participants did not tell their HCPs of herbal medicines (HMs) they consumed at the same time as taking prescription medicines; 69% (n=73) of participants who were taking conventional Western medicines (CWM) as well as HMs said they did not tell their doctor, while 82% (n=87) did not tell their pharmacist. Various reasons for not telling their HCPs about the concurrent use of HMs and CWM were uncovered, such as: a fear of being treated differently, not being treated at all, and being labelled as 'backwards' or uneducated. The SATMED questionnaire was able to extract some valuable information about the current use of HMs amongst diasporic SA communities in the UK; and to establish participants' views of safety, efficacy, and side-effects caused by HMs and CWM. Further to this investigation, the primary researcher was intrigued at looking into what HCPs thought of THM and their experiences with HMs. By asking HCPs to share their opinions on the safety and efficacy of HMs, and their knowledge of interactions and adverse incidents from combining HMs with CWM, both patients and practitioners perspectives could be assessed. It was anticipated that this study would reveal information about HCPs personal and professional views of HMs, something which has not been greatly explored in the UK before (Freymann et al., 2006). There is extensive research available on HCPs in the United States (US) and other European countries but limited information from the UK (Berman et al., 1998; Smith, 2011). Hence, this research will help to contribute to the lack of information on UK based HCPs use and opinions of HMs. The use of social media in communicating, networking, and even health promotion is expanding (Thackeray et al., 2012). Mediums such as Facebook and Twitter were considered as an innovative way to raise awareness of this research and to distribute the questionnaire. The use of social media in conducting social research is being recognised as a valuable tool 84 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra for data collection (Wilson et al., 2012), and was used to get HCPs across the UK involved in this study. 3.2 Aim of the Healthcare Professionals Survey The aim of this investigation is to explore healthcare professionals' personal and professional opinions and experiences of traditional herbal medicines. 3.3 Objectives of the Healthcare Professionals Survey 1. Explore healthcare professionals' personal use and knowledge of traditional herbal medicines. 2. Investigate healthcare professionals' professional experiences of patients taking herbal medicines. 3. Look into the impact of combining traditional and Western medical systems. 4. Uncover healthcare professionals' professional opinions on the safety and efficacy of herbal medicines. 3.4 Background to the Research By reviewing the current literature available around this topic it will help to explain the importance of this study (i.e. supporting the need to conduct and document this research). A definition of what a healthcare professional (HCP) is will describe the criteria for the research population. Exploring the current education standards for UK HCPs to study complementary and alternative medicines (CAM) will give an insight into how HCPs are prepared to manage patients using alternative therapies. The relationship between HCPs and their patients and the implications of combining HMs and CWM will be considered. The use of social media to conduct scientific research will also be examined. The terms THM and HMs will be used interchangeably. 3.4.1 Definition of a Healthcare Professional The International Labour Office (ILO) created a standard definition of occupations called the International Standard Classification of Occupations (ISCO). The latest version was revised in 2008 (ISCO-08). The objectives of the ISCO-08 were to standardise and organise 85 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra occupations so they are universally recognised. The ISCO-08 definition for health professionals is: "Health professionals study, advise on or provide preventive, curative, rehabilitative and promotional health services based on an extensive body of theoretical and factual knowledge in diagnosis and treatment of disease and other health problems. They may conduct research on human disorders and illnesses and ways of treating them, and supervise other workers'' (International Labour Office, 2012; WHO, 2014). The list includes: medical doctors (from all disciplines including general practitioners to specialist physicians), nurses, midwives, paramedics, dentists, pharmacists, environmental and health professionals, physiotherapists, dieticians, nutritionists, audiologists, speech therapists, optometrists, podiatrists, occupational therapists, and traditional and complementary medicine professionals. In the UK the National Health Service Reform and Health Care Professionals Act 2002 has outlined that HCPs are those regulated by bodies such as the General Medical Council, General Dental Council, General Optical Council, General Osteopathic Council, General Chiropractic Council, General Pharmaceutical Council, and the Nursing and Midwifery Council (National Health Service, 2002). In August 2012 The Health and Care Professions Council (HCPC) was created to regulate several professions, including: arts therapists, biomedical scientists, chiropodists/ podiatrists, clinical scientists, dieticians, hearing aid dispensers, occupational therapists, operating department practitioners, orthoptists, paramedics, physiotherapists, practitioner psychologists, prosthetists and orthotists, radiographers, social workers in England, and speech and language therapists (Health and Care Professions Council, n.d.). According to UK standards HCPs will be regulated by a professional body; however, the ISCO-08 does not specify such details, it just standardises what occupations are classed as being HCPs. From this is can be concluded that the term 'healthcare professional' is a very broad term and refers to someone who is involved in diagnosing, treating, caring or rehabilitating, and reviewing patients health. HCPs have a vital role in health promotion and a duty of care to their patients, meaning they must be able to advise patients about various issues appropriately. As the popularity of HMs increases Western HCPs must have some insight into HMs to ensure patients are cared for properly (Zhang et al., 2012). 86 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 3.4.2 Academic Training in Complementary and Alternative Medicines Complementary and Alternative Medicines (CAM) is a very broad term which covers over 700 types of therapies (Kayne, 2002) including: diet and exercise, reflexology, massage, relaxation techniques, and HMs. As CAM is becoming more popular in the UK, and more people are experimenting with holistic treatments they are becoming more professionalized (Clarke et al., 2014). The House of Lords report (2000) highlighted that conventional HCPs should be familiar with CAM therapies, including the potential uses and risks. Some CAM therapies are already accepted and widely incorporated as part of conventional Western medicine systems such as acupuncture, chiropractic and osteopathy; these are well regulated by the Acts of Parliament and are now included in the NHS and NICE guidelines (Clarke et al., 2004; Cant et al., 2012). Other forms of CAM such as HMs are becoming a focus for regulation; but, the extent of which this knowledge of CAM is taught to undergraduate HCPs remains to be discovered. While searching the literature for information about the education of HMs content in medical and pharmacy courses in the UK, it proved difficult to assess how much information was transmitted to undergraduate students about HMs. Subject guides, course and module information from numerous schools were examined with no possibility of determining what future HCPs were taught about HMs. In addition, any research on undergraduate courses in the UK looked at CAM as a whole and did not distinguish between the different elements such as physical or biological therapies. Regulatory bodies such as the General Medical Council (GMC) which regulates doctors, General Dental Council (GDC) which regulates dentists, the Nursing and Midwifery Council (NMC) which regulates nurses and midwives, and the General Pharmaceutical Council (GPhC) which regulates pharmacists all have a role in setting standards for education of undergraduate students (i.e. the future HCPs). The GMC (2009) updated its guidelines for undergraduate medical education in Tomorrow's Doctors for application from 2011-2012, these are the current guidelines in place. One of the objectives under 'prescribe drugs safely, effectively and economically' states courses must, "Demonstrate awareness that many patients use complementary and alternative therapies, and awareness of the existence and range of these therapies, why patients use them, and how this might affect other types of treatment that patients are receiving." The GPhC standards for the initial education and training of pharmacists called 'Future Pharmacists' updated in May 2011, has a single statement 'complementary therapies' in the indicative syllabus under section A1.1 'How Medicines Work'. The GMC, NMC, and GPhC have set very broad statements which institutes must include in their syllabi (GMC, 2009; NMC, 2010; GPhC, 2011); unlike the GDC which does not have any requirements for undergraduate dentistry students to learn about complementary therapies (GDC, 2015). Although some regulatory bodies do state 87 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra some CAM education needs to be included in the teaching syllabi the requirements are very broad and need to clarify the extent of coverage which is adequate for HCPs. The House of Lords Report (2000) claims the current level of CAM education is too uneven. Many researchers around the world have tried to explore the extent of CAM education. In the US the majority of medical schools now offer courses on alternative medicine (Eisenberg et al., 1998). Wetzel et al. (1998) contacted 125 medical schools in the US to establish the provisions for CAM education, of the schools that replied, 64% (n=80) reported offering elective courses in CAM; although, the content and styles of teaching was variable. An online survey conducted by Ho et al. (2013) explored evidence based medicine (EBM) and CAM teaching in UK medical schools; 95 students replied representing 25 different medical schools, of which 54% said they had received lectures on CAM in their core courses. In Europe CAM education is part of the regular curriculum in 40% of medical schools and 72% of health science departments (Barberis et al., 2001; Vagra et al., 2006). Research by Smith (2011) investigated the views and practices of UK medical schools inclusion or exclusion of CAM in undergraduate medical courses; Smith (2011) found that all of the respondents to the survey (18 out of 31 medical schools in the UK) said CAM was included in their syllabus in some way. Institutes claimed the study of HMs was available as a special study module which students could select, while others claimed that CAM was formally taught. The extent of teaching ranged from a single lecture, student centred learning (coursework), presentations, and several mixed methods of coverage throughout the course. The amount of coverage a single lecture can divulge on CAM is questionable. The decision to include CAM in the academic syllabus may be influenced by several factors including: concerns of safety and efficacy, lack of research in the area, resources, and funding (Wetzel et al., 1998). The main reason for including CAM in undergraduate courses appears to be due to requirements by regulatory bodies such as the GMC and GPhC. However, there appears to be several reasons why this topic is not covered in great detail. Smith (2011) discloses various reasons for not focusing more on CAM in undergraduate medicine degrees in the UK, including: lack of interest by students, not enough students interested means running the course is not sustainable, lack of staff interest, no space in the syllabus or teaching programme as it is already stretched, and limited funding and resources to cover the content. Smith (2011) claims there was a consensus for staff to want to focus on evidence based medicine rather than CAM. Pokladnikova and Lie (2008) looked at the attitudes of first and third year pharmacy students in the Czech Republic and found that 83% (n=231) were interested in learning about CAM and between 78-91% of students supported CAM education as part of their curriculum. Similarly in the UK Freymann et al. (2006) explored the knowledge and use of CAM in 88 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra undergraduate pharmacy students in The School of Pharmacy, University of London. They uncovered students were taught about CAM in the second year of the undergraduate course; however, it was still significantly less than the level of CAM education in other European countries. Students strongly agreed that HCPs should be aware of natural remedies. Inevitably, most HCPs will come into contact with patients who are interested in or using HMs; therefore, some provisions for educating future HCPs need to be in place (Pokladnikova and Lie, 2008; Smith, 2011; Ho et al., 2013). 3.4.3 The Relationship between Healthcare Professionals and their Patients The SATMED questionnaire results revealed that participants taking HMs were not always willing to share this information with their HCPs; several reasons such as, a fear of being deemed backwards or treated differently were mentioned by participants. More importantly, factors such as language and cultural barriers were evidently affecting relationships between SA participants and their HCPs. Participants stated that their doctors did not understand them, and they found it difficult to communicate information about their health problems to Western HCPs as they were not familiar with the conditions. This was also uncovered by research by Eisenberg et al. (2001) who found participants did not disclose their use of HMs to practitioners because they felt like HCPs 'would not understand'. This highlights the importance of having an awareness of cultural diversity; this is also part of GMC (2009) requirements in the Tomorrow's Doctors guide which states that, "students should have acquired respect for patients and colleagues that encompasses, without prejudice, diversity of background and opportunity, language, culture and way of life." Dogra et al. (2005) claim the importance of teaching cultural diversity needs to be developed further to ensure future HCPs can deal with the multicultural patient population. The Ipsos MORI survey 'public perceptions of herbal medicines' was carried out on behalf of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) in 2008. The two strands of their investigation involved the qualitative exploration of people's views of HMs (the use, benefits, and risks) and a quantitative survey of the general public's use and attitudes towards HMs. The quantitative section involved face-to-face interviews with 2,032 adults in the UK; the results revealed that 35% of the survey population had used HMs. The majority of respondents were aware that there were risks associated with using HMs concurrently with CWM; thus, 56% of participant thought it was important to tell their doctor about HMs they were using, when they went to see their doctor. In addition, they found Asian and black and minority ethnic (BME) groups were the least likely to tell their 89 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra doctor about the use of HMs, and the most likely to believe it was ok to take the two forms of medicine together. Although pharmacists are 'drug specialists' and are in an ideal position to monitor and support the safe use of HMs it was clear people trusted doctors more in the Ipsos MORI survey, which concluded that participants trusted their doctors for advice on HMs more than pharmacists. The SATMED results also identified that more participants told their doctor (31%, n=19) rather than pharmacist (18%, n=5) about their use of HMs. Negative attitudes of HCPs could affect the relationship with patients as they may not feel comfortable talking about their use of HMs (Robinson and McGrail 2004; Staines, 2011). This was echoed by participants of the SATMED questionnaire who felt that Western HCPs did not approve of their use of HMs. It is clear that patients may feel reluctant to talk to HCPs about their use of HMs if HCPs attitude towards HMs is disapproving. Awodele et al. (2012) revealed that in Nigeria 40.7% (n=122) of doctors would discourage their patients from taking HMs, various reasons such as: lack of traditional healer education and scientific research on HMs were noted as reasons for not promoting the use of HMs by HCPs in Nigeria. Robinson and McGrail (2004) found that patients did not disclose their use of CAM to HCPs as they were worried practitioners would be prejudice towards them and their negative responses would persuade them against using CAM. A study into the use of CAM in children and young adults with inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) revealed that only 24% of patients using CAM had informed their doctor that they were doing so (Heuschkel et al., 2002). Studies into the use of CAM in children with cancer claim a substantial proportion of children use alternative therapies and the use of these therapies is often not discussed with their HCPs (Sawyer et al., 1994). Eisenberg et al. (2001) found that 60% (n=304) of participants claimed they did not tell the doctor about alternative therapies they used as the doctor never asked. Research conducted by the Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin (DTB, 2010) found that 77.3% (n=127) of HCPs surveyed claimed they were worried that patients would take HMs and not tell them (DTB, 2010). If patients do not want to talk to their HCPs about their use of HMs, should the responsibility of asking lie with the HCPs? Heuschkel et al. (2002) found that just 8% of doctors had initiated a discussion about CAM with their patients. Similar surveys conducted in Australia found that patients did not reveal their use of CAM as their practitioners never asked (Xue et al., 2007). The study by the DTB uncovered that only 12.9% (n=21) of HCPs in their survey said they 'always' asked their patients if they took any HMs, 27% (n=44) said they asked 'on most occasions' while just 8.6% (n=14) said they 'never' asked about patients use of HMs (DTB, 2010). 90 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra People have been using HMs since before written records were created; the knowledge of medicinal plants has been passed on through generations and has had a key role in preventing and curing diseases. Inevitably, people cannot be told not to take HMs just because they lack clinical evidence, and people will not stop just because 'the doctor said so'.