Participants were asked if they experienced any unwanted effects from their prescription medicines to compare the results to a previous question which asked if they experienced any unwanted effects from the consumption of HMs. Figure 2-24 shows a higher proportion of participants said they experienced side-effects from CWM (43%, n=46), than from HMs 0%10%20%30%40%50%60%70%80%90%100%Yes NoPercent of participantsUnwanted effects experiencedUnwanted Effects From taking Herbal Medicines and Conventional Western MedicinesHerbalMedicinesConventionalWesternMedicinesFigure 2-24 Unwanted Effects Experienced from Taking Herbal Medicines and Conventional Western Medicines 69 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra (13%, n=16). A survey by Abbot et al. (1996) on users of HMs found that just 8% (n=32) of participants said they experienced adverse effects, and none of the effects were serious. Similarly the participants in this study who said they experienced unwanted effected from HMs, most of the effects reported were minor (Question 4, Table 2-2). In contrast, more serious side-effects caused by CWM were noted, such as: palpitations, cramps, nerve damage, and thiazide induced hyperglycaemia leading to diabetes (Table 2-9). Some of the side-effects reported for HMs and CWM were similar, both were associated with the concept of being 'garam' (i.e. warming the blood and acting as a stimulant); consequently, side-effects such as indigestion and nose bleeds were reported. Generally, fewer side-effects were reported by participants taking HMs; the belief that HMs are natural and safe, so do not have any side-effects was noted by participants including participant 85 who claimed, ''Herbal medicines have less side effects and are safer'' similar views have been documented in numerous other studies too (Ipsos MORI, 2008; Mintel, 2009; Ravindran et al., 2009). Table 2-9 Side Effects from Prescription Medicines Participant Number: Side-effects Reported: 2 Bendroflumethiazide induced diabetes (told by diabetic nurse she should not have been taking it as it can induce diabetes if you're already at high risk). Paracetamol causes itching. 23 Tablets caused constipation, went back to the GP who gave senna. 32 Simvastatin stopped was causing cramps, headache, insomnia and back pain. 40 Bloated. 41 Diagnosed with high blood pressure after taking naproxen long term. 54 Weight gain caused by medication. 71 "If I get any side-effects from doctors' medicines I just do not take them for a while, Son is a Doctor so makes sure its ok to stop medicines." 85 Side effects with tablets doctor gives (metformin for diabetes), so has had doses reduced from one to half a tablet twice daily. Did try and stop taking the tablets but nurse said tablets must be taken for diabetes. 87 "Supposed to be on fifteen tablets daily, for high blood pressure and diabetes but so many side-effects I have stopped them all and feel much better. When you take Western medicines expect more side-effects and tablets to follow." 100 Nausea from taking contraceptive pill. 111 Got diarrhoea from her medicines, went back to the GP who changed the tablet for an alternative. 124 Bad reaction to diclofenac, had to go back to see the doctor. 130 Palpitations caused by medicines. 144 Unpleasant stomach ache from the contraceptive pill so went back to GP who gave an alternative pill, still has the stomach ache but not been back again. 153 Hair was falling out with salbutamol inhalers so went to GP who gave a different inhaler. 70 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra CWM have a substantial amount of clinical data and evidence to support their use. All the side-effects experienced during and after clinical trials are reported (pharmacovigilance); consequently warnings are issued in a patient information leaflet, so patients are aware of side-effects associated with their medication. On the other hand, it could be argued that because HMs do not have the same level of clinical evidence to support their use, their side-effects are not recorded and therefore not as well known. This research has documented some of the side-effects associated with the consumption of HMs, and defined concepts such as 'garam' and 'bhye' which may help people recognise and identify adverse effects from HMs. In summary of this section about the use of HMs alongside CWM, it can be noted that people will try a variety of remedies (traditional, conventional, or both) to supplement, maintain, and treat their health. There are barriers which prevent people from talking to HCPs about their use of HMs; for example, language and cultural differences which make explaining traditional concepts to Western HCPs difficult. Such issues need to be addressed to improve relationships between the ethnically diverse population and HCPs. The lack of HCPs' knowledge and understanding of HMs could be tackled by providing more training and raising awareness of the issues identified (Newall et al., 1996). There is a clear difference in the incidence of side-effects between HMs and CWM; whereby HMs have fewer and less serious side-effects in comparison to CWM. The results from this analysis have given an insight into some of the potential adverse effects and risks of taking HMs and CWM together. Valuable research like this could help raise awareness of the issues identified and promote the safe and effective use of both HMs and CWM. 71 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The following section contains results from all 192 participants surveyed. 2.6.4 Treatment of Minor Health Problems Minor ailments are considered to be conditions such as allergies, coughs, colds, backache, toothache, headaches and migraines, indigestion, and skin problems; in most cases people manage these conditions through self-care using over-the-counter (OTC) products (PAGB, 2009). The treatment of minor ailments is costing the NHS PS2 billion per year (PAGB, 2009); hence, Government initiatives to promote self-care for minor health problems are encouraging people to manage their own health (Local Government Association, 2013). The use of HMs is becoming more popular for minor and even more serious health problems, but the extent of which HMs are used to treat minor ailments remains unknown (Newall et al., 1996; Barnes, 2003). The final section of the questionnaire was designed to gain insight into how SA populations in the UK are managing their minor ailments, and to see where participants go for advice. Moreover, it was an opportunity to explore participants overall opinions on the efficacy of HMs in comparison to CWM. Question 13: Do you use herbal remedies for minor health problems before seeking medical help? Participants were asked if they used herbal remedies before seeking medical help for minor health problems such as a cold or headache. A substantially large proportion of the research population (72%, n=139) claimed they did, while just 28% (n=52) said they did not. The first question of the survey began by asking whether or not any homemade herbal remedies were used to supplement participants' health, to which 66% (n=126) of participants said 'yes'. Question 13 is structured slightly differently but shows more participants claimed to use herbal remedies by the end of the survey. This could be because as the questionnaire progressed it reminded participants of HMs they were familiar with. Consequently, when asked the question of whether or not they used herbal remedies for minor health problems more people said yes by the end of the survey. Participants were then asked what they would do in the event of a minor illness and who they would seek advice from. A ranking order style of question was used for question 14 and 15 to determine in which order participants would take what action. This was to allow participants to decide which action was most appropriate for them. 72 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Question 14: In which order would you consider the following treatments for a minor illness: Participants were asked what they would do for a minor illness such as a sore throat or headache, they were given four options: not consider taking any treatment, self-medication using herbal products, self-medication using over the counter (OTC) products from the pharmacy, or consult their doctor for advice and medication. They were then asked to rank the options one to four in the order they would consider the actions (i.e. one being the first option and four the last). Figure 2-25 demonstrates the ranking of each of the options by the different age groups. The first choice for 44% (n=84) of participants was to self-medicate using HMs; this was the most popular first choice for many of the elderly respondents (n=37) who may have more experience and trust in HMs. Similar work conducted by Bhopal (1986a) found participants were more likely to take 'Asian' herbal remedies than CWM for conditions such as abdominal discomfort, diarrhoea, toothache and earache. Likewise, research by Sandhu and Heinrich (2005) which looked at the use of Sikh HMs uncovered 38% (n=32) of their participants said the first option for treating a minor illness for was by self-medicating with HMs. Other options considered first for minor ailments in this research included: not taking any treatment by 39% (n=75) of participants, followed by 8% (n=15) who would go to the pharmacy for an OTC product, and 9% (n=17) who would see their doctor. Participants who said they would not take any treatment for a minor illness (as the first option) commented on the nature of the condition; stating that if it was a minor ailment it would resolve itself without the need for treatment. The Mintel Report (2009) also found that 05101520253035401st 2nd 3rd 4th 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 1st 2nd 3rd 4thNot consider taking anytreatmentSelf-medication usingherbal products Self-medication usingover the counter productsfrom the pharmacyConsult the doctor foradvice and medicationNumber of participantsRanking of Treatment Options for Minor AilmentsTreatment of Minor Ailments Age 20 or underAge 21-30 yearsAge 31-40 yearsAge 41-50 yearsAge 51-60 yearsAge 61 years +Figure 2-25 The Ranking Order of Treatment Options for Minor Ailments Categorised by Age Groups 73 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 'a do nothing' approach was prominent in the UK, where "six in ten adults would wait for the ailment to run its course" rather than taking any treatment or seeking advice. It should also be noted that the elderly research population in this study were the least likely to leave a minor illness without being treated. Often the older participants were taking several prescription medicines for various long term health problems so preferred to seek medical help from their doctor, rather than do nothing for a minor ailment; as delaying treatment could have serious consequences. The younger age group of participants (under 20-30 years) were more likely to treat a minor illness with an OTC medicine from the pharmacy as their 2nd or 3rd option, than the other age groups. In general, to summarise the ranking order of the four possibilities: the first option for most participants was to self-medicate using herbal products (44%, n=84), the second selection was to self-medicate using OTC products from the pharmacy (38%, n=73), the third choice was to consult the doctor for advice and medication (46%, n=88), and the final option was to not consider taking any treatment (43%, n=83). Question 15: Who are you most likely to seek advice from for minor health problems? The vast majority of participants (82%, n=157) said they would turn to their family and friends as the first port of call for advice for minor ailments (Figure 2-26); a pharmacist was the second option for 43% (n=83) of participants, followed by seeing a doctor as the third option (46%, n=88) and the last option for most participants was consulting a herbal practitioner (83%, n=160). 020406080100120140160180First Second Third FourthNumber of participantsRank order of optionsAdvice For Minor AilmentsFamily/ FriendsPharmacistDoctorHerbalpractitionerFigure 2-26 Ranking Order of Who Participants Would Get Advice for Minor Ailments From 74 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The General Pharmaceutical council (GPhC) claims that pharmacies are a key source of information and advice for people which can be easily accessed (GPhC, 2015). Community pharmacists should be the first port of call for minor ailments, before seeking advice from doctors (Local Government Association, 2013). Participants in this study who said they would seek the advice from their pharmacist (8%, n=15) before the other options acknowledged the pharmacies were easy to access, and a product could be quickly bought without delay. However, the results of this investigation suggest a slightly higher proportion of participants would rather see their GP (9%, n=17) first than a pharmacist for advice for a minor illness. This was also demonstrated in work conducted by Hammond et al. (2004) who found that despite pharmacists having an increasing role in managing minor ailments people continued to see their GP. Similarly the Mintel report (2009) claims the doctor remains the first port of call for seven out of ten adults seeking medical advice. Sandhu and Heinrich (2005), found the majority of participants (58%, n=49) in their research said they would seek medical advice from their HCPs, either their own GP (29%), a family friend who was a GP (9%) or pharmacist (20%) as the first option for minor ailments. A survey conducted on behalf of the GPhC found that nine in ten people said they trusted the health advice from their pharmacist, although there was greater trust for their doctors; of those who preferred to seek advice from their GP many claimed it was a habit and that they did not even think to go the pharmacy (GPhC, 2015). Some of the reasons why people choose to see their GP over pharmacists were identified by research conducted by the PAGB (2009), including: the cost of buying OTC medication in comparison to a free prescription for those who are eligible, people feeling extra cautious when treating children, patients seeking reassurance from their GP, and people lacking knowledge about the pharmacists roles. Participants in this research who took regular prescribed medication (n=12) said they preferred to see their GP as their first option, because the doctor was aware of their current health condition so could provide better advice than a pharmacist who does not know them; in addition, they did not want to risk taking HMs in case of any adverse effects or interactions. With the increasing popularity of HMs (Newall et al., 1996; Mintel, 2009), it would suggest there would be more demand for trained herbal practitioners (Chevallier, 2007). However, the sample surveyed was not interested in seeking the advice of herbal practitioners for minor health problems. This may be due to a lack of awareness of how to access traditional herbal practitioners in the UK, or the cost associated; as conveyed by participant 82 who said, ''I cannot afford herbal medicines they are too expensive to see a practitioner, Western medicine is free and easy to access here.'' This view was shared by several other participants too. The cost of HMs could be a key factor in determining participants' choice of treatment, which may also contribute to the changing attitudes and use of HMs and CWM. 75 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Before the National Health Service (NHS) was established in 1948, it was very expensive to see a doctor and buy the prescribed medicines. The NHS introduced free healthcare to everyone, and this saw a shift from seeing the pharmacist for medicines for minor health problems to going to see the doctor (Royal Pharmaceutical Society, 2011). If people are entitled to free NHS treatment and medicines it appears they would opt for this instead of having to pay for alternative treatments; as Participant 126 stated, "Why do you want to use herbal medicines when the doctor looks after you and you get everything free here?" Johnson et al. (1983) and Bhopal (1986a) identified that SA communities would rather see Western HCPs than a traditional practitioner in the UK; this has also been highlighted from the results of this investigation. Question 16: Would you prefer to use traditional herbal remedies over conventional Western medicines for minor health problems? This question was designed to explore participants' perceptions of what they preferred to take for minor health problems; 79% of participants (n=152) said they would prefer to use HMs for minor ailments. Pieroni et al. (2010) also found the majority of their Bangladeshi participants claimed they would prefer to use traditional medicines over Western medicines. In this study there were some comments which suggested participants were willing to try alternative treatments but had reservations because of their lack of knowledge, and evidence based research to prove their safety and efficacy. As highlighted by participants 114 and 179 who said, "I would prefer to use more herbal remedies if I had the knowledge" and participant 132 who claimed, ''if there was more evidence on the safety of herbal remedies I would prefer to use them over Western medicines.'' Two young female participants mentioned that their parents (who were all born in the UK) only used CWM which meant they did not use or have any knowledge of HMs; they went on to say they would prefer to use HMs if they had better knowledge. Some participants remained uninterested in trying HMs, as exemplified by participant 188 who declared, ''there is not much evidence on effectiveness of herbal medicines, it might just be a placebo effect.'' This view was also shared by participant 191 who revealed he would rather take a prescription medicine than use any HMs. Several participants commented on the duration of action of HMs in comparison to CWM; conveying they would prefer to use HMs if they were as efficient as CWM, as mentioned by participant 143 who said, ''I would prefer to use herbal remedies for minor health problems if they worked as fast as Western medicines.'' 76 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra In discussions amongst participants, while the surveys were being conducted, there was some debate about how much evidence has guided the use of HMs, which have been used for longer than CWM. Participants spoke about their grandparents and parents giving them HMs from a young age, which worked, but there was no clinical evidence to support their use.