Some participants in this study did not think it was important to share this information as HMs were regarded as being natural and therefore safe; this was also documented in the Ipsos MORI report (2008) where respondents did not think HCPs needed to know about their use of HMs. As patients' perspectives of traditional HMs were explored, this led to an interest in exploring the views and opinions of HCPs too. 203 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 5.1.2 Objective 2: Obtain insight into UK based healthcare professionals' knowledge and opinions of herbal medicines. There are several examples of researchers who have looked into undergraduate medical or pharmacy students perspectives of HMs in the UK (Freymann et al., 2006; Pokladnikova and Lie, 2008; Smith, 2011). Numerous researchers have explored the views of HCPs in other countries such as the US, Europe, and Africa (Berman et al., 1998; Smith 2011; Awodele et al., 2012); yet, there is no current documented research which has investigated the opinions of HCPs in the UK. Research to explore the publics' perceptions of HMs in the UK conducted by Ipsos MORI (2008), on behalf of the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), excluded HCPs from the research as they feared it would distort their results. The lack of research into HCPs views of HMs may be restricted by ethical issues around recruiting HCPs to participate in research, as experienced during this investigation. Nevertheless, this study overcame the ethical concerns raised by the De Montfort University Ethics Committee and gained approval from the Leicester City Clinical Commissioning Group. This research used social media (i.e. Facebook and Twitter) to recruit participants and conduct the surveys online (using SurveyMonkey) to explore HCPs views of HMs. Figure 5-1 summarises some of the key concerns HCPs raised about the use of HMs during this investigation, such as: the lack of clinical evidence to validate the safety and efficacy of HMs, the availability of poor quality HMs, and the lack of regulation of HMs which increases the risk of species substitution and adulteration. HCPs claimed that more research needs to be done on HMs and that they required more education on HMs before they could recommend them to their patients, or help patients make informed decision about HMs. The SATMED questionnaire analysis uncovered several barriers which may have affected SA participants' willingness to share information about their use of HMs with their HCPs, such as language and cultural barriers; hence, many participants said they did not tell their HCPs about HMs they consumed. The Ipsos MORI report (2008) found that Asian and black and minority ethnic (BME) groups were less likely to tell their doctor about their use of HMs. The HCPs survey encompassed HCPs from all ethnic groups and their views on the general patient population not a single ethnic community. When HCPs were asked whether or not their patients informed them about their use of HMs 65% (n=64) claimed they did. From the finding of this research it is evident that cultural differences can affect the relationship between patients and their HCPs. In the Tomorrow's Doctors (GMC, 2009) standards for education guidelines published by the General Medical Council (GMC) for undergraduate medical students, it says students should have respect for cultural diversity 204 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra without prejudice. Hence, if HCPs were informed of alternative therapies different ethnic communities used it may help them better understand their patients and provide tailored advice and care. The House of Lords report (2000) states that HCPs should be familiar with Complementary and Alternative Medicines (CAM), which is a broad term which includes hundreds of therapies including: acupuncture, reflexology, and HMs. Most regulatory bodies such as the GMC or General Pharmaceutical Council (GPhC) which govern HCPs and set standards for education of undergraduate courses also state CAM should be taught to students. However, Smith (2011) found that the level of CAM education varied significantly amongst medical schools in the UK. A large number of HCPs (65%, n=62) in this study claimed they did not receive any information about HMs during their professional training, this made them feel incompetent in giving advice to patients about the safe and effective use of HMs. The education of HCPs on CAM needs to be improved, as Smith (2011) suggests standardising the curriculum to ensure HCPs have some knowledge of HMs which patients may be using so they are competent to provide appropriate advice. Furthermore, guidance for patients to improve concordance with conventional medicine could be created to raise awareness of the implications of combining traditional and conventional medicines. There was not enough up to date information on UK based HCPs views of HMs prior to this investigation being conducted. The results of this research can be used to contribute to this discipline where there is a need to improve HCPs knowledge and understanding of HMs used by the culturally diverse population in the UK. As the use of HMs continues to grow in the UK (Mintel, 2009) it is imperative for HCPs to understand the risks and benefits of consuming HMs alone or in conjunction with CWM as they could have a serious impact on patients' health. 205 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 5.1.3 Objective 3: Use DNA barcoding techniques for the identification of herbal medicines and medicinal plants used in South Asian communities. From the results of the SATMED questionnaire tulsi (O. tenuiflorum L.) was identified as the medicinal plant of interest for DNA analysis. The HCPs survey results strengthened the purpose of conducting this authentication research, as HCPs highlighted the issue of species substitution and the need for more high quality research on HMs. This phase of the research was called the Tulsi Project and involved the multi-disciplinary collaboration of social science and molecular technology to attain the aims and objectives of the investigation. Interviews were conducted to explore the cultural and commercial value of the plant and tulsi samples were collected for molecular analysis; in total 111 tulsi samples including seeds, fresh and dried plant material, and commercial products (e.g. capsules, DNA extracts, oils, soaps, teas, and tablets) were accumulated during the research period. The interviews revealed that the tulsi plant holds a prestigious position with Hindu families and temples in the UK, due to its religious affiliation with the Hindu goddess, Virinda Tulsi. In addition, the numerous health benefits mentioned by participants suggested the medicinal values were commonly utilised by participants for diabetes, asthma, respiratory infections, coughs and cold, and various skin conditions; these health benefits have been explored by many researchers (Miller and Miller, 2003; Prakash and Gupta, 2005; Winston and Maimes, 2007; Singh et al., 2012). The interviews enabled the collection of samples from participants personal tulsi plants (referred to as the community samples). Participants identified their tulsi plants as being either the Raam or Shyam varieties and disclosed where the seeds or plants were originally obtained from. Some participants claimed the seeds for their tulsi plants kept in the UK were either from India or Africa, and were commonly shared amongst family and friends. The DNA analysis exposed some interesting findings about the species of the tulsi samples collected from participants in the UK. A combination of barcode regions should be used for the authentication of species (Li et al., 2011). The matK and rbcL regions have been referred to as the "core barcodes" for plants (Kress et al., 2005; Chase et al., 2005; Hollingsworth, 2011); however, they did not produce good quality sequencing data for many of the Ocimum samples in this investigation. The nuclear ITS and plastid trnH-psbA regions produced fast, efficient, and unambiguous results for several of the Ocimum species (e.g. O. gratissimum and O. tenuiflorum); thus, these regions were used to carry out the molecular analysis. Commercial products proved the most difficult to extract DNA from; hence, 29 samples were excluded from the analysis. In total 206 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra the species for 82% (n=67) of the samples analysed were successfully identified using ITS and trnH-psbA barcodes. In comparison to other methods of medicinal plant authentication (e.g. morphology or chemical analysis) DNA barcoding is a relatively new technique which can be used to discriminate between species, and identify contaminants and adulterants (Kress et al., 2005; De Mattia et al., 2011). It was anticipated that the results of this research may provide a novel contribution to this discipline; this was successfully achieved in several ways. Firstly, there was a lack of reliable reference DNA sequences for the Ocimum genus in the current DNA databases (i.e. GenBank and BOLD); thus, authenticated Ocimum samples were obtained and reference DNA sequences were created which will be added to the databases for other researchers to use. Secondly, species substitution amongst the community Raam tulsi samples collected from participants in the UK was uncovered, as Raam and Shyam Tulsi are considered to be varieties of O. tenuiflorum; however, in this investigation Raam tulsi samples were identified as O. gratissimum instead. From the analysis of this research it was apparent that Raam tulsi samples collected in the UK had been substituted by alternative species. A small number of tulsi samples collected had been identified as being O. basilicum and several others as an African species (O. gratissimum) which may be linked to the migration routes of SAs to the UK (Chapter 4, Figure 4-9). The results demonstrate that DNA based techniques are a valuable tool for the authentication of medicinal plant species. It can be argued that there is still more work to be done (i.e. to create more reference DNA sequences for other medicinal plant species); but, this rapidly evolving authentication technique has proved to be very powerful for the identification of species, contaminants, and adulterants in this research. 207 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 5.2 Limitations of the Research 5.2.1 Research Participants Sample Size With just over 3 million SAs living in the UK (Office for National Statistics, 2012) it would have been difficult to survey a significant number of participants in the time frame of this PhD as a single researcher. In addition, there is no validated or accessible sampling frame available for a sample to be drawn from. For these reasons a specific number of participants was not pre-determined and an opportunity sampling technique was employed to conduct the research. In the original PhD proposal for the SATMED questionnaire it was designed to be a self-completion questionnaire; however, after the pilot studies this was changed to be administered by the researcher. As this method of distribution was more time consuming it was not possible to complete as many questionnaires as anticipated (i.e. approximately three to four hundred). The HCPs survey was completed online and circulated by participants which meant the researcher could not regulate the distribution or completion of the questionnaires. If surveys were conducted face to face it could have reduced the number of incomplete questionnaires (n=19) (Moore, 2000); however, this would have limited the range of HCPs recruited. As it was not possible to track who had received the link, attempted or completed the survey it was difficult to determine the potential response rate while the survey was available online. Despite the researcher forwarding the link to a large number of personal and professional contacts via several different channels (i.e. personal email, Facebook and Twitter accounts, Lloyds Pharmacy and Jhoots Pharmacy internal networks, and supervisory teams' contacts) the number of respondents could have been larger as only 112 participants attempted the survey. For the Tulsi Project 13 interviews were conducted; these interviews provided an in depth insight into the topic and enabled very detailed responses to be collected from participants. Baker and Edwards (2012) claim the number of participants acceptable for a qualitative study could range from one to one hundred depending on the purpose of the research. After analysing the results of the 13 participants it was evident that the responses were very similar. Theoretical saturation had been reached as no new significant data were identified (Seale, 1999); therefore data collection was stopped. Despite the sample size being small it was sufficient to meet the objectives of the study (i.e. to determine the cultural values associated with the tulsi plant). 208 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Generally in all three phases of the research (i.e. SATMED questionnaire, HCPs online survey, and Tulsi project interviews) more participants could have been recruited; but, the research needed to be conducted in a timely manner and as the aims and objectives of this research were successfully achieved the sample size was deemed sufficient. Control Group of Participants for The SATMED Questionnaire The aim of the SATMED questionnaire was to focus on SA participants, a population for which little ethnopharmacological data in the UK exists; other ethnic groups were not included in this investigation. However, if a control group of participants (i.e. not from SA ethnic backgrounds) were also included in this research comparisons between the use of HMs amongst different ethnic groups could have been made. As there was no intervention or experimental variables being explored in this study it was not necessary to have a control group (Punch, 2014). Although the SATMED questionnaire only included SA participants the HCPs survey was open to people from all ethnic backgrounds. The HCPs survey analysis did reveal some interesting cultural differences in the use of HMs between participants from SA and other ethnic groups (Chapter 3). 5.2.2 DNA Analysis of Tulsi Samples Before carrying out the DNA analysis it became apparent that there was a lack of reliable Ocimum reference DNA sequences for the study. Due to this, reference DNA sequences had to be created by first collecting reliable authenticated Ocimum specimens (e.g. seed, plant, and DNA samples) and then creating the DNA sequences. This took a significant amount of research time as samples for a range of different Ocimum species had to be obtained, seed samples needed to be germinated and grown, and then the DNA extraction and sequencing had to be done by the primary researcher. One of the anticipated objectives of the Tulsi Project was to create a fast and reliable polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test to determine the type of Ocimum species (i.e. O. basilicum, O. tenuiflorum, or O. gratissimum) of samples; inspired by work conducted by Howard et al. (2009) for the identification of Hypericum species. If a PCR test to identify the Ocimum species was created it would allow for more samples to be analysed. However, due to time constraints and the time taken to collate and create the reference DNA sequences this was not possible. In retrospect this leads to further work which could be conducted as a result of this research. 209 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 5.3 Implications of the Research Smith (2011) looked at the level of education of CAM amongst medical schools in the UK and found that despite it being a requirement of the GMC, the regulatory body which sets standards for education, the level of CAM education was highly variable (i.e. from a single lecture to student centred learning). A large number of HCPs in this study (74%, n=71) felt they did not have enough training on HMs. HCPs revealed that they felt incompetent to give patients advice on HMs as they lacked knowledge and said more training was required. If educational institutes could be made aware of the issues identified by participants in this research, changes to the curriculum could be implemented to improve the level of CAM education. This would mean future HCPs are better equipped with the knowledge of HMs to help make better clinical decisions and inform patients about the safety and efficacy of HMs. HCPs are often required to undertake Continuing Professional Development (CPD) as part of their professional practice. After giving a presentation to the Biomolecular Technology Group at De Montfort University the potential to create a CPD programme for HCPs was discussed with the supervisory team and Gary Trappit (Business Development Manager at DMU); this will be considered at a later date. Participants in the Tulsi Project revealed that the tulsi plant was kept for various reasons including religious and medicinal purposes. Both Raam and Shyam varieties of tulsi were kept by people in the UK and collected for molecular analysis. During the DNA analysis of tulsi samples collected from participants, it was uncovered that Raam tulsi plants kept in the UK were not O. tenuiflorum but were O. gratissimum instead. This leads to several questions which the researcher would have liked to explore further including: What are the implications of having the wrong species (i.e. medicinally and religious/culturally), and whether or not the species of tulsi matters to people who keep it for religious or cultural purposes. Questions for a focus group to explore these concepts further were designed (Appendix 16). The university ethical approval delayed the process and due to time constraints this was not completed. This research has provided the background and resources to continue the work in the future. One of the desired outcomes of this research was to design a fast and efficient PCR test to distinguish between Ocimum species (Howard, 2010). As the starting material were collected during this research and the reference DNA sequences were created, this work was successfully completed at De Montfort University by a visiting researcher Seethapathy GS from the Ashoka Trust for Research in Ecology and the Environment, India (July 2015). This will allow for a larger study to authenticate the species of tulsi samples. 210 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 5.4 Conclusion This research has presented the results of the unique integration of ethnopharmacological research with DNA analysis something which (to my knowledge) has not been previously been done before. The results of this thesis could have important implications for the range of disciplines studied. The SA population in the UK is rising (Office for National Statistics, 2012), now this research has documented evidence which reveals: the knowledge of HMs SA people have, types of HMs they use, and where ingredients are sourced from. The results demonstrate that traditional HMs are still commonly used by diasporic SA communities in the UK. This study enabled both patient and practitioners' view of HMs to be explored. HCPs raised concerns about the safety and efficacy of unregulated HMs which lacked reliable clinical evidence, and felt they needed more training on the risks and benefits of HMs. Ultimately, if HCPs were better educated about HMs they would be able to deal with patients' queries about HMs competently, ensuring patients received the best pharmacological care.