(2014) collected four morphologically distinct plant samples which were identified as being Ocimum species. Using the matK gene for the PCR amplification they identified three of the samples were O. tenuiflorum and one was O. basilicum when the sequences were compared to sequences in GenBank. Like Christina and Annamalai (2014), Anbazhagan et al. (2014) also revealed that the matK region was suitable for DNA barcoding of Ocimum species. 155 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The British Pharmacopoeia (2016) recently validated the use of DNA barcoding techniques for the identification of herbal medicines. They used O. tenuiflorum as an example to demonstrate how DNA barcoding could be used authenticate the plant material which may be used in herbal medicines. The trnH-psbA region was used to create the reference O. tenuiflorum sequence which is now part of the Holy basil monograph in the British Pharmacopoeia (2016). This research highlights the applications of DNA barcoding techniques for authenticating Ocimum species. 156 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.5 Methodology A mixed methods approach was used for this research; the use of semi-structured interviews and molecular techniques presented a dynamic approach to this multidisciplinary research. This section outlines the rationale for the methods used for this investigation. 4.5.1 Interviews with South Asian Communities and Sample Collection Interviews are a type of qualitative research method which enables richer, in-depth knowledge of the individual participants' perception regarding the objectives of the study to be explored (Gill et al., 2008). A semi-structured interview process was used to collect primary data for this research. A mixture of open and closed questions were used during the interviews; as open ended questions give participants the opportunity to share as much information as they wish, while, closed questions enable quantitative analysis of results. During structured interviews the researcher reads out the questions and records the respondents answers; they do not allow for deviations from the set questions (Moore, 2000). Whereas, semi-structured interviews give the flexibility to ask questions around the topic. If participants do not understand the question this type of research method gives the researcher the flexibility to explain the question in a way the participant understands. In addition, it gives the researcher the opportunity to explore interesting concepts further when they are identified (Wisker, 2008). This method allows the researcher to build rapport with participants; which in this research made it easier to obtain tulsi samples for molecular analysis from participants. Conducting semi-structured interviews may be time consuming and expensive, and the results may be difficult to analyse and generalise if no trends are observed; but, with the correct training and skills this is a valuable method of obtaining unique primary data (Moore, 2000). The structure of the interviews was shaped by results from the SATMED questionnaire which the researcher was interested in exploring in more detail. The interview questions (Appendix 8) were designed to explore the cultural and commercial values of tulsi; a plant which many participants in the SATMED questionnaire claimed to use, grow, or import to the UK. An interest in establishing the country of origin of tulsi plants was addressed by asking participants where their seeds or plants were originally from. Participants were asked a range of questions to determine where their knowledge of the plant came from, and what they used it for. Participants were given the opportunity to express their views about the use of tulsi for religious and medicinal purposes, the growing conditions required, and any other special precautions to take with the plant. 157 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra An opportunity sampling technique was used to recruit participants who were willing to take part and give a sample of their tulsi plants. A participant information leaflet (PIL) was given to potential participants so they knew what the research was about and what was required of them (Appendix 9). Although this technique does not allow a representative sample to be selected, it is a fast and efficient way of recruiting a sample (McLeod, 2014). Participants were identified through the researchers' personal contacts; initially, recruiting friends and family who kept a tulsi plant, and were willing to participate. Followed by contacting participants who agreed to take part; either from previous contact with the researcher (during the SATMED questionnaire distribution), via the social media network created (Facebook), or by word of mouth from other participants. Posters and leaflets (Appendix 10 & 11) designed were used to create awareness of the project and provided contact details of the researcher for people interested in taking part. A website (www.dmutulsiproject.webs.com) and a Facebook profile (Tulsi Project - https://www.facebook.com/pages/Tulsi-Project/531956563523250?fref=ts) were also created to raise awareness of the project. The participant inclusion criteria for this aspect of the research was very broad; anyone over the age of eighteen years old, of SA origin, who had a tulsi plant or any tulsi products, willing to take part were accepted. (See Appendix 2D for the ethics proposal for this research). Tulsi leaves, seeds, and other samples were collected from participants during the face-to-face interviews. Several interviews were conducted remotely via telephone; these participants were asked to post samples to the researcher. All tulsi samples collected from participants were classified as 'community samples' and given a code to identify where they were collected from (see section 4.5.2). 4.5.2 Collection of Tulsi Samples A variety of tulsi samples were collected for molecular analysis. This included samples from participants taking part in the interview and any volunteers encountered throughout the research period; these samples were labelled as 'community samples'. Tulsi products (e.g. seeds, plants, tablets, capsules, oils, juices, soaps, and shampoos) bought from multiple sources in the UK, India and online were identified as 'commercial samples'. The 'reference specimens' represent the reference Ocimum samples obtained from botanists and established sources; i.e. Professor Peter Nick (Botanical Institute Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany), Dr. Eike Reich (Director at CAMAG Laboratory, Switzerland), and The Royal Botanic Gardens Kew - DNA bank (samples from Chase M.W and Suddee et al.). A unique code for each sample was issued; a letter for the source/ location (e.g. A = Africa, B = Birmingham, C = commercial, G = Germany, I = India, L = London, Li = Leicester, V = 158 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra reference, etc. ), followed by the chronological sample number (Appendix 12). For community samples given by participants who took part in the interviews the participant identification code was the same as the sample code for their tulsi sample. If multiple samples were given by a participant a letter was added to the end of the identification code (e.g. participant B15 from Birmingham gave two samples - B15a and B15b). The letter 'g' after a code was used to represent seed samples which were given from the original plant sample (e.g. B07 leaves from a plant and B07g were seeds from the same plant). 4.5.3 Scanning Electron Microscopy of Tulsi Samples The Carl Zeiss Evo(r) HD 15 scanning electron microscope was used to conduct the SEM work on the tulsi samples collected, under the supervision of Rachel Armitage (Senior Technician and PhD Researcher) and Liz O'Brien (Senior Technician). Several of the reference Ocimum samples obtained from Professor Peter Nick were analysed under SEM. 4.5.4 DNA Analysis of Tulsi Samples In order to authenticate a plant species the DNA must first be extracted, followed by a PCR to amplify the target DNA sequence, and then gel electrophoresis to check the PCR has successfully worked. If a positive PCR result is obtained the sample is then sequenced. The DNA sequence data can then be used to identify the plant species. DNA Extraction The Qiagen DNeasy Plant Mini Kit was used to conduct all DNA extractions. The Mini Protocol from the DNeasy(r) Plant Handbook, pages 22-25, was used (Qiagen, 2012). Once samples were selected for DNA extraction the appropriate amount was weighed (0.1g of fresh plant material or 0.02g of dried material). The samples were mechanically disrupted using a pestle and mortar and then lysed in a TissueLyser (for 1 minute at 30 Hz) with a tungsten bead in a microcentrifuge tube. For fresh plant samples 400ul of the lysis buffer (AP1) and 4ul RNase A (100mg/ml) was added during the maceration in the TissueLyser; while for dried samples these were added after. The tubes were then re-positioned in the TissueLyser and this step was repeated, to ensure equal homogenisation. For the cells to be completely lysed the samples were left to incubate at 65oC for ten minutes. 159 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra  To precipitate the proteins and polysaccharides from the sample 130ul Buffer AP2 was added and then incubated on ice for five minutes. Cell debris and precipitates were removed by spinning the samples through a QIAshredder column, for two minutes at 14 000 revolutions per minute (rpm). 1.5 times the flow through volume of Buffer AP3/E was then added to help the DNA bind to the membrane of the DNeasy spin column. The sample was then applied to a DNeasy spin column and centrifuged for one minute at 8000 rpm. 500ul of Buffer AW was added and centrifuged (for one minute at 8000 rpm) and the flow through was discarded to remove any contaminants. This was then repeated; however, it was centrifuged for two minutes at 14000 rpm to dry the DNeasy membrane. For the final elution of the DNA, 100ul of Buffer AE was left to incubate on the DNeasy spin column membrane for five minutes, before being centrifuged for one minute at 8000 rpm. This was repeated, to leave a final volume of 200ul of pure DNA sample. Once the DNA was extracted 50ul was pipetted into two separate tubes to be stored at minus 20oC and minus 80oC for preservation. The 100ul left in the original tube was used as the working sample of DNA. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) A master mix containing the MyTaq Red Mix (2x), forward primer, reverse primer, and distilled water was made (Table 4-1). 48ul of the master mix was aliquoted into a 0.5ml PCR tube, followed by 2 ul of template DNA. A positive control (known DNA sample) and negative control (distilled water) were always used to ensure the PCR had worked successfully and there was no contamination. Table 4-1 PCR mixture with BioLine MyTaq Mixture Component: Volume per reaction: MyTaq Red Mix 25 ul Forward Primer 1 ul Reverse Primer 1 ul Template DNA 2 ul Distilled Water 21 ul Total 50 ul The PCR tubes were then transferred into the Bio-Rad PTC-200 Thermal Cycler for the PCR reaction to commence. 160 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Primers and protocols used include: rbcL rbcL_f (Forward primer) 5'-ATGTCACCACAAACAGAGACTAAAGC-3' rbcL_rev (Reverse primer) 5'-GTAAAATCAAGTCCACCRCG-3' PCR protocol for rbcL: Initial denaturation step - 5 minutes at 95degC. Followed by 35 cycles of 30s at 95degC, 20s at 52degC and 50s at 72degC. Final extension period of 5 minutes at 72degC. matK 3F Kim (Forward primer) 5'-CGTACAGTACTTTTGTGTTTACGAG-3' 1R Kim (Reverse primer) 5'-ACCCAGTCCATCTGGAAATCTTGGTTC-3' PCR protocol for matK: Initial denaturation step - 5 minutes at 94degC. Followed by 5 cycles of 30s at 94degC, 40s at 44degC and 40s at 72degC. Then 30 cycles of 30s at 94degC, 40s at 46degC and 40s at 72degC. Final extension period of 3 minutes at 72degC. ITS ITS1 (Forward primer) 5'-TCCGTAGGTGAACCTGCGG-3' ITS4 (Reverse primer) 5'-TCCTCCGCTTATTGATATGC-3' PCR protocol for ITS: Initial denaturation step - 7 minutes at 95oC. Followed by 30 cycles of 1 minute at 95oC, 30s at 60oC and 1 minute at 72oC. Final extension period - 7 minutes at 72oC. trnH-psbA psbA (Forward primer) 5'-GTTATGCATGAACGTAATGCTC-3' trnH (Reverse primer) 5'-CGCGCATGGTGGATTCACAATCC-3' PCR protocol for trnH-psbA: Initial denaturation step - 5min at 95degC. Followed by 35 cycles of 1 minute at 95degC, 30s at touchdown temperature* and 1 minute at 72degC. Final extension period of 7 minutes at 72oC. *Touchdown temperature begins at 58degC, reduced by 1degC per cycle until 48degC, then continued at 48degC for the remainder of the program. (Primers and Protocols obtained from Biomolecular Technology Group, A guide to molecular techniques, Standard Operating Procedures, 2013) 161 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Gel Electrophoresis After the PCR reaction was complete, the samples were loaded (5 ul) on a 1% w/v agarose gel (0.5g agarose powder mixed with 50ml 0.5 X TBE* buffer, and 2ul SYBRsafe(tm) as the DNA stain), with TBE buffer for the electrophoresis. The gel electrophoreses was run for 30 minutes at 90V. An image of the gel was then taken using the Bio-Rad Gel Doc EZ imager and the Image LabTM Software. The Bioline Easy Ladder 1 was used to determine the molecular weight of the DNA. *TBE = Tri-borate-EDTA, made by mixing 10.8g Trise base, 5.5g Boric acid, 0.584g EDTA and 1 litre of distilled water. Extraction of Multiple Bands When multiple bands were seen on the agarose gel, the Qiagen(r) QIAquick gel extraction kit was used to cut multiple DNA bands from the gel for further analysis. In order to extract the DNA from the multiple bands, the gel electrophoresis was repeated with the following modifications: up to 50ul of PCR sample was loaded on the gel and it was run for 60-90 minutes at 90V. An image of the gel was printed to map the bands on the gel. The gel was then taken to the UV light box where the individual bands were carefully cut out using a blade. The segments were placed in a labelled tube before the protocol for the extraction was followed from the QIAquick Spin Handbook, page 25-26 (2006). Once the DNA was eluted from the gel, another agarose gel was made to check the DNA had been successfully extracted, before sending the samples for sequencing. 5ul of the sample was mixed with 2ul of loading buffer before being pipetted onto the gel, which was run for 30 minutes at 90V. Samples were then sent for sequencing, or a PCR was done to amplify the DNA before sending the samples for sequencing. DNA Isopropanol Clean Up DNA may need to be cleaned in order to remove impurities and contaminants such as enzymes, proteins, and cell debris if they are not fully removed during the final stages of the DNA extraction. The isopropanol clean up method from the De Montfort University - Biomolecular Technology Group, A Guide to Molecular Techniques, Standard Operating Procedures, page 6, 2013 was used: 50ul of the DNA sample was added to 35ul of isopropanol in a 1.5ml microcentrifuge tube. The mixture was centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 30 minutes at 4degC. The supernatant was then 162 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra removed before re-suspending the pellet in 200ul of 70% ethanol. This mixture was then centrifuged at 15,000 x g for 10 minutes at room temperature. The supernatant was once again removed, and the ethanol was allowed to evaporate (for 20-30 minutes). Finally the pellet was re-dissolved in 50ul of elution buffer TE. NanoDrop Spectrophotometry The NanoDropTM Lite (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc) was used for quantification of DNA in the samples. It is a UV spectrophotometer which uses Light Emitting Diode (LED) technology to measure the samples absorbance at 260 and 280 nm. A very small quantity of sample (1-2 ul) is required for the analysis. It provides three key readings: concentration (ng/ul), A260, and A260/A280 purity ratio. The concentration value reveals the concentration of nucleic acid in the sample. The A260 measures the absorbance and should have a value between 0.1-1.0, results less than 0.1 are not very reliable. The A260/A280 purity ratio determines the level of protein contamination; a value of 1.8 is accepted as being pure DNA, lower values indicate the presence of proteins, phenols, and other contaminants which also absorb at 280nm (Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc, 2012). Sequencing Samples which gave a positive PCR result (as indicated by the gel electrophoresis) were sent for sequencing to an external sequencing company, Macrogen Europe, Amsterdam (The Netherlands) who provide Sanger sequencing services. The results from the sequencing company provided details of the sequence length, GC%, and also the sequence trace (electropherogram). The DNA data obtained were then used for analysis, identification, and construction of a reference database. Sequence Analysis Data was analysed using CLC Main Workbench 6 (CLC bio).