1557]"... in this island [Hispaniola], as also in otherprovinces of these new countries, there are somebushes, not very large, like reeds, that produce a leaf... which (where it is used) is held in great esteem bythe natives, and very much prized by the slaves whomthe Spaniards have brought from Ethiopia. Whenthese leaves are in season, they pick them, tie themup in bundles, and suspend them near their fireplacetill they are very dry, and when they wish to usethem, they take a leaf of their grain (maize) andputting one of the others into it, they roll them roundtight together; then they set fire to one end, andputting the other end into the mouth, they draw theirbreath up through it, wherefore the smoke goes intothe mouth, throat, the head, and they retain it as longas they can, for they find a pleasure in it, and somuch do they fill themselves with this cruel smoke,that they lose their reason. And there are some whotake so much of it, that they fall down as if they weredead, and remain the greater part of the day or nightstupefied. Some men are found who are content withimbibing only enough of this smoke to make themgiddy, and no more. See what a pestiferous andwicked poison from the devil this must be.... I haveentered the house of an Indian who had taken thisherb, which in the Mexican language is called tabacco,and immediately perceiving the sharp fetid smell ofthis truly diabolical and stinking smoke, I was obligedto go away in haste, and seek some other place. In LaEspanola and other islands, when their doctors wantedto cure a sick man, they went to the place where theywere to administer the smoke, and when he wasthoroughly intoxicated by it, the cure was mostlyeffected. On returning to his senses he told athousand stories, of his having been at the council ofthe gods and other high visions." [Girolamo Benzoni, 1565]"And now good Countrey men let us (I pray you)consider, what honour or policie can moove us toimitate the barbarous and beastly maners of thewilde, godlesse, and slavish Indians in so vile andstinking a custome....? Why doe we not as wellimitate them in walking naked as they doe? inpreferring glasses, feathers, and such tpyes, to goldeand precious stones, as they do? yea why do we notdenie God and adore the Devill, as they doe....? Haveyou not reason then to be ashamed, and to forbearethis filthie noveltie, so basely grounded, so foolishlyreceived and so grossly mistaken in the right usethereof? ... A custome lothsome to the eye, hateful tothe Nose, harmefull to the braine, dangerous to theLungs, and the blacke stinking fume thereof, neerestresembling the horrible Stigian smoke of the pit isbottomlesse. [King James I. 1604. A Counterblaste to Tobacco]"If I cannot smoke cigars in Heaven, I shall not go!" [Mark Twain]-208-"Tobacco is an indispensable as the daily ration; wemust have thousands of tons of it without delay." [General John "Blackjack" Pershing]' ' ' ' 'The genus Nicotiana, of the nightshade family(Solanaceae), is composed of about 60 species; 45 ofthem native to the New World, 14 to Australia, andone to the Pacific. The plants are usually small trees.Only two species, both of them tetraploids (2n = 4x =48), are of any economic importance. Nicotianatabacum is the source of smoking tobacco leaves andN. rustica, with its higher alkaloid content, is thesource of nicotine used as an agricultural insecticide.Both are of hybrid origin. Neither species is known inthe wild today.TIMELINE: TOBACCOBCE:5000 Tobacco first cultivated2500 Reaches northern regions of North America 400 Tobacco domesticated in South AmericaCE: 500 Shamanistic use (enemas)1492 Columbus records use of leaves in his diaries1519 Tobacco introduced into Spain1542 Tobacco introduced into Japan via a shipwreck1556 Cultivation begins in Europe1556 Andre Thevet introduces seeds to Europe1561 Jean Nicot sends tobacco to Catherine deMedici1565 John Hawkins introduces tobacco from Floridato England1565 Nicolas Monardes extols healing properties1571 Mathias L'Obel describes plant and its use1588 Ecclesiastical decree forbids use 1598 Ben Johnson satirizes tobacco use in "EveryMan in His Humour"1602 First English anti-tobacco tract published1604 King James I of England publishes"Counterblaste to Tobacco"1609 Japan bans tobacco1612 John Rolfe begins cultivation in Virginia1615 Coin-operated dispensing machines appear inEnglish taverns1616 John Rolfe takes first shipment to London1620 King James I forbids domestic production1624 Pope Urban VIII threatens users withexcommunication1624 Greek Orthodox Church bans use1629 Cardinal Richelieu imposes customs duty1632 Massachusetts bans public smoking1633 Charles I of England issues proclamationsimilar to that of his father, James I1635 French restrict sale to physician's prescription1636 Tabacalera, world's first tobacco company,founded1640 Ming Emperor imposes death penalty for use1641 Czar Michael Romanov forbids sale and use1642 Pope Urban VIII bans use 1697 Czar Peter permits open sale/use1753 Linnaeus names plant Nicotiana tabacum1760 P. Lorillard Tobacco Co. founded1761 John Hill notes abnormal growths after snuffing1790 Vatican opens its own tobacco factory1809 Louis Vauquelin isolates nicotianine1828 Ludwig Reimann & Wilhelm Heinrich isolatenicotine1875 Richard Joshua Reynolds founds company1880 James A. Bonsack invents cigarette machine1889 James B. Duke founds American Tobacco Co.1907 U. S. government uses American Tobaccounder anti-trust, anti-monopoly laws1911 Supreme Court dissolves American TobaccoCo.1918 War Department buys entire output of BullDurham Tobacco for use by American troops1920 U. S. consumes 100 billion cigarettes for firsttime1945 Alton Ochsner correlates smoking and lungcancer1939 Franz H. Muller links smoking and lung cancer1950 Morton Levin confirms link between smokingand lung cancer1954 U. S. tobacco industry publishes "FrankStatement to Cigarette Smokers"1962 British Royal College of Physicians issues"Smoking & Health"1964 U. S. Surgeon General issues report on "Smoking & Health"1966 Congress passes Cigarette Labeling andAdvertising Act1971 U. S. bans cigarette ads on television1991 FDA declares second-hand smoke dangerous1995 FDA declares nicotine a drug1997 The Liggett Group admits tobacco addictive1998 Master Settlement Agreement reachedbetween tobacco industry and various states1999 Japan bans tobacco ads on television' ' ' ' 'HISTORYWhen Europeans arrived in the New World in 1492they found the indigenous peoples using what theCarib Indians called " tobacco." Whether it was theirword for the plant itself or one of the ways that theyprepared it is unclear. These uses were largelyreligious, medicinal, and ceremonial. They either rolledthe leaves into cigars and inhaled through the mouthor nostrils, or they inhaled the smoke of burningtobacco leaves through long hollow tubes inserted intothe nostrils. The Indians also put tobacco in claypipes, some of them with other plants in them thatacted to filter the smoke. We have extensivearcheological remains of these pipes. The Spanishwere much amazed at these sights and wroteaccounts of the savages who drank fire and whosenavels belched smoke.The fame of tobacco spread quickly to Europe. By1519 it had been introduced to Spain, and from thereit spread to the rest of the continent. It wasintroduced into France by Jean Andre Thevet in 1557.Three years later it was brought to the attention of theFrench Court by Jean Nicot, the ambassador toPortugal. It is Nicot who is commemorated in thegeneric name Nicotiana. Tobacco was introduced intoEngland by Sir John Hawkins, who brought it fromFlorida. Hawkins' tobacco was different from thatdiscovered by the Spanish. Sir Walter Raleigh didmuch to popularize the use of tobacco in England.The smoking of tobacco became controversial almostimmediately in England and Europe. In 1604, KingJames I of England wrote an unsigned pamphlet called"Counterblaste to Tobacco," in which he referred tothe plant as the "precious stink." (Look at the quote atthe beginning of the this section. He also slapped atax on tobacco to discourage its use. Such taxescontinue to this day and have become a most lucrativesource of income for many countries.The English colonies in America, particularly Virginia,were in the tobacco business almost since theirfounding. The English began with N. rustica, a species-209-native to the area, but much inferior to the N.tabacum used by the Spanish. In about 1610-12, JohnRolfe "procured" seeds of the Spanish tobacco for useby the English colonial planters. This was thebeginning of the tobacco industry in the United States.In 1615, Virginia exported 2300 lbs. of tobacco; in1629, 1,500,000 lbs., and 86,000,000 lbs. at the turnof the century.The tobacco industry has remained a southerninstitution. The oldest tobacco company in the U.S.and the world is P. Lorillard, founded in 1760supposedly with tobacco from George Washington'sVirginia plantations. Liggett and Meyers Co. wasbegun in 1822 and the R. J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. in1875.In 1890, W. Duke and Sons combined with four othertobacco companies to form the American TobaccoCompany. The company soon absorbed P. Lorillard,Brown and Williamson, Liggett and Meyers, and PhillipMorris. By 1910, 82% of the 8.6 billion cigarettes soldin the U.S. were made by the American TobaccoCompany. In 1911, the government declared it amonopoly. Most of today's major companies werecarved out of the American Tobacco Co. in the legalsettlement that followed.James Buchanan Duke retained the American TobaccoCo. In 1924, Duke offered Trinity College in Durham,North Carolina, $40 million if it would change its nameto Duke University. Trinity College agreed. Duke diedin 1925, leaving an additional $40 million to hisuniversity.HOW IS IT USED?Tobacco is used in several ways. It may be smoked,snuffed, chewed, drunk, or even eaten. Today, onlysmoking, snuffing, and chewing ("smokeless tobacco")remain popular. Because the leaves are smoked,tobacco is a fumatory; because it is chewed, it is alsoa masticatory. Here is a more comprehensive look athow tobacco has been used.SmokedSnuffedChewedDippedEatenDrunkLickedSmeared over bodyBlown over warrior's facesBlown over women's facesEye dropsEnemasOffered to the godsOffered as a giftNarcoticMedicineInitiation ceremonyTOBACCO AS A MEDICINEYou may have been surprised to see tobacco listed asa medicine. Historically, it has been used to treatwounds, rashes, rabies, head injuries, plague,syphilis, insomnia, thirst, hunger, toothache, scorpionbites, and migraines.PRODUCTIONThe United States leads the world in growing tobacco,with most of it grown in North Carolina, Kentucky,South Carolina, Tennessee, and Georgia. Otherleading producers include The People's Republic ofChina, India, and Pakistan.Tobacco is planted from seed and requires a greatdeal of care. The seedlings are subject to manydiseases with exotic names. At a certain stage in theirgrowth, the plants are "topped" by cutting off thegrowing point. This prevents flowering and promotesthe enlargement of leaves and the accumulation ofmaterials, including nicotine. Individual leaves areharvested from the plants, usually two or three at atime, from the bottom upward. The tobacco leaves arethen dried or cured. This process is done is twoprincipal ways. One is to air cure the leaves inventilated barns, a common sight in the South. Theother method is fire curing the leaves in smoke to addflavor. Curing over artificial heat also occurs. Aftercuring the leaves are gathered into "hands" and thensold to buyers. After the purchase they are usuallyallowed to age for a period of six months to threeyears. Fermentation occurs during this period, and thecharacteristic aroma develops. The percentage ofnicotine in the leaves also decreases.NICOTINEMany of the desirable and undesirable effects oftobacco may be attributed to the alkaloid nicotine(C10H14N2). Its effects on the human body arecomplex. It can:' stimulate autonomic ganglia;' stimulate skeletal neuromuscular junctions;' stimulate sympathetic nervous system;' increase heart rate (10-20 bpm);' increase blood pressure (5-10 mm mercury);' increase cardiac stroke volume/output;' increase coronary flow;' produce initial arousal, then relaxation;' cause changes in brain wave patterns;' act on midbrain "reward system" region; and' cause the release of dopamine.The amount in a cigarette, though not particularlyhigh, is still harmful. Nicotine is a potent poisoncausing:' vomiting;' nausea;' evacuation of the bowels and bladder;' mental impairment;' twitching and convulsions;' blood to coagulate more easily, which can lead tothe formation of thromboses; and' inflammation and chronic lung disease.Forty to fifty milligrams taken orally can be fatal in anadult. The dependence of the body on nicotine is stillbeing investigated. Last year the U. S. Food and DrugAdministration declared nicotine to be an addictivesubstance. As you are aware, multi-billion dollarlawsuits are working their way through the courts thatrest, at least in part, on that very point. Did thetobacco companies not only know of the addictivenature of nicotine, but engage in practices that wouldenhance it?SMOKING AND HEALTH"Smoking is the largest single cause of chronic diseaseand premature death in our society. "Recent work indicates that nicotine may be only onepart of the problem. Tobacco smoke contains over4000 combustion products, 400 of them toxic, and 40of those are carcinogenic. They include: nitrogen,-210-oxygen, carbon monoxide, hydrogen sulfide,ammonia, various resins, essential oils, methylalcohol, acetone, formic acid, butyric acid, and aceticacid. In December 1997, the Liggett Tobacco Groupreleased additional ingredients used in its L & Mcigarettes. They include molasses, patchouli oil,licorice flavoring, valerian root extract, vanilla extract,and cedarwood oil.Smoking is the leading cause of lung cancer and it isa major factor in deaths from coronary heart disease,chronic bronchitis, emphysema, and other diseases. Itis also involved in cancer of the pancreas, esophagus,mouth and throat, larynx, bladder, kidneys, andcervix. Over 400,000 Americans die each year fromtobacco-related causes. Another 6000 will die from theeffects of second hand smoke. By comparison, 30,000die each year from sexually-transmitted diseases,25,000 from motor vehicle accidents, and 20,000 fromabuse of illicit drugs.Bidis (also called beedies or beadies) are cigarettesimported from India. They are very popular withyounger smokers. Bidis have the tobacco wrapped inleaves from a relative of the persimmon tree, andtied with colored thread. They are typically flavoredwith chocolate or strawberry. The Center for DiseaseControl cautions that bidis have about three timesmore carbon monoxide and nicotine and about fivetimes the tar found in regular cigarettes.COCA LEAF "Which is it today," I asked, "morphine or cocaine? "...It is cocaine," he said ... "would you care to try it? ""No, indeed," I answered brusquely... "Perhaps youare right, Watson... I suppose that its influence isphysically a bad one. I find it, however, sotranscendently stimulating and clarifying to the mindthat its secondary action is a matter of smallmoment." [Sir Arthur Conan Doyle]"They may have found a substitute for its [tobacco's]narcotic qualities in the coca ..., or cuca, as called bythe natives. This is a shrub which grows to the heightof a man. The leaves when gathered are dried in thesun, and, being mixed with a little lime, form apreparation for chewing, much like the betel-leaf ofthe East. With a small supply of his cuca in his pouch,and a handful of roasted maize, the Peruvian Indian ofour time performs his wearisome journeys, day afterday, without fatigue, or, at least, without complaint.Even food the most invigorating is less grateful to himthan his loved narcotic. Under the Incas, it is said tohave been exclusively reserved for the noble orders.If so, the people gained one luxury by the Conquest;and, after that period; it was so extensively used bythem, that this article constituted a most importantitem of the colonial revenue of Spain. Yet, with thesoothing charms of an opiate, this weed so muchvaunted by the natives, when used to excess, is saidto be attended with all the mischievous effects ofhabitual intoxication." [William H. Prescott. 1847.History of the Conquest of Peru]"I naturally learned to chew ... toasted coca leavesand, finding it to be a most helpful custom when onemust work hard and there is little food, I used coca foreight years while in these remote areas, withabsolutely no desire to continue upon my return.Cocaine, the powerful alkaloid extracted from theleaves is, of course, a very dangerous addicting drug.But coca leaves, as they are used by the SouthAmerican Indians, particularly in the bleak Andeanheights, are not addictive and they do serve a usefulpurpose enabling undernourished, debilitated personsto do a day's work and thus, at least, survive.