In recent years,however, Vavilov's work has come under increasingcriticism. Vavilov himself recognized the validity of some ofthese criticisms and made certain basic changes in histheories. Probably the major improvement in histheories involves recognizing that what he called"centers of origin" should have been called "centers ofdiversity." The Abyssinian Center of Vavilov containsmany plants that had their origins elsewhere. Cropssuch as wheats, barleys, peas, flax, and lentils havegreat diversity there, but their sites of origin may wellbe in the Middle East. None of the wild counterparts ofthese plants occurs in Ethiopia. This presents a seriousproblem, unless we accept the idea that domesticatedplants arise de novo. In an attempt to answer thiscriticism, Vavilov distinguished between "primarycenters" where domestication began and "secondarycenters" where cultivated plants may be found afterthe initial domestication.A summary of Vavilov's eight centers, their geographicdelimitations, and their most important plant speciesis presented below.I. The Chinese Center. This is the largest center oforigin. It covers the mountainous regions of centraland western China and the adjacent lowlands. 136species, including the peach, apricot, cherry, walnut,kumquat, loquat, persimmon, litchi, water chestnut,taro, soybean, rhubarb, eggplant (now you can seethis hideous creature in its true light -- a communistplot against all right-thinking citizens! ), cucumber,broomcorn millet, tea, mulberry, paper mulberry,opium poppy, ginseng, sesame seeds, tung nut oil,China berry, cassia, ramie, and hemp.II. The Indian Center. This center includes Burmaand Assam, but it excludes northwest India, thePunjab, and the northwestern frontier region. 117species, including many peas and beans, mango,orange, jack fruit, betel nut, chaulmoogra oil tree,rice, sorghum, madder, Indian rubber tree, yam,henna, madder, black pepper, cardamon, cumin,cinnamon, coconut, safflower, black mustard, gumArabic, and sandalwood.-37-IIa. The Indo-Malayan Center. This area includesthe Malay Archipelago, Java, Borneo, Sumatra, thePhilippines, and Vietnam. 55 species, including thebanana, plantain, mangosteen, durian, air potato,pokeweed, ginger, vetiver, clove tree, nutmeg, blackpepper, sugar cane, Manila hemp, gutta-percha, Job'stears, and candlenut tree.III. The Central Asiatic Center. The area includesnorthwest India, Afghanistan, the Soviet Republics ofTadjikistan and Uzbekistan, and western Tian-Shan.42 species, including the pistacio, apricot, pear,almond, Russian olive, grape, English walnut, apple,lentils, mung bean, flax, coriander, carrot, turnip,onion, garlic, spinach, bread wheat, and cotton.IV. The Near-Eastern Center. This center occupiesthe Near East. 83 species, including nine endemicwheats, fig, pomegranate, cherry, hazelnut, chestnut,pistachio, Russian olive, rye, oats, cantaloupe,pumpkins, cabbage, carrot, leeks, lettuce, alfalfa,vetch, anise, anisette, sumac, and coriander.V. The Mediterranean Center. This center occupiesthe Mediterranean region. 84 species, including thegarden beet, turnip, chives, asparagus, celery,chicory, parsnip, salsify, Spanish oyster, caraway,fennel, thyme, hyssop, hops, lavender, peppermint,rosemary, sage, laurel, three kinds of wheat, blackand white mustards, carob, madder, and sumac.VI. The Abyssinian Center. This center includesEthiopia and Eritrea. It is limited in both size and inthe number of endemic species. 38 species, includingteff, raggi, pearl millet, fenugreek, cow pea, hyacinthbean, castor bean, khat, coffee, okra, myrrh, andindigo.VII. South American & C. American Center. Inaddition to southern Mexico and Central America, thiscenter also includes the Antilles. 49 species, includingthe prickly pear, soursop, sapodilla, three kinds ofsapote, papaya, avocado, guava, star apple, cashew,yam bean, sweet potato, arrowroot, chayote, agave,cherry tomato, cacao, annatto, tobacco, lima bean,tepary bean, upland cotton, sisal, henequen, maize,and various peppers.VIII. The South American Center. This centerincludes Peru, Ecuador, and Bolivia. Many of theendemic plants occur in the high mountains. Theregion is characterized by unusual potatoes and othertuber-bearing plants. 45 species, including potatoes,oka, nasturtium, tomato, tree tomato, ground cherry,pumpkin, peppers, marigold, coca, passion flowers,quinoa, Egyptian cotton, quinine, and tobacco.VIIIa. The Chiloe Center. This is the smallest centerof origin, a small island off southern Chile. 4 species,including the white potato and wild strawberry.VIIIb. The Brazilian-Paraguayan Center. Althoughrich in wild plants, this center is poor in its number ofcultivated species. 13 species, including manioc,peanut, cacao, the rubber tree, Paraguay tea,pineapple, Brazil nut, and cashew.NUMERICAL SUMMARY OF CENTERSCenter Number ofSpecies% of TotalChineseIndianCentral AsiaNear EastMediterraneanAbyssinianMesoamericanS. American13617242838438496220.425.86.312.512.65.77.49.3Certain facts are immediately apparent from theselists. First, the vast majority of the 666 speciestreated by Vavilov are of Old World origin. Only 111are New World plants. About 80% of the Old Worldplants had their origin in southern Asia. Themountains and tropical regions of Asia are the homeof many plants that we use today. Second, there aremajor continental areas that are particularly poor inmajor endemic cultivated plants. They are NorthAmerica, Europe, Africa, and Australia. This is not tosay that these areas are devoid of cultivated plantsthat played some role in the ethnobotanicaldevelopment of peoples. It is just that they areimpoverished in major cultivated plants. Can youname, for instance, a major crop plant that is nativeto the United States?VAVILOV AND LYSENKOAs Vavilov's fame grew around the world, he foundhimself the target of scientific and political opposition,especially from one of his staff members, an ambitiouscharlatan named Trofim D. Lysenko. He claimed thatchromosomes did not exist and that the field ofgenetics was just some silly notion of a Catholic monk(Mendel). His bizarre ideas of crop breeding includedthe belief that one species of plant could betransformed into another in a matter of months.Unfortunately for Soviet agriculture in general, and forVavilov in particular, Lysenko had a very powerfulpatron -- none other than Josef Stalin himself.Lysenko finally decided that his position was strongenough to bring down Vavilov, who was accused ofbeing a British spy, accepting the concepts of westernscientists, and rejecting those of Soviet workers,including Lysenko. Vavilov was arrested, tried, andsentenced to death. He was put in one of the infamousSiberian labor camps. He became a "non-person." Oneof the 20th century's most distinguished scientistssimply failed to exist. The circumstances surroundingVavilov's death remained unclear for many years. Nowwe know that he died in 1943 of starvation and heartdisease.Lysenko became a dominant figure in Sovietagriculture, which accounts, at least in part, for decades of food shortages as the collective farms wereforced to adopt his scientifically discreditedprocedures. Lysenko fell from grace when NikitaKhrushchev was ousted. A few years later, the Sovietgovernment not only acknowledged that Vavilov hadexisted, but it restored his reputation and accordedhim great honors.TIMELINE: N. I. VAVILOV1887 Born in Moscow1913 Studies in England1917 Becomes Professor at Univ. of Saratov1921 Heads All-Union Inst. of Plant Industry1922 Publishes "Law of Homologous Series"1926 Publishes "Centers of Origin..."1932 Visits U. S.1938 Visits U. S.1938 Replaced by Lysenko as President of Academy ofAgricultural Science1939 Elected President of International Congress in-38-Edinburgh1940 Arrested for being a spy for England1941 Sentenced to death1943 Dies in Soviet labor camp at Saratov1967 Vavilov's rehabilitation beginsTIMELINE: T. D. LYSENKO1898 Born in Ukraine1933 Presents paper at All-Union Collective1936 First public attack on western genetics1938 President of Agricultural Academy1939 Appointed Academician1940 Director of Institute of Genetics1945 Becomes "Hero of Soviet Labor"1948 Publishes "Agrobiology"1948 Begins purge of opposing scientists1949 Awarded Stalin Prize for "Agrobiology"1953 Joseph Stalin dies1955 Awarded Michurin Gold Medal1956 Forced to resign from some posts1965 Forced from power1976 Dies in MoscowTHE NATURE OF THE EVIDENCEDe Candolle, Darwin, Vavilov and other scientists ofthe 19th and early 20th century used a number ofdifferent sources of evidence in their investigations ofthe origins of our domesticated plants. They include:' comparison of wild and cultivated living forms;' fossil remains, in the form of:! charred (carbonized) material;! impressions;! silica skeletons;! water-logged material;! desiccated or mummified grains;! frozen material;! petrified material;' art work with botanical illustrations' references to plant use in ancient texts; and' linguistic studies.We are now able to combine these lines of evidencewith genetic data (DNA comparisons) and chemicaldata from living plants to produce a more completepicture of the ancestors of our modern domesticatedplants.