The Baron von Humboldt may well havebeen the last of his breed -- a botanist, zoologist,entomologist, geologist, physicist with an encyclopedicknowledge of the natural history of our planet. Hisextensive exploration in South America uncovered awealth of botanical information.hunter-gatherers. The term applied to a people whoacquire most or all of their food by hunting animalsand gathering edible plants from their surroundings.hybrid. In the most widely used sense, a plant oranimal that is the offspring of two parents that belongto different species, subspecies, or varieties.hybrid vigor. See heterosis.hydrolysis. The chemical reaction between water anda substance, resulting in the decomposition of thatsubstance.hydroponics. The procedure of growing plants inwater, sand, or gravel that has had nutrients added,rather than soil.hyoscyamine. One of the belladonna alkaloids foundin Atropa belladonna and related plants.hypnotic. A substance that induces sleep.HYV's. High yielding varieties.- I -ibotenic acid. The substance in the fly agaric(Amanita muscaria) that causes hallucinations.inbreeding. The type of breeding that involves onlyvery closely related individuals, as in members of thesame population or cultivated strain.inbred line. A true breeding line that is homozygousat all (or practically all) of its loci.indehiscent. The term applied to a fruit or otherstructure that does not open at maturity by means ofsutures, lids, pores, etc.indigenous. The term applied to a plant or animalspecies that occurs naturally in a particular area; onethat was not accidentally or purposefully introduced byhumans.indole acetic acid (IAA). A substance, withhormone-like properties, that causes cell enlargementand that affects cell division.inflorescence. The arrangement of one or moreflowers on a floral axis. There are many types ofinflorescences, such as heads, spikes, etc.infusion. The process of extracting a substance bysteeping it in cold or hot (but not boiling) water, as inthe preparation of a cup of hot tea.inheritance of acquired characters. The theory,developed by the noted French naturalist J. B. P. A. deMonet, chevalier de Lamarck , that evolution proceedsthrough the inheritance and passing from onegeneration to the next of features or characteristicsacquired during the life of a plant or animal.insecticide. A substance that kills insects, such asDDT and pyrethrum flowers.internode. The region on a stem between twoadjacent nodes (points of attachment of leaves orbracts).-253-involucre. A set of bracts that is attached below aflower or an inflorescence. - J -jumping genes. See transposable elements.- K -kelp. The collective common name for various large,marine brown algae.kernel. The softer and often edible inner tissues of aseed or hard-shelled fruit. The term is also used for acereal grain, as in a kernel of corn.Kreb's Cycle. A series of subcellular reactions thatconstitute the principal metabolic pathway forproducing the hydrogen and electrons needed togenerate adenosine triphosphate (ATP), the mainenergy-carrying substance in living cells.- L -land race. A distinct strain or cultivar of a particularcrop.latex. A white or brightly-colored sap found in avariety of unrelated herbaceous and woody plants. Itis typically a thick, viscous colloid that is transportedin specialized latex ducts or simply oozes throughtissues.lathyrism. The disease caused by consumption oftoxic amounts of the sweet pea or chick pea (Lathyrusspp. ), a member of the legume family. It ischaracterized by skeletal deformation and loss ofbowel and bladder control. Although little-known inthe U. S., lathyrism can be a serious problem in ThirdWorld countries.laudanum. An alcoholic solution of opium, oncewidely used as a pain killer.leaflet. Any one of the discrete segments of acompound leaf.lectins. A group of toxic proteins, especially commonin plants of the legume family, that causes clumpingof red blood cells.legume. A one- to many-seeded dry, dehiscent fruitthat typically opens along two sutures at maturity. Itis the characteristic fruit type of the legume family(Leguminosae) and the same term is used to denoteits members.Lewin, Louis (1850-1929). German pharmacologistand toxicologist. Author of important monographs onkava, betel nut, and the classical survey ofpsychoactive plants, Phantastica.liana. A woody, climbing vine.lichen. A life form composed of a fungus and an algaliving in a symbiotic relationship. They are often seenas brightly-colored crusts on rocks, tree trunks, etc.Others are leafy or resemble small shrubs. Lichens arevery sensitive to atmospheric pollution.lignin. A complex, chemically inert polymer found inthe cell walls of plants. It binds cellulose fiberstoegether and thereby increases structural support.Linnaeus, Carolus (1707-1778). Swedish naturalistwho is remembered primarily for his naming ofliterally thousands of plants and animals. Trained asa physician, Linnaeus became the best known scientistof his time. In addition to writing the SpeciesPlantarum and Genera Plantarum, he was extensivelyinvolved in the study of economically importantplants.lipids. A heterogeneous group of small organicmolecules that are more or less insoluble in water, butsoluble in various organic solvents. The group includesfats, oils, waxes, terpenes, and steroids. Theyperform a variety of functions within the plant body.liquor. Any alcoholic drink, especially a distilled one.The term is also used for the liquid phase involved inextraction processes, as in cocoa liquor.Livingstone, David (1813-1873). Scottishmissionary to Africa. European discoverer of theZambezi River and Victoria Falls. With Henry M.Stanley, searched for source of the Nile. Expert onAfrican arrow poisons of plant origin.locule. The cavity or compartment within an ovary orfruit.Lysenko, Trofim Desinovich (1898-1976). Russianagronomist and geneticist. Through political acumen,he became the dominant figure in Soviet agricultureunder Josef Stalin, with disastrous results for cropproduction and for scientists who opposed him.lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). A powerfulhallucinogen first isolated from the ergot fungus(Claviceps purpurea) and later found in morning gloryseeds (Ipomoea violacea).lysis. The rupturing or disintegration of a cell.- M -macropsia. Seeing objects larger than they actuallyare.malaria. A disease caused by a protozoan(Plasmodium vivax and related species) andtransported by a mosquito (Anopheles spp.). It is arecurring disease characterized by chills, sweating,trembling, and damage to internal organs. It is oftenregarded as the world's most debilitating disease.malt. A grain, usually barley, that is steeped in water,allowed to germinate, and then dried. Enzymesproduced during germination play a critical role inreducing the carbohydrate used during the brewingprocess. Beers made in this fashion are said to bemalted.maltose. A disaccharide sugar formed from twoglucose units. It is the sugar formed when starch isbroken down by enzymes in malt, saliva, etc.Mangelsdorf, Paul (1899-1989). Americanbotanist, associated with Harvard University for manyyears. He was one of the world's experts on maize andits origin. Along with Richard Reeves, he developedthe theory that the ancestor of our modern maize wasa primitive pod corn.mano and matate. Spanish for mortar and pestle.mash. The mixture of malt or another grain and hotwater used in brewing; the fermented material that isdistilled.massecuite. The dense mass of sugar crystals andsyrup that forms during crystallization of cane sugar.-254-masticatory. A plant material that is chewed,ground, or otherwise manipulated by the teeth andtongue, but typically not swallowed. One result is themixing of plant material with the enzymes in oursaliva. Most contain psychoactive substances, as inthe coca leaf and the betel nut.materia medica. The body of medical knowledgedeveloped by a people, including particularly itsinventory of medicinal plants and their uses.McClintock, Barbara (1902-1992). Americangeneticist who developed the theory of transposableelements or "jumping genes." She was awarded theNobel Prize for her work in 1983.Mendel, Gregor Johann (1822-1884). Austrianmonk whose experiments with garden peas that hegrew at the monastery led to the discovery of severalbasic principles of genetics. His findings werepublished in 1865 in a relatively obscure journal andwent unnoticed until their rediscovery in 1900.mercerize. A process, developed by John Mercer, inwhich cotton fibers are treated with sodium hydroxideto shrink them and to increase their absorption ofdyes.mericulture. The growing of excised growing tiptissue in a sterile culture.mescal buttons. The dried tops of the peyote cactus.mescaline. An alkaloid found in peyote (Lophophorawilliamsii) and a few other cacti. It is responsible forthe vivid color hallucinations associated with ingestionof this plant.mesocarp. The middle layer of a fruit wall (pericarp).It is typically seen as the flesh in an edible fruit.methadone. A synthetic opiate used medicinally torelieve pain and as a substitute for morphine andheroin.methanol. Methyl alcohol or wood alcohol. It is atoxic solvent and unsuitable for use in alcoholicbeverages.mill. A building that contains the machinery requiredto crush stems, remove husks from fruits and seeds,or to grind cereal grains into flour. The term is alsoused for the crushing and grinding processes.minor cereal. A true cereal, other than wheat, rice,and maize. Common examples include barley, rye,oats, etc.minute. Small, as in the size of your vocabulary ifyou found it necessary to look up this word.monocots. The semitechnical group name for thoseflowering plants with one seed leaf on the embryo,with parallel-veined leaf blades, and with flower partsin 3's or multiples thereof.monoculture. The agricultural practice of growing asingle crop over a large area.monoecious. The condition of having male andfemale flowers on the same plant, as in the banana.monosaccharide. A sugar, such as glucose, thatcannot be broken down to simpler sugars.mordant. A substance that fixes a dye in cloth.morphine. An alkaloid found in the latex of the opiumpoppy (Papaver somniferum), widely used in medicinefor its pain-killing properties.morphology. The branch of the biological sciencesthat deals with the general form or structure of plantsand animals, generally without dissecting them.mortar and pestle. A hard surface or container(mortar), often made of stone or wood, used inconjunction with a grinding implement (pestle) togrind food, herbs and spices, or medicines. Primitiveversions were stone slabs and rounded rocks; moreelegant are the ceramic vessels and pestles used inpharmacies.mulch. A mixture of plant materials spread on theground to enrich or insulate it.multiple fruit. A type of false fruit in which manytrue fruits derived from separate flowers fuse atmaturity to produce a structure that appears to be asingle fruit, as in the pineapple.mutagen. A substance that causes mutations.mutation. A change in the structure or amount ofgenetic material in the nuclei of a plant or animal.Most are structural changes to individual genes andare deleterious.MV. Modern varieties. Also known as HYV's, highyielding varieties.mycology. The branch of botany that deals with thestudy of fungi.mycorrhiza. A close physical and symbioticrelationship between a fungus and the root system ofa vascular plant, as seen in citrus plants. Attemptingto grow the citrus without its associated fungalsymbiont will fail.- N -narcotic. A substance that induces drowsiness, sleep,or unconsciousness. The term is also used for anydangerously addictive drug and for any drug that hasbeen legally listed as a narcotic.natural selection. The process by which a series ofbiological and environmental factors determines whichplants or animals in a population will survive andreproduce themselves. It is often expressed in thephrase, "survival of the fittest. "naval stores. The various resins and other materialsrequired to caulk sailing ships.Neolithic. Of or pertaining to the more recent or laterStone Age. It began about 10,000 BCE and is theperiod of time that saw the development of polishedstone tools and the rise of agriculture.neurotransmitter. A chemical substance that isreleased at the end of a nerve fiber and that isinvolved with the passage of an electrochemicalimpulse to another nerve or a muscle.New World. North America, Central America, andSouth America taken collectively.nibs. Roasted cacao beans (seeds).-255-nicotine. An alkaloid found in tobacco (Nicotianatabacum) and other related and unrelated species. Itis a powerful toxin.N. I. H. National Institute of Healthnitrogen cycle. The biological process of theinterconversion of nitrogen and oxygen to nitrates.Bacteria play the critical role of both fixingatmospheric nitrogen together with oxygen to formnitrates that are used by plants, and later breakingthem down into nitrogen and oxygen.nitrogen fixation. The reduction of atmosphericnitrogen and its incorporation into various nitrogenouscompounds. This conversion occurs during thunder-storms, via the electrical energy released by lightning;during certain photochemical processes in theatmosphere; and by the action of nitrogen-fixingmicroorganisms, especially bacteria that livesymbiotically in the root tissue of legumes. The plantderives ammonia from the bacterium and it receivescarbohydrates in return. Nitrogen fixation is notlimited to legumes and bacteria. A number of otherplants are involved in nitrogen fixation with bacteria,and with bluegreen algae and lichens.node. The point or region on a stem where one ormore leaves or bracts are borne.nodule. A rounded, irregular swelling or growth.Nitrogen-fixing bacteria form nodules on legumeroots. They are also seen at sites of infection.N. S. F. National Science Foundationnut. A 1-seeded, dry, indehiscent fruit derived fromtwo or more united carpels, as in the walnut.- O -Oceania. The islands of the central and South Pacific,including Australia and New Zealand, takencollectively.oil. A thick, viscous liquid, typically a triglyceride, that is usually flammable, insoluble in water, andsoluble in organic solvents. Old World. Europe, Africa, and Asia as seencollectively.oleoresin. A plant compound composed of anessential oil and a resin, as in capsaicin.opiate. A preparation that contains opium.opium. The crude dried latex found in the opiumpoppy (Papaver somniferum) and related species. Itcontains a number of physiologically active andinactive alkaloids, such as morphine and codeine.organic. A substance that contains carbon. The termis also used for a food or crop that is grown withoutthe use of artificial fertilizers, herbicides, pesticides,and without being genetically modified.ouabin. A potent cardiac glycoside that is theprincipal active ingredient in various arrow and dartpoisons. It acts by retarding the movement of sodiumand potassium ions across cell membranes.outbreeding. Exhibiting cross-pollination on a regularbasis.ovary. The typically swollen, lower, central organ ofthe flower that contains one or more seeds.ovule. An immature seed.oxidation. A chemical reaction in which atoms ormolecules gain oxygen or lose hydrogen andelectrons.- P -paan. A psychoactive mixture made from betel nut,lime, and various flavorings.paddy. A agricultural field, flooded naturally orartificially, used to grow rice. Hence, rice paddy isredundant.paleobotany. The study of old dead plants by olddead botanists.Paleolithic. Of or pertaining to the early or old StoneAge.papain. An enzyme found in papaya (Carica papaya),used in meat tenderizers and to aid digestion.paper. A thin sheet made of pulped wood or cloth whose surface is suitable for writing and printing.papyrus. A paper-like writing material made from strips of tissue cut from the stems of papyrus(Cyperus papyrus). It was used extensively by theancient Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans.parboil. Although the term originally meant to boilthoroughly, it now means to boil partially, typicallybefore frying or roasting.parasite. An organism that lives in or on another hostorganism and that derives nourishment or otherbenefits from it. The word comes from the Greek for,"one who eats at the table of another."parched. Dried out, as a result of heating.paregoric. An opium preparation, incorporatingcamphor and dissolved in alcohol, that is used torelieve pain and to treat diarrhea.parthenogenesis. Literally "virgin beginning," it is aform of asexual reproduction in which an egg developsinto an embryo and adult without being fertilized. parthenocarpy. The production of fruits in theabsence of sexual reproduction. It is one kind ofparthenogenesis.Pasteur, Louis (1822-1895). French bacteriologistwho made fundamental discoveries that explained therole of microorganisms in fermenting wine andspoilage of food, and who developed the treatmentfor rabies.pathogen. An organism or other agent that causesdisease.pathology. The science that deals with the study ofdisease.peat. Partially decomposed and compressed vegetablematter, commonly formed in waterlogged sites whereanaerobic respiration occurs. Peat is harvested inmany parts of the world to burn for heat.-256-PDC. Pentadecacatachol. Any one of the severalrelated toxic principles in poison oak and its relatives.pectins. A group of soluble, gelatinouspolysaccharides that are rich in galacturonic acid.They are common in certain fruits.