At the top of the fig is a small opening(osteole) lined with scales. The inner wall of the vase-like structure is lined with hundreds of unisexualflowers. The upper section is covered with maleflowers; the middle and lower portions with femaleflowers. Figs produce two kinds of female flowers. Onetype is sterile and the other fertile. The latter willproduce a tiny, one-seeded fruit. These are the truefruits of the fig. As in the strawberry, it is easy toassume that the tiny fruits are the seeds of the plant,located within a fleshy fruit. POLLINATIONLet's focus on the wild form of the edible fig (Ficuscarica). It will form three different versions of figsduring the year. The first one appears during thewinter months. It contains male flowers and sterileflowers. Tiny female wasps (Blastophaga psenes) willenter the opening at the top of this fig, penetrate thewall of the ovary, and deposit their eggs inside thesterile flowers. When she lays an egg, she also injectsa drop of a special secretion that will stimulate thesterile flower to develop gall tissue. This will nourishthe newly-hatched wasp larvae. She then dies. Theeggs hatch, with male wasps appearing first. Theyhave poorly-developed legs and eyes, and they haveno wings. The males roam around in the interior of thefig, looking for flowers that contain female wasps. Themales bore through the ovary wall, find the females,and fertilize them right then and there. Talk aboutcradle-robbing. The males then die. The femalesemerge from the flowers and find their way to theopening, and exit the fig. The scales around theosteole will often damage their wings and antennae. As they pass through the opening, they are dustedwith the pollen of the male flowers, which have justmatured. It is June. The gravid female wasps nowmigrate to a second generation of figs that has beenmaturing on the tree. They leave behind the earthlyremains of their mother and their brothers.The second generation of figs contains a mixture offemale flowers and sterile flowers, or it may containonly female flowers. The wasp will lay her eggs in bothtypes of flowers, but only those laid in the sterileflower type will develop. They have a hollow, shortneck (style) that sits on top of the ovary. It is shortenough that when the female wasp attempts to layeggs in the sterile flower, her egg-laying apparatus(ovipositor) is long enough to reach the chamber inthe flower's ovary. That location is essential for propermaturation of the wasp's eggs. The female flowers, onthe other hand, have a much longer, solid style -- toolong for the wasp's ovipositor. However, when thewasp attempts to lay her eggs in the female flowers,she coats the stigma with the pollen that she hasbrought on her body from the first generation of figs.That pollen will fertilize the female flowers and theywill set seed. It is now autumn. Following the sameplan, gravid female wasps emerge from the sterileflowers, leave the second generation of figs, andmigrate to the third generation of figs. It has a smallerreceptacles and it contains only sterile flowers. Egglaying and fertilization occur, as before. A newgeneration of wasps emerges in the winter and thecycle repeats itself.FIG POLLINATION[February]Gravid female wasp enters figLDeposits egg + injects special secretionLGall forms (food for her young)LShe diesLLarvae hatchLMale wasp emerges firstLPierces flower - fertilizes female waspLMale wasps die[May or June]Fig has ripened, but tough/bitterMale flowers shed pollenGravid female emergesLShe leaves fig - dusted with pollenLEnters 2nd generation of figs-93-LLays eggsLShe dies[September or so]Fertilized females emergeLEnter third generation of figsLInsects emerge in winterIn the fig, we see a complex inter-relationshipbetween a plant and its pollinator. Because it involvespollination and fertilization, it is an example -- acomplicated one -- of sexual reproduction. In thedomesticated figs, many cultivars produce figs withonly female flowers that set seed without pollinationand fertilization have occurred. These figs, like thebananas, have replaced sexual reproduction withasexual reproduction and have parthenocarpic fruits.We have maintained them through the centuriesbecause we like their predictably tasty figs.FIG CULTIVARSKadota Self-pollinated or parthenocarpicMission Self-pollinated or parthenocarpicSmyrna Figs with & flowers onlyCapri Figs with % flowers onlyCapri + Smyrna + rituals and incantations u figsOTHER TROPICAL FRUITSMANGO. Mangifera indica is native to Asia, where ithas been in cultivation for at least 6000 years. It isone of the few tropical fruits that has beensignificantly improved by cultivation. Some peoplediscover that they are allergic to the skin of themango fruit. This is not surprising when you realizethat the plant is member of the same plant family thatcontains poison-oak and poison-ivy. The toxin is notin the skin itself, but exudes on to the surface whenthe fruit is harvested.PAPAYA. Carica papaya is a native of the New World,to the West Indies more specifically. Its flowers areunisexual and occur on separate trees. There are alsocultivars with bisexual flowers. The fruits containpapain, a digestive enzyme similar to pepsin. Look forit in meat tenderizers.CASHEW. Also native to the New World, Anacardiumoccidentale is now heavily cultivated in the Old World.India is the leading producer. The familiar cashew nutis attached to a larger swollen structure - the cashewapple. It is also edible, but because it is so perishableit is relatively unknown outside the tropics. The fruitscan cause rashes in sensitive individuals. The cashewis also in the poison-ivy and poison-oak family. Thetoxin is in the shell and it is destroyed when thecashew is roasted.ACKEE OR AKEE. Blighia sapida, a tree of thesoapberry family (Sapindaceae), is named in honor ofLt. William Bligh. It is doubtful that he would bepleased, because this is a poisonous plant thatproduces fruits that are edible only during a shortperiod of their maturation. Fruits can be lethal whentoo ripe. They cause epidemics of poisoning in theCaribbean, calledthe "Vomiting Sickness of Jamaica."DURIAN. Durio zibethinus is native to westernMalaysia. Its green, spiny fruits usually weigh up to2 kg (5 lbs.) and grow high up on trees 30 m tall.Falling fruits have killed people! We are not the onlyfan of the durian; elephants, tigers, and monkeys areparticularly attracted to its fruits.The durian may be the world's most notorious fruit.Most people find its smell and taste repulsive. Theodor of mature fruits is so strong that they are bannedin subways, on airplanes, and in public buildings.What does it smell like?' French custard passed through a sewer;' stale vomit;' a civet cat;' a fermented papaya after a fruit-eating bat haspee'd on it; and my personal favorite;' a garbage truck that has run over a skunk in apaper mill town on a damp day!Others express something akin to adulation when discussing its unique qualities. The great naturalistAlfred Russel Wallace, who described himself as a"confirmed durion eater," put it this way:" A rich butter-like custard highly flavoured withalmonds gives the best general idea of it, but inter-mingled with it com wafts of flavor that call to mindcream-cheese, onion-sauce, brown-sherry, and otherincongruities. Then there is a rich glutinoussmoothness in the pulp which nothing else possesses,but which adds to its delicacy. It is neither acid, norsweet, not juicy, yet one feels the want of none ofthese qualities, for it is perfect as it is. It produces nonausea or other bad affect, and the more you eat of itthe less you feel inclined to stop. In fact, to eatdurions, is a new sensation worth a voyage to the Eastto experience.-94-TROPICAL AND SUBTROPICAL FRUITSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Family Commentsabiu (Pouteria caimito) Sapodilla Andean; used for refrescosacerola (Malpighia glabra) Malpighia Same as the Barbados cherryaguacate (Persea americana) Laurel Same as the avocadoakee (Blighia sapida) Soapberry African; lethal at wrong stagealligator-pear (Persea americana) Laurel Same as the avocadoamatangula (Carissa grandiflora) Dogbane Native to Natalambarella (Spondias cytherea) Cashew Polynesian; resembles small mangoassai (Euterpe oleracea) Palm South Americanavocado (Persea americana) Laurel Tropical Americasbacupari (Rheedia brasiliensis) Garcinia Brazil; used for jamsbacuri (Platonia insignis) Garcinia South American; used for refrescosbanana (Musa x paradisiaca) Banana Southeast Asia; now pantropicalBarbados-cherry (Malpighia glabra) Malpighia Tropical America; used for refrescosbatjang (Mangifera foetida) Cashew Native to Malay Archipelagobignay (Antidesma bunius) Spurge Native to Southeast Asiabilimbi (Averrhoa bilimbi) Oxalis Woody relative our of sour-grassbiriba (Rollinia deliciosa) Annona Brazil; used for refrescosborojoa (Borojoa patinoi) Madder Colombia; used for refrescosbreadfruit (Artocarpus altilis) Mulberry East Indies; now pantropicalbullock's heart (Annona reticulata) Annona Tropical Americas; fruit +- insipidcabelluda (Eugenia tomentosa) Myrtle Native to Brazilcaimito (Pouteria caimito) Sapodilla Same as the abiucaja (Spondias lutea) Cashew Same as the yellow mombincanistel (Lucuma nervosa) Sapodilla Native to West IndiesCape-gooseberry (Physalis peruviana) Nightshade North & South America; Eurasiacapulin (Muntingia calabura) Elaeocarp South America; also a fiber plantcarambola (Averrhoa carambola) Oxalis Malayan; gooseberry-like fruitscarissa (Carissa grandiflora) Olive South American; cranberry-likecashew (Anacardium occidentale) Cashew Brazilian; also contains a toxinceriman (Monstera deliciosa) Philodendron Central America; philodendron-likeCeylon-gooseberry (Dovyalis hebecarpa) Flacourtia Tropical Asia; dark purple fruitschempedak (Artocarpus integer) Mulberry Malayan; relative of breadfruitcherimoya (Annona cherimola) Annona Native to northern Andescitron (Citrus medica) Rue Native to Southeast Asiaclementine (Citrus reticulata) Rue Related to tangerinecoconut (Cocos nucifera) Palm Old World native; now pantropicalcoco plum (Chrysobalanus icaco) Rose Same as the icacocupuassu (Theobroma grandiflora) Cacao Relative of cacaoCuracao-apple (Eugenia javanica) Myrtle Malayancuruba (Passiflora mollissima) Passion Flower Relative of passion fruitcustard apple (Annona reticulata) Annona Tropical American favoritedate palm (Phoenix dactylifera) Palm Southwest Asia; source of arrakdeciduous-orange (Poncirus trifoliata) Rue One of the citrus relativesdowny myrtle (Rhodomyrtus tomentosa) Myrtle India and Sri Lankadurian (Durio zibenthinus) Bombax Malayan; you will love it or hate it!egg fruit (Lucuma salicifolia) Sapodilla Central Americaemblic (Phyllanthus emblica) Spurge Tropical Asia, India; acid fruitsFehi banana (Musa fehi) Banana Southeast Asiafeijoa (Feijoa sellowiana) Myrtle Native from Brazil to Paraguayfig (Ficus carica) Mulberry Old World; now pantropicalgenip (Melicocca bijugatus) Soapberry Tropical Americagenipado (Genipa americana) Madder South America & West Indiesgolden-apple (Spondias dulcis) Cashew Same as the ambarellagovernor's plum (Flacourtia indica) Flacourtia Madagascar & Southeast Asiagandaria (Bouea macrophylla) Cashew Malayangranadilla, giant (Passiflora quadangularis) Passion Flower Tropical America; pantropical-95-granadilla, purple (Passiflora edulis) Passion Flower Brazil, juice produced comerciallygranadilla, sweet (Passiflora ligularis) Passion Flower Tropical Americagranadilla, yellow (Passiflora laurifolia) Passion Flower Tropical America & West Indiesgrapefruit (Citrus x paradisi) Rue West Indies; a pummelo mutant?groselha (Phyllanthus distichus) Spurge Oriental; acid fruits for jelliesgrumichama (Eugenia dombeyi) Myrtle Native to sourthern Brazilguabiroba (Abbevillea fenzliana) Myrtle Native to Brazilguanabana (Annona muricata) Annona West Indies; delightful beverage, tooguava (Psidium guajava) Myrtle Mexico, Peru, and West Indiesguava, Brazilian (Psidium guineense) Myrtle Much like the guavaguava, C. Rican (Psidium friedrichstalianum) Myrtle Central America; used for jelliesguava, Para (Campomanesia acida) Myrtle Brazil; used to make jelliesguisaro (Psidium molle) Myrtle Mexico, Central America; jellieshill-gooseberry (Rhodomyrtus tomentosa) Myrtle India & Malaysiahog plum (Spondias purpurea) Cashew Mexico & Central Americahondpara (Dillenia indica) Dillenia Native to the Far Easthusk-tomato (Physalis ixocarpa) Nightshade Same as the tomatilloicaco (Chrysobalanus icaco) Rose South America; plum-like fruitsilama (Annona diversifolia) Annona Mexico & Central Americaimbe (Garcinia livingstonei) Garcinia Tanzania to Gambiaimbu (Spondias tuberosa) Cashew Brazil; acid fruitsinga (Inga spp.) Bean Tropical America; fleshy podsjaboticaba (Myrciaria cauliflora) Myrtle Brazil; grape-like fruitsjackfruit, jakfruit (Artocarpus heterophyllus) Mulberry India; breadfruit relativejambolan (Syzygium cumini) Myrtle Native to Malay ArchipelagoJapanese cherry (Prunus salicifolia) Rose Subtropical cherryJapanese medlar (Eriobotrya japonica) Rose Same as the loquatJapanese persimmon (Diospyros kaki) Ebony Same as the kakiJava plum (Syzygium cumini) Myrtle Same as the jocotejobo (Spondias purpurea) Cashew Same as the hog plumjocote (Syzygium cumini) Myrtle A clove relativejujube (Zizyphus jujuba) Buckthorn A major Chinese fruitkaki (Diospyros kaki) Ebony Native to China and Japankaranda/caranda (Carissa carandas) Dogbane Native to India and Malaysiakei apple (Doryalis caffra) Flacourtia Native to South Africaketembilla (Doryalis hebecarpa) Flacourtia Relative of the umkokolakiwi (Actinidia chinensis) Actinidia China; fruits high in Vitamin Ckumquat (Fortunella spp.)