In contrast,after co-administration of Casp significantly lower ALAT valueswere observed compared to LPS-only-treated mice.Oxidative Stress in Different OrgansSince oxidative stress plays a major role in systemic inflammation,the impact of Casp on LPS-induced changes in the oxidativestatus was evaluated in different organs. For this purpose, tissuelevels of lipid peroxidation products as well as the tissue contentof GSH and GSSG were determined. After LPS challenge, tissuecontent of lipid peroxidation products was increased by 12,20, 24, 45, 60, and 170% in brain, heart, lung, spleen, kidney,and liver, respectively, suggesting considerably elevated oxidativestress in these organs (Figures 3A-E). Soy lecithin administrationalone caused a decrease in LPO levels only in liver by about 30%,compared to control levels. Similarly, only in heart LPO weredecreased by about 20% after sole Casp treatment. Comparedto LPS-only-treated animals, combined soy lecithin and LPSadministration reduced LPO levels in lung, heart, and spleen,but increased the values in liver. In contrast, co-treatment withCasp significantly attenuated LPS-mediated elevation of LPOtoward control in all organs investigated, thus indicating anoticeable additional antioxidant capacity of Boswellia serrataextract (Figures 3A-E). Regarding glutathione status, increasesin GSH, GSSG, and total glutathione concentrations by about 10,20, and 60% were noticed in kidney, lung, and spleen after LPStreatment (Figure 3F), respectively, while liver levels decreasedby 10% (representing the primary organ of glutathione synthesis;data not shown). There was, however, no major change in theGSH/GSSG ratio in all tissues. In brain and heart, no influence ofLPS administration on glutathione concentrations was observed.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387125fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 6Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 1 | Clinical severity score (A), blood glucose values (B), changes in body temperatures (C), changes in b.wt. (D), spleen (E), and adrenal weights (F). Micewere administered either vehicle (control), soy lecithin (Phyto), Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Data are given asmeans +- SEM, n = 8 for each group. *, significantly different from controls; +, significantly different from LPS-treated animals; o, significantly different from soylecithin plus LPS-treated animals (p <= 0.05; Mann-Whitney U-test followed by Holm-Bonferroni correction).After additional administration of Casp to LPS-treated animalsonly in spleens a normalization of the glutathione status could beachieved (Figure 3F). In all other organs no relevant significantimpact of either soy lecithin or Casp on LPS-mediated effects ontissue glutathione levels was observed.Spleen: Apoptosis, Immune CellRedistribution, and TNF-a ExpressionSince apoptotic processes are of substantial importance in thecourse of systemic inflammation and spleen function is crucialfor the removal of damaged red and white blood cells and ofbacteria from the blood stream, cleaved caspase-3 expressionwas assessed in spleens by means of immunohistochemistryas a marker of apoptotic processes. Examination of spleensfrom LPS-only-treated mice revealed a markedly enhancedexpression of cleaved caspase-3, especially in the white pulp,compared to controls and to soy lecithin R(c)- or Casp-only-treated animals (Figures 4A,B). Besides being increasinglypresent in spleno- and lymphocytes, strong immunostainingwas noticed especially in tingible body macrophages, whichwere much more frequently present in the white pulp ofspleens from LPS-challenged mice than in the other treatmentgroups (arrowheads in Figure 4B). While no difference inFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387126fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 7Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 2 | Serum concentrations of TNF-a (A), IL-6 (B), IL-10 (C), and ALAT (D). Mice were administered either vehicle (control), soy lecithin (Phyto), Casp, LPS(control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Data are given as means +- SEM, n = 8 for each group. *, significantly different from controls; +,significantly different from LPS-treated animals; o, significantly different from soy lecithin plus LPS-treated animals (p <= 0.05; Mann-Whitney U-test followed byHolm-Bonferroni correction).cleaved caspase-3 expression was detected between LPS-only andsoy lecithin-plus-LPS-treated mice, co-administration of Caspyielded a clear-cut reduction in cleaved-casepase-3 expressionin spleen, thus indicating an anti-apoptotic effect (Figure 4C;NB: in Figure 4 and Figures 5-8 photomicrographs from soylecithin- or Casp-only-treated mice and from soy lecithinplus LPS-treated mice are not depicted separately since theydid not differ from controls or from LPS-only-treated mice,respectively).To assess the effects of Casp on LPS-induced changes inimmune cell distribution in the spleen, immunostainingsfor CD3 and CD68 as markers for T-lymphocytes andmonocytes/macrophages, respectively, were performed. Incontrol animals and in soy lecithin- or Casp-only-treatedmice, CD3+ cells were abundantly present in the periarteriolarsheaths of the white pulp (Figure 4D). In contrast, after LPSchallenge the splenic tissue was nearly devoid of CD3+ cells(Figure 4E). This effect was partially reversed after co-treatmentwith Casp (Figure 4F), but not with soy lecithin, indicating aspecific immunomodulatory action of the frankincense extract.In contrast to the massive emigration of CD3+ positive cellsfrom the splenic tissue after LPS administration, a considerableimmigration of CD68+ cells was detected in spleens after LPStreatment of the animals when compared to controls or to soylecithin- or Casp-only-treated mice (Figures 4G,H). Thesecells were mainly observed in the red pulp, but an increasedinfiltration of CD68+ cells was also noticed in the whitepulp. Again, this effect was nearly completely reversed afterco-administration of Casp, but not of soy lecithin (Figure 4I).Tumor necrosis factor-a is mainly secreted by macrophages.Due to the massive immigration of CD68+ cells into the spleensafter LPS treatment, TNF-a expression was additionally assessedin spleen tissue by immunohistochemistry. These investigationsrevealed TNF-a expression patterns, which were very similarto those seen in the CD68 immunostaining: In comparisonto control or to soy lecithin- or Casp-only treatment, LPS-challenge caused a massive immigration of TNF-a-positive cellsinto the splenic tissue, which was almost completely abolishedby co-treatment of the mice with Casp (Figures 5A-C), whereasco-administration of soy lecithin showed no effect.Not only LPS, but also pro-inflammatory cytokines suchas TNF-a are known to induce iNOS expression in immunecells such as neutrophils and monocytes/macrophages via theNFkB pathway. Besides giving rise to cytotoxic peroxynitrite,excess NO production is critically involved in the course ofsystemic inflammation, since it contributes to hypotension,cardiodepression, vascular hyporeactivity, and ultimately septicshock. Therefore, in the present investigation, iNOS expressionFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387127fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 8Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 3 | Tissue content of LPO in hearts (A), lungs (B), kidneys (C), livers (D), and spleens (E), and concentration of GSH in spleen tissue (F) as a measure ofoxidative stress in the organs. Mice were administered either vehicle (control), soy lecithin (Phyto), Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS(Casp + LPS). Data are given as means +- SEM, n = 8 for each group. *, significantly different from controls; +, significantly different from LPS-treated animals; o,significantly different from soy lecithin plus LPS-treated animals (p <= 0.05; Mann-Whitney U-test followed by Holm-Bonferroni correction).was also assessed in spleen and liver tissue. Following LPStreatment, a massive immigration of iNOS-positive neutrophils(and occasionally also of macrophages) was detected in the redand occasionally also in the white pulp of the spleens fromLPS-only-treated animals in comparison to control and soylecithin- or Casp-only-treated mice (Figures 5D,E). Also here,co-administration of Casp, but not of soy lecithin, distinctlyameliorated this effect (Figure 5F).Liver: Immune Cell Immigration,Glycogen Content, andBiotransformation CapacityIn parallel to the investigations in the spleens, immunostainingsfor different immune cell markers and for TNF-a and iNOSwere also performed in the livers. Here, in contrast to thespleens, an increased presence of CD3+ T-lymphocytes wasobserved after LPS treatment of the animals (Figures 6A,B).Additionally, liver expression of the macrophage markerF4/80 was distinctly higher in LPS-challenged mice incomparison to controls, soy lecithin- or Casp-only-treatedanimals (Figures 6D,E). Likewise, TNF-a expression wasstrongly enhanced in monocytes/macrophages and alsoin sinusoidal endothelial cells after LPS administration(Figures 7D,E). Additionally, and as in the spleens, LPSchallenge yielded a massive appearance of iNOS-positiveneutrophils in the livers (Figures 7A,B). All these effects weresignificantly less pronounced after pre-administration of Casp(Figures 6C,F, 7C,F), whereas soy lecithin had no impact onLPS-induced changes.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387128fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 9Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 4 | Cleaved caspase-3 (A-C), CD3 (D-F), and CD68 (G-I) expression in the spleens of control (A,D,G), LPS (B,E,H), or Casp plus LPS (C,F,I)-treatedmice. Mice were administered either vehicle (control), soy lecithin, Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Representativephotomicrographs from one of eight different tissue samples from control mice, LPS-treated, and LPS plus Casp-treated animals are shown. Photomicrographs fromsoy lecithin- or Casp-only-treated mice and from soy lecithin plus LPS-treated mice are not depicted separately since they did not differ from controls orLPS-only-treated mice, respectively. Immunohistochemistry (red-brown color), counterstaining with hematoxylin; original magnification: x400. Arrows in B and Cmark cleaved caspase-3-positive apoptotic cells, arrowheads indicate tingible body macrophages; arrows in G, H, and I mark CD68-positivemonocytes/macrophages.Since liver function is crucial for overall patient outcomein severe systemic inflammation, liver glycogen content andbiotransformation capacity were assessed as representativeparameters. In comparison to livers from control, soy lecithin- orCasp-only-treated mice, LPS-challenge caused almost completeglycogen depletion. This effect was partially reversed byadditional administration of Casp but not of soy lecithin(Figures 7G-I).Biotransformation capacity was evaluated by assessing theexpression levels of three different CYP isoforms and bymeasuring CYP-dependent monooxygenase activities by meansof specific model reactions. All three CYP isoforms (CYP1A1,CYP2B1, and CYP3A2) assessed were predominantly expressedin the hepatocytes located around the central veins (Figure 8).In comparison to controls and soy lecithin-only-treated mice,LPS administration produced a strong reduction in CYPisoforms expression. In Casp-only-treated animals, in contrast,a strong increase in CYP expression was observed, whichwas most clearly visible in the pericentral regions of theliver lobules. Whereas co-administration of soy lecithin didnot show any visible influence on LPS-mediated effects,additional treatment with Casp was able to restore CYPexpression levels completely (Figure 8). Also in the CYPmodel reactions a distinct decrease in enzyme activitieswas observed after LPS administration in comparison tocontrols (Figure 9). In contrast, after sole soy lecithin andespecially after sole Casp treatment distinct increases in CYPactivities were observed, suggesting a noticeable CYP-inducingcapacity of Casp (Figure 9). Whereas additional soy lecithintreatment in some instances slightly ameliorated the LPSeffects, biotransformation capacity was completely restored backto control values after supplementary Casp administration(Figure 9).Effects of Casperome R(c) in Human PrimaryMonocytesIn order to investigate anti-inflammatory effects of Casp ina human in vitro model, the influence of the extract onLPS-induced cytokine release from human monocytes wasFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387129fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 10Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 5 | TNF-a (A-C) and iNOS (D-F) expression in the spleens of control (A,D), LPS (B,E), or Casp plus LPS (C,F)-treated mice. Mice were administered eithervehicle (control), soy lecithin, Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Representative photomicrographs from one of eightdifferent tissue samples from control mice, LPS-treated, and LPS plus Casp-treated animals are shown. Photomicrographs from soy lecithin- or Casp-only-treatedmice and soy lecithin plus LPS-treated mice are not depicted separately since they did not differ from controls or LPS-only-treated mice, respectively.Immunohistochemistry (red-brown color), counterstaining with hematoxylin; original magnification: x400. Arrows in A-C mark TNF-a-positivemonocytes/macrophages, arrows in E and F indicate iNOS-positive neutrophils, respectively.FIGURE 6 | CD3 (A-C) and F4/80 (D-F) expression in the spleens of control (A,D), LPS (B,E), or Casp plus LPS (C,F)-treated mice. Mice were administered eithervehicle (control), soy lecithin, Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Representative photomicrographs from one of eightdifferent tissue samples from control mice, LPS-treated, and LPS plus Casp-treated animals are shown. Photomicrographs from soy lecithin- or Casp-only-treatedmice and soy lecithin plus LPS-treated mice are not depicted separately since they did not differ from controls or LPS-only-treated mice, respectively.Immunohistochemistry (red-brown color), counterstaining with hematoxylin; original magnification: x400. Arrows in A-C mark CD3-positive T-lymphocytes, arrowsin D-F indicate F4/80-positive macrophages, respectively.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 387130fphar-09-00387 April 18, 2018 Time: 17:27 # 11Loeser et al. Casperome R(c) in Systemic InflammationFIGURE 7 | iNOS (A-C), TNF-a expression (D-F), and glycogen content (G-I) in the livers of control (A,D,G), LPS (B,E,H), or Casp plus LPS (C,F,I)-treated mice.Mice were administered either vehicle (control), soy lecithin, Casp, LPS (control + LPS), soy lecithin + LPS, or Casp plus LPS (Casp + LPS). Representativephotomicrographs from one of eight different tissue samples from control mice, LPS-treated, and LPS plus Casp-treated animals are shown.