[4] Erel O; A novel automated direct measurement method for total antioxidant ca-pacity using a new generation, more stable ABTS radical cation; Clinical Biochem-istry 2004; 37:227-285.oxiDative stress statusin chilDren with PyelonePhritisPredrag Stojakovic1, Marija Slavkovic1,Gorica Banjac1, Milica Miljkovic1,Jasmina Ivanisevic1, Jelena Kotur-Stevuljevic1,Amira Peco-Antic2, Dusko Paripovic2,Stanislava Petrovic31Department for Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy - Univer-sity of Belgrade, Serbia2University Children's Hospital, Belgrade, Serbia3Health Center "Stari Grad", Belgrade, SerbiaintroDuctionAcute pyelonephritis is an ascending urinary tract infection that hasreached the renal pelvis, usually accompanied by infection within therenal parenchyma. It is one of the most common bacterial infection inchildren. imbalance between antioxidants and pro-oxidants in favorof the pro-oxidants is involved in renal parenchymal inflammatoryprocesses and progressive kidney damage.objectivesThe aim of this study was to determine the concentrations of markersof total oxidant and antioxidant status in serum and urine in childrenduring the acute phase, and after normalization of clinical parame-ters of pyelonephritis, in order to determine the degree of oxidation -stress disorders in pyelonephritis.materials anD methoDsThe study included 40 children with acute pyelonephritis. Total oxida-tive status (TOS) and total antioxidative status (TAS) were measured inserum and urine. The samples were taken after hospital admission andalso at discharge in clinically stable condition. TOS was determined byspectrophotometric method with o-dianisidine as a chromogen; TASby colorimetric assay using a stable ABTS + cation as chromogene.resultsOur results showed that the concentration of serum TOS in childrenwith pyelonephritis in acute phase of disease was significantly highercompared to values at discarge (36+-15.8umol/L vs. 29+-15.8 umol/LP<0.05). Urine TOS values were slightly higher in the acute phase, butthe difference was not statistically significant. TAS values were notsignificantly different either in serum or in urine.conclusionThe results showed that the values of TOS in children in the acutephase of pyelonephritis were significantly higher, which indicates thatTOS increase could be a marker of tissue damage during pyelonephri-tis. TAS is not a good indicator of antioxidative protection in acutepyelonephritis. This parameter is the sum of all reducing substances incirculation, urea and uric acid mainly, whose concentration increase inblood due to kidney damage.references[1] Erel O; A novel automated direct measurement method for total antioxidant ca-pacity using a new generation, more stable ABTS radical cation; Clin. Biochem. 2004;37:227-285. [2] Erel O; A new automated method for measuring total oxidant status; Clin.Biochem. 2005; 38:1103-1111. [3] Elitsa Lyubomirova Pavlova, Marusia Illieva Lilova, Varban Minkov Savov; Oxidativestress in children with kidney disease; Pediatr Nephrol (2005) 20:1599-1604Detection of non-Dairy fats anD oilsin Dairy ProDucts using gaschromatograPhy-mass sPectrometryNatalija Krusarovska, Jane BogdanovInstitute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics,Sts. Cyril and Methodius University-Skopje, MacedoniaDairy products represent an important group of food products. Thequality and authenticity of dairy products is of enormous importanceand reliable methods for uncovering adulteration are necessary. Theauthenticity of dairy products is usually based on fat content and if de-clared as such are based on the dairy fat content. One of the mostcommon ways of adulteration is replacing the dairy fat with cheapernon-dairy fats and oils. If other non-dairy fats and/or oils areadded/present than they have to be properly detected and in somecases quantified. Triglycerides (triesters of glycerol and fatty acids)represent (97-98%) of the total lipids in the milk and the first step ofanalysis is the extraction of fat. The preferred method of extractionand determination of total fat is the Rose-Gottlieb method. To obtainthe fatty acid profile the extracted fat (mainly triglycerides) is sub-jected to base - catalyzed transmethylation at ambient temperature,using freshly prepared methanolic potassium hydroxide. The obtainedfatty acid methyl esters (FAMEs) are then directly subjected to GC-MSanalysis, using DB-5 capillary column. The presence of butyric acidC4:0 (methyl butyrate) and its concentration is the major criterion fordetection and quantitation of adulteration of dairy products with fatsand oils. The identity of the FAMEs is done by matching the obtainedmass spectra with the mass spectra from the NIST library, as well ascomparison with authentic standards.After the transesterification is complete, the analysis should be172PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiperformed immediately to prevent evaporation of the volatile methylbutyrate. The absence of short-chain FAMEs methyl butyrate (C4:0) andC6:0, and medium-chain FAMEs indicates absence of dairy fat. Also, fromour experience the ratios of weight % C4:0 /C6:0, C4:0/C8:0, C4:0/C10:0and C4:0 /C12:0 are good indicator of a pure dairy fat. Low amounts ofbutyric acid were particularly difficult to quantify and this wasaccomplished with methyl valerate as internal standard. An interestingsource of added non-dairy fat/oil is coconut oil which contains C6:0, C8:0and C10:0 and may initially confuse the analyst. However, if one performscareful analysis of the GC data it is easily detected by the increasedweight % of methyl laurate (C12:0). Other noteworthy examples ofanalysis of milk products will be presented. We have found that additionof Na2SO4 and NaHSO4 after the transesterification and prior to theGC-MS analysis extends the lifetime of the capillary columns.DETEKTsIJA NA MASTII MASlA OD DRUGO POTEKlOVO MlEChNI PROIzVODISO GASNA khROMATOGRAFIJA-MASENASPEKTROMETRIJANatalija Krusharovska, Jane Bogdanov1Institut za khemija, Prirodno-matematichki fakultet, Univerzitet"Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Skopje, MakedonijaMlechnite proizvodi pretstavuvaat vazhna grupa na prekhranbeniproizvodi. Kvalitetot i avtentichnosta na mlechnite proizvodi seod enormno znachenje i verodostojni metodi za otkrivanje na falsi-fikati i dodatotsi se neopkhodni. Najchesto avtentichnosta na mle-chnite proizvodi se odreduva spored sodrzhinata na masnotii i akoe deklarirana kako takava se bazira na sodrzhinata na mlechni ma-snotii. Eden od najchestite nachini za falsifikuvanje e delumnaili potpolna zamena na mlechnata mast so poeftini masti i masla.Ako drugi masti i/ili masla se dodadeni/prisutni tie treba so-odvetno da se detektiraat i vo nekoi sluchai da se kvantifikuvaat.Triglitseridite (triesteri na glitserol i masni kiselini) pret-stavuvaat (97-98%) od vkupnite lipidi vo mlekoto i prviot chekor voanalizata e ekstraktsija na mlechnata mast. Preferirana metoda naekstraktsija i odreduvanje na vkupnoto kolichestvo na mlechni mastie taa spored Rose-Gottlieb. Za da se dobie masno-kiselinskiotprofil ekstrakhiranite triglitseridi se podvrgnuvaat na bazno-katalizirana transesterifikatsija na sobna temperatura so svezhoprigotven rastvor na kalium khidroksid vo metanol. Dobienite me-til esteri na masnite kiselini (ang. fatty acid methyl ester, FAME)direktno se analiziraat so gasna khromatografija-masena spektro-metrija (GC-MS), koristejkji kapilarna DB-5 kolona. Prisustvotona buternata kiselina C4:0 (metil butirat) i nejzinata kontsentra-tsija e glaven kriterium za detektsija i odreduvanje na avtentichno-sta na mlechnite proizvodi. Identitetot na metil esterite na ma-snite kiselini, FAMEs e odreden preku sporedba na dobienitemaseni spektri so tie od NIST bibliotekata, kako i so sporedbaso avtentichni primerotsi.GC-MS analizata treba da se izvede vednash po transesterifi-katsijata za da se izbegne gubitokot na isparliviot metil butirat.Otsustvoto na nizhite metil esteri, metil butirat (C4:0) i metilkapronat (C6:0) kako i otsustvoto na C8:0 i C10:0 ukazhuva deka voop-shto nema mlechni masnotii. Isto taka, od nashe iskustvo soodnosotna masenite udeli C4:0 /C6:0, C4:0/C8:0, C4:0/C10:0 i C4:0 /C12:0 edobar indikator za chistotata na mlechnata masnotija. Osobenoteshko se kvantifikuva metil butiratot koga e prisuten vo niskikontsentratsii i toa se postignuva so metil valerat, C5:0, kakovnatreshen standard. Interesen i chesto koristen dodatok vo mle-chnite proizvodi e kokosovoto maslo koe sodrzhi C6:0, C8:0 i C10:0i prvichno mozhe da go zbuni analiticharot. No, ako se napravi de-talna analiza na podatotsite od gas khromatografskata analiza,lesno mozhe da se detektira prisustvoto na kokosovoto maslo pozgolemeniot masen udel na metil lauratot (C12:0). Utvrdeno e dekadodavanjeto na NaHSO4 i Na2SO4 po transesterifikatsijata, apred GC-MS analizata go prodolzhuva rokot na traenje na kapilar-nite koloni.valiDateD hPlc-PDa methoDfor Determination of tramaDolin human serumSnezana Dordevic, Vesna KilibardaPoisoning Control Centre, Military Medical AcademyTramadol is a centrally acting opioid analgesic, used in treating mod-erate to severe pain. The drug has a wide range of applications. It pos-sesses weak agonist actions at the u-opioid receptor, releasesserotonin, and inhibits the reuptake of norepinephrine.Tramadol provides analgesia through 3 mechanisms: mu-opioid bind-ing (through its metabolite O-desmethyltramadol), serotonin reuptakeinhibition (through (+)-tramadol) and norepinephrine reuptake inhibi-tion (through (-)-tramadol).After oral administration, tramadol is rapidly and almost completelyabsorbed. Peak serum concentration are achieved in about 2 h. Thetherapeutic plasma concentration after administration of 50 mg oftramadol is between 100 and 300 ng/ml, being almost completely andquickly absorbed through a metabolism. The toxic tramadol concen-tration is 1 mg/L, and lethal 2 mg/L.Tramadol abuse is becoming more popular, mainly because in mostcountries tramadol is the only available non-scheduled opiate. Beingan opioid, tramadol carries all possible risks known from other opiates.Tramadol causes respiratory depression, although usually weaker thanthat seen with other opiates, such us heroin.Because of many cases of tramadol abuse in our country, it was nec-essary to develop a routine analytical method for monitoring its con-centration in poisoned patients.Liquid chromatographic techniques are mostly used for detection andquantitation of tramadol. The aim of this work was to validate HPLC-PDA method for determination and monitoring of tramadolconcentration in human serum in acute poisoned patients.Determination of tramadol was performed by high performance liquidchromatography with photodiode array detection (HPLC-PDA). Mobilephase composed of phosphate buffer (pH = 3.6) and acetonitrile wasset up using gradient flow from 1 - 1.5 mL/min.The stock tramadol solution was prepared by solving 10 mg of tra-madol in 10 mL methanol. Working standard solutions were preparedby dissolving stock solution with methanol. Calibration curves were173fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsprepared by spiking blank human plasma samples with tramadolworking standard solutions. Serum samples were prepared by neutralsolid-phase extraction on Oasis HLB cartridges with methanol aseluent.Separation of tramadol from matrix compounds and possible beenpresent other drugs was done on C8 column, with safety guard columnC18, operated at 30degC. Relative retention time was 10.6 min.Identification of tramadol has done by comparison of analytespectrum with library of UV spectrums. Qualitative and quantitativeanalysis of tramadol was performed on = 200.5 nm.Described method was linear in the range of concentration from 0.05to 1.5 mg/L. The limit of detection and limit of quantitation fortramadol in serum were 0.03 mg/L, respectively. The mean recoveryfrom serum spiked by tramadol after neutral solid phase extractionwas 89.25 %, and was in the range from 79.65 to 99.22 %.Calculation of tramadol concentration has done on the basis of cali-bration curve which has gotten after analysis of serum spiked by tra-madol standard solution ranged from 0.05 to 1.5 mg/L.Thanks to library of UV spectrum about 1000 drugs and their meta-bolites, described method coul be used not only for determination oftramadol, but also for identification possibly presented other drugs inblood samples of acute intoxicated patients.Described HPLC-PDA method is simple, precise and accurate andcould be applied for determination of tramadol concentration inserum in order to monitor safety of its therapeutically application,possible abusing, or to confirm a diagnosis of poisoning and to assistin a forensic investigation of a case of fatal overdosage.174PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMEDITsINSKII AROMATIChNI RASTENIJAoralni prezentatsiiMEDICINALAND AROMATIC PLANTSoral presentationsApplicAtion of nucleAr MAgneticresonAnce (nMr) Methodsfor structure elucidAtionof nAturAl productsSlobodan MilosavljevicFaculty of Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Studentski trg 16,11000 Belgrade, SerbiaNuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is acknwledged as amajor analytical tool for structure determination of chemical com-pounds for several years. The potential of the method has been sub-stantially increased due to a number of developments over the lasttwo decades such as: (a) increase in magnetic field strength, (b) indirectobservation of heteronuclides (e.g. 13C and 15N) via proton-detection(so-called inverse detection), (c) routine application of two-dimensio-nal (2D) methods on daily basis, (d) application of pulsed field gradients(PFG) for clean signal selection, (e) wider use of sophisticated data pro-cessing, (f) a continuous increase in sensitivity leading to a substantialreduction of the amount of sample, so nowdays NMR experiments canbe performed on microgram quantities for medium and small sizecompounds (<1000 Daltons) as typical in natural products.