Vo klinichkite studiikade lekovite se potentni i se doziraat vo mnogu niskakontsentratsija, kriteriumite na visoka osetlivost i odlichnaselektivnost na metodot se osnova shto ja pravat tsvrsto - faznataekstraktsija tekhnika od izbor za podgotovka na bioloshkiprimerotsi.LITERATURA1. Hannah White, Presentation of Sample Preparation Strategies for Water Analysis,Waters Corporation, (2007)2. David A. Wells, High Throughput Bioanalytical Sample Preparation Methods andAutomation Strategies, Sample Prep Solutions Company, St.Paul, Minesota, pp. 41-51,361-383, (2003)3. J.Henion, E.Brewer and G.Rule, Anal. Chem. 70 (1998) 650A-656A4. Patrick D. McDonald, Ph.D.; Edourd S.P. Bouvier, Ph.D., Solid Phase ExtractionApplications Guide and Bibliography, A Resource for Sample Preparation MethodsDevelopment, Sixth Edition, (1995) 5. Somenath Mitra, Sample Preparation Techniques in Analytical Chemistry, volume 162(2003), pp. 81-9665PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011FORCED DEGRADATION STUDY ON CLOPI-DOGREL 75 mg FILM COATED TABLETS ASUSEFUL TOOL DURING ANALYTICALMETHOD DEVELOPMENTKsenija Brzilova, Ana Georgieva,Elena Kazandzievska, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Suzan Memed-Sejfulah, Sanja Simeonovska, Biljana Sapkareva, Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republic of MacedoniaINTRODUCTION Clopidogrel is active pharmaceutical ingredient which belongs to thegroup of platelet aggregation inhibitors used to inhibit blood clots incoronary artery disease, peripheral vascular disease and cerebro vascu-lar disease. In the literature, four impurities of Clopidogrel have already been iden-tified: Clopidogrel related compound A, positional stereo isomers ofClopidogrel named as Clopidogrel related compound B1 and B2, andchiral isomer of Clopidogrel named as Clopidogrel related compound C.AIM OF THE STUDYThe purpose of this forced degradation study was to challenge theability of the analytical method, enclosed in USP monograph for Clopi-dogrel tablets, to separate, detect, identify and quantify degradationproducts formed when film coated tablets were exposed on severaldifferent stress conditions.EXPERIMENTALClopidogrel 75 mg film coated tablets were exposed at the followingstress conditions:>> photolytic degradation [2] (illumination of 1.2 million luxhours for 7 hours; integrated near ultraviolet energy of200Wh/m2 for 3hours; and then exposed to five times increasedirradiance dose for 35hours);>> thermal degradation (105degC for 120hours);>> temperature and humidity degradation(40degC and 75%RH for 50days).HPLC method was used for determination of degradation products:>> Column: Ultron ES-OVM Chiral, 150mm x 4.6mm i.d. ; 5um;>> Detection: UV-220nm;>> Mobile phase A: Phosphate buffer containing 1.36g KH2PO4in 1000ml H2O;>> Mobile phase B: Methanol;>> Isocratic elution;>> Waters Alliance HPLC system, with PDA Detector.RESULTS AND DISCUSSION The obtained results are presented in the Table 1.Table 1. Obtained data for the control and stressed sample of Clopi-dogrel 75 mg film-coated tablets.It can be seen that the biggest amount of the degradation productswas formed during the thermal degradation. On the other hand, it canbe noticed that thermal degradation study was performed at extremeexternal stress stimuli, notably different than the real environmentalcondition on which the finished product can be exposed. Therefore, itcan be concluded that the main degradation of active pharmaceuti-cal ingredient Clopidogrel is generated when film coated tablets areexposed to higher temperature and humidity levels. This stress condi-tion causes growing of the amount of the known impurities Clopido-grel Related Compound A and Clopidogrel Related Compound C. Itcan be also seen that there is a significant growth of the amount ofthe unknown impurity with relative retention time around 0.3. The lit-erature data [1] suggests that this impurity is oxidation impurity ofthe active substance. UV and Mass spectroscopy characterization of the unknown impuritywas performed by LC-DAD-ESI-MS. The obtained UV and Mass spectrawere compared with the corresponding UV and Mass spectra pre-sented in the literature [1] and it was found that they are identical.Small portion of this impurity was synthesized according to the mo-lecular structure found in the literature, having chemical name 5-[1-(2-ch loropheny l ) -2 -methoxy-2 -oxoethy l ] -6 ,7 -d ihydroth ieno[3,2-c]pyridine-5-ium. The comparison of the spectral data, regardingthe unknown impurity, obtained from the forced film coated tablet'sspecimen and the synthesized example, confirmed the identity of thiscompound, having relative molecular mass of 320. The purity of the obtained peak of Clopidogrel in this forced degra-dation study was also checked. Since the purity angle value was lowerthan the purity threshold value, it was shown that the Clopidogrel peakwas pure, with no peaks beneath it. CONCLUSION It is concluded that HPLC method used for determination of relatedand degradation products in the finished product has shown good se-lectivity and is stability indicating. This HPLC method can be used indetermination of potential known and unknown impurities which canbe formed during the degradation process of active pharmaceutical in-gredient Clopidogrel bisulfate.REFERENCES1. A. Mohan, M. Hariharan, E. Vikraman, G. Subbiah, B. R. Venkataraman, D. Saravanan,J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 47 (2008) 183-189. 2. Q1B: Photostability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products,(November1996)66Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOSTUDIJA NA ZABRZANA DEGRADATsIJANA CLOPIDOGREL 75 mg FILMOBLOZhENI TABLETI - KORISNAALATKA PRI RAZVOJ NA ANALITIChKATAMETODAKsenija Brzilova, Ana Georgieva, ElenaKazandzhievska, Gjorgji Petrushevski, Suzan Memed-Sejfulakh, Sanja Simeonovska, BiljanaShapkareva, Sonja UgarkovikjIstrazhuvanje i razvoj, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski12, 1000 Skopje, Republika MakedonijaVOVEDClopidogrel e aktivna farmatsevtska supstantsa koja spagja vo grupatana inkhibitori na trombotsitnata agregatsija. Vo literaturata sepoznati i identifikuvani chetiri onechistuvanja na Clopidogrel:Clopidogrel Related Compound A, stereo izomerite na Clopidogrelimenuvani kako Clopidogrel Related Compound B1 i B2, i khiralniotizomer Clopidogrel Related Compound C.TsEL NA STUDIJATATselta na ovaa studija na zabrzana degradatsija beshe da se ispitasposobnosta na analitichkata metoda, objavena vo USPmonografijata za Clopidogrel tableti, da gi odvoi, detektira,identifikuva i kvantifitsira degradatsionite produkti koi sesozdavaat koga film oblozhenite tableti kje se izlozhat podvlijanie na razlichni nadvoreshni stres uslovi.EKSPERIMENTALNI DETALIClopidogrel 75 mg film oblozheni tableti bea izlozheni naslednive stres uslovi: >> fotolitichka degradatsija [2] (zrachenje od 1.2 milioni lux/h votraenje od 7 chasa, integrirana UV energija od 200Wh/m2 votraenje od 3 chasa, i potoa izlozhuvanje na pet pati zgolemenadoza na zrachenje vo traenje od 35 chasa);>> termichka degradatsija (105degC za vreme od 120 chasa);>> degradatsija pod vlijanie na temperatura i vlaga (40degC i75%RH za vreme od 50 dena).Za detektiranje na degradatsiskite proizvodi beshe koristenaHPLC metoda:>> Kolona: Ultron ES-OVM Chiral, 150mm x 4.6mm i.d; 5um;>> Detektsija: UV-220nm;>> Mobilna faza A: Fosfaten pufer koj sodrzhi 1.36g KH2PO4vo 1000ml H2O;>> Mobilna faza B: Metanol;>> Izokratsko eluiranje na mobilnata faza;>> Waters Alliance HPLC sistem so PDA detektor.REZULTATI I DISKUSIJADobienite rezultati se prezentirani vo Tabela 1.Tabela 1. Dobieni rezultati za netretiran i tretiran primerokClopidogrel 75 mg film oblozheni tabletiPri izvedba na termichkata degradatsija se zabelezha sozdavanje nanajgolemo kolichestvo na degradatsioni produkti. No, bidejkji ovaastudija beshe izvedena pod dejstvo na ekstremni stres uslovi, koiznachitelno se razlikuvaat od realnite uslovi na koi gotoviotproizvod mozhe da bide izlozhen, ne bea zemeni kako relevantnipokazateli za vistinskata degradatsija. Vsushnost, beshezabelezhano deka glavnata degradatsija na farmatsevtski aktivnatasupstantsa Clopidogrel se sluchuva koga film oblozhenite tableti seizlozheni na vlijanie na zgolemena temperatura i vlaga. Pri oviestres uslovi doagja do zgolemuvanje na kolichestvoto na poznatiteonechistuvanja Clopidogrel Related Compound A i Clopidogrel RelatedCompound C. Isto taka, beshe zabelezhan i znachitelen porast nakolichestvoto na nepoznatoto onechistuvanje so relativnoretentsiono vreme okolu 0.3. Literaturnite podatotsi [1] ukazhuvaatdeka ova onechistuvanje e oksidatsisko onechistuvanje na aktivnatasupstantsa Clopidogrel.Karakterizatsijata na nepoznatoto onechistu vanje beshe izvedena soizuchuvanje na negoviot ultravioletov (UV) i masen spektar so pomoshna LC-DAD-ESI-MS. Dobienite UV i masen spektar bea sporedeniso soodvetnite spektri prezentirani vo literaturata [1] i beshezaklucheno deka tie se identichni. Malo kolichestvo od ovaonechistuvanje beshe sintetizirano, spored molekulskata strukturaobjavena vo literaturata (5-[1-(2-khlorofenil)-2-metoksi-2-oksoetil]-6,7-dikhidritieno [3,2-c]piridin-5-ium. Iden ti fi katsijana nepoznatoto onechistuvanje, dobieno pri forsiranatadegradatsija na film oblozhenite tableti, beshe dopolnitelnoizvedena preku sporedba na negovite spektri i spektrite dobieniod sintetiziraniot primerok. Beshe zabelezhano potpolnosovpagjanje na spektroskopskite podatotsi za onechis tuvanjeto isintetiziraniot pri merok. Beshe opredelena i relativnatamolekulska masa (320) na onechistuvanjeto.Dopolnitelno, beshe proverena i chistotata na dobieniot pik naClopidogrel. Dobienata vrednost za "purity angle" beshe poniska oddobienata vrednost za "purity threshold", so shto se pokazha dekapikot na Clopidorel e chist, odnosno deka pod negovata povrshinanema drugi pikovi.67PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011ZAKLUChOKSpored podatotsite dobieni od studijata na zabrzana degradatsijabeshe zaklucheno deka HPLC metodata koja se koristi za odreduvanjena srodnite i degradatsionite produkti vo gotoviot proizvod eselektivna i "stability indicating". Metodata mozhe da se koristi zaodreduvanje na potentsijalnite poznati i nepoznati onechistuvanjakoi mozhe da se formiraat pri degradatsija na aktivnatafarmetsevtska supstantsa Clopidogrel. REFERENTsI1. A. Mohan, M. Mariharan, E. Vikraman, G. Subbaiah, B.R. Venkataraman, D.Saravan "Identification and characterization of a principal oxidation impurity inClopidogrel drug substance and drug product", ScienceDirect (Dekemvri 2007)2. Q1B: Photostability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products,(Noemvri 1996)DEVELOPMENT AND OPTIMIZATION OF AHPLC METHOD FOR DETERMINATION OFCLOPIDOGREL-CARBOXILIC ACID, INACTIVEMETABOLITE OF CLOPIDOGREL, IN HUMANPLASMAL.Bogdanovska, N.Nakov, J.Acevska, S.Trajkovic-Jolevska, A.Dimitrovska, R. PetkovskaUniversity "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Pharmacy, Vodnjanska17, 1000 Skopje, MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONClopidogrel is a prodrug which is intensively metabolized in the humanliver (1). The presence of clopidogrel and its active metabolite inhuman plasma can not be accurately determined. Therefore, the phar-macokinetic profile of clopidogrel is determined by quantification ofthe serum concentration of clopidogrel-carboxilic acid (CCA) - themain circulating metabolite which is pharmacollogicaly inactive (2, 3).The quantification of CCA in human plasma can be performed by sev-eral GC-MS, LC-MS and HPLC methods (4). The aim of our study was to optimize and validate RP-HPLC methodwith UV detection for determination of clopidogrel-carboxilic acid(CCA) in human plasma.MATERIALS AND METHODSCHEMICALS AND REAGENTSAcetonitrile and tetrahydrofuran were HPLC-grade and monobasicpotassium phosphate was analytical grade. Solid-phase extraction(SPE) columns -Strata-X-C 30 mg/1 ml with SCX/RP sorbent were pur-chased from Phenomenex. Clopidogrel-carboxilic acid and ticlopi-dine hydrochloride used as an internal standard were referencestandard substances.SAMPLE PREPARATIONHuman plasma was obtained from volunteers who had recivedclopidogrel therapy. 0.2 N HCl and 50 mL internal standard solutionwere added to 0.5 ml plasma and, then samples were mixed for 10s.Solid-phase extraction was performed in several steps. The SPEcolumn was washed with 1 ml 0.1 N HCl and then with 1 ml methanol.The elution of the compounds of interest was performed with 1 ml 5%ammonia solution prepared in methanol and acetonitrile mixture 1:1.The eluent was collected in clean glass tubes and dried undernitrogen. The residue was reconstituted in 200 ml freshly prepared mo-bile phase.