Definitsija na zhivotni tsiklusi i protsesni tekoviPodelbata na zhivotniot tsiklus na dokumentot na stadiumi pomagavo pretsizno definiranje i modeliranje na biznis protsesite.Za sekoj stadium na zhivotniot tsiklus potrebno e da se definira:avtomatskite aktivnosti koi kje se izveduvaat na dokumentot,lokatsijata (patot) na dokumentot, posledovatelnost na aktivnostitei izveduvachite na ovie aktivnosti (protsesen tek), informatsija kojakje bide skladirana vo zapisite za sledlivost na aktivnostite.Sekoja biznis politika definira serija na stadiumi (kako ,,natsrt",,,pregled" ili ,,odobren") preku koi se utvrduva progresot nadokumentot.Pokraj mozhnosta za kreiranje, pregled, odobruvanje, so soodvetniulogi na avtorot, pregleduvachot, odobruvachot, postoi mozhnost zaodbivanje na dokumentot, zabeleshki, arkhiviranje, sledlivost napovlekuvanje na dokumentot, kako i utvrduvanje na verziite imomentalniot stadium na dokumentot e ovozmozheno zaedno sosledlivosta na aktivnostite. Potpishuvanjeto vo sistemot seizveduva elektronski. ZAKLUChOK:Sistemot za Upravuvanje so Dokumenti ovozmozhuva elektronskokreiranje, pregled, odobruvanje, arkhiviranje na dokumentot sotselosna sledlivost za aktivnostite koj, koga, kade, zoshto, gozapochnal, pregledal i zavrshil dokumentot. LITERATURA 1. Eudralex - The rules governing medicinal products in the European union -Volume 4 EU Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice - Annex 11:Computerized systemsRISK MANAGEMENT FOR SOLUTION FORHAEMODIALYSIS AMINAL 100BNada Popstefanova, Svetlana Trajkoska Dabevska,Ornela Kuzmanovska, Sonja SterjevskaALKALOID AD SkopjeINTRODUCTIONRisk management according ISO 14971:2007 for is very important toolfor medical device liability. The goal of responsible manufacturer is toreduce product risk and identify the level of remaining risks, which aretied to user's (clinician and patient) safety.GOALThe primary purpose of designed Product Risk Management File forconcentrated solution for haemodialysis Aminal 100B is to evaluate aproduct's risk for acceptance, reduction and/or mitigation. This doc-ument has many uses - it is important part of CE-marking TechnicalFile / EU's Medical Device Directive Design Dossier and prominent partof all risk-based activities as CAPA investigations, product and man-agement reviews etc. This controlled document is subjected to peri-odic reviews, linked to CAPA/ Design / Change Control system and alsoto Management Reviews / Internal Audit.METHODSThe Risk Management File documents product - Aminal 100B duringwhole lifecycle. The file begins with top-level document Risk Manage-ment Plan which defines how risk management for Aminal 100B is im-plemented, by whom and when, as well as lifecycle considerations andinterfaces. The risk management process which includes hazards/riskanalysis, purpose, risk estimation and classification is reflected in nextdocument. The risk control/ mitigation including options/ actions andrisk/benefit analysis is next document. Methology used in risk assess-ment activities for Aminal 100B is FMEA (Failure Mode, Effects Analy-sis). The Risk Management Report, which covers key issues and givesconclusions, is summary of all data recorded in Risk Management Filefor Aminal 100B.RESULTSHazards / risks are evaluated as physical, chemical, biological, envi-ronmental and risks in use. According the risk action evaluation andcorrective actions: for Aminal 100B no risk is classified with high pri-ority, there are only 4 risks with medium priority with risk priority num-ber (RPN >= 4 ) and 22 risks with RPN < 4 which means - low priority.Risks appearance, effect and detection is monitored during allprocesses for each batch of product. In the case of each unconfor-mity, atypical or process result out of limits, a corrective action or de-viation is initiated. These corrective actions contribute to thereduction or removal of specified risk the consequences of the prod-uct and its applicationConcerning risk as microbiological contamination of the dialysis liquidor inadequate care of the vascular access points in medical centers,the control is provided in medical institutions by detailed instructions,training and control. CONCLUSIONThe risk management report ensures the acceptable level of riskcontrol, the status of defined risks and effectiveness of actions taken254Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOfor Alkaloid's medical device - concentrated solution for haemodialy-sis Aminal 100B.REFERENCESISO 14971:2007- Medical devices -Application of risk management to medicaldevicesEC Directive 93/42/EEC of June 14,1993 and amended M5ICH Q9UPRAVUVANjE SO RIZIK ZA RASTVOR ZAKhEMODIJALIZA AMINAL 100BNada Popstefanova, Svetlana Dabevska Trajkoska, OrnelaKuzmanovska, Sonja SterjevskaALKALOID AD SkopjeVOVEDUpravuvanje so rizik soodvetno standardot ISO 14971:2007 e mnoguvazhna alatka za utvrduvanje na odgovornosta pri proizvodstvo nameditsinski pomagala. Tselta e da se redutsiraat rizitsite priproizvodstvo i da se utvrdi nivoto na prifatlivost napreostanatite rizitsi povrzani so bezbednata upotreba naproizvodot (lekar i patsient)TsELPrimarna namena na kreiranjeto na dokumentot za Upravuvanje sorizik za proizvodot rastvor za khemodijaliza Aminal 100B, e da seotseni prifatlivosta ili namaluvanjeto/reduktsija na rizikot priproizvodstvo i primena na ovoj proizvod. Ovoj kontrolirandokument ima povekje nameni-toj e sostaven del na Tekhnichkoto dosieza CE znakot/EU DIR 93/42/EEC, vazhen element na CAPAaktivnosti,del e od pregledite na rakovodstvo kako i preglediteza proizvod,del od sistemot na Kontrola na promeni, interniproverki i.t.n METODSe zapochnuva so Plan za Upravuvanje na rizik, kako dokument odnajvisoko nivo vo koj se definira koj, koga i kako kje go sproveduvaupravuvanjeto so rizikot vo tek na tseliot zhivoten tsiklus zaproizvodot. Protsesot na upravuvanje so rizikot koj ja vkluchuvakontrolata na rizikot, otsenkata, klasifikatsijata na rizik, optsiiza ublazhuvanje i aktivnosti za redutsiranje na rizikot prodolzhuvavo slednata faza. FMEA analiza (Failure Mode, Effects Analysis) emetodata shto se koristi za otsenka na rizikot. Izveshtajot shtoproizleguva od primenata na ovaa metoda, so analiza na kluchniteprashanja i krajnite zakluchotsi, prestavuva rezime na site aktivn -o sti povrzani so Upravuvanjeto na rizik.REZULTATIVlijanijata od pojavata na odreden rizik vrz proizvodot mozhe dase klasifitsiraat kako: fizichki, khemiski, bioloshki, rizitsiporadi vlijanie na okolinata i rizitsi pri upotreba na proizvodot.So primena na RPN metodata na proizvodot Aminal 100B iprezemanje korektivni aktsii za utvrdenite rizitsi, krajniotrezultat od analizata na rizik e deka ne postoi rizik od najvisokprioritet, detektirani se 4 rizitsi so sreden prioritet (RPN >= 4)i 22 rizitsi so RPN < 4 shto znachi deka se so nizok prioritet.Pojavata na rizik,vlijanieto vrz protsesot i klasifikatsija naistiot, se vrshi za sekoja serija proizvod. Vo sluchaj na bilo kakvootstapuvanje ili vrednosti nadvor od spetsifitsiranite limiti,se initsira korektivna aktivnost ili se kreira devijatsija. So oviekorektivni dejstva se doprinesuva za namaluvanje iliotstranuvanje na posleditsite od utvrdeniot rizik vrz proizvodoti negovata primena.Za da se izbegne rizikot od mikrobioloshko zagaduvanje narastvorot za khemodijaliza vo meditsinskite ustanovi, poradinegova nesoodvetna primena i rakuvanje, se obezbeduvaat upatstvaza upotreba i obuka za meditsinskiot personal.ZAKLUChOKIzveshtajot za upravuvanje so rizik obezbeduva prifatlivo nivo idefiniran status za rizik kako i efektivnost na prezemenikorektivni dejstva za meditsinskoto pomagalo-kontsentriranrastvor za khemodijaliza Aminal 100B .REFERENTsI1. ISO 14971:2007- Medical devices -Application of risk managementto medical devices2. EC Directive 93/42/EEC of June 14,1993 and amended M5ICH Q9ANALYSIS OF LIPOSOMES WITH RESVERATROL AND VITAMIN C AND EAtanackovic M1, Cvejic J1, Bursac M1, Lj. Gojkovic-Bukarica2, H. Heinle31Department of pharmacy, Faculty of medicine, Hajduk Veljkova 3,21000 Novi Sad, Serbia,2Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology,Faculty of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Serbia,3Institute of Physiology, University of Tubingen, D-72076 Tubingen, GermanyTrans-resveratrol (trans-3,5,4'-trihydroxystilbene) is a naturallyoccurring phytoalexin isolated for the first time from the root ofVeratrum grandiflorum in 1940. Since then, it has been isolated andindentified in over 70 different plant species. Resveratrol is used intraditional medicine for treatment of different bacterial and fungalinfections, inflammations, dermatitis, hearth, liver and blood vesselsdiseases (1). Numerous publications suggest that this polyphenolpossesses variety of biological properties which include inhibition oflipid peroxidation, prostaglandine synthesis and trombocyteaggregation, free radical quenching, vasodilatation, antineoplasticand estrogenic activity (2-5). Still, resveratrols' physical properties arelimiting factor for its application. It has low water solubility (<0.001mol/l) and converts to less active cis-form when irradiated with UVlight (6). Most of the experiments use resveratrol in its free form,dissolved in organic solvents, which are inappropriate forpharmaceutical application. Some suggested ways for improvementof resveratrol low solubility include micellar and liposomalsolubilization (6-8). Liposomes are optimal carriers for theentrapment and cellular delivery of drugs because they canincorporate a lipophilic drug within the membrane bilayers andprotect it from light and other degradative processes. 255Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONThe aim of the study was to characterize liposomes prepared withresveratrol and vitamin C and vitamin E and to evaluate theirantioxidant potential. Liposomes containing 200 mM of resveratrol (RL) and mixture of 200mM of resveratrol with the same amount of vitamin C (RLC) or E (RLE)were prepared using thin lipid film hydration method. Lipid phasecomprised of Phospholipon 90H, cholesterol and di-cetyl phosphate.Control samples (pure liposomes) were produced without addition ofresveratrol or vitamins. Preparations were subjected to successivesonication and filtration and particle size, polydispersity index andzeta potential was determined. Antioxidative properties ofpreparations were evaluted by the suppression of luminol-enhancedchemiluminescence from spontaneous thermic decomposition of 2-2'amidinoazopropane dihydro-chloride (AAPH). Antioxidative activitywas determined by graphical analysis and quantified using calibrationcurve prepared with pure resveratrol or resveratrol and vitamin C or E.Results showed that for liposomal preparations with pure resveratroland resveratrol in combination with vitamin E, succesive sonicationand filtration lead to decrease of particle size and polydispersity index.More specifically, particle size of liposomes with resveratrol decreasedfrom 4647 to 119.7 nm while liposomes with vitamin E had initial size647.5 nm and after sonication it was 177.5 nm. Filtration additionallydecreased particle size, which was at the end 119.7 and 177.5 nm forRL and RLE, respectively. On the other hand, applied procedure didnot have the same effect on liposomes with resveratrol and vitamin C.Particles with size above 1000 nm were still present in preparation,which indicates system instability and occurrence of particleaggregation. Similar results concerning liposomes prepared withvitamin C were not observed in literature. Size of RL liposomes afterfiltration was 108.3 nm and polydispersity index was around 0.2 whichis in agreement with previously published results and indicates narrowsize distribution (7,9). On the other hand, significantchemiluminiscence quenching was observed with all liposomalformulations tested. Quantification showed that liposomalpreparations possesses 90-110% of initial antioxidant activity of addedsubstances.REFERENCES1. Fremont L, Biological effects of resveratrol. Life Sci. 2000; 66(8):663 - 73.2. Jang M, Cai L, Udeani GO, Slowing KV, Thomas CF, Beecher CWW, Fong HHS,Farnsworth NR, Kinghorn AD, Mehta RG, Moon RC, Pezzuto JM. Cancerchemopreventive activity of resveratrol, a natural product derived from grapes.Science 1997; 275: 218-220.3. Frankel E, Waterhouse A, Kinsella J. Inhibition of human LDL oxidation byresveratrol. Lancet. 1993; 341: 1103-1104.4. Novakovic A, Gojkovic-Bukarica Lj, Peric M, Nezic D, Djukanovic B, Markovic-Lipkovski J, Heinle H. The Mechanism of Endothelium-Independent RelaxationInduced by Wine Polyphenol Resveratrol in Human Internal Mammary Artery. JPharmacol Sci. 2006; 101: 85-90.5. Pervaiz S, Holme AL, Aggarwal BB, Anekonda TS, Baur JA, Gojkovic-Bukarica L,Ragione FD, Kim AL, Pirola L, Saiko P. Resveratrol: its biologic targets andfunctional activity. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2009;11(11):2851-97.6. Kristl J, Teskac K, Caddeo C, Abramovic Z, Sentjurc M. Improvements of cellularstress response on resveratrol in liposomes. Eur J Pharm Biopharm. 2009; 73: 253-259.7. Caddeo C, Teskac K, Sinico C, Kristl J. Effect of resveratrol incorporated inliposomes on proliferation and UV-B protection of cells. I J Pharm. 2008; 363:183-191.8. Atanackovic M, Posa M, Heinle H, Gojkovic-Bukarica Lj, Cvejic J. Solubilization ofresveratrol in micellar solutions of different bile acids. Colloids surf B: Biointerf.2009;72:148-54.9.