Zecevic M, Jocic B, Zivanovic Lj, Protic A, Chromatographia, 2008, 68, 911-9182. Jocic B, Zecevic M, Zivanovic L, Licanski A , Anal Lett, 2007, 40, 2301-23163. Bartolini M, Bertucci C, Gotti R, TumiattiV, Cavalli A, Recanatini M, Andrisano V, J Chromatogr A, 2002, 958, 59-67SOLID-PHASE EXTRACTION OF IBUPROFENFROM PHARMACEUTICAL CREAMSlavica Sunaric, Milica Petkovic and Marko DenicFaculty of Medicine, Department of Chemistry, Bulevar Zorana Djindjica 81, Nis, SerbiaIn many new commercial preparations ibuprofen is mixed with otheractive substances or excipients that facilitate its absorption. Thesesubstances may interfere with the determination of ibuprofen by UVspectrophotometry. In cream, the active substance is dispersed incomplex emulsion containing hydrophobic and hydrophiliccompounds, emulsifying agents and preservatives. Solid phaseextraction is widely used tools for sample cleanup, but in the analysisof drugs from pharmaceuticals is rarely used. The aim of this studywas investigation of ibuprofen extraction on three different SPEsorbents. The appropriate SPE conditions (sorbent, pH, adsorption,washing, and elution) were investigated using UV spectrophotometryand ibuprofen absorption at 264nm. The performance of thedeveloped SPE method was first evaluated on standard ibuprofensolutions and then the suitability of the method was checked onsolutions of commercial pharmaceutical cream samples.Optimal solid phase extraction conditions and recovery were tested onthree different sorbents: OASIS(r) MAX, 1 cc, Waters Corporation, Mil-ford, Mass., USA, OASIS(r) HLB, 1 cc, Waters Corporation, Milford, Mass.,USA and Chromabond(r) C18ec, 1ml/100mg, Macherey-Nagel, GmbH,Duren, Germany. Methods optimization has been done with thestandard methanol ibuprofen solution concentration of 0.5 mg/ml.Since ibuprofen is a weak acid (pKa 5.2) at low pH values will be in theneutral form, while at higher pH values ionized form will be dominant.In order to investigate the retention of ibuprofen on hydrophilic-lipophilic sorbent (HLB), octadecyl-modified silica (C18) and stronganion exchanger (MAX), pH of the ibuprofen solutions was varied in therange from 3.0 to 10.0.Before use, the SPE columns were conditioned and equilibrated with2ml methanol and 3ml deionized water. Solutions of ibuprofen, whichare passed through HLB and C18 columns are adjusted by acetic acidto pH 3.0. For extraction on MAX cartridges pH of the ibuprofensolution is set to 10.0 with 2% ammonium hydroxide. After sampleloading, the sorbents were washed with 2% CH3COOH (HLB andC18ec) and 2% NH4OH (MAX). For elution of ibuprofen from HLB andC18 cartridges methanol was used, while elution from MAX sorbentwas performed with mixture of MeOH:2%CH3COOH (2:1,v/v). Afterextraction ibuprofen was determined by UV spectrophotometry usingcalibration curve at 264nm. Adequate retention was observed for ibuprofen on all three SPEsorbents. At low pH ibuprofen was more strongly retained underreversed-phase condition, so the recovery values were higher on HLBand C18ec sorbents. In contrast, at high pH ibuprofen was stronglyretained on strong anion-exchange MAX sorbent. Yield of standardibuprofen extraction has very good value for the MAX cartridge(recovery 98%). For HLB and C18ec sorbents these values were 88%and 105% respectively. For all three used cartridges relative standarddeviations were up to 3%.Commercial pharmaceutical ibuprofen cream (Brufen(r)-Galenika) wasdisolved in methanol, homogenized by stiring and filtered. Furthersample preparation and extraction procedure were the same as forthe standard ibuprofen solutions. The best extraction yield wasobtained on the MAX cartridge 99.2%. For HLB and C18 sorbentsrecovery values were much higher, which indicates retention andinterferences some lipophilic compounds from pharmaceutical cream.The obtained results show that ibuprofen could be successfullyseparated and determined UV spectrophotometrically using theproposed extraction procedure for MAX Oasis cartridge.REFERENCES1. British Pharmacopoeia, electronic version 11.0., The Stationery Office on behalfof the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), CrownCopyright 2006.2. D. Watson, Pharmaceutical Analysis, Edinburgh, Elsevier, 2005.DETERMINATION OF DOXYCYCLINE INPHARMACEUTICAL SAMPLESBY HPLC WITH UV DETECTIONSlavica Sunaric1, Sandra Stojanovic 2, Snezana Mitic 31Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chemistry, Bulevar dr ZoranaDjindjica 81,18000 Nis, Serbia, 2Beiersdorf d.o.o.Beograd, Omladinskihbrigada 88a, 11070 Novi Beograd, Serbia, 3Faculty of Natural Sciencesand Mathematics, Department of Chemistry, Visegradska 33/224,18000 Nis, SerbiaDoxycycline is a broad spectrum antibiotic against gram-positive andgram-negative bacteria and non-typical microorganisms. Favourableantimicrobial properties, as well as absence of great number of side ef-fects led to its wide application in therapy of both human and animalinfections. The solid dosage forms available on our market containdoxycycline in the form of monohydrate and hyclate.21PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011Determination of active substances in pharmaceutical preparationsis an integral part of quality control of drugs. The aim of this paperwas the modification of the existing pharmacopoeia's HPLC methodfor determination of doxycycline. For such a purpose, it was necessaryto investigate the influence of various parameters and determine op-timal chromatographic conditions. Mobile phase has been insertedisocratically. The composition of mobile phase was partially changedin comparison to the procedure given in Ph. Jug V. The mobile phaseconsisted of 2-methyl-2-propanol (80g), 35 g/L K2HPO4 adjusted to pH9.0, 10 g/L triethylammonium-acetate adjusted to pH 9.0 and 40 g/LNa-EDTA adjusted to pH 9.0. Measured pH of mobile phase was 8.5.ODS silica gel C18 analytical column was used instead of the styrene-divinylbenzene copolymer. Satisfactory separation of doxycycline fromthe mixture with excipients and filling agents was achieved on the re-versed-phase Zorbax Extend C18 analytical column (4.6x250 mm, 5 mmparticle size) at 40degC with flow-rate of 1.0 mL/min and the injected vol-ume of 30 ml. A UV/VIS detector set at 254 nm, 275 nm and 375 nm wasused to monitor the effluent. For calibration curve, a series of standard solutions of doxycycline wasprepared in the interval of concentrations from 1.85-12.94 mg/mL.Chromatograms of standard solutions at three above-mentionedwavelengths were recorded. Calibration curves at 3 wavelengths werelinear with correlation coefficients of 0.999. The limits of detectionand quantification were from 0.24-0.25 mg/mL for LOD and 0.80-0.83mg/mL for LOQ. Calibration curve at 275 nm has been the most suit-able for quantitative analysis of doxycycline from solid dosage formsdue to its largest slope. Retention time at which the peak of doxycy-cline appears is short (4.45 min), enabling fast and efficient chro-matographic analysis.After validation, the method was applied for determination of doxy-cycline-hyclate and doxycycline-monohydrate in commercial solidpreparations Doksiciklin(r), Dovicin(r) and Vibramycin(r). Proposed HPLCmethod may be applied for determination of doxycycline in pharma-ceutical preparations with satisfactory accuracy and precision. Meanrecoveries were 101.1%, 96.6% and 91.4% for Doksiciklin(r), Dovicin(r) andVibramycin(r). The relative standard deviation was lower than 1.5% forthe most of samples. Each analysis required no longer than 5.0 min.Results obtained by the proposed method, were compared to those bythe reference HPLC method that is described in Ph.Jug V and satis-factory agreement was achieved.REFERENCES1. Ph.Jug V, Savremena administracija, Beograd, 2000.2. D. Watson, Pharmaceutical Analysis, Edinburgh, Elsevier, 2005.3. Delgado JN, Remers WA. Wilson and Gisvold's Textbook of Organic Medicinal andPharmaceutical Chemistry. New York: Lippincott-Raven Publishers, 1998.DETERMINATION OF KETOCONAZOLE INPHARMACEUTICAL FORMULATIONSBiljana GjorgjeskaFaculty of Medical Sciences, University "Goce Delcev"-StipINTRODUCTIONKetoconazole is used to treat fungal infections. Ketoconazole is mostoften used to treat fungal infections that can spread to different partsof the body through the bloodstream such as yeast infections of themouth, skin, urinary tract, and blood, and certain fungal infectionsthat begin on the skin or in the lungs and can spread through the body.Ketoconazole is also used to treat fungal infections of the skin or nailsthat cannot be treated with other medications. Ketoconazole is in aclass of antifungals called imidazoles. It works by slowing the growthof fungi that cause infection. Branded as NizoralR ketoconazole is for-mulated as tablets, cream and over-the-counter ketoconazoleshampoo. OBJECTIVESThe aim of this research was to study and to standardize an ultravioletspectrophotometric (UVS) method, potentiometric and a high per for -mance liquid chromatographic (HPLC) method for the determ i na tionof ketoconazole in commercially available pharma ce uti cal pre pa ra ti -ons (tablets and creams). These three methods were com pared anddis cussed with respect to their sensitivity and ready-applicability inro utine analytical work.METHODSAbsorption spectra and spectrophotometric determination were car-ried out on a UVS spectrophotometer, in 1 cm cuvettes. The concen-tration of ketoconazole stock solutions was 10-4 mol.dm-3 in 0.1mol.dm-3 HCl. Solutions in range of investigated concentrations wereobtained by diluting of stock in range from 0.003 to 0.02 mg.dm-3. Theabsorbance was measured at 224 nm. Potentiometric titrations weremade using glass and saturated (KCl) calomel electrode. The deter-mined ketoconazole is dissolved in acetic acid. A solution of HClO4(0.1 mol.dm-3) in acetic acid was used for titrations. Each cm3 of HClO4(0.1 mol.dm-3) is equivalent to 0.02657 g of ketoconazole. HPLC analy-sis of ketoconazole, in the presence of econazole as internal standard,was performed using Ultrapac LiChrosorb RP 18 (5 mm) column, withthe mobile phase consisting of 0.2% diethilamin in methanole/0.5%ammonium acetate solution (78:22); flow rate = 0.9 cm3/min and UVdetection at 224 nm.RESULTS From the obtained results it can be seen that the differences in assayvalues in all methods are not statistically significant. CONCLUSIONSThe described methods for quantitative determination of ketocona-zole in pharmaceutical preparations are simple and accurate. They canbe performed directly without removing the ingredients. The spec-trophotometric method is recommended for quantitative determina-tion in routine analysis. It is not only satisfactorily reproducible, butalso selective with respect to the ingredients. Although, the poten-tiometric method cannot be considered as selective, it is rapid andreproducible enough to be used as an alternative routine method. TheHPLC method is useful especially for determination of impurities and22Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOdegradation products in stability studies.REFERENCES1. European Pharmacopoeia (2008) 6th Ed., European Pharmacopoeia Commission2. The United States Pharmacopoeia 33th NF 29 (2010), Ed. Rockwille: UnitedStates Pharmacopeial Convention3. Heyden, Y.V., A.N.M. Nguyet, M.R. Detaevernier, D.L. Massart & J.P. Vercammen(2002) 4. J. Chromatogr. A 958 p. 191-2015. Arranz, P.; Arranz, A.; Moreda, J.M. ; Cid, A.;Arranz, J.F. (2003) J. Pharm.Biom. Anal.,New York, 33, p. 589-5966. Inara Staub, Ana Maria Bergold (2004) Acta Farm. Bonaerense 23 (3) p.387-390Y Vander Heyde, A Nguyen Minh Nguyet, M R Detaevenier, D L Massart, J Plaizier-Vercammen(2002) Journal of Chromatography A 958 (1-2), p. 191-2017. El-Shabouri, S.R. ; Emara, K.M. ; Kashaba, P.Y. ;Mohamed, A.M (1998)Anal. Lett, New York, 31, p. 1367-1385OPREDELUVANjE NA KETOKONAZOL VOFARMATsEVTSKI FORMULATsIIBiljana GjorgjeskaFakultet za meditsinski nauki, Univerzitet "Gotse Delchev"-ShtipVOVEDKetokonazol se koristi vo tretman na gabichni infektsii.Ketokonazol najchesto se koristat za lekuvanje na gabichni infektsiikoi mozhat da se shirat na razlichni delovi od teloto prekukrvotokot kako shto se gabichni infektsii na ustata, kozhata, naurinarniot trakt, i krv, i nekoi gabichni infektsii, koi zapochnuvaatna kozhata ili na belite drobovi i mozhe da se proshiri niz teloto.Ketokonazol isto taka se koristi za lekuvanje na gabichni infektsiina kozhata i noktite koi ne mozhat da bidat tretirani so drugilekovi. Ketokonazol e vo klasa na antifungalni lekovi narecheniimidazoli. Toj raboti preku zabavuvanje na rastot na gabite koipredizvikuvaat infektsii. Zashtiten kako NizoralR , ketokonazoldoagja vo forma na tableti, krem i kako ketokonazol shampon. TsELTselta na ova istrazhuvanje e da se prouchat i standardiziraatultravioletovata spektrofotometriska (UVS) postapka, poten tsi -ome triskata i visoko performansnata techna khromatografska(HPLC) metoda za odreduvanje na ketokonazol vo komertsijalnodostapni farmatsevtski preparati (kremovi i tableti). Ovie trimetodi se sporeduvani i diskuturana e nivnata senzitivnost iprimenlivost za rutinska analitichka rabota.MATERIJALI I METODIApsorptsionite spektri i spektrofotometriskoto opredeluvanjebea snimeni na UVS spektrofotometar, vo kiveti od 1 sm. Kon tsent -ra tsijata na ketokonazol vo osnovniot rastvor beshe 10-4 mol*dm-3vo 0,1 mol mol*dm-3. Vo ramkite na ispitanite kontsentratsiimernite rastvori se dobieni so razreduvanje na osnovniotrastvor vo kontsentratsii od 0,003-0,02 mg*dm-3. Apsorptsijata besheizmerena na 224 nm.