2007;137:1188-1193.Masters N, McGuire MA, Beerman KA, et al. Maternal supplementation with CLA de-creases milk fat in humans. Lipids. 2002;37:133-138.healing of DuoDenal ulcer aftereraDication of helicobacter PyloriS. Efremova1, D. Efremova21 University Clinic for surgical diseases "St. Naum Ohridski", Skopje;2 DOOEL "ReplekFarm", SkopjeintroDuctionInfection with Helicobacter pylori is the primary reason for duodenal ulcerdisease and its eradication leads to a significant reduction of ulcer relapse.Material and methods: We analyzed 48 patients with positive findingof Helicobacter pylori and duodenal ulcer who meet the criteria of thestudy. Standard therapy of patients with ulcer is a one week triple ther-apy that contains: 1) a proton pump inhibitor such as omeprazole, orpantoprozol rabeprazol 2) antibiotics, clarithromycin and amoxicillin ortinidazol for patients who are allergic to penicillin, 3) metronidazole. Wedo not recommend using just one drug. The presence of Helicobacterpylori confirm the IMMULITE 1000 analizer for qualitative detection ofIgG Helicobacter pylori-antibody in samples of serum or plasma. Thepatients underwent endoscopy after they were initially treated with oneweek standard triple therapy and endoscopy was performed after 6weeks for verification of the eradication and healing of the ulcer.resultsThe rates of eradication and ulcer healing 6 weeks after treatmentwere as follows: recovery of the ulcer was present in 40 patients, andthe other 8 patients were reevaluated after 6 months. These patientsafter 6 months had no symptoms and decline in titre of IgGHelicobacter pylori antibodies.conclusion6 months after treatment 40 patients were "cured" and 8 in groupreevaluated. Positive serology can be sent as an indicator of possibleulcer relapse, especially when it occurs along with repeated symptoms.It seems justified in such situations to repeated treatment with differenttherapies and expects this to be useful in many patients from that group.referencesBianchi Porro G, Lazzaroni M, Bargiggia S, Maconi G, Trespi E, Perego M, Alvisi C,155fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsVillani L, Luinetti O, Fiocca R, Franceschi M, Cesana B, Solcia E. Omeprazole coupledwith two antibiotics for Helicobacter pylori eradication and prevention of ulcerrecurrence. Am J Gastroenterol. 1996 Apr;91(4):695-700.Vilaichone RK, Mahachai V, Tumwasorn S, Nunthapisud P, Wisedopas N, KullavanijayaP. Duodenal Helicobacter pylori associated duodenal ulcer depend on gastricHelicobacter pylori status. J Med Assoc Thai. 2002 Jun;85 Suppl 1:S97-102.Butorov IV, Osoianu IuP, Maksimov VV, Butorov SI. Medical, social, and economiceffectiveness of treatment of day-case patients with peptic ulcer. Klin Med (Mosk).2006;84(1):53-6.Cho SJ, Choi IJ, Kim CG, Kook MC, Lee JY, Kim BC, Ryu KH, Nam SY, Kim YW. Riskfactors associated with gastric cancer in patients with a duodenal ulcer. Helicobacter.2010 Dec;15(6):516-23.zAzDRAVUVAnjE NA DUODENAlNIOTUlKUS PO ISKORENUVAnjETONA helicobacter PyloriS. Efremova1, D. Efremova21 Univerzitetska klinika za khirurshki bolesti,,Sv. Naum Okhridski", Skopje;2DOOEL ,,ReplekFram", SkopjeVOVEDInfektsijata so Helicobacter pylori pretstavuva primarna prichinaza ulkusnata bolest na duodenumot i nejzinata iskorenetost vodido znachajno namaluvanje na retsidivot na ulkusot.MATERIJAl I METODIAnaliziravme 48 patsienti so pozitiven naod na Helicobacter pylorii so duodenalen ulkus koi gi ispolnuvaa kriteriumite na studijata.Standardna terapija na bolnite od ulkus e ednonedelna trojnaterapija koja sodrzhi: 1) inkhibitor na protonskata pumpa kako shtose omeprazol, pantoprozol ili rabeprazol; 2) antibiotitsi, klari-tromitsin i amoksitsilin ili tinidazol za patsienti koi se alergichnina penitsilini; 3) metronidazol. Ne se preporachuva koristenje nasamo eden medikament. Prisustvoto na Helicobacter pylori go potvrdu-vavme so IMMULITE 1000 analizer za kvalitativna detektsija na IgGHelicobacter pylori-antitela vo primerotsi na serum ili plazma.Bolnite bea endoskopirani na pochetokot, tretirani so standardna-ta ednonedelna trojna terapija i endoskopirani po 6 nedeli zaverifikatsija na iskorenuvanjeto i zazdravuvanjeto na ulkusot.REzUlTATIStapkite na iskorenuvanje i zazdravuvanje na ulkusot 6 nedeli potretmanot bea slednive: zazdravuvanje na ulkusot beshe prisutnokaj 40 patsienti, a ostanatite 8 patsienti bea reevaluirani po 6mesetsi. Ovie patsienti po 6 mesetsi nemaa simptomi i imaa pad natitarot na IgG Helicobacter pylori antitelata.zAKlUChOK6 mesetsi po tretmanot vkupno 40 patsienti bea "izlecheni" i 8 vogrupata na reevaluatsija. Pozitivnata serologija mozhe da se pratikako indikator za mozhen ulkusen retsidiv, osobeno koga se javuvazaedno so povtoreni simptomi. Se chini opravdano vo takvi situa-tsii da se povtori tretmanot so razlichni terapii i se ochekuva ovada bide korisno kaj mnogu patsienti od taa grupa.lITERATURABianchi Porro G, Lazzaroni M, Bargiggia S, Maconi G, Trespi E, Perego M, Alvisi C,Villani L, Luinetti O, Fiocca R, Franceschi M, Cesana B, Solcia E. Omeprazole coupledwith two antibiotics for Helicobacter pylori eradication and prevention of ulcerrecurrence. Am J Gastroenterol. 1996 Apr;91(4):695-700.Vilaichone RK, Mahachai V, Tumwasorn S, Nunthapisud P, Wisedopas N, KullavanijayaP. Duodenal Helicobacter pylori associated duodenal ulcer depend on gastricHelicobacter pylori status. J Med Assoc Thai. 2002 Jun;85 Suppl 1:S97-102.Butorov IV, Osoianu IuP, Maksimov VV, Butorov SI. Medical, social, and economiceffectiveness of treatment of day-case patients with peptic ulcer. Klin Med (Mosk).2006;84(1):53-6.Cho SJ, Choi IJ, Kim CG, Kook MC, Lee JY, Kim BC, Ryu KH, Nam SY, Kim YW. Riskfactors associated with gastric cancer in patients with a duodenal ulcer. Helicobacter.2010 Dec;15(6):516-23.examination of gluthationeProtective role in acute intoxicityby leaD anD caDmium via activityof the liver enDonucleasesR.S. Nikolic1, J.M. Jovanovic1, N.S. Krstic1, M.N.Stankovic1, G.M. Kocic21University of Nis, Faculty of Science and Mathematics, Department ofChemistry, Visegradska 33, 18000 Nis, Serbia2University of Nis, Faculty of Medicine, Bulevar dr Zorana Dindica 81,18000 Nis, SerbiaintroDuctionHeavy metal are pollutants of significant ecological concern causethey are not biodegradable and have long halflives in the soil Ways ofPb and Cd intake in the body include contaminated food, water andair. As a metal with a cumulative effect Pb is competitive with essen-tial metals (Fe, Ca, Cu, Zn) for their various functions in the body,especially those related to the presence of free-SH groups as part ofthe biomolecules of proteins and enzymes (1). Cadmium contaminatedfood after intake can cause the gastrointestinal dysfunctions. Thesystematic exposure to Cd leading increas Ca excretion, the risk ofappearing kidney stones and bone damage (2).According to physicochemical properties Pb and Cd easily inhibit thephysiological activity of the enzyme with active -SH groups.Glutathione (GSH) is a tripeptide L--glutamyl-L-cysteinyl-glycine (Fig.1) which constitutes 90% of total nonprotein sulphur cellularcompounds, and it is a essential cofactor of some enzymes. Glu-tathione as a chelating agent contains one thiol group (in reducedform) participating in formation of mercaptide bond with heavy metalions like Zn, Cu, Cd, Pb and Ag (3).fig. 1: structural formula of glutathioneLiver endonucleases (acid and alkaline DNase) are hydrolases that de-grade both native, and denatured DNA molecules. The main role of156PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiDNase is reflected in the regulation of synthesis and degradation ofendogenous and exogenous DNA, modified DNA in reparation and re-moval of circulating DNA from the organism. According to the litera-ture, DNase are considered as the main executors of apoptosis,responsible for internucleosomal fragmentation of DNA cellular inapoptosis. Internucleosomal DNA fragmentation, as a biochemicalmarker of apoptosis, presents separation of chromosomal DNA intofragments oligonucleosome size (4).This study was performed in order to investigate the protective role ofGSH, in acute intoxicity by Pb and Cd, via the activity of liverendonucleases (acid and alkaline DNase).materials anD methoDsmaterialsThe research was carried out on white Wistar female rats, 6 weeks old,weight 220+-20 g. The experimental animals were raisen in the labora-tory conditions on a normal dietary regime in the vivarium on Facultyof Medicine, University of Nis. During three weeks of the experimentanimals were dosing treated with CdCl2 and Pb(CH3COO)2 injectedintraperitoneally. Total doses were below the lethal dose (Pb <0.1 g/kg,Cd <1 mg/kg), with appropriate control group and group that besideCd and Pb was treated with GSH (20 mg/kg). Biological material wereanalyzed according to the working standards in biochemical labora-tories.methodsThe liver endonuclease activity was measured spectrophotometricallyin 10% homogenate, according to the method of Bartholeyns (5).Statistical analysis. Statistical data were interpretated using the Stu-dent's t-test (Microsoft Office Excel).results anD DiscussionResult of the determination acid and alkaline DNase activity of ex-perimental animals that were intoxicated with CdCl2 andPb(CH3COO)2, as well as the results of measurements of these com-pounds in the presence of LA, are shown in Figure 2 for acid, and Fig-ure 3 for alkaline DNase, as mean value +- SD in international units pergram of protein.fig. 2: results of the determination acid Dnase activityfig. 2: results of the determination alkaline Dnase activityResults of the determination liver enzymes activity showed that Pband Cd multiply and statistically significant, increase the value ofthese enzymes (p <0.01). It is assumed that Cd probable cause oxida-tive damage of DNA, proteins and lipids, which lead to apoptosis. Cdcan cause increased production of free radicals, so we can talk aboutthe genotoxic effects of metals on the enzymatic and nonenzymaticcomponents of antioxidant defense system of the organism. DNAdamages and genotoxic effects in the cell can be increased when thecells are exposed to the influence of Pb, leading to the activation ofDNase, which will participate in the degradation of DNA as the ulti-mate effect of activation of apoptosis, i.e. programmed cellular death(4). The addition of GSH, a day after exposure to these metals duringthe experiment, partly reduce the effect of poisoning, because GSHforms complex compound with metal ions. Probably, structure of thecomplex GSH-heavy metal ions is M(GSH)2. Stability of the complexGSH-heavy metal ions depends on the latter size, acid-base propertiesand thiol group affinity that decreases in the order: Cd2+ >Pb2+>Cu+/Cu2+, so the effect of "blocking" Cd is more pronounced.conclusionsGSH is an effective detoxicant because it has a free -SH group throughwhich can build a stable mercaptide, so block the heavy metals andreduces their toxic effects.referencesSayeda AL, Newairy A, Protective role of flax lignans against lead acetate inducedoxidative damage and hyperlipidemia in rats. Food Chem. Tox. 2009; 47: 813-818.Godt J, Scheidig F, Grosse-Siestrup C, Esche V, Brandenburg P, Reich A, Groneberg DA,The toxicity of cadmium and resulting hazards for human health, J. Occup. Med. Tox-icol. 2006; 1(22): doi: 10.1186/1745-6673-1-22.Polec-Pawlak K, Ruzik R, Lipiec E, Investigation of Cd(II), Pb(II) and Cu(I) complexationby glutathione and its component amino acids by ESI-MS and size exclusion chro-matography coupled to ICP-MS and ESI-MS, Talanta 2007; 72: 1564-1572.Counis MF, L-DNase II, a Molecule That Links Proteases and Endonucleases in Apop-tosis, Derives from the Ubiquitous Serpin Leukocyte Elastase Inhibitor. Mol. Cell. Biol.1998; 18: 3612-3619.Kocic G, Pavlovic D, Pavlovic R, Nikolic G, Cvetkovic T, Stojanovic I, Kocic R, Sodiumnitroprusside and preoxynitrite effect on hepatic DNases: An in vitro and in vivo study.Comp. Hepatol. 2004; 3(6): 1-9.157fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsQuality anD safety of aDDitivesin meat ProDuctsJakimova D.1, Angelova S.1, Kadifkova Panovska T.21Centar Of Public Health, Kumanovo, R. Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, Skopje, R. MacedoniaAdditives that are contained in food products have to fulfill thefollowing conditions: to be added in sufficient quantity; not toinfluence significantly in nutrition value of the product; to be able toidentify and determine their quantity; not be harmful for humanhealth if their use is technologically approved. The additives type andquantity needs to be labeled on the original package.In meat products which are temperature processed, are added mixtureof additive which contain: polyphosphates, monosodium glutamate,proteins, aromatics, ascorbic acid etc. Use of these substances isregulated by Rulebook on additives that can be used for foodproduction, Gazette 118/2005. According to this Rulebook the allowedconcentration of added phosphates expressed as diphosphoruspentoxide in meat products should not exceed 0.3%. Polyphosphatesare added in order to improve the technological properties ofproducts. In additives composition the common concentration ofpolyphosphates is in range between 18 and 25%, expressed asdiphosphorus pentoxide, The use of polyphosphates as additives infood industry, from technological point of view, have shown manyadvantages. However, the health issue has to be covered consideringthe fact that polyphosphates can be very harmful. Many authorsconsider that consumption of polyphosphates through food can causedepletion of minerals as: calcium, iron, copper, magnesium etc.