Accuracy was deter-mined by 5 times replicate analysis of plasma samples at three differ-ent concentration levels of HA (Table 1)Table 1: Intra-day precisionIntermediate precision was determined by measuring 5 individuallyprepared spiked plasma samples at 3 different concentration levels ofHA: low, middle and high in three different days. The content of HA(mg/ml plasma) was calculated for each sample against the standardcalibration curve. From 15 determinations the average value and rel-ative error were calculated. Results are shown in Table 2.Table 2: Intermediate precisionThe recovery for HA in spiked plasma samples, compared to HA watersamples, is 97.94-101.01%. Robustness was investigated usingPlackett-Burmane experimental design (N=12). Results of robustnesstesting by means of effect of investigated factors on resolution (Rs)between peaks of HA and IS are shown in Table 3.71PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011Table 3: Robustness testingThe method has shown robust.The proposed validated method was successfully applied in determi-nation of lisinopril in human plasma taken from healthy volunteersafter oral administration of single dose of 20 mg lisinopril. Table 4shows plasma concentrations (ng/ml) of lisinopril obtained from tenhealthy volunteers.Table 4: Plasma concentrations of lisinopril (ng/ml) in healthy volun-teers after administration of single dose of 20mg CONCLUSIONThe data presented in this study indicate that the proposed HPLCmethod for determination of HA in plasma samples is repeatable,reproducible, linear in demanding range, accurate and robust. The re-sults from the validation study shown that HA can be analyzed inhuman plasma in the concentration range of 0.25mg /ml to 25mg /mlwith sufficient reliability for pharmacokinetic studies. This methodcan further be used for determination and quantification of manyACE-inhibitors in human plasma.REFERENCES:1. Sagrilli O, Ersoy L: An HPLC method for the determination of lisinopril in humanplasma and urine with fluorescence detection. J. Chrom. B 2004, 809: 159-165.2. Huang J, Gao S, Guo Q. Development of a LC-MS assay for the quantification oflisinopril in human plasma. Rapid. Commun. Mass. Spectr., 2006, 20: 248-252.3. Greenbaum et al. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of fosinoprolat withenalaprilat and lisinopril in patients with congestive heart failure and chronic renalinsufficiency. Brit. J Clin. Pharm. 2000; 49(1): 23-31.4. Anzenbacherova E, Anzenbacher P, Macek K, and Kvetina J. Determination ofenzyme (angiotensin convertase) inhibitors based on enzymatic reaction followedby HPLC. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 24: 1151-1156, 2001.5. FDA. Guidance for Industry; Bioanalytical Method Validation. U.S. Department ofHealth and human services, Food and Drug administration, Center for DrugEvaluation and Research (CDER), Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM), May2001(GENERIC).OPTIMIZATsIJA NA RP-HPLC METOD ZAODREDUVANjE NA AKE INKhIBITORI VOKhUMANA PLAZMA SO PRIMENA NAREAKTsIJA NA ENZIMSKA DEGRADATsIJAL.Bogdanovska, N.Nakov, V. Karchev, A.Dimitrovska, R. PetkovskaUniverzitet ,, Sv. Kiril i Metodij",Farmatsevtski fakultet, Vodnjanska 17, 1000, Skopje, MakedonijaVOVEDAKE inkhibitorite spagjaat vo najuspeshnite lekovi koi se koristatvo borbata protiv khipertenzija. Kontsentratsijata na AKEinkhibitorite, kako shto se lizinopril i fosinopril, vo bioloshkiprimerotsi, mozhe da se odredi so fluorimetriski, GC-MS i LC-MS metodi so ili bez postapki na derivatizatsija (1,2,3). Oviemetodi za direktno odreduvanje na AKE inkhibitorite vo plazma sebrzi i pretsizni, no pokazhuvaat nedostatotsi vo pogled nadostapnosta. AKE inkhibitorite vo khumana plazma mozhat da seodredat i so primena na enzimsko-inkhibitorni metodi (4).Tselta naovoj trud e razvoj i optimizatsija i validatsija na HPLC metod zaopredeluvanje na khipurna kiselina (HA) koja pretstavuva produktotna enzimsko-inkhibitornata reaktsija na AKE inkhibitorot(lizinopril i fosinopril).MATERIJALI I METODIREAGENSIHipuril - L - Histidil - L - Leucin, substrat (slobodna baza), khipurnakiselina i kaliumovata sol na ftalna kiselina se dobieni odSigma Chemical Co. Substratot se podgotvuva vo pufer (100 mMkalium fosfat i 300 mM natrium khlorid, pH=8.3). Rastvorot navnatreshniot standard (IS), ftalna kiselina, e podgotven vo metanolso HPLC chistota.ENZIMSKO-INKhIBITOREN METOD Kontsentratsijata na AKE inkhibitorot koj stapil vo reaktsija soenzimot e obratno proportsionalna so kontsentratsijata na khipurnakiselina koja se osloboduva od substratot. Kolichinata nasozdadena khipurna kiselina ja prikazhuva preostanatata aktivnostna AKE inkhibitorot. KhROMATOGRAFSKA SEPARATsIJAZa khromatografsko razdeluvanje koristena e Polar-RP 80A Synergi,150x4.6 mm, 4mm, Phenomenex khromatografska kolona isoodvetna Polar-RP Synergi, 4.0x3.0 mm, 4mm Phenomenexpredkolona na temperatura od 25degS i mobilnata faza sostavenaod 0.02M amonium atsetat so pH=4.3 i metanol vo odnos 95/5.Protokot na mobilnata faza e 1.4 ml/min, a UV- detektsijata e nabranova dolzhina od 228 nm. Volumenot na injektiranje e 20ml. REZULTATI I DISKUSIJAValidatsijata na HPLC bioanalitichkiot metod za opredeluvanje naHA vo khumana plazma e izvrshna vo soglasnost so baranjata na FDAvodichot (5).Selektivnosta na metodot beshe opredelena so sporedba nakhromatogramite na rastvoruvachot, rastvor na HA i IS, chista plazma72Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOi plazma so dodaden lek, pri shto ne se zabelezhani inter fe -rirachki pikovi na retentsionoto vreme na HA i IS. Retentsionitevreminja na IS i HA bea 4.1 i 5.6 minuti, soodvetno (sl.1).Sl.1.Khromatogrami chista plazma, plazma so interen standard iplazma so 0,15mg/0.1 ml HALinearnosta beshe opredelena vo kontsentratsisko podrachje od 0.25do 25 mg/ml vo 10 kontsentratsiski tochki na HA, vo tri razlichnidenovi (R2= 0.9996). Tochnosta beshe odredena na primerotsi odplazma vo koja beshe dodadena HA, vo tri razlichni kontsentratsii(Tabela 1).Tabela 1: Tochnost vo eden raboten denIntermediernata pretsiznost beshe odredena preku analiza na 5individualno prigotveni primerotsi na plazma koi sodrzhatdodaden lek vo tri razlichni kontsentratsii (Tabela 2).Tabela 2: Intermedierna pretsiznostAnalitichkiot prinos za HA vo primerotsi od plazma so leksporeden so vodeni rastvori na HA, iznesuva od 97.94-101.01%.Robustnosta na metodot beshe opredelena so primena na Plackett-Burmane experimental design (N=12). Rezultatite od ispituvanjetona robustnosta, izrazeni kako efekt na ispituvanitekhromatografski uslovi na rezolutsijata megju pikovite na IS i HA eprikazhana vo Tabela 3.Tabela 3: Robustnost na metodotIspituvani faktori Rezolutsija (Rs) Efekt P-vredn. pH namobilna faza -1,9565 1,20E-06 Protok (ml/min) -0,1322 0,1229Temperatura na kolonata -0,3608 0,0039 Sodrzhina na MOH vomobilna faza (v/v) -0,4672 0,0012 Kontsentratsija na amoniumatsetaten pufer (M) 0,3428 0,0048 Predlozheniot metod besheuspeshno primenet za opredeluvanje na lizinopril vo khumanaplazma zemena od zdravi dobrovoltsi po aplikatsija na edinechnadoza od 20 mg lizinopril (Tabela 4).Tabela 4: Plazmatski kontsentratsii na lizinopril (ng/ml) kajzdravi dobrovoltsi po peroralna administratsija na edinechnadoza od 20mg ZAKLUChOKRezultatite od validatsijata na predlozheniot HPLC metod zaopredeluvanje na HA vo plazma pokazhuvaat deka metodot linearen,pretsizen, tochen i robusten. Metodot mozhe da se primeni zaopredeluvanje na khipurna kiselina vo plazma vo kontsentratsiskopodrachje od 0.25 mg/ml do 25 mg/ml. Toj dava mozhnost za uspeshnaprimena vo farmakokinetski studii, kako metod za opredeluvanjena kontsentratsijata na AKE inkhibitornite lekovi vo khumanataplazma.LITERATURA:1. Sagrilli O, Ersoy L: An HPLC method for the determination of lisinopril in humanplasma and urine with fluorescence detection. J. Chrom. B 2004, 809: 159-165.2. Huang J, Gao S, Guo Q. Development of a LC-MS assay for the quantification oflisinopril in human plasma. Rapid. Commun. Mass. Spectr., 2006, 20: 248-252.3. Greenbaum et al. Comparison of the pharmacokinetics of fosinoprolat withenalaprilat and lisinopril in patients with congestive heart failure and chronic renalinsufficiency. Brit. J Clin. Pharm. 2000;49(1): 23-31.4. Anzenbacherova E, Anzenbacher P, Macek K, and Kvetina J. Determination ofenzyme (angiotensin convertase) inhibitors based on enzymatic reaction followedby HPLC. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 24: 1151-1156, 2001.5. FDA. Guidance for Industry; Bioanalytical Method Validation. U.S. Department ofHealth and human services, Food and Drug administration, Center for Drug Evaluationand Research(CDER), Center for Veterinery Medicine(CVM), May 2001(GENERIC).73PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011COMPARISON OF THE HYDRODYNEMIC EF-FECTS ON THE DISSOLUTION RATE IN THEPADDLE APPARATUS AND ITS DESIGNMODIFICATIONSBlagica Debarlieva, Irena Brasnarska, Ema Kikovska-Stojanovska, Biljana Sapkareva, Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republic of MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONDrug dissolution testing is an integral part of drug product develop-ment and quality assessment. Often drug dissolution testing is a reg-ulatory requirement to establish the quality of a drug product[1]. Itutilizes specialized equipment, commonly known as basket and pad-dle apparatuses, also referred to as Apparatuses 1 and 2, respectively.It has been well documented that results obtained from dissolutiontesting using these apparatuses may be highly variable and unpre-dictable[2] and often lack relevance to the in vivo drug release charac-teristics (bioavailability) of the products[3]. In some reported studies[4],it has also been demonstrated that, because of the lack of an ade-quate stirring and mixing environment in the dissolution vessels, in-accurate comparative drug dissolution/release of the test productsmay also be observed. Regulatory agencies often consider dissolution methods with Appa-ratus 2 developed using speed of 50 rpm to represent the most ap-propriate operating conditions since it is assumed that it providesoptimum discriminating power with respect to both manufacturingprocess and stability changes. However, for certain tablet formula-tions, the dissolution rates can be a reflection of system artifactsrather than a discriminatory tool. Under these conditions there is vari-ability in dissolution rates due to radial flow in the cylindrical vessel.A "dead zone" forms at the bottom of the vessel where the agitationrate is minimal. The disintegrated mass of the dosage form settles inthis zone forming a cone of trapped drug particles leading to low dis-solution rates.To address these flaws and artifacts of the currently used apparatuses,we have demonstrated the role of hydrodynamics in the dissolutiontesting with the Apparatus 2 by comparing the dissolution ratesachieved with normal set-up and some design modifications.MATERIALS AND METHODSWe performed dissolution tests of immediate release tablets con-taining BCS Class II active substance using paddle apparatus (Appara-tus 2) at 50 rpm under normal set-up, by tilting the vessels by 7 mm,in the PeakTM vessels and by using crescent-shaped spindles (Figure 1).The tilting was achieved by inserting shims between the lips of eachvessel and the base plate of the dissolution equipment resulting in tiltof 7 mm. The modified spindles were shaped from commercially avail-able brush made of stiff twisted metal wires and fine bristles, attachedto the shaft as a substitute for the paddle spindle. The bristles were incontact with the surface of the vessel. The medium was 900 ml simu-lated gastric juice without pepsin and the bath temperature was main-tained at 37+-0.5degC. Samples were pulled at 20 minutes, centrifugedand analyzed using a UV-visible spectrophotometer at a wavelengthof 291 nm.Figure 1. Photographic image of PeakTM vessel (left) and crescent-shaped spindle (right).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe active substance is a low solubility drug and some of the excipi-ents in the formulation increase the viscosity in the microenvironmentof the disintegrated particle making it a good candidate for our re-search.As observed in Table 1 under the normal set-up 52.73+-1.14% of theactive substance was released. Table 1. Results from the effect of different apparatus settings on thedissolution performance of studied samples (Q stands for 'quartile')When the vessels were tilted, the release rate increased to 57.34+-1.74%.The flow at the bottom of the vessel increases when the vessels aretilted. This in turn disrupts the cone and exposes more drug to the dis-solution medium, enabling the drug to go into solution (Figure 3). Figure 3. Schematic depiction of the dissolution in the normal set-upand with the tilted vessels adopted from T. Mirza et al, 2005 [5].The release rate from PeakTM vessels was 61.04+-0.85%. The cone in thePeak vessels is not stationary and is located on the top of the convexshaped bottom.