The real problem lies in the lack of clear guidelines on howto implement regulations and quality standards.REGULATIONS, STANDARDS, AND GUIDELINESAnalytical laboratories in the chemical and pharmaceutical industries,as well as analytical routine laboratories in other disciplines such asenvironmental and food analysis, have generally accepted and introducedthe appropriate standards, norms, and principles in the analyticalprocess.Validation and qualification of analytical laboratories are required bymany regulations, regulatory guidance documents, quality standards,and company policies. The most important regulations applying to validations are the goodmanufacturing practices (GMPs), good clinical practices (GCPs) andgood laboratory practices (GLPs) [2,3]. The ICH publishes guidelines as the results of the discussion onscientific and technical aspects of product registration between theregulatory authorities and the experts of Europe, Japan, and theUnited States [4]. The most important guidelines are those for thevalidation of analytical methods, stability testing, impurity testing,good manufacturing of APIs, and risk assessment.The best-known quality standards are the ISO 9000 series, whichprovide generic standards for development, manufacturing, and service.Most relevant ISO Standard for laboratories is ISO/IEC 17025 [5,6]. Thestandard specifies the general requirements for the competence tocarry out tests and/or calibrations, including sampling. It covers testingand calibration performed using standard methods, non-standardmethods, and laboratory developed methods. The requirements of thestandard are segmented into management and technical requirementsand are used as a basis for laboratory accreditation.HOW TO DEAL WITH MULTIPLE REGULATIONS AND QUALITY STANDARDSLaboratories are frequently faced with a situation where they have tocomply with regulations from different countries or with bothregulations and quality standards at the same time. The solution tothis problem is to combine all regulations and quality standards in asingle quality manual and a single set of operating procedures. Analytical control laboratory within a pharmaceutical company thatmarkets medicinal products in different countries has to work incompliance with the GMPs of the countries in which the drug ismarketed. A chemical companies are certified for ISO 9001. The scopeof the certification also covers the analytical service laboratory, sothe laboratory has to work in compliance with ISO 9001 and with ISOGuide 17025. An independent test laboratory has to comply with ISO17025 and with GLP and cGMP regulations.The laboratory management establishes, implements and maintains aquality system appropriate to the scope of its activities, including thetype, range and volume of testing and/or calibration, validation andverification activities it undertakes. The laboratory managementdescribes its policies, systems, programmes, procedures andinstructions to the extent necessary to enable the laboratory to assurethe quality of the test results it generates. Documentation used in thisquality system must be communicated and available to, understoodand implemented by, the appropriate personnel. The elements of thissystem must be documented in a quality manual, which is available tothe laboratory personnel and must be maintained and updated by anominated responsible member of the laboratory personnel.The quality manual should place the laboratory's own quality systemfirst and foremost. This may be based on a well-known qualitystandard, such as ISO 17025.ISO 17025 contains all of the requirements that testing and cali-bration laboratories have to meet if they wish to demonstrate thatthey operate a management system, are technically competent, andare able to generate technically valid results [6].The acceptance of testing and calibration results between countriesshould be facilitated if laboratories comply with this InternationalStandard and if they obtain accreditation from bodies, which have en-tered into mutual recognition agreements with equivalent bodies inother countries using this International Standard. The use of this In-ternational Standard will facilitate cooperation between laboratoriesand other bodies, and assist in the exchange of information and ex-perience, and in the harmonization of standards and procedures.REFERENCES1. Validation and Qualification in Analytical Laboratories, InformaHealthcare USA, Inc. New York, 20072. WHO Good practices for pharmaceutical quality control laboratories, Workingdocument QAS/09.296, 20093. Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products: Main PrincipleAnnex 4, WHO Technical Report Series 908, 2003 4. International Conference on Harmonization of Technical Requirements forRegistration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), www.ich.com.5. ISO. 9000 Standards Compendium: Quality Management. Geneva Switzerland.2000.6. ISO/IEC 17025 "General requirements for the competence oftesting and calibration laboratories" Geneva, Switzerland, 2005.Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPREDIZVITsI PRI UPRAVUVANjE SO KVALITETOT VO ANALITIChKITE LABORATORIIL. Ugrinova, K. Brezovska, J. Atsevska, A. Potseva-Panovska, J. Tonikj-Ribarska,S. Trajkovikj-Jolevska, A. DimitrovskaTsentar za ispituvanje i kontrola na lekovi, Farmatsevtski fa ku l tet,Univerzitet ,,Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Skopje, R. Makedonija SISTEM NA KVALITETKhierarkhijata na kvalitet vo ramki na edna laboratorija e utvrdenaso slednite termini: kontrola na kvalitet, obezbeduvanje nakvalitet, sistem za kvalitet, podobruvanje na kvalitet i upravuvanjeso kvalitet. Kontrolata na kvalitetot opfakja operativni tekhnikii aktivnosti shto se koristat za da se ispolnat baranjata zakvalitet i regulatornite baranja. Obezbeduvanje na kvali tetot edefinirano kako sproveduvanje na pla ni ra ni i sistematskiaktivnosti za obezbeduvanje na doverba deka organizatsijata giispolnuva baranjata za kvalitet. Sistemot za kvalitet opfakjaseopfatni i koordinirani napori za ispolnuvanje na tselite zakvalitet. Podobruvanje na kvalitetot stava aktsent naprepoznavanjeto na mozhnostite za podobruvanje vrz osnova naindi ka torite za kvalitet. Upravuvanje so kvali te tot e upravuvanjefokusirano na dolgorochen uspekh vo zadovoluvanje na baranjata nakorisnitsite na uslugi.Regulativata e edna od dvete golemi sili shto go ovozmozhuvavospostavuvanjeto na sistemot za kvalitet vo analitichkitelaboratorii. Vtorata i povazhna prichina e podobruvanje nasigurnosta, konzisten-tnosta i tochnosta na analitichkite rezultati.Dobro dizajnirani, razvieni i vali di ra ni analitichki metodi,kvalifikuvana oprema i materijali, zaedno so motiviran ikvalifikuvan pe rsonal se preduslov za postignuvanje na ovaa tsel.Predizvikot za bilo koj plan za validatsija e obezbeduvanje nakvalitet, no so minimalni dopolnitelni troshotsi i najmalaadministrativna opteretenost. Naporot za postignuvanje naoptimalna validatsija e vo granitsite pomegju ne sproveduvanje nabilo kakva validatsija i obidot da se validira se (100%) [1].Prashanje shto chesto se postavuva e: "Do koj stepen e potrebno da sesprovede validatsijata?" Vistinskiot problem lezhi vo nedo sta to -kot na jasni nasoki za toa kako da se implementiraat regulativitei standardite za kvalitet.REGULATIVI, STANDARDI I VODIChIAnalitichkite laboratorii vo ramki na khemiskata i farma tsev t ska -ta industrija, kako i analitichkite laboratorii vo drugi di stsi -plini, kako shto se zhivotnata sredina i khrana, imaat vovedenosoodvetni standardi, normi i printsipi vo analitichkiot protses. Validatsijata i kvalifikatsijata na analitichkite laboratorii sebara od strana na mnogu regulatorni dokumenti, standardi zakvalitet, i politiki na kompaniite.Najvazhnite pravila shto se odnesuvaat na validatsijata sedefinirani so: Dobrata proizvodstvena praksa (DPP), Dobrataklinichka praksa (DKP) i Dobrata laboratoriska praksa (DLP) [2,3].ICH vodichite za nauchnite i tekhnichkite aspekti za registratsija nalekovite, se proizvod na sorabotkata megju regulatornite tela iekspertite od Evropa, Japonija i SAD [4]. Najvazhni se vodichite zavalidatsija na analitichki metodi, ispituvanje na stabilnost,ispituvanje na onechistuvanja, dobroto proizvodna praksa vo pr -oi zvodstvoto na aktivni supstantsii, kako i za protsenkata na rizik.Najpoznatite standardi za kvalitet se serijata na ISO 9000, koi gidefiniraat baranja za kvalitet za razvoj, proizvodstvo i uslugi.Najrelevantni ISO standard za laboratoriite e ISO/IEC 17025 [5,6].Ovoj standard gi spetsifitsira opshtite baranja za kompetentnostza izvrshuvanje na ispituvanje i/ili kalibratsija. Baranjata nastandardot se podeleni vo baranja za upravuvanje i tekhnichkibaranja. Standardot se koristi kako osnova za akreditatsija nalaboratoriite.SPRAVUVANjE SO POVEKjE REGULATORNI BARANjA ISTANDARDI ZA KVALITETLaboratoriite chesto se soochuvaat so situatsija kade shto treba dase usoglasat so regulativite od razlichni zemji i/ili so razlichnistandardi za kvalitet vo isto vreme. Reshenieto za ovoj problem ekombiniranje na site propisi i standardi za kvalitet vo edenprirachnik za kvalitet.Kontrolnata analitichka laboratorija vo ramkite na ednafarmatsevtska kompanija shto izvezuva lekovi vo razlichni zemjimora da raboti vo soglasnost so DPP na zemjite od interes.Kompaniite za proizvodstvo na khemikalii se sertifitsirani zaISO 9001. No, dokolku opsegot na aktivnosti opfakja i uslugi voodnos na laboratorii za ispituvanje i/ili kalibriranje,kompanijata mora da raboti vo soglasnost i so ISO 9001 i ISO17025. Nezavisna laboratorija za kontrola, pak mora da rabotivo soglasnost so ISO 17025 i so propisite na DLP i DPP.Rakovodniot tim na laboratorijata go vosposta v u va, implementirai odrzhuva sistemot za kvalitet soodveten na obemot naaktivnostite na labo ra to ri jata. Rakovodniot tim gi definirapo l i t i ka ta, sistemite, programite, postapkite i upat stva ta dostepen potreben za da se ovozmozhi laboratorijata da obezbedikvalitet na re zul ta ti te od ispituvanjeto shto go sproveduva. Dok u -men ta tsijata shto se koristi vo sistemot za kvalitet tre ba da bidedostapna, razbirliva i implemen ti rana od strana na soodvetniotpersonal. Elementite na sistemot za kvalitet treba da bidat definirani voprirachnikot za kvalitet, a da se zasnovaat na dobro poznatitestandardi za kvalitet, kako shto e ISO/IEC 17025 standardot [6]. Prifakjanje na rezultatite od ispituvanje i kalibratsija pomegjuzemjite e vozmozhno ako labo ra to riite rabotat vo soglasnost soovoj megj u na ro den standard i ako se akreditirani od tela shto sezaemno priznaeni od ekvivalentni tela vo dru gi zemji vo odnos naovoj megjunaroden standard. Upotrebata na standardot ja olesnuvasorabotkata pomegju laborato-riite i regulatornite tela, i pomagapri razmena na informatsii i iskustva, kako i pri usoglasuvanje nastandardi i pro tse du ri.LITERATURA1. Validation and Qualification in Analytical Laboratories,InformaHealthcare USA, Inc. New York, 20072. WHO Good practices for pharmaceutical quality controllaboratories, working document QAS/09.296, 20093. Good Manufacturing Practices for Pharmaceutical Products:Main Principle Annex 4, WHO Technical Report Series 908, 2003 4. International Conference on Harmonization of TechnicalRequirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for HumanUse (ICH), www.ich.com.5. ISO. 9000 Standards Compendium: Quality Management.Geneva Switzerland. 2000.6. ISO/IEC 17025 "General requirements for the competence oftesting and calibration laboratories" Geneva, Switzerland, 2005.8Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOREVIEW, EVALUATION AND REPORTING OF ANALYTICAL RESULTS K. Brezovska, J. Acevska, A. Poceva Panovska, J. TonicRibarska, L. Ugrinova, S. Trajkovic Jolevska, A. Dimitro-vskaCenter for drug quality control, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, MacedoniaThe analytical laboratory should perform the testing in a qualitysystem based on quality regulations, guidelines and standards in orderto guarantee a sufficient level of confidence in the results. Thepurpose of any chemical analytical measurement is to get consistent,reliable, and accurate data. Many decisions are based on the resultsobtained from qualitative and quantitative chemical analysis, and it isimportant to be aware of the quality of the analytical results.The results of the testing performed in analytical laboratory may havesignificant consequences for the products involved, especially if asample is found to be out of specification. Measures taken by theCompetent Authority may include recalls, batch rejection, thoroughproduction investigations, refusing of marketing authorisation of theproduct. If drugs with undetected impurities are distributed, they canhave a negative impact on peoples' health. If harmful contaminantsin environmental or food samples are not detected, they can bedangerous to the environment or to consumers. In addition, reportingincorrect analytical results at any particular time leads to loss of alaboratory's confidence in the validity of future results. Any laboratoryshould do its utmost to ensure accurate results within a known level ofconfidence, and reliable reporting of test results and conclusions ofconformity or non-conformity of a product. Validation and qualificationof processes and equipment will help to meet this goal [1,2]. TEST RESULTSAnalytical laboratory should have quality control procedures formonitoring the validity of tests performed and results obtained.Standard operating procedure should be established and main-tained for protecting the data, and should include definition of rawdata, integrity and confidentiality of data entry or collection, datastorage, data transmission and data processing. Data obtained fromanalytical tests should be reviewed and validated by a qualified andauthorized person following the standard operating procedures.Final results should be traceable back to the individual who enteredthe data, or, in cases where data are acquired on-line from ananalytical instrument, the instrument should be identified. If changeshave been made to any data, the original raw data should not beobscured by these changes. Checks, preferably performed automatically, should be built into anyroutine method to identify errors. Requirements for a validity check ofdata include well-maintained instruments, documented measurementprocesses, and statistically supported limits of uncertainty [1,3].Estimation and reporting of uncertainty of measurements The uncertainty of measurement "characterises the dispersion of thevalues that would be reasonably attributed to the measurand" [4].According to ISO/IEC 17025: "...Testing laboratories shall have and shallapply procedures for estimating uncertainty of measurement..." [3].The uncertainty of the measurement should be considered in theresult for all quantitative measurements. Both the Eurachem/CITAC Guide [4] and EA guidelines EA 4/16 [5] givetwo possible approaches for estimation of measurement uncertainties:- "step-by-step" approach (combined uncertainty) - identifying andquantifying each component which contributes to the overalluncertainty and combining all contributions.