Adamova, L. Makraduli, R. Dameska, E. Ristevska, L. Ivceska, H. Litovin, D. Dimova, A. Sekovanic, M. Anevska, D. Lepcevska265PP-141Formulation of gastro-resistant tablets with Eudragit(r)Sonja Dimchevska, Packa Antovska, Bosilka Stefanova, Sonja Ugarkovic268PP-142Evidence Based Homeopathy - Scientific Framework of Homeopathy Drugs Preparations in Homeopathic Materia medicaVesna Simonova, Dora Pachova269Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011TABLE OF CONTENTSFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPP-143 Supplier qualification - approach through risk assessmentSnezana Vecerkov Vukmirovic270PP-144 Preformulation studies of Zolpidem tabletsPacka Antovska, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Sonja Dimcevska, Bosilka Stefanova, Sonja Ugarkovic272PP-145 Influence of Different Lactose Monohydrate Supplier on In-process parameters on tablets produced on a rotary tablet pressDejan Kostovski, Krume Toshev, Liljana Krsteska, Sonja Ugarkovic 274PP-146 Static image analysis study of the morphological properties of crystalline pharmaceutically active ingredientDejan Kostovski, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Liljana Krsteska, Sonja Ugarkovic 277PP-147Use of descriptive statistics for evaluation of the tableting process of Zolpidem 5 mg film-coated tablets as apart of concurrent validationBosilka Stefanova, Packa Antovska, Sonja Dimcevska, Sonja Ugarkovic, Blagica Debarlieva, Filip Butikoski280PP-148 Deviation Management in Integrated Pharmaceutical Quality SystemNada Popstefanova, Marija Davcheva, Miroslava Ilievska, Svetlana Trajkoska Dabevska283PP-149Effects of formulation variables on the particle size and viability of L.casei - loaded in whey protein-Ca-alginate microparticlesKatarina Smilkov, Tanja Petreska Ivanovska, Lidija Petrusevska Tozi, Anita Grozdanov, Marija Glavas Dodov, Nikola Geskovski, Rumenka Petkovska, Kristina Mladenovska285PP-150 Qualification and process validation on blister packaging lineMaja Stojevska, Biljana Pavicevic, Sonja Sterjevska, Darko Atanasoski, Biljana Nanova, Milkica Gligorova287PP-151 Influence of excipients on in-process parameters on metronidazole tabletsMeri Davceva289PP-152 Process capability indexes determination during the validation of the tablets production processVioleta Dinic Milisavljevic, Natasa Anevska Stojanovska, Sonja Ugarkovic, Marija Glavas Dodov291PP-153 Continuous granulation, a new approach in pharmaceutical manufacturingEmilija Spaseska Aleksovska, Aleksandar Aleksovski, Emina Zahirovic291PP-154 Formulation optimization of ketoprofen hydrophilic matrix system by using factorial experimental designH. Litovin, R. Dameska, D. Dimova, E. Adamova, A. Sekovanic, E Ristevska, M. Anevska, D. Lepcevska, L. Ivceska,E. Dimitrovska, L. Makraduli292PP-155 Formulation and evaluation of solid lipid nanoparticles loaded with budesonide for delivery to the inflamedcolonic mucosaH. Litovin, K. Goracinova, N. Geskovski, M. Simonoska Crcarevska, S. Dimcevska, K. Mladenovska, M. Glavas Dodov295PP-156 Characterization of silica xerogel microparticles as 5-FU carriers for colon cancer therapyB. Djurdjic, N. Geskovski, G. Petrusevski, M. Simonoska Crcarevska, M. Glavas Dodov, M. Cvetkovska, K.Goracinova297PP-157Dissolution studies of alpha lipoic acid capsulesD. Dimova, R. Dameska, L. Makraduli, E. Adamova, E. Ristevska, M.Anevska, A. Sekovanic, D. Lepcevska, L. Ivceska,H. Litovin299PP-158Formulation and characterization of amino-functionalized silica particles for budesonide deliveryV. Petrovska, K. Goracinova, M. Simonoska Crcarevska, A. Georgieva, N. Geskovski, M. Cvetkovska, M. Glavas Dodov302PP-159 Formulation of dental gel with micro particles loaded with tea tree oil, Melaleuca alternifoliaM. Stefkova, M. Glavas Dodov, N. Geskovski, M. Simonoska Crcarevska, K. Goracinova304PP-160Strategies for improvment of the EPR effect of PLGA amphipilic nanoparticlesM. S. Crcarevska, N. Geskovski, M. G. Dodov, S. Calis, S. Dimcevska, K. Goracinova306PP-161Pharmacy-based survey of patient experiences and treatment effectiveness of acute diarrhea using probioticsin R. of MacedoniaT. Sterjeva, K. Goracinova, M. Glavas Dodov309PP-162Quality control of radiopharmaceutical agent technetium [99mTc] Mebrofenin- as a prerequisite for its applicationKlimentina Trajkova, Aneta Dimitorvska, Emilija Janevik- Ivanovska311pp-162 Quality control of radiopharmaceutical agent technetium [99mTc] Mebrofenin- as a prerequisite for its applicationKlimentina Trajkova, Aneta Dimitorvska, Emilija Janevik- Ivanovska311PP-186 Water Intrusion Test, Advantage and Practical AspectsKukeska Silvana, Tomovska Elena, Gligorova Milkica313SODRZhINAPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOCLINICAL PHARMACYOP-48Intravenous immunoblobulin in the treatment of neurological diseasesSlobodan Apostolski316OP-49Congenital malformations and pharmacological treatment of epilepsy in pregnancyGordana Kiteva-Trencevska316OP-50Optimization of ELISA method for determination of serum anti-GM1 antibodiesAna Poceva Panovska, Katerina Brezovska, Aleksandra Grozdanova, Slobodan Apostolski, Ljubica Suturkova318OP-51Characterization of glycoproteins isolated from human peripheral nerve and two Campylobacter jejuni O:19isolates: enteritis and GBS associatedK. Brezovska, A. Poceva Panovska, A. Grozdanova, S. Apostolski, Lj. Suturkova320OP-52Induction of anti-ganglioside antibodies in Guillain-Barre Syndrome animal modelGrozdanova Aleksandra, Poceva Panovska Ana, Brezovska Katerina, Trajkovska-Dokic Elena, Apostolski Slobodan,Suturkova Ljubica323OP-53Individualized epilepsy treatment with Carbamazepine and Valproic acidSterjev.Z, Dimovski A.J., Suturkova Lj325PP-163Potential drug-drug interactions in patients hospitalized in the Infectious Diseases Hospital 'Mother Teresa' in TiranaKlejda Hudhra, Besnik Jucja, Gjergji Minga, Vigan Saliasi328PP-164The impact of antineoplastic drugs on the health of healthcare professionalsVigan Saliasi, Gjergji Minga, Dhurata Tarifa, Klejda Hudhra, Delina Hudhra328PP-165Influence of immunosuppressive therapy on biochemical parameters in kidney transplant patientsNikola Stefanovic, Radmila Velickovic-Radovanovic, Aleksandra Catic-Djordjevic, Tatjana Cvetkovic329PP-166Same target different pathways: Clinical pharmacist and Clinical pharmacologistGolocorbin-Kon S., Lalic-Popovic M., Mikov M.330PP-167Bone mineral density in women with risk factors for osteoporosisTamara Vojnovic, Tanja Lazova, Slobodan Gigov, Ivana Indic, Jelena Zivkovic, Jelena Gigov330PP-168Monitoring the implementation and security of montelucast in childrenMarija Popovic Milenkovic331PP-169Angiogenesis inhibitors - New approach to treatment of malignant diseaseVera Dabanovic, Ana Pantovic334PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTRY/BIOMOLECULAR SCIENCIESOP-54Electrochemical monitoring of anticancer drugs-DNA interactions by single-use sensor platformsArzum Erdem334OP-55(Benzamidomethyl)triethylammonium Chloride: A Mild and Versatile Reagent for BenzamidomethylationEmil Popovski334OP-56Antiiflammatory activity and docking studies of some b-hydroxy-b-aryl propanoic acidsJelena Savic, Bojan Markovic, Sanda Dilber, Marina Milenkovic, Milena Jovcic, Brizita Drdevic334OP-57Phenylalanine derivates, new selective ligands for ampa- and kainate receptor subunits of ionotropic glutamate receptorsSerafimoska Zorica, Kapedanovska Nestororvska Aleksandra, Suturkova Ljubica, Tommy N. Johansen, Karla Frydenvang336PP-170Arylpiperazines active on 5HT1A receptor - QSAR analysisIvaValkova, Irini Doytchinova340PP-171In vitro study of antimicrobial activity of a,b-unsaturated carboxylic acids and a-bromo-carboxylic acidsSara Filipovic, Marina Milenkovic, Sanda Dilber, Vesna Vitnik, Tanja Jovanovic, Zeljko Vitnik341PP-172Synthesis and investigations of some 8-substituted derivatives of 1,3,7-trimethylxanthineAl. Zlatkov, Pl. Peikov341TABLE OF CONTENTSFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPP-180 Harmful effects of UV radiation on humanDaliborka Jovanova, Katerina Andonovska, Biljana Bauer Petrovska366PP-181 Use of poppy through the agesKaterina Andonovska, Daliborka Jovanova, Biljana Bauer Petrovska368OTHERPP-182Importance of trade marks for pharmaceutical productsKaterina Ancevska Netkovska370PP-173Electrochemical monitoring of anticancer drugs-DNA interactions by single-use sensor platformsArzum Erdem342PP-174(Benzamidomethyl)triethylammonium Chloride: A Mild and Versatile Reagent for BenzamidomethylationEmil PopovskiAntiiflammatory activity and docking studies of some b-hydroxy-b-aryl propanoic acids342PP-175Jelena Savic, Bojan Markovic, Sanda Dilber, Marina Milenkovic, Milena Jovcic, Brizita DrdevicPhenylalanine derivates, new selective ligands for ampa- and kainate receptor subunits of ionotropic 343PP-176glutamate receptorsSerafimoska Zorica, Kapedanovska Nestororvska Aleksandra, Suturkova Ljubica, Tommy N. Johansen, Karla FrydenvangArylpiperazines active on 5HT1A receptor - QSAR analysis346PP-177IvaValkova, Irini DoytchinovaIn vitro study of antimicrobial activity of a,b-unsaturated carboxylic acids and a-bromo-carboxylic acids 346PP-178Sara Filipovic, Marina Milenkovic, Sanda Dilber, Vesna Vitnik, Tanja Jovanovic, Zeljko VitnikSynthesis and investigations of some 8-substituted derivatives of 1,3,7-trimethylxanthineAl. Zlatkov, Pl. Peikov348ACADEMIC SECTIONOP-58PHARMINE - Pharmacy education in EuropeJeffrey Atkinson and Bart Rombaut356OP-59Harmonization and reformation of the Master in Pharmacy study programme at the Faculty of Pharmacy, University of LjubljanaIrena Mlinaric-Rascan, Mirjana Gasperlin, Borut Bozic356OP-60The science and practice in the curricula of the Faculty of Pharmacy at the university "Ss Cyril and Methodius"in Skopje, MacedoniaAleksandar J. Dimovski, K. Mladenovska357PP-179Pharmaceutical care in the curriculum of Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry: past experience and futurechallengesZ. Juricic, L. Bach-Rojecky, S. Vladimir-Knezevic, R. Jurisic Grubesic360STUDENTS SECTION ORAL PRESENTAIONSTitles of oral presentations (in order of appearance) 362STUDENTS SECTIONPLENARNI PREDAVANjAPLENARY LECTURESPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOCURRENT TRENDS AND FUTUREPROSPECTS OF PHARMACOECONOMICSAND OUTCOMES RESEARCH - WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO HEALTHTECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENTFinn Boerlum Kristensen1National Board of Health, EUnetHTA Coordinating Secretariat, Copenhagen2 University of Southern Denmark, Odense, DenmarkPharmacoeconomics, outcomes research and health technology as-sessment are composite scientific disciplines that are increasinglyused to determine value and inform healthcare decisions.Pharmacoeconomics refers to the scientific discipline that comparesthe value of one pharmaceutical drug or drug therapy to another[1]. Itis a sub-discipline of Health economics. A pharmacoeconomic studyevaluates the cost (expressed in monetary terms) and effects(expressed in terms of monetary value, efficacy or enhanced healthrelated quality of life) of a pharmaceutical product. Health RelatedQuality of Life refers to how the individual's wellbeing may beimpacted over time by a disease, a disability, or a disorder[2]. Itencompasses those aspects of overall quality of life that can be clearlyshown to affect health--either physical or mental.Outcomes research investigates the outcomes of healthcarepractices. It has been defined as the study of the end results of healthservices that takes patients' experiences, preferences, and values intoaccount. It is intended to provide scientific evidence relating todecisions made by all who participate in healthcare [3] .Health Technology Assessment (HTA) is a multidisciplinary process thatsummarises information about the medical, social, economic andethical issues related to the use of health technology in a systematic,transparent, unbiased, robust manner. Its aim is to inform theformulation of safe, effective, health policies that are patient focusedand seek to achieve best value. Despite its policy goals, HTA mustalways be firmly rooted in research and the scientific method[4] .The European network for HTA (EUnetHTA) is developing and testingtools to facilitate European cross-border collaboration in HTA to in-crease the application, volume, and quality of information for health-care decision-making at the national level. It is co-financed by the EUCommission and partner institutions in Member States[5] .REFERENCES1. Arnold RJG and Ekins S, Time for cooperation in health economics among themodeling community, PharmacoEconomics 2010; 28:609-13.2. McHorney CA. Health status assessment methods for adults: pastaccomplishments and future directions. Annual Rev Public Health 1999; 20:309-35.3. Clancy, CM; Eisenberg JM. Outcomes research: measuring the end results of healthcare. Science 1998; 282: 245-6.4. Kristensen FB, Makela M, Allgurin Neikter S, et al. European network for HealthTechnology Assessment, EUnetHTA: Planning, development, and implementation ofa sustainable European network for Health Technology Assessment. Int J Technol As-sess Health Care 2009;25(Suppl 2):107-116.5. Kristensen FB, Lampe K, Chase DL, et al. Practical tools and methods for healthtechnology assessment in Europe: Structures, methodologies, and tools developedby the European network for Health Technology Assessment, EUnetHTA. Int J Tech-nol Assess Health Care 2009;25(Suppl 2):1-8.PERSPECTIVES OF EUROPEAN ANDGLOBAL PHARMACOVIGILANCEGunilla Sjolin-ForsbergCIOMS, c/o WHO, 20 Avenue Appia-CH-1211 Geneva 27, SwitzerlandThe management of pharmacovigilance has shifted from national are-nas to more global activities. There is a development to perform moreclinical trials in resource-limited countries and national or regional de-cisions may have an impact globally. To make efforts towards harmo-nization, common standards (ICH, CIOMS WHO etc) and capacitybuilding is essential. Knowledge about pharmacological mechanismsincluding pharmacokinetics, metabolism and genetics is a necessarybasis for understanding adverse drug reactions.