Asa result, MPO and its downstream inflammatory pathways representattractive targets for both prognostication and therapeutic interven-tion in the prophylaxis of atherosclerotic cardiovascular disease (KVD).The essential role of MPO as a component of the innate immune re-sponse to foreign invasion was first recognized nearly 4 decades ago.Spurred initially by the recognition that MPO is enriched within humanatheroma, both MPO and its reactive oxidants have been implicatedas participants in tissue injury during a large number of inflammatoryconditions.The Human Experience: Multiple lines of evidence suggest that MPOmay play a role in atherogenesis in humans. Early studies localizedMPO and its products as being enriched within human atheroscleroticplaques. Individuals with total or subtotal MPO deficiency, a defectwith a frequency of 1 in every 2000 to 4000 whites, appear less likelyto have CVD develop. Increasing systemic levels of MPO have also beendemonstrated to predict the presence of angiographic coronary ar-tery disease. Individuals who possess MPO levels in the fourth quartileamong sequential subjects undergoing diagnostic cardiac catheteri-zation at a tertiary referral center were 15- to 20-fold more likely todemonstrate abnormal coronary angiograms compared with subjectsin the lowest quartile. This relationship remained significant after sta-tistical adjustments for Framingham risk score and C-reactive protein.In addition, plasma and serum levels of MPO have been shown to pre-dict risks of subsequent major adverse cardiac events (nonfatal my-ocardial infarction, death, and need for revascularization) in patientspresenting with either chest pain or acute coronary syndromes. The Mouse Experience: In contrast, data from animal studies of ath-erosclerosis have failed to demonstrate such relationships. When low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptor in experimental mice underwentirradiation and subsequent infusion of bone marrow, the extent of ath-erosclerotic lesions actually modestly increased. These results sug-gested that MPO has little role, or may even be atheroprotective, inexperimental mice. These findings highlight a clear species difference between: athero-sclerosis in human and experimental mice. This has led to the conclu-sion that common mouse models of atherosclerosis may not permitinvestigation of the potential involvement of MPO in human athero-genesis. Although experimental mice with atherosclerosis to date haveyet to demonstrate the presence of MPO or its catalytic activity withinthe target organ/tissue, it is notable that more acute inflammationmodels in mice demonstrate both the presence of MPO and its oxi-dation products. Models of mice in which both MPO and its oxidativeproducts are observed have been used to support a key role for the en-zyme in promotion of lipid peroxidation, and other oxidative modifi-cations, endothelial dysfunction, and adverse ventricular remodelingin the setting of acute myocardial infarction, as discussed. A role for MPO throughout the evolution of the atheroscleroticprocess has been supported by numerous investigations. Mechanisticlinks exist between MPO and the generation of atherogenic lipopro-teins, consumption of nitric oxide (NO), and development of en-dothelial dysfunction, initiation and propagation of the matureatheroma and its subsequent complications of plaque rupture, throm-bosis, and ventricular remodeling. The many links between MPO and proatherogenic activities that mightparticipate in many stages of cardiovascular disease has stimulatedconsiderable interest in the development of therapeutic strategies toinhibit MPO catalysis. One potential difficulty with development of anMPO inhibitor is the concern that such a drug might have adverse ef-fects related to impairment in the role of enzymes in innate host de-fenses. It should be noted, however, that only subjects with profound(near total or complete) deficiencies in MPO appear to have a signifi-cant increase in risk for infections, and only in the setting of con-129Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY / FOOD AND NUTRITION oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONcomitant factors that predispose to immunosuppression, such as di-abetes. MPO stores within leukocytes may be relatively protected frominhibition because the enzyme is stored in a crystalline form withingranules and only released into the phagolysosome compartment andextracellular space upon leukocyte activation. As a result, through useof more polar inhibitors, it may be possible to target extracellularMPO, such as enzyme trapped within the subendothelial space, andnot to significantly impede leukocyte killing of phagocytosedpathogens. The development of MPO inhibitors awaits further inves-tigation.REFERENCES1. Ross R. Atherosclerosis-an inflammatory disease. N Engl J Med. 1999; 340: 115-126.2. Klebanoff SJ. Oxygen metabolism and the toxic properties of phagocytes. AnnIntern Med. 1980; 93: 480-489. 3. Zhang R, Brennan ML, Shen Z, MacPherson JC, Schmitt D, Molenda CE, HazenSL. Myeloperoxidase functions as a major enzymatic catalyst for initiation of lipidperoxidation at sites of inflammation. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277: 46116-46122.MIELOPEROKSIDAZA - RIZIK FAKTORZA KARDIOVASKULARNI ZABOLUVANjA Milena Spasovska1, Despina Efremova2, SilvijaNeshova3, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska41P.Z.U Apteka " Prima"- Okhrid 2Grupatsija Replek AD- Skopje 3P.Z.U Apteka "Naris"- Veles 4Farmatsevtski fakultet-SkopjeMielopreoksidaza (MPO), e enzim koj se naogja vo leukotsitite i,katalizira golem broj na oksidativni reaktsii. Uchestvuva voimuniot odgovor i golem broj podatotsi ukazhuvaat dekaoksidativnite derivati na MPO uchestvuvaat vo oshtetuvanje natkivoto za vreme na inflamatsija. Kataliziranite reaktsii od MPOimaat proaterogena aktivnost vo razvoj na kardiovaskularnizaboluvanja, pochnuvajkji od initsijatsija, razvoj i akutnikomplikatsiski fazi na aterosklerotichni protsesi. Kako rezultatna toa, MPO i inflamatornite protsesi se prouchuvaat so tsel da sepredvidi i da se intervenira vo profilaksa na kardiovaskularnizaboluvanja (KVZ).Ulogata na MPO kako komonenta na vrodeniot imun odgovor bilaotkriena pred 4 detsenii. So otkrivanjeto deka MPO se naogja voateromatoznite plaki na chovekot, MPO i negovite reaktivnioksidi se nabljuduvani kako uchesnitsi vo tkivno oshtetuvanje zavreme na inflamatorni protsesi. Istrazhuvanja kaj chovek: Golem broj na podatotsi ukazhuvaat dekaMPO pridonesuva za aterogeneza kaj chovekot. Novite istrazhuvanjapokazhuvaat deka aterosklerotichnite plaki se bogati so MPO inegovite produkti. Individuite so totalna ili subtotalnadefitsitarnost na MPO, shto se javuva kaj 1 na sekoi 2000 do 4000individui vo populatsijata kaj belata rasa, imaat pomalaverojatnost za razvoj na KVZ. Zgolemenite sistemski vrednost naMPO predviduvaat zgolemeno prisustvo na koronarna arteriskabolest. Individuite koi imaat povisoki vrednosti na MPO, imaatabnormalen koronaren angiogram (toa e potvrdeno so nivnadijagnostichka kardijalna kateterizatsija vo zdravstveni ustanovi).Ova korelatsija ostanuva signifikantna posle statistichkaobrabotka na Framingham rizik faktor (test za opredeluvanje namozhnosta za razvoj na KVZ vo narednite 10 godini) i C -reaktivniot protein. Serumskite i plazma vrednosti na MPOukazhuvaat na rizik za nastanuvanje na poseriozni kardijalnizaboluvanja (nefatalen miokardijalen infarkt, smrt i potreba odrevaskulizatsija) kaj patsienti koi chustvuvaat gradna bolka iliakuten koronaren sindrom. Istrazhuvanja kaj eksperimentalni gluvtsi: Podatotsite odistrazhuvanjeto kaj zhivotnite za ateroskleroza ne pokazhuvaat vakvapovrzanost. Koga retseptorot za lipoprotein so mala gustina (LDL)kaj eksperomentalni gluvtsi se izlozhi na radijatsija i posledova -telno se dodava infuzija od koskena srtsevina, stepenot naatreosklerotichni lezii umereno se zgolemuva. Ovie rezultatipoka zhuvaat deka, kaj eksperimentalni modeli na gluvtsi koi imaatateroskleroza, MPO ima mala uloga, pa duri pokazhuva i ateropro -tek ti ven efekt. Naodite pokazhauvaat jasna razlika pomegju vidovite: ateros kl e ro -za kaj chovek i eksperimentalni gluvtsi. Ova ne upatuva na zakluchokdeka modelite na gluvtsi so atreoskleroza ne mozhat da se koristatpri istrazhuvanje za potentsijalno uchestvo na MPO vo aterogenezakaj chovek. Iako modelite na gluvtsi so ateroskleroza do sega nepokazhale prisustvo na MPO ili katalitichka aktivnost vo tselniotorgan ili tkivo, znachajno e deka kaj gluvtsi koi imaat akutnainflamatsija ima prisustvo na MPO i negovi oksidativniprodukti. Modelite na gluvtsi kade MPO i negovite oksidativniprodukti se nabljuduvani, se koristat za da se dokazhe glavnatauloga na enzimite vo razvojot na lipidna peroksidatsija, i drugioksidativni modifikatsii, endotelna disfunktsija, i ve n t ri -kularno remodeliranje vo utvrduvanje na akuten miokar di jaleninfarkt. Ulogata na MPO vo razvoj na aterosklerotichni protsesi e podrzhanaso golem broj na istrazhuvanja. Postoi povrzanost megju MPO isozdavanjeto na aterogeni lipoproteini, iskoristuvanjeto naazoten oksid (NO) i razvojot na endotelna disfunktsija, initsijatsijai razvoj na zrela aterosklerozna plaka i pojava na ruptura,tromboza i ventrikularno remodeliranje. Povrzanosta na MPO i proaterogena aktivnost koja mozhe dauchestvuva vo razvoj na povekje fazi na kardiovaskularnizaboluvanja, e iskoristena za razvoj na terapevski strategii zainkhibiranje na katalizata na MPO. Pri razvoj na inkhibitor naMPO se pojavuva problem deka lekot kje vlijae negativno na uchestvona enzimite vo vrodeniot imun odgovor. Individuite so vkupennedostatok na MPO imaat zgolemen rizik za razvoj na infektsijakako i tie so dijabet, koi imaat predispozitsija za razvoj naimunosupresija. MPO koj se naogja vo leukotsitite mozhe delumno dase zashtiti od inkhibitsija bidejkji enzimot e skladiran vokristalna forma na granulite i e osloboden samo vofagolizozomskiot del i ekstratselularniot prostor prileukotsitna aktivatsija. So upotreba na polarni inkhibitori, mozheda se targetira ekstatselularna MPO, kako enzim koj se naogja vosubendotelniot prostor a ne go poprechuvaat unishtuvanjeto nafagotsitirani patogeni od strana na leukotsitite. MPOinkhibitorite podlezhat na ponatamoshno istrazhuvanje.LITERATURA1. Ross R. Atherosclerosis-an inflammatory disease. N Engl J Med. 1999; 340: 115-126.2. Klebanoff SJ. Oxygen metabolism and the toxic properties of phagocytes. AnnIntern Med. 1980; 93: 480-489. 3. Zhang R, Brennan ML, Shen Z, MacPherson JC, Schmitt D, Molenda CE, HazenSL. Myeloperoxidase functions as a major enzymatic catalyst for initiation of lipidperoxidation at sites of inflammation. J Biol Chem. 2002; 277: 46116-46122.130Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA /TOKSIKOLOGIJA / KhRANA I ISKhRANA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOSCIENCE AS A TOOL FOR PROTECTING THEWORKING ENVIRONMENT: DRUG AND AL-COHOL ABUSE IN THE WORKPLACEZoran Kavrakovski, Katerina Jugreva, BiljanaBauer PetrovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius" SkopjeIs the safety of our workplace, of other employees and of the generalpublic jeopardized if employees abuse drugs and consume alcoholbefore or during working hours? Often enough drugs and alcohol area real and definite risk for the employees safety in a work environment(1). More than 50% of employees worldwide are connected with misuseof readily available drugs, and 70% of them with alcohol abuse in theworkplace (2, 3). Testing for alcohol and drug abuse in the workplace should be a newlegal regulation, mandatory for all employees in the Republic ofMacedonia. The introduction of the drug testing program should atthe same time be an introduction to the process of solution makingthat will signify greater safety in the workplace. Therefore we need todevise the work methodology and to review all the necessary testswhich need to be conducted among employees in order to determinewhether there is an alcohol and drug abuse in the workplace. Trials ofdrugs will primarily be carried out for easily available drugs and drugsthat might be detrimental to the body, such as cocaine, cannabinoids,designer drugs, prescribed medications not used for medical purposes,inhalants, hallucinogens and narcotics (4). The presence of alcohol canbe also detected, as well as the presence of other active substanceswithin the drug (having a significant effect on the CNS), which mayaffect the psycho-somatic ability of the employees (5). Alcohol anddrug abuse is closely connected with the reduction of the nationalproduction capacity and the reduction of the working-age populationdue to injuries, illnesses or death.Poison Control Centre (PCC) can take part in designating specificmeasures and actions to help all employers and managers who areinterested in the development and improvement of the programs fortesting alcohol and drug abuse in the workplace by organizingeducational courses, workshops and conferences regarding thebenefits and the significance of the health and safety effects of theseinvestigations in the working and life environment. For manyemployers, the drug and alcohol testing program shall certainlyimpose less absence from work, less changes in shifts within the workteam, improved health, safety and morale of the employees, as wellas increase of efficiency and productivity at work.The drug testing program in the workplace can be carried out not onlyon all new applicants before being employed in the service, but on thealready employed ones as well. This is of great significance foremployees in workplaces with a high risk of injury or illness, as well asother job positions defined as high-risk and sensitive in terms of healthand safety of the employees, their associates and customers. Forinstance, job positions in organic-chemical and oil industry, constru -ction, aviation, tourism and transportation of passengers, technicaland health care, police and military structures, working with dangerousand harmful chemicals, explosives etc. Drug abuse testing shall becarried out before employment, after a certain incident, purposefullyand periodically. Currently, studies for drug abuse testing programsamong employees in the Republic of Macedonia are only a legalchallenge.