METHODSThe validation of the process of sterile production of Natrii chlorideinfundibile cum glucose 5%,0,9% (2:1) covers the stages of the overallprocess of production. Stages in the production are: 1.Weight 2.Bar-boting 3. Dissolve the active substance 4. Dissolve of component forthe adjustment of pH-value of the solution 5. Filling up to final volume6.Membrane filtration7.Dosage 8.Streilization 9.Visual control 10.PackingIn order to analyze the parameters in the physical-chemical and mi-crobiological research we use the following methods : 1.pH values 2.Conductivity 3. Bacterial endotoxines 4.Content of Natrium chloride5. Content of glucose 6.The looks of the solution 7.Solutio bio-burden8.Mechanical impurities 9.Sterility RESULTSThe critical parameters in the process of terminal sterilization are thetemperature and the time from which the sterility of the given prod-uct depends. >> results of the physical analyses of put termoelements in the au-toclave-penetration of temperature>> results of the physical/microbiological analysis-microbiologicalvalidation - Bi>> monitoring of parameters for every sterilizations cycle ( time,temperature, pressure )>> results of the microbiological analyses of the samples of the so-lution of Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose taken before thefiltration equipment >> results of the physical and chemical analyses of the samples ofsolution of Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose taken beforethe filtration equipment >> results of the physical and chemical analyses of the samples ofthe solution of Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose taken dur-ing and after the continuous process of production after filtration >> results of the physical/chemical research of glass containersfilled with solution of Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose akenafter autoclaving 251Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATION>> results of the microbiological analysis of the samples of theglass containers filled with solution taken after autoclaving >> results of the analyses of content of active substance in the finalsolutionDISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONSAfter the three documented series were made , the process for pro-duction of Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose is considered to bevalidated. The validation of the process of sterile production in asep-tic working conditions, confirms, the capacity of the process to yielda product of an adequate quantitative, qualitative and micro-biolog-ical quality.REFERENCES1.Drug,device and manufacturing,Carol Desain2.Pharmaceutical Dosage forms(Parenteral Medications)HerbertA. Lieberman Vol23.Pharmaceutical Process validation,Ira R.Berry,Robert A.Nash,KarlL. Hofmann4.WHO good manifecturing practices: specific pharmaceutical products(Sterilepharmaceutical product)5.Guidance for Industry -Sterile Drug products Produseds by Aseptic processing-Curent Good Manufacturing Practice,2004http:/www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/5882fnl.pdfGMP PRI PROIZVODSTVO NAINFUNDIBILIJA M. PavlovskaKlinichka bolnitsa Bitola, Bolnichka apteka Bitola, R.MakedonijaVOVEDValidatsijata na protsesot na sterilnoto proizvodstvo ne mozhe dase sprovede pred da bidat pretkhodno sprovedeni postapkite naKvalifikatsija na Opremata, Prostorot, Sistemite i Validatsijana protsesite koi prestavuvaat oddelni segmenti od protsesot nasterilno proizvodstvo, kade imame terminalna sterilizatsija. . TsEL NA TRUDOTDa se prikazhe validatsija na protses na sterilno proizvodstvo nainfundibilija Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose 5%,0,9% (2:1)preku ispituvanje na tri konsekventni pilot serii. METODIValidatsijata na protsesot na sterilno proizvodstvo na Natrii chlo-ride infundibile cum glucose 5%,0,9% (2:1) gi opfajkja fazite navkupniot protses na proizvodstvo.Fazi vo tek na proizvodniotprotses: 1. Merenje 2. Barbotiranje 3. Rastvaranje na aktivnakomponenta 4. Rastvaranje na komponenta za podesuvanje na pH 5.Dopolnuvanje do finalen volumen 6. Membranska filtratsija 7.Doziranje 8. Sterilizatsija 9. Vizuelna kontrola 10. Pakuvanje.Za analiza na parametrite vo tek na fizichkokhemiskoto imikrobioloshkoto ispituvanje se koristat slednite metodi: 1. pHvrednost 2. Konduktivnost 3. Bakteriski endotoksini 4. Sodrzhinana Natrium chloride 5. Sodrzhina na glukoza 6.Izgled na rastvorot 7.Bioburden na rastvorot 8. Mekhanichki onechistuvanja 9. Sterilnost REZULTATIKritichni parametri kaj protsesot na terminalna sterilizatsija setemperaturata i vremeto od koi zavisi postignuvanjeto na baranatasterilnost na dadeniot proizvod.>> rezultati od fizichko ispituvanje na postavenitermoelementi vo avtoklav - penetratsija na temperatura>> rezultati od fizicho/mikrobioloshki ispituvanja-mikrobioloshka validatsija - Bi>> sledenje na parametrite za sekoj sterilizatsiski tsiklus(vreme,temperatura, pritisok)>> rezultati od mikrobiloshko ispituvanje na primerotsi narastvor na Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucoso zemeni predopremata za filtriranje>> rezultati od fizichkokhemisko ispituvanje na primerotsite narastvorot na Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucoso zemenipred opremata za filtriranje>> rezultati od fizichkokhemisko ispituvanje na primerotsite narastvor na Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucoso zemeni votek i na kontinuiran protses na proizvodstvo posle filtri ranje >> rezultati od fizichkokhemisko ispituvanje na primerotsite nastakleni kontejneri ispolneti so rastvor na Natrii chlorideinfundibile cum glucoso zemeni posle avtoklaviranje>> rezultati od mikrobioloshko ispituvanje na primerotsite nastakleni kontejneri ispolneti so rastvor na Natrum chlorideinfundibile cum glucoso zemeni posle avtoklaviranje>> rezultati od ispituvanje na sodrzhinata na aktivnata kompo -nen ta vo vkupen rastvorZAKLUChOTsI I DISKUSIJAPosle izvedeni tri dokumentirani serii, protsesot za proizvod st -vo na Natrii chloride infundibile cum glucose 5%,0,9% (2:1) se smetade ka e validiran. Validatsijata na protsesot na sterilno proiz vod -stvo vo aseptichni uslovi na rabota, ja potvrduva sposobnosta napro tsesot da proizveduva proizvod so soodveten kvalitativen,kvantitativen i mikrobioloshki kvalitet. LITERATURA1.Drug,device and manufacturing,Carol Desain2.Pharmaceutical Dosage forms(Parenteral Medications)HerbertA. Lieberman Vol23.Pharmaceutical Process validation,Ira R.Berry,Robert A.Nash,KarlL. Hofmann4.WHO good manifecturing practices: specific pharmaceutical products(Sterilepharmaceutical product)5.Guidance for Industry -Sterile Drug products Produseds by Aseptic processing-Curent Good Manufacturing Practice,2004http:/www.fda.gov/cder/guidance/5882fnl.pdf.252Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVODOCUMENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM AS PART OF COMPUTERIZED SYSTEMS IN ALKALOID ADVerce Jovanovska Jankovska, Nada Popstefanova,Elizabeta Karadzinska, Darko Atanasoski,Miroslava IlievskaAlkaloid AD Skopje, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Re-public of MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONThere are different forms of computerized systems used as part of aGMP regulated activities. A computerized system is a set of softwareand hardware components which together fulfill certain functionali-ties. The application should be validated, IT infrastructure should bequalified. Where a computerized system replaces a manual operation,there should be no resultant decrease in product quality, process con-trol or quality assurance. There should be no increase in the overallrisk of the process1.Document management System is extremely configurable web appli-cation for the purposes of managing with document. It is a systemthat enables completely and secure control of documents during theircreation, reviewing, approving, publishing, maintaining reusing andarchiving. Well managed documentation is one of the most importantattributes of a successful organization Risk management should be applied throughout the lifecycle of thecomputerized system taking into account patient safety, data integrityand product quality. As part of a risk management system, decisions onthe extent of validation and data integrity controls should be based ona justified and documented risk assessment of the computerised sys-tem.PERSONNELClose cooperation between all relevant personnel with appropriatequalification, level of access and defined responsibilities1SCOPEThe purpose of this software enables import of documents, classifi-cation of scanned documents, publishing of the documents (word, PDFrendition), controlled printing, linking of documents (related docu-ments, virtual documents)Controlled distribution including confirmation of requirement (distri-bution list, read and understood confirmation), production of docu-ment change requestMETHODSDefinition of: user roles, lifecycle, workflows, audit trail records.User permissions and available attributes may depend on user role,lifecycle state, workflow activity. Users are assigned to roles and ac-cording to their role have different permissions to work with a docu-mentDefinition of lifecycles and workflowsSplitting document lifecycle in lifecycle states helps us to preciselydefine and model business processesFor each lifecycle state we should define: automatic actions that willbe performed on the document, location (path) of the document, se-quence of activities and performers of those activities (workflow), in-formation that will be stored in audit trail recordEach business policy defines a series of states (such as "draft", "re-view" or "approved") through which a document progresses.Besides the posibility of creating, reviewing, approving with appro-priate roles of the author, reviewer, approver there is a posibility of do-cument rejection, notes, arhiving, suspending either way tracebility,as well as versions and current state of the document is possible to-gether with audit trail. Signing is performed in the system electroncly.CONCLUSION:Document Management Systems enables creation, reviewing, ap-proving, archiving the document electronically, with full traceabilityand audit trail performance of who, when, where, why started, re-viewed and finish the document.REFERENCES1. Eudralex - The rules governing medicinal products in the European union -Volume 4 EU Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice - Annex 11:Computerized systemsSISTEM ZA UPRAVUVANjE SO DOKUMENTI KAKO DEL ODKOMPJUTERIZIRANI SISTEMI VO ALKALOID ADVerche Jovanovska Jankovska, Nada Popstefanova,Elizabeta Karadzhinska, Darko Atanasoski,Miroslava Ilievska.Alkaloid AD Skopje, Bul. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje,Republika MakedonijaVOVEDKako del od DPP reguliranite aktivnosti se upotrebuvaatrazlichni formi na kompjuterizirani sistemi. Kompjuteriziransistem pretstavuva set na komponenti od khardver i softver koizaedno ispolnuvaat odredeni funktsionalnosti. Potrebno eaplikatsijata da e validirana i IT infrastrukturata kvalifi ku va -na. Zamenata na manuelna operatsija so kompjuteriziran sistem netreba da rezultira so namaluvanje na kvalitetot na proizvodot,protsesnata kontrola ili obezbeduvanjeto kvalitet. Ne treba daima porast vo vkupniot rizik na protsesot1.Sistemot za Upravuvanje so Dokumenti pretstavuva visoko kon fi -gu rab ilna mrezhna aplikatsija so tsel za upravuvanje so dokumentot.Toa e sistem koj ovozmozhuva tselosna i bezbedna kontrola na do ku -men tite za vreme na nivnoto kreiranje, pregled, odobruvanje, obja -vu vanje, odrzhuvanje na povtorna upotreba i arkhiviranje. Dobroupravuvana dokumentatsija e eden od najvazhnite atributi za uspe -shna organizatsija.Upravuvanje so rizik treba da se aplitsira niz tseliot zhivotentsiklus na kompjuteriziraniot sistem zemajkji gi vo predvidbezbednosta na patsientot, integritetot na podatotsite i kvalitetotna proizvodot. Kako del od sistemot za upravuvanje so rizik,odlukite za stepenot na validatsija i kontrola na integritetot napodatotsite treba da se baziraat na opravdana i dokumentiranaprotsenka na rizikot na kompjuteriziraniot sistem.253Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPERSONALBliska sorabotka megju vkupniot relevanten personal so soodvetnakvalifikatsija, nivo na pristap i definirani odgovornosti1. PODRAChJETselta na ovoj softver e ovozmozhuvanje na vnesuvanje dokumenti,klasifikatsija na skenirani dokumenti, objavuvanje na dokumentite(word, PDF oblik), kontrolirano pechatenje, povrzuvanje nadokumentite (srodni dokumenti, virtuelni dokumenti).Kontrolirana distributsija vkluchuvajkji potvrda za utvrdenapotreba (distributsiona lista, potvrda za prochitano - razbrano),kreiranje na baranje za promena na dokument. METODIDefinitsija na: ulogi na korisnitsi, zhivoten tsiklus, rabotnitekovi, zapisi za sledlivost na aktivnostite. Dozvolite za korisnikot i dostapnite atributi zavisat od ulogatana korisnikot, stadiumot na zhivotniot tsiklus, aktivnosta natekovniot protses. Korisnitsite imaat dodeleni ulogi i sporedsvojata uloga imaat razlichni dozvoli za rabota so dokumentot.