Kluchot vo kontroliranje na268Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOosloboduvanjeto na aktivnata supstantsija e pH zavisnatarastvorlivost na polimerot vo film-obvivkata, shto ovozmozhuvaosloboduvanje na aktivnata supstantsija na tochno odredeno mestovo digestivniot trakt1 . Bidejkji e potrebno polimerot da serastvori duri otkako tabletata kje pristigne vo kolonot kade shtopH e okolu 7, kako najsoodveten polimer za ovaa namena shto serastvora na pH>=7 e poly(methyl acrylate, methyl metacrylate,methacrylic acid), koj komertsijalno e dostapen vo vid na 30% vodenadisperzija. MATERIJALI I METODIVodena disperzija na polimetakrilati, Triethyl citrate, Glycerolmonostearate, Polysorbate 80, Zholt zhelezen oksid, Emulzijasimetikon 30%, Talc, Opadry clear.Pri protsesot na film-oblozhuvanje, polimetakrilatite stanuvaatleplivi i postoi mozhnost od aglomeratsija pri protsesiranjeto.Zaradi toa e neopkhodno dodavanje na sredstva koi kje ja namalattendentsijata kon lepenje (talk, glitserol monostearat)1. Priformulatsijata na suspenzijata za film-oblozhuvanje so Eudragit,aktsent beshe staven kon nadminuvanje na leplivosta na Eudragit iovozmozhuvanje na dobar tek na protsesot na film-oblozhuvanje. Zataa tsel bea napraveni probi so razlichni sredstva protiv lepenjei vo razlichni kontsentratsii:Sredstvo protiv lepenje Kontsentratsija vo odnos na suviotpolimetakrilaten polimer (%w/w) Formulatsija 1 Talc 50 %Formulatsija 2 Glycerol monostearate 5 % Formulatsija 3 Glycerolmonostearate 10 % Film-oblozhuvanjeto beshe napraveno vo konventsionalen barabanza oblozhuvanje. Formulatsijata so talk beshe otfrlena zaraditalozhenje na talkot od suspenzijata za filmuvanje i namalenprotok na suspenzijata niz sprej-mlaznitsata. Formulatsiite soglitserol monostearat ovozmozhija dobar tek na protsesot na film-oblozhuvanje bez lepenje i aglomeratsija na tabletite. Dobienitegastro-rezistentni tableti (formulatsija 2 i 3) odgovaraa nafarmakopejskoto baranje za dezintegratsija na ovoj tip tableti:tabletite ne smee da se raspadnat vo 0.1M HCl za vreme od 2 chasa,a treba da se raspadnat vo 1.5 %w/v rastvor na natrium khidrogenkarbonat za vreme od eden chas3. Megjutoa, pri chuvanjeto na film-oblozhenite tableti in-bulk na sobna temperatura, posle nekolkunedeli se zabelezha aglomeratsija na tabletite kaj formulatsijata2, shto ne beshe sluchaj kaj tabletite so pogolema kontsentratsija naglitserol monostearat kako sredstvo protiv lepenje (formulatsija3). Sepak, zaradi obezbeduvanje na ushte pogolema sigurnost deka votek na rokot na upotreba na film-oblozhenite tableti so Eudragitnema da se pojavi lepenje na film-obvivkata za gnezdata nablister-pakuvanjeto, tabletite bea dopolnitelno oblozheni soushte eden sloj na zashtiten film so khidroksipropilmetiltseluloza (Opadry clear).ZAKLUChOKFilm-oblozhenite tableti so formulatsija 3 (so 10%w/w glitserolmonostearat vo odnos na suviot polimetakrilaten polimer) idopolnitelen zashtiten film so Opadry clear pokazhaa dobrirezultati. Tabletite spakuvani vo blister pakuvanje ne pokazhaatendentsija kon lepenje na film-obvivkata za gnezdata, shto ukazhuvana pravilen izbor na tipot i kontsentratsijata na sredstvoto protivlepenje.LITERATURA1. Eudragit(r) Application Guidelines, 11th edition, september 2009, EvonikIndustries2. R.C. Rowe, P. J. Sheskey, S. C. Owen, The Handbook of PharmaceuticalExcipients, Pharmaceutical Press and American Pharmacists Association (2006)3. British Pharmacopoeia 2011EVIDENCE BASED HOMEOPATHY-SCIENTIFIC FRAMEWORK OF HOMEOPATHYDRUGS PREPARATIONS IN HOMEOPATHICMATERIA MEDICAVesna Simonova, Dora PachovaCenter for Health and Education "EDICTA", Sofia, BulgariaINTRODUCTIONHomoeopathy is a system of medicine founded by the celebratedphysician Dr. Samuel Hahnemann (1755-1843) of Germany. It is basedon the principle that "like cures like". In practice, this means that amedicine capable of producing certain effects when taken by a healthyhuman being is capable of curing any illness that displays similareffects.1 Skilled homeopathic prescribing requires that thecharacteristics of the chosen medicine should be as similar as possibleto the characteristics of the illness in the patient. Thus, homeopathyis highly individualized and based upon a holistic assessment. Medicalphilosophy is coming more and more to the conclusion that the meretreatment of symptoms and organs can only help temporarily and thatit is the healing power of the body as a whole that has to beenhanced.2 Vitality makes an individual alive and sustain. Fuelled andanimated by the bio-energy, the biological entity represents its ownpattern of energy. Disease is nothing but a disruption of the biologicalrhythm and it represents a deviant biological energy with respect toform, function and structure. Cure is restoring, rectifying, andmodifying the deviated diseased energy through perceiving.3OBJECTIVESDrug is a substance that changes the biological system by interacting with it.When a drug is introduced in our body it causes physiological and biologicalchanges in it. The conventional pharmacy drug act with chemical andbiological mode of action, but in homeopathy it is energetic mode of action.The objective of this paper is exploring the scientific framework ofhomeopathy remedies preparations in Homeopathic Materia Medica.Materia Medica is the branch of medical science concerned with the269Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONstudy of drugs and their properties, preparation, and their mode ofaction, including: knowledge of sources of drugs;. knowledge of modeof collection of drug, substance and their method of preservation,knowledge of preparation of drugs, potentization; knowledge ofvehicles, knowledge of posology; knowledge of pharmacology;knowledge of drug proving; knowledge of standardization; knowledgeof prescription writing and new researches.6Preparation: Homeopathic drug has specific energetic pattern ofaction, different from classical drugs used in the modern medicine.This is so because of specific mode of preparation calledpotentization. The process of potentization witch is a step by stepdilution and succussion (jerking) of the drug makes it extremelypowerful and at the same time renders it harmless. Potenciesemployed by the homoeopath are from mother tincture to the 100.000th potencies.1 Various techniques have been employed todemonstrate that there are physical differences between potentizeddilutions and the solvent. These studies have included the use of ultraviolet spectra, conductivity and infra red analysis, surface tensionmeasurement, nuclear magnetic resonance, spectroscopy and other.7There are some hypotheses for homeopathic micro diluted remedieswhich explain the specific organization of molecules of the solvent inhomeopathic microdilutions which can maintain the properties of aninitial substance not effectively present in the solution. The hypothesisassume that during the first dilutions, clusters are formed which areaggregates of a small number of molecules of the substance. They aresurrounded by shells of organized hydrogen-bonded molecules of thesolvent (called clathrates). Because of the applied forceful succussions,small clusters move out of their clathrates. A new clathrate then formsaround each relocated cluster and an additional clathrate is formed.4A new magnetic resonance method has been developed for measuringhomeopathic potencies. There has been detected magnetic photonsin homeopathic potencies. Magnetic resonance method where varioushigh-potentized homeopathic remedies were put in a strong magneticfield and were found to resonate differently - each remedy with its ownmagnetic resonance. Homeopathic photons are bound to their carriermolecule, either water or sugar, by their magnetic poles. When shakingup a remedy, water structure change is caused by various types ofphotons with their specific frequencies and by their energy when theyare bound to the magnetic pole of water. Because photons aremagnetically bound with their characteristic properties, homeopathicremedies contain "information." This information is the homeopathicmagnetic photon with its intrinsic electromagnetic wave packet anddifferent frequencies transformed by the preparation ways (succussion)into higher frequencies at higher potencies. In general each homeopathicpotency contains a distinct energy level. The highest energy is found inthe potiencies that have been shaken-and-diluted the most. Healing byhomeopathy is achieved by a regulation of the electromagnetic fieldaccording to the principle of resonance. Each remedy carries its ownresonance pattern. Their electromagnetic properties are proved by anewly developed magnetic resonance method, using two different Teslacoils which generate longitudinal waves at distinct resonance frequenciesin the HF range. When laid into the maximum of the magnetic field,homeopathic high potencies with frequencies being in resonance withthose of the coils attenuated the magnetic field. Therefore, it can beconcluded that homeopathic potencies consist of magnetic photons.For the first time, the degree of each potency could be measured andcharacterized by its specific mV input level which separated the photonsfrom their carrier molecule of sugar at their resonance frequency.Homeopathic potencies are magnetic photons with several frequenciesin the HF range and with different energies. 5Provings: The homeopathic remedies that are used are tested onhuman volunteers (provers) to elicit the symptoms they can produce.The symptoms of each remedy as experienced by the provers arerecorded in exact detail and they form the homoeopathic MateriaMedica. Proving is a method with strictly described procedure and isconducted by prepared and trained people. All safety rules areconsidered - no harm for the provers.Doctrine of signature: In Homeopathy, the relation between the drugsource and drug symptoms is known as doctrine of signature.CONCLUSIONBecause of the specific methods of preparation and action,homeopathic remedies create no side-effects and do not inducetherapy resistance. Homeopathy is safe for pregnant women, babiesand elderly people. Production, storage and distribution ofhomeopathic remedies are simple. University research on homeopathymust be encouraged, stimulated and supported by the public healthauthorities.REFERENCES1. Sankaran R., The Spirit of Homoeopathy, Second edition, 19922. Homeopathic care in a medical context, European Committee for Homeopathy(ECH), www.homeopathyeurope.org3. Medical history for homeopathic treatment, Dr. Ajit Kulkarni4. The working hypothesis for homeopathic microdiluted remedies,G.S.Anagnostatos, Demokritos National Research Center for Physical Sciences,Athens, Greece; G.Vithoulkas, C.Tavouxoglou, Homeopathic Medical Center,Athens, Greece; P.Garzonis, Chest Disease Hospital, Athens, Greece5. Homeopathic Potencies Identified By A New Magnetic Resonance Method:Homeopathy--An Energetic Medicine, Dr. .Karin Lenger6. Evidence based homeopathy November 2010, Liga Medicorum HomeopathicaInternationalis and of the European Committee for Homeopathy7. A hypothesis on the nature of Homeopathic Potencies, Kumar A. Jussal,BritishHomeopathic Journal 68: 197-204, 19798. Modern Instrumentation for the Evaluation of Homeopatnic Drug Structure,Smith R.B.Boericke G.V., Journal of the American Institute of Homeopathy 59: 263-280, 19669. Nuclear \Magnetic Resonance Studies of Succussed Solutions, Young, T.M.,Journal of the American Institute of Homeopathy 68: 8-16, 197510. Dielectric Strengh Testing of Homeopathic Dilutions of HgCl2, Brucato A.,Stephenson J, Journal of the American Institute of Homeopathy 59: 281-286, 1966SUPPLIER QUALIFICATION - APPROACHTHROUGH RISK ASSESSMENTSnezana Vecerkov VukmirovicAlkaloid doo BelgradeINTRODUCTIONProducers of generic medicines who implement their strategy throughthe development and strengthening of operational management, havereinforced their competitive advantages on superior relationshipswith their suppliers. European directives implemented into nationallegislation and collected into Guidelines - Good ManufacturingPractice, have defined the expectations based on economicjustification of the supplier qualification, primarily from the reductionof overal expenses standpoint. Clearly delineated program of supplieraudit together with appropriate selection strategy shall, byimplementing the ICH Q9 and application of risk assessment tools,effectively support the quality management system by acquiringreturn information to system design and realization of supplierqualification.270Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOSCOPEWhen pharmaceutical industry contemplates a vendor, the first no-tion pops up of suppliers of starting and packaging materials that areused in the manufacture of medicinal products, but also of vendorssupplying equipment, software, hardware, contract manufacturers,contract laboratories, as well as those supplying services, such as ware-housing and distribution, calibration, environmental condition moni-toring, and HR agencies. Consequently, it becomes obvious that thepurpose of supplier qualification is the way to secure an appropriatelevel of confidence that such a supplier/vendor will consistently de-liver substances, materials, equipment, and services of adequate qual-ity, and in line with regulatory requirements and client expectations.Quite reasonably, a cost-effectiveness analysis of services to be ren-dered and observance of deadlines shall be included in such qualifi-cation so that client company business plans may have realization asexpected and be generally accomplished through Quality ManagementSystem (QMS) implementing Quality Risk Management (QRM) analysis.METHODPharmaceutical industry and regulatory authorities have the risk eva-luated and processed by multiple different empirical methods basedon identification and compilation of observations and trends provi-ding useful deviation- and QMS-defficiency-related information. Qua-lity Risk Management (QRS) should be recognized as an efficientmethod of evaluation, control, communication and critical asses-sment of the risk impact on the medicinal product quality throughoutthe life cycle of such product. Although a systematic approach isusually favored, the implementation of informal procedures in the riskmanagement is quite acceptable, as well. In case of practical supplierqualification approach the risk analysis process embraces a two-wayconsideration, namely: What such risk analysis means to the company? How shall such risk analysis procedure be applied to supplier qualifi-cation?This paper responds to the issues relying on two methods:Systematization of theoretical concept of risk management in the pro-cess of starting material delivery and finished product manufacture.Analysis of risk management in the Alkaloid doo Belgrade supply chain.ResultsSupplier evaluation activities and the management of supplier quali-fication process itself is accomplished through the process of docu-ment and action creation, analysis and tracking through systematicprocessing of data collected by, e.g. questionnaires, monitoring lists,audits, third party inspections, quality history tracking, presence/ab-sence of QMS certificates/ licenses, etc. The supplier ranking by riskidentification and consideration given to potential suppliers' impacton patient safety, product quality and efficacy, personnel safety andregulatory requirement, helped identify the three levels of possible riskthe company may be facing, namely:>> high-risk supplier, direct impact: contract laboratories and sup-plier of software generating the product release data; >> medium-risk supplier, indirect impact: API and excipient sup-pliers, suppliers of primary packaging material, intermediate(s),printed packaging material, warehousing and distribution servicesuppliers, consultants contributing to report generating, softwaresub-system providers; >> low-risk supplier, with no direct impact: providers of non-GXPservices, secondary packaginh material suppliers.As supplier-qualification tool, a questionnaire design depends on whowe are intending to qualify - a new supplier or the existing one. Anynew supplier shall provide complete answers, well documented, withemphasis on the supplier's QMS, company size and sites, certificates/licenses held, reference list, organization flow-chart, and history of au-dits / inspections.