GGM proektot e motivirachki vo odnos na tselokupnoto strateshkoi opsezhno vlijanie. Poseduva jasna dimenzija za nadgradba nakapatsitetite i sposobnostite (jaknenje i unapreduvanje nakonkurentnosta na chovechkiot potentsijal, znachitelno podobruvanjena upravuvanjeto so lekovite, novi uslugi i aplikatsii koi senadovrzuvaat na spetsichinite potrebi). Vrz osnova na prikazhanoto,programata poseduva potentsijal za neopkhoden pridones nafarmatsevtskite funktsii, opshtestvenite prashanja, zdravstvenitepolitiki i zdravstveniot sistem vo zemjata. KORISTENA LITERATURA1. National integrity system: a guiding framework. Kuala Lumpur, Integrity Instituteof Malaysia and United Nations Development Programme, 2007(http://iim.com.my).2. Measuring Transparency in Medicines Registration, Selection and Procurement.Geneva, WHO, 20063. Report on "Measuring Transparency in Medicines Registration, Promotion,Inspection, Selection, Procurement and Distribution in the former YugoslavRepublic of Macedonia",National Assessment, WHO, 20094. Eloy Anello, A framework for good governance in the pharmaceutical sector,Department of Essential Medicines and Pharmaceutical Policies, Geneva,WHO, 2008COST ANALYSIS OF THE MANAGEMENT OFDIABETES IN ALBANIABesiana Bezhani1, Florian Toti2, Adriana Cano31Hygeia Hospital Tirana 2Qendra Spitalore Universitare Nene Tereza 3Poliklinika nr 8, TiraneOBJECTIVEDetermine the cost per patient and determine the overall cost ofillness of diabetes mellitus in Albania by the Ministry of Health, theInsurance Institute of Public Health (ISKSH) and prospects of thesociety.METHODSTo do my study, I conducted an observational study, retrospectiveusing the method of clinical audit, an instrument that through theanalysis and review of the work, aims to assess the cost of managingthis disease in Albania by Albanian Institutions. Were identified thedirect means (drugs, laboratory tests, doctors, hospitals, health care)and the cost has been verified by national lists or values that theseinstitutions have established. The data used for these calculationscome from two sources: 1) . From the recordings and by referring tothe individual medical records from the database of Dr. Adriana Cano,GP at the clinic no. 8 of Tirana. We extracted (for each diabeticpatient-a total of 92) respective data on medications used for for eachdiagnosis established by specialists, covering the period from Januaryto November 2010 (observation period). 2). In addition, we studied themedical records of discharged patients from the hospital in thedepartment of endocrinology at the University Hospital CenterMother Teresa in Tirana. We decided about the study period to be twomonths, August and September 2010, to better represent the averagenumber of admissions. The total number of folders is 190. RESULTSThe cost of a patient admitted to hospital in the department ofendocrinology was EUR 146.54 for an average hospitalization of 7.11 days.Our study calculated only the direct costs. As for indirect costs orsocial point of view there is no data or studies available. For thepatient following the ambulatory service, for 1 patient, the cost oftheir diabetes treatment is Eur 13.43 per month or 38.6%, while thetotal treatment with care also for the complications is EUR 34.8 permonth. Of this amount, ISKSH pays respectively Eur 12.4 and Eur 29.1per month and the patient pays the rest. The total amount spent bythis Institution for antidiabetics A10-group, is EUR 4,426,344.12 per year. CONCLUSIONSWe estimated the direct annual cost of diabetes in Albania by theAlbanian institutions' point of view. For indirect costs or social pointof view there is no data or studies available. We also estimated thedirect cost per patient and the cost of treatment of diabetes andmacrovascular complications. The economic burden is significant andit is not comparable to results from other countries. The modelshowed a logical progression of the disease.REFERENCES1. World Health Organization. Diabetes mellitus fact sheet no. 312. Geneva: WHO;2006. 2.Grundy SM, Benjamin IJ, Burke GL, Chait A, Eckel RH, Howard BV, et al. Diabetesand cardiovascular disease: a statement for healthcare professionals from theAmerican Heart Association. Circulation. 1999;100:1134-46.3.Wannamethee SG, Shaper AG, Lennon L. Cardiovasculardisease incidence and mortality in older men with diabetes and in men withcoronary heart disease. Heart. 2004;90:1398-403.4.Ettaro L, Songer TJ, Zhang P, Engelgau MM. Cost-of-illness studies in diabetesmellitus. Pharmacoeconomics. 2004;22:149-64.5.Akobundu E, Ju J, Blatt L, Mullins CD. Costof- illness studies: a review of currentmethods. Pharmacoeconomics. 2006;24:869-90.6.Oliva J, Lobo F, Molina B, Monereo S. Direct health care costs of diabetic patientsin Spain. Diabetes Care. 2004;27:2616-21.7.Taylor AK. Medical expenditures and insurance coverage for people with diabetes:estimates from the National Medical Care Expenditure Survey. Diabetes Care.1987;10:87-948.Massi-Bennedetti M, CODE-2 Advisory Board. The cost of diabetes type II inEurope, the CODE-2 Study. Diabetologia. 2002;45:S1-4.9.http://www.isksh.com.al10.http://www.moh.gov.al/11.http://www.instat.gov.al/12.http://www.who.int/.13.http://www.diabetesatlas.org/.14.http://www.eatlas.idf.org/.15.http://www.diabetes.org16.http://www.nlm.nih.gov/.97Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACOECONOMY / SOCIAL PHARMACY / PHARMACOINFORMATICS oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONADJUSTMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OFCROATIAN P&R MODEL IN MACEDONIATonci BubleBelupo d.d., CroatiaPricing and Reimbursement policy in Croatia was established in 2001,where the final P&R policy model was established in 2006. This modelis still in place with some minor changes. In 2009, Croatian model waspresented in Macedonia, using the same methodology for referral asCroatian model: external referral as comparative price for all drugsfrom the positive lists and internal referral as reference price for pre-scription drugs as per pharmaco-therapic groups.In 2001 in Croatia started implementation of model with external re-ferral of prices and calculation of comparative prices, while reim-bursement was defined as percentage of wholesale price. Even thoughthe same methodology is still in place, the system has been throughmany changes (levels of correction of the prices, rules for prices of newgenerics) and the major influence on increase of expenditures was themeasure of releasing of over 50% of ensures of payment co-payment(2003). Change in P&R policy was placed in 2006 when in reimburse-ment for drugs on prescription, reference prices per therapic groupswere introduced, where co-payment in percentages has changed indifference in price towards the reference price and any release for pay-ing co-payment was excluded. Croatian model for P&R provided unique approach in defining pricesfor drugs on positive list, financially covered by the National health in-surance (HZZO). When system was completely defined and imple-mented (2007) it was based on external referral to 3+2 countries forreference (Italy, France, Slovenia + Spain, Czech Republic). Three lev-els of comparison were defined, where comparison was determinedseparately for generics and for originator drugs. Negotiations for prob-lematic prices of specific drugs were introduced as well. The internalreferral system was placed through definition and implementation of41 therapeutic groups for prescription drugs (drugs with same or sim-ilar pharmacotherapic effect, mostly up to the fourth ATC level ofcomparison). Additional criteria for defining the reference price werepossibilities for supply of the market (share of consumption), based onexpenditures and utilization for previous year. The system enabled au-thorities in realistic projections of expenditures on drugs on yearlybasis, as well as control of the market and rational drug use. This isshown in drugs expenditures for the period 2008-2010 where expen-ditures for prescription drugs remained the same, despite inclusion ofnew drugs on the drug list and increased number of prescriptions forapprox. 7 millions.The adjustment of the Croatian P&R system in Macedonia started in2009 and implementation as of May 2010. The Croatian model was ad-justed to the needs of Macedonian's pharmaceuticals market. Thesame model of external referring was used for 383 drugs from the pri-mary health care positive list, where four countries of reference wereselected (Croatia, Slovenia, Serbia and Bulgaria). Internal referring wasused for 5 pharmacotherapic groups defined for prescription drugs.Within the methodology, data on drug utilization and expenditures forprevious year was used. The model enabled decrease of total drug ex-penditures for the patients (in terms of decreased co-payment) forsame expenditures for National health insurance (FZOM). It is shown bythe following indicators announced by the FZOM: for more than twicethe number of drugs without co-payment has been increased (209generics without copayment compared to 77 as per old model), andeven though the number of prescriptions in 2010 was increased for2,1%, expenditures for drugs for FZOM decrease 2,8%. Both models were implemented adequately and their best practicewas seen as increasing transparency for drug expenditures and rationaldrug utilization for National health insurances. Overall overview of theexpenditures was established with realistic estimation of plannedcosts. In addition, model enabled the National insurance to obtainmore available effective drugs for the population within same expen-ditures. Systems were set as benefit for state and patients, but theyneed "close look" and fine tuning, regarding the needs of the popula-tion, countries' financial capacities and developments of pharmaceu-ticals' markets.CONSUMPTION OF THE PRESCRIPTIONDRUGS COVERED BY THE HEALTH INSUR-ANCE FUND: DRUGS FROM GROUP C, J AND N BY ATC CLASSIFICATION Kristina Hristova, Sonja Zlatanovska, Kristina To-sevskaHealth Insurance Fund of MacedoniaMonitoring of the consumption of drugs has a direct impact on theprocess of rational consumption of drugs. The costs associatedwith use of drugs account for a significant portion of the total costs ofhealth care which amounts to approximately 10-15% in moredeveloped countries and around 30 to 40% in some developingcountries. In the recent years the Health Insurance Fund in Macedonia putemphasis on the monitoring and analysis of the consumption of drugsthat are covered by the HIF. It is a good way to assess the rational useof drugs, plan the introduction of new drugs on the positive list thatis provided by the Fund and plan the primary health care drugsbudget. The HIF receives the data on drug consumption from its own e-information system which directly collects the data from thecontracted pharmacies. So far, the HIF concluded contract with 740pharmacies out of 838 registered in the Republic of Macedonia, thatis 88% of all pharmacies.The purpose of this analysis is to evaluate and present theconsumption of drugs in different cities in Macedonia. Theclassification of drugs is in accordance with ATC classification. Theconsumption of drugs is followed by the methodology of defined dailydoses (DDD). The targeted groups of drugs in accordance to thehighest consumption per volume and value of prescriptions are asfollowing: antibiotics (J), drugs for the cardiovascular system (C) andthe nervous system (N). For the period 2008-2010 the largest amounts and growth in theconsumption rate, increase from 21 to 25% has been observed in theC drug group. It is followed by the second largest drugs group J(antibiotics) which share remains constant at the level of 20% of thetotal amount. In the same period, drugs group N is on the third place98Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNA FARMATsIJA / FARMAKOINFORMATIKA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOwith around 15% of the total amount of consumption. For the same period (2008-2010) the largest volume has been observedfor the C drug group with 40% of all prescribed drugs. Drugs from theN group are the second and remark increase of 2% (from 13% to 15%).On the third place are J group drugs with approximately 13% of all pre-scribed drugs, and remark decrease of 2% (from 15% to 13%).POTROShUVAChKA NA LEKOVI NA RETsEPTNA TOVAR NA FZOM: LEKOVI OD GRUPAC, J I N SPORED ATC KLASIFIKATsIJA Kristina Khristova, Sonja Zlatanovska, KristinaTosevskaFond za zdravstveno osiguruvanje na MakedonijaSledenjeto na potroshuvachkata na lekovite ima direktno vlijanievrz protsesot na ratsionalna potroshuvachka na lekovite. Troshotsitepovrzani so upotrebata na lekovite zavzemaat znachaen del odvkupnite troshotsi za zdravstvena zashtita i iznesuvaat od 10-15% vorazvienite zemji do 30-40% vo nekoi zemji vo razvoj. Vo RepublikaMakedonija, Fondot za zdravstveno osiguruvanje vo poslednitegodini stava aktsent na sledenjeto i analizata na potroshuvachkatana lekovi koi se na tovar na FZOM. Toa e dobar nachin zaotsenuvanje na ratsionalnoto koristenje na lekovi, planiranje navoveduvanje na novi lekovi na listata na lekovi koi se na tovar naFZOM i planiranje na finansiskite sredstva na FZOM namenetiza lekovi vo primarnata zdravstvena zashtita.Podatotsite za potroshuvachka na lekovi, FZO gi dobiva prekusopstven informatichki sistem direktno od PZU aptekite so koiFondot ima dogovor. Dosega takvi se 740 PZU apteki od vkupno 838registrirani vo RM, shto e 88% od vkupniot broj na apteki.Tselta na ovaa analiza e da se otseni i prikazhe potroshuvachkata nalekovi na retsept na tovar na FZOM po gradovi vo R.Makedonijaodnosno po podrachni sluzhbi na FZOM. Klasifikatsijata nalekovite e soglasno ATS klasifikatsijata. Potroshuvachkata nalekovite e sledena preku metodologijata na definirani dnevnidozi (DDD). Kako tselni grupi na lekovi, spored najgolemapotroshuvachka po iznosi i brojot na realizirani retsepti,analizirani se slednite grupi na lekovi: antibiotitsi (J), lekoviza kardiovaskularen sistem (S) i nerven sistem (N). Za periodot 2008-2010 godina najgolema potroshuvachka i najgolemporast na potroshuvachkata (od 21% na 25%) se zabelezhuva kajlekovite od S grupata. Sledi potroshuvachkata na lekovite od Jgrupata (antibiotitsite) koi se na vtoro mesto so konstantni 20% odvkupnata potroshuvachka. Za istiot period, lekovite od grupata N sena treto mesto so okolu 15% od vkupnata potroshuvachka. Za istiot period (2008-2010 godina) spored brojot na realiziraniretsepti, prvi po potroshuvachka se lekovite od S grupata so okolu40% od vkupniot broj na realizirani retsepti.