From previous work I had carried out in the context of environmental risk (Bidwell & Thompson, 2012; Bidwell, 2011) I was aware that both naturalness and risk are complex constructs with individual, social, cultural and moral dimensions (Duncan & Duncan, 2004; Lupton, 2013; Pawson & Brooking, 2013; Petersen & Lupton, 1996; Zinn, 2008). It seemed important to pay much closer attention to what was going on behind these surface statements that were so often repeated about the attractive qualities of supplements. Secondly, the physical presence of the supplement products in pharmacies, health stores and in the homes of people I interviewed appeared to have been almost entirely overlooked. It was the sheer volume of these 'natural health' products that had first drawn my attention to the topic, and yet I had found nothing in the literature that had examined what role their materiality might play. There were however, some leads in studies that had examined how medicinal 17 substances (of all kinds, not just supplements) acted in the home setting. A study by Hodgetts et al (2011), for example, framed medicines as 'objects from outside' that became woven in to relationships and meanings within domestic settings. During the course of my research, two further papers explored the home as a centre of medication practices in a way that was different from but aligned to my thinking (Dew et al., 2014; Dew et al., 2015). Recently too, a Swedish study (Reichenpfader et al., 2019) looked at the human and non-human actors that are brought together in medication practices when people are discharged from hospital to home with newly prescribed medications. While none of these papers focused specifically on supplements, and none on retail settings, the theoretical approaches and the consideration of the medicines themselves as 'actors' in the home setting were relevant to gaps I had identified and wanted to investigate. Thirdly, while some investigations had looked at empowerment and personal control over health (Haddon, 2001; Hedderson et al., 2004; Sointu, 2013; Stoneman et al., 2013), they had largely been limited to wider studies of CAM treatments, with supplements only one minor component available to people who seek alternative therapies. They included Sointu's (2013) study on embodied subjectivity, expertise and experiences of healing in people who sought out CAM treatments, and the studies by Danish researchers (Baarts & Pedersen, 2009; Pedersen, 2013, 2018; Pedersen & Baarts, 2018) on CAM therapies as an expression of technologies of the self (Foucault, 1988) which people engaged in as a low risk health regimen. Also relevant were aspects of the study by Reichenpfader et al., (2019) which had noted the way people make the change from being passive recipients of medicines in hospital to taking control of their regime once at home. None of these studies, however, had looked at supplements alone, which, given that they are more directly under an individual's personal control than therapist-dependent treatments or prescribed medicines, would seem to warrant a separate and more detailed investigation. These gaps in the research were the starting points for the investigation. Although this seems clear with hindsight, when I look back to the start of my study, the direction of the argument was still somewhat uncertain at the beginning, and it was a process that developed gradually over time. The journey from my initial inspiration for the topic to the submission of the completed thesis was a lengthy and continual evolution that began with the core ideas for investigation that I have set out above and incorporated others as they proved to be relevant. How my study was finally structured is set out below. 18 Structure of the thesis Chapter 2 is a background chapter giving a brief overview of the place that ingested substances have occupied firstly in myths and legends of the life quest and some well-known examples from literature and popular culture that echo this tradition. This is followed by a historical overview of traditional and folk medicines, the gradual separation of orthodox medicine from lay health practices, and the persistence of home remedies in Western societies. Chapter 3 sets out the methodology and methods for the study. It describes my epistemological stance, and discusses my own position in relation to the topic and the generation of the data. It covers the selection and interviewing of the participants, their characteristics, and the analytical approach. It concludes with a short overview of the major theoretical framing of the study. Chapter 4 investigates the main discourses about supplements that the participants raised, using ideas drawn from Derrida's writing on deconstruction. It examines in detail three main concepts that were highlighted as reasons for supplement use: their naturalness, holistic characteristics, and their role in counteracting risks to health. The chapter shows how diverse and fluid these concepts are, continually developing and changing over time. Chapter 5 turns attention directly to the physical presence of the supplements themselves which played a key role in the interviews. Materialist concepts are used to examine the agency of these non-human things to create effects in people's lives and to inter-connect with the discourses examined in the previous chapter. Chapter 6 focuses on negotiations of power in relation to the way participants managed their health with supplements. Drawing from Foucault's writing on governmentality and the formation of subjects in the neoliberal state, it examines the participants' attitude to personal responsibility and expertise as a way of building a sense of control over health options. In time the confidence they acquired became part of their sense of identity as someone who knew about supplements and could pass on what they had learned to others. Chapter 7, the discussion and conclusion, first draws the analysis chapters together using ideas from Barad to show how discourse, materiality and power come together and are enacted in the supplement practices that take place in everyday life. It looks at the human quest for a meaningful life, and the role that the ritual element of supplement practices play in deferring fears of disability and decay. Finally the conclusion links back to the ancient theme of the quest and the need for enablers that support the life journey. 19 20 Chapter 2: Ingested substances: ancient and modern Legends and literature Throughout human history, people have sought out substances to protect them against the harms that threaten to disrupt their life journey. The motif of the powerful substance that enables, protects and cures is woven into both myths and legends and what is known about the history of traditional medicines from before the start of recorded history (Anderson, 2005). Indeed magic and medicine are hard to separate one from the other because both offered a means of protecting and preserving life, and the natural and supernatural powers they appealed to were intimately linked (Smith, 1953: 847). This chapter provides a brief overview of ancient and modern healing and protective substances as a background to the use of supplements today. The tale of the person who sets out on a perilous journey, the hardships and barriers they face and their ultimate salvation is a universal generic narrative (ur-narrative) that is found in almost all cultures (Berger, 2016). Campbell (1973) in his study of cross cultural mythology traces the common characteristics in the many different narratives of the archetypical hero or heroine who is called to set out from home on a quest during which he or she will need to battle against both internal and external forces to achieve their reward. The universal life journey (termed the 'monomyth' by Campbell), can be found in myths, legends, and religions throughout the ages and continues in popular culture in the present day. The life journey is, however, fraught with obstacles and grave dangers that stand in the way of the central character reaching their goal. These perils are symbolised in various ways, but it is in the process of the journey and overcoming its difficulties that the hero or heroine achieves self-realisation and personal growth, becomes a force for good, and, in some myths, returns to become a leader of their people. The characters in these ancient stories have exceptional qualities that make them stand out from others, but their journey also provides a template for the ordinary person who is faced with obstacles that threaten to disrupt their lives and which they need to overcome (Hubbell, 1990). Whether exceptional or ordinary, however, the ultimate success is by no means certain, and some will suffer or even die in the attempt. It is the quest and the ongoing journey that is important, not whether or not the destination is reached. A recurrent motif in many of these narratives is the supernatural object or substance which comes in to the story at a critical time to protect the hero or heroine from harm, cure their injuries, and revive them so that they can continue pursuing their quest (Campbell, 1973: 57). 21 Myths, fairy tales and legends across many cultures are rich in these powerful supernatural 'things' such as a ring, a cloak, a sword that enable impossible obstacles to be overcome and the journey to progress. Alternatively the 'thing' may be a substance with mysterious properties to be consumed in the form or food or drink or rubbed onto the body to be absorbed through the skin. The substance is subtly different from the artefacts like the swords, cloaks, and rings; these latter are already imbued with power which the hero can use but they do not become part of him or her. In swallowing or absorbing the substance, however, the power is embodied in the hero or heroine, enabling them to become braver, plan more strategically and be more able to withstand and overcome the perils of the ongoing journey. In the ancient Greek legend of Jason and the Argonauts, for example, Medea gives Jason a potion she has concocted from the blood red juice of the crocus (Graves, 1977). Once he has swallowed1 it, Jason is protected from the bull with the fiery breath and enabled to fight off the armed men and that spring from the dragon's teeth that block his way to claiming the golden fleece. Similarly, in the Odyssey, the sorceress Circe has given Odysseus a magic herb which protects him from her enchantment. Thus enabled, he forces Circe to turn his men back to human form so they can continue with their journey (Rouse, 1957:175). Potions are also found in many fairy tales; in the Grimm's fairy tale of the Twelve Dancing Princesses, a draught of drugged wine administered to their worldly suitors allows the princesses to escape them and pursue their evening adventures dancing in the enchanted forest (Sideman & Kredel, 1977). Probably the best known of all in the Western world is Hans Christian Anderson's tale of the Little Mermaid. In this story, the mermaid wants above all to win the heart of the prince with whom she has fallen in love but knows she can never be with him unless she can become human. Begging the sea witch to help her, she obtains a magic potion. When she reaches the shore and drinks it, it enables her to grow legs and take on a human form of great beauty and gracefulness, so that she achieves her desire and marries the prince (Andersen, 1996 [1930]). The little mermaid must, however, pay a high price for her human form, losing her voice and living a life of pain as every step on her human legs is like walking on knives. So the magic potions are not always benign. The witches in Shakespeare's Macbeth, for example, are brewing "poisoned entrails" in their cauldron with obvious malign intent, and the apple that Snow White chokes on was intended to kill her and put an end to her beauty overshadowing the wicked stepmother. Whether positive or negative, however, these supernatural substances have agency, they cause effects, and carry the action of the narrative forward. A fascinating aspect of these examples, (though outside the scope of the study to 1 In some versions Jason anoints himself with a liquid rather than swallowing it. 22 explore) is that in almost all cases the substance is supplied by a female protagonist, counter to the usual gendered stereotypes of women as beautiful but passive in these traditional tales (Evans 1998; West 1993; Haase 2004; Rowe 1979). Closely related to the powerful and protective substance of legend, is the substance that revives and resuscitates after injury or even death so that the hero is enabled to return to full strength and continue with their quest. Strengthening and restorative herbs feature in the Fellowship of the Ring when Frodo is lying wounded: ...Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was steeped. The pungent fragrance filled the dell ... soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and his breath grew easy (Tolkien, 1974: 319). The same idea is found in the Grimm's fairy tale of the Two Brothers where a hare places a magic herb in the dead man's mouth to revive him (Varecha, 1982), and in the Celtic tales of the Horned Women and the Battle of the Birds, where dead and bewitched children are brought back to life by sprinkling them with water mixed with blood (Jacobs, 1994). The elixir of life motif (or the elixir of immortality) also occurs across many cultures including Chinese and Indian myths, and throughout Polynesia. Variations on the myth of the Land of the Water of Life of the Gods can be found in many of the Pacific Island groups including New Zealand, Tonga, Samoa, Tahiti as well as the Hawaiian islands (Beckwith, 1970). The land lies beyond the horizon where there is a lake of living water and where the gods have immortality. This water is called Ka wai ola a Ka-ne or the water of life of Ka-ne and has the power to restore humans to life. One story concerns a king who was gravely ill. His three sons each went searching after the water of life, two of whom met with disastrous fates, until eventually it was found by one son and brought to the king who immediately regained his health and strength (Westervelt, 1993). It is this same water of life that features in the Maori legend of the moon: when the moon sickens, wanes and comes nigh to death, she goes afar off across the ocean to seek the waters of life, or fountain of youth, the Waiora a Tane. In a far region she bathes her wasted form in the healing waters of Tane and so returns to this world as Hina-keha, once more young and beautiful (Best, 1951:137-138). Ingested substances with supernatural properties are also recurring motifs in Jewish and Christian traditions. In the Biblical story of the flight of the Israelites from Egypt, manna comes 23 down from heaven (Exodus Chapter 16)2 and later on in the journey when the Israelites were dying in the desert in their flight from Egypt, Moses struck the rock and "water gushed in abundance" (Numbers 20:11) thus allowing them to continue their journey to the promised land. Jesus, too spoke about living bread and living water. In the incident where he meets the Samaritan woman at the well (John 4:13) Jesus tells her, "whoever drinks the water I give them will never thirst. Indeed, the water I give them will become in them a spring of water welling up to eternal life." A little further on Jesus refers to himself as being "the living bread that came down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever." These instances lead up to the symbolic gift of the Last Supper where Jesus designates the bread and wine as giving everlasting life to those who "do this as a memorial of me" (Luke 22: 19). These ancient motifs appear in modern guises in both literary and popular works. The monomyth of the hero who overcomes the dangers and trials that hinder their quest is the principal theme of the Harry Potter series and Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz, among many others (Robbins, 2005). George Lucas has acknowledged that the Star Wars series was heavily influenced by the "Hero with a Thousand Faces" (Tiffin, 1999), Joseph Campbell's scholarly work on the many versions of the monomyth of the hero's journey (1973). The mysterious and powerful substance motif is repeated in Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland. After falling down the rabbit hole and then drinking the potion in the bottle she finds on the table at the bottom, Alice shrinks to a height of ten inches. Now she is small enough to get access to the new world she has found, and "her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for going through the little door into the lovely garden" (Carroll, 1865 [1898]: 10). Thus enabled she can embark on her journey to independence and self-discovery. In humorous form, the same motif is found in the Asterix series where the venerable Druid Getafix brews magic potions that endow the person who drinks them with superhuman strength (Goscinny & Uderzo, 1974). Similarly, Mad Max in the Princess Bride revives the dead hero Wesley with the aid of a chocolate covered capsule so he can rescue the princess and defeat the forces of evil (Goldman, 2003). In short, the notion of the ingested magical substance that protects, enables, cures, and revives is a motif that runs through many of the "symbolic stories that embody the enduring and universal qualities of our experiences"(Smith, 2002: 2). As Armstrong (2005: 4) has observed, "mythology speaks of another plane that exists alongside our own world and that in some sense supports it." 2 All Biblical references are from The Jerusalem Bible 1968. Jones, A. (ed). London: Longman. 24 Running in parallel with this other-worldly plane, are the substances that have been used from the earliest times for healing in traditional medicine. The art of medicine implicitly acknowledges its debt to Asclepios (Asclepius in Latin), the god of healing in the Greek myths, whose staff with the coiled snake, chosen because the sloughing of the snake skin was believed to renew youth, is still associated with medicine. The connection between magic and healing is not always clear cut; there is a blurred boundary where they cross over or at least complement each other. As Porter (1997: 33) has commented, "because illness raises the spectre of that mystery of mysteries, death", medicine, religion, and magic have always been closely intertwined. Healing takes place through magic substances in myth and legends and traditional healers have often been credited with magic powers, particularly in situations where illness may be attributed to supernatural causes (Adewuya & Makanjuola, 2008; Bartocci & Littlewood, 2004; Petrus & Bogopa, 2007; Razali et al., 1996).