Sally described what she liked about the online system: And they've [the local health shop] been very good ... until I thought, well I'll go on the internet and it's brilliant, absolutely brilliant. Order it and I get it the next morning. It's couriered. It's absolutely amazing. They tell me exactly when they have packaged it. It's just a two second operation now that I know how to use the thing. (Sally) It is interesting to note that Sally encapsulates this whole process and underlines its anonymity in describing it as "knowing how to use the thing". Her 'sense of the game' shows how she has understood that buying things can be adapted from the walk-in shop to use other actants in the assemblage that are now at her disposal. She already knows what 'things' she needs, she uses her skills with modern communication things to find an online source where she can buy her products more conveniently - no need to go out to visit the store - and even more cheaply, becomes familiar with how it works, places orders, and receives messages in return, with the result that the package of supplements lands on her doorstep the next morning. The agency of the material things drives these transactions in a way that humans may use but over which they have only limited control. People bring various levels of skill to seek what they want but what they find is largely determined by the non-human things that are unseen but lie behind the user interface: the systems on which the search engines run, the algorithms that 130 determine what they see, and the capacity and speed of the internet connections and the phones or laptops which the human users employ as tools. Most participants appeared to be aware of both the advantages and limitations of these technical things and would cross check what they found from several angles and compare prices and sources of supply. They were also continuing to develop expertise in interpreting what they found and recognising which were the more reliable sources of information and which were simply driven by marketing and promotion of particular products. This last point leads on to the economic and commercial actants that are deeply entangled in the sources that generate the information about supplements things. They include the products themselves, the companies that develop and market them (and their share- holders), the buyers and sellers and the channels through which they are disseminated. The next section tackles the implications of these actants, the levers of supply and demand, and how they were manifested in the data generated in the discussions with the participants. Marketing things Undoubtedly, commercial interests have played a part in the increasing use and availability of supplements and herbal products across all developed countries in recent decades (McCann, 2005; Van Buul & Brouns, 2015). There is much money invested in their manufacture and marketing (Persistence Market Research, 2017), with companies from large corporates to small independent businesses always aiming for new ways to attract new customers, and retain them by providing a point of difference from other similar products (Sosna et al., 2010; Suleria et al., 2015). The underlying demand, however, does not appear to be driven only by the pull of advertising but the push from consumers who are searching for new products and new ways of managing their health (Khedkar et al., 2017; Shepherd & Bachis, 2014; Wrick, 1995). Whether push or pull, the marketing revolves around 'things' to sell backed up by discourses and images to encourage buyers and communication channels to disseminate the message widely. The 'things' themselves may not necessarily be new, but older products that have been reimagined and repackaged to appeal to the contemporary consumer by combining, formatting or naming them differently. Cod liver oil once spooned out of a bottle to previous generations of children has become the more scientific sounding omega-3 fish oil in easy-to-swallow capsules now promoted as having benefits for people of any age. Garlic, already familiar from its use in everyday recipes or herbal remedies for generations, has been reformulated into tablets that avoid the mess and smell of the natural product and combined with other herbs and vitamins as an immunity booster (Percival, 2016; Ried, 2016; Totelin, 2015). As discussed in the previous chapter, traditional medicines from other societies that are new and exotic to western 131 consumers have also become increasingly incorporated into mainstream ranges in health stores and pharmacies (Connell, 2006; Loyer & Knight, 2018; May, 1996). With the market for supplements well established, but highly competitive, participants who sold supplements and herbal products were keenly aware of the pressure on their business to remain viable by keeping abreast of current trends. They described a constantly moving scene at the point of sale, with new products, combinations, and formulations constantly vying for the attention of customers, who, it seems have a constant demand for novelty (Gallagher, 2012). They talked about the need to find a balance between anticipating or responding rapidly to consumer demands for new things, and being wary of investing too much in any particular one thing, as consumer demand was volatile, with interest prone to flare and then wane just as quickly: There tend to be trends - definitely trends as to what is the 'in product' ... for instance turmeric is quite big at the moment so everybody comes out with their turmeric ...things like R3 was on the radio for ages and ages. We couldn't get it. We didn't know who supplied it. Huge demand for it. As soon as we got it, it started to back off a little bit. ...it's not sold so we put it out on special and wait for the next trend. (Kerry) Rarely, it appeared, a small businessman like Paul, might see a trend coming and capitalise on it early before others caught up. However, the market was always changing and there appeared to be a small window of time before, as Paul found out, "people were able to find it in health shops and in supermarkets and that sort of thing and our market slowly dried up." Marketing makes good use of communication channels which underpin much of the waxing and waning of trends. Online marketing in particular has a wide reach as it spans geographical distance in a way that other marketing tools cannot. Moreover, online advertising makes use of advanced technological algorithms to remember what people have searched for and automatically display similar but related products that are likely to appeal to them (Alagoz et al., 2010). However, marketing alone cannot make the promotion successful; if consumers do not find some advantage in a particular product, then it is likely to fade away, just as Kerry describes above. Although almost all the participants talked about their use of online sources, more traditional marketing was still a powerful influence on their purchases. Radio has already been mentioned by both Paul and Kerry as connecting potential users with a supplement of interest and many others mentioned reading about products in a magazine or other print publication. One retailer participant advertised his products and services in a full page advertisement in a 132 local newspaper every two weeks and local pharmacy chains promoted their 'specials' in print publications in their stores, as well as online. A health store chain continued to publish a substantial free magazine every month, with products and advice focusing on a particular theme each time, for example, sleep, stress, immunity or surviving winter illnesses. These magazines provided a rich source of informal data over the course of the study about the mix of typical communication and marketing actants that are used to appeal to the widest possible range of potential customers. While they clearly had human input into their design, they stood out as using the material form to connect with discourses that would maximise the appeal of the things they were promoting. Well-chosen images are powerful actants that create positive associations with the things they are promoting (Roininen et al., 2006). In these magazines, images of glossy leaves, luscious- looking fruits and berries, scenic landscapes and happy, smiling families accompanied by bland descriptions of products as 'healthy', 'natural' and 'good for you' appeared to confirm the wisdom of the old adage that 'a picture is worth a thousand words'. Supplement users were depicted as young, good looking, often in exercise gear, jumping for joy and full of 'get up and go'. Personalised testimonials complete with signatures and photographs of satisfied users, ordinary citizens, or locally well-known sports or media personalities also featured, adding authentication and conviction to the marketing message (Koteyko & Nerlich, 2007). Older people, a key market for many of the products because of their concerns about aching joints, prostate problems, heart disease, and dementia, were not often depicted, but when they were, they also appeared in full health, engaging in active outdoor pursuits. Supplements in these sort of media are constructed as things with the power and agency to create desirable effects in people's lives through strategic combinations of linguistics and images. The healthy and active 'lifestylism' they promote (Koteyko and Nerlich, 2007) is commonly reinforced by the imperative voice, seeming to speak directly to the reader in a personal way and instruct them to be active participants in making themselves healthy, for example the exhortation to "Jump start your exercise mojo!!" (Dobson, 2016). There is a relentless positivity about almost all the language used to communicate and market the benefits of supplement things to users in these publications (see Figure 2). They 'cleanse', 'balance', 'renew', 'boost' and 'soothe'; they improve immunity, give 'kids calm' and provide 'tranquil sleep'. Most frequently they 'support': in a single issue of the one magazine I examined, various products were said to 'support' menopause, sleep, stamina, healthy cartilage, joint comfort and mobility, the prostate, digestive balance, the body's response to allergens, and to give extra 133 support that would 'lift brain power'. The framing of supplements like this serves several purposes; it conveys overwhelmingly positive associations; it chooses language that is open to being applied and interpreted in any way; and, importantly, it constructs the products as distinct from the therapeutic claims associated with pharmaceuticals. This last contrast is a useful one; not only does it construct supplements as being for wellness rather than illness (in contrast to prescribed medicines) but it is able to make a virtue out of the necessity of complying with regulatory regimes in most developed countries that prohibit supplement marketing from claiming to treat or cure a health condition (Crawford & Leventis, 2005). Figure 2: Marketing things: graphic by Alex Bidwell, used with permission Participants were clearly aware of and entangled with the assemblage of marketing actants as almost all of them commented about them in some way. Most indicated that they believed they could distinguish between genuine information and unrealistic marketing promises and few would admit to being swayed by advertising. Tessa, however, confessed that she had sometimes felt foolish for believing claims she had read in product promotions: I get a bit enthusiastic, excited when I see something online about a new product, or something that's going to have an effect on my brain functioning and all that kind of stuff and improve my memory and make me feel really fantastic. .... So I do have to be careful because I am a bit - because I can make decisions a bit too quickly. (Tessa) There is also an awareness among marketers and advertisers, however, that they need to attract those users who are sceptical of promotional discourses and images, but can be reached through their sensitivity to price. Price was definitely a major consideration for many of the participants 134 who were frank about how costly they found supplements. Most of them knew the exact price they paid for a particular product and how it compared to other brands or sources of supply. Iris, Marama, and Caro all referred to items they would never buy because of the price; Trudy described changing from a pharmacy product to a cheaper supermarket generic brand, and Sally and Cliff now both bought primarily from online outlets because they could save money. Even those who seemed not to worry about the absolute cost, were keen to ensure that if they did spend more than the cheapest price, it should be money well spent. As Penny remarked "sometimes they are quite expensive and you don't actually want to spend that money if you don't think it is actually going to work." There is a different set of marketing actants that come into play around price; discounts, 'two for one deals', loyalty cards, or 'free gift with purchase' offers. Additionally, 'price plus advice' combinations do seem to attract regular customers who just want their usual product rather than looking for novelty. Several participants reported that they always went to the same store, even if it meant travelling out of their way because they got regular discounts for their loyalty and also felt they were given good advice. Companies use these sorts of drawcards to build a 'brand community' (Gommans et al., 2001; Hur et al., 2011; McAlexander et al., 2002) that creates a link: ...between the customer and the brand, the customer and the firm, the customer and the product in use, and between fellow customers (McAlexander et al 2002: 38) This so-called 'community' is itself an evolving assemblage built around a set of human and non- human actants connected in a network of shifting interactions. Online outlets cannot provide face-to-face advice but offset this by being able to generate 'e-loyalty' (Gommans, 2001), connecting users via their website without being bounded by time zones or geographical distance, and encouraging interactive customer-to-customer comments. Additionally, a company 'expert' may offer advice through their website. A participant who regularly bought products online from the same outlet reported her experience of requesting their advice: I've just swapped to this one here [indicating new product] ...my arthritis seemed to be just getting worse. ... So I just actually typed on the helpline and told them my situation ... and I pretty well got an instant reply. And they said, you know, probably the arthritis is getting worse because there is no difference in the ingredients. Anyway, it didn't really help but it's much better. (Sally) The experience Sally reports here serves to underline the complex entanglement of 'things' in the assemblage around the material substances of the supplements; the technical connection 135 through the online help service provided by the product retailer and the prompt communication of information in a personal (though disembodied) response. Although the advice appeared to change nothing for her physical problem, Sally appeared reassured, confident she was coping with her condition, felt better anyway and was overall a satisfied customer who was likely to keep using the same outlet for her supplies. A number of participants in the study were engaged in network marketing, a differently organised set of similar actants connected together in their own rhizomatic assemblage around a specific set of supplement things. These participants were a relatively small group within the study, but the data generated from the discussions with them are worth examining in some detail because of the intensity of their engagement with their 'things'. Network marketing differs from everyday transactions where people buy things from a range of stores or other outlets that sell to the general public; the 'things' are familiar but they are differently organised and sold. The network marketing model is focused around material products and familiar discourses but mobilised through economic enticements, entrepreneurial discourses, personal relationships and the transformation narratives of company heroes. Products are sold through a network of distributors, who sell directly to friends and contacts but are also urged to recruit these contacts and anyone else in their networks to become distributors themselves (Kong, 2001). The emphasis on making money by selling through personal contacts is a key feature differentiating network marketing from other marketing strategies. Distributors generally receive commissions and bonuses on both the amount of product they sell, and the successful recruitment of others as salespersons (Keep & Vander Nat, 2014; Kong, 2001). Supplements have been a key product in network marketing right from the beginning; during the 1940s, an American supplement manufacturing company was the first to use this model of sales (Keep & Vander Nat, 2014; Kong, 2001; Msweli & Sargeant, 2001) and supplements have continued to be a mainstay of this mode of selling. During the course of the study I heard from participants about a number of different network marketing companies that they had been, or were currently, involved with. Their accounts provided a clear picture of the various strategies that were used to attract users. One of these drew on the same social discourses of harmful things that have already been described in the previous chapter, as Clara's experience showed: He [the presenter] talked about the nutrition that is not in our food any more, it is all processed out. The foundation food for health is gone, essential fatty acids, is gone, for shelf life. (Clara) 136 This is not a new strategy; Cardwell (1998) noted more than 20 years ago that network marketing recruits are commonly exposed to an identical scenario, which portrays the food supply as deficient in essential nutrients, and that all health problems are related to these deficiencies, but they can be remedied by taking the particular company's products on offer. There was a two-way entry into network marketing it seemed. Some participants, like Clara, had used the products and had begun selling them to offset the cost of their own supplies; others like Molly and Murray, became involved as a business opportunity and an entrepreneurial challenge while also 'doing good' for others, but had then begun to take the products themselves. Molly explained how the two-pronged approach had been precisely what had inspired her to give up her previous job to take on network marketing as a distributor: ...there are different levels [of commission] as you keep going and enrol more people .... once you hit executive, you get ten percent of everything everyone else earns as well ... it sounds really cheesy but we are not focusing on the money at the moment because you can't rely on it at this stage of the game it's more about just getting people into it and when I do get paid it's great, it's awesome, and I'm definitely getting way more than I was this time last month but I'm not just sitting there waiting for the pay cheque. I'm sitting there going right, who else can I help. Because I think if you start to focus on the money it just all goes out the window. ... You've got to have dreams and you've got to want the cars and that sort of thing or you won't do anything to get there but I think if your number one goal is to help people, life's going to be better off. (Molly) However, network marketing is more than a business opportunity that has a mildly idealistic flavour. The distributors are encouraged to identify with the company and show loyalty and commitment to it, becoming emotionally as well as financially invested, so that their personal and business lives are interlinked.