Pilgrims in both ancient and modern traditions leave behind their normal lives for a time and travel to a place which is often far away (Barber, 1991; Gesler, 1996; Rountree, 2006). In this state of "liminality" (Gesler, 1996: 96), bracketed between their departure and return, they are open to healing and transformation, "... a journey both outward to new, strange, dangerous places, and inwards to spiritual improvement, whether through increased self-knowledge or through the braving of physical dangers" (Barber, 1991: 1). One participant had made a pilgrimage to just such a faraway place, drawn by the idea of experiencing a mysterious substance: I went to Peru to see a shaman. ... I booked myself onto a lodge in the middle of nowhere in the Amazon ... just did ayahuasca to see what it was all about. ... The stories I have read is that potentially a serpent will appear and will talk to you. I didn't have that. I just had this kind of strange experience where I ended up getting sick. It's more of a cleansing than anything - cleansing your body of all these toxins, evil. ...it's referred to in the Amazon as the healing vine maybe more at an emotional level than a physical level, I don't know. (Duncan) Duncan's account had easily recognisable echoes of the hero's journey (Campbell, 1973) in myth and legend, where the protagonist sets out on a strange and potentially dangerous journey to a remote place, drawn by the idea of being able to find a 'magic' substance or the 'water of life' that will endow them with special powers. Whereas mystics may be able to take the journey inwardly without leaving home, pilgrims need a concrete object or place - an exteriorised, physical 'thing' - as a focus for the spiritual experience (Barber, 1991: 3). It may be a natural phenomenon that has special spiritual significance like the river at Benares for Hindus, the grotto and spring at Lourdes for Christians seeking healing (Gesler, 1996), or a man-made structure of special significance like the Neolithic stones at Stonehenge or the Glastonbury Tor that have become the focus for neo-pagan pilgrimages (Rountree, 2006). Duncan's pilgrimage was not only to an outwardly strange (to him) place that was hard to reach, but focused on obtaining an exotic 'thing' as an enabler to inward cleansing and healing. Although he told me that he had made this journey without much thought, his reference to evil and to the deeply ambivalent symbolism of the serpent makes the underlying spiritual meaning of his journey impossible to overlook. According to Mundkur (1983; Mundkur et al., 1976) the cult of the serpent (also known as ophiolatry) can be traced back into distant antiquity and has always excited the human imagination, inspiring reverence but also a primeval fear. Serpents are woven into myths and 117 depicted in art from Mesopotamia, to Australia and from Asia to all parts of the Americas. In the Garden of Eden myth of Christian and Jewish tradition, the serpent brings expulsion from paradise but also knowledge, underlining its dual appeal as "the garden of double messages" (Slivniak, 2003: 439). Duncan's comments during our discussion suggested that, in spite of not encountering the serpent, he had found the 'thing' unsettling and possibly more than a little frightening, and now saw his youthful confidence as being somewhat misplaced: In hindsight I think I should potentially have been a little more cautious. ... Looking at it now, yes, I'm glad I did it but I don't know if I would necessarily recommend it to people. (Duncan) Some participants also implied in their comments that they experienced spiritual effects from other therapies that they had used to complement their health practices with supplements. While these were not the focus of the study, and I did not wish to be drawn into the diverse assemblage of therapies described as CAM (complementary and alternative medicine), two particular modalities - reiki and kinesiology - stood out for the number of times they were mentioned by participants and the mysterious 'thing' power they seemed to create for them. Both reiki (Miles & True, 2003) and kinesiology (Hamilton, 2011) are therapies that share the concept of energy flows which can be released to relieve physical and emotional pain and promote healing. They both involve a therapist as a conduit, but the 'thing' enabled through the therapist's touch appears to be something beyond its surface appearance and not something that can be rationally explained. Reiki is of Japanese origin and is said to "redistribute stagnant energy" within a person to promote emotional and physical healing (Raingruber & Robinson, 2007). Kinesiology originated as a muscle testing therapy developed in Sweden by a physiotherapist (Ottosson, 2010). However, the kinesiology practice that the participants reported attending in Christchurch appeared to be an expanded version of applied kinesiology (Rosner & Cuthbert, 2012). According to the information on this practice's website the therapists there have their own technique for "evaluation of physical, emotional, psychological and spiritual systems of the body" (Integrated Health, undated). Both reiki and kinesiology resemble the 'laying on of hands' that is used in religious ceremonies to transfer conviction and power to the recipient (Carr, 2000). They also draw on the idea of therapeutic touch that itself forms an assemblage encompassing an entanglement of orthodox and alternative healing modalities. As well as reiki and kinesiology, therapeutic touch and its ally, massage, is found in nursing (Bulette Coakley & Duffy, 2010; Hart, 2012), physiotherapy (Weerapong et al., 2005), and Maori traditional massage (mirimiri) where it is accompanied by karakia (prayer) (Ahuriri-Driscoll et al., 118 2008). Therapeutic touch has been used to relieve distress and pain in people with cancer (Currin & Meister, 2008), to relieve depression (Field et al., 2012), to ease low back pain (Furlan et al., 2015) and to calm preterm infants (Hernandez-Reif et al., 2007). The spiritual benefits from the healing touch have been described as "a little understood enigma of a signally human interaction"(Krieger, 1975: 784). However, it is the 'thing' beyond explanation in human terms (the enigma), that appears to be the crucial component. All participants who commented on reiki and kinesiology struggled to put into words how they imagined the therapies created the effects they reported. Johnny likened reiki to meditation, saying that it reduced his stress and helped him during times when he had chronic sleeping problems but was unable to be more specific. Duncan had taken a basic training course in reiki but although he reported that "... you just put your hands on top of [a person] and kind of feel for blockers and stoppages", his explanation served only to underline the mysterious nature of the effect. Participants who talked about kinesiology were equally unable to say what happened in their treatments. Jane, Sally, and Rana (who were not known to one another) had all consulted the same kinesiology practice in Christchurch and spoke about their experiences during our discussions. I was interested to know more about kinesiology from them as it was a modality I was unfamiliar with. Each of these participants had sought help for markedly different problems and each of them had found it helped them, but none of them was able to pinpoint why. Jane referred to inflammation in the body that kinesiology had been able to reduce but followed it up by saying "to be quite honest, half of it I couldn't [explain]". Sally had found resolution for long lasting pain which had not been identified even after a cascade of medical appointments and tests. She mentioned that the kinesiologist pressed her arm down and massaged the site of the pain in her side, and was "a lovely guy... a nice guy who is effective...not dodgy stuff either" but followed it up by saying "I don't know what it is or what it does." Rana, who indicated that her problems were psychological rather than physical distress, was also unable to say in more than the vaguest terms what happened during the treatment: So he works on - I don't know what you call it now - but uses those oils and things - sprays them into you and the resistance in your joints, so he did that and I noticed a difference almost immediately in my being, in the way I was thinking , in the way I was feeling, I noticed a difference. (Rana) It is interesting here that they all attempt to explain the effect in physical terms; Jane draws on constructions of inflammation and both Sally and Rana focus on the outward signs; the touch and the 'oils and things' and 'joint resistance' in the minimal descriptions they were able to 119 come up with, but they hardly provide an explanation of why any of them were able to report feeling so much better. The intimacy involved in touch therapies certainly requires a degree of empathetic rapport between the therapist and the client/patient. However, there seemed to be a spiritual 'thing' operating here, which went beyond empathy, an enigma beyond rational explanation which generated effects in those who found the treatment so helpful. It may seem simplistic or even nonsensical to ascribe the alleviation of bodily and spiritual 'dis- ease' to a particular substance, whether every-day or exotic, a 'cleansing' drink, or an undefinable energy that comes from a particular treatment. Nevertheless, the participants' diverse reports showed their conviction that they had drawn energy from whatever 'thing' they used and had gained in wellbeing. Some reported improved biomedical symptoms; others did not, but still found that the 'things' enabled them to cope better with whatever had been bothering them. As one participant pointed out directly, a biomedical cure is not always the way to find healing. She had witnessed a healing ceremony embedded in Maori traditional medicine where a family member had their partial vision restored to full sight. This had a profound effect on her and she was unworried that the sight improvement had been only temporary: ...it [the improved sight] didn't stay, but it gave us enough of a window into a different world of healing. We were like, O my goodness, there is some really strong energy and effective practice going on here that we don't understand. So that ... started the journey of learning ... (Olivia) The 'journey' referred to by Olivia is an aptly chosen word. It points ahead to the way that the participants' practices with supplements had been an influence for change and development, enabling them to move forward in their lives. So far, this chapter has highlighted only the participants themselves and their connections with the supplementary and therapeutic 'things' that they engaged in. Their lives, however, were much richer than this suggests. Far from being focused on these 'things' for their health, they were 'ordinary' citizens who were well engaged socially and economically across a diverse range of fields. Drawing from the participants' accounts, the next section looks at the wider context of their lives and traces some of the human and non-human components in the network of actants that interacted with the supplement things in the evolving assemblage. Things in the evolving assemblage All participants were part of the study because they had rich experience with supplements and herbal medicines. So it goes without saying that at the time I spoke to them, this connection had 120 already happened at some time in the past, they considered their health practices with supplements to be important, and they were able to speak about their experiences at some length. When discussing with them how they first started to take supplements, I could see that an apparently simple decision to start using a particular product was the result of a long chain of events within a network of many connections, some deliberate and others quite random. While the immediate situations that precipitated the action may have been a health problem of some kind, it was far from a simple connection. Entangled in the decision were their own views about health and illness that came from their cultural background and life experiences, examples of families, friends and acquaintances who also took supplements, wider social discourses of health and illness, heterogeneous pieces of information from many different kinds of commercial, health, and social media, and previous contacts with the orthodox health system. All these came together at a node in the network when each participant made the decision to take action. They bought and took a particular product which then became ingested matter and part of their being. Moreover, the chain of events did not terminate at that point, but went on to inform subsequent decisions and produce new connections which led to further actions. Deleuze and Guattari's (1987) rhizome again helps to conceptualise the tangled relationships within such an assemblage. While it is the synthesis between the connections and interactions of the rhizome which creates the forward movement, it is still useful to look at several of the individual actants in more detail to elucidate the range of personal, social, and economic factors that were apparent across the data generated in the study. Of course, a single interview of around an hour could not expect to reveal the multitude of connecting points that had come together for each of the participants and set off their engagement with supplements. Nevertheless it was possible to distinguish several broader categories that had been influential for all of them, and to trace the connecting threads between the vital matter of the supplements and how they were linked to previous experiences in their lives, contacts with other people that had been influential, and wider social and economic discourses that they had come across. It was clear from the discussions with the participants that many of them assumed it was both obvious and sensible to find things to treat themselves with whenever possible, and to only consult a health professional as a back-up approach if they needed more than they could do alone. This self-sufficient attitude appeared to be derived from their family and the wider cultural milieu in which they had grown up. It echoed constructions of the 'do-it-yourself' (DIY) New Zealander which places a high value on being a "Kiwi bloke" (Cox, 2016) who takes pride in being able to bring together their own materials and skills and solve most problems 121 independently. This was even more pronounced in those participants who lived or had lived in rural areas, where self-sufficiency and independence is assumed to be part of the ethos of small communities (Herbert-Cheshire, 2000; Powell et al., 2016; Swaffield & Fairweather, 1998): We were farmers so we had our own orchard .... But I think cod liver oil and Vicks were the staple things that my mother had in her first aid bag.... Whenever we went to the sea, my mother would go, just go and put it in the sea, salt water was very healing. (Caro) This type of embodied cultural capital that Caro articulated and which forms people's assumptions is accumulated, largely unconsciously, over a lifetime, strongly affecting people's ideas and beliefs (Calhoun et al., 1993). This is Bourdieu's notion of the habitus. A person's habitus results in actions that are "neither fully determined nor fully willed" (McNay 1999: 100) but played out in what Bourdieu termed "le sens pratique" generally translated as 'the rules of the game' (King 2000; McNay 1999). This means that the response to particular circumstances is variable and creative within the bounds of what an individual finds to be reasonable behaviour for their family, group or social class (Garnham and Williams 1980: 213). Individuals become skilled at the game, evolving beyond its original limitations and (using an analogy with tennis), develop "... the practical flexibility to know when they should run to the net or into space" (King 2000: 419). The comments made by participants like Caro and others tended to focus on the household items and patent medicines from which they had acquired their 'sense of the game' and formed their independent attitude towards looking after themselves in most circumstances: Ok, you've got some sunburn, let's get out some - whatever it is - and put that on. Rawleighs [a patent medicine company] I guess was really big then as well, so that's what you would do. You get a cold, so you get the Vicks Vaporub(tm) [mentholated cough and cold remedy] on. My older brother used to get croup quite bad so they would get all the stuff they needed to and get the old preserving thing out and make lots of steam with it and have it in a tent sort of. (Johnny) Here Johnny looks back to his childhood and describes the material things that had been meaningful to him as simple DIY remedies. His description shows that he had observed the adults in his life interacting with them had provided the template for how he went about managing his minor health problems now although the 'things' themselves had moved on. The patent remedies he mentioned in his early years had mostly evolved over time, becoming more 122 elaborate and less likely to be common household ingredients, but the underlying concept of practical independence using simple material products and applying learned skills had not. Johnny now said he took multivitamins, omega-3 tablets, magnesium, and sleepy tea if he was having "a few sleep issues". Several of the participants who had immigrated to New Zealand from different European countries continued with the alternative products they had been prescribed by doctors there but had learned to be self-reliant and seek them out independently because they were not available in the standard health system in New Zealand. Similarly, participants who had knowledge of Maori traditional medicine from their childhood were also continuing to use adapted forms that fitted around their current circumstances. All of them were using their 'sense of the game' to adapt and change in a flexible way, making use of what worked for them at the time I met them. Each had their unique assemblage of actants around their health practices to which their habitus from the past had clearly contributed the 'codes' of the assemblage. However, it was constantly changing and evolving with the material things being, adapted, or woven in with new ideas and discourses as time moved on and they themselves were changed. Rather than simply adapting the codes of the assemblage as times changed, some participants related stories of a dramatic departure from their normal practices that sparked radical change, as 'lines of flight' from the usual actants in the rhizomatic assemblage.