It then follows on to show how their ideas of responsibility had evolved, continuing to be underpinned by basic health advice from orthodox medicine and public health, but developing, in addition, their own individualised approach through their use of supplements. I show how they navigated their way between the contrasting forces of being responsible in terms of official health advice on the one hand, and the societal encouragement to participate avidly in the supplement market on the other. I look at the influence of marketing models on orthodox health itself and how the development of the 'health consumer' has encouraged people like the participants to mobilise their ability to buy and sell in any market, including 'shopping around' for health care. The second half of the chapter moves on to focus on the participants' evolving expertise about supplements as their experience with them grew. Drawing again from the concept of the rhizomatic network (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987), it shows the range of actants that the participants were able to bring together to create individualised assemblages of knowledge, connecting multiple and disparate threads of information and experience to gain confidence and control over choosing appropriate health care options in different circumstances. For those who also sold supplements, their 145 personal expertise was further enhanced as they took steps to learn more about their products so as to feel confident in advising others. A final section then looks at the way the participants' enhanced skills and confidence had become woven into their life narrative and was contributing to their ongoing identity formation. Being a responsible citizen As an overall group, the participants appeared to exemplify the ideal neoliberal citizen who has internalised the importance of monitoring and self-managing their health. They made numerous unprompted comments about the importance they placed on being responsible and took pains to demonstrate that they knew about the basic principles of a healthy lifestyle and were doing their best to put them into practice: I'm into the whole thing about doing the best you can for your body, looking after yourself. (Frances) Without exception they indicated that they saw responsibility as a positive thing in their lives. They did not consider it to be a burdensome duty, but something in which they chose freely and in which they could take pride and satisfaction. Bryony, for example, saw being responsible for one's health as a positive aspiration that everyone should work towards: .... my biggest thing is about people taking responsibility - checking in with their body and learning to be able to understand what it needs, when it needs, and be their own director of health. .... So they are actually the person living in their body and they have chosen to take responsibility for how they are and how well their body is. So to me, that is the ultimate. (Bryony) Bryony and Frances both indicate here that they see responsibility as being in their own interests and as the 'right' thing to aspire to. They both appear to draw on the idea of the physical body as something that needs tending carefully as a mediator between "the world around us and our internal thoughts, feelings and sensations" (Fox, 2012: 1). Bryony's remarks in particular seem to construct the body as an "eminently governable subject" (Lorenzini, 2018: 155) of the overall person, nicely reflecting in microcosm the concept of the person as a subject of the state. Her comment suggests that the underlying concepts of governmentality have become deeply, if unconsciously, internalised into her world view. All participants represented themselves in much the same way as Bryony and Frances; as 'good subjects', consciously doing their best to keep themselves healthy in the present and using strategies they hoped would maintain and 146 protect their health into the future. As far as I could tell, none of them smoked and none were obese; if they had indulged in 'bad' health behaviours in the past, which one participant did speak about, they had long left them behind. Moreover, they were not simply refraining from poor health habits, but had also adopted the proactive diet and exercise behaviours that are recommended by authorised experts for a healthy lifestyle (Steptoe et al., 2002). Many mentioned the importance of eating well, especially ensuring they ate enough vegetables, for example, this comment from Bob: Well I've always been a bit diet conscious. I don't have butter and I don't have margarine. I'm not an absolute fanatic. I don't sit down and have a roast meal now ... I've always eaten a lot of vegetables; I've got a fairly good vege garden now... I consciously think I should drink more water. A considerable number of participants were actively engaged in various sports, with some of them having been involved for most of their lives. Even those that did not undertake regular sporting activities talked about the importance of ensuring they had some form of exercise. Wendy had "started exercising, cycling and stuff ... you know, you have to balance exercise with diet and mix that up with vegetables". It was clear from the way that participants presented themselves that they saw their behaviour as being congruent with the framing of responsibility as a positive and autonomous way to exercise freedom of choice about looking after oneself and ensuring that they lived a healthy life. Several of the participants had also adopted a distinctly moral tone towards those whose behaviour they perceived as being less responsible than the standards they applied to themselves. Johnny, for example, said he had noticed that he took care of himself "a little bit more than maybe some people". Lesley more overtly constructed herself as responsible in contrast to others whom she considered were failing to do the right thing in spite of her efforts as a health store owner to inform and guide them about the correct way to live in a healthy way: I think it is important that people understand that they actually have to be responsible for their own health in lots of ways. They have to take the bull by the horns themselves. ... I give them information [original emphasis] ... I know usually whether they are ready to run with it ... you can tell, I mean, you know if someone's just after a quick fix ... (Lesley). Lesley implies that people who just want a 'quick fix' are too lazy or irresponsible to make any effort themselves even when she has told them what to do. She echoes the judgemental 147 'othering' of people who are believed to be shirking their responsibility to be healthy (Thompson & Kumar, 2011). There are clear moral meanings in pursuing healthy living that affirm people's self-image as being 'good' and allow them to contrast themselves with others whom they view as having less healthy habits. Those who continue to smoke, take illegal drugs, drink too much alcohol, or are obese tend to be seen as irresponsible, even deviant, if they persist in keeping up their behaviours rather than address them with expert advice (Greener et al., 2010; LeBesco, 2011; Measham & Brain, 2005; Pennay & Moore, 2010; Rideout & Barr, 2009). Such people may be considered personally undeserving of the health care they will need in the future because of their poor choices, as well as an economic drain on the health system and therefore a cost to all of society (Frohlich et al., 2012; Lupton, 1999). As Herrick (2011: 21) succinctly puts it, "health and responsibility rarely venture out unaccompanied by each other because individual lifestyle choices condition the risk of chronic disease." Lesley and Johnny's comments indicate that this attitude does not just emanate from health authorities but also tends to become the norm among those who see themselves as 'good' subjects. Viewing others as bringing ill health on themselves through failing to address their 'irresponsible' lifestyle habits has been interpreted as a modern manifestation of ancient concepts of illness as a retribution for sin (Douglas, 1992; Lupton, 2013). Although modern medicine makes a feature of being scientific, unbiased, and therefore that it stands outside moral considerations, "morals remain deeply embedded in our considerations of health and disease" (Brandt & Rozin, 1997: 2). It is not hard to see how these ideas embedded in religious belief systems from earliest times can easily be transferred into secular society so that: ... 'health' and 'illness' become tools of government. What was once part of a system of control based on a belief in divine retribution is now embedded in a network of power relations which is integral to the notions of freedom of choice (Galvin, 2002: 130). A few participants, resisted being drawn into the good/bad, responsible/irresponsible citizen discourse. Vonnie talked about the life circumstances that limited many people's capacity to be responsible about their health, indicating that she was speaking from her own experiences as a worker in community health. She recognised that the issue was a great deal more nuanced and complex than telling people what to do and then getting them to 'choose' to do it: .... sometimes people are just overwhelmed by life - overwhelmed by the lack of choices. In some cases there is some personal responsibility certainly [but] I notice that often in the community, people really, really try very hard but if you are on a really strict budget and you are working two part time jobs and you've got kids to get to school and you've 148 got your elderly mum living with you or your extended whanau [family] living with you, you try and make ends meet and try and be 'healthy' or try and stay 'well' - it's really difficult. (Vonnie) Vonnie's comments here draw on the concept of the determinants of health - the resources available to a person in terms of income, food and housing security, cultural background, education and social connectivity - that influence the amount of responsibility that each individual is able to have over managing their health even if they know what they ought to be doing (Marmot, 2005). Vonnie's reflections, based on her working knowledge of others' disadvantage, were unusual among the participants, who generally appeared to take it for granted that being responsible about health was something that everyone could and should be able to do as they themselves were doing. Reconfiguring responsibility: supplement users In spite of their 'good' citizen behaviour, participants presented something of a paradox from the perspective of official advice, as they were all keenly engaged with supplements as users, sellers, or both. Although supplements are hardly in the same category as smoking, obesity, and too much alcohol, they were quite well aware of the orthodox view that treating oneself with supplements was both potentially risky and probably futile (Eliason et al., 1999; Hensrud et al., 1999; Walji et al., 2010) and that by using or selling them they had moved outside the sphere of recommended health protecting behaviour. However, rather than seeing themselves as irresponsible, participants seemed to consider that their supplement use was a way to be even more proactive about being healthy - a type of 'responsibility plus'. Pam explained, for example, that she had been taking multivitamins for some while but had recently decided to change to a new brand with more components and had added glucosamine as well: Susan: So did you start taking the glucosamine off your own bat? Pam: Yes, well pretty much so. Just having problems with muscular problems and things like that... I thought taking that would be an added bonus for me and it seems to have helped. And that there (indicating the container), the multivite. I always have really, been taking multivitamins... It's the first time I've taken it right through, you know - from A to Zinc ... so it will be interesting to see. Seems to be OK. (Pam) 149 There were many other instances like Pam's where participants reported a particular trigger that had led them to start on supplements, none of which had been on the advice of a health professional. It appeared that having a firm belief in themselves as responsible, autonomous citizens, they were confident in deciding what was appropriate to try for themselves. There was no indication from any of them that their actions were deliberately designed to resist expert advice; none gave the impression that they were on a personal crusade or that they were activists in a social movement with a "politicized collective illness identity" (Brown et al., 2004: 60,64), that had been formed to challenge accepted knowledge and practice. Most often their comments simply indicated that their involvement with supplements had begun as a pragmatic strategy that filled an unmet need for them at the time and was, as Pam said, 'an added bonus' to anything that medical professionals might offer them. As Rana commented, about her decision to take evening primrose oil for her menopausal symptoms, "I'd read the material, and OK, this is what I want. It won't harm me." Nevertheless, even though they did not articulate their decision as such, they were, in effect, challenging the power of expert health authorities to decide what was good or not good for them. It was their own form of counter-conduct, a resistance to being conducted by experts, and making the decision to "conduct ...the domain of [their] own conduct or behaviour" (Foucault 1997 cited in Lorenzini 2018: 194-5) and go straight to the market for what they wanted. In contrast to the interpretation of the disordered body that represents a "moral failing" because it needs to be reordered with prescribed medicines (Dew et al., 2015: 272) , the participants clearly saw their self-chosen ingestion of supplements as quite the opposite; that was an additional way of responsibly 'ordering' themselves and, by implication, also morally good. This reconfiguring of responsibility into independent, "hybridised medication practices beyond the purview of medicine's centres of calculation" (Dew et al., 2014: 39), however, meets with disapproval from experts; people are not supposed to treat themselves without consulting a health professional (Bond & Hannaford, 2003; Ventola, 2010). Doing so is framed from the orthodox perspective as lay people being over-confident about their own judgement and "at risk of being exploited, losing their money and damaging their health" (Ernst & Singh, 2008: 281). In response, health professionals over the years have continued to call for more regulation over supplement sales citing the same concerns about effectiveness and safety as noted above (Dwyer et al., 2018; Fontanarosa et al., 2003; Starr, 2015). Yet while these statements come from one branch of authorised expertise and appear to be taken seriously, the importance of the supplement industry to commercial activity and economic growth (Grand View Research, 2019) 150 seems to outweigh the imposition of any further restrictions. In New Zealand, for example, a survey of New Zealand companies engaged in the manufacture and marketing of supplements estimated that the industry had a turnover of $1.4 billion with projections that there would be between 30-50% growth over the next three years (Crowe Horwath, 2014). Moreover, the export of dietary supplements containing locally grown botanical ingredients is enthusiastically supported by New Zealand Trade and Enterprise, an agency of government (Natural Health Products New Zealand, 2019). From this point of view, it appears, growth in the market that results in an increasing number of people buying supplements is framed as an entirely positive thing. For responsibility and healthy behaviour are only one aspect of what the modern state needs from its citizens. It also requires them to be 'good' at participating in the market, buying and selling products and services that keep the economy growing. Messages urging people to be responsible and restrain themselves from indulging in 'unhealthy' behaviour compete constantly with counter messages that urge consumers to keep consuming. People are strongly encouraged to spend, no matter if they spend on 'irresponsible' products: The one thing that would utterly destroy the new capitalism is the serious practice of deferred gratification. (Bell 1976: 78 in Starr, 2007: 214) Economic growth is seen as not only important, but "morally necessary" (Baumol et al., 2007: 33) and is helped along by commercial interests that encourage a recurring cycle of acquisition, use and disposal of a vast array of products and services for the general public to consume (Gregson et al., 2007; McCollough, 2009). If consumer spending falls in any one quarter, there are immediate concerns about faltering growth and the viability of the economy, underlining the "tensions that mark out neoliberalism as continually at odds with its own ends and means" (Herrick, 2011: 33). These tensions between expert advice on the one hand and strong encouragement to spend, no matter on what, provide opportunities for people to navigate between the two forces, mobilising their autonomy as responsible citizens to bypass the official 'expert' power of orthodox health care, and decide for themselves how to act independently. The participants' choice to buy (or sell) supplements was a manifestation of the way that the ordinary citizen can carry out independent choices about how to implement their responsibility on their own terms, bypassing orthodoxy and turning to the market. But could their claims of positive and independent action to be extra responsible about their health be taken at face value? Or was 151 their resistance to expert messages about avoiding supplements simply a sign that they were unwittingly moving into the grasp of yet another manifestation of power, and one which does not pretend to aim at public good, but at profit? The participants' remarks strongly suggested that they were not so easily duped. All participants, whether they used or sold supplements (or both), talked about cost in our discussions. Many of them, without prompting, explained their methods for navigating their way through the market, assessing products carefully so that they obtained the best buy for the lowest cost. Trudy outlined how she carried out her own investigation, comparing prices and quality of a magnesium supplement from three different sources - a pharmacy, a health store, and a supermarket - to ensure she got value for her money: .... when I went to the chemist they had exactly the same brand [name] that the supermarket had but slightly more expensive ...So I thought ... I am going to try a generic brand because if it helps, it helps; if it doesn't, I wasted huge amounts of money. So I tried it, found it really good and I went to a health store [name of store] ... and asked them and they said that's fine ...but this particular magnesium is more pure and it is from a different source and so we would probably recommend you take this. ... So I tried it, but if I am totally honest, I couldn't tell the difference. It wasn't significantly better, or significantly worse and anyway it was pretty much the same so I thought, why pay an extra twenty dollars. (Trudy) Trudy constructs herself here as a sensible consumer, using personal responsibility and informed choice, the "bedrocks of neoliberal health policy" (Herrick, 2011: 17).