As well as the fears about external substances that they might be ingesting or inhaling, many of them also raised concerns about being invaded stealthily from within by processes that were already going on in their bodies. Supplements, it seemed, could also be 87 mobilised as a protection against these internal risks, which might be lurking passively waiting their time to become active and damage their health and wellbeing. The quiet invader within Even if individuals are leading exemplary lives, and following all the recommended advice about taking care of their health there is always the possibility that they may suddenly find themselves 'at risk' of an unexpected disease or condition. There is no doubt that the 'body at risk' is a constant theme in both the general and academic media. Popular publications tend to grasp new studies of risk and highlight the most alarming points out of context, particularly if they are linked to dreaded conditions like cancer or dementia (Behuniak, 2011; McDonald et al., 2016). Medical systems too tend to give the impression that everyone is at risk, highlighting one risk after another followed by a constant stream of advice and warnings to individuals about how they should conduct themselves in the face of these risks (Crawford, 2004). People who are otherwise perfectly well are routinely assessed for cardiovascular risk, checked for diabetes, and urged to participate in cancer screening programmes (Ali et al., 2015; Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care, 2012; Goff et al., 2014; Wardle et al., 2016; Weng et al., 2017). Additionally, technical advances in DNA analysis that have resulted from the human genome project, and the popularity of low-cost direct-to-consumer genetic testing has greatly increased the genetic conditions that can be identified far ahead of any symptom development (Manolio et al., 2019; Peterson et al., 2019). Members of the public can send samples of their saliva for testing and may find out they have a genetic makeup which is a risk factor for conditions which may never develop, or diseases which the individuals concerned may never have heard of (Armstrong et al., 2003; Gollust et al., 2003; Heshka et al., 2008; Hogarth et al., 2008; Ransohoff & Khoury, 2010). While these advances have been advantageous in some respects (Wise et al., 2019), they have also exacerbated anxiety about risks that would never have previously been anticipated (Oliveri et al., 2016). As Lupton (2013) has pointed out, the widespread focus on risk rather than making people feel safer may increase their anxiety through highlighting it as something to which they need to direct their attention. It is well documented, for example, that cancer screening programmes generate anxiety in some individuals, simply by inviting them in to be checked even leaving aside the inexactitude of some of the measures used (Byrne et al., 2008; Consedine et al., 2004; Yeh et al., 2015). A number of participants with arthritis or residual discomfort from sports injuries worried about their conditioning worsening to the point where it would prevent them doing their usual activities. Their fears were not about the present but of chronic illness and disability lurking in 88 the body and which could flare up and hit them with permanent 'biographical disruption' (Bury, 1982; Morden et al., 2017; Williams, 2000). They had turned to supplements to try to defer the anticipated deterioration in their health as long as they could. Murray explained what it meant to him to have found supplements that helped: everything...my mobility, independence, not relying on anyone for help ... the procosamine - the glucosamine sulphate - helps joint health and build ...cartilage ... [I have] full mobility ... and without it my hip wouldn't have done, wouldn't have lasted. (Murray) Others had no problems as yet but worried about the unknown future if they did not take preventive measures now, based on the history of older family members. Johnny's experience of his mother's poor health at a relatively young age and her distress at being dependent and in pain had made him fear what could be ahead for himself. He said it had been a strong incentive for him to resolve to stop smoking, and generally lead a healthier life in the expectation that he could avoid having his quality of life eroded in the same way: Seeing what my mother is like, I don't want to actually be like that myself. You know, she feels like she is a burden on people. ... Mum, she's overweight so she finds it harder to exercise and then with her heart problem the way it was, she couldn't actually get up and walk anywhere. ... She has to have a knee replacement but she doesn't get the knee replacement until she loses some weight .... (Johnny) He had not smoked for many years now, exercised more, and was taking "all the vitamins and minerals and things" as well as using different alternative therapies to do his best to stay fit and healthy. A further category of unknown risk raised by participants was the concept of 'subtractives' (Rozin et al., 2009), that is, concern about nutrients that were missing from their ordinary foods. So rather than worrying about chemicals or additives in food that could harm them, their concerns related to what was assumed to be in food but was not: ... the amino acids which are not in our proteins anymore because they put on farms - super phosphates that kills ... microbes, there's no worms on the farms; the minerals can't get into the plants; there's no vitamins in the plants. They sit up; the grass looks green but there is no nutrition in it. Therefore the animals are eating that and everything is on the back foot. (Clara) 89 The food might look fresh and wholesome, but Clara and several other participants spoke of their concerns about the possibility that the food they consumed was deficient in nutrients and that their health was therefore being gradually undermined. Murray, similarly, raised a point about the properties of plants that had been manipulated for commercial reasons, further reducing their nutrient value. He said he believed that something was wrong with modern cultivation methods though was uncertain of the exact details: ...we are not getting the minerals and vitamins from our foods that we used to, because wheat is stripped of twenty two and then replaced with six or whatever .... (Murray) Pat, who had worked in a bakery also talked about the reduction in the quality and nutrient value of bread during his time there because of new methods that were brought in to speed up the process and avoid the long hours needed for 'natural' rising of the dough. This had resulted in "this crap bread that you get in the supermarkets. It's not good for us". The concern about harm from what has been taken out of food is less often voiced than that relating to what has been added. Rozin et al (2009) found that only a tiny minority of the more than 1000 comments they collected from the public about naturalness in foods mentioned what he termed 'subtractives', while almost two thirds mentioned additives. The participants in my (much smaller) study, however, highlighted the issue of foods that lacked nutrients a number of times, suggesting perhaps that there may have been a growing concern about what is lacking in food in the decade that has passed since the Rozin study was published. What has not changed is that, in common with the findings by Rozin et al (2009), turning to supplements, a positive form of 'additive' was a strategy to overcome the unknown shortfall and allay their concerns. Almost all participants were also worried about the unknown risk of stress on their health. Although stress can have positive as well as negative connotations (Baum, 1990; Bernstein, 1996; Lazarus, 1993; Selye, 1973; Skjong, 2005), the participants tended to see it only in a negative light. The issue of stress was particularly salient at the time the participants were interviewed, as it was only a few years after a series of major earthquakes in Christchurch, when many of them had lost their homes or had them seriously damaged. Some were still fighting to get insurance payouts for their homes and/or business and were uncertain about their future housing and financial position. Even those who had not been materially affected were still suffering from a degree of anxiety and uncertainty that the long running series of earthquakes had provoked. While their comments indicated that they attributed the cause of stress to external events and circumstances, they interpreted the effect of stress as being an eroding 90 force from within and one which could have unknown, but potentially far-reaching effects on their health. ...one of the biggest influences on health is stress because I feel like it has a huge impact on your ability to stay healthy and happy in the world. (Bryony) The natural characteristics of supplements were viewed as a positive buffer against stress and a safeguard against the long-term, quiet undermining of their health without resorting to antidepressants or sleeping tablets, and, as Vonnie remarked, a far better option than "using more crutches ....alcohol, also drugs, smoking". The most acute expression of unknown risk, however, came from one participant whose pessimistic view of the future had been a trigger for a radical revision of her family's lifestyle to include natural products, supplements and self-sufficiency strategies: I was into the essential oils - essential oils and natural stress [relief] coming here after the earthquakes ... I think if anything major happens in the world we are going to have to go back to natural stuff. That was one of the reasons we had started back then, us believing in a doomed world - you know, if there was fighting in certain areas then you are not going to be able to access it. So then what are you going to do? What are you going to be able to use? So we have started - we are not great at it - but we have started growing vegetables, trying to do a few more things. (Wendy) Wendy here draws on the link between the 'unknown unknowns' that are part of the risk assemblage and links them with the assemblage of the natural to frame her view of the future and the strategy that she and her family were evolving to cope with it. She did not raise climate change but her comments about a 'doomed world' do appear to be connected to the same discourses of the perilous future regarding global planetary health (Hansen et al., 2013; Kendall et al., 2018; Sundstrom et al., 2014). Her ideas were unusual among the participants at the time, but in the few years since we spoke, they have become part of general discourse. In contrast, the one risk that appeared to be almost entirely disregarded by all by participants was any notion that they might be at risk from taking self-prescribed supplements and herbal medicines. They saw them as an avenue whereby they could "do something safely for myself" (Charles). Their lack of concern about taking products they chose for themselves was in sharp contrast to their concerns about prescribed medicines. It was also in direct contrast to the volume of medical literature which frames supplements as risky, and consumers as vulnerable 91 and in need of protecting from taking products without professional supervision (Geyer et al., 2008; Lewis, 2019; Stickel et al., 2009; Tsai et al., 2012). Many participants indicated that they were well aware of this disapproval by the medical profession but did not consider it relevant to their decisions about supplements. Most would, however, usually avoid discussing their supplement use with their doctor to avoid any conflict. The juxtaposition of these opposite points of view is taken up again in Chapter 6. Those who sold supplements, on the other hand, appeared to be keenly aware of the discourse of risk from self-prescribed supplements that emanated from health professionals. Although I was not the one to raise the issue in the interview, almost all of them appeared to be positioning themselves in relation to the criticism that they attract for selling such products to members of the general public. They all outlined in detail the steps they took to ensure the safety of their products and advice. They spoke about the attention they paid to ensure that they stocked good quality products that were accurately labelled and complied with regulations. They reported that they questioned their customers carefully about any prescribed medicines they took so that they could check for potentially dangerous interactions. They drew attention to the importance of being confident themselves in their products and maintaining their reputation for providing professional and reliable advice which did not put their customers 'at risk'. As Kerry noted, All the brands that we have got down there [in the shop] are good brands. I would feel really safe recommending any of them. (Kerry) One of them also pointed out that the product manufacturers, too, had their reputation at stake and would lose a great deal if their merchandise was found to be contaminated or of poor quality: And all the providers through the [name of health store chain] are randomly audited and regularly tested through the Ministry of Health as well and they know... if there was anything in those products - it would just wreck their multi-million dollar business overnight. They are extremely careful to be clean. (Bernie) At the time of the interviews there had been a flurry of news in the popular media based on a recent study of fish oils that were on sale locally (Albert et al., 2015). The reports described fish oil as being more like 'snake oil', noting that it was often oxidised, in which state if could be harmful to those taking it. One of the pharmacists commented on this controversy: 92 ...from what I saw and what I heard was that it was a storm in a teacup; it was a misinformed article and it wasn't actually relevant to what we use in New Zealand. Primarily it came back to storage conditions. You will get an article that will be quite inflammatory - everyone that is for it [for example, fish oil] says 'pile of rubbish' and everyone against it and doesn't believe it in the first place says 'Oh, I thought so, I had my suspicions, I knew all along'. (Jo) Subsequent stories about fish oil across various popular websites over the next couple of years cycled back and forth through positive and then negative framings and back again. Fish oil was presented in some items as preventing diabetes, helping heart health and being beneficial for pregnant women. Other headlines pronounced that fish oil products often lacked the ingredients they claimed, were ineffective, a waste of money, or potentially harmful if they had been stored too long. It is well documented that popular and social media tend to provide this kind of contradictory advice on health issues to readers with eye-catching headlines (Ramachandran et al., 2018). The end result of this kind of reporting, as Jo noted, is that people tend to dismiss those that do not coincide with their own views and interpret those they agree with as an endorsement for what they practice.10 The participants' approach to risk was different again from the way they talked about either naturalness or holistic health. Whereas naturalness was shown to be much richer and more nuanced than the straightforward meaning many participants assumed, and holism was revealed to be evolving towards meaning almost anything, it was the detailed discussions and explanations that participants put forward about the risks that concerned them that stood out. The shifting nature of risk is well recognised in modern everyday life because of the focus of attention that it receives from the media, the orthodox health system, and many other fields. It was interesting that none of the participants contested the idea that they were 'at risk' or found risks to be over-stated. On the contrary, most seemed to accept that there were known and unknown risks everywhere that could affect them and it was up to them to take action to counteract them. However, the risks they singled out from the amorphous assemblage were individualised, reflecting adverse health events experienced or witnessed in their own lives, but also overlaid with interpretations in the light of prominent public discourses that had resonated with them. Participants, in effect deconstructed risk themselves. Their comments showed their recognition that risk was heterogeneous, always evolving and always open to the appearance of 10 The paper that sparked the controversy was retracted in September 2019, after acknowledging that it contained 'fundamental calculation errors' (Rucklidge et al 2019). 93 something new and 'other' (Derrida 1997). They also implicitly recognised the rhizomatic nature of risk as something which was connected to a wide variety of actants in the assemblage around supplements, including foods, medicines, the environment, their genetic makeup and familial disposition to disease and to ideas about a 'doomed world'. The focus on risk in this section may give a somewhat misleading impression of the participants as a group of over-anxious people, the kind that are dismissively referred to as the 'worried well' (Lapsley, 2006; Lentjes, 2019) obsessed with their health status, and constantly on the watch for emerging risks that could strike them from within or without. However, their concerns are not out of line with general popular and academic discourses. An endless stream of studies and reports continues to be published that investigates many of the very issues that the participants raised and these are taken seriously by the scientific community and a considerable proportion of society (Berge et al., 2013; Chang et al., 2014; Kendall et al., 2018; Meeker, 2012; Mink et al., 2011; Sundstrom et al., 2014; Weber et al., 2018). Moreover, the shifting boundaries in the classification of disease through the construct of pre-disease states, create categories of people who are in an ambiguous position between normal health and pathology (Swallow, 2019). Being in this uncertain state leads to even greater feelings of risk and uncertainty and the need to respond to it in some way. Ironically, it seems that the climate of risk promulgated, at least in part, by orthodox medicine, may assist the flourishing of the supplement industry as people such as the participants turn to products that they believe will offer protection. So rather than being disproportionately obsessed with risk, it may be that it is their independent decision making that bypasses the need for 'expert' advice that underlies a good deal of the criticism that supplement users attract from health professionals. Indeed, once the participants recognised a risk, they did not dwell on it obsessively, but used their concerns in a productive way. They made decisions and took action to address those risks they believed were important in the light of their own experiences and context. Supplements offered a strategy to defuse their anxiety, and get on with living their lives, at least for the time being. This was the impression I got from talking to them; that having decided that they could do something about their concerns, they could then set their mind at rest. They did, however, appear to view risk as evolving and changing all the time rather than something that they had dealt with permanently and were alert to risks that might develop in the future.