Starting from the mid-twentieth century, the fields of medical sociology (and anthropology), social studies in health and medicine, the sociology of health and illness, and the sociology of medicine have spawned a wide range of studies on the sick role, medicine as a profession, the experience of health and illness, the social construction of illness, the medicalisation of society, the inadequacies of public health delivery systems, and changing concepts of health and illness (see Albrecht, et al. 2000; Bird, et al. 2000). These studies have for the most part shared in a critical questioning of modern medicine, or biomedicine as it is popularly known today,4 which is typically described as "the dominant allopathic approach that treats disease as a breakdown to be repaired by direct biochemical and/or surgical intervention" (Saks 1995: 104). And while there are of course many 4 I will use the two terms interchangeably throughout. 22 different theoretical and methodological approaches to doing sociology in and on the medical field, a recent handbook on social studies in medicine suggests that the common critical task of social scientists is "to question dominant definitions of health and illness, to evaluate alternative options for achieving health, and to assess the appropriateness of health-care systems for individuals and groups" (Albrecht, et al. 2000: 5). Accordingly, sociological studies in medicine have in large part focused on what are seen as the dire limitations and shortcomings of a biomedical profession that has monopolised society's understanding of health and illness, and consequently medicalised virtually all aspects of our existence, from birth to death. Sociological and anthropological rulings on biomedicine are wide-ranging. Illich famously accused modern medicine of in fact exacerbating illness through processes of clinical, social and cultural iatrogenesis that have transformed individuals "into unfeeling spectators of their own decaying selves" (1976: 35). Kleinman has claimed that "biomedical reductionism and [the] technological 'fixes' it employs are inadequate to understand and treat most problems in health care" (1980: 381). Stacey has argued that there are "limitations to modern clinical medicine which come from the limitations imposed by its conceptual framework as well as from its mode of organization" (1988: 172). And O'Connor has suggested that "conventional medicine does not and cannot provide everything that people need in order to cope with all aspects of the experience of illness, or to meet their desires to achieve or maintain optimal health" (1995: 162). Indeed, it is not too much to suggest that from some fifty years of critical social analyses of medicine emerges a caricature of biomedicine as cold, reductionist, side-effect engendering, hegemonic, highly technologised, impersonal, synthetic, and toxic. In sharp contrast to this caricaturised biomedical approach to healing stands alternative medicine, a field that, as already mentioned, saw its birth in the emergent medical counter-culture of the 1960s. It was around this time that a whole range of what (for just over a century) had been considered 'fringe', 'marginal' or even 'quack' therapies in the industrialised world (see Bynum and Porter 1987; Inglis 1964; Wallis and Morley 1976) became known as 'alternative', 'natural', and later, 'complementary'.5 And although 5 It is interesting to note in this connection that a simple title search on 'alternative medicine' in the reference catalogue of the British Library gave 0 titles from the 1960s and earlier, 5 titles from the 1970s, 44 titles from the 1980s, 67 titles from the 1990s and already 61 titles from the first four years of the current decade. Correspondingly, the reference catalogue of the Library of Congress had 0 'alternative medicine' titles from the 1960s and earlier, 4 titles from the 1970s, 18 titles from the 1980s, 117 titles from the 1990s and 116 titles 23 figures are notoriously patchy and often speculative, a consensus has emerged among health researchers, regulators and practitioners alike that public interest in the alternative has taken off ever since as reflected in steady increases in numbers of users, practitioners, consultations and remedy sales throughout the industrialised world (British Medical Association 1993; Cant and Sharma 1996; Cant and Sharma 1999; Coward 1989; Eisenberg, et al. 1998; Eisenberg, et al. 1993; House of Lords 2000; Salmon 1984; Sharma 1992; World Health Organization 2002). For example, surveys among readers of the British consumer magazine Which? showed that the proportion of readers claiming to have used some form of alternative medicine - from herbs to acupuncture to osteopathy - rose from 14% in 1986 to 25% in 1992 and 33% in 1995 (cited in Cant and Sharma 1996), while in the United States an oft-cited study by Eisenberg et al. (1998) argued that use of at least 1 out of 16 alternative therapies increased from 34% of Americans in 1990 to 42% in 1997, a proportion that has remained more or less consistent since (Tindle, et al. 2005). By the mid 1990s, estimates ranged from about 20% to 49% of populations in different industrialised countries actively using some form of alternative medicine (Cant and Sharma 2000). At the same time, the 1960s were also a decade where what had generally been considered the 'primitive' or 'backward' medicines of 'natives' in colonial times (see Arnold 1993; Hillier and Jewell 1983; Last, et al. 1986) came to be post-colonially known as 'traditional medicine'.6 As these medicines successfully shed their predominantly negative colonial connotations, many newly independent former colonies experienced a traditional medicine revival that continues to this day. Countries as far apart as China, Ghana, Taiwan, Botswana, Mexico and Korea have all seen a resurgence in the practice and use of their respective forms of traditional medicine (Feierman, et al. 1992; Hong 2001; Kleinman 1980; Last, et al. 1986; Nigenda, et al. 2001; Tsey 1997). In these and many other countries, increasing numbers of Academies, Departments, Associations, Hospitals, and Institutes of Traditional Medicine have been established to advance research into and the development of medical practices based on their national cultural heritages. Increasing numbers of governments are now promoting the "safe", "effective" and "proper" practice from the first three years of the current decade. And finally, an 'alternative medicine' title search in the Institute for Scientific Information's Web of Science journal database (covering natural, social and human sciences) gave 165 articles from the 1980s, 667 articles from the 1990s and 776 from the first 4 years of the current decade. 6 A simple title search on 'traditional medicine' in the British Library catalogue gave 4 titles from the 1960s, 7 from the 1970s, 50 from the 1980s, 79 from the 1990s and so far 19 from the current decade. 24 and use of traditional medicine as an accessible and affordable means to providing 'healthcare for all', encouraged by the World Health Organization (WHO) (2001; 2002b). Indeed, in spite of many decades of colonial and consequently developmental efforts to modernise public health delivery systems, the WHO (2002a) estimates that around 80% of populations in many so-called developing countries continue to rely on what is today considered alternative medicine in the industrialised world. The sociology of traditional, alternative and complementary medicine So what are all these remedies, therapies and treatments that have recently earned the titles of alternative, traditional and/or complementary medicine, and what are they complementary or an alternative to? To begin with, the distinction between traditional and alternative medicines has largely been geo-political, with the latter found in industrialised countries and the former in developing countries.7 The term 'complementary medicine', on the other hand, could easily be used in both contexts (although it tends to be used primarily in an industrialised country context) as it was introduced about a decade after 'alternative medicine'8 to indicate that a wide variety of therapies and treatments were not being used exclusively, but rather in combination throughout the world as users shopped around for different options to fit their individual needs (see Feierman, et al. 1992; Kleinman 1980; O'Connor 1995; Reed 2003). It is also increasingly used to indicate that many countries are gradually adopting incorporationist agendas to accommodate a 'new medical pluralism', where complementary therapies are viewed as "partners to, though different in nature from, scientific medicine" (Fulder 1996: 3). Nevertheless, it would be fair to say that, in general, medicines are traditional, complementary, or alternative as opposed to biomedicine, even if the boundaries between them have always been rather fluid and blurred. This, in turn, of course begs the questions of just what it is that distinguishes these medicines from modern medicine, questions that have been at the heart of the increasing attention that social scientists have paid to TM and CAM over the past couple of decades. 7 This distinction is of course not absolute as, for example, Traditional Chinese Medicine is very popular in a number of industrialised countries, while in India the use of an 'alternative medicine' like homoeopathy is widespread. 8 A simple title search on 'complementary medicine' gave no titles from the 1970s and earlier, with numbers increasing rapidly from the 1980s onwards (cf. footnote 5). Interestingly, use of the term 'complementary medicine' seems to be more prevalent in Europe, while 'alternative medicine' remains prevalent in America. 25 It is possible to identify three predominant anthropological and sociological approaches to accounting for the history of traditional, complementary and alternative medicines, all of which emphasize TMCAM/biomedicine dichotomies to varying degrees. The first relates to a personal politics of meaning, cognitive frameworks, values, cultural beliefs, metaphors, or identity, suggesting that what TM and CAM have in common is a fundamentally different view of the individual than does biomedicine, as accentuated in whole-person/ body or holistic/reductionist dichotomies. This kind of approach is often rooted in classic sociological critiques of modernity as life-enfeebling, alienating and dehumanising which is duly contrasted with the vitalizing, emancipatory and rehumanising potential of TM and CAM. Indeed, it seems quite safe to suggest that an emerging sociology of alternative medicine literature9 in industrialised countries has often highlighted alternative medicine as a gentle, low-tech, personalised, or 'natural' approach to treating the 'whole person' and improving 'quality of life', providing an equally caricaturised foil to biomedicine (see Cant and Sharma 1996; Coward 1989; Easthope 1986; O'Connor 1995). By focusing on why growing numbers of people in industrialised countries are turning to alternative medicine these kinds of studies have linked the growing popularity of alternative medicine to the failures of biomedicine: practitioners of biomedicine have not been able to fully deliver on their promises of healing (especially in cases of chronic disease); their theories of illness and health have proven inadequate and no longer match up with the public's concepts of health and body; their exclusive interest in symptoms ignores the subjective experience of illness by patients; their rationalisation of the doctor-patient relation has transformed patients into passive subjects; their over-reliance on technology has taken disease out of its social context; indeed, their entire approach to health and illness has not been good enough. In other words, the modernisation of medicine has come at the cost of alienating its subject and it is alternative medicine that is in a position to remedy this by providing patients with a sense of meaning to help them cope with their illnesses, by empowering its patients into taking active responsibility for their health, and by providing them with concrete means to change their lifestyles. 9 Although the sociology of alternative medicine is certainly a field in growth, there are to date but a handful of rigorous sociological studies on 'alternative medicine', with Coward, Cant, Kelner, Sharma, Saks and O'Connor having carried out the most comprehensive studies on the subject (Cant and Sharma 1996; Cant and Sharma 1999; Coward 1989; Kelner and Wellman 2003; O'Connor 1995; Saks 2003; Sharma 1992). Studies focusing on specific forms of 'alternative medicine' include Kelner's (1980) study of chiropractic, Saks' (1995) study of acupuncture as well as Easthope's (1986) and Frohock's (1992) studies of healing. Further to these there are a number of edited anthologies where, typically, chapters are devoted to a specific form of alternative medicine (e.g. Callahan 2002; Cant and Sharma 1996; Cooter 1988; Johnston 2004; Saks 1992; Salmon 1984; Tovey, et al. 2004). 26 To cite a few examples, Coward suggests that "for many, the notion of alternative is considerably more than just doing it differently from orthodox medicine. It is also a symbolic activity. It is a profound expression of a new consciousness which individuals have about health and body... involv[ing] a commitment to finding a new life style, to pursuing well-being... [and] a new consciousness of the importance of the individual in achieving health" (Coward 1989: 11). O'Connor (1995: 162-3) highlights a "patient's authoritative agency" in his or her quest for "a different cognitive framework" with which to understand and cope with illness. Leiser, in his study of patterns of belief among alternative medicine users, concludes that support for complementary and alternative medicine is "characteristic of patients with a self-aware lifestyle and a more active approach to managing their problems" (2003: 461); while Foote-Ardah has suggested that using alternative therapies is "a matter of self-regulation of treatment regimens aimed to manage everyday life by increasing personal control" (2003: 482). In a so-called developing country context, medical anthropologists have long argued that what were often considered the superstitions of a backwards or primitive people are in fact coherent healing systems built up around complex symbolic frameworks and healing practices. What is more, following these cultures' colonial and postcolonial encounters with biomedicine and in the face of constantly changing demographics and epidemiology, recent anthropological studies of traditional medicine have come to highlight the hybrid nature of healing practice in these countries. These studies have juxtaposed "Western medicine's penetration into [the] life and consciousness" of non-Westerners with the persistence of tradition-derived or more "familiar" medical practices (Craig 2002; Janzen and Arkinstall 1978: 223). It is a heterogeneity so vividly captured in Kleinman's opening description of the clinic-lined streets of the medical neighbourhood in Taipei's Lung-Shan district, where bone-setters practice side by side with Western-trained physicians, herbalists and Chinese-style doctors (Kleinman 1980: 1-8). In an equally eclectic African context, Feierman et al. suggest that "it is quite usual... for a patient to be treated for sorcery on one day, at a hospital on the second and for spirit possession on the third" (1992: 5). Common to this diverse medical anthropological literature on traditional medicine in various parts of the world has been a focus on the multiple cognitive healing frameworks, illness episodes, and coping strategies that individual patients will operate by. 27 Interestingly, in spite of the medical pluralism and hybridity that is empirically accounted for in studies of the cognitive underpinnings of medicine in both Western and non-Western settings, traditional and alternative medicine are nevertheless often presented as being in opposition to biomedicine: "a full-scale criticism of the values of conventional attitudes towards health" (Coward 1989: 11), an "alternative... to expensive, possibly ineffective, and often alienating and dehumanising biomedicine" (Janes 1999: 1808), "not consonant with... the impersonal, bureaucratised mode of Western medical authority" (Janzen and Arkinstall 1978: 224) or even "a post-modern rejection of the absolute authority of medical science" (Cant and Sharma 2000: 436). However, it should be pointed out that inasmuch as these studies have argued that the modernisation of medicine (for all its spectacular technological advances) has ended up alienating and dehumanising its subject and that alternative and traditional medicines (with their focus on the whole person and the subjective and cultural experience of disease and illness) are in a position to remedy this shortcoming, then surely this leaves plenty of scope for an 'alternative biomedicine' as opposed to only alternatives to biomedicine. Armstrong (1983; 1984) as well as Arney and Bergen (1984) were among the first to point out how misleading the reductionist/holistic binary was in a post-WWII biomedical context. Their studies of the reconstruction of the patient's view and of medicine's subjective object in the post-war years demonstrated how a more 'holistic (bio)medicine' (a movement which has in many ways grown in parallel to alternative medicine) became possible. In other words, a concern for the 'whole person' is not somehow necessarily exclusive to non-biomedical forms of therapy - there is "no monopoly on holism" (Watt and Wood 1988: 33) - even if it is a characteristic that is often used to distinguish alternative medicine from biomedicine, not in the least by recourse to studies that show growing dissatisfaction with impersonal biomedical consultations juxtaposed against increasing appreciation of the lengthy and personal consultations that alternative practitioners are seen to provide their patients with (e.g. Sharma 1992).10 A second sense in which therapies or treatments have been distinguished as 'alternative' or 'traditional' relates to the question of their availability through public or private health insurance schemes (primarily in industrialised countries), their place in national public 10 It is also relevant to point out that concerns have been voiced as to the thin line that can separate responsibility for one's health from blaming a patient for their ill health. With so much focus on personal responsibility in alternative and complementary medicine, some theorists have highlighted the potentially negative effects that this can have on particularly more 'vulnerable' patients (see Hughes 2004). 28 health delivery systems, and/or their degree of incorporation into national medical education and research programmes.