Through an archaeological analysis of some of the classic medical anthropology studies by Rivers, Ackerknecht, Evans-Pritchard, Levi-Strauss and Turner, I will suggest that the mechanism of action of this posited symbolic efficacy can be understood in terms of what anthropologist Arthur Kleinman has summarised as all those "symbolic pathway[s] of words, feelings, values, expectations, beliefs, and the like" (1973: 210), which facilitate the redressive restoration of cognitive order in patients, generate hope and provide patients with practical and cognitive means with which to come to terms with their conditions, thus enabling them to cope with the anxiety, stress and chaos of disease. To this day, illness narratives, experiences and behaviour in the context of coping strategies remain key objects of both anthropological and sociological studies of medicine, especially so in the field of the sociology of TM and CAM. 123 The second conceptual recast I will describe relates to the infamous placebo effect. Much has been written and said of the placebo effect in recent years, not least as a 'plausible' explanation for any positive effects TMCAM therapies and remedies might be having on patients. What I will show is how the above-mentioned medical anthropology studies also played a pivotal role in making space for what I argue has been a kind of decriminalising of placebo in recent decades. Just as has been the case with symbolic efficacy, placebo efficacy,67 it is increasingly argued, accounts for a significant share of the overall therapeutic efficacy of all medicines and therapies and the role of medical anthropology in suggesting this clinical reality is an important but overlooked part of social studies of the placebo effect.68 By showing how medical anthropologists have accounted for the persistence of seemingly "outdated" medical practices well into the 20th century, I will argue that the notion of placebo efficacy has been used to provide a vital link between a cognitive realm of symbolic efficacy and a corporeal realm of bio-efficacy, via what have been termed "intermediate pathways" that "connect cultural events and forms with affective and physiological processes" (Brody 1997: 80; Kleinman 1973: 210). That is to say, a non-fraudulent placebo effect can be understood as a kind of inverted psychosomatic disorder - a concrete, symbolically-incited (whether accounted for in behaviouristic, linguistic, cognitive or psychotherapeutic terms) 'spill-over effect' into an equally concrete somatic domain of bio-pathway facilitated efficacy. Finally, the third conceptual recast I will describe relates to the biological/physiological specificities of herbal medicine. As already mentioned, the pressures to demonstrate an efficacy that is 'above and beyond placebo' are increasing by the day, perhaps even more so in the field of TMCAM, which historically has been particularly associated with superstition, delusion and trickery (cf. Kaptchuk 1998a; Ruggie 2004). By presenting a genealogical analysis of the practices that make up the protocols, experiments, standardised 67 Kienle and Kiene (1997: 1317) have made the important conceptual argument that the term 'psychosomatic efficacy' might be more appropriate since "many factors and phenomena [e.g. natural course of disease, polite answers from patients, anxiety relief] have been summed up under the terms 'placebo' and 'placebo effect' without being placebos or effects of placebo administrations". It is an important point since the classic description of a placebo as a "pharmacologically inert substance" was based on the authentic-looking bread and sugar pills, while today the deployment of the concept of placebo - or sham treatment - takes place in a much wider arena of therapies, from sham surgery to sham acupuncture, with all the related debates about whether such placebos are plausible at all. 68 For example, in an interdisciplinary anthology on the placebo effect historian of science Anne Harrington suggested that it was only from the 1980s that medical anthropologists began arguing for a role for symbols in the healing process (Harrington 1997: 7). I will show how the anthropological legacy goes back much further than this. 124 outcome measures, and final results of the many clinical efficacy trials that both St. John's Wort and Heantos have been subject to in the past two decades, I will show how in both cases there has been a particular emphasis on demonstrating that there is more to these two remedies than symbolic and placebo efficacy, that they have an efficacy that is above and beyond the superstitions of old days. A crucial part of the ongoing processes to establish the worth of these two herbal remedies has been attempts to demonstrate that they have a very specific, verum medicine-induced bio-efficacy in the treatment of depression and addiction respectively. Most importantly, while symbolic and placebo efficacy are considered to be significant components of the overall therapeutic efficacy of all medicines, therapies and healing encounters, I will show how establishing (preferably via double-blind randomised controlled trials) that a remedy has a bio-efficacy that is above and beyond the bio-efficacy that otherwise demonstrably results from 'spill-over' placebo or psychosomatic effects has been set as a milestone threshold of efficacy for both Heantos and St. John's Wort which 'once and for all' can eliminate any suggestions that these are based on nothing but backwards superstitions, suggestion or placebo. Ironically enough, as we will see, establishing an efficacy that is above and beyond placebo in these two particular cases nevertheless has relied on the utilisation of standardised clinical outcome measures that are calculated from not just observable physiological indicators but just as importantly from elicited 'subjective' treatment experience accounts of individual trial participants. Moreover, these standardised clinical outcome measures, or templates of healing (cf. Triantafillou and Moreira 2005), are fast becoming points of contention in themselves as to their 'appropriateness' and 'adequacy' in measuring the efficacy of a treatment or remedy. Decriminalising placebo - leechcraft and the symbolic therapeutics of coping As Kaptchuk (1998a) has shown, during the 'golden age of quackery', where bad medicine was particularly associated with hucksters and cranks accused of deliberately pretending spectacular claims for their snake oils and miracle cures, blind assessment of a treatment emerged as a tool specifically designed for detecting fraud. These quacks were out to scam the public and by way of ingeniously designed blind trials, their game could be exposed. The appointment of a royal commission by King Louis XVI of France in 1784 to investigate the effects of animal magnetism claimed by Franz Anton Mesmer and his followers is often cited as a significant moment in the emergence of a new way to determine the purported efficacy of a treatment or remedy - that is, by comparing its effects 125 with that of a sham treatment made practicable by blind-folding prospective treatment recipients and observing how they react to both verum and sham treatments (see Harrington 1997; 2006; Kaptchuk 1998a). Importantly, in the final report of King Louis XVI's royal commission, who had carried out a series of blind-folded trials on a number of subjects, Benjamin Franklin and his team of scientists concluded that any "sensations, real or pretended, were determined by the imagination" (cited in Darnton 1968: 62-5). Ever since, a role for the imagination, mind and later brain in generating therapeutic cures for what came to be considered essentially biophysical diseases, has been scientifically posited and vigorously studied. Even as a number of psychologists picked up on the role of "suggestion" in the eliciting of therapeutic effects towards the end of the 19th century, the contention remained that whatever the observed effects in patients these were deceptions, 'tricks of the mind', or even cases of conscious fraud on the part of a practitioner. It would not be until the early 20th century that this vilification of the imagination as a deceiving healing agent would begin its gradual transformation into a recognised and acknowledged therapeutic agent of all forms of treatment and medicine (see Harrington 2006), eventually canonised as the 'placebo effect' in 1950 when pharmacologist Stewart Wolf of Cornell University Medical College concluded that "'placebo effects' which modify the pharmacologic action of drugs or endow inert agents with potency are not imaginary, but may be associated with measurable changes at the end organs" (Wolf 1950: 108, my emphasis). While historical studies of the placebo effect have done well to highlight the important role played by especially psychologists, neurologists and pharmacologists in the post-WWII emergence of the placebo effect as a legitimate object of scientific inquiry, the pivotal role of early medical anthropology in the conceptual recasting that has taken the sham out of placebo has been hitherto overlooked. There is an interesting coincidence in the history of blind assessment in medicine and that of medical anthropology in the work of experimental psychologist and medical anthropologist W.H.R. Rivers. While at Cambridge University, Rivers carried out pioneer work in the use of "control mixtures which have usually been wholly indistinguishable from those containing active substances" (cited in Kaptchuk 1998a: 419) when testing psychological stimulants, and while doing fieldwork in Melanesia and New Guinea he came to describe "the part played by suggestion in the production and cure of diseases 126 among such people as the Papuans and Melanesians" (Rivers 1924: 50). Nineteenth century evolutionary classifications of peoples and races into gradated categories of savages, barbarians and civilised had assumed a linear development of languages, religions and customs from simple to complex, and as a result the first anthropological reports of the "primitive medicine" and "witchdoctors" of the 'savages' were mostly explained in terms of a child-like simplicity and immaturity which made them susceptible to irrational beliefs. The animistic religions, "monosyllabic" languages, "superstitious" healing rituals, and rudimentary tools of the savages were all taken as proofs of an immature people who were easily suggestible and rarely capable of "deep thought" (Lubbock 1875: 143). Consequently, 19th century civilisation taxonomies were dominated by metaphors of a child maturing into an adult, the argument being that child-like savages were mentally immature compared to the rational civilised who were considered the adults of humanity (see Wahlberg 2001; 2003). Classification systems which centred around such teleologies of maturation ranged from Morgan's (1877) three statuses of savagery, barbarism and civilisation, Comte's ([1830] 1974) primitive, metaphysical and positive states of intellectual speculation, and Spencer's gradated measurement and taxonomising of the mean capacities of aboriginal Australian, African, Malayan and English crania which he argued showed "an increase in the course of the advance from the savage state to our present phase of civilization" ([1852] 1972: 33). But this evolutionary account of immature peoples and primitive medicine would undergo a drastic recasting with the advent of Malinowskian cultural immersion in the early part of the 20th century. Like Malinowski, Rivers had become convinced during his visits to Melanesia that Melanesians were in fact highly rational and sophisticated people, a point he would make emphatically in his medical anthropology classic Medicine, Magic, Religion: "the concepts underlying the magical procedure of savage man have not the vague and indefinite character often assigned to them, but form clear and relatively concrete motives for the complex procedures of the sorcerer and leech" and conversely, "the practices of these peoples in relation to disease are not a medley of disconnected and meaningless customs, but are inspired by definite ideas concerning the causation of disease" (1924: 52, 51). As a consequence, Rivers consistently used the term leechcraft in place of the more evolutionarily-loaded primitive medicine when referring to the healing arts of the so-called "peoples of rude culture". 127 A few decades later, Ackerknecht went on to summarise this conceptual recast by arguing that, "[in the past,] students either decided that certain primitives have no medicine at all, because their medicine fits so badly into our pattern of medicine, or they regarded it only as a mere immature or degenerate variety of our medicine... [But,] primitive medicine is not a queer collection of errors and superstitions, but a number of living units in living cultural patterns, quite able to function through the centuries in spite of their fundamental differences from our own pattern" (Ackerknecht 1971: 120). Even Evans-Pritchard, who suggested in his 1937 ethnography of Witchcraft, Oracles and Magic Among the Azande of southern Sudan that it could well be that "the majority of [Zande witchdoctors] are quacks", did not account for their continuing prevalence by suggesting an irrationality or simplicity on the part of the Azande69: Azande do not consider what their world would be like without witch-doctors any more than we consider what it would be like without physicians. Since there is witchcraft there are naturally witch-doctors... All their beliefs hang together, and were a Zande to give up faith in witch-doctorhood he would have to surrender equally his belief in witchcraft and oracles.... In this web of belief every strand depends upon every other strand, and a Zande cannot get out of its meshes because this is the only world he knows. The web is not an external structure in which he is enclosed. It is the texture of his thought and he cannot think that his thought is wrong. Nevertheless, his beliefs are not absolutely set but are variable and fluctuating to allow for different situations and to permit empirical observation and even doubts. (Evans-Pritchard 1937: 185, 194-5) The increasing number of ethnographically detailed accounts of the medical practices of 'primitive peoples' that emerged during the first half of the 20th century were more or less unified in their conclusion that "in the department of his activity in which he endeavours to cope with disease, savage man is no illogical or prelogical creature, ... his actions are guided by reasoning as definite as that we can claim for our own medical practices" (Rivers 1924: 53). But this still left anthropologists with the question of just how the leechcraft of the savages could work, as this, Ackerknecht argued, it quite dramatically did: "There are too many well testified cases in primitive tribes where magic kills by suggestion for the fact to be doubted. Why should the power that kills not be able to heal?" (Ackerknecht 1971: 130). It was common knowledge at the time that herbs and plants have been an important source of medicines for peoples and cultures throughout the world since time immemorial. 69 Indeed, Evans-Pritchard made a point of underlining that it was his Zande informants themselves who had pointed out the 'trickery' of many of their witchdoctors to him, but also that there were "a few entirely reliable practitioners" (1937: 185). 128 But Evans-Pritchard for one was definitely not convinced that the efficacy of Azande healing could be attributed to the pharmacological properties of the plants used by their witchdoctors and healers: The assumption that Azande would hardly have continued to use drugs for centuries if they possessed no curative properties... is unhappily contradicted by the history of European medicine and by the history of magic everywhere and at all times. The enormous number of drugs which Azande employ and the variety of herbal products they bring to bear on a single disease at once demonstrate their lack of therapeutic value when we reflect what scientific pharmacology really implies. (Evans-Pritchard 1937: 494) Not everyone was in full agreement with Evans-Pritchard on this point however, as, for example, Ackerknecht argued that "an enormous number of effective drugs is known to the primitives. From twenty-five to fifty percent of their pharmacopoeia is often found to be objectively active" (1971: 128). Nevertheless, there was broad agreement in anthropological debates that the efficacy of leechcraft could not be accounted for by the medicinal plants used in healing practices alone. Instead, medical anthropologists began building up a theory of symbolic efficacy to account for the healing effects of leechcraft. The concept of 'coping' has been and indeed remains central to this objectifying work. It was Rivers who initially suggested that the leechcraft of 'savages' should be understood in terms of their "endeavours to cope with disease", and that among the Papuans and Melanesians: we can see clearly that most of the processes by which disease was thought to be produced and was treated are such as would act through the mind. The manifold lines of treatment by which human or spiritual agents were induced to cure disease acted, if they were successful, through the agency of faith and suggestion. (Rivers 1924: 122) Importantly, he did not view these processes as necessarily fraudulent, but argued instead that "there is reason to believe that [the sorcerer or priest] is not wholly a deceiver, but in some measure shares the general belief in his own powers... I believe that, in many cases, it is the same among ourselves, and that a study of our own quacks and charlatans, with that amount of care which we devote to the Australian or the Melanesian leech, would show us the impostor far less than is usually supposed" (Rivers 1924: 50-1). 129 So how did faith and suggestion work in the leeches' endeavours to assist their patients to cope with their diseases, and thereby to elicit cures? This was a central question for Ackerknecht, Levi-Strauss and Turner. From their work we can discern some of the forms of the many different pathways that are to this day seen to enable symbolic efficacy - that is to say, its mechanisms of action. "The primitive treatment centres around symbolical actions, for the symbol is of enormous importance in primitive thought," wrote Ackerknecht in a 1942 paper on the 'Problems of primitive medicine' (1971: 123). The primary function of the symbol, he and other anthropologists argued, was to make visible, concrete and material otherwise invisible forces, thereby making them amenable to manipulation and ultimately enabling cure. The primitive symbol is "concrete and material, and permits action by mystical participation upon invisible forces which it cannot attain otherwise", primitive therapy "is partly a process of making hidden and secret things visible and thereby accessible, if they are harmful, to redressive and remedial action" and the primitive cure consists "in making explicit a situation originally existing on the emotional level and in rendering acceptable to the mind pains which the body refuses to tolerate" (Ackerknecht 1971: 123-4; Levi-Strauss 1968: 190; Turner 1967: 302-3).