With the validity, efficacy and safety of the violent purging techniques practiced by educated physicians very much in question by the mid 1800s, homeopathy's similia similibus curentur (law of similars), mesmerism's principle of animal magnetism, hydropathy's system of water cure, and herbalism's principle of stimulating the body's own 65 vis medicatrix naturae surely did not appear any more far-fetched or 'less scientific' than heroic medicine's theory of humours or Pasteur's germ theory. This is certainly suggested by the fact that many of these new medical movements were hailed in the popular media while also amassing considerable followings, not only among the general public but also among scientists and physicians. Indeed the patronage of esteemed members of society to both homoeopathy and herbalism has often been highlighted as an important factor in their survival (Griggs 1997; Saks 1992). Nevertheless, after the initial successes of their fanfare-filled entries on to the medical scene, many of the leaders and practitioners of these medical movements were eventually pushed to the fringes and margins of medicine, often condemned as the new 'quacks' of a biomedical age (see Inglis 1964; Saks 1992; Wallis and Morley 1976). What followed was a good century of what has variously been called the 'dominance', 'hegemony' or 'monopoly' of biomedicine as witnessed in the ways in which medical practice was organised and regulated in the General Practices, hospitals, schools, laboratories and journals of medicine. The medical profession, it is argued, was so successful at defending the boundaries of its competencies that the period spanning the late 19th to mid-20th centuries is often referred to as the "dark ages" of such modes of therapy as homoeopathy, acupuncture and herbalism in the United Kingdom, with numbers of both users and practitioners falling into steady decline.18 Numerous studies have shown how these (and other) 'fringe medicines' and their practitioners were systematically shunned and brought into disrepute by the medical journals of the day, kept off the curricula of medical schools, denied coverage by the emergent public and private health insurance schemes, and refused the privilege of becoming registered practitioners. As the argument goes, the medical profession was able to keep practitioners of 'marginal medicine' at bay by actively pursuing strategies of subordination, limitation or exclusion, while also ostracising the medical heretics amongst their own ranks who dared to stray from orthodoxy (see Brown 1985; Cooter 1988; Dew 2003; Inglis 1964; Saks 1995; Salmon 1984; Wallis and Morley 1976; Willis 1983; Wrobel 1987). 18 For accounts of the "dying out" of herbalism , "declining empire" of homoeopathy and "marked decline" of acupuncture see Griggs (1997), Inglis (1964) and Saks (1995) respectively. It should, however, be pointed out that at no point in time did any of these therapies completely disappear. 66 While the term 'quackery' has its origins in the therapeutic plurality of early modern Britain where sellers of patent medicines were often accused of quacking or exaggerating the curative properties of their wares, in the 'golden age of biomedicine' contestations and controversies often took place in an epistemological field of competing theories and concepts of health and disease. This was a quackery with a difference, and it is with this understanding of it that we should explain the eventual denial of a Medical Herbalists Bill (which would have given them statutory recognition as a medical profession on par with biomedical doctors) by the British Ministry of Health in 1923 on the grounds that it is "doubtful whether a trained herbalist is any less dangerous than a trained one" (Chief Medical Officer cited in Larkin 1992: 117). In a similar vein, Saks (1986) has shown how the 'esoteric' theories of Chinese medicine were often highlighted in campaigns to dismiss acupuncture in the early part of the 20th century, and Larkin has shown how the theories of osteopaths came to be attacked in the British Medical Journal as "far-fetched and fanciful, and, when applied to grave diseases such as typhoid fever and diphtheria, as decidedly dangerous" (1992: 116). What made these controversies novel was, as Porter (1989: 232) has argued, that these various 'fringe' medical movements "chose to secede wholly from official medicine..., set[ting] themselves up in judgement upon the medical profession, rather as regular medicine had traditionally put quackery in the dock". In addendum to campaigns against miracle cure peddlers and their patent medicines which were initiated in the late 19th century, the medical profession in the United Kingdom turned its attention towards this new group of medical fringe activists who claimed to be intent on rectifying the erroneous theories and practices of the medical establishment while offering more 'natural' theories and methods of healing in lieu thereof. In effect, the battleground of good vs. bad medicine was broadened from a mainly commercial field of patent medicines and miracle cure products to include an epistemological field of competing theories about the underlying causes of illness and disease. In this sense 'quackery' came to denote the actions of not just hucksters and cranks, but now also a whole new breed of 'pseudo-practitioners', ranging from registered heretics and deviants to marginal, fringe or quasi-practitioners of non-biomedical therapies, who were considered dangerous not so much (or at least not only) because of the products they peddled but rather because of their heretic or unorthodox beliefs (Larkin 1992; Saks 2003; Wallis and Morley 1976; Wolpe 1994). Regarded as ineffectual at best and downright deleterious at worst by state-sanctioned professional medical associations, members of the public were to be shielded as best 67 possible from non-biomedical forms of therapy as a matter of protecting their health by way of active and often malicious efforts to discredit, subordinate, limit or exclude these practitioners and their therapies (see Griggs 1997; Saks 1986; 2003).19 "Weaning the natives from witchcraft" The role of modern medicine as a 'civilising weapon' in colonial policy and practice is well documented, something hardly surprising considering the near perfect coinciding of the emergence of biomedicine with the colonial heydays of the late 19th and early 20th centuries. Whether in large-scale tropical hygiene programmes, targeted campaigns to stamp out 'witchcraft' or national vaccination initiatives, modern medicine was to play an important role in civilising colonial populations that were considered 'backward', 'primitive' or 'simple' (see Arnold 1993; Hillier and Jewell 1983; Last, et al. 1986; Stoler 1995). And even if the impact of modern medicine in terms of primary healthcare delivery has been limited to say the least, the dividing practices that constitute the modern regulation of medical practice have certainly not been unique to Europe and America. In Vietnam, as Monnais-Rousselot (2003) has shown, the efforts of colonial authorities to "medicalise" French Indochina took hold at the turn of the 20th century with the establishing of a Colonial Health Advisory Council and a Colonial Health Corps of colonial doctors that would set up hospitals and provide medical services under a motto of "Vaccinate, Register and Disinfect". Local or 'auxiliary' doctors were trained at the Hanoi School of Medicine to assist colonial doctors in implementing an Indigenous Medical Assistance programme aimed at preventing epidemic and endemic diseases, especially through hygiene education. The effect of these and similar colonial health care programmes on the practice and use of what is commonly referred to today as Vietnamese traditional medicine was tangible. And although its practice and use was never even close to being abolished, scholars of traditional medicine in Vietnam do suggest that colonial healthcare policies were responsible for "ruthlessly dr[iving] traditional medicine into stagnation and decline" (Hoang, et al. 1999: 25-6). This was not in the least because of a largely negative colonial view of Vietnamese traditional medicine as "quackery", made up of "secret remedies" and 19 As Saks (1986) has shown, one would do well to empirically examine the various forms of justifications for these active efforts to discourage and limit the practice of unorthodox medicine. Although primarily framed in a rhetoric of "public health protection", they certainly did not circumvent commercial and professional self-interests on the part of biomedical practitioners. 68 "superstitious" practices. For example, Monnais-Rousselot quotes a colonial doctor's frustrations when attempting to treat typhoid patients: Their families... ply them with all sorts of remedies coming from the Chinese quackery; no attention is paid to the cleanliness of the patient. It is only after the failure of Chinese sorcery and witch doctoring that the family brings the patient to the hospital. (cited in Monnais-Rousselot 2003: 12-3) Moreover, as a result of it being "ignored by the French-run medical college and scorned by [auxiliary] physicians trained in the European manner who blamed it for its imprecise and anti-scientific knowledge of anatomy and physiology", Hoang et al. argue that Vietnamese traditional medicine experienced a decline in systematic training and as a result "the number of less than capable traditional physicians or quacks increased" (1999: 25). In short, "the colonial regime sought to strangle traditional medicine and bar it from public services" (Nguyen 1965: 26). What emerges from colonial problematisations of Vietnamese traditional medicine is a general, though not overall (see Monnais-Rousselot 2003; Thompson 2004; Tran 2002), rejection of its public health value. In other words, in colonial Vietnam, traditional medicine was for the most part marginalised and discouraged by public health programmes which favoured modern pharmaceuticals, hospital services and hygiene education. The theories of healing underlying Vietnamese traditional medicine (closely related to those of traditional Chinese medicine) were dismissed as "unscientific", and even if some of the plants and substances used by Vietnamese herbal practitioners were picked up on by colonial health practitioners for their medicinal and financial value, the sale of "secret remedies" was certainly seen as a threat to public health, especially as these were rarely subject to quality controls and regulation (Monnais-Rousselot 2003).20 Moreover, there is no question that colonial health authorities in Vietnam, as they did in many other parts of the world, viewed the Vietnamese population as largely incapable of looking after their own health, especially since they were seen as resorting to superstitions and witchcraft in their quest for healing assistance. And it was exactly this perceived backwardness of native 20 Notwithstanding the generally negative climate facing Vietnamese traditional medicine during colonial times (often referred to as a "period of stagnation"), Thompson (2004) has shown how the roots of today's collaborative, rather than competitive, relationship between biomedically trained and traditional practitioners can be traced to the colonial period. Moreover, Guenel (2005) has demonstrated how more than 600 titles published in the 1930-1960 period (most before the end of colonial rule in 1954) are currently catalogued under the heading "Dong Y" (Oriental Medicine) at the National Library in Hanoi. 69 populations in the colonies that was highlighted to justify long-term efforts by medical missionaries, 'self-sacrificing jungle doctors'21 and locally trained auxiliary doctors "to wean the natives from witchcraft" throughout especially Africa and Asia (Nicolson 1988: 79).22 The birth of TM and CAM After many decades of such colonial attempts to eradicate, marginalise or limit the so-called 'sorcery' and 'superstitions' of 'backward' populations, the mid-20th century was to mark a turning point in the history of public health promotion in many so-called developing countries, including Vietnam. The gradual demise of colonial rule left many newly independent nations with massive public health challenges, especially as regards those rural populations that had had little or no benefit from colonial health programmes. It was at this time that what has come to be known as 'traditional medicine' or TM began its transformation from a colonial evil that was to be routed out in the name of public health and progress into a postcolonial resource to be actively recruited in the quest to safeguard and improve the health of individuals and populations. Not surprisingly, it is in China that a symbolic moment of this transformation might be placed.23 Following a lively debate within his own party as to whether or not the practice of traditional medicine should be wholly abolished, chairman Mao Zedong argued in a 1944 speech that: to rely solely on modern doctors is no solution. Of course modern doctors have advantages over doctors of the old type; but if they do not concern themselves with the suffering of the people, do not train doctors of the people, do not unite with the thousand and more doctors and veterinarians of the old type... then they will actually be helping the witchdoctors... There are two principles for the united front: the first is to unite and the second is to criticise, educate and transform. (cited in Hillier and Jewell 1983: 312-13) 21 See Vaughan (1991, especially chapter 7) for an excellent discussion on popular representations of the 'jungle doctor' as a self-sacrificing hero who sets out into the wilderness on a mission to bring order into nature, inevitably clashing with an 'evil witchdoctor' and barely escaping the jaws of a man-eating lion along the way, and all in the altruistic service of the 'natives'. 22 In this connection we should not forget that in campaigns to subordinate and limit the practice of fringe medicine in Europe, similar arguments have been made about the need to change the "backwards" healing ways of especially rural populations (see Ramsey 1988). 23 See Taylor (2005) for an account of how traditional Chinese medicine became an important element of the national public health policies of the Chinese Communist Party. 70 Ten years later, on the 7th of May 1954, 10,000 French soldiers surrendered to Ho Chi Minh's Viet Minh fighters at Dien Bien Phu, thus putting an end to eight years of struggle for control of Northern Vietnam between the two. Nine years earlier, Ho Chi Minh had declared the Democratic Republic of Vietnam independent, ultimately igniting Vietnam's first war of independence against French soldiers. Following the departure of the last French soldiers in October 1954, Ho Chi Minh returned to Hanoi to set up a government of the Democratic Republic of Vietnam, and it was during these times of nation-building that President Ho Chi Minh was to deliver a famous 1955 speech in which he would echo the words of Chairman Mao: We must build our own medicine... Our ancestors had rich experience in the treatment of disease using local medications and those of the north [China]. To enlarge the sphere of action of medicine, it is necessary to study means of integrating traditional and modern medicine. (cited in Hoang, et al. 1999: 26; Nguyen 1965: 27) This, it turns out, would be Vietnam's moment of transformation, a moment where Vietnamese traditional medicine was no longer to be discouraged in the name of public health. In the ensuing years, a comprehensive network of institutions was established mandated with modernising, standardising and repopularising Vietnamese traditional medicine. The first of these was the National Institute of Traditional Medicine, which was opened under the Ministry of Health in 1957 to preserve the legacy of traditional medicine and to promote scientific research into its methods and remedies. In the same year, the first unified National Association of Traditional Practitioners was also formed by active groups of herbalists who had long been incensed by colonial attitudes to their trade (see Thompson 2004). A few years later, in 1961, the Institute of Materia Medica was opened with a mandate to scientifically research the chemical properties of the many medicinal plants that were being collected and to modernise traditional herb formulas (Vietnam. Institute of Materia Medica. 2004). And in the same year, a Department of Traditional Medicine was opened for the first time in the previously French-run Hanoi Medical College to signal "cooperation between the Traditional Medicine and modern medicine systems in the fields of disease prevention and treatment, pharmaceutical production, staff training and scientific research" (Vietnam. National Congress of the Workers' Party cited in Nguyen 1965: 27). This mid-20th century recasting of traditional medicine into a public health resource in China and Vietnam would mark the beginnings of a trend that has since spread not only to 71 other 'developing countries' in Asia, Africa and Latin America, but also to industrialised countries in Europe, America and Australasia. For, as we saw in the opening chapter of this dissertation, it was around this time that after nearly a century of dominance, state-sanctioned biomedical professions found themselves increasingly under fire from both within and without by an emergent medical counter-culture. The familiar critiques of biomedicine by so-called 'fringe practitioners' claiming a more 'natural' approach to healing were joined by a growing wave of professional critiques of the iatrogenic effects of biomedicine, psychological critiques of the neglect of the 'whole person' in biomedical treatment, feminist critiques of the over-medicalization of female existence, environmentalist critiques of the toxicities of chemical medicine, as well as sociological critiques of biomedicine's reductionist definitions of health and illness. By the late 1970s, questions were being asked in many industrialised countries as to how many people were actually seeking medical help outside authorised and established sources. In 1981, the Commission on Alternative Systems of Medicine that Dutch State Secretary for Health and Environmental Protection Jo Hendriks had put together in 1977 famously concluded that "the consensus of public opinion is no longer behind the [biomedical] monopoly, and the law is broken a thousand times a day as sick and disabled people seek the help of people, who are not legally authorised to provide it" (The Netherlands. Ministry of Health. 1981: 1). Since then, we have seen somewhat of a barrage of national hearings, public inquiries and committee investigations into the growing use of CAM throughout the industrialised world.