Herbal medicinal products can be industrialised and commodified, but only against assurances of adhering to full spectrum extracts rather than single active ingredient isolation and of pesticide-free (not to mention GMO-free) cultivation and contamination-free production. Herbal practice can be bureaucratised and professionalised, but only if this formalisation does not subvert or eradicate the specific theories and concepts of herbal medicine and leaves space for age-old traditions of apprenticeship. Herbal medicine use can be rationalised to safeguard the public from shady products and potentially dangerous effects resulting from unsupervised self medication, but only if this rationalisation does not succumb to reductionist 'quick fixes' that treat herbal remedies as magic bullets. Treatments can be clinically tested to build up an evidence base, but not if this means stripping down person-centred approaches and standardising treatments. It is a constant struggle to counterbalance risks of degeneration and alienation with active initiatives to humanise and maintain a holistic approach when modernising herbal medicine. In this way, humanisation becomes, not the antithesis of, but rather, a crucial component of modernisation - yet another addition to modernity's growing inventory of isations (cf. Armstrong 1983). It is this shift that I have pointed to in suggesting that the 20th century 225 mobilisation of herbal medicine in Vietnam and the UK has counted on a neo-vitalisation of a 'cold' biology with quality of life. It is a shift that has been facilitated by an ongoing opening up and mapping out of both individual subjectivities and a multiple subjectivity as concrete sites of life optimisation. We saw how this manifested itself in efforts to make herbal practitioner subjectivities amenable to technical public health interventions, by insisting on statutory minimum qualifications, codes of conduct and continuous professional development as a means of preventing the herbal quackery of today - irresponsible, unqualified, incompetent or worst of all unscrupulous herbal practice. We saw it in efforts to account for the efficacy of herbal medicines, not only in terms of bio-physical mechanisms of action of the body, but equally importantly in terms of the bloodless, gutless mechanisms of action of human subjectivities where symbolic efficacy is the key. We saw it in ethno-scientific efforts to map out and document ethnic knowledge systems so as to be able to practically benefit from them. And we also saw it in the swarming of a whole plethora of grassroots techniques of emancipation and coping, including those offered through herbal practitioner consultations, consumer awareness programmes, cultural revival initiatives, self help literature and the like, which provide subjects with concrete means of working on and improving their bodies and subjectivities as a matter of (quality of) life optimisation. Life itself and human subjectivity itself are the objects of bio-power today. Herbal dispositifs How then should we account for the revival and renaissance of herbal medicine in Vietnam and Britain? Having analysed the microphysics of this revival in terms of efforts to regulate, validate and promote the responsible practice, production and use of herbal medicine, it seems to me that the standard reply - which points to the limitations of and/or frustrations with modern medicine, and the subsequent superiority of an epistemologically distinct herbal medicine in terms of both symbolic and bio-physiological efficacy (not to mention economic feasibility) - overemphasises a dichotomy that is very difficult to find in the microphysics of the revival. Practitioners of herbal medicine in both Vietnam and the UK are increasingly trained in the basics of both biomedicine and herbal medicine. Herbal medicinal products are both standardised according to biochemical markers in high-tech laboratories, and preserved as whole plant extracts that can be used alone or in combination with other herbs in the prescriptions of herbal practitioners. Users of herbal medicine can easily navigate between using antibiotics for particular illnesses and herbal remedies for 226 others. Indeed, as I have emphasised, it is exactly this apparently disorienting plurality that has been diagnosed as defining of the so-called 'late modern' era that both Vietnamese and British subjects are seen to be living in. This is not to say that important differences between a biomedical and a herbal medicine approach do not persist, rather it is to say that 'incommensurability' is increasingly being tackled as a hurdle that can be technically overcome in day-to-day healing practices, specifically by targeting the subjectivities of practitioners, researchers and users. And so, by going to the microphysics of regulation, validation and use in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom, a much more complex account of the revival and renaissance of herbal medicine becomes evident. A number of transformations, reconfigurations and recasts have been necessary components of this revival, resulting in particular and novel herbal dispositifs in both countries. What I have argued has been one of the most important recasts to facilitate the birth of 'traditional medicine' in the former colonies and the subsequent birth of 'complementary and alternative medicine' in industrialised advanced liberal countries, resulted from the advent and rise of 20th century social and cultural anthropology, which took the individual and collective lifeworlds and cognitive frameworks of the 'primitive' as its object. In doing so, 19th century evolutionary assumptions, about a teleological progression from immature and simple savages to mature and complex civilised peoples, could be challenged by the possibility of multiple, equally complex and rational worldviews. It is easy to forget how radical a notion this was in anthropology and sociology alike just one hundred years ago. And, as I have shown, it was this shift that would in part provide the conditions for a recasting of 'primitive medicine' into TM and of 'fringe medicine' into CAM. It was also a shift that would contribute to the decriminalising of placebo and the subsequent introduction of symbolic efficacy as an equally significant component of all healing interventions - a shift captured in the sociological assertion that there is more to illness than biology. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it has also introduced the notion that, in a globalised world, subjects have to negotiate and navigate through a plurality of different worldviews on a daily basis. Indeed this negotiation has become a vital element of the care of the modern self. What I have argued in this dissertation, then, is that the revival and renaissance of herbal medicine in Vietnam and the United Kingdom cannot be understood without taking into account the dispositif in which it has taken place. It is a dispositif within which: the 227 problem of quackery has been transformed into a question of not only 'miracle cures' or dubiously 'esoteric' knowledges, but increasingly also of practitioner competences, qualifications and conduct almost regardless of the therapy in question (although we did see how healers and 'witchdoctors' in Vietnam and crystal therapists and iridologists in the UK, for example, continue to be marginalised today); the problem of efficacy has definitely not been removed from a bio-physiological realm of either biomedical pharmacodynamics and pharmacokinetics on the one hand or herbal vital life forces and energy flows on the other, but to it has been added a cognitive realm of symbolic pathways and coping mechanisms, with a decriminalised placebo effect emerging as the link between the two; and finally the problem of life has been neo-vitalised such that a politics of life itself and a politics of human subjectivity itself are inseparable components of overall operations of a life administering bio-power in both countries. In other words, what should be clear from the foregoing chapters is that what I have described as a governmentalisation of human subjectivities - of both individual lifeworlds and of collective consciousness - has been as important a part of the said revival as the disciplining, rationalisation and industrialisation of the production, practice and use of herbal medicine. Whether Vietnamese and British herbal medicine are better or worse off today than they were prior to their late 20th century revivals is a question, as forewarned, that I cannot claim to have come any closer to answering. The debate, however, as I have shown, is manifestly burgeoning in both countries. Subjectivity as a modern particularity Further to these central findings concerning the revival and renaissance of British and Vietnamese herbal medicine specifically, what I have also intended my study to contribute to is the beginnings of a kind of historicising or contingentalising of the modern disciplines of anthropology and sociology. Sociologists have been very keen to highlight the objectifying and looping effects of various forms of expert knowledge, from biology to psychology, medicine, law and economics. What I have begun to ask in this study is how one might introspectively redirect such analytical scrutiny towards sociology and anthropology as modern disciplines themselves. And what I have found is that shimmering through all the plurality, insecurity and disorientation that sociologists and anthropologists have sought to account for since the beginnings of the 20th century, have been human subjectivities as a kind of lowest common sociological/anthropological denominator uniting otherwise dislocated and fragmented communities, social movements and individuals 228 throughout the world. However different their lifeworlds, healing practices or coping strategies might be, what a Namibian sangoma patron, a Vietnamese herbal medicine user, a Dutch oncology patient, or a Mexican traditional healer's client are seen to have in common is a subjectivity. The question I have put to myself is if Canguilhem was able to generate such unique insight by carrying out archaeological analyses of the biological concepts of regulation, the reflex, the normal and the pathological, would not a similar approach towards anthropological/ sociological concepts of coping, alienation or fragmentation also be fruitful? Moreover, is it possible to approach the disciplines of anthropology and sociology in terms of ways of knowing or 'styles of thinking' and if so what kind of effects might they have for organising particular ways of doing (e.g. health interventions) and in providing possible forms of ethics or ways of being (e.g. as whole persons)? In so many ways, anthropology and sociology have, from their inception as disciplines, been actively engaged in the disciplining of subjectivities - which is to say in systematised efforts of mapping them out, locating mechanisms of their formation and pathologisation, in both their individual and collective forms. To do this, these disciplines have had to, in Bachelard's sense, set forth detailed methods with which to access and chart human subjectivities, including ethnographies, participant observation, semi-structured interviews, opinion surveys, etc. All of this raises the crucial question of whether or not we should revisit what is certainly the central hypothesis of 20th century sociology, namely that modernity, in all its various forms of 'pre-', 'early', 'high', 'late' or 'post-', has been a repressive, destructive and disruptive force on our subjectivities and our societies. Foucault (1978) famously argued that far from having ushered in an age of increased sexual repression ("the monotonous nights of the Victorian bourgeoisie"), modern industrial societies witnessed an unprecedented explosion in scientific discourses about sexuality, practices preventing or condemning certain 'deviant' forms of it as well as public health programmes to raise awareness about its risks. We might well ask, I contend, whether a similar argument pertains to sociology's repressive, alienating and disorienting hypotheses about subjectivity (cf. also Armstrong 1983, especially chapter 12). This tentative conclusion without question merits further meticulous study, but if there is one characteristic one might choose to highlight from 19th and 20th century anthropology and sociology (often borrowing heavily from or in close alliance with the psy-sciences), 229 then surely it must be the unparalleled wave of studies intent on demonstrating how subjectivities come into being, how they 'work' and how they can be influenced, pathologised or recuperated. It is during the course of this project that Man's interiority came to be nicknamed 'subjectivity'. One can of course not claim that the problem of the self is somehow unique to modernity, any more than one can suggest that taking care of the self by attending to some kind of interiority (soul, spirit, mind) is. Very practical and concrete examples of self care advice can be found in thousand-year old records found in both East Asia and Europe (Foucault 1985; Unschuld 1985). Yet what I am arguing is that the ways in which these interiorities came to be known, mapped out, worked upon, and harnessed in overall efforts to secure human healing and progress are novel; it is the politics of human subjectivity that is a particularity of modernity. What is more, as these individual and collective subjectivities came to be charted and monitored, they also became amenable to manipulation and intervention though techniques of self-help, patient empowerment initiatives, awareness-raising programmes, cultural revival campaigns and human capability initiatives, i.e. the governmentalisation of human subjectivities has made it possible to govern through subjectivities (see Rose 1996b). In suggesting this, I am of course not saying that processes of modernisation, industrialisation, bureaucratisation and technologisation have not had their side effects - some of which have been atrocious to say the least. The point I am making is conceptual, but no less important for it: subjectivity, it seems, is a particularity of modernity in the sense that we have witnessed an explosion in systematised efforts to circumscribe and characterise it which in turn have resulted in the formation of expert bodies of knowledge (sociology, psychology, anthropology) that can and have been harnessed and mobilised in governmental programmes to shape the conduct of ourselves and others. To borrow from Latour (1987; 1986), a future avenue of research that awaits following this dissertation is to investigate "sociology in action" and to characterise "field life". Symbolic efficacy Related to these reflections on the governmentalisation of human subjectivities has been the centrality that symbolic efficacy as a sociological/anthropological concept has had in my analysis. It is clear that optimising temporal life today is not only about engineering our vitality in the sense of sustaining, normalising or enhancing our bodily capacities of biological subsistence, we are also engineering our subjectivities in the sense of 230 developing, emancipating, recuperating or grounding our capabilities for a 'full' psychological, sociological or anthropological existence. 'Mere' subsistence is not sufficient for a 'good' life today, which instead is increasingly defined in terms of its quality. And it is in this connection that symbolic efficacy is key. There are of course, as I have stressed throughout, direct linkages between a politics of life itself and a politics of human subjectivity itself, such as a decriminalised placebo effect which attributes concrete and measurable biological effects in the body to symbolic restorations of cognitive order, to treatment-intervention-engendered hope, or to culturally-learned expectation (e.g. go to doctor, get better). Conversely, equally measurable, but negative biological effects in the body are often attributed to psychosomatic mechanisms of action that are seen to transfer cognitive states of terror, sadness, stress or anxiety into corporeal disruptions and pathologies. What is more, recent developments in psycho- and neuropharmacology have begun mapping out biological pathways for psychological pathologies, including depression, anxiety, shyness and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and by implication also their converses in happiness, wellbeing, confidence and concentration. Notwithstanding these many forms of interconnections between our vitality and our subjectivity, it is also clear that a bloodless, gutless realm of human subjectivities where symbolic efficacy is invoked to describe mechanisms of their formation and normal working remains. It is within this realm that our quality of life is to be found, measured and intervened upon, even if this includes pharmaceutical, surgical or herbal forms of intervention. The maturing, emancipating and coping subjects that the disciplines of psychology, sociology and anthropology have called into being are a requisite object of quality-of-life-enhancing interventions. With herbal medicine, as we saw, the object of a healing intervention is not only to rebalance the vital rhythms or flows of the body, it is also to provide herbal medicine users with a 'story' or cognitive framework through which they can relate to their particular ailments and conditions and adjust their lifestyles accordingly. Indeed, emotional and physical well-being are considered inherently interlinked and inseparable for it. Now, as I have argued, this mobilisation of symbolic efficacy in herbal healing interventions has relied on a governmentalisation of human subjectivities that anthropology and sociology have in large part contributed to and continue to do so, together with the psy-disciplines. Indeed, I have suggested that anthropology and sociology (their medical sub- 231 disciplines in particular) can be usefully approached in terms of ways of knowing or 'styles of reasoning', which have in turn offered possible ways of doing and being. That is to say, civilising, emancipating and coping subjects have in a sense been side effects of the governmentalisation of human subjectivities as anthropological/sociological ways of thinking have pervaded the practices and health interventions of herbalists, doctors, social workers, self help manuals, etc. Not as the only, or for that matter most important, ways of thinking, but rather as one group of rationalities/systems of practices among many others. As we saw, a single herbal consultation can easily involve vitalist, neurochemical, psychological, sociological and phytochemical rationalities and practices. East and West A final set of reflections on my findings concern my choice of comparing an 'Eastern' with a 'Western', or put in another way a 'developing country' with an 'advanced liberal' context. The division of labour that to a certain extent persisted between an anthropology of the primitives and a sociology of the modernised/civilised up until the early 20th century has all but dissolved. If anthropologists came home from the tropics, then sociologists have increasingly ventured out into 'the orient'. Yet curiously enough, comparative sociological and/or anthropological research tends to remain geographically, culturally or socio-economically clustered. In the field that I have studied for this dissertation, such clustering is evident in the distinction between TM and CAM. Traditional Medicine is found in 'developing countries' whereas Complementary and Alternative Medicine is found in industrialised countries. When I have attended conferences they have either been CAM conferences where participants have primarily carried out their research in industrialised country settings, even when researching, for example, Traditional Chinese Medicine. And conversely, to interact with fellow researchers interested in Traditional Medicine I have had to attend conferences with titles ending with "in Asia". What I hope to have demonstrated with this study is that there is no other reason than a researcher's own particular interests that should prevent comparisons 'across' the cultural, socio-economic or geographical divide suggested by the TM-CAM division. I am of course fully aware that in suggesting this I am opening myself up to charges of 'Euro-' or 'ethnocentrism'. Indeed there are perhaps some who would argue that the foregoing analysis is nothing but a typically Eurocentric attempt at accounting for traditional medicine practice and use in Vietnam. I would of course not only vehemently oppose such 232 a characterisation of my analysis, but would also point to one of the key arguments that I have been making throughout.