In the following years and then decades, sales of herbal medicines, the number of schools providing training in herbalism and consultations with herbalists all surged in tandem with an increasingly active medical counter-culture (Griggs 1997; O'Sullivan 2005; Saks 2003). It is this significant increase in public use of herbal medicine, coupled with traditions of self-regulation dating back to the formation of the NIMH as well as the herbal safety issues outlined above, that have made it a priority candidate for regulatory efforts to protect the public from its "dangerous and incompetent" practice (see chapter 3). The NIMH, by far the largest of herbal practitioner organisations today with over 500 members (Great Britain. Department of Health. European Herbal Practitioners Association. Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health. 2003: 12), has in many ways pre-empted the debates which the House of Lords Select Committee set in motion with their November 2000 report on CAM. Already in 1991, the NIMH introduced a binding Code of Ethics, Code of Practice and Disciplinary Procedures, which was followed up by the formation of an NIMH Accreditation Board in 1994 to assess standards in the training of Medical Herbalists. Training to become a herbalist by an accredited institution in the UK today, includes courses in the theories and diagnostic practices of both herbal and bio- medicine, including anatomy, physiology and pathology.58 57 To the great frustration of herbalists, as Brown reflects citing the president of the Association who in 1927 lamented that: "there have been occasions when depression has seized me, and I have realised how powerful are the forces arrayed against us" (Brown 1985: 86). 58 The Scottish School of Herbal Medicine makes the points that: "If we want to continue to enjoy our right in this country for trained Medical Herbalists to have the right of primary diagnosis (a licence which is unique in Europe and perhaps even in the 'developed' world), we have to acquire a high level of orthodox clinical skills. To this end, the first two years of the course contain, alongside Herbal Science, a fair degree of Anatomy, Physiology and Pathology" (The Scottish School of Herbal Medicine 2006). 109 Yet, the NIMH has certainly not been alone in its endeavours to organise and train herbal practitioners, as further to the NIMH the past century has also seen the formation (and in some cases gradual demise) of a Society of United Medical Herbalists of Great Britain (1877), a Society of Herbalists (1927), a Botano-Therapuetic Institute (1931), a British Herbal Union (1930s), an International Register of Consultant Herbalists (1960), a British Herbal Medicine Association (1964), a College of Practitioners of Phytotherapy (1982), and an Association of Master Herbalists (1996). Common to these many different organisations has been that most of their members have been practitioners of a tradition of herbal medicine indigenous to the United Kingdom - often referred to as 'western herbal medicine' to acknowledge transatlantic and continental influences - whose father figures include Gerard, Culpeper and Coffin (see Brown 1985; Griggs 1997). Moreover, in more recent years, an additional component of new medical pluralism has manifested itself in the UK, i.e. the consolidation of various herbal medical practices rooted in the cultural traditions of immigrant ethnic communities, such as Ayurveda, Traditional Chinese Medicine and Traditional Tibetan Medicine. Consequently, during the past two decades, a Register of Chinese Herbal Medicine (1987), a College of Tibetan Medicine (1993), an Association of Traditional Chinese Medicine (1994), an Ayurvedic Medical Association (1996), a British Ayurvedic Medical Council (1999), a British Society of Chinese Medicine (2001), and even a Unified Register of Herbal Practitioners59 (1997) have been formed. And a still further complicating factor in this growing collection of associations and councils is the fact that many herbalists will at the same time practice acupuncture, iridology, aromatherapy or naturopathy which are considered separate disciplines. In the face of such plurality/fragmentation and recalling the House of Lords Select Committee's recommendation to help the public to know where to look by bringing fragmented professional bodies together, the formation of a Herbal Medicine Regulatory Working Group in 2001 was perhaps inevitable. The Working Group was put together as a joint initiative of the Department of Health, the Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health and the European Herbal Practitioners Association, and includes representation from 59 For Western, Chinese and Ayurvedic herbal practitioners. 110 no fewer than 11 herbal medicine organisations, representing some 1,500 practitioners, with a mandate to come up with proposals for the statutory regulation of the herbal medicine profession as a whole. While it is too early to say anything about the final outcome of this ongoing process of unifying and formalising herbal medicine practitioners, what is beginning to emerge from this ensemble of self-regulatory initiatives is a steadily growing body of expert knowledge that is to be entrusted to a Council of some form and that will eventually provide the legal grounds for determining minimum levels of competence for those wishing to be registered as "herbalists" (with due specifications for Western, Chinese and Ayurvedic forms of it), standards of ethical and responsible practice of herbal medicine, as well as disciplinary mechanisms for excluding and/or penalising "unacceptable professional conduct" by registered herbalists (Great Britain. Department of Health. European Herbal Practitioners Association. Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health. 2003: 17-21). The justification for introducing such exclusionary measures has been recently summed up by the Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health: "It is important to remember that anything that has the power to help you could also cause harm if taken unnecessarily or provided by an untrained or insufficiently trained person" (Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005: 7). In other words, at stake is a Council that would help members of the public as well as health authorities distinguish the competent, responsible and qualified from the dangerous, irresponsible and incompetent, while at the same time ensuring that registered practitioners live up to certain minimum training standards and continue to professionally update their own skills. Where for many years it was possible for anybody to set up shop as a 'herbalist' in the UK, or as a 'herb doctor' in Vietnam, increasingly such practice is requiring either registration with a representative regulatory body (as has been suggested in the UK) or licensing with local health authorities (as is being introduced in Vietnam). This is not to say that herbal medicine is no longer practiced outside the bounds of a self-regulated or licensed profession, rather it is to suggest that the practice of herbal medicine by untrained, unregistered or unlicensed practitioners is increasingly being problematised as a public health concern and as a direct result of this, a number of initiatives have been taken in both countries to restrict their ability to do so, at least under a protected title. And so, not only are herbal medicinal products considered potentially dangerous to the public, so too are the 111 herbal practitioners that dispense them, as it is now argued that inadequate training can lead to: an increased likelihood of misidentifying and substituting a potent for a toxic medicinal plant; exaggeration of efficacy claims; unwillingness to recognise the limits of their competence (e.g. when attempting to treat acute cases of cancer); and inability to diagnose properly because of a lack of basic anatomical and physiological knowledge (see British Medical Association 1993; Bui 1999; Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000; WHO 1995; 2002b). And so, while these many efforts to regulate the practitioners of herbal medicine underline a relatively new acceptance that far from all herbalists are 'dangerous' to the public health, it remains just as clear that the problem of herbal 'quackery' is here to stay, with focus now directed at those unlicensed, unregistered, unqualified, untrained or even 'rogue' herbalists that either actively distance themselves from or are oblivious to governmental licensing systems and/ or the voluntary codes of practice advocated by representative organisations. Herbal vigilance and awareness The continued pervasiveness of herbal remedies in day-to-day household medical practices in Vietnam was highlighted in a survey by the Institute of Traditional Medicine from 1999, according to which 85.2% of respondents could name and describe the medicinal use of at least ten plants (Huu and Borton 2003: 91), an inclination corroborated by Craig (2002: 107) who reported that mothers of the 60 families he interviewed recalled having used an average of 11.1 herbal remedies in the past year. While not nearly as prevalent in the United Kingdom,60 the volume of over-the-counter sales of herbal medicines61 does suggest that people are in many cases diagnosing and medicating themselves without first seeking the advice of either a herbalist or a doctor. Whatever the exact numbers of herbalist consultations or sales of herbal medicinal products are, it is certainly clear that herbal medicine is not a practice that is in any way limited to registered and licensed practitioners. 60 In a 1999 BBC survey, 20% of respondents claimed to have used some form of CAM in the past 12 months - the most popular form being herbal medicine which 34% of the 20% had used (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 1.17). 61 In the UK alone, it is estimated that the market for herbal medicines is up to PS240 million per annum, which includes retail, internet, direct and mail order sales (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 5.86). Figures for the Vietnamese herbal market are harder to come by, but it has been estimated to generate some US$ 20 million in export revenues, and the government has recently set a target of 30% of the domestic pharmaceutical market for traditional medicinal products (Vietnam. Ministry of Health. 2003). These figures, however, relate to industrialised herbal medicines, and do not take into account the prevalent cultivation and use of herbal starting materials by individual households. 112 Rather it plays a significant part in commonsense, day-to-day care of the self in both countries, a point I will be returning to at length in chapter 7. At any rate, self-medication or public use is an aspect of herbal medicine that has definitely not been overlooked in recent regulatory initiatives, as the consumers of herbal medicinal products have become the target of information and awareness campaigns on the "appropriate" use of herbal medicines and, in the case of Vietnam, also programmes to encourage the growth and use of medicinal plants as a cost-effective means of treatment - programmes that, in the words of the WHO, "promote the proper use of TM/CAM through consumer education/training" (2004a: x). In the United Kingdom, the normalisation of herbal medicine use by consumers is primarily seen as a task of awareness raising that ultimately assists users in making "informed choices" about the healthcare products they use. The internet, media and popular literature are all mediums through which the proper use of herbal medicine is being advocated. For example, the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA) recently launched a Herbal Safety News website to "help widen awareness of the safety issues sometimes raised by the use of herbal remedies, and in doing so, help to protect public health" (Great Britain. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 2004b). The site provides general advice to consumers on the use of herbal medicine, urging them to be cautious towards both products and practitioners, as well as providing up to date information on the latest safety concerns and product recalls. There are plenty of other internet sites providing similar kinds of safety alerts, ranging from Herbal Watch, Quackwatch, DietFraud, PhytoNet, to the European Medicines Agency's Product Safety Announcements. What is being advocated in these sites is a kind of herbal pharmacovigilance on the part of consumers, encouraging them to be wary of "100% natural!" claims, as well as of the exaggerated efficacy claims which it is suggested are especially rampant in spam e-mail advertisements and online 'pharmacies'. These sites include procedures for the reporting of adverse effects such that this information can be shared with as many interested users as possible. Yet, it is not only the regulators and the consumer watchdogs who are encouraging and advocating responsible use of herbal medicines. The NIMH has also been active in urging cautious and vigilant use of herbal medicines, as outlined in a 2002 BBC interview by then President Trudy Norris: 113 What we are concerned about is that lots of people self-prescribe in an inappropriate way... We are not against commercial herbal remedies bought for self-medication, but urge people to find out as much as possible before self-prescribing. In the market place matters of health and illness can create vulnerability. The practitioner's main focus is the actual health needs of the patients over and above any consideration of profit. This can not always be said of the entire supplement market. (BBC News Online 2002) Since then, an annual Herbal Medicine Awareness Week has been organised, a Herbal Health Advice Line has been opened to allow members of the public to get in touch with a local herbalist for expert advice, local walks with qualified herbalists to learn about the properties of medicinal plants growing in the UK have been organised, and a revised edition of the booklet Making Sense of Herbal Remedies has been published advising consumers to choose their products carefully and to always seek advice from a qualified herbalist when in doubt (NIMH 2004a; Norris 2004). One of the more contentious issues stemming from awareness campaigns on the proper use of herbal medicines has been that of the role of the General Practitioner. While there are some who do view and use herbal medicine as a complete alternative to those services he or she would otherwise receive through the National Health Services, surveys have suggested that most people use herbal medicine in a complementary fashion, but are reluctant to inform their GPs that they are using herbal medicines for fear of ridicule or because they view it as a private matter (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000). However, following a number of reports of harmful herb-pharmaceutical interactions, consumers are now being advised "to tell your doctor or pharmacist if you are taking a herbal remedy with other medicines such as prescribed medicines" (Great Britain. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 2004b). At the same time, the wisdom of using herbal medicine as a complete alternative to conventional treatment has also been questioned by health authorities. As we saw in the previous section, recognising and advertising the limits of their competence was a crucial component of the responsibilisation of herbal practitioners, and this message is also being conveyed to herbal medicine users: "Anyone who has previously experienced any liver complaint, or any other serious health complaint is advised not to take any herbal remedy without speaking to their doctor first" (Great Britain. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 2004b). Also the NIMH points out that "[q]ualified herbalists know when a condition is best seen by a doctor or another therapist" (NIMH 2004b). 114 And so, in the United Kingdom, normalising public use of herbal medicine has been very much about "enabl[ing] them to make appropriate decisions on how to improve their health" by making sure that they are "better informed and aware" (WHO 2004a: vi). In Vietnam, on the other hand, where the vast majority of people are self-medicating with herbs and the government's strategy has been to actively mobilise traditional medicine as a means of promoting more than protecting public health, official policy has been to encourage the growth and use of herbal medicinal plants as a cost-effective way of treating some of the country's most common ailments. One would perhaps assume that since Vietnam has had such a long history of herbal medicine use, its promotion has never been a problem. This is far from being the case, as both the extent and forms of use of traditional herbal medicines have been the object of a number of programmes and campaigns since the battle of Dien Bien Phu in May 1954. The period might be roughly divided into three parts with the first three decades up to 1985 characterised by a chronic shortage of modern medicinal supplies as a direct result of trade embargos against Vietnam, as well as conflict. As a way to overcome this shortage, the Vietnamese government launched a "revolutionary movement to bring traditional medicine back to the grassroots level" (Hoang 2004), especially since colonial policies had done so much to discourage the use of traditional medicine. Indeed, as Thompson (2004) has shown, traditional medicine and its practitioners played an important role in the building up of a nationalist movement together with western-trained physicians in the first half of the 20th century, and as a result they participated actively in the Viet Minh's campaign against French soldiers (1945-54). Following formal inauguration in 1957, the Institute of Traditional Medicine continued this strategy of mobilising traditional medicine at the grassroots level, by organising a number of training courses aimed at mobilising and training some 2,000 activists who were to return to their districts as focal persons for the promotion of traditional medicine, initially in North Vietnam. The Institute also nominated groups of three to four persons who were then sent out to a number of villages to work with medical staff in the area on ways to promote traditional medicine. As described by Minister of Health Pham Ngoc Thach in 1965: "We promote the cultivation of medicinal plants, not only on an industrial scale but also by individual families. We encourage each family, particularly in the countryside, to grow in a corner of its garden a few plants for the treatment of common diseases (headache, diarrhoea, etc.) and plants with antibiotic properties" (Pham 1965: 13). 115 As armed conflict broke out against American forces in 1965, traditional therapies and herbal remedies would again play a decisive role in Vietnam's so-called 'second war of independence' which was fought out in the dense jungles of central Vietnam. In the face of critical shortages of modern medical supplies, traditional remedies were used to treat burns, war wounds and tropical disease (Hoang, et al. 1999: 27). Bearing this in mind, it must surely stand as one of the great ironies of Vietnam's tragic postcolonial history that just as modern medicine had been used as a 'civilising weapon' against what were considered ignorant and superstitious natives by Vietnam's colonisers, modernising and repopularising traditional medicine in Vietnam became a crucial element of their own grassroots-based efforts to drive these very colonisers out. As we will see in chapter 7, it is no coincidence that traditional medicine played such a central role in the building up and promoting of a Vietnamese national identity throughout the 20th century.