For healing is an inherently problematising activity 35 (regardless of whether it is conventional, alternative, new age or traditional) requiring practices of diagnosis, treatment, validation and regulation, yet always surrounded by practices of resistance, contestation and defiance, and always invoking/producing certain bodies of knowledge in the justification and codification of these practices. As I will argue in the following chapter, such an approach should be seen as distinct from those reviewed above that tend to account for the history of traditional, alternative and complementary medicine in terms of either a personal politics of meaning, values, beliefs or identity; a politics of (self-)interests between rival groups, movements or professions; or a politics of epistemologically-incommensurable healing paradigms. What makes approaching herbal medicine as a field of problematisation different? It was noted before that the task of social scientists in the field of medicine has been described as one of questioning, evaluating and assessing the appropriateness of definitions of health and the adequacy of healthcare delivery systems. In contrast, approaching herbal medicine as a problem is to turn the tables by investigating just how such evaluations and assessments are made feasible and how concepts of safety, quality and efficacy come into play in the codification, justification and organisation of herbal healing practices. The purpose of this study will therefore not be to assess whether herbal medicine is better or worse than biomedicine, nor will I attend to the (in)justices of how it has been both promoted and discouraged through the past decades in both countries. Rather, since my point is that notions of what is 'good' as opposed to 'bad' medicine is integral to any form of healing, I will be analysing the practices that enable such distinctions today, as a means to historicise and unsettle them, and to demonstrate their unavoidably contingent and normative grounds. In the same way that there is 'good' and 'bad' biomedicine, there is 'good' and 'bad' herbal medicine, as will become clear. But what is herbal medicine and how is it relevant to such a study of alternative and traditional medicine as I am suggesting here? Generally speaking, herbal medicine is a catch-all phrase used for a wide range of practices, therapies and elements of therapies that come from all over the world, including medical herbalism, traditional Chinese medicine, herbology, phytotherapy, medical botany and Ayurvedic herbal medicine, which all have the identification and use of plants (or parts of plants) for therapeutic effect in common. Its claims of a 'natural' and 'whole person' approach to healing today relate to both the life-enfeebling and the soul-battering side effects of modernisation and industrialisation. Yet, 36 although it is sometimes argued that it constitutes a complete alternative to modern medicine, research into contemporary practice and use suggests that this is not the case. On the other hand, while it is often commented that medicinal practices in Asia, Europe, Africa, America and Australasia were all originally developed on the basis of the healing properties of plants, the practice of herbal medicine has been marginalised and discouraged to varying degrees in the majority of countries in the past centuries. This has certainly been the case in both the United Kingdom and in Vietnam where I will not only be analysing overall problematisations of herbal medicine, but also concrete efforts to have two herbal remedies, St. John's Wort and Heantos, approved and improved for safe and effective use by the public. The rationale for deciding on these two remedies in these two distinct national settings is fivefold. To begin with, choosing two herbal medicines will allow me to investigate what kind of role both the life-enfeebling and the soul-battering critiques of modern medicine have played in the recent renaissance of this particular form of traditional, alternative or complementary medicine in both countries. Secondly, they are both promoted as targeting illnesses of the mind (mild to moderate depression and drug addiction respectively) and, as we will be seeing, scientific research into their mechanisms of action has led to a fascinating meeting between these 'natural' remedies and cutting edge neuroscience. Thirdly, the modernisation of St. John's Wort and Heantos into industrially-produced herbal medicinal products through the 1980s and 90s has in both cases been a typically global endeavour with a curious, yet not entirely fortuitous convergence in Germany. Fourthly, while the modernisation of St. John's Wort (a single plant species) began as a search for single active ingredients to explain its efficacy, Heantos is made out of thirteen different plants with scientists questioning whether or not a single active ingredient approach would be the most appropriate, providing me with insight into one of the most salient debates in the field of herbal medicine today. And finally, analysing the ways in which herbal medicine has been problematised in both an industrialised country of the West and a developing country of the East will allow me to address the oft-invoked distinction between an exotic, almost mystical Eastern medicine and a rational, Western medicine that is doing all it can to struggle against such 'superstitions'. Even a brief look at what has been happening with herbal medicine in the past four decades or so in Vietnam and the United Kingdom provides a staggering panorama of a whole 37 complex of new regulations, toxicity tests, clinical efficacy trials, scientific research programmes and standardised production procedures, centred on the key problems of safety, quality and efficacy. Previously rejected as 'fringe medicine' or 'quackery', Vietnamese and British herbal remedies are increasingly being mobilised and regulated according to their evidence bases as their sanctioning and legitimacy becomes dependent on the rigorous safety and efficacy trials that are currently favoured in biomedicine. At the same time, however, critics of biomedical notions of safety and efficacy continue to call for a rethinking of the patient, rejecting a view of him or her as one who 'merely lodges the disease' in favour of a view of the 'whole person' where safety and efficacy are linked not just to symptom-based measures of health but also to quality of life and balance. Herbal medicine patients are not 'merely' to be treated for certain health conditions, they are also to be activated out of passive roles as recipients of healthcare, 'responsibilised' into leading healthier lifestyles, provided with a framework of meaning for understanding and coping with their illnesses, and encouraged to actively improve their personal well-being and self-appraisal by taking charge of their lives. And finally, practitioners' qualifications are increasingly being scrutinised with calls for a standardisation of competency criteria and the establishing of registers or licensing systems. Hence, it would appear that what the birth of 'alternative medicine' and 'traditional medicine' has marked is a transformation of the ways in which 'quackery' is thought about and regulated against in these two countries, as well as an inauguration of new objectivities and subjectivities, as novel configurations - or dispositifs - of biomedical, anthropological, psychological, vitalistic, and neo-vitalistic rationalities and practices of healing come into operation. To guide this history of contemporary herbal healing practices I have chosen the following research questions which concern the different ways in which herbal medicine in Vietnam and the United Kingdom is regulated, validated and used. * How has it become possible for 'primitive' and 'quack' treatments in a Vietnamese setting and 'fringe' and 'marginal' treatments in a British setting (e.g. herbal medicine) to be recast into 'traditional', 'alternative', and/or 'complementary' medicines? * How has the concept of 'efficacy' been deployed in contemporary Vietnamese and British herbal treatments? 38 * In which ways have herbal medicine users come to be objectified as 'whole persons' in Vietnam and the United Kingdom? Histories of the present that seek to interrogate the normative grounds of contemporary healing practices can be made feasible with the help of the two strategic methodological pillars of archaeology and genealogy that have been refined over the years by such scholars as Bachelard (1984), Canguilhem (1989), Foucault (1977; 1985), Corbin (1990), Darnton (1968), Donzelot (1980), Rabinow (1989), Rose (1999) and many others. Where archaeology can help is in showing how truth about the efficacy or inefficacy of herbal medicine, the competent or incompetent herbal practitioner, and the toxic or safe herbal medicinal product is produced. That is to say, an archaeology of the bodies of knowledge that are invoked when the effectiveness of herbal medicine is put to the test, when the qualifications of herbal practitioners are evaluated, and when the remedies of herbal medicine are controlled for quality, will help us to recognize some of the objects, concepts, and norms that codify, organise and justify the practices of herbal medicine today. Genealogy on the other hand, can help us to see how individuals are transformed into subjects through practices of herbal healing that provide them with particular ways of relating to and understanding themselves, thereby making available a whole range of self-forming practices or what Foucault refers to as forms of ascesis. It is with this interplay and overflow between modes of knowing (the remit of archaeology) and modes of doing and being (the remit of genealogy), between objects and subjects, that histories of the present are concerned, and as Foucault has suggested, one might summarise the endeavour to describe the problematisations and practices that are made possible by these interlinkages as studies of "how men govern (themselves and others) by the production of truth" (Foucault 1991: 79). How to read this dissertation The following chapters contain an analysis of how the problem of herbal medicine has played out in a Vietnamese and a British context during the past five decades or so, with a view to situating two decades worth of efforts to have St. John's Wort and Heantos approved and improved for use, and to understanding how herbal medicine has contributed to the making up and managing of subjectivities in these two countries. Chapter 2 starts out with a discussion of how one might study some of the practices of regulation, validation and use that make up the field of herbal medicine today in terms of a field of 39 problematisation. In particular, the chapter distinguishes the social study of dispositifs from ethnography, policy analysis, science and technology studies, and histories of ideas, and highlights methodological and research design considerations. The chapter also identifies interrelations between modernity, normalisation, governmentalisation, disciplines and subjectivities as consistent themes for the chapters that follow. The formation of the five chapters of analysis that make up the substance of this dissertation has been guided by my three key research questions. Each question concerns controversies surrounding: how to protect people from quackery; how to determine the safety and efficacy of a herbal treatment; and what kind of life herbal medicine is seen to be optimising in the two countries under study. Chapter 3 investigates the conditions that have allowed for the mobilisation of TM and CAM in Vietnam and the United Kingdom in the past few decades. The chapter suggests that the transformation of 'primitive medicine' into TM in postcolonial Vietnam and the recasting of 'fringe' or 'marginal medicine' into CAM in late 20th century Britain has relied on an internalisation of the kind of dividing practices that previously were used to distinguish biomedical from non-biomedical forms of therapy into a plurality of therapies. This recasting has in turn reconfigured the way in which quackery is conceptualised and regulated against in the two countries. Chapter 4 picks up on this internalisation as pertains the practice of Vietnamese and British herbal medicine since the 1960s, arguing that the normalisation and regularisation of the production, practice and use of herbal medicine has relied on a kind of bio-politicisation which has worked to ensure that herbal medicine contributes to rather than hinders public health. In chapter 5, the highly contested concept of efficacy is analysed in the context of recent efforts to validate the safety and efficacy of the two prominent herbal remedies - St. John's Wort and Heantos. The chapter starts with a Canguilhemian-style archaeology of the theory of 'symbolic efficacy' as formulated and adapted in a number of classic medical anthropology texts. The chapter argues that medical anthropology has played a pivotal role in what has been a 20th century decriminalisation of placebo, circumscribing placebo efficacy as a kind of spill-over effect from a symbolic, cognitive realm into a corporeal, bio-physiological realm. Chapter 6 continues the analysis as pertains the search for 'plausible' mechanisms of action to explain the clinical effects of St. John's Wort and Heantos. In particular, the chapter shows how the search for plausibility has involved often innovative collaborations between herbalists, pharmacologists, neuroscientists and 40 phytochemists. The analysis suggests that debates between 'vitalist' and 'rationalist' theories of biology are alive and well in the pharmacology laboratories that work to modernise and standardise St. John's Wort and Heantos. The question of what kind of life herbal medicine is seen to be improving is addressed in the final chapter of analysis. Importantly, chapter 7 argues that with the consolidation of modernisation critiques during the course of the 20th century, relations between 'life itself' and 'human subjectivity itself' have come to be reconfigured such that both form therapeutic sites of life optimisation. As such, bio-power in Vietnam and the UK today operates around the biological task of optimising and disciplining bodies and populations, while also making possible the optimisation of human subjectivities via a range of grassroots techniques of coping in a kind of neo-vitalisation of quantity with quality of life. Herbal medicine in both Vietnam and the UK has been mobilised to address some of the many perceived side effects of 'our modern way of living' - including depression and addiction. The chapter analyses how the said neo-vitalisation of life has made an entire host of techniques of the self available to both Vietnamese and British subjects, albeit in very different ways and with very different outcomes. It argues that a govenmentalisation of individual and collective lifeworlds has been a requisite part of the mobilisation of herbal medicine in both countries. And so it is with this structure in mind that this dissertation should be read. While the analysis of the three different controversies might seem somewhat isolated in relation to each other, taken together they all contribute in very specific ways to the task that I have set myself, which is that of accounting for the late 20th century revival and renaissance of traditional herbal medicine in the United Kingdom and Vietnam. As will become clear in the following, such an account cannot help but delve into the contestations and controversies that have surrounded quackery, efficacy and life. 41 2 Histories of the present There is a clear distinction to be made between approaching a field such as alternative and traditional medicine with a view to establishing a myth, an injustice, an advantage or a failure, and an approach that seeks to locate the rationalities and practices - the thought spaces - that make different forms of medicine feasible at a certain point, in a certain place. I am neither herbalist, clinician, regulator, pharmacist, chemist, community worker, herbal medicine user, pharmacologist nor doctor, and I will do well to leave the former approach and the important questions it raises competently in their hands, at their risk, and to their credit (cf. Canguilhem 1989: 34). Rather what I am is a social scientist with an intense curiosity about our present; its conditions, its possibilities, its liabilities. In particular, I am a sociologist preoccupied with one of the most important hypotheses to have formed out of the relatively short history of my discipline, namely that modernity has been a degenerative, dehumanising, ossifying, repressive, and/or disorienting force on societies and the individuals they comprise. It is both from within and against these sociological diagnoses of modernity's many side effects that I will be embarking on my inquiry into the revival and renaissance of herbal medicine in Vietnam and the United Kingdom. On the one hand, as we will see, there can be no question that herbal medicine in both countries has in recent decades been proposed as an antidote to the physiological and subjective pathologies that 'a modern way of life' has been charged with engendering: traditional remedies for modern woes. Yet on the other, if one does not ascribe to the theories of vitality and subjectivity that underpin such diagnoses but rather approaches these theories as modern artefacts on a par with the 'reductionist' economic theories that have long been seen to power processes of modernisation and industrialisation, then the critical task becomes one of demonstrating both the practicality and the historical contingency of the novel herbal dispositifs which have emerged in both countries to problematise and/or facilitate the said revivals. As such, what follows is not so much a definitive study of Vietnamese and British herbal medicine as a comparative inquiry into what the past few decades of efforts to modernise, rationalise and normalise the practice, production and use of herbal medicine in these two 42 countries can tell us about our present.14 That is to ask, what can these efforts tell us about the ways in which the public is to be protected from dangerous practitioners; about the forms of validation that establish whether or not a medicine is safe and efficacious; and about the pathologies our bodies and subjectivities are seen as prone to, as well as the techne, ascesis and phronesis (i.e. the very practical forms and ways of working on ourselves) that are both available to and required of 'whole person' herbal medicine users in the care of their selves and their lives today? To address these questions I will be drawing upon work done by Bachelard, Canguilhem, Foucault, Rose, Rabinow and Hacking in particular. Common to the work of these authors has been an empirically rigorous interest in the interrelatedness, indeed inseparability, of thoughts and practices. In this chapter, I will set out some of the key theoretical and methodological considerations that have helped me assemble and pursue a research strategy geared at accessing herbal dispositifs in Vietnam and the UK. Bachelard, Canguilhem and the historicity of objectification To approach herbal medicine as a field of problematisation is of course to build on a solid base of research that has sought to analyse a wide range of social problems in many different contexts, including crime, families, prostitution, poverty, development, and the self (Corbin 1990; Donzelot 1980; Escobar 1994; Foucault 1977; Rose 1999). It is an approach that seeks to unsettle and trouble the various self-evidences, givens and convictions that underpin contemporary efforts to heal with herbs in Vietnam and The United Kingdom; not with a view to break them down, expose or replace them, but rather to take them at face value by exploring the conditions of their possibility through an archaeological interrogation of their normative grounds and objectifications, as well as a genealogical investigation of their modes and effects of subjectification.