According to GMP and GPP guides, there are integral elements needed for reducing risk linked with compound-ing, including: standard operation procedures affirmed by quality assurance unit, calibrated equipment, quality con-trol of starting materials, evaluation of starting materials and compounding process by means of health hazards, documented independent check of pharmaceutical calcu-lations, trained personnel involved etc. To underline as an example, the organization of services for total parenteral nutrition in many cases is a real challenge for HPs due to the unavailability of commercially prepared products. As it is known, this service of HP may be followed by risk in calculation errors, stability and incompatibility connected with product compounding. However, since the aforemen-tioned GCP guidelines are more general they cannot cover in detail all aspects thus, some countries developed addi-tional national guidelines on compounding adopted by cer-tain professional bodies (PB, 2015).These guidelines in-clude both, steps in compounding process and competenc-es required. Another important compounding aspects relat-ed to algorithm for decision making process when there is a need to choose suitable dosage form for the patient need. For example, firstly, it is looking for standardized, validat-ed dosage form; secondly, if it is not available, then com-pounding according to scientific principles and practice is recommended and thirdly, whenever suitable and possi-ble, to consider compounding of the simplest pharmaceu-tical formula (Glass and Haywood, 2006). The next step is the process of dosage form evaluation which includes several GCP related aspects that must be considered such as: ingredients quality, palatability, irritability, toxicity and stability; possibility of extensive API metabolism by first pass, therapeutic index data and bioavailability; packaging, storage, and labeling, assessment for possible interactions development between API-excipients-containers, quality control, stability, expiration, and beyond-use dating stabil-ity testing date etc. Additional important steps tailored to compounding process in HP environment include: evalua-tion of toxicity and safety of compounded dosage form and monitoring of the clinical effect ad and adverse drug re-actions etc. When medicines with marketing authorization have to be modified to facilitate administration there is a benefit for compounding pharmacists to acquire informa-tion from the manufacturer about: physical and chemical data about API, excipients, critical functional character-istics of dosage form, possibility for manipulation in order to change the dosage form, possibility to obtain API from manufacture to compound quality dosage form, relevant information about testing and analyzing API on request by pharmacist (EMA/CHMP/PEG/194810/2005). ConclusionHPs should maintain at least four sets of records for compounding. An existing development requires reference library and other sources of information relevant to com-pounding to be included in the guidelines for GCP. As a provider of pharmaceutical care, the HPs have to be well educated and trained in the field of art and science of pharmacy compounding for creating personalized medi-cines solutions. In addition to the policy and good practic-es, further guidelines supporting the creation of safe and effective medicines have to be put in place.ReferencesEMA/CHMP/PEG/194810/2005, 2005. Reflection paper: Formulation of choice for the paediatric population. www.ema.europa.eu/.../WC500003782.pdf.GCP, 2016. Good Compounding Practices Chapter 1075 In: The United States Pharmacopeia, 39th rev., and The national formulary, 34 th ed. Rockville, MD: The United States Pharmacopeial Convention.Glass, B.D., Haywood, A., 2006. Stability considerations in liquid dosage forms extemporaneously prepared from commercially available products. J. Pharm. Sci. 9(3), 398-426.GMC, 2013. General Medical Council, Good practice in prescribing and managing medicines and devices London http://mm.wirral.nhs.uk/document_uploads/guidelines/WirralSpecialsMar11.pdfPB, 2015. Pharmacy Board of Australia. Guidelines on compounding of medicines. http://www.pharmacyboard.gov.au/Codes-Guidelines.aspxCouncil of Europe, 2011. Resolution CM/ResAP (2011)1 on quality and safety assurance requirements for medicinal products prepared in pharmacies for the special needs of patients. European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & Health Care (EDQM). Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 621 - 622 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616-002.2-085(497.7)Short communicationRole of community pharmacists in chronic disease management in the Republic of MacedoniaDonka Pankov*, Maja Simonoska Crcarevska, Kristina Mladenovska, Renata Slaveska Raicki, Marija Glavas DodovInstitute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* dpankov0@gmail.comIntroductionChronic diseases are increasing in global prevalence and seriously threaten developing countries. They become dominant health burden, with 70-80% of health-care costs spent on their management. Chronic diseases are interrelat-ed, have common risk factors and are largely preventable. However, in their prevention, only 3% of health expenses are presently invested (Commission of the European Com-munities, 2007; The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2012). Management of chronic diseases has been also pointed as a serious concern, with WHO's statement that approximate-ly 50% of chronic patients do not adhere to therapy and re-ports on the economic magnitude of this problem (WHO, 2003), 194,500 deaths and estimated costs of EUR125bn annu-ally in the EU due to miss-dose and non-adherence to pre-scribed medication (PGEU, 2008). Therefore, a successful and sustainable chronic disease management program re-quires a collaborative approach at the system level, both professional-directed and patient-oriented (NEHI, 2009).The current primary care models implicate that the strong physician-patient-pharmacist relationships are not promoted; training for chronic disease management is rare-ly sufficient and there is insufficient continuity and coordi-nation among health-care providers. Among the healthcare professionals, community pharmacists are the most acces-sible and are in an ideal position to assist the management of patients with chronic diseases. However, despite the re-cent developments in pharmacy practice there still appears to be an overall unawareness of their potential within this area of health-care system, with "the potential for pharma-cy being untapped" (Petrushevska-Tozi and Mladenovska, 2012; WHO, 2011). Therefore, WHO has been called phar-macies upon to engage further in health promotion, chron-ic disease prevention and rational use of medicines, specif-ically by supporting people with chronic conditions, im-proving their quality of life and self-management, support-ing better knowledge about pharmacotherapy, etc (WHO, 2011). However, in order to take up the challenge, it would be necessary to examine what have already been done in chronic disease management by community pharmacists in the Republic of Macedonia, from both patients and health-care providers perspectives, which was the aim of this study. Materials and methodsFor the patients and health-care providers, two sepa-rate cross-sectional descriptive questionnaires were de-signed, where combined pre-coded open ended and mul-tiple choice closed questions were used with type of re-sponse format A-agree, B-partly agree, C- disagree, cov-ering two essential components: need of providing patient education by a pharmacist to prevent chronic diseases and disability by promoting healthy life-style and need of ex-panding pharmacy services and interventions in chronic disease management. The questionnaires were pre-tested by involving the target groups in the design (10 commu-nity pharmacists (PHs) from different pharmacies, 10 gen-eral practitioners (GPs), 10 specialists in internal medicine (SPs) and 10 patients (PTs), to evaluate the apparent (log-ical) validity of the questionnaires (instructions, coverage of the issue of research, format and questions sequences, legibility and readability, too much/little offered answers, measurability of the questions, time for completing, etc.). The average age (+-SD) of the health-care professionals S7 PP 297622Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 621 - 622 (2016)Continuing professional developmentPoster presentationswas 47.3 +-10.5 yrs, of which 76.7% were females. Related to the profile of patient group, the average age (+-SD) was 67+-9 yrs, with most of them females (80%) and 60% hav-ing university degree diploma. The responses were collected face-to-face in the GPs' and SPs'offices and community pharmacies, from Janu-ary 3rd to February 28th, 2016, with the surveyors being pharmacists. Only 10% of the respondents stated that some of the questions were unclear and these items will be fur-ther reconsidered when generating direct anonymous final questionnaire. Obtained data were tabulated using Microsoft Excel(r) (Microsoft Corp. Redmond, WA, USA), computed and consequently evaluated using statistical software STAT-GRAPHICS Centurion XVI evaluation (Stat Point tech-nologies Inc., USA). Results and discussionUnlike GPs, who think that patients are either well- or partly educated about the chronic diseases, their preven-tion and management (30% and 70%, respectively), 20% and 40% of the PTs, 20% and 70% of the SPs, and 50% and 50% of the PHs believe that patients are not properly or partly educated, respectively, pointing to the necessity of pharmacists to use their competences and skills in educat-ing patients about prevention and management of chronic disease. This necessity was approved by 60% of the PHs and SPs, while 40% of them it partly approved. Interest-ingly, 30% of GPs were not agreed with this statement, un-like 100% of PTs, who expect best pharmacy practice and care in this area. In this respect, 100% of PHs and 90% of PTs are agreed that engagement of pharmacists in chronic disease management would improve patients' use of med-icines and adherence and their understanding about the chronic diseases they have. However, only 20% of the GPs and 40% of the SPs think that CPs can improve patients' use of medicines, pointing that the pharmacists cannot im-prove patients' understanding about their chronic disease. Within the chronic diseases management, engage-ment of pharmacists in education of chronic patients for using medical devices for drug administration or therapeu-tic monitoring was also evaluated. The most of responders were agreed that this activity contributes to efficacious dis-eases management by a patient itself and improve outcome of the treatment. Only 20% of the PHs and 30% of the GPs were not agreed with one or both of these statements, un-like PTs, who were all agreed. Considering engagement of the community pharmacists in disease/therapeutic moni-toring, 70% of PHs, 60% of GPs, 50% of SPs and 100% of PTs acknowledge the need of these additional services. In-terestingly, 20% of PHs are not interested and 10% of GPs and SPs think the same. Interest and willingness of pharmacists to be engaged in education, care and control of patients with chronic dis-eases were also a matter of interest. For 90% of PHs, 60% of GPs and 100% of SPs, pharmacy structure was identi-fied as a key factor/barrier. All health care responders were consent that it is necessary to determine the resources and content for education and training of pharmacists in man-aging chronic diseases and to implement and develop mu-tual cooperation between pharmacists and physicians for a better control of chronic diseases. ConclusionFrom the processed answers one can conclude that the role of community pharmacists in chronic disease manage-ment is indisputable. Further thorough research is needed to identify the key areas for intervention for medication adherence to be improved, pharmacy services to be intro-duced or their scope expanded, interprofessional collabora-tion to be strengthened, and education and training of phar-macists in managing chronic diseases to be implemented. In addition, a strategy for all stakeholders should be de-veloped, in order awareness and understanding of the role of pharmacists in providing pharmaceutical care and addi-tional services in patients with chronic diseases to be in-creased.ReferencesCommission of the European Communities, 2007. Together for health: A strategic approach for the EU 2008-2013: White paper. European Commission 1-11. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_overview/Documents/strategy_wp_en.pdf. NEHI, New England Healthcare Institute, 2009. Thinking outside the pillbox: A system-wide approach to improving patient medication adherence for chronic disease. Available at: http://www.nehi.net/publications/17-thinking-outside-the-pillbox-a-system-wide-approach-to-improving-patient-medication-adherence-for-chronic-disease/view.Petrushevska-Tozi, L., Mladenovska, K., 2012. Building platform for implementation of GPP in Macedonia. A report from the project 2012. Pharmaceutical Chamber of Macedonia.PGEU (Pharmaceutical Group of the European Union), 2008. Targeting adherence: Improving patient outcomes in Europe through community pharmacists' interventions. Available at: http://www.pgeu.eu/en/policy/5-adherence.html/.The Economist Intelligence Unit, 2012. Never too early: Tackling chronic diseases to extend health life years, Report. The Economist Intelligence Unit Limited 1-31. Available at: http://digitalresearch.eiu.com/extending-healthy-life-years/report.WHO, 2003. Adherence to long-term therapies: Evidence for action. Available at: http://www.who.int/chp/knowledge/publications/adherence_report/en/.WHO, 2011. Joint FIP/WHO guidelines on good pharmacy practice: Standards for quality of pharmacy services. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 961, Geneva. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 623 - 624 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.15:614.256(497.7)Short communicationThe role of the community pharmacist in self-medication with over-the-counter drugs: R. Macedonia surveyMarija Glavas Dodov1, Ana Poceva Panovska2, Maja Simonoska Crcarevska1, Andrea Puzderliski3, Vladimir Indov3, Aneta Dimitrovska21Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of ''Ss. Cyril & Methodius'', Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia2Institute of Applied Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analyses, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of ''Ss. Cyril & Methodius'', Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia3Alkaloid AD Skopje, PC Pharmaceuticals, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* magl@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionResponsible self-medication with over-the counter (OTC) drugs assumes that individuals treat minor ailments and conditions with medicines approved by national regu-latory agencies and are available without prescription, safe and effective when used as directed (Bakic-Miric, 2009; Cavaco and Pereira, 2012). Literature data indicate that self medication is prevalent form of medical care in the world, with estimation that 80% of all medical symptoms are self-recognized and self-treated without professional care where more than 92% of all consumers used at least one OTC drug in the past year, and 55% of which have used more than one (Wertheimer and Serradell, 2008). Community pharmacists working on the frontline of health-care system are primary and easiest accessible source of professional information for OTC drugs as most commonly they are supplied in community pharmacies, al-though in some countries there are OTC drugs that can be sold elsewhere. Community pharmacists - OTC consum-ers interface is of substantial importance for ensuring prop-er and safe OTC drug use as community pharmacists have more experience with self-care products than any other health care professional (Gazibara et al., 2013).The aim of the present study was to investigate com-munity pharmacists' attitudes, perceptions, practice and perceived barriers/obstacles in ensuring the proper phar-maceutical care with OTC medicines in the community pharmacies in Republic of Macedonia (RM).Materials and methodsEducational course entitled "The role of pharmacist in self-care and self medication" was conducted by pharma-ceutical company Alkaloid AD, Skopje in a two months period, February to March, 2014. Participant of this course were mainly community pharmacists and minority of phar-macy technicians, from different regions in RM. Survey was completed by 465 participants of the course.For the purpose of this survey, a structured anonymous questionary was used. The questionnaire included 26 items related to the community pharmacists` attitudes and per-ceptions in everyday practice with OTC drugs as well as obstacles in ensuring the proper pharmaceutical care. The anonymous questionnaire covers data related to: i) socio-demographic factors (city, age, gender, work ex-perience in the pharmacy), location and workforce in the community pharmacy and average number of patients and prescriptions per week; ii) attitudes (job satisfaction, im-portance of OTC counseling in everyday practice, willing-ness to provide OTC recommendations) and iii) probable barriers (lack of time, lack of trainings, continuing educa-tion courses, etc.) Obtained data were tabulated using Microsoft Excel(r) (Microsoft Corp. Redmond, WA, USA) and were comput-ed and consequently evaluated using statistical software STATGRAPHICS Centurion XVI evaluation (StatPoint technologies Inc., USA).S7 PP 298624Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 623 - 624 (2016)Continuing professional developmentPoster presentationsResults and discussionA vast majority of the surveyed participants were grad-uated pharmacists (89.2%) while pharmacy technicians with 5.4% were significant minority. The rest 5.4% did not pro-vide information about educational attainment.