We will discuss medication adherence tracking, using patient health records to engage patients, cost-related aspects of non-adherence and discuss what approaches have shown success and/or promise in addressing this high-impact uni-versal health challenge. ReferencesCutler, D.M., Everett, W., 2010. Thinking outside the pillbox -- Medication adherence as a priority for health care reform. N. Engl. J. Med. 362, 1553-1555.Feldman, B.S., Cohen-Stavi, C.J., Leibowitz, M., Hoshen, M.B., Singer, S.R., Bitterman, H., Lieberman, N., Balicer, R.D., 2014. Defining the role of medication adherence in poor glycemic control among a general adult population with diabetes. PLoS One9(9), e108145. Krivoy, A., Balicer, R.D, Feldman, B., Hoshen, M., Zalsman, G., Weizman, A., Shoval G., 2016. Adherence to antidepressants is associated with lower mortality: A four-year population-based cohort study. The Journal of Clinical Psychiatry. Epub ahead of print.Osterberg, L., Blaschke, T., 2005. Adherence to medication.N. Engl. J. Med. 353(5), 487-497.Singer, S.R., Hoshen, M., Shadmi, E., Leibowitz, M., Flaks-Manov, N., Bitterman, H., Balicer, R.D., 2012.EMR-based medication adherence metric markedly enhances identification of nonadherent patients. Am. J.Manag. Care 18(10), e372-377.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 35 - 36 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615(439)Short communicationAnalyzing pharmaceutical policies: Hungary as a case studyRok Hren1,21Carso, d.o.o., a Member of Salus Group PLC, Litostrojska Cesta 46, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia2Institute of Mathematics, Physics and Mechanics, Jadranska 19, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia* Rok.Hren@carso.siIntroductionIn this study, we examined the impact of Pharma Eco-nomic Act (PEA), which was introduced in Hungary in 2007. The motivation to analyze this particular legislative measure within a single mid-size country is in its compre-hensiveness and in its unique approach toward marketing authorization holders (MAHs). Moreover, recent econom-ic crisis is making such a >>laboratory of cost-containment tools<< attractive for authorities and payers not only among the Central and Eastern European (CEE) countries, but also among Western (e.g., EU-15) jurisdictions. Final rea-son for the analysis is availability of detailed data on Hun-garian prescription drug market, which are provided to the public by the authorities. While the National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF-OEP) data provide strong evidence that the PEA resulted in cost-containment of the public expenditure for prescription drugs in Hungary, cost-contaninment itself, however, may not lead to efficiencies either in the prescription drug mar-ket, let alone in the overall healthcare market. As it is well known, cost-containment may stifle innovation, thereby re-ducing the dynamic efficiency; on the other hand, price re-ductions of off-patent drugs and their generic versions may be insufficent, allowing their prices to remain way above the marginal cost of production and thus promoting static inefficiencies.Static efficiencyTo assess static efficiency, we examined risperidone group (ATC5 group N05AX08). Risperidone group is a suitable proxy for genericized therapeutic group at the time of introduction of the PEA. Risperidone faced expiry of its intellectual property right (IPR) at the end of 2005, however, in this particular case, the branded firm was unable to follow the price de-crease due to the fact that the IPR was still in power in EU-15 jurisdictions and Hungarian price could thereby have a potential detrimental spill-over effect via international ref-erence pricing. To prevent complete loss of revenue, the branded firm launched in 2006 its own authorized generic drug in cooperation with the local partner; in 2008, the lo-cal partner launched its own generic, completely abandon-ing marketing of the authorized generic. After the introduction of PEA, public expenditure per mg of risperidone decreased in 2008 from 162.7 HUF (EUR0.54) to 101 HUF (EUR0.33) for a branded drug and from 155.2 HUF (EUR0.51) to 92.5 HUF (EUR0.3) for authorized ge-neric drug. In 2008, public expenditure per mg of risper-idone fell further to 37.1 HUF (EUR0.12) for authorized ge-neric drug. The co-payment per mg increased sharply in 2007 due to the PEA; having in mind that patients suffer-ing from schizophrenia typically poorly adhere to the treat-ment, such an increase could present potential adherence risk. However, since the average daily dose of risperidone is 4.7 mg, the monthly co-payment would be in total ap-proximately 340 HUF (EUR1.1), unlikely a financial issue even for such a socially disadvantaged patient group. As we have observed earlier with atorvastatin, price of generic risperidone initially dropped rapidly (by 76% from 2006 to 2008), but in 2009 and 2010 remained virtually unchanged. If we take cost of goods sold (COGS) at 10% of the mo-nopoly price as the rough estimate of marginal cost of pro-duction, for a typical branded small molecule launched in 1990s then the potential for further price reduction does exist. Public expenditure with included 12%-rebate was in 2010 for risperidone relatively modest - 871 million HUF (EUR2.8 million) - yet could still be reduced by about 60%. S1 OP 1036Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 35 - 36 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsDynamic efficiencyTo assess dynamic efficiency, we examined a line ex-tension of oral risperidone, which was launched by the branded firm at the end of 2004. This incrementally modi-fied product, however, reached way beyond the usual >>ev-ergreening strategies<< of branded firms as the product pre-sented the first long-acting atypical antipsychotic (admin-istered once every 2 weeks) and thus addressed the issue of adherence of patients suffering from schizophrenia and as-sociated higher hospitalization rates and costs. The brand-ed firm entered in 2005 into price-volume agreement with NHIF-OEP, which was renewed in 2008. In spite of the controlled nature of growth, the long acting atypical an-tipsychotic achieved in Hungary diffusion which was globally surpassed only by Spain; in April 2011, its mar-ket share in the total antipsychotic market (N05A) was 23.7% (vs 26.7% in Spain, 17.1% in France, 13.4% in It-aly, 10.9% in Germany and 6.8% in the United Kingdom) (IMS, 2011). One of the former top ranking NHIF-OEP of-ficials mentioned that in his opinion, >>majority of patients should be treated by long-acting atypical antipsychotic<< and thus corroborated the fact that Hungarian authorities did not oppose the novel technologies in spite of the over-all framework of cost-containment.As with oral risperi-done, co-payment surged in 2007 and the absolute amount has been with average monthly dose of 75 mg around 525 HUF (EUR1.7), which is as with oral risperidone likely not ex-cessive. In fact, OEP's own publication found no impact of co-payments on adherence of patients with schizophrenia; another former NHIF-OEP official claimed that in 2006 >>25% of schizophrenic patients were treated with two or more atypical antipsychotics, which was clearly a waste of resources<<. ConclusionsNHIF-OEP managed to sharply decrease expenditure for risperidone by implementing the PEA in January 2007. The cost-containment policies did not exclude innovation: an example of a long acting atypical antipsychotic suggests that Hungarian prescription market under the PEA has en-abled diffusion of new technologies, on at least per-capi-ta basis comparable to those of G-5 countries. An obvious inefficiency is that the PEA was still financing excessive rents for off-patent drugs, which remain a global challenge for payers. The Hungarian off-patent market reinforces in particular the general notion that regulating generic prices may lead to price convergence and inefficiencies and that generic competition is not sufficiently fierce in regulated environment. Our study has some obvious limitations as we have examined a limited number of products and one might well find the product or a group of products which would deviate from our conclusions.ReferenceIMS, 2011. Long-acting injectable risperidone data in European Union. Danbury, CT: IMS Health.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 37 - 38 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.2:339.562(4-11)Short communicationImpact of parallel trade/import of pharmaceuticals in Central East European CountriesZoran Sterjev*, Rubin Zareski, Katerina Anchevska Netkovska, Zorica Naumovska, Aleksandra Kapedanovska Nestorovska, Aleksandra Grozdanova, Ljubica ShuturkovaInstitute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* zost@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionParallel trade of pharmaceuticals in European Union (EU) started in the '70s as a process in which licensed phar-maceutical distributor in any EU member state can, after obtaining proper authorization, import any drug from an-other member state, so long as the drug that is being import-ed is identical to the drug that is locally sourced, that is, it contains the same active ingredient and is produced by the same manufacturer (Kanavos et al., 2005). Since the middle '90s the share of parallel trade grew up to 7-17%, especially in countries like Denmark, Sweden, United Kingdom, Ger-many and the Netherlands. This process is based on the ex-istence of heterogeneous price regulation systems among different countries in EU. Parallel trade of pharmaceuticals is legal within the EU based on the principle of free move-ment of goods laid down in Article 28 of the EC Treaty to create a single market. However, it is subject to restrictions to protect industrial and commercial property and human life and health, according to Article 30 (Ginter et al., 2005). Representatives of the parallel trader's consumers and pa-tients while converging prices between different geographic markets and thereby harmonizing the markets for pharma-ceutical products. Representatives of the pharmaceutical in-dustry, on the other hand, claim that parallel trade (or "gray market trade") is nothing more than free riding, or piggy-backing, on pharmaceutical companies' profits and thereby condemning innovation by reducing the ability and willing-ness to invest in research and development ("R&D"), while at the same time distorting the supply chain of drugs in low-price countries, which makes availability of certain drugs uncertain for patients (Nilsson, 2013).In the previous year's parallel trade originally was concentrated on the most important patented products, but now the situation is a different and this process has extend-ed to a wider range of pharmaceutical products. The main problem generated within the parallel trade in CEE coun-tries is a drug shortage. Namely these countries realize the greatest export of drugs resulting in hampering the access to drugs for the local patients. Republic of Macedonia (RM) as a associate member of the EU is not a part of parallel trade process. There is a similar process named parallel import of drugs. The paral-lel import of medicines is legally defined and basically it is a modification of the procedure for parallel trade in med-icines in the EU Member States. According to our law, PI is import of such medical products that has medical au-thorization in the R.M under import license issued by the Drug agency from the referent countries, when the import-er is not appointed by the MA holder (national decision). The term "Parallel" implies that the MP is imported via pathways that are different to the established one (desig-nated by manufacturer or its original supplier), as competi-tive channels that are active in the same time/parallely. The countries that are chosen as the reference for the registra-tion of drugs are also chosen as the reference countries for parallel importation. Those countries are: EU Countries, USA, Japan, Switzerland, Canada. Russia and Turkey are added as two another counties to this list. This fact was rea-son for development of two different and opposing views on the feasibility of introducing of the parallel importation of medicines in our country. On one side was the attitude of some experts and the representatives of the pharmaceu-tical companies, first of all the innovative pharmaceutical companies, according to which this process will lead to the possibility for the emergence of the counterfeit drugs that will affect the quality of the medicines, the safety in their S1 OP 1138Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 37 - 38 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsuse and will be the reason for the closure of the representa-tive offices of these companies and the withdrawal of reg-istration files for these drugs from our country. On the oth-er side was the attitude of the managing persons from the Ministry of Health according to whom this process will lead to increased competition, lower drug prices and the proposed legislation and prevent the occurrence of drugs of dubious quality pharmaceutical market. The aim of this article is to present the effects of par-allel trade/import in the pharmaceutical markets in CEE countries.MethodsTraditional legal search methods were used for iden-tification of impact of parallel trade/import on CEE coun-tries. A literature search was carried out in the PubMed da-tabases, ISPOR databases, Google Scholar and on official web sites of regulatory bodies from CEE countries. A fol-lowing combination of key words has been used: paral-lel trade and pharmaceuticals and Central East European Countries or medicines.Results and discussionThe share of parallel imports in EU increased contin-ually due to a growing focus on specialty drugs (oncology, hematology products, HIV- and CNS-therapeutics) and the capping of price differences at 15 euros per package worth 100 euros or more. The annual turnover of more than 100 parallel traders in 2015 was 5.5 billion in Europe. The par-allel trade as a process has some negative effects for the CEE countries. The main is the problem of drug shortage in the countries with smaller prices of medicinal products. Medications imported on other markets come mainly from these countries. They are exported from those particular countries in large numbers, thus hampering the access to drugs for the local patients, causes delays in bringing prod-ucts to market. For example, the parallel import market of medicinal products in Poland in 2005 was 0.01% of the pharmaceutical market with 40 licenses for this procedure, in 2009 was already 0.7% with 308 licenses, and only in the first three quarters by 2010 it reached nearly 1.1% (Re-ligioniand Czerw, 2012). In Czech Republic the parallel export of medicines is around 185 Mil. EUR in 2015 (Skoupa, 2016). The oncology drugs are accounted for about 30% of exports in values. In Slovakia, the problem is particularly acute. The medicines price regulation makes Slovakia an attractive destination to buy cheap medicines and export them abroad. Drug sales in Slovakia amount to about EUR1 billion annually, with re-exports making up as much as 30 percent of the revenue. In Greece in 2012 parallel exports accounted for around 500 million euros of the total value of the pharmaceutical market. During the economic crisis in 2014 the situation it became worst. Based on this situ-ation the Greek government has announced a provisional ban on the parallel exporting of 34 innovative medicines as a emergency measure. Faced with this problem CEE coun-tries from begging of 2013 have been started with intro-ducing of new legal measures to monitor and restrict par-allel exports. Slovakia's parallel trade-restricting law has served as the model for a similar regulation introduced in Bulgaria, Romania and Estonia latter. In R. Macedonia in the previous 2 years period almost 350 different drugs have obtained parallel import authori-zation. The list includes drugs which are used in oncology, neurology, hematology daily practice, drugs for treatment of respiratory disease, interferons, insulins. List is getting wider and wider. These are drugs that mostly belong to the group of originator medicines and are intended for the hos-pital usage. But, on the list you can also find generic drugs. In this period parallel importation of medicines in Mace-donia led to a reduction in drug prices and to the savings in the health system, while the occurrence of counterfeit med-icines and disorders in the quality of imported products are not recorded for now. Based on the data from Ministry of health, to date the total savings enabled through the parallel importation of drugs in RM is 14 million euros.ReferencesCarri, G., 2005. Free movement of goods and parallel imports in the internal market of the EU. European Journal of Law Re-form VII(3,4), 505-524.Kanavos, P., Gross, D., Taylor, D., 2005. Parallel trading in med-icines: Europe's experience and its implications for commer-cial drug importation in the United States. Washington, DC: American Association for Retired Persons (AARP). Nilsson, O., 2013. Parallel trade in pharmaceutical products with-in the European Economic Area-A legal and economic inqui-ry..Juridiskainstitutionen Stockholm universitet.Religioni, U., Czerw, A., 2012.