Health work-ers should communicate with young people and create con-fidence for the open discussion about problems (Rasevic, 2014). The most appropriate form of transfer and acquisi-tion of knowledge represent a group work and active learn-ing methods through the workshop proceedings. The rec-ommendation of the World Health Organization from 2002 "The Community is to promote the value of counseling, parents be encouraged to support the youth and adolescents S1 PP 2668Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 67 - 68 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsto be informed and involved in the activities of the institu-tion".It is alarming that health workers have the least im-pact on young people in the preservation of reproductive health. At a low level, there is a family, which should in-fluence the formation of positive attitudes about sexuality. In the project "Health education on reproductive health" of 950 second grade students of secondary schools in Vo-jvodina (10 high schools), average age of 16,9 years, the most common source of information about sex life is the media in 675 (71.0%) of students and peers-608 (64.0%) of students. Less common sources of information are par-ents-152 (16.0%) of students, the school-85 (9.0%) of stu-dents and health workers-38 (4.0%) of students (Ukropi-na et al., 2014).When it comes to students of the first and fourth grade of Pharmacy and Physiotherapy School, knowledge about emergency contraception is satisfying, although there is a small percentage of students who had not heard of it. For in-formation about emergency contraception students of first and fourth grade have the least confidence in health profes-sionals (doctors and pharmacists), and maximum in mag-azines and friends. There are differences in the respons-es of first and fourth grades in the awareness of the emer-gency contraception tablets and the source of the informa-tion. 15 first grade students (12.3%) haven't heard about emergency contraception, while the number of informed students received information from various sources: 35 students (28.8%) from the magazine, 39 students (32.6%) from a friend / relatives, 10 students (8.4%) from phar-macists, 6 students (5.32%) from doctors and 15 students (12.6%) from other sources. The fourth graders showed better informed about emergency contraception. 8 students (6.9%) haven't heard of it, and the other students had dif-ferent sources of information: 50 students from magazines (41.5%), 41 students (33.8%) from a friend / relative, 9 stu-dents (7.9%) pharmacists, 7 (5.6%) students from doctors, 5 students (4.6%) from other sources (Vasic, 2015).The results suggest that we should work on overcom-ing prejudice and creating communication between stu-dents and health workers. Students need to be provided with timely and accurate information about emergency contraception, and the best source for this is health work-ers. Health workers are in similar position when it comes to sources of information about sex life in the project "Health education on reproductive health." In this sensitive peri-od of maturation young people should be given the correct message, so the responsibility of health workers is high. The results of research conducted in Pharmacies in Bel-grade form May to June of 2014 on 60 people of repro-ductive age (15-49) are similar. A total of 25% of respon-dents have heard of emergency contraception: 21.3% from friends / relatives, 3.3% from doctors and 30 % from other sources (Milosavljevic et al., 2014).ConclusionTest results related to reproductive health of young people show the need for further education of young peo-ple in relation to reproductive health, better cooperation between young people and health workers and greater in-volvement of the educational system in preserving the health of young people. Reproductive health of young peo-ple is at risk because of lack of education on contraception and sexuality. It is alarming that health workers have the least impact on young people in the use of emergency con-traception and preservation of reproductive health. Recog-nized attitudes and gaps in knowledge of students about emergency contraception impose an obligation on health-care professionals (doctors and pharmacists) in educating young people about emergency contraception with the aim of preserving and improving reproductive health. Pharma-cists are the most accessible health care professionals in the primary health care level, and their role in the educa-tion process of youth is very important.It is necessary that health centers, pharmacies and ed-ucational institutions in the municipalities organize pub-lic discussions on reproductive health and its preservation. A permanent solution for information, education and pro-motion of reproductive health and prevention of sexually transmitted diseases and HIV should be found. It is espe-cially important that the socially disadvantaged and mar-ginalized groups are informed as well. At the macro level, the reproductive health of young people should be part of the policy of the whole society in order to prosperity. Joint action of employees in education, health, local government units and families can preserve the health of young people.ReferencesMilosavljevic, J., Krajnovic, D., Bogavac Stanojevic, N., 2014. What sources of information pharmacists in Serbia use and how much they know about emergency contraception. Pharmaceutical Association 465, 292-293.Rasevic, M., 2014. Education and promotion of reproductive health of young people in Serbia. Demographic Review; 19, 1-4. Ukropina, S., Kapamadzija, A., Zotovic Kostic, A., 2014, Evaluation of the project "Health education on reproductive health", Institute of Public Health of the Vojvodina.Vasic, B., 2014. The role of education in the development of health literacy of young people about emergency contraception. VI Serbian Congress of Pharmacy with international participation, Abstract book 241-242.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 69 - 70 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.035.7Short communicationThe use of drugs outside of approved applicationSvetlana Golocorbin-Kon1*, Mladena Lalic-Popovic1, Nebojsa Pavlovic1, Maja Danic 2, Natasa Milosevic1, Branislava Rakic1, Momir Mikov21Department of Pharmacy, Medical faculty, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad, Serbia2University of Novi Sad, Medical faculty, Department of Pharmacology, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad, Serbia* magistrakon@orcon.net.nzUsing the drugs in compliance with the marketing li-cense specifying the formulation, dosage and age-category, issued by a relevant authority is referred to as on-label use. However, the practice of off-label prescribing is very com-mon. It implicates the use of the medication in a manner not listed in the approved prescribing guidelines with re-spect to indications, age-category, dosage regimen or ad-ministration route (Christopher, 1993). EMA, FDA. and other national regulatory authorities, as well as the ALIMS are responsible for ensuring the quality, safety and effec-tiveness of the drug put on the market and its compliance with the approved guidelines. However, such authorities generally do not regulate the application of drug in every-day practice. The doctors are entitled for freedom in pre-scribing drugs. Such prescription-freedom must be in ac-cordance with fundamental postulates of medicine - doc-tor's responsibility and care for patient's wellbeing. The physicians must keep in mind their professional liabilities and responsibilities towards relevant national legislation and obey the medical ethical principles. In line with novel scientific accomplishments, the doctors should prescribe an off-label drug only if this off-label prescription is the safest and most effective therapeutic option for the patient (Beck, Azari, 1998). The aforementioned facts clearly indi-cate that the off-label practice of drug prescribing is legal and very common in many countries worldwide. Based on the outlooks from the available international literature, it is evident that off-label prescribing is legitimate (Killick, Berghe, 2010). The question that inevitably arises is when is the off-label prescribing an appropriate approach? Re-grettably, a universal answer does not exist. The physicians are entitled and responsible to estimate what could be con-sidered the "appropriate" off-label application in each indi-vidual case. Contrary to drug prescribing, which is regulat-ed by somewhat more flexible regulations, promotion of drugs is strictly regulated by national laws. The European regulations governing the marketing of medicines do not offer a universal definition for "appropriate application of the off-label drugs", yet defining the number of situations where off-label prescription is allowed: products currently undergoing clinical trial, exceptions from EU Directive and, off-label use under the individual decision of a treat-ing physician while applying appropriate procedure to pro-tect patients' health (Sackett et al., 1996). In the majority of EU member countries, the patient's right is to obtain infor-mation about available alternative treatments to that pro-posed by a treating physician, that is, available on-label therapies when a doctor suggested an off-label treatment option. Similar to the neighboring countries, the issue of off-label prescription of drugs in Serbia has not been ad-dressed in relevant legislation. Although the off-label pre-scription practice is evident from the data on everyday medical practice, the ALIMS has not yet publicly commu-nicated any official data. Contrary to Great Britain where the registry of off-label drugs applied in pediatrics or neo-natology is available, neither regulations pointing to the off-label drug prescription nor relevant registries of off-la-bel medicines exist in our country. Moreover, promotion and advertising of off-label medication is not regulated, i.e., directly prohibited by any law or subordinate legisla-tion except for the general prohibition on advertising and promotion of drugs other than OTCs. Advertising of a pre-scription drug to professional community is allowed under conditions stipulated in the license, and in accordance with the previously approved summary of drug characteristics. One of the major reasons behind off-label prescribing by the physicians is the unavailability or lack of licensed, ef-fective and safe therapeutic options for particular condi-tions and diseases. Sometimes, off-label prescribing is the ultimate choice of the doctors, particularly after the ap-S1 PP 2770Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 69 - 70 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsproved treatment options have failed. The lack of therapeu-tic alternatives for specific patient populations, often re-sults in off-label drug prescribing to unapproved patient population in spite of potential contraindications stated in the SmPC or PIL). Consequently, off-label prescription is often practiced in pediatric, geriatric and obstetric practice. Another common reason for prescribing medicines outside the limits of their original license is convincing evidence on their effectiveness and safe application in particular sit-uations. Physicians' decisions on off-label prescribing are often justified by the clinical and scientific facts relying on EBM The EBM concept represents "the conscientious, ex-plicit, and judicious use of current best evidence in making decisions about the care of individual patients", that is, "in-tegrating individual clinical expertise with the best avail-able external clinical evidence from systematic research" (Weynantset al., 2010). This very definition of EBM en-courages some physicians in prescribing off-label drugs, provided that such application is appropriate in given cir-cumstances. The doctor should decide about the best avail-able therapeutic option for the patient while providing pa-tient's consent for its application. Off-label drug prescrip-tion is highly prevalent in medical practice. Most frequent-ly, the drugs are prescribed outside their licensed indica-tions or to different age categories. The studies revealed that off-label prescribing is more common among special-ists than in general practitioners. Psychiatric and malignant diseases are often associated with off-label prescribing, which is not surprising, having in mind, that unknown eti-ology and factors influencing disease progression require highly complex approach to the treatment and selection of an effective therapeutic. Application of drugs outside their original license is evident in obstetrics, psychiatry as well as in the treatment of some infectious diseases. Off-label prescribing is common in pediatrics practice, which is due to the specific age of the patients. The most commonly pre-scribed off-label drug categories include drugs used in the therapy of cardiovascular diseases, anticonvulsive drugs, antipsychotics, antidepressants and antiasthmatics. Nu-merous studies conducted in various therapeutic fields, among different age groups and geographic regions indi-cated that the newborns are the population that is most commonly treated with medications that are beyond the li-cense for this particular age group. According to these studies, the percentage of children who received at least one off-label or unregistered drug range between 36%-92% at pediatric departments, 80%-97% at neonatology department and 11%-37% in primary health care. Off-label prescription is highly prevalent in oncology. According to available data, particular antineoplastics are more fre-quently associated with unlicensed and off-label drug pre-scriptions than with the licensed one. However, the draw-backs of off-label prescription practice should not be ne-glected. Potential problems associated with the off-label drug prescription include the following: adverse reactions associated with off-label drug prescription, increased re-sponsibilities of health care providers in view of patient wellbeing, impossibility of compensating health care ex-penses due to application of off-label drugs, promotion of off-label drugs by the manufacturers. Major drawback of the off-label drug application is an increased probability of adverse effects of the drug. It is attributed to the fact that safety and effectiveness of an off-label drug have not been confirmed. The, implementation of more precise legisla-tion defining appropriate prescription and application of off-label drugs as well as stipulating the responsibilities of all parties participating in such therapeutic approach is highly demanded in our country. Creation and regular up-date of a registry of off-label drugs applied in daily health-care practice is of vital importance.ReferencesBeck, J.M., Azari, E., 1998. FDA, off-label use, and informed consent: debunking myths and misconceptions. Food Drug Law J. 53(1), 71-104.Christopher, W.L., 1993. Off-label drug prescription: filling the regulatory vacuum. Food Drug Law J. 48, 247-262.Killick, J.R., Berghe, P., 2009. Does promoting off-label use of medicines on budgetary grounds risk jeopardizing the integrity of the marketing authorization requirement system? Pharmac. Law Insight 4-5.Sackett, D.L., Rosenberg, W.M., Gray, J.A., Haynes, R.B., Richardson, W.S., 1996. Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it isn't. BMJ. 312, 71-72.Weynants, L., Schoonderbeek, C., Weyne, C., 2010. Off-label use and promotion: risks and potential liability. Bio-Science Law Review 11(4), 115-130.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 71 - 72 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.37-006.6-085.277 615.277:616.37-006.6Short communicationThe impact of clinical effectiveness of gemcitabine on quality of life in patients with pancreatic cancer in all stagesZana Ibraimi1*, Ilir Kurtishi2, Ardiana Murtezani3, Agim Shehi4, Edita Alili51Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina, St."Bulevardi Deshmoret e Kombit"n.n. 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo 2Institute of Oncology, University Clinical Center of Kosovo, St."Bulevardi Deshmoret e Kombit" n.n. 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo 3Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation Clinic, University Clinical Center of Kosovo, St."Bulevardi Deshmoret e Kombit" n.n. 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo 4Institute of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tirana, St. "Aleksander Moisiu" no. 80, 1000 Tirana, Albania 5Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, State University of Tetovo, St."29 Nentori" n.n. 1200 Tetovo, Macedonia* zibraimi@yahoo.comIntroductionPancreatic cancer is an aggressive disease which usually causes no symptoms in its early stages, making it difficult to diagnose. Initial symptoms may include severe pain in the back or stomach area, unexpected weight loss, jaundice, feeling sick, diarrhea, weight loss and loss of appetite, which can severely reduce a patient's quality of life (QoL). As such, there are rarely more than a few months between diagnosis and death. In this context of limited survival, quality of life assumes great importance and it`s improvement must be the main treatment goal. Gemcitabine is a chemotherapy treatment that is toxic to cancer cells by stopping a part of the cancer cell replicating itself. It has been considered the standard treatment for locally advanced or metastatic adenocarcinoma of the pancreas, because it has a wider spectrum of antitumor activity due to its different cellular pharmacology and mechanism of action. Gemcitabine is metabolized intracellularly to two active metabolites, gemcitabine diphosphate (dFdCDP) and gemcitabine triphosphate (dFdCTP). The cytotoxic effects of gemcitabine are exerted through incorporation of dFdCTP into DNA with the assistance of dFdCDP, resulting in inhibition of DNA synthesis. The aim of this study is to assess the clinical effectiveness of gemcitabine on quality of life in patients through different stages of pancreatic cancer.Materials and methodsFifty pancreatic cancer patients, suffering from local, advanced or metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma, as histologically proven by the Oncological Institute of Kosovo, were recruited in a trial during the period, 2014/2015. They were treated with gemcitabine of 1000 mg/m2 once weekly for seven weeks, followed by one week of rest during the first cycle and subsequently 1000 mg/m2 once weekly for three weeks followed by one week of rest until relapse or intolerable toxicity.