All experimental values were in the range of extrapolated val-ues.By extrapolating of the logarithmic regression curve, theoretical values for release of the active substance in Lisinopril tablets 10 mg after 48 months are obtained, with interval of confidence at a statistical confidence of 95% and compared with experimental values obtained. All ex-perimental values were in the range of extrapolated values. In the study for the stability of tested Lisinopril tab-lets 10 mg, the parameter "related content and degradation products" was monitored as well as the organoleptic char-acteristics of the same batches on which content and re-lease the active component of both manufacturers was de-termined. Most of the obtained values for impurities were below limit of quantification, defined in the validation of analytical methods. These parameters were processed us-ing risk analysis. Risk assessment of Lisinopril tablets 10 mg was performed by using Failure Mode Effects Analysis (FMEA) method to identify and assess the risk of extend-ing the shelf life and introducing an active substance from a new manufacturer.ConclusionIn line with the pre set goals of this paper, the influ-ence of the choice of the active substance on the stability of Lisinopril 10 mg tablets is defined through monitoring the stability with defined testing up to 36 months, with possi-bility of extending the shelf life up to 48 months, in order to extend the period of use.The results of the determination of the content and re-lease of the active substance during the stability tests up to 48 months, indicate that none of the tested batches of Lisinopril tablets 10 mg exceeds the limit of the permitted deviation of the content of the active substance of 94% i.e. the limit of tolerance of the parameter of release does not affect the stability and quality of products and allows ex-tension of the active substance of 85%. It can be conclud-ed that the expiry date can be extender for an additional 12 months, without risk of occurrence of endangering the health of the patient, if using the active substance of the two manufacturers.Monitoring and statistical evaluation of the results from the stability studies of the final pharmaceutical prod-uct has proved as useful approach for extending the shelf life of products with proven life cycle stability and possi-bility for incorporation of active substances from different manufacturers. This concept can be applied to any prod-uct of interest and established need for extension of the shelf life.ReferencesDiana, F.J., 2008. Post-approval changes - Stability requirements and regulation in: Huynh-Ba K. (Ed. ), Handbook of stability testing in pharmaceutical development: Regulations, methodologies, and best practices. Springer Science & Business Media, (ISBN: 978-0-387-85626-1), pp. 303-320EDQM (European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & Healhtcare), 2015. Certification of suitability to the monographs of the European Pharmacopoeia, France. ICH (International Council on Harmonization on Technical Re-quirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use), 2003a. Stability testing of new drug substances and products, Q1A(R2), Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Switzerland.ICH (International Council on Harmonization on Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use), 2003b. Guideline on evaluation for stability data, Q1E, Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Switzerland.Lyon, R.C., Taylor, J.S., Porter, D.A., Prasanna, H.R., Hussain, A.S., 2006. Stability profiles of drug products extended be-yond labeled expiration dates. J. Pharm. Sci. 95(7), 1549-1560.O'Brien, R.G., 1979. A general ANOVA method for robust tests of additive models for variances. J. Am. Stat. Assoc. 74(368), 877-880.Yoshioka, S., Stella, V.J., 2000. Stability of dosage forms in: Yo-shioka S., Stella V.J., Stability of drugs and dosage forms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, (ISBN-0-306-46404-7), New York, pp.178-184.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 189 - 190 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33.012Short communicationDetermination of clarithromycin residues on manufacturing equipment surfaces in cleaning validation processKaterina Kochova*, Elena Petrovska, Gordana Trendovska SerafimovskaQuality Control Department, Pharmaceutical Company Replekfarm DOOEL, Kozle 188, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* katerina.kocova@replek.com.mkIntroduction"Cleaning validation is a process to ensure that equip-ment cleaning procedures are removing residues to prede-termined levels of acceptability" (FDA, 1993).In many cases the same equipment is used for man-ufacturing of different pharmaceutical products (ICH, 2000b). Well defined cleaning procedure must be used to avoid any contamination of a subsequent product with res-idues of a previous product, cleaning agents and microbi-al contaminants.A new EU GMP requires that limits for the maximum acceptable carry over (MACO) of product i.e. API's res-idues should be based on toxicological evaluation, PDE (permitted daily exposure) concept (EMA, 2014).There is a difference between the acceptance criteri-on usually used so far (1/1000 dose and 10 ppm), in ac-cordance with FDA's guidelines and the determination the MACO by the PDE concept. For residues where toxico-logical data is available, the MACO calculation should be based on the no observed effect level (NOEL). NOEL is the amount of drug in mg that does not have any effect on the human health and is calculated by using LD50 of the drug. The principle of MACO calculation is that the cal-culated acceptable carry-over from the previous product, based upon the PDE, is transferred into the next manufac-turing product (APIC, 2014; ECA, 2007). For the control of a cleaning procedure, a method suit-able for determination of the clarithromycin residues dur-ing the process of cleaning validation is needed.In this research a sensitive analytical method based on high performance liquid chromatography was adapted and validated to determine residues of clarithromycin in swab samples.Materials and methodsVarian HPLC System was used, equipped with Vari-an Prostar 240 pump, Varian 325 LC detector and Galax-ie1.9.301.220 software for data handling. The experiments were carried out by HPLC using Discovery C18, (125 x 4,6 mm i.d., 5mm) column. The HPLC system was operated at isocratic mode using mobile phase composed of buffer so-lution (30mM phosphate buffer pH 3.8 - 4.0) and methanol in ratio 35:65 (%). The temperature was 45degC, UV detec-tion was at 200 nm and injection volume 100 mL.The swabbing procedure was optimized in order to ob-tain a suitable recovery of clarithromycin from stainless steel surfaces. Using the head of AlphaTM Swab Texwipe previously rinsed with methanol, the predefined 25 cm2 surface area was wiped first in a horizontal and secondly in a vertical way, starting from the outside towards the centre.Results and discussionThe HPLC method was appropriately adapted and validated according to ICH guidelines (ICH, 2000a). The method was validated through determining these valida-tion characteristics: selectivity, linearity, precision, accura-cy, quantification limit and detection limit. Predetermined maximal levels of acceptability for clarithromycin residues were 21 ppm in samples and 17.3 mg/cm2 per surface area (LeBlanc, 2000). Achieved values for LOD of 0.59 ug/mL (ppm) and for LOQ of 1.9 ug/mL, indicate that the pro-posed HPLC method is enough sensitive for determining the established product residual limits. Linearity was stud-ied in the concentration range 1 - 40 ppm, and the corre-lation coefficient (r2) = 0.9998 obtained for the regression line demonstrates the excellent relationship between peak area and the concentration of clarithromycin. The selectiv-ity was studied by comparing a blank solution and an clar-S2 PP 86190Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 189 - 190 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsithromycin test solution, which was prepared by wiping a stainless steel plate 5x5cm2 spiked with 10 mg/cm2 of clar-ithromycin according to optimized swabbing technique. The blank solution was prepared in the same way by wip-ing a clean plate. No sources of interference of the swab material were observed at the retention time of the analyte. As sensitive sampling methods require development and must be applicable to each specific piece of equipment used, swab recovery was determined using spiking studies incorporating coupons of equipment surfaces. The swab-bing procedure was optimized in order to obtain a suitable recovery of clarithromycin from stainless steel plates. The obtained "swab recovery" factor of 87.81% confirmed the appropriateness of the cleaning method, that recovery was taken into account in the results of cleaning validation.ConclusionHPLC method was developed and validated in order to determine residual amounts of clarithromycin after the cleaning procedure. The chromatographic technique was demonstrated to be sensitive, linear, accurate and precise in the concentration range studied. Direct sampling meth-od was optimized to obtain effective and reliable recov-eries. The detection limit for proposed liquid chromatog-raphy analytical method was sufficiently sensitive to de-tect the established acceptable level of the residues of clar-ithromycin.ReferencesEuropean Chemical Industry Council, Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients Committee (APIC), 2014. APIC Guidance on aspects of Cleaning Validation in Active Pharmaceutical Ingredient plants, BrusselsEuropean Compliance Academy (ECA), 2007. ECA Justification of Limits for Cleaning Validation in the Manufacture of Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients, Discussion and practical implementation of the requirements of ICH Guideline Q7A. European Medicines Agency (EMA), 2014. EMEA Guideline on setting health based exposure limits for use in risk identification in the manufacture of different medicinal products in shared facilities, (EMA/CHMP/CVMP/SWP/169430/2012)5. International Council on Harmonization on Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), 2000a. Q2(R1) Validation of analytical procedures: text and methodology, Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Switzerland. International Council on Harmonization on Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), 2000b. Q7A Good Manufacturing Practice Guide for Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients, Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Switzerland. LeBlanc D.A., 2000. Validated cleaning technologies for pharmaceutical manufacturing. Interpharm. Press., Denver, Colorado,USA. U. S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration, 1993. Guide to Inspections of Validation of Cleaning Processes, Validation of cleaning Processes 7/93, FDA, Rockville, Maryland, USA, [Updated: November 25, 2014].Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 191 - 192 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.225.2.074:543.544.5.068.7Short communicationValidation of RP-HPLC stability-indicating method for cilazapril and hydrochlorothiazideJasmina Sljivic*, Mira Zecevic, Biljana Otasevic, Ana Protic, Jelena GolubovicDepartment of Drug Analysis, University of Belgrade, Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia* hadzicjasmina@hotmail.comIntroductionHydrochlorothiazide is thiazide diuretic whose phar-macological effects are based on inhibition of the sodium and chloride reabsorption and enhancement of potassium secretion. Cilazapril is angiotensin-converting enzyme in-hibitor. Hydrochlorothiazide and cilazapril are antihyper-tensive drugs which can be used as monotherapy or in fixed combinations (Skolnik et al., 2000; Sweetman, 2009). Forced degradation studies are complementary part of drug development strategy being undertaken for identifica-tion of degradation products, to elucidate the degradation pathway and intrinsic stability of the drug. Investigation of degradation products formed under stress conditions is useful in development and validation of stability-indicat-ing procedures and it is also necessary due to changes in toxicity, bioavailability or therapeutic effects of the dos-age form (Alsante et al., 2007; ICH Q1A (R2), 2003; Kur-mi et al., 2014). To date, no information on stability of cilazapril and hydrochlorothiazide in therapeutic combination was found in the literature. Therefore, stability-indicating method was developed. In order to confirm its applicability in routine quality control of cilazapril and hydrochlorothiazide dos-age forms, robustness and other validation parameters of the established method have been investigated.Materials and methodsSatisfactorily chromatographic separation was achieved on Kinetex C18 (2.6 um, 50 mm x 2.1 mm) col-umn (Phenomenex Inc., Torrance, USA) with column tem-perature set to 25 degC with the mobile phase consisting of acetonitrile and buffer solution (20 mM ammonium for-mate, pH adjusted to 8.5 with formic acid) and pumped at 400 mL/min flow rate in following gradient elution mode: initial composition was acetonitrile : buffer solution (5:95, v/v) and final composition was acetonitrile : buffer solution (35:65, v/v). Time of the gradient elution mode was 15.38 minutes. The detection was performed using PDA detec-tor at 215 nm, 250 nm and 270 nm. Cilazapril and hydro-chlorothiazide solutions were subjected to acidic (1.0 M HCl), basic (1.0 M NaOH), thermal (70 degC) and oxidative (15-30% H2O2) degradation and appropriate stress solu-tions were used during method development and meth-od selectivity investigation. Standard stock solutions of cilazapril and hydrochlorothiazide were prepared in con-centrations of 1000 ug/mL and standard stock solutions of cilazaprilat and hydrochlorothiazide impurity B were pre-pared in concentrations 200 ug/mL, separately by dissolv-ing standard substances in the mixture of acetonitrile-water (50:50, v/v). For method validation purposes, further dilu-tions of standard stock solutions were done with the mix-ture of acetonitrile and 20 mM ammonium formate buf-fer solution pH = 8.5 (20:80, v/v) in order to attain con-centrations in the following ranges: 50.00-150.00 ug/mL for cilazapril, 125.00-375.00 ug/mL for hydrochlorothia-zide, 0.50-1.50 ug/mL for cilazaprilat and 0.25-3.75 ug/mL for hydrochlorothiazide impurity B. Cilazil HCT(r) tab-lets (Pliva, Zagreb, Hrvatska) containing 5 mg of cilaza-pril monohydrate and 12.5 mg of hydrochlorothiazide were purchased and used for validation.Results and discussionForced degradation studies on cilazapril and hydro-chlorothiazide active substances were conducted prior to method development in accordance with the ICH regulato-ry guidelines (ICH Q1A (R2), 2003). Cilazapril appeared S2 PP 87192Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 191 - 192 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsto be unstable towards acid and base hydrolysis which re-sulted in formation of cilazaprilat. Hydrochlorothiazide de-graded after acid, base and thermal hydrolysis and formed degradation product was hydrochlorothiazide impurity B. Both degradation products were already reported in offici-nal monographs of cilazapril and hydrochlorothiazide (Ph.Eur., 2011) as their related organic impurities. After oxida-tive degradation of both active substances, unknown prod-ucts arisen. The stability-indicating UHPLC-UV-MS method was developed. The experimental conditions that enabled sep-aration of cilazapril, hydrochlorothiazide and all of their degradation products were previously described. Method validation was carried out in accordance to ICH and FDA guidelines (Guidance for industry: Bioanalytical method validation, 2001; ICH Q2(R1), 2005).The selectivity of the method was confirmed by chromatographic screening for interfering substances. No interfering peaks were present in the chromatogram of dosage form sample at the reten-tion times of cilazapril, hydrochlorothiazide, cilazaprilat, hydrochlorothiazide impurity B and unknown degradation products that were recorded in the chromatograms of stress samples. The method robustness was considered during the method development and optimization procedure. Initial percentage of acetonitrile in mobile phase, final percentage of acetonitrile in mobile phase, time of gradient elution and column temperature were defined as critical variables. In-vestigated responses were retention factors of degradation products of cilazapril and hydrochlorothiazide denoted as k283.6 and k429.9, respectively, as the first and the last elut-ing substances. Initial percentage of acetonitrile in mobile phase and column temperature demonstrated more signif-icant influence on observed responses while the influenc-es of final percentage of acetonitrile in mobile phase and time of gradient elution was less significant. Small chang-es in value variables did not jeopardize responses of inves-tigated substances.