The biocide activity is within the antimicrobial activity, but depending on the circumstanc-es may have "static" activity directed to agents that inhib-it growth (bacteriostatic, fungistatic and sporostatic), and also "cidal" activity directed to agents that completely de-stroy all microorganisms present (bactericidal, sporocidal, fungicidal). The antiseptics are chemicals that are safely used for disinfection of skin and mucous membrane con-tact (McDonnell and Russell, 1999).Intra-hospital or nosocomial infections are caused by organisms acquired during hospitalization of the patients and clinically manifest from 48 to 72 hours after their ad-ministration (Rutala et al., 2008).Mechanical cleaning before applying the disinfectant is essential. The mechanism of action of disinfectants is summarized in a number of papers published and avail-able to the entire scientific community. For example, al-cohols show quick action, and broad spectrum antimicro-bial activity through denaturation of proteins, but do not act sporocidal. Aldehydes bind with amino groups of pro-teins, RNA and DNA. Oxidizing agents such as peroxides and halogen elements oxidize the protein thiol groups, and surface active agents act mainly on the cytoplasmic mem-brane of the bacterial cell. Phenols generally destroy the cell membrane (Block, 2001).It is well known that the type and quantity of used dis-infectant and the disinfection procedures is directly related to the effects of their use (Ducel et al., 2002).The aim of this study was to review of the use of an-tiseptics and disinfectants in general hospital in Gevgelija in Republic of Macedonia over five years period, to make analysis of the amount of antiseptics and disinfectants con-sumed annually on each department in hospitals, to ana-lyze of the total amount of consumed antiseptics and dis-infectants in selected hospitals for five years and to com-pare the results to the data obtained from the microbiolog-ical evaluations conducted periodically in each department in selected hospitals for five years.Materials and methodsThe data were collected from the general hospital in Gevgelija over five years, form 2010 till 2014. The data from the annual reports for disinfectants and antiseptics (Bactosal, Ecosal 10%, Ecosal ultra, Dezintal, Betadine 10%, Betadine 7,5%, Hydrogen peroxide 30%, Formalde-hyde 33%, Ethanol concentrate, Gigazyme, Deconex 36 Intensiv, Gigasept forte AF, Gigasept FF, Gigasept PAA, Deconex 54 Sporocide, Microzid AF liquid, Arcana alca combi, Plivasept, Arcana san, Arcana anti fat) used on the selected departments (gynecology, surgery, transfusion, treatment of infections, internal medicine etc.) were col-lected. The results of microbiological testing conducted by the public health center in Gevgelija over five years were S2 PP 69156Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 155 - 156 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationscollected and used. Routine testing period for microbiolog-ical controls in hospitals was 15 days.Results and discussionThe obtained data are getting an overview of the disin-fectants and antiseptics used in the departments each year. It can be concluded that the highest consumption is in the operating room. The reason for this is that there are used all cleaning tools for disinfection of surfaces and instru-ments and antiseptics. Reduction of use of disinfectants and antiseptics in surgery room would cause much higher risk for intra-hospital infections. The highest amount (227 l) in the operating room is wasted in 2012. The lowest con-sumed amount of antiseptics and disinfectants was in men-tal health center and center for addicts. To determine the relationship between the amount of used antiseptics and disinfectants with the emergence of intra-hospital infections, in addition the data obtained by the microbiological analysis in public health center in Gevgelija were processed. In 2012 a total of 27 inspections were conducted, 156 swabs and sediments were taken, 147 were sterile and 9 conditionally pathogenic. The reason for the reduced number of isolated patho-gens was increased amount of antiseptics and disinfectants used during 2012. From children's department and neona-tology, all taken swabs were sterile. From surgical opera-tion room, 2 pathogen samples were detected. In the rest of the surgical department, 2 pathogenic bacteria are isolated: Staphylococcus epidermidis, and Staphylococcus albus, but they have been isolated from patient beds and hands which is normal findings. Comparing to 2011 when they were isolated 6 conditionally pathogenic samples at the gy-necology department; in 2012 the number of conditional-ly pathogenic samples was reduced to 2. At dialysis, a to-tal number of swabs taken was 16 and 3 of them were con-ditionally pathogenic.It is detected that the number of conditionally patho-genic bacteria is reduced starting from 2012. The reduction of the quantity of disinfectant used is also noted from 2012. By appointment of Ministry of health in 2012 each hospi-tal had been established the intra-hospital infection times. The results indicate a significant reduction of contamina-tion with conditionally pathogenic bacteria when disinfec-tion is conducted according to the standardized procedures controlled by the intra-hospital infection times.ConclusionIn general the disinfectants and antiseptics are used optimally and correctly according to the needs of the hos-pital investigated. The amount of disinfectants and antisep-tics consumed comparing with the microbiological data in-dicates their rational utilization starting from 2012. Use of disinfectants according to the standardized procedures es-tablished by the intra-hospital infection time allows current daily care for patients and staff in the hospital investigated. The processed data from public health center confirm the above and point out the precautions to be taken when con-ditionally pathogenic bacteria have been detected. It is pointed out the role of intra-hospital infection times in the hospitals as well as the role of hospital phar-macists. We would like to suggest the implementation of disinfection process validation as standardization measure as well as more often routine microbiological controls in the hospitals.ReferencesBlock, S. S., 2001. Disinfection, sterilization and preservation, 5th ed. Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, Philadelphia, pp. 19-22.Ducel, G., Fabry, J., Nicolle, L., 2002. Prevention of hospital-acquired infections, A practical guide, 2nd edition, World Health Organization, Department of Communicable Disease, Surveillance and Response, WHO/CDS/CSR/EPH/2002.12, pp. 30-34.McDonnell, G., Russell, A.D., 1999. Antiseptics and disinfectants: activity, action, and resistance. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 12(1), 147-179.Rutala,WA., Weber, D.J., The Healthcare infection control practices advisory committee, 2008. Guideline for Disinfection and Sterilization in Healthcare Facilities, Department of Health and Human Services, USA.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 157 - 158 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.262:547.857.4]:543.544.5.068.7Short communicationHPLC determination of caffeine in anti-cellulite gels after the solid phase extractionKristina Mladenov* and Slavica SunaricDepartment of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis, Bulevar Zorana Dindica 81, Nis, Serbia* kristina_mladenov@yahoo.com; slavica.sunaric@medfak.ni.ac.rsIntroductionCaffeine, an organic nitrogenous base is a naturally oc-curring methylxanthine alkaloid, which is being increas-ingly used in cosmetics due to its high biological activi-ty and ability to penetrate the skin barrier. As for a cosmet-ic purpose, caffeine is used as an active compound in an-ti-cellulite products. Cellulite deposition is one of the most common problems associated with a large population male and female person throughout the world. Caffeine prevents an excessive accumulation of fats and promotes the lipol-ysis process. It inhibits phosphodiesterases, which leads to lipogenesis reduction. Caffeine also stimulates the drain-ing lymph systems in fatty tissue by removing accumu-lated fat and toxins, which can improve the microcircu-lation of blood vessels (Herman and Herman, 2013). The commercially available topical anti-cellulite formulations usually contain 1-2% of caffeine, although some products may contain up to 3% of caffeine (Hexsel and Soirefmann, 2011). There are number of papers about caffeine determina-tion in different food products, but limited works which describe caffeine determination in cosmetics (Injac et al., 2008; Marchei et al., 2013). Cosmetics are complex for-mulations and for their analysis different and lengthy sam-ple treatments are required. Sample preparation and clean-up are crucial, especially for the HPLC analysis, where the sample solutions are directly injected to HPLC column. Also, anti-cellulite gels and creams contain a wide variety of synthetic and natural (plant-derived) substances which may interfere with the caffeine determination. Solid phase extraction (SPE) is useful for sample preparation and clean-up in the analysis of pharmaceutical creams. It is more rap-id and efficient than liquid/liquid extraction, yields quanti-tative extractions that are easy to perform without using of high volumes of toxic organic solvents. In this study, a solid phase-extraction method followed by HPLC with ultraviolet-diode array detection to deter-mine of caffeine content in anti-cellulite gels was devel-oped. Materials and methodsCaffeine (1,3,7-trimethylxanthine) of analytical grade was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (Germany). The sol-vent used, methanol, was of HPLC grade (J.T.Baker). For the sample preparation ethanol (95-96%, Ph.Eur.V, Zorka-Pharma, Serbia) was used. Stock solution of caffeine con-centration of 1.0 mg/mL was prepared in deionized water. This solution was stored for up to one week at 4 degC.Working solutions were prepared by diluting and mixing the stock with deionized water.Cellulite reduction cosmetics were obtained from a local perfumery. Two products were analyzed: Producer 1-Aqua Destock and Anticelulit gel-Producer 2. Both prod-ucts contain caffeine in significant amount, and many syn-thetic substances and plant extracts also. The exact content of caffeine was not declared. Solid-phase extraction Chromabond(r)HR-X cartridg-es (100 mg, 1 mL volume, Macherey-Nagel, Germany) were selected as optimal for the clean-up and extraction of caffeine from anti-cellulite gels. SPE cartridges were con-ditioned with 3 mL of methanol and 3 mL of deionized wa-ter. One milliliter of the prepared sample was loaded on the cartridge at the flow rate of 1 mL/min. Desorption of caf-feine was achieved with 4 x 1 mL of methanol. HPLC analyses were performed on the Agilent Tech-nologies 1200 Series apparatus with DAD and FL detec-tion. Separation was carried out on the Restek Ultra IBD S2 PP 70158Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 157 - 158 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsC18 column (150 mm x 3 mm, 3 mm) at 30 degC. The mobile phase consisted of a methanol-water solution (40:60, isocratic) at a flow rate of 0.4 mL/min. A 2 mL of the final eluate was injected in the HPLC column. UV detection at 274 nm was used as the optimal wavelength for caffeine determination.Sample preparation A 0.5 g of the gel was accurately weighed and dis-solved in 10 mL of 95-96% ethanol. NH4OH was added to obtain pH 7-8. Insoluble excipients were separated by cen-trifugation for 10 min. Then, 1 mL of the supernatant was loaded on the cartridge and SPE procedure was performed. Results and discussionOptimization of SPE procedure included cartridge se-lection, solvent selection and recovery evaluation. To eval-uate the accuracy of the extraction method, recovery stud-ies were carried out. A known amount of caffeine standard solution, at three different concentration levels was ex-tracted on different cartridges and recovery was calculated as the ratio of the loaded and eluted caffeine. The percent-age extraction recovery was found to be 82-90% for the Chromabond(r)HR-X cartridge, while for the other types of cartridges this value was significantly lower. After the pro-cedure of gel preparation, the obtained supernatants were also loaded on different SPE cartridges. The highest chro-matographic peak purity, peak area and concentration lev-els of caffeine were also obtained for Chromabond(r)HR-X cartridge. For that reason, this type of cartridge was select-ed for the extraction and clean-up of the examined anti-cel-lulite gels.The caffeine content in the examined samples was determined by using the calibration curve in the range of 0.01-0.2 mg/mL. The caffeine concentration found in Pro-ducer 1-Aqua Destock was 1.70 g/100 g (1.70%), while the value for Anticelulit gel-Producer 2 was 0.69 g/100 g (0.69%). The found content of caffeine in investigated cel-lulite reduction cosmetics were in agreement with those re-ported by other authors (Injac et al., 2008; Marchei et al., 2013). and with the expected values.ConclusionThe most effective and marketed products for cellulite reduction contain caffeine as the active ingredient, but its exact content in these products is not strictly declared. The extraction step is necessary for the analysis of caffeine in anti-cellulite gels by chromatographic methods. Because of the fact that caffeine is contained in the complex cosmetic matrix, its extraction is difficult and depends on the nature of the sample. A purification of the cosmetics and extrac-tion of the analyte can be achieved by using SPE technique.The present results show the applicability of the pro-posed SPE procedure for the caffeine extraction from anti-cellulite gels and its HPLC determination, which could be used for the routine analysis of these commercial products. AcknowledgementThis research was supported by grant TR 31060 from the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological De-velopment of the Republic of Serbia.ReferencesHerman, A., Herman, A.P., 2013. Caffeine's mechanisms of action and its cosmetic use. Skin. Pharmacol. Physiol. 26, 8-14.Hexsel, D., Soirefmann, M., 2011.Cosmeceuticals for cellulite. Semin. Cutaneous Med. Surg. 30, 167-170.Injac, R., Srdjenovic, B.,Prijatelj, M.,Boskovic, M., Karljikovic-Rajic, K., Strukelj, B., 2008. Determination of caffeine and associated compounds in food, beverages, natural products, pharmaceuticals and cosmetics by micellar electrokinetic capillary chromatography. J. Chromatogr. Sci. 46, 137-143.Marchei, E., De Orsi, D., Guarino, C., Dorato, S., Pacificia, R., Pichini, S., 2013. Measurement of iodide and caffeine content in cellulite reduction cosmetic products sold in the European market. Anal. Methods. 5, 376-383.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 159 - 160 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.076 Short communicationValidation and quantification of bacterial endotoxins with turbidimetric kinetic method for benzyl alcoholElizabeta Popovska1*, Silvana Ilioska-Zlatanovic1, Hristina Babunovska1, Biserka Simonovska21Alkaloid A. D, Blvd. A. Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, R.Macedonia2Pharmachem Diagnostic Laboratory, Str. 4th July No 2/3, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* epopovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionBacterial endotoxins are contaminants from gram-neg-ative bacteria and are the most common cause of pyroge-nicity in pharmaceutical products. Any preparation admin-istered parenterally should be sterile and comply with the test for bacterial endotoxins (BET) as described in the Ph. Eur. (Ph. Eur., 2014). Finished products often contain in-gredients in addition to the active drug substance. Excipi-ents serve as a solvents, solubilizing, suspending, thicken-ing, and chelating agents; antioxidants, antimicrobial pre-servatives, buffers, pH adjusting agents, bulking agents, and special additives (British Pharmacopoeia, 2014; CHMP, 2013; ICH, 2009; Ph Eur., 2014).Benzyl alcohol is an aromatic alcohol with the formu-la C7H8O. In the body, benzyl alcohol is metabolised into benzoic acid. It is used as an excipient for its preserva-tive properties or as a solubilising agent. Benzyl alcohol is also used as an active ingredient in local antiseptics and lo-cal anesthetic products.