In mammalian cells cytosolic GSTs are further categorized into seven major classes according to their amino acid sequence: alpha, mu, pi, theta, zeta, omega, and sigma subfamilies, which have been identified in dimeric forms (Mathew et al., 2006).For the GST-mediated detoxification reactions, a sub-strate/GSH conjugation (complex formation) is required. GSTs are a family of Phase II detoxification enzymes that catalyze the conjugation of the GSH to a wide variety of electrophilic compounds. GSTs catalyze the conjugation of the reduced form of glutathione (GSH) to electrophilic centers of endogenous and exogenous hydrophobic com-pounds. For GST-mediated catalytic reactions, the activa-tion of the sulfur atom of the G site bound GSH to the thio-late anion, which is a strong nucleophile, is required in or-der to perform a GS-substrate conjugate by attacking to the electrophilic center of substrates bound to the H site. Fur-thermore, the GS-conjugated compounds may be actively extruded from the cell through specialized pumps; princi-pally, the multidrug resistance proteins MRP-1 and MRP-2 (Wu and Dong, 2012).Human glutathione-S-transferase pi1-1 (hGST P1-1) is a member of the pi class subfamily of cytosolic GST and composed of two homodimer GST P1 subunits. The structural analysis indicates that the hGST P1-1 is a sol-uble protein comprised of 209 amino acid residues. The crystal structures show that each GST subunit of the pro-tein dimer contains an independent catalytic site composed of two components. The first is a binding site specific for GSH or a closely related homolog (the G site) formed from a conserved group of amino-acid residues in the amino-ter-minal domain of the polypeptide. The second component is a site that binds the hydrophobic substrate (the H site), which is structurally variable. Amino acid variations of the H-site, among the different GST classes, determine sub-strate specificity (Wu and Dong, 2012).It is known that hGST P1-1 participates in a particular role in one of the mechanisms of the development of resis-tance in cancer cells towards the administration of antican-cer agents in chemotherapy. Human GST P1-1 is overex-pressed in many cancers and contributes to multidrug resis-tance by directly conjugating to chemotherapeutic agents including cisplatin, adriamycin, etoposide, thiotepa, and chlorambucil. It is suggested that this resistance is related to high expression of hGST P1-1 in cancers such as breast, lung, colon, pancreas and cervix, thereby contributing to resistance to chemotherapy. Studies have shown that hGST P1-1 levels correlate with resistance to standard chemo-therapy and are elevated in biopsies of tumour tissues that have become resistant to therapy after administration of anticancer agents (Wu and Dong, 2012). Consequently, in-hibitors of human GST P1-1 catalytic activity remain a po-tential therapeutic tool in cancer cell resistance to drugs. In order to overcome this resistance specific hGST P1-1 in-hibitors are in demand.Furthermore, a variety of sulfonamido-containing compounds are apparently accommodated by the H-site of GST and found to be the substrates for GSTs. Data given in the literature are clearly shown that GSTs can mediate the enzymatic cleavage of the sulfonamide bond displaying a sulfonamidase activity by catalyzing the GSH-mediated S6 P 122S6 PP 273572Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 571 - 572 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationshydrolysis of sulfonamide bonds. Groups capable of with-drawing sufficient electron density from the alpha carbon atom to the sulfonyl group are an absolute requirement in this enzymatic process. GST-mediated sulfonamide cleav-age results in the formation of the GS-conjugate, the corre-sponding amine, and sulfur dioxide. The released GS-con-jugate may provide a strong inhibitor against intracellular GSTs, thus facilitating cancer chemotherapy (Mathew et al., 2006).The benzoxazoles have been the aim of many re-searches for many years because they constitute an impor-tant class of heterocyclic compounds exhibiting substantial chemotherapeutic activities.The newly synthesized 2-sub-stituted-5-(4-nitrophenylsulfonamido)benzoxazole de-rivatives, which were screened for the in vitro inhibition of hGST P1-1, exhibited significant inhibitor activities. Among the tested compounds, 2-(4-chlorobenzyl)-5-(4-nitrophenyl-sulfonamido)benzoxazole displayed the most potent inhibitory activity for hGST P1-1 with an IC50 val-ue of 10,2 uM, showing a similar potency with the used reference drug ethacrynic acid (Ertan-Bolelli et al., 2014).The molecular docking studies performed by us-ing CDocker method is revealed that the new synthesized 2-substituted-5-(4-nitrophenyl-sulfonamido)benzoxazoles are acting as catalytic inhibitors of hGST P1-1 by binding to the H-site and performing conjugates with GSH forming S-(4-nitrophenyl)-GS complex via nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction (Ertan-Bolelli et al., 2014). It is reported that the active site residues Tyr7 and Tyr108 play important roles for the activity of hGST P1-1. Different models have been proposed for the activation of GST, all highlighting the key role of active site resi-dues Tyr7 and Tyr108 (Wu and Bong, 2012). In the mech-anism for activation of GSH, Tyr7 acts as a general base, promotes proton abstraction from the GSH thiol, and cre-ates a thiolate anion with high nucleophilic reactivity. Ad-ditionally, the hydroxyl group of Tyr108 appears to con-tribute to the catalytic mechanism in the conjugation reac-tion of GSH with the docked sulfonamide-substituted ben-zoxazoles (Ertan-Bolelli et al., 2014,).Moreover, it was found that groups capable of with-drawing sufficient electron density from the alpha carbon atom to the sulfonyl group are an absolute requirement. The electrophilic substructure of the sulfonyl group is sole-ly responsible for activation of the sulfonamide bond to-ward cleavage. On the other hand, the amine portion has little or no impact on the cleavability of sulfonamide sub-strates (Ertan-Bolelli et al., 2014).In conclusion, the newly developed hGSTP1-1 in-hibitory active 2-substituted-5-(4-nitrophenylsulfonami-do)benzoxazoles are promising lead compound for further in vivo studies to develop a new chemotherapeutic agent for the treatment in MDR cancers. It is accepted that the hGST P1-1 contributes directly to drug resistance in some cell types via their catalytic activity. The development of chemotherapy resistant tumour cells is a significant prob-lem encountered in cancer treatment. The finding of over expression of hGST P1-1 in many cancer tissues as well as in drug resistant cell line, suggests that elevated hGST P1-1 expression may be of direct relevance not only to ac-quired resistance, but also in natural resistance. hGST P1-1 has been shown to catalyse the conjugation of GSH with the alkylating agents chlorambucil and thiotepa, suggest-ing that overexpression of hGST P1-1 in cells exposed to these drugs would confer resistance. Elevated cellular lev-els of hGST P1-1 have been shown to accompany resis-tance to various common anticancer drugs, and the addi-tion of the GST inhibitors will be restored sensitivity to al-kylating agents in drug-resistant cells. Therefore inhibitors of hGST P1-1 catalytic activity remain as a potential ther-apeutic tool in MDR cancer chemotherapy. ReferencesErtan-Bolelli, T., Musdal, Y., Bolelli, K., Yilmaz, S., Aksoy, Y., Yildiz, I., Aki-Yalcin, E., Yalcin, I., 2014. Synthesis, biological evaluation of 2-substituted-5-(4-nitrophenylsulfonamido) benzoxazoles as human GST P1-1 inhibitors and description of the binding site features. ChemMedChem. 9, 984-992.Mathew, N., Kalyanasundaram, M., Balaraman, K., 2006. Glutathione S-transferase (GST) inhibitors. Expert Opin. Ther. Patents. 16:431-444.Wu, B. and Dong., D., 2012. Human cytosolic glutathione transferases: structure, function, and drug discovery. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences. 33, 656-668.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 573 - 574 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33.015Short communicationPhysicochemical properties of novel derivatives of norfloxacin: solubility and pKaPranvera Breznica-Selmani1,2*, Kristina Mladenovska1,2, Bozhana Mikhova3, Arlinda Daka4, Dashnor Nebija4, Blerina Koshi4, Z. Kavrakovski1 and Emil Popovski2,51Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia2Research Center for Environment and Materials, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia3Institute of Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phytochemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Akad. G. Bonchev 9, 1113 Sofia, R. Bulgaria 4Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina, Mother Theresa 10 000, Prishtina, R. Kosovo5Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Arhimedova 5, PO Box 162, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* pranvera.breznica@uni-pr.eduIntroductionA major advance in the quinolones field came in 1980, when chemists at the Kyorin company reported the prep-aration of norfloxacin, in which the cyclic diamine piper-azine found in pipemidic acid was combined with 6-flou-rine found in flumequine (Andriole, 2000). Later studies revealed that introduction of this atom serves both to in-crease quinolone activity against the enzyme target DNA gyrase and to facilitate penetration into the bacterial cell. Norfloxacin is a broad-spectrum antibiotic that is active against both Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacte-ria. The fluorine atom at the position 6 increases poten-cy against Gram-negative organisms, while the piperazine moiety at the position 7 is responsible for anti-pseudo-monal activity. As it is known, fluoroquinolones are fairly insoluble in water. Due to presence of basic amine and car-boxylic acid they possess zwitter ionic character, which is reflected on their solubility, lipophilicity and acidity/basic-ity. At acidic pH, both amine and acidic group are protonat-ed providing the molecule positive charge. At high pH val-ues, amine group is in the free base form, while the carbox-yl group exists as a carboxylate anion, providing the over-all molecule negative charge. Therefore, the fluoroquino-lones tend to be more soluble in water at acidic and/or ba-sic pH (Andriole, 2000; Riley et al. 1989), which signifi-cantly affects their permeability. It has been well explained that solubility, dissolution and gastrointestinal permeabili-ty are fundamental parameters that control rate and extent of drug absorption and its bioavailability. In order to devel-op novel compounds based on quinolone core with favor-able physico-chemical properties i.e. higher permeability, we have synthesized different derivatives of norfloxacin by incorporating (benzoylamino)methyl functions (BAM salts) on the free nitrogen of the 7-piperazinyl group. The aim of this study was to evaluate their solubility in wa-ter (logSw) and phosphate buffer solution (PBS) pH 7.4 (logS7.4) and pKa values as well.Materials and methodsNorfloxacin was purchased from Fluka (Sigma-Al-drich ChemieGmbh Munich, Germany), while the com-pounds for preparation of phosphate buffer saline (PBS), NaH2PO4, NaOH and KH2PO4, were purchased from Mer-ck KgaA (Germany). MethodsThe BAM salts and norfloxacin derivatives were syn-thesized by the methods already described (Breznica-Sel-mani et al., 2015). Five different derivatives of norfloxacin were synthesized: 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4[(benzoylamino)S6 PP 274574Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 573 - 574 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsmethyl]piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1a), 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(4-meth-ylbenzoylamino)methyl]piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-di-hydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1b), 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(3-methylbenzoylamino)methyl]piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1c), 1-eth-yl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(2-chlorobenzoylamino)methyl] piper-azin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1d) and 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(3-chlorobenzoylami-no)methyl]piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1e). Solubility of the newly synthesized (benzoylamino)methyl derivatives of norfloxacin and nor-floxacin as a reference was determined in water and in PBS (pH 7.4) using a static equilibrium method (Zhang and Wang, 2008). An excess of the compounds was exposed to the solvents, accordingly, the mixtures were allowed to be stirred in a thermostatic water bath at 37 +- 1 oC (Haake, SWB 20, Waltham, MA, USA) and the samples were as-sayed once every 4 h until the analyzing results were repli-cated three consecutive times. Afterwards, the supernatant solutions, obtained by ultracentrifugation at 12 000 rpm for 15 minutes, were filtered to ensure that they were free of particulate matter before sampling. The concentration of the synthesized compounds and norfloxacin was quanti-fied by UV absorption at lmax 271-275 nm (Shimadzu UV - 1800, Japan). The whole procedure was light-protect-ed. Sodium thiosulphate was added to the medium when PBS pH 7.4 was used to prevent oxidation. All the solubil-ity experiments were repeated at least three times, and the mean values were considered as the measured results. The logScalc was calculated by online ChemAxon's software for fast and accurate predictions of basic physicochem-ical properties such as logP, logD, pKa and logS (www.chemicalize.org). ChemAxon'saqueous solubility predic-tor is based on the topology of the molecules. To determine the pKa's of all synthesized compounds and norfloxacin, a potentiometric titration was applied and for data analysis, second-derivative method was used. As it was reported by Qiang and Adams (2004), the second-derivative method, widely used to determine the pKa's of most drugs, is the most convenient for determination of pKa value among the three most applicable (Gran's plot, second-derivative and the least-square non-linear regression), because it is inde-pendent of titrate and titrant concentrations.Results and discussionThe experimentally determined solubility data for the leading compound norfloxacin were in agreement with the pharmacopeia and literature data that point to very slight water solubility (0.1-1 mg/mL) and sharp increase in sol-ubility at pH below 4 and above 10 due to the amphoteric nature (Dua et al., 2007). The water solubility of the syn-thesized derivatives, experimentally determined, was low-er than the one of the leading compound norfloxacin, rang-ing from 0.005 (1b) to 0.030 mg/mL (1d). Considering the solubility in PBS (pH 7.4), similar values for norfloxacin derivatives were observed, ranging from 0.011 mg/mL (1e) to 0,036 mg/mL (1d), all being lower than the solubility of norfloxacin (0.447 mg/mL). However, it must be empha-sized that the solubility of norfloxacin as hydrochloride salt was used as a reference.