(Samuelsson, 2004).Accordingly, the aim of this study was assessment of the plant material and the extracted chemical substances capacity in stomatology practice.Material and methodsIn this study 25 different medical plants were presented and additionally was estimated their potential application in stomatology due to their content of chemical defined and pharmacological active substances. Results and discussionFor the purpose of the study, 25 different medical plants were discussed: Ononidis radix is used for rinsing the mouth with toothache due to the triterpenes and flavonoids; Plantaginis radix, used against toothache (iridoids and aucubine); Tormentillae rhizome, for toothache and for oral inflammations, while ground herbal powder is effective for teeth due to tannins; Rubi fruticosi folium, to strengthen the right (flavon glycosides, phenolic acids, galotannines); Solidaginis virgaureae herba is used for inflammation of the oral mucosa as it contains flavonoids (rutin, quercetin); Benzoe tinkinensis, as addition to preparation for mouthwash (benzoic acid); Symphyti radix - mouthwash (tannines, alkaloids, alantoin); Caryophylli flos for toothache for inflammation of the oral mucosa, to reduce local pain and in dentistry (due to the presence of the essential oil components: eugenol, aceteugenol, b-caryophyllene); Verbasci flos as mouthwash, while the root is used for toothache (iridoid glycosides: aucubin, saponins, flavonoids); Zingiberis rhizome is used as toothpaste and for mouthwash and gargle (gingerol, essential oil components: zingiberen, citral); Caricae S5 PP 243510Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 509 - 510 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsPoster presentationsfructus for ulcers treatment; Aloe capensis to treat diseases of the oral cavity (anthracene derivatives); Anisi fructus removes the bad odor from the mouth due to anethole and anisaldehyde; Frangulae cortex can be used against the purulent processes teeth (anthraquinones); Millefolii herba for toothache (essential oil, azulene); Althaeae radix as mouthwash; Capsici fructus, for garglingin inflammation of the mouth and pharynx (capsaicinoids, essential oil, carotenoids); Myrrha for halitosis and also has the potential to strengthen the teeth (essential oil: eugenol, m-cresol, alcohols); Melissae folium against deposits in the mouth and as toothache (essential oil: citronellal, citronellol, nerol, geraniol, citral); Menthae piperitae folium is used as toothpaste (essential oil: menthol, menthone, menthofuran); Chamomillae flos as toothpaste (essential oil: chamazulene, bisabolol, farnesene, flavonoids); Iridis rhizome as tooth powder, (essential oil); Basilici herba as toothpaste (essential oil: 1,8-cineole, linalol, methyl chavicol); Salviae folium as gargling agent and for disinfection of the mouth (essential oil: thujones, 1,8-cineole, borneol) and Aetheroleum Melaleucae for inflammatory processes due to the presence of 1,8-cineole (Heinrich, 2004).Plant products have long been used in dentistry as part of various dental materials right from impression materials to eugenol, which forms an integral part of the dental clinic. The use of herbs in dental practice is not limited to only material sciences. A single herb shows a variety of effects like anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, antifungal activity and many more. Hence the incorporation of these herbs in dental practice will prove to be a valuable adjunct in dental treatment.ConclusionThe use of natural medicinal raw materials is constantly increasing. The use in dentistry is not monitored enough. However, the above example of uses of medicinal plant material gives a broad possibility. Phytotherapeutic treatment in dentistry may include all of the most common toothache to the incorporation of the implant.This paper is only an introduction for future clinical and laboratory investigation as a momentum for return to herbal medication in the treatment of different infective diseases in stomatology.ReferencesFarnsworth, N.R., Soejarto, D.D., 1991. Global importance of medicinal plants. In: Akerele, O.; Heywood, V. and Synge, H., (Eds. ), Conservation of Medicinal Plants. Cambridge (United Kingdom), pp. 25-51.Heinrich, M., Barnes, J., Gibbons, S., Williamson, E.M., 2004. Fundamentals of Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy, Churchill Livingstone Edinburgh, London, New York, Philadelphia, St Louis, Sydney, Toronto. Sammuelsson, G., 2004. Drugs of Natural Origin, 5th revised edition, Apotekarsocieteten, Sweden. Shanley, P., Luz, L., 2003. The impacts of forest degradation on medicinal plant use and implications for health care in Eastern Amazonia, BioScience 53, 573-584.Shengji, P., 2002. Ethnobotany and modernisation of Traditional Chinese Medicine. In: Paper at a workshop on Wise Practices and Experimental learning in the Conservation and Management of Himalayan Medicinal Plants, Katmandu, Nepal.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 511 - 512 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 665.57:543.544Short communicationInvestigation of chemical substances of essential oils in commercial perfumes by method of thin layer chromatographyElvira Kovac-Besovic*, Azra Besovic, Haris NiksicDepartment of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Sarajevo, Zmaja od Bosne 8, 71000 Sarajevo, Bosnia and Herzegovina* elvira-kb@hotmail.comIntroduction Essential oils are natural products or complex mixtures of hundreds of chemical compounds isolated from aromatic plants. Most of these compounds can be grouped into four major groups: aliphatic compounds, terpenes and terpene derivatives, benzene derivatives and miscellaneous compounds (Oyen and Dung, 1999). They represent the base in the perfume production. However, in the analysis of certain types of perfume, it can be examined from which plant species are used essential oils for their product (Kovac-Besovic, 2001). Essential oil and plant materials containing such oils are natural products of great economic importance. Their main use is in perfumery, cosmetics, flavoring food and drink, for scenting incense and cleaning product (Sarac, 2009). All the world's leading brands of the highest quality perfumes use not one, but several different essential oils. With their combination, are achieved a number of so-called "fragrance notes" by which they are famous and required. In pharmaceutics, essential oils are used to give drugs an agreeable smell or taste. A few essential oils or pure compounds isolated such oils are used directly as medicines due to their antimicrobial, antifungal or anti-inflammatory activity (Samuelsson, 2004).Thin layer chromatography (TLC) within a short period of time has become most important technique for the identification, characterization and determination of chemical compounds as well as complex mixtures (Nigam et al., 1965). With this technique can be analyzed the chemical substances of natural and synthetic origin (Kovac-Besovic, 2001).Therefore the aim of the present study was to determine and confirm the essential oil components used for perfume production with thin layer chromatography.Materials and methodsIn this study were analysed five different commercial perfumes taken randomly, marked as sample 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5. The contents written of the label (declaration) of each of the perfume gives the presence of chemical substances that are integral components of different essential oils derived from various plant materials.The label given for perfume No. 1 declared the following components: linalool, geraniol, isoeugenol, limonen, citral, citronelal.The label given for perfume No. 2 declared the following components: linalool, geraniol, citral, citronelal. The label given for perfume No. 3 declared the following components: linalool, geraniol, eugenol, limonen, citral, citronelal.The label given for perfume No. 4 declared the following components: linalool, geraniol, isoeugenol, limonen, citral, citronelal, farnesol.The label given for perfume No. 5 declared the following components: linalool, geraniol, limonen, citral, citronelal.Components of the essential oils and extracts of plant material used as base for perfume production and chromatographic analysis were: Aetheroleum Rosae (geraniol, citronelol), Aetheroleum Lavanulae (linalool), Aetheroleum Citri (citral), Aetheroleum Melissae (citral and citronelal), Aetheroleum Caryophylli (eugenol), Aetheroleum Aurantii floris (farnesol).One mL of different essential oils was diluted with toluene and 5 mL were used for TLC. Commercial perfumes were prepared in toluene in ratio 1:30 (Wagner and Bladt, 1996).As TLC adsorbent, silica gel GF254 was used, while toluene-ethyl acetate in ratio 93:7 was used as mobile phase for separation of the components from the essential S5 PP 244512Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 511 - 512 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsPoster presentationsoils as well as the perfumes. The detected components were visualized under UV lamb on 254 nm and 366 nm, while p-anisaldehyde-sulfuric acid was used as spray reagent.The mobile phase is suitable for the analysis and comparison of all important essential oils, but the plates obtained with chloroform (Melissae folium) and dichlormethane (Caryophylli aetheroleum, Lavandulae aetheroleum), can be used as solvents systems for the drugs and their essential oils.Results and discussionPreliminary experiments were done on five randomly provided perfumes to determine and confirm the nature of constituents present (declared on the label), using a mixture of toluene-ethyl acetate (93:7) as developing solvent. Additionally, essential oils (Aetheroleum Rosae, Aetheroleum Lavandulae, Aetheroleum Citri, Aetheroleum Melissae, Aetheroleum Caryophylli, Aetheroleum Chamomillae) and plant material that naturally contain the target components were used. Performing TLC, visualized with p-anisaldehyde sulfuric acid and seen under UV lamp at 254 nm and 366 nm, in all investigated samples were detected: linalool, geraniol, citral and citronellal. In four samples was detected lemon, in two samples farnesol and isoeugenol, eugenol in one sample, while in three samples was identified coumarin. Conclusion The examples described above show that TLC has the ability to separate mixtures of substances of similar structure as are the perfumes and essential oils. Additionally it is important to mention that using TLC different perfumes were evaluated for their content declared on the labels provided from the manufacturer. Finally this was done with cheap and easy to perform technique.ReferencesKovac-Besovic, E., 2001. Metode u farmakognoziji, Sarajevo-Publishing, Sarajevo.Nigam, M.C., Nigam, I.C., Levi, L., 1965. Essential Oils and Their Constituents. XXV*(c) Thin Layer Chromatography. Some Chemical and Chemotaxonomic Applications. J. Soc. Cosmetic Chemists 16, 155-168.Oyen, L.P.A., Dung, N.X., 1999. Plant Resources of South-East Asia No 19. Essential-oil plants, Backhuys Publishers, Leiden.Samuelsson, G., 2004. Drugs of Natural Origin, fifth revised edition, Apotekarsocieteten, Sweden.Sarac, N., Ugur, A., Duru, M.E., 2009. Int. J. Green Pharm. 3, 24-28.Wagner, H., Bladt, S., 1996. Plant Drug Analysis, Springer-Verlag, Berlin- Heidelberg-New York.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 513 - 514 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 582.929.4-13.55(497.115)Short communicationChemical composition of the essential oils of some Thymus spp. (Lamiaceae) from KosovoVerka Nedanova*, Nebija Flurim, Marija Karapandzova, Ivana Cvetkovikj, Gjoshe Stefkov, Svetlana Kulevanova Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia. * verce.nedanova@yahoo.comIntroductionAmong the aromatic plants belonging to the Lamiace-ae family, numerous of species and varieties of wild-grow-ing plants of the genus Thymus are very important. Thy-mus species are well known as medical plants that con-tain tannins and flavonoids and are considered as aromat-ic due to their essential oil content. Several studies empha-sized the existence of marked chemical differences among essential oils extracted from different species or varieties. This chemical diversity is generally a function of three fac-tors: genetical and physiological factors as well as the en-vironmental conditions, that can affected the biological ac-tivity of the oils (Mustafa et al., 2012).Production of essential oils by plants is believed to be predominantly a defense mechanism against pathogens and pests as essential oils have been shown to possess an-timicrobial and antifungal properties. Nowadays, essen-tial oils and theirs components are gaining increasing in-terest because of their relatively safe status, their wide ac-ceptance by consumers and their exploitation for potential multi-purpose functional use (Mohammadi et al., 2013).Beside this, the representatives of genus Thymus from Kosovo were poorly investigated in the past thus the aim of this study was essential oil chemical analysis of several wild-growing Thymus species collected from different lo-cations in Kosovo.Material and methodsTotal of 20 samples of eight wild-growing Thymus species were analyzed. The samples of Thymus tosevii (Osljak and Zapluze), Thymus jankae (Zapluze), Thymus longicaulis (Belobrod), Thymus pulegioides (Vata), Thy-mus moesiacus (Brezovica and Prevalla), and Thymus to-sevii ssp. substriatus (Gllobocica) were collected from lo-calities in South Kosovo. The samples of Thymus balcanus were collected on Ljumbard Mtn., West Kosovo while the sample of Thymus pannonicus from Germia, East Kosovo.Plant material was harvested in full flowering stage during summer, 2013. The material was put on the paper sheets in a shade and left to air dry. Essential oils were iso-lated by steam distillation in a Clevenger-type apparatus for 3 hours. The essential oil composition was analyzed by GC/FID/MS on Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatography system equipped with flame ionization detector (FID) and Agile-nt 5975C Mass Quadripole detector. Operating conditions were as follows: oven temperature 60 degC (5 min), 1 degC/min to 80 degC (2 min) and 5 degC/min to 280 degC (5 min); flow rate of 1 mL/min (He); injector T=260 degC; FID T= 270 degC; 1 uL injection volume at split ratio 1:1.The MS was operated in scan mode. Identification of the components present in essential oils was made by com-paring mass spectra of components in essential oils with those from NIST, Wiley and Adams mass spectra libraries, by AMDIS (Automated Mass Spectral Deconvolution and Identification System) and by comparing literature and es-timated Kovat's (retention) indices that were determined using mixture of homologous series of normal alkanes from C9 to C25 in hexane, under the same above mentioned conditions. The percentage ratio of essential oils compo-nents was computed by the normalization method of the GC/FID peak areas and average values were taken into fur-ther consideration.S5 PP 245514Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 513 - 514 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsPoster presentationsResults and discussionWith gas chromatography, 140 compounds were iden-tified in essential oil samples of T. balcanus (South Koso-vo), representing 76.23-98.62% of the oil. Sesquiterpens were found as predominant components, with E-caryoph-yllene (26.96%) as the most abundant compound. One oil sample has showed extremely deferent composition with monoterpene linalool (59.51%) as major constituent. Com-pared with literature, similarities were found with the es-sential oil isolated from T. balcanus from R. Macedo-nia, which contains E-caryophyllene (22.42%), b-pinene (12.48%) and a-pinene (5.64%) as main constituents (Ku-levanova et al., 1998).On the other hand, 78 compounds were identified in the essential oil samples of T. jankae (South Kosovo), rep-resenting 97.62% of the total oil.