Beyond ensuring that the right medi-cine is delivered to the right patient in the right dose, there is now a greater focus on pharmacist-delivered patient-centered care. The aims of such care are to ensure opti-mal therapeutic outcomes and improved quality of life, re-duce adverse reactions to medication and the risk of patient harm, improve access, and reduce the overall cost of health care delivery. For pharmacists, the focus has shifted from the medication itself to the correct and optimal use of the medication by the patient.With advances in technology, medical and pharmaceu-tical knowledge, medication use has a greater potential for good, but therapy is often more complex, and the risk of suboptimal outcomes or even patient harm through inap-propriate selection and/or use of medication can be high. The need for a competent healthcare professional to advise on selection and manage the medication therapy is becom-ing increasingly clear, both at the individual patient level as well as at a societal level.The foundational knowledge needed by pharmacists in the biomedical and pharmaceutical sciences has not di-minished but additional knowledge is now needed in so-cial, behavioral, administrative, and clinical sciences. But it does not stop there; in order to effectively manage the medication use process of patients and populations, phar-macists need to acquire new skills and develop the appro-priate attitudes and values. Together, these reflect the com-petency profile of a contemporary pharmacist, which has been described by the International Pharmaceutical Fed-eration across four domains: pharmaceutical public health, pharmaceutical care, organization and management, and professional/personal (FIP, 2012). Schools of pharmacy have to undertake a major reform of their curriculum - both in terms of content and delivery - in order to prepare graduates with the needed competen-cies, to be "fit for purpose" and able to deliver the servic-es required to meet societal needs. In addition, models for continuing education and continuing professional develop-ment have to change, because it is likely that the majority of pharmacists in practice today do not have all the compe-tencies to deliver this model of care.In addition to practice and education, a third sector plays a vital role when it comes to advancing the profes-sion of pharmacy. This is the regulatory sector, which is by nature, however, more conservative due to its primary role to protect the public. For obvious reasons, profession-al regulations cannot be changing constantly, but change is certainly needed in this sector. With the roles of pharma-cists evolving and expanding, regulation of the profession has also had to change. In addition, regulation has had to change - or in some cases be introduced for the first time - for the pharmacy support workforce, members of which play a vital role in supporting pharmacists to free them up to deliver pharmaceutical care, or "medication thera-py management" services as now referred to in some coun-tries.It is evident that for improvements and advancement to come in the profession of pharmacy, change is required, but change will not come without commitment - commit-ment from practitioners, educators, regulators and all other key stakeholders who have a role to play. People can often recognize the change that they want to happen in their en-vironment to improve their situation. It is, however, not al-ways as easy for individuals to recognize and be commit-ted to the change that must occur within themselves. We assume that all pharmacists want to succeed in their pro-fessional careers. At the end of their career when they look CL 212Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 11 - 12 (2016)Closing lectureback, they want to believe that they have made a difference .... left some "footprints." What are some of the factors that will determine whether or not pharmacists will, in fact, make a difference in the lives of patients, their professional colleagues, and others they meet and work with? What will determine if the "seeds" that pharmacists plant in the "field of pharmacy" will grow and produce a harvest?Pharmacists work in different "fields" and likely have different ideas about what results they want to achieve ... what impact they want to have personally and profession-ally, but are there some principles and values that are com-mon - and important - regardless of where pharmacists live and work, and what they do?Today, pharmacists acquire expert knowledge and skills, firstly through their pre-service education and train-ing, and after that through continuing education and con-tinuing professional development activities. How does the profession ensure that pharmacists also develop the right attitudes and values to be ethical, professional and car-ing pharmacists, and members of inter-professional teams, working together to achieve optimal medication therapy outcomes for patients? Can these attitudes and values be "taught" in a classroom? How else can they be cultivated?Beyond having the right knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values, what else determines whether or not pharma-cists will bring about the changes that are needed and have the desired impact; whether or not pharmacists make the difference in life that they aspire to make? That takes com-mitment, and "Commitment to Change" is the bridge that spans the "chasm" between learning and behavior change, between good intentions and real impact (Wakefield et al., 2003; Wakefield, 2004).While some things must change in order to achieve im-provement, certain values and attitudes must be preserved throughout the career of a pharmacist for him/her to be a successful professional, delivering quality care and oth-er services. Important lessons learned and attitudes, val-ues and habits that the author has found to be important in his pharmacy career include: have a desire to innovate; build the best team; learn to work with others who are not like you, take pride in what you do; keep searching for the things that are hard to find; keep climbing; draw on others' experience; find a mentor; be a mentor; take some chanc-es; build strong networks; know your strengths and don't underestimate your contribution; find things to be passion-ate about; don't suffer from "paralysis by analysis" or al-ways insist on perfection; there are no shortcuts to any place worth going; partner with people who share your vi-sion; not all change leads to improvement... but all im-provement requires change; and perhaps most importantly, sometimes "availability" is more important than "ability. "ReferencesFIP (International Pharmaceutical Federation), 2012. FIP Education Initiatives Pharmacy Education Taskforce A Global Competency Framework Version 1.Wakefield, J.G., Herbert, C.P., Maclure, M., Dormuth, C., Wright, J.M., Legare, J., Brett-MacLean, P.,Premi, J., 2003. Commitment to change statements can predict actual change in practice. J. Contin. Educ. Health Prof. 23, 81-93.Wakefield, J.G., 2004. Commitment to change: Exploring its role in changing physician behavior through continuing education. J. Contin. Educ. Health Prof. 24, 197-204.      Macedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 15 - 16 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.214(438)Short communicationNew psychoactive substances - analytical challenges and threats to the public health: European and Polish experience in the new drugs combatingZbigniew FijalekDepartment of Bioanalysis and Drug Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, Warsaw Medical University, Banacha 1, 02-097 Warsaw, PolandIntroduction to the problem and European NPS marketIn recent years, the UE has seen the emergence of new drugs that have similar effects to drugs that are interna-tionally controlled. These drugs can be collectively called New Psychoactive Substances (NPS). The key features are that NPS are psychoactive i.e. ones that stimulate, or de-press the central nervous system, or cause a state of depen-dence; have a comparable level of potential harm to inter-nationally controlled drugs; and are newly available, rath-er than newly invented. These substances may be the ac-tive pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) used in authorised medicines (phenibut) or suspended/withdrawn medicines (sibutramine, DMAA) or potential medicines in the mak-ing (remimazolam). Methcathinone was originally used as an antidepressant in the former Soviet Union in the 1930s, but very quickly it became a recreational drug. Pyrova-lerone and amfepramone have been used as anorectics, but they are currently obsolete. Bupropion is used as antide-pressant and as an aid for those who wish to quit tobacco smoking. But NPS goes beyond APIs, in fact most of them come originally from the scientific and patent literature as a result of Pharma and academic institutes' research and development efforts. They have been designed to evade drug laws, are widely available and have the potential to pose serious risks to public health and safety and can even be fatal. The short-term harms of NPS can include para-noia, psychosis and seizures and their long-term harms are often unknown. NPS a new class of psychoactive sub-stances, known as 'legal highs', 'herbal highs', 'designer drugs' or 'party pills' has emerged on the drug use market. They are frequently advertised as 'plant fertilizers/food', 'air fresheners', 'herbal incenses', 'spice', 'bath salts', 're-search chemicals' (in Poland commonly known as 'dopal-acze' - literally translated as afterburners). Based on their chemical structures, designer drugs can be classified into amphetamine types, 2,5-dimethoxy amphetamines, 2,5-phenylamines, b-keto amphetamines (cathinones), phencyclidines, piperazines, pyrrolidinophe-nones, fentanyls, piperidines, tryptamine derivatives and synthetic cannabinoids. Based on the spectrum of exert-ed psychoactive effects, NPS can be classified into four ba-sic categories: synthetic cannabinoids, stimulants, opioid-like compounds, and hallucinogenic/dissociative (psycho-dysleptic); however, they may have a combination of these effects due to their designed chemical structure.From 2008 there has been a rapid increase in the num-ber and range of new substances with greater ease of avail-ability, with their open sale in offline retail outlets and through the global marketplace of the internet ('clearnet' and 'darkweb'). The Early Warning System (EWS) run by the European Monitoring Centre for Drugs and Drug Ad-diction (EMCDDA) detected 86 novel NPS in 2013, 101 in 2014 and 100 in 2015. Whilst generally there has been an increase in the number of novel NPS detected, it is important to note that the vast majority are permutations of groups of similar sub-stances with similar effects (e.g. cathinones), or dissimilar substances that produce similar effects (e.g. synthetic can-nabinoids), rather than new distinct types of drugs. Fur-thermore, it is likely that many of the substances identified are not in widespread or even limited use. It may be that the market, to some extent, regulates itself with less effec-tive or more harmful NPS only being seen for very short periods of time or in a limited number of countries (Dar-PL 316Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 15 - 16 (2016)Zbigniew Fijalekgan and Wood, 2013; Zawilska and Andrzejczak, 2015; Zawilska, 2015).Polish new drugs marketNew psychoactive substances were present on the Pol-ish drug scene before 2008. At the beginning, there were oc-casional sale offers of psychoactive substances on the Pol-ish Internet forums, which were in compliance with legal regulations at that time. In 2008, a website called 'dopalac-ze.com' was launched. It offered a new quality approach in terms of professional and marketing strategy. The website products were advertised as safe alternatives to illicit psy-choactive substances. One advertising slogan of 'dopalac-ze.com' emphasised the harmless effects of its products: 'Life is too short to take unhealthy pills'. NPS were mar-keted as collectibles not intended for human consumption. They were described as legal in the European Union, con-trolled, regulated and safe. They were also marketed as the so-called 'party drugs'. The shops also stocked herbal con-coctions, known for centuries in various cultures and used for a number of purposes including rituals e.g. Salvia divi-norum. It came as a big surprise to NPS users that herbal concoctions contained synthetic cannabinoids, which were to a large extent, if not wholly, responsible for the psycho-active effects thereof. In mid-2008, following the opening of the first high street smart shop, trade in NPS entered the reality offline. As soon as by the end of 2008, 40 high street smart shops were operational in the centers of major Pol-ish cities offering an increasingly wide range of psychoac-tive products. While describing the beginnings of the le-gal highs scene it is worth mentioning a first synthetic can-nabinoid called JWH-180, which was identified in Poland by the Central Forensic Laboratory in February 2009. This substance gave rise to a massive supply of such-like sub-stances on the Polish market. At the same time, other new psychoactive substances and products were arriving rapid-ly including synthetic cannabinoids, mephedrone and later on a whole range of cathinone-type substances. New smart shops started springing up exponentially and soon, by the end of 2010, 1 400 smart shops were up and running across the country. After the closure of high street smart shops by sanitary inspection, NPS kept being sold online (Jablonski and Malczewski, 2014).Unfortunately in next years, some shops have been re-opened and the situation regarding increased hospitaliza-tions in July 2015 was similar to that from 2010, so there-fore, it became necessary to develop a new orthogonal ap-proach to solve the problem of identification of the new chemical structures appearing on the market by applying complementary techniques, i.e. LC-MS/MS-TOF, GS-MS/MS, LC-CAD and NMR. In December 2010 analysis of NPS samples collected by the sanitary inspection found seven main chemical groups; the highest incidences being MDPV (23%), and 16% for JWH-081 and RCS-4. From 2010 Polish National Medicines Institute have analyzed over 7000 various designer drugs and herbal highs prod-ucts. About 160 psychoactive compounds were identified including: substituted cathinones, phenethylamines, syn-thetic cannabinoids, phenylpiperazines, tryptamines, phar-maceuticals and other. Poland still has one of the fastest growing market for new psychoactive substances in the EU with hundreds of hospitalizations resulting (approx. 1100 in 2013, 2000 in 2014 and 7000 in 2015).ConclusionsDesigner drugs present an ongoing challenge to chem-ists, toxicologists, and law enforcement agencies due to their dynamic and changing markets. To effectively com-bat the problems associated with designer drugs, a collec-tive effort needs to be in place from forensic scientists, health professionals, and law enforcement authorities. It is important to stay at the forefront of drug detection tech-niques and strategies to allow speedy identification of new substances as they emerge. Metabolism and toxicity data need to be collected to facilitate diagnosis and treatment of designer drug intoxication. At the same time, drug sched-uling authorities need to schedule these drugs promptly to enable laws to be applied to the production, distribution, and consumption of these illicit substances to safeguard so-ciety.The global nature of the NPS phenomenon also pres-ents opportunities for enhanced international collabora-tion, and the importance of data sharing within the Euro-pean and international authorities. The Poland is currently an active participant in the European Early Warning Sys-tem on NPS and this network has proved useful in the ear-ly identification of emerging threats in this area. Sustained collaboration in the future would not only continue to al-low the rapid exchange of information between countries but also the potential for mutual benefit through collabora-tion in research initiatives or through the sharing of refer-ence material and toxicological information.ReferencesDargan, P.I., Wood D.M., 2013. Novel Psychoactive Substances: Classification, Pharmacology and Toxicology. Academic Press, Boston.Zawilska, J.B., Andrzejczak, D., 2015. Next generation of novel psychoactive substances on the horizon - A complex problem to face. Drug Alcohol Depend. 157, 1-17. Zawilska, J.B., 2015. 'Legal Highs' - An Emerging Epidemic of Novel Psychoactive Substances, in: Taba P., Lees A., Sikk K. (Eds. ), International Review of Neurobiology. The Neuropsychiatric Complications of Stimulant Abuse. Elsevier Inc. 120, 273-300.Jablonski, P., Malczewski, A., 2014. New psychoactive substances: problem and response. National Bureau for Drug Prevention, Warsaw.Macedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 17 - 18 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.015.4:620.3Short communicationGreen "cage" nanoparticles as efficient carriers for challenging drugsRuxandra GrefInstitut des Sciences Moleculaires d'Orsay, UMR CNRS 8214, Avenue Jean Perrin, Universite Paris Saclay, 91400 Orsay, FranceBackgroundNanotechnology revolutionizes drug delivery by en-abling achieving: i) targeted drug delivery; ii) transcyto-sis of drugs across biological barriers; iii) delivery of drugs to intracellular targets and iv) visualization of sites of drug delivery (theranostics). High loadings and surface engi-neering are important prerequisites for efficient drug nano-carriers.