ConclusionVegetable growers have been using neonicotinoid pesticides frequently to have a higher and insect free yield. Unfortunately, overdoses of systemic pesticides sprayed on to the plant, fail to dissipate and do not reach the required MRL that are advisable by the WHO directives, constituting potential health risks to consumers. The pesticides residues can be decreased only if the recommended dose is applied by the vegetable. In conclusion, a further investigation upon PHI of acetamiprid should be conducted and the data would be of great benefit to cultivators in our region. ReferencesAbbassy, A. M., Mamdouh, A. M., Hoda, M.N., and Awatef, S. M., 2014. Analytical determination of Imidacloprid and Tetraconazol residues in Cucumber plants after whitefly and powdery mildew control. SOP Transactions on Analytical Chemistry 1(2), 1-14. Chandra, S., Mahindrakar, A.N., and Shinde, L.P., 2010. Determination of cypermethrin and chlorpyrifos in vegetables by GC-ECD. International Journal of Chemtech Research 2, 908-911.Tomlin, C., 2009. In The Pesticide Manual, 15th (ed. ), British Crop Protection Council:Hampshire, UK.Kadenezki, L., Arpad, Z., Gardi, I., Ambrus, A., Gyorfi, L., and Reese, G., 1992. Column extraction of residues of several pesticides from fruits and vegetables; a simple multiresidue analysis method. Journal of AOAC International 75, 53-61.Mateu-Sanchez, M., Moreno, M., Arrebola, F.J., Martinez Vidal, J.L., 2003. Analysis of acetamiprid in vegetables using gas chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. Analytical Science 19, 701-704.Matsuda, K., Buckingham, S. D., Kleier, D., Rauh, J. J., Grauso, M., and Sattelle, D. B., 2001. Neonicotinoids: insecticides acting on insect nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 22(11), 573-580. Navalon, A., Gonzalez-Casado, A., El-Khattabi, R., Vilchez, J.L., Fernandez-Alba, A.R., 1997. Determination of imidacloprid in vegetable samples by gc-ms. Analyst 122, 579-581.Obana, H., Okihashi, M., Akutsu K., Kitagawa Y., and Hori S., 2002. Determination of acetamiprid, imidacloprid, and nitenpyram residues in vegetables and fruits by hplc with diode-array detection. Journal of Agricultural and Food Chemistry 50(16), 4464-4467.www.codexalimentarius.org/meetings-reports/en, 2009. Summary Report from the Joint FAO/WHO Meeting held in Rome.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 279 - 280 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 614.878:547.533Short communicationThe toxicity of organic solvents mixtures, containing toluene and its oxidation productsSoica Codruta*, Simu Georgeta-Maria, Coricovac Dorina, Mioc Marius, Borcan Florin, Ionescu Daniela, Dragos Dan, Andoni Mihaiela, Dehelean Cristina"Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., RO-300041, Timisoara, Romania* codrutasoica@umft.roIntroductionToluene (methyl-benzene) is a colorless liquid, with high vapor pressure and an aromatic odor, mostly used in paint fabrication as a solvent, fuel industry and in chemical synthesis. Toluene also naturally occurs in the crude oil an in the tolu tree (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry - ATSDR, 2015). The main oxidation derivatives of toluene include benzaldehyde, benzoic acid, cresols or methyl-phenols, methyl-catechols and methyl-resorcinols. However, among these compounds, cresols are known to be more toxic then the others upon exposure. Cresols or methyl phenols are oxidation products of toluene, consist-ing of 3 isomers: o-cresol, m-cresol and p-cresol. Two of the compounds are colorless solids with low melting points (o-cresol and p-cresol), whereas the third one is a colorless thick liquid (Pubchem open chemistry database, https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Exposure to these substances often occurs by inhala-tion of contaminated air or accidental ingestion.Toluene induced toxicityThe main pharmacological effect, correlated with tol-uene intoxication in humans and animals, via inhalation, is the depression of the central nervous system (CNS) (Faust, 1994). After the uptake into the blood stream, tol-uene crosses the blood brain barrier. In the brain, the sol-vent interacts with CNS neurotransmitters, especially g-aminobutyric acid and to a lesser degree, with glycine and dopamine, inducing symptoms like: euphoria, hallu-cinations, delusions, tinnitus, dizziness, confusion, head-ache, vertigo, seizures, ataxia, stupor, and coma (McKe-own, 2015). Toluene also influences locomotor activity in rats, as shown by Apawu et al. by modulating dopamine levels across the striatum. The study showed that acute and chronic exposure to toluene increased locomotor activity in rats and although dopamine levels in the striatum were increased, dopamine uptake was not affected (Apawu et al., 2015).Other toluene exposure induced effects include cardio-toxicity, hepatotoxicity, nephrotoxicity and skeletal muscle damage and reproduction system impairment.Symptoms related to the cardiovascular system in tol-uene exposure include blood pressure and heart rate fluc-tuations. Toluene exposed rats exhibited apoptosis in heart tissues mediated by increased caspase-3 activity (Tas et al., 2013). Toluene is metabolized in the liver to benzoic and hip-puric acid. The metabolism produces free oxygen radicals which cause liver damage through oxidative stress. A study by Tas et al. showed that rats exposed to toluene suffer se-vere liver damage exhibiting: increased levels of amino-transferase and malonylaldehyde (parameter for oxidative damage), balloon degeneration and fibrosis in the liver tis-sue (Tas et al., 2011). Liver cell apoptosis is also present, mediated by increased activity of Bax and caspase-3 en-zymes (Ayan et al., 2012). Toluene exposure affects the renal system, serum ion concentrations and locomotor activity. Patients exposed to toluene showed distal tubular renal acidosis type 1, hypo-kalemic acidosis, increased serum alkaline phosphatase, muscle paralysis and proteinuria due to rhabdomyolysis (Camara-Lemmaroy et al., 2015). Meydan et al. showed that rats exposed to toluene exhibited renal tissue damage. Shrinkage in the glomerular tufts, differentiation in the S3 PP 130280Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 279 - 280 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationscapsule, and increase in the connective tissue in the inter-stitial area all occurred. Also increased levels of serum cre-atinine, catalase and superoxide dismutase were observed (Meydan et al., 2013).Another study by Nakai et al., reported that toluene in-duces male reproductive dysfunctions in rats. The results suggested that toluene induced reproductive toxicity by di-rect oxidative damage of the spermatozoa was related to the formation of 8-oxo-7,8-dihydro-2'-dezoxyguanosine in the male rat testicles, which is a biological marker for DNA oxidative damage (Nakai et al., 2002).Cresol induced toxicityToxic effects of cresols due to inhalation can affect re-spiratory functions, and produce mucosal irritation. Sys-temic effects on humans due to inhalation are not report-ed but there are several studies that report cardiotoxicity, hepatotoxicity, renal toxicity, neurotoxicity in animals ex-posed to cresol aerosols (Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry - ATSDR, 2008). Ingestion of cresols is more severe and can cause death in humans.The most studies regarding cresol toxicity are centered on p-cresol (4-methylphenol). P-cresol induces hepatotoxicity in rats. The mecha-nism proposed for hepatotoxicity induction involves bio-transformation of p-cresol to a reactive quinone methide intermediate which covalently binds to cellular macromol-ecules and elicits cytotoxicity (Thompson et al., 1996). P-cresol is also a protein-bound uremic toxin (toxins which accumulate in the serum in chronic renal failure pa-tients treated with standard dialysis) (De Smet et al., 2003). A study by Tanaka et al. focused on the effects of p-cresol on 3T3-L1 cells. The results showed that p-cresol inhibit-ed cell proliferation, adipogenesis, glucose uptake and in-duced apoptosis in these cells (Tanaka et al., 2014). Anoth-er effect of p-cresol is the increase in the reactive oxygen species production, cell cycle proliferation arrest and apop-tosis stimulation, as stated by Chang et al. The study car-ried on U937 cell lines also revealed an induced delayed effect on endothelial cell migration which can be translated in an increase in the time needed for wound closure (Chang et al., 2014).ConclusionToluene and cresols are widely used in various indus-tries. Exposure to these compounds may lead to intoxica-tion. It is best that exposure is avoided taking in account that intoxication with toluene and cresols could be very dangerous since it can affect significant number of organs like the brain, heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, muscles and re-productive glands.ReferencesApawu, A.K., Mathewc, T.A., Bowen, S.E., 2015. Striatal dopamine dynamics in mice following acute and repeated toluene exposure. Psychopharmacology 232, 173-84.Ayan, M., Tas, U., Sogut, E., et al., 2012. The apoptotic effect of a high dose of toluene on liver tissue during the acute phase: an experimental study. Toxicology and Industrial Health 29, 728-36.Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry - ATSDR, 2015. Draft toxicological profile for toluene. Available at: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp56.pdf.Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry - ATSDR, 2008. Toxicological profile for cresols. Available at: http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp34.pdf.Camara-Lemarroy, C.R., Rodriguez-Gutierrez, R., Monreal-Robles, R., et al., 2015. Acute toluene intoxication-clinical presentation, management and prognosis: a prospective observational study. BMC Emergency Medicine 15, 19.Chang, M., Chang, H., Chan, C.,Yeung, S., Hsien, H., Lin, B., Yeh, C., Tseng, W., Tseng, S., Jeng J., 2014. p-Cresol affects reactive oxygen species generation, cell cycle arrest, cytotoxicity and inflammation/atherosclerosis-related modulators production in endothelial cells and mononuclear cells. PlosONE. 9.De Smet, R., Van Kaer, J., Van Vlem, B., De Cubber, A., Brunet, P., 2003. Toxicity of free p-cresol: a prospective and cross-sectional analysis. Clinical Chem. 49, 470-478.Faust, A.R., 1994. Toxicity summary for toluene. Biomedical and Environmental Information Analysis Section Health Sciences Research Division, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee.McKeown, N.J., 2015. Toluene Toxicity. Medscape. Available at: http://emedicine.medscape.com/article/818939-overview. Meydan, S., Altas, M., Nacar, A., et al., 2012. The protective effects of omega-3 fatty acid against toluene-induced neurotoxicity in prefrontal cortex of rats. Human and Experimental Toxicology 31, 1179-1185.Nakai, N., Murata, M., Nagahama, M., et al., 2003. Oxidative DNA damage induced by toluene is involved in its male reproductive toxicity. Free Radical Research 37, 69-76.Pubchem open chemistry database. Available at: https://pubchem.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/, [Accessed 27 Feb 2016 ].Tanaka, S., Yano, S., Sheikh, A.M., et al., 2014. Effects of uremic Toxin p-Cresol on proliferation, apoptosis, differentiation, and glucose uptake in 3T3-L1 cells. Artificial Organs 38, 566-571.Tas, U., Ogeturk, M., Meydan, S., Kus, I., Kuloglu, T., Ilhan, N., Kose, E., Sarsilmaz, M., 2011. Hepatotoxic activity of toluene inhalation and protective role of melatonin. Toxicology and Industrial Health 27, 465-473.Tas, U., Ekici, F., Koc, F., et al., 2013. Acute cardiotoxic effects of high dose toluene: an experimental study. Anadolu Kardiyol. Derg. 13, 3-8.Thompson, D.C., Perera, K., London, R., 1996. Studies on the mechanism of hepatotoxicity of 4-methylphenol (p-cresol): Effects of deuterium labeling and ring substitution. Chemico-Biological Interactions 101, 1-11.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 281 - 282 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 637.123:577.161.3Short communicationAssessment of vitamin E content in bovine colostrum supplement by using solid phase extraction and HPLC methodSlavica Sunaric, Jelena Lalic, Marko Denic*, Gordana KocicFaculty of Medicine, University of Nis, Bulevard Zorana Dindica 81, 18000 Nis, Serbia* mdenic84farm@gmail.com; slavica.sunaric@medfak.ni.ac.rsIntroductionColostrum is a pre-milk fluid secreted by mammals within the first few days after giving birth. Colostrum is a rich natural source of more than 90 essential nutrients: immune and growth factors, vitamins, minerals and ami-no acids. Bovine colostrum is milk produced during first few days after calving and its chemical composition is very similar to that found from humans. It contains high con-centrations of immunoglobulins, cytokines, growth fac-tors, lactoperoxidase, lactoferrin, transferrin, lysozyme, proline-rich polypeptides, lactalbumins and other proteins which play an important role for immunity and act as im-munomodulators. Vitamins A, B1, B2, B6, B12, C, D, E, folic and pantothenic acid and minerals: calcium, magne-sium, chromium, iron, zinc are also components of bovine colostrum (McGrath et al., 2016). Vitamin E is a lipid soluble vitamin responsible for a variety of functions in the body. The main biological func-tion of vitamin E is as an antioxidant which protects the polyunsaturated fatty acids of cell membranes from free-radical damage. Natural vitamin E includes two main groups of compounds: tocopherols (a, b, g and d) and to-cotrienols (a, b, g and d). Alpha-tocopherol is the most ac-tive, whereas the activity of the other tocopherols is 70-95% less.Colostrum is a natural food that has been used in tra-ditional medicine for hundreds of years. It has many bene-fits for resistance, strength and vitality of human body. This natural product is widely considered to help slow the aging process and assist with healing the body. Aging and disease are the result of losing the natural immune and growth fac-tors. It is considered helpful in alleviating the symptoms of influenza and the effects of some types of allergies and auto-immune diseases. It helps balance blood sugar levels and increase mental alertness and assists with weight loss. Since colostrum is an important and rich source of immune and growth factors, it is recommended regular intake, at all ages (Donovan and Odle, 1994). Pharmaceutical colos-trums are based on bovine sources and they are safe and effective health supplements. They are produced as pow-der or capsules as dietary products for oral intake. Vitamin E is an important component of colostrum. The esterified form of vitamin E (tocopherol acetate) is commonly used in commercial pharmaceutical health supplements because of better stability in the products.For the vitamin E determination purification of the sample is necessary in order to perform HPLC analysis, be-cause of colostrum is very complex sample and cannot be directly injected into the HPLC column. The objective of this study was to evaluate both a-tocopherol and tocopher-ol acetate content in commercial pharmaceutical colostrum product by using previously developed solid phase extrac-tion (SPE) and HPLC method.