By talking with the patients, pharmacists can identify the majority, as well as, solve minor health problems, ed-ucate patients on self-medication, proper use of medicines and medical devices and where necessary direct the patient to the doctor.The objective of this study was to determine in which degree patients/citizens trust in knowledge and expertise of pharmacists subject to their health status, age and education.Materials and methodsFor the needs of this study were used responses to ques-tions from a questionnaire conducted in 26 chosen Farma-nea pharmacies in Belgrade, Republic of Serbia, during the period from January 3rd to February 28th, 2014. The questionnaire was anonymous and consisted of 17 closed type questions. The patients filled out the questionnaires in the pharmacy either alone or in consultation with pharma-cists. At the beginning of the questionnaire the patients were asked to state their health status, age and education level. The questions referred to reasons and frequency of pharma-cy visits and counseling service satisfaction. For the needs of this survey four questions from questionnaire were cho-sen and the influence of health status, age and education lev-el of respondents was analyzed.The chosen questions were to give answers to: (1) Most common reasons patients visit pharmacies, i.e. how many of them state counseling for minor ailments as major reason for visit to the pharmacy; (2) To what degree do the patients first consult the pharmacist when facing a minor health problem and (3) Do they subsequently consult the GP; (4) Which health professional do the patients consult on queries relat-ed to proper use of medicines or medical devices. The ques-tionnaires were processed by statistic program SPSSV19.Results and discussionA total of 3656 fully completed questionnaires were collected. This survey presents and discusses results ob-tained by analyzing of responses to four questions from the questionnaire depending on the health status, age and edu-cation level of respondents. To the question "Which is the most common reason for your visits to the pharmacy" 21.4% of the patients an-swered that they visited the pharmacy because of health problem, 27.1% in order to obtain prescription medicine from pharmacy and 51.5% came to buy a specific product.Related to health status structure of respondents, the analysis showed that healthy persons (23.4%), persons with minor ailments (24.5%) as well as those who didn`t check their health status (27.6%) were those who visited the pharmacy for reason of health problem in a percentage above the general average.Patients who suffered from serious health problems and severe chronic illnesses in largest number of cases (60.8% S1 OP 1444Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 43 - 44 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsand 69.6%) visited the pharmacy in order to get their pre-scription medicines. Analysis determined that persons who suffered from serious health problems and severe chronic illnesses where in 57% of cases over 65 years of age, hence the most common reason for their visits was as anticipated.In view of patient age structure, oscillations to general average answers were most noticeable with persons young-er than 30 and over 65 years of age. Patients younger than 30 in 26.6% of cases visited the pharmacy for health prob-lem reasons.Patients over 65 stated obtaining of prescription med-icine (59.2%) as the most common reason for visiting the pharmacy which was expected, hence these patients were the majority of those who suffered from serious health prob-lems and severe chronic illnesses.Related to respondent education level there were no significant oscillations in percentage of patients visiting the pharmacy for health problem reason.To the question "Which health professional do you first consult when facing a minor health problem", the majority of respondents, 65.3%, stated that they first consult the phar-macist, while 34.7% stated that they first consult their doc-tor/dentist.Healthy persons (74.4%), persons with minor health problems (69.8%) and those who don`t check their health status (81.6%) first consult the pharmacist when facing a minor health problem.Patients younger than 65 in a larger number of cases consulted a pharmacist when having a minor health prob-lem. Patients over 65 years of age were in 67.3% of cases persons who suffered from serious health problems and se-vere chronic illnesses, who because of possible deteriora-tion of health status or comorbidity in 54.2% of cases con-sulted their doctor when facing a minor health problem. Fur-thermore these patients visit their doctors once per month to receive prescriptions for their regular therapy and use this opportunity for physician counseling (Nikolic et al., 2014).The responses to the question "Do you visit your doctor after pharmacist counseling regarding the same health prob-lem" were analyzed on the answers of those who said that they first consult the pharmacist when facing a minor health problem. Results have shown that 81% of them don`t con-sult their doctor related to same health problem.The patient health structure analysis determined that persons who suffered from serious health problems and se-vere chronic illnesses in a lager degree, in relation to aver-age question response, subsequently consulted their doctor. The stated patient group visits their doctor once monthly in order to get their regular monthly therapy prescription and uses these visits for counseling (Nikolic et al., 2014).Patients younger than 45 do not consult the doctor after pharmacist counseling in 85.6% of cases, while in 31.7% of patients over 65 years of age subsequently consult their doc-tor, which was expected bearing in mind their health status.Results analysis to question "When you hear in a com-mercial "please consult your doctor or pharmacist on indi-cations, safety precautions and adverse reactions related to medicine or medical device", who do you consult" showed that 61.6% of patients consulted the pharmacist, 15.5% the doctor and 22.9% of patients didn`t consult neither the doc-tor nor pharmacist.Responses from persons suffering from serious health problems and severe chronic differed from those of gener-al average, hence they in 22.1% and 24.8% of cases respec-tively consulted their doctor after watching the advertise-ment. An interesting fact is that persons with serious health problems consulted the pharmacist in 64.4% of cases af-ter watching the commercial. The category of patients who don`t check their health status especially stands out. They don`t consult any health professional after watching the commercial in 49.3% of cases.ConclusionThe majority of the respondents recognize the impor-tance of the counseling role of the pharmacist. Healthy persons, persons with minor health problems, persons who don`t check their health status and those younger than 65 years of age visit the pharmacy for counseling on their health issues in over the average number of cases. Persons under 45 years of age don't consult their GP after consult-ing the pharmacist regarding the same health problem in a high percentage.The majority of patients on indications, safety precau-tions and adverse reactions consult their pharmacist after watching a commercial.This study has shown that the role of pharmacist in primary healthcare is reflected in education on preven-tion, solving of minor ailments and advising on therapy for patients who are younger, those who consider them-selves healthy or are with minor ailments while for patients who are older, with serious or chronic illnesses the primary role of the pharmacist is in therapy dispensing, advising on proper use and monitoring of therapy outcome. This survey has shown that persons who don`t check their health status see the pharmacy as the place of their first choice. ReferencesChandra, A., Malcolm, N., Fetters, M., 2003. Practising health promotion through pharmacy counseling activities. Health Promot. Pract. 4, 64-71. Nikolic, L., Ivosevic, U., Lalic Cunkovic, N., Savicevic, M., 2014. Contribution of pharmacists to primary healthcare - Serbia case study. Apotekarska Praksa online 1, 11-19. Available at: http://farmkom.rs/index.php?option=com_flippingbook&view=book&id=14&page=1&lang=sr-yu (Accessed 2014 Dec 20).Puspitasari, H.P., Aslani, P., Krass, I., 2009. A review of counseling practices on prescription medicines in community pharmacies. Res. Social Adm. Pharm. 5,197-210.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 45 - 46 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615:004.738.5(4)Short communicationInternet and computer use amongst European pharmacy studentsSelenYegeneoglu1*, Bilge Sozen Sahne1, Daisy Volmer2, Afonso Cavaco3, Maarten Postma41 Hacettepe University Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy Management, 06100 Sihhiye Ankara-Turkey2 University of Tartu Department of Pharmacy, Tartu-Estonia3 Universidade de LisboaFaculdade de Farmacia & iMed. Lisboa, Lisboa, Portugal4 University of Groningen Faculty of Medical Sciences, Department of Pharmacoepidemiology and Pharmacoeconomics, Groningen Research Institute of Pharmacy, Groningen-The Netherlands* selen.yegen@gmail.comIntroductionInformation technologies are accepted as ubiquitous resources for social and professional information. In particular, Internet use has become important to most daily activities, from work and entertainment to education and participation in society. Also, statistics show that  3/4 of all European citizens (EU-27) is using Internet, with Central and Nordic countries as the most active and Southern countries comparably less active (Seybert, 2012). Internet communication is preferred due to speed and ease in many services and activities (Komerik, 2005). With younger generations being the most intense users, students present an interesting group for studying Internet use and potential misuse. Social networks, online gambling, shopping, banking, watching TV series/movies, and education resources, are known to be the most popular reasons for using Internet among university students (Miller et al., 2010; Turkish Statistical Institute, 2012; Wang et al., 2011; Yilmaz, 2012). However, no comparative analysis on Internet use has been done so far on pharmaceutical students, which present a rather homogeneous group, with curricula that are equivalent or similar in most European countries (PHARMINE Consortium, 2011). Knowing some differences between Southern and Northern European countries, a comparitive analysis focusing on both differences and similarities between countries and regions seems worthwhile. The present study aims to describe Internet use by pharmacy undergraduates as well as to establish an initial comparison of this use amongst European countries. Materials and methodsThis study is descriptive using a questionnaire-based survey. Pharmacy Schools from Northern, Central and Southern Europe participated. A total of 748 4th year university students from Estonia, Latvia, the Netherlands, Portugal and Turkey were invited to participate. Notably, included centers were: Ankara, Gazi, Hacettepe Universities; the University of Lisbon; the University of Groningen; the University of Tartu; and Universities of Riga Stradins and Latvia. The questionnaire aimed to gather information regarding students' socio-demographics, health status, and Internet use and potential misuse. The questionnaire was pre-tested in each partner country, assuring that no linguistic issues remained. The participants filled out a paper-based questionnaire in the presence of a local coordinator. Data gathering and structuring was completed for all countries in December 2012. SPSS v15.0 was used for data entry, merging and qualitative and quantitative analysis. Pearson Chi-Square, ANOVA and linear correlations, were applied using the significance level at 0.05.S1 OP 1546Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 45 - 46 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsResults and discussionOut of 748 graduate students, 654 students (87.4%) par-ticipated in the study. The majority of the participants were from Turkey (44.5%) and Portugal (32.6%). In all countries, the majority of the students were females.Students' Internet use is presented in Table 1. Latvi-an students used Internet at school in a significantly low-er frequency (43.1%) than students from all other countries. For all countries, students used Internet more outside (e.g. at home) than inside the school, except in the Netherlands. Turkish students reported less frequent use of Internet at home than rest students in other countries (p<0.001). The frequency of Internet access via smart or cell phone was less than 19.0% in Latvia, presenting the lowest frequency of all countries investigated here (p<0.001) compared to all other studied countries.The most often reported purposes for using Internet were communication, academic work, social networking, listening to music and watching movies. Dutch students used Internet for social networking and listening to music more frequently than the others and this difference was sta-tistically significant (p=0.016 and p=0.002, respectively). Portuguese students used Internet for both watching mov-ies and shopping less frequently than all the others (p=0.002 and p<0.001, respectively). Internet use for chatting was more popular among the Estonian students than among oth-er pharmacy students (p<0.001).The results of this study provide valuable evidence on how Internet is being used by pharmacy students, recogniz-ing its true potential and actual use in this group in higher education (Garrison and Kanuka, 2004). This study aimed to look at a coherent educational co-hort (i.e. 4th year pharmacy students) between 5 countries: 2 Mediterranean, 1 Central European and 2 Baltic nations. There was a good participation rate (near 90%). The pharmaceutical profession in Europe is predomi-nantly a female occupation (FIP, 2012; Ruiz et al., 2006). And this predominance was also found in all the surveyed countries. Beyond the demographic apparent homogeneity, com-puter and Internet use varied significantly between studied countries, with a lower overall use for the Turkish partic-ipants. This lower use can be explained by relatively low computer penetration rates at home in Turkey among the 5five countries (Turkish Statistical Institute, 2012). Internet use for communication and educational pur-poses was found not to differ from country to country. This suggests a common electronic ground for studying pharma-cy, although information sources may vary. More important-ly, results confirmed the central role of computers and In-ternet for communication and performing academic work. All countries presented high percentages for those activi-ties, which have a clear implication on the development of teaching and learning. Educators should not neglect the pro-gressive, but continuously, swift to online education, while keeping the right balance between media-based/distant and face-to-face teaching (Ruiz et al., 2006). Social networks have emerged as important tools for maintaining and improving social capital (Johnston et al., 2013; Miller et al., 2010). Although statistically significant differences were found in this sample, high use of social net-works was observed in all countries. This issue may take a lot time and interrupt academic working and success. Also social isolation may occur because of intense use of Inter-net social networking. This can lead the teaching staff to re-member their roles and responsibilities: the emergence of an "e-professionalism" concept, the legal and ethical implica-tions of online postings in students' educational decisions, how online personas may blend into professional life - all these factors increase educators' role demands (Cain, 2008). ConclusionAccording to the results, Internet and computer use amongst pharmacy students during their education seems to be equivalent amongst culturally diverse countries.ReferencesCain, J., 2008. Online social networking issues within academia and pharmacy education. AJPE 72(1), Article 10.Clauson, K.A., Singh-Franco, D., Sircar-Ramsewak, F., Joseph, S., Sandars, J., 2013. Social media use and educational preferences among first-year pharmacy students. Teach. Learn Med. 25(2), 122-128.FIP, 2012. FIP Global Pharmacy Workforce Report. Amsterdam: International Pharmaceutical Federation.Garrison, D.R., Kanuka, H., 2004. Blended learning: Uncovering its transformative potential in higher education. Internet High Educ. 7, 95-105. Johnston, K., Tanner, M., Lalla, N., Kawalski, D., 2013. Social capital: the benefit of Facebook 'friends'. Behav Inform. Technol. 32(1), 24-36. Komerik, N., 2005. Use of the Internet among dental students in Turkey. J. Dent. Educ. 69(4), 470-475.Miller, R., Parsons, K., Lifer, D., 2010. Students and social networking sites: the posting paradox. Behav. Inform. Technol. 29(4), 377-382.PHARMINE Consortium, 2011. Pharmacy education in Europe. Retrieved from. Available: http://www.pharmine.org/.Ruiz, J.G., Mintzer, M.J., Leipzig, R.M., 2006. The impact of E-learning in medical education. Acad. Med. 81(3), 207-212.Seybert, H., 2012.Internet use in households and by individuals in 2012. Eurostat - Statistics in focus 50/2012. Turkish Statistical Institute, 2012. Information and communication technology (ICT) use survey on households and individuals. Press Release 10880.Wang, H., Zhou, X., Lu, C., Wu, J., Deng, X., Hong, L., 2011. Problematic Internet use in high school students in Guangdong Province, China. PLoS ONE. Yilmaz, B., 2012. Profiles of university students according to Internet usage with the aim of entertainment and communication and their affinity to Internet.