ICH Q6A . Specifications: test procedures and acceptance criteria for new drug substances and new drug products: Chemical substances.The United States Pharmacopeia Convention, 2015. The United States Pharmacopeia and National Formulary (USP 38-NF 33); The United States Pharmacopeia Convention, Inc.: Rockville, MD, USA.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 217 - 218 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.233.074:543.544.3Short communicationValidation of GC method for determination of ethanol, methanol, toluene and benzene as residual solvents in pholcodine monohydrate drug substanceOlivera Blazeska*, Vlado Petrusevski, Ana Petkovska, Monika Stojanovska, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Irena Brasnarska, Biljana Sapkareva, Sonja UgarkovicInstitute for Research and Development, Alkaloid AD - Skopje, bul. Aleksandar Makedonski br. 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* oblazeska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionDuring extraction and synthesis of pholcodine mono-hydrate, organic solvents are used. For that purpose a HS-GC-FID method for determination of ethanol, methanol, toluene and benzene in pholcodine monohydrate has been developed and validated. Even though benzene is not used during any of the manufacturing stages, it is a regulato-ry requirement to monitor for its eventual presence in the product, since benzene is a known degradation product of toluene. Furthermore, benzene is the most toxic among these solvents (Class 1) and it is recommended to be avoid-ed in the production of drug substances, in accordance to ICH Q3C (R5) (ICH, 2011). Methanol and toluene show severe toxicity (Class 2), hence their usage should be limit-ed, and ethanol is the least toxic of them (Class 3) (Ph.Eur., 2014). As residual solvents are highly volatile compounds, HS-GC-FID is the most convenient technique for their de-termination and quantitation (Ph.Eur., 2014). This study describes the development and validation of method for routine analysis of four residual solvents (ethanol, methanol, toluene and benzene) in pholcodine monohydrate drug substance.Materials and methodsEthanol, methanol, N,N-dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) and N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) - GC grade were ob-tained from Merck Millipore (Darmstadt, Germany), tolu-ene and benzene-from Sigma Aldrich (Sent Louis, USA) and pholcodine monohydrate API was obtained from Al-kaloid AD Skopje, Macedonia. The method was developed, optimized and validated on a Shimadzu 2010 Plus gas chromatograph, equipped with FID detector and PAL AOC-5000 autosampler for headspace and liquid samples (Shimadzu Corporation, Kyoto, Japan), with helium as a carrier gas in the split mode. The separation of the components was performed using Agilent DB-624 (30 m x 0.53 mm x 3 um) WCOT capillary column.Results and discussionA standard stock solution in N,N-Dimethylformamide containing the investigated residual solvents in API phol-codine monohydrate was prepared in such a way that the final concentrations of the solvents were approximately 2500 ppm for ethanol, 1500 ppm for methanol, 440 ppm for toluene and 1 ppm for benzene (concentration level 100%). The sample solution was prepared by weighing ap-proximately 500 mg of pholcodine monohydrate in a 20 ml headspace vial, followed by addition of 1 mL N,N-Dimeth-ylformamide as diluent.Chromatographic method development started with ini-tial gradient conditions: 0 to 10 minutes isocratic segment at 45 degC, then linear temperature gradient of 10 degC/min to 220 degC and finally and isocratic segment at 220 degC for 2.5 minutes, for total chromatographic runtime of 30 minutes. These conditions provided complete separation of the four tested solvents and the diluent, with adequate column per-formance and good peak shape for all analytes, howev-S2 PP 100218Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 217 - 218 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationser with unnecessarily long run time. Judging by this con-clusion, chromatographic conditions was performed by in-creasing the initial column temperature to 50 degC, shortening the initial isocratic segment to 3 minutes and selecting more aggressive temperature gradient of 20 degC/min.The method was validated within the ICH guidelines. Parameters included in the validation procedure were: specificity, linearity and range, accuracy, repeatability and intermediate precision, limit of detection, limit of quantita-tion and robustness. In order to determine the specificity of the optimized method, a blank solution (DMF), sample solution and in-dividual standard solutions of the investigated residual sol-vents, as well as their mixture, were injected onto the GC column. DB-624 column (30 m length x 0.53 mm i.d. x 3 um film thickness) provided sufficient baseline separation of all residual solvents, including the diluent, fulfilling the criterion for the resolution between ethanol and methanol peaks being not less than 4. The retention time for residual solvents individually and in spiked standard solution was determined. There was no co-elution between the observ-able peaks.Linearity evaluation was prepared by quantitative di-lutions of the stock solutions of ethanol, methanol and tol-uene in order to obtain solutions in the range from quantifi-cation limit to 150% of working concentration (Lokhannde et al., 2012). The average value for the area under the peak obtained from the three injections for each solvent was plotted against the corresponding concentration in ppm, hence calibration curves were obtained. The correlation coefficients were above 0.990. The accuracy of the analytical method was confirmed by evaluation of the recovery. The recovery test was car-ried out at three concentration levels: 50%, 100% and 150% of the limits for each residual solvent. The percent-age recovery ranges was from 82.12% to 104.41%.Repeatability of the system as a validation parame-ter was evaluated on the basis of the results for the rela-tive standard deviation from six successive injections. The RSD for at least of six injections was not more than 15% according to Ph.Eur. (Jahnavi and Saravanan, 2012). To evaluate the intermediate precision, six sample so-lutions were prepared individually using single batch of pholcodine monohydrate drug substance as per test meth-od, and were applied in two consecutive days according to the same procedure. The difference between the results ob-tained in two different days was less than 20%, so accep-tance criteria was fulfilled and the method was confirmed being precise.The limit of detection and limit of quantification were found to be specific for each solvent.Robustness was tested by introducing small variations in the method parameters: carrier gas flow (+- 0.1 ml/min), injector temperature (+- 5 degC) and detector temperature (+- 5 degC). For each set of variation, six replicate injections of the standard solution with concentration level of 100% were performed. The obtained results for all variations in-dicated that studied variations of GC-HS conditions will not cause any significant changes in system suitability and the method robustness was confirmed.ConclusionDuring the validation procedure, carried out accord-ing to ICH guidelines, highly selective HS-GC-FID meth-od was developed and validated for the identification and quantification of residual solvents present in pholcodine monohydrate API through an understanding of the synthet-ic process, nature of solvents and nature of stationary phas-es of columns. The residual solvents, ethanol, methanol, toluene and benzene were determined and quantified. The developed method was found to be: specific, accurate, pre-cise and robust as per ICH guidelines, hence can be used for routine quality control of residual solvents in pholco-dine monohydrate API. ReferencesEuropean Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2014. European Pharmacopoeia 8th edition. Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare of the Council of Europe (EDQM). Strasbourg, France.ICH (International Council on Harmonization on Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use), 2011. Q3(R5) Guedeline for residual solvents, Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Switzerland. Jahnavi, N., Saravanan, V.S., 2012. Method development and validation for the determination of residual solvents in methocarbamol pure drug by HC-GC. Int. J. Res. Pharm. Chem. 2(2), 2231-2781.Lokhannde, R.S., Sinagare, P.U., Jadhav, P.V., 2012. Development and validation of headspace method for determination of residual solvents in Diphenoxylate hydrochloride bulk drug. Am. J. Chem. 2(2), 1-5.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 219 - 220 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.276.074:543.544.5.068.7Short communicationEvaluation of drug-excipient interaction in formulation of ibuprofen topical gel by High Performance Liquid ChromatographyElena Kazandzievska*, Slavica Mitrevska, Irena Brasnarska, Liljana Krsteska, Dejan Kostovski, Marina Kajdzanoska, Sonja UgarkovicResearch & Development, Alkaloid AD-Skopje, Blv. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* ekazandzievska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionIbuprofen is a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) used to reduce fever and treat mild to moderate pain or inflammation caused by minor injury, menstrual cramps, toothache, back pain, arthritis or headache. There is a great interest to develop non-oral dosage forms of ibu-profen to reduce its common side effects which are related to gastric disorders. Using topical gel means that the total amount of ibuprofen in the body remains low; this in turn means reducing the mentioned side effects.In general excipients are known to facilitate the ad-ministration and release of active component as well as to protect and stabilize formulation from the environment. However, excipients can also give rise to inadvertent or unintended effects such as increased degradations of the drug. Knowledge of the chemistry of the active substance and excipients can often minimize formulation surprises (Bharate et al., 2010). Assessment of possible interactions (incompatibility) between the active substance (i.e. ibupro-fen) and different excipients along with the evaluation of thermal stability are crucial parts of a normal study prior to the formulation of a medicine (Lira et al., 2007).Excipients used for formulating gel for topical use often consist of gelling agents (cellulose derivates; car-bomers; poloxamers), solvents in which the active ingredi-ent is dispersed or solubilized (water, alchohol), pH stabi-lizers which neutralize polymers as a means of gel forma-tion (organic amines, NaOH), penetration enhancers and cooling agents (menthol).The aim of this study was to evaluate binary/terna-ry mixtures prepared between ibuprofen and some of the most used excipients for gel topical formulations and pre-dict possible interactions by evaluating the related and deg-radation products of ibuprofen using HPLC stability indi-cating method, when exposed to different stress conditions for a predetermined period of time. Materials and methodsMaterialsActive pharmaceutical ingredient (API) ibuprofen used for preparation of the mixtures was of pharmaco-poeial quality (with Certificate of Suitability to the mono-graphs of the European Pharmacopoeia, CEP). European Pharmacopoeia Chemical Reference standard ibuprofen impurity BCRS was used. Excipients used for preparation of the binary/ternary mixtures are all pharmacopeial grade. All other chemicals used in this study were obtained com-mercially as HPLC or analytical grade reagents.Preparation of binary and ternary mixtures Binary and ternary mixtures were prepared by mix-ing equal masses of ibuprofen and the excipient (1:1 and 1:1:1), except Propylene glycol (1:2). Diisopropylamine was pre-hated at temperature of 40-45 degC. Due to aggre-gate form of the excipients, some mixtures were liquids, solid state and slurry mixtures.One of the approaches to investigate drug-excipient in-teraction is using drug and excipients under thermal meth-ods of analyses (Patel et al., 2015). All binary/ternary mix-tures and pure API, were stored under stress conditions, ex-amining the effect of temperature and humidity at different conditions (25 degC/60% RH and 40 degC/75% RH) for 14 days.S2 PP 101220Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 219 - 220 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsMethodsEvaluation of related and degradation products of ibu-profen in binary/ternary mixtures, was performed using validated HPLC method. The equipment consisted of Agi-lent 1260 binary pump, 1260 diode array detector, and de-tection wavelength on 214 nm. Samples were analyzed on Zorbax Extend C18 column (150 mm x 4.6 mm column ID, 5um particle size). The mobile phase consisted a mixture of 1ml o-H3PO4 85% in 2L water and acetonitrile (64:36, v/v) and run through HPLC system at a flow rate of 2 ml/min at room temperature.Results and discussionThe HPLC method used in this study was selective since no other peaks due to excipients appear on the reten-tion time of ibuprofen. The limit of detection and quanti-fication were found to be 0.12 ug /ml and 0.40 ug/ml, re-spectively. Related substances present as impurities in ibuprofen can originate from the synthesis and from degradation. Ac-cording to Ph. Eur. (04/2008:0721) specified impurities in ibuprofen API are ibuprofen impurity A, impurity J and impurity N. All other impurities are limited as other/un-specified impurities. The results obtained from the HPLC analyses revealed that pure drug ibuprofen and the mixtures with Carbopol 940 and levomenthol, were stable during 14 days under both storage conditions since no significant change in the degradation profile were noted. There were no other peaks related to degradation products of drug or excipients. Binary mixture of ibuprofen and propylene glycol re-vealed significant increase of unknown impurities (RRT 1.57; RRT 1.67; RRT 1.74) at 40 degC/75% RH. This may be expected having in mind the chemical properties of pro-pylene glycol as oxidative reagent which is easily degrad-ed under presence of high temperature, acidic or basic con-taminants and the extreme mass ratio (1:2) between ibu-profen and propylene glycol. Regarding the corresponding binary mixtures, the ter-nary mixture, composed of ibuprofen, diisopropylamine and Carbopol 940 shows different degradation profile. While 25 degC/60% RH for 14 days did not reveal signifi-cant change in the degradation profile, 40 degC/75% RH re-vealed rise of unknown impurities (RRT 0.11 and RRT 0.12) which are not noted as degradation products in the binary mixtures. As for RRT 0.38 which occurs in signifi-cant amount in the binary mixture with diisopropylamine (40 degC/75% RH), in the ternary mixture it is reduced for 60% on 40 degC/75% RH, and not detected on 25 degC/60% RH, for the same period of time. It is well known that the chemical compatibility of an API in a binary mixture may differ from that of a multi-component prototype formulation. Although the degrada-tion is evident at elevated temperature or at unrealistical-ly high concentration ratio of excipient to API, they may not be seen at ambient (real) temperature or at excipient to API ratio for the duration of the product shelf-life (Bharate et al., 2010). However such information can be very help-ful in analyzing any instability issues with commercial for-mulations or during the development of new formulations. ConclusionTraditionally, excipients have been regarded as inert. In this study, excipients which were commonly used for gel topical formulation of ibuprofen were evaluated for inter-actions possibility by estimating the degradation profile of ibuprofen in the mixtures under stress conditions.No significant change of known impurities was ob-served during 14 days stress conditions in all samples. Bi-nary mixtures with organic amines (triethanolamine and diisopropylamine) and propylene glycol, reveled signifi-cant increase of unknown impurities on accelerated condi-tions of 40 degC/75% RH. However the behavior of ternary mixture, composed of ibuprofen, Carbopol 940 and DIPA is completely different then the binary mixtures (mild ris-ing of unknown impurities which are not noted in the bina-ry samples and extreme reducing of the significantly raised unknown impurities).ReferencesBharate, S.S., Bharate, B.S., Bajaj, N.A., 2010. Interaction and incompatibilities of pharmaceutical excipients with active pharmaceutical ingredients: a comprehensive review. J. Excip. Food Chem.