The statistical analysis was per-formed using Statistical package for Social Science (SPSS v. 17.0). Descriptive statistics were calculated to summa-rize the data. T test and chi-square test were used to ana-lyze differences among groups. Statistical significance was set at the level p<0.05.Results and discussionIn total there were 450 questionnaires distributed and 352 returned as completed (response rate 78.2%). Majority of the respondents (97.2%) agreed that health promotion is very important to patients and half of them (53.4%) considered that community pharmacies could provide this type of services. Although even 69.3 present S1 PP 3688Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 87 - 88 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsof pharmacy professionals think that smoking cessation information is available for the pharmacy patients in many various resources, but only 31,9 percent of the respondents think that patients who want to quit smoking can do it by themselves without any professional consultation and the only condition for stop smoking is a wish. 73.3 percent of all the respondents agrees that community pharmacy is the place where comes patients with smoking cessation questions, but only 33.3 percent of the respondents strongly agreed with a statement that that "I am a qualified professional who can help people who want to stop smoking" (26.5 percent disagreed with this statement). Most of the pharmacist (85.3 percent) also disagreed with a statement that "It is nothing wrong to smoke few cigarettes per day". Respondents have experienced interest towards smoking cessation consultation one to two times per day and mostly it took up to five minutes to communicate with patient. Despite on 79.8% of the respondents reported having professional experience on smoking cessation consultation, a number of barriers connected with pharmacist (professional competence and communication skills); management of pharmacy (payment for extended services, selection of nicotine replacement products, possibility for private consultation, lack of time for communication with patients) and governmental activities (dissemination of information on tobacco use risks and reimbursement of nicotine replacement therapy) were listed. More frequent information sources about smoking cessation for pharmacists were professional journals and books (76.1%), formal education (university/college) and internet (53.6%) and the information provided from industry of nicotine replacement therapies 4 (2.3%), the patient's motivation (91.1%), pharmacist's competence (78.6%) and duration of the consultation were named as the main factors for successful communication. Pharmacists who had longer working experience and previous status of smoking were more keen on providing smoking cessation consultation (p<0.05). Nicotine gum (94.4%) and nicotine patches (86.3%) were indicated to be the most effective medications for ceasing smoking. ConclusionCommunity pharmacists in Lithuania have positive perception towards health promotion activities at community pharmacy. Most of the respondents declared existing professional knowledge for provision of this type of services. Smoking cessation counseling is everyday practice at community pharmacies in Lithuania. Improving pharmacists' education in patient counseling and health promotion including smoking cessation would increase quality of extended community pharmacy services in the future. ReferencesWHO, 2008. Milestones in Health Promotion Statements from Global Conferences. World Health Organization, Geneva, SwitzerlandPoster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 89 - 90 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.035.7-053.2(496.5)Short communicationACE inhibitors, calcium antagonists, b- blockers products authorized in Albania and their availability for pediatric groups Briseida Dosti*, Ledjan MalajDepartment of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine-Tirana, Str. Kongresii Manastirit, No. 133, 1005 Tirana, Albania* brizidosti@yahoo.comIntroductionIn order to provide medical assistance to children, physicians often have prescribed unauthorized medicinal products due to lack of suitable and authorized medicine for children (Cuzzolinet al., 2006). This attitude seems to lead to an increased rate of adverse drug reactions and medical errors (Auby, 2008). Moreover, tablets have been authorized for children below the age of 6 years, even though they may be not able to swallow tablets (Cohen et al., 2009). It is very important to study at what rate authorized medicines are really adequate for use in children. The first objective of this study was to evaluate the number of medicines and active ingredients for pediatric population that are authorized and marketed in Albania, for five selected groups. The second objective was to evaluate the age-appropriateness of the selected medicines evaluated on two aspects: dose capability and suitability of the pharmaceutical form for use in children.Materials and methodsFrom database of medicines of Albanian National Agency of Medicines and Medical Devices in Albania, till 10 April 2015, was identifies authorized medicines. For this study were selected the following active ingredients: ACE Inhibitors: Captopril, Ramipril, Enalapril; Calcium antagonists: Nifedipine, Verapamil, Amlodipine; b- Blockers: Propranolol, Carvedilol, Atenolol. This database doesn't allow extraction of marketed products and active ingredients classified based on age-appropriateness. For this reason were the evaluated Summary of Product Characteristics (SmPC). From SmPCs that were used sources information document, were analyzed sections: pharmaceutical form, therapeutic indications, posology, route of administration, suitability of dosages and pharmaceutical forms for use in children. A special focus was dedicated to age-appropriateness of selected products. First investigated aspect was if recommended dose is prescribed to children based on classification of pediatric age: preterm newborn infants, term newborn infants, infants and toddlers, children and adolescents. Second investigated aspect was if approved pharmaceutical form, for selected products in this study, were suitable for use in children. For solid forms (such as tablets and capsules) were evaluated presence of score line and possibility of opening or not of contain of capsules and mixing of it with liquid.Based on all prescribed methodology use for this study were collected these data: authorized indications; authorized age-group; pharmaceutical form; authorized dosage; presence of score line in tablets or film coated tablets; information on possibility for opening capsules contains.Results and discussionIn total was studies 118 authorized medicinal products in Albania; 5 products containing Captopril, 18 products containing Ramipril, 17 products containing Enalapril, 17 products containing Nifedipine, 9 products containing Verapamil, 19 products containing Amlodipine, 1 product containing Propranolol, 24 products containing Carvedilol and 8 products containing Atenolol. Evaluation of the SmPCs of products suggesting that only 3 active substances are authorized for use in children. Furthermore, all these products were for solid oral intake forms and all were tablets (n = 118, 100 %). Investigation of the SmPCs for age-appropriateness of these products S1 PP 3790Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 89 - 90 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsbased on recommended dose and suitability of forms for use in children showed that all products are authorized in following pharmaceutical forms: 78.5 % tablets, 7.4 % coated tablets, 12.4 % modified-release film-coated tablets and 1.7 % film coated tablets. For any active ingredient weren't found authorized liquid formulations, which are more appropriate for use in children. Evaluation of authorized solid (tablets, film coated tablets, capsules) pharmaceuticals forms for the presence score line, in other to archives smaller dosages shows these results: 40.7 % of medicinal products were without score line (n = 48), 53.4 % have score line in one side of the tab-let (n = 63), 3.4 % have score line in both sides (n = 4) and for 2.5 % (n = 3) information wasn't available in checked SmPCs.ConclusionThis study shows lack of availability of pediatric medicines for selected products and shows that pediatric medicines may not be age-appropriate. Therefore, are needed more efforts to increase the number of drugs authorized for the pediatric groups. The development of medicines for use in children require that a specific active ingredient need to be available in different dosage forms and strengths. The dose capability was considered an important criteria. A medicine is either dose capable or it is not. However, the suitability of pharmaceutical forms is not as absolute. According to EU reflection paper tablets and capsules are only suitable from the age of 6 years. However, recent studies have shown that small tablets can be swallowed by young children. Also, some capsules can be opened and their content can be mixed with liquids, such as water. This make possible easy intake comparing with other solid forms.Healthcare personnel's should consider that by using formulation not appropriate for children may cause administration errors, lack of therapeutic compliance and unexpected side effects. In order to reduce the risk of any of below problems, they are encouraged to search between marketed products the most appropriate medicine for treating groups of pediatric population.ReferencesAuby, P., 2008. Pharmaceutical research in pediatric populations and the new EU Pediatric Legislation: an industry perspective. Child Adolesc. Psychiatry Ment. Health 2, 38.Cohen, R., de La Rocque, F., Lecuyer, A., Wollner,C., Bodin,MJ., Wollner, A., 2009. Study of the acceptability of antibiotic syrups, suspensions, and oral solutions prescribed to pediatric outpatients. Eur. J. Pediatr. 168(7), 851-857.Cuzzolin, L., Atzei. A., Fanos, V., 2006. Off-label and unlicensed prescribing for newborns and children in different settings: a review of the literature and a consideration about drug safety. Expert. Opin. Drug Saf. 5, 703-718.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 91 - 92 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.12(474.5)Short communicationThe characteristics of non-chain community pharmacies in Lithuania and their owners' attitude towards professional autonomyJurgita Dauksiene1,2*, Edita Tiurninaite1, Edita Kizeviciene1,2, Aiste Balzekiene31 Lithuanian University of Health sciences, Academy of Medicine, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Drug technology and Social pharmacy, Sukileliu str.13, LT-50009 Kaunas, Lithuania2 Kaunas University of Applied Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacy, K. Petrausko str. 15, LT-44162 Kaunas, Lithuania3Kaunas University of Technology, Faculty of Social Sciences, Arts and Humanities, Institute of Public Policy and Administration, A. Mickeviciaus str. 37-1106, LT-44244 Kaunas, Lithuania* jurgita.dauksiene@gmail.comIntroductionIn recent years, the number of independently owned pharmacies has declined even as the total number of phar-macies in Lithuania has increased. The studies indicate that current factors affecting public pharmacy are not condu-cive to independent pharmacies development. Global trend is that that the traditional model of a pharmacist owning his/her own pharmacy is replaced by chains of communi-ty pharmacies .With increasing corporate ownership, there is concern that this trend will adversely affect the profes-sion's ability to influence pharmacy practice and practice change. "Dual loyalty" of pharmacists (to the employ-er and to the patient) is present in all sectors of pharma-cy practice. The professional autonomy is defined as "the right and privilege granted by a governmental authority to a class of professionals, and to each licensed individ-ual within that profession, to exercise independent, expert judgment within a legally defined scope of practice, to pro-vide services in the best interests of the client. It is very im-portant to pharmacy practice because of the change in the profession vision: the movement from a mainly medication compounding and supply to a patient-care function is ob-served. A code of Ethics for Pharmacists regulates the pri-ority of patient need and wellbeing, but corporate owner-ship can force the pharmacist to the enhancement of supply side" (FIP, 2014). The risks associated with the decrease of health professional autonomy are poorly perceived by con-sumers, policy makers, health insurance executives, hos-pital and health care administrators, and many health-care practitioners. The aim of the study is to determine the char-acteristics of non-chain community pharmacies and to ana-lyze their owners' attitude towards professional autonomy.Materials and methodsThe research was conducted from January to Decem-ber, 2015. The research projects was divided into 2 stages. In first part the independent non - chain pharmacies were identified and classified, and then only the owners of inde-pendent pharmacies who owned 4 or less pharmacies were asked to participate in the survey, using structured ques-tionnaire. Questionnaire included the questions about at-titudes towards professional autonomy and characteristics of their pharmacies. The evaluation of professional auton-omy consisted of two parts: pharmacist' professional au-tonomy benefits (1) for society and (2) for the profession of pharmacy. In total there were 121 questionnaires distrib-uted, out of which 102 were returned fully completed (re-sponse rate 84.3%). The statistical analysis was conducted using SPSS (Statistical Package for Social Science) 17.0. Descriptive statistics such as frequencies, means and rang-es were calculated to summarize the data. T test and chi-square were used to analyze the differences among groups. Results were considered significant when the p value was less than 0.05.S1 PP 3892Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 91 - 92 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsResults and discussion81.4% of the respondents were women and 91. % of respondents had a Master's degree in Pharmacy. In most cases, respondents indicated that they manage one pharma-cy (71.6%). Over half of respondents (56.86%) do not offer additional services in their pharmacies (i.e. blood pressure measurement, the determination of glucose concentration in the blood, etc.). Evaluating their pharmacies respon-dents provided the following answers - nearby treatment facility (55.89 %), is not far away from a direct competitor (58.82%), is not nearby intensive flow of people (85.29 %), is not a niche pharmacy (77.45%). Individual non-chain pharmacies owners claim highly qualified professionals work in their pharmacies (100%). Respondents strong-ly agreed and agreed that pharmacists, whose profession-al autonomy is unrestricted, (1) can meet the patients ex-pectations better (94.12%), can apply professional knowl-edge more competently (90.20%), can collaborate with other health care professionals more actively (87.25%), contribute to better health care system (92.16%) and (2) have greater public confidence (68.63%), avoid a conflict of interest when they recommend a product to patients (82.35%), ensure pharmacist profession cultural improve-ment and maintenance of professional honor (92.16%). According to respondents, the main benefits of indepen-dent pharmacy are motivated staff (39.31 %) and patient's stability (28.32%). The main difficulties in the manage-ment of an independent pharmacy are unequal discounts from wholesale (47.2%) and tax burden (25.6%). 43.14% of respondents hoped that they will be able to keep their pharmacies in the coming 5 years. This study highlights distinct 'independent' expression of professional identity and suggests the need to assess the value of independent community pharmacy as being different from but comple-mentary to the service provided by multiples/large chains.ConclusionThis study showed that all owners of independent community pharmacy work in their pharmacies as pharmacists or administration staff. Pharmacy owners perceive professional autonomy a high level.. They believe that it has great influence to their professional practice, enhance job satisfaction and bring added value to the patients. Despite all difficulties in the management and tough competition with non-chain pharmacies, the majority of independent community pharmacies owners value the professional autonomy and this encourages them to keep business.ReferencesFIP, 2014. Pharmacist Ethics and Professional Autonomy: Imperatives for Keeping Pharmacy Aligned with the Public Interest. Geneva. https://www.fip.org/www/uploads/database_file.php?id=358&table_id=.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 93 - 94 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.12-008.64-052:316.728Short communicationThe impact of socio-demographic and lifestyle factors in patients diagnosed with heart failure Pamela Gruda1*, Mihal Tase2, Mirjeta Beqiri3, Suela Kellici4 1 Representative Office of Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Rruga "Hoxha Tahsim" No.23, Tirana, Albania2 Internal Medicine Department, University Hospital Center, Rruga e Dibres 372, Tirana, Albania3 School of Business Administration, Gonzaga University, 502 E. Boone Ave Spokane, WA 99258-0009 4 Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Medicine, Rruga e Dibres, 371,Tirana, Albania* pamelagruda18@gmail.comIntroductionHeart failure can be defined as an abnormality of car-diac structure or function that results in the inability of the heart to deliver oxygen at a rate sufficient to meet the re-quirements of metabolizing tissues, despite normal filling pressures (McMurray et al., 2012). Heart failure is a ma-jor cause of morbidity and mortality. The aim of this study is to assess the impact of socio-demographic and lifestyle factors in patients diagnosed with heart failure as lifestyle interventions could have substantial power to improve pa-tient's health. The prevalence of heart failure is expected to increase by 25% by 2030 (Heidenreich et al., 2011). Heart failure is a life-threatening disease and it should be consid-ered a global priority. There is little evidence about heart failure patients in Albania, hence the necessity of carrying out such a study.Materials and methodsWe surveyed 200 patients, who were hospitalized at the department of Internal Medicine in QSUT "Nene Tereza", Tirana during the period from January 2015 until June 2015. The methodology consisted of the use of both primary and secondary data. This study was mostly prospective, but it had some retrospective elements. We used Chi-squared test to find statistically significant correlations between socio-demographic and lifestyle factors with heart failure.