Dissolution test was performed in relevant (sa-liva-like) conditions (phosphate buffer pH 7.4, 37degC, hor-izontal mixing) using cellulose ester- based Float a Lyser device (MWCO 100kDa) (at particular time point samples were withdrawn and analysed by HPLC means and Uv-de-tection /254nm/ of DOXY component).Results and discussionPhysiologically stable drug-free, as well as DOXY-enriched GNPs were successfully processed by optimised nanoprecipitation method, where EDC/NHS chemis-try was introduced in final processing phase. This chem-ical stabilization results in up to 70% crosslinking degree, identified by means of NH2 group's reduction. Due to the presence of suitable chemical moieties and their respec-tive pKa values, we assume that cross-linking occur not only between GEL molecules, but also between GEL and DOXY, and potentially, between the GEL and the Pluron-ic F-127. DOXI chemical "arrestment" was found to af-fect its dissolution profile, which, for particular formula-tion was estimate to 35% in 24 h period. Moreover, we observe significant effect of processing conditions, i.e. the mixing of DOXY-GNPs dispersions after nanoprecip-itation influence on their aggregation behaviour, giving a clue for more complex interactions within examined, mul-ticomponent system.Resulting DOXY- integrated GNPs where visualised mainly as individual, spherically shaped NPs in 150-240 nm size range, while, relatively high encapsulation effi-ciency (up to ~40%) and drug content (25%) were identi-fied for selected factors combination.ConclusionDOXY-enriched GNPs may be further applied as sin-gle formulation or included in other delivery system (e.g. Guided Tissue/Bone Regeneration /GTR, GBR/ mem-brane) and used in periodontal disease treatment. Nanopre-cipitation methodology can be further explored in process-ing of GNPs as carriers of different types of drugs, thus serving as a processing platform for facile, yet controlled engineering of drug delivery carriers.AcknowledgementThis work was financially supported by the ERAS-MUS MUNDUS mobility program- Join EU-SEE>PENTA (Action 2).ReferencesKhan, S.A. and Schneider, M., 2013. Improvement of nanoprecipitation technique for preparation of gelatin nanoparticles and potential macromolecular drug loading. Macromol. Biosci. 13, 455-63. Raheja, I., Kohli, K., Drabu, S., 2013. Periodontal drug delivery system containing antimicrobial agents. Int. J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci. 5, 11-16.Segundo-Pinon, E., Jacques, Y., Ganem-Quintanar, A., Quintanar-Guerrero, D., 2000. Optimization of a process ro obtain nanoparticles of triclosan for periodontal treatment. Proceed. Int'l. Symp. Control. Rel. Bioact. Mater, 27(c).Tamimi, F., Torres, J., Bettini, R., Ruggera, F., Rueda, C., Lopez-Ponce, M. and Lopez-Cabarcos, E., 2008. Doxycycline sustained release from brushite cements for the treatment of periodontal diseases. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A. 85, 707-714.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 443 - 444 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.849.2(497.7)Short communicationProspective of PET radiopharmaceutical development -new approach and strategy for their application Katerina Kolevska1*, Maja Velickovska2, Marija Atanasova1, Filip Jolevski1, Maja Chochevska1, Emilija Janevik-Ivanovska11Faculty of Medical Sciences, Goce Delcev University Stip, Republic of Macedonia2Project Unit for implementation of Positron Emission Tomography - PET Center Skopje in Republic of Macedonia, Ministry of Health of the Republic of Macedonia* katerina.kolevska@ugd.edu.mkIntroductionThe University Institute for Positron Emission Tomog-raphy of the Republic of Macedonia is the first center in our country with opportunity for production of PET radio-pharmaceuticals, which are prepared as sterile solutions for parenteral use. In the first line of production are includ-ed the most used radiopharmaceuticals for PET imaging, such as: [18F] FDG; Na18F; [13N] NH3; [11C] Choline and 68Ga labelled somatostatin analogs.Pharmacological approach of the PET radiopharma-ceutical drugs - first line of production of The University Institute for PET of Republic of Macedonia[18F] FDG[18F] FDG is the most widely used PET radiopharma-ceutical in clinical practice, especially in oncology, neu-rology and cardiology, providing functional information based on tissue metabolism. This radiopharmaceutical is a structural analogue of 2-deoxy-D-glucose labelled with positron-emitting isotope 189F in the position 2 of the glu-cose core structure. Widespread use of [18F] FDG is based on the principle of 'metabolic trapping' in the cancer cells.After intravenous administration, [18F] FDG through the bloodstream is distributed into cells with the same mechanism as plasma glucose. It is actively transported into the cell mediated by a group of structurally related glucose transport proteins (GLUT). Tumor cells have an overexpression of GLUT compared to a normal cell, and therefore the uptake of [18F] FDG is increased. When the [18F] FDG is transported in the cells, it is phosphorylat-ed in [18F] FDG-6-phosphate under the catalytic action of hexokinase and it remains metabolically trapped intracel-lularly, because [18F] FDG-6-phosphate is not a substrate for glucose-6-phosphate isomerase, the enzyme that me-tabolizes glucose (Scott et al., 2012).The accumulation of [18F] FDG in the malignant cells generally is proportional to the metabolic activity of the cancer cells, which enables their detection by the PET scanner. [18F] FDG is non-specific cancer radiopharma-ceutical. Increased accumulation of [18F] FDG occurs in processes such as inflammation, infection, especially sar-coidosis, tuberculosis, fungal infections, and pneumonia (Jacobson et al., 2012).Normally increased accumulation of [18F] FDG is ob-served in the brain because the glucose is the main ener-gy source for the brain. Also very important is the concen-tration of glucose in the blood of the patient and it should be evaluated prior to administration of [18F] FDG. The in-creased concentration of blood glucose causes elevated levels of insulin, which increases biodistribution of [18F] FDG in muscle and adipose tissue (Lindholm et al., 1993). [18F] Na18F[18F] Na18F PET/CT is diagnostic tool for imaging benign and malignant bone diseases. Fluoride ions are in-corporated into the bone matrix at the bone surface pref-erably in sites of newly mineralizing bone, such as during growth, infection, malignancy (primary or secondary), af-ter trauma or during inflammation. The initial [18F] Na18F distribution represents blood flow that varies among different bones. Almost all deliv-S4 PP 211444Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 443 - 444 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsered [18F] Na18F is retained by bone after a single pass of blood. The uptake of fluoride ions is better in osteoblastic processes, while purely osteolytic processes have a low-er uptake or even no uptake at all. [18F] Na18F is rapid-ly cleared from plasma and excreted by the kidneys. The target organ is bone, but approximately 20% is excreted through the kidney in the urine in the first 1-2 hours (Cz-ernin et al., 2010). [13N] NH3The main clinical application of [13N] NH3 radiophar-maceutical is assessment of myocardial perfusion in pa-tients with suspected or known coronary heart disease.Following intravenous injection, [13N] NH3 rapidly clears from the circulation. It is taken up mainly by the myocardium, brain, liver, kidneys, and skeletal muscle. [13N] NH3 is extracted from the capillaries through the ammonia transporter. The accumulation in tissue is in pro-portion to blood perfusion of the tissue.In the cells, it is converted to glutamine and can diffuse out of the cell or be metabolized to glutamate and retained within the cell. [13N] NH3 undergoes a five-enzyme step metabolism in the liver to yield [13N] Urea, the main cir-culating metabolite, which is eliminated from the body by the urinary excretion (Adeva et al., 2012). [11C] Choline [11C] Choline is radiopharmaceutical for oncological PET imaging of tumors which overexpress choline kinase. Result of overexpression of choline kinase is increased lev-el of phosphorylcholine by accumulation of free choline for cell membrane synthesis. [11C] Choline is accumulated preferentially within prostate cancer tissue, for that reason the most important application of this radiopharmaceutical in clinical practice is in visualization of this type of tumor. [18F] FDG is not first choice in visualization of the tumors in pelvis area, because of the low uptake, related to low-er expression of glucose transport proteins and to the huge [18F] FDG urinary excretion (Lodi et al., 2012).The maximal tumoral[11C] Choline uptake is related to primary tumor stage (Reske et al., 2006).After intrave-nous administration, the peak of uptake is reached by five minutes and the activity is retained over the subsequent 30 minute scanning period. The distribution of [11C] Choline is mainly to the pancreas, kidneys, liver, spleen and colon. The major metabolite detected in blood is [11C] Betaine (Roivainen et al., 2000).68Ga labelled somatostatin analogs: [68Ga] DOTATOC, [68Ga] DOTANOC and [68Ga] DOTATATEThe use of [68Ga] DOTATOC, [68Ga] DOTANOC and [68Ga] DOTATATE radiopharmaceuticals for visual-ization of neuroendocrine tumors is based on high affinity of the biological ligand to somatostatin receptors (SSTR). Natural somatostatin has low metabolic stability, therefore synthetic analogues with high affinity for SSTR and resis-tant to enzymatic degradation are developed. (Velykian, 2014). [68Ga] DOTA SST analogues show a rapid localiza-tion of the target site, fast blood and renal clearance. Ra-dioactive metabolites are not detected in serum or urine af-ter 4 hours. The maximum accumulation of activity in the tumor is reached 70 +- 20 min after injection. Excretion is almost entirely by the kidneys.ConclusionThe mapping of the radiopharmaceutical distribution in vivo provides images of functional morphology of or-gans in a non-invasive manner and plays an important role in the diagnosis of many common diseases associated with the malfunctioning of organs in the body as well as in the detection of certain type of cancers (IAEA, 2006).ReferencesAdeva, M.M., Souto, G., Blanco, N., Donapetry, C., 2012. Amonium metabolism in humans. Metabolism 61, 1495-511.Czernin, J., Satyamurthy, N., Schiepers, C., 2010. Molecular mechanisms of bone 18F-NaF deposition. J. Nucl. Med. 51, 1826-1829.IAEA, 2006, Advances in medical radiation imaging for cancer diagnosis and treatment, Nuclear Technology Review, pp. 110-127.Jacobson, S.M., Steichen, A.R., Peller, J.P., 2012. PET-CT and PET-MRI in Oncology.Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, pp.19-30.Lindholm, P., Minn, H., Leskinen-Kallio, S., Bergman, J., Ruotsalainen, U., Joensuu, H., 1993. Influence of the blood glucose concentration on FDG uptake in cancer. A PET Study. J. Nucl. Med. 34, 1-6.Lodi, F., Malizia, C., Castellucci, P., Cicoria, G., Fanti, S., Boschi, S. 2012. Synthesis of oncological [11C] radiopharmaceuticals for clinical PET. Nucl. Med. Bio. 39, 447-460.Reske, S.N., Blumstein, N.M., Neumaier, B., Gottfried, H.W., Finsterbusch, F., Kocot, D., Moller, P., Glatting, G., Perner, S., 2006.Imaging prostate cancer with 11C-Choline PET/CT. J. Nucl. Med. 47, 1249-54.Roivainen, A., Forsback, S., Gronroos, T., Lehikoinen, P., Kahkonen, M., Sutinen, E., Minn, H., 2000. Blood metabolism of [methyl-11C] choline; implications for in vivo imaging with positron emission tomography. Eur. J. Nucl. Med. 27, 25-32.Scott, P.J.H., Hockley, B.G., Kilbourn, M.R., 2012. Radiopharmaceuticals for positron emission tomography (Radiochemical syntheses Volume 1), John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey pp. 3-15.Velikyan, I., 2014.Prospective of 68Ga-Radiopharmaceutical Development.Theranostics 4, 47-80.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 445 - 446 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 665.58Short communicationCosmetovigilanceIrina DukovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, University Skopje "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* idukovska@gmail.comDefinition of a cosmeticThe human need for improvement of the physical appearance is in constant increase year after year. This is revealed by various types of tests and ongoing market research. Hence, the production, the application and the consumption of products for personal hygiene as well as cosmetic products for care, protection and enhancement of the beauty are becoming more and more popular among large number of consumers. A cosmetic product is classically defined as any preparation that is applied to the skin, eyes, mouth, hair or nails for the purpose of cleansing, appearance enhancement, protection and/or for pleasant smell. Unlike drugs, which are used for treatment or prevention of a disease in the body, cosmetics are not considered to change or affect the body's structure or functions. However, the distinction between drugs and cosmetics is sometimes not well defined. In spite of the considerable safety of and the high skin tolerance for the cosmetic products, adverse effects still occur from their use, which might be a result from the use of an inappropriately chosen product. Most often these adverse effects are of small or medium intensity and appear usually on the skin (Evaluation of the Cosmetics and Explosives Directives, 2007; Regulation (EC) N0 1223/2009). The research subject of this work is cosmetovigilance, which refers to a series of defined actions that have the purpose of revealing, estimating, monitoring, recording and preventing the potential undesirable reactions that appear as a consequence of the application of a cosmetic product. The concept of cosmetovigilance is recently added to the European Regulation for cosmetic products. It is a form for objective monitoring of the unwanted effects of the cosmetic products, which are of public health interest. In contrast to the monitoring carried out by the industry, the aim of which is the safety of its own market for commercial purposes, cosmetovigilance has strictly medical aim (Vigan and Castelain, 2014).The European regulationThe European resolution (ResAP (2006)1) from 2006 laid the foundations of the cosmetovigilance system which is based on the reports from the recorded cases. The European Regulation (EU) 1223/2009 for cosmetic products, which was officially introduced on 11 July 2013, requires from all manufacturers to appoint a responsible person who would constantly monitor and record the implementation of the cosmetovigilance for the products available on the market. From 2013 onwards, the new European regulation demands that the serious undesirable effects which are reported to the competent authority to be also delivered to the competent authority of the other member states as well as to the responsible person for a certain cosmetic product in the company. The regulation for cosmetic products primarily addresses the safety of the products that are used by large populations of healthy consumers. However, the efficacy and the safety of cosmetic products are not reviewed or approved by national competent authorities before they are sold to the public. The identification and the analysis of the adverse effects related to cosmetic products is a process that is still to a large extent industry-driven. It is a manufacturers' responsibility to determine that the product and its ingredients are safe before they are put on the market. Moreover, manufacturers have the responsibility of collecting the reports for all the recorded adverse effects. Although manufacturers do their best to ensure safety of their products, it should be taken into consideration that a potential conflict of interests is always present (Moretti and Velo, 2008).The aim of this work is to present the implementation of the cosmetovigilance system in the countries in Europe S4 PP 212446Maced. pharm.