Farmaceutskopravo - pravo o lekovimaisteteodlekova, Nomos, Beograd.Junod, V. D., 2006. Pharmaceutique: un apercu global, Juriste Europeen, 4, pp. 24.DukesG., 2006. The law and ethics of the pharmaceutical industry, second ed. Elsevier Science.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 111 - 112 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 628.4.045/.046:615]:502.13(497.11)Short communicationPharmaceutical waste management: a necessity to position a pharmacist as a pillar of public awareness campaignNatasa Jovanovic Ljeskovic*, Manda Dizdar, Branislava Rakic, Milan Ilic, Nikola Jojic, Marina Gavrancic, Slobodan GigovFaculty of Pharmacy, Novi Sad, University Business Academy in Novi Sad, TrgMladenaca 5, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia* natasa.ljeskovic@faculty-pharmacy.comIntroductionImportance of the pharmaceuticals is well acknowl-edged and recognized for health and wellbeing of our so-ciety but on the other hands they have become chemicals of concern to the public because of their potential to reach drinking-water. Recent study in Serbia showed the pres-ence of pharmaceuticals in water samples collected from 25 locations (in total 47 out of 81 investigated drugs were detected) (Petrovic et al., 2014).Although more research is needed to properly estimate the risk and the impact of measured concentrations of the pharmaceuticals on the environment and on human health, it is clear that more attention needs to be paid to this issue in coming years. This is especially because the production rate of pharmaceutical waste is constantly growing world-wide as a consequence of increased use of pharmaceuticals (Smith, 2002).Pharmaceutical waste management is complex chal-lenge requiring compliance with of health and environmen-tal regulations as well as involvement of all parties includ-ed in providing and receiving of health service. To mini-mize the risk of uncontrolled pharmaceutical waste dispos-al preventive measures and systematic drug-take back pro-grams are needed. However, equally important prerequi-site for success of the whole process is enhanced commu-nication to the public on proper pharmaceutical waste man-agement. And for that purpose pharmacists can and should play key role. Focus of this work was to investigate to what extent raising of public awareness is needed and if there are any particular population groups (i.e. regarding education, age) that require additional attention. Materials and methodsThis research has been conducted among citizens of Serbia. The study included 100people. People in the pharmacies in the cities of Novi Sad, Subotica, Ruma, Arandjelovac and Vlasotince and their country sides, were approached randomly and invited to participate. The anon-ymous questionnaire consisted of 9 questions. Three ques-tions were related to the socio-demographic characteristic of the population, and other six were related to medication storage and disposal. Participants could either complete the questionnaire themselves or have their responses marked by the investigators. Analysis was performed in Excel.Results and discussionOut of total sample size of 100 responders, 10% of re-sponders were from municipality of Arandjelovac, 10% of responders were from Ruma, 9% of responders were from Subotica, 28% responders were from Vlasotince and 43% responders were from Novi Sad. The majority of the exam-inees were from the cities (83%) and 17% from the coun-try sides. Fifty-four percent (54%) of responders had high school degree and forty-one (41%) had university degree. Out of all respondents, 18% were students, 52% were em-ployed and 28% were retired. More than 80% of responders said that they had kept the unused medicine at home.In the questionwhat do they do with unused medicine the examinees most often an-swered "I keep it in a case I may needed it for later" (60%), "I give to other people if they need it" (16%), "I dispose it in the household ban" (19%) and about 5% answered "I re-turn unused medicine to a pharmacist or a doctor".Also, the examinees were asked about their dispos-al practice of primary packaging of medicines (prescrip-S1 PP 48112Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 111 - 112 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationstion bottles, blister packs, etc.) and 89% of them did this in an environmentally inappropriate way. Answers indicat-ed that primary packaging of medicine was disposed as a house hold waste. Only 7% of the examinees were recy-cling and just 4% reported returning primary packaging to a pharmacy for disposal. This is in line with our previous study where some 87% out of 253 examinees answered to dispose primary packaging as household waste (Gigov et al., 2014).Among the examinees who tried to return unused pharmaceuticals or primary packaging to a pharmacy, only 36% had founded pharmacy that accepted unused pharma-ceuticals, 45% of them were referred to other institution and in a case of 19% of responders the pharmacy could not accepted pharmaceutical waste.Obtained results show that the lack of public aware-ness of pharmaceutical waste management is unfortunate-ly equally distributed throughout the population in Serbia. The majority of the examinees were not informed about proper pharmaceutical waste management. There are no differences between behavior of the responders related to the place where they were interviewed, neither to their ed-ucation nor their employment/student status.ConclusionIt is obvious that further education of the population is needed. Active involvement of the pharmacists is one of the most important steps. Pharmacists due to their educa-tion and their position to daily communicate with the pa-tients about the medicines can offer the most updated and relevant info about pharmaceutical waste management. Raising public awareness with central role of pharma-cists on one hand and introducing a systematic approach in pharmaceutical waste management with preventive mea-sures should decrease a risk of unwanted and potential haz-ardous effect of pharmaceutical waste. This effort should be centrally promoted and supported by government and health sectors in Serbia that should enable a system for continuous education and regular update of the pharma-cists with most recent regulations and trends in pharmaceu-tical waste management. ReferencesGigov, S., Gavrancic, M., Dakovic Svajcer, K., 2014. Disposal of pharmaceutical waste: how much do we pollute our environement? 6th Serbian Congress of pharmacy with International participations; Oct 15-19; Belgrade. Abstract book: 296-297.Petrovic, M., Skrbic, B., Zivancev, J., Ferrando-Climent, L., Barcelo, D., 2014. Determination of 81 pharmaceutical drugs by high performance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry with hybrid triple quadrupole-linear ion trap in different types of water in Serbia. Sci. Total. Environ. 415-428.Smith, C.A., 2002. Managing pharmaceutical waste - What pharmacists should know. J. Pharm. Soc. Wis. 17-22.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 113 - 114 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.379-008.64-052-047.22(497.7)Short communicationAwareness of the importance of self-management in Macedonian diabetes patientsBiljana Indova*, Zorica Naumovska, Aleksandra Kapedanovska Nestorovska, Aleksandra Grozdanova, Ljubica Suturkova, Zoran SterjevFaculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, MajkaTereza 47, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* biljana.p.indova@gmail.comIntroductionDiabetes is a complex, chronic illness requiring con-tinuous medical care with multifactorial risk-reduction strategies beyond glycemic control. Ongoing patient self-management education and support are critical to prevent acute complications and reduce the risk of long-term com-plications. Hyperglycemia, or raised blood sugar, is a common effect of uncontrolled diabetes and over time leads to se-rious damage to many of the body's systems, especially heart, blood vessels, eyes, kidneys, and nerves. Type 1 di-abetes is characterized by deficient insulin production and requires daily administration of insulin. Diabetes Type 2, results from the body's ineffective use of insulin and com-prises 90% of people with diabetes around the world, and is largely the result of excess body weight and physical in-activity. Until recently, this type of diabetes was seen only in adults but it is now also occurring in children. Gesta-tional diabetes is hyperglycemia with blood glucose values above normal but below those diagnostic of diabetes, oc-curring during pregnancy. Impaired glucose tolerance and impaired fasting glycaemia are intermediate conditions in the transition between normality and diabetes. About 347 million people worldwide have diabetes and this number is projected to reach 552 million in 2030 (Whiting et al. 2011). In 2014, 9% of adults (18 years and older) had diabetes. About 6% of Macedonian population has diabetes mellitus, either type 1 or 2. There is an emerg-ing global epidemic of diabetes that can be traced back to rapid increases in overweight, including obesity and phys-ical inactivity. In 2012 diabetes was the direct cause of 1.5 million deaths. Majority of diabetes deaths (80%) occur in low- and middle-income countries. The overall risk of dy-ing among people with diabetes is at least double the risk of their peers without diabetes (Roglic et al. 2005). Ear-ly diagnosis can be accomplished through blood testing. Treatment of diabetes involves lowering blood glucose and the levels of other known risk factors that damage blood vessels. Nevertheless improvement in diabetes manage-ment in the last years, 33-49% of patients still do not meet targets for glycemic, blood pressure, or cholesterol control, and only 14% meet targets for all three measures and non-smoking status (Ali et al., 2013).Patients with diabetes type 2, without cardio vascular disease (CVD) and mikroalbuminemija, are in the catego-ry of patients with very high 10-year risk (13.4+-11.4%) of fatal CVD as a result of inadequate glycemic control with a mean HbA1c 9.5+-2.0% (recommendations for adequate glycemic control HbA1c < 6.5%) (Smokovski I., 2009). In parallel to healthcare system further development and im-provement, successful diabetes care requires a systematic approach to supporting patients' behavior change efforts, including: 1. Healthy lifestyle choices (physical activity, healthy eating, tobacco cessation, weight management, and effective coping), 2. Disease self-management (taking and managing medications and, when clinically appropriate, self-monitoring of glucose and blood pressure) and 3. Pre-vention of diabetes complications (self-monitoring of foot health; active participation in screening for eye, foot, and renal complications; and immunizations). High-quality di-abetes self-management education (DSME) in US has been shown to improve patient self-management, satisfaction, and glucose control (Powers, 2015). To date, perception for the importance of self-management in diabetes patients has not been evaluated in Republic of Macedonia (RM).The aim of this paper is to assess the awareness and level of perception of the self-management importance as-sociated with glycemic control achievement in patients from RM.S1 PP 49114Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 113 - 114 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsMaterials and methodsThe study follows a descriptive design using a ques-tionnaire-based survey. The questionnaire was created to assess perception for self-management in diabetes patients using the principles of Diabetes Self-Management Ques-tionnaire developed at the Research Institute of the Dia-betes Academy Mergentheim (Schmitt et al., 2013). First part of the questionnaire contains 6 demographic ques-tions related to gender, age, urban or rural place of resi-dence, education, history and type of diabetes. The second part contains 19 questions segmented in 4 subgroups relat-ed to: Glucose Management, Dietary Control, Physical Ac-tivity and Health-Care Use. The rating scale was designed as a four-point Likert scale, in a range 3-0 points, from the response options "applies to me very much" (3 points) to 'does not apply to me' (0 points). 300 diabetes patients have been assessed with this questionnaire in 11 different towns in R. Macedonia: Skopje, Bitola, Strumica, Kumanovo, Kicevo, Tetovo, Prilep, Veles, Ohrid, Struga, and Stip. As-sessment has been performed in direct contact of pharma-cist with patient, with previously gained patient's consent for participation. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 21.0.0. Group comparisons involved One-way Anal-ysis of Variance, Student's t-test and Pearson's chi-squared test. In all analyses a P-value of < 0.05 (two-tailed test) was considered as criterion of statistical significance.Results and discussion300 diabetes patients were assessed, most at age >51years and older, 60% female and 40% male. Most of the patients come from urban environment with second-ary education. 90% of the subjects have diabetes type 2 and a history of disease > 5 years. Regarding to our find-ings, diabetes patients from Republic of Macedonia most-ly pay attention in regards to glucose management and reg-ular treatment. In Dietary control questionnaire segment, most of the patients rated with 2 points (applies to me to a considerable degree). What is concerning is the low level of the perception for the need for physical activities and its impact on overall disease management.ConclusionThe preliminary results suggest on concerning low level of perception for self-management in diabetes pa-tients in R. Macedonia.ReferencesAli, M.K., Bullard, K.M., Saaddine, J.B., Cowie, C.C., Impera-tore. G., Gregg, E.W., 2013. Achievement of goals in U.S. diabetes care, 1999-2010. N. Engl. J. Med. 368, 1613-1624.Roglic, G., Unwin, N., Bennett, P.H., Mathers, C., Tuomilehto, J., Nag, S., et al. 2005. The burden of mortality attributable to diabetes: realistic estimates for the year 2000. Diabetes Care 28(9), 2130-2135.Powers, M.A., Bardsley, J., Cypress, M., Duker, P., Funnell, M.M., Fischl, A.H., Maryniuk, M.D., Siminerio, L., Vivian, E., 2015. Diabetes self-management education and support in type 2 diabetes: a joint positionn statement of the Amer-ican Diabetes Association, the American Association of Di-abetes Educators, and the Academy of Nutrition and Dietet-ics. Diabetes Care 38, 1372-1382.Schmitt, A., Gahr, A., Hermanns, N., Kulzer, B., Huber, J., Haak, T., 2013. The Diabetes Self-Management Questionnaire (DSMQ): development and evaluation of an instrument to assess diabetes self-care activities associated with glycaemic control. Health and Quality of Life Outcomes 11, 138.Smokovski, I., Pavlovska, K., 2009. Rating on the cardiovascu-lar risk of the patients with diabetes mellitus type 2 by using the system score. Physioacta 3(1), 9-15.Whiting, D., Guariguata, L., Shaw, J., 2011. IDF Diabetes Atlas: Global estimates of the prevalence of diabetes for 2011and 2030. Diabetes Res. Clin. Pract. 94(3), 311-321.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 115 - 116 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.035.7(497.731)"2013"Short communicationEvaluation of rational / irrational drug use at orthopedic department in Clinical Hospital Stip in the period from January to April 2013Biljana Lazarova1*, Aleksandra Kapedanovska Nestorovska2, Zorica Naumovska2, Aleksandra Grozdanova2, Ljubica Suturkova2, Zoran Sterjev21Clinical Hospital - Stip, Ljuben Ivanov bb, Stip, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, MajkaTereza 47, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* blazarova55@yahoo.comIntroductionAccording to WHO, rational use of medicines is de-fined as process that allows prescribing of the right drug for a right patient in the proper dose, duration of therapy, with the lowest cost for the patient and the community. World-wide, more than 50% of all medicines are prescribed, is-sued, or sold inappropriately. The most common reasons for the irrational drug use are: using too much medication per patient, improper use of antibiotics (inadequate intake for non-bacterial infection), use of the wrong medication for specific condition, drug use with questionable effec-tiveness, using a drug with uncertain security status, exces-sive use of parenteral formulations, where the use of oral formulations is more appropriate, inappropriate self-med-ication. Irrational drug use represents a major generator of progressively increasing costs in all health systems. (Hol-loway and Green, 2003).The aim of this study was to eval-uate rational/irrational drug use at orthopedic department - Clinical HospitalStip.Materials and methodsA retrospective evaluation for the period of 4 months concerning to consumption of analgesics (Tramadol and Ketoprofen), antibiotics (Ceftriaxon), unfractionated hep-arin and low molecular weight heparins was done.