Therefore, the purposes of this research were to develop w/o/w multiple emulsion formulation us-ing Brij(r) 93 and Tween(r) 20 as surfactants with resvera-trol as active agent and to evaluate the characteristic prop-erties and stability of the designed system. Materials and methodsMaterialsResveratrol (RSV) 2% aqueous solution was kindly donated from ACTIChem., France. Polyoxyethilene oleyl ether (Brij(r) 93) and polyoxyethilene sorbitan monolaurate (Tween(r) 20) were obtained from ICI, USA. Liquid par-affin was supplied from Merck KGaA, Germany. All oth-er chemicals and reagent were of analytical grade and used as received.Preparation of multiple emulsionsMultiple emulsions were prepared by a two-step emul-sification process. Briefly, for primary emulsification, 3 g of aqueous phase and 1 g of oil phase (liquid paraffin and Brij 93, mass ratio = 1:0.25) were preheated at 38 degC. Af-terwards, the aqueous phase was gradually added to the oil phase using high-shear rotor-stator homogenizer (2.5 min, 9500 rpm; Ultra-Turrax(r) T25, Ika-Werke, Germany). Homogenization was continued for additional 7.5 min. For secondary emulsification, prepared w/o emulsion was emulsified with 6 g of external aqueous phase containing 1% of Tween 20 under the same conditions. Three differ-ent formulations of RSV loaded (1.5%) w/o/w emulsions were prepared (sample 1 - RSV was incorporated into the inner aqueous phase (100%), sample 2 - 75% of RSV was S8 PP 310650Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 649 - 650 (2016)Poster presentationsStudent sessionincorporated into the inner vs. 25% in outer aqueous phase) and sample 3 - RSV was equally divided into two aqueous compartments (50:50%)). Blank sample was prepared for comparison.Characterization of multiple emulsions with resveratrolMicroscopic analysis was conducted in order to gain information about the multiple structure of the prepared emulsions. An optical microscope (OPTIKA(r) B-352A, OPTIKA SRL, Italy) with camera (AIPTEK(tm) 1080p HD, Aiptek International GmbH, Germany) was used through-out the study. The droplet size was measured using Mas-tersizer 2000 (Malvern instruments, UK) equipped with Hydro 2000S, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK. In vitro RSV release studies were carried out using simple dissolution cells with semipermeable membrane (Visking tube from regenerated cellulose, thickness 0.9 nm, pores size 1.52-2 nm; Serva Feinbiochemica GmbH, Germany). Briefly, 2 g of each formulation was added to donor compartment and membrane was tied on the bottom end of the tube. The tube was dipped into vessel contain-ing 40 ml of water and was stirred at 100 rpm on a mag-netic stirrer and maintained at 32 degC. Aliquots of 5 ml were collected from receiving chamber at predetermined time intervals and the RSV content was determined UV spec-tophotometrically (UV/VIS Spectrophotometer, Perkin El-mer Lambda 16, USA) at 324 nm.Stability studiesThe emulsions were monitored for consistency, color, homogeneity, phase separation and particle size during the storage period of three months at 5 +- 3 degC. Conductometric analysis was performed after the preparation of the sam-ples and after three months stability period. Conductivity of the emulsions was measured directly using conductivi-ty meter SevenCompact(tm) Conductivity S230 (METTLER TOLEDO, Switzerland) at 25 degC +- 2 degC.Results and discussionImmediately after preparation, the w/o/w emulsions were apparently brownish and homogenous viscous liq-uids. The samples do not show any changes in appearance and homogeneity during the first 2 months of stability stud-ied period. However, physical destabilization/flocculation was observed at the end of third month.Microscopic analysis revealed the multiple character of the prepared samples with droplets containing a large number of small internal droplets (type A multiple emul-sions) (Okushima et al., 2004). Blank sample had a mean size of 1.82 um and SPAN factor of 1.45, with unimodal narrow size distribution. Mean droplet size of RSV load-ed emulsions was 2.35, 1.76 and 2.38 um and SPAN fac-tor 1.45, 1.77 and 1.37 for samples 1, 2 and 3, respective-ly. No significant differences in particle size were observed during the first two months of stability studied period. Af-ter three months, mean droplet size was 0.21, 0.69 and 0.46 um for sample 1, 2 and 3, respectively, with bimodal par-ticle size distribution indicating physical destabilization of the prepared systems probably due to the osmotic flow of water from internal to the external phase thus leading to shrinkage of the internal water droplets. Electrical conduc-tivity of the freshly prepared samples was 48.8 - 54.2 uS/cm. At the end of stability studied period only slight in-crease in the conductivity values was observed most like-ly due to coalescence of the internal and aqueous phases (Mahmood and Akhtar, 2013), but however no significant differences in conductivity were determined. RSV release from the prepared samples was 50.13, 51.86 and 85.42% during the investigated period of 24 h for samples 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The rate of RSV re-lease followed non-zero order kinetics (R > 0.997) with the release exponent ranging between 0.1 and 0.5.ConclusionResveratrol (1.5%) loaded w/o/w multiple emulsions containing low concentration of surfactants were prepared and characterized with respect to their size, release prop-erties and stability. Obtained results suggested that formu-lation prepared with equally divided amount of resvera-trol into the two aqueous compartments could be explored as a skin rejuvenating candidate. Further studies will be focused on formulation modification in order to achieve long-term stability.ReferencesBaxter, A.R., 2008. Anti-aging properties of resveratrol: Review and report of a potent new antioxidant skin care formulation. Journal of Cosmetic Dermatology 7, 2-7.Kumar, R., Kumar, S.M., Mahadevan, N., 2012. Multiple Emulsions: A review. International Journal of Recent Advances in Pharmaceutical Research 2(1), 9-19.Mahmood, T., Akhtar, N., 2013. Stability of a cosmetic multiple emulsion loaded with green tea extract. The Scientific World Journal 2013, 1-7.Okushima, S., Nisisako, T., Torii, T., Higuchi, T., 2004. Controlled production of monodisperse double emulsions by two-step droplet breakup in microfluidic devices. Langmuir 20 (23), 9905-9908.Vasiljevic, D.D., Parojcic, J.V., Primorac M.M, Vuleta, G.M., 2009. Rheological and droplet size analysis of w/o/w multiple emulsions containing low concentrations of polymeric emulsifiers. J. Serb. Chem. Soc. 74(7), 801-816. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 651 - 652 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.37Short communicationProbiotics and immunological disordersSpase Stojanov*, Katarina SmilkovFaculty of Medical Sciences, Goce Delcev University, Stip, R. Macedonia, "Krste Misirkov" no.10-A, 2000 Stip, R. Macedonia* spase.151134@student.ugd.edu.mkIntroductionProbiotics are defined as live microorganisms that have positive health effects on the host. There are many strains of probiotics that can confer health benefits, but the most prominent species are Lactobacillus and Bifidobacte-rium. Numerous evidences indicate that selected probiotic strains can provide health benefits to the human host. Up to date, many clinical trials investigated the medical effects of these bacteria, particularly the positive effects to the gas-trointestinal (GI) system. Moreover, studies have shown that probiotics exert beneficial effects to the immune sys-tem, the urogenital system, in diabetes, oral health etc. (Charalampopoulos and Rastall, 2009).The immune system, being highly adaptable defense system, functions in preserving the integrity of the organ-ism by eliminating all elements perceived as foreign. Sev-eral in vitro and in vivo studies have shown that specific strains of probiotics are able to modulate the functioning of the immune system, stimulate the immune function to pro-tect against infectious diseases and different types of can-cer and regulate over expressed immune responses asso-ciated with immune inflammatory disorders such as aller-gy (Gill and Guarner, 2004). In addition, studies presented beneficial effects in atopic diseases, including atopic ecze-ma, allergic rhinitis and asthma.The purpose of this review was to explore among the reported effects of different probiotic strains to the immune system, specifically in allergy.Effects of probiotics in asthma and rhinitisIn one of the study with 41 asthmatic children (age 6-12 years) a decrease of the inflammatory cytokine, TNF-a and Th2 cytokine IL-10 and IL-13 was shown. Pe-ripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMCs) were collected from the patients assigned to the probiotic-treated groups prior to and following the treatment and were then incubat-ed with phytohemagglutinin, Dermatophagoides pteron-yssinus, supplemented with Lactobacillus gasseri for 72h. Production of the cytokines in the culture supernatants was assayed using enzyme-linked immune-sorbent assay (ELI-SA). The results of the study showed that the patients who took L. gasseri capsules for 8 weeks showed significant de-crease in the cytokine level compared to the control group (Chen, et al., 2010).Another study examined the effect of Lactobacillus casei in the treatment of asthma and allergic rhinitis. A group of 187 asthmatic children between the age 2 and 5 years were tested for period of 12 months. This study pre-sented that the milk, fermented with Lactobacillus casei didn't show significant difference in the health status of asthmatic children compared to the control group. How-ever, consumption of Lactobacillus casei fermented milk resulted in improvement in children with allergic rhinitis, i.e the number of rhinitis episodes was lower in the chil-dren treated with probiotics compared to the control group (Giovannini et al., 2007).Effects of probiotics in allergy animal modelsAnimal studies concerning effects of probiotics in al-lergy also emerge, presenting a deeper understanding of the effects of probiotics. For example, one study exam-ined the potential of 28 strains of probiotics in prophylax-is of peanut-induced allergy in mouse model. Groups of 8 mice were orally exposed to PBS (control) or peanut ex-tract (PE) plus cholera toxin (CT). Oral exposure was per-formed on days 0, 1, 2, 10, 17 and 24. After a 6-week pro-S8 PP 311652Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 651 - 652 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationsbiotic treatment with each strain and a 4-week oral expo-sure regimen to PBS or PE with CT, the IgE specific for PE was measured. The results showed that Lactobacillus plan-tarum increases the IgE in the serum, but Lactobacillus sal-ivarius decreases the IgE for PE. In addition Lactobacillus casei Shirota didn't show any effect to the IgE for PE, but the measured IL-4 and IL-5 levels were lowered by just us-ing these strains. Again, L. plantarum increases the IL-4 level but didn't show any effect on IL-5 and L. salivari-us showed slightly decreased level of the both cytokines (Meijerink et al., 2012).Another study in mouse model of asthma studied the effect of Lactobacillus rhamnosus, using clinical evalua-tions in vivo, bronchoalveolar lavage fluid analysis, serum IgG analysis, cytokine and lymphocyte proliferation as-says. The mice were sensitized by intra peritoneal admin-istration of 10 ug ovalbumin with alum mixture. Treg cells, isolated from the spleen were analyzed for CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ expression using flow citometry. This study pre-sented that Lactobacillus rhamnosus treatment led to a sig-nificant increase in CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cells, com-pared to the percentage in positive control mice, suggest-ing that Lactobacillus rhamnosus induced attenuation of allergic responses in the mouse model of asthma is associ-ated with an increased CD4+CD25+Foxp3+ Treg cell popu-lation (Jang et al., 2012).ConclusionMany studies are trying to unveil the mechanisms of probiotic involvement and their beneficial effects to the health. Animal studies and clinical trials in different popu-lations regarding different medical conditions, present ef-fects that are somewhat controversial. In this context, as our literature research resulted, many of the evidences re-garding immunological (allergic) diseases present weak or minimal effects.ReferencesCharalampopoulos, D., Rastall, R.A. (Eds. ), 2009. Prebiotics and Probiotics Science and Technology, Springer Science and Business Media, LLC, New York.Chen, Y.S., Lin, Y.L., Jan, R.L., Chen, H.H., Wang, J.Y., 2010. Randomized placebo - controlled trial of lactobacillus on asthmatic children with allergic rhinitis. Pediatr. Pulm. 45(11), 1111-1120.Gill, H.S., Guarner, F., 2004. Probiotics and human health: a clinical perspective. Postgrad. Med. J. 80, 516-526.Giovannini, M., Agostoni, C., Riva, E., Salvini, F., Ruscitto, A., Zuccotti, G.V., Radaelli, G., 2007. A randomized prospective double blind controlled trial on effects of long-term consumption of fermented milk containing Lactobacillus casei in pre-school children with allergic asthma and/or rhinitis. Pediatr. Res. 62, 215-220.Jang, S.O., Kim, H.J., Kim, Y.J., Kang, M.J., Kwon, J.W., Seo, J.H., Kim, H.Y., Kim, B.J., Yu, J., Hong, S.J., 2012. Asthma prevention by Lactobacillus Rhamnosus in a mouse model is associated with CD4+ CD25+ Foxp3+ T cells. Allergy Asthma Immunol. Res. 4(3), 150-156.Meijerink, M., Wells, J.M., Taverne, N., de Zeeuw Brouwer, M.L., Hilhorst, B., Venema, K., van Bilsen, J., 2012. Immunomodulatory effects of potential probiotics in a mouse peanut sensitization model. FEMS Immunol. Med. Mic. 65(3), 488-496.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 653 - 654 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616-008.83Short communicationThe functions of sialic acid and its polymers and associated diseasesSofija Gicheva*, Marija Hiljadnikova Bajro, Tatjana Kadifkova PanovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Majka Tereza 47, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* g.sofija28@gmail.comIntroductionThe sialic acid is involved in many biological process-es, related to the non-reducing terminal end of glycolip-ides, glycoproteins and other glycoconjugates. Most fre-quently, in glycoconjugate complexes, the sialic acid is found in a monomeric form. Sialic acid is often found as a polymerized structure. Sialic monomers possess the ability to bond with one an-other and form dimers, oligomers and polysialic acids. In particular, polysialic acids are found to be involved in neu-ral adhesion, more precisely, they regulate the activity of the molecules that control neural adhesion. The group of sialic acids contains about 50 derivates of N-acetylneuraminic acid, N-glycolylneuraminic acid and deaminoneuraminic acid. Methylation, sulfation, acet-ylation and interactions between monomers of these three substances form the large group of sialic acids. Polysialic acids are mainly involved in changes of many functions of the nervous system. Neural cell adhe-sion molecule is the most studied polysialated protein in which the polysialic acid contains a2-8 bonded N-acetyl-neuraminic acid. This protein is connected to the cell mem-brane with glycosyl phosphatidylinositol or it can be pres-ent as a transmembrane protein involved in cell signaliza-tion.