Materials and methodsStandards of a-tocopherol and tocopherol acetate (TA) of analytical grade were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). All solvents were analytical grade (JT Baker, Deventer, Netherlands). Chromabond C18 ec cartridges, used for purification of samples, were pur-chased from Macherey-Nagel, Duren, Germany. Concentrations of a-tocopherol and tocopherol acetate in analyzed samples were determined by calibration curve method. The range of the calibration curve was 0.01-0.5 mg/mL for a-tocopherol and 0.2-2.0 mg/mL for tocopher-ol acetate. The stock standard solutions of a-tocopherol (1 mg/mL) and tocopherol acetate (1 mg/mL) were prepared by dissolving standards in absolute ethanol. The working S3 PP 131282Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 281 - 282 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationscalibration solutions were freshly prepared for each run by diluting the stock standard with absolute ethanol.Commercial pharmaceutical colostrum was obtained from local pharmacy. One of the bovine colostrum prod-ucts, available on the Serbian market is Ekolostrum(r). This product was made from the fresh bovine colostrum ob-tained in the first 16 hours after calving. Ekolostrum(r) cap-sule contains 480 mg high-quality 100% natural bovine co-lostrum powder with no additives and flavouring. The con-tent of any form of vitamin E was not exactly declared.Sample preparation: 500 mg of powder sample from the capsule was weighted and dissolved in 50 mL of deion-ized water. After complete dissolving, 1 mL of the sample was treated with 0.5 mL of 0.5% ascorbic acid and 5 mL of absolute ethanol. The mixture was vortexed vigorously for 1 min and centrifuged at 4000 rpm for 10 min at 20 degC. Fi-nally, supernatant was purified with solid phase extraction. Based on our previously extraction recovery evalua-tion, Chromabond C18 ec column was selected among five different types of cartridges. Chromabond C18 ec was pre-conditioned by passing through 1 mL of deonized water, followed by 1 mL of methanol and 1 mL of acetonitrile. Then, 3 mL of supernatant was slowly passed through the cartridge at a flow rate of 1 mL/min and the analyte was eluted with 2 x 1 mL of methanol. HPLC determination was achieved at 40 degC using RESTEK Ultra IBD column (3um, 150x3mm) with the mo-bile phase consisted of 100% acetonitrile and fluorescence detection (lex=295 nm, lem=330 nm) for a-tocopherol and UV detection at 220 nm for tocopherol acetate. The flow rate was kept at 0.45 mL/min.Results and discussionThe analyzed samples of commercial colostrum sup-plement had average a-tocopherol and tocopherol ace-tate concentration of (0.2+-0.01) mg/100 g and (6.5+-0.3) mg/100 g, respectively. The content of a-tocopherol in the examined pharmaceutical colostrum was similar to that for the fresh bovine colostrum found by Kehoe et al. (2007), who reported that the concentration of a-tocopherol is in ranges from 0.06 to 1.04 mg/100 g, with a mean value of 0.29 mg/100 g. On the other hand, the found value was lower than for human colostrum (1.28 mg/100 g) reported in our previous work.The high content of the synthetic form of vitamin E (tocopherol acetate) was found in the examined sample. Tocopherol acetate is not naturally present neither in bo-vine nor in human colostrum. TA is added to many pharma-ceutical and dietary products for the fortification and en-richment, but it needs to be hydrolyzed in gut to free to-copherol which exerts its activity in vivo. Also, the differ-ent vitamin E stereoisomers obtained by hydrolysis of TA have different biopotencies.ConclusionThis work showed that the SPE method was success-fully applied for the preparation of colostrum samples for HPLC simultaneous determination of a-tocopherol and to-copherol acetate, which is important for the quality control for this type of pharmaceutical products. Examined bovine colostrum product contains appropriate amounts of vita-min E, therefore it can be considered as important nutri-tional source of vitamin E and good supplement for all gen-erations.AcknowledgmentsThis research was supported by grant TR 31060 from the Ministry of Education, Science and Technological De-velopment of the Republic of Serbia.ReferencesDonovan, S.M. and Odle, J., 1994. Growth factors in milk as mediators of infant development. Annu. Rev. Nutr. 14, 147-167.McGrath, B.A., Fox, P.F., McSweeney, P.L. and Kelly, A.L., 2016. Composition and properties of bovine colostrum: A review. Dairy Sci. Technol. 96, 133-158.Kehoe, S.I., Jayarao, B.M. and Heinrichs, A.J., 2007. A survey of bovine colostrum composition and colostrum management practices on Pennsylvania dairy farms. J. Dairy Sci. 90, 4108-4116.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 283 - 284 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.27:616.379-008.64]:599.325.1.084Short communicationEffects of different doses zinc gluconate on copper, iron and calcium levels in experimentally induced diabetic rabbits and type 2 diabetic patients Zorica Stanojevic Ristic1*, Snezana Stevic1, Julijana Rasic1, Dragana Valjarevic2, Momcilo Stanic31Institute of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Pristina, Kosovska Mitrovica, Serbia2Department of Mathematics, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University of Pristina, Kosovska Mitrovica, Serbia3Biochemical-Clinical Laboratory, Medical Centre, Kosovska Mitrovica, Serbia* zorica_stanojevic@yahoo.comIntroductionResearches with micronutrients are getting more and more important in science and also in practice. In this view zinc, chromium, copper and selenium are having a special role in preventing micro- and macro vascular diabetic com-plications, as integral components of antioxidant enzymes and also as cofactor of enzymes and hormones involved in the metabolism of glucose and lipid. Results of numerous studies also suggested that, because of hyperzincuria and low zinc absorption, diabetic patients are more susceptible to zinc deficiency compared to healthy persons. On the other side, it`s known that zinc, as divalent cat-ion, compete with cadmium, copper, lead, iron and calci-um for similar binding site. The physiological effects of zinc and several other cations such as copper and calci-um are due to alteration in the permeability of the cellu-lar membrane or modulation of the activity of membrane-bound enzymes. It has been reported that zinc may sup-press calcium effect by displacement of calcium ions from its cell binding sites, thus altering the membrane calcium pump resulting in a reduction in free intracellular calcium (Pathak et al., 2011). Copper deficiency might be a contrib-utor to the glucose intolerance in diabetic patients.There are also reports of altered metabolisms of other micronutrients such as copper (Cu) and iron (Fe) in diabe-tes. Moreover, previous investigation reported that Zn de-ficiency increases the absorption of intestinal Cu and that Cu significantly inhibits the influx of Zn across the intesti-nal brush border membrane (Condomina et al., 2002). It`s only unknown whether Zn supplementation can normalize the Cu/Zn ratio. Iron is capable of generating reactive ox-ygen species and contributes to diabetic nephropathy. Ex-cess Fe has been implicated in the pathogenesis of diabetes and its complications.In view of these facts, the aim of our study was to eval-uate the effects of three different single doses of zinc glu-conate on serum copper, iron and calcium levels in exper-imentally induced diabetic rabbit and type 2 diabetic pa-tients.Materials and methodsThe experimentally study was conducted on twenty-four New Zealand rabbits, weighing 2 to 3.5 kg. Experi-mental diabetes was induced in rabbits by intravenous in-jection of alloxan (80 mg/kg BW). Two weeks after ap-plication of alloxan, animals were subjected to 16h fast-ing, which was determined by the concentration of glucose in the blood. The test includes only 14 rabbits with fast-ing glucose between 9.99 and 14.98 mmol/L, which corre-sponds to the degree of damage of the pancreas in patients with insulin-independent diabetes mellitus. Three weeks after induced experimental diabetes, rabbits were treated orally appropriate doses of zinc gluconate determinate by Clarc formula: first dose 5.5 mg, after the washout period S3 PP 132284Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 283 - 284 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentations(10 t1/2) - second dose 9.2 mg, after the washout period (10 t1/2) - third dose 18.4 mg. Blood samples were taken at certain time intervals: before and 24h after the first, sec-ond and third dose of zinc gluconate. The human study was conducted on a group of 12 pa-tients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and a control group of 12 healthy subjects. All participants did not take nutritional supplements and any drugs that are known to interfere with metabolism of studied metals during the period of study and at least 2 week before sampling. Blood samples were drawn after an overnight fasting in both groups, before and 24 hour after administration of zinc gluconate in three dif-ferent single doses (15, 25 and 50 mg) with washout peri-od (10 t1/2) between treatments.All the material used for zinc collection, separation and storage was plastic and metal free. Serum samples were frozen and stored at -20 oC until the time of measure-ment. Determination of concentrations essential minerals (Zn, Cu, Fe and Ca) was performed by colorimetric meth-od (Randox and Roche Diagnostics assays). Each value is expressed as the mean+-SD. Differenc-es between groups were examined using the unpaired Student`s t-test, differences in the group were examined using the paired Student`s t-test and to asses possible rela-tionship between different variables, Pearson`s correlation coefficient (r) was used. The study protocol was approved by Ethical Commit-tee of the University of Pristina Faculty of Medicine, in Kosovska Mitrovica (Serbia). All subjects gave written, in-formed consent. The animals were handled in accordance with the European Community guidelines (86/609/ EEC). ResultsDifferent single doses of zinc gluconate did not cause any significant change on copper, iron and calcium levels in serum of healthy rabbits. However, in diabetic rabbits the calcium concentration in serum was significantly de-creased 24h after zinc gluconate administration in doses of 9.2 and 16.4 mg, compared with the baseline value (0h) marked before the treatments (p=0.041; p=0.039).Also, different single doses of zinc gluconate did not cause any significant change on copper, iron and calcium levels in serum of healthy subjects. In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus were found significant decreased the se-rum calcium concentration 24h after zinc gluconate admin-istration in dose of 50 mg compared with the baseline val-ue (0h) marked before the treatment (p=0.038). The Cu/Zn ratio were significantly reduced in diabetic patients 24h after zinc gluconate administration in doses of 25 and 50 mg compared with baseline values (0h) marked before the treatment (p=0.033; p=0.026). ConclusionsBased on obtained results it can be observed that ad-ministration of zinc gluconate in single higher doses showed reduction of serum calcium level in type 2 diabe-tes mellitus. Considering that zinc, as divalent cation, com-pete with calcium for similar binding site, this could to be due to antagonistic effect of zinc on calcium. Also, the administration of zinc gluconate in single higher doses decreased the Cu/Zn ratio only in type 2 dia-betic patients. These results are very significant consider-ing that previous studies reported that an impaired Cu/Zn ratio in serum from diabetics could be an important factor in the development of micro- and macro-vascular compli-cations in type 2 diabetes mellitus.ReferencesCondomina, J., Zornoza-Sabina, T., Granero, L., Polache, A., 2002. Kinetics of zinc transport in vitro in rat small intestine and colon: interaction with copper. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 16, 289-295. Pathak, R., Dhawan, D., Pathak, A., 2011. Effect of zinc supplementation on the status of thyroid hormones and Na, K and Ca levels in blood following ethanol feeding. Biol. Trace Elem. Res. 140, 208-214.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 285 - 286 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 637.13/.3:579.864 663.813:635.13]:579.864Short communicationViability and metabolic activity of Lactobacillus casei 01 in dairy and non-dairy productsTanja Petreska Ivanovska*, Kristina Mladenovska, Lidija Petrushevska-ToziFaculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodious", Mother Theresa 47, Skopje, Macedonia* tpetreska@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionProbiotics are widely used as functional ingredients because they beneficially affect the host by improving its intestinal microbial balance. Accepted dose of live probi-otic bacteria is required to be between 106-108 CFU per mL or g of the food product at the time of consumption (Vasiljevic and Shah, 2008). As probiotic viability is con-sidered essential for their health benefits, viability of pro-biotic bacteria in foods throughout their storage is a con-stant challenge for the food industry. Dairy foods are the most frequently used as probiotic carriers and well accept-ed by the consumers, while development of non-dairy ma-trices has been encouraged due to the increasing demand for new probiotic products. Food matrix was found to play an important role in the beneficial health effects of probi-otics on the host (Do Espirito Santo et al., 2011). Incorpo-ration of microencapsulated probiotics is a potential strate-gy for manufacture of both dairy and non-dairy products at the same time improving the functional value of the prod-uct and ensuring protection of living cells from unfavor-able conditions.The aim of the present study was to examine the sur-vival and metabolic activity of probiotic strain Lactobacil-lus casei 01 both in dairy product (ayran) and non-dairy matrix (carrot juice) during storage for two weeks at 4 degC.Materials and methodsThe cell suspension of probiotic Lactobacillus casei 01 (Chr. Hansen, Denmark) was divided into two parts: one part was used for microencapsulation and another was used as free cells for direct adding in carrot juice prepared by extraction of washed and peeled carrots and commer-cially available ayran (Ayran, Zdravje Radovo, Macedo-nia). Carrot juice samples after pasteurization at 80 degC for 20 min was fermented using a cell concentration of 7.4+-0.1 log CFU/mL according to the recommendations for min-imum counts of approximately 7.0 log CFU per g or mL of probiotic food to exert beneficial effects (Vasiljevic and Shah, 2008). Prebiotics fructooligosaccharides (FOS) with DP > 10 (Sigma-Aldrich, USA) and oligofructose-enriched inulin (Synergy 1) which is the mixture of oligofructose (DP 2-8) and long-chain inulin fraction (DP 10-60) (Orafti-Rue L. Marechal, Belgium) were added to carrot juice and ayran samples containing non-encapsulated cells, respec-tively, at the same time with the probiotic cells. An opti-mal formulation of microparticles containing FOS or Syn-ergy 1 as prebiotic with high cell viability of L. casei 01 (11.28-11.38 log CFU/g) was prepared using 4% w/w algi-nate, 0.5% w/w chitosan and 5% w/w CaCl2 (Petreska Iva-novska et al., 2014). An aqueous dispersion of alginate (LF 10/60 LS, fG 35-45% Protanal, FMC Biopolymer, IMCD, UK), prebiotic at a level of 1.5 w/w and L. casei 01 with a cell load ca. 12 log CFU/mL was submitted to spray-drying (nozzle diameter 0.7 mm, aspirator pressure 90%, flow rate 6 mL/min, inlet and outlet temperature, 120 degC and 60 degC; Buchi Mini Spray Dryer B-290, SW) followed by subse-quent cross-linking and coating in solution of CaCl2 (Mer-ck, Germany) and chitosan (Chitine, France) in 1% v/v acetic acid.