It can be said that individual value-control charts, moving ranges-control charts and process capability in-dexes are very simple but valuable tools for process under-standing and for following the quality of the product con-tinuously.ReferencesAmer, G., 2009. GMP Monitoring, What, Why, Where, and How, JVT. 15, 11-15.Bakker, A., Kent, P., Derry, J., Noss, R., Hoyles, C., 2008, Statistical inference at work: The case of statistical process control. SERJ. 7, 130-145.Thomas, D.M., Shailesh,K.S., Merlin, L.U., 2006. Statistical Process Control and Process Capability, in James S.(ed. ), Encyclopedia of Pharmaceutical Technology, Third Edition, Taylor & Francis, North Carolinia, pp.3499-3511.Sven, W., 2016.Objectives of Statistical Process Control, ECA seminar on SPC, Germany.Bonnie, B.S., 1956. Statistical Control Quality Handbook, Western Electric Co. Inc., pp. 25-28.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 409 - 410 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.356:577.164.2Short communicationEffects of PSD and wet granulation properties (concentration of granulation aid, temperature and humidity) on physical stability of ascorbic acid 95% granulateOja Memed*, Krume Tosev, Natasa Anevska Stojanovska, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Marina Chacorovska, Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development, Alkaloid AD, AleksandarMakedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* omemed@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionDC (direct compressible) granules nowadays are one of the most popular and most preferable pharmaceutical forms to formulators and as well as to companies because of their easy handling, less time consuming and cost effec-tiveness aspects.Granules are manufactured through a complex multi-stage processes which takes relatively long times under which the starting materials change their physical charac-teristics a number of times before they take place in final dosage form.Ascorbic acid is a chemical substance that is best known by its antioxidant activity and free radical scaveng-ing (Heber, 2007). Ascorbic acid is susceptible to oxidative degradation and, therefore, it requires significant physico-chemical and stability considerations in its formulations (Odeniyi and Jaiyeoba, 2007).The purpose of this study was to investigate the vari-ability in the physical stability properties of ascorbic acid 95% granules induced by wet granulation process of ascor-bic acid in order to produce ascorbic acid 95% granules used as product which will take place in further processing of conventional tablets.Materials and methodsDifferent batches from ascorbic acid 95% granules containing ascorbic acid (95.0% w/w) and hydroxypropyl methylcellulose (HPMC) type 2910 (50 mPas) (5.0% w/w) were prepared by wet granulation technique. Based on be-fore gained experience and literature reference data, con-centration of purified water used as granulation aid, pro-cess parameters of drying process and sieves/screen size for dry granulate were varied, in order to evaluate the role and check which of this variables is/are most important from the aspect of colour stability of ascorbic acid 95% granules. All manufactured batches from ascorbic acid 95% granulate were stored in stability testing chambers with defined conditions for temperature (40 @C) and hu-midity (75% RH) in open Petri dishes for 15 days and were analysed on zero, fifth and fifteenth day. Physical charac-terization of granules was conducted using a range of ex-perimental methods.All excipients used in the present study are approved for use in the pharmaceutical industry. Ascorbic acid 95% granules were produced by using ascorbic acid (DSM), hy-droxypropyl methylcellulose type 2910 - HPMC E 5 LV (Methocel, Colorcon, UK). All methods were performed according to Good Man-ufacturing Practices (GMP.) Process parameters: mixing time, mixing speed and chopper speed of the high shear mixer granulator (Dios-na 4L, Diosna, Germany) used during wet granulation pro-cess were same for all laboratory trials. Mixing of pre-blend of ascorbic acid (475.0 g) and HPMC E 5 LV (50 g) - mixing time: 3 min, mixing speed: 250 rpm, chopper speed: 1000 rpm. Wet granulation phase was separated in two phases granulation I/II (granulation time: 3 min /6 min, granulation speed: 150 rpm/200 rpm, chopper speed: 1000 rpm/1000 rpm).Concentration of water purified used as granulation aid during process of wet granulation was varied in different batches as 3.0% w/w, 3.5% w/w and 4.0% w/w.S4 PP 194410Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 409 - 410 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsDrying process of granules were made in fluid bed dri-er (Huttling, Germany), by varying of drying parameter in different batches as inlet air temperature 60 degC, 40 degC and 30 degC. As end point determination for drying phase was used loss on drying (LOD) of granules to be maximum 0.5%. In accordance with the varied drying parameters for inlet air temperature, drying time varied from 7 min to 35 min for the drying process. Variations on drying process parameters were made on ascorbic acid 95% granules pro-duced with 4.0% w/w water purified as granulation aid, be-cause based on before gained experience, 4.0% w/w water purified is determined as optimal concentration of granula-tion aid for obtaining good granulate with acceptable qual-ity parameters.Prepared dry granules from all batches were separate in two equal parts and were passed through laboratory sieve equipment (QuadroComil, Quadro, Canada) under differ-ent sieve size. First part of granules were sieved through sieve with pore size 0.813 mm and the other part from the sieve with pore size 0.610 mm in order to obtained gran-ules with different particle size distribution (PSD).All manufactured batches of ascorbic acid 95% gran-ules with all variables described above were placed sepa-rately in open Petri dish in stability chambers with defined conditions for temperature (40 degC) and humidity (75% RH) and were stored for fifteen days.Physical and chemical characterization of granules were analysed on zero, fifth and fifteenth day by various experimental methods: Fourier Transform Infrared spec-troscopy (FTIR, Varian 660, Australia), Differential Scan-ning Calorimetry (DSC, Netzsch 204F1 Phoenix, Germa-ny), appearance, colour- organoleptic examination, bulk density and tapped density (Erweka SVM 102, Erweka, Germany), flow characteristics, angle of repose (deg) (Erwe-ka granulate flow tester GTB, Erweka, Germany), loss on drying (Mettler Toledo HG 63, Mettler Toledo, Switzer-land) and optical microscopy (Morphologi G3S, Malvern, UK).Results and discussionFrom the results obtained in this study it can be eas-ily seen that it is most challenging scientific task to sep-arate just one parameter as responsible for physical (co-lour) stability issue of ascorbic acid 95% granules. From the produced batches with different variables it is more than obvious that humidity (concentration of granulation aid 4.0% water purified) and time spent under high humid-ity (concentration of granulation aid 4.0% water purified and dried with 30 degC inlet air temperature which take about 37 min for drying process) are the most responsible factor for changing the colour of ascorbic acid 95% granules and also PSD of the granules plays huge role in colour stabil-ity because it was noticed that granules with bigger gran-ules (their fraction with bigger granule) change their colour more drastically than the granules with smaller fraction. It is important to note that even we have made physical characterization by using range of experimental techniques with none of them except organoleptic and visual examina-tion, changes can't be detected. On the other side by visu-al examination it can be easily seen that there is big colour difference among the granules. ConclusionResults present in this study indicates that production of ascorbic acid 95% granules due to the nature of active substance is very complex process and as most important factors which affect physical stability of granulate, humid-ity and temperature can be pointed.ReferencesHeber, D., 2007.PDR for Herbal Medicines 4th edition. Thomson Healthcare, Montvale.Odeniyi, M.A., Jaiyeoba, K.T., 2007. Influence of formulation variables on the physicochemical stability of ascorbic acid tablets. J. Pharm. Res. 6, 29 - 33.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 411 - 412 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33:616.314.17 616.314.17-085.33Short communicationPreparation of doxycycline loaded chitosan microparticles for periodontal disease treatment by TPP ionic cross-linking combined with spray dryingSilvana Gjoseva*, Nikola Geskovski, Simona Dimchevska, Katerina GoracinovaFaculty of Pharmacy, University of SS Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* sgjoseva@Alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionPeriodontal disease is simply defined as bacterially in-duced chronic infectious-inflammatory disease that affects the tissues that support and anchor the teeth. It is a disease very difficult to treat, with very little change in the treat-ment over the last several decades. So, even though with limited efficacy, mechanical plaque biofilm disruption is still at the mainstream of periodontal therapy with the ad-dition of several treatment modalities (systemic antibiot-ics, topical antimicrobials, laser therapy etc.) but only as adjunct to scaling and root planning. However, optimism for discovery of the treatments with improved efficacy is restored due to continuous research efforts especially dur-ing the last two decades, and revised as well as upgrad-ed understanding of the ethyology, pathogenesis and com-plexity of this disease. Unquestionably, understanding of the complex microbial community, its virulence and the impact upon the host cells response as well as the impor-tance of the host inflammatory-immune response to intra-oral plaque for the disease development and progression creates new perspectives in management of periodontitis. Basically, novel research data clarified that the disease out-come depends upon the host response towards the complex dysbiotic oral microbial community (Yucel, 2015). Addi-tionally, it may be modified by genetic and different en-vironmental factors. Consequently, host modulation ther-apies are being proposed (Deshmukl et al., 2011) in order to tackle excessive host inflammatory reaction and target-ing of various aspects of the inflammation pathways (lev-els of enzymes, cytokines, prostanoids, as well modulation of osteoclast). Host modulating agents include non-steroi-dal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDS), sub antimicrobi-al dose doxycycline as well as topical doxycycline, sys-temic bisphosphonates, host modulating agents antagoniz-ing pro-inflammatory cytokines, selective inhibitors of ni-tric oxide synthase, inhibitors targeting the signaling path-ways like c-Jun N-terminal kinases (JNK) inhibitor; Extra-cellular-Signal-Regulated Kinases (ERK) inhibitor; NFkB inhibitor; JK3 inhibitor etc.Tetracycline apart from its an-timicrobial property, when used in sub-antimicrobial doses works as anti-inflammatory agent and has capability of in-hibiting the activities of neutrophils, osteoclasts, MMP 8, thereby inhibiting tissue and bone destruction. However, systemic therapy and conventional polymer implants with Doxycycline hyclate could not supply sufficient concentra-tion of the active substance at the site of action for a pro-longed period of time in order to provide efficient therapy. Smart bioadhesive micro and nano drug delivery systems with controlled release of the active substance will great-ly contribute to improved therapeutic efficacy, considering their ability to interact with the permeable junctional epi-thelium as well as elements of inflammation like macro-phages, dendritic cells etc, at the same time allocating high concentration of Doxycycline in the vicinity and/or at the site of the inflammation.Therefore, the main objective of this study is develop-ment and evaluation of mucoadhesive controlled release chitosan microspheres for local treatment of periodontal disease, with a size span from 1-10 mm, loaded with Dox-ycycline hyclate.S4 PP 195412Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 411 - 412 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsMaterials and methodsMaterialsDoxycycline hyclate was obtained form Kunshau Chemical, China, chitosan with degree of deacetylation 75-85%, sodium tripolyphosphate (TPP), sodium citrate, 2-methyl-2-propanol and calcium citrate were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, Germany and tetrabutilammponium hydrogen sulphate was purshased from Merck Millipore, Germany.MethodsMicroparticles were produced by spray drying meth-od (Buchi Mini Spray dryer B-290, Switzerland) with these conditions: inlet temperature 175 @C, aspiration 70%, pump flow 2% and air flow of 600 Nl/h. The colloidal so-lutions were prepared by ionotropic gelation method, with gradual addition of the cross-linking agent solutions (10 ml) to the solutions of polymers (1% chitosan sol.) and ac-tive ingredient (50 mg) (magnetic stirrer Variomag, Multi-point HP 15, Germany). Particle size and the swelling in-dex were determined with laser difractometry (Mastersiz-er 2000, Malvern Instr., Ltd, UK) using cell Hydro 2000S, (Malvern Instr., Ltd, UK). The swelling degree was mea-sured in diluted 1:2 phosphate buffer pH 7.0 (USP) with similar ionic strength of saliva. Drug release rate was fol-lowed in a suspension of microparticles in diluted 1:2 phos-phate buffer pH 7.0 (USP), placed in closed tubes in hori-zontal shaker at 37 degC, (Unitronic OR, Selecta, Barcelona, Spain). The concentration of released doxycycline hyclate in different time intervals as well as drug content and effi-cacy of encapsulation were determined using HPLC meth-od, column Phenomenex(r) 250-4.6 mm, PolymerX 5mm RP-1 100A (Phenomenex, Torrance, CA, USA), mobile phase of 2-methyl-2-propanol, buffer pH 8.0 R (Ph.Eur. ), tetrabutilammponium hydrogen sulphate, and diluted solu-tions of sodium hydroxide and sodium edetate.Results and discussionDoxycycline loaded microparticles were prepared by TPP ionic cross-linking combined with spray drying meth-od. Since the cross-linking of chitosan depends on the availability of the cationic sites and the negatively charged TPP species, the crosslinking process was carried out at pH 4.5, where chitosan as a polycation (pKa 6.3) will present -NH+3 sites and mostly phosphoric ions from TPP will be generated (Desai & Park, 2004). Different concentrations of the TPP cross-linking solutions (formulation A - 0.1% TPP; B - 0.5%; C - 0.75%; D - 1%) were used in order to evaluate their influence upon the physico-chemical prop-erties of the chitosan microparticles like, particle size and particle size distribution, yield, efficacy of incorporation, drug content and dissolution rate. The results pointed that at higher TPP concentration larger particles were produced with a presence of aggre-gates after the spray drying process. Mean particle sizes were 5.0 mm; 3.3 mm; 7.5 mm and 50 mm for series A, B, C and D, respectively. Span factor gradually increased with increasing concentrations of TPP solution, confirming the aggregation in series prepared using 0.75% (span = 2.9) and 1% (span = 4.8) TPP cross-linking solution. Yield and efficacy of encapsulation were slightly increased for mi-croparticles prepared using 0.75% and 1% TPP. The dis-solution studies showed that although dissolution rate de-creased with increasing TPP concentrations, the rate reduc-tion was not significant and it may have resulted from the particle size difference and the differences in the surface area exposed to the dissolution medium (formulation B - Dissolution results at T 1h, 3h, 5h were 40%, 60% and 90 cum.% compared to formulation C Dissolution rate results of 35, 50 and 80 cum.% at T 1h, 3h, 5h, respectively).ConclusionThe present study investigated the influence of differ-ent concentration of the cross-linking agent on the physico-chemical properties of the spray dried chitosan micropar-ticles. It was found that the TPP concentration influenced the particle size, particle size distribution, yield, drug load-ing and efficacy of encapsulation, swelling index as well as the dissolution rate of Doxycyline hyclate.