The clinical significance of the affini-ty is likely minimal because of the low levels of the metab-olite produced (Pagani et al., 2014).Literature survey reports that Exemestane can be de-termined by different analytical techniques such as HPTLC (Mane et al., 2010), UV-spectrophotometry (Angala-parameswari et al., 2012), GC-MS (de Albuquerque Cav-alcanti et al., 2011), LC-MS (Allievi et al., 1995), HPLC (Konda et al., 2011; Ksycinska et al., 2011) and UPLC (Reddy et al., 2011) in pharmaceutical dosage forms. In these described methods C18 (modified silica gel with a hydrocarbon chain of 18 carbon atoms) stationary phas-es were used. In our work C12 stationary phase was used. Using C12 stationary phase we have developed a method for the quantification of exemestan and its impurities in the tablets. The developed method was validated as per ICH guidelines with respect to specificity, linearity, LOD, LOQ, accuracy, precision and robustness.Materials and methodsThe experiments were performed on the chromato-graphic system Agilent HP1200 with DAD detector. The analytical columns used in this study were in examining of chromatographic conditions were used: reference standards exemestane, impurities B and C, the chromatographic col-umn Synergi 4um MAX-RP 80A 150 x 4.60 mm (C12). The optimum conditions for separation and determination of exemestane and its impurities were achieved with the mobile phase: water /acetonitrile in the ratio 50/50 (v/v), at a flow rate of 1.2 mL / min and the column temperature was maintained at 30 degC. Stocks of standard solutions were pre-pared in the methanol and storage in the fridge. To evalu-ate the linearity of the developed method, five solutions of exemestan and its impurities were prepared in the concen-tration range from the 50 mg/mL to 150 mg/mL, 0.49 mg/mL to 49 mg/mL and 0.54 mg/mL to 54 mg/mL for exemestan, imp. B and imp. C. The accuracy of the method was con-firmed by preparing three series of solutions containing ap-propriate placebo, exemestan and impurities in three levels: low level 80%, medium level 100% and high level 120%. To prove the precision of the method, three different solu-S2 PP 98214Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 213 - 214 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationstions of exemestan and impurities were prepared. The val-ues for LOD and LOQ were obtained by calculating the sig-nal / noise ratio. Sample solution was prepared in the mo-bile phase in the final concentration 75 mg/mL.Results and discussionThe proposed method was validated as per ICH guide-line. The system suitability was evaluated on the basis of res-olution between exemestan and impurities (Rs >1.5). In the specificity study chromatograms of placebo had shown no peaks at the retention time of exemestan and impurities. The precision of method was verified by repeatability and inter-mediate precision at three concentrations levels (1-3 mg/mL for impurities B and C, 80-120 mg/mL for exemestan). The RSD (%) of results for exemestan and impurities were calcu-lated (RSD for exemestan is 0.06% to 1.41%, for impurity B 0.41% to 1.41% and impurity C 0.56% to 1.52% RSD < 2%). The intermediate precision of the method was also evaluated using different analyst and different instrument and perform-ing the analysis on different days (RSD < 3% for both im-purities and exemestan). The LOD and LOQ for impurities were determined at a signal-to-noise ratio of 3:1 and 10:1, respectively, by injecting a series of diluted solutions with known concentrations (LOD is 0,049 mg/mL and LOQ 0,12 mg/mL for both impurities). The method was linear over the range of concentrations: for impurities B 0.49 mg /ml to 4.90 mg /ml (r =0.999), impurity C of 0.54 mg /ml to 5.40 mg / ml (r = 0.999) and for exemestane 50.90 mg /mL to 152.70 mg /mL (r =0.999) In the based on the obtained results, the iden-tification and quantification of impurities in the investigated exemestane tablets examined the impurities C is present in quantities of less than 0.10%, while the amount of B < LOQ. On the basis of validated methods to determine the content of exemestane in the exemestane tablets of 95.68%.ConclusionIt can be concluded that the defined RP-HPLC method is rapid and efficient for purity testing of exemestane in the raw material and pharmaceuticals dosage forms. AcknowledgementsWe gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the Ministry of Science and Education of the Republic of Serbia, grants OI 172041.ReferencesAllievi, C.M., Zugnoni, P., Strolin Benedetti, M., Dostert, P.J., 1995. Determination of plasma levels of exemestane (FCE 24304), a new irreversible aromatase inhibitor, using liquid chromatography/thermospray mass spectrometry. Mass. Spectrom. 30(5), 693-697.Angalaparameswari, S., Thiruvengadarajan, V.S., Amruth Kumar, N., Kutumbarao, M., Ramkanth, S., Adhusudhanachetty, C., 2012. Analytical method development and validation of exemestane tablet by UV spectrophotometry. J. Chem. 9(4), 2068-2073. de Albuquerque Cavalcanti, G., Carius Garrido, B., Dias Leal, F., Costa Padilha, M., de la Torre, X., Radler de Aquino Neto, F., 2011. Detection of new exemestane metabolites by liquid chromatography interfaced to electrospray-tandem mass spectrometry. J. Steroid. Biochem. Mol. Biol. 127, 248-254.Ksycinska, H., Kwasnik, K.B., Szlagowska, A., Rudzki, P.J., 2011. A Simple, sensitive, selective and high throughput liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (Lc/Ms/Ms) assay of exemestanein human plasma. J. Chromatogr. B 879(21), 1905-1910.Konda, B., Tiwari, R.N., Fegade H., 2011. Development and validation of stability indicating method for the determination of exemestane by reverse phase high performance liquid chromatography. J. Chromatogr. Sci. 49(8), 634-639.Mane, M.B., Sangshetti, J.N., Wavhal, P.J., Wakte, P.S., Shinde, D.B., 2010. Determination of Exemestane in bulk and pharmaceutical dosage form by HPTLC. Arabian J. Chem. 2, 1016.Pagani, O., Regan, M.M., Walley, B.A., Fleming, G.F., Colleo-ni, M., Lang, I., Gomez, H.L., Tondini, C., Burstein, H.J., Perez, E.A., Ciruelos, E., Stearns, V., Bonnefoi, H.R., Martino, S., Geyer, C.E. Jr., Pinotti, G., Puglisi, F., Criv-ellari, D., Ruhstaller, T., Winer, E.P., Rabaglio-Poretti, M., Maibach, R., Ruepp, B., Giobbie-Hurder, A., Price, K.N., Bernhard, J., Luo, W., Ribi, K., Viale, G., Coates, A.S., Gelber, R.D., Goldhirsch, A., Francis, P.A., 2014. TEXT and SOFT Investigators; International Breast Can-cer Study Group 2014. Adjuvant exemestane with ovari-an suppression in premenopausal breast cancer. N. Engl. J. Med. 371, 107-118.Reddy, M.M., Reddy, K.H., Ramkumar, D., Reddy M.U., Vara-prasad. B., 2011. A novel high resolution RP-UPLC method for the quantitative determination of exemestane and its related compounds. J. Pharm. Res. 4(2), 546-548.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 215 - 216 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.015.4Short communicationDissolution method development for generic drug productsMarija Petrovska*, Ivana Mitrevska, Tina Achkoska, Irena Brashnarska, Packa Antovska, Dejan Kuneski, Sonja UgarkovicResearch & Development, Alkaloid AD-Skopje, Blv. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* mpetrovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionThe rate and extent in which the amount of drug sub-stance dissolves over a period of time is called dissolution. Dissolution testing has emerged in the pharmaceutical field as a very important tool to characterize drug product per-formance. Dissolution test is required to study the drug re-lease from the dosage form and its in vivo performance. Dissolution test is used to assess the lot to lot quality of drug product. Before selecting the proper dissolution me-dium should be determined physical and chemical charac-teristics of the active substance (Ph. Eur., 2015). Dissolu-tion test procedures can be a challenging process, on mul-tiple fronts. The aim of the study was to develop a dissolu-tion test for the quality control for new generic immediate-release drug product with one active substance. Sink con-ditions, drug solubility in different dissolution media, dif-ferent filter type, different volume of the dissolution medi-um and different apparatus were tested. Materials and methodsThe dissolution procedure has several distinct compo-nents. These components include a dissolution medium, an apparatus, the study design (including acceptance criteria) and the mode of assay. All of these components must be properly chosen and developed to provide a method that is reproducible for within laboratory day-to-day operation and robust enough to enable transfer to another laboratory.Selection of dissolution medium When selecting the dissolution medium, physical and chemical data for the drug substance and drug product need to be considered, e.g. the solubility and solution state stability of the drug as a function of pH value. The solubil-ity of the active substance is pH dependent and the increase of pH would enhance its solubility and consequently the dissolution rate, particularly at pH > pKa of the compound.Sink conditions have been determined by in house method. Generally, when developing dissolution method, one of the goals is to obtain sink conditions. According to the European Pharmacopoeia (Ph. Eur., 2015), "sink con-ditions" normally occur in a volume of dissolution medium that is at least 3 to 10 times the saturation volume, there-fore sink conditions are maintained throughout the dura-tion of the test film-coated tablets in the specified medium, phosphate buffer at pH 7.2. The dissolution media temper-ature is fixed i. e. 37.0 (+-0.5) degC (Ph. Eur., 2015). Media deaeration is usually required, and can be ac-complished by heating the medium or (more commonly) filtering the medium or placing it under vacuum for short period of time. Bubbles can cause particles to cling to the apparatus and vessel walls. On the other hand, bubbles on the dosage units may increase buoyancy, leading to an in-crease in the dissolution rate, or may decrease the avail-able surface area, leading to a decrease in the dissolution rate (USP, 2015). Selection of dissolution apparatus/ agitation The choice of apparatus is based on the dosage form performance in the in vitro test system. For solid oral dos-age forms, Apparatus 1 and Apparatus 2 are used most fre-quently. For immediate-release and capsule (both soft gel and hard gel) formulation , USP-I i.e. basket apparatus at 100 rpm or USP-II i.e. paddle apparatus at 50 or 75 rpm are recommended. Coning in dosage form can be reduced by increasing the paddle speed, thus reducing the artifact and improving the data (USP, 2015).Apparatus II (paddle) rotating at 75 rpm was selected as most appropriate. Different paddle speeds (50 rpm and 75 rpm) and different Apparatus (Apparatus 1 and Appara-S2 PP 99216Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 215 - 216 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationstus 2) were tested. On 50 rpm conning was noticed which leads to incomplete release of active ingredient from tab-lets and higher variability in dissolution rates. Results and discussionDissolution is evaluated by measuring rate release pro-file or the amount dissolved over time. For immediate-re-lease dosage forms, dissolution time from 30 min to 60 min is recommended (British Pharmacopoeia, 2015). In our ex-perimental case multiple time points were performed for establishing the dissolution time. Observations are espe-cially useful during method development and optimiza-tion. USP chapter <1092>contains additional information on observations (USP, 2015). Sampling probe can affect the hydrodynamics of the system and so that can change the dissolution rate. Regard-ing the position of sampling, the probe should be sampled at approximately half the distance from the basket or pad-dle to the dissolution medium and not closer than 1 cm to the side of the flask. Adsorption of the active substance onto filter needs to be evaluated. Filter material must be saturated with the active substance by repeated passage to avoid losses that might go undetected during the test sam-pling. Accumulation of the particulate matter on the sur-face may cause significant error in the dissolution testing. Sample solutions were prepared in proposed dissolu-tion medium. The sample solutions were prepared using film-coated tablets into 900 mL dissolution medium at 37.0 +- 0.5 degC and with at 75 rpm for 45 minutes. Different al-iquots (0.3 and 6 mL) were filtered using different filter types (0.45-um), diluted suitably and analyzed spectropho-tometrically. A filter type is found to be acceptable for use if the results of the filtered portions are within 98-102% of the original concentrations of the unfiltered standard solu-tion and the centrifuged sample solution. Acceptance criteria must also be considered during test development. Acceptance criteria are derived in the form of "Q-factors" a minimum amount dissolved at a giv-en time as a percentage of the labeled content (ICH, 1999). Assaying the resultsThere are two common ways of analyzing dissolution test samples, spectrophotometric (UV) determinations and HPLC. The selection of the optimal wavelength for analy-sis was based on the wavelength of maximum absorption in the UV spectrum of the active substance. Cells with path lengths ranging from 0.02 to 1 cm were used. Optimization of Dissolution TestThe dissolution experiments were conducted in a six-station bath dissolution apparatus by subjecting six imme-diate-release tablets to 900 mL of proposed dissolution medium, paddle dissolution apparatus, and stirring speeds of 75 rpm. The temperature was maintained at 37 +-0.5 degC. Aliquots of 10 mL were withdrawn manually at 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, and 45 min, and replaced by the same volume of the medium heated at 37 +-0.5 degC. The sample was filtered using regenerated cellulose (RC), 0.45-um filter and ana-lyzed spectrophotometrically at 221 nm. Acceptance crite-ria for not less than 85% (Q+5%) of the labeled content for 45 min was set.Discriminatory properties of the dissolution methodFinally, the dissolution test procedure should be dis-criminating enough to be capable of distinguishing signif-icant changes in a composition or manufacturing process that might be expected to affect in vivo performance. In general, a properly designed dissolution test should result in reproducible data.The proposed dissolution methodology has shown to be suitable for quality control of tablets manufactured us-ing the commercial process and is capable of discriminat-ing changes in the critical manufacturing process steps and formulation composition. To elucidate the discriminatory power of the dissolution method, a formulation contain-ing different quantity of the active ingredient than the fi-nal tested product, was analyzed using the proposed disso-lution method and the dissolution profiles of both formula-tions were compared. ConclusionThe obtained results indicate that pH 7.2 as a dissolu-tion medium of choice, together with the selected dissolu-tion method parameters, are reflective of the product char-acteristics and are able to distinguish differences in formu-lation of the product.ReferencesBritish Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2015. British Pharmacopoeia. Appendix XII B. Dissolution Guidance on dissolution testing;. British Pharmacopoeia Commission, UK.European Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2015. European Pharmacopoeia 8th Edition, Supplement 8.6 General Chapter 2.9.3. Dissolution Test for Solid Dosage Forms. Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare of the Council of Europe (EDQM).Strasbourg, France.FDA, 1997. Guidance for Industry. Dissolution Testing of Immediate Release Solid Oral Dosage Forms.International conference on harmonisation of technical Requirements for registration of pharmaceuticals for human use (ICH), 1999.