The rise of PAMPA. Expert Opin. Drug Metab. Toxicol. 1, 325-342.Becke, A.D., 1993. Density-functional thermochemistry. III. The role of exact exchange. J. Chem. Phys. 98, 5648-5652.CambridgeSoft Corporation. 2013. ChemBio3D Ultra, Version 13.0. Cambridge, MA, USA.ChemAxon. 2013. MarvinSketch 6.1.0. Budapest, HungaryDragon 6, TALETE srl, Via V. Pisani, 13 - 20124 Milano - Italy, http://www.talete.mi.itErnsberger, P., 2000. Pharmacology of moxonidine: an I1-imidazoline receptor agonist, J. Cardiovasc. Pharmacol. 35, S27-41.Fenton, C., Keating, G.M., Lyseng-Williamson, K.A., 2006. Moxonidine: A review of its use in essential hypertension. Drugs 66, 477-496.Finn, D.P., Marti, O., Harbuz, M.S., Valles, A., Belda, X., Marquez, C., Jessop, D.S., Lalies, M.D., Armario, A., Nutt, D.J., Hudson, A.L., 2003. Behavioral, neuroendocrine and neurochemical effects of the imidazoline I2 receptor selective ligand BU224 in naive rats and rats exposed to the stress of the forced swim test. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 167, 195-202.Iczkowski, R.P., Margrave, J.L., 1961. Electronegativity. J. Am. Chem. Soc. 83, 3547-3551.Kaliszan, R., 2007. QSRR: quantitative structure-(chromatographic) retention relationships, Chem. Rev. 107, 3212-3246.Lee, C., Yang, W., Parr, R.G., 1988. Development of the Colle-Salvetti correlationenergy formula into a functional of the electron density. Phys. Rev. B 37, 785-789.Liu, X., Testa, B., Fahr, A., 2011. Lipophilicity and its relationship with passive drug permeation. Pharm. Res. 28, 962-977.Molero-Monfort, M., Martin-Biosca, Y., Sagrado, S., Villanueva-Camanas, R.M., Medina-Hernandez, M.J., 2000. Micellar liquid chromatography for prediction of drug transport. J. Chromatogr. A 870, 1-11.Parr, R.G., Yang, W., 1989. Density-Functional Theory of Atoms and Molecules.Oxford University Press, New York.Simulation Plus Inc, 2013. ADMET Predictor 6.5.0013. Lancaster, CA.Umetrics AB. 2008. SIMCA P+ Program, Version 12.0.0.0. Umea, Sweden.Vucicevic, J., Nikolic, K., Dobricic, V., Agbaba, D., 2015. Prediction of blood - brain barrier permeation of a-adrenergic and imidazoline receptor ligands using PAMPA technique and quantitative-structure permeability relationship analysis. Eur. J. Pharm. Sci. 68, 94-105.          Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 603 -604 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.1Short communicationExcellence in pharmacy practice - Quality indicators based on tradition, experience and innovationsArijana MestrovicPharma Expert Competency Development Manager, Dunjevac 2, 10 000 Zagreb, Croatia* arijana.mestrovic@pharmaexpert.hrIntroductionPharmaceutical care is the responsible pharmacists practice, which provide safe and best available therapy for the patient. It is the professional activity in which the phar-macist, using his knowledge and experience, revealing pa-tients' needs, set priorities in the treatment process, and takes responsibility for a positive outcome of drug thera-py (Hepler and Strand, 1989). That responsibility is shared with the doctor who determined the diagnosis and pre-scribed therapy, and with patients, encouraging them to the compliance, frequent check and counseling about respon-sible treatment. Today, many countries are trying to incor-porate this new concept in its health care system, and al-though such attempts are of great interest to national and international pharmacy organizations, many challenges of-ten appear in the implementation of this concept. Some of the difficulties may include: attitudes and opinions of other health professionals, lack of cooperation, and inadequate communication between them, an insufficient number of pharmacists, space or equipment for the provision of phar-maceutical care, including the structure and organization of health care (EDQM, 2012). Pharmaceutical care derives from the principles and postulates of clinical pharmacy, which pharmacists recog-nize as the scientific basis for intervention in the treatment of patients (RPSGB, 2007). The concept of clinical phar-macy clarifies the role of the pharmacist in the process of providing health care. It involves different ways of cooper-ation of health professionals in which science and practice can be linked to patient care. But to make this impact had the biggest impact possible, it is necessary to develop clin-ical knowledge, but also communication skills, judgment and decision- making. Clinical practice should occupy an increasing role in the daily work of a pharmacist, instead of being just one of the possible options or specialty phar-macist. Clinical pharmacy practice means and includes the philosophy of pharmaceutical care that is focused on spe-cialized knowledge and experience in the treatment. As a scientific discipline, clinical pharmacy includes the task of collecting and contributing to the creation of new knowl-edge that can improve the health and quality of life (Mc-Givney et al., 2007).Indicators of quality of pharmaceutical care are equal-ly appropriate for in-patient and community settings, for hospital and community pharmacists, and other health-care professionals, as applicable, in low-, middle-income and industrialized countries in Europe and other regions of the world. The indicators provide information about the range; quantity and quality of pharmaceutical care inter-ventions/services delivered. The indicators also provide an opportunity to gather in-depth knowledge on pharmaceu-tical care practices regionally, nationally, and internation-ally that will permit the sharing and follow-up of experi-ences over time by professional disciplines and the health sector in general, regionally, nationally and international-ly. These indicators are rather broad, and can be further de-veloped and refined over time, but they are easily under-stood and will help pharmacists, other healthcare provid-ers, and professional regulators to formalize and develop the pharmaceutical care philosophy and its working meth-ods (EDQM, 2012).Some of the terms, which are used in Indicators of quality, are:1. Adverse drug reaction (ADR) means a response to a medicinal product which is noxious and unintended and which occurs at doses normal-ly used in man for the prophylaxis, diagnosis or therapy of disease or for the restoration, correc-tion or modification of physiological functionS7 OP 288604Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 603 - 604 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional development2. Documentation - the detailed description of a patient-provider or provider-provider interac-tion. Documentation serves as a record for stat-ing relevant participants, evidence, assumption, rationale, and analytical methods used in eval-uating patient progress and quality of care or outcomes for individuals. Also functions as a means of communication among providers and analysis for billing purposes. 3. Customer loyalty - expresses an intended be-havior related to the product or service. This in-cludes the likelihood of future purchases or re-newal of service contracts or, conversely, how likely it is that the customer will switch to an-other brand or service provider.4. Follow up is maintenance of contact with or re-examination of a person (as a patient) at usu-ally prescribed intervals following diagnosis or treatment 5. Medication review is an evaluation of patient's medicines with the aim of optimizing the out-come of medicine therapy by detecting, solving and preventing drug-related problems 6. Interprofessional collaboration - working to-gether with one or more health care profession-als who each make a unique contribution to ob-tain optimal patient medication outcomes, con-sidering patient needs, expectations, and quali-ty of life 7. Patient Medication Profile - is a comprehensive summary of all regular medicines taken by the patient. Professional assessment of prescription is the assess-ment of whether the prescription includes an appropri-ate dosage form and appropriate route of administration; appropriateness according to patient's condition; dosage within therapeutic range; duration of treatment; appropri-ateness according to patient's parameters (age, weight, etc.) and previous medication; compatibility with other medica-tion; consistency with formularies, clinical guidelines and protocols; possible side effects; risk of adverse drug reac-tions; potential for non-concordance, inappropriate use and misuse by patient; contraindications (RPSGB, 2007).Pharmaceutical care is the responsible provision of drug therapy for the purpose of achieving definite out-comes that improve a patient's quality of life. These out-comes are:* Cure of a disease* Elimination or reduction of a patients' symp-tomatology* Arresting or slowing of a disease process* Preventing a disease or symptomatologyPharmaceutical care involves the process that a phar-macist co-operates with the patient and healthcare pro-fessionals in designing, implementing, and monitoring a therapeutic plan that will produce specific therapeutic out-comes for the patient. This in turn involves three major functions:* Identifying potential and actual drug-related problems* Resolving actual drug-related problems and * Preventing drug-related problems.Pharmaceutical care is a necessary element of health care, and should be integrated with other elements (Mc-Givney et al., 2007).Pharmaceutical care is, however, provided for the di-rect benefit to the patient, and the pharmacist is responsible directly to the patient for the quality of that care. The fun-damental relationship in pharmaceutical care is a mutually beneficial exchange in which the patient grants authority to the provider and the provider gives competence and com-mitment (accept responsibility) to the patient. These funda-mental goals, processes, and relationships of pharmaceuti-cal care exist regardless of practice setting and of profes-sional background (Hepler and Strand, 1989).ReferencesHepler, D.D., Strand, L.M., 1989. Opportunities and responsibilities in pharmaceutical care. Am. J. Pharm. Educ. 53, 7S-15S.McGivney, M.S., Meyer, S.M., Duncan-Hewitt, W., Hall, D.L., Goode, J.V., Smith, R.B., 2007, Medication Therapy Management: Its relationship to patient counseling, disease management and pharmaceutical care. J. Am. Pharm. Assoc. 47(5), 620.EDQM (European Directorate for the Quality of Medicines and HealthCare), 2012. Pharmaceutical care policies and practices for a safer, more responsible and cost-effective health system. RPSGB (Royal Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain), 2007. Developing and implementing standard operating procedures for dispensing. Available at: http://www.rpsgb.org.uk/pdfs/sops.pdf. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 605 - 606 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.1(497.7)Short communicationQuality of community pharmacy service in Republic of Macedonia - professional supervision Bistra Angelovska* and Jasminka PatcevaPharmaceutical Chamber of Macedonia, 50 Divizija, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* bistra_anglovska@yahoo.comLegal frameworkPharmaceutical Chamber of Macedonia (Chamber) as a professional association of pharmacists with high educa-tion, beside public authorizations for issuing, continuing, renewing and revoking of working licenses and keeping registers, with the adoption of the Law on Health Care Pro-tection in 2012 has obtained one more public authorization - professional supervision (LHP, 2012). According to this Law, supervision of the professional work of the health-care institutions and other institutions that perform health-care activities and of the healthcare workers and co-work-ers is being performed for the purpose of control of the professional work, the implementation of the professional guidelines, assessment of the professional work, as well as assessment of the conditions and the manner of provided healthcare (LHP, 2012). The final goal of the profession-al supervision is evaluation of the quality of the healthcare services provided by the healthcare workers, in this case pharmacists, and undertaking measures for their improve-ment. The quality of provided services by the pharmacists, as well as the conditions under they are provided have in-valuable significance for the provision of pharmaceutical activities as a part of the whole health care protection, care for the patients, prevention of the diseases and obtainment health for the population. The Chamber has fully recog-nized the aims and the goals of the professional supervi-sion, the need for determining the provision, quantity and sustainability of the quality of the healthcare services re-spectively, as well as determining the conditions for per-forming the supervision and their maintenance at the re-quired level according to the current legal provisions.Creating basis for implementation and developing acts and toolsThe implementation of the professional supervision as a new public authorization in the Chamber started with forming a Commission for organizing the professional su-pervision with duties: to make proposed list of pharmacists - providers of the supervision, to develop criteria for per-forming professional supervision, to propose annual plan for conducting professional supervision, to keep evidence of performed supervisions and suggested and taken mea-sures for improvement, to write annual reports, to give re-ports of performed supervisions to the Ministry of Health, to make orders for performing the supervision, to deter-mine performers for supervision, all according to the Law, the Statute of the Chamber and the Code of Ethics (Rule-book, 2014). During the 2013, the Commission for professional su-pervision created a Rulebook on the performing the profes-sional supervision, which later was adopted by the Cham-ber's Assembly and published in the Official Gazette of R. Macedonia (Rulebook, 2014). In the Rulebook are de-termined the way of organizing the professional supervi-sion and the procedures for performing according to the legal provisions. The conducted supervision can be reg-ular supervision or professional supervision when neces-sary - extraordinary professional supervision (LHP, 2012). Regular supervision is conducted according to the annu-al plan, set by the Commission and adopted by the Execu-tive Board of the Chamber (LHP, 2012). The extraordinary supervision is carried out in the case of a request for ex-amination the operation of the health care facility and the work of the pharmacists during the provision of the phar-maceutical services (LHP, 2012). The request can be sub-mitted by patient, member of the patient's family and gov-ernmental body (LHP, 2012). The professional supervision S7 OP 289606Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 605 - 606 (2016)Oral presentationsContinuing professional developmentis conducted by the performers, who fulfill certain crite-ria such as (1) having specialization in the certain field of pharmacy or master degree, at least 5 years working ex-perience in appropriate health care institution and valid li-cense to work, or (2) having at least 10 years working ex-perience in appropriate healthcare institution and valid li-cense to work (Rulebook, 2014). During the profession-al supervision performers examine, evaluated and control the organization and the management of the work in the healthcare institution, the manner of work of the healthcare institution, professional qualifications of the pharmacists, the rights and the obligations of the pharmacists, profes-sional work of the pharmacists, their continuing education, keeping official books and registers and provision of the legal requirements and professional guidelines (Rulebook, 2014). After completing the professional supervision, per-formers prepare minutes, which is submitted to the Com-mission. Commission further submits report to the Minis-try of Health (LHP, 2012). If the performers determine ir-regularity in the work, they are obliged to give directions for eliminating the irregularity (Rulebook, 2014). They are also obliged to give instructions for improvement if need-ed. If pharmacists and the pharmacy don't carry out the in-structions within the period laid down by the performers, then the Commission shall notify the competent authorities and bodies of the Chamber (Rulebook, 2014).Furthermore, the Chamber announced call for selec-tion of providers of professional supervision. After the per-formers' selections was completed, lists of providers of the professional supervisions for community pharmacy, hos-pital and clinical pharmacy, laboratories and other health care providers where pharmacists work were formed.It was also decided professional supervision to start to be conducted in community pharmacies, and then to cover other healthcare institutions. Because of fair, efficient and quality delivery of pro-fessional supervision the Commission has prepared List of indicators for the implementation of professional supervi-sion over the work of community pharmacies and pharma-cists who work in them. The List is a helpful tool to facil-itate the conduction of the professional supervision with-out subjective influence on performers. The List is struc-tured form of statements that determine certain obligation, criteria, condition or process needed to establish the quali-ty of the provided healthcare services by the pharmacists as well as the conditions in which those services are provided.Performing and initial resultsProfessional supervision began to be implemented in the second half of 2014. At the beginning was conducted on 8 pharmacists employed in 6 pharmacies on the territory of Skopje. The next year, were conducted 28 supervisions on pharmacists employed in 19 pharmacies in 9 communi-ties in Skopje.