Distribu-tion of drug in system octanol/water is in correlation with its lipophilicity and its optimal value ranges between 2.5 and 5 (Pardridge, 1998). Most of newly developed drugs have poor permeability. Thus novel pharmaceutical formu-lations are developed containing drug permeators. Drug transfer across BBB could be facilitated using permeator enhancers (e.g. bile acids). Value logP in system octanol/water is dependent on drug solvent interaction (i.e. hydro-gen bonding), and because of this it is a poor predictor for BBB penetration, since this barrier is highly hydrophobic. Better system is cyclohexane/water since cyclohexane has no possibility for hydrogen bonding. If permeator that is most suitable could be predicted in vitro in preformulation investigations, it could decrease formulation development costs. Thus the aim of this study was to investigate glicla-zide distribution in systems n-octanol/water and cyclohex-ane/water as in vitro prediction models for in vivo BBB penetration. Also the aim was to determine whether men-tioned in vitro models could predict the influence of per-meators such is dexycholic acid (DCA) on gliclazide trans-fer across BBB.Materials and methodsDistribution coefficient (logD) was determined us-ing a "flask shake" method. In glass tubes 1 ml of organic solvent (cyclohexane or octanol) was mixed with 5 ml of aqueous phase. Partition profile was determined over phys-iological pH range (pH 1.2 HCl solution, pH 4.5 acetate buffer, pH 6.8 and 7.4 phosphate buffer and pH 7 distilled water) for 5 combinations of n-octanol or cyclohexane with aqueous gliclazide solution (10 ug/ml) of different pH and with or without the addition of DCA (0.5 mM) into n-octa-nol or cyclohexane phase. The analyses were done in tripli-cate for each pair of organic solvent/water. Concentrations of gliclazide were determined using modified high perfor-mance liquid chromatography method (Mikov, 2008). Val-ues of logD at pH 7.4 were compared with literature date of gliclazide BBB penetration and influence of DCA on its penetration (Lalic Popovic, 2012).Results and discussionGliclazide is a small lipophilic molecule which is ex-pected to readily cross biological barriers. However it has poor BBB penetration, and since it shows antioxidant properties on brain cells its penetration into central ner-vous system is of interest (Sandoval, 2009). Though some drugs do cross BBB, there is a great number of drugs like gliclazide for which BBB is impermeable. In this investi-gation a higher partition into organic layer was found in system n-octanol/water than cyclohexane/water. Profiles of distribution after 1 and 24 h were different which leads to a conclusion that 24 h is needed time for a partition to be finished in system cyclohexane/water. There were no observed differences in logD values after 1 or after 24 h between systems with and without DCA in n-octanol (pH S4 PP 177376Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 375 - 376 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / Biopharmacy6.8; 7 and 7.4), but minor differences were noticed in low-er pH values (i.e. pH 1.2 and pH 4.5). Also DCA signifi-cantly increased partition of gliclazide in system cyclohex-ane/water but not in system n-octanol/water. Value of logD at pH 7.4 without DCA in organic layer in system n-octa-nol/water was 0.34+-0.05 and in system cyclohexane/wa-ter was -0.74+-0.11. According to logD value in cyclohex-ane/water, gliclazide have poor BBB, which is in correla-tion with in vivo data (logBBB 0.23+-0.02 healthy animals and 0.85+-0.03 diabetic animals) (Lalic Popovic, 2012). Value of logD at pH 7.4 with DCA in organic layer in sys-tem n-octanol/water was 0.54+-0.07 and in system cyclo-hexane/water was 0.18+-0.01. Both systems showed in-creased transfer of gliclazide when DCA was present in or-ganic layer. This is also in correlation with in vivo investi-gation where animals were pretreated with DCA (logBBB 0.96+-0.03 healthy animals and 1.35+-0.14 diabetic animals) (Lalic Popovic, 2012). Thus partition of gliclazide in sys-tem cyclohexane/water better correlates with in vivo data where penetration of gliclazide was increased with DCA pretreatement, but in diabetic animals, penetration was in-creased in group with and without DCA pretreatement and investigated in vitro systems could not this predict.ConclusionIncreased logD value in organic layer when DCA is present indicates existence of physicochemical interactions of DCA and gliclazide. Investigated system cyclohexane/water predicted poor gliclazide BBB penetration and the influence of DCA on gliclazide penetration but system n-octanol/water failed to do so. However investigated sys-tems could not predict differences in penetration between diabetic and healthy animals. Further investigations are necessary to determine value of system cyclohexane/water in prediction of BBB transfer.AcknowledgmentThis work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology Development of Serbia (41012 III).ReferencesLalic Popovic, M., 2012. The difference in the blood brain barrier penetration of antidiabetic drugs in healthy and diabetic experimental animals [PhD thesis]. Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Novi Sad, Serbia.Mikov, M., Al-Salami, H., Golocorbin-Kon, S., Skrbic, R., Raskovic, A., Fawcett, J.P., 2008. The influence of 3, 7-dihydroxy-12-keto-5-cholanate on gliclazide pharmacokinetics and glucose leves in a rat model diabetes. Eur. J. Drug Met. Pharm. 33, 137-142.Pardridge, W.M., 1998. CNS drug design based on principles of blood-brain barrier transport. J. Neuroch.70, 1781-92.Sandoval D., Obici S., Seeley R., 2009. Targeting CNS to treat type 2 diabetes. Nature 8, 386- 39Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 377 - 378 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.8Short communicationChoosing the right blister packaging filmBiljana Pavicevic, Maja Lazarova*, Biljana Nanova, Milkica GligorovaAlkaloid AD Skopje, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* mstojevska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionThe main function of packaging is to ensure protec-tion of the pharmaceutical product, its safety and proper use, information on the identity, instruction of use and stor-age at any time point before expiration date of the drug product. The pharmaceutical dosage product and its con-tainer closure system act together to serve as an integral unit. The primary packaging comes into direct contact with the product and it is the most significant component in the pharmaceutical product packaging. It serves the two main functions of protecting the product from outside influences that would otherwise render it useless while allowing the manufacturer of the product to package it using practices that typically involve automated form-fill-seal equipment. As innovations continue and new films enter the market, a thorough understanding of how regulatory, package perfor-mance and film attributes fit together should help ease the selection process and, hopefully, provide some framework to avoid potential problems throughout the life of the phar-maceutical product.CGMP requirements for packaging materials for par-enteral, inhalation and liquid products are wider than for solid oral dosage forms (FDA, 1999).ObjectiveCorrect selection of contact packaging has a signifi-cant impact on safety and efficiency. The goal is to choose the appropriate contact material for blister packaging. Prin-ciples and contribution to simplification and proper choice of packaging material are: out of the vast number of pack-aging materials to choose a range of materials that can be used for packaging a certain product, materials that meet quality requirements and are tested by the manufacturer, from reliable suppliers of high quality and favorable price, to fully comply with the equipment and resources for pack-aging at the factory. An analysis of the characteristics of materials for blister packaging was made.Critical factors in choosing the right blister packaging filmFor choosing the right blister packaging film it is nec-essary to have great knowledge of drug characteristics, physical and chemical properties, microbiological quality, technical considerations of blister films, dimensional sta-bility of the webs, ability for thermoforming and cooling of formed film, variation in thickness, compatibility of form-ing film and lidding foil.Films for blister packagingThe base in blisters produced by thermoforming pro-cess is a polymer plastic film. The blisters are formed un-der increased temperature. PVC film used for blister pack-aging represents a rigid film due to the absence of soften-ers and plasticizers, which provides structural rigidity and physical protection of the pharmaceutical dosage form. It is transparent, rigid material with a greattermoform abil-ity, easy to color and low cost. The main disadvantage is low barrier properties, high water vapor and gases perme-ability. PVDC has a significant role in blister packaging as lamination or coating of PVC. PVDC provides excel-lent barrier to gases and water vapor, unlike other poly-mers that provide either one or other protection. Perme-ability to gases does not depend on the relative humidity, so it can be used for packaging in various environmental conditions. The properties of the copolymer depend on the content of the VDC, greater amount of VDC result in better barrier properties, the smaller the amount of VDC the flex-ibility improves. The amount and type of co-monomer, as S4 PP 178378Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 377 - 378 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationswell as additives and manufacturing technology affect the properties of PVDC. The weight of PVDC coatings ranges from 40, 60, 90 and 120 g/m2. PVDC coatings have been used with duplex (PVDC/PVC) and triplex (PVDC/PE/PVC) structure being the most common ones used (Bauer, 2009). Aclar(r) has the lowest water vapor permeability of all the films used for blister packaging. It has good barri-er properties to gases, but this material is not used often in applications where impermeability to gases is primary de-mand. Aclar(r)UltRx (CTFE homopolymer) has the highest moisture barrier of any clear thermoplastic film. It process-es within the same range as other thermoforming films on conventional blister packaging equipment. PET has a high-er permeability to water vapor compared to PVC. PVDC - coated PET has a similar permeability to water vapor as PVDC. PS has very good thermoforming properties, but has high permeability to water vapor. PP has good barri-er properties to water vapor (similar to PVDC). The prob-lem is thermoforming. The temperature required for ther-moforming PP and the further cooling process must be pre-cisely controlled. There may be distortion of blisters in sec-ondary packaging due to the thickness of PP film. Another disadvantage is the thermal instability and the possibility of collection of the film after performing the process. The process of blister packaging on a standard blister machine with a PP is difficult to perform and is much slower unlike PVC. COC (Cyclic Olefin Copolymer) in multilayer com-binations with PP, PE or PETG has very good barrier prop-erties. Cyclic olefins have good thermoforming properties even for deep blister cavities. COC is used in combina-tion with semicrystal PE or PP polymers to improve ther-moform properties. The films are produced with co-extru-sion or lamination. COC does not contain halogen in mo-lecular structure comprising only from carbon and hydro-gen. COC is used for packaging which requires deep blis-ter cavities (Pilchik, 2000).Blisters produced by cold forming are formed mechan-ically without the use of temperature and have high barrier properties. OPA/aluminum/PVC/ALU has excellent barri-er properties for oxygen and is also impermeable to water vapor and therefore, it is the first choice of packaging ma-terial. Its cost per square meter can withstand comparison with PVDC. However, cold forming takes up more pack-aging material for the same number of tablets or capsules of the same size, unlike PVDC.Multilayer films can be laminated, co-extruded, or a combination of the two. In laminated films, all film layers are extruded separately and are bonded together by a ther-moset adhesive. In co-extruded films, the film is manufac-tured in a single-step operation in which the film layers are bonded together by a tacky thermoplastic polymer. These two manufacturing techniques can be combined. Flexible materials are used for the layers of the laminates, such as aluminum foils and films of polymer materials of varying thickness. With the right choice of a layer, a laminate with best suited properties for the packaging of a product at a low price could be obtained. Foil for the inner layer usu-ally has good barrier properties, the lowest permeability to gases and water vapor. The inner layer should not have in-teraction with the product. The possibility of shaping and closing is provided by inner layer that should be termoseal-able (PE, PVC, PS, PVDC) (Stagnaro, 2011).ConclusionThe categorization of the polymer film is made accord-ing to their barrier properties: WVTR (water vapor trans-mission rate) and permeability to gases. PVC has a signifi-cantly higher permeability to water vapor from all types of PVC/PVDC and all types Aclar(r). PVC/PVDC and Aclar(r) are closely comparable values for WVTR, depending on the thickness of the impermeable layer in the polymer film. Gas permeability, especially O2 and CO2 is important when the product inside the packaging material is sensi-tive to oxidation. PVC and all types of Aclar(r) have signif-icantly higher oxygen permeability of all types PVDC film. OPA/aluminum/PVC/ALU has excellent barrier properties for oxygen and is also impermeable to water vapor.Identifying the most suitable blister packaging mate-rial is complex. It requires very good understanding of the film properties in relation to application/ machine parame-ters for getting an optimal packaging performance.ReferencesBauer, E.J., 2009. Pharmaceutical packaging handbook, Informa Health Care, New York, USA.CPMP/QWP/4359/03, 2005. Guideline on plastic immediate packaging materials - specific to plastics only, EMEA.FDA, 1999. Guidance for industry, Container closure systems for packaging of human drugs and biologics.Pilchik, R., 2000. Pharmaceutical blister packaging, Part I: Rationale and materials. Pharm. Technol., 24(11), 68-78.Stagnaro, D., 2011. Selecting film for blister packaging, Healthcare packaging, http://www.healthcarepackaging.com/package-component/films/selecting-film-blister-packaging.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 379 - 380 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 661.12:614.31Short communicationQualification of cleanrooms in pharmaceutical industryViktorija Veljanoska*, Silvana Gjosheva, Elena Tomovska, Milkica Gligorova Alkaloid AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* vveljanoska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionClean rooms and associated controlled environments provide control of airborne particulate contamination to levels appropriate for accomplishing contamination-sensi-tive activities. Production of sterile pharmaceutical prod-ucts is regulated in a separate Annex 1 in European Guide-line for Good Manufacturing Practice (EU GGMP, 2008) and contains instructions for minimizing the risk of con-tamination of these specific products with particles, mi-crobes and pyrogens.Presented study represent a critical review of some tests in guidance document for pharmaceutical industry, used in the process of qualification and monitoring of clean rooms for the manufacture of sterile medicinal products. Qualification of clean rooms Qualification of clean rooms in pharmaceutical indus-try is comprised of different tests like air supply, air veloc-ity, air changes, flow pattern, filter integrity, pressure test, particle count, temperature, microbial count, relative hu-midity, noise level and vibration test.The purpose of air supply capacity test is to demon-strate that the air system is balanced and capable of deliv-ering sufficient air volumes as per design to maintained re-quired air change in the defined area. The air capacity is demonstrated by following the procedure of measuring air flow in supply and returned duct and air volume to meet the design required.The purpose of air velocity/uniformity test is to pres-ent the capability of the air system for delivering sufficient air volumes to maintain a minimum cross section veloci-ty under HEPA terminal filter modules. The measuring is performed by calibrated anemometer at numerous sites in order to provide one measurement for each 0.37 m2 filter area. For Laminar Flow sections air flows uniformity has to be 0.45 m/sec +- 20%.