Sonboli A, Fakhari A, Kanani MR, Yousefzadi M. Antimicrobial Activity, EssentialOil Composition and Micromorphology of Trichomes of Satureja laxiflora C. Kochfrom Iran. Zeitschrift fur Naturforschung C, Vol. 59 (2004) 777-781.10. Yamasaki K, Nakano M, Kawahata T, Mori H, Otake T, Ueba N, Oishi I, Inami R,Yamane M, Nakamura M, Murata H, Nakanishi T. Anti-HIV-1 activity of herbs inLabiateae. Biological & Pharmaceutical Bulletin, Vol. 2 (1998) 829-833.188Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011MEDITsINSKI I AROMATIChNI RASTENIJA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOEVALUATION OF SPONTANE AND CULTIVATED FLORA OF "BRIGADE PALACE" PARKAjola Mesiti1, Liri Dinga21Universiteti Amerikan i Tiranes, Fakulteti Mjekesor2Universiteti i Tiranes, Fakulteti i Shkencave Natyrore, Kopshti BotanikINTRODUCTIONThe Brigade Palace park which is a bupheric zone between urban re-gion and the suburbs of Tirana has got an area of 100 ha. The rese-arch intends: finding out the spontane and cultivated contents of thedifferent kinds of flora; studying the evolution of plants (based on theearly data of the park) under the conditions of the urban park; identi-fying the main plant groups and their principal plant associations;analysing their anthrotopotoleranca and their origine; giving out ge-neral facts of their eco-biology.MATERIAL AND METHODSDifferent kind of habitats of the park has been examined. There hasbeen collected from the field different kind of unknown species and ithas been taken photos for each species with a specific status. For eachspecie it has defined it's parameter of anthropotolerance, origin andbiological forme. RESULTSThe research results: the park has got a flora treasure consisting of382 species from which 228 species are spontane that belong to phi-toclimatic shelves of forests and mediterenian bushes. The Arbuto-Quercetum ilicis overveils here. There are also 154 cultivated andintroduced species. Analysing their status according to IUCN in theBrigade Palace park we have kinds with special status such as: E- (en-dangered), V (vulnerabile), E- (endangered), Ex? (extinted).CONCLUSIONOur research clearly shows that this park even though surrounded bywall where entry is not allowed for the public, it is under the constantanthropogen influence and an improper management of the park. Thisresearch has identified different kinds of plants according to certainecological indicators. It also brings into focus that in the park there are different sorts ofplants that easily fit themselves to the changes brought by athropo-gen influence, which are called neutral urban plants. Their number isalways enriching among which there are the socalled urbanophobeplants. The origine of plants is also studied paying attention even tothe human influence in the park. Each of these indicators clearly showsthe ecological view of the park and its evolution. The permanent anth-ropogen pressure and the climate changes vahe influence in the floraof the park. Its maintainance must be carried out in compliance withdifferent consultations of forest specialists and botanists avoiding theavailable plant association damages. REFERENCES1. Coutanceau M. -Encyclopedie des Jardins- Paris 1957 2. Demiri M. - Flora Ekskrusioniste e Shqiperise- ShBLSH Tirane,19833. Dinga L. -Florikultura -ILB, Tirane, 19764. Dinga L. - Luletaria - ILB, Tirane, 19855. Encyclopedie du Monde Vegetale - Paris 19646. Ingels E. J. -Ornamental Horticulture -Principles and Practices-Nee York 1985 7. Kalajnxhi A. - Vleresimi i biodiversitetit floristik e fitosociologjik i ParkutKombetar (i propozuar) te Dajtit - (disertacion doktorature)- Tirane,2006 8. Mitrushi I. - Druret dhe Shkurret e Shqiperise - Instituti i Shkencave , Tirane 1955 9. Nau J.- Ball Perennial Manual- Illinois, 1996 10. Northington D. etj.- The Botanical eorld-Toronto 1984 11. Paparisto K. etj.- Flora e Tiranes -UShT., Tirane,196212. Pumo E. etj. - Gjeografia Fizike e Shqiperise -ASh., Tirane,199013. Vangjeli J. etj. -Libri i Kuq - ASh. Tirane 199514. Vangjeli J. - Udhezues Fushor i Flores se Shqiperise - ASh., Tirane, 200315. Floristic Investigations of Historical Parks in St. Petersburg, Russia* 16. Ruderalization in a Roman Park as a Result of Changing Management* 17. The Nonnative Flora of the Kiev (Kyiv) Urban Area, Ukraine: A Checklist and Brief Analysis* 18. An Overviee of the Nee York Metropolitan Flora Project*. FAGOPYRUM ESCULENTUM -ABIOTIC ELICITATIONTumova L., Martin J.Faculty of Pharmacy Hradec Kralove, Charles University in Prague,Czech RepublicINTRODUCTIONBuckwheat (Fagopyrum esculentum) is a valuable source of flavonoid ofrutin and common buckwheat is an important agricultural plant. Rutinhas a hypotensive effect, antioxidant activities and antagonizes the in-crease of capillary fragility. In Czech Republic, there the cultivation ofthis plant became more widespread in about 16th century, namely in thepoor soils of mountain regions. At present, buckwheat farming in ourcountry goes through a revival. In the last few years obtaining raw plantmaterials has become increasingly more and more difficult due to a de-crease in plant sources, changes in an environment, or other factors. In vitro cultures have been seen as an alternative source of biologi-cally active compounds (1). Therefore, various methods have beentested to enhance and to initiate secondary metabolite biosynthesisand production of important metabolites in in vitro plant cells.The treatment of plant cells with biotic or abiotic elicitors has beenone of the most effective means to improve the yields of secondarymetabolites in plant cell cultures (2). The elicitors (heavy metals) testedin former studies to increase secondary metabolite accumulation inplant cell cultures were Pb(NO3)2, HgCl2 or MnSO4 (3).OBJECTIVESThe objective of this study was to verify the elicitor effects of CeCl3by measuring the content of rutin. The experiments were proceededin callus and suspension cultures of Fagopyrum esculentum treatedwith 3 concentrations of CeCl3.MATERIAL AND METHODSThe callus and suspension cultures were maintained on Murashige andSkoog medium /SH/ in Erlenmeyer flasks supplemented with 2,4-dichlorphenoxyacetic acid (2,4-D) at a concentration of 10 mg/L asgrowth regulator. These cultures were cultivated in growth room at26+-1degC under 16 h light and 8 h dark. Suspension cultures were shakenconstantly on an shaker at 110-120 rpm. Callus and suspension cul-tures from the 22th - 31th passages were used. Elititor CeCl3 in con-189Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTSposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONcentration of 4.057.10-3mol/l (c1); 4.057.10-4mol/l (c2) and 4.057.10-5mol/l (c3) was added to callus and suspension cultures 25th day of cul-tivation. After 6, 12, 24, 48, 72 and 168 hours of elicitor application, thecalluses and suspension cells were taken off, dried and the content ofrutin was determined using methods of Czech Pharmacopeia 2005 (4).All experimental analyses were carried out in minimum of three inde-pendent samples for each elicitation period and each concentration.RESULTSCallus and suspension cultures of Fagopyrum esculentum did not pro-duce rutin in the 22nd-31 st passages. The 3rd-10th passages of callusculture showed 0.023 % rutin production (5).The maximal content of rutin in callus culture was determined after 6hours treatment with CeCl3 in concentration c1 (4.057.10-3 mol/l (Tab1). Other tested concentrations of elicitor and periods of its actionwere ineffective. Suspension culture cells exposed to elicitor treat-ment in various concentrations did not lead to rutin production.CONCLUSIONElicitor CeCl3 seems to be improper elicitor for effecting rutin pro-duction in in vitro cultures in comparison with other heavy metals usedas elicitors.Tab. 1 Content of rutin (%) in Fagopyrum esculentum callus cultureafter elicitor (CeCl3) treatment in various concentrations 0K-control (without elicitor treatment)Low or any rutin production in Fagopyrum esculentum culture in vitrocould be caused by old age (the 22th - 31th passages) of callus and sus-pension culture. Other possibility of any rutin production can be usingof improper specific abiotic elicitor.Acknowledgments: The research was supported by Research projectMSM 0021620822 and SVV-2010-261-002 grant.REFERENCES1. Verpoorte, R., van der Heijden, R., ten Hoopen, HJG., Memelink, J. : Metabolicengineering of plant secondary metabolite pathways for the production of finechemicals. Biotechnology Letters 21, 467-479, 1999.2. Dornenburg, H., Knorr, D.: Strategies for the improvement of secondarymetabolite production in plant cell cultures. Enzyme Microbiol Technology 17, 674-684, 1995.3. Tumova L., Tuma J., Stankova J.: Heavy metals elicitation and the flavonoidproduction in Ononis arvensis L. culture in vitro. Herba Polonica 44(1), 27-32, 1998.4. Compositae authors: Czech Pharmacopeia 2005, 1 and 3 volume, Grada, Prague2005.5. Pichova M.: Rustove a produkcni charakteristiky Fagopyrum esculentum in vitro-I. Diploma thesis, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hradec Kralove, 2006.SCREENING OF SELECTED PAPAVERACEAE SPECIES FORCHOLINESTERASES INHIBITION AND FREE RADICAL SCAVENGING ACTIVITYMacakova Katerina, Kratochvilova Eva, ChlebekJakub, Opletal LubomirCharles University in Prague, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department ofPharmaceutical Botany and Ecology, Heyrovskeho 1203, CZ-500 05Hradec KraloveAlzheimer's disease (AD) is one of the most common type of demen-tia in elderly patients. Its treatment is based on the knowledge of in-dividual pathogenetic changes, which can be observed in AD patients.One of the therapeutic approach is the use of brain cholinesterases in-hibitors, which increase content of acetylcholine in the brain and thusimprove neuronal transmission (e.g. galanthamine), hence the search-ing for new sources of cholinesterases inhibitors is actual now. Manystudies also pointed out that the progress of AD is associated with ox-idative stress and that the antioxidants can have beneficial effect.Dried herbs of 14 Papaveraceae species (genera Eschscholzia, Dicra-nostigma, Argemone, Glaucium) were extracted by 80% EtOH in ul-trasonic bath. These extracts were tested for their human erythrocyteacetylcholinesterase (HuAChE) and human serum butyrylcholi ne ste -rase (HuBuChE) inhibition activity with the use of Ellman's reagent [1].The antioxidant activity was evaluated by means of DPPH (2,2'-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical) test using SIA (PC-controlled Se-quential Injection Analysis system) method developed in ourlaboratory [2]. This activity is often attributed to phenolic substances,hence the content of total phenolics was determined with the use ofFolin-Ciocalteau reagent [3]. G. elegans exhibited significantly the highest inhibition activity of bothHuAChE and HuBuChE with IC50 values of 4.27 and 18.52 mg/ml, re-spectively. Other species showed significantly lower activity. None ofthe tested species demonstrated significant DPPH free radical scav-enging activity. The highest activity was exhibited by G. squamigerum>D. leptopodum> E. douglasii >E. pulchella. The free radical scaveng-ing activity correlated with the content of total phenolics moderately190Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011MEDITsINSKI I AROMATIChNI RASTENIJA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVO(R2= 0.78). Most of the tested species, except G. elegans, showed relatively lowHuAChE and HuBuChE inhibition activity. However, despite this fact allof them can be used for isolation of active substance which could beused as lead structures for design of potential drugs. None of theseplants can be considered as appropriate source of antioxidant sub-stances.REFERENCES1. Ellman GL, Courtney KD, Andres V, Featherstone RM. (1961) Biochem Pharmacol,7:88-95.2. Polasek M, Skala P, Opletal L, Jahodar L. (2004) Anal Bioanal Chem, 379:754-758.3. Singleton VL, Rossi JA. (1965) Am J Enol Viticult, 16:144-158.Aknowledgments: This project was financially supported by Grantagency of Charles University (grant number GAUK 122309) and bySVV/2011/263002. FLAVONOID PRODUCTION IN SCUTELLARIABAICALENSIS BIOREACTOR CULTUREMartin J., Krskova Z., Tumova L.Faculty Of Pharmacy, Charles University, Heyrovskeho 1203, 500 05Hradec Kralove, Czech republicINTRODUCTIONThe most commonly studied flavonoids in Scutellaria baicalensisGeorgii include baicalin, its aglycon baicalein, wogonin and wogono-side. These compounds can serve as free radical scavengers, antioxi-dants as well as antihypertensive and anti-inflammatory agents,cytostatics, sedatives, anticoagulants, antialergens. The productionof these secondary metabolites using plant tissue cultures has beensuggested as a feasible technology. In plant cell culture, considerableeffort has been directed toward the improvement of flavonoid biosyn-thesis for achieving an economically viable process for commercial ap-plications. OBJECTIVESThe objective of this experimental work was to investigate the appli-cability of suspension culture conditions to bioreactor cultivation. Pre-viously reported effects of phytohormones (kinetin, BAP, NAA and2,4-D), irradiation length, and precursors (cinnamic acid, cinnamic acidsodium salt) added to suspension culture growing in flasks were sum-marized and these results were used for cultivation in bioreactor. (1,2,3) The effects of elicitors Mg-ATP and methylene blue were alsoexamined.MATERIALS AND METHODSSuspension cultures of S. baicalensis growing in flasks were derivedfrom callus cultures five years ago and were continuously cultivated onMurashige-Skoog (MS) medium with addition of a-NAA (10mg/l). Thesecultures were used for bioreactor inoculation.Bioreactor cultivation: Suspension culture was cultivated in two sep-arate bioreactor vessels (bioreactor BIOSTAT B-DCU 2 l). MS medium,16-h light photoperiod, agitation of 150 rpm and aeration of 0.3 vvmwere used. Before inoculation, the medium of the first vessel was en-riched with one of examined substances mentioned lower. The sec-ond vessel performed the control cultivation under the same condi-tions without tested substance. Phytohormones: Always one of the studied phytohormones was addedto culture medium of the first vessel: kinetin (in concentration of1mg/l), BAP (2mg/l), a-NAA (10mg/l) and 2,4-D (1mg/l). Precursors and elicitors: Always one potential precursor or elicitor wasfed to culture medium: cinnamic acid (1 mg/l), sodium cinnamate (5mg/l), MgATP (1,594 g/l), methylene blue (100 mg/l). The effect ofMgATP and methylene blue in combination was investigated as well.Dry weight determination: 50 ml samples were collected during therun and filtered under reduced pressure. The cells were washed threetimes with water and dried at 60degC.