bull., 62 (suppl) 457 - 458 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsOral presentationsMaterials and methodsDry overgorund parts, leaves and buds, from wild growing Cannabis sativa L., Cannabinaceae (tentative identification) were collected in central east part of R. Macedonia (RM), during two vegetative seasons, in 2014 and 2015. Additionally, coarsely grounded dry leaves and buds of Cannabis indica L., Cannabinaceae (tentative identification) obtained by donation from patient for scien-tific-research purposes were used. Cannabis oil (CO): various samples were obtained by donations from patients for scientific-research purposes.0.1 g dry plant material or oil were dissolved in 10 mL n-Hexane and placed in ultrasonic bath for 15 min. After-word were filtrated through disposable Econofilter 25/0.45 mm RC pore size and injected in the GC system.Standard substance solutions were made by dissolv-ing standards of THC and CBD into methanol in following concentrations: 0.05 mg/mL and 0.02 mg/mL, respectively.Samples were analysed with an Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatography system with FID detector and Agilent 5975C mass spectrometer. HP-5ms capillary column (30 m x 0.25 mm, 0.25 mm) was used. Adams' analytical method was used prolonged for 10 min at the end (Adams, 2007). The components were identified by comparing the mass spectra of components present in the samples with refer-ence spectra obtained from NIST, Wiley and Adams' mass spectra libraries. Quantification of the THC and CBD was done according corresponding standard substances.Results and discussionIn the analyzed samples (CO and dry plant) the follow-ing six cannabinoids were identified: THCV, CBD, CBC, THC, CBG, CBN and delta-6-tetrahydrocannabinol (D6-THC). Five terpenoids compounds (a-pinene, camphene, limonene, trans-E-caryophyllene and germacrene B) were also detected with percentage share 1-6%. THC and CBD were predominant cannabinoids in all analyzed samples. Two types of samples can be distinguished: type 1-high in THC (73-95%) and low in CBD (0-16%) and type 2- low in THC (2-4%) and high in CBD (48-84%). The analysis of the wild growing cannabis from RM, revealed low THC (3.02-4.13%), followed by CBC (4.48-6.88%) and high CBD content (72.30-73.73%), thus can be classified as type 2. On the contrary, C. indica plant sam-ple was classified as type 1, appearing to be high in THC (86.38%) and low in CBD (0.71%). The relative abun-dance of these and other cannabinoids can vary depending on a number of factors such as the Cannabis strain, the soil and climate conditions or the cultivation techniques. The content of THC in the indigenous cannabis was (0.159-0.587%) and 19.23% in C. indica. Quite the opposite the CBD content varied from 3.11-7.22% in the wild growing cannabis and 0.122% in the C. indica plant sample. From an average of 2 151 samples collected in Europe between 2006 and 2008, the average concentration of THC found was 0.075% (Sarmento et al., 2015). The analysis showed that most of the CO belongs to type 1 and the content of THC and CBD is very close to the distinguished percent-age share.Recently, changes of the Law for narcotic substances in RM were made concerning legalization of cannabis for medicinal and scientific purposes, in a way of cultivation, production of cannabis medical preparations as well as im-port of pharmaceuticals and cosmetics, containing canna-bis or cannabinoids.ConclusionDue to the legal constraints on the possession and use of cannabis, relatively little research on the medicinal qual-ities of this plant has been conducted. Recently, due to the changes of the Law for narcotic substances in RM, an op-portunity, for starting a scientific-research work on this plant and related products, has appeared. Preliminary re-sults of the study for chemical characterization of various cannabis products, CO and cannabis plant material from indigenous and foreign origin are reported.ReferencesAbramovici, H., 2013. Information for Health Care Profession-als: Cannabis (marihuana, marijuana) and the cannabinoids. http://www.hcsc.gc.ca/dhpmps/alt_formats/pdf/marihuana/med/infoprof-eng.pdf (accessed on 18 March, 2016). Adams, R.P., 2007. Identification of Essential Oil Components by Gas Chromatography/Mass Spectrometry. 4th Ed. Illinois: Allured Publishing Corporation, IL, USA, pp. 9-31.Ben Amar, M., 2006. Cannabinoids in medicine: A review of their therapeutic potential. J. Ethnopharm. 105, 1-25.Hillig, K.W., Mahlberg, P.G., 2004. A chemotaxonomic analysis of cannabinoid variation in Cannabis (Cannabaceae). Am. J. Bot. 91, 966-975.Sarmento, L., Carus, M., Grotenhermen, F., Kruse, D., 2015. Sci-entifically Sound Guidelines for THC in Food in Europe. Re-port of nova-Institut GmbH.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 459 - 460 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 633.75(497.7)Short communicationALKMAF - Breeding opium poppy for improved alkaloid contentGjoshe Stefkov1, Jelena Acevska2, Mirjana Jankulovska3, Marija Karapandzova1, Aneta Dimitrovska2, Svetlana Kulevanova1, Sonja Ugarkovik4, Igor Mickovski4, Natasha Nasteva4, Sonja Ivanovska3*1 Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, MajkaTereza 47, Skopje 1000, Republic of Macedonia2 Institute of Applied Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, Skopje 1000, Republic of Macedonia3 Institute of Plant Biotechnology, Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Aleksandar Makedonski bb, Skopje 1000, Republic of Macedonia4 Alkaloid AD, Skopje, Alexandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* s.ivanovska@zf.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionAccording to the International Narcotics Control Board of UN (Technical report 2015: estimated world requirements for 2016 and statistics for 2014), in the preceding decades, the demand for natural poppy alkaloids (morphine, codeine, thebaine and oripavine) is continually growing, which consequently implies on the necessity for advanced production. Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.) is a valuable source of therapeutic agents and has great historical and socio-economic importance for Republic of Macedonia. The excessive and continuously growing need for natural alkaloids from opium poppy was the main reason to launch a project for reviving the growth and utilization of opium poppy in Republic of Macedonia.One of the goals of this project is to increase the ultimate yield of opium poppy alkaloids. The production of opium poppy in Macedonia is mainly based on local landraces and one commercial cultivar. The need to improve existing germplasm became apparent in the recent years. Consequently, the renewal and upgrade of the poppy breeding program was necessary. The first step was to establish a germplasm collection out of which promising lines could be selected. The genotypes in the starting collection should be grouped according to their characteristics. Therefore, analyses of the genetic diversity among poppy landraces and breeding lines from Macedonia and introduced poppy genotypes based on various morphological traits and determination of the extent of genetic diversity for proper utilization in the breeding program were performed (Ivanovska et al., 2012; Jankulovska et al., 2012, 2013; Stefkov et al., 2012). The overview of the advancements in the newly established opium poppy breeding program is presented.Materials and methodsThe field experiments were performed every year (2010-2015) near Skopje in R. Macedonia. Each year, number of genotypes decreased as a result of positive selection. During the vegetation different growth stages were observed, as well as the morphology of the genotypes. The agro-morphological characterization and assessment of the genetic diversity of opium poppy genotypes was based on 11 quantitative and 10 qualitative traits. Agro-morphological traits were described according to UPOV descriptor (1999). The GC/FID/MS and the HPLC/DAD analysis were performed on poppy straw methanolic extracts, obtained by optimized ultrasonic agitation, for determination of the content of six alkaloids: morphine, S5 OP 218460Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 459 - 460 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsOral presentationscodeine, thebaine, oripavine, papaverine and noscapine (Acevska et al., 2012a, 2012b). Principal component (PCA) and cluster analyses (CA) were applied for variation evaluation of the most important quantitative characters. Positive selection of genotypes with desirable traits was continuously conducted (Ivanovska et al., 2012; Jankulovska et al., 2012, 2013; Stefkov et al., 2012). Results and discussionThe pattern of morphological and productive variation between all accessions was evaluated through the qualitative (shape of capsule base, capsule ribbing, shape of capsule, capsule dehiscence, shape of stigmatic disc, surface of lobes, shape of lobes apex, seed color, petal color, petal base color) and quantitative (plant height, number of capsules per plant, number of stigma lobes, diameter of stigmatic disc, diameter of capsule, length of capsule, weight of main capsule, weight of seed of main capsule, seed yield per plant, capsule yield per plant, total yield per plant) characters. The analyzed opium poppy collection expressed broad variability for all investigated traits. Principal component (PCA) and cluster analyses (CA) served as effective tools for identification of genotypes with a combination of positive characteristics. The most variable traits were seed yield per plant and number of capsules per plant. Extraction procedure (liquid extraction using methanol as an extraction solvent, under reflux and ultrasonic agitation) followed by HPLC/DAD were developed and optimized for fast screening and in same time accurate assessment of the content of six alkaloids in the poppy straw samples using design of experiments (DoE). Chemical characterisation of the samples revealed high variability in the alkaloid content between the analyzed genotypes e.g. : morphine (0.07-1.65%); codeine (0.01-0.66%); thebaine (0.05-0.17%); oripavine (0.001-0.07%); papaverine (0.007-0.62%); noscapine (0.005-0.63%).The starting germplasm collection represented a good basis for successful selection of promising opium poppy lines with a combination of high seed and capsule yield as well as high alkaloid content.ConclusionThe characterization of opium poppy germplasm revealed high variability among the evaluated genotypes considering agromorphological traits and alkaloid content. Genotypes which expressed high seed and capsule yield per plant and high morphine content were successfully identified. These genotypes will be considered for variety registration and production in R. Macedonia.ReferencesAcevska, J., Stefkov, G., Petkovska, R., Kulevanova, S., Dimitrovska, A., 2012. Chemometric approach for development, optimization and validation of different chromatographic methods for separation of opium alkaloids. Anal. Bioanal. Chem. 403, 1117-1129. Acevska, J., Dimitrovska, A., Stefkov, G., Brezovska, K., Karapandzova, M., Kulevanova, S., 2012. Development and validation of RP-HPLC method for determination of alkaloids from Papaver somniferum L., Papaveraceae. J. AOAC Int. 95, 399-405.Ivanovska, S., Jankulovska, M., Stefkov, G., Acevska, J., Jankuloski, Lj., Boshev, D., 2012. Assessment of genetic diversity in opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.) based on agro-morphological characters. Book of abstracts, I International Symposium and XVII Scientific Conference of Agronomists of Republic of Srpska.Trebinje, Bosnia and Herzegovina.Jankulovska, M., Ivanovska, S., Stefkov, Gj., Acevska, J., Jankuloski, Lj., Bosev, D., 2012. Interrelationship between seed and capsule yield and yield contributing characters in opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.). Agr. Sci. 4, 13-18.Jankulovska, M., Ivanovska, S., Stefkov, Gj., Acevska, J., Boshev, D., Jankuloski, Lj., 2013. Morphological diversity of some opium poppy genotypes (Papaver somniferum L.). IV International Symposium "Agrosym 2013", Jahorina, Bosnia and Herzegovina.Stefkov, Gj., Acevska, J., Jankulovska, M., Karapandzova, M., Dimitrovska, A., Kulevanova, S., Ivanovska, S., 2012. Agro-morphological, productive and chemical characterization of opium poppy collection in R. Macedonia. Book of abstracts, 7th Conference on Medicinal and Aromatic Plants of Southeast European Countries (7th CMAPSEEC), Subotica (Serbia).Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 461 - 462 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 582.929.4Short communicationPossible health benefits of pine nuts as a source of omega fatty acidsMarija Karapandzova*, Ivana Cvetkovikj, Gjoshe Stefkov, Svetlana KulevanovaUniversity "SS. Cyril and Methodius", Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* marijakarapandzova@yahoo.comIntroductionIn the public's mind, the word "dietary fat" has be-come synonymous with obesity and heart disease. Conse-quently, as nuts are typically high in fat, they are tradition-ally avoided in an attempt to low blood cholesterol and the risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). However, there is increasing evidence that diets that include nuts may elic-it cardio protective effects (Ryan et al., 2006). Different heath studies reported that women who consumed nuts five or more times a week have a 35% lower risk of total CHD compared with women who rarely eat nuts (Hu et al., 1998) and strongly support the link between consumption of nuts and the reduced risk of heart disease (Albert et al., 2002; Fraser et al., 1992). Additionally, several clinical studies have evaluated the effect of diets high in nuts on blood lipids level. In a randomized controlled study, Sabate et al. (1993) reported that men on nut diet had a 12% and 16% decrease in total and in low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol levels, respectively, compared to normal diet. Furthermore, the beneficial effects of nut consumption ob-served in epidemiological and clinical studies underscore the importance of distinguishing different types of fat and have long established that the type of fat, but not the total amount of fat, predicts serum cholesterol levels. Although, nuts are high in fat, the predominant types are "healthy or good fats" such as mono and polyunsaturated fatty acids which lower the LDL cholesterol and hence the CHD risk (Hu et al., 2001).In many cultures, pine nuts are traditionally used as in-gredients in sauces, pastries or in desserts and are added to savory foods. The main species consumed in Europe are Pinus pinea, Pinus koraiensis, Pinus sybirica and Pinus gerardiana (Destaillats et al., 2011). Nowadays, very little is known about the consumption of pine nuts from Mace-donian species probably due to the lack of data related to their chemical composition as well as fatty acids profile. Thus, the aim of the present study was to determine to-tal oil content and fatty acid composition of these conifers nuts in order to obtain any information that will help to dis-close their possible usage.Materials and methodsPlant materials (pine nuts) of two pine species (Pinus peuce and Pinus nigra) were collected from two localities in R. Macedonia (Pelister and Berovo, respectively). Be-fore oil extraction, plant material was dried and properly homogenized.A known weight of sample (30 g) was extracted in a Soxhlet apparatus using petroleum ether as a solvent for 36 hours. After isolation, the samples were evaporated to re-move residual traces of petroleum ether (Trajkovic et al., 1983). Fatty acid methyl esters (FAME) were prepared from extracted oil with potassium hydroxide in methanol ac-cording to method described by Trajkovic et al. (1983) and were analyzed on Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatogra-phy system equipped with FID detector and Agilent 5975C Mass Quadrupole detector.