Glutathione conjugates formed in the liver can be excreted intact in bile or they can be transformed to mercapturic acids in the kidney and excreted in urine. The conversion of glutathione conjugates to mercapturic acids requires sequential cleavage of glycine and glutamic acid from glutathione moiety subsequently followed by N-acetylation of the resulting cysteine conjugate (Gibson & Skett, 2001). Glutathione conjugation of metabolites is an important detoxification step because electrophiles for example, are known to be potentially genotoxic species and can bind to critical nucleophiles such as DNA and proteins leading to genetic mutations and cellular damage. However, in some cases, conjugation with glutathione amplifies the toxicity of a xenobiotic by being inherently toxic or being degraded into a toxic metabolite (Williams & Aruoma. 2000).As shown in Figure 2.18, andrographolide can be converted into four possible metabolites via 7 different reactions and these metabolites in turn can also be further transformed into various different metabolites. However, cellular conditions and the amounts of cofactors present for Phase II metabolism dictate the direction of biotransformation pathway. Thus, there will be major and minor andrographolide metabolites being produced depending on the circumstances. The cellular concentrations of PAPS for example (approximately 75pM), are significantly lower than those of glutathione (~10mM) and UDP-glucuronic acid (~350pM) and the relatively low concentration of PAPS limits the capacity for xenobiotic sulfonation (Gibson & Skett, 2001). The availability of UDP-glucuronic acid can also limit the rate of glucuronidation of endogenous as well as exogenous compounds especially if they are in high doses and being extensively conjugated such as acetaminophen. Figure 2.19 shows one example of possible routes for andrographolide biotransformation yielding a glutathione-conjugate.Before the Phase II biotransformation, andrographolide is susceptible to Phase I enzymes as suggested by the metabolic tree (Figure 2.18). Hydroxylation and epoxidation of doubleCopy 1 95Y. SharifuddinChapter 2bonds are two main reactions of andrographolide metabolism attributed to cytochrome P450. Even though the aglycone was predicted to be metabolised by these reactions, one cannot really ascertain whether the metabolites are more or less reactive by referring to the metabolic tree. Andrographolide is shown to be susceptible to epoxidation of the double bonds and as shown in Figure 2.16f, this epoxide group resides close to the butyrolactone moiety of the phytochemical. Although, epoxides have been known to be potentially mutagenic (Guengerich, 2003; Benigni, 2005) per se, the reactivity of epoxy- andrographolide can only be determined experimentally. Alternatively, another double bond exists within the structure at the A8(17^ position as highlighted in Figure 2.8 and is also susceptible to epoxidation according to METEOR assessment. However, the half-lives of relatively simple epoxides are known to be usually on the order of hours in the absence of added nucleophiles. Many of these simple epoxides are carcinogens when administered to rodents at high doses (Dunkelberg, 1979) whereas the evidence for human carcinogenicity such as styrene is probably equivocal at best (Yeowell-O'Connell et al, 1998). Functionalisation of epoxides with the addition of certain groups lead to enhanced reactivity such as 2 -cyanoethylene oxide that is more reactive than propylene oxide and is mutagenic (Recio et al., 1988; 2001). Butadiene diepoxide is much more reactive and genotoxic than would be expected on the statistical basis of having two epoxides (Cochrane & Skopek, 1994). A comparable example on epoxide generation in herbs is that observed in Teuchrium chamaedrys (Germander), which was once promoted as slimming products in the 1990s until hepatotoxicity cases were reported in France. The hepatotoxicity has been attributed to the diterpenoids in T. chamaedrys namely teucrin A and teuchamaedryn A.The furan ring of these diterpenoids is susceptible to oxidation by CYP3A4, which has a wide substrate spectrum, to reactive epoxides that react with proteins such epoxide hydrolase and CYP3A (Loeper et al., 1994; Lekehal et al., 1996; Fau et al., 1997; Loeper et al., 2001). The presence of these reactive epoxides led to mitochondrial membrane permeability transition and apoptosis in rat and mouse hepatocytes (Loeper et al., 1994;Lekehal et al., 1996; Fau et al 1997). It was revealed that teucrin A binds covalently to hepatocyte proteins and the furano diterpenoid part of the compound increased cytosolic^ Ilevels of Ca but decreased cellular glutathione (GSH) and cytoskeleton-associated protein thiols resulting in the formation of plasma membrane blebs and apoptosis (Lekehal et al.,1996; Fau et al 1997).Copy 1 96Y. SharifuddinChapter 2Futhermore, the epoxide functional group in andrographolide can be further converted into vicinal diols, another functional group that can be mutagenic, which may or may not increase the reactivity of andrographolide and can only be assess in laboratory studies. However, this prediction is made on the probability that these metabolic routes are the one favoured by the cellular or systemic conditions since there were other relatively safer pathways such as glucuronidation. The possibility that these metabolites are produced as minority products cannot be ruled out too. It is also important to note that the unsaturated butyrolactone site of andrographolide was predicted by DEREK as able to cause chromosome damage in mammals and whether structural transformation to this moiety will enhance or reduce the potency of such effect is not deducible without experimental data, which currently is inadequate.Recently, Jarukamjom et al. (2006) studied the impact of aqueous and alcoholic extracts of A. paniculata on mouse hepatic cytochrome P450 enzymes and found the extracts to significantly elevate the activities of ethoxyresorufin O-dealkylase (EROD) and pentoxyresorufin O-dealkylase (PROD) but not methoxyresorufin O-dealkylase (MROD).It was also suggested that CYP1A1 and CYP2B10 were the P450 isoforms responsive to A. paniculata extracts (Jarukamjom et al., 2006). However, the utilisation of crude extracts in the study cannot provide valuable qualitative data on the effects of individual components in the extracts on specific P450 isoforms, especially andrographolide which is a major diterpenoid present (Kleipool, 1952; Siripong et al., 1992). Furthermore, one must take into account that individual substances in the extract, as it is the case with many plant extracts, may act in an antagonistic or synergistic manner in the expression of bioactivation and detoxification pathways. Thus, another study into the effects of andrographolide on cytochrome P450 isoenzymes activities showed that the phytochemical significantly evoked the expression of CYP1A1 and CYP1A2 but not that of CYP1B1 in mouse hepatocytes in a concentration-dependent manner (Jaruchotikamol et al., 2007). The mRNA expression of CYP1A1 induced by andrographolide is higher compared to CYP1A2 but lower than that stimulated with typical CYP1A agonists such as benz(a)anthracene and p-naphthoflavone (Jaruchotikamol et al., 2007). It is known that the mechanisms of transcription regulation differ between CYP1A1, CYP1A2 and CYP1B1 (Guengerich & Shimada, 1998) hence the dissimilarity in the expression levels observed (Jaruchotikamol et al., 2007). However, further studies involving major cytochromes such as CYP3A4 isCopy 1 97Y. SharifuddinChapter 2needed. This recent study could possibly shed more light into the reported hepatoprotective effect modulated by andrographolide.Andrographolide has been reported to be the major anti-hepatotoxic compound present in A. paniculata extract conferring protection to liver cells against toxicity induced by carbon- tetrachloride, galactosamine and acetaminophen (Handa & Sharma, 1990a; Handa &Sharma, 1990b). Since the mode of action and hence toxicity induced by galactosamine and acetaminophen are different, it was suggested that a non-specific hepatoprotective activity may be attributed to this phytochemical (Handa & Sharma, 1990b). It may be possible that andrographolide is involved in cytochrome P450 activity manipulation, effectively shielding the liver cells from cytotoxicity. After all, cytochromes 1A2, 2E1,2A6 and 3A4 have been shown to oxidise acetaminophen (paracetamol) into A-acetyl-/?- benzoquinone imine (NAPQI) that in turn is detoxified by glutathione (GSH) resulting in the formation of acetaminophen-GSH conjugate (Patten et al., 1993; Chen et al., 1998)Although metabolic predictions made by CSAR programme such as METEOR is useful, there are several caveats to this finding. Any predictions made cannot overrule experimental data. Mammals was the chosen parameter for METEOR where no distinction was made between human and animals, thus the metabolic tree generated was not representative of any particular species but mammals in general plus there are inter- and intra-species variability in metabolic capacity. This might explain the absence of sulfonation process from the metabolic tree generated in contrary to experimental findings where sulfate conjugates were isolated (He et al., 2003a, b, c; Cui et al. 2004). Secondly, METEOR is able to suggest the most plausible molecular structure of possible metabolites but it cannot exactly determine their reactivity and toxicity, which can only be proven experimentally. This involves extraction and identification of the metabolites using high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) or gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC/MS) to name a few. Subsequently, various genotoxicity studies whether in vitro and subsequently followed by in vivo if necessary, can be performed on the isolated metabolites to assess its genotoxic potential. For example, butyrylactone moiety of andrographolide was suggested to contribute to its activity but this functional group is susceptible to conjugation with glutathione and one can never be certain whether andrographolide will be more or less reactive. Finally, all of the metabolism studies cited previously merely elucidate the type of metabolites being produced by a rather small sample of healthy maleCopy 1 98Y. SharifuddinChapter 2human volunteers and rats. Although the studies did not report any adverse effects experienced by the human volunteers during the study period, this does not necessarily means that more subtle form of injury such as mutagenesis and cellular damage can be mled out despite successful extraction of more hydrophilic metabolites. Furthermore, human metabolism studies may produce metabolites from the compound of interest, which may not be observed in in vitro or animal studies and therefore may not have been thoroughly assessed for possible risk to humans. In a case where the metabolites wereconsiderably high in humans, additional testing with the metabolites or the pathwaysinvolved would be essential to properly evaluate the potential of the compound to cause genotoxicity in humans (US FDA, 2005).Therefore, METEOR was useful in determining the most plausible routes ofbiotransformation for a compound based on the application of structure-activityrelationships and meant to complement experimental data or assisting in better experimental designs. In this study, many similarities were observed between the results generated via in silico assessment of possible andrographolide metabolism pattern using METEOR and in vitro/in vivo experiments conducted previously, thereby granting the opportunity to appreciate the strengths and weaknesses of such approach. Furthermore, semi-quantitative information on metabolic fate of this phytochemical along with SAR study conducted using DEREK gave a better picture.Copy I 993CHAPTER 3ASSESSMENT OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDE GENOTOXICITY POTENTIAL USING THE IN VITRO CYTOKINESIS BLOCK MICRONUCLEUS ASSAYY. SharifuddinChapter 3CHAPTER 3ASSESSMENT OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDE GENOTOXICITY POTENTIAL USING THE IN VITRO CYTOKINESIS BLOCK MICRONUCLEUS ASSAY3.1 Micronuclei as Genotoxicity Biomarker: A Historical PerspectiveThe most often used assay in routine genotoxicity testing of xenobiotics in vitro is bacterial mutation (Ames test). However, the detection of natural and synthetic carcinogenic substances that act through a non-direct mode of DNA alteration and are negative in bacterial mutation assays requires additional test systems. Another often-used endpoint in routine testing is the induction of chromosomal aberrations in mammalian cells. Alternatively, the in vitro micronucleus assay is easier to perform and is suitable to monitor genotoxicity of such compounds in mammalian cells.Micronuclei were described as "corpuscules intraglobulaires" by Jolly in the late 1800s and early 1900s or known as "fragment of nuclear material" in the cytoplasm of erythrocytes by Howell about a century ago hence these structures are known to hematologists as "Howell- Jolly bodies". Similar intracellular structures were described in other cell types, for example in rat and mouse embryos by Brenneke in 1937 or in Vicia faba by Thoday in 1951, and are known as "fragment nuclei" or "micronuclei". These micronuclei were consistently found after radiation exposure of cells and it was assumed that they originated from acentric fragments that were excluded from the two daughter nuclei at the late stages of mitosis. The instrumental application of micronucleus as biomarkers for cytogenetic damage was discovered by Evans et al. in 1959, while comparing the efficiency of neutrons to y-rays in Vicia faba roots.Boiler and Schmid's work paved the way for the utilisation of micronuclei as an assay system for elucidating genotoxicity potential and were first to suggest the term "micronucleus". Studies on bone marrow erythrocytes by Heddle also contributed to theCopy 1 100Y. SharifuddinChapter 3decisive development. Subsequently, Countryman and Heddle introduced lymphocytes as another useful cellular system for detection of chromosomal damage by the determination of micronucleus induction. They also recommended the utilisation of micronuclei as a biomarker in testing schemes.3.2 The In Vitro Cytokinesis Block Micronucleus Assay and Its ApplicationThe simplicity of scoring and wide applicability of the in vitro micronucleus test in various cell types makes it an appealing method in cytogenetic abnormality assessment. However, incomplete comprehension of micronuclei induction mechanisms and the absence of sufficient methods to concurrently assess cell proliferation and micronucleus formation, inevitably delayed the validation of the in vitro micronucleus test for genotoxicity testing.Micronuclei are small, membrane bound extranuclear bodies that arise in dividing cells from whole chromosome/chromatids or acentric chromosome/chromatid fragments that lag behind in anaphase and remained outside of the daughter cells' nuclei in telophase. Micronuclei are only formed during cell division regardless of the location of the actual damage that occurred during the cell cycle, either by damage to the DNA or damage to the mitotic apparatus.In the in vitro cytokinesis block micronucleus assay (CBMA) developed by Fenech and Morley (1985), cytochalasin-B is added to the cells in culture. Cytochalasin-B is a metabolite of the fungus Helminthosporium dematioideum that blocks cytokinesis but not karyokinesis and results in the formation of binucleated cells from cells that have undergone one nuclear division (Carter, 1967; Ridler & Smith, 1968). Cytochalasin-B prevents cytokinesis by binding to high-molecular-weight complexes in the plasma membrane, which is responsible in inducing actin polymerisation to form microfilaments that governs the cleavage of the dividing cell into two daughter cells. This allowed the identification of once-divided nuclei in binucleated cells and granted an efficient approach to study the mechanism leading to micronuclei formation as illustrated in Figure 3.1. With restriction on micronuclei scoring only in cells that had undergone one cell cycle, the cytokinesis-block micronucleus assayCopy 1libraryY. SharifuddinChapter 3(CBMA) solved the technical predicament of possible variation in micronucleus frequency caused by modifications in the proportion of dividing cells that may occur either due to sub- optimal culture conditions or exposure to genotoxic agents (Fenech, 2000). Table 3.1 compares the in vitro CBMA and chromosomal aberration assay, which is widely used previously to assess genotoxicity.A micronucleus that contains a whole chromosome mainly results from defects in the chromosome segregation machinery such as failure of the mitotic spindle, kinetochore, or other parts of the mitotic apparatus, deficiencies in the cell cycle governing genes or by damage to chromosomal substructures, mechanical disruption (Albertini et al., 2000) as well as centromeric DNA hypomethylation (Fenech et al., 2005).