Numerous remedies for coughs and colds were listed including: honey and lemon, turmeric in milk, Echinacea, tulsi, ginger, and cinnamon. Mint, ginger, cardamom, and cumin were frequently mentioned for improving digestion. Various remedies for skin conditions such as aloe vera, turmeric, and neem were noted. For stress, anxiety and mild depression products such as St John's wort, valerian, and passion flower were documented. The most popular product mentioned was turmeric, cited by 45% of participants (n=19); its uses as an anti-inflammatory and antiseptic for skin infections and wound healing, coughs, colds, and immune boosting properties were detailed. Other products frequently cited included: ginger, cloves, mint, honey, lemon, aloe vera, and herbal sleeping aids. Some products such as fever grass, Sorrel Bitter herbs, nettle tea, and bush tea were identified by just a small number of participants. Similar to the results from question one, SA participants claimed to use HMs more than any of the other ethnic groups. The responses from participants of SA origin were compared to the other ethnic group participants, and a distinctive difference was seen. Most of the 106 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra products listed by SA participants included herbs and spices native to Asia such as ajwain, cardamom, and tulsi. Whereas products listed by the other ethnic groups were native to Western countries for example Agnus castus, camomile, Echinacea, nettles, and valerian. The most popular Western herbal product noted was Echinacea (Echinacea angustifolia DC.) which is native to North America (Chevallier, 2007). It has a long standing use in traditional medicine and has been considered as one of the most important medicinal herbs used to treat common cold and infections (Rezaie et al., 2013). Miller (2005) identifies it as "one of the top-selling herbs of all time," as numerous commercial products in different pharmaceutical forms are available. The evidence supporting the use for Echinacea, as with most other herbal remedies, is variable (Miller, 2005). Table 3-3 Summary of the Herbal Remedies Used by Healthcare Professionals Participant Number: Herbal Remedies Used: 2 Rhodiola for energy. 3 Fresh mint in tea to help aid digestion. Turmeric Powder for upset stomachs. 4 Honey, ginger, lemon mixture for dry coughs. 6 Nettle tea. 8 Turmeric. 12 It's not a part of my normal routine but could use one on recommendation depending on the ailment. An example is Turmeric extract for skin inflammation 16 Turmeric and salt - antiseptic properties. Cinnamon and ginger - digestive properties Tulsi - digestion and coughs. Cardamom - digestion, infection. Clove -painkiller/tooth pain. Cumin - digestion. 17 I use aloe vera from my plant pot for eczema on my hand. I do not like the idea of using chemicals found in creams on my hand which I may then use to pick up food when eating. In addition, I have tried a number of medicinal creams (e.g. steroid creams emollients etc.) which have been ineffective so I wanted to try something different. 20 Ginger-sore throats. Turmeric-sore throats. Echinacea-sore throat. 21 Turmeric being the main one. If someone has a cold, Turmeric in milk does the trick. 23 Tulsi, cinnamon, turmeric, clove, cardamom, aniseed, fennel seeds, fenugreek seeds, mint, honey, nutmeg, okra. I use the above to treat cough and cold, diarrhoea, abdominal pains, acidity, toothache, weight loss, indigestion, lower the blood glucose etc. 26 Neem tablets and washing products. 32 Peppermint tea for indigestion. Honey and lemon for colds. 35 Herbal sleeping tablets on occasion. 44 Very rarely. In conjunction with OTC medicines I may have used a small amount of ground turmeric in some milk to help with coughs and colds. 46 Turmeric for its antiseptic properties, sometimes with a hot chapatti (wholegrain wheat flour based) to act as a heated bandage for sprains. A mixture of chapatti flour and cold water to form a paste to apply on small burns. A mixture of turmeric and honey as a cleansing face mask. 48 Mint-for upset tummy, Turmeric as antiseptic. 107 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 49 Aloe Vera, Cerissie tea, Fever grass, Sorrel Bitter herbs, Ginger, Garlic, Bush tea. 50 Turmeric, Basil. 51 I use traditional Chinese herbs for cough related to Aspergillus in my lungs. I tell my consultant I do so. The herbs reduce the mucous, infection and dramatically reduce coughing spasms. The herbs are specifically prescribed for me according to my symptoms. 53 Valerian- sleep. 56 Camomile tea for relaxation, witch hazel for antiseptic. 63 Local honey for hay fever - works amazingly well! Agnus castus for PMS symptoms. I advise patients to try linseed oil for excess GI wind. Some patients report benefits from St John's wort for depression/ anxiety; passion flower for anxiety/ stress. 64 Many. Only daily ones are hawthorn and Ginkgo tinctures for circulatory problems. I use natural antiseptics and digestive remedies too. 70 Senna is used as a primary constipation therapy. 74 Ajwain for indigestion and headaches, cloves for toothache, turmeric. 81 Turmeric for infections and skin problems. 85 Ginger, tulsi, turmeric. 86 Ginger, ground roots for sickness and nausea. Fresh turmeric as a hot drink for cough and sore throat. Dry turmeric powder soaked into cloths for wounds, Clove for toothache. Garlic oil for ear infections. Mint. 88 Mentha (calm nerves, eases digestion) lemon, honey, cinnamon (sore throat, colds, allergy, immune system), ginger (nausea, immune system), coconut oil and water (health being, skin). 90 Lots- turmeric, ginger, garlic, cinnamon, cumin, fennel, black pepper, honey are the most common that I use here in the UK for various ailments. Sandal wood, red sandal wood, turmeric and honey for skin. 92 Ginger tea for cold. 97 Ginger for upset stomach. 101 Turmeric with hot milk for sore throat. 102 Turmeric, mint, cinnamon, pepper, and ginger. 105 Echinacea, to maintain immune system. Turmeric, general wellbeing. Aloe Vera skin heath and wound repair. 108 My mum thinks having turmeric powder with hot milk helps with coughs. 112 Turmeric + Ginger. Provides rapid and effective relief in comparison to conventional medications. There is very little research which has explored UK based HCPs personal use of HMs. Generally research focuses on patients' use of HMs, concurrent use of HMs with CWM, or undergraduate students views of HMs (Heuschkel et al., 2002; Freymann et al., 2006; Smith, 2011). The results from this question reveal there are several factors which may influence HCPs decision to use HMs including: traditional use amongst ethnic and family backgrounds, perceived safety and efficacy, and clinical evidence to support the use of HMs. It was clear from some participants' feedback that evidence based medicine was crucial in influencing their decision to take HMs; due to the lack of clinical research to support the use of HMs, HCPs were often reluctant to use them for their own health. While other HCPs revealed the use of HMs has been part of their traditional heritage and the long standing use of HMs is sufficient evidence to support their use. Table 3-3 Summary of the Herbal Remedies Used by Healthcare Professionals Continued... 108 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Question 3: Would you prefer to use traditional herbal remedies over conventional Western medicine for minor health problems? E.g. cold/constipation/mild skin irritation? The results from this investigation found that 42% (n=47) of participants said they would prefer to use HMs for minor health problems rather than CWM. As reflected by participant 91, a pharmacist, who claimed that, "using nature's remedies rather than synthetic, has fewer side effects and many more health benefits." Several references to HMs being natural and therefore safe were noted. In addition, participants claimed the use of HMs had been passed on through generations of the family and therefore they had tried them, when recommended by a family member. There was no correlation between the preference of using HMs with gender, or age; however, similar to previous questions participants from SA ethnic backgrounds generally preferred to use HMs for minor health problems more than other ethnic groups (Figure 3-5). Figure 3-5 Healthcare Professionals' Ethnicity and Preference to Use Herbal Remedies for Minor Ailments On the other hand, 58% (n=65) of participants claimed they did not prefer to use THM over CWM for minor health problem. The participants forming this research group were all HCPs who were specialists in various sectors of the healthcare framework. Their practice and education is evidence based and their distrust of HMs which lacked scientific validation was evident, as demonstrated by: participant 71 who stated, "lack of controlled trial data and standardisation of preparations is a crucial weakness in the use of herbal medicines," and participant 100 who said, "to be credible more patient and double blind trials need to take place." Other reasons for not favouring the use HMs for minor health problems included: distrust in natural remedies, the effects of HMs being compared to a placebo, suspicion of unregulated products, and uncertainty of what the HMs actually were (i.e. adulterated species). This was demonstrated by participant 60 who said, "The difficulties with quality control (specifically in terms of dosage and active ingredients) make treatments with herbal remedies very much a gamble." 05101520253035White: British/IrishBlack/ BlackBritish: African/CaribbeanAsian/ AsianBritish: Indian/Pakistani/BangladeshiOtherNumber of ParticipantsEthnicity Ethnicity and Preference To Use Herbal Remedies For Minor Ailments Prefer toUse HerbalRemediesDo NotPrefer toUse HerbalRemedies109 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Question 4: Can you name any herbal remedies which can be used for the following conditions (arthritis, cough, diabetes, and indigestion)?-If so, please state what could be used. (Question 4 was answered by 101 participants) The four conditions selected for this question, arthritis, cough, diabetes, and indigestion, were also used in the SATMED questionnaire (Chapter 2); therefore, it was decided to use the same conditions in this survey. This question was designed to explore HCPs knowledge of HMs for common health problems treated in the UK (WHO 2006; PAGB, 2009; Arthritis Research UK, 2013a). In addition, similarities and differences between the SATMED participants and HCPs knowledge of HMs used for these conditions could be compared. Less than half of the participants (46%, n=46) did not state any HMs for the conditions listed; these participants either left the question blank or replied with answers such as 'no,' 'not sure,' or 'none are useful'. Research by the DTB found that doctors' knowledge about the clinical aspects of HMs and regulation was poor; of the HCPs who completed their survey 36.2% claimed their knowledge of HMs was 'quiet poor' while 10.4% said it was 'very poor' (DTB, 2010). The results from this survey could suggest that the 47% of HCPs who did not state any HMs in this question lacked the knowledge about the clinical benefits of HMs for the conditions stated. On the other hand, it may be argued that just because participants did not list any HMs does not mean they lack the knowledge, but instead they chose not to reply. The remaining 54% (n=55) of participants did attempt to state HMs for the conditions listed: 31% of the participants stated a HM for just one condition, 15% for two conditions, 24% for three conditions and 30% were able to recall a remedy for all four conditions (Table 3-4). Figure 3-6 illustrates the number of participants who recalled a herbal remedy for each of the conditions; cough (n=37) and indigestion (n=41) had more responses in comparison to arthritis (n=30) and diabetes (n=28). Cough and indigestion are amongst the top ten most common minor ailments treated by doctors and over-the-counter by pharmacists in the UK (PAGB, 2009), which could explain why more HCPs knew about HMs for these conditions in comparison to arthritis and diabetes. Figure 3-6 Healthcare Professionals' Who Recalled a Herbal Remedy/Remedies for the Conditions Listed 0204060Arthritis Cough Diabetes IndigestionNumber of Responses Herbal Remedies Known For Some Common Health Conditions 110 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Table 3-4 Summary of Herbal Remedies for Arthritis, Cough, Diabetes, and Indigestion Arthritis Cough Diabetes Indigestion Apple cider vinegar (2) Basil Aloe vera (2) Ajwain/ Trachyspermum ammi (3) Avocado with Soybean Black pepper (2) Black pepper in honey Bilberry extract (2) Anise tea Aniseed (3) Black Currant Oil Cardamom Bitter gourd /karela (11) Cabbage core (contains pepsin) Boswellia (3) Coltsfoot Black seed Cardamom Bromelain Echinacea Cinnamon (6) Camomile Chondroitin Garlic (2) Fenugreek (4) Cloves Cod liver oil (2) Ginger (4) Garlic Cold milk Commiphora Jeevan San Jeevan (an Indian herbal remedy) Green tea Corn flour paste Devils claw (4) Liquorice (2) Ginger Fennel (8) Eucalyptus oil Honey (2) Honey in warm milk Honey in hot water with/without lemon (8) Honey, lemon &ginger Honey & lemon/ black pepper Gurmar Ginger (6) Fenugreek seeds Mallow Okra (2) Haajmola/ trifla churan (2) Garlic Pineapple juice Sweet potatoes Liquorice and coriander Ginger (4) Poppy Tulsi (basil) Milk thistle Glucosamine (5) Squill Turmeric Mint (5) Rosehip (2) Tea Peppermint (1) Peppermint oil Peppermint tea (3) Sesame seed oil Thyme (3) Plantain and green bananas for ulcers Tulsi Tulsi (2) Senna Turmeric (6) Turmeric (10) Turmeric powder in milk Suva (Dill seeds) Willow bark = aspirin/salicylates (3) Turmeric Wintergreen (topically) 111 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Arthritis Research UK (2012) revealed that approximately 10 million people seek advice from their GP about arthritis; it is a condition which can affect all ages. Arthritis Research UK (2012) have acknowledged that sufferers will be tempted to try alternative therapies and have created a report based on randomised controlled trials which have tested the effectiveness and safety of some common HMs used for rheumatoid and osteoarthritis. It has summarised the safety and efficacy of several products including: fish oil, borage seed oil, evening primrose oil, Cat's claw, and flaxseed oil for rheumatoid arthritis; Indian frankincense, ginger, Devil's claw, willow bark, glucosamine, and chondroitin for osteoarthritis. Each product was given an efficacy score between 1-5 depending on the reported improvement in pain, movement, and general wellbeing; 1 correlated to no or very little evidence, while 5 represented data where there was consistent evidence across several studies. A traffic light system was used to code the safety profile, green represented minor/ infrequent side-effects reported, amber signified commonly reported side-effects (even minor ones) or more serious effects, and red illustrated serious side effects reported. The full report is available for the general public to access to help make more informed decisions about herbal remedies to help with their condition (Arthritis Research UK, 2012). The most common HMs documented for arthritis by participants in this survey were: turmeric, glucosamine, ginger, Devils' claw, cod liver oil, rosehip, apple cider vinegar, and willow bark (Table 3-4). Many of these remedies were similar to those listed in the Arthritis Research UK (2012) report 'Complementary and alternative medicines for the treatment of rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis and fibromyalgia.' Several remedies such as turmeric, ginger, and sesame seed oil were similar to responses listed by the SATMED survey participants. The key difference noted was that the participants in this survey mentioned products such as glucosamine, rosehip, Boswellia and willow bark, which none of the SATMED participants identified. Boswellia (also known as Indian frankincense, Boswellia serrate Roxb. ex Colebr.) is famous for its use in the traditional Indian medical system of Ayurveda (Siddiqui, 2011). The resin from the trees has an anti-inflammatory action as it is rich in mono/di/tri-terpenes and pentacyclic triterpenic acids i.e. b-boswellic acid which inhibit pro-inflammatory enzymes (Sontakke et al., 2007). Research by the Royal Pharmaceutical Society (2014) found that common ailments such as coughs and colds cost the NHS PS1.1 billion a year, when patients are treated by their GPs or Accident and Emergency. The HMs mentioned for cough included turmeric, tulsi, honey (with or without lemon, black pepper, ginger, in hot water), and liquorice. HMs such as poppy, squill, coltsfoot, mallow, and thyme were mentioned specifically by White-British/ Irish participants. Mallow (Marshmallow, Althaea officinalis L.) is a traditional European herb; that has demulcent properties which help sooth a cough (Chevallier, 2007).