Morphine, in particular,remains a widely used pain-killer and sedative. Whenadministered in small quantities (about 8 mg),morphine produces a drowsiness that soon turns intosleep. When 15-30 mg are used, the patient goes intoa dreamless sleep, can easily be awakened, but willreturn to sleep when left alone. Larger doses producea deep coma characterized by a slow respiratory rateand contracted pupils. In overdose quantitiesmorphine causes a purple discoloration of the face(cyanosis), extreme respiratory slowness, dilation ofthe pupils, and finally death. Morphine is used also tocontrol diarrhea and vomiting and to induceperspiration.Codeine, usually in the form of codeine sulfate, isused orally or subcutaneously to control coughing andas an analgesic. The abuse of the opiates aspsychoactive substances is treated in the next section.COCA LEAFCocaine, an alkaloid found in the South Americanshrub Erythroxylum coca, has some medical use as alocal anesthetic applied to the surface. It isparticularly useful in operations of the eye, nose,throat, and anus. The alkaloid is one of the activeingredients of the coca leaf, the popular masticatory.A discussion of cocaine as a psychoactive material willbe found in the next section.EPHEDRA (MAHUANG)Ephedra sinica, a relative of the Mormon tea of ourwestern deserts, is probably the oldest medicinal plantin continuous use since ancient times. The Chinesemention its use in 2700 B. C. E. Mahuang containsephedrine, used in the treatment of bronchial asthmaand in drug poisoning. It dilates the pupils and it is aspinal anesthetic.Various herbal preparations containing ephedraappear to be the cause of a number of deaths in thepast few years. Some states have already banned itsuse; others, including California are looking into thematter.Another ephedrine alkaloid, pseudoephedrine, hasbeen the focus of recent attention because variousOTC preparations have been used to makemethamphetamine.ERGOTERGOT POISONING/USE: TIMELINEBCE: 600 "A noxious pustule ... of grain" 350 "Noxious grasses that cause womento drop the womb and die in childbed"CE: 590 Outbreak of ergot poisoning in France 941 40,000 die in France1000 First precise description of affliction1129 12,000 die1582 Lonier cites ergot to quicken childbirth1597 Infected rye cited as cause of ergotism1674 Severe outbreak in France1692 Strange behavior in Salem, MA1812 Austria confiscates contaminated rye1818 Desgranges publishes medicinal uses1824 Hosack writes of stillborn children1920 Ergonovine isolated1926 Outbreak in Russia1935 Ergotamine isolated1943 Hofmann synthesizes LSD1943 Ergocristine isolated1977 Outbreak in EthiopiaYou will recall that the alkaloids produced by the ergotfungus (Claviceps purpurea) can have deleteriouseffects on the circulatory system and on the centralnervous system. The poisoning is typically the resultof consuming bread products made out of ryecontaminated by the ergot fungus. Now we knowinglyinfect entire fields of rye grass with ergot to get a richcrop of these toxic alkaloids. Why? Because thesesubstances, given in precisely controlled quantities,are highly effective during childbirth and in thetreatment of migraine headaches. In both cases, theability of the ergot alkaloids to constrict blood vesselsis the key. During delivery, significant hemorrhagingcan occur, especially at the time of expulsion of theplacenta. The ergot alkaloids help control post-partumbleeding and they also stimulate the smooth muscle ofthe uterus.In the Middle Ages, midwives ground up the beak-likefungal bodies and gave them to women duringdelivery. They called the beaks "mother seed" or"mutterkorn." It was not until 1920 that the alkaloidergonovine was isolated. Fifteen years later (1935)ergotamine was isolated. It is the alkaloid that ishighly effective in constricting dilated cranial bloodvessels, especially in combination with caffeine andthe belladonna alkaloids.-181-GINSENGGinseng (Panax quinquefolia + other spp.) is anotherplant highly regarded because of its almost limitlesspowers. In Asia, it is used to treat anemia, diabetes,insomnia, gastritis, and impotency. It is, "... a tonic tothe five viscera, quieting animal spirits, establishingthe soul, allaying fear, expelling evil effluvia,brightening the eye, opening up the heart, benefittingthe understanding, and if taken for some time it willinvigorate the body and prolong life." Not bad!It is the root that is so highly prized. The UnitedStates exports about 200,000 tons of three to six yearold plants each year; about 90% goes to Hong Kong.This is nothing new. We have been exporting ginsengroot since Colonial times. Recent biochemical studiesshow that the roots contain a complex mixture oftriterpenoid saponins that affect the midbrain, heart,internal secretions, and blood sugar levels.GINKGOOne of the more important medicinal herbs of the lastdecade is the maidenhair tree, Ginkgo biloba, a widelyplanted ornamental tree. We use a concentratedextract made from the dried leaves. The extractcontains a mixture of flavonoids and diterpenes, thelatter known as ginkgolides A, B, and C.Two things make ginkgo exciting. It appears to beeffective in the treatment of reduced blood flow to thebrain and as a scavenger of free radicals. Some claimssuggest that GBE is also effective in the prevention ofstrokes and of Alzheimer's disease, but theseassertions have not yet been properly demonstrated.ST. JOHN'S WORTHypericum perforatum is a European herb of thegarcinia family (Guttiferae). The common name isbased on the belief that the plant has been observedto release a blood red oil on 29 August, the day thatJohn the Baptist was decapitated. It has long hadmagical powers associated with it, including the abilityto ward off evil spirits. It has been a popular herbalremedy since ancient times. Hippocrates andDioscorides recommended its use.The plant contains hypericin, hyperforin, andpseudohypericin. St. John's wort has been used totreat wounds and bruises, warts, hemorrhoids,bacterial infections, influenza A & B, and herpessimplex virus 1 & 2. However, its main claim to fameis as a sedative and antidepressant. One of its currentcommon names, probably of Madison Avenue origin,is "Nature's Prozac." As a mild depressant, it inhibitsthe uptake of serotonin, norepinephrine, anddopamine, naturally occurring neurotransmitters.Current investigations are focused on its use in thetreatment of HIV, psoriasis, and the seasonal affectivesyndrome.St. John's wort was once a major weed in this part ofthe United States, where it is known as Klamath weed.Ranchers noticed that when their animals ate the plantthey experienced severe skin blisters. They werecaused by an interaction between sun-light and redpigments found in glands on the stems, leaves, andflowers. Humans who have taken excessive amountsof St. John's wort have experienced similar problemswhen they are exposed to sunlight.INDIAN SNAKEROOTRauvolfia serpentina has been used for thousands ofyears in India to treat the mentally ill, to rid oneself ofintestinal worms, and to cure insect bites. Untilrecently the plant was largely ignored as just anotherexample of quaint plant mythology. Today it is ofgreat importance in the treatment of hypertension andcertain kinds of mental illness, particularlyschizophrenia. The roots contain the alkaloidreserpine. It is similar to serotonin, a naturallyoccurring chemical in our brain. It has been suggestedthat schizophrenia is the result of a serotoninimbalance.Reserpine occurs in several other species of Rauvolfia.In addition to perhaps correcting a serotoninimbalance, reserpine also decreases blood pressureand pulse rate. Its action appears to be on all parts ofthe central nervous system, particularly thehypothalamus.ECHINACEA OR CONE FLOWEREchinacea or coneflower (Echinacea purpurea + otherspp.) is a 19th century "blood purifier" derived fromNorth American Indian herbal medicine. The termblood purifier was often a euphemism for treatingvenereal disease. Echinacea's claim to fame is that itstimulates our body's own ability to heal itself. Studiescarried out in the last 50 years would seem to showthat echinacea does cause a number of changes thatcould lead to enhanced resistance to disease,particularly colds and flu. It is also sold as a cream orlotion for the treatment of wounds and burns.FEVERFEWTanacetum parthenium, a member of the sunflowerfamily, has been used for over 2000 years to treatheadaches. It has been rediscovered and it is nowwidely used for migraine and the associated nauseaand vomiting. The active ingredients include a numberof sesquiterpene lactones that are found in the leaves.In the olden days, people simply ate the leaves, butthis often resulted in ulcers and inflammation of themouth and lips. Today it is put up as a tablet orcapsule.VALERIANValerian is the dried underground portions of Valerianaofficinalis. For a thousand years we have used thisplant for its sedative, tranquilizing powers. Studiescarried out in the last few decades show that it candepress central nervous system activity. The activeingredients have yet to be identified to everyone'ssatisfaction.PERIWINKLEThe periwinkle or Madagascar periwinkle(Catharanthus roseus) is a member of the dogbanefamily (Apocynaceae). The plants contain about 70 orso alkaloids, known collectively as the vincaalkaloids. At the time the original research was done,periwinkle was placed in the genus Vinca. The mostfamous of them are vincristine and vinblastine.They have the ability to inhibit tumor growth and to-182-arrest nuclear division. They have been verysuccessful in treating childhood leukemia, Hodgkin'sDisease (a cancer of the lymphatic system), cancer ofthe testicles, and Kaposi's sarcoma.PACIFIC YEWTaxus brevifolia is a coniferous tree of the PacificNorthwest, It contains taxol, now considered verypromising in the treatment of ovarian and breastcancers. Taxol is found in bark of about 80 year oldtrees; it is also in the needles.MEDICINAL PLANTSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Active Ingredient(s) Therapeutic Use(s)agar (Gelidium cartilagineum) Polysaccharide Bulk laxative; emulsions; lubricantsaloe (Aloe vera) Aloin Skin-softening; burn treatmentautumn crocus (Colchicum autumnale) Colchicine Treatment of goutbalsam of Peru (Myroxylon balsamum) Volatile oil Skin ointments; flavor medicinesbelladonna (Atropa belladonna) Atropine* Dilate pupils for eye examsbenzoin (Styrax benzoin) Benzoin Loosens phlegm in respiratory passagesbetel nut palm (Areca catechu) Arecoline Destroys tapeworms; treat urinary tract problemsblack pepper (Piper nigrum) Piperine* Reduces gases; stimulates heartblue cohosh (Caulophyllum thalictroides) Saponin Rheumatism; promotes menstruationbuckbean (Menyanthes trifoliata) Gentianine* Pain-killer; lowers blood pressureCalabar bean (Physostigma venenosum) Physostigmine Stimulates heart: treatment of glaucomacamphor (Cinnamomum camphora) Camphor oil Superficial pain/itching; vapors (asthma)cascara sagrada (Rhamnus purshiana) Anthraquinone glycosides Laxativecastor oil (Ricinus communis) Ricinolein Irrigates intestineschaulmoogra (Hydnocarpus wightiana) Hydnocarpic/chaulmoogric acids Treatment of leprosyChinese rhubarb (Rheum palmatum) Anthraglycosides/tannins Treat constipation/diarrheacloves (Syzygium aromaticum) Oil of clove Antiseptic/pain-killercoca (Erythroxylum coca) Cocaine Local anesthetic; heart/respiratory stimulantcomfrey (Symphytum officinale) Allantoin Treat psoriasis/other skin problemscorkwood (Duboisia myoporoides) Scopolamine Anesthetic/pain-killercranberry (Vaccinium macrocarpum) Fructose + unknown Treat urinary tract infectionsechinacea (Echinacea spp.) Polysaccharides/chicoric acid Treat infectionselecampane (Inula helenium) Sesquiterpene lactones Asthma; chest colds; antibioticergot (Claviceps purpurea) Ergot alkaloids Uterine contractions; treat migraineeucalyptus (Eucalyptus globulus) Oil of eucalyptus Antiseptic; treat bronchial congestionfeverfew (Tanacetum parthenium) Parthenolide Treat migraine headache, nausea, vomitingfoxglove (Digitalis purpurea) Digitalis glycosides Regulates heart beat/contractionsgarlic (Allium sativum) Disulfide* Antiseptic; reduces hypertension; antispasmodicginger (Zingiber officinale) Volatile oils Soreness; reduce gas; prevent motion sicknessginkgo (Ginkgo biloba) Glycosides Treat cardiovascular disordersginseng (Panax quinquefolia) Volatile oils CNS stimulant; complex tonic effectsgoldenseal (Hydrastis canadensis) Hydrastine* Antiseptic; stops bleeding; treat stomach achesgum arabic (Acacia senegal) Gum arabic Treat sore throats, coughs; diarrheahenbane (Hyoscyamus niger) Hyoscyamine* Sedative; muscle relaxant; dilates pupilshorehound (Marrubium vulgare) Mucilage Bring up phlegm from respiratory passageIndian snakeroot (Rauvolfia serpentina) Reserpine Treat mental illness; high blood pressureipecac (Cephaelis ipecacuanha) Emetine Induce vomiting; treat persistent coughsjaborandi (Pilocarpus jaborandi) Pilocarpine Treat glaucoma; diureticJamaica quassia (Picrasma excelsa) Quassin Stimulates stomach/intestines; pesticidekaraya (Sterculia urens) Gum karaya Laxativekava (Piper methysticum) Methysticin* Tranquilizer; stimulate appetitekhat (Catha edulis) D-norpseudoephedrine CNS stimulantlignum vitae (Guaiacum officinale) Guaiaretic/guaiaconic acids Anti-inflammatory; local stimulantMadagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) Vincristine/vinblastine. Inhibit tumor growthma huang (Ephedra sinica) Ephedrine CNS stimulant; treat low blood pressuremayapple (Podophyllum peltatum) Podophyllin Treat testicular/ovarian canceropium poppy (Papaver somniferum) Morphine* Pain-killer; treat intestinal/stomach spasmsPacifc yew (Taxus brevifolia) Taxol Treat ovarian cancerpapaya (Carica papaya) Papain Digest protein; break up blood clotspsyllium (Plantago psyllium) Mucilage Intestinal lubricant/laxativequinine (Cinchona pubescens) Quinidine* Treat malaria; muscle cramps; headaches-183-rue (Ruta graveolens) Skimmianine Induce menstruation; produce abortionsaw palmetto (Serenoa repens) Oils, acids, glucosides Treat enlarged prostatesea onion (Urginea maritima) Scillaren* Heart stimulant; powerful emeticsenna (Cassia senna) Sennosides (anthraquinones) LaxativeSolomon's seal (Polygonatum officinale) Allantoin Anti-inflammatory; lowers blood pressurestrophanthus (Strophanthus gratus) Ouabain Heart stimulantstrychnine (Strychnos nux-vomica) Strychnine Increase muscle activity; antidote for depressantsSt. John's wort (Hypericum perforatum) Hypericin* Treat depressionsweet flag (Acorus calamus) Essential oil Treat stomach crampstansy (Tanacetum vulgare) Tanacetin Expel worms; induce menstruation; antispasmodicturmeric (Curcuma longa) Curcumin Stimulates bile production; antibiotic propertiesvalerian (Valeriana officinalis) Volatile oil? Sleep aid/tranquilizerwillow bark (Salix spp.)