The peyote ceremony consists of an allnight meeting in a special teepee or other speciallydesignated structure. The worshipers sit in a circlearound the peyote altar. Special drums, gourd rattles,and a carved staff are passed around after certainpurification ceremonies. The worshipers are led inprayer, meditation, and chanting by a cult leader or"roadman." The peyote ceremony ends with a ritualbreakfast consisting of parched corn, fruits, water,and boneless meat. In most cases the ceremonycombines elements of both Christian worship andIndian belief.Peyote is usually consumed in the form of mescalbuttons the dried brown tops of the cactus. Thebutton is the above ground photosynthetic portion ofthe plant. Much of the plant body is below the surface.The dried buttons may be stored indefinitely. Themescal buttons are usually taken into the mouth andsoftened by rolling them in saliva. They are swallowedwithout chewing. Some users prefer to soak them inwater and make a drink from the buttons. The numberof buttons consumed varies from three or four toabout thirty.EFFECTS. The resulting intoxication is one of the mostcomplex known from any psychoactive plant. It ischaracterized particularly by brilliant colorhallucinations. These are often accompanied by tactile,auditory, and olfactory hallucinations. Many usersdescribe a sensation of weightlessness, doubling ofthe ego, and depersonalization. Alteration or loss oftime is common. Symptoms of hallucinating varygreatly from individual to individual and with thesource of material. Injection of any one of thealkaloidal principles can produce some of thesensations, but the effects of intoxication from theentire button should be distinguished from the resultsof injecting any one of these principles.ACTIVE PRINCIPLES. The peyote cactus contains atleast fifteen different alkaloids. The most famous ofthese is mescaline (3, 4, 5-trimethoxy-phenylethylamine). It is the alkaloid responsible forthe pronounced color visions.MESCAL BEANWhile I suspect that most everyone has heard ofpeyote, the mescal bean or red bean is a new plant formost of us. Sophora secundiflora, a member of thebean family, is native to the American Southwest andthe adjacent regions of Mexico. Early reports byCabeza de Vaca (1539) indicate that the plant was intrade. The Stephen Long expedition in 1820 reportedthat the Arapaho and Iowa Indians using it as amedicine and a narcotic. The mescal bean is knownfrom archaeological sites in the Southwest from aboutA.D. 1000.Well-developed mescal bean cults were known inmany Indian tribes, including the Apache, Comanche,Delaware, Iowa, Kansa, Omaha, Oto, Osage, Pawnee,Ponca, Tonkawa, and Wichita. In most cases thebeans were used in initiation ceremonies and fordivination. The hallucinogenic effects were apparentlynot pronounced and much of the mescal bean fervordeclined rapidly with the introduction of peyoteceremonies. Today most of the details concerning thenature of mescal bean ceremonies is unknown.The use of the mescal bean did not completely diewhen the peyotl cactus cults began. Even today theleaders of the peyote ceremonies sometimes wearnecklaces of Sophora secundiflora. The Comanche,Oto, and Tonkawa Indians have mixed peyote andmescal beans together, perhaps leading to some ofthe confusion in names that now exists.-214-THE SACRED MUSHROOMS"As I was perfectly well aware that my knowledge ofthe Mexican origin of the mushrooms would lead meto imagine only Mexican scenery, I tried deliberatelyto look on my environment as I knew it normally. Butall voluntary efforts to look at things in theircustomary forms and colours proved ineffective.Whether my eyes were closed or open, I saw onlyMexican motifs and colours. When the doctorsupervising the experiment [Hofmann had ingestedPsilocybe mexicana] bent over me to check my bloodpressure, he was transformed into an Aztec priest,and I would not have been astonished if he had drawnan obsidian knife. In spite of the seriousness of thesituation, it amused me to see how the Germanic faceof my colleague had acquired a purely Indianexpression. At the peak of the intoxication, about 1 1/2hours after ingestion of the mushrooms, the rush ofinterior pictures, mostly changing in shape and colour,reached such an alarming degree that I feared that Iwould be torn into this whirlpool of form and colourand would dissolve. After about six hours, the dreamcame to an end. Subjectively, I had no idea how longthis condition had lasted. I felt my return to everydayreality to be a happy return from a strange, fantasticbut quite really experienced world into an old andfamiliar home." (Albert Hofmann, Swiss biochemistand discoverer of LSD]' ' ' ' 'When the Spanish conquered Mexico, they found theAztecs using certain mushrooms as a sacrament intheir religious ceremonies. The Aztecs referred to theplants as teonanacatl, which translates roughly asthe "flesh of the gods." The Roman Catholic clergywas strongly anti-mushroom because these fungipresented a stumbling block for the establishment ofChristianity in the New World. The Aztecs could seelittle advantage to this new religion when the use ofthe sacred mushroom allowed them to speak directlyto their deities.There are ancient references to the use of the sacredmushrooms. Artifacts from Guatemala show clearrepresentations of them. These pieces are about 3000years old. When first discovered they were thought tobe phallic symbols.Most of our knowledge of the sacred mushrooms hascome from investigations done in Mexico in the pastfew decades. In 1915 William Safford, a notedAmerican ethnobotanist, suggested that the sacredmushrooms were not really fungi at all, but peyote.Safford pointed out that no one had seen anyMexicans eating mushrooms for over four hundredyears, but that the peyote cult was well known. Sincethat time, extensive field work has shown the use ofmushrooms by the Indians of the State of Oaxaca.The Indians of Mexico use at least 24 species ofPsilocybe, Stropharia, Conocybe, and Panaeolus.Collectively we refer to them as the sacred mush-rooms.The chemistry of the mushrooms is not completelyknown. Psilocybe mexicana contains psilocybine (4-hydroxy-dimethyltriptamine), which is allied tobufotenine and serotonin.THE DATURAS"Datura stramonium acts very powerfully upon thecerebrospinal system, causing a line of symptomsshowing it to be a narcotic-irritant of high degrees.The symptoms collated from many cases of poisoningby this drug are: vertigo, with staggering gait, andfinally unconsciousness; stupor and deep sleep, withstertorous breathing; mania, with loquaciousness ormelancholia; hallucinations of terrifying aspect, thepatient bites, strikes, and screams, and throws thearms about, or picks and grasps at unattainableobjects; congestive headaches, with dull beating andthrobbing in the vertex. The pupils are dilated, andthe patient suffers from photophobia [sensitivity oflight], diplopia [double vision], and hemeralopia [dayblindness]; the eyes are wide open, staring and set, orare contorted, rolling, and squinting. The facebecomes red, bloated, and hot, the mouthspasmodically closed, and the tongue dry and swollen;the patient suffers greatly from thirst, but the sight ofwater throws him into a spasm and causes greatconstriction of the throat, foaming at the mouth, butseldom vomiting. The sexual functions are oftenexcited, more especially in women, in whom it causesnymphomania. Spasms of the muscles of the chestare of frequent occurrence; inspiration is slow andexpiration quick. Paralysis of the lower limbs and lossof speech, with twitchings and jerkings of the musclesoften mark a case. Its action will be seen to be similarto that of Belladonna, yet differing in many respects. [Mitilda Cox Stevenson. 1915. Ethnobotany of theZuni Indians....]"The James Town Weed (which resembles the ThornyApple of Peru, and I take to be the plant so call'd) issupposed to be one of the greatest Coolers in ourWorld. This being an early Plant, was gather'd veryyoung for a boil'd Salad, by some of the Soldiers sentthither, to pacifie the Troubles of Bacon; and some ofthem eat plentifully of it, the Effect of which was avery pleasant Comedy; for they turn'd natural Foolsupon it for several Days; One would blow up a Featherin the air; anoyther would darts Straws at it withmuch Fury; and another stark naked was sitting up ina corner, like a Monkey, grinning and making Mows atthem; a Fourth would fondly kiss, and paw at hisCompanions, and snear in their Faces, with aCountenance more antick, than any in a Dutch droll.In this frantick Condition they were confined, lest theyshould in their Folly destroy themselves; though it wasobserved, that all their Actions were full of Innocenceand good Nature. Indeed, they were not very cleanly;for they would have wallow'd in their own Excrements,if they had not been prevented. A Thousand suchsimple Tricks they play'd, and after Eleven Days,return'd to themselves again, not remembering anything that had pass'd." [Robert Beverley. 1705. TheHistory and Present State of Virginia]' ' ' ' 'Species of Datura, a member of the nightshade family,are native to both the Old World and New World. Theyhave been used since prehistoric times. In the OldWorld, Chinese and Sanskrit literature make severalreferences to the use of these plants. The genericname is derived from the Hindi word "dhatura." InAsia the seeds of Datura are still used by thieves tostupefy their victims. A group of thugs called theDhatureas once used the plant to kill their victims.-215-USES OF THE DATURASMedicinal:"cureth all inflammation whatsoever"Treat bruises and woundsAsthma preparationsAnesthetic (surgery)AphrodisiacToxic plant (stun, punish, stupefy, or kill victims)Recreational drug useRitual/ceremonial use:DivinationVisionary journeysShape-shifting (birds)ClairvoyanceInitiation ceremoniesFuneral ceremoniesMagic ("herbe aux sorciers")Discipline unruly childrenZombification (making zombies)The real ethnobotanical center of Datura is the NewWorld. Here the plants assume great medicinal,religious, and magical importance. In North Americathe plants are used mostly in the American Southwestand in adjacent Mexico. However, the Algonquins andother Indian tribes of the eastern woodlands used theJimson weed (Datura stramonium) in initiationceremonies for the young males of the tribe.The species most commonly employed in theSouthwest and Mexico is the sacred datura, D. inoxia(= D. meteloides in the older literature). Among theZunis, for instance, the plant was used as a narcotic,an anaesthetic, and a poultice for wounds and bruises.The rain priests of the tribe put the powdered root ofthe sacred datura in their eyes and ate the root toenable them to talk with the dead and ask for rain.Their belief was that the plant was divine and couldonly be used by members of the priest caste. The useof the plant in Mexico antedates the Conquest. TheAztecs used "toloatzin" as both a medicine andnarcotic.RITUAL USE. In South America, different species areemployed in weird and wonderful ways. Several ofthese plants, belonging to the genus Brugmansia(once part of Datura ), are large shrubs or small trees.In Ecuador the plants are used to produce a deepsleep in children who have been misbehaving. Duringthe sleep the children hear the voices of theirancestors who admonish them for their poor behavior.In Pre-Conquest Bogota, the wives and slaves of deadchieftains and warriors were drugged with Brugmansiabefore being buried alive with their departed husbandsor employers. Among the Jivaro Indians the plant isused as part of an initiation ceremony for the youngboys of the tribe. A boy is expected to take a sip of aninfusion from the plant from each member of thetribe. Soon he is unable to drink any more. The ritualdoes not cease, however. He is given an enema of theinfusion. During the unconscious period that follows,the boy is supposed to forget all of his boyhood waysand awake a man. "The Solemnity of Huskanawig is commonly practis'donce every fourteen or sixteen years, or oftener, astheir young men happen to grow up. It is anInstitution or discipline which all young men mustpass, before they can be admitted to be of the numberof the Great Men.... The whole Ceremony is performedafter the following manner. [The] principal part of the business is to carry theminto the Woods, and there keep them underconfinement, and destitute of all Society, for severalmonths; giving them no other sustenance, but theInfusion, or Decoction of some Poisonous IntoxicatingRoots [Datura stramonium or wysoccan]; by virtue ofwhich Physick, and by the severity of the discipline,which they undergo, they become stark raving Mad;In which raving condition they are kept eighteen ortwenty days.... When the Doctors find that they havedrank sufficiently of the Wysocccan, (so they call thismad Potion) they gradually restore them to theirSenses again, by lessening the Intoxication of theirDiet; but before they are perfectly well, they bringthem back to their Towns, while they are still wild andcrazy, through the Violence of the medicine. After thisthey are very fearful of discovering any thing of theirformer remembrance; for if such a thing shouldhappen to any of them, they must immediately beHuckanaw'd again; and the second time the usage isso severe, that seldom any one escapes with Life.Thus they must pretend to have forgot the very use oftheir Tongues, so as not to be able to speak, nounderstand any thing that is spoken, till they learn itagain. Now whether this be real or counterfeit, I don'tknow; but certain it is, that they will not for sometime take notice of any body, nor any thing, withwhich they were before acquainted, being still underthe guard of their Keepers, who constantly wait uponthem every where, till they have learnt all thingsperfectly over again. Thus they unlive their formerlives, and commence Men, by forgetting that theyever have been Boys...." (Robert Beverly. 1705. TheHistory and Present State of Virginia. )ACTIVE PRINCIPLES. The daturas manufacture aseries of the tropane or belladonna alkaloids. They areresponsible for the effects on the central nervoussystem.SYMPTOMS OF TOXICITY. Symptoms appear withina few minutes to a few hours after ingestion of plantmaterial. They include:' intense thirst' dilated pupils; avoidance of light' flushed skin' delirium' picking at imaginary objects on clothing or in air' convulsions' coma' death from respiratory paralysisHALLUCINOGENIC SNUFFSTobacco leaves are not the only plant that we snuff.The indigenous peoples of South America havediscovered that they could reduce dried leaves, bark,and seeds to a fine powder and sniff it into thenostrils, with dramatic effects.EPENA, also known as yakee, parica, and nyakwana,is one of the widely used hallucinogenic snuffs of theAmazonian region. It goes by various names,depending upon the tribe that prepares it. Althoughthe use of snuffs probably goes far back into thehistory of the New World Indians, detailed botanicaland ethnobotanical knowledge is relatively recent.They were first described in detail after an expeditionto Colombia in 1954.In some tribes, particularly those that refer to thesnuff as yakee, only the witch doctors are allowed toprepare and use the plant. It is felt that during thehallucinogenic phase they are better able to diagnosedisease and to see into the future. Yakee is often-216-prepared from Virola calophylla and V. calophylloidea,species of the family Myristicaceae. Nutmeg and maceare also derived from this family.In other tribes, the epena or nyakwana snuff isprepared from V. theiodora. Generally speaking, anymale member of the tribe may use epena. Thepreparation of the Virola snuffs involves removing thebark from trees, scraping off the inner bark thatcontains a resinous exudate, mixing the resin withwater, and boiling it down into a thick syrup. Thesyrup is sun-dried, pulverized, sifted, and mixed withthe ashes of other plants. The exact recipe and choiceof supplementary plants varies with the tribe.The effects of intoxication vary, but usually include aninitial phase of excitability, numbness of the limbs,twitching of the facial muscles, loss of coordination,visual hallucinations, including macroscopia, andfinally a deep sleep.The Virola plants contain tryptamines in relatively highpercentages. These are believed to be the activeprinciple. These same plants are also used to makearrow poisons.YOPO or PARICA is a strong hallucinogenic snuffprepared from the seeds of Anadenanthera peregrina,a South American legume. Records from 1511 relatethe inhaling of the snuff through long tubes. Thisspecies is probably the basis of many reports ofsnuffing by the South American Indians. Many ofthese reports are now thought to be unfounded andthe use of yopo is more restricted than once believed.Yopo contains various tryptamine derivatives as thepsychoactive principle. Bufotenine, once thought to bein the material, is apparently not involved.