(Nicolas Culpeper. English Physician, 1680)"God [has] imprinted upon Plants, Herbs, and Flowers,as if it were in Hieroglyphics, the very signatures oftheir vertues." (William Turner, in an herbal dedicatedto Queen Elizabeth I).In other words, the very shape of a plant or portion ofa plant gives us a sign as to how it can be used totreat our medical problems. If a plant has a heart--177-shaped leaf, it is a sign that it is good for the heart; aplant with a scorpion-shaped flower cluster is effectivein the treatment of scorpion bites. Kidney beansshould be good for the kidneys and walnuts ought tomake us smarter. Such nonsense persists today.MORE RECENT DEVELOPMENTSUntil the early part of this century, the practicingphysician derived most of his standard cures from theplant kingdom. Medical botany was a required coursein a physician's formal training. The intimaterelationship between medicine and botany yielded aninteresting side effect. Many of our outstandingbotanists, including Linnaeus Himself, were trained inmedicine. A number of them gave up their medicalpractices to go into botany full-time.The use of drugs of botanical origin began to declineas they were replaced by synthetic substitutes. In1820, 82% of the drugs listed in the NationalFormulary were from plants. In 1946, only 38% wereof plant origin; 56% were chemical; and 6% animal.Today the plant kingdom is once again a major sourceof interest to both the major drug houses and the U.S.government. Large screening programs are underwayto test thousands of species for their ability to controlcancer and leukemia. Other programs areinvestigating plants, such as the yams of Mexico, thatmanufacture the chemical components that are vitalto the biosynthesis of steroidal hormones. Several arebeing looked at as useful in the treatment of AIDS.The shelves of our local bookstores and articles in thepopular press provide strong evidence of a renewedinterest in herbal remedies. A number of reasons havebeen suggested, including dissatisfaction with modernhealth care systems, the costs of commercial drugs,and returning to a more natural way of treating ourillnesses. A recent study cited in Brevoort (1994)showed that about half of the people who purchasemedicinal herbs use them every day, 70% buy themregularly, and about a third of people have been usingherbs for 15 years or more. Regular users of medicinalherbs spend about $30 per month on them.Herbal remedies constitute a major industry in thiscountry. The following data are from Blumenthal(2001). Total retail sales declined about 15% over theprevious year. Of the top ten herbs shown below, onlysoy and valerian sales were up.IRRATIONAL HERBALISMThe late Varro Tyler, one of our most respectedexperts on the use of medicinal herbs, offered somewords of caution. He suggests that if we accept any ofthe following precepts, then we have adoptedirrational beliefs about herbal medicine.' A conspiracy by the medical establishmentdiscourages the use of herbs.' Herbs cannot harm, only cure.' Whole herbs are more effective than their isolatedactive constituents.' "Natural" and "organic" herbs are superior tosynthetic drugs.' The Doctrine of Signatures is meaningful.' Reducing the dose of a medicine increases itstherapeutic activity.' Astrological influences are significant.' Physiological tests in animals are not applicable tohuman beings.' Anecdotal evidence is highly significant.' Herbs were created by God specifically to curedisease.TERMS USED IN HERBAL MEDICINEastringent: an agent, often rich in tannins, that precipitates proteins and thereby leads to thecontraction of tissues and the checking of bleeding;bitter: an agent that aids in digestion by promoting salivation and the secretion of stomach acids anddigestive enzymes;carminative: an agent that soothes the digestive system by relieving gas, spasms, and distention;cathartic: an agent with a laxative effect, thereby causing an evacuation of the bowels;demulcent: an agent, often mucilaginous, that soothes irritated or inflamed tissues, especiallymucous membranes;diaphoretic: an agent that promotes perspiration;emmenegogue: an agent that stimulates menstrualflow;emollient: an agent that softens or smooths the skin;febrifuge: an agent that lowers fever;galactagogue: an agent that promotes the flow of milk;nervine: an agent stimulates or depresses thenervous system;purgative: an agent with strong laxative effectstomachic: an agent that supports gastric functionsand promotes appetite;tonic: an agent that invigorates specific organ(s) oran entire individual;vulnerary: an agent that supports the healing of wounds[After Boon & Smith, 1999]10.3 ! SURVEY OFMEDICINAL PLANTSThere are literally hundreds of plants with medicinalproperties, well-documented and otherwise. Many ofthem have been officially recognized by governmentsand medical associations for approved use byphysicians. Many more reside in the realm of "herbal-178-remedies" with varying degrees of demonstratedeffectiveness.MANDRAKEMandrake (Mandragora officinarum) is not really amedicinal plant. I have included it because of its longhistory in folk medicine and its bizarre reputation.From the beginning it has been considered one of thebest aphrodisiacs and cures for sterility. A reference toone or both of these uses is found in the Hebrew Bible(Genesis 30:14-16). This is probably the firstreference to the plant in western literature. Thesenotions as to the power of mandrake arise from theappearance of its root system, as viewed by someonewith a little imagination. The root system is carrot-like, but it is often branched. To many people thebranched roots represent tiny humans, complete withsex organs. To others the unbranched root clearlyrepresented a man's penis. In either case, the beliefwas that the Lord, in His Infinite Wisdom, constructedthe root in such a way to give an indication of its use.This view was in keeping with the "Doctrine ofSignatures. "In the Middle Ages, mandrake became a cure-all.Preparations were also used in drinks to stupefy thevictim. One recent author has also claimed thatperhaps Jesus of Nazareth was given a mandrakedrink to produce a death-like trance while on thecross. Mandrake wines were used in this fashion inPalestine.Harvesting such a powerful plant was fraught withperil. The plants were so full of strong magic that theycould not be pulled from the ground by mere mortals.One way of extracting a mandrake was to draw threecircles around the plant with a sword or stick and digonly while looking west. Stuff your ears before doingthis because the plant will produce horrible, deafeningscreams as it is pulled from the ground. It is also bestto stand upwind because of the foul stench the plantsgive off. The most favorable time for doing all of thiswas a Friday evening. Apparently so many peoplewere deafened or killed by extracting mandrakes thatdogs were later substituted. One end of a rope wastied around the dog, the other end around themandrake. The dog was struck and it ran away,pulling the mandrake from the ground. Naturally, thedog died.The sedative properties of mandrake result from aseries of alkaloids, principally hyoscyamine, scopol-amine, and mandragorine. The aphrodisiac qualitiesare yet unsubstantiated.QUININE AND MALARIA"The great gift of malaria is utter apathy." (Sir Richard Burton, noted explorer; not the actor)"Malaria can strike anyone, but history and experienceshow that it affects primarily the poorest, mostperipheral and most marginal groups of a population." (World Health Organization)"A tree grows which they call 'the fever tree' in thecountry of Loxa, whose bark, the color of cinnamon,is made into a powder amounting to the weight of twosmall silver coins and given as a beverage, cures thefevers and tertians; it has produced miraculous resultsin Lima." (An Augustinian monk writing in 1633)' ' ' ' 'MALARIA & FEVER BARK: TIMELINEBCE: 200 "Marshes produce small creatures..."CE:1633 "A tree which they call 'the fever tree'1717 Lancisi suggests transmission by mosquitos1807 Crawford suggests malaria caused by eggs1882 King finds malaria transmitted by mosquitos1897 Ronald Ross identifies Plasmodium vivax asthe cause1820 Pelletier & Caventou isolate quinine1858 J. Schweppe patents quinine tonic water1932 Atabrine synthesized1939 Chloroquine synthesized1944 Doering & Woodward synthesize quinine1976 Quinine sulfate synthesizedThe World Health Organization estimates that onethird of the world's population is constantlyendangered by malaria. The annual death toll is about2 million and another 200-800 million are chronicsufferers. We tend to think of malaria as a disease ofthe tropics, but until control procedures becameeffective, 4-6 million people in the southern U.S. weremalaria-ridden.Malaria is caused by several species of the protozoanPlasmodium, particularly P. vivax. The protozoan iscarried in the stomach of a female Anophelesmosquito which, in turn, brings the organism to us.Plasmodium enters the body when the mosquitopierces the skin. It gets into the blood stream whereit attacks red blood cells. Their destruction and thesubsequent release of waste products bring on thecharacteristic "chills-fever-sweat" cycle of malaria.For centuries there was little known about its cause orpossible treatment. The method of choice used byphysicians was bloodletting. This only tended tohasten the end because the malaria victim wasanemic. Another treatment was to drink winecontaining three drops of blood from the ear of a cat.This must be administered by a woman of high birthto be effective. But, even in the days of ancient Romescholars suggested that malaria was caused by somesort of invisible creature associated with marshes.These suggestions were ignored. They were contraryto the accepted religion and science of the day. In theMiddle Ages, malaria was thought to be the result ofbreathing bad night air. Look again at the word"malaria." Doctors recommended closing all windowsand doors at night to exclude these foul vapors.Closing the house did help, because it kept somemosquitos out.While the Old World was busy worrying about the badnight air, the Indians in the New World were using the"fever bark" tree or "quina" to control malaria. Thereis some question as to whether the Indians reallyknew of the advantages of the bark. Some suggestthat they knew quite well that it would controlmalaria, but were somewhat reluctant to share thisknowledge with the Spanish conquerors. After all,"The only good Spaniard ...."The most famous story of how the fever bark becameknown to the Europeans involves the Countess ofChinchon, wife of the Viceroy of Peru. In 1638 she fellvictim to malaria and was on the verge of death whenthe Governor of Loja heard of this and sent her some-179-of the bark of "quinaquina" (Quechuan for "bark ofbarks"). This bark effected a miraculous cure and shereturned to Spain, extolling the virtue of the Indiancure. Linnaeus, being aware of this popular story ofthe fever bark tree, named the tree Cinchona, afterthe Countess. He misspelled her name.Unfortunately, the story is a complete myth. The firstCountess died three years before her husband wasappointed Viceroy, and the second never had malariaand died of other causes in Colombia, without everreturning to Europe.The Jesuits played an important role in the spread ofknowledge and use of the fever bark tree. They hadintimate contact with the Indians who used it regularlyand did much to bring it to the attention of Europeans.Some people were convinced that fever bark wasactually a Jesuit poison used to kill Protestants. OliverCromwell died of malaria in 1685, rather than usingthe "Jesuit bark. "The active ingredient in the bark is a series ofalkaloids. The best known is quinine. It is extractedfrom several species of Cinchona and from Remijiapedunculata, another member of the madder or coffeefamily (Rubiaceae). The extraction of the alkaloidallowed standardization of doses. This eliminatedmuch of the trial and error treatment of malaria. Theexact mode of action is still incompletely known. Onesuggestion is that quinine interferes with an enzymesystem of the Plasmodium. This has not beendemonstrated, however.Although Cinchona is native to South America, thechief site of production for most of this century hasbeen Java. At the time of the Second World War, 95%of the world's quinine supply came from Java. Thissource was eliminated from the Allies by the Japaneseoccupation. This initiated an intensive search forquinine substitutes and for new sources of high gradematerial in the New World.In 1944, Doering and Woodward synthesized quinine.Unfortunately, it cost about $1000 per gram. Atabrine,synthesized by the Germans in 1928, was used by theU.S. Army at the rate of a billion pills per year. Duringthe Korean War, the U.S. used chloroquine. Since thenseveral other quinine substitutes have beendeveloped. Unfortunately, not all malaria strains canbe controlled by these alkaloids. New ones are knownthat are resistant to quinine or any of its syntheticderivatives. Malaria remains our costliest disease.FOXGLOVE AND HEART DISEASE"In the year 1775 my opinion was asked concerning afamily recipe for the cure of dropsy. I was told it hadlong been kept a secret by an old women inShropshire, who had sometimes made cures after themore regular practicioners had failed. I was informed,also, that the effects produced were violent vomitingand purging; for the diuretic effects seem to havebeen overlooked. This medicine was composed oftwenty or more different herbs; but it was not verydifficult for one conversant in these subjects toperceive that the active herb could be no other thanthe Foxglove." (Dr. William Withering,1785)' ' ' ' 'One of the most important heart drugs is obtainedfrom a plant of the snapdragon family, the foxglove(Digitalis purpurea + other spp.). For centuries it wasa favorite ornamental. In the 1700s, foxglove wasused by witches and others to treat dropsy. Thisdisorder was characterized by an accumulation ofliquids in the chest and abdomen, and a swelling ofthe legs and ankles. William Withering, an Englishdoctor, after hearing stories about the success of localwitches, experimented with treating dropsy patientswith pulverized foxglove leaves and found that theydid correct the disorder. In 1785 he published "Anaccount of the foxglove and some of its medical uses:with practical remarks on dropsy and other diseases,"which remains one of the most famed monographs inmedical history.The real importance of foxglove was not realized untilresearch showed that dropsy was a symptom of amore serious problem, heart disease. Today foxgloveremains an important tool in the treatment of heartpatients. The leaves yield cardiac glycosides, knowncollectively as the digitalis glycosides. Two of themare digitoxin (C41H64O13) and digitalin (C35H36O14).The digitalis glycosides have not been synthesized. We grow large fields of foxglove plants and usealcohol to extract the glycosides from leaves.The effects of the digitalis glycosides are:' the intervals between cardiac contractions arelengthened;' the contractions are stronger and more regular;' the pulse is more regular;' blood pressure is increased;' kidney functioning improves; and' urine is passed in copious quantities.Dr. Withering also recognized the toxic nature offoxglove when he noted, "... when given in very largeand quickly repeated doses, [it] occasions sickness,vomiting, purging, giddiness, confused vision, objectsappearing green or yellow, increased secretion ofurine with frequent motions to part with it; slow pulse,even as low as 35 in a minute, cold sweats,convulsions, syncope [fainting as a result of deprivingthe cerebrum of oxygen], and death. "BELLADONNA"Belladonna, n. in Italian a beautiful lady; in English adeadly poison. A striking example of the essentialidentity of the two tongues. "(Ambrose Bierce. The Devil's Dictionary) ' ' ' ' 'Atropa belladonna, also called the deadly nightshade,has been known for many centuries. For most of thistime, belladonna was a favorite poison. The plant isnative to central and southern Europe and Asia. Thecommon name comes from the Italian for "beautifulwoman," and the generic name from Atropos, the Fatewho cuts the thread of life.The leaves contain a series of alkaloids, knowncollectively as the belladonna alkaloids. These areextracted after the leaves have been dried from 2-15weeks. Ether or ethyl acetate solvents are often used.The alkaloids are then crystallized. Some of the chiefalkaloids are atropine, hyoscyamine, andscopolamine.Atropine is used to stimulate the sympathetic nervoussystem, to dilate the pupils of the eye during-180-examinations, to relieve pain, and to reduce musclespasms. Scopolamine, a depressant, is used as asedative, in the treatment of insomnia, and to helpreduce the symptoms of motion sickness. You mayhave noticed people wearing scopolamine skin patchesbehinds their ears.OPIUM, THE GREAT PAIN KILLER"Among the remedies which it has pleased AlmightyGod to give to man to relieve his suffering, none is souniversal and so efficacious as opium." (Sydenham, 1680)Opium is the name for the crude latex extracted fromthe opium poppy (Papaver somniferum), a relative ofthe popular garden poppies. The sap that oozes fromcut surfaces on the plant contains a series of alkaloidscollectively known as opiates. They have played animportant role in medicine.