One of themore pronounced symptoms of hallucination is seeingpeople and other objects upside down.AYAHUASCA"I had scarcely dispatched one cup of the nauseousbeverage, which is but half the dose, when the rulerof the feast -- desirous, apparently, that I should tasteall his delicacies at once -- came up with a womanbearing a large calabash of caxiri (mandioca beer), ofwhich I must needs take a copious draught, and as Iknew the mode of its preparation, it was gulped downwith secret loathing. Scarcely had I accomplished thisfeat when a large cigar, 2 feet long and a thick as thewrist, was put lighted into my hand, and etiquettedemanded that I should take a few whiffs of it -- Iwho had never in my life smoked a cigar or a pipe oftobacco. Above all this, I must drink a large cup ofpalm-wine, and it will readily be understood that theeffect of such a complex dose was a strong inclinationto vomit, which was only overcome by lying down ina hammock and drinking a cup of coffee which thefriend who accompanied me had taken the precautionto prepare beforehand. ""In two minutes or less after drinking it, its effectsbegin to be apparent. The Indian turns deadly pale,trembles in every limb, and horror is in his aspect.Suddenly contrary symptoms succeed; he bursts intoa perspiration, and seems possessed with recklessfury, seizes whatever arms are at hand ... and rushesto the doorway, where he inflicts violent blows on theground.... In about ten minutes the excitement haspassed off, and the Indian grows calm, but perhapsexhausted. Were he at home in his hut, he wouldsleep off the remaining fumes, but now he must shakeoff his drowsiness by renewing the dance." [RichardSpruce, noted explorer of South America]"My own experiences from participation in manyAmazonian Banisteriopsis rituals might be summarizedby saying that the intoxication began with a feeling ofgiddiness and nervousness, soon followed by nausea,occasional vomiting and profuse perspiration.Occasionally, the vision was disturbed by flashes oflight and, upon closing the eyes, a bluish hazesometimes appeared. A period of abnormal lassitudethen set in during which colours increased in intensity.Sooner or later a deep sleep interrupted by dream-likesequences began. The only uncomfortable after-effectnoted was intestinal upset and diarrhoea on thefollowing day. At no time was movement of limbsadversely affected. In fact, amongst many AmazonianIndians, dancing forms part of the caapi-ritual." [Richard Evans Schultes]' ' ' ' 'Ayahuasca, also called caapi and yaje, is apsychoactive drink made by the Indians of thewestern Amazon region. One of the earliest writtenaccounts of the use of ayahuasca is that ofVillavicencio. He reported that the drink helped theIndians to decipher enemy war plans, to formulatereplies to ambassadors in matters of war and peace,to interpret illness, and to help young men endure thephysical pain associated with certain initiations intomanhood.Ayahuasca is the bark of Banisteriopsis caapi and B.inebrians, sometimes fortified with the bark of B.rusbyana. These plants belong to Malpighiaceae, afamily little known to us in North America. As with somany of the South American preparations, variousadditives are often included. These confuse theethnobotanist and chemist and delay a trueunderstanding of the formulae used.The effects of caapi are an early feeling ofnervousness and giddiness, sometimes nausea andvomiting, profuse perspiration, and flashes of lightbefore the eyes. There follows a deep sleep withhallucinations. Early chemical work by Fischer-Cardenas isolated an alkaloid called telepathine. Morerecent work shows the active principle to be anotheralkaloid, harmine, and perhaps harmaline.OLOLIUQUIThe early Spanish historians reported the use ofhallucinogenic seeds by Aztec priests who used themas an analgesic. They were commonly employedbefore making sacrifices on mountain tops and whencommunication with the gods was required. Todaythese morning glory seeds may be the most widelyused hallucinogen of the Mexican Indians. Untilrecently, their use was relatively unknown outsideethnobotanical circles.The identity of ololiuqui remained in doubt for about400 years. Crude drawings and descriptions gave thestrong impression that the plant was a member of themorning glory family. Other experts suggested that itmight be the "sacred datura," Datura inoxia. InMexico, botanists and anthropologists working on theproblem believed that the plant was Rivea corymbosa(now called Turbina corymbosa). In 1939, RichardSchultes found it growing next to the doorway of aZapotec witch-doctor in Oaxaca. This was notaccepted as sufficient proof of the identity of ololiuqui-217-until Albert Hofmann (the discoverer of LSD-25)isolated lysergic acid derivatives from the seeds.Since that time, McDougall discovered the use ofIpomoea violacea in conjunction with or as asubstitute for Rivea. This has helped to clear up someof the botanical confusion.-218-SECTION 12 ! ETHNOBOTANICAL STUDIES12.1 ! AN OVERVIEW' Many of the early ethnobotanical studies weresimple in concept. Which plants did a particularpeople use and how did they use them?' The techniques and methodology used in modernstudies are much more sophisticated, showingvery clearly their dependence on other disciplinesin the natural and social sciences.' Controversy continues as to the focus ofethnobotanical research. Is it just the study of"primitive" peoples?' To what extent do intellectual property rightsextend to the fruits of ethnobotanical research?' What is a fair compensation to a people whoseknowledge translates into a multi-million dollarproduct, such as a new medicine?' More than ever, there is a sense of urgency.Everyone has heard of endangered species. Whatabout "endangered knowledge?"12.2 ! GOALS &TECHNIQUES"The best ethnobotanist would be a member of anethnic minority who, trained in both botany andanthropology, would study ... the traditionalknowledge, cultural significance, and the managementand uses of the flora. And it would be even better --for him and his people -- if his study could result ineconomic and cultural benefits for his owncommunity." (A. Barrera)"Our challenge is to salvage some of the native ... lorebefore it becomes forever entombed with the culturesthat gave it birth." (Richard Evans Schultes)' ' ' ' 'We have looked at the scope of economic botany orethnobotany, its history, the domestication of plants,exploration for useful ones, and the plantsthemselves, grouped by how they are used. Thepurpose of this section is to introduce you to howethnobotanical studies are carried out and in the"Selected References" section to show a reasonablycomprehensive list of the published results of thisresearch.RELATED DISCIPLINESTo a considerable degree, ethnobotany is not a standalone discipline. In other words, much of theinformation that it uses, and the analyticalapproaches that it employs are those of otherscientific disciplines. They include traditional botany(especially taxonomy), pharmacology, anthropology,archeology, ecology, economics, and linguistics.GOALS OF RESEARCHThe early studies were rather straightforward: how dothe people of tribe X use plant Y for purpose Z. Thosecarrying out the studies tended to be from Europe orNorth America; those studied were often located inremote, poorly known parts of the world. They werecharacterized as primitive, unlettered, non-industrialized, and non-urbanized.The earlier procedure of simply preparing a list or acatalogue of useful plants no longer satisfiesethnobotanical enquiry. Current research ischaracterized by the diversity of its research stylesand its objectives. "Contemporary ethnobotany examines the dynamicinterdependencies between humans and plants,recognizing that plants permeate materially,symbolically, and metaphorically every aspect ofculture and that nature is by no means passive tohuman actions. The subject matter of ethnobotanyencompasses traditional primitives and prehistoricpeople as well as literate societies, acknowledging thatwe have much to learn about our society's folk botanyquite apart from the economic botany of modernindustry and agrobusiness.... Thus, ethnobotany ismore than simply an examination of plants useful tonon-Western people, for it is devoted tounderstanding the limitations and behavioralconsequences of human actions on their botanicalenvironment." (Ford, 1981)QUESTIONS THAT NEED ASKINGAlcorn (1995) suggested the following:' Which plants are available?' Why are they available?' What factors cause a plant to be viewed as aresource?' How is knowledge distributed in the population?' What do the people think about plants?' How do they differentiate and classify elements intheir environment?' From which resource zone(s) are plantsharvested?' How are they used?' What economic/financial benefits are derived?-219-' How are the plant populations managed?' What is the effect of this management on the localvegetation and on local institutions?' How have human activities influenced theevolution of local plants?KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMSIn carrying out ethnobotanical research, it is importantto realize that although all cultures have studied thenatural world around them, they have done so usingdifferent values and approaches. The followingcomparison of knowledge systems is based on thework of Johnson (1992). While useful in drawing apoint by point contrast between two world views, Isuspect that our scientific methods of conductingethnobotanical research have been modified in recentyears as the result of a better understanding of howtraditional knowledge of plants and their uses isgenerated.TRADITIONAL KNOWLEDGE SYSTEMS' All parts of natural world regarded as animate; alllife forms as interdependent' Knowledge transmitted largely through oral media' Knowledge developed and acquired throughobservation and practical experience' Knowledge is holistic, intuitive, qualitative, andpractical' Knowledge generated by resource users on a long-term time scale' Nature and status of particular knowledgeinfluenced by sociocultural factors, such asspiritual beliefs, and communally held' Explanations behind perceived phenomena oftenspiritually-based and subjective' Knowledge used to make suitable decisions undervariable conditionsWESTERN SCIENTIFIC SYSTEMS' Human life generally regarded as superior, withmoral right to control other life forms' Knowledge transmitted largely through writtenword' Knowledge generally learned in situation remotefrom its applied context' Knowledge essentially reductionist, quantitative,analytical, and theoretical' Knowledge generated largely by specialists on ashort term time scale' Nature and status of particular knowledgeinfluenced by peer review, and held by individuals' Explanations behind perceived phenomenaessentially rational and objective' Knowledge used to put forward hypotheses and toverify underlying laws or constants.-220-SECTION 13 ! PLANTS BY GROUP/FAMILYThis list began as a updating and expansion of oneprepared by Albert F. Hill (1952) for his introductorytextbook in economic botany... and, I'm afraid it justgot out of hand! I also thought it would be useful toadd a brief description of how the plant is used andwhat part yields the product. There are a number ofmore or less encyclopedic references on this subject.The number of plants and the details of their uses aresimply overwhelming. In the list below, I haveattempted to focus on plants that are of directeconomic importance to us, and to present them bygroups or families. I have not included ornamentals,weeds, and toxic plants (unless we knowingly usethem to kill something or someone). The variousdictionaries of economic plants also include, on a hit-and-miss basis, plants that are sometimes eaten onlylocally or that have been used medicinally in somefashion. I have included only those food plants thatenjoy wider use and those medicinal plants that havedemonstrated properties. There is an emphasis onplants of the New World.The listing of nonvascular plants, ferns, and their alliesis short enough to scan quickly to find a particularplant. The much more extensive coverage of floweringplants is arranged by plant family.If you are not familiar with their technical names, lookat the end of this section for assistance. ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' ' 'Scientific Name. Common Name Use [Plant Part]BACTERIAAcetobacter aceti Used to make vinegar [all]Brevibacterium linens Used to make limburger cheese [all]Lactobacillus acidophyllus. Milk bacterium Milk fermentation [all]Lactobacillus bulgaricus. Yogurt bacterium Used to make yogurt [all]Lactobacillus casei. Cheese bacterium Used to make various cheeses [all]Propionobacterium freudenreichii Used to make Swiss cheese [all]Streptococcus spp. Used to make yogurt, sour cream, butter, buttermilk [all]Xanthomonas campestris. Xanthan bacterium Xanthum gum in food products [all]ALGAEAlaria esculenta. Murlin Food [plant body]Ascophyllum nodosum. Knotted wrack Gum (algin) [plant body]Bangia fusco-purpurea. Cow hair, hair seaweed Food [plant body]Chondrus crispus. Irish-moss Gum (carrageenan) [plant body]Eisenia bicyclis. Arame Food [plant body]Furcellaria fastigiata Gum (furcellaran) [plant body]Gelidium spp. Agar-agar Gum (agar) [plant body]Gracilaria spp. Gracilaria Gum (agar) [plant body]Hijikia fusiformis. Hijiki Medicine (goiter, high blood pressure) [plant body]Laminaria digitata. Kelp Food [plant body]Laminaria saccharina. Kelp, sugar wrack Food [plant body]Laminaria spp. Kombu, oarweed Gum (algin) [plant body]Macrocystis pyrifera. Kelp Food [plant body]Nostoc spp. Star jelly Food [plant body]Palmaria palmata. Dulse Food, salt substitute [plant body]Porphyra spp. Nori, laver Food; wrap sushi [plant body]Spirulina spp. Spirulina Food [plant body]Ulva lactuca. Sea-lettuce, green laver Food [plant body]Undaria pinnatifida. Wakame Food; medicine (suppress tumors) [plant body]FUNGIAgaricus bisporus. Button mushroom, field mushroom, portobello mushroom Food [sporocarp]Agaricus campestris. Meadow mushroom Food [sporocarp]Agrobacterium tumifaciens Cause of crown gall disease; used in genetic engineeringAmanita muscaria. Fly agaric, soma Psychoactive [sporocarp]Aspergillus flavus. Bread mold Fermentation: sake and soy sauce [all]Aspergillus oryzae. Miso mold Fermentation: sake [all]Auricularia auricula-judae. Wood ear, Judas's ear Food [sporocarp]Boletus spp. Boletes Food [sporocarp]Botrytis cinerea Flavoring (wine grapes) [all]Candida albicans Disease (yeast infections, thrush) [all]-221-Cantharellus cibarius. Chanterelle Food [sporocarp]Claviceps purpurea. Ergot fungus Medicine (vasoconstrictor), psychoactive [sclerotium]Conocybe spp. Sacred mushroom, teonanacatl Psychoactive [sporocarp]Cortinellus edodes. Shitake Food [sporocarp]Cryphonectaria parasitica Cause of chestnut blightDrechslera oryzeae Cause of southern leaf blight in maizeFlammulina velutipes. Enoki mushroom, velvet shank Food [sporocarp]Fusarium oxysporum Cause of banana wilt and Panama diseaseHemileia vastatrix Cause of coffee rustLactarius deliciosus. Orange agaric Food [sporocarp]Lentinus edodes. Shitake mushroom Food [sporocarp]Lycoperdon marginatum. Gi-i-sa-wa Psychoactive [sporocarp]Lycoperdon mixtecorum. Gi-i-wa Psychoactive [sporocarp]Lycoperdon spp. Puffball Food [sporocarp]Monilinia fructicola Cause of brown rot in stone fruits of rose familyMorchella esculenta. Morel Food [sporocarp]Mycosphaerella spp. Cause of sigatoka disease in bananaOphiostoma ulmi Cause of Dutch elm diseasePaneolus spp. Sacred mushrooms Psychoactive [sporocarp]Penicillium camemberti Ripening and flavoring of cheese [all]Penicillium chrysogenum Antibiotic (penicillin) [all]Penicillium notatum Antibiotic (penicillin) [all]Penicillium roquefortii Ripening and flavoring of cheese (Roquefort) [all]Phytophthora infestans Cause of late blight of potatoPhytophthora palmivora Cause of pod rot in cacaoPlasmopara viticola Cause of downy mildew in grapesPleurotus spp. Oyster mushroom Food [sporocarp]Psilocybe spp. Sacred mushrooms Psychoactive [sporocarp]Puccinia graminis Cause of stem rust in wheatRhizobium leguminosarum Nitrogen fixation symbiontRussula spp. Food [sporocarp]Saccharomyces carlsbergensis. Beer yeast Alcohol production (brewing) [all]Saccharomyces cervisieae. Baker's yeast, brewer's yeast Alcohol production (brewing) [all]Saccharomyces ellipsoideus. Wine yeast Alcohol production (wine making) [all]Saccharomyces theobromae. Cacao yeast Fermentation process (cacao) [all]Streptomyces spp. Antibiotics [all]Stropharia spp.