Once enough heat has been reached, thecell walls of the xylem itself begin to burn or glow.This is the stage of maximum heat production.For most of us, burning wood is not a necessity, butan option that we enjoy. We buy cords of wood for ourfireplaces or we burn charcoal in our cookouts. A cordof wood is a stack 8' wide, 4' high, and 4' deep. A facecord has the same width and height, but the individuallogs may be only 16" or 24" long, as opposed to 48"in the full cord. Charcoal is wood that has been burnedin a contained area where only enough oxygen occursfor partial combustion, as in an underground pit. Inother words, it has gone through the first and secondstages of burning that I described in the lastparagraph. Charcoal can produce very hightemperatures, hot enough to smelt some metals. Inthis country we see charcoal in the form of briquets.They are molded from wood waste and often containcoal. Before you get too upset about learning that youwere cooking with coal at your last picnic, have youever considered that coal is, for the most part, wood?Yes, very, very old wood. Fossil wood.LUMBER. About 0.5 billion m3 of timber are harvestedeach year as sawlogs for the production of lumber forthe construction. The United States and Canada arethe leading consumers of timber for this purpose, withEurope close behind. In the U. S., we harvest about38 billion board feet or almost 0.25 billion m3 eachyear for lumber. There is little of this activity in Asia,Africa, and Latin America. Logging and millingoperations are often geographically close to oneanother because 50-70% of the cost of producinglumber is in getting the logs to the mill. In a highlyefficient, modern mill about 60-70% of the log willeventually become lumber. The rest is shavings,sawdust, trimmings, etc. In the United States, most ofour timber comes from forests in the West and in theSoutheast. Lumber production is about 40 billionboard feet per year, with about 75% of it beingderived from softwoods. The demand of lumber forthe housing industry is a major use. A typical framehouse contains about 10,000 board feet. Each yearabout 3 billion board feet of lumber go into themanufacture of furniture, handles, baseball bats,musical instruments, caskets, and an almost endlesslist of other items. Here both utility and beauty of thewood are critical factors.A particular piece may be may of solid wood or aveneer, a thin (0.25 mm to 1 cm thick) sheet of woodof uniform thickness that is either shaved (slicedveneer) from a flat surface of a log or more commonlypeeled from it as the log is revolving (rotary-cut). Thetechniques may suggest to you that advancedtechnology is needed to produce veneers, but this isnot the case. We find them in the tombs of thePharaohs who lived 3500 B. P. How they did it issomething of a mystery. Yet another example, somewould say, of extraterrestrial intervention. Becausethey can be laminated onto the surface of a cheaperwood or composite material, veneers are very popular.When considering the purchase of some piece offurniture, most of us would select something madefrom solid wood, as opposed to a veneer. Obviously,solid wood is better than an item where only thesurface is the real thing. Perhaps not! An expertveneer cutter can produce an exterior beauty that thevast majority of solid woods cannot match. Furnituremade of a solid wood is also more likely to warp,crack, and split. Of course, if the wood is to be carved,then solid wood is the choice.The most utilitarian use of veneer is in themanufacture of plywood. Douglas-fir is the principalsource of plywood veneer in this country. To make-133-plywood, an odd number of sheets of veneer are gluedto one another, each so that the grains run at rightangles to the sheet immediately above and below it.Recent development of synthetic resins havepermitted very effective gluing of the plies to oneanother. The chances of failure and peeling are muchreduced. Pound for pound, modern plywood arestronger than steel.OTHER USES OF RAW WOOD. Some logs arestripped of their bark, allowed to dry, often afterhaving been impregnated with chemicals. Thisunmilled material is called round wood. It finds its wayinto a variety of products, including poles, posts,pilings, and timbers for mines. Over 6 million newpoles for telephone and telegraph wires are producedeach year; about 300 million new posts annually. Wealso cut these logs into shingles and shakes. If oneend is thicker than the other, it is a shingle.I have no idea how many railroad ties there are in thiscountry. Because we have been unable to come upwith anything better, we still use about 1 billion boardfeet per year to replace worn out ties. That translatesinto about 30 million per year.Most of the need in this country for wooden barrelshas disappeared because of metal, plastic, and papersubstitutes. But, barrel-making, technically known ascooperage, remains as a minor industry. If you needa watertight container, you want a tight cooperagebarrel; otherwise a slack cooperage one will do. Thebest wood for tight cooperage is white oak becausethe xylem cells of its wood are clogged up so badlythat water will not pass through them. The wood alsohas no undesirable smell or taste to it. The vastmajority of the white oak goes for whiskey barrels andto age red wine. Some large redwood tanks have beenin use in California wineries for almost a century.LUMBER BYPRODUCTS. Pieces of wood that are toosmall, poorly shaped, or simply ugly have their uses,as well. They are made into particle board, fiberboard,and chipboard. The first two require that these piecesof wood be reduced to smaller chips, sorted, andgraded. The particles are then mixed with glues,pesticides, fire retardants, etc. and then pressed intothe required size and shape. Fiberboard, as the namesuggests, are made from wood fibers, not from smallwood chips. Pieces of wood are placed in chemicalsolvents to separate the fibers, resins, and otheradditives are mixed with them, and the resultingproduct then pressed into sheets and dried.Masonite is manufactured by subjecting wood chips tohigh pressure in a steam chamber and then explodingthem by a quick release of the pressure. This changetears the fibers apart and it reactivates the lignin,which will act as a glue to fix and bind the wood fibersin their new orientation. Further application of heatand pressure will produce a grainless, synthetic boardthat is hard and water resistant.Rayon, cellophane, and acetate are also woodbyproducts, in that they come from wood cellulose.The first two differ only in their final form -- a sheet ora thread. Wood chips are placed in a chemical baththat reduces them to a pulp that is washed, groundup, and oxidized in the air. Carbon bisulfide is mixedin, along with caustic soda. The product sits until itreaches the proper consistency, at which time it ispressed into sheets of cellophane or extruded throughsmall openings to yield threads of rayon. Some of thenewer rayon fibers rival natural ones in many of theirphysical attributes. Acetate is a more synthetic fiber,in the sense that the pure cellulose has beenaugmented by acetyl groups during the manufacturingprocess. The cellulose comes from wood or from fibersleft on cottonseeds are they have gone through theginning process. Because the fibers resist wrinkling,they are popular in the manufacture of permanentpress clothing. They are also used to make cigarettefilters.Turpentine is a mixture of essential oils and resins.We extract it from a variety of trees in a variety ofways. About one-quarter of what we produce in thiscountry comes from distilling wood, especially oldstumps and roots of pine trees. About half is producedas a byproduct of the sulfate paper-making processdescribed above.PAPER. One of the most important byproducts of thetimber industry is paper. Before outlining themanufacturing process, a definition is in order. Variouscivilizations used plant tissues to create a surface fortheir writings. We also used animal skins and silkcloth. The Egyptians cut strips of pith from the stemsof the papyrus sedge (Cyperus papyrus). Our word"paper" comes from papyrus. Asians also used thepith of the rice paper plant (Fatsia papyrifera), whichis not a kind of rice; and the Polynesians and theMayans both pounded the bark of the paper-mulberry(Broussonetia papyrifera) into sheets. This samespecies is the source of tapa cloth worn by thePolynesians. Early Spanish colonials in the New Worldused century plants and fig leaves. However usefulthese materials might have been, they are not"paper," according to the narrow definition. Truepaper, a Chinese invention from about A. D. 100, ismade by separating plant fibers from one another andthen reconstituting them into thin sheets on a mat orscreen. It has been suggested that observing thepaper-making wasp construct its nest from maceratedwood provided a helpful clue! After drying, the sheetsof paper are peeled away from the surface of thescreen. The earliest true papers were often mixturesof flax, hemp, paper-mulberry, and rags. Until about200 years ago, paper making was labor intensive andtherefore expensive. It comes as a surprise to learnthat since Colonial times until the close of the lastcentury, much of our paper in this country was madeof hemp (Cannabis sativa). Other forms of this samespecies are the source of psychoactive materials andare called marijuana, etc. Therefore, there is no needto mutilate pre-Civil War books by smoking them. Theinvention of movable type by Gutenberg and of paper-making machines made it necessary to look for newsources of plant fibers. Those from wood pulp were anobvious choice.Processing consists of stripping the bark from logs andthen turning them into pulp. In mechanical pulping,debarked logs are forcefully pressed against arevolving grindstone to yield a mush of short woodfibers and fragments. Various agents (bleaches, gums,starches, etc.) may be added. These additives, calledsizings, will produce a paper with a smoother surfaceand one that will accept the printer's ink more readily.The mixture is then floated onto the surface ofscreens. The slurry of fibers begin to interlock withone another, forming a thin mat of plant fibers. Afterdraining and pressing, the paper is wound up in largerolls. One cord of wood will produce about a ton ofpulp. The paper that comes out of this mechanicalpulping process is inexpensive and of poor quality. Itsoon acquires a yellow tinge to it and crumblesrapidly. You encounter it daily (at least I hope youdo!) in the form of newsprint used to make yourfavorite newspaper. Most of the books manufacturedafter about 1850 employed paper made by the sulfiteprocess. The world's libraries are now discovering that-134-their vast holdings of older books are now crumblingas the paper disintegrates. The Library of Congress,probably the world's largest library, is attempting tosave its books from this era by moving them into alarge chamber where the books are treated withdiethyl zinc. This chemical neutralizes the acid residueon the paper.There are three chemical processes used to producepaper pulp. In the sulfite process, wood chips areplaced in a large metal digester and heated underpressure with bisulfites and hot acid. The dissolvedlignins are drained off. The softened fibers ofessentially pure cellulose are then washed and dried.They may be stored in this form or sent on to beatersand the paper-making screens and presses. Thestrong and durable paper is used in many differentproducts, as in kraft wrapping paper. In the sulfateprocess, wood chips are reduced in an alkalinesolution of sodium hydroxide and sodium sulfide.These chemicals are able to remove resins, waxes,and fats from wood chips. This means that a widervariety of woody plants may be used, including thesoftwoods (conifers). Most of our paper these days ismade this way. In the soda process, sodiumhydroxide is the only digester used. The paper thatresults here is often used in books and magazines.Ninety percent of today's paper is made from woodpulp. Cigarette paper and banknotes are still made outof the linen fibers from flax. Paper made from hemp,straw, and other fibers are produced on a very smallscale. In the United States, we consume about 600lbs. of paper and paperboard per person each year;200 lbs in Britain, under 100 lbs. in France; about 50lbs. in Japan, and 25 lbs. in Russia, and only 2 lbs. perperson per year in The Peoples Republic of China. Asour demand for paper increases -- the computer agenotwithstanding -- there is renewed interest intraditional pulp sources (hemp, bamboo, etc.) and innew ones. Two new ones of particular interest arekenaf (Hibiscus cannabinus), a cotton relative, andsunn (Crotalaria juncea), a member of the beanfamily.OTHER ODDS AND ENDS. If you subject a piece ofwood to rapidly moving knives or teeth, the result isexcelsior. These thin, curled strands can be madefrom almost any light weight, lightly-colored, odorlesswood. Basswood is especially prized. We use excelsiorfor packing and for stuffing mattresses and furniture.One cord of wood will produce about 1500 lbs. ofexcelsior. Shavings, especially those from white pine,are also used as packing material. Sawdust is used forfuel, bedding, as a packing material, as a soilamendment, and as an ingredient in a number ofindustrial products. Wood flour is finely groundsawdust, shavings, and wood waste. It finds its wayinto linoleum, plastic, nitroglycerin, veneer, flooring,and many other products. I am reminded of the oldjoke about the cow. The only part that isn't used is themoo.SURVEY OF TIMBER TREESTEMPERATE WOODSScots pine (Scotch pine). Pinus sylvestris(Pinaceae) is probably the most important coniferthrough northern Europe and Asia. It is used infurniture, poles, veneers, and it is pulped for makingkraft paper.Eastern white pine. Pinus strobus (Pinaceae) is ourmost famous pine. It is native from southern Canadathrough New England across to the Great Lakes. Whenwe were a British colony, this species was protectedon royal reserves because the trunks were used tomake the masts for sailing ships. After we gained ourindependence, we set about logging vast tracts ofeastern white pine, making it the most often cuttimber tree in the New World. Only about 2% of theoriginal forests remain. Today it is relativelyunimportant because so little remains and because ithas become the victim of the white pine blister rust,a fungal infection introduced from Europe.Longleaf pine. Pinus palustris (Pinaceae) is the bestknown pine from the southeastern United States.Longleaf pine is the heaviest of the commercialsoftwoods. It is very important economically becauseit yields lumber for heavy construction and it is pulpedto make paper. This is the world's leading source ofrosin and turpentine.Ponderosa pine. Pinus ponderosa (Pinaceae) is thesource of more lumber than any other North Americanpine. It is the most widely distributed and importantpine in the West. Its wood is light, hard, and strong.Douglas-fir. Pseudotsuga menziesii (Pinaceae)accounts for about half of the standing timber in thewestern United States and is the source of about 20%of the timber cut each year. It is native to westernNorth America from British Columbia southward alongthe Pacific coast and the Rocky Mountains into Mexico.It reaches its greatest size in our local forests (thelargest being almost 300 ft. tall and 14 ft. indiameter). The wood is highly prized for all kinds ofconstruction. Much of our plywood is made from thisspecies.Redwood. Sequoia sempervirens (Taxodiaceae)grows along the Pacific coast of southern Oregon andCalifornia. Its wood is valuable because it is relativelysoft, light, and resistant to decay. Swellings on thetrunk (burls) are valuable because they yielddecorative lumber that can be turned into table andcounter tops, along with a myriad of strange noveltyitems that tourists love to purchase.White oak. Quercus alba (Fagaceae) is probably themost valuable of several oaks that yield timber. Itswood is used in furniture-making, flooring, and tomake staves for tight cooperage for red wines andthat most elegant of alcoholic beverages, Scotchwhiskey! We import white oak from Europe. It is veryexpensive.Black walnut. Juglans nigra (Juglandaceae) is nativeto much of the eastern United States. On favorablesites it can reach a height of 150 ft. and a diameter of4 ft. The wood is so valuable that I read of walnut treerustling a few years ago. The lumber is heavy, strong,and durable. It is popular in cabinet making and forinterior finishes. The wood from its roots is used tomake gunstocks.Black cherry. Prunus serotina (Rosaceae) is native tomuch of the eastern United States and southeastCanada. It also occurs in North America in Arizona andTexas. While many cherry trees are small, blackcherry can reach a height of 60-80 ft. Its wood isvalued for high quality furniture and interiors. It isalso used in such specialty items as the wooden blocksthat support the electrolyte plates used in printing.Sweet gum. Liquidambar styraciflua (Ham-melidaceae) is a 50-120 ft tall tree native to theeastern United States. Its wood is used to make a-135-beautiful veneer, lumber, plywood, boats, toys, slackcooperage, and boxes. We also chew its sweet sap.Tulip tree.