The effects of refined sugar on the body remaincontroversial, especially its purported addictiveproperties.' Sugars are not the only sweetening agents foundin plants. Some contain proteins or glycosidesthat are 4000 times sweeter than sucrose.6.2 ! SPICES ANDFLAVORINGSSpices are edible materials that are consumed not somuch for their food value as they are for theiraromatic, flavor-producing qualities. They are notnecessities; spices generally have little nutritionalvalue. Many of them are produced in Central America,northern South America, equatorial Africa, andSoutheast Asia. Most spices owe their popularity tothe essential oils that they contain. These oils arehighly aromatic. Chemically they are benzene orterpene derivatives or straight-chain hydrocarbons ofintermediate molecular length, seldom more than 20carbon atoms long. Some may contain sulfur ornitrogen.FUNCTIONSThe major functions of spices are: ' to add variety to our diet;' to disguise the unpleasant taste of bad meat, animportant consideration in warm areas; and' to increase perspiration and salivation, therebycooling the body and perhaps aiding in digestion.Some not so major, but historically interesting, usesof spices include:' as deodorants' for prevention of the plague' for the fumigation of areas before royal visits' for covering up bad breath (once an absoluterequirement before an audience with the Emperorof China)' for embalming the dead, particularly in ancientEgypt' in magical rites of various sorts' in religious purification ceremonies' as ingredients or cosmetic flavorings in medicines' as aphrodisiacs.HISTORYAlmost all of the spices that we use today have beenin use for thousands of years. Until the 14th century,the world spice trade was controlled by the Arabs. Inthe 15th century, Venice took control and it was atabout this time that many spices became known andwidely used in Europe. In the late 1400's, Portugalbecame the leading figure in international spice trade.None of the important spices left the East Indies,except on Portuguese ships. An uprising in 1574ended their rule of the Moluccas, also known as "TheSpice Islands." England soon controlled India and theSpice Islands. This was the era of the founding of thefamous East India Company. The Dutch then tookcontrol of the East Indies and for almost two centuriesthey dominated the distribution of pepper, mostcinnamon, cloves, ginger, mace, and nutmeg. Todaymany of the spices are widely planted and no singlecountry has a monopoly.TIMELINE: SPICE TRADEBCE:5000 Spices used in Middle East3000 Egyptians use spices in embalming2000 Arabs establish monopoly in spice trade1500 Queen Hathepshut of Egypt imports spicesfrom the Land of Punt992 Queen of Sheba brings spices to KingSolomon200 Chinese import cloves from the Spice IslandsCE:410 Fall of Rome610 Arab domination begins (to 1096)812 Charlemagne orders spices planted onimperial farms1096 First Crusade opens trade routes1180 Pepperer's Guild founded in London1271 Nicolo, Marco, & Maffeo Polo sail for Asia-106-1460 Portuguese bring back grains-of-paradisefrom Africa1492 Columbus sails for the Indies in search of itsprecious spices1498 Vasco de Gama reaches Calicut, India1510 Portuguese gain control of Ceylon (Sri Lanka)1522 Magellan arrives in Spice Islands1560 Overland trade route to Asia re-established1574 Uprising against Portuguese in Spice Islands1579 Sir Francis Drake reaches East Indies1600 British East India Company founded1602 United (Dutch) East India Co. founded1605 Dutch drive Portuguese out of Spice Islands(to 1621)1641 Dutch capture Spice Islands 1651 Dutch begin destroying nutmeg and cloves1770 Pierre Poivre smuggles cloves, etc. from SpiceIslands1795 U. S. sails for Sumatra - enters pepper trade1795 English plant clove trees on Malay Peninsula1796 English gain control of East Indies1799 English end control by Dutch East India Co.1955 Hurricane Janet destroys 90% of Grenada'snutmegs1983 International Spice Group foundedROOTS, RHIZOMES, AND BULBSONIONS AND THEIR ALLIESCommon Name Scientific NameCanadian garlic Allium canadenseCh'iao t'ou Allium chinenseChinese chives Allium odorumChives Allium schoenoprasumEgyptian onion Allium cepaElephant garlic Allium ampeloprasumEschalot Allium cepaGarlic Allium sativumGiant garlic Allium scorodoprasumKurrat Allium ampeloprasumLeek Allium ampeloprasumLevant garlic Allium ampeloprasumNodding onion Allium cernuumOnion Allium cepaRakkyo Allium chinenseRamp Allium tricoccumRocambole Allium sativumShallot Allium cepaTree onion Allium cepaWelsh onion Allium fistulosumWild garlic Allium canadenseWild leek Allium tricoccumONION (Allium cepa) is one of our oldest food andflavoring plants. It is the most popular of the group ofrelated species shown in the table. Onions areprobably native to southwestern Asia. Theircharacteristic flavor and aroma come from a sulfur-containing compound, allicin. The onion is also heldin high regard as a medicinal plant.GARLIC (Allium sativum) is second only to the onionin popularity as a flavoring. It is also native to Asia.Garlic cloves are segments (axillary buds) of theparent bulb, surrounded by a papery sheath. Garlichas a long history of medicinal uses to cure cancer,tuberculosis, athlete's foot, hemorrhoids, and to treathigh blood pressure, and as an aphrodisiac.Sacks of garlic worn about the neck have beenconsidered by some people to be useful in warding offtrolls and vampires. All I can say in this matter is thatnot a single friend of mine who uses garlic has everbeen the attacked by either of these creatures.OTHER "ROOTS"GINGER (Zingiber officinalis) is the most important ofthe root spices. It is actually the rhizome that containsthe spice. Ginger, a member of the ginger family(Zingiberaceae), is native to Southeast Asia.TURMERIC (Curcuma longa) is native to SoutheastAsia. It is also a member of the ginger family. Thespice is derived from rhizomes with blunt tubers.Turmeric is immensely popular because it is a principalingredient in curry powder.HORSERADISH (Armoracia rusticana) roots containa very potent glycoside called sinigrin. The plant, amember of the mustard family (Cruciferae), is nativeto southeastern Europe, where it can be a weed.WASABI (Wasabia japonica) is related to thehorseradish, but it is not a kind of horseradish. It isalso known as the Japanese horseradish, which addsto the confusion in common names. This perennialmember of the mustard family grows naturally next tomountain streams; it is cultivated in flooded terraces.The roots are ground to make a green powder orpaste. Most of the wasabi that we are served ishorseradish + mustard + green food coloring. The realwasabi is far too expensive for general use.It is very pungent! One fellow who did not know aboutwasabi thought that it was strange that a Japaneserestaurant would be serving guacamole. Afterconsuming a hearty bite, he ended up in the hospital.SARSAPARILLA (Smilax spp.) is a trailing, pricklyvine native to the New World tropics. The roots yieldthe spice, once widely used in various health tonicsand beverages. The hero in the old western moviesalways ordered this when he found himself in asaloon. The plant belongs to the lily family (Liliaceae).BARKSCINNAMON (Cinnamomum zeylanicum) comes froma tree native to Ceylon and India. The volatile agentis cinnamic aldehyde. Bark is removed by hand afterthe monsoon season. The best material is intact barksections from which the underlying cells have beenremoved. These are the "quills" of commerce.Damaged quills and fragments are converted intopowdered cinnamon.CASSIA (Cinnamomum cassia), an ancient spice, isoften confused with true cinnamon. The tree is nativeto Burma. Its bark is loosened, stripped off, and dried.Cassia is used in medicine, flavorings, soaps, andcandies. A significant portion of the cassia crop is soldas cinnamon.SASSAFRAS (Sassafras albidum) comes from a treenative to eastern North America. It has been used toflavor medicines, root beers, soaps, etc. It hasindustrial applications in floor oils and polishing oils.The once popular sassafras tea is now rarely-107-encountered because of its recently discoveredcarcinogenic properties.LEAVESBASIL comes from Ocimum basilicum, a mint nativeto India and Africa. It is much used in stews,dressings, and in mock turtle soup.PEPPERMINT is also derived from a mint, Menthapiperita. It grows wild in Europe, Asia, and NorthAmerica. The plants yield menthol, an essential oilwith wide applications.SPEARMINT is derived from Mentha spicata, a mintnative to Europe and Asia. It is a widely used flavoringmaterial.SAGE (Salvia officinalis) is a mint native to theMediterranean region. It has been a popular culinaryherb since ancient times. The generic name, derivedfrom the Latin verb "to save," tells us of its reputationas a medicinal plant. The specific epithet indicates thatthe plant was listed officially and approved for medicaluse.WINTERGREEN comes from the leaves of a birchtree, Betula lenta. The flavoring derives from aglycoside, methyl salicylate. Originally this popularspice came from Gaultheria procumbens, a plant ofthe heath family.TARRAGON (Artemisia dracunculus) is an Asian herbthat belongs to the daisy or sunflower family. It is inthe same genus as the sagebrush of our westernstates. Its distinctive bittersweet flavor has made itone of the most popular culinary herbs. Tarragon'spopularity appears to go back only to about the MiddleAges.FLOWERS AND FLOWER BUDSCAPERS are the flower buds of a shrub (Capparisspinosa) native to the Mediterranean. It is alsocultivated in the southern U. S. Caper buds are pickledin salt and strong vinegar.CLOVES are the unopened flowers and attachedsection of stem from Eugenia caryophyllata, a treenative to the Spice Islands. Most cloves now comefrom Zanzibar and the Malagasy Republic. Oil of clovesis obtained by distillation. Eugenol is used in thesynthesis of vanillin, the artificial vanilla flavoring.SAFFRON, from the stigmas and styles of Crocussativus, a relative of the garden crocus, is the mostexpensive of the commonly used spices. It takesabout 70,000 flowers to yield one pound of saffron.The material has also been used as a plant dye.FRUITSALLSPICE is derived from Pimenta dioica, a treenative to the West Indies and Central America. Thecommon name comes from the fact that the spicetastes as though it were a combination of severalflavorings.PEPPERS is the common name used for the fruits ofvarious species of Capsicum, New World members ofthe nightshade family. Because they can be confusedwith black and white pepper, some authors prefer tocall these plants "capsicums" or "capsicum peppers. "A SUMMARY OF CAPSICUM PEPPERSCommon Name Scientific NameAji C. baccatum var. pendulumAji C. chinenseAnaheim C. annuum var. a.Ancho C. annuum var. a.Banana C. annuum var. a.Bell C. annuum var. a.Bird C. annuum var. glabriusculumBird C. frutescensCascabel C. annuum var. a.Cayenne C. baccatum var. baccatumCayenne C. frutescensChamburoto C. pubescensChile manzana C. pubescensChili C. frutescensChili C. annuum var. a.Chilipiquin C. annuum var. glabriusculumChiltepine C. annuum var. glabriusculumGreen C. annuum var. a.Habanero C. chinenseHungarian wax C. annuum var. a.Jalapeno C. annuum var. a.Mango C. annuum var. a.Mirasol C. annuum var. a.Paprika C. annuum var. a.Peperoni C. annuum var. a.Pepperoncini C. annuum var. a.Peter C. annuum var. a.Pimiento C. annuum var. a.Poblano C. annuum var. a.Rocotillo C. chinenseRocoto C. pubescensSerrano C. annuum var. a.Squash C. annuum var. a.Tabasco C. frutescensTomato C. annuum var. a. [After Andrews, 1984 and others]The volatile agent is capsaicin. Our tongue can detectconcentrations of as little as 1 part per million.Capsaicin can produce burns that are so severe thatthey require medical attention. The greatestconcentration of capsaicin is in the placenta, the tissuewhere the seeds are attached. Relative "heat" istraditionally expressed in terms of Scoville Heat Units.Wilbur Scoville was a pharmacist. The delicatescientific instrument that he used to quantify"hotness" was his tongue.RELATIVE INTENSITIES OF PEPPERSType of Pepper Scoville Heat UnitsBell 0Pimiento 0Chile con carne 15-30Paprika (dry, ground) 0-150Taco sauce 300El Paso 100-500Cherry 100-500Big Jim 500-1000Anaheim 500-1000-108-Ancho 1000-1500Sandia 1500-2500Rocotillo 1500-2000Tabasco sauce 4500Jalapeno 2500-5000Mirasol 2500-5000Yellow wax 5000-15,000Serrano 5000-15,000De Arbol 15,000-30,000Santaka 50,000-100,000Chiltecpin 50,000-100,000Thai 50,000-100,000Bahamian 100,000-300,000Habanero 100,000-300,000Pure capsaicin 16,000,000BLACK PEPPER and WHITE PEPPER are bothderived from Piper nigrum, a climbing vine native toCeylon and India. It is a member of the piper orpeperomia family and not at all related to thenightshades. The unripened fruits are hand picked,piled in heaps, and dried in the sun. Naturalfermentation causes the fruits to turn black. The hard,berry-like fruits are called "peppercorns." Commercialblack pepper is made by grinding up the peppercorns.White pepper is made by soaking the ripe peppercornsfor about two weeks. The outer skins are removed andthe smooth, white insides are washed and dried in thesun.VANILLA beans are the unripened, fermented fruitsof Vanilla planifolia, a New World tropical vinebelonging to the orchid family. The essential oil,vanillin, is extracted with alcohol. The Spanish foundvanilla in use by the Aztecs. Bernal Diaz describesMoctozuma using it to flavor a beverage calledchocalatl.THE "SAVORY SEEDS"Several plants of the carrot family (Umbelliferae)produce small, seed-like fruits that are commonlyknown as "savory seeds." Some examples are:ANISE from Pimpinella anisum, one of our oldestspices, is used to flavor cakes, pastries, candies, andanisette, a liqueur.CARAWAY, from Carum carvi, is used in baking,medicine, and to make kummel. The plant is native toEurope and Asia.DILL comes from Anethum graveolens, native toEurope and Asia. It is used in cooking and to flavorpickles.FENNEL, a common roadside weed in our area,comes from Foeniculum vulgare, a native of theMediterranean region. All parts of the plant arearomatic. It is widely used in cooking.SEEDSWHITE MUSTARD, from Sinapis alba, containssinalbin, a glycoside. When combined with water, ityields a non-volatile sulfur compound that imparts thecharacteristic taste. White mustard is used in medicineand as a condiment.BLACK MUSTARD is derived from Brassica nigra, aEurasian plant. It is now widely cultivated. The seedscontain sinigrin, which will produce a volatile sulfurcompound when it breaks down. It is exceedinglypowerful and can cause great damage to the sensitivelinings of the digestive tract. Black mustard has astimulating effect on the salivary glands and on theperistaltic action of our gastrointestinal tract. Theground mustard that we typically purchase is often amixture of black and white mustards.NUTMEG comes from Myristica fragrans, a tree nativeto the Spice Islands. It was unknown to most of theancient world. Most nutmeg is now grown on Grenada,an island in the West Indies. The seeds also containpsychoactive compounds.MACE comes from the very same tree.