480-377 BC), physicians recognized the impact of food onhuman health. The question of the continuum between food andmedicine is of great interest to (ethno-)pharmacologists (Etkinand Ross, 1982; Leonti, 2012; Valussi and Scire, 2012; Jenningset al., 2014; Alarcon et al., 2015).In many countries medicinal plants are widely used as dietarysupplements, in daily foods and as functional foods, with the aimof promoting health. In Eastern cultures food and medicine areseen to come from the same source. Their use is based on thesame fundamental theories, and they are equally important inmaintaining and improving health and for preventing and curingdiseases, as well as facilitating rehabilitation. In China, Japan,Korea, and Southeast Asia, medicinal plants are widely used bothdaily foods (cereals, vegetables, and fruits) and functional foods,for replacement and medical purposes (Shi et al., 2011). Thelast few decades has seen the introduction to Europe of a widerange of species used in other continents, including from SouthAfrica e.g. rooibos (Aspalathus linearis (Burm.f.) R.Dahlgren)and to a lesser extent honey bush tea (Cyclopia sp.) or Hoodiagordonii (Masson) Sweet ex Decne. to regulate the appetite. Alsosome exotic fruits, such as acerola (Malpighia glabra L.) fromSouth America, rich in vitamin C are now marketed as foodsupplements (Franz et al., 2011).In the early history of Western biomedicine, diet figuredprominently in the prevention of diseases and therapeutics.The history of biomedicine customarily is traced to Greece andthe Hyppocratic Corpus, some 60 medical texts dating to thefifth to fourth centuries BCE. Diet regulation was the mostprominent element in all the Hippocratic texts (Etkin, 2006).Due to its location between East and West Russian tradition ofmedicine and diet has accumulated and adopted approaches thatoriginated in Europe and Asia. The Greek influence on Russianmedicine is of particular relevance in this context (Shikov et al.,2014a).Russia in the past and present can be regarded as a"herbophilious" society. The term "herbophilia" was usedby Luczaj (2008) for such cultures, in which medicinaland food plant species are often used and highly prized.Approximately 58% of the Russian population was reported touse phytopharmaceuticals as a form of treatment (Shikov et al.,2011) including wild plants. Plants are an integral part of Russianeveryday life. A large number of species of green vegetables areused in agricultural communities, particularly those in whichfood shortages are frequent. Due to the harsh climatic conditionscoupled with poor crop harvests Russian peasants were educatedon how to survive by relying on wild plants (Kovaleva, 1972).Wild food plants became highest priority in the USSRduring the Second World War most notably during the siegeof Leningrad (1941-1944). In 1942 a special manual aboutmost important wild food plants of the Leningrad regionwas published and distributed to the army and civilians. Thescientists from V.L. Komarov Botanical Institute described thirtyseven common herbs and two edible lichens, their nutritionaland functional properties, specificity of harvesting, and foodprocessing (Tikhomirov, 1942).As a result of socio-economic changes after the SecondWorldWar, the active role of wild plants gradually diminished in regulardiet. However, some species are still gathered and made intofood products by small companies. Wild berry harvesting is verypopular especial among of rural populations. The practice ofpreparing jam, compotes, and home made liqueurs from wildberries has been passed down by housewives from generation togeneration (Grigorieva, 2008).A wide choice of herbal medicines or botanicals hasprovided increasing opportunities for both the development andmarketing of herbal food products, dietary supplements, andfunctional foods.Wild species were selected for food application by humansnot only because of their pleasant taste and aroma, but somepharmacological effects were considered as well (Gammermanand Grom, 1976). Herbal medicine products have becomepopular over the past decade and they are widely used forthe treatment and prevention of various diseases. However,safety and efficacy of herbal medicine should be confirmed.Utilization of knowledge about positive pharmacological effectsof edible plants included in in a pharmacopeia is oneof probably safe and effective way for development offunctional products with new beneficial effects (Kunakova et al.,2011).Searching for new food supplements is essential. Systematicexplorations of pharmacopoeial plants are one particularlyrelevant opportunity in Eastern Europe, especially in thoseareas which, for historical reasons, remain relatively isolated.The use and importance of Russian medicinal plants remainslargely unknown in the West. The aim of this review is tosummarize data about species that are referenced in the RussianPharmacopoeia and about their health food value with a primaryfocus on literature published in Russian.OVERVIEW OF SPECIES FROM THERUSSIAN PHARMACOPOEIA USED ASFOODSFor centuries the multinational population of Russia has usedplants in daily diet and for self-medication. The beneficial effectsof plants were carefully collected by "knowledgeable experts"(znahar = "znakhar'"in Russian) and recorded in chroniclesand manuscripts. In 1778, Russia was among the first countriesto implement a national pharmacopeia: The PharmacopoeiaRossica in St. Petersburg. This work contains 770 monographs,of which 316 texts are on herbal medicinal preparations (Shikovet al., 2014a).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org November 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 841268Shikov et al. Food, Wild Plants, Russian PharmacopoeiaSince 1990, the Russian Federation has followed theState Pharmacopoeia of the USSR (1990) 11th edition.This Pharmacopeia includes 83 individual monographsfor plants describing 119 species. There are 26 Rosaceae,12 Compositae (syn. Asteraceae), eight Lamiaceae, sixPolygonaceae, four each of the Apiaceae, Betulaceae, Ericaceae,and Malvaceae species, three representatives each of theSolanaceae, Leguminosae (Fabaceae), and Plantaginaceae,two species each of the Adoxaceae (Caprifoliaceae),Asparagaceae (Liliaceae, s.l), Araliaceae Fagaceae, Gentianaceae,Hypericaceae, Laminariaceae, Pinaceae, Rhamnaceae, andViolaceae, and one member each of the Acoraceae (Araceae),Brassicaceae, Caprifoliaceae (Valerianaceae), Crassulaceae,Cucurbitaceae, Cupressaceae, Equisetaceae, Hymenochaetaceae,Linaceae, Menyanthaceae, Myrtaceae, Papaveraceae, poaceae,Polemoniaceae, Ranunculaceae, Rubiaceae, Saxifragaceae,Schisandraceae, and Urticaceae, respectively.In the most of monographs, just one species is described asa source of plant material. However, 13 species are approvedfor Fructus rosae, 11 species are approved for Fructus crataegi,two species are approved for Herba hyperici, Fructus alni, Herbaviolae etc. Different parts are described for Viburnum opulus L.(Cortex viburni as diuretic and Fructus viburni as diaphoreticand anti-inflammatory) and Crataegus (Flos crataegi-13 speciesand Fructus crataegi-11 species for cardiovascular problems).The large majority of species included in the RussianPharmacopoeia (98 out of 119) are known to have been usedas food by local population in Russia. For a majority of species,the part of plant used in food and as a medicine is the same.For example, the aerial parts of Origanum vulgare L., Thymusserpyllum L., Leonurus cardiaca L., are used as a medicine andas a food. Acorns and leaves of Quercus robur L. and Q. petraea(Matt.) Liebl. are used in food, while oak bark is used as amedicine. Fruits and bark of Viburnum opulus L. are used asmedicine, with only the fruits being edible. Roots and rhizomesof Acorus calamus L., Taraxacum campylodes G.E.Haglund (syn.Taraxacum officinale L.), and Aralia elata (Miq.) Seem. are usedas a medicine while young sprouts, leaves, flowers and fruits areused in food. The aerial parts of Equisetum arvense L. are usedin medicine, while its cone-bearing shoots and black nodulesattached to the roots are eaten raw in spring.In general, considering all 98 edible plant species in theRussian Pharmacopoeia 11th edition, a higher number of plantparts are used in nutrition as compared to medicine. In thecontext of this article, the term "wild medicinal plants" referringsmainly to non-cultivated species. Twenty one plants includingCalendula officinalis L., Eucalyptus viminalis Labill., Pimpinellaanisum L., Zea mays L., and some others do not occur inRussia outside of cultivation and are excluded from this review.All poisonous and toxic species are not used in food as suchas the species belonging to the Solanaceae (Atropa belladonnaL., Datura stramonium L., Hyoscyamus niger L.), Asparagaceae(Convallaria majalis L., Convallaria keiskei Miq. ), Rhamnaceae(Frangula alnus Mill., Rhamnus cathartica L.), Ranunculaceae(Adonis vernalis L.), Papaveraceae (Chelidonium majus L.) andsome species from the newly circumscribed Plantaginaceae(Digitalis purpurea L., Digitalis grandifloraMill. ).Consumer andmarketing studies invariably showed that taste,as opposed to perceived nutrition or health value is the keyinfluence on food selection (Drewnowski and Gomez-Carneros,2000). Sensitized to the astringent taste of tannins or some bitterpoisons, humans reject foods that are perceived to be excessivelyastringent or bitter. Polemonium caeruleum L. (Polemoniaceae),Rubia tinctorum L. (Rubiaceae), Alnus incana (L.) Moench andAlnus glutinosa (L.) Gaertn. (Betulaceae) are not considered tobe edible due to their taste, as well as Gnaphalium uliginosum L.and Bidens tripartita L. (Asteraceae) which, however, are withoutany strong taste.Edible wild species included in the Russian Pharmacopoeiahave a wide range of uses: expectorant, diuretic, astringent,haemostatic, bitterness and choleretic, anti-inflammatory,diaphoretic, tonic, sedative, spasmolytic, polyvitamin,cardiovascular, and antihelminthic (Table 1).Plants with expectorant properties alleviate the symptoms ofpatients in certain stages of bronchitis or tracheitis. Beneficialexpectorant effects are mentioned for nine edible wild species.Certain edible species (nine species) are natural diuretics.Astringent species (eight species) provide not only specifictaste for wine, tea, and other beverages due to high tanninscontent, but are effective in stopping the flow of blood or othersecretions, and resolve diarrhea. Bitterness and choleretic herbs(seven species) are useful for development of functional foodswith digestion-enhancing properties. The haemostatic effectsof herbs (six species) are often due to mechanisms such astannin astringency rather than enhancement of coagulation,although there are a few haemostatic herbs have been shownto reduce clotting times and have inhibitory effects on thePlatelet Aggregation Factor. Four species included in the RussianPharmacopoeia are used for their anti-inflammatory action.In the last decades, so-called natural anti-inflammatory dietshave gained popularity (Sears, 2015). Diaphoretic herbs (fourspecies) induce involuntary perspiration and thus reduce fever,promote circulation, relieve muscle tension, aching joints, andinflammatory skin conditions. These herbs are used as wellto relieve diarrhea, dysentery, kidney nephritis, liver, urinary,and gall bladder. Tonic herbs (four species) as supplement tofood are consumed throughout the world on a daily basis topromote radiant health and are included in many beverages.Motherwort and valerian provide mild sedative effects. Thespecies with spasmolytic effects (two species) are noticeableas components of diets for treatment of gastro-intestinalailments.Hawthorn berries and flowers are useful for the creationof functional products with cardiovascular properties.Antihelmintic properties of tansy are complementary to itscholeretic effects. The well documented anxiolytic effect of L.cardiaca L. may lead to the development of antistress functionalfood products. Increased access to information throughsystematic evaluation of medicinal plants and its nutritionalproperties will support the generation of ideas for functionalfood with new value added properties.Underground parts like roots, shoots and leafy greens, berriesand other fleshy fruits, seeds, and other species commonly yieldwild-harvested foods, a practice which is based on specializedFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org November 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 841269Shikov et al.