The most representative enzyme-ligandcomplexes were reported in Figures 2-4.Apigenin has been previously reported to inhibit both AChEand BChE by IC50 of 7.72 micro/Mol (Balkis et al., 2015) and37.4 micro/Mol (Katalinic' et al., 2010), respectively. The bestdocked pose interacts with AChE in the binding pocked byestablishing two hydrogen bonds to Glu199 and Ser122 andtwo pi-pi stacks to Phe330 and Trp 84 with a docking scoreof -9.607 and a binding energy of -60.64 Kcal/Mol. Apigeninalso interacts with several residues present in the binding pocketof BChE forming two hydrogen bonds to Thr120 and Glu197with a docking score of -9.459 and a binding energy of -52.54kcal/Mol. Also, considering the abundance in the ethyl acetateand methanol extracts, apigenin could be also responsible for theamylase and glucosidase inhibiting activity. Indeed, it has beenpreviously reported that apigenin was an efficacious inhibitor ofa-glucosidase with a IC50 of and a moderate a-amylase inhibitorwith a IC50 of 10.5 u/Mol (Zeng et al., 2016).Apigenin interacts with a-glucosidase by forming twohydrogen bonds to Asp215 and Gln353 and with the enzymaticcavity of a-amylase by forming three hydrogen bonds to Gln63,His299, and Glu233. The aqueous extract has shown a strongactivity toward tyrosinase. Themost abundant substances presentin the extracts are benzoic acid, luteolin and quercetin. All ofthese substances have been demonstrated to have an tyrosinaseinhibitory activity in in vitro experiments (IC50= quercetin 0.13mM) (Chen and Kubo, 2002). However, benzoic acid reporteda scarce docking score (-5.1) and a positive binding energy(+41.7 Kcal/Mol) which indicate none or very little affinity forthe binding pocket of the enzyme, whereas the luteolin andquercetin have obtained the best binding energy. (-28 Kcal/Moland-29.31 Kcal/Mol, respectively).However, it is noteworthy to highlight that the plant extractscontain several phenolic compounds which in less extent areable to inhibit the tested enzymes all with non-competitivemechanism as demonstrated in our previous paper (Picot et al.,2017). Inhibitory action of the plant extracts on AChE, BChE,tyrosinase, a-amylase, and a-glucosidase might be due to theconcerted action of several phenolic compounds rather than asingle molecule.DNA Protective EffectsVarious stress factors, such as oxidative stress, acid, alkaline,UV, and heavy metals can damage DNA. ROS formed byhydroxyl radicals cause DNA strand breakage that is broughtabout carcinogenesis, mutagenesis and cytotoxicity (Golla andBhimathati, 2014). Here, we targeted to measure the DNAdamage by Fenton reaction-mediated oxidative stress. Fenton'sreagent (Fe2+ + H2O2 - Fe3+ + OH- + .OH) produces thehighly deleterious hydroxyl radicals that damage the cellularcomponents, such as DNA, lipid and proteins. The scavengingeffect of extract was tested in plasmid nicking assay. Figure 5illustrates the DNA protection activity of theOnonis extracts withtwo different concentrations (5 and 10 mg/ml). Ononis extractedin water (10 mg/ml) had the most effective on protectionof DNA with 78%, followed by water (5 mg/ml) (70%) andmethanol extract with 5mg/ml (53%). Except for the ethyl acetateextract (5 and 10 mg/ml), water and methanol extracts protectedsupercoiled form of pDNA and indicated DNA protectionactivity.FIGURE 6 | Cells morphology of HeLA and PC3 cancer cell lines after application of different extracts of Ononis natrix. Control and different concentrations of extractswere tested in HeLA or PC3 cancer cell lines and indicated for each figures.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 600327Yerlikaya et al. A Multidirectional Perspective on Ononis natrix subsp. hispanicaIn the present study, the water extract had the most protectionactivity on DNA. This can be arisen from availability of differentmetabolites in water extract. Quercetin and sinapic acid areonly metabolites which found in this extract. So, it can beconcluded that these chemicals may be responsible for protectionof DNA from Fenton reagent. Like water extract, the methanolextract also contained specific metabolite, such as rosmarinicacid. In this sense, the observed DNA protection ability for themethanol extract can be arisen from presence of higher amountof rosmarinic acid. Therefore, it seems that different ingredientsof the extracts may cause formation of DNA protection propertyfor the tested extracts. According to DNA protection assayresults, water extract ofOnonis natrix showed themost protectiveactivity for DNA. This result may be explained by determinationof phenolic components in the extracts using HPLC analysis. Asindicated inTable 4, rosmarinic acid and quercetin were themostdissolved components in methanol and water extracts of Ononisnatrix, respectively. So, it can be concluded that rosmarinicacid and quercetin can be considered as potential chemicalsfor protection of DNA from free radicals, hydroxyl radicalsand mutagens. Quercetin is a well-investigated antioxidantknown as promising molecule for pharmacological studies. In acomprehensive research for DNA protection ability of quercetin,its supplementation indicated protection of nuclear DNA fromoxidative damage and significant genoprotective activity onmitochondrial DNA (Potenza et al., 2008). In a different study,three polyphenolic compounds including luteolin, quercetinand rosmarinic acid, were investigated for their protectiveeffects against oxidative DNA damage (Silva et al., 2008).They found that all of these phenolics were protection agentsagainst oxidative stress-induced DNA damage. In another search,protective activity of pure rosmarinic acid and elagic acid wereevaluated. It has been found that they have equal effect ondeclining AAPH-induced oxidative DNA damage (Vattem et al.,2006). These results are in accord with our study indicating thatmethanol and water extracts of Ononis natrix can be consideredFIGURE 7 | Cell viability assay (MTT) analysis of HeLA and PC3 cancer cell lines after application of different extracts of Ononis natrix. White bars and striped barsindicate controls and significantly different applications, respectively.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 600328Yerlikaya et al. A Multidirectional Perspective on Ononis natrix subsp. hispanicaas valuable DNA protectors because of presence of rosmarinicacid and quercetin.Cytotoxic EffectsThe cytotoxic effects of Ononis natrix on the survival of HeLaand PC3 cells were determined by MTT cell viability assay. HeLacervical cancer cell line and PC3 prostate cancer cell line weretreated with these extracts with different concentrations for 24 h.Cells morphology was observed under inverted microscope andillustrated in Figure 6. According to morphological appearance,there was no significant apoptotic effect onOnonis natrix extractsfor HeLa cell line. However, the water and methanol extractscaused initiation of apoptosis for PC3 cell line. To indicate effectof three extracts on cancer cell lines, cell viability assay (MTT)was also conducted. Although there was a cytotoxic activity forHeLa cells after application of the water extract, no significantdecline was observed in cancer cell numbers compared tocontrol (Figure 7). On the other hand, 2.5mg water extract,1mg methanol extract and 0.1 ug ethyl acetate extract caused asignificant cell number reduction on PC3 cancer line (Figure 7).Ethyl acetate extract indicated cytotoxic activity with the smallestconcertation (0.1 ug) among all extracts. 2.5mg of the waterextract showed dose-independent cytotoxic effect on PC3 cell linesince there was no effect for 5mg and 10mg water extracts. Ithas been considered that concentration of water extract morethan 2.5mg may be toxic against healthy or normal viable cells.Thus, it can be concluded that 2.5mg is amoderate concentrationfor cytotoxicity on PC3 cancer cell line. It was also monitoredthat other treatments had cytotoxic effect whereas, they were notsignificantly different from control sample anymore.According to reports, about 60% of anticancer drugs areisolated from plant-derived natural compounds. These medicinalplants highly contain polyphenolic compounds which areactually inhibitors for cancer development (Sukumaran et al.,2016). Cytotoxic and apoptotic effects of the studied extractson HeLa and PC3 cell lines were investigated. Although therewas no significant variation on HeLa cells, 2.5mg of water and1mg methanol extracts leaded to cytotoxic activity comparedto control in PC3. Some of phenolic compounds show anti-proliferative effect which depends on polarity of compounds.Cytotoxic effect of methanol extract can be explained withthe presence of rosmarinic acid, apigenin, and epicatechin.Effect of anti-carcinogenic and scavenging of reactive oxygenradicals of rosmaniric acid were particularly searched in Perillafrutescens (Osakabe et al., 2004). The body's response to cancershowed parallel effects with the inflammatory response. Since,inflammatory cytokine networks may affect survival, growth,mutation, proliferation, differentiation and relocation of tumorand stromal cells (David, 1988; Balkwill and Mantovani, 2001;Osakabe et al., 2004). Rosmaniric acid is a water-solublepolyphenolic compound and has function on inhibition ofangiogenesis (Huang and Zheng, 2006). There was a potentialevidence that ROS acts as initiating angiogenesis and onsetof cancer mechanism. It was proved that hydrogen peroxidestimulated angiogenesis in vitro condition (Shono et al., 1996;Yasuda et al., 1999; Huang and Zheng, 2006). Rosmaniric acidreduced ROS expression, hydrogen peroxide level and VEGF(Vascular Endothelial Growth Factor) level that are importanton cancer development (Huang and Zheng, 2006). Furthermore,the previous report which indicated effect of methanolic extractof plant species on antioxidant activity and examination of levelof rosmaniric acid (Tepe, 2008). In addition, in our previousstudy, three extracts (ethyl acetate, methanol and water) of twoPotentilla species (Potentilla reptans and P. speciosa) showedcytotoxic activity against A549 andMCF-7 due to some phenoliccompounds (Uysal et al., 2017). The findings of this analysissuggest that one or more than one phenolic compounds andtheir interaction may cause initiation of apoptosis in cancer celllines. However, further investigation should be performed in invivo test to arrive at a definite judgment for inhibition of cancerdevelopment.Antimicrobial EffectsAntimicrobial activity of the extracts from O. natrix subsp.hispanica were searched against to 13 bacteria and 1 fungusby the disk diffusion method. The extracts were loaded thedisks at the concentration of 10, 50, and 100 mg. According toresults, 50 and 100mg of methanol and ethyl acetate extractsshowed the best antibacterial effect against to Staphylococcusaureus ATCC 25923 and Staphylococcus epidermidis strains(Figure 8). In addition, 100mg water extracts had a small effecton Salmonella kentucky. It was realized that extracts possessedmore protective effect against to gram positive bacteria strains. Inaddition, concentration-dependent effect was also observed. Forexample, S. epidermis stain was more sensitive against to 100mgof methanol and ethyl acetate extracts than 50mg ones. Methanoland ethyl acetate extracts ofO. natrix subsp. hispanica were moreeffective than water extract for antimicrobial analysis. The resultsof this analysis support the idea that because of higher totalphenolic and flavonoid contents of methanol and ethyl acetateFIGURE 8 | Antimicrobial activity of methanol, ethyl acetate and water extractsof Ononis natrix against to S. aureus ATCC 25923, S. epidermidis andS. kentucky.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 600329Yerlikaya et al. A Multidirectional Perspective on Ononis natrix subsp. hispanicaextracts, they indicated more antimicrobial activity than waterone.Staphylococcus aureus (ATCC 25923) is a gram positivebacterium and causes several human infections and leads tosanitary problems. S. aureus also shows resistance to someantibiotics and drugs particularly to methicillin (Hannan et al.,2008). Resistance problems induced to researchers to tend forseeking novel therapy. S. epidermidis together with S. aureuslead to severe infectious diseases (Otto, 2009). S. epidermidis ismore being tend to cause infectious diseases due to developingpersistent infection on human skin (Otto, 2009). Researchersare seeking the mechanisms by which S. epidermidis promotesdiseases (Otto, 2009). In a study of Sayari et al. (2016)Ononis natrix leaves extracts were tested against to 9 bacterialstrains (5 gram-negative and 4 gram-positive). Consistentlywith our study, S. aureus were the most susceptible againstto Ononis natrix leaves extracts. In another study, S. aureus(ATCC 25923), and E. coli (ATCC 25922) were found to havemore sensitivity against the Ononis natrix essential oils withinhibition zone as 27 and 25, respectively (Elamrani and Benaissa,2010).CONCLUSIONIn recent years, pharmaceuticals and functional ingredients fromplant sources have been of paramount interest. In this sense,chemical profile and biological abilities of O. natrix subsp.hispanica were investigated in the current work. As far aswe aware, this work is the first report on this species. Thetested extracts, especially ethyl acetate and methanol, exhibitednotable biological effects correlated with higher levels of bioactivecompounds. The results obtained from the present work providea new framework for utilization of the genus Ononis and as aresult, O. natrix subp. hispanica could be suggested as a naturalsource of bioactive agents, such as antioxidant, antimicrobial andanticancer. We hope that our research will serve a base for futurestudies for in vivo and bioavailability studies on O. natrix subsp.hispanica.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSSY, GZ, MB, and YC set up and carried out experiments. AM andAA executed data analysis.REFERENCESAlbayrak, S., Aksoy, A., Sagdic, O., and Hamzaoglu, E. (2010).Compositions, antioxidant and antimicrobial activities of Helichrysum(Asteraceae) species collected from Turkey. Food Chem. 119, 114-122.doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2009.06.003Al-Rehaily, A. J., Shamim Ahmad, M., Yousaf, M., Iqrar Khan, S., Mustafa, J.,Tekwani, B. L., et al. (2014). Bioactive chemical constituents of Ononis natrix.J. Chem. Soc. Pak. 36, 1114-1121.Amessis-Ouchemoukh, N., Ouchemoukh, S., Meziant, N., Idiri, Y., Hernanz,D., Stinco, C. M., et al. (2017). Bioactive metabolites involved in theantioxidant, anticancer and anticalpain activities of Ficus carica L., Ceratoniasiliqua L. and Quercus ilex L. extracts. Ind. Crops Prod. 95, 6-17.doi: 10.1016/j.indcrop.2016.10.007Amoah, S. K., Sandjo, L. P., Kratz, J. M., and Biavatti, M. W. (2016).Rosmarinic acid-pharmaceutical and clinical aspects. PlantaMed. 82, 388-406.doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1568274Balkis, A., Tran, K., Lee, Y. Z., and Ng, K. (2015). Screening flavonoids forinhibition of acetylcholinesterase identified baicalein as the most potentinhibitor. J. Agric. Sci. 7, 26-35. doi: 10.5539/jas.v7n9p26Balkwill, F., andMantovani, A. (2001). Inflammation and cancer: back to Virchow?Lancet 357, 539-545. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(00)04046-0Baytop, T. (1999). Therapy with Medicinal Plants in Turkey (Past and Present).Istanbul: Nobel Tip Basimevi.Berman, H. M., Westbrook, J., Feng, Z., Gilliland, G., Bhat, T. N., Weissig,H., et al. (2000). The protein data bank. Nucleic Acids Res. 28, 235-242.doi: 10.1093/nar/28.1.235Bouhlali, E. D. T., Ramchoun, M., Alem, C., Ghafoor, K., Ennassir, J., andZegzouti, Y. F. (2017).