9:299.doi: 10.3389/fphar.2018.00299Greater Celandine's Ups andDowns-21 Centuries of MedicinalUses of Chelidonium majus From theViewpoint of Today's PharmacologySylwia Zielin'ska 1, Anna Jezierska-Domaradzka 1,2, Magdalena Wojciak-Kosior 3,Ireneusz Sowa 3, Adam Junka 4 and Adam M. Matkowski 1,2*1 Pharmaceutical Biology and Botany, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 2 Botanical Garden of Medicinal Plants,Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, Poland, 3 Analytical Chemistry, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland,4 Pharmaceutical Microbiology and Parasitology, Wroclaw Medical University, Wroclaw, PolandAs antique as Dioscorides era are the first records on using Chelidonium as a remedy toseveral sicknesses. Inspired by the "signatura rerum" principle and an apparent ancientfolk tradition, various indications were given, such as anti-jaundice and cholagogue,pain-relieving, and quite often mentioned--ophthalmological problems. Central andEastern European folk medicine has always been using this herb extensively. In thisregion, the plant is known under many unique vernacular names, especially in Slavoniclanguages, associated or not with old Greek relation to "chelidon"--the swallow. Typicallyfor Papaveroidae subfamily, yellow-colored latex is produced in abundance and leaksintensely upon injury. Major pharmacologically relevant components, most of which werefirst isolated over a century ago, are isoquinoline alkaloids--berberine, chelerythrine,chelidonine, coptisine, sanguinarine. Modern pharmacology took interest in this herbbut it has not ended up in gaining an officially approved and evidence-based herbalmedicine status. On the contrary, the number of relevant studies and publicationstended to drop. Recently, some controversial reports and sometimes insufficientlyproven studies appeared, suggesting anticancer properties. Anticancer potential wasin line with anecdotical knowledge spread in East European countries, however, in theabsence of directly-acting cytostatic compounds, some other mechanisms might beinvolved. Other properties that could boost the interest in this herb are antimicrobialand antiviral activities. Being a common synanthropic weed or ruderal plant, C. majusspreads in all temperate Eurasia and acclimates well to North America. Little is knownabout the natural variation of bioactive metabolites, including several aforementionedisoquinoline alkaloids. In this review, we put together older and recent literature dataon phytochemistry, pharmacology, and clinical studies on C. majus aiming at a criticalevaluation of state-of-the-art from the viewpoint of historical and folk indications. Thecontroversies around this herb, the safety and drug quality issues and a prospective rolein phytotherapy are discussed as well.Keywords: isoquinoline alkaloids, chelidonine, chelerythrine, cytotoxic, anti-inflammatory, anti-microbial164Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majusINTRODUCTION"No less extraordinary is the property of the herb Celandine;which, it is said, if any man shall have this herb, with the heartof a Mole, he shall overcome all his enemies, all matters in suit,and shall put away all debate," and "if before named herb beput upon the head of a sick man, if he shall die, he shall singanon with a loud voice, if not, he shall weep"; and "it bringeththe business begun to an end," so wrote Albertus Magnus inthirteenth century A.D. (Best and Brightman, 1999). Nowadays,mankind would definitely benefit from such a miraculousremedy. Unfortunately, such claims about Chelidonium majusL.--the Greater Celandine, have not been verified according tothe modern evidence-based approach (but no data on rigoroustesting toward such properties actually exist in the literature).However, through years of investigations, many other propertiesascribed to this inconspicuous but characteristic plant have beenconfirmed or re-discovered. Several others could not be positivelyconfirmed. Despite the widespread use in folk medicine and inofficial phytotherapy, both in Europe and in Traditional ChineseMedicine, the celandine herb did not join themost popular herbalremedies such as chamomile, valerian, St. John's wort or ginseng.It has been listed in pharmacopeias and sold in pharmaciesin parallel to the spontaneous collection by people seekingdrugs against gastrointestinal disorders, cancer, infections, butespecially against warts and any skin protuberances. This wasthe reason to combine the available historical and ethnobotanicaldata with the state-of-the art in pharmacology of C. majus andits components in the present review (Supplementary Figure 1).To date, only a couple of papers have provided review ofpharmacological and phytochemical knowledge with the EMAassessment report from 2011 (European Medicines Agency,2011) and the review (Gilca et al., 2010), being the mostrecent and comprehensive ones. Biswas (2013) has publisheda short review with overview of selected bioactivities butonly covering a fraction of available literature and suggestingfuture directions of research. Similar approach to review theC. majus properties was used by Arora and Sharma (2013) whosummarized some activities based on selected literature andincluded pharmacognostic characteristics. Gilca et al. (2010) hasclassified the pharmacological evidence into the categories relatedto traditional usage, also from the viewpoint of the TCM, such asanti-infectious, spasmolytic, gastric and hepatic, and anticancer.They also listed traditional indications that had not beenconfirmed by modern research, such as diuretic, anti-edema,expectorant and antitussive, pulmonary, and ophthalmologicaldiseases. Some current information is also available in herbalbooks and compendia (Wichtl, 2004) or in the Internet. The lattersource is of course difficult to verify.Therefore, we chose to include a possibly high number ofavailable literature, by selecting records from database search(PubMed, Scopus, Google Scholar) with the term "chelidonium"or "celandine" and manually eliminating papers pertaining tofield botany, ecology and other aspects not relevant to medicinaluse of this plant. Some references that have been reviewed earlier(e.g., in Colombo and Bosisio, 1996) were also not cited directlyif the information was redundant. Some information about thehistorical applications and folk medicine in Central and EasternEurope were obtained from sources available in local libraries. Inparticular, we describe the phytochemical composition of variousparts of the plant, the methods used for obtaining extracts andanalysis of the herbal material. Further, we critically summarizethe most credible research on bioactivity and clinical efficacy ofvarious products and substances from C. majus. In addition, thehighly debated and controversial issue of the patented, apparentlysemi-synthetic drug NSC-631570 (Ukrain R(c)) promotedmainly asa cancer cure was discussed (Ernst and Schmidt, 2005). With thisreview, we hope to encourage more research and attract interestto this quite common but not always adequately respected weed.BOTANICAL DESCRIPTIONC. majus L. (Papaveraceae1) is a short-lived hemicryptophyte. Ithas up to 1m high stem, branched and sparsely pubescent. Thealternately placed leaves are light bluish at the bottom and greenat the top. The basal leaves are long-petioled, with the obovatedin contour, pinnatosected leaflets with 5-7 lobed segments. Theapical leaves are short-petioled, with 3-lobed leaflet. From Aprilto October the plant produces umbellate inflorescences with 2-6 flowers, which have 4 bright yellow petals and two whitish,early dropping sepals. The fruit is an elongated (3 cm), pod-shaped, multiseeded capsule, dehiscent with two valves. Theseeds are shiny, ovate and dark brown or black, with elaiosomes.The underground part is a short tap root with numerous andelongated lateral roots. The whole plant contains yellow to orangelatex.C. majus grows in the lowlands and foothills in leafy forests,in brushwood, parks, gardens, on the roadsides and aroundbuildings. It prefers moist soils rich in nitrogen and organicmatter (Zarzycki et al., 2002).Distribution AreaC. majus is native in Europe, western and central part of Asiaand in northern Africa. It occurs from Portugal in the West, toCentral, Eastern to Northern Europe. The Asian range coversTurkey, Iran, Kazakhstan, Mongolia, Caucasus, and Siberia. InNorth America it is an introduced plant.Taxonomy and NomenclatureUntil the mid-twentieth century the genus Chelidonium L.was monotypic with C. majus L. as the only species. In 1982Krahulcowa based on cytotaxonomic study of C. majus L.sensu lato, proposed to divide the genus into two microspecies.She proposed C. majus L. (2n = 12) distributed in Europe,Siberia, and China and a new species C. asiaticum (Hara)Krahulcova (2n = 10), an East Asian vicariant (Krahulcova,1982). Aside from the difference in chromosome numbers anddistribution area, C. asiaticum slightly differs morphologicallyfrom C. majus. It is more hairy, with narrower and sharper leaflobes. Within C. majus she distinguished European C. majus L.subsp. majus with more laciniate lobes of leaves, and C. majus.1The Plant List. Available online at: http://www.theplantlist.org/1.1/browse/A/Papaveraceae/Chelidonium/ (Accessed Sept 29, 2017).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299165Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majussubsp. grandiflorum (DC.) Printz, in South Siberia and China(Krahulcova, 1982). (Krahulcova, 1982) Name of the genus derives from Greek(khelidonion) with chelidon (khelidon) meaning swallow (a bird)for the plant usually blooms simultaneously with arrival of thesebirds. The specific epithetmajus in Latin means bigger.Common English name: Greater celandine.The name celandine originates from Medieval Latin wordcelidonia, a phonetic variant of Latin chelidonia, which wasrecorded by Pliny. Similarly, the German name, Schollkraut,comes from Schellkraut (Bauhin, 1651), which is derived fromLatin-Greek chelidonium (Waniakowa, 2015).Common and Folk Names in Some EuropeanLanguagesAlbanian--latrapeci, bar saraleku; Belarussian--padtynnik,barodaunik (wart herb); Bosnian--rosopas; Bulgarian--zmiyskomlako; Croatian--zmijino mlijeko, rosopas; Czech--vlastovicVnik, celadona, celduneV, cen dalie, dravnicovina,hadi mlicV, krkavnik; Dutch--stinkende gouwe; English--Tetterwort, devils's milk, rock poppy; French--grandechelidoine Eclair, herbe aux boucs, herbe a l'hirondelle;German--Schollkraut, Gilbkraut, Goldwurz, Schwalbenkraut,Warzenkraut; Italian--celidonia, cinerognola, Montenegrin--rusopas, rusa; Polish--glistnik jaskolcze-ziele, celidonia,cyndalia, cencylja, glistewnik, glis'nik, niebospad, zloty groszek,zlotnik, zolte ziele, zolte kwiatki, roztopas'c'; Ukrainian--hladyshnyk, hnystnyk, zhovtyi molochay, smetannyk, chystotil;Romanian: rostopascaV; Russian--chistotel; Rusyn--rostopast';Serbian--rusopas, rusa, rusomacVa; Spanish--Golondrinera,Hierba de las verrugas (wart herb).Chelidonium majus IN FOLK MEDICINEHistory of UsageC. majus has been known as medicinal species since the veryAntiquity. Medicinal properties of C. majus were describedby Dioscorides and Pliny the Elder in the first century AD.Dioscorides in De Materia Medica states that celandine beginsto blossom when the swallows arrive and withers when theydepart. He also refers to a lore saying that swallows restore sightto their blind nestlings with use of celandine (Osbaldeston andWood, 2000). Pliny the Elder repeats these accounts in NaturalisHistoriae (Jones, 1966).The foremost medicinal use of celandine, described since theancient times until the sixteenth century, was treating visualimpairment and eye diseases. For such conditions, Dioscoridesadvised to use herb juice, boiled with honey in a brass vessel.The juice could also be dried in the shade and the resulting smallpellets were ingredients of other medicinal products. Accordingto Dioscurides celandine soaked in wine together with anisefruits was helpful in treating jaundice and dermatologic disorderssuch as herpes. Besides, chewing on a root relieved toothache(Osbaldeston and Wood, 2000). Pliny advised a kind of eyelotion, which takes its name, chelidonia, from the name of theplant (Jones, 1966).Celandine was an admired medicinal plant during the MiddleAges, mostly used to cure eye diseases, for throat cleansing,treatment of ulcers and skin eczema as well as against colicand jaundice (Mayer et al., 2003). In 1080, French monkand physician Odo Magdunensis wrote De viribus herbarum,also known as Macer floridus, a botanical poem describingmedical effects of 77 plants. One of the chapters of M.floridus deals with medicinal application of celandine in "visualimpairment as well as skin and liver conditions" (Mayer et al.,2003). Hildegard of Bingen wrote about celandine in her workLiber subtilitatum diversarum naturarum creaturarum createdduring 1150-1160A.D. and finally published in 1533. Hildegardrecommended celandine juice to enhance sight and juice mixedwith tallow as a cure for skin ulcer (Mayer et al., 2003).Moreover, celandine would be a strong aphrodisiacum, butcausing infertility on ladies. Breathing the smell of the plant byspouses prevents arguments. Celandine was also recommendedby to treat jaundice and against hair overgrowth (Czekan'ski,2007).Since the sixteenth century, according to Paracelsus'ssignature doctrine, celandine was used to treat jaundice andliver diseases (Rostanski, 1997). C. majus was described incomprehensive botanical medical works of scholars such as:Joannes Minoritanus, Marcello Vergili, Hieronymus Bock,Leonhard Fuchs, Pierandrea Matthioli, and Adam Lonicer.The authors refer to antique sources and recommend usingcelandine to treat eye and skin conditions. According to Lonicer,to cure various dermatologic diseases, known in those days as"leprosy," the juice of the root of celandine had to be applied onthe skin, conjointly with drinking the juice mixed with syrup ofcommon fumitory (Fumaria officinalis) twice a day for 9 days(Mayer et al., 2003). At the turn of the sixteenth and seventeenthcentury two large works on herbs and their applications werewritten in Poland. The first is Herbarz Polski by Marcin ofUrz ,edowo, printed in 1595 and the second is Herbal by SimonSyrenius, published in 1613. Marcin of Urz ,edowo described,based on works of Dioscorides, uses of celandine to treat eyediseases, jaundice, wounds, toothache, and colic. To cure sightimpairment, herb juice boiled with honey or pellets made ofjuice dried in shade should be used. Cataract, on the other hand,should be treated with juice draining from a broken stem orroot of the plant. In case of jaundice, root of celandine shouldbe boiled in white wine and the decoction should be drunk fora few days. The crashed root with wine was drunk to treat colicand applied on wounds. Applying a piece of root of celandine toan aching tooth, relieved the pain (Marcin of Urz ,edowo, 1595).Simon Syrenius, described celandine-based recipes used ineye diseases. The main ingredient of such medicines is freshcelandine juice. As one of the few authors, Syrenius consideredthe juice irritative and therefore recommended mixing it withsmall amounts of vinegar, milk, or rose water. He also adviseddrinking a decoction of celandine roots cooked in wine withanise or a mixture of powdered root with vinegar before bedtimeto treat jaundice, colic, and stomach ache. In case of toothachehe advised to rub teeth with powdered root with vinegar. Bodyulcers and scabs on the head skin can be cured with a salve ofpowdered rootmixedwith pork fat and vinegar. Alternatively, theFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299166Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majuspowdered root alone could be put directly on the ulcers.