Haris Saslis-Lagoudakis,Natural History Museum of Denmark,Denmark*Correspondence:Hugo de Boerhugo.deboer@nhm.uio.noSpecialty section:This article was submitted toEthnopharmacology,a section of the journalFrontiers in PharmacologyReceived: 23 April 2017Accepted: 31 May 2017Published: 19 June 2017Citation:Raclariu AC, Mocan A, Popa MO,Vlase L, Ichim MC, Crisan G,Brysting AK and de Boer H (2017)Veronica officinalis ProductAuthentication UsingDNA Metabarcoding and HPLC-MSReveals Widespread Adulteration withVeronica chamaedrys.Front. Pharmacol. 8:378.doi: 10.3389/fphar.2017.00378Veronica officinalis ProductAuthentication Using DNAMetabarcoding and HPLC-MSReveals Widespread Adulterationwith Veronica chamaedrysAncuta C. Raclariu1,2, Andrei Mocan3,4, Madalina O. Popa2, Laurian Vlase5,Mihael C. Ichim2, Gianina Crisan3, Anne K. Brysting6 and Hugo de Boer1,7*1 Plant Evolution and Metabarcoding Group, Natural History Museum, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 2 Stejarul ResearchCentre for Biological Sciences, National Institute of Research and Development for Biological Sciences (NIRDBS), PiatraNeamt,, Romania, 3 Department of Pharmaceutical Botany, Faculty of Pharmacy, Iuliu Hatieganu University of Medicine andPharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 4 ICHAT and Institute for Life Sciences, University of Agricultural Sciences and VeterinaryMedicine of Cluj-Napoca, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 5 Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Biopharmaceutics, IuliuHatieganu University of Medicine and Pharmacy, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, 6 Department of Biosciences, Centre for Ecologicaland Evolutionary Synthesis (CEES), University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway, 7 Department of Organismal Biology, EvolutionaryBiology Centre, Uppsala University, Uppsala, SwedenStudying herbal products derived from local and traditional knowledge and their valuechains is one of the main challenges in ethnopharmacology. The majority of theseproducts have a long history of use, but non-harmonized trade and differences inregulatory policies between countries impact their value chains and lead to concernsover product efficacy, safety and quality. Veronica officinalis L. (common speedwell),a member of Plantaginaceae family, has a long history of use in European traditionalmedicine, mainly in central eastern Europe and the Balkans. However, no specifiedcontrol tests are available either to establish the quality of derived herbal products orfor the discrimination of its most common substitute, V. chamaedrys L. (germanderspeedwell). In this study, we use DNA metabarcoding and high performance liquidchromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS) to authenticate sixteenV. officinalis herbal products and compare the potential of the two approaches todetect substitution, adulteration and the use of unreported constituents. HPLC-MSshowed high resolution in detecting phytochemical target compounds, but did notenable detection of specific plant species in the products. DNA metabarcoding detectedV. officinalis in only 15% of the products, whereas it detected V. chamaedrys in 62% ofthe products. The results confirm that DNA metabarcoding can be used to test forthe presence of Veronica species, and detect substitution and/or admixture of otherVeronica species, as well as simultaneously detect all other species present. Our resultsconfirm that none of the herbal products contained exactly the species listed on thelabel, and all included substitutes, contaminants or fillers. This study highlights theneed for authentication of raw herbals along the value chain of these products. Anintegrative methodology can assess both the quality of herbal products in terms oftarget compound concentrations and species composition, as well as admixture andsubstitution with other chemical compounds and plants.Keywords: adulteration, DNA metabarcoding, herbal products, HPLC-MS, Veronica chamaedrys, VeronicaofficinalisFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 378333fphar-08-00378 December 19, 2017 Time: 13:31 # 2Raclariu et al. DNA Metabarcoding for Authentication of Veronica officinalis ProductsINTRODUCTIONTraditional herbal medicines play an important role in meetinghealthcare needs around the world, and complementary andalternative medicines based on these are gaining in importance inmany industrialized countries as a perceived healthy alternativeto synthetic pharmaceuticals (World Health Organization, 2013).The commercialization of such products is undergoing atransition process from unregulated locally traded products tointernationally traded mass produced herbal pharmaceuticalsand food supplements (Heinrich, 2010; Leonti and Casu,2013). A challenge in ethnopharmacology is to study suchnovel herbal products and their value chains (Heinrich,2010; Atanasov et al., 2015), as these are impacted by non-harmonized regulatory and trade policies (Booker et al., 2012,2016).The regulation of herbal products varies globally andbetween EU member countries, these falling under specificlegislation depending on their intended use, for instance, as food,food supplements, herbal medicines, or homeopathic products.Similar to the United States and Canada, the EU currently doesnot have a centralized marketing authorization procedure forherbal products, but instead provides relevant methodologicalspecifications to guarantee manufacturing quality. The EU alsolacks a central public institution for pharmacovigilance of theherbal products, and the primary legal responsibility for safety ofthe marketed herbal products is delegated to the pharmaceuticalindustry, whereas national pharmacovigilance agencies monitordrug safety.A lack of standards for studies of medicinal plants has beenpreviously identified (cf. Rios and Recio, 2005; Gertsch, 2009)and several authors have advocated a stronger guidance of valuechains to mitigate this shortcoming (Rios et al., 1988; Cos et al.,2006; Verpoorte, 2008). Current quality assessment methods relymainly on morphology and analytical chemistry based methodsdetailed in national or EU pharmacopoeias (EDQM - Councilof Europe, 2014). However, the resolution of these methods ishighly influenced by factors such as the phenotypic plasticity,morphological cryptic taxa, species-specific chemical markers,growing conditions, harvesting process, storage condition, or theextraction procedure (Barnes, 2003; Bickford et al., 2007; Jianget al., 2010; Shaw et al., 2012).In addition to ensuring that herbal products contain theintended ingredients in the right quantities, an importantproblem is the use of substitutes and undeclared fillers (Coghlanet al., 2012, 2015; Newmaster et al., 2013). Misidentification(Saslis-Lagoudakis et al., 2015) or incongruences in thevernacular names of the raw material (Farah et al., 2006;Ouarghidi et al., 2012; Walker and Applequist, 2012; De Boeret al., 2015) can lead to accidental substitution, but rising pricesof raw materials and the high demand for such products alsoprovide an incentive for deliberate adulteration. The use ofunlabelled ingredients presents a serious safety challenge asadverse drug reactions cannot be associated to the product labeland ingredients (Heubl, 2010; Gilbert, 2011). Recent studies ofherbal medicine and herbal food supplement value chains using acombination of phytochemical and metabolomics analyses havefound that adulteration of these products often occurs in thefirst stages of their value chains (Booker et al., 2012, 2014,2016).Veronica officinalis L. (common speedwell) is a popularmedicinal plant in several European countries, especially incentral eastern Europe and the Balkans, and used in herbalmedicine both traditionally and increasingly in commercialherbal products. Veronica L. (Plantaginaceae) is a genusof about 450 species (Albach and Meudt, 2010) occurringover most of the Northern Hemisphere and in many partsof the Southern Hemisphere (Mabberley, 2008). Modernsystematic studies of the genus have focused on molecularphylogenies of several nuclear and plastid markers: the nuclearribosomal internal transcribed spacer, nrITS (Wagstaff andGarnock-Jones, 1998; Albach and Chase, 2001; Albach et al.,2004; Buhk et al., 2015), the plastid regions trnL-F (Albachet al., 2004, 2006; Buhk et al., 2015), ndhF-rpl32 (Sonibareet al., 2014; Albach and Al-Gharaibeh, 2015; Buhk et al.,2015), trnH-psbA (Sonibare et al., 2014; Albach and Al-Gharaibeh, 2015), rps16 intron (Albach and Chase, 2004),rps16-trnK (Sonibare et al., 2014; Albach and Al-Gharaibeh,2015).Ethnopharmacological Importance ofVeronica SpeciesSeveral Veronica species are used in European traditionalmedicine to treat respiratory affections, as an expectorant,an antiscorbutic, a diuretic, and for wound healing (Baytop,1984; Harput et al., 2002a). In Turkey, the aerial parts ofVeronica anagallis-aquatica L. are boiled in milk to obtaina poultice used to alleviate abdominal pain (Kupeli et al.,2005), or used as a bath cure to relieve rheumatic pain(Fujita et al., 1995). In the Valdesi valley of Italy, in thepoorer villages Veronica species are traditionally used as aninexpensive substitute for imported teas and this has beenposed as an explanation of the modern use of Veronicaspecies in recreational teas (Bellia and Pieroni, 2015). Intraditional Chinese medicine V. anagallis-aquatica is used forthe treatment of influenza, hemoptysis, laryngopharyngitis,and hernia (Su et al., 1999). In Europe, V. officinalis isthe best-known and most commonly used species (Table 1).The main ethnopharmacological indications for V. officinalisare inflammatory conditions, rheumatism, stomach ulcers,respiratory ailments (Scarlat et al., 1985; Mocan et al., 2015b), andnervous, cardiovascular and metabolism system disorders (Voglet al., 2013).Phytochemical and PharmacologicalStudiesVeronica species are rich in iridoid glucosides, mainly aucubin,catalpol and benzoic and cinnamic acid esters of catalpol, allcompounds that have previously been investigated for theirbioactivities (Harput et al., 2002a,b, 2014; Saracoglu et al., 2002).Saracoglu and Harput (2012) showed that some iridoid glucosidesof V. anagallis-aquatica, V. persica Poir, and V. thymoidesP.H.Davis subsp. pseudocinerea M.A.Fisch. exhibited cytostaticFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org June 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 378334fphar-08-00378 December 19, 2017 Time: 13:31 # 3Raclariu et al. DNA Metabarcoding for Authentication of Veronica officinalis ProductsTABLE 1 | Traditional uses of Veronica officinalis in different European countries.Country Use ReferenceAustria Cardiovascular system Vogl et al., 2013MetabolismNervous systemRespiratory tractBulgaria Appetizer Ivancheva and Stantcheva,2000; Leporatti and Ivancheva,2003Anti-inflammatoryAntitussiveAsthmaCoughsExpectorantPharyngitisTonsillitisItaly Recreational tea Bellia and Pieroni, 2015Montenegro Bronchitis Menkovic' et al., 2011Rheumatic complaintsSkin diseasesWoundsRomania Antiulcerous activityCatarrhCoughHepatoprotective activityHypocholesterolemic effectTamas et al., 1984; Scarlatet al., 1985; Cris,an et al., 2007;Grundemann et al., 2013Kidney diseasesLung diseasesWound healing propertiesSerbia Against anemia Zlatkovic' et al., 2014HypolipemicTreatment of skin diseasesSweden Recreational tea Soukand et al., 2013and cytotoxic activities on human and murine cancer celllines, with verminoside being the most cytotoxic compoundand Harput et al. (2002a) showed that V. cymbalaria Bodard,V. hederifolia L., V. pectinata L. var. glandulosa, V. persica andV. polita Fr. possess anti-inflammatory, cytotoxic and radicalscavenging activities. Vogl et al. (2013) showed for the firsttime in vitro anti-inflammatory activity of the extracts preparedfrom V. officinalis. Nikolova (2011) found that V. bellidioidesL., V. kellereri Degen & Urum., V. vindobonensis (M.A.Fisch. )M.A.Fisch., V. beccabunga L., V. rhodopea Degen ex Stoj.& Stef. and V. austriaca L. showed significant antioxidantproperties.Quality Issues of Veronica officinalisHerbal ProductsAs a folk remedy, V. officinalis is used mostly in traditionalmedicine, and no current national pharmacopeia monographsinclude standards for quality control or authentication ofVeronica herbal products. Identification tests currently availableto detect substitutes and adulterants rely on chromatographicmethods, usually as a combination of separate approaches (e.g.,HPLC with TLC-densitometry) or a combination of differentapproaches into a single procedure (e.g., HPLC-UV, HPLC-MSor GC-MC) (European Medicine Agency [EMA], 2006; EDQM -Council of Europe, 2014).All raw materials of V. officinalis used in the marketed herbalproducts are harvested from the spontaneous flora, and sourcedfrom several countries in central eastern Europe and the Balkans.Kathe et al. (2003) and Ichim et al. (2011) cite that the exploitationpressure of wild-harvesting could potentially threaten the species.The limited availability of V. officinalis is a likely driver behindthe widespread substitution with V. chamaedrys L. (germanderspeedwell), an abundant herb of grassland and forest edges,with no proven therapeutic uses Cris,an et al. (2007, 2011).Furthermore, even though their vegetative morphology is clearlydistinct, the flowers of V. officinalis and V. chamaedrys caneasily be confused (Leyel, 1937). Cris,an et al. (2001, 2011)report histological, anatomical and phytochemical charactersthat distinguish V. officinalis and V. chamaedrys and propose arapid differentiation method using thin-layer chromatography(TLC) of species-specific phenyl-propanoic compounds. Theseanalytical methods enable chemical identification of some targetcompounds, but cannot rule out that other Veronica species,or mixtures thereof, might be present in the investigatedproducts. Marketed herbal products are complex formulationsthat are usually highly processed and consist of numerousingredients.DNA Barcoding and MetabarcodingRapid advances in DNA sequencing have enabled cost-effectiveuse of DNA sequences for species identification. Hebert et al. (2003) coined the concept of DNA barcoding as a rapid andaccurate way of species-level identifications using short standardDNA regions. Different combinations of plastid markers (e.g.,rbcL, matK, and trnH-psbA) and the nuclear ribosomal internaltranscribed spacer (nrITS) have been proposed as the primarybarcodes for plants, and the current core barcodes are rbcLand matK, supplemented by nrITS (Kress and Erickson, 2007;CBOL Plant Working Group, 2009; China Plant BOL Group,2011; Hollingsworth et al., 2011). Several studies have shownthat about 75-85%, and in some floras over 90%, of plantspecies can be identified to species level using DNA barcoding(Lahaye et al., 2008; Kress et al., 2009, 2010; Chen et al.,2010; Burgess et al., 2011). In taxonomically difficult plantgroups, where hybridization is frequent, or in lineages ofrelatively young age the use of traditional barcodes may notbe reliable (Kress and Erickson, 2007; Fazekas et al., 2009).In such groups the use of low-coverage shotgun sequencingof genomic DNA could resolve relationships and augmentcurrent plant barcodes (Coissac et al., 2016; Hollingsworth et al.,2016).Techen et al. (2014) reviewed the progress made in DNAbarcoding of medicinal plants.