The proposed method was fully validatedaccording to the ICH guidelines in terms of accuracy, precision, lin-earity and range.2-4 The obtained data for precision, (RSD of 9.69%),and accuracy (recovery of 104.39%) are suitable for this kind of analy-sis. The linearity of the proposed method was tested in the range of0.1 - 1.8 mg mL-1 with regression coefficient of 0.9995 obtained. Thesevalidation results demonstrate the suitability of the method for qual-ity control of this oral solution with expected content of ferulic acidof about 0.0001%, m/m (1ppm).This developed HPLC method was proven to be precise, specific, sen-sitive, and accurate for routine quality assessment of raw materialplant Ferula assafoetida L., its extract, and pharmaceutical products.REFERENCES:1. Lee,CL; Chia-Lin Lee, Lien-Chai Chiang, Li-Hung Cheng, Chih-Chuang Liaw,Mohamed H. Abd EI-Razek, Fang-Rong Chang, Yang-Chamg Wu (August19,2009(Web)). "Influenza A (H1N1) Antiviral and Cytotoxic Agents from Ferula Assa-foetifa". Journal of Natural Products xxx(xx):1568-72. doi: 10.1021/np900158f (http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/np900158f). PMID 19691312 (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19691312)2. ICH Q2R1: Validation of Analitical Procedures: Text and Matodology, Proceedingof the International Conference on Harmonisation of technical Requirements forRegistration of pharmaceuticals for Human Use, Geneva, Switzerland, 19963. 9. AOAC Peer-Verified Methods Program, Manual on policies and procedures,Arlington, Va., USA (1998)http://www.aoac.org/vmeth/PVM.pdf4. G.C. Hokanson, a cycle approach to the validation of analytical methods duringpharmaceutical product development, part I: The initial validation process, Pharm.Tech., Sept. 1994, pp. 118-130.ODREDUVANjE NA FERULNA KISELINASO RP-HPLC METOD VO PERORALENRASTVOR KOJ SODRZhI EKSTRAKT OD FER-ULA ASSAFOETIDA L. I VISCUM ALBUM L.Jasmina Slavkovska, Maja Shishovska, DragitsaDoneva, Zoritsa Arsova -Sarafinovska, KaterinaStarkoskaJZU Institut za javno zdravje na Republika Makedonija, Sektor zaispituvanje i kontrola i na lekovi, 50 Divizija Br. 6, 1000 Skopje,Republika MakedonijaFerula assafoetida L. e bilka koja ima shiroka primena votraditsionalnata meditsina. Korenot na Asafoetida, sodrzhikomponenti koi imaat antiviralno dejstvo, koi deluvaat i navirusot na svinskiot grip, H1N1.1 Tsel na ova istrazhuvanje beshe dase razvie i validira RP-HPLC metod za rutinska kontrola nakvalitet na peroralen rastvor koj sodrzhi ekstrakt od Ferulaassafoetida L. i Viscum album L., dostapen na pazarot vo RepublikaMakedonija.Odreduvanje na sodrzhinata na ekstraktot od Ferula assafoetida L.vo peroralniot rastvor beshe izvedeno preku odreduvanje nasodrzhinata na ferulna kiselina, edna od komponetiteidentifikuvani vo bilkata Ferula assafoetida L.. Khromatografskaseparatsija beshe postignata na reverzno - fazna kolona PurospherSTARO RP -18e (150 x 4,6 mm i.d., so golemina na chestichki 5mm),raboteno so gradient (koristejki acetonitrile i 0,01M orto-fosforna kiselina, kako mobilna faza), na temperatura od 25 oC,so protok 1,5 ml min-1. Detektsijata na ferulnata kiselina besheizvedena na 316 nm. Predlozheniot metod beshe kompletnovalidiran soglasno ICH vodichite vo odnos na tochnost, pretsiznost,linearnost i opseg.2-4Dobienite rezultati za pretsiznosta (RSD9,69%), i tochnosta (analitichki prinos od 104,39%) odgovaraat naovoj vid analiza. Linearnosta na predlozheniot metod beshetestirana vo opseg od 0,1 - 1,8 mg mL-1 so koefitsient na korelatsija0,9995. Rezultatite dobieni pri validatsijata na metodotpotvrduvaat deka predlozheniot metod e soodveten za kontrola nakvalitet na peroralen rastvor koj sodrzhi ferulna kiselina okolu0,0001%, m/m (1ppm).Razvieniot HPLC metod e pretsizen, spetsifichen, osetliv i tochen,a so toa i soodveten za rutinska kontrola na kvalitet na bilkataFerula assafoetida L., ekstraktot i farmatsevtski proizvodi.LITERATURA1. Lee,CL; Chia-Lin Lee, Lien-Chai Chiang, Li-Hung Cheng, Chih-Chuang Liaw, MohamedH. Abd EI-Razek, Fang-Rong Chang, Yang-Chamg Wu (August 19,2009(Web)). "Influenza A(H1N1) Antiviral and Cytotoxic Agents from Ferula Assa-foetifa". Journal of NaturalProducts xxx(xx):1568-72. doi: 10.1021/np900158f(http://dx.doi.org/10.1021/np900158f).PMID 19691312(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/19691312)2. ICH Q2R1: Validation of Analitical Procedures: Text and Matodology, Proceeding ofthe International Conference on Harmonisation of technical Requirements forRegistration of pharmaceuticals for Human Use, Geneva, Switzerland, 19963. 9. AOAC Peer-Verified Methods Program, Manual on policies and procedures,Arlington, Va., USA (1998)http://www.aoac.org/vmeth/PVM.pdf4. G.C. Hokanson, a cycle approach to the validation of analytical methods duringpharmaceutical product development, part I: The initial validation process, Pharm.Tech., Sept. 1994, pp. 118-130.40Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOSALTING-OUT EFFECTS IN THE ETHER EX-TRACTION OF PARACETAMOLG.M. Nikolic, J.V. Zivkovic, A.M. Veselinovic, D.Atanaskovic, D. VlajinUniversity of Nis, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Chemistry,Bulevar dr Zorana Dindica 81, 18000 Nis, SerbiaINTRODUCTIONParacetamol (acetaminophen, N-acetyl-p-aminophenol) is one of themost widely used analgesic and antipyretic drugs. Since misuse ofparacetamol may lead to serious toxic effects (eg. hepatic necrosis)its determination in various samples is of great importance (1).Numerous methods for paracetamol determination include the liquid-liquid extraction step during the sample preparation for the analysisand diethyl ether is often used for such purpose (2). However, as in thecase of some other phenolic compounds paracetamol is poorlyextracted with ethers and one way to overcame this problem is salting-out (3).The aim of this work was to study salting-out effects in the extractionof paracetamol with diethyl and diisopropyl ether from aqueous solu-tions containing inorganic salts.MATERIALS AND METHODSMATERIALSAll the chemicals used in this study were of analytical grade purity andhave been used without further purification. Stock solutions of parac-etamol (0.01 mol dm-3) and inorganic salts were prepared by dissolvingexactly weighted mass of pure substances in doubly distilled waterand 0.01 mol dm-3 solution of HCl was added to adjust the pH valueof paracetamol solution to ~2. Just before each series of extractionsstock solution of paracetamol was diluted 100 times with doubly dis-tilled water or aqueous salt solutions. Extraction was performed by theshake-flask method for each aqueous phase composition in triplicate.MEASUREMENTS AND CALCULATIONSEvolution 60 UV/Vis scanning spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific,USA) was used for absorbance measurements. The absorbance ofaqueous phases were measured at 243 nm and the distribution ratio(D) of paracetamol was calculated by using the equationwhere A0 and A were absorbances of the aqueous phases before andafter extraction, and Vaq and Vorg were the volumes of aqueous and or-ganic phase, respectively.Salting-out effect in the extraction of paracetamol was quantified bycalculating the salting coefficient, ks, according to the equation analo-gous to that given by Setschenow (4)log (D/D0) = ks'Cswhere D0 and D represented distribution ratios obtained in the extractionof paracetamol from pure aqueous solution and solution containing inor-ganic salt, respectively, and Cs was the concentration of salt in solution.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe dependence of log(D/D0) on the salt concentration for the parac-etamol extraction by diethyl ether is shown in Fig.1.Fig. 1: Dependence of log(D/D0) on the salt concentration in the aque-ous solution for the paracetamol extraction by diethyl ether.The values of salting-out constants for the extraction of paracetamolwith diethyl and diisopropyl ether from aqueous solutions of salts in-vestigated in this study are given in Table. 1.Table 1. Salting-out constants for the extraction of paracetamol withdiethyl and diisopropyl ether from aqueous salt solutions.For booth ethers used in this study we found that salting-out con-stants for the paracetamol extraction decreased in the orderks(NaCl) > ks(KCl) > ks(NH4Cl)the same order which was found for the extraction of catechol with di-ethyl ether (4) and extraction of 1-naphtol with carbon tetrachloride (5).Although salting-out constant for a particular substance/salt combi-nation is expected to be independent of the organic solvent appliedfor the extraction we obtained higher values for all three salts investi-gated in the case of diisopropyl ether. Some variability of ks(NaCl) val-ues was also observed for the 1-naphtol when different organicsolvents have been used for the extraction (5). In our case possible rea-son for higher ks values in the case of diisopropyl ether may be that itis much less soluble in water than diethyl ether. When comparingks(NaCl) values for different substances the value for paracetamol ob-tained in this study was much lower than the value for 1-naphtol (be-tween 0.195 and 0.218 for four different organic solvents) probablybecause of the more polar nature of paracetamol.Our results indicated that salts investigated in this study exhibited sig-nificant effect on the extraction efficiency of paracetamol with etherswhich could be used for improving sensitivity of analytical methodsusing liquid-liquid extraction for sample treatment as in the case ofcatechol and hydroquinone (3). Also these results may be used for bet-ter understanding of salting-out phenomenon and its dependence onthe chemical structure of various substances. 41PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011SaltSalting-out constantDiethyl ether Diisopropyl etherNaCl 0.118 0.162KCl 0.106 0.127NH4Cl 0.058 0.080ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work was supported by the Ministry of Education and Science ofthe Republic of Serbia under the Project No. 172044.REFERENCES1. Espinosa Bosch M, Ruiz Sanchez AJ, Sanchez Rojas F, Bosch Ojeda C,Determination of paracetamol : Historical evolution. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 2006;42: 291-321.2. Li H, Zhang C, Wang J, Jiang Y, Paul Fawcett J, Gu J, Simultaneous quantitationof paracetamol, caffeine, pseudoephedrine, chlorpheniramine and cloperastine inhuman plasma by liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry. J. Pharm.Biomed. Anal. 2010; 51: 716-722.3. Nikolic GM, Perovic JM, Nikolic RS, Cakic MM, Salting-out extraction of catecholand hydroquinone from aqueous solutions and urine samples. Facta UniversitatisSer. Pys. Chem. Techn. 2003; 2: 293-299.3. Nikolic GM, Nikolic RS, Perovic JM, Determination of Setschenow salting-outconstants of catechol by liquid-lquid extraction. Proceedings of the 7thIntrnational Conference on Fundamental and Applied Aspects of PhysicalChemistry (Belgrade 2004) 841-843.4. Balon Almeida M, Maestre Alvarez A, Munoz de Miguel E, Soria del Hoyo E.Setchenow coefficients for naphthols by distribution method. Can J Chem 1983;61: 244-248.SALIVA AS AN ALTERNATIVE MATRIX FORTDM OF AEDS: HPLC DETERMINATION OFCARBAMAZEPINE AND VALPROIC ACID INSALIVA OF EPILEPTIC PATIENTSJ.Tonic-Ribarska1, Z.Sterjev1, A.Haxhiu1, G.Kiteva2,E.Cvetkovska2, I.Petrov2, I.Kuzmanovski2,N.Baneva2, A.Arsovska2, N.Tanovska2, Lj.Suturkova1, S.Trajkovic-Jolevska11Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, Macedonia2Clinic of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, University "Ss Cyril andMethodius", Skopje, MacedoniaINTRODUCTION During the last several years there has been a great interest in the useof saliva as an alternative body fluid for the TDM of AEDs. Not onlysaliva can be obtained easily with minimal discomfort to the patient,but more importantly, salivary AED concentrations are assumed to re-flect their free levels in tissue and therefore may have greater clinical rel-evance than measurements of AED concentrations in serum/plasma (1).Carbamazepine and valproic acid, in view of their broad therapeuticspectrum and proven efficacy, are important and commonly useddrugs in the treatment of epilepsy (2, 3).The purpose of this study was to establish the reliable SPE-HPLCmethods for the determination of CBZ and VPA in saliva samples ob-tained from the epileptic patients undergoing chronic CBZ and VPAtherapy, in order to investigate the possibility to use saliva as analternative matrix for TDM of these AEDs.MATERIALS AND METHODSCHEMICALS AND REAGENTSCBZ, nitrazepam (IS), valproic acid sodium salt and octanoic acid (IS)were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich, USA. Methanol and acetonitrile(HPLC grade), potassium dihydrogen phosphate and phosphoric acid(analytical grade) were obtained from Merck, Germany. For all analysis,HPLC grade water was used. OASIS HLB cartridges and SampliQ OPTcartridges used for sample preparation were supplied by Waters, USAand Agilent Technologies, USA, respectively. SALIVA SAMPLESSaliva was collected from healthy volunteers and from the epilepticpatients under oral chronic CBZ and VPA therapy. The saliva sampleswere frozen at -20oC until the analysis. The principles embodied in theHelsinki Declaration were adhered to and the Ethics Committee atthe Faculty of Pharmacy and the Faculty of Medicine, Ss.Cyril andMethodius University - Skopje, approved the research protocol for thisstudy.The extraction of the analytes from saliva samples was performed bymeans of a solid-phase extraction (SPE) procedure using OASIS HLBcartridges for CBZ and SampliQ OPT cartridges for VPA determina-tion. CHROMATOGRAPHIC CONDITIONSThe separations were performed on Agilent 1100 HPLC system with:- CBZ: Zorbax Extend C18 column using isocratic elution with AcN andwater (35:65, v/v) as a mobile phase. The temperature was 30degC andUV detection was set at 220 nm.