Na ovoj nachin kjese potkrepi vospostavuvanjeto na nova kategorija na litsentsiranikherbalni lekovi, podgotveni vo soglasnost so postoechkata DobraProizvodstvena Praksa, koja kje gi zadovoli standardite za bezbed-nost i kvalitet i koja kje bide regulirana od lokalnite vladiniinstitutsii koi se ekvivalent na organizatsiite kako Agentsijata zaKontrola na Lekovi vo Velika Britanija, FDA vo SAD i soodvetni-te institutsii vo zemjite od Evropskata Unija.lITERATURAJordan SA, Cunningham DG, Marles RJ., Assessment of herbal medicinal products:challenges and opportunities to increase the knowledge base for safety assessment.Toxicol Appl Pharmacol, December 14, 2009.WHO. Guidelines for assessing quality of herbal medicines with reference to conta-minants and residues. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2007.WHO. Guidelines on good manufacturing practices (GMP) for herbal medicines. Ge-neva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2007.WHO. Guidelines on good agricultural and collection practices (GACP) for medicinalplants. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2003.WHO. Guidelines on safety monitoring of herbal medicines in pharmacovigilance sy-stems. Geneva, Switzerland: World Health Organization; 2004.AntiAggregAtorYeffect of flAVonoidsMarica Medic-Saric, Mirza BojicUniversity of Zagreb, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry,Department of Medicinal Chemistry, A. Kovacica 1,HR-10000 Zagreb, CroatiaintroductionLeading causes of death in developed countries are cardiovascular dis-eases. Polyphenols, namely flavonoids and phenolic acids, have manypharmacological properties that can explain their protective role inthe prevention of cardiovascular diseases: antioxidant capacity, va-sorelaxation, anti-inflammatory and antiaggregatory effects. Benefi-cial effects of natural sources of polyphenolics on platelet aggregationsuch as wine (French paradox), green tea (Asian paradox), dark choco-late, gingko, propolis are well documented. [1,2]Although antiaggregatory activity of flavonoids is well known propertyof these compounds, the results of a systematic search for highly po-tent members of this family are still missing.MAteriAls And MethodsIn order to analyze the antiaggregatory activity of series of flavonoids180PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011MEDITsINSKI I AROMATIChNI RASTENIJA oralni prezentatsii(n = 10), namely: 3,7-dihydroxyflavone, 6-hydroxyflavone, acacetin, epi-catechin, genistein, hesperetin, isorhamnetin, pinocembrin, pinocem-brin-7-methylether, tectochrysin. Platelet impedance aggregation inwhole blood has been selected for measurement of the platelet ag-gregation while the ADP has been used as an aggregation agonist. Thewhole blood was obtained from healthy volunteers. A total number of30 volunteers participated in this research that was approved by eth-ical comities of Croatian Institute of Transfusion Medicine and Fac-ulty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry.The biological end point was defined as minimal concentration offlavonoid that can lower the platelet aggregation statistically com-pared to the control.results And discussionThe minimal concentration of flavonoid that produces antiaggrega-tory effect ranged from 0.95 uM to 30.5 uM (p < 0.05); Figure 1.Figure 1. Minimal concentration of flavonoid that can produce anti-aggregatory effect.The following members among analyzed flavonoids show the most po-tent antiaggregatory effect: epicatechin, 6-hydroxyflavone, tectochrysinwith minimal concentrations that lowers platelet aggregation of 1.9,0.95 and 0.95 respectively.Among the analyzed flavonoids the most potent members posses fol-lowing structural properties: double bond on position C2-C3 and hy-droxyl group on position C3 of the ring C (flavonols), Figure 2.Figure 2. Basic structure of flavonoids.Having in mind the daily consumption of flavonoids of up to 50 mgper day in normal diet [3], flavonoids can achieve micromolar levels inblood. Using coupled techniques e.g. HPLC-MS micro molar levels ofindividual flavonoids have been confirmed in vivo [4].Thus the results of this research suggest that even daily consumptionof flavonoids can effect aggregation of platelets.conclusionFlavonoids can effect platelet aggregation in concentrations that canbe achieved in every day diet. As flavonoids are widely distributed inplant kingdom, diet should be taken into account when interpretingplatelet aggregation and coagulation results.references[1] J.A. Guerrero, M.L. Lozano, J. Castillo, O. Benavente-Garcia, V. Vicente, J. Rivera,J. Thromb. Haemost., 3, 369-376 (2005). [2] P. Pignatelli, F.M. Pulcinelli, A. Celestini, L. Lenti, A. Ghiselli, P.P. Gazzaniga, F. Violi,Am. J. Clin. Nutr., 72, 1150-1155 (2000). [3] G.G. Duthie, S.J. Duthie, J.A. Kyle, Nutr. Res. Rev., 13, 79-106 (2000). [4] K.S. Krogholm, L. Bredsdorff, P. Knuthsen, J. Haraldsdottir, S.E: Rasmussen, Eur. J.Clin. Nutr., 64, 432-435 (2010).AntiMicroBiAl ActiVitYof pinus peuce griseB. essentiAl oilsMarija Karapandzova1, Gjose Stefkov1,Elena Trajkovska-Dokik2, Ana Kaftandzieva2,Svetlana Kulevanova11Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy,University"Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, Macedonia2Institute of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine,University"Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, MacedoniaAlthough the biological activity of essential oils is well known, themode of their action is not completely understood. Generally, the ac-tivity of essential oils is the result of combined effect both of their ac-tive and inactive components. Inactive components may affectresorption, speed of reaction and bioavailability of active components(1, 8), while the active components can have a synergistic effect. Theessential oils are familiar with antibacterial, antifungal and antiviralactivity. Many studies have explained antibacterial activity of essentialoils against Gram-positive and Gram-negative bacteria (6, 11, 5, 12, 2,9) and have confirmed their antifungal activity (3). There are differ-ences in the biological activity of essential oils, especially when itcomes to different strains of Gram-positive and Gram-negative bac-teria. The different susceptibility of bacteria to the action of essentialoils are not only due to a different chemical composition of the oils,but the differences in the composition and structure of the cell wall,lipid and protein composition of cytoplasmic membrane and specificphysiological processes in different bacterial species. The way andmechanism of antibacterial activity of essential oils are not suffi-ciently explained yet. Nowadays, it is accepted that some essentialoils and their components mainly act on bacterial cytoplasmic mem-brane (10). Literature data suggest a correlation between biologicalactivity of oils and chemical characteristics of their components. Gen-erally, strong antibacterial activity of essential oils due to the pres-ence of certain mono and sesquiterpenes (4, 13, 7).Essential oils from different pine species have antibacterial and anti-fungal activity, thus the aim to this study was to investigate antimi-crobial activity of Pinus peuce essential oils against certain types ofmicroorganisms that affect respiratory, gastrointestinal and urogeni-tal system and the skin.Examination of antimicrobial activity was made on samples of termi-nal branches of Pinus peuce that were collected on three different lo-calities in the country: Pelister, Nidze and Shara Mountain. Threesamples were obtained by separating the needles from the branches:181fifth congress of phArMAcY of MAcedoniA With internAtionAl pArticipAtionMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS oral presentationsbranches without needles, branches with needles and only needles.Isolation of essential oils was made by hydodistillation in all Clevengerapparatus from 20 g plant material for 4 hours. Antimicrobial activityof essential oils was studied against 14 different microorganisms, in-cluding 13 bacterial isolates representing both Gram-positive (Staphy-lococcus aureus ATCC 29213, Stahylococcus epidermidis,Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococ-cus pyogenes and Enterococcus) and Gram-negative bacteria (Acine-tobacter spp, Escherichia coli ATCC 25927, Salmonella enteritidis,Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 700603, Pseudomonas aeruginosa ATCC27853, Haemophylus influenzae and Proteus mirabilis) and one strainof Candida albicans ATCC 10231. Hole-plate method was used forscreening the antimicrobial activity of all essential oils (determinationof growth inhibition zones of studied microorganisms that occuraround certain essential oil). This investigation was followed by brothdilution method (determination of minimal inhibitory concentrationMIC of the particular oil).The most sensitive bacteria against tested needle essential oils wereStreptococcus pneumoniae. Compared with sensitivity to the effectsof essential oils isolated from needles, bacteria showed higher sensi-tivity to essential oils isolated from branches without needles. Thehighest sensitivity to the effects of these essential oils, beside Strep-tococcus pneumonia, showed Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococ-cus epidermidis and Candida albicans. Susceptibility ofmicroorganisms to the effects of essential oils isolated from brancheswith needles is much different in terms of susceptibility to the essen-tial oils isolated from needles and from branches without needles. Thehighest sensitivity to the effects of essential oils isolated frombranches with needles showed Streptococcus agalactiae, Strepto-coccus pyogenes, Enterococcus and Candida albicans. These oils alsoshowed the highest activity (essential oil isolated from branches withneedles from Nidze and Shara Mtn).references1. Colgate SM, Molyneux RJ. (1993) Bioactive Natural Products - Detection, Isolationand Structural Determination. CRC Press: Boca Raton: 9-34.2. Dorman HJ, Deans SG. (2000) Antimicrobial agents from plants: antibacterial acivityof plant volatile oils. J Appl Microbiol 88: 308-316.3. Hammer K, Carson CF, Riley TV. (1998) In-vitro activity of essential oils, in particularMelaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil and tea tree oil products against Candidia sp..Antimicrob Agents Chemother 42: 591-595.4. Oluwadayo Sonibare O, Olakunle K. (2008) Chemical composition and antibacter-ial activity of the essential oil of Pinus caribaea from Nigeria. African Journal ofBiotechnology 7 (14): 2462-2464.5. Reichling J, Harkenthal M, Saller R. (1999) In-vitro-Untersuchungen zur antimicro-biellen Wirkung ausgewahlter atherischer Ole. Erfahrungsheilkunde 48: 357-366.6. Reichling J. (1999) Plant-microbe interaction and secondary metabolites withantiviral, antibacterial and antifungal properties; In: Wink M, ed. Functions of PlantSecondary Metabolite and their Exploitation in Biotechnology. Annual Plant Review.Sheffield: Sheffieled Acad. Press: 187-273.7. Sacchetti G, et al. (2005) Comparative evaluation of 11 essential oils of different ori-gin as functional antioxidants, antiradicals and antimicrobials in foods. Food Chem-istry 91: 621-632.8. Svoboda KP, Deans SG. (1995) Biological activity of essential oils from selectedaromatic plants. Acta Hortic 390: 203-209.9. Takarada K, Kimizuka R, Takahashi N, et al. (2004) A comparation of theantibacterial efficacies of essential oils against oral pathogens. Oral MicrobiolImmunol 19: 61-64.10. Ulrich F, Jurgen S. et al. (2008) Efficacy, absorption and safety of essential oils.Dermatologic, Cosmeceutic, and Cosmetic Development: 401-418.11. Weseler A, Greiss HK, Saller R, et al. (2005) A novel colorimetric broth microdilutionmethod to determine minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antibiotics andessential oils against Helicobacter pylori. Pharmazie 60: 498-502.12. Youesf R, Tawil G. (1980) Antimicrobial activity of volatile oils. Pharmazie 35: 698-701.13. Youg-Suk K, Dong-Hwa Sh. (2005) Volatile components and antibacterial effectsof pine needle (Pinus densiflora S. and Z.) extracts. Food Microbiology 22: 37-45.ANTIMIKRObNO DEJSTVONA ETERIChNO MASlO OD MOlIKA(pinus peuce griseB. )Marija Karapandzhova1, Gjoshe Stefkov1,Elena Trajkovska-Dokikj2,Ana Kaftandzhieva2, Svetlana Kulevanova11Institut za Farmakognozija, Farmatsevtski fakultet, Univerzitet"Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Skopje, Makedonija2Institut za Mikrobiologija, Meditsinski fakultet, Univerzitet"Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Skopje, MakedonijaIako biloshkata aktivnost na eterichnite masla e dobro poznata,nivniot nachin na dejstvo ne e sosema razjasnet. Generalno, dejstvo-to na eterichnite masla e rezultat na kombiniraniot efekt, kako naaktivnite taka, i na neaktivnite komponenti. Neaktivnite kompo-nenti mozhat da vlijaat vrz resorptsijata, brzinata na reaktsijata ibioraspolozhlivosta na aktivnite komponenti (1, 8), dodeka ak-tivnite komponenti mozhat da imaat sinergistichko dejstvo. Za ete-richnite masla se vrzuvaat antibakterisko, antifungalnoto i anti-viralnoto dejsto. Golem broj studii ja objasnuvaat antibakteriska-ta aktivnost na eterichnite masla protiv Gram-pozitivni i Gram-negativni bakterii (6, 11, 5, 12, 2, 9), a pokraj toa potvrdeno e inivnoto antifungalno dejstvo (3). Postojat razliki vo bioloshkataaktivnost na eterichnite masla, osobeno koga se vo prashanje ra-zlichni bakteriski soevi na Gram-pozitivni i Gram-negativni ba-kterii. Razlichnata osetlivost na bakteriite kon dejstvoto naeterichnite masla se dolzhi ne samo na razlichen khemiski sostav namaslata, tuku i na razlikite vo gradbata i strukturata na kleto-chniot dzid, lipidniot i proteinskiot sostav na tsitoplazmatskatamembrana i na spetsifichnite fizioloshki protsesi kaj razlichnibakteriski vidovi. Nachinot i mekhanizmot na antibakteriskotodejstvo na eterichnite masla seushte ne se dovolno objasneti. Denese prifateno deka eterichnite masla i nekoi od nivnite komponentiglavno dejstvuvaat vrz bakteriskata tsitoplazmatska membrana (10).Podatotsite od literaturata ukazhuvaat na vrskata pomegju biolo-shkata aktivnost na maslata i khemiskite karakteristiki na kompo-nentite. Generalno, silnoto antibakterisko dejstvo na eterichnitemasla se dolzhi na prisustvo na opredeleni mono i seskviterpeni(4, 13, 7).Eterichnite masla od razlichni vidovi bor pokazhuvaat antibakte-riska i antifungalna aktivnost.