SEM micrograph of blank xerogel NPsOrganic groups linked to the oxide network by stable chemical bondsnot only changed the inner structure of the matrix by disrupting theregularity of the silica network, thus changing the porosity andincreasing the average size, but also affected the EE (%) and particlessurface charge (Table 1). Table 1. Physicochemical characteristics of particlesThe incorporation of aminopropyl groups into the silica matrix wasqualitatively confirmed by FT-IR spectra. Data suggested that BDS waseffectively entrapped into particles at a molecular level.The dissolution profiles of TEOS based and hybrid particles inphosphate buffer pH 7.4 are presented in Fig. 2. 302Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOFig. 2. Release profiles of BDS from prepared formulationsThe drug release showed a dual-phasic profile with initial bursts of 20-40% and a slower release period. The differences in release ratebetween TEOS based and APTES modified particles could beattributed to the presence of functional groups on the pore walls thusincreasing the porosity and hydrophilicity of the network. Therefore,BDS molecules diffuse out more rapidly from organic/inorganic hybridmatrix than from TEOS base particles. As a conclusion, spray drying has been shown to be a fast and simplemethod for obtaining particles from silica sol for controlled drugdelivery. Changes in the reaction conditions during sol-gel processingand partial substitution of TEOS with APTES modified the morphologyof silica xerogels, resulting in increased average size, loading efficiencyand rate of BDS released. Also, the presence of amino groups affectedthe surface charge, thus increasing the stability of the prepared carriersystem.REFERENCES1. Zhijian Wu Z, Xiang H, et al. Surface properties of submicrometer silica spheresmodified with aminopropyltriethoxysilane and phenyltriethoxysilane. J. Contol.Release 2006; 304:119-124.2. Zhang Y, Zhi Z, et al. Spherical mesoporous silica nanoparticles for loading andrelease of the poorly water-soluble drug telmisartan. J. Control. Release 2010;145:257-263.FORMULATsIJA I KARAKTERIZATsIJA NA AMINO-FUNKTsIONALIZIRANISILIKA ChESTIChKI ZA KONTROLIRANOOSLOBODUVANjE NA BUDEZONIDV.Petrovska1, K.Gorachinova1, M. SimonoskaTsrtsarevska1, A. Georgieva3, N.Geshkovski1,M.Tsvetkovska2, M.Glavash Dodov11Farmatsevtski fakultet, Univerzitet Sv.Kirili Metodij, Skopje,Makedonija2Tekhnoloshko-metalurshki fakultet, Univerzitet Sv.Kiril iMetodij, Skopje, Makedonija3Alkaloid AD, Skopje, MakedonijaVOVEDVo tekov na izminatite detsenii razvieni se raznovidni poli m er -ni nosachi za nasocheno i kontrolirano osloboduvanje na aktivnatasupstantsija. So tsel podgotovka na silika chestichki zabiomeditsinska aplikatsija, sol-gel protsesot e protses od izbor.Morfoloshkite karakteristiki i povrshinskata funkts i onal i za tsi -ja vlijae vrz performansite na ovie sistemi. Tokmu poradi ova,promenite na reaktsionite uslovi kako i partsijalnata supstitutsijana tetraetoksisilanot (TEOS) koj e silika prekursor, so alkilsupstituiran alkoksid kje rezultira so promena vo strukturata,povrshinskite karakteristiki i khemiskata reaktivnost na for mu -li raniot nosach. Seto ova pak kje rezultira so promeni i vobrzinata na osloboduvanje na aktivnata supstantsija (1,2).Tselta na ovoj trud beshe dizajniranje i evaluiranje na neorganskii organsko/neorganski khibridni silika kserogel chestichki pod go -t veni so razlichni molarni odnosi alkoksid/voda kako pogodninosachi za kontrolirano osloboduvanje na budezonid.MATERIJALI I METODIMATERIJALINeorganskite i organsko/neorganskite khibridni silika chestichkibea podgotveni so TEOS (Sigma, Germany), 3-amino pro pi l tri et o k -si silan (APTES) (Sigma, Germany), etanol (Merck, Germany), otsetnakiselina (Merck, Germany), budezonid- BDZ(Crystal Pharma, Spain) idestilirana voda. Site ostanati supstantsii bea so analitichkachistota. PODGOTOVKA NA ChESTIChKISilika kserogel chestichki koi sodrzhat 2% m/m budezonid bea pod -got v eni preku kiselinsko kataliziran sol-gel protses. Molarniteodnosi na TEOS:voda:etanol:otsetna kiselina bea 0.02:5.5:1.71:0.02i 0.02:5.5:3.42:0.02 soovetno (probi 1T i 2T). Po kondezatsijata che -sti chkite bea sprej susheni (Buchi 290, Mini Spray Dryer, Swiss) podsled nite uslovi: vlezna temperatura 135degC, protok na proba 4ml/min, protok na vozdukh za sushenje 35m3/h i protok na vozdukh zarasprnuvanje 600 NL/h. So metod na ko-kondenzatsija prekupartsijalna supstitutsija na TEOS so 2.5 mol% na APTES bea pod go -t veni organsko/neorganskite khibridni chestichki (probi 1AP i 2AP)koristejkji gi gorenavedenite uslovi na sprej sushenje.Beapodgotveni i prazni chestichki za sporedba.KARAKTERIZATsIJA NA ChESTIChKITEMorfoloshkata karakterizatsija (SEM) beshe izvrshena so primenana JEOL 6400, Japan. Goleminata i distributsijata na chestichki pogo lemina beshe izvrshena so primena na laserska difraktometrija. (HydroG/S/M 2000; Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK).Beshe odreden zeta potentsijalot (Zetasizer Nanoseries, Nano-ZS,Malvern Ins.,UK) vo puferi (pH 2.0 and 7.4) so niska jachina istrikes/min. molarnost. FTIR spektri na prazni i chestichki polniso BDZ bea snimena so KBr (Varian 2000 FT-IR, USA) Efikasnosta naenkapsulatsija (EE) na BDZ vo formulatsiite beshe odredena soHPLC metoda (Agilent 1200 so UV detektor, kolona RP C-18 Lichrocart,Merck, Germany). Osloboduvanjeto na BDZ od neorgan ski te ikhibridnite chestichki beshe sledena vo pufer pH 7.4 na termostatiranavodena banja (37 degC) so meshach (Unitronic OR Selecta,Spain).REZULTATI I DISKUSIJADobienite chestichki bea sferichni so mazna povrshina (Sl. 1), sosreden volumenski dijametar pomegju 0.7 and 0.9 nm i so tesnaunimodalna distributsija. Khibridnite silika chestichki beasferichni no pogolemi i so poshiroka distributsija (Tab 1).303Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONSl 1. SEM na prazni kserogel chestichkiOrganskite grupi povrzani so kislorodnata mrezha preku stabilnikhemiski vrski ne samo shto ja menuvaat vnatreshnata struktura namatriksot preku razrushuvanje na silikatnata mrezha tuku jamenuvaat poroznosta, povrshinskata naelektriziranost, jazgolemuvaat goleminata i efikasnosta na enkapsulatsija (Tab 1).Tabela 1. Fizichko khemiski karakteristikiInkorporiranjeto na aminopropil grupite e potvrdeno preku FT-IRspektrite. Rezultati go potvrduvaat inkorporiranjeto na BDZ namolekularno nivo. Osloboduvanjeto na BDZ od neorganskite ineorgansko/organskite chestichki vo fosfaten pufer e prikazhanona Sl 2.Initsijalno se osloboduvaat 20-40%, a potoa sledi pobavnoosloboduvanje. Razlikite vo osloboduvanjeto chestichkite se dolzhina prisustvotot na funktsionalni grupi koi doprinesuvaat voporoznosta i khidrofilnosta na mrezhata, poradi shto molekulitena BDZ difundiraat pobrzo niz matriksot. Mozheme da zakluchimedeka sprej sushenjeto e brz i ednostaven metod za dobivanje nasilika chestichki so kontrolirano osloboduvanje. Promena nauslovite za vreme na sol-gel protsesot kako i partsijalnatasupstitutsija na TEOS so APTES gi menuva morfoloshkitekarakteristiki na sistemot shto doveduva do promena vo go le -minata, EE(%) kako i stepenot na osloboduvanje na aktivnatasup stantsija. Prisustvoto na amino grupi vlijae vrz po vr shin -askata na elektriziranost so shto se zgolemuva stabilnosta napodgotveniot sistem.REFERENTsI1. Zhijian Wu Z, Xiang H, et al. Surface properties of submicrometer silica spheresmodified with aminopropyltriethoxysilane and phenyltriethoxysilane. J. Contol.Release 2006; 304:119-124.2. Zhang Y, Zhi Z, et al. Spherical mesoporous silica nanoparticles for loading andrelease of the poorly water-soluble drug telmisartan. J. Control. Release 2010;145:257-263.FORMULATION OF DENTAL GEL WITHMICRO PARTICLES LOADED WITH TEA TREEOIL, MELALEUCA ALTERNIFOLIAM. Stefkova, M. Glavas Dodov, N. Geskovski, M. Simonoska Crcarevska, K. GoracinovaFaculty of Pharmacy, Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, Republic of MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONGingivitis is undestructive periodontal disease mainly caused by bac-terial biofilm - plaque, adhered on the teeth surface and it is the mostfrequent form of periodontal disease (1). The local activity potentialand prolonged contact time as well as the control of the release rateof the active substance from the carrier-microparticles are rationalapproaches for formulation of an effective and stable therapeuticaldosage form for treatment of periodontal diseases (2). Dental gels aspharmaceutical dosage forms provide prolonged contact time timeand possibility for precise dosage of the active substance, locally, atthe place of the infection.Alginate, with its muco/bioadhesive characteristics, biocompatibilityand biodegradibility and pH depended swelling effects provides an op-portunity for prolonged release of active substance and it is an excel-lent candidate for designing controlled release microparticularsystems. The essential oil of tea tree, Melaleuca alternifolia,Myrtaceae, has strong antimicrobial activity, especially on cariogenicbacteria. (3, 4, 5).Having this into consideration, the aim of this study was to develop adental gel formulation with calcium-alginate microparticles (MPs)loaded with tea tree oil. MATERIALS AND METHODSPreparation of the formulations. Tea tree oil microparticles were pre-pared using sodium alginate (Protanal LF 10/60, FMC BioPolymer,Norway), calcium chloride (Alkaloid, Macedonia) and tea tree oil(Melaleuca aetheroleum, Jan Spider, Croatia). The preparation proce-dure included emulsification of the tea tree oil and its encapsulationin calcium alginate (Ca-Alg) MPs using method of spraying intocrosslinking solution (Buchi Mini Spray dryer B-290, Switzerland) (6).The obtained water dispersion of MPs (VD Ca-Alg Mps) was lyofilizated(LF Ca-Alg MPs) using Labconco, FreeZone 2.5L Freeze Dry System, USA. For dental gel preparation, Noveon AA-1 (Noveon Europe BVBA,Belgium), polymer of acrylic acid, cross-linked with divynil glycol wasused. The lyophylizated microparticles (LF Ca-Alg Mps) at conce n tra -tion of 2% (m/m) were incorporated in the previously prepared gel. Characterization of the prepared formulations. The mean particle sizeand the particle size distribution of the microparticles was determinedby laser difractometry (Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instr., Ltd, UK). Usingthe same technique, the swelling index of Ca-Alg MPs in simulatedsaliva ( pH 7.4), was determined in intervals of 1, 3, 5 and 24 hours.304Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOThe antimicrobial activity evaluation of the prepared Ca-Alg MPsusing method of difusion on agar was made (7). Streptococcus mutans,ATCC 25175 was used as the most frequent cause for gingivitis (1).The stability of the prepared gel formulations with incorporated Ca-Alg Mps was determined in 6 months period, at temperatures of 25 oC+- 2 oC / 65% RH +- 5% RH and 37 oC +- 2 oC / 65% RH +- 5% RH, throughdetermination of the parameters appearance and pH of the gel.RESULTS AND DISSCUSIONUsing the technique of emulsification and spraying without drying, VDCa-Alg Mps and LF Ca-Alg MPs encapsulated with tea tree oil were pre-pared. The mean diameters of the prepared formulations is shown inTable 1.Table 1. Mean volume diameter of the prepared formulations (n=6)The swelling index of Ca-Alg MPs loaded with tea tree oil in simulatedsaliva with pH 7.4 at different time intervals, in 24 hours period isshown in Picture 1. The microparticles showed significant swellingbehaviour, which is in favor of their prolonged contact on the gingivaand a potential for gradual release of the active substance.Picture 1. Swelling index of the prepared formulations in simulatedsaliva (pH 7.4)At the evaluation of the antimicrobial activity of the prepared Ca-AlgMPs using the method of difusion on agar, the measured zones of in-hibition of growth of the selected bacteria coresponded to the liter-ature data on MIC (Minimum Inhibitory Concentration, % v/v) of teatree oil (0.25 - 2.0 % v/v) (4,5). The prepared dental gel formulations showed satisfactory results forstability in the period of examination. CONCLUSIONThe prepared dental gel formulation with microparticles loaded withessential oil, prepared with modified method of spraying without dry-ing, show potential for providing local antibacterial effect and efficacyin the therapy of the periodontal diseases.REFERENCES1. Tanzer JM, Livingston J, Thompson AK, The microbiology of primary dental cariesin humans, J Dent Educ., 65, 1028-1037 (2001)2. Bruschi et al., Oral bioadhesive drug delivery systems, Drug Development andIndustrial Pharmacy, 31, 293-310 (2005)3. Finlay et al., Antiinflamatory activity of tea tree oil (2003)4. Riley , The antimicrobial activity of tea tree oil (2003)5.