Od tuka proizleguva i interesotza ispituvanje na antimikrobnoto dejstvo na eterichnoto maslo odmolika kon opredeleni vidovi mikroorganizmi, predizvikuvachina infektsii na respiratoren, gastro-intestinalen i urogenita-len trakt i na infektsii na kozha.Ispituvanja na antimikrobnata aktivnost se napraveni na prime-rotsi na vrvni granchinja od molika, sobrani na tri lokaliteti vozemjata: Pelister, Nidzhe i Shar Planina. Od sobraniot rastitelenmaterijal, so izdvojuvanje na listovite (iglichkite) dobieni se potri primeroka: granki so iglichki, granki bez iglichki i samo iglichki.Izolatsija na eterichnoto maslo e napravena so destilatsija sovodena parea vo aparat po Klevendzher od 20 g rastitelen materijal,vo vreme od 4 chasa.Antimikrobna aktivnost na eterichnite masla e ispituvana na 14razlichni mikroorganizmi, vkluchuvajkji 13 bakteriski izolati naGram-pozitivni (Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 29213, Stahylococcusepidermidis, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Streptococcus agalactiae,182PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011MEDITsINSKI I AROMATIChNI RASTENIJA oralni prezentatsiiStreptococcus pyogenes i Enterococcus) i Gram-negativni bakterii(Acinetobacter spp, Escherichia coli ATCC 25927, Salmonella enteriti-dis, Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 700603, Pseudomonas aeruginosaATCC 27853, Haemophylus influenzae i Proteus mirabilis) i na edenizolat na gabata Candida albicans ATCC 10231. Za ispituvanje na an-timikrobno dejstvo na eterichnite masla se koristeni agar difu-ziona (opredeluvanje na zonite na inkhibitsija na rast na ispi-tuvanite mikroorganizmi shto se javuvaat okolu odredeno eterichnomaslo) i agar dilutsiona metoda (opredeluvanje na minimalna in-khibitorna kontsentratsija MIK na dadenoto maslo).Najgolema osetlivost na dejstvo na eterichni masla od iglichki odmolika pokazha bakterijata Streptococcus pneumoniae. Sporedenoso osetlivosta na dejstvoto na eterichnite masla od iglichki, bakte-riite pokazhaa pogolema osetlivost, koga se vo prashanje eterichni-te masla izolirani od granki bez iglichki. Najgolema osetlivostna dejstvo na ovie masla, pokraj bakterijata Streptococcus pneu-moniae, pokazhaa i bakteriite Staphylococcus aureus, Staphylococ-cus epidermidis i gabata Candida albicans. Osetlivosta namikroorganizmite na dejstvoto na eterichnite masla od granki soiglichki od molika e mnogu porazlichna vo odnos na osetlivosta nadejstvoto na eterichnoto maslo od iglichki i od granki bez iglichki.Najgolema osetlivost na dejstvoto na maslata od granki so iglichkipokazhaa bakteriite Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pyo-genes, Enterococcus i gabata Candida albicans. Voedno, ovie maslapokazhaa i najgolema aktivnost (eterichno maslo izolirano od gran-ki so iglichki od molika od Nidzhe i od Shar Planina).lITERATURA1. Colgate SM, Molyneux RJ. (1993) Bioactive Natural Products - Detection, Isolationand Structural Determination. CRC Press: Boca Raton: 9-34.2. Dorman HJ, Deans SG. (2000) Antimicrobial agents from plants: antibacterial acivityof plant volatile oils. J Appl Microbiol 88: 308-316.3. Hammer K, Carson CF, Riley TV. (1998) In-vitro activity of essential oils, in particularMelaleuca alternifolia (tea tree) oil and tea tree oil products against Candidia sp..Antimicrob Agents Chemother 42: 591-595.4. Oluwadayo Sonibare O, Olakunle K. (2008) Chemical composition and antibacter-ial activity of the essential oil of Pinus caribaea from Nigeria. African Journal ofBiotechnology 7 (14): 2462-2464.5. Reichling J, Harkenthal M, Saller R. (1999) In-vitro-Untersuchungen zur antimicro-biellen Wirkung ausgewahlter atherischer Ole. Erfahrungsheilkunde 48: 357-366.6. Reichling J. (1999) Plant-microbe interaction and secondary metabolites withantiviral, antibacterial and antifungal properties; In: Wink M, ed. Functions of PlantSecondary Metabolite and their Exploitation in Biotechnology. Annual Plant Review.Sheffield: Sheffieled Acad. Press: 187-273.7. Sacchetti G, et al. (2005) Comparative evaluation of 11 essential oils of different ori-gin as functional antioxidants, antiradicals and antimicrobials in foods. Food Chem-istry 91: 621-632.8. Svoboda KP, Deans SG. (1995) Biological activity of essential oils from selectedaromatic plants. Acta Hortic 390: 203-209.9. Takarada K, Kimizuka R, Takahashi N, et al. (2004) A comparation of theantibacterial efficacies of essential oils against oral pathogens. Oral MicrobiolImmunol 19: 61-64.10. Ulrich F, Jurgen S. et al. (2008) Efficacy, absorption and safety of essential oils.Dermatologic, Cosmeceutic, and Cosmetic Development: 401-418.11. Weseler A, Greiss HK, Saller R, et al. (2005) A novel colorimetric broth microdilutionmethod to determine minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of antibiotics andessential oils against Helicobacter pylori. Pharmazie 60: 498-502.12. Youesf R, Tawil G. (1980) Antimicrobial activity of volatile oils. Pharmazie 35: 698-701.13. Youg-Suk K, Dong-Hwa Sh. (2005) Volatile components and antibacterial effectsof pine needle (Pinus densiflora S. and Z.) extracts. Food Microbiology 22: 37-45.deVelopMent of noVel YeAst strAinsAs cell fActories for the productionof plAnt terpenoidsIvana Cvetkovikj1, Antonios Makris1,2,Codruta Ignea1, Gjoshe Stefkov3,Svetlana Kulevanova31Department of Natural Products and Biotechnology, CentreInternational de Hautes Etude Agronomiques Mediterraneennes(CIHEAM). Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania (MAICh),P.O.Box 85, Chania 73100, Greece.2Institute of Agrobiotechnology/CERTH, P.O.Box 60361,Thermi 57001, Thessaloniki, Greece.3Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy,University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, Macedonia.BAckgroundThroughout human history, secondary metabolites from natural foun-dations have been important sources of aromatic and pharmaceuticalcompounds which are used till present as commercial flavors, fragran-ces, medicines (Chang and Keasling, 2006). An important class of naturalproducts, terpenoids and isoprenoids comprise a very large family, ex-ceeding 50.000 different compounds (Buckingham, 2007). Their broadenspectrum of application was important bottleneck in the further exploi-tation of these compounds by the industry especially due to their limi-ted quantities of production in plants. Over the past decade, a fiercerace was initiated to exploit microorganisms and genetically engineeredplants as sources for production of these valuable compounds.As a model for understanding eukaryotic organisms or as a cell fac-tory that offers distinct advantages over bacteria and plants, S. cere-visiae (baker's yeast) has taken center stage in these efforts. It hasbecome a major platform for metabolic engineering, through its ca-pacity to produce plant terpenoids, as well as the ability to be subjectto further modifications to improve the production yields (Nevogoit,2008). Previous efforts resulted with production of mono- and sesqui-terpenoids at almost 3-fold higher levels than the wild type yeast cells(Ignea, 2009, Ignea et.al., 2011).To achieve commercially exploitable levels, we tested by overexpression,the contribution of several endogenous genes from the sterol biosynt-hetic pathway which produce the substrates of terpenoid synthases.MAteriAls And MethodsYeast expression vectors: The following expression plasmids were usedfor expression in yeast cells: pYES2 (URA3, 2, Gal prom. ); pYES2-myc(URA3, 2u, Gal prom., myc tag); pJG4-4 (TRP1, 2 , Gal prom. ); pJG4-6(TRP1, 2u, Gal prom. HA-tag); pYES-ADH1 (URA3, 2 , ADH1 prom. ); mod-ified pUG27 vector (Gueldener et.al., 2002) without Xho1restriction site.Genes: The open reading frame minus the transit peptide (orf) of S.fruticosa cineole synthase 1 (SfCinS1, Acc. DQ785793) was PCR am-plified from a previously isolated full length cDNA. The yeast gene iso-prenyl diphosphate synthase (YPL117c, Acc. NP_015208) was PCRamplified from yeast genomic DNA.Development of COD4 and COD40 cassettes: The pGAL1-MCS-ts wasPCR amplified from pDNR-Gal vector. The insert and the modifiedpUG27 linearized backbone digested with HindIII and SalI were ligated.The novel cassette was named COD4. The IDI orf was inserted into thepUG27 vector using the EcoRI and XhoI restriction sites at the MCSgenerating the construct pCOD40.183fifth congress of phArMAcY of MAcedoniA With internAtionAl pArticipAtionMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS oral presentationsTerpene production in yeast: Monoterpenes sampling was performedusing a Solid Phase Microextraction (SPME) assembly with 2 cm-50/30um DVB/Carboxen(tm)/PDMS StableFlex(tm) Fiber for Manual Sampling andwere analyzed on Hewlett Packard 5890 II gas chromatographequipped with flame ionization detector capillary column HB5. Theworking conditions has been describe previously (Ignea et.al., 2011).results And discussionThe focus was kept on the yeast sterol pathway gene IDI1 which en-codes a dimethylallyl pyrophosphate isomerase. The balance of IPP(isopentenyl pyrophosphate) and DMAPP (dimethylallyl pyrophosphate)was shown to be important for monoterpene production. To this con-notation, we used the cre-loxP recombination system adapted mole-cular tools which enabled us to perform target insertions of theexogenous IDI1 gene into the yeast genome as well as subsequent re-cycling of the selection marker. Using these strains, plant SfCinS1-mo-noterpene synthase from the sage species Salvia fruticosa wasexpressed. The novel strains were robust, could sustain for an exten-ded period, and give 20-fold increase in monoterpenes than the stan-dard reference strain BY4741. Additionally, maximum monoterpeneproduction levels were obtained with co-expression from plasmids ofIDI1 and HMG2 (K6R) variant in the improved strain background. Fina-lly, the effects of media composition in long term production of plantterpenoids in yeast were examined as well as alternative moleculartools and procedures were established for cost reduction and addi-tional terpenoid yield increase.conclusionUsing the developed molecular tools, new yeast strains were genera-ted with increased capacity to produce mono- and sesquiterpenesthat can be further used for production of high value added com-pounds such as diterpenes, minor constituents of plants with a multi-tude of biological activities (antioxidants, cytostatic etc. ).referencesBuckingham J (2007): Dictionary of Natural Products on DVD. CRC Press.Chang, M. C. Y., and Keasling, J. D., (2006): Production of isoprenoid pharmaceuticalsby engineered microbes. Nature Chemical Biology.Gueldener U, Heinisch J, Koehler GJ, Voss D, Hegemann JH, (2002): A second set ofloxP marker cassettes for Cre-mediated multiple gene knockouts in budding yeast.Nucleic Acids Res, 30(6):e23.Ignea C, (2009): Engineering yeast for the production of plant terpenoids andcharacterization of their biosynthetic enzymes from Salvia sp. (Arabidopsis plantsoverexpressing select antioxidant genes exhibit resistance to oxidative stress andbacterial infection), PhD thesis, University of Crete, Department of Biology, Crete, Greece.Ignea C., Cvetkovikj I., Loupassaki S., Kefalas P., Johnson C.B., Kampranis S.C., MakrisA.M., (2011): Improving yeast strains using recyclable integration cassettes for theproduction of plant terpenoids, Microbial Cell Factories, 10(4).Nevoigt E, (2008): Progress in Metabolic Engineering of Saccharomyces cerevisiae,Microbiology and Molecular Biology Reviews, 72(3), 379-412.tools for eXperiMentAl designAnd AnAlYsis of eXtrActionprocess for plAnt MAtricesJana Klopcheska1, Renata Slaveska Raichki2,Vesna Rafajlovska11Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of "Ss. Cyril and Met-hodius", Skopje, Republic of Macedonia,2Faculty of Pharmacy, University of "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje,Republic of MacedoniaNumerous research results testify that mass transfer on analytes ofinterest from natural matrices is often qualified as a complex and themost time consumable step of the integral procedure required for fast,efficient and safe studies of chemical multicomplex systems.The appropriate choice of conditions for performing the extraction pro-cess have to ensure selective and maximum extraction of analytes fromthe matrix, while at the same time minimizing the eventual changes intheir structure [1,2,3,4]. Hence the greater interest for selection and ap-plication of mathematical models for defining the individual and inte-ractive influences of certain operational parameters, such as rationalapproach for designing and analyzing the experiments for conductingprocesses of extraction is absolutely justified and reasonable [5,6,7].In our researches, we applied tools for experimental design and ana-lysis of the process for extraction of chlorophylls by using the Stat-Soft software. The maceration has been performed at independentchangeable operational conditions, namely at 25oC extraction tem-perature, dynamic time in the range of change from 1 to 5 days, andquantity of solid and liquid phase from 2-10g and 40-100 mL, respec-tively, with ethanol as extraction means. The influence of the inde-pendent variables on the chlorophylls yield designated as dependentvariable has been studied.The results from the performed statistical analysis and the data obtai-ned from the equations that adequately describe the process of chlo-rophylls extraction, indicate that the quantity of used extraction meansis the most influential factor. The increase of the extraction meansquantity has a positive influence on the chlorophyll yield. The influenceof the time factor is also positive, but with lesser significance comparedto the influence of the extraction means quantity. As concerns the ana-lyzed system, it has been proven that the independent variable of solidphase quantity has a significantly negative influence on the dependentvariable. The examinations of interactive influences of independent va-riables confirm that there is a significant negative influence of the in-teraction between the quantity of solid phase and time of extraction.This indicates that the process is to be carried out with smaller quan-tity of solid phase and at shorter phase contact. Data analysis of the in-teraction of the quantity of extraction means and time has showed thatthe interaction is positively significant, but with lesser effect comparedto the effect of interaction of solid phase quantity and time.