The results demonstrate that dry extracts of the aerial parts of of Cen-taurium erythrea, contain flavonoids, xantones and iridoides withantihyperglycemic effects when administered to rats.217Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTSposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONANTIDIJABETIChNI I ANTI-LIPIDEMIChNI EFEKTI NA CENTAURIMERYTHREA L. (GENTIANACEAE)Gjoshe Stefkov1, Biljana Miova2, Suzana Dinevska-Kjovkarovska2, Jasmina Petreska2, MarinaStefova2, Gordana Petrushevska3, Svetlana Kulevanova11Farmatsevtski fakultet, Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, R. Makedonija 2Prirodno-matematichki fakultet, Gazi baba bb, 1001 Skopje, R.Makedonija3Meditsinski fakultet, Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, R. Makedonija Tsel na ovaa studija e da se dobijat soznanija za osnovnitebiokhemiski, antidijabetichni i antilipidemichni efekti na suvekstrakt dobien Centaurium erythrea L., (divo-rastechko rastenieod R.Makedonija). Izvrshena e kratkotrajna metanolna ekstraktsijaso ultrasonichna agitatsija (USA ekstraktsija) na suvi nadzemnidelovi na ispituvanoto rastenie. Ekstraktot (CE) potoa besheliofiliziran i izmereniot prinos na suviot ekstrakt iznesuvashe23,1%.So HPLC-DAD-ESI-MS analizite bea identifikuvani 4sekoiridoidi, 7 flavonoidni kheterozidi i 7 ksantoni, zastapeniso 53%, 25% i 22%, soodveten soodnos site komponenti vo suviotekstrakt. Portsenkata na antidijabetichniot efekt na CE-ekstraktot beshenapravena vrz osnova na ispituvanjata na aktivnosta/kontsen tra -tsi ja na kluchnite khepatalni enzimi/substrati od jaglekhidratniotmetabolizam i preku kontsentratsijata na glukozata i lipidiniotstatus kaj zdravi i streptozototsin- (STZ) dijabetichni staortsi.Kratkotrajniot (12-dneven) tretman na STZ-dijabetichnite staortsirezultirashe so 74% reduktsija na produtsiranata khiperglikemija,shto e za samo 6% poniska od reduktsijata na khiperglikemijatapredizvikana od tretmanot so glibenklamid (GLB), kako pozitivnakontrola. Suviot ekstrakt od CE predizvika znachajni promeni na nivo nakhepatalniot jaglekhidraten metabolizam, intenzi-virajkji ja direk -t nata sinteza na glikogen i namaluvajkji ja aktivnosta na glukoza-6-fosfatazata, so shto doagja do namaluvanje na pro duk tsi jata natsirkulatorna glukoza. Khistomorfoloshkite analizi na tsrniotdrob isto taka ukazhaa na akumulatsija na glikogen vo khe pa to tsitite.Od dolgotrajniot eksperiment (42 dena) za protsenka na efektite odkhronichen treman so CE (250 mg/kg) mozhe da se zakluchi dekaefektite vrz regulatsijata na nivoto na glukoza kaj dijabetichnitezhi votni se najgolemi na pochetokot na eksperimentot, za dapostepeno se namaluvaat kon krajot na istiot. Znachajno e da senaglasi deka vrednosta za HbA1c kaj CE grupata e poniska i odsrednata vrednost izmerena vo grupata tretirana so glibenklamid(pozitivna kontrola). Ova ukazhuva na faktot deka podolgotraen tretman so ekstraktotCE kaj dijabetichni zhivotni pozitivno vlijae i go regulirapokachenoto nivo na glukoza vo krvta, shto vo ovoj sluchaj e podobrootkolku regulatsijata so glibenklamid.Od site analizirani podatotsi i rezultati, vo ekstraktot od Cen-taurium erythrea L. identifikuvavme tri grupi na komponenti imnogu verojatno e deka site tri (gorchlivite iridoidi, koipredizvikuvaat stimulatsija na stomachnite zhlezdi, vkluchitelno ina pankreasot, ksantonite i flavonoidnite komponenti) seodgovorni za negoviot pozitiven antikhiperglikemichen efekt. Od protsenkata na antilipidemichniot efekt na CE, mozhe da sezakluchi deka istiot nema vlijanie na lipidniot status (vkupenkholesterol, triglitseridi i lipoproteinite so visoka i niskagustina) koj ostana skoro nepromenet za vreme na ispituvanjata,kako kaj zdravite, taka i kaj STZ-dijabetichnite staortsi. Dobienite rezultati ukazhuvaat deka suviot ekstrakt od Centauriumerythrea, sodrzhi flavonoidi, ksantoni i iridoidi, shto pokazhaaantikhiperglikemichen efekt pri in vivo administratsija kaj zdravii dijabetichni staortsi.ESSENTIAL OIL COMPOSITION OF WILDGROWING SAGE FROM R. MACEDONIAGjoshe Stefkov1, Ivana Cvetkovikj2, Marija Kara-pandzova1, Valbona Krluku1, Svetlana Kulevanova11Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss. Cyriland Methodius", Skopje, Macedonia.2Departmenet of Natural Products and Biotechnology, CentreInternational de Hautes Etudes Agronomiques Mediterraneennes,Mediterranean Agronomic Institute of Chania, Crete, Greece. INTRODUCTIONGenus Salvia has medicinal and horticultural importance as theyproduce many useful natural constituents including terpenes andflavonoids (Kelen and Tepe, 2007). They are counted as one of thelargest members of the Lamiaceae or mint family that includes around900 species and has an almost cosmopolitan distribution(Mediterranean, Asia Minor, Central Europe and America etc.). "Sage", the dialect name of the genus Salvia is attributed to differentspecies from these groups that are widely used in the food, drug andfragrance industry. The high diversity in their secondary metabolites(essential oils and the phenolic derivatives) isolated from sage plants,even today shown excellent antimicrobial activity as well asantioxidant capacity and some are used as anticancer agents or havehypoglycemic effect (Kintzios, 2000). Several species of Salvia includingS. officinalis (S. officinalis folium) and S. triloba (S. triloba folium) canbe found in many pharmacopeias (Flamini et.al., 2005). Although sageis an ancient spice and remedy, its importance today is quite limitedto the Medi terranean countries (starting from Italy till Greece).The Macedonian flora includes 37 species of this genus. Of the manyexisting Salvia species, Salvia Officinalis also known as "Dalmatiansage" or "Garden sage", has economic importance and can be used forpreparation of various herbal remedies and extracts with antisepticand antibacterial properties which are attributed to the rich chemicalcontent of the essential oil and proven by the modern medical science.Up to present there are no evident data about essential oilcomposition of S. officinalis populations growing in Republic ofMacedonia. The importances of S. officinalis dry our attention toexamine and identify the active ingredients of the essential oilsobtained by hydrodistillation of the sage leaves collected from R.Macedonia.MATERIALS AND METHODSThe Plant material from three different populations was harvest fromKaraorman Mtn., Galicica Mtn., and Jablanica Mtn., located in the218Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011MEDITsINSKI I AROMATIChNI RASTENIJA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOwestern part of Macedonia, nearby the Albanian border, during June2009/10. The leaves were air dried and stored until distillation.Essential oil isolation from sage leaves was performed byhydrodistillation in all-glass Clevenger apparatus (Ph. Eur.7). Thesamples were analyzed on Agilent 7890A Gas Chromatography systemequipped with FID detector and Agilent 5975C mass spectrometer.HP-5ms 5% phenyl 95 % dimethylpolysiloxane bonded phase capillarycolumn (30 m x 0.25 mm, film thickness 0.25 mm) was used. Operatingconditions were as follows: oven temperature at 60 degC for 5 min, thenincreased to 80 degC at rate of 1 degC/min and held 2 min and at the endincreased to 280 degC at rate of 5 degC/min and held 5 min; helium ascarrier gas at a flow rate of 1ml/min; temperature of the injector 260degC and that of the FID detector 270 degC; the GC split ratio 1:1. 1ml ofeach sample was injected per GC run. The mass spectrometryconditions were: ionization voltage 70 eV, ion source temperature 230degC, transfer line temperature 280 degC and mass range from 50 - 500 Da.The MS was operated in scan mode. Results and discussion: Sixty three components (37 monoterpenes, 17sesquiterpenes, 5 diterpenes and 4 other components) were identifiedin the essential oil from Galicica population, fifty seven (34 monoter-penes, 12 sesquiterpenes, 5 diterpenes and 6 other constituents) fromGlobocica and fifty one from Karaorman (27 monoterpenes, 13sesquiterpenes, 5 diterpenes and 6 other components- aromatic andaliphatic hydrocarbons, esters and etc). The most abundant con-stituents were the terpene hydrocarbons, encompassing the monoter-penes: camphor (13.151 - 25.907%), a-thujone (19.246 - 26.327%),a-thujone (2.033 - 5.275%), 1.8-cineole (6.508 - 13.603%), a-pinene (0.93- 1.472%), borneol (1.073 - 4.673%), the sesquiterpenes: trans (E)-caryophyllene (1.716 - 5.332%), a-humulene (2.893 - 7.987%), viridiflorol(4.273 - 7.987%), and the diterpene: manol (2.125 - 3.792%). Camphorwas the predominant compound in the essential oils of Galicica andGlobocica populations, and a-thujone in the samples from Karaorman.These results are comparable with the data listed for sage essentialoils where the analysis shows that the major constituent is thujone(35 to 60%) in two epimeric forms, the a-form of this keton is presentfrom 22.2 to 36.8% while a-thujone from 4.0 to 27.5%. The average dis-tribution of the other components is 18% camphor, 16% borneol, 15%1.8-cineol, 4.4% a-pinene, and 3.5% a-pinene (Hager, 2006, Ignea et.al.,2011, Avato et.al., 2005, Maksimovic et.al., 2007). CONCLUSIONThe qualitative essential oil composition extracted from S. officinalispopulations from R. Macedonia corresponds to the essential oilcomponents of Dalmatian sage.REFERENCESAvato P., Fortunato I.M., Ruta C., D'Elia R., (2005): Grandular hairs andessential oils in micropropagated plants of Salvia officinalis L., PlantScience, Vol.169, pp.29-36.Flamini G., Cioni P.L., Morelli I., Bader A., (2007): Essential oils of theaerial parts of three Salvia species from Jordan: Salvia lanigera, S.spinosa and S. syriaca, Food Chemistry, Vol.100, pp.732-735.Hager, (2006): Hagers Handbuch der drogen und Arzheinstoffe,Springer. Ignea C., Cvetkovikj I., Loupassaki S., Kefalas P., Johnson C.B.,Kampranis S.C., Makris A.M., (2011): Improving yeast strains usingrecyclable integration cassettes for the production of plantterpenoids, Microbial Cell Factories, Vol.10, No.4.Kelen M., Tepe B., (2007): Chemical composition, antioxidant andantimicrobial properties of the essential oils of three Salvia speciesfrom Turkish flora, Bioresource Technology.Kintzios S.E., (2000): Sage: the genus Salvia, Australia: HarwoodAcademic, Abingdon: Marston.Maksimovic M., Vidic D., Milosh M., Sholic M.E., Abadzic S., Siljak-Yakovlev S., (2007): Effect of the environmental conditions on essentialoil profile in two Dinaric Salvia species: S. brachyodon Vandas and S.officinalis L., Biochemical systematic and ecology, Vol.35, pp.473-478THE CONTENT OF MACRO AND MICRONU-TRIENTS IN DRIED NEEDLES ANDBRANCHES OF MACEDONIAN PINE (PINUSPEUCE GRISEB., PINACEAE) V.S. THEIRCONTENT IN THE PLANT RESIDUE AFTERDISTILLATION OF ESSENTIAL OILMarija Karapandzova1, Gjose Stefkov1, TrajceStafilov2, Katerina Baceva2, Svetlana Kulevanova11 Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University"Ss. Cyriland Methodius", Skopje, Macedonia2 Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics,University"Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, MacedoniaThe growth and development of plants depend to a large extend onthe physical-chemical characteristics of the soil, as well as availabilityof nutrients and their ration. Plants assimilate nutrients selectivelyand according to biological needs. All of them are necessary and nonecan be replaced by some other elements as each element has its ownfunctions (1). There are two defined criteria for an element to beessential for plant growth: in its absence the plant is unable tocomplete a normal life cycle or the element is part of some essentialplant constituent or metabolite (2). Nineteen chemical elements areknown to be important for a plant's growth and survival. These ele-ments are divided into two main groups: non-mineral and mineral. Thenon-mineral nutrients are hydrogen, oxygen and carbon and are foundin the air and water. In a process called photosynthesis, plants con-vert carbon dioxide (CO2) and water (H2O) into starch and sugar whichare indicate as plant's food. The 13 mineral nutrients, which comefrom the soil, are dissolved in water and absorbed through a plant'sroots. There are not always enough of these nutrients in the soil for aplant to grow healthy thus the reason why many farmers and gardenersuse fertilizers to add the nutrients to the soil. The mineral nutrientsare divided into macro and micronutrients. Macronutrients can beprimary (nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium) which are usuallylacking from the soil because plants use large amounts of these ele-ments for their growth and survival and secondary (calcium, magne-sium and sulfur) which are usually found in enough amounts especiallysulfur. This macronutrient generates from slow decomposition of soilorganic matter, an important reason for not throwing out grassclippings and leaves. Micronutrients (boron, copper, iron, chlorine,manganese, molybdenum, zinc, nickel, selenium and sodium) areessential for plant growth and are needed in very small (micro)quantities. These elements are known as minor or trace elements (2,3).