They drew from the assemblage of the natural whatever fitted with their own concept and they felt was appropriate in a particular situation. Although some of their comments indicated that they saw natural products and prescribed medicines as ideologically separate categories, they generally seemed to take the view that having access to all kinds or products in both categories gave them greater choice. Even those, like Vonnie, who made the comment about "pumping drugs into your body", were not averse to using prescribed medicines if they believed them appropriate to particular circumstances. They appeared to see this as practical and realistic rather than being concerned that it was inconsistent with their views on naturalness. Some did, however, comment on how disappointing it was that their doctors did not seem to have an equally open and flexible attitude to suggesting natural products as an option: I feel I have had some really good doctors through the years, I just don't feel that they ever even give the option for the natural way forward. It's usually, here's your whatever medication it is. (Penny) Another participant, Paul, drew attention to the way perceptions of a product could be manipulated by a simple labelling change; privileging a popular or botanical name of a herbal product would point out its simplicity and naturalness, but the chemical name component could be used in other circumstances to create a different impression: ...because of having chemical names for everything, people are actually looking for it to be simpler than that. The ones in our shampoo are extracted from the palm tree. The neem tree. And the active ingredient in it has got a chemical name - Azarydin [Azadirachtin]. So, people say, are they chemical free? But in actual fact they have got chemicals in them because everything has a chemical symbol of some sort. (Paul) Other examples of constructing products using different discourses that frame them as either 'natural' or a 'chemical' product are also easy to find. The wholesome sound of 'pure spring water' or 'naturally fermented cider vinegar' on labels, for example, creates quite a different perception than if the same products are described as H2O or E260 on another (Beebee & Sabbarton-Leary, 2010; Plessi, 2003). Naturalness is clearly not the "perfectly self-contained and self-sufficient" truth (Jackson and Mazzei, 2012: 18) that it may appear to be on the surface. The 'naturalness' of supplement products can easily be deconstructed to show the multiplicity of understandings and perceptions about them that unsettle the idea of a dualistic division between them and prescribed 60 medicines. While some participants appeared to accept their naturalness as being obvious and simple, they also seemed well aware that labelling something as 'natural' did not necessarily make it so. Others were self-reflexive, presenting thoughtful insights about the inconsistencies in what they said and what they actually did in their practices with supplements. The participants' comments reflected the tension and multiplicity that Derrida spoke about that keep ideas alive and make them productive instead of closing them in on themselves. 'Natural', it seemed, was a flexible enough descriptor to retain its overall salience as a concept but one that could be interpreted from a variety of perspectives and fit a variety of circumstances. As other writers have also noted, while everyday understandings about the natural are imprecise and can easily be deconstructed, it is a mistake to overlook the sentiments that they give rise to; the concept of naturalness has a broad and enduring appeal across cultural and philosophical differences, values and self-image (Johar & Siergy, 1991; Soper, 1998: 181). Importantly, ideas about what was natural were in process of change. It was clear from talking to the participants that their practices and the particular substances they thought of as natural were becoming even more nuanced as they continued to evolve. New products, new circumstances and experiences continued to arise, and new discourses and information continued to come to hand which fitted in one way or another with various individuals' view of what naturalness consisted of. Some of these changing aspects of the natural assemblage were highlighted by the participants, and are discussed below. The evolving assemblage of the natural: traditional, exotic, novel, ethical Many of the participants looked back to the past, referring to practices that had been used by their parents and grandparents when they spoke about their preference for natural products. They frequently drew on childhood memories, recalling simple home remedies that had been used at the time. They gave accounts of family illnesses being treated successfully with a minimum of fuss. There was a strong element of nostalgia in the way participants recalled these traditional practices using products that were readily to hand: My mother was a country girl, and my grandmother. In those days they were isolated, I suppose. There was always lemon honey for a sore throat, those sort of things. Baking soda for bites, vinegar for stings ... (Frances) Comments like this evoked an idyllic and comfortable past "... as it should have been" (Thomson, 2008: 4-5), when simple remedies sourced from home kitchens sufficed to soothe all ailments. 61 But as the epigram rather cleverly puts it, "Nostalgia is like grammar: the present is tense but the past is perfect" (Lowenthal, 2015).9 Common cultural narratives which draw on memories of a better, simpler past from which unpleasantness has been brushed away are a known phenomenon (Horton, 2008; Taylor, 2000). The (re)construction of childhood as being a utopian time, a golden age that has been displaced by modernity, according to Soper (1988: 188) is not just a contemporary phenomenon but can be found as far back as the beginning of recorded history. Many of the participants' reminiscences drew on this sort of familiar narrative. Interestingly, no matter whether their childhood years were quite recent or many decades behind them, participants of all ages spoke of their childhood as a time when household remedies had been used at home for family illnesses and "you didn't just pop down to the doctor for anything" (Johnny). They indicated that they were simply continuing this tradition by being self-reliant and using the knowledge that they had been brought up with. They framed their practices learned from their earlier years as 'natural' but it was clear that, even if they did not recognise it, both the participants and their 'natural' practices had changed and evolved considerably over time. Two of the Maori participants illustrated precisely how their traditions had drawn from the past but evolved over time, and for each of them in a different way. Caro had grown up in a farming family where rongoa (Maori traditional healing) was in everyday use. She explained that her grandmother was a skilled practitioner and her treatments worked "for us in the old days" but since then, attitudes and practices had changed: In my Nanny's days, there was always karakia [prayer], there was always a big process. It wasn't just about making rongoa and selling it and using it. There was all this pre- stuff, you stuff. ... See, at the Matatini [the national festival of Maori culture], and I'm not bagging them, but they had a tent with people in there doing massage and things and they had things in bottles. In my day, they didn't have that. You became unwell, Nanny went into the bush or wherever, got stuff, made stuff, and did the karakia, and did all the things before she applied or you took the stuff. It wasn't about going somewhere and buying stuff and taking it. That's where the difference is. (Caro) 9 Lowenthal (2015) cites this epigram and indicates in a footnote that this remark is of doubtful origin and is "attributed to radio historian Owens Lee Pomeroy or speechwriter Robert Orben." I have not been able to find any further source for this. 62 Caro was now a grandmother herself, and while she clearly regretted that the old ways were disappearing, she acknowledged that the social context had changed and the practices could not remain static, but had to adapt. The positive aspect, she went on to remark, was that interest in traditional Maori medicine was growing and being opened up to a much wider range of people. She wished that she knew enough to "educate people correctly", but noted that keeping strictly to the old traditions would not be an option for most people as the necessary natural substances were hard to find in urban environments. Another participant, Marama and her family, had a different way of adapting the older ways they knew. They had prioritised retaining one traditional practice they considered important to carry out in the original way they had learned. She and her husband had first-hand knowledge from elders in their family for brewing infusions from the leaves of the kawakawa tree (Piper excelsum). They went on family expeditions to rural areas to gather the leaves themselves, recited the traditional karakia (prayers) that had come down to them from older generations, and kept special utensils for brewing and processing the leaves into a liquid. In keeping with changing times, however, they kept the infusion in the fridge and mixed it with orange juice for their children to drink. Many of the other participants who recounted home health care practices from their past could also be seen to have adapted them as time passed and the context changed. They might still fall back on old home remedies like lemon and honey drinks, but equally they had added new and different options that were readily available. Glucosamine and magnesium, for example, which are clearly not kitchen cupboard essentials, were the most frequently mentioned products in the study, with many participants taking one or the other (or both) regularly. The evolution of health practices in just this way appears to be inevitable and is not necessarily something to be regretted. Moreover, it also happens in less developed countries where people's use of traditional practices is common but changes over time and when new circumstances arise. An example reported in a study of traditional health practices in Tanzania (Bignante & Tecco, 2013) showed that although some aspects of traditional medicines had been lost, people now had access to a wider range of health care options: herbal remedies and traditional healers, as well as doctors and allopathic medicines, all of which they found valuable. Somewhat paradoxically, the interest in home-made traditional medicines has given rise also to a surge of interest in the traditional medicines of distant societies that are made from substances little known to Western consumers (Connell, 2006; May, 1996). This fascination has been attributed to a type of nostalgia, not for a personal past, but for a utopian 'ideal' and a way of getting in touch with a simpler and more natural way of life that has retained what has been 63 lost by those living in contemporary Western society (Holbrook & Schindler, 2003; Pickering & Keightley, 2006). While this is clearly an oversimplification of the complexities involved (see Snodgrass & Tiedje, 2008), part of the appeal of unfamiliar substances seems to be in their exoticism, their 'otherness' and novelty "rather than any particular efficacy or medical merit" (Bivins, 2007: 12). There also appears to be an element of the mythologisation of indigenous cultures as exemplifying an authentic and uncorrupted way of living harmoniously with nature, a phenomenon that Davidov describes as: burgeoning worldwide, creating instances of performed culture through a web of commodification connecting the indigenous producers, brokering their own culture with Western consumers that come in search of their fantasies (2012: 482). Two examples of these 'new' products sought by Western consumers are powdered maca root (Lepidium meyerii) from the Peruvian Andes (Gonzales 2012), and Garcinia cambogia (Nayak et al 2010), a fruit from Indonesia. The medicinal uses of maca and garcinia have been well known for centuries in their places of origin but have only recently entered the 'natural health' range in health stores and pharmacies. Loyer and Knight (2018) in their case study of maca, show that the discourses around this so-called 'Inca superfood' draw on an idealised framing of the people of the Andes as living in a nutritional utopia where plants are grown using traditional and timeless methods, presenting it in contrast to the industrialisation of the developed countries where it has suddenly become popular. Certainly, products containing maca or garcinia were heavily promoted in the print publications that I collected during the course of this study, often with reference to their exotic origins. So while the assemblage of the natural includes discourses of simplicity, homeliness, and memories of the past, it may also evolve to encompass those products which are unfamiliar but seem appealing both because of their exoticism in the individual's particular context and the idea they convey of a more 'natural' way of life. Pickering et al (2006) have argued that nostalgia is not necessarily a regressive longing for the past, but can also accommodate progressive ideals for change. One participant, for example, spent much of the interview enthusiastically describing his recent discovery of a new and exotic product known as etherium gold, which, he told me had originated with the pharaohs of ancient Egypt 2000 years ago, and which he was able to obtain online: ....this is a white powder a nano-particle white powder. They found that throughout Egypt ... there's some temples in Syria that are Egyptian that have every pharaoh there 64 and it's dedicated to gold and all they found inside was massive amounts of this white powder. And this is what they put in the bread and the mana and everything else that the pharaohs ate that let them contact the after-life. (Cliff) It seemed as if its main appeal for him was in its novelty, exoticism and links to a distant mythical past rather than any particular naturalness. But rather than nostalgia for his own, or an ancient past, he appeared to be using the novel substance as a means to progress and renew his life in which, he told me, he had at times become trapped in negative and damaging behaviour patterns which he regretted and had now put behind him. Some participants, in contrast, were uncomfortable about the idea of exotic products, commenting on their decided preference for products to which they felt a connection to their own environment: I feel like our natural environment where we live affects us and what is grown in that environment I feel generally is what is good for the climate and the people that are living there. And when you start getting things from overseas and all over the place out of season and what not, then sometimes you can disturb the balance that you have to you as a person living in the environment and right now. (Bryony) People with this kind of preference for the local product have been described elsewhere as 'ethnocentric' consumers (Batra et al., 2000; Haque & Maheshwari, 2015), that is, individuals who relate their health and social practices to feelings about their own culture and environmental surroundings. Olivia was another such individual; even more than Bryony, she voiced active disapproval of exoticism and found it to be a form of cultural appropriation, an attempt to 'buy' into traditions that had no place out of their own context: I have a distaste for a lot of that ... new ageism, stuff that goes into things that I don't understand why you would want to connect to something that is so foreign. ... On the other hand, if you are connecting to traditions that your ancestors have practised for thousands and thousands of years but have been displaced through colonisation or other effects of migration, for me, that's an entirely appropriate way back to source. (Olivia) Olivia is not alone in viewing the 'exotic' in this way. Davidov (2011:483), while primarily discussing eco-primitivism, has referred to the appeal of the exotic as a form of retro- colonialism, where fragments of nature serve to connect the user to "post-colonial fantasies of an authentic pre-industrial harmonious fusion of nature and culture". But this too is not as clear 65 cut as it seems; what is 'natural' and what is 'exotic' evolves over time and space and is never static. Many plants now perceived as being local and natural in New Zealand, are not natives, but arrived with European colonisation in the 19th century. Centuries before that, the kumara, a staple of the pre-European diet for Maori, was in its turn brought to New Zealand from islands in the Pacific and adapted for New Zealand growing conditions (Law, 1970; Yen, 1963). Additionally, participants' interpretations of what was 'naturally' found locally tended to vary depending on their own life trajectory. Bryony quoted above, indicated that for her, it was plants that grew in her own garden and nearby, regardless of where they were originally from. Devon, on the other hand, who had come to New Zealand quite recently as an adult, did not consider the herbs she knew from her home country as being 'local' to her new surroundings: So that is perhaps another unique thing here, that we use western medicine - or western herbs, which actually have to be [imported] - well some of them grow here now - but they are not natives here. (Devon) Even very recent 'exotics' that have come into favour as components in natural products, such as the goji berry plant (Lycium barbarum), can now be bought from plant nurseries in New Zealand by the home gardener, demonstrating that being 'local' is a dynamic concept that resists being bounded to a physical place once it becomes established in another. Modern communications and population movements, globalisation and multiculturalism give rise to co-mingling and fusion of cultures that at the same time "dilutes, enriches and alters individual cultures" (Craig & Douglas, 2006: 323). So the assemblage of the 'local' and 'exotic' is made up of individual connections, and is continually evolving, including, in the world of herbal medicines. Another evolving meaning of the 'natural' that came to light in the study was an implication that natural products are environmentally sustainable and therefore an ethically responsible choice (Soper, 1998: 2; Todd, 2004). A considerable number of the participants commented on their preference for the Kiwiherb(r) range of herbal medicines, where both the name and the use of New Zealand native plant products indicate that it is literally, 'rooted' in the local environment: ...we are developing a whole lot more natural based products within New Zealand compared to way back then, which is interesting...maybe it's the clean, green image that we have. ... Maybe the greeny side of people in New Zealand who are conscious of the carbon footprint as well, whether that comes into it ... accessibility, I think we are more looking after our own in our own little space.