(Lesley) 66 Here Lesley is drawing on discourses that construct the New Zealand environment as a pristine land of natural landscapes symbolised by the international marketing promotion that has been used to advertise New Zealand tourism and agricultural products as '100 percent pure' (Desmarais, 2015; Patil, 2019). Though easily deconstructed to show that the New Zealand environment cannot live up to this impossible claim, the belief that New Zealand has a unique and largely unspoilt natural environment has tended to persist. The use of New Zealand products in supplements resonated strongly with other 'ethnocentric' (Batra et al., 2000) participants who valued home-grown products that they found familiar and culturally congruent with their own upbringing. Lesley's comment about being conscious of the carbon footprint also touches on the concept of reducing the environmental impact of bringing imported products in to New Zealand when they can be produced on site, and implicitly draws on concepts related to the wider discourses around climate change and human behavior that affect the natural environment (Holden et al., 2014; Stephenson et al., 2013). While the Kiwiherb(r) products appear to live up to their reputation of using (at least some) home grown ingredients, labels that claim naturalness do not always live up to what they imply. The phenomenon of 'borrowing' an aura of naturalness but without any grounds for doing so is known as 'greenwashing' and is a way of promoting sales by linking to discourses of sustainability and naturalness that resonate with consumers. 'Greenwashing' has been described in the supplement field (Todd, 2004), as well as in the marketing of organic foods and fair trade products (Jaffee, 2010; Jaffee & Howard, 2010). Moreover, even if products themselves are genuinely naturally grown and produced, there may be other perverse effects if a particular plant becomes the focus of a wave of global attention. One participant raised this issue in relation to the surge of interest in honey and oils from manuka [Leptospermum scoparium], a New Zealand native plant that grew prolifically in her home area: An American company had come in to the Hokianga [a rural area in the north of New Zealand] and bought some land up there that had loads and loads of manuka. There were acres of it full of manuka .... it is going to America and they are putting it in plasters and bandages. ... What that spoke to me was, why didn't Maori get on to this? Why are we leaving Americans to come and buy our land and we can't even buy it? Then they speak of - we are going to bring work into the Hokianga, we're going to bring revenue - of course it hasn't happened. I think they are getting Norwegians and Germans, you know, tourists, student visas, to work, to do that, and not the locals. (Marama) 67 Not only had the local population missed any benefit as Marama suggested, but the swift rise in global demand for manuka products had been acutely negative. The so-called 'manuka honey wars' had broken out; thefts, vandalism, violent beatings of competitors, outsiders coming into the area, uplifting or sabotaging competitors' hives, poisoning the bees, and putting long-term beekeepers who understood the sensitivity of the local ecology out of business (Neal, 2016; Roy, 2016). A different set of adverse consequences from the same popular demand for naturally grown herbal products in Nepal was reported by Kunwar et al (2013). Whereas local people had been able to gain an extra means of livelihood for their families by gathering and selling the plants (Larsen & Olsen, 2007; Olsen & Larsen, 2003), the lack of an overall strategic plan for sustainability had "pushed many of Nepal's medicinal plants to the brink of extinction" (Kunwar et al., 2013:1). So while both the manuka products and the Nepalese medical plants were certainly 'natural' by one reckoning, they resulted in environmentally and ethically questionable situations. This kind of blending of the natural into the different, new, or 'other' also seemed to be linked to a further phenomenon that I encountered on my pharmacy and health store visits. Some of the products in the 'natural health' section were branded with names that made them seem more like a chemical or pharmaceutical, rather than anything obviously 'natural'. Examples included CoQ10 (Co-enzyme Q10), Kyolic (a garlic extract), and curcumin (from turmeric), all of which are derived directly from natural substances. Kerry, a participant who worked in one of the stores I visited showed me sample sachets of both Kyolic and CoQ10 that she gave out as a trial for customers who wanted something that might enable them to cut down or even substitute for some of their prescribed medicines that they believed were giving them negative reactions: ...there seems to be a little bit more sensitivity coming in to drugs. I can't take that because it reacts with me so I take CoQ10 and Kyolic instead for my blood pressure, that sort of thing. I'm not sure whether that's because I am dealing with it more often or because that's a trend. (Kerry) Deliberately branding products with a name that conveys neither what the product does, nor the common name for what it is, seems a puzzling strategy. Several things may possibly be happening here at once that make the seemingly counter-intuitive label work: the name is both novel and intriguing so that a certain mystique is generated for those who are attracted to something 'other'. Moreover, because it is shelved in the 'natural health' space and alongside products with functional names for similar conditions, those whose prime need is to stick with 'natural' products may be reassured, even though the name seems obscure at first sight. 68 Conversely, it may also be that the more 'medicinal' sounding name may reassure others new to or suspicious of 'alternatives'. Deconstructing the natural shows how it "opens things up for] the "incoming of the other" (Derrida, 1997: 77) and undermines the notion of a sharp dividing line between what is natural and what is not. The participants' comments about what was natural were at once far more nuanced and also far more productive of change and development than the polarised oppositions that see separately bounded categories between natural products and prescribed medicines. A spectrum of meanings of naturalness could be accommodated within the assemblage around supplements no matter where individual participants drew their own line between what they considered natural or not. The diverse products, public and private discourses, experiences and understandings of the participants and the unique connections that each person had made between them formed a complex network of actions and interactions around ideas of what was natural. Past and present, novelty and tradition, exoticism and localness, environmental sustainability, all were tangled together and connected to naturalness in different ways. Names of products could be highlighted as simple natural substances, or presented to appear more like a medicine. Older ideas might fall out of favour and be discarded, or just as easily be reformulated or reimagined to suit changing times. The connections and relationships between the many components could be arranged and rearranged according to the interpretation of different individuals, in a constant state of immanence, connecting to "the semantic and pragmatic contents of statements, to collective assemblages of enunciation, to a whole micropolitics of the social field" (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987: 6). Together all these perspectives of the natural formed an intricate and complex rhizomatic assemblage that was constantly in a state of becoming and changing. Woven into the components of the natural was a further notion as yet only touched on; the idea that natural products have integrity; they are pure, complete in themselves, whole and untampered with by human interference. As such they are often described as 'holistic' and the use of them to be a part of an 'holistic' approach to health care. The next section of the chapter examines the various interpretations of this ubiquitous word that were manifested in the discussions with the participants. Holism and holistic health Studies examining the preferences of users of alternative products and therapies have commonly accepted participants' assertions of the preference for 'holistic' health without 69 further analysis or comment (Barrett et al., 2003; Doel & Segrott, 2003; Sointu, 2013; Vickers et al., 2006). Peters et al (2003: 121) for example, report without further comment, that the people they talked to stated they wished "to take a more holistic approach to treatment and health." Similarly, Vickers et al. (2005: 5) found that participants in their study "preferred a more natural way of healing embedded in a holistic approach". The underlying idea in all these attempts seems to be that holistic health care is everything that 'reductionist' health care is not (Bell et al., 2002; Plsek & Greenhalgh, 2001). Participants, too, talked about holistic health as a desirable approach that went beyond biomedical care. Lesley, a health store owner, for example described her approach to clients as: .... putting the jigsaw puzzle together for them and then I can make a much better go at supporting whatever system is down or supporting where they are coming from - a holistic approach, if you know what I mean. (Lesley) The term holistic as it is used in general speech today, however, is itself an assemblage of ideas that span almost any area of human endeavour. While 'holistic' is frequently seen in relation to health and health care, it is also used as a descriptor for fields as diverse as computing (Soomro et al., 2016), religion (Parmer & Rogers, 1997), organic farming (Hole et al., 2005), entrepreneurialism (Jensen, 2014), human resources management (Hecklau et al., 2016), the organisation of government services (Dawes et al., 2004) and many more. Health practitioners who describe themselves as holistic range from registered medical professionals in general practice on the one hand (RNZGP, Undated), to alternative therapists offering services such as "a holistic pulsing journey to peace awareness and healing" (Murray, Undated). It is no wonder then there is a "plurality of understandings of holism, [that] encapsulate a fluid spectrum of perspectives"(Nissen, 2011: 80) covering scientific, sociological and metaphysical world views. As Kretchmar (2013: 23) notes succinctly, "much traffics under the name of holism today". There are two vastly different philosophical approaches to holism. The first of these, the cosmic or metaphysical view of holism, has its origins in the eastern religions of Hinduism, Taoism, and Buddhism (Cobb et al., 2012; Erickson, 2007; Shroff, 2011). Holism in this sense is the belief that all matter, whether human or non-human, is unified by a life force; the self is merely a small part of the collective which in turn is part of the wider cosmos (Joshanloo, 2014; Shroff, 2011). The abnegation of the self and its desires are viewed as the way to achieve inner peace and harmony rather than the individualism and autonomy which are more generally admired in Western societies (Ricard, 2011; Shamasundar, 2008). The same fundamental belief in a unifying life force that permeates all matter is also shared by many indigenous cultures including Canadian First 70 Nations (Auger et al., 2016; Hunter et al., 2006), African and South American traditional healing systems (Izquierdo, 2005; Truter, 2007). Similarly, in the Maori world, the life force (mauri) exists in all things, binding people to the environment and to the whole cosmos (Mark & Lyons, 2010; Roberts et al., 1995): Everything is related - people (living and dead), land, sea, flora and fauna, and the spiritual world. Land, sea, wind, and other environmental elements .... A person's well- being [is] intimately linked to the wellbeing of all others, human or non-human (Waitangi Tribunal, 2011: 64). In the metaphysical view of holism, an individual is intimately connected with everything around them and their health and wellbeing will be disrupted if their body, mind, and spirit are out of balance within themselves, or within their wider family, society or natural environment. The other major approach to holism was first proposed by Smuts in his 1926 publication Holism and Evolution (Erickson, 2007; Freeman, 2005; Nissen, 2011). Smuts' defined holism as a state where the body, mind, and spirit are in perfect balance within each individual. If this state is achieved, the totality constitutes more than the sum of its parts. It is a creative synthesis where "all parts reciprocally influence and determine each other..." (Smuts 1926: 86 cited in Nissen 2011:77). Adherents to this view of holism dismiss the life-force, or metaphysical approach to holism as belonging to "primitive and closed belief systems" (Baum, 1998). They prefer to distance themselves from it, terming it 'vitalism', and describe it as superstitious, anti-scientific, and lacking in intellectual rigour (Nissen, 2011). Smuts himself described cosmic holism as "...a vague expression, already ruined by popular use and abuse" (Smuts 1926: 86 cited in Nissen 2011:77). Much contemporary writing, however, seems to subscribe to neither of the two theoretical approaches entirely but to draw from both in a range of widely different combinations. Where definitions are attempted they seldom agree with one another; some incorporate metaphysical elements while others do not (Erickson, 2007; Goldstein et al., 1988; Hoffmann, 1988; McColl, 1994; Shroff, 2011; Sointu, 2013). One commentator, for example, states that holistic health promotes "integrative energy that pervades, unites and directs all human dimensions" (Goddard, 1995: 810), while another (Shroff, 2011: 245) proposes that the term 'holistic health care' can be used "interchangeably with alternative or complimentary [sic] medicine". Orthodox medical practices too draw very different meanings from the term. A New Zealand 'integrative' medical practice indicates it follows "an holistic philosophy...addressing body, mind and spirit" (Helios Health, Undated), but the definition by the Royal New Zealand College of General 71 Practitioners omits any reference to things spiritual, or even emotional. Their definition, instead, refers to the way health services are provided, contrasting specialist with generalist care: Where hospital doctors often focus on just one part of your body, a GP looks at your whole body, your background, and the environment you live in when diagnosing illnesses and prescribing treatments. This is known as holistic healthcare (RNZGP, Undated). McEvoy and Duffy (2008: 413) attempt to pin down exactly what holism is and provide a detailed analysis of what they term the "nebulous and subjective" concept of holism. However, the lengthy table of components they list appears to add further to the confusion and demonstrates the futility of trying to provide a bounded definition. Their efforts underline yet again Derrida's insistence that any attempt to "totalize, to gather" into a unified and bounded definition is doomed to failure and will always run up against "the limit it had to encounter" (Derrida 1997: 13). My own ideas about holism and holistic health were just as ill-defined at the time of the interviews and I accepted what the participants said without exploring further how they understood the concept of holism. It was only on analyzing the data that I realised how vague and undefined the participants' statements were when they mentioned holistic health, although clearly they all recognised it as something positive to aspire to. None of them referred directly to either of the philosophical approaches to holism, and none reflected on the meaning of the term as several had done when talking about what was natural. Nevertheless, on closer examination of the participants' comments, I was able to distinguish a number of underlying concepts that provided some insights into the meanings that they associated with the aspiration for an holistic approach to caring for their health. Balance and uniqueness of the person Foremost among the ideas participants expressed regarding holistic health were their various interpretations of 'balance'. Balance (or harmony) is an important and uncontroversial concept in holism (McEvoy & Duffy, 2008; Shroff, 2011) and one which is common to both the cosmic 'life force' and the 'integrated individual' theoretical approaches. 72 I would say I am into holistic, without being over the top. I'm into the whole thing about doing the best you can for your body, looking after yourself, everything in moderation kind of. (Frances) Frances here interprets the idea of balance as moderation and avoiding extremes. There is a suggestion in her comment that she applies the idea of balance not only to her physical health but to other areas of her life as well. For Murray on the other hand, the idea of balance was about the physical body alone and the use of supplements was to ensure he had what he believed to be the 'correct' mix of nutrients for good health: ...the unpaired electrons attack unhealthy cells trying to balance themselves. Well if, for whatever reason, the body is slightly run down, the baddies can overwhelm the goodies and invade the body. So if the body is healthy through having all the sufficient minerals, vitamins and amino acids, it can stay at that higher level of health and fitness. (Murray) Wendy similarly focused on the body and the importance that she and her husband placed on "getting the balance right" by adding various supplements to their diet in addition to the food they ate. Bryony's views, on the other hand, were more aligned with the concept of the body as an integrated whole; in her view, she said, any health care treatment should be designed to address a person's "unique way of disharmony" and restore their "whole body balance". Other participants, however, seemed to connect their idea of balance with cosmic holism. In the discussion with Tracy, for example, she referred to being guided by the Maori model of health which uses the metaphor of a house with four pillars, all of which must be equally strong to keep everything in balance.