Controlling blood glucose levels is one of the main goals of every therapeutic approach used to treat the disease in order to avoid complications that could result in premature death of T2D patients. In developing countries such as Mexico, diabetic patients consume infusions of medicinal plants to control this disease. In particular, the usage of the aerial parts of Eryngium cymosum F. Delaroche by locals of Tlanchinol and Huejutla de Reyes municipalities was detected in the Hidalgo state. Hence, we aimed to assess the hypoglycemic effect of its traditional extract and then it was evaluated on two of the main mechanisms responsible of fasting and post-prandial hyperglycemia: gluconeogenesis and carbohydrate breakdown by alpha-glucosidases. In addition, insulin was measured in the two conditions to stablish a link between the hypoglycemic effect and insulin-related mechanisms. The results showed that the E. cymosum extract exerted a significant hypoglycemic effect in STZ-NA rats that could be related to the inhibition of gluconeogenesis since the extract held a significant anti-hyperglycemic effect in pyruvate tolerance tests (AUC reduction of 38%). Moreover, it powerfully inhibited the activity of glucose-6-fosfatase and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase (91% and 96%, respectively). On the other hand, it was able to significantly decrease the post-prandial hyperglycemia in maltose tolerance tests (AUC reduction of 46%) regardless of a modest inhibition of alpha-glucosidase activity (32%). Finally, insulin levels were unchanged after the administration of the extract indicating that its hypoglycemic effect is not associated to insulin-related mechanisms. In conclusion, the traditional consumed form of E. cymosum presents a hypoglycemic effect that is mainly related to its inhibitory capacity of gluconeogenesis, contributing to the reduction of fasting and post-prandial hyperglycemia.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org23420th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP122. Amelioration of insulin resistance and inhibition of gluconeogenic rate-limiting enzymes by 3 Mexican medicinal plants.G. Mata-Torres, A. Andrade-CettoLaboratory of Ethnopharmacology, School of Science, National Autonomous University of Mexico, MexicoType 2 diabetes (T2D) is a disease that affects the metabolism of carbohydrates, lipids and proteins partially due to insulin resistance. The liver of a diabetic patient produces 35 g extra of glucose per day because of hepatic insulin resistance; therefore, inhibiting the hepatic glucose production is a good target for the control of high glucose levels. In traditional medicine, Ageratina petiolaris (Ap), Cecropia obtusifolia (Co) and Equisetum myriochaetum (Em) have been used by people in some communities of the Hidalgo State in Mexico for the treatment of T2D. In previous works we demonstrate their hypoglycemic effect as well as the effect over gluconeogenesis in a pyruvate tolerance tests in STZ-NA hyperglycemic rats. Therefore, the aim of this study was to stablish whether this effect was caused by allosteric inhibition of rate-limiting enzymes of the gluconeogenic pathway. Additionally, the effect of the extracts on insulin resistance was assessed in STZ-NA hyperglycemic rats. The results showed that, after 42 days of treatment, extracts of Ap, Co and Em reduced both glucose and triglyceride levels of the hyperglycemic rats. The extracts also improved glucose tolerance by reducing the AUC glucose vs the control. Furthermore, Ap and Co reduced HOMA-IR indices. The enzymatic assays showed that while the extracts of Ap and Co inhibited the enzyme glucose-6-phosphatase (G-6-Pase) (IC50 = 223 and 146 mg/ml, respectively), Em did not. Moreover, fructose-1,6-bisphosphatase (F-1,6-BisPase) was inhibited by the three extracts (IC50 = 41, 238 and 64 mg/ml, respectively). In conclusion, the inhibition of gluconeogenesis exerted by these plants could be explained by the reduction of the activity of either G-6-Pase or F-1,6-BisPase and additionally they decreased insulin resistance, which contribute to diminish the glucose levels.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 23520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP123. Nerolidol induced apoptosis in blader carcinoma (TCC SUP cell line) by activation of p38 MAPK signaling pathway.M. Radan1, M. Glumac2, V. Cikes Culic21 Faculty of Chemistry and Technology, University of Split, Croatia2 School of Medicine, University of Split, CroatiaNerolidol is a sesquiterpene alcohol occurring in many essential oils. In recent years it has been a subject of numerous studies showing many beneficial properties which could be used to treat broad range of health problems including viral, bacterial, fungal and parasitic infections, inflammation and cancer. The aim of present work is to investigate the effect of nerolidol on human bladder carcinoma (TCC SUP cell line) and the pathway leading to apoptosis.In order to assess the pathway leading to apoptosis of TCC SUP cell line induced by nerolidol, series of tests were performed. Cell proliferation assay, conducted by means of MTT staining, was used to determine cytotoxicity of nerolidol on investigated cell line. As a reference, well known chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin was used. To find out the mode by which nerolidol is decreasing the number of the cells, apoptosis quantification using Annexin/PI staining was used. In order to provide additional information about apoptosis induced in the cell culture, impact of nerolidol on two signaling molecules (Ca2+ and cAMP) was determined. To further demonstrate that apoptosis is the main way involved in nerolidol-induced cell death, immunostaining of p38 MAPK proteins was done. Results suggest nerolidol induces apoptosis by activating p38 MAPK signaling pathway. Cell proliferation assay suggests nerolidol has a cytotoxic effect on tested cells in concentration and time dependent manner. Anexin/PI test done for nerolidol concentration of 0.05 mg/mL after 48-hour incubation, confirms that nerolidol induces apoptosis in TCC SUP cells. Immunostaining results show increase in active p38 enzyme forms suggesting inducement of apoptosis by this signaling pathway. Nerolidol induces a strong calcium release from endoplasmic reticulum after drug administration. Administration of nerolidol increases level of cAMP suggesting nerolidol activates adenylate cyclase.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org23620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP124. Chemical and Pharmacological Progress on a Tibetan Folk Medicine Formula Bawei Chenxiang Powder.X.L. Gao, J.M. Wang, J.R. Cao, L.L. Kang, Z.Z. Yang, S.N. Wuken, J.J. Li, P.F. Tu, X.Y. ChaiModern Research Center of Traditional Chinese Medicine, School of Chinese Materia Medica, Beijing University of Chinese Medicine, Beijing, ChinaBawei Chenxiang Powder (BCP) is a traditional Tibetan folk medicine formula which has been used in clinic for more than 1300 years. It includes the resinous wood of Aquilaria sinensis, kernel of Myristica fragrans, fruit of Choerospondias axillaris, travertine, resin of Boswellia carterii or B. bhaw-dajiana, stem of Aucklandia lappa, fruit of Terminalia chebula (roasted), and flower of Gossampinus malabarica. BCP has the function of clearing heart heat, nourishing heart, tranquilizing mind, and inducing resuscitation in traditional medicine. Modern research shows that the chemical composition of BCP mainly contains terpenoids (sesquiterpenes, triterpenes), polyphenols (flavonoids, lignans), and tannins, which exert the pharmacological activities such as anti-myocardial ischemia, anti-cerebral ischemia, spatial learning and memory promotion. However, most chemical studies are the single herbs of BCP and lack of the overall analysis of this formula considering the cross-reaction of compound ingredients. Based on the multi-component, multi-path and multi-target effects, the modern technologies such as metabolomics, system pharmacology, system biology and others were used to investigate the material basis and mechanism of action of BCP. In short, as a typical representative of valuable resources of Chinese medicine, BCP is widely used in Tibetan and Mongolian traditional medicine that are worthy of further study and beneficial to the solution of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 23720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP125. Anti-ovarian cancer activity of Zaleya decandra against the human ovarian teratocarcinoma cell line PA1 by impairing mitochondrial activity.M. Deivasigamani1, V. Rajapandian1, S. Muthusami1,2, H. Lakshmanan1,21 Department of Biochemistry, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Tamil Nadu, India2 Karpagam Cancer Research Centre, Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Tamil Nadu, IndiaOvarian cancer is a major challenge to public health and globally stands seventh in the most common cancers and eighth in most cancer deaths among women. Despite its rare occurrence, ovarian cancer remains the deadliest form of gynecological malignancy. Even though treatments such as surgery, chemotherapy, immunotherapy, radiotherapy are available, the percentage of adverse effects is light with low survival rate. In the era of new therapeutic drugs for various ailments, medicinal plants and natural compounds are promising alternatives for cancer treatment. Zaleya decandra is one such medicinal plant attracting researchers to explore the biomedical importance of the plant. Considering the pharmacological significance of Z. decandra, the current research work was put forth for the first time to validate the in vitro anti-proliferative activity of ethanolic root extract of Zaleya decandra (EEZD) against the human ovarian teratocarcinoma cell line (PA1). The preliminary phytochemical analysis showed the presence of alkaloids, terpenoids, phenolics, flavonoids, tannins, and sterols. The increase in the generation of ROS in Z. decandra treated cells indicate that the phyto-constituents present in the extract alone or in combination could have targeted this enzyme while exerting anti-proliferative effects. The mitochondrion membrane potential (MMP) in Z. decandra treated PA-1 cells using cationic fluorescent dyes displayed a drastic reduction in the rhodamine binding indicating reduced mitochondrial activity. ROS induced DNA damage by Z. decandra in ovarian cancer cell is evident as stained by AO/EtBr which could probably be mediated by ROS induced inhibition of PARP-1 by the constituents present in Z. decandra. Therefore the present study warrants extensive investigation using pre-clinical model system to substantiate the findings. Since the toxicological studies report the safety of Zaleya decandra, it promises to emerge as a possible alternative drug to treat ovarian cancer.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org23820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP126. Evaluation and analysis of clinical value of phytotherapeutic potential of natural herbal medicines in the treatment of asthma.W.T. Liao1,2, C.C. Su31 Institute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan 2 Chinese medicine department, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan3 Post Baccalaureate Medicine, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, TaiwanAsthma is one of the most common chronic diseases with a multifactorial etiology that is characterized by chronic airway inflammation. Affecting approximately 358 million people worldwide. Over the past decades, the global prevalence, mortality, morbidity, and economic burden of asthma have increased. The treatment response for a particular patient may be difficult to predict due to the heterogeneous nature of asthma. For many decades, natural herbal medicines, polyherbal formulations and decoctions of plant-derived materials have widely been accepted as alternative complementary therapies for the treatment, cure or prevention of a wide range of chronic airway inflammation diseases including chronic sinusitis, chronic otitis media, chronic pharyngitis, chronic rhinitis, and chronic laryngitis and asthma. This review was aimed to summarize and critically discuss about the therapeutic viability and clinical applicability of natural herbal medicines for the treatment of asthma in human. The critical analysis of the literature revealed that oral and acupuncture application of natural herbal medicines exhibit remarkable potential for the treatment of asthma in adults. In this review, the clinical efficacy of various herbal formulations such as Chinese herbal formula therapies, single herb therapies, acupuncture and diet therapy for the treatment of asthma has been discussed. Conclusively, we recognized that natural herbal medicines demonstrate remarkable clinical efficacy when used alone or in conjunction with other complementary therapies for the treatment of asthma patients.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 23920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP127. Insights into the distribution and diverse applications of southern African indigenous Kei-apple as a potential candidate for commercialization.A.O. AremuFood Security and Safety Niche Area, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, North West University, Mmabatho, North West Province, South AfricaIndigenous Knowledge Systems (IKS) Centre, Faculty of Natural and Agricultural Sciences, North West University, Mmabatho, North West Province, South AfricaGlobally, there is an increasing awareness of the importance of indigenous plants in new product development. However, existing basic and fundamental information on interesting indigenous plants need to be critically examined in order to provide a foolproof pathway for commercialization. Kei-apple known as Dovyalis caffra L. is a member of the family Salicaceae. Presently, Kei-apple is found in many southern African countries such as South Africa, Swaziland, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia and Zimbabwe. Furthermore, the plant is widely reported in most of the provinces in South Africa. An estimated 28 different genotypes from different parts of South Africa are currently maintained in a National facility (Agricultural Research Council farm, Friedenheim, Nelspruit, Mpumalanga Province; 25.4884deg S; 30.4028deg) in South Africa. Kei-apple is recognized as an underutilized wild fruit with great potential and high commercial prospect. In ethno-medicine, the value of different parts of Kei-apple for treating different disease conditions in humans and livestock is well-recognized. Kei-apple is used for producing jelly jam, nectars and fruit leather and home-made beverage. As a result of its durability and presence of thorn, it is highly preferred for fencing (forming an impenetrable hedge) gardens in rural communities. Sales of the fruit also serve as source of income in some parts of South Africa. These aforementioned diverse applications provide the basis for more focused and co-ordinated research to fully explore the commercial potential locked in Kei-apple. Thus, critical aspects especially detailed basic research in the botany for selection of genotype(s) with desired traits is paramount. In addition, effective propagation approach/protocol and efficient orchard management need to be devised in order to optimize fruit yields for the anticipated commercialization demands.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org24020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP128. Evaluation of the antiproliferative effect of the Pinaropappus roseus Less. Phenolic aqueous extract on MCF-7 and HeLa cells.I. Arriaga-Gonzalez1, L.L. Mendez-Lagunas1, J. Rodriguez-Ramirez1, S. Sandoval-Torres1, L.V. Aquino-Gonzalez1, L.G. Barriada-Bernal21 Instituto Politecnico Nacional, Centro interdisciplinario de Investigacion para Desarrollo Integral Regional (CIIDIR-IPN), unidad Oaxaca. Santa Cruz Xoxocotlan, Mexico2 Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnologia (CONACYT). Santa Cruz Xoxocotlan, Oaxaca, Mexico.The biological activity of phenolic compounds against some cancer types has been reported. The use of Pinaropappus roseus Less. (Asteraceae) is advised by Mexican ethnopharmacology against some medical pathologies as inflammatory events, gastrointestinal and skin infections and this is was advised to use in some cancer pathologies. It must be noted that there is not scientific evidence to prove its therapeutic effect. The objective of this work was to evaluate the antiproliferative effect of the aqueous phenolic extract of Pinaropappus roseus Less. (APE) on MCF-7 and HeLa cells. The total phenols of the APE was 0.368+-0.00 mg gallic acid equivalents gdb-1 by Folin-Cicolteau method. The characterization of phenolic compounds by HPLC-DAD-MS2 allowed to identify six phenolic compounds: 3-hydroxybenzoic acid; 2',6-dihydroxyflavone; 5,6,7-trihydroxyflavone; apigenin; 4',5,7-trihydroxy-3'-methoxy-flavone and luteoline-7-glucoside .The antiproliferative effect (cell death) was evaluated by the violet crystal assay.