The crude extract also had a high phenolic content corresponding with high antioxidant activity, as well as good anti-inflammatory activity and relatively low cytotoxicity. These are all beneficial attributes in protecting poultry against infection as well as in protecting the feed against fungal infestation. Fractionation of the extract and analysis of the most active fractions using mass spectrometry identified predominantly long chain fatty acids which are likely to be responsible for the activity, although further work is needed for confirmation of the identity of bioactive compounds in P. zombamontana.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 11720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP014. Antimicrobial activity and selectivity indices of acetone leaf extracts of South African Eugenia and Syzygium (Myrtaceae) species against Staphylococcus aureus isolated from mastitic cattle.I.M. Famuyide, L.J. McGawPhytomedicine Programme, Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Science, University of Pretoria, South Africa Mastitis poses significant economic and welfare challenges to the livestock dairy industry globally. Staphylococcus species constitute the most abundant bacteria causing mastitis. Antimicrobial resistance and selective pressure for resistance development by mastitic bacteria treated with existing antibiotics complicates the control of mastitis, necessitating the search for novel effective and safe antibacterial compounds. Plants are putative sources of novel anti-staphylococcal compounds. South Africa is a hotspot for diverse useful medicinal plants. Here, the antibacterial activity and cytotoxicity of acetone crude leaf extracts of seven Eugenia and Syzygium (Myrtaceae) species native to South Africa were determined against six clinical strains of Staphylococcus aureus isolated from milk of cattle with subclinical mastitis, and a reference S. aureus strain. A microplate serial dilution method was used to determine the minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) of the extracts. Cytotoxicity was determined against C3A liver cells using the 3-(4,5-dimethythiazolyl-2)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide reduction (MTT) assay. The concentration causing 50% inhibition of cell viability (LC50) was calculated. Total antibacterial activity (TAA = extract yield/MIC) and selectivity index (SI = LC50/MIC) values were obtained.The mean MIC values of the extracts ranged from 39-182 ug/mL with Syzygium legatii being the best (39 ug/ml) compared to gentamicin (2.23 ug/ml). All extracts had relatively low cytotoxicity (LC50 > 20 ug/ml) compared to doxorubicin (2 ug/mL). Syzygium gerrardii had the best SI of 6 suggesting a higher toxicity to bacteria than to mammalian cells. S. gerrardii also had the best mean TAA of 2912, meaning that a 2912 times dilution of the amount extracted from 1 g of the extract can inhibit bacterial growth.These plants may be potential candidates to investigate for presence of novel anti-staphylococcal compounds to combat mastitis caused by S. aureus. Alternatively, a topical antibacterial herbal product may be produced from these plants.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org11820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP015. Effect of Greek aromatic plants as feed additives on laying hens' performance, and oxidative stability of egg yolk and albumen.E. Sidiropoulou1, K. Grigoriadou2,3, I. Giannenas1, E. Bonos4, S. Vasilopoulos1, E. Christaki1 1 Laboratory of Nutrition, School of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.2 Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Hellenic Agricultural Organization - DEMETER, 570 01 Thermi, Thessaloniki, Greece, Athens, Greece, 3 ELVIZ Hellenic Feedstuff Industry S.A., Plati-Imathia, 59300, Greece 4 Department of Agriculture, School of Agriculture, University of Ioannina, Kostakioi Artas, Greece.An important recent area of research is the use of medicinal and aromatic plants (MARPs) in farm animal diets, aiming to increase the productive parameters and to improve the animal products quality. The objective of this experimental trial was to evaluate the effects of the dietary supplementation of a mixture of Greek dried aromatic - medicinal plants (oregano, thyme, Greek mountain tea and chamomile) on laying hens performance, egg quality and egg oxidative stability. Oregano and Greek mountain tea clones were collected from the natural environment and clonal propagation by cuttings were performed. Thyme and chamomile plants were seed propagated and all plant material was field cultivated. 432 Lohmann laying hens, 24-week-old, were randomly allocated into two dietary treatments (6 pens of 36 birds per treatment). The hens of the Control group were fed a commercial maize-soybean diet, whereas the hens of the MARPs group received the control diet further supplemented (5 g/kg) with a mixture of the examined aromatic plants. Following 6 weeks feeding, eggs were collected and analysed. Egg production and feed conversion ratio were not significantly affected. The eggs of the MARPs group showed higher (P<0.05) eggshell thickness and maximum load strength, although the other examined parameters (egg weight, yolk, weight, egg white weight, yolk color) were not significantly affected. Yolk resistance to oxidation under refrigerated storage (up to 60 days) was improved (P<0.05), as well as yolk resistance to iron induced oxidation (P<0.05). On the other hand, albumen carbonyl levels were not modified.Acknowledgments: This research has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH - CREATE - INNOVATE (project code: T1EDK-05041). Acronym "FeedMAP"www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 11920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP016. Comparison of dietary protected vs non-protected essential oil extracts on broiler chickens' performance and meat chemical composition.E. Bonos1, I. Giannenas2, I. Skoufos1, A. Tzora1, A. Tsinas1, E. Christaki21 Department of Agriculture, School of Agriculture, University of Ioannina, Kostakioi Artas, Greece.2 Laboratory of Nutrition, School of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.Presently, aromatic plants and their essential oils are used in the production of feed additives for various farm animal species. It is possible that the protection of these active substances, in the form of coating or encapsulation can modify or enhance their activity and their metabolism in the animal gut. Accordingly, in a 35 days trial a total of 576 male one-day-old chicks (Ross 308) were used randomly allocated into 3 groups (12 pens of 16 chickens per group). The control group was fed commercial maize and soybean meal diets. The chickens of the Arom and ProtArom groups were fed the same diets, which were further supplemented with either a mixture of unprotected essential oils (50 g/ton) or protected essential oils (40 g/ton), respectively. The main active ingredient of the mixture was carbacrol. Feed and water were provided ad libitum and conventional housing conditions were kept throughout the trial. The body weight of the chickens was recorded on days 10, 24, and 35, whereas feed consumption and mortality recorded daily. At the end of the trial, meat samples were collected and analyzed by the FoodScan apparatus. Analysis of variance (ANOVA) was used for the statistical analysis. The main findings were that the ProtArom group had higher (P<0.001) final body weight, better body weight gain (P<0.001), reduced food intake (P<0.05), and better food conversion index (P<0.001), compared to the other two groups. In addition, it was noted that the carcass protein was higher (P<0.001) and fat was lower (P<0.01) in both supplemented groups, compared to the control group. Consequently, the use of aromatic essential oils in a protected form seems to work better than the unprotected form in terms of performance increase in broiler chickens. Furthermore, feed supplementation with this essential oil mixture can modify the meat chemical composition.Acknowledgments: This research has been co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund) in context "Research-Create-Innovate" within the Operational Program (Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation (EPANEK) of the NSRF 2014-2020. Project Code: T1EDK-03856. Acronym "GREEN POULTRY MEAT ANTIFREE".www.ethnopharmacology2021.org12020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP017. Effects of different dietary plant extracts on production parameters and meat chemical composition of broiler chickens.E. Sidiropoulou1, E. Bonos2, I. Giannenas1, I. Skoufos2, A. Tzora2, E. Christaki11 Laboratory of Nutrition, School of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece.2 Department of Agriculture, School of Agriculture, University of Ioannina, Kostakioi, Arta, Greece.Aromatic and medicinal plants contain valuable bioactive substances that can be fed to animals and benefit their health and production. In this experimental trial, three different dietary feed additives containing extract of aromatic and medicinal plants were evaluated in broiler chicken nutrition. In a 35-day trial, total of 768 male one-day-old broiler chickens were randomly allocated to 4 groups (12 subgroups of 16 chickens / group). Control group (A) was fed with commercial maize-soybean meal diets. The other three groups were fed with the same diets, further supplemented with: (B) 50 g/ton of a feed additive containing carvacrol and thymol; (C) 100 g/ton of a feed additive containing carvacrol and cinnamaldehyde; (D) 150 g/ton of a feed additive containing estragol, carvacrol and p-cymene. Feed and water were offered ad libitum and conventional housing conditions were kept throughout the trial. The body weight of the chickens was recorded on days 10, 24 and 35, while feed consumption and mortality were recorded daily. At the end of the trial all birds were slaughtered and samples were collected for meat chemical analysis. The statistical analysis (ANOVA) showed that: Groups B and C had higher body weight (P<=0.001) and weight gain (P<0.001), as well as the best feed conversion ratio (P<=0.001), compared to the control and group D. In addition, group D performed better than the control group A, regarding final body weight (P<=0.001), weight gain (P<=0.001) and feed conversion ratio (P<=0.001). Differences were found on the meat chemical composition: Group D had lower whole carcass meat fat (P<=0.001) compared to groups A and C, while all three supplemented groups presented higher protein percentage (P<=0.001) on meat compared to the control group A. It can be concluded that the examined feed additives improved the performance and affected the chemical composition of broiler chickens to a different degree. Acknowledgments: This research has been co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund) in context "Research-Create-Innovate" within the Operational Program (Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation (EPANEK) of the NSRF 2014-2020. Project Code: T1EDK-03856. Acronym "GREEN POULTRY MEAT ANTIFREE".www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 12120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP018. Dietary flaxseed and lupin supplementation improve fatty acid profile of milk in dairy cows.I. Giannenas1, E. Bonos2, K. Kalaitsidis1, E. Sidiropoulou1, I. Skoufos2, A. Tzora2, P. Florou-Paneri1, E. Christaki11 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, School of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Department of Agriculture, School of Agriculture, University of Ioannina, Kostakioi, Arta, GreeceDairy products (cheese, yoghurt, etc.) are an important part of the human diet worldwide, with a steadily rising production and consumption. A new strategy in the creation of novel dairy products is the enrichment of the milk nutritional profile through the dietary manipulation of the cow. Such examples of enrichment include the modification of the fatty acid profile (ratio of unsaturated to saturated fatty acids). It is possible that the enriched milk and dairy products can help in the prevention of chronic diseases such as cardiovascular disease and cancer. Today, many plants and their extracts, and by-products are examined in ruminant nutrition, such as flaxseed (Linum usitatissimum), cannabis (Cannabis sativa) and lupines (Lupinus albus). Flaxseed can be fed to cows, although its content of anti-nutritional factors, such as cyanogenic glycosides are toxic and in increased levels can be lethal for animals. Fatty acids account for 55% of the total fat content of the seed and are mainly represented by a-linolenic which corresponds to 18% of the total seed weight. Available data concerning dairy cows indicate that the addition of 0.9-1 kg of flaxseed per cow per day resulted in an increase in a-linolenic from 0.44 to 0.78 % whereas an 8% content per kilo of dry food substance increased the content of polyunsaturated fatty acids from 33.5 to 36.5 g/kg. Another new feed ingredient is the by-product of industrial cannabis (Cannabis sativa) that is rich in polyunsaturated fatty acids. Cannabis oil is mostly (84%) comprised of polyunsaturated omega-3 and omega-6 fatty acids (56% linolenic, 22% a-linolenic, 4% g-linolenic and 2% stearidonate). There is yet a small number of reports on the change in the fatty acid profile of milk in animals fed with 5-10% of cannabis in the mix of concentrated feed. Moreover, a significant source of polyunsaturated fatty acids is the white lupine (Lupinus albus) that contains on average 8.5% oil mainly with C18-ln9 (4.36%) and C18-2n6 (1.45%) fatty acids. An important consideration in the use of sources of unsaturated fatty acid in cow diets is that large amounts of the dietary unsaturated fatty acids are hydrogenized by the rumen bacteria to saturated fatty acids which limits the effects of the dietary modifications. For this reason, feed processing methods have been proposed to protect against the oxidative action of rumen microorganisms, such as formaldehyde treatment, micronization and heating.Acknowledgment: This research has been co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund) in context "Research - Create - Innovate" within the Operational Program (Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation (EPANEK) of the NSRF 2014-2020. Project Code: T1EDK-04727. Acronym "GreenFeeds".www.ethnopharmacology2021.org12220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP019. Dietary flaxseed and lupin supplementation alter fatty acid composition of ovine milk and Kefalograviera type cheese from sheep flocks under semi extensive Mediterranean farming system, in the area of Vonitsa, Amphilochia, Western Greece.I. Giannenas1, E. Bonos2, E. Sidiropoulou1, S. Vasilopoulos1, I. Skoufos2, A. Tzora2, P. Florou-Paneri1, E. Christaki11 Laboratory of Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, School of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Department of Agriculture, School of Agriculture, University of Ioannina, Kostakioi, Arta, GreeceIn the current study, feed supplementation with flaxseed and lupin was evaluated regarding some milk quality characteristics, as well as chemical composition and fatty acid profile of Kefalograviera hard cheese originating from 20 different semi-extensive sheep farms in the area of Vonitsa, Amphilochia, Western Greece. For each farm, the diet (roughages and concentrates) of animals in the second month of milking period, was analyzed for moisture, crude protein, ether extract, crude fiber, neutral detergent fiber, starch and ash, showing that the total daily feed contained on average 17% (+-1%) crude protein and 3% (+-0.5%) fat. Fatty acid profile of these diets was also examined, revealing that among the most abundant fatty acids were the linoleic (C18:2), oleic (C18:1) and palmitic acid (C16:0). Further, milk samples were collected from each farm and analyzed for their chemical composition (fat, protein, lactose and total solids content) and fatty acid profile.