Available at: https://www.cir-safety.org/sites/default/files/rosmar032014TAR.pdfAknowledgement: Research was financed by grants of the National Program EYDE-ETAK, GSRT, BIOFARM/95734.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org14220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP037. Towards sustainable exploitation of Greek Satureja pilosa as a new industrial crop: Biotype selection, DNA-barcoding, clonal propagation, acclimatization and HPLC-PDA-MS studies.V. Dourdouni1, A. Kofos1, A. Karioti1, G. Tsoktouridis2, E. Maloupa2, N. Krigas21 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Hellenic Agricultural Organization - Demeter, Institute of Breeding and Plant Genetic Resources, Thessaloniki, GreeceThe genus Satureja (Lamiaceae) include more than 30 species and subspecies which are widely distributed in the Mediterranean [1] and 11 of these are found in Greece [2]. They are traditionally used for culinary purposes and as herbal teas for gastrointestinal disorders, for the treatment of cramps, muscle pain, and infectious diseases [3,4]. S. pilosa (range-restricted Balkan endemic savoury extending to Italy) with accession number GR-1-BBGK-04,2656-06 is a native Greek biotype selected under pilot ex situ cultivation for its ascending stems to be used potentially as new medicinal-aromatic crop and/or ornamental plant. Molecular barcoding was evaluated with the 18S-26S (nuclear ribosomal DNA) and atpF/atpH, matK, rpoC1, petB/petD, rpl16, rpoB, chloroplast DNA molecular markers. DNA sequences were analyzed, deposited in the GenBank and compared for genetic similarities with different Satureja taxa. New genetic information was generated based on new DNA sequences produced from the petB/petD, rpoB and rpoC1 molecular markers for the S. pilosa biotype. An in vitro clonal propagation protocol (shoot tips-nodes as initial explant material) has been developed. Axillary shoot proliferation was achieved on the AB50 basal medium supplemented with 0.4 ppm BA and 0.1 NAA. Shoots were rooted in a half strength MS medium supplemented with 4 ppm IBA. Acclimatization of the microplants was assessed: (a) in vitro (two systems), (b) in vivo (eight soil substrates, greenhouse and outdoors), and (c) in field (pilot cultivations in eight distant areas of northern Greece). An HPLC-PDA-MS method was developed for the qualitative/quantitative characterization of wild-growing S. pilosa aerial parts. Qualitative analysis showed the presence of depsides and flavonoids, mainly rosmarinic acid, eriodictyol-7-O-rutinoside and luteolin-7-O-rutinoside. Quantitative analysis demonstrated that S. pilosa is particularly rich in depsides (3.54 +- 0.10 mg%). The above are aimed to facilitate the sustainable exploitation of this potential new industrial crop in man-made environments. [1] Moghadam SE, Ebrahimi SN, Gafner F, Ochola JB, Marubu RM, Lwande W, Haller BF, Salehi P, Hamburger M. Industrial Crops and Products, 2015, 76, 892-899[2] Dimopoulos et al. Englerra 31, 2013; Willdenowia, 2016, 46(3), 301-347[3] Maskovic P, Velickovic V, Mitic M, Durovic S, Zekovic Z, Radojkovic M, Cvetanovic A, Svarc-Gajic J, Vujic J. Industrial Crops and Products, 2017, 109, 875-881[4] PDR for Herbal Medicines 2nd Ed. P. 739www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 14320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP038. In vitro study for micropropagation and production of secondary metabolites from callus of Alkana tinctoria (Boraginaceae).K. Grigoriadou1, V. Sarropoulou1, N. Krigas1, E. Dina2, N. Aligiannis2, E. Maloupa11 Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Hellenic Agricultural Organization (HAO)-DEMETER, Thessaloniki, Greece2 Department of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, GreeceThe roots of Alkanna tinctoria (Boraginaceae), contain large quantities of substances (alkannins and shikonins) with a wide spectrum of biological properties and excellent wound healing effect. Wild-growing plants were collected from Seich Sou forest, Thessaloniki, Greece for long-term ex situ conservation and sustainable exploitation. Shoot tips from the collected plants were disinfected and cultivated in vitro. The combined effect of three basal culture media (MS, WPM, Gamborg B5; supplemented with 1 mM BA, 0.1 mM NAA, 0.3 mM GA3, 20 g/L sucrose) and two gelling agents (6 g/L Plant Agar, 3 g/L Gelrite) was studied for multiple shoot induction. MS medium solidified with Plant Agar proved to be the most effective exhibiting 100% shoot formation (4.7 shoots/explant, 1.82 cm height) but showed serious hyperhydricity problems. Furthermore, full and  1/2 strength MS in combination with IBA (0, 2.5, 5 mM) was tested for rooting in vitro. Full MS medium with 5 mM IBA resulted in 50% rooting. For callus induction, root segments were cultured in MS supplemented with 4.5 mM kinetin, 5.5 mM NAA, 30 g/L sucrose and 6 g/L Plant Agar. The calluses produced were re-subcultured in two different liquid media (MS + 2.5 mM kinetin + 34.5 mM IBA + 30 g/L sucrose and MS + 1 mM BA + 34.5 mM IBA + 30 g/L sucrose) shaken in a rotary shaker, in dark. The callus produced was dried and extracts were made using green extraction techniques. The chemical profiles of the callus extracts were compared with extracts from roots of wild-growing A. tinctoria plants from the same population and similarities occurred. Their methanolic extract appeared to contain phenolic compounds that resemble flavonoids and lignans (perhaps iridoids).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org14420th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP039. EthnoHERBS: Conservation of European Biodiversity through Exploitation of Traditional Herbal Knowledge for the Development of Innovative Products.E. Dina1, N. Fokialakis1, V. Dimitrov2, Z. Dajic3, AR. Bilia4, K. Savikin5, A. Dias6,11, A. Termentzi7, JR. Munoz Montano8, P. Allegrini9, K. Gardikis10, M. Oluski12, H. Hristova13, N. Aligiannis11 Department of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece2 Institute of Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phytochemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Sofia, Bulgaria3 Faculty of Agriculture, University of Belgrade, Serbia4 Department of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", University of Florence, Florence, Italy5 Institute for Medicinal Plants Research "Dr Josif Pancic", Belgrade, Serbia6 Department of Biology and CITAB-UM research Center, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal7 Department of Pesticides Control and Phytopharmacy, Benaki Phytopathological Institute, Athens, Greece8 Zurko Research SL, Madrid, Spain9 Indena SpA, Milan, Italy10 Apivita, Athens, Greece11 TecMinho, Campus de Azurem, University of Minho, Guimaraes, Portugal12 MACVAL, Novi Sad, Serbia.13 VenusRoses Labsolutions, Sofia, BulgariaEthnoHERBS is the first systematic multidisciplinary attempt in South-Eastern (SE) Europe, promoting evidence that ethnobotanical information can lead to valuable drug discovery. EthnoHERBS is a H2020-MSCA-RISE project aiming to record and evaluate information on SE European traditional knowledge, explore in a high-throughput manner the biodiversity of Balkan Peninsula flora and elaborate cutting-edge technologies in Natural Products Chemistry to discover and develop innovative cosmeceutical products against skin disorders. A well-balanced multidisciplinary consortium has been established that consists of five academic and six non-academic beneficiaries from EU member states (Greece, Bulgaria, Italy, Portugal, Spain), two academic and one non-academic partners from Candidate Country (Serbia). EthnoHERBS' extensive network aims to the exchange of know-how and culture, the enrichment and broadening of scientific knowledge and enhancement of collaboration. EthnoHERBS aims to contribute to:* Inventing and validating an integrated approach for the sustainable and effective exploitation of SE European traditional knowledge and biodiversity for the development of innovative products based on natural ingredients against skin disorders. * Establishment of an extensive network of academic and private sector entities, exchange of know-how and culture, enrichment and broadening of scientific knowledge and enhancement of collaboration potentials. * Widening the application of emerging techniques, novel approaches and advanced methodologies originally produced in the academic environment in order to be exploited by European biotech companies. * Establishment of dynamic synergies between SMEs and academia through exploitation of complimentary expertise and mutual understanding in different environments and skills, stimulating entrepreneurship, creativity and innovation. * Enhancement of the competitiveness of the European industries in the area of skin care and healing products and broadening the potentialities for the development of optimized products in favour of consumers and the society. * Growth of the MAPs sector and strengthening the national economy of SE European countries by highlighting the unique biodiversity and the richness of Balkans' traditional medicine.EthnoHERBS project is funded under the European H2020-MSCA-RISE-2018 (823973) call.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 14520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP040. Antioxidant and antimicrobial activities and total phenolic contents of hydroalcoholic extracts from ten thyme-scented plants (Thymus spp., Thymbra capitata) under ex-situ conservation.O. St. Tsiftsoglou1, M. Petridou1, A. Liaka1, N. Krigas2, N. Sreckovic3, V. Mihailovic3, D. M. Lazari11 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Thessaloniki, Greece 2 Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Hellenic Agricultural Organization DEMETER, Thessaloniki, Greece3 University of Kragujevac, Faculty of Science, Department of Chemistry, Kragujevac, SerbiaExtracts and essential oils isolated both from wild and cultivated thyme-scented plants (Thymus spp., Thymbra spp. ; Lamiaceae) can potentially be used in the pharmaceutical and food industries as natural preservatives due to their biological activities. The present study aimed to investigate in a comparative way the antioxidant and antimicrobial effects of hydroalcoholic extracts of 10 Greek native thyme-scented plants (species and subspecies), i.e. the Mediterranean Thymbra capitata and T. longicaulis subsp. longicaulis, the Balkan endemics Thymus boissieri, T. degenii and T. thracicus, the Balkan subendemics T. sibthorpii, T. striatus and T. longicaulis subsp. chaubardii, and the local Greek endemics T. holosericeus and T. plasonii. The aerial parts of the studied material were collected during early spring (March) at the Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources from ex situ cultivated mother plants of the 10 studied species and subspecies, all of which were asexually propagated from wild-growing individuals.The phytochemical profile of all the extracts was monitored using NMR spectroscopy and applying techniques for evaluation of total phenolic (TP) and total flavonoid (TF) contents which are in accordance with the results estimated using the Folin-Ciocalteu method (TP:181.06-225.18mg/g, TF:58.00-138.09mg/g of extracts). All extracts were tested for their antioxidant activity using two in vitro methods, i.e.DPPH and ABTS*+ radical scavenging assays. All the extracts showed good to moderate antioxidant activity, compared to the reference substance BHT. Moreover, their antibacterial activity was tested against some of the major food-borne pathogens (Enterococcus faecalis, Bacillus subtilis, Staphylococcus aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Salmonella typhimurium, Escherichia coli and Klebsiella pneumoniae). However, none of these extracts showed satisfactory antimicrobial activity against them.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org14620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP041. Isolation of non-volatile secondary metabolites from Centaurea phyllocephala Boiss.K. M. Dimitriadis1, C. Tsioumela1, O. Tsiftsoglou1, A. Karioti1, M. Arfan2, H. Skaltsa3, D. Lazari11 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Department of Chemistry, University of Peshawar, Pakistan3 Department of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, School of Pharmacy, Athens, GreeceThe Centaurea genus contains about 200-700 species, making it one of the biggest genera of the Asteraceae family. They are usually annual herbaceous plants or shrubs, rarely biennial and perennial, that thrive in the Mediterranean and southwest Asia, but can also be found in America or Africa. The Centaurea genus has a significant pharmaceutical value, as it affects many biological targets. Its plants have been used traditionally for their antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, antibacterial, antidiabetic, anti-dandruff, antirheumatic, anti-pyretic and hypotensive effects. Centaurea phyllocephala Boiss. is the main Centaurea species in Iraq and has been used traditionally as an antidiabetic. The main compounds that have been isolated from the Centaurea genus belong to four chemical groups: sesquiterpene lactones, lignans, flavonoids and alkaloids. In this research, we studied the aerial parts from Centaurea phyllocephala Boiss., which was collected from the outskirts of Peshawar, Pakistan in May 2004. Until this point, we have isolated secondary metabolites that belong to the groups of sesquiterpene lactones and flavonoids. For the isolation we used chromatographic methods, such as column chromatography and HPLC, and for the identification we used NMR spectrometry (1H, 13C, COSY, HMQC, HMBC).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 14720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP042. Phytochemical investigation of Centaurea cyanoides (Asteraceae) from Jordan.S. Karavergou1, O. St. Tsiftsoglou1, A. Bader2, D.M. Lazari11 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Thessaloniki, Greece 2 Department of Pharmacognosy, College of Pharmacy, Umm Al-Qura University, Makkah, Saudi Arabia Centaurea genus includes herbaceous and mostly annual plants with several biological and pharmacological properties. They have been used many years in folk medicine as diuretic, anti-diarrheic, anti-inflammatory and emmenagogue. Many reports have mentioned the importance of Centaurea species in health level, mainly referring to species such as Centaurea cyanus, called also cornflower and many compounds have been isolated belonging to the groups of sesquiterpene lactones, lignans and flavonoids. Centaurea sp. is native to Europe, specifically in Mediterranean zones, in the area of Turkey and in the Middle East. Centaurea cyanoides, named also as Syrian cornflower is distributed in the Western part of Asia and shares common characteristics with the C. cyanus but it has not been further investigated. In this study Centaurea cyanoides, collected from Jordan, has been studied in order to isolate its non-volatile secondary metabolites. Through different chromatographic methods (CC, HPLC), phenolic acids and flavonoids like vanillic acid, and apigenin, as well as sesquiterpene lactones, have been isolated.