(2019) The phloroglucinol derivative Agrimol G isolated from Leucosidea sericea, induces microtubular degeneration in Haemonchus contortus. Experimental Parasitology 20710778.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 4520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL09. How can we manage dairy animal health and welfare?M. CaropreseDepartment of Agriculture, Food, Natural Resources, and Engineering (DAFNE), University of Foggia, ItalyConsumers constantly require healthy food from healthy animals and are aware that milk quality has important impacts on human health. In the last few years, there is a growing concern about livestock health and welfare in relation to the spread of antimicrobial resistance caused by the misuse of antibiotics, highlighting the interest of new alternatives to antibiotics in veterinary medicine practices. As an alternative to the use of antibiotics, there is a considerable interest in the use of feed supplementation, such as oily seeds, and additives, such as compounds or mixtures, added in animal feed to improve health status, growth rate, productivity, and performance of dairy animals. Feed supplementations and additives can be used as growth promoters, antimicrobials, immunostimulators, and antioxidants, having a particular role for the livestock health, and thus satisfying the increasing consumer demand for natural foods with functional properties. On the other hands, meeting the increasing demand for animal-based food for the increasing human population is a major sustainability challenge. A possible approach could be an increase in total efficiency and the reduction of the impact of livestock by feeding livestock recycling biomass from agro-food systems unsuitable as food. The use of by-products from the agro-food system could reduce feed-food competition and, therefore, the utilization of croplands for feed production. Moreover, the use of agricultural by-products in animal feeding represents a circular economy model to guarantee the production of healthy and affordable food by reducing the livestock system impact from an environmental and societal point of view and minimizing waste outputs. The effects on the use of feed supplementation or additives, also deriving from of agro-industrial by-products, will be presented and analysed in terms of milk quality and dairy animal health and welfare.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org4620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL10. Evaluation of sesquiterpenes as permeation enhancers for transdermal delivery.D. FatourosSchool of Pharmacy, Aristotle university of Thessaloniki, GreeceChemical permeation enhancers (sulfoxides, pyrrolidones, fatty acids, alcohols and glycols, surfactants, urea and its derivatives, essential oils, terpenes and their derivatives, phospholipids) have been used extensively to promote the transport of actives across human skin. Among them active compounds derived from essential oils (terpenes) have been widely used as permeation enhancers for both hydrophilic and hydrophobic drugs. Terpenes can interact with intracellular lipids in the SC to increase the diffusion of the drugs. Beyond the relatively small monoterpenes, larger terpene molecules (sesquiterpenes) have also been evaluated as enhancers for molecules permeating human skin membranes. Recent work from our team demonstrated the effect of sesquiterpenes as chemical enhancers for the transdermal delivery of a model macromolecular compound across human skin in vitro.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 4720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL11. Archaeoethnopharmacological studies in South America: back to the roots of ethnopharmacology?J. EcheverriaDepartamento de Ciencias el Ambiente Facultad de Quimica y Biologia, Universidad de Santiago de ChileSince the term Ethnopharmacology was defined in 1967, this scientific discipline was closely linked to the study of psychoactive plants. This is demonstrated by the pioneering studies of hallucinogenic snuffs from South America (Bo Holmstedt), alkaloids from cacti collected in the Mexican desert (Jan G Bruhn), and tryptamines/beta-carbolines from ayahuasca samples collected in the Amazon (Laurent Rivier). With time, this discipline has evolved to other themes, topics, and interests, losing - to a great extent - its original essence.Recent archaeological investigations in archaeological materials found in various archaeological sites in South America have focused their interest on the chemical and botanical study of the material evidence of the consumption of psychoactive plants by the first inhabitants of the continent, to understand and interpret the cultural complexity of these practices in prehistory.At present, is fascinating and captivating to recognize that very distant and different disciplines such as archaeology and ethnopharmacology, have merged into common scientific interests. The most important convergence points are the context of the study material, psychoactive plants; the analytical, botanical/chemical/pharmacological approach; as well as the geographic context, South America. It is neither illogical nor unrealistic to propose the emergence of a new discipline, Archaeoethnopharmacology. This conference will reveal the close relationship between the origins of ethnopharmacology and recent chemical and botanical studies of archaeological materials associated with the use of psychoactive substances in the prehistory of South America. The main plant species and their most important management practices will be reviewed. These antecedents will seek to answer the following question: Are we facing a return to the roots of ethnopharmacology?www.ethnopharmacology2021.org4820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL12. Recommended standards for conducting and reporting ethnopharmacological field studies.M. LeontiDepartment of Biomedical Sciences, University of Cagliari, ItalyWhat are the minimum methodological and conceptual requirements for an ethnopharmacological field study? How can the results of ethnopharmacological field studies be reported so that researchers with different backgrounds can draw on the results and develop new research questions and projects? And how should these field data be presented to get accepted in a scientific journal such as JEP?We focus on conducting and reporting ethnopharmacological field studies on medicinal plants or materia medica and associated knowledge of a specific people or region.We highlight the most frequent problems encountered in literature, own fieldwork and insights gained from peer-reviewing of field studies [1].Research needs to be ethical and legal and follow local and national regulations. Primary ethnopharmacological field data need to be collected and presented in a transparent and comprehensible way. In short this includes: 1) Relevant and concise research questions, 2) Thorough literature study encompassing all available information on the study site from different disciplines, 3) Appropriate methods to answer the research questions, 4) Proper plant use documentation, unambiguously linked to voucher specimens, and 5) Qualitative and quantitative analyses of the collected data, the latter relying on use-reports as basic units. [1] Weckerle CS, de Boer HJ, Puri RK, van Andel T, Bussmann RW, Leonti M. 2018. Recommended standards for conducting and reporting ethnopharmacological field studies. J Ethnopharmacol. 210, 125-132.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 4920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL13. Pharmacopeias for Indian herbal drugsP. K. Mukherjee1,2, A. Kar1, S. Banerjee21Institute of Bioresources and Sustainable Development, Department of Biotechnology, Government of India, Imphal, Manipur2School of Natural Product Studies, Dept of Pharmaceutical Technology, Jadavpur University, Kolkata, India Among Indian systems of medicines, herbs/herbal formulations occupy a prominent place. The quality control of these herbal formulations is important for maintaining their safety, efficacy and export potential to other countries. Indian systems of medicine use pharmacopoeias for the quality control and standardization herbs and formulations. Various pharmacopoeias are published in India stating the quality control specification. Major among them is Indian Pharmacopoeia (IP) which contains 168 specific monographs of herbs. Herbal Products and Phytopharmaceuticals Monograph Development Subcommittee of IPC, is developing the Phytopharmaceutical Ingredient (PPI) category monograph with the support of stakeholders. AYUSH is working on promotion of Indian traditional medicine (ITM) and developing pharmacoepial specifications for drugs used in Indian medicine (IM). Ministry of AYUSH, Govt of India and Pharmacopoeia commission for Indian medicine & homoeopathy Ghaziabad publishes Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India (API). API cover monographs of 645 plant derived drugs. Monographs for 191 herbal formulations are published in Ayurvedic formulary of India. Other than API, Siddha Pharmacopoeia of India part I consists of monographs of 139 plant derived drugs. It consists of a brief introduction, synonym, description (macroscopic, microscopic, powder), foreign matter, total ash, acid insoluble ash, alcohol soluble extractive, water soluble extractive, liquid chromatography assay with reference standard, thin layer chromatography for fingerprinting, chemical constituents, properties and actions, important formulations, therapeutic uses and dose. Homeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India consists of monographs of 1117 plant derived drugs. Unani Pharmacopoeia of India cover 298 herbal drugs and 150 herbal formulations. Quality standards of Indian Medicinal plants by Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) are a non pharmacopoeial reference guide on standards of Indian herbs. Monographs on 449 plants are included in this guide. Indian Herbal Pharmacopoeia published by Indian Drugs Manufacturers Association (IDMA) containing 40 monographs of medicinal plants. The inclusions of herbs/herbal formulations in Pharmacopoeia have helped develop quality standards of these herbal medicines. This would ensure use of quality herbs/herbal products and improve its export potential through maintaining internationally accepted standards for quality thus promoting Indian herbal drug industry.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org5020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL14. Traditional Herbal Resources and Herbal Pharmacopoeia: the contribution of the Taiwanese flora.C.-H. LinSchool of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University.Research Center for Traditional Chinese Medicine, China Medical University HospitalTaichung, TaiwanIn Taiwan, more than 30% of Taiwanese utilize Chinese medicine. However, 80% of the raw herbal materials come from abroad. Geographically, Taiwan has diverse terrains and mountains surrounded by the sea, and different climates across tropical, temperate and frigid zones. Therefore, it creates an enriched ecological environment for medicinal plants in Taiwan. Breeding more than 4000 kinds of vascular plants.There are many indigenous peoples in Taiwan who rely on fishing, hunting, gathering and planting for their livelihoods. Therefore, natural medicinal resources have been used for many years to reduce or treat diseases, which is a valuable source for the development of pharmacy. Thanks to the assistance of the Japanese in hundreds of years ago, they began to systematically sort out the medicinal herbs in Taiwan, with more than 300 species in total. Because Taiwan is a humid and sultry environment, most of medicinal plants are the effects of clearing away heat, detoxifying, and promoting blood circulation. In Taiwan, in addition to the private use of medicinal plants, the government is also actively including native medicinal plants in the pharmacopoeia.The first edition of the Taiwan Herbal Pharmacopoeia was published in 2004, which was revised and a third edition was published in 2018. The Taiwan Herbal Pharmacopoeia regulates the quality of Chinese medicinal materials, containing 357 items, including 329 plants, 13 animals, 6 fungi, 3 insects and 4 minerals. In addition, Taiwan's native species Dendrobium tosaense, Bletilla formosana, Orthosiphon aristatus, Pteris multifda, Litsea cubeba and Uncaria lanosa var. appendiculata are added.The government also actively supports the development of local herb in the research of active ingredients and pharmacology. For example, the Agriculture and Food Agency and Taiwan Seed Improvement and Propagation Station have also invested in Chinese herbal medicine for many years. Some school research center uses traditional pharmacy knowledge to integrate database and literature as the basis for scientific and systematic sound quality control and application, to promote the internationalization of Taiwan's traditional Chinese medicine and the development of the traditional Chinese medicine industry.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 5120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL15. Evaluating Greek honey-bees' products (Honey, Propolis, Royal Jelly) through centuries, as vehicle of high value chemical and pharmacological potential.I. ChinouLaboratory of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, Dept. of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, GreeceHoney-bees (Apis mellifera) have played an important role through centuries. Famous Greek honey has observed an increasing interest in its use in traditional Mediterranean food. Propolis, a resinous material by bees, derived from the Greek "pro", in front of, at the entrance to, and "polis" the city/community; a substance that is in defense of the city/hive. It has been used in folk medicine, cosmetology and in food industry for health foods, and nutrition supplements. The chemistry of propolis is highly depended on the flora of the geographic region from which it is collected. The rich flora of Greece contributes a lot to a distinguished chemical profile of proposed as "Mediterranean type of propolis", well accepted after our investigations. Royal jelly is secreted by the hypopharyngeal gland of young worker (nurse) bees, to feed young larvae and the adult queen bee. It has been harvested in very small quantities and also is so expensive. Some Hundreds of samples of Greek/Mediterranean bee keeping products till now, have been chemically analysed and several isolated compounds have been structurally determined by modern spectral means. Furthermore, they were tested for their antimicrobial activity against Gram (+) bacteria and fungi. Their anti-oxidative activity has been also assayed together with cytotoxicities. RJ samples, were further subjected i) in a clinical study at postmenopausal healthy women, showing a significant decrease in LDL and increase in HDL- cholesterol ii) in an in vivo study on Wistar male rats in Water-maze test, where RJ exerted an improvement of the spatial memory while iii) strong immunomodulatory influence. All these bioactivities, therefore, have considerable commercial appeal, ranging from the pharmaceutical and food industries up to cosmetic ones.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org5220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL16. A case of pharmaceutical development based on the therapeutic potential of the essential oil combination of three Cretan herbs (Cretan IAMA(r)).S.A. PirintsosDepartment of Biology, University of Crete, GreeceBotanical Garden, University of Crete, GreeceObservations from the island of Crete (Greece) suggest that infusions of traditional Cretan aromatic plants, well known for their ethnopharmacological use in the Eastern Mediterranean region and Near East, could be effective in the prevention and treatment of upper respiratory tract infections, including viral-induced infections. CAPeo (Cretan Aromatic Plants essential oil), a mixture of essential oils derived from Thymbra capitata (L.) Cav., Salvia fruticosa Mill. and Origanum dictamnus L. in olive oil, which has a remarkable antiviral activity against influenza A/H1N1 virus strains, influenza B and human rhinovirus 14 (HRV14) has been advanced by our research group and released in the market in 2015. Here, the scientific evidence which support this product, and the recently findings about its antiviral activity against SARS-CoV-2 will be presented.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 5320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES www.ethnopharmacology2021.org54OralsOralsAfrican WorkshopOrals20th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican WorkshopO01. Multidirectional pharma-toxicological investigations on Harpagophytum procumbens DC. ex Meisn. : focus on water extract activity.G. OrlandoDepartment of Pharmacy, University <<G. d'Annunzio>> of Chieti-Pescara, ItalyInflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs) are chronic, relapsing and multifactorial disorders of the colonic mucosa, which show increased and unbalanced intestinal immune response to external stimuli. Plant-derived extracts were described to possess the capability in contrasting IBDs related oxidative stress and inflammatory pathways. In the present study, we investigated the water extract of Harpagophytum procumbens DC. ex Meisn. in an experimental model of IBDs. Additionally, a microbiological investigation was carried out to discriminate the efficacy against bacterial and fungal strains involved in IBD. Finally, an untargeted proteomic analysis was conducted on more than 100 colon proteins involved in tissue morphology and metabolism. The extract blunted the level of selected biomarkers of oxidative stress and inflammation, including serotonin, prostaglandins, cytokines and transcription factors. Additionally, the extract inhibited the growth of Candida albicans and C. tropicalis. The extract was also able to exert a pro-homeostatic effect on the levels of multiple colon proteins, thus corroborating protective effects against the burden of inflammation and oxidative stress. On the other hand, the supraphysiological downregulation of cytoskeletal-related proteins involved in tissue morphology and antimicrobial barrier function, namely ezrin, actin, plastin-1, smoothelin and defensins, was observed, as well. Concluding, the present multidirectional study showed protective effects of H. procumbens water extract in blunting the burden of oxidative stress and inflammation in LPS-stimulated colon, alongside with antimicrobial effects against pathogen fungi involved in IBD.