Additionally, the fingerprint phytochemical analyses suggest the involvement of multiple active principles namely harpagoside, gallic acid, catechin, epicatechin and resveratrol in the observed pharmacological effects. Nevertheless, the supra-physiological downregulation of ezrin, actin, plastin-1, smoothelin and defensin indicates potential morphological alterations in the colon that should be taken in account in further researches. Overall, this study recommends caution in the use of botanicals enriched with H. procumbens.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org5820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican WorkshopO02. The antifibrotic potential and pharmacokinetic assessment of Euclea natalensis A.DC. as a hepatoprotective agent.A.M. Reid, N. LallPlant and Soil Sciences, University of Pretoria, South AfricaEuclea natalensis has been used by the Tsonga, Venda and Zulu people in southern and tropical Africa for the treatment of dysentery, abdominal pain, stomach problems and chest related complaints, including tuberculosis. The pharmacodynamic properties of the ethanolic shoot extract (DER 1:10 (w:v)) from this plant were tested and validated for its antibacterial, antimycobacterial and hepatoprotectant properties. In addition, the extract showed a reduction in the Th1, and increase in the Th2 immune response. The extract was able to reduce alanine aminotransferase (ALT) in mice associated with drug-induced liver injury. In an attempt to develop the extract further, additional toxicity tests, the antifibrotic potential, as well as the absorption and metabolism of the extract, were assessed. The extract showed effective antifibrotic activity by decreasing 50% of the levels of transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-b) at a concentration of 48.46+-1.21 ug/mL (IC50) in rat hepatic stellate cells (HSC-T6). A lesser effect was observed on alpha-smooth muscle actin (a-SMA), where the extract showed an IC50 value of 2249+-3.09 ug/mL). The effect of the extract on cytochrome (CYP) P450 enzyme metabolism, revealed the inhibition (IC50) of CYP2A6 (68.94+-1.1 ug/mL), CYP2D6 (26.44+-0.89 ug/mL) and CYP3A4 (24.92+-1.36 ug/mL) and the induction of CYP1A1/2. No effect was observed for CYP2B6 and CYP2C9. A metabolomics approach was used to investigate the absorption of the extract through an intact human epithelial colorectal adenocarcinoma cell (Caco2) layer. The results of this study can be used in support of the further development of this extract into an effective hepatoprotectant either as a single entity or in a polyherbal formulation.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 5920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican WorkshopO03. Anthelmintic screening of five Palmatilobae species used in Traditional Medicine in Katanga Province (DR Congo).M.G. Nzuzi1,2,3, N.W. Muyumba2,4, M.L. Gauthier2, S.K. Panda5, W. Luyten5, A. Nachtergael2, S. Vandenput3, S.A. Bakari6, E.V. Okombe1, P. Duez21 Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Unit of Pharmacology and Therapeutic, University of Lubumbashi (UNILU), DR Congo2 Unit of Therapeutic Chemistry and Pharmacognosy, University of Mons (UMONS), Belgium3 Bibliotheque des Sciences de la vie, University of Liege (ULiege), Belgium4 Department of Chemistry-physics, High college training teachers of Lubumbashi, DR Congo5 Animal Physiology and Neurobiology Section, Department of Biology, KU Leuven, Belgium6 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Lubumbashi (UNILU), DR CongoResistance to known anthelmintics has become a growing concern. Based on 2017-2019 ethnomedical and ethnoveterinary surveys carried out in Katanga Province, several species of shrub locally identified as Vitex species (Lamiaceae) are used to treat helminthiases. In this study, 5 of these species, including different morphotypes, were selected for in vitro screening in order to search for new anthelmintic lead compounds.n-heptane, dichloromethane (DCM), ethyl acetate (EtOAc) and methanol (MeOH) extracts of selected plants (leaves, root barks and stem barks) were evaluated for their anthelmintic activity. The experiment was assessed using a standard motility assay on the N2 wild-type Caenorhabditis elegans strain.Anthelmintic activity was confirmed by the calculation of motility inhibition. The following extracts, tested at 200 ug extract/mL, were significantly active on this model (average +- SD; n = 3; positive control, levamisole, 50 uM: 98.7 +- 4.3 % of motility inhibition): Oldfieldia dactylophylla (Welw. ex Oliv.) (Picrodendraceae; locally misidentified as V. congolensis De Wild and T. Durand) [DCM leaves (71.0 +- 5.7 %), MeOH stem barks (90.0 +- 7.3 %) and MeOH stem roots (97.0 +- 5.9 %)] ; V. doniana Sweet [EtOAc leaves (64.0 +- 4.4 %)] ; V. fischeri Gurke [n-heptane leaves (98.0 +- 7.8 %) and MeOH leaves (96.2 +- 6,3 %)] ; V. madiensis subsp. Milanjiensis (Britten) F.White [DCM leaves 3-5 leaflets (65.0 +- 5.6 %) and 5 leaflets (69.0 +- 6.6 %)] and V. mombassae Vatke [DCM leaves 3-5 leaflets (62.0 +- 8.1 %)]. Anthelmintic screening study showed that 9 of 84 tested extracts are significantly actives on Caenorhabditis elegans. The motility inhibitions measured on that N2 wild-type nematode model provide support for the traditional use of these plants and call for further studies to develop compounds as possible treatments for parasitic worm infections.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org6020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican WorkshopO04. Bio-guided fractionation and in vitro anti-inflammatory potential of Entada africana from Benin used in the management of pain related-conditions.M. Codo-Toafode1,4, V. Spiegler2, C. Vissiennon3,6, V. Ahyi1, A. Hensel2, K. Fester4,51 University of IRGIB Africa, Inter-Regional University of Industrial Engineering, Biotechnologies and Applied Sciences, Cotonou, Benin2 University of Munster, Institute for Pharmaceutical Biology and Phytochemistry (IPBP), Germany3 University of Leipzig, Institute for Medical Physics and Biophysics, Germany4 University of Leipzig, Institute of Pharmacy, Germany5 University of Applied Sciences Zittau/Gorlitz, Faculty of Natural and Environmental Sciences, Germany6 REPHA GmbH Biologische Arzneimittel, Langenhagen, GermanyEntada africana Guill. & Perr., was reported for the management of pain in an ethnopharmacological study in Benin during treatments of fractures and sprains [1]. Additionally, the plant was used in a traditional recipe which was tested for its potential analgesic efficacy in the management of pain related-diseases [2]. The aim of the present study was to determine the anti-inflammatory effect of a hydroalcoholic extract and fractions of E. africana obtained with a sephadex LH 20 fractionation using a step gradient from ethanol, methanol-water, and methanol to acetone. This fractionation led to the collection of 25 combined fractions (FC) which were analyzed for their flavonoid profile on thin-layer chromatography. Then, the hydroalcoholic extract of E. africana (Ea) and its fractions (FC3, FC4, FC7, FC8, and FC22) were tested for their anti-inflammatory activity according to their phenolic profile. The in vitro anti-inflammatory assay was performed using a TNFa-stimulated human keratinocyte (HaCaT) as a skin inflammation model. The MTT assay was first performed, to determine the cytotoxicity of the extracts. FC3, FC4, FC7, FC8, and FC22 extracts did not affect the cell viability, while the hydroalcoholic extract decreased significantly the cell viability. FC7 and FC22 significantly decreased the release of IL8 with FC7 (IC50 = 91.74 ug/ml) and FC22 (IC50 = 63.47 ug/ml) respectively. For IL6 release, fractions FC3, FC4, FC8 and FC22 had a significant influence with FC3 (IC50 = 54.13 ug/ml), FC4 (IC50 = 87.55 ug/ml), FC8 (IC50 = 75.85 ug/ml) and FC22 (IC50 = 72.91 ug/ml) respectively. These results support the anti-inflammatory effect of E. africana and its application in the traditional Beninese medicine. Further, its fractions which demonstrated anti-inflammatory effects will be characterized in order to identify promising active compounds for the treatment of pain-related conditions. [1] Toafode, M. C., Vissiennon, C., Bekoe, E. O., Ahyi, V., & Fester, K., Zeitschrift fur Phytotherapie[2] Vissiennon, Z., Ahyi, V., Koupkaki, E., & Nieber, K., Planta Medicawww.ethnopharmacology2021.org 6120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican WorkshopO05. The holistic anti-ageing potential of Persicaria senegalensis (Meisn.) Sojak ethanolic and fermented extracts.B.D. Payne1, C.-H. Lin2, N. Lall1,21 Medicinal Plant Science, Department of Plant and Soil Sciences, University of Pretoria, South Africa2 School of Natural Resources, University of Missouri, Columbia, USAPersicaria is one of the fifty genera in the Polygonaceae family of mono- and dioecious herbs, small trees and shrubs. It is abundantly distributed throughout the Northern hemisphere but can be found throughout Africa growing along streams, rivers, pools and swamps in freshwater systems. Traditionally, it has been used for a range of skin troubles and was therefore selected for the current study. The anti-ageing potential of Persicaria senegalensis was confirmed as the ethanolic extract was found to preserve the integrity of the dermis by inhibiting elastase at a fifty percent inhibitory (IC50) value of 50.59 +- 4.36 ug/mL. Additionally, the ethanolic extract was found to curb the chronic inflammation associated with ageing skin by inhibiting cyclooxygenase-2 (IC50 1.97 +- 0.44 ug/mL) and 5-lipoxygenase (IC50 13.3 +- 7.14 ug/mL), and scavenge superoxide (27.22 +- 4.3 ug/mL) and hydrogen peroxide (IC50 71.66 +- 9.86 ug/mL). In the competitive realm of anti-ageing technologies, it is only normal that the search for more powerful actives will always be an enduring one which requires innovation and for the sake of sustainability, frugality. To investigate this, the ethanolic extract was fermented using Bifidobacterium and investigated for its elastase inhibitory potential. The fermented extract was found to have a five-fold lower IC50 value of 10.86 +- 2.15 ug/mL. These results support the use of the ethanolic and fermented extracts of P. senegalensis as anti-ageing actives that can be used in the development of anti-ageing technologies.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org6220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican WorkshopO06. A natural choice for antimicrobial protection using an indigenous South African plant for acne vulgaris.I.A. Lambrechts, N. LallPlant and Soil Sciences, University of Pretoria, South AfricaAcne vulgaris (AV) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the pilosebaceous follicle caused by the Gram-positive bacteria, Cutibacterium acnes. The disease affects approximately 9.4% of the world population, making it the 8th most prevalent disease worldwide. In nature, microorganisms rarely exist as planktonic microorganism suspensions, but rather as a complex biofilm. These biofilms, consisting of consortia of species, contribute to antibiotic resistance seen in AV. The Lamiaceae family are aromatic plants known for their antibacterial properties and is used by traditional healers in southern Africa for treating skin diseases. The ethanolic semi-pure fraction from the leaves of plants belonging to the Lamiaceae family was tested against C. acnes (ATCC 6919) to determine the antibacterial, prevention of biofilm formation and quorum sensing inhibition potential. In vitro studies revealed that acne-causing bacteria have a virulence effect through the increased production of the quorum sensing molecule, autoinducer-2 (AI-2). This signalling molecule contribute to the formation of biofilms and the release of virulence factors such as lipase that is associated with inflammation. The inhibition potential of the sample on biofilm formation and AI-2 release was determined. The semi-pure fraction was tested against inflammatory enzymes such as lipase, Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) and matrix metalloproteinase-9 (MMP-9) which have been identified to contribute to inflammatory acne. The semi-pure fraction was confirmed to prevent biofilm formation and the release of AI-2, preventing quorum sensing. Enzymatic studies revealed that the semi-pure fraction was effective against various inflammatory enzymes associated with AV. In vivo studies confirmed that the semi-pure fraction was not irritating to the skin and formulated at 10% in a gel formulation was effective against acne after fourteen to twenty-eight days of consecutive use twice a day. These data suggest the potential of this South African plant for the treatment of acne vulgaris.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 6320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSAfrican Workshopwww.ethnopharmacology2021.org64Application of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesOrals20th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesO07. Qualitative and quantitative characterization of chemical profiles in three different parts of Poria cocos.L. Zhu, J. Xu , X. Dong, Z. ZhaoSchool of Chinese Medicine, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, ChinaPoria cocos (Schw.) Wolf has been widely used in traditional Chinese medicine for centuries. Its three medicinal parts are Poria Cutis, the epidermis or fulingpi in Chinese; White Poria, the middle part or baifuling; and Poria cum Radix Pini, the sclerotium with some part of host pine root or fushen. The hostwood in fushen is the inner part, known as fushenmu. The epidermis, middle part and middle-plus-inner part have different clinical applications, but the differences in their chemistry have not been determined. Therefore, it is of great significance to determine how the bioactive components are distributed in the three parts to provide some explanation for their differential clinical use. 13 batches of Poria cocos were collected; the botanical parts in each sample, namely, the epidermis, the middle part and the inner part, were manually separated. The carbohydrates (polysaccharides, oligosaccharides and monosaccharides) and secondary metabolites in the three parts were qualitatively and quantitatively characterized by high performance gel permeation chromatography coupled with charged aerosol detector (HPGPC-CAD) and ultra-performance liquid chromatography coupled with triple quadrupole mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QqQ-MS/MS), and ultra-performance liquid chromatography-quadrupole/time-of-flight mass spectrometry (UHPLC-QTOF-MS/MS), respectively. The obtained data were further processed by principal component analysis (PCA) and supervised orthogonal partial least squared discriminant analysis (OPLS-DA). The carbohydrates and secondary metabolites in the three parts varied remarkably. The epidermis contained more polysaccharides with larger molecular weight and higher amount of glucose residue than that of the middle and inner parts, and eight major bioactive triterpene acids accumulated mostly in the epidermis and inner part, with the least accumulation in the middle part. This systematic information on the differences in carbohydrates and secondary metabolites in the three botanical parts of Poria cocos provides a factual chemical basis not only for its distinctive therapeutic practice but also for its quality evaluation.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org6620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021ORAL PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesO08. PEGASUS: An analytical chemometrics platform for the discovery of bioactive natural compounds.A. Cheilari1, A. Vontzalidou1, VI.