Mertzanidis2,4, T. Pallia1, A. Assimopoulou3,4, S. Kokkini2,41 Postgraduate Studies Program "Conservation of Biodiversity and Sustainable Exploitation of Native Plants", School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Laboratory of Systematic Botany and Phytogeography, School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece3 Organic Chemistry Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece4 CIRI- AUTH Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation - Aristotle University of ThessalonikiAmong the different herbs and spices used in the traditional cooking of North Greece, spearmint leaves are the most popular. They are widely known since antiquity with the Greek name "eduosmos" (derived from the two words edus+osme = sweet odor), named to date by local people and sold in different Greek market places by the short name "duosmos". Fresh or dried leaves obtained from small scale cultivations (home gardens or even pots in apartment balconies) are used in a wide variety of cooking recipes, from the preparation of legume soups up to cereal and/or meat based foods. Besides, it is also used as a traditional medicine for the preparation of teas against stomach pain. The taxonomic identification of the fresh or dried leaves is very difficult to succeed with the formal identification keys which required the occurrence of inflorescence, flowers, seeds and the presence of non-glandular hairs on the leaves. On the basis of plant habit, leaf shape and their characteristic sweet odor we conclude that they are members of the genus Mentha and in particular that they belong to the Section Spicatae (included plants with a spike-like inflorescence). Research published in the last 40 years suggest that only the members of that Section may produce essential oils rich in carvone, dihydrocarvone and their relative alcohols and esters responsible for the sweet odor of plants, commercially known as spearmint. Taking into account the wild growing Mentha taxa in North Greece area and their surrounding countries wherefrom the cultivated glabrous "diosmos" plants are apparently selected, it is suggested that they belong to a particular chemotype of Mentha longifolia or M. spicata or the sterile hybrid between them, M. x villoso-nervata. [1] Karousou R, Balta M, Hanlidou E, Kokkini S (2007) Mints, smells and traditional uses in Thessaloniki (Greece) and other Mediterranean countries. J Ethnopharmacol 109:248-257[2] Kokkini S, Hanlidou E, Karousou R (2000) Smell and essential oil variation in Labiatae: Does it deserve a taxonomist's appreciation? Botanika Chronika 13:187-199[3] Kokkini S, Karousou R, Lanaras T (1995) Essential oils of spearmint (Carvone-rich) plants from the island of Crete (Greece). Biochem Syst Ecol 23:425-430Acknowledgements: This research has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE (project code: T1EDK-04174).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org13020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP026. Chemical profiling of Trigonella foenum graecum extracts from different cultural practices, using NMR and multivariate data analyses.M. Santikou1,2, A. Vontzalidou1, A. Cheilari1, A. Folina2, D. Bilalis2, N. Aligiannis11 Department of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece2 Department of Crop Science, Laboratory of Agronomy, Agricultural University of AthensTrigonella foenum graecum (fenugreek), is a common medicinal plant in many traditional healing systems (e.g. Ayurvedic and Chinese medicine). It is used in the form of infusions, water and alcohol extracts or tinctures, for general health improvement exerting hypoglycemic, antihyperlipidemic, antidepressant, psychotonic properties etc. [1]. Fenugreek seeds and leaves are rich in bioactive substances and secondary metabolites such as saponins, flavonoids and phenolic compounds, whereas their production is strongly depended on agricultural factors. Since it is a plant of considerable value for its nutritive composition and medicinal effects, our aim was to investigate whether different composting methods [2] could affect the yield of fenugreek crop and the metabolic profile of final products. For this reason, a field experiment was conducted for the cultivation of T. foenum graecum, using 4 fertilization treatments (compost, manure, NPK basic fertilization, biocyclic), as well as control with three repetitions. The duration of the experiment was 3 months and the effect on the growth, yield and quality of fenugreek crop was evaluated. Samples of the aerial parts (leaves and shoots) and the seeds of the plant were collected in the middle and in the end of the growing season. All plant material was pulverized; the aerial parts were extracted with a mixture of MeOH/H2O (50/50) and the seeds with n-Hexane and MeOH consecutively. 1D NMR spectra of the polar extracts were recorded and the samples were classified using multivariate statistical analysis (PCA and PLS-DA). Their chemical profile was further investigated with HPTLC and the n-Hexane seed extracts were subjected to GC-MS analysis. The obtained results revealed a distinct separation of the samples from different composting methods, and secondary metabolites responsible for groups clustering were identified. Hopefully these findings will contribute to reveal the best cultural practices of fenugreek, based on the chemical content. [1] Meghwal, M., and Goswami, T.G. A review on the functional properties, nutritional content, medicinal utilization and potential application of Fenugreek. J Food Process Technol 2012, 3:9[2] Bilalis, D., Kakabouki, I., Karkanis, A., Travlos, I., Triantafyllidis, V., Hela, D.G. Seed and Saponin Production of Organic Quinoa (Chenopodium quinoa Willd.) for different Tillage and Fertilization. Not Bot Horti Agrobo, 2012, 40(1):42-46www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 13120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP027. Essential oil analysis and study of the antioxidant activity of cultivated oregano.C.S. Chatzimavroudis1, F. Papadopoulos2, E. Metaxa2, G. Menexes3, D. Hadjipavlou-Litina4, E. Maloupa5, D. Lazari11 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Greece2 HAO->>DEMETER>>/ Soil and Water Resources Institute (SWRI), Thessaloniki, Greece3 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Environment, School of Agriculture, Laboratory of Agronomy, Greece4 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Greece5 Balkan Botanic Garden of Kroussia, Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Hellenic Agricultural Organization DEMETER, Thessaloniki, GreeceThe aim of this work was to study the various data concerning the growth of cultivated plants of Origanum vulgare L. ssp. hirtum (Link) Letsw (Lamiaceae). The study was focused mainly on the qualitative and quantitative characteristics of the essential oil obtained by distillation of the aerial parts and whether these characteristics are affected by the soil composition, the time of collection of the plant material and the application of two foliar fertilizer formulations to plants. The experimental plan was based on a latin square 3x3 and the statistical analysis of data was done using the ANOVA method with the SPSS 15.0 program. The volatile components were obtained by hydrodistillation and the quality and quantity control took place in a gas chromatography mass spectrometry (GC-MS). Finally, the antioxidant activity of the cultivated oregano was studied via the interaction of the samples with the stable free radical 1,1- diphenyl- 2- picrylhydrazyl (DPPH). The results of the study show that only the time of collection and not the application of various formulations to plants was statistically significant. As far as the antioxidant activity is concerned, some of the essential oils did not exhibit high radical-scavenging properties as shown in the DPPH assay, especially those of fresh plant material and thus further research is necessary.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org13220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP028. Essential oil analyses of the wild-growing Micromeria hispida, Teucrium alpestre and Thymbra calostachya (Lamiaceae), three local endemic plants of Crete, Greece.R. Mponti1, CS. Chatzimavroudis1, N. Krigas2, D. Lazari11 Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Greece 2 Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Hellenic Agricultural Organization DEMETER, Thessaloniki, GreeceMicromeria hispida, Teucrium alpestre and Thymbra calostachya are Greek endemic plants that belong to the Lamiaceae family. They are range-restricted local endemics which are confined to parts of the island of Crete [1]. The rock-dwelling M. hispida is fairly rare in intermediate altitudes in Central and East Crete, T. alpestre is found in a variety of habitats but mainly in rocky mountainous areas in South and Central-East Crete, and T. calostachya is a lowland rock-dweller in East Crete [2]. Wild-growing material (dried leaves and/or inflorescences) were collected from the wild during different seasons, i.e. summer for T. alpestre (initiation of flowering); autumn (after the end of flowering) and spring (before the initiation of flowering) for T. calostachya; spring (before flowering), summer (full flowering), autumn and winter (in partial flowering) for M. hispida. The essential oils were isolated from each of the wild-growing species by hydrodistillation. The quality and quantity control of the obtained essential oils was performed with Gas Chromatography Mass Spectrometry (GC-MS). The essential oils of M. hispida were consisted mainly of borneol, caryophyllene oxide, hinesol and carvacrol. Those of T. alpestre mainly contained hinesol and carvacrol, while the essential oils of T. calostachya were characterized by g-terpinene, p-cymene, thymol acetate and carvacrol. Only traces of essential oils were obtained for T. alpestre. Quantitative differences were acquired among the studied essential oils in different seasons and the yield for T. calostachya was comparatively higher in autumn (10.95%), while that for M. hispida was higher during spring before flowering (1.56%). The essential oil yield of T. calostachya was much higher in comparison to those of M. hispida and T. alpestre (7-fold to 11-fold, respectively). [1] Dimopoulos et al., Englerra 31, 2013; Willdenowia, 2016, 46(3), 301-347. [2] Strid A., Englerra 33 part 2, 2016.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 13320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP029. Antioxidant activity of ethanol extracts of Rosa pendulina L. (Rosaceae) from Serbia.L. Zarkovic1, J. S. Matejic2, M. Veljic1, P. D. Marin1, A. M. Dzamic11 University of Belgrade - Faculty of Biology, Institute of Botany and Botanical Garden "Jevremovac", Serbia2 University of Nis, Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, SerbiaRosa species are popular plants used for cosmetic preparations and to treat a variety of ordinary diseases. Teas prepared from rose hips are effective in infectious and urinary diseases, rheumatism and arthritis. This study provided information about the antioxidant activity and total phenolic content (TPC) of rose extracts. The extracts were obtained from the leaves, fruits, and nuts of Rosa pendulina, collected from Kopaonik Mt., Serbia. The total phenolic content and antioxidant potential for the studied 70% ethanol extracts were achieved by spectrophotometric measurements. Antioxidant activity was evaluated by DPPH, ABTS and b-carotene assays. The highest phenolic content was determined in leaves extract (280.24 mg GAE/g of dry extract), while extracts of fruits and nuts showed lower TPC (236.35 mg GAE/g and 232.15 mg GAE/g of dry extract, respectively). All tested extracts showed high antioxidant capacity. Among the tested samples the highest antioxidant activity in DPPH, ABTS and b-carotene tests was found for leaves extract (IC50 0.091 mg/ml, IC50 0.131 mg/ml and IC50 0.848 mg/ml, respectively). The obtained activities could be attributed to the presence of high TPC. The present results are in the range of BHA (IC50 0.090 mg/ml, IC50 0.101 mg/ml and IC50 0.017 mg/ml, respectively) and indicate the high antioxidant potential of R. pendulina extracts. The study confirms the use of wild roses in the ethnobotany and ethnomedicine. Also, R. pendulina extracts present a rich source of natural antioxidant compounds.Acknowledgments: The authors thank the Serbian Ministry of Education, Science and Technological Development for financial support (Grant No 173029).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org13420th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP030. Exploration of the biodiversity for the development of and sustainable use of Greek genotypes of Rosa canina L., rich in ascorbic acid.T.K. Papagrigoriou1, E.E. Patelou2, D.M. Lazari1, A.K. Kanellis21 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Department of Pharmacognosy and Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. 2 Group of Biotechnology of Pharmaceutical Plants, Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Department of Pharmacognosy and Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Faculty of Health Sciences, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GreeceThe aim of the BIOFARM project is the evaluation of Greek native aromatic and pharmaceutical plants, for the selection of genotypes rich in active molecules. In this project, Rosa canina L. (Rosaceae) were selected in order to identify genotypes with a high concentration in ascorbic acid. Furthermore, the development of a quick and selective assay for its determination, was another aim of this work. Rosa canina pseudo fruits are particularly rich in ascorbic acid- even more than citrus fruits- and therefore, a good natural source of vitamin C [1]. Moreover, rosehips also have a high content of polyphenols, which contribute to the fruits' antioxidant activity [2]. In the present study, ripe rosehips growing wild in Northern (Rhodopi Mt., Thrace and Chalkidiki, Central Macedonia) and Western (Pindos Mt., Epirus), Greece, were collected at full ripeness, during autumn. Ascorbic acid content was determined spectrophotometrically, by means of the ascorbate oxidase redox assay, which was optimized specifically for tissue's characteristics [3]. The Folin-Ciocalteu method was used for the evaluation of the total phenolic content and the radical scavenging activity was assessed by means of the DDPH assay. Our results corroborate the existing bibliographic data, proving the antioxidant capacity of the rosehip extracts. Additionally, a comparison between the three different regions, showed that the genotypes collected from Chalkidiki had a higher average content of ascorbic acid and better radical scavenging activity. [1] Nojavan, S., Khalilian, F., Kiaie, F.M., Rahimi, A., Arabanian, A., Chalavi, S. (2008). Journal of Food Composition and Analysis, 21(4), pp. 300-305. [2] Roman, I., Stanila, A., Stanila, S. (2013). Chemistry Central Journal, 7(73). [3] Sanmartin, M., Pateraki, I., Chatzopoulou, F., Kanellis, A.K., Pateraki, E., (2007). Planta, 225(4), pp. 873-885.Acknowledgements: research was financed by grants of the National Program EYDE-ETAK, GSRT, BIOFARM/95734.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 13520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP031.