The microparticles formed were cured at least 3 h, separated and freeze-dried (-50 degC, 0.070 mbar, 24 h, FreeZone Freeze Dry System, Labconco, USA). Synbiot-ic microparticles were added to the carrot juice and ayran, respectively, on the same day of preparation. All samples were packed into sterile flasks and stored at 4 degC. The via-bility of L. casei 01 was determined on MRS agar (Merck, Germany) after 72 h of incubation at 37 degC using a plate-count method. For enumeration of bacteria, 1 mL of the S3 PP 133286Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 285 - 286 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationssample was mixed with 9.0 mL of peptone water, vortexed for 15 s and serially diluted with peptone water. In the sam-ples containing microparticles enumeration was done after removing the particles by filtration, washing with sterile saline solution and liquefying with phosphate buffer (pH 6.9). The pH values of synbiotic samples were also exam-ined (pH meter PB 11 Sartorius, Germany). The production of lactic and acetic acid was measured using HPLC (Agile-nt Technologies 1200, USA) by loading supernatants of the pretreated samples with 0.5 M H2SO4 on a reverse phase column (250 mm x 4.6 mm, 5 mm, Discovery HS C 18, Su-pelco Park, USA) set at 40 degC and eluted with 0.005 M H2SO4 at a flow rate of 1 mL/min with detection wave-length of 210 nm.Results and discussionEncapsulated L. casei 01 added to ayran either carrot juice survived significantly better compared to non-encap-sulated cells upon cold storage due to the ability of chito-san-coated alginate particles to preserve cell viability. Rel-atively high viable cell counts in carrot juice and ayran at the end of storage were observed, 9.11 and 8.22 log CFU/mL, respectively. The viability of free and encapsulated L. casei 01 in ayran samples was reduced for 3.38 and 1.21 log CFU/mL, respectively, while the corresponding cell vi-ability loss in carrot juices was 1.49 and 0.44 log CFU/mL. Results have shown that both non-encapsulated and encap-sulated L. casei 01 survived better in carrot juice compared to ayran. This finding may be the result of characteristics of probiotic strain or substrate as well as the oxygen con-tent in the product. Acidity of the carrot juice as substrate was determined to be lower than ayran acidity (pH 6.25 vs. 4.55, respectively). The mild acidity of carrot juice de-clined to 4.23 and 5.44 after fermentation with free and en-capsulated L. casei 01, respectively, while pH values mea-sured in ayran samples enriched with free and encapsulat-ed L. casei 01 were 4.54 and 4.58, respectively. The reduc-tion of pH values was similar in both carrot juice or ayran samples during the storage, but ayran contains 0.4% salt which may contribute to further reduction of the cell via-bility. Probiotic culture L. casei 01 produced higher quan-tity of lactic acid in ayran samples compared to carrot juice samples due to the presence of lactose in dairy products. In ayran samples containing non-encapsulated and encap-sulated synbiotic, the concentration of lactic acid tend to increase during storage from initial values of 51.32 and 56.94 mmoL/L to 59.14 and 72.36 mmoL/L, respective-ly. Production of acetic acid was lower, but with similar in-creasing trend to those of lactic acid. As the result of sac-charolytic activity of the probiotic culture able to ferment sugars present in the carrot juice, production of lactic and acetic acid was observed. Initially measured concentra-tion of 30.53 mmoL/L lactic acid remained constant during the storage of the carrot juice containing non-encapsulat-ed synbiotic, while initial concentration of 18.43 mmoL/L lactic acid of the sample with encapsulated synbiotic in-creased to 31.53 mmoL/L at the end of storage. In the car-rot juice samples both containing non-encapsulated or en-capsulated synbiotic, the concentration of acetic acid was significantly lower compared to corresponding ayran sam-ples and tend to decrease during the storage period. How-ever, in both dairy either non-dairy product, the metabolic activity of L. casei 01 was better retained in samples with encapsulated synbiotic as lactic acid is the main product of lactobacilli metabolism.ConclusionSurvival rate of the encapsulated L. casei 01 incor-porated in carrot juice as well in ayran was found to be above the therapeutic level with retained metabolic cell activity during the investigation period. The results have shown higher probiotic viability in carrot juice compared to ayran, albeit dairy products are naturally connected with lactic acid bacteria. Further, synbiotic carrot juice may be offered to lactose intolerant individuals and to those suffer-ing from cardiovascular diseases. Additional studies to in-vestigate the influence of the food matrix in preserving cell viability under gastrointestinal conditions as well the abil-ity of the matrix to deliver viable cells to the lower intes-tine are required.ReferencesDo Espirito Santo, A.P., Perego, P., Converti, A., Oliveira, M.N., 2011. Influence of food matrices on probiotic viability: A review focusing on the fruity bases. Trends Food Sci. Technol. 22, 377-385.Petreska Ivanovska, T., Petrushevska-Tozi, L., Grozdanov, A., Petkovska, R., Hadjieva, J., Popovski, E., Stafilov, T., Mladenovska, K., 2014. From optimization of synbiotic microparticles prepared by spray-drying to development of new functional carrot juice. Chem. Ind. Chem. Eng. Q. 20, 549-564.Vasiljevic, T., Shah, N.P., 2008. Probiotics - from Metchnikoff to bioactives. Int. Dairy J. 18, 714-728.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 287 - 288 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 663.236Short communicationEffect of glucose concentration on glucose oxidase activity in a minimal model mustVerica Petkova1, Irina Mladenoska1*, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska21 Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Ss. ,,Cyril and Methodius", Rudjer Boskovic, 16, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2 Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ss. ,,Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* irinaetf@t.mkIntroductionDuring the last couple of decades, the interest among the nutritionists and food industry for production of low alcohol and alcohol free wines has been increased. It has been reported that the consumption of low alcohol wines had a very positive effect on the consumer's health. Thus, Karatzi (Karatzi et al., 2004), showed that the consump-tion of 250 mL per day of alcohol free wine has improved the condition of the cardio-vascular system in patients with a progressive coronary disease. There are, also, literature data witnessing the benefit of alcohol free wine consump-tion and its connection with lowering the high blood pres-sure (Chiva-Blanch et al., 2012). In order to produce low or alcohol free wines, food in-dustry applies several pre-fermentative, during and post-fermentative procedures. Post-fermentative techniques are usually physical like pervaporation or utilization of spin-ning cone column, but all of these processes have draw-backs such are specific and expensive equipment and changes in aromatic composition (Heux et al., 2006).Unlike post-fermentative, pre-fermentative enzymatic methods for lowering the alcohol level in wines are fast-er, high specific methods that minimize loss or alteration of sensory qualities and off-flavor development (Schmid-ke et al., 2012). In this paper the effect of glucose concentration in the minimal model must on the enzymatic activity of sever-al different commercial glucose oxidase preparations was examined. The first one was the commercial bakery addi-tive Alphamalt Gloxy 5080 (glucooxidase and low catalase activity). The second one was pure glucooxidase from the mould Aspergillus niger and the third preparation was cou-pled mould glucooxidase and a beef liver catalase. The glu-cose concentration of 10 g/L and 100 g/L were used as sug-ar concentrations in the minimal model must. The effect of the enzyme activity on the final pH of the reaction media was also studied.Materials and methodsEnzymatic preparations: Alphamalt Gloxy 5080 (Muhlenchemie, Germany) was a commercial enzyme preparation obtained from Aspergillus niger strain. This was a food grade bakery additive with activity of 10500 units per gram (U/g) and low catalase activity. The pure glucose oxidase (EC 1.1.3.4) was in its ly-ophilized form and was also derived from Aspergillus ni-ger (Merck, Germany). This preparation was with much lower activity than the previous one. The activity of the ly-ophilized glucose oxidase was 8 U/mg. The liquid catalase (Merck, Germany) was obtained from beef liver and had an activity of 1300000 U/mL. Media: A medium with high glucose concentration of 100 g/L was prepared. This high concentration was chosen to be of the same order of magnitude as the one measured in the real must. For comparison, the medium with low-er concentration of glucose of 10 g/L was also used. The minimal model must, besides glucose, was also containing 4.0 g/L tartaric acid, 1.5 g/L malic acid and 0.5 g/L citric acid. The pH of the medium was adjusted to pH 3.5 using sodium hydroxide (10 M NaOH) to be similar as the pH of the real must.Glucose oxidase reaction: All the three preparation used were diluted in the medium to give a certain concen-tration of the enzyme preparation. The reactions were car-S3 PP 134288Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 287 - 288 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationsried on an orbital shaker (Ceromat R, B. Brown Biotech In-ternational) with agitation rate of 150 rpm (oxygen disso-lution) in 100 mL Erlenmeyer flasks containing 50 mL of medium. The reaction temperature was kept 30 degC.Determination of glucose concentration: D-glucose was measured using DNS method for determination of reduced sugars (Miller, 1959). The absorbance was mea-sured on a spectrophotometer Cary 50 Scan (Varian) at 540 nm wave length.Determination of pH value: The pH value of the media was determined by utilization of Sartorius Basic pH Meter PB-11. The pH value was determined at the beginning (ini-tial pH value) and at the end of the enzymatic reaction (fi-nal pH value).Results and discussionEnzymatic reaction in the minimal model must with 10 g/L glucoseThe effect of the lower concentration of glucose, 10 g/L, on the enzymatic activity was evaluated by utilizing three different glucose oxidase preparations in the medi-um simulating a must (minimal model must). Those were Alphamalt Gloxy 5080, pure glucose oxidase and the third one was a combination of glucose oxidase and catalase. The most active of all the three was the commercial Alpha-malt Gloxy 5080 preparation, showing even 71.12% con-version at the 24th hour of the reaction. Unlike the Alpha-malt Gloxy 5080, the other two glucose oxidase prepara-tions showed negligible activity towards the glucose sub-strate used in the concentration of 10 g/L. It was, thus, ob-vious, that not even the presence of catalase could increase the activity of the pure glucose oxidase, in this, not favor-able conditions for the enzyme activity (pH 3.5).Enzymatic reaction in the minimal model must with 100 g/LIn the second experiment, ten times higher concentra-tion of glucose was used, as it was actually necessary to simulate the concentration of glucose present in the real must (approx. 100 g/L glucose+100 g/L fructose). None of the three enzymatic preparations used was active enough at this high concentration of glucose. However, the Alpha-malt Gloxy 5080 showed certain activity. Namely, during the reaction period of 120 hours it converted only 7.37% of the substrate. It can be assumed that for the conversion of glucose into gluconic acid in media with high glucose con-centration, at these unfavorable conditions for glucose ox-idase activity, the acidic environment, high concentrations of enzyme preparation, preferably Alphamalt Gloxy 5080, should be used. The pH value of the media and its difference between the initial and the final value (after the reaction), is also a good indirect indicator of the enzymatic activity. Thus, the very logical results were obtained when the pH value of the medium containing 100 g/L was used as a minimal model must. Only a very slight difference in the pH value (from 3.55 to 3.50) was measured in the medium with coupled glucose oxidase/ catalase enzymatic system used as a cata-lyst. It was interesting that the Alphamalt Gloxy 5080 has changed the pH value of the medium from 3.50 to pH 3.00, and it was the most active enzymatic preparation among the three examined.ConclusionThe effect of glucose concentration on the enzyme ac-tivity was evaluated by utilization of three different enzy-matic preparations. It was found out that the commercial bakery additive Alphamalt Gloxy 5080 was the most suit-able enzymatic preparation for glucose oxidation, at as low pH of the medium as pH 3.5, although even this enzymatic preparation was not very active at the higher glucose con-centration (100 g/L). This paper is only a part of the com-plex research process for development of a sophisticated method for pre-fermentative lowering of the sugar concen-tration in the must, with a final aim- production of low al-cohol wine. ReferencesChiva-Blanch, G. Urpi-Sarda, M., Ros, E.,Arrans, S., Valderas-Martinez, P., Casas, R., Sacanella, E., Liorach, R., Lamuela-Raventos, R. M., Andres-Lacueva, C., Estruch, R., 2012. Dealcoholized red wine decreases systolic and diastolic blood pressure and increases plasma nitric oxide: short communication. Circ. Res. 111, 1065-1072. Heux, S., Sablayrolles, J.M., Cachon, R., Dequin, S., 2006. Engineering a Saccharomyces cerevisiae wine yeast that exhibits reduced ethanol production during fermentation under controlled microoxygenation conditions. Appl. Environ. Microbiol. 72, 5822-5829.Karatzi, K., Papamichael, C., Aznouridis, K., Karatzis, E., Lekakis, J., Matsouka, C., Boskou, G., Chiou, A., Sitara, M. Feliou, G., Kontoyiannis, D., Zampelas, A., Mavrikakis, M., 2004. Constituents of red wine other than alcohol improve endothelial function in patients with coronary artery disease. Coron. Artery Dis. 15, 485-490.Miller, G.L., 1959. Use of dinitrosalicylic acid reagent for determination of reducing sugar. Anal. Chem. 31, 426-428.Schmidke, L.M., Blackman J.W., Agboola, S.O., 2012. Production technologies for reduced alcoholic wines. J. Food Sci. 77, 25-41.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 289 - 290 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.2:546.4/.8]:543.421Short communicationDetermination of lead and cadmium in foods by Graphite Furnace Atomic Absorption SpectroscopySuzana Angelova1*, Biljana Mladenovski1 and Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska21PHI Center for Public Health Kumanovo, 11th Octomvri bb, 1300 Kumanovo, R. Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* suzanaangelova@yahoo.comIntroductionHumans can be exposed to heavy metals through var-ious ways, including consumption of contaminated food. Although heavy metals are usually present in foods at very low levels, long-term exposure can have negative health impacts. According to the Macedonian regulations for gen-eral requirements for food safety, determination of cadmi-um (Cd) and lead (Pb) are obligatory. It can enter food ei-ther through environmental processes or through contami-nation in processing and/or packaging. Therefore, it is very important to measure levels of Cd and Pb in a variety of food matrices. A major challenge in the analysis of food samples is the extremely low analyte levels versus the very high matrix levels.