Typical matrix-derived polyatomic interference ions arising from the analysis of gelatin capsules include 40Ar12C+, 51V1H, 35Cl16O1H and 40Ca12C, etc. on 52Cr and 40Ar13C, 37Cl16O and doubly-charged 106Ru++ on 53Cr. The total dissolved solids (TDS) of the samples were less than 0.2% and any matrix effects were eliminated via the use of the internal standard calibration method.ConclusionOperating the Agilent 7700x with ORS3 in helium mode effectively removes polyatomic interferences via kinetic energy discrimination allowing the rapid, accurate, semi-quantitative screening of complex sample types, such as gelatin capsules. For each sample, semi-quantitative and full quantitative analysis can be performed simultaneously without the need to adjust the instrument.S2 OP 55128Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 127 - 128(2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsOral presentationsReferencesLiba A., McCurdy E., 2011. Proposed new USP general chapters <232> and <233> for elemental impurities: The application of ICP-MS for pharmaceutical analysis, Agilent publication 5990-9382EN.McCurdy E., Woods G., 2004 . J. Anal. At. Spectrom. 19, 607-615.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 129 - 130 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 633.888:615.212.7.074Short communicationChemometrics - powerful tool in tracking the origin of cannabis samples?Slavica Razic1*, Natasa Radosavljevic-Stevanovic21 Department of Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia2The National Crime - Technical Centre, Ministry of Interior, Republic of Serbia, Bulevar Dr Zorana Dindica 104, Belgrade, Serbia* slavica.razic@pharmacy.bg.ac.rsIntroductionIllicit production and trade of Cannabis affects many societies. This herb is mostly produced for domestic or re-gional markets and its production in Europe is believed to be increasing in indoor settings, under the control of orga-nized crime groups. Usually, the authorities are faced with the problem of a lack of information on where the canna-bis was grown. This material is also widely consumed by the population in each country and therefore establishing of system for classifying the origin of this plant can be a challenge for the scientists and a great benefit for the po-lice authorities. When drugs are concerned and especially for the fo-rensic purposes, the most significant compounds in Canna-bis samples are cannabinoids, terpenophenolic compounds unique to cannabis. For the forensic practice, the most im-portant cannabinoids are: 9-tetrahydrocannabinol (9-THC), cannabinol (CBN) and cannabidiol (CBD). The first compound, 9-THC is psychoactive component, while the other two mentioned cannabinoids are not. On the other, hand, transition metals are important for plant growth and they are distributed in different cells, in certain concen-trations due to the established homeostasis. Hemp has the ability to tolerate and accumulate heavy metals. Bearing in mind the lack of literature on possible correlations between content of cannabinoids in Cannabis plants and metals in both Cannabis samples and soil where the plants were cul-tivated, multivariate methods were applied aiming to assist in determination of origin of cannabis and its production. Materials and methodsYoung plants of Cannabis sativa species had been seized by the Police authorities as material planted by the criminal groups on different locations in Serbia. The plants were grown illegally under controlled indoor conditions by applying certain levels of temperature, humidity and inten-sity of light. The plants were randomly selected from the plantations in the early growing stage for the purpose of fo-rensic analyses. The rhizosphere soil from the root zone at a depth of 5-10 cm was sampled. The plant samples were further separated into roots, stems and leaves. The roots parts were cleaned from traces of soil, washed with de-ionised water and dried. The Cannabis leaves were dried and grounded to a powder. The mass of 33.3 mg of dried leaves material was dissolved in 5 mL of methanol, shak-en in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min, and filtered. The fil-trate was heated for 12 min at 150 degS in order to run decar-boxylation of the cannabinoid acids into cannabinoids. The evaporated extracts were reconstituted with 2 mL of meth-anol. The resulting solution of 1 uL, for each sample was applied on the TLC plate together with the volume of 1 uL of the dissolved reference materials: D9-THC, CBN and CBD in methanol in concentration of 0.05 mg/mL and 1 uL of pure methanol. Mobile phase was n-hexane: diethyl ether in ratio 4 : 1. Visualization was conducted by the dis-solved Azoic Diazo Component in 0.1 M sodium hydrox-ide in water. In the second step, 20 mg of each sample were dis-solved in 5 mL methanol, shaken in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min, filtered and evaporated to dryness. The residue was reconstituted with 2 mL of methanol. 1 uL of the re-sulting solution for each sample was injected into the GC-FID system in order to analyse the content of cannabinoids. S2 OP 56130Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 129 - 130 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsOral presentationsFor the purpose of elemental analysis, the sampled soils, roots, stems and leaves were subjected to microwave-as-sisted acid digestion, according to a known procedure (Ra-zic et al., 2006). The determination of the cannabinoids by thin lay-er chromatography (TLC) with plates made of aluminium and covered with silica gel with fluorescence indicator of UV254, by conducting the semi quantitative analyses.The determination of the cannabinoids was performed using an Agilent GC System, Model 7890A, fitted with a Flame Ionization Detector. The conditions were as fol-lows: column HP-5 (30 m x 320 um x 0.25 um), injection temperature: 250 degC, splitless mode, oven program: initial temperature 150 degC for 0 min, heating rate 15 degC/min to 300 degC and held for 5 min, nitrogen flow rate: 46 mL/min. The determination of the Cu, Zn, Mn, Fe, Ca and Mg was conducted on a Perkin-Elmer Model 5000 atomic ab-sorption spectrophotometer, operated under optimized measurement (Razic et al., 2005). The determination of the Cr was accomplished using a Perkin-Elmer Model 5000 atomic absorption spectrophotometer with a graph-ite furnace HGA 400 Automatic Burner Control (Razic et al., 2006).Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 11.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) and Minitab 13.20 (Minitab Inc., State College, PA), for Windows software packages. Results and discussionSince the roots contain only trace amounts of these sub-stances while the stems, branches and twigs have less than the leaf material, the cannabinoid content was measured only in the leaves. For the purpose of comparison of the can-nabinoid content in the young plants and the mature one the semi quantitative method of the TLC was conducted and the difference in the cannabinoids content was detected. The cannabinoids content in the leaves of the exam-ined cannabis plants was determined by external calibra-tion. The values varied from 0.03 to 1.47 mg/mL for THC and from 0.11 to 1.12 mg/mL for CBN. The lowest lev-els were from 0.003 to 0.06 mg/mL for CBN, what is rea-sonable since the level of this cannabinoid, as degradation product of THC, increases with time during storage of can-nabis plants. Quantification of metals was performed by external cal-ibration. The accuracy of the methods was checked by anal-ysis of a standard reference material, NIST SRM 1547 - Peach Leaves and NIST SRM 2711 - Montana II Soil, when satisfactory recoveries (90.06 - 115.35%) were obtained.The objective of this study was to analyse the corre-lations of seven metals and three main cannabinoids us-ing multivariate methods of analysis. After preliminary tests (Ryan-Joiner and Grubbs tests) the concentration data were subjected to principal component analysis (PCA) in order to highlight any relations between the elements. Four principal components (PCs) appeared to account for 89.42% of the variance of the data. These factors are re-lated to the sources of the elements and cannabinoids in the studied samples. The first factor comprises Mn, THC and CBN with high loadings. A correlation like this indi-cates that they arise from the same sources. Fe and Cr show significant positive loadings in the second factor and are negatively correlated with Zn and CBD with high nega-tive loading. The third factor is dominantly loaded by Cu as an essential element; a constituent of co-enzymes im-portant for a plant cycle. It is also correlated with Mg, with a high but negative loading. These correlations led to the consideration of the biosynthesis of cannabinoids and the involvement of metals as cofactors in the enzymatic cata-lyzed synthesis cycles (De Meijer et al., 2002; Pate, 1994; Radosavljevic-Stevanovic et al., 2014; Sirikantaramas et al., 2005; Taura et al., 2007).ConclusionThis work is conducted in order to determine whether the metals content in rhizosphere and cannabis can affect the levels of three important cannabinoids. The obtained results were subjected to chemometrics evaluation which gave an opportunity to get a better insight into role of met-als in the biosynthesis of cannabinoids. Identified patterns could be helpful in tracking the origin of Cannabis plant and its product adding a value to the applied analytical and chemometrics methods in forensic sciences. ReferencesDe Meijer, E.P.M., Bagatta, M., Carboni, A., Crucitti, P., Moliterni, V.M.C., Ranalli, P., Mandolino, G., 2002. The inheritance of chemical phenotype in Cannabis sativa L. Genetic. 163, 335-346.Pate, D.W., 1994. Chemical ecology of Cannabis. J. Int. Hemp. Ass. 2(29), 32-37.Radosavljevic-Stevanovic, N., Markovic, J., Agatonovic-Kustrin, S., Razic, S., 2014. Metals and organic compounds in the biosynthesis of cannabinoids. A chemometrics approach to the analysis of Cannabis sativa samples. Nat. Prod. Res. 28(8), 511-516.Razic, S., Djogo, S., Slavkovic, L., 2006. Multivariate characterization of herbal drugs and rizosphere soil samples according to their metallic content. Microchem. J. 84, 93-101.Razic, S., Onija, A., Slavkovic, L., Popovic, A., 2005. Determination of metal content in some herbal drugs - Empirical and chemometric approach. Talanta. 67, 233-239.Sirikantaramas, S., Taura, F., Tanaka, Y., Ishikawa, Y., Morimoto, S., Shoyama, Y., 2005. Tetrahydrocannabinolic Acid Synthase, the enzyme controlling marijuana psychoactivity, is secreted into the storage cavity of glandular trichomes. Plant. Cell. Physiolol. 46(9), 1578-1528. Taura, F., Sirikantaramas, S., Shoyama, Y., Yoshikakai, K., Shoyama, Y., Morimoto, S., 2007. Cannabinolic-acid synthase, the chemotype-determining enzyme in the fiber-type Cannabis sativa. FEBS Lett. 581, 2927-2934. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 131 - 132 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 343.52:615.012]:614.35Short communicationPattern recognition techniques in preventing of API falsificationJelena Acevska*, Katerina Brezovska, Natalija Nakov, Rumenka Petkovska, Aneta DimitrovskaInstitute of Applied Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* jelena@ff.ukim.edu.mkBackground Falsification of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) has been recognized as an important health issue since a series of health scares involving large numbers of casualties happened when altered APIs escaped detection in routine analytical testing (Degardin et al., 2014). API falsification usually means discrepancy between the information for declared manufacturer and the actual manufacturer of the APIs used for manufacturing of fin-ished dosage forms (FDF). Any form of tampering the con-tent or information about the content might affect the qual-ity of an API and therefore constitutes a direct threat to the health of patients. Since the reason for any falsification is fast and easy money, there is no general rule what APIs can be subjected to falsification. For any substance that can bring economic benefits to the manufacturer / distributor there is a potential risk to be falsified. The conventional analytical approach often fails to de-tect falsification since the quality and quantity of the API is within the standards. Instead, methods that allow for dis-tinguishing API samples and determining the source of APIs suspected for falsification are needed. Alternative ap-proach must include broader analytical window using spe-cific techniques to reveal some characteristic analytical in-formation, such as impurity profile, spectral data, physico-chemical constants, etc., thus creating an 'API fingerprint' database. APIs can be characterized, compared and clas-sified based on features revealed from such 'fingerprints', using chemometric methods, like different pattern recog-nition techniques (PRT) (Acevska et al., 2015; Petrusevs-ki et al., 2015).The aim of this research was to give an overview of analytical and chemometric methods used to differentiate the origin of the samples based on a 'fingerprint' database by the discriminatory matching of specific analytical fea-tures of the specific API.API fingerprinting API fingerprinting is the common name of a group of analytical applications for detection, identification and quantitative determination of related substances and oth-er impurities. Impurity profiling (organic, inorganic im-purities, residual solvents, enantiomeric purity), chemi-cal characterization (polymorphism/solvatomorphism) and other contaminants (radioactivity) of the APIs requires ad-vanced and robust fingerprint method. It usually comprise a set of several highly specific techniques, like: liquid and gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometer (LC/MS, GC/MS), differential scanning calorimetry (DSC), & differential termogravimetric analysis (TG/DTG), Furrier-transformed infrared (FTIR), near infrared (NIR), Raman or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR); in-ductively coupled plasma combined with optical emission (ICP-OES) or mass spectrometry (ICP/MS), X-ray diffrac-tion (XRD) etc. The characteristic and reproducible chemi-cal features revealed during the API fingerprinting are used for discriminating between samples. This data highlights the API fingerprinting as core activity in modern drug anal-ysis and tool for getting reliable results for combating API falsification. Pattern recognition of API fingerprintsPattern recognition techniques that can be applied to API fingerprinting consist of two general areas; unsuper-vised or supervised. From the characterization of the sam-ples of known origin, predictive models can be built and S2 OP 57132Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 131 - 132 (2016)Oral presentationsPharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairstested with new samples of unknown composition. By de-termination of different origins of the APIs, their falsifica-tion can be detected.In unsupervised pattern recognition (hierarchical clus-ter analysis (HCA), principal component analysis (PCA), generally viewed as exploratory data analysis methods, from which natural clusters in the data set can be identi-fied, no knowledge concerning the origin of the samples is necessary. HCA gives no indication of the variables which contribute most to the classification of objects in the data set, unlike PCA, where the loadings indicate the variation contained within each variable. There may be a loss of in-formation in the dendrogram generated by HCA, especial-ly if clusters are not well resolved. However, HCA does present all the variation in the data set, in contrast to PCA where only a percentage of the variation is typically pre-sented (Adams, 2004).In supervised pattern recognition (classification and discriminant analysis (CDA), orthogonal partial least square regression (OPLS/O2PLS), soft independent mod-eling of class analogy (SIMCA), etc. ), the groupings of samples must be known to allow predictions to take place. These methods require prior knowledge of the sample ori-gin to develop models, which are subsequently used to as-sign unknown samples to a parent group. The OPLS-DA method is well suited for classification of data that have multi-collinear and noisy variables, which is common for many types of chemical data. Refined properties of the OPLS-DA methodology have illustrated how Y-orthogo-nal variation can be useful not only for evaluation, but also for classification, thus rendering a PLS-DA/SIMCA hybrid discriminatory model (Bylesjo et al., 2006).Validation of the classification method The outcome of the investigation on API falsification should be accurate and reliable. For sample authentica-tion purposes, it is essential to ensure that their affiliation is properly defined (Gonzalez, 2007). In other words, de-tection of false negatives (excluding sample that belongs to the class) and false positive (includes a sample that does not belong to the class) results must be enabled.