Polysialic acids are present in the adult brain in the hypocampus, thalamus, amygdale, subventricular zone and prefrontal cortex, to be precise, in the parts where neu-ral plasticity, neural generation and remodeling of neural connections are ongoing. It is more abundant in embryon-ic brain tissue. The processes that polysialic acids are involved in-clude neural cell migration, axonal guidance, myelina-tion, fasciculation and plasticity of the nervous system. The mechanism of these actions is the anti-adhesive effect of polysialic acids in cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions. The anti-adhesive effect on is a results of the polyanion-ic nature of these molecules, that generate a large negative electric field (Sato and Kijatima, 2013). Clinical implicationSchizophrenia is a psychiatric disorder with multiple factors contributing to its pathogenesis. Some reports sug-gest that polysialic acids are involved in schizophrenia and other related psychiatric disorders. The background of this thesis lays in the gene that codes for an enzyme called al-pha-2,8-sialyltransferase. Biochemical analysis suggests that the activity of this gene is decreased in schizophrenic patients, thus resulting with impairment of the quality and quantity of polysialic acids in the brain (Sato and Kijatima, 2013). The level of sialylation of the neural cell adhesion molecule is decreased as well. Many cancer cells express polysialic acids on their cell surfaces. This results in attack to these cells by many mol-ecules including anti-sialic antibodies (Sato and Kijatima, 2013). Furthermore, because of its anti-adhesive effect, polysialic acids stimulate metastasis of the disease. Mono/di/oligosialic acids are considered as parts of other pathological changes in the human organism. Many bacterial toxins such as toxins from cholera, tetanus and pertussis, as well as various virus types bind to sialylated glycoconjugates. An example of this is the binding of influ-enza virus with sialic acid containing glycans. The mecha-nism of action is based on the activity of influenza's most important glycoproteins: hemagglutinine and neuramini-dase. Both glycoproteins recognize and bind to the the si-alylated glycans of the cell membrane. First, the virus rep-lication occurs, and then the activity of neuraminidase be-gins stimulating dissociation of the sialic acids from the S8 PP 312654Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 653 - 654 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationsglycan and subsequent increased permeability of the cell membrane for the virus (Gamblin and Skehel, 2010). Sialic acids are also found to be involved in nonalcho-holic fatty liver diease (Zhenya et al., 2016). The concen-tration of the sialic acids in the serum increases when non-alcoholic fatty liver disease occurs in non obese patients. Three possible mechanisms might underline the associa-tion between sialic acids and the disease. Firstly, nonalco-holic fatty liver disease patients are insulin resistant. The mechanisms that cause insulin resistance also causes ele-vated sialation of the glycolipides and glycoproteins in the human serum and secondly, the reason for a higher concen-tration of sialic acids in the serum of these patients can be the oxidative stress. Oxidative stress is an inevitable part of this disease, damaging the liver, and producing reactive oxygen species that interact with the terminal nonreducing parts of the serum glycoconjugates. This results with dis-sociation of the sialic acids in the human serum. Finally, si-alic acids can be part of proteins produced by the liver as a response to the disease, called acute phase proteins. Sialic acids are involved in other inflammatory processes such as cardiovascular diseases. Sialic acids are bioindicators of diabetes mellitus. Their presence is greater in type 2 diabetes patients suf-fering from diabetic nephropathy. Some of the sialylated glycoproteins in the human serum are called acute phase reactants, because their concentration increases during in-flammation. In type two diabetes mellitus, there is a stage of cytokine induced-acute phase response which leads to elevated sialic acid concentration in the serum. In diabet-ic nephropathy, there is damage to the vascular endotheli-al cells of the kidney, which is accompanied with inflam-mation, resulting with elevated concentration of sialic ac-ids in the serum. It is important to note that the concentra-tion of these substances is greater when diabetic nephropa-thy occurs, in comparison to cases with uncomplicated di-abetes (Varma et al., 2016). ConclusionSialic acids play a great roll in the ethiopathology and the diagnosing of many pathological changes in the hu-man organism. They are considered one of the indicators in diagnosing diabetic nephropathy in patients suffering from type 2 diabetes mellitus. Elevated levels of sialic ac-ids in the human serum are associated with non obese fat-ty liver disease and indicate a potential risk for its develop-ment. This means that sialic acids play a role in the meta-bolic changes that result with this disease, and as such are used in its diagnosis. In infections on the other hand, sial-ic acids are used indirectly in therapy. Identification of the mechanisms of binding of the viruses to the cells, enables creation of antiviral medications for treatment of many in-fections caused by resistant viruses and bacteria. Various types of cancer show elevated concentration of polysialic acids, making the diagnosis of the disease easier. Finally, in vivo and in vitro analyses show that enzymatic activity of alpha 2,8-sialyltransferase is decreased in patients with schizophrenia, resulting with impairment of the quality and quantity of the polisyalic acids.ReferencesGamblin, S.J., Skehel, J.J., 2010. Influenza Hemagglutinin and Neuraminidase Membrane Glycoproteins. J. Biol. Chem. 285(37), 28403-28409.Sato, C., Kitajima, K., 2013. Disialic, oligosialic and polysialic acids: distribution, functions and related disease. J. Biochem. 154(2), 115-136.Varma, V., Varma, M., Varma, A., Kumar, R., Bharosai, A., Vyas, S., 2016. Serum total sialic acid and highly sensitive C-reactive protein: Prognostic markers for the diabetic nephropathy. J. Lab. Physicians 8(1), 25-29.Zhenya, L., Han, M., Chengfu, X., Zhou, S., Chao, C., Youming, L., 2016. Serum sialic acid level is significantly associated with nonalcoholic fattylLiver disease in a nonobese Chinese population: A cross-sectional study. BioMed Article ID 5921589, 1-6. doi:10.1155/2016/5921589.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 655 - 656 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.272Short communicationBiosimilars in clinical use Martina Keshkjec*, Martina Miloshevska*, Aleksandra GrozdanovaFaculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* martinakeskec@hotmail.comm.miloshevska@gmail.comIntroductionBiologic medicines are mainly protein-based medi-cines derived from living organisms or cells cultured in a laboratory. Those medicinal products are larger and more complex than conventional (non-biological) drugs. Biolog-icals can be hormones (growth hormones, insulin, erythro-poietin), enzymes, monoclonal antibodies, blood products, immunological medicinal products (sera and vaccines) or advanced technology products such as gene and cell ther-apy (Consensus Information Paper, 2013). The structure-function relationships of biologicals are very sensitive, be-cause modifications of tertiary or quaternary configuration may affect safety, purity and potency. They have a complex mechanism of action by targeting more selective to the cell or molecule that is responsible for the development of cer-tain diseases.The paradigm for biologicals "the process is the prod-uct" still is viable today. Their manufacturing is challeng-ing process, where critical culturing and purification steps is required to produce a consistent, high quality active in-gredient. Gene manipulation, fermentation and purification are used with high level of expertise in order to guaran-tee the safety and efficacy of the final product. Biologicals are usually more difficult to characterize than chemical-ly derived medicinal products. Moreover, post-translation-al modifications such as glycosylation, oxidation and de-amination can be significantly altered by changes (Geigert, 2013). Even minor changes in manufacturing process can cause significant changes in efficacy or immunogenicity.The use of modern technologies like biotechnology, DNA recombinant techniques etc. results with the first re-combinant biological medicine, human insulin (Humulin), approved for therapeutic use in 1982 from FDA. The era of recombinant monoclonal antibodies started in 1995. Since then, the number of biologicals approved for human use, including monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), has increased considerably.These medicines have advanced the treatment of many chronic and life-threatening diseases. Even though bio-logicals are much more expensive than chemical entities, health care providers and payers considered that they are worth their cost - as long as the appropriate patients re-ceive them and achieve the desired clinical outcomes. Pa-tients for whom biologicals are a good choice include those who have failed on conventional therapies or for whom no other options exist. The predictions are that by 2017 glob-al biological pharmaceutical market will amounts to about $220 billion (Dolinar and Reilly, 2013). On the other hand, after the first biological medicines were launched, exclusivity rights on these drugs have be-gun to expire, and thus present an opportunity for pharma-ceutical companies to consider developing biosimilar med-icines of these products. In general, this means that the bi-ological reference medicine must have been authorized for at least 10 years before a biosimilar can be made available by another company.What are biosimilars?Biosimilars are not generic versions of biologics. "A biosimilar is a biological medicinal product that contains a version of the active substance of an already authorized original biological medicinal product (called reference medicinal product). Similarity to the reference medicinal product in terms of quality characteristics, biological ac-tivity, safety and efficacy based on a comprehensive com-parability exercise needs to be established." This includes physicochemical and biological characterization and re-quires knowledge on how to interpret any differences be-S8 PP 313656Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 655 - 656 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationstween a biosimilar and its reference medicinal product (Eu-ropean Medicines Agency, 2014). Actually, the changing outlook for biosimilars comes at a time when the global pharmaceutical market is feeling the combined impact of two key events: a period of unprecedented patent expira-tions on many of the world's largest pharmaceutical prod-ucts, and a financial crisis that has required healthcare sys-tems to make significant and sustained cost reductions. Bi-osimilars may have the potential to increase patient ac-cess to potentially valuable therapies at a lower cost (IMS Health, 2011). Approval and licensing pathways of biosimilars In 2005, the EMA/ European Commission were the first to implement a well documented legal and regulato-ry pathway for the approval of biosimilar products that is distinct from the generic pathway. The approval of the first biosimilar product, somatropin (Omnitrope), following the EMA's new approach, was in 2006, followed by erythro-poietin (2007) and filgrastim (2008). Five years later, in 2013 the first mAb biosimilar, infliximab, was approved in Europe. Market authorization for biosimilars is issued on "step by step, case by case" basis to demonstrate similarity with respect to structural and functional characterization, in vitro biological assays and pharmacokinetic and phar-macodynamics evaluation, as well as safety, efficacy and immunogenicity studies. Substitution and interchangeabilitySubstitution of generic drugs for reference drugs is un-controversial because the two will be identical if they have demonstrated bioequivalence. Since biological drugs can never be exact copies, the question whether they can be substitutes of original biologics remains unclear (Ebbers and Chamberlain, 2014). These medicinal products are not directly interchangeable. In EU these terms, interchange-ability and substitution, are not used as synonyms. (Espin et al., 2011). Interchangeability refers to the prescription of biosimilar in place of the reference product by prescrib-ers, while substitution means that pharmacists are allowed to dispense a biosimilar. EMA does not guarantee inter-changeability and established that these aspects are beyond its competence. The decisions on the interchangeability of biosimilars and innovator products rest with the Mem-ber States in the EU. The European Generic Association (EGA) reported that more than 12 countries across the EU have introduced rules to avert automatic substitution of in-novator biological with biosimilars. The increased use of this medicine have arisen many questions and there remains an need to continued guidance for substitution from regulatory agencies with regards to safety issues, as well as those for pharmacovigilance and risk- mitigation activities. This is anticipated and will be critical to the further therapeutic use of biosimilars. ReferencesConsensus Information Paper, 2013. What you need to know about Biosimilar Medicinal Products. European Commission. Available at: http://ec.europa.eu/enterprise/sectors/ healthcare/files/docs/biosimilars_report_en.pdf (accessed on 20.03.2016) Dolinar, R.O., Reilly, M.S., 2013. The future of biological therapy: a pathway forward for biosimilars. GaBI Journal 2(1), 36-40.Geigert, J., 2013. Biologics are not chemical drugs. In: The challenge of CMC regulatory compliance for biopharmaceuticals and other biologics. 2nd ed., Springer, New York, pp. 21-23.Ebbers, H.C., Chamberlain, P., 2014. Interchangeability. An insurmountable fifth hurdle? GaBI Journal 3(2), 88-93.Espin, J., Garcia, L., Olry de Labry, A., Rovira, J., 2011. The impact of biosimilars' entry in the EU market. Andalusian School of Public Health. Available at: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi510.1.1.357.2218&rep5rep1&type5.pdf. European Medicines Agency, 2014. Guideline on Similar Biological Medicinal Products. EMA/CHMP/437/04. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Scientific_guideline/ 2014/10/ WC500176768.pdf (accessed on 20.03.2016).IMS Health, 2011. Shaping the biosimilars opportunity: A global perspective on the evolving biosimilars landscape.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 657 - 658 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.918:582.282.123.4Short communicationThe toxicology of aflatoxins and public awarenessElisaveta Durolojkova*, Marija Hiljadnikova Bajro and Tatjana Kadifkova PanovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, Institute for Applied Biochemistry, Department of Toxicology, "Ss. Cyril and Methodius" University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* elisaveta.durolojkova@hotmail.comIntroductionThe aflatoxins are toxic substances produced as sec-ondary metabolites by the fungus Aspergillus flavus and Aspergillus parasiticus. Foods in which aflatoxins are commonly found include rice, corn, peanuts, tree nuts, co-coa beans. The aflatoxins are potent toxic, carcinogenic, mutagenic and immunosuppressive agents. Today, there are approximately 16 known types of aflatoxins including: aflatoxin B1, aflatoxin B2, aflatoxin B3, aflatoxin G1, af-latoxin G2, aflatoxin G2a, aflatoxin M1, aflatoxin M2, af-latoxin P and aflatoxin T2. The four major aflatoxins that cause illness in humans and can be found in food are: afla-toxin B1, aflatoxin B2, aflatoxin G1 and aflatoxin G2. The International Agency for Research on Cancer has classified aflatoxin B1 as a group 1 carcinogen (carcinogenic to hu-mans) and aflatoxin M1 as a group 2b carcinogen (carcino-genic to laboratory animals and possibly carcinogenic to humans, respectively). The exposure to aflatoxins and the resulting aflatoxicosis can vary from acute to chronic, and the illness can range from mild to severe. Acute exposure to high doses of aflatoxins can result in aflatoxicosis, hav-ing the liver as a target organ, which can lead to serious liv-er damage. Chronic exposure to sublethal doses of aflatox-ins can result in liver cancer, impaired protein formation, impaired blood coagulation and toxic hepatitis.People who have aflatoxicosis might exhibit the fol-lowing characteristics:- Liver damage may be confirmed by jaundice and characteristic yellowing of tissues- Gall bladder may become swollen- Immunosuppression may provide an opportunity for secondary infections- Vitamin K functions may decrease- High level of aflatoxin B1 - albumin adducts may be present in plasma. Clinical implicationThe most commonly used human samples for aflatox-in analysis are blood and urine.