As only a small number of participants claimed HMs were not part of their traditional family background, claims such as a loss of transmission of knowledge to SAs in the UK cannot be made; although, during data collection one participants did suggest that this was the case. Participant 39 commented on how Westernised her own children had become that they did not even let her use HMs which she knew worked, they only used CWM and never considered the use of HMs despite it being part of their heritage. It was also noted that two participants claimed their families only ever used CWM; thus, they were not aware of traditional or cultural practices of HMs. 020406080100120140No YesNumber of ParticipantsDo Participants Use Herbal MedicinesTraditional and Personal Use Of Herbal Medicines Yes-HerbalMedicines Are Partof TraditionalBackgroundNo- HerbalMedicines Are NotPart of TraditionalBackgroundFigure 2-15 Participants Personal Use of Herbal Medicines and Traditional Heritage 48 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Question 7: How often do you use herbal medicines? This question adopts a modification of the Likert scale to determine the frequency of use of HMs. Initially, the questionnaire was designed with the options: very frequently, frequently, occasionally, rarely and never; however, after review these options were changed to daily, weekly, monthly, when required, and never, to better determine the use of HMs. Participants were asked how often they used HMs to determine how frequently they were used by the research sample (Figure 2-16). The majority of participants (48%, n=92) claimed to use herbal remedies 'when required'. Remedies such as: cardamom pods for nausea, cloves for toothache, honey and lemon for coughs, and aloe vera for skin conditions were commonly used when required. The 26% of participants (n=50) who stated they used herbal remedies 'daily' mentioned taking substances such as cinnamon to lower cholesterol, ajwain for digestion, masala tea and turmeric milk for general health and wellbeing. Out of these 50 participant who used herbal remedies daily just over half (56%, n=28) were elderly participants. The few participants (3%, n=5) who claimed to use herbal remedies 'weekly' made reference to not taking too much of various ingredients as they are garam so should only be consumed in moderation; karela for diabetes and some masalas were amongst those that should be consumed in moderation. Despite 66 participants claiming they did not use any HMs for themselves in the first question, only 44 participants said they 'never' used herbal remedies in this question. This implies the 22 participants who selected alternative options may have later realised that they did sometimes use HMs. This would suggest that more of the research participants do actually use HMs than first thought. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100NeverWhen requiredMonthlyWeeklyDailyNumber of Participants Frequency of use Frequency of Herbal Medicine UseFigure 2-16 How Frequently Participants Used Herbal Medicines 49 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The following question was divided into two parts; the first section (a) asks participants to list any herbal remedies, products, or ingredients they know which have medicinal benefits; while the second section (b) focuses specifically on medicinal plants. Question 8A: List as many herbal remedies, products or ingredients you know of... The aim of this question was to explore participants' knowledge of HMs. The first draft of the questionnaire asked participants to list 'herbal remedies' they knew of; however, after reviewing the feedback from the pilot study the terms 'herbal remedies, products or ingredients' were used to stimulate participants to think about different HMs they knew of. The refined wording in the question acted as a prompt which permitted for a wider range of responses, without influencing participants' answers (Harris and Brown, 2010). Participants were asked to list as many products as they could think of which were good for their health or had medicinal values, even if they did not personally use them. The results exemplify a vast range of herbal remedies known and used by the research sample (Appendix 5). Figure 2-17 represents the number of items recalled by participants; this includes the individual ingredients which may be used to formulate a herbal remedy and commercial products. Only 7% (n=13) of the research population were unable to list any herbal products in this question. The mean (M) number of responses per participant was seven. The highest number of products recalled was by participant 16 who listed thirty products. The most popular product mentioned by 57% (n=109) of participants was turmeric. Other frequently mentioned items included: ginger, ajwain, fennel, cinnamon, garlic, aloe vera, clove, tulsi, black pepper, neem, and black seed. Various nuts (e.g. almonds and walnuts), teas (e.g. green tea, nettle tea, and masala tea), and oils (e.g. olive, mustard, eucalyptus, sesame, castor, sunflower, and fish oil), were also mentioned (Appendix 5). 05101520250 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 +Number of participantsNumber of items recalled Number of Herbal Remedies Listed Figure 2-17 The Number of Herbal Remedies Recalled by Participants 50 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Question 8B: What plants do you know that have medicinal benefits? Part B of the question asked participants to specifically name any plants which had medicinal benefits; Figure 2-18 represents the number of plants recalled by participants. The majority of participants (24%, n=46) recalled at least one medicinal plant (M = 2), the maximum number of plants listed by one participant was twelve. Aloe vera was the most frequently mentioned plant by 41% (n=80) of participants, followed by mint (28%, n=54) and tulsi (23%, n=44). Participants said they used aloe vera for skin conditions (e.g. eczema, itchy skin, burns, and skin irritation), diabetes, and arthritis. The gel contained in the fleshy leaves of the aloe vera plant has been associated with anti-inflammatory and wound healing effects which have been linked to the mannose-6-phosphate sugar component (Davis et al., 1994). Other traditional uses of aloe vera include its use in treating tooth aches, aiding the recovery of mouth ulcers, stomach and duodenal ulcers, irritable bowel syndrome, and its immune boosting effects (Chevallier, 2007) Various fruits (e.g. amla, cranberry, dates, oranges, and figs), vegetables (e.g. broccoli, carrots, and karela), and herbs (e.g. basil, coriander, fenugreek, rosemary, and parsley) were documented. Other products such as ajwain, cannabis, cinnamon, chillies, curry leaves, dandelion, fennel, ginger, neem, nettles, rose, spinach, and turmeric were also cited by participants (Appendix 5). Despite having successfully named multiple herbal products in part A, 21% (n=30) of participants failed to name any plants with medicinal benefits in this section. This could have been because participants did not want to repeat themselves from part A as they had already listed numerous products; or because participants did not know of any medicinal plants, as suggested by participant 8 who listed nine herbal remedies in part A but said he could not name any plants. Some participants (2%, n=4) were able to recall more products when they were asked specifically about plants with medicinal benefits in comparison to section A of this question. The ways people use plants is dynamic (Heinrich et al., 2006); the range of plants recalled by participants illustrates that they had a considerable wealth of knowledge of medicinal plants (Appendix 5). 010203040500 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10+Number of participantsNumber of plants recalled Number of Medicinal Plants ListedFigure 2-18 The Number of Medicinal Plants Recalled by Participants 51 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Question 9: Do you know any herbal remedies or products which can be used for the following conditions? In this question participants were presented with seven health conditions a mixture of minor and serious health problems (i.e. arthritis, cough, diabetes, headache, indigestion, itchy skin, and wounds) and asked to state any HMs they knew of which could be used to treat or manage the conditions. The rationale for selecting these conditions is because they are amongst some of the most popular health problems people seek treatment for in the UK (PAGB, 2009). Conditions such as cough, headache, indigestion and skin disorders are amongst the top ten ailments treated over the counter (OTC) and may be considered as minor health problems (PAGB, 2009; Pharmacy Research UK, 2014). Arthritis affects around 10 million people in the UK (NHS, 2014). Research into arthritis and ethnic minority groups in the UK has found that some forms of arthritis appear to be more common and more severe in SA ethnic groups (Samanta et al., 1992; Samanta et al., 2005). It is estimated that 3.3 million people in the UK have diabetes (Diabetes UK, 2015); SAs in the UK are up to six times more likely to have diabetes than the Caucasian population (Khunti et al., 2009). These health problems can have a serious impact on peoples' lives; despite this little is known about how the conditions are managed by SA populations (Khunti et al., 2009). By investigating participants knowledge of HMs used for these conditions a better understanding of alternative therapies used for these health problems can be assessed. The majority of participants (86%, n=165) were able to list treatments for one or more of the conditions (Figure 2-19); just 8% (n=15) of participants listed a remedy for each of the seven conditions. Of the total population surveyed, 14% (n=27) were unable to state herbal remedies for any of the conditions listed. Figure 2-19 represents whether or not participants stated a response for each of the health conditions. It is evident that more participants were able to recall remedies for conditions such as a cough (n=151), indigestion (n=127), and wounds (n=98) in comparison to arthritis (n=65), diabetes (n=68), and headache (n=63). As cough, indigestion, and skin conditions are amongst the top ten conditions treated OTC in the UK (PAGB, 2009); this could explain why more participants knew of HMs to treat them in comparison to the other conditions. 020406080100120140160Number of participantsHealth conditionsHerbal Remedies Known For Health ConditionsYesNoFigure 2-19 Herbal Remedies Known for the Health Conditions Listed 52 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Figure 2-20 represents HMs stated by participants for each condition organised according to the age ranges - young, middle aged and older; it illustrates that for conditions such as itchy skin there was a similar number of responses from young, middle aged and older participants (n=25, 26, 26 respectively). For conditions such as cough and wounds there were more responses from younger participants than the other age groups. While, conditions such as arthritis and diabetes there were more responses from the middle aged and older participants in comparison to the younger participants. Although arthritis and diabetes can affect people of all ages (Arthritis Research UK, 2013a; Diabetes UK, 2015), middle aged and older participants appeared to have better knowledge of how to treat and manage them with HMs in comparison to younger participants. Ginger was mentioned for its use in arthritis (n=9); due to its anti-inflammatory action which can help with the pain and loss of mobility caused by the condition (Grzanna et al., 2005). The notion that ginger is garam and thus improves circulation was frequently documented. It could be eaten in its raw form, soaked in water over night and the liquid taken in the morning, infused in tea, or incorporated into daily meals. Ginger powder, tablets, beverages, and many other formulations are now readily available and there is a vast amount of literature which supports the medicinal claims associated with its use (Polunin and Robbins, 1992; Pharmaceutical Press, 2013). Ali et al. (2008) say the anti-inflammatory effects of ginger have been known for centuries; although, evidence was only made available when research conducted identified the active components in ginger and claimed they worked like non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs); moreover, ginger avoids the side-effects caused by NSAIDs. Ginger is known to contain a mixture of biologically active compounds which work in different ways to reduce inflammation; i.e. some compounds have an inhibitory effect on the production of inflammatory cytokines, while others inhibit the proliferation of inflammatory cells (Ali et al., 2008; Bartels et al., 2015). Fenugreek was 010203040506070Number of ParticipantsConditionHerbal Medicines For Health Conditions By Age Range YoungParticipantsMiddle agedParticipantsOlderParticipantsFigure 2-20 Herbal Medicines Cited for Each Condition by the Different Age Groups 53 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra another popular remedy recommended for arthritis (n=10); the fresh or dried leaves could be incorporated in cooking or infused in tea, the seeds could be ground and blended with other herbs, or soaked overnight in water and drank the next morning. Massaging the affected joints with various oils was also recommended, including: black seed oil, flax seed oil, and garlic oil - made by infusing cloves of garlic in olive or mustard oil. There was a clear warning to avoid sour or acidic foods such as yoghurt, oranges, and lemons as they were believed to make the condition worse. Participant 62 claimed, ''lemon is very bad for arthritis, anything acidic should be avoided.'' However, there is no evidence to suggest cutting these substances out of the diet helps with arthritis; if anything they are an important source of nutrients so should be consumed as part of a balanced diet (Arthritis Research UK, 2013b). For the treatment of coughs there were several common herbal remedies suggested; 50% (n=76) of participants listed honey as being useful to sooth a cough of which half (n=38) recommended taking it with lemon. While others suggested combining honey with black pepper, ginger, brandy, cinnamon, or turmeric. Honey is made up of a mixture of compounds which give it anti-inflammatory, anti-bacterial, and antioxidant effects which explain why it has been used in traditional medicine for coughs (Oduwole et al., 2014). Liquorish, mint, tulsi, fennel, black seed, banaksha, and salt water gargles were also listed as being used for a cough. Banaksha (Viola odorata L., sweet violet) has traditionally been used to treat cough, catarrh, fever, headache and pain, hence its popularity for relieving the symptoms of coughs and colds (Bhatia et al., 2014). For diabetes it was well known that there was no cure for the condition but blood glucose (BG) levels could be managed and kept in control by the consumption of HMs. Of the 68 participants who listed a herbal remedy for diabetes, 56% (n=38) mentioned the hypoglycaemic properties of karela (Momordica charantia L.). Participant 107 claimed, ''karela is good for diabetes as bitter things can be used to counteract the sugar.'' Fresh karelas are widely available in the UK and can be consumed as a curry, juiced, or soaked overnight in water. Various commercial karela formulations are also available, including: dry powder, concentrated juice, and tablets. There is an abundance of research conducted on the use of karela in diabetes around the world (Baxter, 2008; Pandey et al., 2011; Lone et al., 2012). There are several proposed methods which can explain the hypoglycaemic effects of karela; it is believed to reduce glucose absorption, increase glucose uptake in liver cells, and improve insulin secretion (Jayasooriya et al., 2000). Fenugreek (Trigonella foenum-graecum L.) was mentioned by 16% (n=11) of participants who highlighted the anti-diabetic properties were best obtained by soaking the seeds in water over night, or consuming the leaves regularly as part of the diet. Studies have shown that fenugreek can stimulate glucose 54 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra uptake into cells and plays a part in activating the insulin secretion signalling pathway; thus, helping reduce BG levels and improving insulin response in diabetics (Vijaykumar et al., 2005; Chevallier, 2007). Other products described by participants for diabetes included: tulsi infused in water or tea, turmeric with milk, ginger mixed with cinnamon and honey, honey to substitute other sugars, figs soaked in milk overnight, gram flour chapattis instead of wheat flour, okra as a curry or soaked in water over night, amla, cinnamon, chick peas, curry leaves, olives, grapefruit, and neem. Just 63 participants (33%) said they knew of HMs which could be used to treat a headache. The first response from many participants was often 'paracetamol' but participants were reminded that this research was focused on HMs, so these responses were disregarded. Herbal remedies to treat a headache included: massage the head with oil (olive, almond, coconut, or mustard oil), drink plenty of water, masala tea, mint tea, ginger tea, ginger infused in water, holy water, honey in hot water, ajwain seeds chewed or infused in water or tea, millet flour compress on forehead, menthol rubbed onto forehead, steam inhalation with menthol crystals, cloves warmed and the fumes released inhaled, and black pepper chewed or infused in tea. Participant 85 claimed, ''you do not get headache if your digestion is ok.'' This point was also highlighted by several other participants and an Ayurvedic practitioner (Dr. Pankanj Chansarkar, Kerala), who described the anatomy and explained the causes of a headache.