Many cases of plant poisonings are accidents,often involving misidentification.' Not all cases of poisoning are accidental. We alsoemploy toxic plants in purposeful ways, in theform of arrow, fish, insect, rat, and ordealpoisons. This will be the focus of our look at toxicplants.' The abuse of two toxic plant products, alcoholand tobacco, are leading causes of death in theUnited States.9.2 ! INTRODUCTION"What is food to one, is to others bitter poison. "[Lucretius, 99-55 BCE]"Unfortunately, the illustrations of edible andpoisonous mushrooms were reversed on page 14 ofthe Sunday edition." [Chicago Tribune]"... there are few more excruciating ways of expiringthan to eat a misidentification." [R. S. Cowan, an American botanist]' ' ' ' 'A DEFINITIONA poisonous plant is one capable of disrupting thenormal functioning or state of health of its victim -- aperson, a wild or domesticated animal, or evenanother plant. Some toxic plants are lethal. Most ofthe several hundred that occur in North America arenot. What makes a plant poisonous? The majority ofthem are toxic because they manufacture one or morepoisonous substances. They are called toxicprinciples or poisonous principles. Some plants donot make a poison, but instead they absorb oraccumulate a toxic principle from the environment.The locoweed weeds, for instance, do not manufacturethe selenium found in their tissues. They absorb itfrom the soil in which they grow.RELATIVE TOXICITYThe amount of toxin required to kill a test animal maybe amazingly small. It is typically expressed in termsof an amount of toxin per weight of the victim. Thefigures below show the MLD (minimum lethal dose) inmicrograms (1 million micrograms = 1 gram) of toxinper kilogram of subject. The poison is administered byinjection. Notice that such well known poisons assodium cyanide and strychnine are relatively crude.TOXICITY OF SELECTED POISONSToxin (source) MLD in micrograms/kilogramNicotine (tobacco) 50,000Ouabain (arrow poison) 14,000Sodium cyanide 10,000Amanitin (mushroom toxin) 1,100Strychnine 500Curare (arrow poison) 500BWSP-toxin (black widow spider) 100Tetradotoxin (puffer fish) 8-20Rattlesnake toxin 0.2Ricin (castor bean toxin) 0.02Tetanus toxin 0.0001Botulinus toxin A 0.00003FACTORS INFLUENCINGTOXICITYA number of factors influence the severity of plantpoisonings. They include:' the kind of toxin produced;' the quantity of material ingested or contacted;' the part of the plant eaten and its condition;' the time of year;' environmental conditions, such as drought orfrost;' the kind of animal, its age, sex, and generalhealth;' personal sensitivities, allergic systems, and' even the genetic background of the victim.HOW DOES POISONING OCCUR?People fall prey to poisonous plants in a variety ofways:' curiosity, especially in children;' mistaking a toxic plant for an edible one;' using toxic plant parts in jewelry or as toys;' sucking nectar from flowers;' using leaves for teas;-155-' misuse of herbal or medicinal preparations;' abuse of recreational drug plants, such as thejimson weed; and' direct or indirect contact with toxic plants whencamping, weeding the garden, backpacking, orplaying.A few simple precautions will help lessen the chancesof poisoning. Know the common toxic plants of yourarea, including the ornamentals. Keep pets, infants,and small children away from attractive (especiallybrightly-colored) ornamentals and seeds. Store bulbs,seeds, and rootstocks away from children.SOME COMMONMISCONCEPTIONSOn the other hand, you can get yourself into a passelof trouble by accepting some widely held beliefs thatare without any foundation.' Discoloration of a silver spoon or coin is not areliable way of telling a mushroom from atoadstool.' Poisonous plants do not come color-coded. Not allred fruits are poisonous; not all blue ones aresafe.' Toxic plants do not always have bitter,disagreeable tastes; some are quite pleasant.' You cannot use the eating habits of birds or wildanimals as a reliable guide; birds are quite fond ofbrightly-colored "fruits" of the yew trees, whichwill kill us within minutes.' While cooking will destroy some toxic principles,others are not heat sensitive.SYMPTOMS OF PLANTPOISONINGSymptoms of plant poisoning in humans are manifoldand may present themselves in a variety of areas onand in our bodies. They include:' itching, redness, stinging, burning, blistering ofthe skin;' tingling, numbness, burning, swelling of the lips,mouth, tongue, or throat;' sweating, salivation, and tears;' nausea, retching, and vomiting;' stomach/abdominal pains, diarrhea, orconstipation;' changes in pulse rate and blood pressure;' headache, dizziness, faintness, and weakness;' difficulty in breathing, speaking, or seeing;' change in pupil size;' lack of muscular coordination, trembling, orparalysis;' convulsions or epileptic-like seizures;' changes in mental state (nervousness, giddiness,depressions, or signs of hallucinations;' sleepiness, coma, and' death.TREATMENTIt may come as a surprise to learn that there are noeffective antidotes for most of the poisons found inplants. Treatment usually consists of providingsymptomatic relief -- treating the effects of thepoisons, as opposed to neutralizing or destroying thetoxin. What can be done in cases of plant poisoning?' Make the victim vomit, if he or she is conscious.' Keep the victim warm and quiet, while observingclosely.' Call a physician or take the victim to a hospital.' Be ready to identify the plant or bring some of itwith you. Plant material in vomitus or stools mayalso be useful in identification.A word of caution. You and I are not medical doctors.We cannot legally tell a victim that he or she shouldfollow a particular "cure."9.3 ! SURVEY OF PLANTSThere are roughly 30,000 native, naturalized, andornamental higher plants in North America; but onlya few hundred of them are toxic. Perhaps thirty orforty species are known to cause serious instances ofpoisoning or fatalities. One of them, tobacco[Nicotiana tabacum] is far and away the mostdangerous toxic plant encountered by most of us inmodern society. Its use leads to the death of severalhundred thousand people each year in this countryand to billions of dollars in health care expenses andlost productivity. It seldom receives the attention thatit should in discussions of toxic plants, probablybecause it is a legal drug plant whose use has beenwidely accepted and it is the source of tax revenue.EXPOSURES IN U. S. (1985-1994)Unidentified plants 84,593Unidentified berries 11,384Philodendron spp. (philodendron) 61,200Dieffenbachia spp. (dumbcane) 35,645Euphorbia spp. (spurges) 31,414Capsicum spp. (peppers) 29,461Ilex spp. (hollies) 23,904Crassula spp. 22,295Ficus spp. (figs) 20,450Toxicodendron spp. (poison-ivy, etc.) 19,395Phytolacca spp. (pokeweed) 18,552Schefflera (Brassaia spp. ) 17,708Solanum spp. (nightshades) 17,177Spathiphyllum spp. 14,380Epipremum spp. 13,471Saintpaulia spp. (saintpaulia) 12,238Pyracantha spp. (firethorns) 11,227-156-Taxus spp. (yews) 11,217Rhododendron spp. (rhodondendrons) 9590Schlumbergia spp. 9423Chrysanthemum spp. (chrysanthemum) 8058Quercus spp. (oaks) 7871Chlorophytum spp. (spider plant) 7790Begonia spp. (begonias) 7536Aloe spp. (aloes) 7505Pelargonium spp. (geraniums) 7021Eucalyptus spp. (eucalyptus) 7020Hedera spp. (English ivy) 6982Taraxacum spp. (dandelions) 6618Nerium spp. (oleanders) 6581Aglaonema spp. 6196Narcissus spp. (narcissus) 6064Caladium spp. 6053Lonicera spp. (honeysuckles) 6007Syngonium spp. 5541Prunus spp. (chokecherries) 5359Dracaena spp. 5110Cornus spp. (dogwoods) 4960Sorbus spp. (mountain-ashes) 4945Impatiens spp. (forget-me-nots) 4653Tulipa spp. (tulips) 4647Asparagus spp. 4597Rosa spp. (roses) 4422Nandina spp. (heavenly-bamboo) 4337Cactus (unidentified) 4259Nephrolepis spp. (Boston ferns) 3872Pinus spp. (pines) 3776Liriope spp. 3768Iris spp. (irises) 3699Juniperus spp. (junipers) 3670Modified after Krenzelok, E. P. & T. D. Jacobsen. 1997. Plantexposures... A national profile of the most common plantgenera. Vet. Human Toxicol. 39(4): 248, 249.In the descriptions that follow, I have selected plantsthat are poisonous to humans or animals. Most ofthem are well known to the general public; one or twowere included to demonstrate particular aspects oftoxicity.POISON-OAK AND POISON-IVYIn many ways, it is convenient to treat poison-oak andpoison-ivy as though they were one plant. They arevery closely related structurally, chemically, andgenetically. Western poison-oak (Toxicodendrondiversilobum) and eastern poison-ivy (T. radicans)account for most of the million or so cases ofdermatitis reported in the United States each yearbecause most of us do not recognize these plants inthe field and unknowingly come into direct or indirectcontact with them. The plants may grow as low,much-branched shrubs or they may be robust anderect. They may climb trees by means of aerialrootlets that fasten them to the trunk. The shape ofthe three leaflets is variable. All parts of the plant, with the possible exception ofpollen grains, are potentially dangerous at any time ofthe year. Plants do not have to be in flower or in fruitbefore they can produce symptoms. The mainconstituent of the irritating oil in poison-oak andpoison-ivy is urushiol, a pale-yellow liquid. It is amixture of catechol derivatives. The vast majority ofus appear to be initially immune to urushiol, so thatour first encounter with these plants will not producedermatitis. However, this event does initiate a seriesof immunological changes that will render theindividual much more likely to present symptomswhen plants are touched on future occasions. Thatmay be as early as the second encounter. Some of usappear to have much higher threshold levels thatmust be reached before symptoms appear.Contrary to popular belief, poison-oak and poison-ivydo not give off mysterious vapors or rays that causerashes. Direct or indirect contact with plants isrequired. It is the indirect means that most of us tendto overlook. We gleefully chop down poison-oak orpoison-ivy and then carelessly put away the hoe,shovel, and rake. We handle the family pet that hasjust run through a patch of these plants. We stand inthe smoke of burning leaves and stems, not realizingthat the toxin may be carried in droplets in the smoke.The characteristic streaks of red and vesicles areindicative of points of contact with the plant. The signsof itching, burning, and redness are usually seenwithin a few hours to about five days after exposure,depending upon the sensitivity of the victim. In moresevere cases, open running sores may develop. Thefluid from these sores is lymph, not the toxin itself.Urushiol binds with the protein of the skin withinabout ten minutes, so that reinfection from the spreadof this lymph is most unlikely. What often passes forthe spreading of poison-oak or poison-ivy fromrunning sores is actually caused by reinfection fromplant material beneath the fingernails or contaminatedclothing. Reactions to urushiol in some individualsmay be so severe that hospitalization is required.There are many time-honored cures for poison-oakand poison-ivy. Most of them cannot withstand closescrutiny. One of the more popular is taking a hotshower with yellow soap immediately after exposure.This does little more than wash off excess toxin. Anancient preventative, supposedly practiced by NativeAmericans, calls for eating a small piece of poison-oakto bring about a natural immunity. One person whoattempted this procedure came down with a seriousinflammation of the mouth and of the anus. Most ofthe creams, lotions, and pills that are available over-the-counter provide only symptomatic relief; they donot cure. Those treatments requiring a physician'sprescription have had mixed results.What follows is taken from a handout for a class onpoisonous plants that I once taught. You might alsofind it helpful.' Poison-oak is not a type of oak, nor is poison-ivya type of ivy. Both are members of the genusToxicodendron of the cashew family(Anacardiaceae), which includes the pistachio,cashew, pepper tree, and the mango.' There is no poison-ivy in California, only thewestern poison-oak.' The toxic substance in poison-oak and poison-ivyis called urushiol, a complex of four catechols.' The toxin is present in all parts of the plant thatcontain resin canals.' The toxins are not contracted via mysteriousvapors or rays; direct or indirect contact isrequired.' Urushiol may be present in the smoke of burningplants, because it is trapped in dust or ash.-157-' The toxins may be spread by animals. Petting adog that has run through a patch of poison-oak orpoison ivy is a way of contracting it.' Toxins may be spread by articles of clothing. It ispossible to reinfect yourself by handling the sameitems you were wearing in the field.' The liquid that oozes from broken blisters islymph and does not contain the toxins.' Sensitivity is based upon reactions at the cellularlevel between the toxins and specialized whiteblood cells called T-lymphocytes.' Sensitivity gradually declines with time,regardless of continued exposure. A minority ofpersons over 60 are sensitive.' Usually one must be sensitized by an initialcontact before you will react by producingdermatitis from subsequent exposures.' The level of sensitivity to urushiol and relatedtoxins differs from person to person. Once youhave surpassed a threshold of sensitivity, you willmost likely alter that threshold. In someinstances, it appear that a severe case will heraldeven more serious ones; in others it appears thatit precludes future episodes.' Strong soap merely removes excess poison fromthe skin, but it will not remove any that hasalready reacted, because the toxins have becomechemically bound to the skin within minutes afterexposure.' Eating a leaf as a means of building a naturalimmunity to poison-oak or poison-ivy can be mostdangerous. The internal poisoning likely to occurcan be serious, even fatal.' There is no evidence to support the widespreadbelief that the American Indian (or any otherracial or ethnic group) is naturally immune tothese plants.' Medicines used on the skin do not cure theinflammation. They serve only to dry the blisters,to treat secondary infections, and to relieveitching.' Injections and over-the-counter remedies areuneven in their effectiveness. They can makematters worse. Their use during an acute attack ishazardous.' Corticosteroids are the only agents with ademonstrated ability to benefit dermatitis frompoison-oak and poison-ivy.' There is some evidence to suggest that in someinstances dermatitis from poison-oak andpoison-ivy may be psychosomatic in its origin.HORSE CHESTNUT OR BUCKEYEAesculus is a genus of shrubs and trees representedin North America by both native species and thoseintroduced as ornamentals because of their attractivefoliage and spikes of flowers. All parts of these plantsare potentially dangerous. Children are often thevictims of buckeye poisoning, perhaps because of thelarge, interesting seeds that must be sampled, orbecause children like to make teas. Cattle have alsobeen poisoned. The toxic principle is aesculin, a kindof glycoside. It causes incoordination, sluggishness,vomiting, diarrhea, dilated pupils, and may lead toparalysis and death.Native Americans realized the toxic properties of theCalifornia buckeye [Ae. californica]. They used theseeds and other plant parts to stupefy fish. Also, aftercareful leaching, the seeds were ground up and eaten.LARKSPUR OR STAGGERWEEDDuring the spring and summer months, plants of thegenus Delphinium are among our most attractive wildflowers. Many of them have been brought intocultivation. But, the larkspurs or staggerweeds, asthey are known to ranchers, are a leading cause ofcattle loss in the western United States. There aremany kinds of larkspur and they are difficult todistinguish from one another. Assume that all of themare toxic to one degree or another. When they are inflower, larkspurs are readily identified by the singlenectar spur. They are not so easily spotted in thevegetative state because they closely resemble plantsof the buttercup, mallow, and geranium families.