The midsectionof the hippocampus was fixed to the table of a vibratingmicrotome (Rhema Labortechnik, Hofheim, Germany) usinga cyanoacrylate adhesive, submerged in chilled bicarbonate-buffered saline [artificial cerebrospinal fluid (ACSF): NaCl:124 mM, KCl: 5 mM, CaCl2: 2 mM, MgSO4: 2 mM, NaHCO3:26 mM, glucose: 10 mM], and cut into slices of 400um thickness.All slices were pre-incubated for at least 1 h in Carbogen saturatedACSF (pH 7.4) in a pre-chamber before use (Dimpfel et al., 1991).The stimulation of Schaffer Collaterals leads to release ofglutamate, resulting in excitation of the postsynaptic pyramidalcells. The result of the electrical stimulation is recorded asa so-called population spike. The amplitude of the resultingpopulation spike represents the number of recruited pyramidalcells. The response of the pyramidal cells to electric stimulationin the form of the amplitude of the population spike indicatesactivation as increase of the amplitude as reported earlier forSideritis extract (Dimpfel et al., 2016a) or calming and sedatingeffects (attenuation of the amplitude). Of special interest is theresponse to theta burst stimulation (TBS) resulting in LTP, whichrelates to an increase of time- and space-dependent memory.During the experiment, the slices were held and treated ina special super-fusion chamber (List Electronics, Darmstadt,Germany) (Haas et al., 1979) at 35*C (Schiff and Somjen, 1985).The preparation was super-fused with ACSF at 180-230 mL/h.Electrical stimulation (200 uA constant current pulses of 200 uspulse width) of the Schaffer Collaterals within the CA2 area andrecording of extracellular field potentials from the pyramidal celllayer of CA1 (Dimpfel et al., 1991) was performed according toconventional electrophysiological methods using the "Labteam"Computer system "NeuroTool" software package (MediSystGmbH, Linden, Germany). Measurements were performed at10 min intervals to avoid potentiation mechanisms. Fourstimulations, each 20 s apart, were averaged for each timepoint. After obtaining three stable responses to SS, LTP wasinduced by applying a TBS. The mean amplitudes of threesignals were averaged to give the mean of absolute voltage values(Microvolt) +- standard error (SE) of the mean for four slices forone of the experimental conditions. Four slices were used per day.Statistical AnalysisThe results are reported as means +- SD (standard deviation) or+-SE for the indicated number of experiments. The significanceof differences between samples and controls was determinedwith one-way independent measures ANOVA, followed by thepost hoc Tukey's test for multiple comparisons. The correlationswere evaluated using F-test. All calculations were performedusing GraphPad (San Diego, CA, United States) Prism software(version 3.03) for Windows. GraphPad Prism was also used forsupplemental graphs. All statistical tests were two-sided tests withp-values< 0.05 regarded as significant (Supplementary Data S3).Wilcoxon-Mann-Whitney U test was also used throughoutall experimental data for comparison to results obtained byvehicle administration at the particular timing with respect toelectrophysiological data (Supplementary Data S4).RESULTSUPLC and HPTLC Metabolite ProfilingRepresentative UPLC and HPTLC fingerprints of two R. roseaextracts, EPR-7 and the reference standard SHR-5, are shownin Figures 2, 3. They are almost identical except for thepeaks corresponding to rosavins, which are higher on thechromatogram of EPR-7 (Figure 2) and the presence of somefluorescent compounds in SHR-5, which are absent in EPR-7(Figure 3).The contents of all active markers in all studied extracts(Table 1) were quite different, with a lack of rosavin, rosin, androsarin in one extract from China. Even the extracts from thesame geographic region - Altai (Russia) differed; e.g., the contentof rosavin in Alt-X was 100-fold lower (0.03%) compared withSHR-5 (3.1%) or EPR-7 (3.7%), despite that all other phenyl- andethyl propanoids were within common limits. This may have asignificant impact on the activity of the Rhodiola Alt-X extractin T cell activation and apoptosis (Marchev et al., 2017). Overall,the highest content of rosavin and salidroside was in the RhodiolaEPR-7 extract.Electrophysiological Activity in aSynaptic Model of Memory:Hippocampal Long-Term PotentiationFigure 4 shows the concentration-dependent effects ofsalidroside and rosavin on pyramidal cell activity in termsFIGURE 3 | High performance TLC (HPTLC) fingerprint of extracts exposed toUV 366 nm, after derivatization with 10% sulfuric acid in methanol. Track A -EPR-7, track C - SHR-5, track E - Alt-S, track B and D - reference standardsrosarin Rf = 0.28 and salidroside Rf = 0.36. Solvent system:EtOAc:MeOH:H2O:HCOOH, 77:13:10:2.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 42578fphar-09-00425 May 22, 2018 Time: 17:35 # 7Dimpfel et al. Quality Control of Rhodiola Extracts by BioassayFIGURE 4 | Concentration-dependent effects of salidroside and rosavin on pyramidal cell activity in terms of changes of population spike amplitudes (millivolts).Results were obtained after a single stimuli (SS) or burst stimuli (TBS). Data represent the mean +- SEM of n = 4 slices (all concentrations). The details of statisticalanalysis see in Supplementary Data S3.FIGURE 5 | Effects of Rhodiola extracts at the lowest active concentration(5 mg/L) on pyramidal cell activity in terms of changes in population spikeamplitudes (millivoltage). Results are obtained after burst stimuli. Datarepresent the mean +- SEM of n = 4 slices (all concentrations). The details ofstatistical analysis see in Supplementary Data S3.of changes of population spike amplitudes (millivolts) inhippocampus slices. In the presence of salidroside, the amplitudesof the population spike were enhanced in a concentration-dependent manner. During SS, amplitudes reached about 2.3 mVand about 4.3 mV during TBS. At 0.5 mg/L, salidroside wasmore effective than rosavin in the TBS test, while at the higherconcentrations of 0.75 and 1.5 mg/L, the effect of rosavin wassuperior (Figure 4, upper part).A comparison of the Rhodiola extract Chi-R, containingthe phenyl ethanoids, tyrosol and salidroside, with the extractscontaining both salidroside and rosavin, e.g., Chi-R vs. RhodiolaEPR-7, demonstrated that the content of salidroside in bothextracts was almost the same 2.5-3.0%, while the content ofrosavin in EPR-7 was 3.5-fold higher than in Chi-R (Table 1).That is in line with results where the EPR-7 extract was as active asChi-R at a 2.5-fold lower concentration (Figure 4, lower part, andFigure 5). Figure 5 shows that EPR-7 was the most active extractat 5 mg/L, which corresponds to a concentration of rosavin of0.18 mg/L (0.4 uM).The EC50 values (Table 2) were calculated during SS andTBS. All results were fitted using a hyperbolic tangent functionto give EC50 values (effective concentration to induce a half-maximal effect). The lower the EC50 values, the less compound isneeded to exert its pharmacological effect. The lower the effectiveconcentration, the less side effects are expected. According to thisbioassay, the EPR-7 extract had the lowest EC50 value amongthe seven Rhodiola extracts compared in this study (Table 2 andFigures 5, 6).DISCUSSIONIn this study, we compared the biological activity of variouscommercial extracts of R. rosea in a synaptic model of memory:Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 42579fphar-09-00425 May 22, 2018 Time: 17:35 # 8Dimpfel et al. Quality Control of Rhodiola Extracts by BioassayFIGURE 6 | Concentration-dependent effects of Rhodiola extracts on pyramidal cell activity in terms of changes in the population spike amplitudes (millivolts).Results were obtained after a single stimuli (SS) or burst stimuli (TBS). Data represent the mean +- SEM of n = 4 slices (all concentrations). The details of statisticalanalysis see in Supplementary Data S3.the LTP of synaptic transmission in the hippocampus (Bliss andCollingridge, 1993). Synaptic transmission is critical in learning,memory, and functioning of the nervous system. As memoriesare thought to be determined by alteration of synaptic strength, apersistent increase in synaptic strength following high-frequencystimulation of a chemical synapse (LTP) is generally consideredone of the major cellular mechanisms that triggers learning andmemory.When comparing the content of rosavin and/or salidrosidein seven extracts with their EC50 values (Table 2), one canconclude that the EPR-7 extract, which has the highest contentof both active markers, was active at the lowest concentrations.However, this correlation did not apply to other extracts, e.g.,SHR-5, which presumably contained compounds that reducedthe overall efficacy of the total extracts (Figure 3). Activecompounds other than rosavin or salidroside might account forthe efficacy of the extracts in this bioassay through synergisticor antagonistic modes of action. In this study, the brainslice is exposed directly to the samples, circumventing theblood-brain barrier. However, both preclinical and clinicalstudies have proven that Rhodiola extract exerts actions onthe brain, suggesting enough compound passes the blood-brainbarrier.The efficacy of Rhodiola SHR-5 extract was demonstratedpreviously on healthy subjects (Spasov et al., 2000; Shevtsovet al., 2003; Dimpfel, 2014), subjects experiencing stress andfatigue (Darbinyan et al., 2000), and patients with chronicfatigue (Olsson et al., 2009) and major depressive disorder(Darbinyan et al., 2007; Mao et al., 2015). In a doubleblind, placebo-controlled study on 20 healthy subjects, Dimpfeldemonstrated that a single dose administration of two capsulescontaining 200 mg R. rosea SHR-5 extract changed thespectral signature of electric brain activity in a stimulatingway compared with placebo. The effect was regarded as asafe booster of mental activity during cognitive and emotionalchallenges. Rhodiola EPR-7 extract was also studied earlierin isolated skeletal muscle cells (Hernandez-Santana et al.,2014), animals (Dimpfel et al., 2016b), and healthy humansubjects (Shanely et al., 2014; Ahmed et al., 2015). Oraladministration of 100 mg/kg of R. rosea root extract led tosignificant attenuation of a1, a2, b1, b2, d, and th waves of theelectropharmacograms, which are associated with the activationof dopamine, serotonin, glutamate, GABA, acetylcholine, andnorepinephrine-mediated signaling pathways (Dimpfel et al.,2016b). The most affected were a2 (dopaminergic transmission -CNS stimulating effect) and b1 (glutaminergic transmission -CNS stimulating effect) in the frontal cortex. The next strongestchanges were seen in the striatum, and the weakest changes inthe reticular formation. Spectral changes lasted up to 4 h afteradministration.These results are in line with those of our recent publication,where we evaluated the effects of Rhodiola extract and salidrosideon gene expression profiling in the T98G human neurogliacell line (Panossian et al., 2014). The most significantlyaffected canonical pathways across the entire dataset, whichcontains the 1062 genes deregulated by Rhodiola and salidroside,were G-protein coupled receptor signaling, glutamate receptorsignaling, ephrin receptor signaling, cAMP-mediated pathways,and dopamine signaling pathways associated with the expressionof cell survival genes (Panossian et al., 2014). A meta-analysison the putative antidepressant action of Rhodiola extractrevealed it was effective on major depressive disorder (146subjects) and stress-induced mild depression (714 individuals)(Amsterdam and Panossian, 2016). Rosavin was not includedin that study. The results of our study are in line witha previous publication where the LTP effect of Rhodiolaextract was tested in vitro in the hippocampal slice (Dimpfelet al., 2016b). A concentration of 5 mg/L induced a slightincrease in the amplitude of the population spike andan increase in LTP. Further increases were observed byincreasing the concentration up to 30 mg/L. During TBS,amplitudes of more than 4 mV were measured, indicating theireffect on LTP.CONCLUSIONIn conclusion, rosavin, salidroside and various R. rosea extractspotentiated the in vitro electric stimulation of an intra-hippocampal electric circuit, which resulted in higher responsesFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org May 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 42580fphar-09-00425 May 22, 2018 Time: 17:35 # 9Dimpfel et al. Quality Control of Rhodiola Extracts by Bioassayof pyramidal cells in isolated hippocampus slices. Rosavin wasmore active in higher concentrations than salidroside; while,salidroside was more effective at lower concentrations. Thehighest content of both active markers was found in the extractsthat were active at the lowest concentrations. Although, thiscorrelation was not applicable to some extracts containingother compounds that presumably reduced the efficacy due toantagonistic interactions. The standardized content of activemarkers is necessary for the quality control of herbal preparationscontaining Rhodiola extracts, but insufficient for assessment oftheir potential efficacy. The application of bioassays should berequired for adequate assessment of the quality and efficacy ofR. rosea extracts.AVAILABILITY OF DATA AND MATERIALThe datasets used and/or analyzed during the current studyare available from the corresponding author upon reasonablerequest.ETHICS STATEMENTThe principles of laboratory animal care were followed in alltrials and the local authority ("Regierungsprasidium" Giessen) -responsible for animal care - was informed according to GermanHealth Guidelines. Details of the acclimatization, housingconditions, and surgery have been reported (Dimpfel et al., 1991).Experiments were performed according to SS4 German AnimalProtection Law (Tierschutzgesetz), which states, that animals areallowed to be killed for taking out organs for scientific purposes.Allowance to keep animals is renewed by governmental authorityevery 3 years.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSAP planned the experiments and wrote the manuscript. LSperformed the experiments. WD carried out data analysis andwrote a report on the results. All authors critically revised andapproved the final version of the manuscript.FUNDINGThis work was supported by the EuroPharma USA. Sponsor ofthe research: Terry Lemerond, EuroPharma USA Inc.ACKNOWLEDGMENTSThe authors acknowledge the support of EuroPharma USA Inc.for supplying the investigational agents and material support. Theauthors are grateful to all participants of the study.SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIALThe Supplementary Material for this article can be foundonline at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fphar.2018.00425/full#supplementary-materialREFERENCESAhmed, M., Henson, D. A., Sanderson, M. C., Nieman, D. C., Zubeldia, J. M.,and Shanely, R. A. (2015). Rhodiola rosea exerts antiviral activity in athletesfollowing a competitive marathon race. Front. Nutr. 2:24. doi: 10.3389/fnut.2015.00024Aksenova, R. A., Zotova, M. I., Nekhoda, M. F., and Cherdintsev, S. G. (1968). "Comparative characteristics of the stimulating and adaptogenic effects ofRhodiola rosea preparations," in Stimulants of the Central Nervous System, Vol.2, ed. A. S. Saratikov (Tomsk: Tomsk University Press), 3-12.Amsterdam, J. D., and Panossian, A. G. (2016). Rhodiola rosea L. as a putativebotanical antidepressant. Phytomedicine 23, 770-783. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2016.02.009Barnaulov, O. D., Limarenko, A. Y., Kurkin, V. A., Zapesochnaya, G. G., andShchavlinskij, A. N. (1986). A comparative evaluation of the biological activityof compounds isolated from species of Rhodiola. Khim. Pharm. Zh. 23,1107-1112.Bliss, T. V., and Collingridge, G. L. (1993). A synaptic model of memory: long-termpotentiation in the hippocampus. Nature 361, 31-39. doi: 10.1038/361031a0Booker, A., Jalil, B., Frommenwiler, D., Reich, E., Zhai, L., Kulic, Z., et al.