He spent next30 years collecting botanical flora from the northern slopes ofBeskids mountain ranges, including trips to more distant regionsof Podolia and Pokuttya. Here he compiled the most extensivePolish herbal to date-Zielnik herbarzem z iezyka lacinskiego zowia(Polish herbal, 1613), printed 2 years subsequent to his death.Similarly to previously described monographs, this volume waslargely based on translations of Dioscorides Materia medicaand its adaptation by Petri Matthioli, known as Senensis midici,commentarii in sex libros (1565), including the original woodcutsfrom Matthioli's work (Rostanski, 1997). The volume provideddetailed records of 765 plants, mostly from Southern and CentralEurope. The information was presented in a systematic way,including plant description, area of distribution, collection andprocessing techniques, and medicinal properties, followed by anindex of Latin, Polish, and German names.Finally, a fairly unknown Old-Eastern-Yiddish remedy book(refue-bukh) with the Hebrew title of Seyfer derekh ets ha-khayimwas printed in Poland in 1613. While the exact printing place ofthe book is unknown, as is the name of the author, Krakow wasone of the possible places of its origin (Geller, 2009). Apart from arichly decorated title page, the book contains no illustrations, sotechnically it was not an herbal but rather a self-help botanicalguide. It described 87 remedies of plant, animal, and mineralorigin, with many Polish words used to identify plant names.Most botanical terms and folk remedies were referenced to thetradition of Hippocrates, Dioscorides, and Avicenna, thereforeit is not clear whether this book was an original compilationof the classical sources, or a more recent adaptation of oneof the herbals similar to those listed above. To this point, wewould like to highlight the unknown author's experience at thePadua medical school to which he refers in the beginning ofhis book (Geller, 2009)-a striking parallel to the educationalbackground of his contemporaries Marcin de Urzedow andSzymon Syrenius. This may suggest a Padua-Krakow axis asa primary route for introduction and adaptation of antiquebotanical knowledge into the Carpathian region. Indeed, over thecourse of the sixteenth century, approximately 1,400 Polish andRuthenian students, including nearly all physicians to the Polishroyal family, attended Padua University (Theodorescu, 1989).Jan Zamoyski, Polsih Crown Chancellor and graduate of PaduaUniversity, founded Zamojski Academy in 1594 and shortly afterthat, a Jesuit Collegium was founded in Lviv (1608), which laterbecame Lviv Academy (1661). Together with Krakow University,these institutions rapidly became the major centers of intellectualand spiritual life in the region.ON RELEVANCE OF PRINTED HERBALSTO TRADITIONAL BOTANICALKNOWLEDGEThe sixteenth century scholars discovered a critical obstaclein sorting and presenting botanical knowledge that hadaccumulated over the centuries in antique natural and medicalliterature, and had been translated to various languages onmultiple independent occasions. The same plants were oftengiven different names based on the place of their origin. To makethings worse, the ancient texts and names of old herbal remedieswere often distorted due to evolution of the language andinadequate translation or transcribing, especially when detaileddescriptions of target plants were absent from the original texts.This notion did not escape the attention of herbal editors, asstated by Marcin de Urzedow in the introduction to his work:"We are no longer satisfied by knowledge of garden and field plants,but search for new ones in the wild, in forests, on mountains andcliffs, and even places where mountain goats reached seldom." Forthis particular reason, it was very difficult to define and isolatelocal traditional knowledge in these monographs, as medicinaluse of many ancient herbs was fully adopted and integratedinto local folk knowledge. There was, however, a speculativeevidence of an opposite flow of knowledge aboutmedicinal plantsfrom Slavic into Greco-Roman tradition: Slavic knowledge ofmedicinal plants supported the hypothesis of Tomaschek thatthe majority of so-called Dacian synonyms interpolated into theDioscorides text from the Viennese codex are of Slavic origin(Grmek, 1959).PHARMACOPEIAS THAT REGULATEDAPOTHECARY TRADITION IN THE REGION(FIFTEENTH-NINETEENTH CENTURIES)The official Polish and Polish-Latin scientific literature concernedwith herbal medicines became comparatively extensive betweenfifteenth and seventeenth centuries. The first place amongearlier manuscripts from the region belongs to the volumeentitled Antidotarium seu Vocabularium medicum, passim cumnominibus herbarum Germanis et Polonis rubro adscriptis (1419),currently kept at the Jagiellonian Library in Krakow. It waslikely written by an unknown physician or monk of Germanorigin who worked in Poland and had first hand knowledge ofPolish plants (Magowska, 2004). This pharmacological work wasFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 295219Kozlowska et al. Botanical Provenance of Carpathian Herbal Medicinesa direct adaptation from Antidotarium parvum, a pharmacopeia-like manuscript written by an unknown author in Salernobetween eleventh and thirteenth centuries. Different editions ofthis work included 110-170 recipes from antiquity and earlymedieval writers, which were annotated with German and Polishnames. We also cannot rule out the possibility that some chapterswere borrowed from Antidotarium magnum, another work ofunclear origin from the twelfth century, which may have beeninitiated by Constantinus Africanus and contained 1,200 recipes(Prioreschi, 2003).Jan Stanko (Johannes Stanconis) of Luban near Wroclaw, agraduate of Padua University and a royal physician to Polish KingKazimierz Jagiellonczyk (Lisowski, 2007), compiled a botanicaland medical glossary entitled Incipit Antibolomenum BenedictiParthi in 1472 (now kept at the Archives of the Krakow CathedralChapter). He listed 20,000 scientific andmedicinal terms of Latin,Greek, Arabic, Italian and other origins, translated into German,Polish, and Czech languages. The Antibolomenum served as anapothecary index identifying 433 domestic and 90 foreign plants,219 domestic species of animals and the minerals used as theingredients of the apothecary remedies. While useful for quickidentification of medicinal ingredients and their equivalents, themanuscript was never published, and had nomajor impact on thedevelopment of the natural sciences at the time.The first printed pharmacopeia that had significant impacton the apothecary tradition of Poland was compiled bya German physician Johann Placotomus (Breitschneider)under the title of Pharmacopoeia in compendium redacta andpublished in 1560. This book was developed on the basis ofDispensatorium written by Valerius Cordus (1546). The workincluded information on individual materia medica (simples)and complex recipes for powders, pills, syrups, decoctions,ointments, and oils. It also included recipes and instructionsfor preparation of theriacs-panacea-type medical concoctionsas general antidotes against poisons and infectious diseases.Another pharmacopeia was compiled by Polish physician andapothecary in Krakow, Jan Woyna of Jasienica under thetitle of Pharmacopoea Cracoviensis and published in 1683, incompilation with two other works, Experemintorum medico-chymicorum and Observationes medicochirurgico by DanielMatthia. This monograph was rather short; although it listedcirca 1,500 apothecary ingredients in alphabetical order, thedescriptions were very brief or nonexistent. Instead, multiplecross-references to other, mostly foreign pharmacopeias anddispensatoria, were provided. The only exceptions were madefor new recipes developed by the author, in which casemore detailed information on ingredients and methods ofpreparation were given. Certain new recipes were very complex,for example a novel preparation named Spiritus CastoreiCracoviensis consisted of four herbs, Castorei (locally sourcedCastor fiber), Anacardini (American Anacardium occidentale),Asa (Asa foetida from Persia or Afghanistan), and Storacis(Styrax liquidum from Asia Minor). All four monographs,however, were private publications without any official characteror certification.In spite of the fact that unification and standardization ofapothecary tradition in Europe were long overdue, the firstlegally enforced government pharmacopeia was published onlyin 1698 as Dispensatorium Brandenburgicum. This monographwas released in Latin language, contained descriptions of over1,000 apothecary ingredients, including 906 complex mixtures.The most demanding recipe was that of Theriaca Andromachithat comprised a mixture of 71 individual components. Dukeof Warsaw Frederick Augustus I made Dispensatorium arequired apothecary regulatory document for all Polish landsin 1714 under a modified title. Following the first partitionof Poland, the Carpathian foothills were divided betweenPoland and Austria, and two new pharmcopeias were publishedto regulate the apothecary practices including PharmacopoeaRegni Poloniae (1817) and Pharmasoroea Austrica (1820)(Table 2). These monographs contained descriptive notes onprescribedmedicines and were intended to register approved andestablished remedies (for the physician), and to provide formulaand appropriate methods of preparation (for the pharmacist).HANDWRITTEN HERBAL MANUSCRIPTSFROM THE REGION(SIXTEENTH-EIGHTEENTH CENTURIES)The beginning of the seventeenth century marked a turningpoint in the use of botanicals for medicine and folk healing. Thepractices of trained physicians and apothecaries became chieflysummarized and regulated by pharmacopeias, while the localknowledge of healers and witchcraft practitioners was mainlyrestricted to oral tradition and handwritten manuscripts. Whilethe second sources often originated from the first, they weremuch less consistent. Thesemanuscripts typically borrowed frommultiple printed sources, original or translated, and accretedwith remarks and personal observations of the successiveowners. Thus, while printed herbals recommended carline thistle(Carlina acaulis) to protect children from the evil enchantmentsof the "old women," the same "old women" often used this plantto aid in apotropaic and love magic (Ostling, 2014).One of the earliest examples of such manuscripts, recordedsomewhere in Grand Duchy of Lithuania and self-described as "atranslation from Latin and Polish books," was created in the midsixteenth century (designated here as Pushkarev). If the dating iscorrect, this manuscript was translated at the same time asHortussanitatis books known as "vertograds" were printed in Moscow(1534) and Kolomna (1588) (Novoselski and Pushkarev, 1977).The section of the manuscript that describes herbal tradition isentitled Knigi lechebnya ot mnogih lekarev sobranye o koreniah io zeliah (Medicinal books collected from many doctors). Othersections contained discussions on hygiene, Galenic commentaryon Hippocrates, notes and quotations from Avicenna and othermedieval physicians, exerts from the pseudo-Aristotle tractates,descriptions of commonmedicinal practices such as bloodletting,and magical spells. Large numbers of spelling errors, incorrectinterpretations and misrepresentations, all point to the fact thatthe manuscript was written not for personal use, but rather forsale by a professional transcriber with little knowledge on thesubject. Extensive references to old Ruthenian terms zhuravly(cranes), zubry (buffalo), tryascia (malaria), tsybula (onion),Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 295220Kozlowska et al. Botanical Provenance of Carpathian Herbal MedicinesTABLE 2 | Pharmacopeias that regulated regional apothecary practices in the sixteenth-nineteenth centuries.Front pageAuthor Johann Placotomus(1514-1574)Jan Woyna(1605-1693)Prussian Magistrate Polish SupremeHealth CouncilAustrian PharmaceuticalCollegeTitle Pharmacopoea incompendium redacta perJohannem Placotomum(Antwerp, 1560)PharmacopoeaCracoviensis (Frankfurtam Main, 1683)Dispensatorium Regium etElecto-rale Borusso-Brandenburgicum(1714)Pharmacopoea RegniPoloniae (1817)Pharmacopoea Austrica(1820)Notes 256 pages502 plants total147 pages1,500 recipes305 ingredients357 mixturespevne (probably), and many other words suggested Volhynia orCarpathian forelands as possible places of its origin.The compilation of such manuscripts with no referenceto the original sources was very common among EasternSlavic groups during sixteenth-eighteenth centuries. In hisRusskije vrachebniki work, a bibliographer of the history ofRussian medicine listed 186 such manuscripts, most fromthe seventeenth century (Zmejev, 1895). As these manuscriptswere transcribed in time, each subsequent version underwenta complex change based on the local needs and traditions,with a progressively shifting emphasis onto local and easilycollectible plants, and away from their exotic and expensivealternatives. It is therefore critical in future works to establishwhich particular plants and beliefs were incorporated intoSlavic folk healing manuscripts from European sources, whichknowledge specifically reflects oral local tradition that was fixatedin these works, and which part of the tradition was an originalcontribution of local ethnic groups. To achieve this goal, wewould need to determine and investigate independent partsof handwritten herbal manuscripts (i.e., chapter groups) thatoriginated from the common source. Another prevalent featureof these manuscripts that separated them from printed herbalswas the lack of plant illustrations or prints. Otherwise, the plantuses described in these manuscripts were correct and targetedeither a function of the human body (medicine), social life(relationships and feelings), household issues, or superstitionbeliefs (Ippolitova, 2008). With time, these descriptions becamea part of the oral local tradition, and many of medicinalprescriptions and uses were eventually transferred to otherunrelated plants.A Ruthenian handwritten manuscript from the late sixteenthcentury, also likely a translation from a Polish source, was foundin the State Archive of Bucharest (Syrku, 1883) (designatedhere as Syrku). Some of the plant descriptions from thismanuscript, for example, plantain (Plantagomajor), St. Benedict'sthistle (Cnicus benedictus), Norwegian angelica (Archangelicaofficinalis), and lesser burnet (Pimpinella saxifraga) were veryclose if not identical to other subsequent manuscripts, showingcontinuation of handwritten tradition in time (Nimchuk, 1976).One of them, a Ruthenian herbal manuscript Kniha lechebnaya omnogih lekarstv, dated to the mid seventeenth century, survivedin the Swidzinski collection from Sanok area (Peredrijenko,1984) (designated here as Swidzinski). This manuscript wasa compilation of various texts, legends, poems, and prayersin addition to herbal tradition. The territory to which themanuscript was localized, had formed a border line between twoethnic groups of Ruthenian origin, Boyko in the east and Lemkoin the west (Falkowski and Pasznycki, 1935). Both ethnic groupsstill maintain a deep tradition in collecting and consuming avariety of wild plants. Among those, berries, mushrooms andhazelnuts are most popular. Several reorganizations, includingthe deletions of nonessential magical sections, and additions ofimportant material about the habitat and preparation of theplant, were evident from this manuscript. We must thereforepostulate, that the original knowledge about the medicinalproperties of the herbs that was fixated in the earlier printedherbals, became amorphous and open to interpretation whenit entered oral and written tradition of common people in theseventeenth-eighteenth centuries.ETHNOGRAPHIC STUDIES OF THECARPATHIAN FOOTHILLS(NINETEENTH-TWENTIETH CENTURIES)While political and economic transformations took place at thelowlands of Poland and Ukraine, the people who inhabited theCarpathian ridges of the Beskid Mountains saw little change anddependedmostly on cheap and readily available traditional herbalmedicines for the poorest. By that time, the combined knowledgeof printed herbals and handwritten manuscripts was deeplyrooted in the oral tradition of folk remedies (Figure 2). Thisfusion was so profound, that most of the ethnographic studiesof the region that took place in nineteenth and early twentiethcentury recorded and transcribed traditional folk medicines asa part of local cultural and ethnographic "heritage." The riseFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 295221Kozlowska et al. Botanical Provenance of Carpathian Herbal MedicinesFIGURE 2 | Major historical and publishing milestones that define development of regional herbal texts and botanical manuscripts. Black squares indicate theemergence of handwritten herbal mauscripts including Pushkarev (1) and Swidzinski (2), as well as ethnobotanical surveys of Rostafinski (3) and Fisher (4) discussedin this study.of alternative medicines in these areas could be interpretedas one of many signs of poor development and often of aneconomic decline of the region.