Following the reunification of Vietnam in 1976, the government's efforts to encourage use of traditional medicine were expanded to the rest of the country, with the Ministry of Health issuing a decree requiring every district to have a department or institute that provided traditional medical treatment. It is estimated that 40-50% of all medical treatment being provided at the time was based on traditional medicine, with herbal medicine and acupuncture being the most popular therapies (Hoang 2004; Huu and Borton 2003). However, when the Vietnamese government embarked on a series of economic reforms starting in 1986 it had a marked impact on the provision and practice of traditional medicine with "many herbal pharmacists and acupuncturists abandon[ing] their practices" (Huu and Borton 2003: 87), mainly because the subsidies they had been receiving from health authorities were rescinded. At the same time, modern drugs were becoming more freely available with trade embargos gradually being lifted. As a result, traditional medicine experienced a period of decline that lasted until about 1992. Since then, however, the Ministry of Health has led an active campaign to "revitalise" or "revive" traditional medicine (this being the third and final part of the post-independence period). Important components of this "revival" campaign have been the "Drugs at Home" and "Doctor at Home" programmes of the Ministry of Health (see World Bank 1993). Picking up where they had left off, the "Drugs at Home" programme was designed to once again encourage communal clinics as well as villagers to grow thirty-five species of 116 essential medicinal plants in their gardens known for their anti-influenza, anti-inflammatory, anti-dysenteric, anti-rheumatic, anti-tussive, anti-diarrhoeic and emmenagogic properties.62 Each commune is now encouraged to reserve more than half a hectare for such cultivation; the goal is to have about 40% of patients treated with herbal remedies at communal clinics (Bui 1999: 30-31). As part of the "Doctor at Home" programme, a book entitled "Herbal Medicines for Families" has been prepared providing users with instructions on how to prepare remedies for some of their most common ailments, including diarrhoea, whooping cough, allergies, hormonal imbalance and colitis (see Bui 1999; World Bank 1993). This renewed revitalization effort, spearheaded by the Ministry of Health and involving a number of trained activists, has been described as a programme to "re-educate the local people on the use of herbal remedies and [to] encourage them to grow and use medicinal plants" (Huu and Borton 2003: 67). And so, while the aim of normalisation efforts in the United Kingdom (where scepticism as to the efficacy of herbal medicine is still widespread) has been one of instilling and cultivating a kind of herbal pharmacovigilance in consumers of herbal medicines, in Vietnam (where the efficacy of herbal medicines is more or less taken for granted and they are used pretty much universally) it has much more been about "re-educating" the people about the virtues of herbal medicine as a means of instilling a self-sufficient approach to looking after their own health, among other things by cultivating essential medicinal plants in their own gardens. The extent of self-medication with herbal medicines is both recognised, and in the case of Vietnam, encouraged albeit with the relatively new caveat that this self-use be "appropriate". That is to say, public use of herbal medicine is to be promoted insofar as it contributes to the overall promotion of health and well-being. Moreover, as consumers are increasingly encouraged to take an active part in ensuring their own health, the proper use of herbal medicine through "informed choice" now stands as one option among many others. Such proper use is, however, not to be taken for granted, but is rather encouraged through a range of awareness raising and educational efforts that aim to responsibilise and/or activate users of herbal medicines.63 62 These essential medicinal plants had been identified during the course of the various botanising missions carried out by scientists and herbalists described earlier. 63 See chapter 7 for further discussion on how herbal medicine use has been intervened upon in recent decades. 117 Conclusion As already forewarned, for all its discussion of regulatory initiatives, governmental herbal medicine policies, consumer awareness programmes and herbal practitioner association activities, this chapter cannot be said to have provided an exhaustive or representative history of the regulation of herbal medicine in Vietnam and the UK. Nor has my intention been to evaluate the benefits or disadvantages associated with different regulatory regimes, as has perhaps otherwise been customary in policy-oriented research. Instead, what I have done in this chapter is trace the emerging contours of the contemporary problem of herbal medicine in the Vietnamese and UK contexts over the past decades, showing where differences and overlaps have appeared. Rather than approach the field of herbal medicine in terms of marginalisation or coercion, I have chosen to analyse it as a field of problematisation that has opened up debates about who should be allowed to practice herbal medicine, what herbal products should be allowed on to the market, and what patients should do to get the best and safest possible herbal treatment. These problematisations have in turn both relied on and made available a host of new possibilities for action, where producers, practitioners and users are concerned. Herbal practitioners are to be competent, responsible and accountable, which requires: adhering to new codes of conduct; attendance to lifelong learning; refraining from 'quacking' one's wares and abilities; maintenance of skills; registration with local health authorities or practitioner associations; utilisation of quality-controlled herbal remedies; and recognition of the limitations of one's healing abilities. Producers of herbal medicinal products are to follow Good Manufacturing Principles; ensure that they have a sustainable, pesticide-free supply of fresh herbs; and refrain from lacing their products with any 'foreign' substances. And, on their part, herbal medicine users/patients are to act responsibly and vigilantly by making informed choices about the products and practitioners they choose; they should report any false or misleading claims that might be made; in the United Kingdom, they should preferably consult with their GPs before taking any herbal medicines; and in Vietnam, they are to take an active part in growing and harvesting essential herbal medicinal plants, and to learn how to prepare home remedies for common ailments. In sum, promoting and protecting the public health in the field of herbal medicine today requires "appropriate", "informed" and "safe" use of it by active, vigilant and responsible subjects that are enabled to tell the competent from the incompetent herbal practitioner and 118 protected from counterfeit or contaminated herbal remedies. It requires the "responsible" and "ethical" practice of herbal medicine by "qualified" practitioners, who adhere to strict codes of conduct and commitments to continued professional development. What is more, a whole industry is emerging around the practices of assurance that are increasingly demanded of the manufacturers and practitioners of herbal medicines - involving quality controls, clinical trials, training programmes, refresher courses and codes of conduct. The key debates in herbal medicine today are not over whether it should be regulated and controlled (as opposed to marginalised or banned), but rather over how such practices of assurance should be organised so as best to preserve the 'real value' of herbal medicine while at the same time protecting the public from dangerous practitioners and products. Some argue that the kind of regulatory efforts I have been describing in this chapter may in fact end up disenchanting, ossifying or diluting herbal medicine,64 while others are convinced that they have improved its quality, safety and efficacy, a debate we will be returning to throughout the following chapters. For now it is important to understand that the transformation of herbal medicine, from fringe to alternative in the UK and from primitive to traditional in Vietnam, has opened up a new field of problematisation in terms of competency, safety and responsibility which is already being played out through a number of concrete strategies of normalisation. This is what I have called a bio-politicisation of herbal medicine as the objective has been to devise ways of ensuring that herbal medicine - its production, practice and use - promotes rather than harms the health of populations and individuals in both countries. Let us now turn our attention to a concept that I have yet to deal with at length, namely efficacy. 64 For example, herbalist Peter Jackson-Main argues that: "By defining herbal medicine as a graduate entry profession, there is a danger that the emphasis on academic learning may eclipse traditional values and practices. The introduction and consolidation of herbal medicine in universities is a vital step in the fight for recognition, and a coming of age of Western herbal medicine. At the same time, it echoes the process of exclusive professionalisation that characterised the medical profession's assault on the lay community of practitioners in the nineteenth century" (2005: 97). Saks makes a similar point suggesting that one of the dangers of professionalisation is "the way in which such enclaves of exclusionary social closure can become pockets of self-interested protectionism that retard progress, despite the positive ideologies of professional bodies" (2003: 152). 119 5 Above and beyond superstition In the early part of the 1980s, Tran Khuong Dan set off northward from Ho Chi Minh City on a journey that would take him the length of Vietnam's 2,000 or so kilometres. Trained as a traditional herbalist by his father, Dan's travels were to be of a medically edifying nature. For after having witnessed the miserable effects opium addiction was having on individuals and communities first hand in his own neighbourhood, Tran Khuong Dan became determined to find a remedy that could help rid opium-dependent users of their addiction. And very much in tune with national efforts to revive traditional medicine, Dan felt that the experiences and knowledge that traditional herbalists throughout the country had had with opium dependency was a good place to start. His travels would therefore take him off the beaten track, to rural communes and villages where opium cultivation and use had been a part of daily life for centuries. In these villages, Dan sought out traditional herbalists to discuss and exchange ideas on treating opium dependency, only to discover that in most cases local herbal remedies included some quantity of opium aimed at appeasing withdrawal symptoms. Having reached the north of Vietnam towards the end of the 1980s, Dan settled down to digest and organise the experiences and knowledge he had amassed during his travels. He also began scouring traditional Chinese and modern medical texts to learn as much as he could about addiction as well as methods of treatment. It was from this broad base of knowledge, spanning the traditional practices of village herbalists and the theoretical underpinnings of Sino-Vietnamese traditional medicine, that Dan began developing a herbal remedy for addiction. His aim was to home in on a range of plants that could address what he had come to see as the key problems of addiction: an imbalance in the bodies of the addicts, a continuous shortage of drugs in the brain, and a set of sixteen different withdrawal symptoms that made 'cold turkey' detoxification a nightmare. From Sino-Vietnamese theories of healing, Dan knew that addiction could be understood in terms of a Yin-Yang imbalance with addicts suffering from extreme Yin. At the same time, from his own observations in Ho Chi Minh City and during his travels, Dan had become convinced that each of the sixteen withdrawal symptoms that manifest themselves during the first 72 hours of detoxification had to be understood and medicinally addressed in their specificities, albeit as complementary parts of a holistic treatment. This conviction was 120 further corroborated by two years of successive self-inflicted addiction withdrawals, during which Dan self-experimented with various herbs and mixtures.65 And so finally, in September 1990, Tran Khuong Dan approached local health authorities with a complex thirteen-plant herbal syrup, which he was convinced could cure addicts of their addiction by appeasing withdrawal symptoms, restoring balance and, importantly, eliminating cravings. Only a few months later, a memorandum from Minister of Health Pham Song was sent to Prime Minister Do Muoi to inform him that "the Ministry of Health has received a request for a license to manufacture and distribute the medication TKD [later renamed Heantos]... It has been determined that this medication for the cure of drug addiction has an important potential for the social economy and thus the Ministry of Health has granted a license to proceed with trials" (Vietnam. Ministry of Health. 1991). Six years later, in 1996, Dan joined forces with the Institute of Chemistry in Hanoi to further develop his remedy, arguing: while traditional medicine was developed over thousands of years, certain aspects still need to be explained scientifically. And so, it tends to be regarded as superstition. Using science to throw light on traditional medicine is imperative. (cited in Impact 2000) Unbeknownst to Tran Khuong Dan, during the same decade that Heantos was being developed in Vietnam, a plant long known for its medicinal value in Europe was about to be 'rediscovered', kicking off a chain of events that would eventually turn St. John's Wort (hypericum perforatum) into one of the first herbal blockbusters. Records of the medicinal uses of St. John's Wort date back to Theophrastus (373-287 BC), Pliny (23-79 AD) and Dioscordes (40-90 AD) who recommended it for burns, snakebites and as a diuretic. But it was not until the 16th century that the first references to its use as an "arnica for the nerves" can be found, when Paracelsus (1493-1541) recommended it for not just wounds and parasites, but also for what he called 'phantasmata' (see Muller 2005). A century later, in 1630, Italian iatrochemist Angelo Sala reported that: St. John's Wort has a curious, excellent reputation for the treatment of illnesses of the imagination... and for the treatment of melancholia, anxiety 65 This is how Tran Khuong Dan has recounted the story of how he developed Heantos on numerous occasions, see for example, Impact (2000) or the 24 November 1997 issue of Time magazine (Larimer 1997). 121 and disturbances of understanding... With the same power it works against the symptoms caused by witches. (cited in Rosenthal 1998: 197) During the so-called 'golden age of quackery' of the 17th to 19th centuries (Holbrook 1959; Porter 1989), the effectiveness of St. John's Wort in treating "illnesses of the imagination" was accounted for in a few different ways. Ascribing to astrological explanations as well as to the doctrine of signatures, Nicholas Culpeper classed the very yellow-flowering St. John's Wort "under the celestial sign Leo, and the dominion of the Sun" in his English Physitian (1652), while Robert John Thornton explained in his Family Herbal (1814) how "formerly it was supposed, and not without reason, that madmen were possessed of the devil, and this plant was found so successful in that disorder, that it had the title Fuga daemonum, as curing demoniacs" (cited in Rosenthal 1998: 202). Indeed, Rosenthal has shown how accounts of the powers of St. John's Wort to ward off spirits, chase away the devil, or overcome witchcraft were "rampant throughout Europe and the British Isles" during these centuries (1998: 203). But it would not be long before, as we saw in previous chapters, such explanations would come to be dismissed as the superstitions and old wives' tales of backward rural populations, which probably also explains the relative medicinal anonymity of St. John's Wort during the ensuing 'golden age of biomedicine'. In fact, it would not reappear until the early 1980s,66 when a small manufacturer of herbal remedies, Lichtwer Pharma, commissioned a series of clinical trials to test the efficacy of St. John's Wort extract in the treatment of an emerging epidemic of fast-paced modern life: depression. This chapter is about the concept of efficacy. What does it entail to claim that an alternative or traditional remedy is efficacious? What kinds of claims to truth are invoked in doing so? And crucially, how does one go about validating efficacy claims? In the following, we will take a closer look at some of the conditions which have allowed for Heantos and St. John's Wort to rank among the most prominent herbal remedies in Vietnam and the United Kingdom in recent years. Importantly, as we will see, this has relied on an active effort to dismiss suggestions that these remedies are just another set of backward, superstitious concoctions, or to put it in more updated terms, that they have a therapeutic effect that is above and beyond placebo. In both cases, confirming clinical efficacy has taken priority 66 Dr. K. Daniel of Germany did carry out the first controlled trials on patients suffering from mild depression in the late 1930s, but his research appears to have become lost as war broke out in Europe (see Rosenthal 1998: 200-2). 122 over determining the exact (biological) mechanism of action that might be responsible for this effect, although as we will be seeing in the following chapter, this latter work has also begun in earnest. Yet, while randomised controlled trials have played a crucial role in attempts to validate the specific (biological) verum effects (what might be termed the bio-efficacy) of Heantos and St. John's Wort, I will argue that by virtue of their status as traditional and alternative remedies, confirming clinical efficacy has been in part facilitated by an early 20th century anthropological recasting of evolutionarily 'primitive' and 'immature' medical practices into highly rational, sophisticated and coherent systems of healing. As such, there are three particular conceptual recasts, that I will be describing in this chapter and which I will demonstrate have been instrumental in the framing of recent efforts to validate the efficacy of Heantos and St. John's Wort. The first relates to 20th century ethnographic accounts of how 'symbolic cognitive frameworks' - which these two herbal remedies and the healing systems they invoke are certainly seen to provide patients with - are crucial in helping people cope with their diseases/illnesses. By showing how what were once considered the immature superstitions of easily suggestible and backward rural populations - whether in Vietnam or the United Kingdom - were recast into coherent cognitive frameworks, I will argue that pioneer medical anthropology studies have been instrumental in positing a very concrete symbolic efficacy for all therapies, remedies and healing encounters, regardless of whether they are considered primitive, modern, traditional or alternative.