In a paper on 'The nature and scope of ethnobotany', Volney Jones (1941) argued that as a discipline it should be "concerned not only with uses of plants, but with the entire range of relations between primitive man and plant", which is to say not just economic and medical but also symbolic and cultural. These latter relations have of course been the primary domain of medical anthropologists throughout the 20th century and beyond, who on their part have recently been highlighted for a general and converse "lack [of] full engagement with phytomedical reality, and... acceptance that the healthcare practices of most people on the planet depend 98 In recent years, many researchers have questioned the economic viability of bio-prospecting as a business model because of the "elusive value of traditional knowledge" (see Clapp and Crook 2002). Indeed Shaman Pharmaceuticals, founded in 1989 went bankrupt in 2001. 167 on plants and animals" (Ellen 2006: 10). As a result, what has been called for today is more of an inter-disciplinary ethno-science that is "first and foremost, the study of how people of all, and of any, cultural tradition interpret, conceptualize, represent, cope with, utilize, and generally manage their knowledge of those domains of environmental experience which encompass living organisms, and whose scientific study we demarcate as botany, zoology, and ecology" (ibid. : 2, my emphasis). This is where Heinrich et al. argue that an ethnopharmacological approach to developing medicinally useful complex plant extracts for "local use" comes in, as it is an approach which they see as emphasising the "cultural meaning of resources and understanding of indigenous concepts about plant use and of the selection criteria for medicinal plants" (2004: 54). Moreover - and perhaps the revitalisation efforts in Vietnam that focused on developing herbal remedies particular to the health needs of rural populations would be taken as a case in point here - they also argue that rather than only look for patentable single-compound drug candidates, an ethno-pharmacological approach will often prioritise 'local solutions for local problems' as a matter of economic and practical feasibility and not necessarily of commercial viability. As argued by Health Minister Pham in 1965: Take for instance the medicinal plants. In the West, scientists abandon plants and resort to chemical synthesis. But what is the extract of a plant, if not a complex body, the product of complicated synthesis? Thus, we have either ready-made medicines or products from which we can make higher synthesis, a good part of which process has already been made by those living laboratories: the plants... [With] traditional medicine, we have at the same time clinical indications to choose the plants for experimentation, and the products of a total or partial synthesis. These are the real short cuts offered us by traditional medicine [and] we are working systematically in this direction. One of the great difficulties of poor countries is lack of medicines. We still have to import a number of products, because our pharmaceutical industry is not yet well developed. Nevertheless, from our experiments with traditional medicine, we have succeeded in preparing a great number of local products... We have even begun to export a number of pharmaceutical products extracted from our country's flora. (Pham 1965: 15) And so, as we have seen in both the British and Vietnamese contexts, while a distinction between ethnopharmacology and bio-prospecting approaches might be tenable to some extent, they can and often do merge and blend into each other. Whatever the particularities of the strategies chosen, it is evident from recent efforts to recapture and exploit age-old traditions and experiences with medicinal plants in these two countries that ethno-sciences, 168 as a particularity of the 20th century, have played and continue to play a pivotal role in the development of their respective traditions of herbal medicine. Disciplining living laboratories Yet it is not only through an ethno-botanic taming of the countryside with the aid of field notes, databases and nomenclatures that the disciplining of herbal medicine is taking place. It is also increasingly taking place in chemistry laboratories filled with high-tech extraction apparatus, chromatographs and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopes. It is in these laboratories that the biomass plant samples collected and taxonomised by herbalists and ethno-scientists are subject to labour intensive phytochemical scrutiny - soaked in extraction solvents, percolated, centrifuged, filtered, dried, partitioned, separated, elucidated and finally characterised in their chemical multiplicities. It is a process which is not only necessary for subsequent pharmacological mechanism of action research, but is equally necessary for those regulatory efforts that seek to assure consumers, as best possible, that they can expect some kind of standardised quality, not to mention safety, of the industrialised herbal products they purchase. For, if there is one thing that is characteristic of phytochemistry, it is that it is a science of ranges that seeks to apply some kind of consistency to the notoriously inconsistent 'chemists' that plants have been shown to be. Whatever disagreements herbalists and scientists may have over specific mechanisms of action as well as concepts used to account for these mechanisms, there is broad agreement that it is the chemicals found in a plant that have a therapeutically significant effect on the body's physiological functioning when ingested. There is also agreement that the amount and quality of chemicals found in an extract of a particular plant species is dependent on growing conditions (soil, climate, weather conditions, pesticide use), time of harvest (before or after flowering, early morning or evening), which part of the plant is used (flower, leaves, stem, bark), extraction processes (drying, grinding, boiling, solvent used), as well as storage conditions (humidity, light, temperature). And while all this can be complicated enough with a single-plant like St. John's Wort, it becomes even more complex when working with a thirteen-plant herbal remedy like Heantos. Plants may well be superb chemists, but the exploitation of the chemicals they produce is dependent on both the conditions in which they 'naturally' produce them and the expertise in extracting them from the plants into a form suitable for ingestion. And so while sustainable cultivation 169 practices are increasingly being developed with the aim of optimising growing conditions for medicinal plant species, phytochemistry has been harnessed in herbal medicine to help reduce batch-to-batch inconsistencies, by breaking plant or remedy extracts down into identifiable single chemical compounds that can be isolated, chemically characterised and thereby used as markers in the standardisation of herbal products. These optimised cultivation practices and standardised chemical markers, it is argued, can then replace a herbalist's traditional organoleptic evaluation of medicinal herbs (taste, smell, texture, appearance) when controlling for quality in industrially produced herbal medicinal products. The goal is to ensure "a consistent content of therapeutically active constituent(s)... irrespective of the year of harvest and the year of production" (Gaedcke and Steinhoff 2002: 16) by standardising production procedures.99 This of course means that in order to be able to standardise a herbal medicinal product according to a defined range of therapeutically active constituents, a manufacturer requires not only a clear understanding of what is to be standardised (i.e. which chemical compounds), but also an understanding of how to ensure more or less controlled cultivation and harvest, of appropriate production methods which will not damage or degrade chemical constituents excessively during extraction, and of acceptable ranges of constituent content in the final plant extract products. These are the specific problems related to the production of plant extract based products as opposed to single active compound drugs. St. John's Wort is a single-plant remedy, even if very often used by herbalists in combination with other medicinal plants. Not only has it become one of the most clinically studied plants in the world, as we saw in chapter 5, it has also become one of the most phytochemically and pharmacologically studied plants in the past few decades. With a long history of documented medicinal use, St. John's Wort (or hypericum perforatum) has recently been described as a "prolific producer of secondary metabolites" (Muller 2005: 5). One of the first of these to have been isolated and characterised is the naphtodianthrone hypericin, a red pigment long known for secreting when the yellow flowers of St. John's Wort are squeezed by hand. It has also been found to be the culprit in causing hypericism (a 99 As Gaedcke and Steinhoff (2002) point out, it should be underscored that in far from all herbal plants and remedies have therapeutically active constituents been pharmacologically identified. For these herbal medicinal products, 'standardisation' refers to the implementation of standardised Good Manufacturing Procedures which can ensure some kind of batch-to-batch consistency. 170 disease that leads to potentially lethal photosensitisation) in cattle who feed off of the plant, and as a result it has been described as defence agent of the plant. Perhaps not so surprisingly then, it was also hypericin that became one of the first lead candidates in the phytochemical search for active compounds that might explain its anti-depressant effects. But hypericum perforatum has since been found to contain many more classes of secondary metabolites including phloroglucinols (mainly hyperforin and adhyperforin), flavonoids (quercetin, rutin and hyperoside), biflavonoids (biapigenin), xanthones, proanthocyanidins (catechin), acid phenols (p-coumric, ferulic and caffeic acids) and essential oils (including 2-methyloctane, limonene and myrcene). To date, pharmacological studies have singled out hypericin, hyperforin, quercetin and rutin as candidate compounds when accounting for St. John's Wort's anti-depressant action. As much as is now pharmacologically known about the active constituents and possible mechanisms of action which might account for any experienced anti-depressant effects, it remains very difficult to devise standardisation procedures for St. John's Wort products. To begin with, comparisons of the composition of eight key chemical constituents in different St. John's Wort plant specimens have shown variations of as much as 700% in individual constituent content measured in micrograms/flowers (Muller 2005: 16). And while the German Commission E monographs (published in the 1980s) recommend that products be standardised according to a range of hypericin content (0.2-1 mg of total hypericin per 2-4 g of herbal drug), more recent research has suggested that hyperforin is more prominent in generating anti-depressant pharmacologic action. Moreover, hyperforin has been shown to be so chemically unstable (due to a liability to oxidative degeneration) that standardisation according to hyperforin content requires very sophisticated and costly extraction techniques. With so many variables at play, it is little wonder that an LA Times-commissioned chemical analysis of 10 St. John's Wort brands from 1998 found considerable discrepancies between what was promised on labels in terms of hypericin content and what was found to be present in sample capsules (three brands contained no more than half the listed amount and four had less than 90% of the listed amount) (Monmaney 1998). The challenge for standardising St. John's Wort then, has become one of balancing a need for suitable (preferably therapeutically relevant) biochemical markers that can ensure batch-to-batch consistency within an accepted range of marker constituents on the one hand, and 171 on the other to ensure that the entire spectrum of chemicals particular to St. John's Wort are present in any whole plant extract products made from it. Ensuring that a final herbal drug preparation contains a certain constituent within a defined content range, either by adding inert adjustment material (e.g. lactose) or blending extract (of the same plant), can ironically enough diminish the quality of the original or so-called 'native extract', and as a result, it is argued "the initial question prior to adjustment should always be, if it is considered more important to administer a sufficient quantity of native extract or a defined quantity of the constitutent(s) the extract is to be adjusted to" (Gaedcke and Steinhoff 2002: 17). The answer to this initial question is far from clear cut with pharmacologists probably inclined to favour the latter and herbalists the former. For example, herbalist Peter Conway argues that "most herbalists would rather use a St. John's Wort preparation that has a natural balance of constituents, achieved through good growing, harvesting and processing, over one that has unnaturally high amounts of one element, as in many standardised products" (2003: 21). Bearing in mind that 'natural' variation in this "natural balance of constituents" can be considerable, Conway does suggest that "it is possible to check the quality of herbal preparations and ensure that there are the right amounts of a broad spectrum of the desirable chemicals present in the product without artificially altering their relative amounts" (ibid. ).100 And so the problem remains of just how to define what is meant by the "right amounts", a task that invariably will require some kind of 'normal spectrum' marker profiles against which batches can be checked or 'quality controlled'. As already mentioned, herbalists in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom have in the past relied extensively on organoleptic evaluations of quality, either as they gather their starting materials from the wild or upon purchasing them from commercial suppliers or at medicinal herb markets. However, as we saw in chapter 4, regulations in both countries are increasingly requiring laboratory-confirmed quality assurances for especially industrially produced herbal products, but also for starting materials. And it is in these practices of quality assurance that control profiles based on chromatographic 'fingerprints' have become crucial. By using thin layer (TLC), gas liquid (GLC) and high performance liquid (HPLC) chromatography methods, a plant extract can be broken down into its various chemical constituents, appearing as either bars on a TLC chromatogram or peaks on GLC and HPLC chromatograms. And just as the fingerprints from a crime scene can be checked 100 Mills concurs arguing that "although there is variability, it is within workable limits, and quality control can reduce it even further" (1993: 262). 172 against a database of past suspects for a match, so too can the chromatograms from a new batch of herbal medicine extract be checked against constituent control 'profiles' to ensure a standard batch-to-batch consistency.101 For, once chromatographically separated, chemical constituents can be phytochemically identified using nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy or mass spectrometry, which allow for three-dimensional structure elucidation of an individual molecule of the chemical constituent under scrutiny. The goal being to identify suitable marker compounds unique to the medicinal herb in question, which can then be used to build chemical reference profiles based on norms of purity and content. It is also these isolated chemical constituents which can then be individually assayed for possible pharmacologic actions (something we will return to later in this chapter), and thereby classed into groups of either therapeutically active constituents (i.e. those "with known therapeutic activity"), active constituents (i.e. those "which contribute to therapeutic efficacy"), or marker substances (i.e. those "which, according to the state of scientific knowledge, do not contribute to therapeutic activity... [yet] are suitable for identification tests and assay (e.g. batch-to-batch control)") (Gaedcke and Steinhoff 2002: 22-3). Hence, the standardisation of St. John's Wort products today is carried out using not only quantitative content ranges for hypericin and/or hyperforin (expressed in terms of mg per daily dose) which have been identified as pharmaceutically relevant constituents, but also qualitative chromatographic standards which reflect an aim to ensure that an extract contains the plant's 'full spectrum' of constituents in relevant amounts. Ethno-chemistry Now, as we can see, the challenge of standardisation in the case of St. John's Wort has been a time-consuming, costly and technically sophisticated affair. So much so that one can only imagine the magnitude of such a task when presented with a mixed extract containing all of thirteen different plants, such as Heantos. When Tran Khuong Dan approached the health authorities in Vietnam with his herbal mixture for the treatment of drug addicts, his remedy came in the form of a dark, rather earthy-tasting syrup, the result of a complex process of cutting, drying, boiling and mixing. As already highlighted, Dan had spent many years learning from the experiences of fellow traditional practitioners, by travelling 101 Recall that the Institute of Drug Quality Control in Vietnam has, over the years, built up a library of such 'profiles' against which they check the quality of 'raw material' plant samples collected from various medicinal herb markets (see chapter 4). 173 throughout the countryside collecting over one hundred home-made recipes for treating opium addiction in the 1980s. On the basis of this gathered 'ethno-knowledge' combined with information gleaned from classic medicinal texts (most of which were written in Chinese and Nom102), Dan began experimenting with various herb combinations and preparation methods. It was at this time, during the late 1980s, that Dan decided to intentionally addict himself to opium in order to personally evaluate the different remedy batches. He would later argue that "the only way I could test my medication was to experience the torture of withdrawal for myself" (Tran 1999). And so, through a period of two years, Dan would undergo a series of self-inflicted withdrawals, all the while experimenting on himself with the different mixtures he would devise. Dan's final choice fell on a set of thirteen plants and a complex processing protocol which together would consistently produce a herbal remedy for treating addiction. As a complex mixture, Heantos would target each of the individual withdrawal symptoms common in addicts undergoing 'cold turkey', redress what Dan has described as "the continuous shortage of drugs in the brain of the addict", and restore balance and health to the addicts (ibid.). It was using this home-brewed syrup that health officials in Vietnam carried out their first trials on the efficacy of Heantos in treating addiction in the early 1990s.103 Since 1995, however, as we saw in the previous chapter, Tran Khuong Dan has donned a white laboratory coat in an interesting collaboration with some of Vietnam's top scientists at Hanoi's Institute of Chemistry, as part of an international effort to standardise and further develop Heantos.