For example, Salmonella and Shigella can cause necrosis of infected neutrophils and macrophages (Brennan & Cookson, 2000; Francois et al.,2000) as well as CD4+ T lymphocyte destruction by HIV-1 (Borthwick et al, 1999; Plymale et al., 1999; Lenardo et al, 2002). Caspase-independent death is also implicated in myocardial infarction, ischemia-reperfusion injury after cerebral ischemia, glutamate excitotoxicity (Eliasson et al., 1997; Cipriani et al., 2005; Schwabe & Brenner, 2006), diseases such as Alzheimer's (Akiyama et al., 2000), epilepsy (Fujikawa, 2000) and other inflammatory injuries (Kaplowitz, 2000) also involves necrosis.Copy 1 146Y. SharifuddinChapter 3Menage-a-Trois: Micronuclei Induction by Andrographolide and Possible Connections to Apoptosis and Caspase-3 ActivityThe effect of andrographolide on apoptosis is still debatable. It was reported to protect human endothelial cells from growth factor deprivation-induced apoptosis via the activation of phosphatidyl inositol-3-kinase/Akt pathway (Chen et al., 2004). Apoptosis induced using hydrocortisone and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate in thymocytes were also shown to be attenuated by andrographolide (Burgos et al., 2004). However, a relatively high concentration between 40 to 100pM of the phytochemical could induce apoptotic cell death in human leukaemic HL-60 cells (Cheung et al., 2005) and human prostatic adenocarcinoma PC-3 cells (Kim & Milner, 2005) where in both cases, the activation of the caspase cascade was proposed. In contrast, Li et al. (2007) recently suggested apoptosis only occur late in HepG2 cells and did not require the caspase cascade. Caspase-3 activity was significantly up-regulated in andrographolide-treated cells between 24 and 48-hours of in vitro exposure with the absence of potent apoptotic response despite diminishing cell growth and viability (Li et al., 2007). Furthermore, cell death cannot be prevented using neither the caspase-3 specific inhibitor, Ac-DEVD-CHO nor vZAD-fmk which is a pan-caspase inhibitor, indicating that cell death elicited by andrographolide was not relying on cellular caspases activities (Li et al., 2007) and as shown here, necrotic cell death which does not require caspases was the prevalent mode of cell demise.It is still to be ascertained whether the caspase cascade was not initiated or andrographolide is directly inhibiting the apoptotic machinery despite caspase-3 activation. Thus, it is still not clear whether andrographolide is an anti- or pro-apoptotic agent and the detailed molecular mechanism(s) is still largely uncharted. Even if it does promotes programmed cell death in cells, it is still not known whether such an induction is a direct effect of the phytochemical on cellular apoptotic machinery or indirectly via other pathways and/or as a consequence of other events such as severe damage to mitotic apparatus. It was demonstrated that different treatment times with andrographolide, namely for 8 and 24 hours did not show any difference in apoptotic cells induction even though necrosis incidence was lower in shorter treatment duration. Hence, the possibility that apoptosis might be provoked earlier than 24 hours can be ruled out and even at 8 hours, apoptotic response was still lower than the incidence ofCopy I 147Y. SharifuddinChapter 3necrosis. As andrographolide exerts its influence primarily as an aneugen, which suggest the possibility of perturbations on the mitotic machinery, the absence of significant apoptotic response relative to necrosis is intriguing. Furthermore, the revelation that the majority of cell death occurs via necrosis begs the question whether cells adopt this mode of cell death because of disruptions to apoptotic components or other factors. The percentage of apoptotic cells in V-79, AHH-1 and MCL-5 were significantly higher at 30 and 50pM respectively and as pointed out earlier, these concentrations also caused micronuclei induction. Disruption to the mitotic apparatus might have a stake in apoptosis induction.Aneugens are known to be good micronuclei inducer and also possess high propensity to initiate programmed cell death. It was demonstrated that spindle poisons such as carbendazim and nocodazole induced both apoptosis as well as micronuclei, which were later preferentially eradicated via apoptotic cell death (Decordier et al., 2002). The occurrence of apoptosis can eradicate micronucleated cells and leads to the alteration of micronuclei frequency, ultimately negate an accurate damage assessment due to genotoxins exposure that can also act as apoptogens. Thus, the inhibition of apoptosis may increase micronucleated cells ratio in cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay (Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003). Quite recently, it was demonstrated that the inhibition of apical caspases-8 and -9 caused increases in the frequency of nocodazole-induced micronuclei but remarkably, caspase-3 which is regarded to be an effector caspase for apoptosis execution was not involved in the elimination of micronucleated cells (Decordier et al., 2005). Instead, caspase-3 activity was hypothesised to play a direct role in micronuclei formation (Decordier et al., 2005). In this study, the highest incidences of micronuclei were observed to occur at the same concentrations where andrographolide also induced significant apoptotic response in the cell lines tested. Furthermore, the micronuclei scored within the binucleated cells were primarily one micronucleus per binucleated cells and since the cells were examined using both Giemsa and acridine orange, the possibility of mistakenly identifying these cells as containing apoptotic bodies were reduced. Apoptotic cells harbouring apoptotic bodies also possess other features such as visible chromatin condensation within the nucleus as described by Fenech et al. (2003).Copy 1 148Y. SharifuddinChapter 3Caspase-3 has been suggested to be involved in cell cycle control and cell growth modulation. For example in proliferating lymphoid cells, caspase-mediated cleavage of the cyclin-dependent kinase (CDK) inhibitor p27KIP1 contributes to the induction of cell cycle progression (Frost et al., 2001) whereas Carlile et al. (2004) reported the involvement of caspase-3 in normal erythroid differentiation. Yan et al. (2001) showed the presence of active caspase-3 in the nuclei of dividing cells within the proliferative regions of rat forebrain and it was also reported to be involved in embryonic keratinocytes differentiation (Okuyama et al., 2004). However, caspase-3 is also known to inhibit B-cell proliferation (Woo et al., 2003), hence this caspase can mediate a paradoxical proliferative or pro- apoptotic roles. Since apoptosis regulation is closely affiliated to cell cycle and cell division fidelity, where the proteolysis of different substrates is crucial for a spectrum of processes in both non-apoptotic and apoptotic conditions. The exact mechanism(s) of caspase involvement in micronucleation is yet to be elucidated but lamin B may be involved, a nuclear membrane component that has been demonstrated to be associated with micronuclei formation due to DNA replication impairment (Tanaka & Shimizu, 2000; Kottke et al., 2002) and other possible nuclear-mitotic apparatus proteins that are required in mitotic assembly as well as nuclei formation after mitotic completion (Hirata et al., 1998; Decordier et al., 2005).As will be discussed in the following Chapter, andrographolide is capable of inducing microtubule organisation centres (MTOCs) aberration that can lead both to micronuclei formation and/or multinucleated cells.Copy I 1494CHAPTER 4INDUCTION OF CENTROSOME AMPLIFICATION AND ITS CONSEQUENCES IN CELLS CHALLENGED WITH ANDROGRAPHOLIDEY SharifuddinChapter 4CHAPTER 4INDUCTION OF CENTROSOME AMPLIFICATION AND ITS CONSEQUENCES IN CELLS CHALLENGED WITH ANDROGRAPHOLIDE4.1 Introduction to MicrotubulesMany important cellular processes in higher eukaryotic cells including motility, intracellular organelle trafficking, cell growth and division rely on the cytoskeleton which is a complicated network of protein filaments. The functional diversity of the cytoskeleton depend on three kinds of protein filaments namely:* Microfilaments that are also known as actin filaments, dictate cell shape and topography. They are also crucial for cell motility and polarity as well as for being indispensable during cytokinesis. * Intermediate filaments that grant mechanical strength and resistance to physical stress. * Microtubules that manage intracellular trafficking of proteins and organelles, and involve in chromosome segregation during mitosis.iij| Despite their differences in dynamic and mechanical properties, these protein filamentsipossess some identical fundamental characteristics, especially the fact that they exist as polymers consisting of helical assemblies of specific protein subunits which self-associate through side-to-side or end-to-end non-covalent interactions and their dynamic nature to disassembly/reassembly. The functions of these cytoskeletal filaments hinge on various accessory proteins.Therefore, polymerised microtubules remain in a dynamic steady state, alternating between a phase of growth and recession in a situation known as dynamic instability (Mitchison & Kirschner, 1984; Erickson & O'Brien, 1992).Copy 1 150Y. SharifuddinChapter 4Microtubules consist of 13 parallel protofilaments. The subunit of each protofilament is a tubulin heterodimer constructed from a very tightly linked pair of alternating a-tubulin and P-tubulin monomers arranged along the longitudinal axis of the microtubule. There are 6 isotypes of each a- and p-tubulin in human cells, possessing cell- and tissue-specific patterns of expression as well as differences in drug binding abilities (Khan et al., 2000; Hallworth & Luduena, 2000; Burkhart et al., 2001). Microtubules also possess polarity with distinct 'plus' and 'minus' ends.Even though both microtubule ends alternately lengthen and shorten, it is known that net growing occurs at the 'plus' end, which are often free in the cytoplasm or situated near the plasma membrane, whereas net shortening occurs at the 'minus' ends. The 'minus' ends of the microtubules are frequently associated with the microtubule organising centres (MTOCs) or centrosomes, the specific site in the cytoplasm from which microtubules are nucleated.The protein y-tubulin, is the main component of the MTOC and possesses a 28-35% homology with a- and P-tubulins but are being expressed at lower values than these latter isoforms (Moudjou et al., 1996)4.2 Introduction to Centrosomes and Its FunctionsThe centrosome is a small non-membraneous organelle, approximately l-2pm in diameter and is normally located at the periphery of the nucleus. It contains at least 150 proteins (Andersen et al., 2003) that change in abundance through the cell cycle, essential to its main function in nucleating microtubules to determine the spatial organisation of the microtubule network, hence it is often referred to as a major microtubule organising centres (MTOCs). During interphase, the network involves in a number of crucial cellular processes, such as cell growth and division, cell shape determination, polarity, intracellular organelle trafficking and the ability to interact with the environment. The function of the centrosome is equally important during the interphase as well as in mitotic cell.Copy I 151Y. SharifuddinChapter 4S phaseG11 centrosome( ? centrioles)G22 centrosomes(4 centrioles)Fig. 4.1. In G|-phase o f the cell cycle a single centrosome consisting o f two structurally- distinct centrioles, where the mother centriole possesses appendages (denoted in black) that are crucial in microtubule anchoring. Both centrioles are situated inside an electron-dense matrix known as the pericentriolar material, PCM (grey). Subsequently in S-phase, both centrioles produced a progeny and by G2-phase o f the cycle, the cell contains two centrosomes with each consisting o f two closely associated centrioles. Also in late G2, the pericentriolar material achieved maturation (dark grey) in a phosphorylation-dependent process. This augments y-TuRC recruitment and permits increased microtubule anchoring activity essential for spindle formation. (Adopted from Nigg, 2007).The centrosome consists of three major domains with the most prominent being the centriolar and pericentriolar areas with an average diameter of approximately 1 pm in most animal cells. The centriolar domain defines the centre of centrosome and contains either a single centriole or a pair of centrioles, depending on the stage of the cell cycle and each centrioles are composed of characteristic nine parallel triplets of microtubules. The pair of centrioles structurally differ from each other where one with a set of appendages at the distal ends (maternal centriole) and one without appendages (daughter centriole). The daughter centriole acquires these appendages, which appear to be essential for anchoring microtubules, in late G2 phase of the cell cycle. Figure 4.1 shows the changes that occur during normal centrosome duplication between Gi and G2 phases of the cell cycle.The pericentriolar domain encircles the centriole as a cloud of protein meshwork known as pericentriolar material (PCM) containing a large number of coiled-coil proteins and functions as the site for microtubule polymerisation (Bomens, 2002). This matrix provides a scaffold for proteins that are important for regulating centrosome duplication and function, containing the basic unit for microtubule nucleation, the y-tubulin ring complex(y-TuRC) (Moritz et al., 1995a; 1995b), a complex of six proteins in humans that includes y-tubulin and GCP2-6 (Fava et al., 1999; Murphy et al., 2001). The y-tubulin is aCopy I1 5 2Y. SharifuddinChapter 4conserved, ring-shaped multi-protein complex of all microtubule organising centres that apparently serve as a template for microtubule polymerisation from the closely-associated a- and p-tubulins (Moritz et al., 1995a). The centrosome extends out of the pericentriolar domain by integrating with the surrounding organelles and cytoplasm through microtubules and microfilaments as depicted in Figure 4.2 below. These outer extensions of the centrosome are called the outer centrosomal domain.CentrosomeQ y-TuRC deg CentrosomalFig. 4.2. The centrosome is crucial in nucleating microtubules. The y-TuRC (shown as green circles) initiates the polymerisation o f a- and P-tubulin promoters into microtubules (depicted as red rods). Maturation o f the centrosome in G2 controls the y-TuRC content in the pericentriolar material. (Adopted from Sankaran & Parvin, 2006).During mitosis as well as meiosis, centrosomes are the primary organising centre for microtubule in most eukaryotic cells, become the core structures of spindle poles and dictate the formation of mitotic spindles. Each of the daughter cell inherits only one centrosome upon cytokinesis, hence the centrosome must duplicate once prior to the next cell division. Therefore, at any particular time of the cell cycle, cells possess either one unduplicated or two duplicated centrosomes. Since DNA and centrosome are the only organelles that undergo semi-conservative duplication once every single cell cycle, animal cells are equipped with a mechanism that coordinates these two events, ensuring only one duplication step takes place at any one time.In late Gj -phase, the centrosome triggers duplication via physical separation o f the paired centrioles and losing their orthogonal orientation with respect to each other but remained attached via a fiber. Tsou and Steams (2006) proposed that this disorientation step permitsproteins M TO CCopy I1 5 3Y. SharifuddinChapter 4the following duplication steps. In early S-phase, pro-centrioles (daughter centrioles) formed close to the proximal end of each centriole, perpendicular to each pre-existing mother centriole. Pro-centrioles can appear anywhere in the cytoplasm but a regulatory mechanism which is not well understood limits the sites of synthesis to the base of mother centrioles (reviewed in Hagan & Palazzo, 2006). The nascent pro-centrioles elongate through S and G2 phase of the cell cycle and two centrosomes continue to mature by recruiting pericentriolar material.At the G2/M-phase, the centrosomes undergo a dramatic increase in size due to accumulation of several proteins including y-TuRC and the influx of y-TuRC into the pericentriolar material is associated with a higher level of centrosomal microtubule nucleation activity (Khodjakov & Rieder, 1999). The new mother centriole also matures via the binding of specific proteins and in M-phase both centrosomes have acquired the maximal amount of pericentriolar material.Maturationy-TuRC influx centriole modificationCentrioleso o ,,SeparationDisorientationPCMElongation DuplicationFig. 4.3. The centrosome cycle.