IN SILICO PREDICTION OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDE BIOTRANSFORMATION ROUTESY. SharifuddinChapter 2CHAPTER 2PART 1: IN SILICO ASSESSMENT OF GENOTOXICITY AND TOXICITY POTENTIAL OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDE2.1 General IntroductionThere is a general understanding that an in-depth comprehension of all toxicities associated with a new chemical is important to its successful development and marketability. Thus, toxicology in general faces the immensely challenging tasks of conducting safety evaluations in supporting the development of new chemicals prior to human exposures and determining the potential hazard posed by agents whose safety assessments were insufficient.Currently, genotoxicity is examined through the application of a battery of experimental in vitro and in vivo test systems that are not always uniformly concordant but applied in a weight-of-evidence approach. However, these tests can be overwhelmed in light of the accelerating pace of chemical discovery and development as well as the economic feasibility of such endeavours, have highlighted the need for efficient prioritisation and toxicity screening approaches in the 'fail-early, fail-safe' context. There is also a requirement to elucidate the genotoxic potential of metabolites, impurities, degradants and in the occupational health aspect, process intermediates. Since exposure to genotoxic chemicals bears the risk of inducing somatic mutations including those leading to cancer as well as germ-line mutations with the possibility of inherited disorders, evaluating genotoxic potential is regarded to be an essential step in the safety assessment of chemicals.2.2 Chemical Reactivity and Possible Mechanisms of ActionThere is quite a large overlap between genotoxicity and carcinogenicity since the initiating step of the carcinogenic process often involves one or more genotoxic insults. A unifying concept has been that genotoxicants and carcinogens act by attacking the DNA, based on their electrophilicity per se or after metabolic transformation. Thus, genotoxicity should beCopy 1 63Y. SharifuddinChapter 2easier to anticipate than other form of toxicities, such as organ-specific toxicities that can be induced by various chemical or pharmacological mechanisms not directly or necessarily related to chemical structure analysis. However, there are indirectly-acting genotoxicants such as aneugens while epigenetic carcinogens do not act through genotoxic mechanisms and the progress in the identification of structural alerts responsible for epigenetic damage has been much slower (Woo, 2003). It is not surprising that chemical genotoxicity has been the focus of various attempts to develop predictive models and among the theoretical models available, the application of structure-activity relationships concepts has emerged to be promising. This concept and with supporting experimental data, has paved the way to several chemical functional groups and substructures identification, which are referred to as structural alerts.These are capable of causing both mutation and cancer and includes acylating intermediates, aldehydes, carbonium ions (alkyl-, aryl-, benzylic-), epoxides, free radicals, nitrenium ions, oxonium ions, polarized double bonds (a,p-unsaturated carbonyls or carboxylates) and peroxides (Ashby, 1995; Woo et al, 2002). The structural alerts characterisation has been a very important scientific progression because it permitted the possibility of designing safer compounds by avoiding the known structural alerts. In addition, the structural alerts for genotoxicity and carcinogenicity have been incorporated into expert systems for predicting toxicological effects of chemicals (e.g. DEREK, MCASE).2.3 Computer-assisted Structure Activity Relationships (CSAR)Structure activity relationships (SAR) examine the correlation between the chemical structure of a compound and its biological or pharmacological activity. Compounds are often grouped together because they possess common structural characteristics including topology, stereochemistry, size, arrangement and distribution of functional groups. Other factors contributing to structure-activity relationship include electronic effects, resonance, chemical reactivity and inductive effects. Quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSAR) is a refined attempt to correlate structural or property descriptors of compounds with activities using mathematics and more recently, by computational methods.Copy I 64Y. SharifuddinChapter 2MCASE, DEREK and TOPKAT are examples of computer-assisted structure activity relationship (CSAR) systems that are widely used in predicting genotoxicity and carcinogenicity by studying quantitative structure-activity relationships (QSARs). MCASE (www.multicase. com) stands for Multiple Computer Automated Structure Evaluation and it dissociates each input molecule into 2-10 atom fragment (biophore) and statistically examines the strength of the fragments from its database with an associated mutagenicity value that is based on observed mutagenic potency. The database contains information on 3000 compounds and includes Drosophila mutation data. Another program, named TOPKAT (Toxicity Prediction by Komputer Assisted Technology) was originally designed by Health Systems Inc. and is now marketed by Accelrys (www.accelrys.com/products/topkat/index.html) is based solely on bacterial mutagenicity data. It applies 'electro-topological' descriptors rather than chemical structures to predict mutagenic reactivity with DNA. The program cannot be customised by the user.There are also other computer programs that is based on QSAR but built for different purposes. METEOR for example was designed to harness QSAR and expert knowledge in elucidating possible metabolic outcomes of a compound of interest in silico.2.4 Introduction to DEREKDEREK (Deductive Estimation of Risk from Expert Knowledge) is an expert- knowledge base system that was originally created by Schering Agrochemical Company and was subsequently donated to an independent not-for-profit organisation, Lhasa Limited, UK. Effectively, toxicologists from other organisations are now able to use DEREK and continuously contributing to toxicological data in improving the qualitative structure- activity relationships (QSARs) and expert knowledge rules in the program.The main difference of an expert knowledge base system such as DEREK and a database is that DEREK is a software that utilises toxicological expert knowledge rules in predicting the toxicity of chemicals, usually in the absence of known toxicological data. Whereas a database is merely a large set of structured data and database management system is a computer software programmed to manage a database. VITIC (Lhasa Ltd.) is an example of a data management system.Copy 1 65Y. SharifuddinChapter 2DEREK makes semi-quantitative predictions as to whether or not a DNA-reactive moiety is present on the chemical structure of interest and performs a series of key functions based on a substance's chemical structure:* Acts as a high-throughput screen for genotoxic and mutagenic activities.I! * Predicts whether a chemical will be carcinogenic.| * Predicts whether a chemical will be skin sensitiser.I * Highlights potential toxicological hazards covering a spectrum of endpoints fromirritancy to hepatotoxicity.DEREK's learning set was constructed based on bacterial mutagenicity (Ames test) and other available genotoxicity data. Query outputs define the structural alert recognised and! [ the type of genotoxicity attributed to the alert.How DEREK works. * Molecular chemical structures are entered into DEREK for Windows by either importing MDL Molfiles or SDF files, or via a chemical editor program such as ISIS/Draw. All the parameters such as species and endpoints were selected. Figures2.1 and 2.2 shows an example of this step. MDL Molfile is a file format created byIElsevier Molecular Design Limited (MDL) containing information about the atoms, chemical bonds, connectivity and coordinates of a molecule. SDF (structure-data file) file is another file format for holding chemical information especially data on chemical structure. * Then DEREK will utilise QSARs information and other expert knowledge rules to develop reasonable prediction about the potential toxicity of the chemical in question. Example of this step is shown in Figure 2.3. * The program also provides supporting evidence for its conclusion that includes literature references, toxicity data and comments. Toxicological data from structurally similar molecules can also be viewed as shown in the example in Figure 2.4.Copy 1 66t * O c x tr* CfcXrt T<<.1 r<<<<rcM M 0 * r~ * rr # * & >> H>>tp - I t f l X It^ iaw ofo io fQ rQ i^ip io fg raFig. 2 .1. Inserting a chemical structure using ISIS/Draw.h t: M Mit mili'di {{#:, jM H ttfe tfe a r- *1Srfoped | ChtrMcxj l o g p | G <<n*il| Al<<l|l$p*c*t $fiK t<<d$PK <<i64CW*n gun** f<<) h am jtecnrvjrfTialC<<rr-4(frw>f#_j dj i Jj Jrr*>>r<<*Xf5 Oriptapbetoe <<J$croc<<(arQ ttartt C#KdFig. 2.2. Setting parameters to the query process.Y. SharifuddinChapter 2Copy 16 7Y. SharifuddinChapter 2oj[*REC far Wm4ov<<t >>Query Pr-Jit <vt*<<n Window >MejJ-DJ *JA )e < P << >> c n /tn |IH A 5A P H IO K IIO H S* UrrxPoKurffMut<<genic*jr-otis<< rt >><<ro PLAUSIBLE* * * vl!0 PLAU$!$U'&> H..PV ildelvJe a pim jici* Sken **n irtiie lH w i C U STO M fllE D IC T IO N SNc**ir<<j lo !*;>:>'Fig. 2.3. Predictions made by DEREK.8532S!3BHBHnMMen MMM* jncu:<<Tile SSMI /r jtr~ r . ef 1 : w i f l L rVifiri d t l t f e n rt . v t * " < ]~|C*i<<iWIt' art Se^et^CiAW t *. * QUA r, f P n tw ih 1'fU i IV) 1 , fMme Ninti<< <]_1f M O tif K> <<tw< t |Fig. 2.4. User can compare and contrast the chemical in query with structurally similar compound.Copy 1 68Y. SharifuddinChapter 22.5 METHODSDEREK version 8.0.1 ISIS/Draw was used to draw the chemical structure of andrographolide. The main parameters to the query were set as listed below:1. Testing against all alerts.2. Species: bacteria and mammals.3. Super-Endpoints:* Carcinogenicity* Genotoxicity* Irritation* Respiratory sensitisation* Skin sensitisation* Thyroid toxicity* Miscellaneous endpoints4. Consider tautomers as true.5. Hydrogen options: perceive implicit and explicit hydrogens.Full report created by DEREK can be found in the Appendix section. The probability was set to be 'plausible' and above only. Anything less than 'plausible' will not be registered by the program.Copy 1 69Y. SharifuddinChapter 22.6 RESULTSThe molecular weight of andrographolide calculated by DEREK is 350.455, a 100% matchto the figure supplied by Sigma-Aldrich. Figure 2.5 shows the chemical structure of! andrographolide drew using ISIS/Draw. The program made several predictions based on! the molecular structure of andrographolide as described below.00Fig 2.5. Chemical structure o f andrographolide.The ability of andrographolide to induce peroxisome proliferation and a-2-p globulin j nephropathy in mammals is doubted. However, it is plausible for the compound to induce such effect in rat, mouse and other rodents. Figure 2.6 shows all possible locations that can cause peroxisome proliferation and a-2-p globulin nephropathy in rodents.Copy I 70Y. SharifuddinChapter 2000Fig. 2.6. Shows three possible locations where andrographolide may induce nephropathy and peroxisome proliferation in rodents.Copy 1 71Y. SharifuddinChapter 2Skin sensitisation in mammal is predicted to be plausible. The location of a, p-unsaturated ester (or precursor) within the compound, as shown in Figure 2.7, may cause this effect.The same location of a, P-unsaturated ester or thioester within the compound can also cause chromosome damage in mammals in vitro.00Fig. 2.7. The position within the compound that can cause skin sensitisation and chromosome damage in vitro in mammals.2.7 DISCUSSIONDEREK was utilised to assess the potential mutagenicity, carcinogenicity and toxicity of andrographolide. This computer software utilises toxicological expert knowledge rules in predicting the toxicity of chemicals by identifying the structural alerts that may contribute to its activity. Andrographolide was predicted to be able to cause peroxisome proliferation and nephrotoxicity in rats, mouse and other rodents whereas the a-alkylidene y- butyrolactone moiety, detected as a, p-unsaturated ester or thioester by DEREK was considered to be able to cause chromosome damage in mammals in vitro. Indeed, Nanduri et al. (2004) reported that four positions in the andrographolide chemical structure are responsible for its in vitro cytotoxic activity. As shown in Figure 2.8, these positions are (1) the intact a-alkylidene y-butyrolactone moiety, (2) the C-14 hydroxyl or its ester moiety, (3) the A12(13) double bond and (4) the A8(17) double bond or epoxy moiety.Copy 1 72Y. SharifuddinChapter 2Fig 2.8. The chemical structure of andrographolide with the positions responsible for its cytotoxic activity. Modification was made by the author to the original picture adopted from Nanduri et al. (2004) with coloured stars denoting these positions respectively. (Yellow) the intact a-alkylidene y-j butyrolactone moiety, (Red) the C-14 hydroxyl or its ester moiety, (Blue) the A12(l3) double bond and(Green) the A8*1^ double bond or epoxy moiety.I Whereas the structural alerts define the potential for the chemicals to be carcinogenic or|mutagenic, the actual modulation of this potential depends on a series of factors such as| molecular weight, chemical reactivity, solubility and possible metabolism which can differIj within each individual class of compounds. In fact, chemicals sharing the same structural alert such as aromatic amine for example, can behave in different ways because some are active, to a different degree and some are inactive. Such modulating factors can be estimated by minor, context-dependent structural alerts for example, the alteration in the positions of the skeleton of a chemical with a primary structural alert. However, the qualitative approach based on the recognition of structural alerts is rather limited due to thei| inability to predict the activity of sub-structures which are not in the list of known structural alerts or those that possess a combination of alerts.A powerful generalization is provided by the quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) analysis, which is based on a limited number of physical chemical properties with general relevance, and produces a mathematical model for the chemical determinants of the biological activity. The physico-chemical properties of interest for the biological activity of the chemicals are hydrophobic, electronic and stearic effects (Franke & Gruska, 2003). QSARs have been generated for a number of individual chemical classes including aromatic amines, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and lactones (Benigni, 2005). The majority are relative to in vitro mutagenicity. However, a number of QSAR models for the animal carcinogenicity exist as well. A great aspect of the QSARs for the individual chemical classes, as performed according to the classical Hansch approach and point to the physico-chemical determinants of the biological activity of the compounds. Therefore, theyCopy 1 73Y. SharifuddinChapter 2have appreciably contributed to the comprehension of the mechanisms of chemical mutagenicity and carcinogenicity. The other important goal of the use of QSAR analyses is the risk assessment of chemicals. Once formulated, the QSARs can be employed for estimating the activity of other chemicals not tested experimentally or those lacking existing experimental data such as andrographolide.Natural compounds in general are more structurally diverse with greater complexity than synthetic pharmaceuticals and have been shown to be an important source of potential pharmacophores (Rowinsky & Donehower, 1995) and others were found to alter biological function through interaction with cellular macromolecules and affecting xenobiotic metabolism enzymes expression (Chouduri & Valerio, 2005). The fact that natural compounds especially phytochemicals, have a wide spectrum of chemical functional groups where some are known to be structural alerts for toxicologically-based chronic effects such as the induction of carcinogenesis, highlights the need to assess their potential toxicity. However, the predicament is that few phytochemicals have been evaluated for systemic toxicological effects and even less have been subjected to long-term cancer bioassay in vivo. In light of the potential human exposure to the high number of synthetic and natural compounds currently in discovery, development or commercialisation phases, there is a practical desideratum for the development and validation for an efficiently reliable and sensitive methods for screening thousands of untested chemicals for toxicity especially crucial endpoints such as genotoxicity. Assessment performed using DEREK supports previous findings on cytotoxicity (Siripong et al., 1992; Nanduri et al. 2004; Jada et al., 2007) but as highlighted previously, reliable experimental data on possible induction of genetic damage is absent.The current accomplishment of CSAR has been moderate but developing steadily, concomitant with their growing importance in compound selection and study duration (Johnson & Rodgers, 2006). These expert-knowledge based systems are not free from limitations such as inability to predict non-positive structures, does not distinguish between target organs for carcinogenicity, inability to predict potential antagonism or synergism of substructures and variability in key data quality (Johnson & Rodgers, 2006).