An acentric or a lagging whole chromosome that is not included into the main nucleus after nuclear membrane reformation, may become enveloped by separate membrane producing a micronucleus due to the inability to migrate towards the opposite microtubule organising centres (MTOCs) (Lynch & Parry, 1993; Schuler et al., 1997; Fenech, 2000). On the other hand, micronuclei harbouring chromosomal fragments may arise from direct double-strand DNA breakage, inhibition of DNA synthesis or conversion of single strand breaks into double strand breaks after cell replication. Misrepair of two chromosome breaks may cause asymmetric chromosome rearrangement generating a dicentric chromosome and an acentric fragment. Usually, the centromeres of the dicentric chromosomes are pulled towards the MTOCs of the cells during anaphase producing a nucleoplasmic bridge (NPB) between the daughter nuclei and an acentric fragment that lags behind to form a micronucleus (Thomas et al., 2003; Fenech, 2005). Micronuclei can also be formed by gene amplification via breakage-fusion-bridge (BFB) cycles when amplified DNA is selectively placed to specific sites at the periphery of the nucleus and extrude via nuclear budding at the S-phase of the cell cycle (Fenech, 2002).For almost two decades, the in vitro CBMA has evolved into a comprehensive technique in assessing cytostasis, chromosome loss, chromosome breakage, non-disjunction, apoptosis and necrosis. New developments also indicated that this assay could be employed to measure nuclear buds, a biomarker for gene amplification and changes in gene dosage as well as the measurement of nucleoplasmic bridges, which is an indicator for dicentric chromosomesCopy 1 102Y. SharifuddinC'hapter 3resulting from telomere end-fusions or DNA mis-repair (Haaf et al., 1999; Umegaki & Fenech, 2000). Figure 3.2 shows the possibility of various outcomes in cytokinesis-blocked cells upon exposure to genotoxic and/or cytotoxic agents.Table 3.1. Comparison o f strengths and weaknesses o f chromosomal aberration assay and in vitro CBMA.MethodsChromosomal aberrations assayAdvantagesEndpoint: chromosome mutations.Combined with FISFf-painting permits the detection of numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations.Possible co-detection of mitotic indices.Able to identify the nature of the clastogenic damage being examined, strand breaks against base damage.Sensitive method.Interactive scoring possible but not full automation.Disadvantages* Labour-intensive andrequires in vitro cell cultivation.Requires highly qualified skills and experience.In vitro CBMAEndpoints: chromosome and genome mutations.Combined with suitable antibodies (e.g. CREST) allows the identification of aneugen and clastogen; detection of chromosome loss and nondisjunction.Detection of other useful endpoints such as apoptotic, necrotic cells, NPB and NBUD.Simple and fast.Economical to perform and the possibility of automation.Sensitive method with statistical power.Requires cell division for micronucleus expression.Effect of cytochalasin-B on micronucleus frequency.Not able to detect all chromosomal damage events e.g. symmetrical reciprocal translocations.N.B. NPB= nucleoplasmic bridges; NBUD= nuclear budding.Copy I 1 0 3Y. SharifuddinChapter 3GenotoxicinsultParent cellTwo daughter cells with micronuclei after successful cytokinesis(B)Parent cellGenotoxicinsult+ cytochalasin-BA binucleated daughter cell with two micronuclei after one cell cycleFig. 3.1. In (A), a cell that has been subjected to a genotoxic insult may produce micronuclei in daughter cells but they are not suitable for scoring as one cannot ascertain whether the cells has gone through only one cell division. However, the addition o f cytochalasin-B such as shown in (B) allows micronuclei in a binucleated cell to be quantified since cytokinesis is prevented in a cell that is going through one cell cycle.One obvious advantage of the in vitro CBMA lies in its capability in detecting both aneugenic and clastogenic events, resulting to numerical and structural chromosomal aberrations respectively (Fenech, 2000) making the assay more mechanistically enhanced. Distinguishing the two different events is achievable even at low doses of genotoxinCopy I 1 0 4Y. SharifuddinChapter 3exposure. For example, the sensitivity of this assay in detecting damage induced by ionising radiation is 0.2Gy for micronuclei (aneugenic and clastogenic events) and 0.1 Gy when combined with pan-centromeric FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridisation) probes when detecting clastogenic events (Vral et al., 1997; Touil et al., 2002).NecrosisApoptosisoodegoNon- Centrosomev _ jr C h rom o so m edisjunction* Dicentric bre^ ? 90 <? ?net- abnormality1 chromosome and amplificationlossFig. 3.2. The possibility o f various outcomes in cytokinesis-blocked cells upon exposure to genotoxic and/or cytotoxic agents. The application o f these biomarkers within the CBMA allows the quantification o f chromosome breakage, chromosome loss, gene amplification, chromosome rearrangement and cell death (apoptosis and necrosis). Furthermore, cytostatic effects can be elucidated by the ratio o f mono-, bi- and multinucleated cells. The CBMA has not been used previously in measuring centrosome abnormalities incidence but this is possible in theory by quantifying the frequency o f tri- and/or tetranucleated cells and confirming that their DNA content is 4N. (Adopted from Fenech, 2002).3.2.1 CBMA in Combination with Kinetochore LabellingAuto-antibody present in the sera of patients suffering from a specific type of the autoimmune disease scleroderma, CREST (Calcinosis, Raynaud phenomenon, esophageal dismotility, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia) syndrome, possess a high affinity to kinetochore proteins present at the centromere of chromosomes (Moroi et al., 1980). It was later suggested that the CREST antibody could be utilised in distinguishing between micronuclei that contain fragmented (Kinetochore negative; K-) and whole chromosomesCopy I1 0 5Y. SharifuddinChapter 3(Kinetochore positive; K+) (Parry & Parry, 1987). Subsequently, application of the CREST antibody in determining whether structural (clastogenic) or numerical (aneugenic) chromosomal changes was involved in micronuclei induction rapidly ensued (Degrassi & Tanzarella, 1988; Eastmond & Tucker, 1989; Bonassi et al, 1992) as illustrated in Figure 3.3 below.Fig. 3.3. Shows how micronuclei harbouring kinetochore positive and negative can be differentiated by by employing the CREST antibodies against chromosomal kinetochore proteins. Kinetochore positive micronuclei denotes whole chromosome(s) whereas chromosomal fragments detected as kinetochore negative micronuclei.A micronucleus that harbours a centromeric region arise from whole chromosomes or chromosomal fragments containing a centromere, whereas those that do not contain a centromeric region results from the formation of nuclear membrane around acentric fragments or whole chromosomes that have lost the kinetochore from the centromere. As it is assumed that random kinetochore loss, chromosome breakages and fragments containing centrosomes are not common, regular events, the occurrence of either kinetochore positive or negative micronuclei with 70% frequency or higher indicates aneugenic or clastogenic natureIntroduction o f CREST antibodiesA binucleated cell with kinetochore positive m icro n u c le iA binucleated cell with two micronuclei after one cell cycleA binucleated cell with kinetochore negative m ic r o n u c le iCopy I 106I1I| Y. Sharifuddin! Chapter 3l|i of the compound tested respectively (Antoccia et al., 1991; Antoccia et al., 1993; Stopper &Muller, 1997).3.3 Cellular Toxicity in Genotoxicity AssessmentEvery genotoxicity tests employed for regulatory submission must be accompanied by relevant cellular toxicity data where the agent must be subjected to the tests involving ; maximum concentrations (10mmol/l or 5000pg/ml), the highest level permissible bycytotoxicity or the limit of solubility in solvent or growth medium. Thus, the cytotoxicity | assessment is not only critical for the elucidation of possible mode of action but also crucial! for assay validity.A toxic compound is capable of initiating two characteristic forms of cell death with clearly!distinct biochemical and morphological features namely apoptosis and necrosis (Wyllie et al.,1980). Other forms of cell death include autophagy and senescence. The consequent cell death type hinges heavily on the stimulus and cellular context since every cell death mechanism is a net result of self-propagating signals and others that negate the alternative j cell death programs (Clarke, 2002). Typical feature of apoptosis are fragmented nuclei with; condensed chromatin, organised DNA degradation (Wyllie et al., 1980; Duke et al, 1983)and shrunken cytoplasm within an intact plasma membrane. In contrast, necrosis features severe loss of membrane integrity and leakage of cellular components (Wyllie et al., 1980).The same chemical in different concentrations is capable of triggering both type of cell death due to various factors such as increased physical cellular damage, alterations to cellular biochemical homeostasis or intolerable disruption to cellular repair mechanisms. For example, less than lpM cadmium chloride would activate apoptotic response but higher concentrations caused necrosis in cells. Therefore, classical apoptotic and necrotic cell death represent only the extreme end of a wide spectrum of possible biochemical and morphological deaths that can occur simultaneously in tissues or cell cultures exposed to the same agent (Nicotera et al., 1999). Apoptosis may also progress to secondary necrosis when dying cells are not removed by heterophagy (Kroemer et al., 1998).Copy 1 107Y. SharifuddinChapter 3Once a xenobiotic enters the cell, it may directly interact with various receptors and inducing positive or negative effect via signalling pathways manipulation. Alternatively, the xenobiotics are subjected to biotransformation yielding reactive metabolites or become inactive, which is a common fate. However, some of these compounds or their products can have undesired effects. Therapeutic compounds may also possess unrelated effects other than its intended purposes and target sites. For example, an oral fluoroquinolone broad-spectrum antibiotic temafloxacin (Omniflox(tm)) was found to cause allegic reactions in some patients as well as haemolytic anemia, liver and kidney dysfunctions (FDA, 1992) whereas Fansidar(tm) (pyrimethamine-sulfadoxine) that has been used against malaria and toxoplasmosis was reported to induce micronuclei as well as sister chromatid exchanges (Abou-Eisha & Afifi, 2004). Direct-acting genotoxins will target the DNA causing damage such as adducts formation, where they interact with proteins, other macromolecules such as DNA or small molecules such as glutathione (GSH). Depletion of the oxidative defences can cause changes in cellular redox status resulting in disturbances to regulatory systems affected by redox homeostasis, ultimately leading to cell death via apotosis or necrosis as illustrated in Figure 3.4 overleaf.Copy 1 108Y SharifuddinChapter 3ChemicalM - U 'i l # 'l i s . t rInteraction with receptor Products DetoxrficatbnReactiveproducts DNA adductsAdducts with small molecules (for example. GSH)ProteinadductsDepleteoxidativedefencesEffect EffectT _Trigger regulatory systemsLosecrucialfunctionSmallamountprotectiveActivate system to yield detrimental responseMutatbn. block polymerasesDirectdamageeffect?Overwhelm: get oxidative damage to proteinsApoptosisHigh NecrosisamountFig. 3.4. Shows some o f the events related to genotoxicity and toxicity o f xenobiotics. (Adopted from Liebler & Guengerich, 2005).3.3.1 Methods in Cytotoxicity MeasurementVarious methods as well as measurement endpoints are employed in assessing cytotoxicity exerted by a compound of interest. Thus each of the method employed might differ in the terms of the data generated.Copy I 1 0 9Y. SharifuddinChapter 3Vital dyes such as trypan blue or fast green are usually excluded from viable cells but can enter through damaged cell membranes to stain the cytoplasm, and they have long been used as indicators of non-viable cells. Trypan blue was used to study the cytotoxicity of antitumour drug in a variety of tumours and a good correlation was found between the in vitro responsiveness and the in vivo chemotherapy results in both animals and humans (Durkin et al., 1979). The limitation of vital dye exclusion tests is that these type of assays measure dead necrotic cells with damaged membranes and may not measure dying or apoptotic cells with intact membranes.Viable cells can be measured with colourimetric assays utilising a substrate whose colour is modified by living but not dead cells. One example was the development of a rapid colourimetric assay based on the tetrazolium salt 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5- diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) (Mosmann, 1983), which is cleaved and converted to a blue formazan by the mitochondrial dehydrogenase in active mitochondria. Thus, cellular metabolic activity is utilised to distinguish between viable and non-viable cells. Good correlation was observed between MTT and clonogenic assays for drug exposures in some cell lines (Carmichael et al., 1987).Activation of the caspase cascade is an integral event in the apoptotic pathway (Atkinson et al, 1998) and caspase-3 activation is frequently accepted as a reliable marker for apoptosis (Nicholson et al., 1995). Caspase 3 is part of the caspase cascade which initiates the cleavage of various proteins resulting in an ordered breakdown of the cell (Tewari et al, 1995).Determining cell viability is important in assessing mutagenesis, malignant transformation, cellular pathology, toxicity and apoptosis. Furthermore, delineating mechanisms of carcinogenesis would be incomplete without cell viability assessment as tumours may only arise from abnormal living cells. The methods to be employed in cellular toxicity assessment and the advocated levels to be attained are defined in ICH and OECD guidelines (ICH 1995; OECD 1997a; OECD 1997b) that differ between test systems. Cloning efficiency or relative total growth (RTG) are required to be reduced by 80-90% whereas for cytogenetic assays including CBMA, the parameters needed is at least 50% reduction in binucleate indexCopy 1 110Y. SharifuddinChapter 3(Kirsch-Volders et al., 2003) or mitotic index, cell number and confluency (OECD 1997a). Subjecting compound of interest excessively cytotoxic doses may cause artefactual false positive data or difficulties in data interpretation (Kirkland, 1992; Galloway, 2000).3.4 The Objective of the StudyThe objective of this study was to assess the potential of andrographolide to induce genotoxic damage in V-79 as well as metabolically competent cell lines of AHH-1 and MCL-5 using the in vitro cytokinesis-block micronucleus assay. This assay was accompanied by kinetochore labelling using the CREST antibodies in order to determine the type of damage induced whether it is clastogenic or aneugenic in nature. Along with other methods of measurement, the cytotoxicity potential of andrographolide was also assessed using trypan blue-exclusion assay.Copy 1 111Y. SharifuddinChapter 33.5 MATERIALS AND METHODS3.5.1 Safety Aspects.Disposable latex gloves were worn for every laboratory work conducted. Sterile conditions were achieved using Class II Cryomat Pharmaceutical lamina flow hoods which were routinely cleaned with 70% ethanol. Experiments involving toxic and dangerous chemicals were performed with extra gloves in the Class II lamina flow hood. The staining, fixation and mounting of the microscope slides were always conducted inside a flow hood. All items used for the experiments were routinely cleaned with 70% ethanol.Andrographolide and other toxic compounds in solid form were weighed in the toxic handling room and dangerous substances were carefully disposed of in multi-layered toxic bags destined for incineration. Deionised water used for all experiments was UV-purified and filtered with the Milli-Q PF Ultrapure Water Purification System.3.5.2 Annual Mycoplasma Testing.Mycoplasmas are considered as serious contaminants of cell cultures. They are prokaryotes without cellular walls, belonging to the class Mollicutes, order Mycoplasmatules (McGarrity, 1984). They are amongst the smallest of self-replicating prokaryotes, approximately one- sixth the size of an Escherichia coli bacterium. They are capable of altering cellular functions like chromosomal arrangements, uptake of nucleic acid precursors, cell responses to mitogens and secretions of interferon by the cells. Mycoplasma may also deplete arginine or glutamine from the culture medium (Kouri et al., 1983). It as been reported that they produce chromosomal and numerical aberrations of cultured cells (Fogh and Fogh, 1965; Paton et al., 1965; Aula and Nichols, 1967) and for a review of the cytogenetic effects see McGarrity et al. (1984).The annual screening of mycoplasma in the laboratory was achieved using MycoAlert(r) mycoplasma detection based on bioluminescence assay. Basically, the screening experiment was conducted in a two-step process where the reagent containing a substrate for specific enzymes secreted into the culture media by mycoplasma leading to the phosphorylation ofCopy 1 112Y.