Centrosomes consisting o f paired centrioles (depicted as light blue cylinders) surrounded by pericentriolar material (yellow in Gi/S-phases and green, upon maturation in G2/M-phases). Appendages o f the mother centrioles are also shown (red and orange). Different stages o f the centrosome cycle are shown corresponding to the cell cycle and with temporal scale o f activity for kinases (red arcs), ubiquitin ligases (blue arc) and poly- (ADP)-ribosylation or PAR (green arc) that are known to influence centrosome duplication and maturation. Finally, in mitosis the two pairs o f centrioles split o ff the centrosome and migrate to the opposite poles o f the nucleus. (Adopted from Sankaran & Parvin, 2006).Copy I 1 5 4Y. SharifuddinChapter 4Subsequently, the two mature centrosomes move to the opposite poles of the nucleus to form the mitotic spindle regulated by a slew of kinases. It has become increasingly clear that other protein modifications, including ubiquitination and ADP-ribosylation, regulate this process and Figure 4.3 illustrated the centrosome duplication cycle in relation to different phases of the cell cycle.The centrosomes have three important roles. It nucleates the polymerisation of tubulin subunits into long microtubule polymers, it manages nucleated microtubules into functional arrays and it duplicates once per cell cycle, hence legitimising cell cycle progression from Gi into S phase, including exit from cytokinesis. After nucleation in the pericentriolar material by y-TuRC, microtubules are liberated from their nucleating sites and translocated to the anchoring sites situated at the sub-distal appendages of the maternal centrosomes that contain centriolin and ninein as anchor proteins but lack microtubule-nucleating proteins (Doxsey et al., 2001).Centrosomes play a pivotal role in bipolar spindle formation during mitosis and therefore exert a strong influence on karyokinesis and cytokinesis. Cells of higher plants and eggs of many animal species are capable of forming bipolar spindles through centrosome- independent mechanisms (Heald et al., 1996; Schmit 2002, Basto et al., 2006). However in their presence, centrosomes usually adopt a domineering role in determining the orientation and bipolarity of the mitotic spindle (Brinkley, 2001). The presence of two MTOCs during mitosis is critical for the formation of bipolar mitotic spindles because chromosomes are pulled in opposite direction towards each spindle pole and this bipolarity is essential for accurate chromosome segregation into two daughter cells during cytokinesis, hence they are vital for both the fidelity of chromosome segregation and the positioning of the cleavage plane during cell division. Thus, numerical homeostasis of centrosomes is a highly controlled process and abrogation of this control leads to abnormal amplification of centrosomes, which in turn increases the frequency of aberrant mitoses and chromosome segregation errors.4.3 Centrosome AbnormalitiesCentrosome abnormalities can be classified in two, namely structural and numerical aberrations. Although these aberrations often occur together, their origins as well as theirCopy 1 155Y. SharifuddinChapter 4consequences may differ. Both type of centrosomal anomalies have been considered to present diagnostic and/or prognostic values (Deusberg, 2001).Structural centrosome anomalies are most likely to arise from deregulated expression of genes coding for centrosomal proteins or alteration in post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation defects of the corresponding proteins. Consequently, altered or imbalanced protein levels caused the centrosomal structural modification, for example in size due to PCM accumulation around the centrioles. Furthermore, centrosomal coiled coil proteins have the tendency to form intracellular assemblies and this can be manifested as centrosome-related bodies at ectopic sites (Fry et al., 1998, Casenghi et al., 2003). The exact protein compositions of the structurally altered MTOCs and centrosome-related bodies have an impact on function, for example the recruitment of y-TuRCs may be either reduced or enhanced and microtubule nucleation is either suppressed or stimulated (Lingle & Salisbury, 2001; Lingle et al., 2002), which in turn influence the polarity, shape and motility of cells.Numerical centrosome abnormalities are usually linked to genome instability and loss of tissue differentiation (Ghadimi et al., 2000; Lingle et al., 2002,). There are several mechanisms that lead to centrosome amplification. Firstly, centrosomes replicate more than once in a single cell cycle and may not always undergo re-duplication process, hence the final centrosome number can be either odd or even. Cytokinesis failure, resulting in genome and centrosome doubling in even numbers is the second well- known mechanism. There has been a debate as to whether centrosome multiplication is a cause or consequence of chromosome instability and most incidence of centrosome amplification involves deregulated replication and cytokinesis failure. Consequently, the existence of abnormal centrosome number abrogates centrosomal numerical homeostasis, disrupts normal mitotic process and increases the frequency of aberrant mitoses and chromosome segregation errors. Other mechanisms that can cause centrosome multiplication but less frequent than those described previously includes improper splitting of the paired centrioles, de novo formation of acentriolar centrosomes and cell fusion via fusogenic viruses as illustrated in Figure 4.4 overleaf.Copy I 156OverduplicationRe-duplication during (prolonged?) S-phase Excessive multiplication of pro-centriolesXocPSocJ2a>>_cd<U--"SXctOO>-533cacoCL3-ou.0>>o<= c 'PS Bo oX 3oo T3 co C^ c o c o j u"s E X o O g4>> t-E 6^ 3 <2 & <u g XPS E O 33 E O g. d 20 x X oS PSx 3 x o n .1 SS2 sE Eo noPS tog E1 - 4<dE3c00cc3X3 E #*--> c<Dt-<<B5rn#3<u3toficoOco5 2XC3C / 51 11 .1% 'Soc o c o O = i s <u Q0) >, O -73o.& O.PS o.o>L. <3 3 O35 0>3 3 3'E'~ooo>c o T D333s -0 330300PS PS CO O3 30 33CJCL333 c oa *g.3 3!1--cj3 3 0 3= S E _g fc .a 2 U PC / 5 'ms <<--<< 2 oU ci -I> c^ 0303 X*p: 03C s -03 Cl30 P0 sco O3>3303*i-->a>1--. 2 03SO XSSS gWD S (r) 3o *PS<< sQ - |3<X,O03oc03COX303X3 3 . 3 0 3 *#*S HO ^ > ? *#2 s__ <3H3 pC 03o ^03 OPS "S. CL< 53 303>oY. SharifuddinChapter 44.4 Centrosome Amplification, Aneuploidy and CancerCentrosome defects are observed in many types of carcinomas including gall bladder, breast (Lingle et al., 1998), pancreas (Sato et al., 1999), colorectal (Ghadimi et al., 2000), prostate (Pihan et al., 2001), head and neck cancers (Doxsey, 2001; Carroll et al, 2000).For example, almost 80% of invasive breast tumour cells possess amplified centrosome numbers (Lingle et al., 2002) and centrosomal changes are strongly associated with!I aneuploidy and chromosomal instability in various studies (Lingle et al., 1998; Pihan et! al., 2001; Ghadimi et al., 2000; Pihan et al., 2003). Furthermore, MTOCs defects are; known to increase in severity during tumour development (Doxsey, 2001; Pihan et al.,\ 2001; Pihan et al., 2003). The prevalence of centrosomal multiplication in cervical[ carcinoma cells for instance, progressively accrued to approximately 20% of the cell|; population in grade 1 tumours to nearly 70% in grade 3 tumours (Pihan et al., 2003) andi| genetically unstable aneuploid breast tumours exhibit around 6.8 centrosomes per cellj compared to 1.5 in normal tissues (Lingle et al., 2002).IIi\lj Due to karyotypic shuffling, aneuploidy could disrupt global transcription processi! resulting in down-regulation of genes involved in growth control and up-regulation of!growth promoting genes. Indeed, previous finding suggests that aneuploidy due to thei| addition of one single chromosome lead to misregulation of 100-200 genes and only 5-I 20% of misregulated genes were contained on the trisomic chromosome (Upender et al.,2004)Figure 4.5 shows the effects of abnormal MTOCs on chromosome segregation fidelity and the scenarios resulting from such amplification. Most cells harbouring amplified MTOCs will be primarily ushered towards programmed cell death due to deleterious chromosome missegregation. However, some cells may survive after gaining favourable chromosome complement that permits further growth and propagation, usually leading to neoplasms propelled by autocatalytic karyotype shuffling.Most centrosome abnormalities can be allocated into three groups namely abnormal centrosome number, aberrant microtubule nucleation and inability to correctly segregate during mitosis. Centrosomes of tumour cells display different structural alterations including an increase in centrosome number and volume, supernumerary centrioles,Copy 1 158Y. SharifuddinChapter 4accumulation of excess pericentriolar material and inappropriate phosphorylation of centrosome proteins (Pihan et al., 1998; Lingle et al., 1998). Furthermore, centrosomes in tumour cells exhibit functional abnormalities characterised by increased microtubule nucleation activity (Lingle et al., 1998; Salisbury et al., 1999). There can be at least two detrimental consequences of centrosome defects that may contribute to neoplastic transformation and tumour progression. First, centrosome duplication anomaly may severely affect maintenance of cell polarity in interphase cells due to disorganisation in cytoplasmic architecture and directional vesicular trafficking in a cell with multiple MTOCs. Second, centrosome defects may intensify the incidence of multipolar mitoses leading to chromosomal segregation abnormalities and aneuploidy.Copy I 159Y. SharifuddinChapter 4MultipolarNeoplasm Bipolar1 vDeamplificationC oalescenceFig. 4.5. The presence o f supernumerary centrosomes bears different tidings to the cells affected depending on the circumstances. Abnormal MTOCs (red dots) numbers lead to multipolar division where the MTOCs nucleate abnormal number o f microtubule (green lines), consequently the chromosomes are pulled to different poles. Chromosomes missegregation caused genomic instability that primarily courts apoptotic response. Sometimes, daughter cells might gain a chromosome complement favourable to survival. In deamplification scenario, all but two dominant centrosomes are eliminated or deactivated thus reverting to a more manageable ability in nucleating microtubule. Alternatively, in coalescence, the amplified MTOCs formed a pseudo-bipolar segregation. Both routes lead to neoplastic growth. (Adopted from Brinkley, 2001 ).The observation that centrosome abnormalities are very common in tumour cells considering supernumerary centrosomes rendered a clear disadvantage to the affected cells' ability to proliferate is currently a bewildering paradox especially when the definitive long-term data on the cellular fate is limited. Only a sub-population of tumour cells observed to possessing multiple MTOCs and tumour-derived cell lines usually contains around 5-25% of cells with the same feature when cultured in vitro (Lingle et al., 2002; Pihan et al., 2003). Notably, this population seemed to remain roughly constant as the culture is propagated and it is conceivable that cells with aberrant MTOCs number were generated de novo through any of the mechanisms mentioned previously and the majority subsequently died due to chromosomal instability, although some will survive. Therefore, the population size of cells with multiple MTOCs is determined by the generation, elimination and survival rates of these cells.Copy I 160Y. SharifuddinChapter 44.5 The Objective of the StudiesThis study was initiated to elucidate the influence of andrographolide on MTOCs, microtubules, mitotic index and cell fate upon removal of the compound in V-79 cells in vitro. Mitotic machinery aberrations have been shown to lead to aneuploidy and multipolar mitosis is known to be a mechanism for micronuclei induction (Parry et al.,2002). The determination of possible mechanism of action for micronuclei induction by andrographolide does not require a high statistical power since only mechanistic information is needed. The cell fate study was intended to complement the MTOCs studies in determining the outcome of mitoses in the presence of abnormal MTOCs number. The fate of cells after pro-longed exposure to the phytochemical was also examined and intended to determine the frequency of daughter cells with more than one nucleus. The cell recovery study was necessary to assess whether V-79 and MCL-5 cells are capable of recovering from exposure to andrographolide at various concentrations since threshold level of damage is suspected and to determine if damage to mitotic machinery will affect subsequent mitoses.Copy 1 161Y. SharifuddinChapter 44.6 MATERIALS AND METHODS4.6.1 Introduction to V-79 cell line.As stated in section 3.5.6 in Chapter 3.4.6.2 Sub-culturing V-79 cells for treatment.The cells were seeded at 8xl04 cells/ml onto sterile glass microscope slides. The slides were placed in Petri dishes with a total volume of 12ml medium in each Petri dish and incubated at 37+-1degC for 24 hours with circulated 5% CO2 in air prior to treatment.4.6.3 Treatment of cells with andrographolide.Andrographolide with 98% purity was stored at room temperature. Andrographolide to be used at various concentrations was always freshly prepared by dissolving the crystals with DMSO as solvent and administered to V-79 cell cultures within two hours of preparation. The cells were then incubated for another 24 hours at 37+-1degC in the presence of andrographolide inside the incubator with circulating 5% CO2 in air.The experiments were accompanied by negative and positive controls. The negative control preparations were essential for monitoring spontaneous incidence of aberrations in the cell culture and to validate DMSO, the solvent used in formulating andrographolide, was not itself affecting the cells and hence the outcome of the experiments. Colchicine (CAS no. 64-86-8) was chosen as positive control in this study at 0.5pg/ml as used in the laboratory. It possesses the typical profile of a non- carcinogenic aneugen and was shown to be positive in the in vitro and in vivo micronucleus tests (Heddle et al., 1977; Mavoumian et al., 1990; Miller et al., 1998; Matsushima et al., 1999) but negative in gene mutation assays (Heddle et al., 1977; Honma et al., 1999a) except for the mouse lymphoma assay when a 24-hour treatment was adopted (Honma 1999b). Colchicine is known to cause numerical aberrations due to metaphase-blockage by the inhibition of tubulin polymerisation (Galloway et al, 1987; Miller et al, 1998) and have been tested positive for aneuploidy induction in a number of test systems (Liang & Brinkley, 1985), including somatic cells in vivo (Miller & Adler 1989) and mammalian germ cells (Mailhes & Zhin, 1987; Russo & Pachierotti, 1988).Copy 1 162Y. SharifuddinChapter 4For each set of experiment, different andrographolide stock solutions were used and a total of three sets of replicate experiments were conducted for this study.4.6.4 Harvesting the slides.After 24 hours, the growth medium removed and the slides gently washed with cold PBS twice. Subsequently, the slides were fixed in two different fixatives depending on the staining purposes as stated below.4.6.5 Spindle staining using conventional dyes.The slides were fixed in methanol and acetic acid with 3:1 ratio in the presence of MgCh and CaCb for three washes; 14 minutes for each wash. The additions of magnesium ions were to enhanced protein staining while calcium ions were to decrease spindle solubility, resulting in irreversibly stabilised spindles and prevented their possible shrinkage. The slides were air-dried thoroughly and placed in 5% perchloric acid at 4degC for 24 hours for RNA removal. This was followed by washing the slides thoroughly in distilled water for three times; 4 minutes for each wash. Subsequently, the slides were stained with 0.5% Brilliant blue and 0.5% Saffanin O in 15% acetic acid for 12 hours at room temperature. Brilliant blue stains the spindle fibres blue while Saffanin O stains the chromosomes red in colour. Finally, the slides were gently washed with distilled water; air-dried and mounted in DPX.