Such systems is also incapable of accounting for mechanistic considerations such as sex- or species specificity and it cannot provide an estimation of dose or time of exposure (acute or chronic) essential for carcinogenesis.Copy 1 74Y. SharifuddinChapter 2Overall, it can be concluded that predictions for the individual chemicals cannot be taken at face value and cannot replace laboratory experiments, when necessary. Their main role is to complement the information of different nature and from different sources. At the same time, the structure-activity-based methods can have a great role for example in prioritising large numbers of chemicals to be studied or in designing better experiments. In the second part of this Chapter, the metabolism of andrographolide is predicted using METEOR, which is another expert-knowledge rules program and its ability to elicit genomic instability will be examined experimentally by employing genotoxicity tests such as the in vitro micronucleus assay and the HPRTpoint mutation assay.Y. SharifuddinChapter 2CHAPTER 2PART 2: IN SILICO PREDICTION OF ANDROGRAPHOLIDEBIOTRANSFORMATION2.8 Biotransformation of XenobioticsII Biotransformation is the metabolic conversion of endogenous and xenobiotic compounds to more water-soluble derivatives. Generally, the physical properties of a xenobiotic are altered from lipophilicity to hydrophilicity, thereby reducing its absorbability by tissues and favouring its excretion. An exception to this rule is the elimination of volatile compounds by | exhalation.jII Chemical modification of a xenobiotic via biotransformation may also change its biological | effects. Some drugs undergo biotransformation to active metabolites that exert their pharmacodynamic or toxic effect. However, in most instances, biotransformation terminatesIj the pharmacologic effects of a drug and reduces the toxicity of xenobiotics. Enzymes | involved in catalysing biotransformation reactions often determine the pharmacokinetics and j pharmacodynamics of drugs as well as playing a crucial role in chemical toxicity and| chemical tumourigenesis. There are two main phases in xenobiotics biotransformation. PhasetI mainly involves functionalisation, which is the introduction or exposure of functional groups on the chemical structure of a compound. This process provides a chemical 'handle' for conjugating agents in Phase II to react with. However, rendering a xenobiotic more chemically reactive to facilitate their excretion also increases the risk of possible interactions with cellular macromolecules such as DNA, ultimately highlighting the existence of a fine balance between producing conjugation reactions and more reactive metabolites. The functional groups can be either nucleophilic such as carboxyl groups or electrophilic in characteristic like the epoxides and these can be injurious to biological systems. Nucleophiles can interact with biological receptors while electrophiles have the potential to covalently react with electron-rich macromolecules such as RNA, DNA and proteins.There are two groups of enzymes in Phase I, hydrolases and oxidoreductases. Hydrolases are hydrolytic enzymes whose substrates include amides, epoxides, esters and glucuronides. Oxidoreductases introduce an oxygen atom into or expel electrons from their substrates andCopy 1 76Y. SharifuddinChapter 2cytochrome P450 is the major oxidoreductase enzyme system. Other systems include monoamine oxidases (MAO), flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMO) and cyclooxygenases (COX). These hydrolysis, reduction and oxidation reactions lead to the introduction or exposure of a functional group (-OH, -NH2, -SH or -COOH) which usually cause only a small increase in hydrophilicity.The second phase of biotransformation involves conjugation, where functional groups from cofactors are utilised by transferases to react with those present or annexed from Phase I on the compound. The resultant conjugates possess increased excretory potential. Although most conjugations result in pharmacological detoxification or inactivation, some may end in bioactivation. Most of the Phase II enzymes are located in the cytosol except UDP- glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) that are microsomal. The consequence of most phase II biotransformation reactions is a large increment in xenobiotic hydrophilicity, thus greatly promote the excretion of xenobiotic compounds. Figure 2.9 summarises the biotransformation process and its main actors.Phase II reactions are usually faster than Phase I, thus Phase I is the rate-limiting step for biotransformation. Phase II metabolism can deal with all products from Phase I with the exception of glutathione, which requires a chemically reactive conjugating species. The availability of the cofactors during synthesis may have a limiting influence in some Phase II pathways as it affects the formation of sufficient conjugating species necessary for reaction on a substrate or its metabolites. Due to their reactivity, bio-accumulation of these substrates and its metabolites may be harmful.Various compounds are also capable of causing enzyme induction where they accelerate their own biotransformation and excretion. The opposite effect would be the inhibition of the process. Other factors that change enzyme levels include age, sex and genetic polymorphism. Interspecies differences in biotransformation ability also present a challenge in interpreting animal results to humans.Copy I 11Y. Sharifuddin. 2008^ S- deg8 00 ^ <L> (J- c c SL_ cd O X<L>coCD <DCl cdE PSf-- 00J <<D ooC/5 cd . ,, CL.C/3<DPS >; o c t oid X><L> Cd#5 deg 2 *2= 03 c e PS SS J= #SSCO S<u ^1-- CO03 <D- r , 'O_ 300iCLQDHa3Cd oC CPn ^ c2 Cl1 o * .a*2 oX) X2-- O<<--I _CDT3 "cd C -cd o-- COv> Td- # CLcoCL 2^ E2 Ioo_PS0- SS >- 2 u +7'7. "2 <l> 5 c .2 .2 e3 xs' > 5*h -- PS " > < H * ooco r<<. <D U2 << n <deg O . co CO K j_ o L-f 1 *Ch-1XC LcoSSoL.iZ*4--*, oCJ <4--i2 ! Z3CD C/3Oh X Jx o <U U XY. SharifuddinChapter 2NADP*NAOPHFig. 2.10. Catalytic cycle o f cytochrome P450. Cytochrome P450 and NADPH-cytochrome P450 reductase are located in the phospholipid bilayer o f the endoplasmic reticulum. The first part o f the cycle involves the activation o f oxygen and the final part involves substrate oxidation that entails the abstraction o f an electron or a hydrogen atom from the substrate followed by oxygen rebound. (Pratt and Taylor, 1990).Cytochrome P450 enzymes are ubiquitous in nature. About one quarter o f the 57 P450s are typically regarded to be primarily involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics (Guengerich et al., 2005). Unlike P450s that are involved in sterol metabolism which are crucial in normal physiology (Nebert & Russell, 2002), the levels of P450 isoforms involved in xenobiotic metabolism can vary and some individuals may be completely devoid of certain P450 enzymes due to genetics. Figure 2.10 shows the catalytic cycle of cytochrome P450.The human cytochrome P450 (CYP) superfamily consists of 57 genes (Nelson, 2003) contributing to the metabolism of a variety of xenobiotics including carcinogens and therapeutic drugs. Although the enzymes is crucial in detoxification to facilitate excretion from the body, in some instances xenobiotics are converted to metabolites with greater mutagenicity or cytotoxicity potential and a number of human CYPs including CYP1A1, 1A2, 1B1, 2A6, 2B6 and 3A4 are known to be involved in metabolic activation of pro- carcinogens (Guengerich, 2001).reduced Havoprotein Cyt P450 redv((a t<<o x id iz e d f la v o p ro te inRH Cyt P450Cyt P450(Fe3+) d rug (RH) com plexCyt P450(Fe24 )RHP450(F<<2*) deg2drug (R) Cyt P450(F<<3 +)VoxidizeddrugCyt P450(Fe3 *) ROHCopy I 7 9Y. SharifuddinChapter 21 C O -7 5 -$*Da2 5 -E3O Metabolism# Renal# Bile# CYP# UGT# Esteixxse# Other# CYP3A# CYP2E1# CYP2D6# CYP2C1Q# CYP2C9# CYP2B6# CYP1AFig.2.11. Contribution o f individual enzyme systems to xenobiotic metabolism. The first bar on the left showed the fate o f drugs upon administration, the second bar showed the proportion o f enzymes involved in metabolism and the last bar on the right highlights the relative contribution o f as cytochrome P450 isoforms. CYP refers to cytochrome P450 and UGT stands for uridine dinucleotide phosphate glucuronosyl transferase (Wienkers & Heath, 2005).Cytochrome P450 enzymes are probably responsible for more bioactivation processes than other enzymes because several of the reaction products such as epoxides possesses reaction chemistry due to their innate instability and P450s collectively have wider substrate spectrum than any other enzymes, at least on drugs (Guengerich, 2003) as shown in Figure2.11In some cases, the same P450 enzyme catalyses both activation and detoxification reactions. For example, CYP3A4 activates aflatoxin B| to the tumorigenic and hepatotoxic 8,9-epoxide but it also detoxifies the same compound to aflatoxin Qi by 3-hydroxylation (Williams & Aruoma. 2000). This shows that complex factors determine the balance between xenobiotic activation and detoxification.2.8.1 Induction of Cytochrome P450Inducers of cytochrome P450 increase the rate of xenobiotic transformation, lowering blood levels and compromising the therapeutic goal of drug therapy but does not cause an exaggerated response to the drug. Thus such reaction can lead to pharmacokinetic tolerance by which larger drug doses must be administered to achieve therapeutic blood levels because o f increased drug biotransformation. Induction of cytochrome P450 may increaseCopy /8 0Y. SharifuddinChapter 2the activation of pro-carcinogens to DNA reactive metabolites resulting in increased tumour formation. There is little evidence from either animal experiments or human epidemiologic studies that P450 induction amplify the incidence or multiplicity of tumours cavsed by known chemical carcinogens. Most available evidence points to a protective role of enzyme induction against chemical-induced damage.2.8L2 Inhibition of Cytochrome P450Inhibitory drug interactions generally fall into three categories. The first involves competition between two drugs that are metabolised by the same P450 enzyme. The second is also competitive in nature but the inhibitor is not a substrate for the affected P450 emyme. The third type of drug interaction results from non-competitive inhibition of the cytochromes by covalent binding to P450.2.8.3 Phase II Enzyme ReactionsBiotransformation reactions involve in this second phase include acetylation, methylation, glucuronidation, sulfonation, glutathione conjugation (mercapturic acid synthesis) and conjugation with amino acids such as taurine, glycine and glutamic acid.Acetylation, methylation, sulfonation and glucuronidation involve reactions with activated co-substrates while glutathione or amino acid conjugation concerns reactions with activated xenobiotics.N-Acetylation is a major course of biotransformation for xenobiotics containing an aromatic amine (R-NH2) or a hydrazine group (R-NH-NH2) that are transformed into aromatic amides (R-NH-COCH3) and hydrazides (R-NH-NH-COCH3) respectively. This conversion is catalysed by cytosolic A-acetyltransferases and requires the co-substrate acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl-CoA). N-acetylation masks an amine with non-ionisable group rendering the metabolites less hydrophilic than the parent compound. However, N- acetylation of certain xenobiotics such as isoniazid assists their urinary excretion.Copy 1 81Y. SharifuddinChapter 2Methylation is a minor route of biotransformation and targeting 0-, N- and S-containing functional groups. Like N-acetylation, it generally reduces the water solubility of xenobiotics by shielding functional groups which otherwise might be conjugated by other phase II enzymes. It also requires a co-substrate, which is S-adenosylmethionine that is converted to S-adenosylhomocysteine during the methylation reactions.Uridine diphosphate-glucuronic acid is a co-substrate essential for glucuronidation, a biotransformation process that targets electron-rich nucleophilic heteroatom (S, O or N) normally present in phenols, aliphatic alcohols, carboxylic acids, primary and secondary aromatic and aliphatic amines as well as free sulfhydryl groups. Bilirubin, thyroid and steroid hormones are examples of endogenous substrates for glucuronidation. These reactions are catalysed by UDP-glucuronosyltransferases and glucuronide conjugates are polar, hydrophilic conjugates. These conjugates are also substrates for p-glucuronidase present in the intestinal microflora and the intestinal enzyme can liberate the aglycone (parent compound or Phase I metabolite) that enters enterohepatic circulation resulting in impediment to the xenobiotic elimination. Whether these conjugates are excreted from the body in urine or bile is subject to the size of the aglycone.Many xenobiotics and endogenous substrate are conjugated with sulfate, a reaction catalysed by sulfotransferases in the presence of 3 '-phosphoadenosine-5 '-phosphosulfate (PAPS), generally producing a highly hydrophilic sulphuric acid ester. Sulfonation introduces sulfonate from PAPS to the xenobiotic and these metabolites are excreted mainly in urine. Some sulfate conjugates are subjected to further rounds of biotransformation. Sulfotransferases is a multigene family of cytosolic enzymes and are arranged into gene families (SULT1-SULT5) that share less than 40% amino acid sequence homology. Each family tend to work on a specific functional group. Generally, the addition of sulfonate to an aglycone reduces the pharmacologic and toxicologic acitivity of xenobiotics. However, sulfonation also activates methyl-substituted polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, aromatic amines and safrole to mutagenic metabolites.Conjugation of xenobiotics with glutathione includes a huge number of electrophilic xenobiotics or those that are convertible to electrophiles. Glutathione is a tripeptide consisting of cysteine, glycine and glutamic acid. This reaction is calatysed by a family of glutathione S-transferases that are present in most tissues. The substrates for this enzymeCopy 1 82Y. SharifuddinChapter 2are compounds that are hydrophobic, containing an electrophilic atom and react non- enzymatically with glutathione at a quantifiable rate. Glutathione S-transferase increases the rate of conjugation via deprotonation of GSH to GS\ Glutathione conjugates are thioethers, formed by nucleophilic attack of glutathione thiolate anion (GS') with an eletrophilic sulfur, carbon, oxygen or nitrogen in the xenobiotic. There are two types of conjugation reactions namely the addition reactions where glutathione is added to an activated double bond or strained ring system, and the displacement reactions in which glutathione replaces an electron-withdrawing group.The addition of glutathione to a carbon-carbon double bond is facilitated by the presence of a nearby electron withdrawing group, thus the substrate for this reaction normally harbours | a double bond attached to -CN, -COR, -COOR or -CHO. The displacement of an electron-; withdrawing group usually occurs when the substrate contains halide, phosphate, sulfate,1 sulfonate or a nitro group attached to benzylic or allylic carbon atom. Glutathione is alsoj capable of conjugating xenobiotics with an electrophilic heteroatom (S, O and N) where theI initial conjugate formed between glutathione and the heteroatom is cleaved by a secondmolecule of glutathione to form oxidised glutathione (GSSG). The initial reactions are catalysed by glutathione S-transferase, whereas the second reaction that leads to GSSG formation typically occurs non-enzymatically.ii| Last but not least, amino acid conjugation of xenobiotics involves two main pathways andithe substrates for conjugation process is limited to certain aromatic, aliphatic, cinnamic, heteroaromatic and arylacetic acids. The ability of xenobiotics to go through amino acid conjugation depends on stearic hindrance around the carboxylic acid group and by substituents on the aliphatic side chain or aromatic ring.Most Phase II biotransformation enzymes are mainly found in the cytosol and generally progress faster than Phase I reactions. Thus, the rate of elimination of xenobiotics whose excretion hinges on biotransformation by cytochrome P450 followed by Phase II conjugation is generally influenced by the first reaction.Copy 1 83Y. SharifuddinChapter 22.9 Introduction to METEORMETEOR is another computer program developed by Lhasa Ltd. that utilises expert knowledge rules in metabolism to predict the metabolic fate of various chemicals, which can be useful in the absence of experimental data.