It was revealingly noted, that the restrictions "quite possibly affect sales of many popular products".1062 Because the very goal of these restrictions is to limit children's consumption of junk food, they target sales reduction. We could ask what the real goal of self-regulation was; to postpone regulation?, to build a better company image? Also the demand for longer transition periods seems ungrounded. It does not take years to stop advertising during children's programs. The restrictions create a real incentive to reformulate existing products and to develop new products.The US consumer lobby groups say that Americans could use the UK way as an example. They say voluntary ad restrictions in the US are a proven failure and that the UK approach is far more effective. They also say that the US voluntary measures are promulgated merely to forestall government action and to make life easier for advertisers.1063 This is unfortunately often the case with self-regulation: the industry will not be the fi rst to impose stringent limitations on itself.More and more people are of the view that unhealthy food should be treated the same way as tobacco and alcohol. It is clear to practically every consumer that poor diet causes health problems equivalent to those caused by tobacco and alcohol. The food industry might claim that it is their constitutional right to market their legal products. But parents might claim that it is their children's constitutional right not to receive marketing material on harmful products. Junk food can still be sold to children. It would be radical indeed if McDonalds, Burger King, and KFC would stop selling to children altogether.1058 Article 4(C) (8).1059 European Commission web page. Questions and answers on the regulations of GMOs in the European Union. Page 16. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/biotechnology/gmfood/qanda_en.pdf.1060 Ofcom is the independent regulator and competition authority for the UK communications industries. www.ofcom.org.uk.1061 Fletcher 2006. 1062 Warnock 2006 according to Fletcher 2006. 1063 This is claimed to be part of the Bush Administration strategy oriented to protecting business, not consumers. Jacobson 2006. -190-Marketing restrictions on junk food do not directly affect functional foods, but are interesting as they are a step towards the regulatory direction that is anti-junk-food. This kind of "nutritionist's approach" to regulation is favourable to developers of functional foods. This approach already manifests itself in the nutrition and health claim regulation, which allows claims to be made only if the nutritional profi le of the product is under the agreed limit. It has also been suggested that unhealthy foods should be taxed more heavily than others, or that people with diet related diseases should pay for these diseases themselves. Junk food advertising could also be prohibited altogether, also for adults. In the future, drastic measures like this might be considered. The producers and restaurants would be forced to reformulate their product palettes and menus so that every burger and candy bar had a less-fat less-sugar alternative or replacement. This could create more market potential for functional foods.5.2.2 China5.2.2.1 General Rules on Labelling and AdvertisingLike in Europe, there is certain mandatory information that must be given to consumers on foods. Article 21 of the Food Hygiene Law concerned food labelling:"Any standardized packaged food or food additive must, according to the requirements for different products, havethe name of the product, -the place of manufacture, -the name of the factory, -the date of manufacture, -the batch number (or code number), -the specifi cations, -the formula or principal ingredients, -the date of expiration for guaranteed quality, -the method of consumption or use, and -other such information. -The product description for any food or food additive shall not contain exaggerated or false advertising. The label of the food package must be clearly printed and easy to read. Foods sold on domestic markets must have labels in the Chinese language. "5.2.2.2 Nutrition LabellingUntil recently, nutrition labelling was not nationally regulated in China. According to a new regulation, Administrative Measures on Food Nutrition Labelling, China requires basic nutritional labelling on all food packaging from May 1, 2008. Labels are required to show how much protein, fat, carbohydrate and sodium is in a food, and may also show the cholesterol, -191-sugar and vitamin content. The rules stress that nutritional labelling must be accurate and objective.1064 The same regulation covers nutrition claims.China has worked together with ASEAN1065 countries1066 to remove barriers to food and beverage trade.1067 Promoted by ILSI1068 South East Asia Region, these countries have standardised nutrition labelling and scientifi c substantiation of claims1069. Codex guidelines on nutrition labelling (amended 2006) have been used as reference.1070It seems that all over the world, harmonisation of the laws is seen as an important tool to facilitate food trade. However, countries are mainly focused on neighbouring countries when harmonising the rules. In Europe, the main goal is to promote free trade in the European Community. Still, nutrition labelling is based on similar principles in Europe, China, and for example the United States. This is because of makers of international standards, here particularly Codex and ILSI. For instance, the Codex guidelines are fairly identical to national regulations regarding nutrition labelling and nutrition claims.5.2.2.3 Marketing of GMO FoodsChina started implementing new rules on GMOs in 2002. GMO foods have their special labelling requirements1071. As discussed above in chapter 4, the Ministry of Health administers the list of authorised GMOs. The Agricultural GMO Labelling Regulations prohibit sales and imports of listed GMOs (such as soybeans, corn, rapeseed, cotton seed, and tomatoes) unless they are clearly labelled as genetically modifi ed products.1072 This is to ensure traceability of GMOs and to protect consumers' right to information.5.3 Claims in Food Marketing: Nutrition Claims, Health Claims5.3.1 Claims as Statements of Effi cacyThe meaning of the word 'claim' is generally well understood. A widely accepted defi nition of a 'claim' is that of Codex Alimentarius (1991). This defi nition applies to claims in food marketing. Claim is defi ned as "any representation, which states, suggest or implies that a 1064 Reuters Beijing January 11 2008.1065 Association of Southeast Asian Nations.1066 Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, Indonesia, Lao PDR, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam.1067 See: "Memorandum of Understanding between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of the People's Republic of China on Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary Cooperation. Singapore, 20 November 2007. "1068 International Life Sciences Institute. 1069 According to ILSI South East Asia Region, they "promote the development of a harmonized approach for food safety standards". ILSI South East Asia Region web page at: http://southeastasia.ilsi.org/about/.1070 Chinese Nutrition Society. Web page at: http://www.cnsoc.org/asp-bin/GB/?page=8&class=104&id=455.1071 Provisions for Labelling Administration of Genetically Modifi ed Farm Products (MOA regulation; Order No. 10; Promulgation Date: 2002-01-05; Effective Date: 2002-03-20.1072 Food Navigator news. http://www.foodnavigator.com/news/ng.asp?id=43552-gmo-labels-launched.-192-food has certain characteristics relating to its origin, nutritional properties, nature, production, processing, composition, or any other quality".1073 According to the new EU defi nition, "claim" in connection to food marketing means "any message or representation, which is not mandatory under Community or national legislation, including pictorial, graphic or symbolic representation, in any form, which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular characteristics"1074.Food claims, and particularly those related to nutrition and health, have become a legally interesting question mainly because of functional foods.1075 With medicines, the rules on effi cacy and claims have been in place for a long time. Medicines have to be effective, and are therefore tested regarding their fi nal health effects in human subjects. The clinical tests are randomised and controlled. It is clear that medicines are marketed by telling what disease they treat.1076 Functional foods have changed the picture. Now also foods can be effective in fi ghting disease or keeping one healthy. This means effi cacy and claims of foods must be regulated. A product is generally considered effective, if it is scientifi cally proven to have a positive impact on health.In functional food marketing, claims are often related to nutritional science. A key issue on science-related marketing claims is the level of scientifi c proof required including the system to substantiate the claims. The substantiation system shall not become a disincentive for product developers, and it needs to build product acceptance by consumers. The process for the establishment, verifi cation, and use of claims should be scientifi cally sound and credible. At the same time, the process should be fl exible and pragmatic.1077There are different types of health effects, and different types of marketing claims. Claims on foodstuffs and medicines can be divided in three main categories, two of which belong to foods and one to medicines:Nutrition claims simply state nutritional facts without directly referring to health problems. Nutrition claims are scientifi cally and politically rather simple compared to health claims.Health claims state that a product enhances health or reduces the risk of a disease. Health claims are legally the most diffi cult claim category. It is diffi cult to determine which health effect should enable the making of which claim, and at the same time to draw the line to medicinal claims.Medicinal claims state that a product might cure, treat or prevent a disease. In law, medicinal claims are reserved for medicinal products and are thus prohibited on foods.Nutrition claims, health claims, and medicinal claims are factual claims, which the marketer has to be able to substantiate. This is in comparison to claims that are regarded as common appraisals, like claiming your product is "great" or equivalent.1073 Codex General Guidelines on Claims, 31.1074 Nutritional and Health Claim Regulation, Article 2(2)(1).1075 Other types of claims in modern food marketing relate, for example, to ethical and environmental questions.1076 We will return to medicine marketing below.1077 Richardson 1998, 205.-193-5.3.2 Codex Guidelines on Nutrition and Health ClaimsAt international level, the Codex Alimentarius adopted Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling in1985, General Guidelines on Claims in 1991, and Guidelines for the Use of Nutrition Claims in 1997. In 2004, the latter was amended to include health claims.According to Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling1078, and Guidelines for Use of Nutrition and Health Claims1079,"nutrition claim means any representation which states, suggests or implies that a food has particular nutritional properties including but not limited to the energy value and to the content of protein, fat and carbohydrates, as well as the content of vitamins and minerals. The following do not constitute nutrition claims:the mention of substances in the list of ingredients;(a) the mention of nutrients as a mandatory part of nutrition labelling;(b) quantitative or qualitative declaration of certain nutrients or ingredients on the label if (c) required by national legislation. "According to Guidelines for Use of Nutrition and Health Claims, nutrition claims are divided into nutrient content claims and nutrition comparative claims. Nutrient content claims describe the level of a nutrient contained in a food, for example, "source of calcium", "rich in fi bre", "low in fat". Nutrient comparative claims compare the nutrient levels and/or energy value of two or more foods, for example "reduced", "more than", "increases".1080According to Guidelines for Use of Nutrition and Health Claims, "Health claim means any representation that states, suggests, or implies that a relationship exists between a food or a constituent of that food and health. "1081 Health claims include the following:nutrient function claims, -other function claims, and -reduction of disease risk claims. -Nutrient function claim is a nutrition claim that describes the physiological role of the nutrient in growth, development and normal functions of the body.1082 This means that nutrient function claims are regarded both as nutrition claims and as health claims. The reason for this rather confusing regulatory solution is that nutrient function claims were previously defi ned as the third type of nutrition claims. When health claims were included in the Guidelines, nutrient function claims were transferred under health claims without changing their defi nition. 1078 Codex Alimentarius Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling. CAC/GL 2/1985. Amended 2003 & 2006. Section 2.4.1079 Codex Alimentarius Guidelines for Use of Nutrition and Health Claims. CAC/GL 23/1997, Rev. 1/2004. Section 2.1.1080 Sections 2.1.1. and 2.1.2.1081 Section 2.2.1082 Section 2.2.1.-194-According to current Guidelines, claiming what a nutrient does is evaluated according to the same principles as other health claims.Other function claims concern "specifi c benefi cial effects of the consumption of foods or their constituents, in the context of the total diet on normal functions or biological activities of the body". Such claims relate to "a positive contribution to health or to the improvement of a function or to modifying or preserving health".1083Reduction of disease risk claims "relate the consumption of a food or food constituent, in the context of the total diet, to the reduced risk of developing a disease or health-related condition". Risk reduction is, "signifi cantly altering a major risk factor(s) for a disease or health-related condition". The Guidelines clarify the difference between risk reduction and prevention: "Diseases have multiple risk factors and altering one of these risk factors may or may not have a benefi cial effect. The presentation of risk reduction claims must ensure, for example, by use of appropriate language and reference to other risk factors, that consumers do not interpret them as prevention claims. "1084On health claims, Codex Guidelines require scientifi c substantiation of the claim, adequate labelling to instruct the consumer, and that the health benefi t arises from the consumption of a reasonable quantity of the food in question. They also require that national authorities should ban health claims on foods that contain nutrients or constituents in amounts that increase the risk of disease or an adverse health-related condition.1085 This means that the food should be healthy as a whole.When drafting European claim legislation, "due consideration" was given to the defi nitions and conditions set in the above-mentioned Codex Guidelines1086. European defi nitions of 'nutrition claim' and 'health claim' are similar to the Codex defi nitions. The European 'nutrition profi le' requirement corresponds to the Codex principles, and European regulation also separates between function claims and disease risk reduction claims. However, the separation between nutrient function claims and other function claims was not adopted from Codex.1087 The Chinese have also followed Codex guidelines in their 2008 regulation on nutrition labelling and claims1088.5.3.3 EU Rules on Nutrition and Health Claims5.3.3.1 Regulation Background: Prohibition of Medicinal ClaimsIn the European Union, the question of health claims was obscure for a long time. According to the Food Labelling Directive 2000/13/EC, medicinal claims are prohibited. Member States interpreted this prohibition on making medicinal claims on the basis of national tradition, which 1083 Section 2.2.2.1084 Section 2.2.3.1085 Section 7.1086 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, preamble 7.1087 We will return to the European claim legislation in the next chapter.1088 Nutraingredients.com news 13 May 2008 at http://www.nutraingredients.com/Regulation/China-takes-big-step-forward-in-nutrition-labelling.-195-lead to legal uncertainty. Literal interpretations of legal texts prevailed in some Member States, and an approach based on the perceived spirit of the legislation was applied in others.1089According to Article 2(1) of the Food Labelling Directive,"The labelling and methods used must not:be such as could mislead the purchaser to a material degree, particularly:(a) as to the characteristics of the foodstuff and, in particular, as to its nature, identity, (i) properties, composition, quantity, durability, origin or provenance, method of manufacture or production;by attributing to the foodstuff effects or properties which it does not possess;(ii) by suggesting that the foodstuff possesses special characteristics when in fact all (iii) similar foodstuffs possess such characteristics;subject to Community provisions applicable to natural mineral waters and foodstuffs (b) for particular nutritional uses, attribute to any foodstuff the property of preventing, treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties. "Similarly, according to the Directive on dietetic foods1090, the labelling and the labelling methods used, the presentation and the advertising of the products must not attribute properties for the prevention, treatment, or cure of human disease to the products covered by the directive or imply such properties. The prohibition of medicinal claims is also repeated in the food supplement directive 2002/46/EC1091: "The labelling, presentation and advertising must not attribute to food supplements the property of preventing, treating or curing a human disease, or refer to such properties". This means the same rules apply to all foods: medicinal claims are prohibited.The prohibition of medicinal claims is absolute, regardless of whether the substance of the claim is true. The absolute prohibition is founded on the state of scientifi c knowledge at the time of the formulation of the original Directive 79/112/EEC, over 20 years ago. Since then scientifi c knowledge of the relationship between diet and health has advanced considerably. No direction is given in the Directive on health claims, which lie in-between nutrition claims and medicinal claims. This is because in 1979, food was clearly seen as nutrition. The Food Labelling Directive contains a provision1092 according to which the Commission shall come up with a non-exhaustive list of types of claims that should be prohibited or restricted, but all attempts at developing more detailed legislation on claims over the past years failed. Coppens and al.