FOODSTUFFS AND MEDICINES AS LEGAL CATEGORIES IN THE EU AND CHINAFUNCTIONAL FOODS AS A BORDERLINE CASEANU LAHTEENMAKI-UUTELAFaculty of LawUniversity of TurkuTurku 2009Supervised by:Professor Ari Saarnilehto, J.D.Faculty of LawUniversity of TurkuTurku, FinlandProfessor Heikki Kallio, Ph.D.Deparment of Biochemistry and Food ChemistryUniversity of TurkuTurku, FinlandReviewed by:David E. Jukes, Ph.D.Senior Lecturer in Food RegulationDepartment of Food BiosciencesThe University of ReadingUnited KingdomProfessor Jyrki Tala, J.D.Faculty of LawUniversity of TurkuTurku, FinlandProfessor Seppo Salminen, Ph.D.Deparment of Biochemistry and Food Chemistry & Functional Foods ForumUniversity of TurkuTurku, FinlandOpponents:Professor Jyrki TalaProfessor Seppo SalminenPublisher: University of Turku, Faculty of Mathematics and Natural Sciences, Biochemistry and Food ChemistryType setting: Tarja Linden, University of Turku, Faculty of LawISBN 978-951-29-4096-7ISBN 978-951-29-4097-4 (pdf)PainosalamaTurku 2009-III-AcknowledgementsI wish to express my gratitude for people and organisations that helped me with the doctoral thesis. First, I want to thank my supervisors Professor Ari Saarnilehto and Professor Heikki Kallio. Ari was the fi rst ever to suggest that I should write a doctoral thesis. Heikki came up with the idea that I should write about Chinese law. Both encouraged and guided me through the years.Pre-examiners Professor Jyrki Tala, Professor Seppo Salminen, and Dr. David E. Jukes all gave useful comments on the thesis. Jyrki made me focus on law and thanks to him, the dissertation can be called legal research. Jyrki and Seppo also agreed to be my opponents.Miao Qing translated Chinese legal texts for me, and Dr.Yang Baoru helped me with all my China-related questions. Liu Pengzhan made me understand properties of Chinese berries. Li Xiaonong is my favourite Chinese lawyer, and Ye Qing became my China-guide and friend, making me always miss China.For funding of the research, I am grateful to Suomen kulttuurirahasto (Pirjo-Riitta ja Aarre Aurasen rahasto), Maaliskuun 25. paivan rahasto, and Elintarvikkeiden tutkimussaatio. Without my employer, Turku School of Economics, I could not have focused on research. Finally, Sara Aarola and Lextrac Ltd are to be thanked for making my English more beautiful.For the most important things, I thank my husband Petteri Uutela, my daughter Mimosa Uutela, my son Urho Uutela, my mother Eila Lahteenmaki, my father Matti Lahteenmaki, my brother Marko Lahteenmaki, and my sister Veera Lahteenmaki. I dedicate this book to my daughter Mimosa who wants to be a painter or a dancer when she grows up. Follow your dreams, whatever they may be!Eurajoki 21st October 2009Anu Lahteenmaki-Uutela-V-AbstractThe thesis discusses the regulation of foodstuffs and medicines, and particularly the regulation of functional foods. Legal systems investigated are the EU and China. Both are members of the WTO and Codex Alimentarius, which binds European and Chinese rules together. The study uses three Chinese berries as case examples of how product development faces regulation in practice. The berries have traditional uses as herbal medicines. Europe and China have similar nutrition problems to be resolved, such as obesity, cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. The three berries might be suitable raw materials for functional foods. Consumer products with health-enhancing functions, such as lowering blood pressure, might legally be classifi ed either as foodstuffs or medicines. The classifi cation will depend on functions and presentation of the product. In our opinion, food and medicine regulation should come closer together so the classifi cation issue would no longer be an issue.Safety of both foodstuffs and medicines is strictly regulated. With medicines, safety is a more relative concept, where benefi ts of the product are compared to side-effects in thorough scientifi c tests and trials. Foods, on the other hand, are not allowed to have side-effects. Hygiene rules and rules on the use of chemicals apply. In China, food safety is currently at focus as China has had several severe food scandals. Newly developed foods are called novel foods, and are specifi cally regulated. The current European novel food regulation from 1997 treats traditional third country products as novel. The Chinese regulation of 2007 also defi nes novel foods as something unfamiliar to a Chinese consumer. The concepts of novel food thus serve a protectionist purpose.As regards marketing, foods are allowed to bear health claims, whereas medicines bear medicinal claims. The separation is legally strict: foods are not to be presented as having medicinal functions. European nutrition and health claim regulation exists since 2006. China also has its regulation on health foods, listing the permitted claims and how to substantiate them. Health claims are allowed only on health foods. The European rules on medicines include separate categories for herbal medicines, traditional herbal medicines, and homeopathic medicines, where there are differing requirements for scientifi c substantiation. The scientifi c and political grounds for the separate categories provoke criticism.At surface, the Chinese legal system seems similar to the European one. To facilitate trade, China has enacted modern laws. Laws are needed as the country moves from planned economy to market economy: 'rule of law' needs to replace 'rule of man'. Instead of being citizens, Chinese people long were subordinates to the Emperor. Confucius himself advised to avoid confl ict. Still, Chinese people do not and cannot always trust the legal system, as laws are enforced in an inconsistent manner, and courts are weak. In China, there have been -VI-problems with confl icting national and local laws. In Europe, the competence of the EU vs. the competence of the Member States is still not resolved, even though the European Commission often states that free trade requires harmonisation.Food and medicine regulation is created by international organisations, food and medicine control agencies, standards agencies, companies and their organisations. Regulation can be divided in 'hard law' and 'soft law'. One might claim that hard law is in crisis, as soft law is gaining importance. If law is out of fashion, regulation certainly isn't. In the future, 'law' might mean a process where rules and incentives are created by states, NGOs, companies, consumers, and other stakeholders. 'Law' might thus refer to a constant negotiation between public and private actors. Legal principles such as transparency, equal treatment, and the right to be heard would still be important.-VII-AbbreviationsACE Angiotensin-Converting EnzymeAIDS Acquired Immune Defi ciency SyndromeALDE Alliance of Liberals and Democrats for EUANH Alliance for Natural HealthAQSIQ Administration for Quality Supervision and Inspection and Quarantine (China)ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations BEUC Bureau Europeen des Unions de Consommateurs (the European Consumers' Association)BMI Body mass indexBSE Bovine Spongiform EncephalopathyCAM Complementary and alternative medicineCCCD China Certifi cation Committee for DrugsCEN Commite Europeen de Normalisation. European Committee for Standardisation.CENELEC Comite Europeen de Normalisation Electrotechnique. European Committee for Electrotechnical Standardization.CHMP Committee for Human Medicinal Products (EMEA)CIAA Confederation of the Food and Drink Industries in the EUCITES Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and FloraCOMP Committee on Orphan Medicinal Products (EMEA)CTD Common Technical Document (medicine law)CVD Cardiovascular diseaseDG SANCO Directorate General on Health and Consumer Protection (European Commission) DNA Deoxyribonucleic acidEAS European Advisory Services (company)EC European CommunityECJ European Court of JusticeEEC European Economic CommunityEFSA European Food Safety AuthorityEMEA European Medicines AgencyEPHA European Public Health AllianceEPP European People's PartyERNA European Responsible Nutrition AllianceESO European Standards OrganisationESSNA European Specialist Sports Nutrition AllianceETSI European Telecommunications Standards InstituteEU European UnionFAO Food and Agriculture OrganizationFDA Food and Drug Administration (US)FSA Food Standard Agency (UK)FUFOSE European Commission Concerted Action on Functional Food Science in EuropeFVO Food and Veterinary Offi ce (European Commission)-VIII-GATS General Agreements on Trade in Services (WTO)GATT General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (WTO)GCMP Good Chinese Medicine Production PracticeGDA Guideline Daily AmountGMO Genetically Modifi ed OrganismGMP Good Manufacturing PracticeGSP Good Sales PracticeHACCP Hazard Analysis and Critical Control PointsHDL High-density lipoproteinHIV Human immunodefi ciency virusHMPC Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (EMEA)ICH International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human UseILSI International Life Sciences InstituteISO International Organization for StandardisationKFC Kentucky Fried Chicken (company)LACOTS Local Authority Co-ordinating Body on Trading Standards (UK)LDL Low-density lipoproteinMHRA Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency (UK)MOA Ministry of Agriculture (China)MOFTEC Ministry of Foreign Trade and Economic Cooperation (China)MOH Ministry of Health (China)MOST Ministry of Science and Technology (China)MRL Maximum residue levelMT Markkinatuomioistuin (Finland)NAM National Agency for Medicines (Finland)NGO Non-governmental organizationNPC National People's Congress (China)NSB National Standards BodyOECD Organisation for Economic Cooperation and DevelopmentOTC Over-the-counterPAG/UNU Protein Advisory Group of the United NationsPDCO Committee on Paediatric Medicinal Products (EMEA)PES Party of European SocialistsRNA Ribonucleic acidSDA State Drug Administration (China)SFDA State Food and Drug Administration (China)SMEs Small and medium sized enterprisesSPC Summary of Product Characteristics (medicine law)SPC Supreme People's Court (China)SPS Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (WTO agreement)TBT Technical Barriers to Trade (WTO agreement)TCM Traditional Chinese MedicineTRIPs Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (WTO agreement)UCP Unfair commercial practices (EU directive)WHO World Health OrganizationWTO World Trade Organization-IX-ReferencesOffi cial Sources (Governments and Governmental Organisations)Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Memorandum of Understanding between the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and the Government of the People's Republic of China on Strengthening Sanitary and Phytosanitary Cooperation. Singapore, 20 November 2007.ChinaCentral regulationAdvertisement Law of the People's Republic of China. Adopted at the 11th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress on October 27, 1994, promulgated by Order No.34 of the President, and effective as of February 1, 1995.The Medicine Administration Law of the People's Republic of China, revised at the Twentieth Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Ninth National People's Congress on February 28, 2000. (Medicine Administration Law. )Food Hygiene Law of the People's Republic of China. Adopted at the 16th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress on October 30, 1995, promulgated by Order No. 59 of the President, and effective as of the date of promulgation. (Food Hygiene Law. Not in force. )Food Safety Law of the People's Republic of China. Adopted at the Seventh Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eleventh National People's Congress on February 28, 2009, promulgated by Order No.9 of the President, effective as of June 1 2009. (Food Safety Law. )Food Safety Law Implementation Measures. Order of the State Council of the People's Republic of China. No 557. Adopted at the 73rd Standing Committee Meeting of the State Council. Published July 20, 2009. Effective as of publication. (Food Safety Law Implementation Measures. )Ministry of Health: Administrative Regulations for Health Food. Order No. 46; Promulgation Date: 1996-03-15; Effective Date: 1996-06-01. (Health Food Regulation.) Ministry of Health: Technical Standards for Testing and Assessment of Health Food. Order No. 42; Promulgation Date: 2003-2-14; Effective Date: 2003-5-1. (Ministry of Health Notifi cation 2003. )Ministry of Health: Administrative Regulation for Novel Food. 2007. (Novel food regulation 2007. )Other government documentsState Council of China: The Eleventh Five-Year National Plan for Food and Drug Safety. April 2007. Page 2. Translated by USDA Foreign Agricultural Service. Available at: http://www.fas.usda.gov/gainfi les/200707/146291777.pdf. (Five-Year Plan for Food and Drug Safety. April 2007. )-X-Web pagesOffi cial web page of the Central People's Government of the People's Republic of China. http://english.gov.cn/.State Food and Drug Administration web page. http://www.sfda.gov.cn.Ministry of Science and Technology web page. http://www.most.gov.cn.The Government of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region of the People's Republic of China: Food and Environmental Hygiene Department. http://www.fehd.gov.hk.CodeAlimentarius CommissionCodex Alimentarius web page http://www.codexalimentarius.net.Codex General Guidelines on Claims CAC/GL 1-1979, Rev. 1-1991.Codex Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling. CAC/GL 2/1985 (Rev. 1 - 1993).Codex Alimentarius Guidelines for Use of Nutrition and Health Claims. CAC/GL 23/1997, Rev. 1/2004.Council of EuropeCouncil of Europe web page: http://www.coe.int.Council of Europe: Guidelines on Health Claims.European Patent Convention Convention on the Grant of European Patents (European Patent Convention) of 5 October 1973. Last amended 2007.European Union (EU)European Union web page: http://europa.eu.Central Legislation1 EU legislation web page: http://eur-lex.europa.eu/.Directive 2001/83/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 6 November 2001 on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use (Offi cial Journal L 311, 28/11/2001 p. 67 - 128). (Medicinal products directive 2001. )Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 28 January2002 laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food SafetyAuthority and laying down procedures in matters of food safety (General food regulation 2002. )Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 20 March 2000 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs. (Food labelling directive 2000. )Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 January 1997 concerning novel foods and novel food ingredients (Novel food regulation 1997. )Regulation (EC) No 1924/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 December 2006 on nutrition and health claims made on foods. (Claim regulation 2006. )Cases of the European Court of JusticeCase C227-82, judgment of the Court of 30 November 1983, Criminal proceedings against Leendert van Bennekom, European Court Reports 1983:3883.1 The very basic rules on European food and medicine law that are often relevant to a developer of functional foods.-XI-Case C369-88, judgment of the Court of 21 March 1991, Criminal proceedings against Jean-Marie Delattre, European Court Reports 1991, I:1487. Opinion of Mr. Advocate General Tesauro delivered on 16 January 1991.Case C219-91, judgment of the Court of 28 October 1992, Criminal proceedings against Johannes Stephanus Wilhelmus Ter Voort, European Court Reports 1991:I:5485.Documents of the European CommissionEuropean Commission web page: http://ec.europa.eu.StandardsCommunication from the Commission to the European Parliament and the Council on "The role of European standardisation in the framework of European policies and legislation". COM (2004) 674 fi nal. 18 October 2004. (Commission Communication on Standards 2004. )Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament and the European Economic and Social Committee on 'Towards an increased contribution from standardisation to innovation in Europe. COM(2008) 133 fi nal. 11 March 2008. (Commission Communication on Standards 2008. )General consumer lawEU Consumer policy strategy 2002-2006. Communication from the Commission to the European Parliament, the Council, the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of the Regions. COM(2002) 208. (EU Consumer policy strategy 2002-2006. )EU Consumer Policy strategy 2007-2013. Empowering consumers, enhancing their welfare, effectively protecting them. Communication from the Commission to the Council, the European Parliament and the European Economic and Social Committee. COM(2007) 99 fi nal. (EU Consumer policy strategy 2007-2013. )Commission press release: "A new Consumer Strategy: Consumers must lead the drive for growth and jobs." IP/07/256. Date: 27/02/2007.General food lawGuidance on the Implementation of Articles 11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 of Regulation (EC) Ndeg 178/2002 on General Food Law. Conclusions of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health. 20 December 2004.Food labellingLabelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006.Summary of results for the consultation document on: "Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU". December 2006. Directorate E - Safety of the Food Chain.