Where there is doubt or dispute whether the recommended dosage level of the active medicinal ingredient is "therapeutic" or not, the MHRA will seek the advice of its medical and pharmaceutical assessors.582 The MHRA states, that many herbs have an established or accepted use as medicines, for example as a bronchodilator (Ephedra), a respiratory stimulant (Lobelia), a sedative (Valerian), a defence against colds and 'fl u (Echinacea), an anti-depressant (St. John's Wort), a diuretic (Boldo), or an aphrodisiac (Yohimbe bark). The MHRA will generally consider products containing ingredients like these in therapeutic doses to be medicinal products on the basis that they "may be administered with a view to ... modifying physiological function in human beings".583 The MHRA has listed factors that are particularly relevant to deciding whether a product is a medicine under the second part of the defi nition. These are as follows: the pharmacological properties of the ingredient(s) and any signifi cant effect(s) they -have on physiological function in humans;the product promotional literature, including testimonials and any literature issued by a -third party on behalf of the product supplier;the product form, (capsule, tablet, etc.) and the way it is to be used; -the presence of essentially similar licensed or exempt medicines on the UK market. -any claims, explicit or implicit, which although they may not be claims "for treating or -preventing [a specifi c] disease" could suggest to the average consumer that the product can be taken "with a view to ... restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions in human beings ...".584 It is interesting that the MHRA uses claims also as indication of the medicinal function. The claims and the function could also be seen as separate issues, based on the two parts of the medicinal product defi nition. The MHRA sees the two parts of the defi nition intertwined and weighs presentation and functions as one question. Based on this notion, it seems that if the product combines somewhat medicinal ingredients with somewhat medicinal marketing messages it is more likely categorized a medicinal product than a product with only one of the above. A strong medicinal function or a strong medicinal claim would be enough. 582 Guidance note, paragraph 20.583 Guidance note, paragraph 21.584 Guidance note, paragraph 23.-97-It is even more interesting that selling the product in capsule or tablet form is on both lists: Product form is seen indicative both of medicinal presentation and of medicinal function. Product form is seen as a message to consumers, the message being 'this is medicine', and apparently simultaneously as proof of medicinal functions. However, food supplements are a completely legal and supposedly familiar category to consumers. Food supplements are legally foods: they are merely nutrients in compact form. Food supplements cannot bear medicinal claims. HerbalsFor herbal ingredients, MHRA has provided additional advice. According to MHRA, an increasingly large number of products contain herbal ingredients. Following consultation with a number of UK Trade Associations the Medicines Borderline Section has put together a guidance sheet on herbal ingredients, which includes a list of herbal ingredients and their reported uses. This list is not binding in that it would resolve the issue of whether a certain herb is a medicine. The status of a product (food vs. drug) is determined on individual basis taking into account all the factors detailed in Guidance Note 8.585 The Procedure for Borderline Products In the UK, also specifi c procedural legislation on borderline products has also been created. Factual grounds for decisions can still be found in the guidance notes and are under MHRA discretion. On 1 March 2000, The Medicines for Human Use (Marketing Etc.) Amendment Regulations 2000 came into force. They improve the way in which the MHRA determines whether a product is a medicinal product. The aim is a more systematic and transparent categorisation procedure (food vs. drug), along with improved compliance and decision enforcement. According to the Amendment Regulations, MHRA will give full written reasons for its decisions. There is an Independent (Advisory) Review Panel which, on request, will consider written and oral representations against MHRA provisional classifi cation determinations. Guidance on requesting a review of a Provisional Determination issued by the Borderline Section is available. There is now a criminal offence of non-compliance with fi nal MHRA decisions.586 585 In the UK, there are three different kinds of herbal medicines. In addition to herbal medicinal products requiring authorisation and traditional herbal medicinal products requiring registration, there are exempted herbal medicinal products that can be sold without pre-market control. These exemptions are in section 12 of the UK Medicines Act. These are herbal remedies on open sale, sold with no other name than their herbal constituents and without any written recommendations for use. An herbal remedy exempt from licensing is still subject to other legal requirements for medicines, particularly as to labelling.586 MHRA web page. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.-98-According to MHRA, this statutory procedure provides a safe regulatory environment in which safe and benefi cial products are widely available, and illegal products are promptly removed from the market.587 The MHRA describes the background of its borderline product legislation on its web page: "The UK was threatened with Infraction Proceedings at the European Court of Justice following the European Commission's 'Reasoned Opinion'; early in 1998 that it was not enforcing its decisions consistently and without delay." The Agency published Consultation proposals in November 1998. Industry and consumer stakeholders were not happy with these fi rst proposals. Based on criticisms, the independent review panel was created, the MHRA was required to give full reasons for its provisional and fi nal decisions, and burden of proof in criminal issues was shifted back to the Agency. These changes to the proposals were presented in July 1999, and all the parties were quite happy with the fi nal legislation package. The process is considered transparent and effective, and the UK satisfi es its EC obligations. The MHRA also has a special determination procedure for cases of emergency:"In exceptional circumstances, the MHRA is empowered to determine that a product is a relevant medicinal product without following the statutory determination procedure if there are reasons why it would not be appropriate to follow the procedure. Examples are where:there is an identifi able risk to public health and /or patient safety; or -the product is a copy of, or is identical in all material respects to, another relevant -medicinal product that has already been the subject of review panel advice. "588 UK-type systematic and transparent classifi cation procedures might also be created in other EU Member States. However, the classifi cation decision will in the future likely be transferred under the competence of Community authorities, probably the EMEA. Some Member States might be waiting for this move and therefore not create separate borderline categories and procedures. 3.3 China: Foodstuffs = Medicines? In the Chinese Medicine Administration Law, pharmaceuticals are defi ned as follows: ""Pharmaceuticals" are the articles intended for use in the prevention, treatment or diagnosis of human diseases, or intended to effect the purposive regulation of human physiological functions, for which indications or major functions, usage and dosage are prescribed. They include raw traditional Chinese medicinal materials, traditional medicines prepared in 587 The MHRA has further issued Guidance on the operation of the statutory process, in particular the Review Panel's procedures. Trade associations were involved also in drafting this guidance. http://www.mhra.gov.uk/home/idcplg?IdcService=SS_GET_PAGE&useSecondary=true&ssDocName=CON009271&ssTargetNodeId=91.588 Guidance note, paragraph 24.-99-ready-to-use forms, and other prepared Chinese medicines, medicinal chemicals and their preparations, antibiotics, biochemical medicines, radioactive drugs, serums, vaccines, blood products, diagnostic aids, etc. "589 The Chinese defi nition of medicines is much more detailed than the European defi nition of 'medicinal products'. However, in practice the same types of product are covered by both defi nitions. In China, traditional Chinese medicines are particularly mentioned in the defi nition. In Europe, the defi nition of medicines covers traditional herbal medicines. The Chinese want to emphasise the fact that modern and traditional medicines are treated equally. European attitude can be described as allowing the existence of traditional medicine while paying scant attention to it. A difference between European and Chinese attitude towards foodstuffs and medicines can be detected in the stated task of food law. In China, food is traditionally seen as related to health. Interactions between food and health are obvious to the Chinese. The Chinese Food Hygiene Law was enacted "for the purpose of ensuring food hygiene and preventing food contamination and harmful substances from causing injury to human health in order to safeguard the health of the people and improve their physical fi tness". The goal of the new Food Safety Law is more simply stated as "assuring food safety and safeguarding people's health and life"590. In the Chinese Food Hygiene Law, food was defi ned as follows: ""Food" means any fi nished product or raw materials provided for people to eat or drink, as well as any product that has traditionally served as both food and medicament, with the exception of products used solely for medical purposes. "591 This means that medicine is not permitted in foods. Still, products that have traditionally served as both medicine and food can be used as raw materials, condiments or nutrition fortifi ers592. The new Food Safety Law distinguishes between foodstuffs and medicines in Article 50: "Medicines can not be added to food, unless the added substance is traditionally considered both food and Chinese medicine." The catalogue of substances that are traditionally considered both as food and as Chinese medicine will be published by the executive department of health under the State Council. This type of catalogue will offer valuable guidance to Western marketers. In China, several substances can be used either in foodstuffs or medicines. The major implication of a product being classifi ed as a medicine is that it imposes higher requirements for producers and sellers. For example, manufacturers of medicines must hold a GMP certifi cate and wholesale and retail enterprises a GSP certifi cate. This means the categorisation decision (medicine/non-medicine) is as important in China as it is in Europe. However, the classifi cation rules are not clear and the SFDA has not published any guidelines on the subject. Companies are consulting the SFDA on a case-by-case basis. 593 The Chinese Advertisement law, Article 19 stipulates: the contents of advertisements for foods, alcoholic drinks or cosmetics must comply with the conditions in the relevant hygiene 589 Article 102.590 Article 1.591 Article 54.592 Food Hygiene Law, Article 10. "Nutrition fortifi er" refers to any natural or artifi cial food additive belonging to the category of natural nutrients that is put into food to increase its nutritive value. Food Hygiene Law, Article 54.593 Tsoi 2007.-100-licence and no medical jargon or words may be used so as to confuse them with pharmaceuticals. The rule is very similar to the EU one: foods and medicines must be separated and therefore medicinal claims on foods are prohibited. The Health Food Regulation of 1996 created the health food category between regular foods and medicines. 'Health food' is a category suitable for a product that: possesses the general nature of food, -is able to regulate bodily functions of certain consumer groups, but -is not meant for a therapeutic purpose. -In China, only health foods can bear health claims, and only medicines can bear medicinal claims. Article 11 of the Health Food Regulation separates health foods and medicines from each other: "Any medicinal product approved by the government should not apply for the Certifi cate of Approval on Health Food". This way the health food category separates health foods from regular foods at one end, and medicines at the other end. The function and the claim resolve the foodstuff vs. medicine -issue, not the raw material as such. In law, the Chinese seem to have adopted the Western idea of separating between health promotion and disease prevention. The understanding of the roles of foodstuffs and medicines in consumers' minds is another issue. Products are used by people, laws by businesses. 3.4 Legal Status of Functional Foods As stated above in chapter 1.2., 'functional food' is not a legal term. The food industry has started to use the term 'functional' for food products that in some way promote health or enhance performance. The health-effect is achieved through removal of unhealthy ingredients (like saturated fats), adding of healthy ingredients that already exist in food (like folic acid) or the adding of completely new ingredients.594 Functional foods come in many forms: dairy products, beverages, cereals, oils, fats, confectionery, eggs, tomato-based products etc. The role of functional foods can be understood if we look at different ways to understand health. Using the medicinal way to defi ne health, we note health is the absence of disease. A healthy body is like a machine that works well, as opposed to a machine that malfunctions.595. In the humanistic view to health, health is seen as something more than the absence of disease. The humanistic or holistic view relates health to the ability to function, and the ability to achieve goals that are essential for ones happiness.596 The WHO defi nition of health is extremely humanistic: "Health is a state of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infi rmity"597. Functional foods perfectly correspond to the humanistic view of health. Humanists see health as a continuum or alternatively health and sickness as two different dimensions. The two views are presented in fi gures A and B. 594 Elkington - Hailes 1999, 50.595 Medin 2001, 105.596 Medin 2001, 105.597 WHO Constitution, New York 1946.-101-A: Health and Disease as a Continuum: Health Disease When health is viewed as a continuum (see fi gure A), health and sickness can exist simultaneously, and when a person is healthy, he is less sick. When he is sick, he is less healthy.598 Closer to the left of the fi gure, people are in good condition and work freely and they do not have any symptoms relating to weariness or disease. Closer to the right, people have explicit symptoms relating to disease which require treatment. In between, people feel generally weak and can display various symptoms (tiredness, depression, irritability) and these symptoms can affect their ability to manage life.599 Backlund sees that the role of functional foods is to prevent a person in a state of 'health' from shifting into the state of 'labile health'. The function of medicines would be to prevent a person from moving from the state of 'labile health' into 'disease', or to treat or cure diseases. She views health/disease as a continuum. Certainly she considers functional foods to be aimed at healthy people.600 B: Health and Disease as Two Different Dimensions: Health Disease When health and sickness are seen as two different dimensions (see fi gure B), they are not seen as opposites. In this example, it is possible to be very sick and very healthy at the same time, and also not to have any sickness but still not be healthy at all. Health is basically defi ned by a person's happiness. Some observers think that due to this new thinking there has been a 598 Medin 2001, 106.599 Kwak - Jukes, 2000a, 99.600 Backlund 1998, 155.-102-paradigm shift as today the focus of research is usually about what causes well-being, not what causes disease.601 Health is a concept in a totally different dimension to diseases. These humanist ways to understand health appeal to functional food developers. With the use of functional foods, people can become healthier, even if they cannot directly prevent, treat or cure any disease. Here experience of health is decisive602. Making the role of functional foods more complex are the products that are aimed at fi ghting a certain disease. We must draw the line between disease risk reduction and disease prevention as these two are in the same dimension regardless of how you look at it. The separation between risk reduction and prevention is where food and medicine law ultimately meet.603 In practical linguistics, the difference is not clear. An individual might assume that if she eats healthy food, she will not suffer from a heart attack, which to her means prevention. In medicine, the difference has something to do with mathematics. The term prevention is used when preventive therapy will produce a result with a substantial degree of statistical certainty, and risk reduction claims are based on epidemiological evidence gained from population-based studies.604 According to Coppens et al. 2001, there are three types of medicinal disease prevention: Type 1: prevention of disease occurrence. Key characteristics of this type are that the disease is not (yet) present, and the therapy can prevent the occurrence of the disease with a substantial statistical certainty. This represents the absolute sense of prevention, and is for example the purpose of many vaccines. Type 2: prevention of episodes of the disease. Key characteristics are that the disease is present, and the therapy decreases the number, duration, or severity of disease episodes with a substantial statistical certainty. This is exemplifi ed by medicines given to patients with chronic diseases, like asthma or epilepsy and should more correctly be considered as part of the management of an existing disease, rather than prevention in the absolute sense. Type 3: prevention of progression of the patient's underlying disease. Key characteristics are that the disease is present, and that the therapy has been shown to delay the progression of the disease with a substantial statistical certainty. In this case, medicines are given to prevent the more serious consequences of a disease and to hinder its progression rather than to prevent it absolutely. Examples include patients who are either asymptomatic, e.g. lowering blood pressure in hypertensive patients, or symptomatic, e.g. decreasing blood sugar in diabetic patients or treating HIV-positive patients to slow the progression of AIDS. It is accepted that certain types of foods may contribute towards both type 2 and 3 treatments. These foods for special medical purposes are suitable for the dietary management of the particular disease and are regulated at the EU level through Directive 1999/21605. 601 Medin 2001, 106.602 Medin 2001, 106.603 Besides prevent, foods could also possibly treat or cure diseases. In these cases, these foods would clearly be medicines, e.g. herbal medicinal products, and there is in practice no confusion. Prevention and risk reduction are more diffi cult to separate, because they both affect something that is not yet there.604 Coppens et al. 2001, 143. The term prevention is also used in nutrition, when avoiding defi ciencies of essential nutrients.