Emblic leaffl ower is not as common in China as in India, and is mainly used in China as a health food supplement, which still accounts as food use and makes the berry non-novel.1524 Article 8(1) of the Novel food proposal 2007.1525 Article 3(2)(c) of the Novel food proposal 2007.1526 Wolfberry is also added to tonic soups, and used for as herbal tea. Even wolfberry beer is available. Wikipedia. Article on wolfberry. 1527 Haw fl akes are a Chinese sweet made of hawthorn. Hawthorn is also used in jams, jellies, juices, alcoholic drinks etc. Wikipedia. Article on Crataegus.-279-6.7 General Rules on Marketing6.7.1 EUA functional food marketer must keep in mind the general rules on advertising and comparative advertising: giving false or misleading information to consumers is prohibited, and applies both to foodstuffs and medicines.Foods must be labelled so the consumer is provided with all the information required by the labelling rules. The newest labelling requirements relate to common allergens. Nutrition labelling is currently mandatory if a nutrition claim is made, and otherwise voluntary. Novel foods and GMO foods have their own labelling requirements. European consumers are hesitant to purchase GMO foods.For food supplements consisting of vitamins or minerals, the EU regulation of 2002 applies. The regulation includes specifi c labelling requirements. Consistently with the food supplement legislation, rules on foods fortifi ed with vitamins or minerals are harmonised in Europe (since 2004. Also for fortifi ed foods, there are specifi c labelling requirements. For other supplements and other kind of fortifi cation, such as products with fi bre, amino acids or herbal extracts, national rules apply. We predict that European harmonisation of supplements and fortifi ed foods will continue in the future to cover these other types of common products.We are mainly interested in functional foods, referring to foods that are in food form and possess some health effects. Some of these might be fortifi ed as discussed above. One marketing alternative is to sell the product as a dietetic food. For dietetic foods, (foodstuffs for particular nutritional purpose), the word 'dietetic' or 'dietary' can be used. Dietetic foods are always aimed for specifi c groups of people with specifi c dietary needs. Some dietetic foods involve pre-market notifi cation. For dietetic foods, nutrition labelling is mandatory.A nutrition claim on a food is basically a claim where the amount of a certain nutrient is claimed to be high or low. For example, 'low fat' and 'high fi bre' are nutrition claims. Nutrition claims are legally a fairly simple question as all allowed nutrition claims are listed in the Annex of the nutrition and health claim regulation of 2007. One just needs to be aware (to measure) the content of the substance, for example fat, in the product. Health claims on foods will be separately discussed in the next chapter.At least in theory, functional foods could also be sold and marketed as medicines, as discussed above. In this case, the product must comply with rules on medicine labelling and advertising, and restrictions to marketing channels. All medicinal products must include a package leafl et in their packaging, and the information to be given on this package leafl et is precisely regulated. For example instructions for proper use and information on medicine's side effects are important for consumers. All medicine marketing must encourage rational use of medicines. Medicine advertising must not be directed at children. Prescription medicines cannot normally be advertised. Medicinal claims will be separately discussed in the next chapter.6.7.2 ChinaThe Chinese general rules on marketing are largely the same as in Europe. The aim is to provide the consumer with all the relevant information of the product. Misleading advertising is prohibited. -280-Foods must be labelled. Particular requirements on allergy labelling are still missing. Medicines must have a product leafl et containing all the relevant information on the product.In China, it is not so much the marketing legislation but its implementation that is lacking. Because of severe scandals related to counterfeit and fake medicines, the Chinese are now focusing on control and supervision of the rules on medicine advertising.6.8 Legislation on Health Claims and Medicinal ClaimsAbove we have discussed whether our fi ctional functional food products would be regarded as foodstuffs or medicinal products. Here we assume that some of our fi nal products are legally medicines, and some are foods. We have developed products in different legal categories and we want to make marketing claims that are as convincing as possible.1528 Thus, we are willing to present health claims for food products, and medicinal claims for medicinal products.The viable legal categories within the EU are1529:(traditional) herbal medicinal product, - dietetic food (foodstuff for particular nutritional purposes) and, - as the most interesting alternative, - a 'normal' food with health claimsA dietetic food could be sold as a food suitable for diabetics or a food suitable for people with high cholesterol or hypertension. The normal food with health claims could be aimed for example at people with a risk of diabetes or cardiovascular disease.The viable legal categories in China are:traditional Chinese medicine, and -as the more interesting alternative, - health food.6.8.1 EUThe fi rst rule concerning claims is that medicinal claims on foods are prohibited. This applies to all foods including normal foods, dietetic foods and food supplements. Medicinal claim means a statement where a product is said to prevent, treat or cure a disease.Health claims on foods are legal but subject to stringent requirements. There are two types of health claims, so called 'function' claims and disease risk reduction claims. The Commission will publish EU wide lists on both types of accepted health claims.1528 In reality, we would consider the claim issue simultaneously with the safety issue and all the other aspects of product development. In this study, the marketing issue is discussed separately for readability reasons only.1529 Here we have left out the option of developing a 'normal' medicinal product. This would mean fi nding and capturing the active chemicals in the plants, and selling them as (prescription) drugs. It is not certain that this kind of medicinal product could ever be developed and authorised, and it would take years if it were possible. In this study, we are interested in the mass consumer market, and primarily products sold by the food industry. Herbal medicines (in Europe: herbal medicinal products, in China: traditional Chinese medicines) are included, because the legal division between herbal medicines and functional foods is important, and some food-form products might be legally categorised as herbal medicines, regardless of whether intended as such.-281-The EU Member States are currently preparing their lists on established 'function' type health claims. These lists are to be submitted to the EFSA by January 2008. Industry consultant Richardson advised companies to fi nd out what is on the Member State lists. Accordingly, if a food is not on the positive list by 2010 hard work will be required for a claim to be made in the future1530. At this stage, we cannot be sure what claims will be on the 'established claim' list. It is unlikely that claims particularly on emblic leaffl ower, barbary wolfberry or even the more familiar hawthorn will appear. The fi nal list will most likely include antioxidant claims such as claims on fl avonoids and phenolic compounds1531. These substances are present also in our berries, which will make claims similar to "contains antioxidants" available to us.Novel health claims (claims not on the list) and disease risk reduction claims must be authorised separately. We would be interested in claims that maintain: "For sufferers of metabolic syndrome", "Lowers cholesterol", "Lowers blood sugar", etc. We could either state that "Hawthorn lowers cholesterol", or that "Functional food product Hawthorn lowers cholesterol". The rules are the same. The claim must not be misleading: the active ingredient must be present in quantities that produce a health effect in normal use. The scientifi c assessment of a disease risk reduction claim is made by EFSA, and the fi nal decision by the Commission. With disease risk reduction claims, one has to keep in mind that the risk factor itself might not be established. In this case, initially it needs to be proved that a certain condition is a risk factor, and then that the product affects the risk factor.1532The EU Regulation on nutrition and health claims came into force in 2007. It is interesting that Commission claimed to create liberal legislation:"The proposal covers nutrition claims (e.g. "rich in vitamin C" or "low in fat") and health claims (i.e. claims of a positive relationship between a specifi c food and improved health). It sets rules for making such claims and also allows health claims (including "reduction of disease risk" claims) that were previously prohibited. In the interest of consumer protection, it also includes certain restrictions. The Regulation will protect consumers, improve the free movement of goods, increase the legal security of operators and prevent abusive claims, thus ensuring fair competition. The proposal will result in a more liberal environment for claims in labelling and advertising. Disease-related messages, which were until now totally prohibited by EU legislation, will now be allowed if they can be scientifi cally substantiated and authorised at EU level. "1533The Commission seems to state that health claims were previously prohibited and that now they have been freed. In fact health claims were not prohibited before the regulation. In several countries they were allowed, including disease risk reduction claims. The food industry does not see the new regulation as making the situation more liberal; in fact they see the Regulation as one of the strictest possible alternatives of the various systems available.1530 Nutraingredients.com news at: http://www.nutraingredients.com/news/ng.asp?n=76579-efsa-health-claims.1531 See for example the Finnish list of 'function' claims, and particularly the list of antioxidant claims Ministry of Trade and Industry web page at: http://www.ktm.fi /fi les/18357/Antioksidatiivisuus2.pdf.1532 Heiskanen 2001, 26.1533 Commission DG SANCO Food Safety web page 21st September 2006.-282-What is positive to a functional foods developer is that legal uncertainties around the claim issue seem to be resolving, at last. The lists of established claims are impending and there is plenty of guidance available on how to use claims. Nutrition and health claims are factual claims that have to be substantiated, which is not too much to ask from every responsible business. There are procedural costs with new claims, but they affect the competitor similarly. The choice by an entrepreneur of a nutrition or health claim will depend on the costs and benefi ts of the claim.Companies view health claims as a means of recouping some of the fi nancial outlay for testing of effi cacy and toxicity of the products. The possibility of making claims encourages investment in product development and introduction and export of new innovative products.1534 Claims are useful to the company if they are useful to the consumer. Incidentally for some, claims on labels may be the only way to obtain knowledge of healthy products. 1535 The consumers will decide on their own if they want the product, based on many other factors besides the claim1536.It is not necessarily always clever to make a health claim just because it is legally possible. Costs in making claims relate to chemical analysis1537, human studies1538, and submission of the evidence to the regulatory authorities. The new regulation rewards these efforts by granting fi ve-year exclusivity to proprietary materials that support a health claim. After this period, competitors can use the proprietary data without compensation to the originator.1534 For example Suontama 1999, 26, and Tainio 1997, 40.1535 For example through the Kellogg's All Bran campaign in the USA, knowledge of the relationship between fi bre and cancer increased, with the greatest change in those socio-economic groups that do not read educational material. There may, therefore, be an advantage to claims of packaging for those sectors. Stephen 1998, 432. Even in Finland, there are people who never read a magazine on health. Those that are still in school may have up-to-date information on nutrition, but others do not go to lectures on newest nutritional research. 1536 For example the sensory properties of the product, the price of the product, personality, age and social class of the consumer, etc. 1537 Analytical procedures appropriate for determining concentrations of chemical entities within products include gas chromatography, high-pressure liquid chromatography or thin-layer chromatography. Many of the methods are time-consuming and hence costly, but it is unlikely that once the method is developed and validated, the results would be ambiguous. Stephen 1998, 429.1538 With human studies, a considerable fi nancial commitment can be incurred in a study for which the results are not even useful. All efforts should be made to determine that results would be meaningful and unambiguous before substantial costs are incurred. According to Stephen, embarking on the production of new products without recognising the requirement of scientifi c proof of effect as a component of the overall development of a product is a recipe for failure. There are many who believe that a little rapid research is suffi cient to confi rm the reputation of a plant, and then attempt to proceed from there toward lucrative industrial production. Stephen 1998, 429.-283-Scientifi cally, it is not always easy to manufacture a product that justifi es a claim1539. Some studies show1540 that some consumers do not want health claims, as they do not have faith in them. In spite of strict legislation, these consumers might still exist. Sometimes consumers fi rst resist a claim, but then learn to accept it1541. In some countries, functional foods are sold where claims are not permitted, or outside the health food categories. This means health claims are not the only way to success.1542It is also noteworthy that the new regulation on health claims only allows health claims on foods where the nutrition profi le of the food is in certain limits. These nutrition profi les will be established for different foods, such as breakfast cereal and yogurt. This will be done by the EFSA by January 2009. The profi les will include limits for different types of harmful fats, salt/sodium, and sugar. This means that a barbary wolfberry yogurt or an emblic leaffl ower muesli with a health claim cannot contain much sugar or fat. The functional food product must be healthy as a whole.There is one exception to the nutrient profi le rule. If the product only exceeds one single limit in the nutrient profi le, it can still be presented in a nutrition claim of the product that another nutrient is present in low quantities. For example, a yogurt can be claimed to be 'low-fat' even if it has lots of sugar. In this case, a statement 'high in sugar' must be included along with the 'low-fat' statement. As we are interested in health claims, and not so much in nutrition claims, this loophole does not aid our case.Medicines always bear a medicinal claim, as they must have a therapeutic indication. The therapeutic indication is the key of the whole product, and also the key of consumer marketing. The therapeutic effect of a herbal medicine is typically verifi ed by literature instead of scientifi cally verifying it in animal tests and human trials. With traditional herbal medicines, not even literature evidence is required. However, traditional herbal medicines are 1539 Bioavailability and performance of the active ingredients is not always a simple thing. For example, vitamin supplementation often fails, and many vitamin-enriched prototypes contain too little vitamin compared to planned claims. Vitamins C, thiamine and ribofl avin are particularly unstable and diffi cult to work with. A food company might need to partner with someone with medical insight and ability to do clinical trials. For this reason, specialist research companies and the pharmaceutical giants are partnering with food ingredient supplier and food companies. Food Engineering & Ingredients, October 2001, 18.1540 There has been consumer research showing that consumers want strong claims, and research that shows they don't. Niva and Jauho (1999) found a connection between a consumer's perception of research on diet-health relationship and his perception of health claims. If the consumer generally is suspicious of health effects of single products, he does not want health claims - because he thinks they are misleading. Those consumers that have faith on scientifi c research behind functional foods are in favour of the use of health claims in marketing. Niva - Jauho 1999, 46-47. This means that if you do not already have the trust of the consumer, claims will only create adverse reactions.1541 Young 1998, 173.1542 For example in Japan, the population accepts the functional benefi ts and is knowledgeable about them, and thus they will buy the products independent of the claims. While a considerable number of products have been licensed FOSHU (food for special health use) in Japan, this is a small number in comparison to the hundreds of functional products being successfully marketed in Japan. Stephen 1998, 431. With olive oil (particularly in the United States), the fi ndings on its healthiness were reported at scientifi c meetings, in the literature, and from there to the popular press and media. The result was a huge increase in sales of olive oil. Without the ability to make a claim, the olive oil industry is benefi ting through good research in the form of controlled human studies. The fi ndings are sound, unambiguous and have been confi rmed by a number of investigators worldwide. Stephen 1998, 432. This implies that if the scientifi c proof is widely known and trusted, claims are not necessarily needed.-284-not allowed to contain mention of a therapeutic indication. These products are allowed to be sold as medicines, but without medicinal claims.All of the three berries have potential for developing herbal medicinal products. With adequate evidence, these products could be authorised through the primary procedure for medicines. Hawthorn has established use as herbal medicine in Europe, but the traditional herbal medicine option is probably still not available. Only those products that cannot be registered as herbal medicines are allowed to be registered as traditional herbal medicines. The category of traditional herbal medicines is for plants on which information is not available, and on hawthorn there is both literature on traditional use and data from newer scientifi c studies. We would not be interested in the traditional herbal medicine category anyway, because we want to present strong claims.6.8.2 ChinaHealth foods and drinks became big business in China during the 1990's. The market grew chaotic which led to government intervention. With the enactment of the health food regulation in 1996, the number of producers of health foods decreased to less than a third in less than a year. The rigid regulatory environment allows genuine manufacturers to recoup market share and gain a certain critical mass.