It concerns Advertisers, advertising agents and advertisement publishers acting within the territory of the People's Republic of China. Advertisement is defi ned as "any commercial advertisement, which a supplier of goods or services pays for, to introduce their goods or services whether directly or indirectly through the media in all its forms to Public at large"981.976 Here Lex specialis means sector-specifi c rules on marketing.977 Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and betterregulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006, 4.978 Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and betterregulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006, 4.979 Advertisement Law of the People's Republic of China. Adopted at the 11th Meeting of the Standing Committee of the Eighth National People's Congress on October 27, 1994, promulgated by Order No.34 of the President of the People's Republic of China on October 27, 1994, and effective as of February 1, 1995.980 Article 1.981 Article 2.-178-The Chinese law is more specifi c than the European directive. The most general rules of advertising are given in Articles 3 to 5: Advertisements must be factual and lawful, and comply with the principles of advancing socialist culture and ideology982. An advertisement must not contain any information, which is false and or misleading so as to deceive the consumers983. Advertisers, advertising agents and publishers engaged in advertising activities shall act according to law and administrative regulations in a spirit of fairness and integrity984.The specifi c rules on the contents of advertisements are given in Chapter 2 of the Law. According to Article 7, the contents of advertisements shall:lead towards the physical and mental health of the people, -promote the improvement in quality of goods and services, -protect the lawful rights and interests of consumers, -comply with social morality and professional ethics, and -safeguard the dignity and interests of the state. -It is noteworthy that promoting health is fi rst mentioned among advertising tasks. Article 8 mentions health again: "Advertisements may not impair the physical and mental health of minors and the disabled". Foodstuffs and medicines are both widely used and widely advertised consumer products having direct effects on health. Therefore, it is safe to say that regulating food and medicine advertising is one of the key tasks of consumer protection law, and perhaps the most important task of advertising law.According to Article 9, statements in advertisements of the performance, origin of production, use, quality, producer, etc. of the goods advertised shall be clear and explicit. References to scientifi c information are covered by Article 10: Data, statistical information, investigation and survey information, digest and quotes used in an advertisement shall be factually true and accurate, and their sources mentioned. These rules have implications also on functional food marketing, where performance and use of goods is often mentioned, and where scientifi c information is often referred to. There are also special advertising rules on patented products in Article 11985.According to Article 13, an advertisement shall be distinguishable, and make consumers identify it as an advertisement. The mass media may not publish advertisements in the form of news reports. An advertisement published through the mass media shall bear the advertisement mark to distinguish it from new items so that consumers may not be misled. In the Chinese Law, there is no direct rule on comparative advertisement. According to Article 12 of the Advertisement law, an advertisement may not belittle the goods or services of other producers and manufacturers or operators.The European and Chinese general rules on advertising have much in common. Advertising must be clear, true, and accurate. Advertisements must be identifi able as such, and competitors may not be demeaned. Both sets of rules comply with the general marketing codes by the 982 Article 3.983 Article 4.984 Article 5. 985 An advertisement involving patented goods or patented methods shall clearly indicate the patent number and type of patent. Products which have not been patented shall not be passed off as being patented. The use in advertisements of unsuccessful patent applications or those which have been terminated, nullifi ed or invalidated is prohibited.-179-International Chamber of Commerce and there seems to be a global understanding on these fair marketing practices.However, important cultural differences remain as parts of general national advertising laws. Article 7 of the Chinese Advertisement law is an example of Chinese cultural features:"Advertisements may not contain any of the following:the national ,fl ag, national emblem or national anthem of the People's Republic of China,1. the names of state organs or names of staff of state organs,2. such words as the "state-level", the "highest-level" or the "best",3. matters hindering social stability or endangering the safety of life or property, or 4. harming the public interest,matters hindering the public order or violating good social customs,5. pornographic, superstitious, horrid, violent or unpleasant matters,6. ethnic groups, racial, religious or sex discrimination matters,7. matters hindering environmental and natural resources protection, and8. matters that are prohibited by laws and administrative regulations."9. Parts of this list could not exist in a European directive as the Chinese concept of free speech is rather narrow, and matters harming social order and the state must be avoided. The Chinese interpretation of what is "pornographic" or "unpleasant" is also different from the European interpretation of what is considered indecent or immoral.In addition to general rules applicable to advertising of all products, the Chinese Advertisement law includes special rules on medicine marketing. These will be discussed below.5.2 General Rules on Food Marketing9865.2.1 EU5.2.1.1 Prohibition of Misleading Food AdvertisingIn the EU, the general food regulation987 is the basic law both with regard food safety and as regards food marketing. Article 8 regulates the protection of consumers' interest. It states: "Food law shall aim at the protection of the interest of consumers and shall provide a basis for consumers to make informed choices in relation to the foods they consume. It shall aim at the prevention of:fraudulent or deceptive practices;(a) the adulteration of food; and(b) any other practices which may mislead the consumer. "(c) 988986 This means rules other than those applicable to claims.987 Regulation 178/2002/EC laying down the general principles and requirements of food law, establishing the European Food Safety Authority, and laying down procedures in matters of food safety.988 This article refl ects the same principle as Article 1 of the Misleading and Comparative Advertising Directive codifi ed by 2006/114/EC/.-180-Article 16 of the Regulation concerns presentation. It is more precise than Article 8: "Without prejudice to more specifi c provisions of food law, the labelling, advertising and presentation of food and feed, including their shape, appearance or packaging, the packaging materials used, the manner in which they are arranged and the setting in which they are displayed, and the information which is made available about them through whatever medium, shall not mislead consumers." This statement is fairly comprehensive. It aims to cover all means of misleading the consumer. However, more specifi c provisions of food law are mentioned. These rules apply to special types of foods and are discussed below.5.2.1.2 General Rules on Food LabellingIn addition to being cognisant with the rules on food advertising, a marketer must know what information he must give to consumers. In Europe, as in most countries, the ingredient list must appear on the package of a food product.989 Hence the fi rst requirement for the marketer is to know what is in the food. Nutrient information/nutrition labelling (for example how much fat, lactose or vitamin C the product contains) is optional in Europe, if a nutrition claim is not presented. Where nutrition claims appear on labelling, in presentation or in advertising, with the exclusion of generic advertising, nutrition labelling will become compulsory.990General food labelling991 is governed by Directive 2000/13/EC992, which is a codifi ed version of Directive 79/112/EC. The directive concerns the labelling of foodstuffs to be delivered as such to the ultimate consumer and certain aspects relating to the presentation and advertising thereof993. It also applies to foodstuffs intended for supply to restaurants, hospitals, canteens and other similar mass caterers994. For the purpose of the Directive, 'labelling' means any words, particulars, trade marks, brand name, pictorial matter or symbol relating to a foodstuff and placed on any packaging, document notice, label, ring or collar accompanying or referring to such foodstuff995.Most of the provisions date back to 1978. One major recent amendment to the food- labelling directive was introduced in 2003. This amendment makes it obligatory for all ingredients to be indicated on the label. The new labelling rules particularly help consumers suffering from food allergies or consumers who wish to avoid eating certain ingredients for any other reason. The new rules foresee that all ingredients in foodstuffs will have to be included on the label and abolish the previous 25% rule which meant that it is was not obligatory to label the components of compound ingredients that make up less than 25% of the fi nal food product.996989 Ingredients must be listed in descending order in terms of total content.990 Nutrient information is given per 100 g in Europe, or per serving.991 Specifi c labelling issues such as origin labelling or welfare labelling are not discussed here as they are not particularly relevant to functional foods.992 Directive 2000/13/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council 20 March 2000 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the labelling, presentation and advertising of foodstuffs.993 Article 1(1).994 Article 1(2).995 Article 1(3).996 European Commission web page. http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/foodlabelling/comm_legisl_en.htm.-181-According to the European Commission, the evolution of both the foodstuffs market and consumers' expectations as to the information given has led to the need to update this legislation. That is why the Commission is currently preparing to modernise the law on food labelling997, among other rules on labelling of consumer products. According to DG SANCO998, they are focusing on "better regulation" as a means to contribute to achieving growth and jobs999.The Commission is ready to rethink the entire labelling scheme. Benefi ts of simplifying and clarifying the structure and scope1000 of the existing labelling legislation are weighed. The directive might for example be turned into a regulation1001. Commission suggested that maybe food and non-food labelling might be considered as a whole. Prescription vs. fl exibility of the rules is also reconsidered. The Commission is also considering self-regulation or co-regulation in labelling issues1002. In developing labelling rules, the Commission must also think of how to deal with small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs), as the costs of introducing labelling changes will generally be higher for SMEs.As a result of a consultation process launched by the Commission in 2006, stakeholder views on labelling issues were received. The majority of respondents wanted food labelling and non-food labelling to be distinct. As one might imagine, the food industry would like to see as few legislative requirements as possible. The industry would prefer self-regulation as regards voluntary labelling, keeping rules on mandatory labelling in 'hard law'. Consumer organisations and organisations for health and animal welfare would like to see as many legislative requirements as possible. They do not trust self-regulation like codes of practice. Also, predictably, views of governments are between these extremes, as they must search for the right balance.1003 Most stakeholders welcomed the new legislation to be in a form of regulation. The mandatory requirements currently listed under Article 3.1 of Directive 2000/13/EC were not questioned by stakeholders1004.1005997 Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006.998 DG SANCO is the Health and Consumer Protection Directorate General of the European Commission.999 The Consultative Document 2006, 1. Consumer policy is a part of the Lisbon Strategy, where the EU is aiming to create growth and employment. See Commission press release: "A new Consumer Strategy: Consumers must lead the drive for growth and jobs." IP/07/256. Date: 27/02/2007.1000 Information that must be provided might for example be distinguished from information that should be available for the purchaser of the foodstuff. Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006. Page 6.1001 Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006. Page 5.1002 Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU. A DG SANCO Consultative Document February 2006. Page 3. See chapter 2.2 on European hard law and soft law.1003 Summary of results for the consultation document on: "Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU". December 2006. Directorate E - Safety of the Food Chain. Unit E4 - Food law, nutrition and labelling. Pages 4-5.1004 Summary of results for the consultation document on: "Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU". December 2006. Directorate E - Safety of the Food Chain. Unit E4 - Food law, nutrition and labelling. Page 10.1005 Summary of results for the consultation document on: "Labelling: competitiveness, consumer information and better regulation for the EU". December 2006. Directorate E - Safety of the Food Chain. Unit E4 - Food law, nutrition and labelling. Pages 8-9.-182-In January 2008, the Commission proposed to put food labelling and nutrition labelling directives together in one legal instrument, a regulation1006. The proposed rules include the requirement that the print size of the mandatory particulars on label must be at least 3 mm1007. The draft Regulation also extends the current requirements for allergen labelling to cover non pre-packed food, including food sold in restaurants and other catering establishments1008. Rules on origin labelling will also be specifi ed to avoid situations where the consumer is misled for example by the fact that the raw materials come from one place and the manufacturing process takes place in another1009. Nutrition declaration will also be mandatory, see the next chapter.The proposal leaves room for Member States to promote additional national schemes provided they do not undermine the EU rules. While manufacturers or retailers could always use the EU's main nutrition labelling system, national schemes would offer food businesses an alterative way of discharging the labelling obligation. This kind of fl exibility has already been criticised for creating barriers to trade.10105.2.1.3 Nutrition LabellingThe Nutritional Labelling Directive 90/496/EEC concerns nutrition labelling of foodstuffs to be delivered as such to the ultimate consumer. It also applies to foodstuffs intended for supply to restaurants, hospitals, canteens and other similar mass caterers.1011 It does not apply to natural mineral waters or other waters intended for human consumption or to food supplements.1012 The Directive applies without prejudice to the labelling provisions of Council Directive 89/398/EEC on foodstuffs intended for particular nutritional uses and specifi c Directives as referred to in Article 4 of that Directive1013.For the purposes of the Directive, 'nutrition labelling' means any information appearing on labelling and relating either to the energy value or to the amount of the following nutrients: protein, carbohydrate, fat, fi bre, sodium, and vitamins and minerals listed in the Annex1014 of the Directive and present in signifi cant amounts.The most important principle of the Nutritional Labelling Directive is:if nutrition claims are not presented, nutritional labelling is optional, and -if a nutrition claim appears - on labelling, in presentation or in advertising, with the exclusion of generic advertising, nutrition labelling is compulsory.10151006 Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the provision of food information to consumers. COM(2008) 40 fi nal. Brussels, 30.1.2008.1007 Article 14(1) of the proposed Regulation.1008 Article 9 of the proposed Regulation: List of mandatory particulars. Allergens are listed in Annex II of the proposal.1009 Food labelling proposal 2008, page 9. Explanatory memorandum. 3.) Legal elements of the proposal.1010 Warnock 2008. 1011 Article 1(1).1012 Article 1(2).1013 Marketing of these dietetic foods is discussed in the following chapter.1014 The list of vitamins and minerals is updated according to a procedure se out in Art 10. 1015 Article 2.-183-The only nutrition claims permitted are those relating to energy and/or to protein, carbohydrate, fat, fi bre, sodium, vitamins and minerals and to substances which belong to or which are components of a category of those nutrients. Vitamin and mineral claims are limited to those defi ned in the Annex of the Directive and if these are present in a signifi cant amount. A signifi cant amount is defi ned as 15 % of the recommended daily allowance.1016As stated above, a nutrition claim triggers nutrition labelling. There are two alternatives for nutritional labelling. When the claim relates to energy value, protein, carbohydrates or fat, the amounts of all of these shall be given. When the claim is made for sugar, saturates, fi bre or sodium, the amounts of all of these shall also be given.1017 Whenever a claim is made, the amounts of starch, polyols, mono-unsaturates, polyunsaturates, cholesterol, and vitamins or minerals that are listed in the Annex and that are present in signifi cant amounts must also be given1018. There is one other additional requirement for nutritional labelling, which has to be abided by even if a claim is not made: If the amount of polyunsaturates and/or mono-unsaturates and/or the cholesterol rate are given, the amount of saturates must also be given. In this case, the amount of saturates is not considered to be a nutrition claim1019. In other cases where no claim is made, nutritional information can be given, as long as it is accurate.Nutritional information shall be expressed per 100 g or per 100 ml. In addition, this information may be given per serving as quantifi ed on the label or per portion, provided that the number or portions contained in the package is stated.1020 The amounts mentioned are to be those of the food as sold.