Pre-market approval for product- -specifi c claims might be reasonable.1117Voluntary codes can work as a temporary solution while waiting for the EC rules on -health claims.1118Based on opinions of these three important interest groups (consumers, industry and governments) Hill and Knowlton proposed the following:To protect consumers, health claims should be regulated clearly at EC level. -The Food Labelling Directive should be changed so that it would literally allow -enhanced function claims and disease risk reduction claims.A list on general permissible claims should be created, and a notifi cation procedure for -so called new claims.The Nutrition Labelling Directive (Directive 90/464/EC) should be changed to comply -with Codex guidelines on nutrition claims.The Misleading Advertising Directive (Directive 84/450/EC) should be changed to -cover the control mechanisms for claims.The defi nition of food should be clarifi ed. - 1119A campaign to educate consumers on the connection between nutrition and health -should be arranged.After the Hill & Knowlton report, the Commission1120 continued to prepare new legislation on claims and published a discussion paper on nutritional and functional claims in 2001. The discussion paper was based on the idea that harmonisation is needed because of all the different rules restricting trade. The discussion paper presented different alternatives for defi ning 'claim', requirements for presenting a claim and for systems of assessment and acceptance of claims.On nutrition claims, the paper suggested banning claims relating to dietary cholesterol1121, considered the possibility to require some kind of nutritional profi le of "low fat" foods, and presented suggestions on defi nitions of "low fat", "sugar free" etc. For the so-called functional 1117 Here generic seems to mean established, where product-specifi c means innovative.1118 Hill & Knowlton 2000, 12.1119 Since the study, food has been defi ned in the General Food Regulation, but all that defi nition says is that foods that are medicines are not foods. 1120 The Directorate General on Health and Consumer Protection, DG SANCO.1121 This is because dietary cholesterol is not a major factor in coronary heart disease and there is a danger of confusion with blood cholesterol levels. Consumers do not seem to understand the difference between dietary and blood cholesterol. High blood cholesterol is usually related to a diet rich in saturated fats.-203-claims, the paper suggested giving fi rst the presence of the nutrient and then its role in human physiology, for example: "High on protein. Protein helps build and repair body tissues. "1122The paper stated that claims must be substantiated with scientifi c evidence and that evidence must be relevant to consumers in terms of the fi nal product they eat. The paper suggested a pre-market authorisation for nutritional and functional claims, and a list of acceptable and agreed claims for each nutrient or substance, including specifi c wording.1123There were over 880 responses to the DG SANCO paper and it was hard to see how the different positions could be resolved and a consensus for a proposal reached.1124 For example, Italy was of the view that food claims "cater solely for commercial interests." They thought the novel foods trend is dangerous and spoils all the food traditions. They warned that subsequent studies often revise the virtues of specifi c foods, no attention is paid to over consumption, and that a combined consumption of enriched products can cause problems. The UK, on the contrary, saw claims as enabling consumers to make healthy diet choices.Besides nutritional and functional claims, the UK wanted health claims, and disease reduction claims, to be debated. Also, many other Member States, the food industry (particularly CIAA), and consumer groups commented on the absence of health claims from the fi rst paper. They were in all probability left out, as they were considered even more diffi cult, as viewpoints on health claims vary from not wanting health claims at all, to those which would accept some claims under certain rules, to those that have a much more liberal policy. 1125There was a large amount of pressure on the Commission: several stakeholders demanded legislation governing health claims. No one wanted to live in a non-harmonised state. This implies that legislation was considered necessary. The UK continued to allow a reduction of risk claims, and this resulted in confl ict with the Commission, as Commission offi cials said these were illegal.1126 The Commission promised to prepare a Proposal for a Regulation on nutrition, functional and health claims. They planned that the Commission might adopt the proposal in early 2003. The Commission thus decided to put food claims together and abandoned the idea of separate discussion paper and proposal for health claims.1127While waiting for the Commission proposal, a system where a list of claims was authorised, based on established scientifi c evidence, seemed attractive to both consumers and industry. This kind of blanket approval provides certainty and does not involve a lengthy approval procedure.1128 There seemed to be a fair amount of consensus on scientifi c substantiation of claims, and the importance of the total diet. Hill & Knowlton also proposed a notifi cation procedure for novel claims, which was something the industry opposed but the consumers applauded.In July 2003, the Commission adopted a proposal for a Regulation on the use of nutrition and health claims made on foods1129. According to the Commission, "the main objectives of the Commission's proposal are to achieve a high level of consumer protection and increase 1122 Other examples established by Codex: "Calcium aids in the development of strong bones and teeth"; "Iron is a factor in red blood cell formation" and "Vitamin E protects the fat in body tissues from oxidation".1123 Discussion paper on nutrition and functional claims, 10.1124 EU Food Law November 2001, 7.1125 EU Food Law November 2001, 7.1126 EU Food Law June 2001, 10.1127 European Commission's Food Safety web page July 10, 2002.1128 EU Food Law August 2001, 13.1129 COM(2003) 424 fi nal. Brussels, 16.7.2003.-204-legal security for economic operators. It also aims to ensure fair competition and promote and protect innovation in the area of food. By adopting rules on the information given about foods and the nutritional values appearing on labels, the Commission was aiming to ensure that consumers would be able to make informed and meaningful choices when it came to food and drinks. The health and nutrition claims rules will also contribute to a higher level of human health protection, as it ties in with the Commission's campaign for healthier lifestyle choices by allowing citizens to know exactly what they are consuming. "1130 The Commission tried to respond to all the demands presented: particularly consumers wanting more reliable information and the industry wanting clear and harmonised rules not discouraging innovation.The European Parliament held its fi rst reading vote on the Commission's proposal in May 2005.1131 The parliament tried to delete both the article on the authorisation procedure and the article on nutrition profi les. The Internal Market Committee of the European Parliament voted to delete the articles in April 2005. On the authorisation procedure, the vote was 20 for deletion and 14 against. The result of the vote on nutrition profi les was 19 for deletion and 14 against. With both Articles, the EPP (Christian-Democrats) and ALDE (Liberals) voted for deletion, and the PES (Socialists) and Greens voted against deletion.1132 The Commission did not accept the deletions and gave another proposal including the contested articles.In June 2005, EU health ministers unanimously endorsed the Commission's proposal, including the provision for nutrient profi les and the authorisation procedure, during a fi rst reading vote at the Health Council. The European Parliament second reading vote took place in May 2006.1133 Formal adoption of the Regulation by the Parliament and the Council occurred in December 2006. Regulation1924/2006/EC1134entered into force in January 2007, and became applicable in the beginning of July 2007. This means that after all the years of discussion and preparation, the EU fi nally has a regulation on nutrition and health claims. The Regulation is analysed in detail below.5.3.3.2 General Requirements on ClaimsRegulation 1924/2006/EC applies to nutrition and health claims made in commercial communications, whether in the labelling, presentation or advertising of foods to be delivered as such to the fi nal consumer. It also applies in respect of foods intended for supply to restaurants, hospitals, schools, canteens and similar mass caterers.1135 Nutrition and health claims may be used on foods placed on the market in the European Community only if they comply with the provisions of the Regulation.Article 3 lists "the general principles for all claims". The use of nutrition and health claims shall not:1130 European Commission's Food Safety web page September 21st 2006.1131 European Commission web page at: http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/claims/index_en.htm.1132 Foodnavigator news 20 April 2005. http://www.foodnavigator.com/news/ng.asp?n=59508-imco-votes-to.1133 European Commission web page at: http://ec.europa.eu/food/food/labellingnutrition/claims/index_en.htm.1134 Regulation 1924/2006/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, of 20 December 2006, on nutrition and health claims made on foods.1135 Article 1(2).-205-be false, ambiguous or misleading;(a) give rise to doubt about the safety and/or the nutritional adequacy of other foods;(b) encourage or condone excess consumption of a food;(c) state, suggest or imply that a balanced and varied diet cannot provide appropriate (d) quantities of nutrients in general1136;refer to changes in bodily functions that could give rise to or exploit fear in the consumer, (e) either textually or through pictorial, graphic or symbolic representations.Article 5 lists "the general conditions" for claim use. The use of nutrition and health claims shall only be permitted if the following conditions are fulfi lled:the presence, absence or reduced content in a food or category of food of a nutrient (a) or other substance in respect of which the claim is made has been shown to have a benefi cial nutritional or physiological effect, as established by generally accepted scientifi c evidence;the nutrient or other substance for which the claim is made:(b) is contained in the fi nal product in a signifi cant quantity as defi ned in Community (i) legislation or, where such rules do not exist, in a quantity that will produce the nutritional or physiological effect claimed as established by generally accepted scientifi c evidence; oris not present or is present in a reduced quantity that will produce the nutritional (ii) or physiological effect claimed as established by generally accepted scientifi c evidence;where applicable, the nutrient or other substance for which the claim is made is in a (c) form that is available to be used by the body;the quantity of the product that can reasonably be expected to be consumed provides (d) a signifi cant quantity of the nutrient or other substance to which the claim relates, as defi ned in Community legislation or, where such rules do not exist, a signifi cant quantity that will produce the nutritional or physiological effect claimed as established by generally accepted scientifi c evidence;compliance with the specifi c conditions set out in Chapter III Nutrition Claims or (e) Chapter IV Health Claims as the case may be.The use of nutrition and health claims shall only be permitted if the average consumer1137 can be expected to understand the benefi cial effects as expressed in the claim. Nutrition and health 1136 There are nutrients, for which suffi cient quantities cannot be provided by a balanced and varied diet. Derogations for these cases, including the conditions for their application, may be adopted in accordance with the procedure referred to in Article 25(2), taking into account the special conditions present in Member States. 1137 According to preamble 16 of the Regulation, the average consumer test is not a statistical test. : "National courts and authorities will have to exercise their own faculty of judgment, having regard to the case-law of the Court of Justice, to determine the typical reaction of the average consumer in a given case." The average consumer means a person, who is reasonably well-informed and reasonably observant and circumspect. If a claim is specifi cally aimed at children, the claim should be assessed from the perspective of an average child. -206-claims shall refer to the food ready for consumption in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.Article 6 concerns scientifi c substantiation of claims: Nutrition and health claims shall be based on and substantiated by generally accepted scientifi c evidence. A food business operator making a nutrition or health claim shall justify the use of the claim. The competent authorities of the Member States may request a food business operator or a person placing a product on the market to produce all relevant elements and data establishing compliance with this Regulation.Article 7 clarifi es the rule on mandatory nutrition information. As described above1138, Directive 90/496/EEC has previously required nutrition information to be given in cases where a nutrition claim is made. The same rule applies to health claims. With health claims, the information to be provided shall consist of information in Group 2 as defi ned in Article 4(1) of Directive 90/496/EEC. In addition and as the case may be, the amount(s) of the substance(s) to which a nutrition or health claim relates that does not appear in the nutrition labelling shall also be stated in the same fi eld of vision as the nutrition information and be expressed in accordance with Article 6 of Directive 90/496/EEC.1139Claims on alcoholic drinks are restricted1140. Later the Commission may determine other foods or food categories, for which nutrition or health claims are to be restricted or prohibited. This shall be done in the light of scientifi c evidence.1141The Commission, more particularly its Scientifi c Committee on Food Safety and Animal Healthgave a guidance document1142 where the relationship between the Regulation and other Community law is clarifi ed in December 2007. On dietetic foods, it is stated that they can bear claims authorised on the basis of Regulation 1924/2006/EC. However, this does not apply to infant formula: the only permitted claims on these products are listed in Annex IV of Directive 2006/141/EC.11435.3.3.3 Nutrient Profi les5.3.3.3.1 The Nutrient Profi le as a Condition for Claim UseThe new regulation includes the principle that the use of claims is conditional on respecting the overall nutrient profi le of the food. This means perhaps the most controversial thing about the new regulation that only "good foods" are allowed to have claims. The application of nutrient profi les as a criterion for nutrition and health claims aims to avoid a situation where nutrition or health claims mask the overall nutritional status of a food product. Nutrient profi les should be based on generally accepted scientifi c evidence on 1138 Chapter 5.2.1.3.1139 In the case of food supplements, the nutrition information shall be provided in accordance with Article 8 of Directive 2002/46/EC.1140 Only nutrition claims referring to low alcohol levels or low energy levels are allowed. Health claims on alcohols are prohibited. Article 4(3).1141 Regulation 1924/2006/EC, Article 4(5).1142 Guidance on the Implementation of Regulation Ndeg 1924/2006 on Nutrition and Health Claims Made on Foods. Conclusions of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health. 14 December 2007.1143 Scientifi c Committee Claim Guidance 2007, 4.-207-the relationship between diet and health. At the same time, profi les should also allow for product innovation, and take into account various dietary habits and traditions.1144Nutrient profi les will be based on the content of different nutrients and substances with a nutritional or physiological effect. This means calculating the amounts of fat, saturated fat, trans-fatty acids, poly- and mono-unsaturated fats, salt/sodium, sugars, available carbohydrates other than sugars, vitamins, minerals, protein and fi bre. Some of these nutrients and substances are avoidable; some are benefi cial. It is not merely the nutritional content that resolves the issue of claims. When setting the nutrient profi les, the different categories of foods and the place and role of these foods in the overall diet should be taken into account. Due regard should be given to the various dietary habits and consumption patterns existing in the Member States.1145EFSA has given its scientifi c opinion on nutrient profi les in January 2008 and has consulted stakeholders. Scientists and governments have developed different nutrition profi ling models. The Commission was to establish nutrient profi les for different foods and food categories by 19 January 2009. This work has been delayed. With the nutrient profi les, the Commission shall establish all the conditions for the use of claims and also the exemptions. The nutrient profi les for food and/or certain categories of food shall be established taking into account in particular:the quantities of certain nutrients and other substances contained in the food, such as (a) fat, saturated fatty acids, trans-fatty acids, sugars and salt/sodium;the role and importance of the food (or of categories of food) and the contribution to (b) the diet of the population in general or, as appropriate, of certain risk groups including children;the overall nutritional composition of the food and the presence of nutrients that have (c) been scientifi cally recognised as having an effect on health.1146The nutrient profi les shall be based on scientifi c knowledge about diet and nutrition, and their relation to health. In setting the nutrient profi les, the Commission shall request EFSA to provide scientifi c advice, focusing in particular on:whether profi les should be set for food in general and/or categories of food; -the choice and balance of nutrients to be taken into account; -the choice of reference quantity/basis for profi les; -the approach to the calculation of the profi les; and -the feasibility and testing of a proposed system. - 1147After setting up the profi les, the Commission shall continue to carry out consultations with interested parties, in particular food business operators and consumer groups.