by raising, harvesting, slaughtering, and capture, procedures for fermentation and preparation, description of transport and storage conditions, and its traditional role in the diet at locations outside the Community.754Considering information on previous human exposure to the novel food, it is acknowledged that documentation on previous use of the novel food source in the Community or in other parts of the world is important to establish a baseline for assessment. However, it is also fi rmly stated that history of food use outside the Community is not of itself a guarantee that the novel food can be safely consumed in the Community. There might be traditional handling and preparation habits that prevent adverse effects of foods that in other conditions might be toxic. These cultural issues must be included in describing human exposure to the food.755In its discussion paper, the Commission presented different alternatives for the new simplifi ed procedure:Simplifi ed procedure for exotic traditional foods (with history of safe use in third a) countries).Three different categories of novel foods with different requirements and proceduresb) : innovative products with claimed consumer benefi ts, - innovative products without claimed consumer benefi ts, and - exotic traditional foods. -Only one procedurec) and same safety requirements for all products.As stated above, the Commission eventually chose option a). Option c) seems fair and would have been the clearest one. In practice, it would have been unreasonably burdensome to demand all the same scientifi c evidence of all novel foods. Option b) would have been analogous to pre-market approval of medicines: Every product would go through pre-market approval process, but products are subject to different requirements as to the type and quantity of data they must provide.756 By option b), the Commission must have meant that health claim 754 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 5.755 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 5.756 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 20.-134-evaluation would, if necessary, be added on top of the novel food procedure. Safety evaluation as such would have been the same for innovative products with and without claims.After the long debate and problems at the WTO, the proposed Regulation creates a new procedure for traditional foods from third countries (Article 8). They are still considered a subcategory of novel foods, but they are not included in the Community list of authorised novel foods. Instead, a separate list of traditional foods will be created and published on the Commission website.According to the Proposal, a food business operator intending to place a traditional food from a third country on the market in the Community shall notify it to the Commission. The notifi cation must indicate the name of the food, its composition and country of origin. The notifi cation shall be accompanied by documented data demonstrating the history of safe food use in the third country.757 According to proposed Article 3(2)(c), "history of safe food use" means that the safety of the food in question is confi rmed with compositional data and from experience of use and continued use in the normal diet of a large part of the population of a country. This means the marketer will still be required to show safety, and it may be a complex task.The Commission shall forward the notifi cation including the demonstration of history of safe food use without delay to the Member States and the EFSA758. Within four months from the date on which the notifi cation is forwarded by the Commission, a Member State and the EFSA may inform the Commission that they have reasonable safety objections, based on scientifi c evidence, to the placing on the market of the traditional food concerned. In that case, the food shall not yet be placed on the market, and the notifi cation will transform into an application in the primary procedure for authorisation of novel foods. The Commission will inform the food business operator of objections within fi ve months of the notifi cation.759If no reasoned safety objections, based on scientifi c evidence, have been raised and no such information has been communicated to the food business operator itself, the traditional food may be placed on the market in the Community after fi ve months from the date of the notifi cation. The Commission shall publish a list of traditional foods from third countries that may be placed on the market in the Community760.The proposed procedure seems reasonable from the viewpoint of the marketer: in fi ve months, he will either have a permission to put the product on the market, or he will have learned about his notifi cation being objected and transferred into an application. It remains to be seen whether the Member States will try to reject traditional food notifi cations on artifi cial grounds. In that case, the notifi cation procedure would lose its benefi ts, waste time, and only create an additional hurdle to reaching the market.4.2.1.7.5 Required Scientifi c Evidence on Safety Even though the procedures change, the Commission Proposal does not intend to alter the scientifi c evidence required to show safety, apart from creating the new simplifi ed procedure for traditional foods. The detailed requirements for novel food applications are specifi ed in the Commission 757 Article 8(1) of the proposed Regulation.758 Article 8(2) of the proposed Regulation.759 Article 8(3) of the proposed Regulation.760 Article 8(5) of the proposed Regulation. "-135-Recommendation 97/618/EC761. Scientifi c aspects of the information necessary to support applications are specifi ed in the Annex of the Recommendation, Part I. The information should be presented according to Part II of the Annex. Member States should draw up their initial assessment reports according to Part III of the Annex. When new ingredients are used or a food is produced in a new way, the implications for consumer safety and nutritional value require consideration. Information is needed on any issue relating to both these aspects.762 This information must be included in a novel food application763. Safety evaluation includes toxicity tests, showing the product does not cause mutations and cancer. The assessment of the nutritional value of foods presents further scientifi c challenges. Foods are complex chemical mixtures, which are more diffi cult to evaluate than the impact of a single chemical. We don't know the exact mechanisms on how different patterns of nutrient intake affect health. For example, so-called modifi ers of toxic effects might be naturally present in certain foods. It is thus diffi cult to exactly defi ne the concept of nutritional balance.764 Analytical studies of the composition of the novel food are required. Studies are needed for the establishment of substantial equivalence, in which case the simplifi ed procedure applies, and as a prerequisite for nutritional and toxicological assessments. Study methods have to be standardised and validated, and the analyses and data presented have to be based upon sound scientifi c principles. Both substances inherently present and substances derived from the process must be analysed. Investigations should focus especially on determining contents of:critical nutrients - (both macro- and micronutrients), andcritical toxicants - and anti-nutritional factors.765 Toxicological requirements for a novel food are considered on a case-by-case basis. Toxicological data is needed in three different scenarios: Substantial equivalence can be established to an accepted traditional food or food 1) ingredient. In this case, no further testing is needed.Substantial equivalence can be established except for a single or few specifi c traits of 2) the novel food. In this case, further assessment of safety should focus specifi cally on these traits.Neither partial nor total substantial equivalence can be established. In this case, the 3) wholesomeness of the whole novel food or macronutrient has to be assessed using an appropriate combined nutritional-toxicological approach.766 761 97/618/EC: Commission Recommendation of 29 July 1997 concerning the scientifi c aspects and the presentation of information necessary to support applications for the placing on the market of novel foods and novel food ingredients and the preparation of initial assessment reports under Regulation (EC) No 258/97 of the European Parliament and of the Council.762 Commission Recommendation, Annex, Part I, Chapter I.763 Hermann 2004, 7. Wheat has considerable allergenic potential due to the presence of gluten proteins, potatoes involve hazards posed by glycoalcaloids (green colour caused by sunshine), and green leafy vegetables contain nitrate and oxalate.764 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.2.765 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.4.766 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.7.-136-In scenario 3), the wholesomeness assessment has to take into account: identity, chemical structure and physico-chemical properties of the novel food, -potential intake based on the proposed use, -potential exposure of particularly vulnerable population groups, and -the likely effects of processing. - 767 Nutritional implications must be considered both at expected normal intakes and at maximum levels of consumption. Evaluation is based on literature, product compositional analysis and, if needed, data from animal studies. Attention should be paid to particular nutritional needs of groups such as infants, children, pregnant and lactating women, the elderly, and those with chronic diseases like diabetes. The greater the role of the product in the diet the more extensive the nutritional assessment must be. Human nutritional assessment data are needed both on short-term and long-term effects.768 Nutritional and toxicological aspects are integrated in the assessment of a novel food. Nutritional properties of the food (e.g. energy value, protein content, and bioavailability of micronutrients) affect the toxicological testing programme: the anticipated role of the product in the diet determines how much food is given to test animals.769 The greater the predicted dietary exposure the more extensive the required toxicological testing programme will have to be770. However, it is impossible to predict exactly how much the product will be used and what products it will replace. This is why a surveillance programme should accompany marketing of a novel food. The consumption pattern might affect the acceptability of the novel food.771 This notion is rather unclear because the presumption is that a novel food cannot be authorised if it is unsafe or unwholesome. Because the surveillance programme is a recommendation only, consequences for not following the surveillance programme are unclear. Foods and food ingredients which fall within the scope of the novel food regulation, can be divided in categories which differ in complexity and in the issues that need to be addressed. These categories are:simple chemically defi ned substances or mixtures of these, -complex foods such as plants, animals, micro-organisms or food components such as -fats, proteins, or fi bre; andfoods processed in a novel procedure. - 772 The Commission Recommendation gives structured schemes on the types of information that are considered essential to establish the safety of particular classes of novel foods. The Recommendation is not legally binding, and the schemes are therefore provided "for guidance only". However, if an applicant wants to omit certain information from a dossier requested in any of the schemes, the scientifi c justifi cation for this should be given. The results of any other 767 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.7.768 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.8.769 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.6.770 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.7.771 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 3.5.772 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 4. In the Recommendation, there are additional three categories listed for GM products, which no longer fall under the novel food regulation.-137-investigations (not required by the schemes) relevant to safety assessments, which have been carried out must be reported.773 In practice, the information according to the Recommendation is usually the required minimum information.The information schemes are the following:Specifi cation of the novel food, -Effect of the production process applied to the novel food, -History of the organism - used as the source of novel food,Anticipated intake and extent of use of the novel food, -Information on previous human exposure - to the novel food or its source,Nutritional information on the novel food, -Microbiological information on the novel food, -Toxicological information on the novel food. - 774The need for comparative data between the novel food and its counterpart are emphasised in these schemes. The presence of new toxins, anti-nutritional factors or allergens (or increased levels thereof) will indicate the need to assess their safety implications. The nutritional impact of the novel food introduction into human diets must always be assessed, unless the old food and the novel food are nutritionally equivalent.7754.2.1.7.6 Decisions / Regulations? The third important question with novel foods, besides what is considered novel and what is considered safe, is whether others can market the novel food after one company has received authorisation. At the moment, decisions under the Novel Food Regulation are addressed to the applicant. If authorisation is granted, only the applicant is able to place the novel food in question on the market. Another marketer must submit another application or notifi cation. There are in essence two alternatives to manage the issue: Decisions addressed to individuals.a) Regulations with general application. b) According to the Commission, decisions have the advantage that they provide the regulator with more certain and comprehensive information about the novel foods that are legally on the market.776 When they know the fi rms that have applied, it is easy to determine that other marketers are conducting illegal business. The decision approach also allows enforceable conditions to be attached to the decision. By this, the Commission means that for example post-market surveillance requirements can easily be imposed on the fi rm in question.777 This is because the Commission knows the names of the fi rms by the fact that they have applied. It is 773 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 5.774 Commission Novel Food Recommendation 1997, Annex, Part I, Chapter 5.775 European Food Information Council EUFIC Review 04/2000. 776 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 17.777 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 17.-138-more diffi cult to impose precise obligations to parties that are not known by the Commission, and perhaps do not even themselves know that their product is a novel food and that they have certain legal criteria that bind them. A possible downside of the decision approach is, according to the Commission, that creating effective monopolies may not be advisable unless there are very good grounds for it.778 After all, freedom of competition is one of the cornerstones of the European Union. The regulation approach, on the other hand, has the benefi t of being binding to all relevant parties, indicating the labelling requirements are binding on all the sellers of the product, not just the applicant. The regulation approach would save the authorities from multiple applications, and it would also save the competitors from monopolies.779 The regulation could also include other uses for the food products than the ones that the applicant applies for. For example it could include the use of a berry in juice, jam, etc. The Commission has indeed proposed the regulation approach: it is proposed that a Community list of authorised novel foods will be created780. The list would be applicable to all, and only novel foods on the list could be placed on the market. At the same time, a system of rewarding applicants with data exclusivity for 5 years has been suggested. This is a compromise between the decision approach and the regulation approach, and corresponds to the Regulation on claims, which also created the Community lists and the 5-year protection for proprietary data. With medicines, proprietary data included in the application is protected for 10 years. Article 12 of the proposed Regulation stipulates the rules on proprietary data: "On request by the applicant, supported by appropriate and verifi able information included in the application dossier, newly developed scientifi c evidence and proprietary scientifi c data provided to support the applications, may not be used for the benefi t of another application during a period of fi ve years from the date of the inclusion of the novel food in the Community list without the agreement of the applicant." According to preamble 20 of the proposed Regulation, the data exclusivity is granted "under specifi c circumstances in order to stimulate research and development within the agri-food industry, and thus innovation". The protection of scientifi c data provided by one applicant does not prevent other applicants from seeking the inclusion in the Community list of novel foods on the basis of their own scientifi c data781. This means a competitor can choose between: producing the same or similar data himself: comparing the toxicological and nutritional -properties of an old food and the novel food,reaching an agreement with the fi rst applicant to use the data, in practice: buying the -data from the fi rst applicant,waiting 5 years and using the fi rst applicant's data free of charge. -The 5-year exclusivity sounds similar to an intellectual property right. However, patent protection is more far-reaching as it blocks competitors even if competitors developed the 778 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 18.779 Novel food discussion paper 2002, 17.780 Article 5 of the proposed Regulation.781 Preamble 20 of the proposed Regulation.-139-invention themselves782. Patent protection is also longer: 20 years. According to the European patent convention, patent protection is available for a product or a method that is novel, involves an inventive step and is susceptible of industrial application783. Some innovative foods are thus also eligible for patent protection. The patent application could also be done in vain, in case of the novel food application being rejected. One could argue that patent protection is enough and that other kinds of exclusivity rules are not needed. A company could patent what is patentable, and other innovations would be available to competitors in the spirit of freedom of competition. However, data exclusivity of a novel food application is different from protecting the product itself. The 5-year rule rewards the performing of safety tests on the product, not the product innovation. The patent system is not faultless in promoting innovation, hence other forms of intellectual property, proprietary rights, and data protection are created.784 Trademark protection is another issue. It could be argued that trademarks are enough, and that no rules on data exclusivity are needed. The marketer of a novel food can register the name of the product as a trademark. If no period of exclusivity were granted, the developer of the novel food would still be the fi rst to market, have some lead on his rivals, and be in the best position to build his brand to make himself the market leader. However, this lead has not been considered suffi cient by food industry operators to make innovation profi table, at least according to the 2007 report produced for the CIAA. Based on data exclusivity, the trademark and brand holder will have more time to recoup his investment and to build his brand among the consumers.