According to the industry on the other hand, food safety and food quality should be strictly separated into area of law (safety) and area of markets (quality). This would mean leaving the quality dimension of foods for the consumers to decide: consumers will pay for the quality they want. We are of the view that consumers need encouragement by legislators. Products should be legally favoured if they are healthy for people and the environment and also ethically sustainable.7.6 About the Role of Soft Law7.6.1 Types of Soft LawIn Europe, there are at least four different types of soft law concerning food and medicine industries:Administrative regulations and so called normative and scientifi c guidelines by the 1) Commission, the EFSA1577, the EMEA1578 and national food and medicine agencies.Standards by governmental organisations such as Codex or Council of Europe.2) Standards of non-governmental organisations, for example the International Life 3) Science Institute and consumer organisations.Self-regulation guidelines.4) 1576 Nehf 2007.1577 European Food Safety Authority.1578 European Medicines Agency.-303-In China, it is diffi cult to separate between hard law and soft law. First of all, there are laws enacted by the National People's Congress. Then there are regulations and directives given by the State Council, which is the highest administrative body in the nation. In reality, it is the State Council that decides on important law. In addition, there are regulations and directives given by various departments under the State Council. These departments include the Ministry of Health and the State Food and Drug Administration.15797.6.2 Administrative Soft Law and the Role of Regulatory AgenciesVarious administrative guideline-type documents are particularly important in regulating foodstuffs and medicines. There are several reasons for this:There is a need for - scientifi c expertise. Several issues are resolved by scientists alone.There is a need for great regulatory - detail. Requirements on product safety and effi cacy cannot be defi ned in fl exible terms because these may become a matter of life and death or serious impact on health. This applies most of all to the pre-market authorisation procedures. The large amount of detailed rules means large volumes of guidance texts.There is a need for - constant changes, due to the scientifi c and detailed nature of the laws.Administrative soft law is considered a necessary and a natural part of medicine law. In a 2002 WTO publication, it is stated that medicine laws provide the basis for medicine regulation, but standards and guidelines equip regulatory authorities with the practical means of implementing the laws. The absence of soft law guidelines "may lead to variations in the implementation of the law, or even lead to questions about the transparency of law enforcement". Therefore, "standards and guidelines should be established in a written form for all medicine regulatory functions". Administrative soft law should be publicly available to all the parties involved, and be used to guide regulatory practice.1580 For the same reasons, soft law guidelines are needed in the food industry: besides the applicants, guidelines tell the authorities themselves how to lead the application procedures.Senden recommends that European soft law instruments should be rationalised and used consistently, and that their legal effect should be clarifi ed1581. The Commission has worked to clarify the role of guidelines in the fi eld of medicines law1582. The main conclusion is that although not binding, guidelines should be followed unless there is good reason to deviate from them. European soft law on medicines is given mostly at the Community level. The 'Notice to Applicants' by the Commission is an important source of law defi ning the details of the pre-market authorisation process of medicines. The Notice includes regulatory guidelines. Scientifi c guidelines by the EMEA specify the requirements for tests and trials on medicines. These documents are not legally binding but are, in practice, followed like laws.1579 Lists of Chinese food, drug and cosmetics laws in 2007 at: http://www.chinafdc-law.com/laws/index_1.html.1580 Ratanaqijitrasin - Wondemagegnebu 2002, 2.1581 See Recommendations by Senden 2004, 498-502.1582 Procedure for European Union guidelines and related documents within the pharmaceutical legislative framework. London, 20 June 2005. EMEA/P/24143/2004.-304-Efforts to clarify the role of soft law would be welcome also in the food sector. Namely, soft law is also important in European regulation of foodstuffs. With novel foods, the Commission Recommendation is particularly important. The Recommendation defi nes the requirements and details of the European pre-market procedure that applies to novel foods1583. A pre-market procedure applies also to GMO1584 foods. In this case detailed rules were given by the Regulations themselves1585, not by a Notice or a Recommendation. This might have implied that a preference for legally binding instruments was emerging. However, with the Health Claim Regulation, the application procedure is again based on guidelines by the EFSA.Large volumes of soft law materials regulating foodstuffs are given also by EU Member States. For example, the Finnish food agency has their guidelines on practically every issue where legal uncertainty might arise. These guidelines not just explain the law but create it. The Finnish regulatory guidelines include, for instance, a guideline on food supplements, where detailed information on separation of herbal medicines, food supplements and dietetic foods is included. It is stated that to be classifi ed as a food supplement, a product can provide at most 200 kJ energy per day. This information is nowhere else to be found. The UK Food Agency has created a complete regulatory package on so-called borderline products that are either medicines or foods. A particular problem with European national guidelines is that they are not always translated to any other European languages. It is thus diffi cult for entrepreneurs in other European countries or third countries to be aware of their contents. Crucial information could be missed that might even affect the decision on whether to bring the product to the market in the fi rst place.A general problem with international and national guidelines is that the procedure for drafting them is not always democratic or transparent. Guidelines are often discussed among the stakeholders, but there are no rules on who will be asked for opinion and whose opinion weighs the most. When factually delegating legislative power to food or medicine agencies, one must carefully consider who actually makes the decisions and whether common good will be pursued. The capacity and expertise of the agencies must be such that the industries cannot overweigh them.Another basic legal problem with these guidelines is that entrepreneurs and consumers cannot appeal these guidelines as such. Guidelines are something between legislation and administrative decisions implementing the law. Guidelines do not possess the democratic element of legislation, and neither are they subject to control by courts. Legally, the binding nature of guidelines is diffi cult to grasp. Soft law guidelines tell regulation objects how the legislation will be interpreted when decisions in individual cases are made. The makers of soft law guidance documents are not assuming any responsibility on whether they are interpreting the laws correctly. If an entrepreneur decides to follow a guideline, he still cannot be sure of 1583 With novel foods, companies that want to place a novel food on the EU market need to submit their application in accordance with Commission Recommendation 97/618/EC that concerns the scientifi c information and the safety assessment report required. 1584 Genetically modifi ed organism.1585 Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 22 September 2003 on genetically modifi ed food and feed, supplemented by Commission Regulation (EC) 641/2004 of 6 April 2004 on detailed rules for the implementation of Regulation (EC) 1829/2003 of the European Parliament and of the Council as regards the application for the authorisation of new genetically modifi ed food and feed, the notifi cation of existing products and adventitious or technically unavoidable presence of genetically modifi ed material which has benefi ted from a favourable risk evaluation.-305-doing everything correctly. However, following guidelines will probably be seen at least as a bona fi de attempt to follow the law. Not following guidelines will be seen as something an entrepreneur will have to explain. This way, guidelines can be seen as a starting point for discussion.If we want to create law that can be trusted, and rights and obligations that can be enforced, soft law should not be created. In this case, the Commission, the EFSA, the EMEA, and all the national agencies should be given the legal competence to do what they are already doing: giving more detailed regulations on general food and medicine laws. In this case, they would not have to use phrases like "this is not a complete or defi nitive statement of the law". This extensive delegation of hard legislative power does not seem acceptable. In spite of the ambiguity, we might be more comfortable with non-binding soft law.Non-binding guidelines are in fact a part of an implementation strategy where agencies have a lot of power and implementation is based on co-operation, fl exibility, and negotiation. Guidance by guidelines is supplemented by individual guidance given by agencies to targets of regulation. Implementation happens through constant interaction between entrepreneurs and the implementing agencies. Business operators often ask the foodstuff and medicine agencies for information on how to fulfi l their legal requirements, and the agencies explain - and create - the law as best they can. Persuading the regulation targets to follow the rules is often cheaper and faster than forcing them to follow the rules. Using sanctions might spoil the cooperation spirit.The cooperation strategy has its limits, though. First, this kind of implementation strategy can only work when regulation targets are motivated to follow the rules1586. Getting caught selling products that are hazardous to health will have a strong impact on company image for years. For this reason, most food and medicine companies are completely willing to try their best to avoid this. 'Normal' food industry operators and pharmaceutical companies are responsible, or at least interested in their responsible image.However, sometimes business operators will not listen to any non-binding guidance or persuasion. All kinds of 'magic' foods and food supplements marketed for weight loss both in Europe and China can be mentioned as examples. These products are continuously marketed with false and misleading claims, and the agencies must use sanctions to get them off the markets. For these companies, short-term fi nancial gains are more important than long-term credibility.Secondly, there is the risk of so-called regulatory capture, where the objects of regulation push their demands so far that they actually get to decide how they are regulated. Agencies must be careful of not giving too much weight on the industry opinion only. Cooperation and mutual understanding does not mean that the agencies must always please the industry. It merely means that, if possible, industry efforts are recognised, and overly burdensome measures are avoided.The third important challenge of the strategy is treating entrepreneurs equally. The use of non-binding guidelines and case-by-case information guidance means that implementation is fl exible in a certain meaning. This brings the negotiation element into the picture. The entire information and negotiation strategy is based on trust, and it will lose its foundation if implementation takes place on unequal terms. Flexibility cannot mean that companies with similar risks are treated in a different manner. Equal treatment is the responsibility of the 1586 Tala 2001, s. 271. -306-agencies. Ethical rules and implementation principles must be discussed among agency staff. In the supranational context, the decision-making rules are even more important.Scientifi c risk assessments and scientifi c guidelines are the most suitable tasks for foodstuff and medicine agencies. Independent agencies are valuable in resolving scientifi c issues based on science, not politics. If we want the EMEA and the EFSA in Europe and the SFDA in China to perform impartial risk assessments based on science, we must guarantee independence from political actors. This is because it is often tempting to pursue local short-term interests instead of common good, particularly if everybody else is doing the same. Trust in other European nations is needed for the Europeans to allow the agencies to act independently. Likewise in China, the SFDA needs its independence to be credible.Creating total independence of the agency (EMEA, EFSA, of SFDA) creates a control problem, as the agency might develop a will of its own. The control problem can be avoided by setting substantive decision-making criteria by law, in which case it is possible to subject decisions of regulatory agencies to review by courts. This is what Krapohl suggests1587. This means the political actors must set the legal principles under which the agency acts. Only after this can implementation be trusted within a regulatory agency.7.6.3 StandardsStandards are seen as playing a supporting role to legislation. The European Commission sees standards as "technical specifi cations which allow compliance with legal requirements". Standards are seen as innovation-friendly, as they are developed by the interested parties themselves and updated according to state of the art.1588 The European Commission sees standards as the New Approach to legislation that allows public and private interests to merge, at the same time fulfi lling the goals of Better Regulation. The Commission has in 2008 re-asserted its commitment to market-led standardisation and to the voluntary use of standards1589.Even though standardisation is presumed as private action, governments are involved. Standardisation is thus something between public and private. The European Commission says "A stronger role for standardisation ... is important for the ... effort to address economic, environmental and social challenges." If we look at these goals, it sounds like standards are the new law. Standards, particularly global standards, are seen as the new approach saving governance from its oblivion created by the fall of the nation-state. Standards are seen as a "better-regulation" alternative to legislation, and an answer to many of the problems in modern societies.Using standards does not free us from questions of regulation quality, critical evaluation, and further development. How regulation is done is more important than who does it. Standard setting is a procedure: what is important to regulation targets is the outcome of this procedure, the content of the regulation. Regulators need to let stakeholder voices be heard, balance interests, be just.1587 Krapohl 2004.1588 Commission Communication on Standards 2008, 4.1589 Commission Communication on Standards 2008, 6.-307-4.6.4 Self-RegulationAs an alternative to legislation, regulators should consider the viability of self-regulation or industry codes of best practice. Some of food and medicine law issues might be better resolved by the industries themselves. Reliance on self-regulation should always be the result of a conscious process by the government, where the benefi ts and downsides of self-regulation have been weighed. Self-regulation should not exist just because the legislator is too busy to react on some issue, the legislator wants to get the easy way out, or just because the industry claims that legislation is not welcome.There is more space for self-regulation in the foodstuffs sector than with medicines. The pre-market authorisation process for medicines is globally harmonised and very strictly defi ned by law without much room for interpretation. In Europe, the Commission and the EMEA have drafted all the necessary explanatory documents. Self-regulation is mainly related to advertising of medicines. Likewise in China, self-regulation does not have a great role in regulating medicines.Regulation of foods is heading for the same direction: the food industry is getting more and more regulated. New food legislation covers new areas and is also stricter than before. This development is due to serious health problems that have received wide attention and created consumer distrust. Legislators see their job as building confi dence in new products such as functional foods. They have, for example, created pre-market authorisation processes for novel foods and precise criteria for presenting health claims.The food industry is not content with tightening regulatory control. They demand that the area of self-regulation is expanded. They claim to be responsible and willing to guarantee consumer rights themselves. However, they have not in practice addressed the issue of high-energy food marketing to children, for example. Advertising restrictions imposed in Britain were considered too demanding because "they might affect sales". It is not likely that business operators will pass rules on themselves if there is a fi nancial cost to it. Even if the majority of food industry actors were to agree on the rules, there would always be some players breaking the codes and destroying the system.The Chinese government has in food hygiene issues promoted self-regulation and regulation by consumer organisations. The Chinese are also campaigning to make consumers more responsible with regard to food safety issues. Although important, these approaches will not suffi ce. In China it is an enormous task to offi cially control the whole food chain, so the government wishes that food business operators and consumers could manage by themselves. In our opinion, the laissez-faire attitude will not work in China or in Europe. Foodstuffs and medicines are too important for the government to step aside. Self-regulation has proven useful in certain minor questions where the industry as a whole is motivated in following common rules that often supplement hard-law norms.Consumers often prefer legislation to self-regulation, based on experience. Consumer demands in product safety and marketing information are in practice always opposite to the industry propositions. Perhaps consumers are trying to get more than they actually want in order to get at least something. Consumers often ask for things that they don't actually need, and certainly don't want if there is a cost to it. They also ask for things that are certainly not good for them. Consumers are often ignorant, indifferent, or even self-destructive. Just like the industry opinion, the consumer opinion cannot be the only decisive one when deciding on food and medicine law.-308-If we decide to keep creating soft law, we need to discuss the legal weight of this material. There will be no simple answer to the question. Different parts of soft law should have different weight. If a document comes from "a regulatory agency", an average citizen will understand it being the law. There are legal certainty reasons that support giving weight to regulatory agency guidelines. Self-regulation is different, as an entrepreneur knows he is here not dealing with law. The courts do not have to consider that abiding by the industry norms is always adequate. The industry norms might not be strict enough, as businesses are not often the fi rst to impose norms upon themselves. There might be important considerations that have been totally left out of the industry norms. However, following the industry norms can still be used as evidence of bona fi de efforts to act legally, especially where 'hard law' norms are missing.7.7 Final ConclusionsThe main tasks of legislators regarding foodstuffs, medicines, and functional foods are in our opinion:To ensure that products on the market are safe and effective.A) This requires focus on implementation and control. There have to be standards on required scientifi c studies to prove safety.