Litigation in Chinese courts is increasing, but courts are still weak and depend on local governments for fi nancial support and enforcement522. China's initiatives to enhance judicial independence may change this situation. China is taking steps to facilitate enforcement of judgments so that local protectionism will not be a hindrance523.In China, several different government agencies create the laws524. The same authorities are also responsible for the implementation. It is important to notice that in China, legislation has been created very quickly in the past 30 years and implementation lags behind. Laws are typically 521 Five-Year Plan for Food and Drug Safety. April 2007.522 Wikipedia. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese_law.523 Peerenboom 2008 b, 3.524 Food safety for the Chinese domestic market is regulated by several government entities: the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Commerce, the State Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine, and the State Food and Drug Administration. These entities have different and sometimes overlapping responsibilities. The State Administration of Quality Supervision, Inspection, and Quarantine is responsible for imported as well as exported goods. The SFDA oversees all medicines, both Western and traditional Chinese medicines, including their advertising.-84-stricter than reality. This situation allows the government to fl exibly and suddenly tighten control, based on law525. Legislation thus features goals or options rather than reality.The Chinese Food Hygiene Law and Chinese administrators have been criticised for focusing too much on punitive measures and too little on preventive measures such as inspection sites or mandatory safety criteria.526 It is easier to impose penalties instead of facing the enormous task of building the regulation of entire product chains on trust and negotiations. Food and medicine control is particularly challenging due to the huge size and diversity of the country.The Chinese government seems to be dealing with this directly: the administration is restructured and competences are reassigned. This should allow the authorities at least to be aware of their competences and tasks, which is a good foundation. Authorities and their expertise are needed to help regulation targets implement the laws in practice. The new Food Safety Law of 2009 creates a new state-level Food Safety Commission to oversee food safety monitoring. This Commission will consist of members from the Ministry of Health, the Ministry of Agriculture, the General Administration for Quality Supervision and Inspection and Quarantine, State Food and Drug Administration, and the State Administration for Industry and Commerce.525 Welin - Kaulo 2005.526 Li 2005, 29.-85-3 FUNCTIONAL FOODS: FOODSTUFFS OR MEDICINES? In this chapter, we aim to defi ne the boundaries of two legal foodstuffs and medicines. These are the two most important legal concepts for the purposes of this study. This includes reviewing the legal status of functional foods. This chapter forms the background for subsequent chapters, which review the law on safety of foodstuffs and medicines (chapter 4), and the law on marketing of foodstuffs and medicines (chapter 5). 3.1 Legal Concepts and their Functions According to Tuori, legal concepts are important in systematising surface-level legal material.527 New legislation does not function in isolation but is inserted into the legal order's totality. Location of new legislation in this totality is determined by legal concepts. Through the legal concepts, material legislation fi nds its place in the legal order.528 Legal concepts of 'food' and 'medicine' have the important task of systematising the legal material that governs functional foods as we have determined them in chapter 1. The two concepts divide products into two categories, for which separate parts of the legal order apply. Legal concepts are not legal terms. Terms are linguistic phenomena, whereas concepts are semantic phenomena. Concepts are meaning-contents or thought-contents, which can be expressed through one or more terms. 529 This means that the terms 'food', 'foodstuff' and 'elintarvike' (the Finnish word for food) all express the same concept, i.e. they are synonyms. 'Medicine' and 'drug' also express the same concept, whereas 'pharmaceutical' sometimes refers to chemical medicines only. Naturally, 'food' and 'medicine' are also, for example, sociological and medical concepts. Each fi eld of science needs to create their own concepts. Legal concepts are formed by lawyers, whereas, for example, medical concepts are formed by doctors. Lawyers must defi ne legal concepts in order to be able to create and work with legal material. Law-making is not a single process leading to a single legal decision. Instead, law is made in several processes leading to the production of a legal concept.530 The legal concepts 527 Legal concepts are products of the legal culture that lies beneath the surface. Legislation and court cases are the surface. Tuori 2002, 169.528 Tuori 2000, 192-193.529 Frandberg 1983, 84.530 Zamboni 2008, 523.-86-of 'food' and 'medicine' have been formed through legislation and court cases, as will be described below. These concepts can also be developed through jurisprudence. Legal concepts are not static: they are continuously clarifi ed, reformulated, and redefi ned. It is worth noting that legal concepts might be abolished or replaced by other concepts. Rationalism is the ideological base that ties law formation and concept formation together531. Legal concepts can be defi ned as rules aiming to build rationality of the law. Rationality is built in an interaction where different concepts are coordinated and combined to build a rational system. Rationality of the law is not an objective question. It depends on the legal system under consideration, and theoretical assumptions of the observer. Rationality can have both formal criteria such as consistency and coherence, and substantial criteria such as justice or economic effi ciency.532 These criteria of rationality can be applied also to the legal concepts of 'food' and 'medicine'. Legal concepts are lenses through which lawyers see the world533. However, when defi ning legal concepts such as 'food' and 'medicine,' legislators and courts need help from scientists of other fi elds. The separation between foodstuffs and medicines is a question of nutrition, health policy, business opportunities, and consumer behaviour. Besides lawyers themselves, experts of all these other fi elds must acknowledge the legal concepts. Legal concepts affect consumer choice and thus presumably public health. Because of the wide-reaching implications, legal concept formulation deserves consideration, and re-consideration when necessary. Business law is an interaction where legislators and courts respond to the market situation, and markets in turn respond to law. This is also the case in regulating functional foods. By calling business law interaction, we do not see law as merely about removing social friction534. Law is also a question of values: law should guide ethical behaviour. 3.2 Europe: Foodstuffs vs. Medicines? In Europe, the national authorities determine whether a product is a medicine or a food. This categorisation decision is based on European defi nitions of foodstuffs and medicines. However, these defi nitions leave room for interpretation. The European Court of Justice will ultimately decide how the EU defi nitions are to be interpreted. The national authorities will have to follow the ECJ practice. 3.2.1 Defi nitions in Legislation Codex Alimentarius535 defi nes food as: "Any substance, whether processed, semi-processed or raw, which is intended for human consumption, including drink, chewing gum and any substance which has been used in the 531 Frandberg 1983, 115. Rationalists believe that rational structures can be created by rational thinking.532 Zamboni 2008, 523.533 Tuori 2002, 51.534 See Poyhonen 1997, 248. 535 The UN 'food code', jointly made by FAO and WHO. Codex was discussed above in chapter 2.-87-manufacture, preparation or treatment of 'food'". Food does not include cosmetics or tobacco or substances used only as drugs.536 In the EU, a product can be regarded as a medicinal product either by its marketing claims or by its functions. The defi nition of 'medicinal product' in the EU medicinal products directive537 is the following: "Medicinal product:Any substance or combination of substances presented(a) as having properties for treating or preventing disease in human beings; orAny substance or combination of substances which may be used in or administered to (b) human beings either with a view to restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions by exerting a pharmacological, immunological or metabolic action, or in making a medical diagnosis." Of the different functions that medicinal products have, restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions by exerting a pharmacological, immunological or metabolic action have implications for functional foods. Making a medical diagnosis is something a functional food would not do. The defi nition in the Medicinal Products Directive was made to encompass all products designed or claiming to deliver a preventive, therapeutic or curative effect, including not only products having a genuine effect but also those which are not suffi ciently effective or do not have the effect which consumers might expect from their presentation. By submitting all products with medicinal functions and claims to a common licensing procedure, it was considered that effective and consistent consumer protection could be ensured, not only from harmful toxic products as such, but also from a variety of products being used instead of proper, effective remedies.538 The defi nition was changed by the Directive 2004/27/EC539. It was then added that there had to be a pharmacological, immunological or metabolic action, if the product is to be regarded as a medicinal product by function. The new defi nition thus specifi es the type of action that the medicinal product may exert on physiological functions540. The previous defi nition only stated, "modifying physiological functions" without specifying different types of 'actions' through which these 'functions' are modifi ed. 'Physiological functions' clearly mean the functions of the living organism, the physical body. The terms 'pharmacological', 'immunological' and 'metabolic' are more diffi cult to understand and although they are decisive here, they are not defi ned in the directive. The terms still leave room for interpretation on what is considered a medicinal function. 536 Codex General Standard for the Labelling of Pre-packaged Foods (1985), 8.537 Article 1(2).538 Coppens et al. 2001, 141.539 Directive 2004/27/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 amending Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use. The former defi nition was the following: "Medicinal product: Any substance or combination of substances presented for treating or preventing disease in human beings. Any substance or combination of substances which may be administered to human beings with a view to making a medical diagnosis or to restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions in human beings is likewise considered a medicinal product".540 Preamble 7, directive 2004/27/EC.-88-According to the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary, 'pharmacology' means the study of medicines and drugs, including their action, their use and their effects on the body.541 According to Elhurst University542, medicines can be divided into main groups according to the following different types of pharmacological actions:Chemotherapeutic agents used to cure infectious diseases and cancera) 543,Pharmacodynamic agents used in non-infectious diseasesb) 544, andMiscellaneous agents such as narcotic analgesics and local anaesthetics. c) Immunity means the ability of the body to resist pathogens545, i.e. agents that cause diseases. 'Immunology' means the study of immunity and its causes and effects.546 Immunological disorders are conditions where the immune system fails to function properly, such as AIDS. 'Immunological action' in the defi nition of medicinal product thus means something that modifi es, corrects or restores physiological functions by affecting the immune system. According to the Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary, metabolism means "all the chemical processes in your body, especially those that cause food to be used for energy and growth".547 Metabolic processes are organic processes that are necessary for life. 'Metabolic action' in the defi nition of medicinal thus means something that modifi es, corrects or restores physiological functions by affecting the metabolic system. This could be interpreted to mean almost anything that happens in the body to keep the body alive. It seems that foods could have 'pharmacological', 'immunological' or at least 'metabolic' actions. It seems complicated to defi ne medicines in a manner that would clearly exclude foods. A category of "borderline" products has emerged. The European Commission tried to resolve the issue of these borderline products by Directive 2004/27/EC. According to preamble 7 of the Directive, the defi nition of medicinal products and simultaneously the scope of the Medicinal Products Directive needed clarifi cation particularly as a result of scientifi c and technical progress. It was stated that there is a growing number of "borderline" products between the medicinal product sector and other sectors. The aim was to modify the defi nition of medicinal product so as "to avoid any doubt as to the applicable legislation when a product, whilst fully falling within the defi nition of a medicinal product, may also fall within the defi nition of other regulated products".548 Preamble 7 continues: "it is necessary, in case of doubt and in order to ensure legal certainty, to state explicitly which of the two colliding provisions have to be complied with". Where a product comes clearly under the defi nition of other product categories, for example food and food supplements, the medicinal product directive does not apply.549 New Article 2(2) gives the answer in situations where the case is not clear: "In cases of doubt, where, taking into account all its characteristics, a product may fall within the defi nition of a 'medicinal product' and 541 Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary.542 Elmhurst University web page: Virtual Chemistry book.543 Sulfa drugs, antibiotics.544 Cholinergic, Adrenergic, Hallucinogenic, Sedatives.545 The Free Dictionary. http://www.thefreedictionary.com/immunity.546 Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary.547 Cambridge Advanced Learner's Dictionary.548 Preamble 7, directive 2004/27/EC.549 Preamble 7, directive 2004/27/EC.-89-within the defi nition of a product covered by other Community legislation the provisions of this Directive shall apply". This means a product is in unclear cases classifi ed as a medicine. The defi nition of food in the EU General Food Regulation does not offer any guidance on the categorisation issue: "For the purposes of this Regulation, "food" (or "foodstuff") means any substance or product, whether processed, partially processed or unprocessed, intended to be, or reasonably expected to be ingested by humans. "Food" includes drink, chewing gum and any substance, including water, intentionally incorporated into the food during its manufacture, preparation or treatment. It includes water after the point of compliance as defi ned in Article 6 of Directive 98/83/EC550 and without prejudice to the requirements of Directives 80/778/EEC551 and 98/83/EC. "Food" shall not include:feed;a) live animals unless they are prepared for placing on the market for human b) consumption;plants prior to harvesting;c) medicinal productsd) within the meaning of Council Directives 65/65/EEC(21) and 92/73/EEC(22) 552;cosmetics within the meaning of Council Directive 76/768/EEC(23)e) 553;tobacco and tobacco products within the meaning of Council Directive 89/622/EEC(24)f) 554;narcotic or psychotropic substances within the meaning of the United Nations g) Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961, and the United Nations Convention on Psychotropic Substances, 1971;residues and contaminants. "h) 555 This means that when it comes to products ingested for health reasons, such as functional foods, the defi nition of 'food' covers everything that is left outside the defi nition of 'medicinal product'. A product always has to be either a food or a medicine, not both. The Medicinal Products Directive refers to medicinal products as "...substances or combination of substances...". Substance is defi ned as "any matter irrespective of origin which may be human, animal, vegetable or chemical. Foods are substances or combinations of substances within this broad defi nition. Therefore, the raw materials themselves do not determine the classifi cation of a product as food or medicine.556 550 Council Directive 98/83/EC of 3 November 1998 on the quality of water intended for human consumption.551 Council Directive 80/777/EEC of 15 July 1980 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to the exploitation and marketing of natural mineral waters.552 These Directives were codifi ed and replaced by the Directive on the Community Code Relating to Medicinal Products for Human Use 2001/83.553 Council Directive 76/768/EEC of 27 July 1976 on the approximation of the laws of the Member States relating to cosmetic products.554 Council Directive 89/622/EEC of 13 November 1989 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States concerning the labelling of tobacco products.555 Article 2.556 Coppens et al. 2001, 142.-90-3.2.2 European Court of Justice: Case Law As stated above, Article 1 of Directive 2001/83/EEC defi nes a "medicinal product" as: Any substance or combination of substances presented(a) as having properties for treating or preventing disease in human beings; orAny substance or combination of substances which may be used in or administered to (b) human beings either with a view to restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions by exerting a pharmacological, immunological or metabolic action, or to making a medical diagnosis." Medicinal products may well fall under both limbs of the defi nition but the EuropeanCourt of Justice (ECJ) has confi rmed that falling under either limb is suffi cient to classify it as a medicinal product. [Upjohn 1989]: "Directive 65/65 provides two defi nitions of the term "medicinal product": one relating to presentation, the other to function. A product is medicinal if it falls within either of those defi nitions."