A general food and medicine code is complemented by legislation on specifi c matters368.According to Kan and Zhang, factors considered in formulating food standards are:feasibility of standards - on the basis of research,current and future - risk evaluation,international - food law codes and standards of other countries, andindustrial - standards.369When drafting new food regulations, central and regional government, businesses, associations, NGOs, and Internet are consulted370. With reference to better food legislation, Kan and Zhang urge that law shall be based on science, and regulators must look at the food chain from farm to table. Food law must emphasise the responsibility of food producers and sellers to guarantee food safety: food business operators must have effective in-house control, using HACCP371 based systems. The businesses are responsible for taking dangerous products off the 363 Kan and Zhang (2002) use the term "management measures" of these pieces of law. 364 Health foods are foods which have a specifi c health function, are suitable for a certain group of people, and which are not for therapeutic purposes. Health foods will be discussed below as regards requirements on their safety and effi cacy.365 List of Chinese food, drug and cosmetic laws at http://www.chinafdc-law.com/laws/list_1-27_5-118_1.html.366 Food Hygiene Law, Article 15.367 According to Article 24 of the new law, local food laws can be developed in the absence of national laws.368 Hong Kong government web page. http://www.fehd.gov.hk/safefood/foodlaw_list.html#part5.369 Kan - Zhang 2002.370 Kan - Zhang 2002.371 Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points.-58-market. The government should assist by reducing over-detailed regulation and emphasizing coordination.372The Chinese views on how to develop food law sound similar to the European approach, where food law is legally based on scientifi c risk analysis, global harmonization is considered important from free trade perspectives, and industry is always consulted when drafting new legislation. In China, there is not a particular authority like EFSA responsible for scientifi c risk assessment as regards food law. Instead, the Ministry of Health and the SFDA, which will in the near future be transferred under the Ministry, perform risk assessment.The new Food Safety Law covers food safety evaluation, monitoring, recall and information release. In addition to passing a new Food Safety Law, the government promised to stipulate or update more than 7,700 national standards for the safety of foodstuffs, medicines, and other consumer goods in 2008. It is not possible to analyse the effect of this vast legislative work here. Thousands of standards mean thousands of standardised details. The government states that after the current reforms, all the requirements and testing methods should "comply with international standards". Also a more general "National Food Safety Standard" is on the way. The national authorities shall prepare it together, and review it through a Committee373. Legislators have promised to include the general public in the process of law formulation, and to publicly post all the drafts.3742.3.3.2 MedicinesThe basic Chinese law on medicines is the Medicine Administration law along with its Implementing Regulations. The National People's Congress enacted the law itself in 2001, and the State Council gave the implementing regulations in 2002. More detailed information on what is required is to be found in the "Registration Measures" given by the SFDA in 2007375.Similarly to the regulation of foodstuffs, the basic laws on medicines are complemented by several pieces of administrative regulations given by the SFDA. This material could be defi ned as soft law as the SFDA or its predecessor, the SDA, provides it. The SFDA has an important role as a formulator of laws and administrative regulations on medicines. The regulations include rules on manufacturing licences, certifi cation for Good Manufacturing Practice, Good Clinical Practice, Good Supply Practice, distribution, labelling and packaging, advertising, pricing, import-export, etc. Medicine marketing was in 2007 regulated in a stricter and more detailed manner because of the problems and scandals related to false advertising.Regulations on traditional Chinese medicines have existed since 2003. Instead of safety or effi cacy evaluation of traditional medicines, these Regulations are focused on general principles such as the importance of traditional medicine and its development. Also a regulation on Good Agricultural Practice of traditional Chinese medicines has existed since 2002. This regulation 372 Kan - Zhang 2002.373 See Articles 13 - 15 of the Food Safety Law Implementation Measures.374 GOV.cn Saturday, March 8, 2008. http://english.gov.cn/2008-03/08/content_914117.htm.375 The SFDA promulgated the latest "Measures for the Administration of Drug Registration" on July 10 2007, and they entered into force in October 1, 2007.-59-is interim and given by the SDA, the predecessor of the SFDA. A separate law on scientifi c evaluation of traditional medicines is pending, but has caused controversy.Local government authorities have enacted their own medicine regulations, which may supplement and modify some of the national regulations. Local rules exist particularly on labelling.2.3.4 Implementing the Law2.3.4.1 Pre-market Controls Used in China2.3.4.1.1 FoodsFirst of all, enterprises and persons involved in food production and marketing must have a licence. Enterprises engaged in food production or marketing as well as food vendors must obtain a hygiene license issued by the administrative department of public health before they shall be permitted to apply for registration with the administrative departments of industry and commerce. No person without a hygiene licence may engage in food production or marketing.376 The tasks of issuance and control of hygiene licences are delegated to local offi cials377. Food safety risk assessment is "a scientifi c assessment performed in order to identify the possible adverse impact upon human health by biological, chemical and physical hazards of food"378.The following food categories are subjected to pre-market control:food additives -health foods -novel foods -GM foods. -Here we focus on pre-market procedures for health foods and novel foods, as these are probably the most relevant legal categories for our purposes.Producing health foods requires an additional licence. A health food producer will have to apply to the provincial health authorities for a production permit. The permit will be attached to the manufacturer's Hygiene Licence. As do other companies since 2002, health food manufacturers must have Good Manufacturing Practices and Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points in place.379376 Chinese Food Hygiene Law, Article 27. Similarly in new Food Safety Law Implementation Measures, Article 18.377 Article 27.3 of the Food Hygiene Law: The measures for the issuance and control of hygiene licences shall be worked out by the administrative departments of public health of the people's governments of the provinces, autonomous regions, or municipalities directly under the Central Government.378 Food Safety Law Implementation Measures, Article 55.379 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 286.-60-Pre-market registration of medicines and health foods is under the competence of State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA), more particularly its Department of Drug Registration.380 Novel foods, GMO foods, and additives are authorised by the Ministry of Health, and in the future, health foods will also be authorised by the Ministry.All foods with health claims must undergo the approval process set forth by the SFDA. A Chinese company submits the application to provincial health administration authorities who perform preliminary examination. Upon passing this, the application is submitted to the Health Food Evaluation Centre of the State Food and Drug Administration (SFDA). For imported foods, the application is sent straight to the SFDA.381The State Food and Drug Administration, Department of Drug Registration, and the Division of Health Foods administer health foods. The tasks of the Division of Health Foods are:drafting criteria of marketing authorisation and research guidelines for health foods -evaluation and approval of health foods - 382.The SFDA issues a Certifi cate of Approval on Health Food for the qualifi ed health food, and formulates the label for the product. The Certifi cate can be used in connection with the label.383Prior to submission of the application, the following reports must be obtained from an authorised laboratory:report of toxicology safety assessment, -report of functionality (effi cacy) evaluation, -analytical report of active ingredient, -report of product stability study, -report of sanitary inspection. - 384There are more than 30 authorised laboratories in China, although not every laboratory can conduct all tests. Each laboratory is allowed to evaluate certain claims according to its capacity. The Institute of Nutrition and Food Safety, and the Chinese Centre for Disease Control in Beijing test all imported health foods.385Further regulations for the application procedure are given by a separate piece of law, the Regulation on Application and Acceptation of Health Food of Ministry of Public Health 380 According to the SFDA's web page, the tasks of SFDA's Department of Drug Registration are, among others, - to draft and revise national drug standards, - to control approval and registering of new drugs, drugs with national standards, and imported drugs, - to implement protection system for traditional Chinese medicines, - to draft criteria of marketing authorisation for health food, and - to control approval of health foods. http://www.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W44993641/index.html.381 The Measures for the Administration of Health Food Registration, which took effect July 2005. Huang - Lapsley 2005, 264-265. 382 SFDA web page. http://www.sfda.gov.cn/cmsweb/webportal/W44993701/index.html.383 Article 5.384 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 276-282.385 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 282.-61-(1999). Article 6 of the Regulation lists the necessary documents and samples for domestically produced and imported health foods respectively. In addition to the above-mentioned research reports, and three product samples, the following information must be included in the application for Imported Health Food:Hygiene Permit Application Form for Imported Health Foods1. Product formulation and its relevant scientifi c evidence2. Name and content of active ingredient(s) and the analytical procedure for the 3. ingredientsProcessing techniques and fl owchart4. Product quality specifi cation (industry standard)5. Inspection reports (as stated previously) by the authorised laboratory6. Product packaging design (including product label)7. Product manual or description8. An entrust contract, is an applicant is an entrustee9. 386Evidence documents such as product sale permit issued by relevant authority from the 10. manufacturer's countryOther relevant data in support of the approval process.11. 387The SFDA will evaluate the application with respect to the following aspects:Health food name: whether it is accurate and scientifi cally sound. -The application: whether it is complete, translated into Chinese, and legible. -Formulation: which are the raw materials used. -Manufacturing technique: whether good manufacturing practice is followed. -Quality: what is the process for controlling active ingredients. -Safety: evaluating the toxicological test reports. -Effi cacy: evaluating the functionality assessment reports. -Active ingredient: evaluating the analytical report of the active ingredient. -Product stability: whether the product will last two years of shelf life. -Hygiene: evaluating the hygiene reports. -Label and manual: whether they are accurate and true. - 388If the SFDA approves the health food, it issues an "Approval Certifi cate of Health Food" or "Approval Certifi cate for Imported Health Food". Together with the certifi cate, the product receives a serial number such as Foodstuff/Health 2007 No1234. while simultaneously receiving the right to use the health food symbol. Both the serial number and the symbol must be marked on health food packaging.389 For imported foods, the Certifi cate is inspected by the food hygiene and inspection agency at a Chinese entry port390.386 An entrusted agent of a foreign functional food manufacturer.387 Health Food Regulation, Article 6. Huang - Lapsley 2005, 282.388 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 284-285.389 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 265.390 Huang - Lapsley 2005, 286.-62-The pre-market control is not solely a responsibility of the control authorities. Also the food industry operators themselves are responsible for fi nding and controlling risks in their activities. According to the Chinese Food Hygiene Law391, "Enterprises engaged in food production or marketing shall improve their own system for food hygiene control, appoint full-time or part-time workers to control food hygiene and strengthen inspection of the foods they produce or market". It is further stated392 that food and food additives393 may be dispatched from factory or sold only after their producers have carried out inspection and found them to meet the principles according to the hygiene standards and the hygiene control regulations.In China, the plan is to further enhance self-discipline of food industry enterprises by creating and enforcing a culture of credibility. The New Food Safety Law and its Implementation Measures further strengthen the principle of self-control. Enterprises are the fi rst responsible parties for food safety. Blacklists of operators are created, and supervision efforts are focused on the most susceptible enterprises according to risk management principles.394 This focus on self-discipline and supervision based on different risk categories is similar to the European approach. If companies themselves were responsible, the authorities would save in supervision costs.The fi rst Novel Food Regulation in China was issued in 1990. In 2007, a new Regulation395 was issued and came into force at the beginning of December 2007. To drive the novel food industry, the new regulation aims to remove complex approval procedures, while tightening food safety measures.396 The government wants to encourage scientifi c research and development of novel foods397 and to add greater variety to the market.The aim of the Novel Food Regulation is to strengthen supervision and administration of novel foods, and to safeguard the health of consumers.398 The Novel Food Regulation was based on the Food Hygiene Law399 of the People's Republic of China. Novel foods are subject to pre-market approval by the Ministry of Health. It is prohibited to manufacture or use as food or food raw materials, materials corresponding to the defi nition of novel foods in Article 2 of the Novel Food Regulation, if they have not yet been approved and published as novel foods by the Ministry of Health400.According to Article 23 of the Novel Food Regulation, "Enterprises manufacturing, operating and/or using novel foods shall not claim or imply the therapeutic effects and health 391 Article 18.392 Article 24393 And also food contact materials.394 Five-Year Plan for Food and Drug Safety. April 2007. Page 9.395 Ministry of Health: Administrative Measures on Novel Foods.396 The Ministry of Health according to Chinadaily.com.397 Novel Food Regulation, Article 4.398 Novel Food Regulation, Article 1. 399 In the Food Hygiene Law, it is stated: "Before beginning production of new types of foods or food additives using new resources, the enterprises engaged in their production or marketing must submit the data necessary for the evaluation of the hygiene and nutrition of such products;.... Before beginning production of the above new products, it shall also be necessary to provide samples of the products for examination and approval, in accordance with the specifi ed procedures for examining and approving food hygiene standards." Article 20.400 Novel Food Regulation, Article 18.-63-functions of the novel food." If a product is a novel food and health claims are wanted, the health food procedure applies, in which case safety and effi cacy are both evaluated by the SFDA. Novel food assessment is safety assessment, and does not include effi cacy assessment.An application for a novel food at the Ministry of Health shall include the following materials: Application for hygiene administration permit for novel food;(1) Research and production report;(2) Brief summary and fl ow chart of processing techniques;(3) Product quality standards;(4) Status on research and production at home and abroad, as well as safety related (5) documents;Product label and instructions; and(6) Other materials helpful to assessment and review. (7) In addition to these documents, a sealed product sample or 30-grams of raw material is required. In the case of imported novel food, it is also required to submit certifi cates by food control authorities indicating that the food is considered legal in the exporting country.401After accepting applications for novel foods, the Ministry of Health organises the Assessment Committee to conduct a preliminary technical examination. In case additional or corrective materials are needed, the applicant shall cooperate. After the preliminary technical examination, the Assessment Committee shall determine the safety test items, test sample batches, test methods and testing institutions of the novel food, and decide on whether to conduct on-site examination and collect and seal samples, and inform the applicant. Generally, testing institutions accredited by the Ministry of Health shall carry out the safety tests. In case on-site examination and collection of sealed samples is required, the applicants of domestically-produced novel foods shall fi le an application to the local health administration department at the provincial level which shall organise implementation of such on-site examination, collection and sealing of samples. Applicants of imported novel foods shall fi le the applications to the Ministry of Health, who organise the implementation (of the on-site examination, collection and sealing-up of samples).4022.3.4.1.2 MedicinesAs with the European system, China also has pre-market control over the dominant regulatory mechanisms for medicines. Registration of medicines is under the responsibility of the SFDA. Part of its powers has been delegated to local level government authorities (provinces, autonomous regions or municipalities directly under the central government). These local level authorities can issue manufacturing licenses and approve medicine advertisements403.Good Manufacturing Practice (GMP) is where medicine safety begins. GMP is a system to ensure products are consistently produced and controlled according to quality standards. 401 Novel Food Regulation Article 11.402 Novel Food Regulation, Article 12.403 Tsoi 2007. -64-It is designed to minimise the risks involved in any pharmaceutical production that cannot be eliminated through testing the fi nal product. A directive circular issued by the Ministry of Health in July 1995 marked the offi cial launch of GMP certifi cation in China. The China Certifi cation Committee for Drugs (CCCD) was established in the same year.404The Chinese pre-market control of medicinal products is based on one authorisation procedure, the result of which applies to the whole country. It is stated in the law that local people's governments and offi cials shall not restrict or exclude the entrance of authorised pharmaceuticals under the justifi cation of conducting inspections405. The goal is to harmonise medicine law in China and to remove local barriers to trade.The SFDA is responsible for pre-market approval of medicines.