This is to minimise disagreements and to facilitate the application for marketing authorisation in as many markets as possible.248Article 8 of the Directive 83/2001/EC lists the particulars and documents that must accompany an application for marketing authorisation. The same requirements apply to both to 243 European Generic Medicines Association web page http://www.egagenerics.com/gen-authorisation.htm.244 Directive 83/2001/EC, preamble 12.245 Reform of EU Pharmaceutical Legislation. Commission DG Enterprise MEMO/01/267. Brussels, 18 July 2001. 246 Directive 2001/83/EC, as amended by Directive 2004/27/EC, Article 10.247 European Generic Medicines Association web page: http://www.egagenerics.com/gen-authorisation.htm.248 European Generic Medicines Association web page: http://www.egagenerics.com/gen-authorisation.htm.-41-the centralized procedure, the mutual recognition procedure, and the decentralised procedure249. Annex I of the Directive 83/2001/EC contains more precise analytical, pharmacotoxicological and clinical standards and protocols in respect of the testing of medicinal products. The ethical requirements of clinical trials are covered by Directive 2001/20/EC250.The following research results must be included in an application:results of physico-chemical, biological or microbiological tests,-results of toxicological and pharmacological tests,-results of clinical trials.- 251Article 10 of the Directive 83/2001/EC grants procedural relief as regards generic medicinal products: By way of derogation from Article 8(3) (i), the applicant shall not be required to provide the results of pre-clinical tests and of clinical trials if he can demonstrate that the medicinal product is a generic of a reference medicinal product authorised in the primary procedure at least eight years ago in a Member State or in the Community." A generic medicinal product authorised according to Article 10 shall not be placed on the market until ten years have elapsed from the initial authorisation of the reference product.The defi nition of 'generic medicinal product' is important here. The defi nition of 'generic' was added because the previous rules requiring 'essential similarity' were unclear. It is given in Article 10(2) (b):"'Generic medicinal product' shall mean a medicinal product which has the same qualitative and quantitative composition in active substances and the same pharmaceutical form as the reference medicinal product, and whose bioequivalence with the reference medicinal product has been demonstrated by appropriate bioavailability studies. The different salts, esters, ethers, isomers, mixtures of isomers, complexes or derivatives of an active substance shall be considered to be the same active substance, unless they differ signifi cantly in properties with regard to safety and/or effi cacy. In such cases, additional information providing proof of the safety and/or effi cacy of the various salts, esters or derivatives of an authorised active substance must be supplied by the applicant. The various immediate-release oral pharmaceutical forms shall be considered to be one and the same pharmaceutical form. Bioavailability studies need not be required of the applicant if he can demonstrate that the generic medicinal product meets the relevant criteria as defi ned in the appropriate detailed guidelines. "The current law leads to a situation where a generic is normally available to consumers after 10 years from the initial authorisation. The new EU Member States argued unsuccessfully for the period of exclusivity to last only six years. They tried this partly to protect their own generic industries, but also to preserve affordable access to medicines.252The holder of the initial authorisation can have the ten-year exclusivity period extended to a maximum of eleven years. This is if, during the fi rst eight years of the ten years, the 249 Regulation 726/2004/EC, Article 6(1) it is referred to Directive 83/2001/EC: Each application for the authorisation of a medicinal product for human use shall specifi cally and completely include the particulars and documents as referred to in ... Directive 2001/83/EC. 250 Directive 2001/20/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 4 April 2001 on the approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating to the implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for human use.251 Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 8(3)(i).252 Walley 2005. -42-marketing authorisation holder obtains an authorisation for one or more new therapeutic indications, which, during the scientifi c evaluation prior to their authorisation, are held to bring a signifi cant clinical benefi t in comparison with existing therapies.253The rules on generic medicinal products are a compromise between important issues:If the product is proven to be safe and effective, it is not economically sound to allocate 1) more resources for research. There are also ethical reasons for not conducting repetitive tests on humans or animals without over-riding cause254.Innovative fi rms should not be placed at a disadvantage2) 255. There must be an adequate benefi t for completing all the required tests and trials.The summary of product characteristics must contain all the important information on the medicine, for example composition in terms of active substances, therapeutic indications, and undesirable effects.256 The generic industry complains that summary of product characteristics constitutes one of the major hurdles facing a generic medicine's application for authorisation. The generics applicant must introduce the same application fi le with the same summary of product characteristics in all Concerned Member States. However, originator products often have different summaries in different countries. It is thus a problem when some Member States would like the summaries of the originator and the generic to be the same.Article 10(a) grants another relief, which is often used by herbal medicines:"By way of derogation from Article 8(3) (i), ..., the applicant shall not be required to provide the results of pre-clinical tests or clinical trials if he can demonstrate that the active substances of the medicinal product have been in well-established medicinal use within the Community for at least ten years, with recognised effi cacy and an acceptable level of safety ... . In that event, the test and trial results shall be replaced by appropriate scientifi c literature. "The requirements on safety and effi cacy of herbal medicines will be discussed below in detail.2.2.4.3 Post Market Controls in EuropeLike pre-market control, responsibility for post-market control of foodstuffs and medicines lies A) with food business operators themselves and B) with the authorities.2.2.4.3.1 FoodsAs stated above, pre-market control applies to certain foodstuffs, not all. Functional foods and other innovations have widened the area of pre-market control of foods. Novel foods and health claims are scrutinised in the pre-market arena. However, in spite of all the pre-market control activities, illegal foodstuffs commonly appear on the market. Post-market control by entrepreneurs, authorities, and by competitors and consumers is still needed.253 Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 10(1).254 Directive 83/2001/EC, preamble 10.255 Directive 83/2001/EC, preamble 9.256 Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 11.-43-According to the General Food Regulation, if a food business operator fi nds out it has produced or marketed a product not complying with food safety requirements, it shall withdraw the product from the market and inform the authorities thereof257. Even if the food conforms to applicable specifi c provisions, it can be found unsafe258. This might be the case if there is new scientifi c information on an authorised substance, or if the food contains a foreign material such as glass or metal, which is not foreseen in legislation259. If the product may have reached the consumers, the operator shall effectively and accurately inform the consumers of the reason for its withdrawal and, if necessary, recall from consumers products already supplied to them260. The authorities need not be informed if the operator withdraws a food that has not yet left the immediate control of the operator261.The General Food Regulation gives the Member States the general task of post market control. EU Member States must enforce food law, and monitor and verify that requirements of food law are fulfi lled by food business operators at all stages of production, processing and distribution. Consequently, they shall maintain a system of offi cial controls and surveillance.262Regulation 882/2004/EC263 (the Control Regulation) gives more specifi c rules on how the Member States must arrange their food control systems. For example, authorities should have enough qualifi ed and experienced staff, offi cial controls should be regular and proportionate to the risk, procedures should be documented, and laboratories involved should comply with international standards264. Adequate fi nancial resources need to be available for organising the controls, and for this purpose, Member States may levy fees265.In Finland, food law implementation is the task of the Food Safety Agency. Municipal and regional authorities under the Food Safety Agency handle the inspections of facilities and products, whereas advertising is mainly supervised at a national level. Imported products are under the responsibility of the Customs. The authorities may, for example, prohibit release of goods, order labelling to be changed, or order corrective marketing. All decisions can be made more effective with conditional fi nes.266 The decisions of food control authorities can be appealed in the appropriate (regional) Administrative Court.257 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, Article 19(1).258 Guidance on the Implementation of Articles 11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 of Regulation (EC) Ndeg 178/2002 on General Food Law. Conclusions of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health. 20 December 2004. Page 18.259 Guidance on the Implementation of Articles 11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 of Regulation (EC) Ndeg 178/2002 on General Food Law. Conclusions of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health. 20 December 2004. Page 20.260 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, Article 19(1).261 Guidance on the Implementation of Articles 11, 12, 16, 17, 18, 19 and 20 of Regulation (EC) Ndeg 178/2002 on General Food Law. Conclusions of the Standing Committee on the Food Chain and Animal Health. 20 December 2004. Page 18. 262 General Food Regulation 178/2002/EC, Article 17(2).263 Regulation (EC) No 882/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 29 April 2004 on offi cial controls performed to ensure the verifi cation of compliance with feed and food law, animal health and animal welfare rules.264 Preambles 11, 13, 14, and 15 of the Regulation, respectively.265 Preamble 32 of the Regulation.266 The Finnish Foodstuffs Act 23/2006, section 7. -44-The EU further controls the enforcement and control activities of Member States. As the guardian of the European Community Treaties, the Commission is responsible for ensuring that Community legislation on foodstuffs is properly implemented and enforced.267 The Commission has a special task unit, the Food and Veterinary Offi ce (FVO), 268 which evaluates compliance with EU standards and works to make control systems more effective.The main task of the FVO is to carry out inspections in Member States and in third countries that export foodstuffs to the EU. Each year they develop and publish an inspection program, identifying priority areas and countries for inspection.269 The results of each inspection are published in an inspection report, together with conclusions and recommendations.270 The FVO makes recommendations to the country's food control authority to deal with shortcomings revealed during the inspections.For example on 10 May 2007, the FVO published their reports on Latvian potatoes, Indian fi shery and aquaculture products, Nicaraguan fi shery products, pesticides in Moroccan plant products, and UK import controls and border inspection posts. The Member State authority is requested to present an action plan to the FVO on how it intends to address the discovered problems. The FVO evaluates this plan and monitors its implementation through follow-up.271In addition to reports on each inspection, the FVO produces summary reports on series of inspections to several Member States on the same subject, and their annual report. The FVO also has a role in developing EU food law, and where appropriate, the FVO may in their inspection reports point out areas where legislation is unclear, not functioning properly, or missing. The Commission may take these fi ndings into account when drafting new legislation.272If the Member States fail to control foodstuffs, the EU Commission can revert to Article 226 procedures273 of the EC Treaty, and ultimately take the matter to the European Court of Justice. According to Inglis, the Internal Market safeguard clauses of the Accession Treaties give the Commission a more effective instrument regarding the new Member States that joined the EU in 2004. The Commission has wide discretionary powers to take action against new Member States and force them to comply with the EU laws.2742.2.4.3.2 MedicinesIt was stated above that pre-market control is the dominant regulatory mechanism for medicines. In spite of very detailed pre-market control procedure with specifi ed requirements, 267 European Commission web page: http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/index_en.htm.268 The FVO is part of the DG SANCO (Directorate-General for Health and Consumer Protection) and it is based in Ireland. The number of its staff is 163 in May 2007, half of which are on-the-spot inspectors. http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/how_en.htm.269 European Commission web page: http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/how_en.htm.270 The food control authority of the country visited may comment on the inspection reports at their draft stage. http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/how_en.htm.271 European Commission web page: http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/how_en.htm.272 European Commission web page: http://ec.europa.eu/food/fvo/how_en.htm.273 "If the Commission considers that a Member State has failed to fulfi l an obligation under this Treaty, it shall deliver a reasoned opinion on the matter after giving the State concerned the opportunity to submit its observations. If the State concerned does not comply with the opinion within the period laid down by the Commission, the latter may bring the matter before the Court of Justice." Article 226 of the EC Treaty.274 Inglis 2004, 608.-45-post-market control is also needed. Post market control is needed to take illegal medicines off the market, and to tackle illegal medicinal product advertising. In addition, post market control is needed to take products off the market that have originally been authorised but later been uncovered as unsafe or ineffective.Post-market control is performed by entrepreneurs and by authorities. Member States may also impose specifi c requirements on doctors and other health care professionals in respect of the reporting of suspected serious or unexpected adverse reactions, in particular where such reporting is a condition of the marketing authorisation.275 Consumers are also encouraged to report side effects of medicines.Member States must supervise the observance of good manufacturing, laboratory and clinical practices. Member States must inform the relevant EMEA Committee and the Commission of all instances where a manufacturer or importer fails to fulfi l its obligations.276 For medicines authorised in the mutual recognition procedure, decentralised procedure, or national procedure, the national authorities may revoke product licenses or order a marketer to stop marketing illegal medicinal products . In Finland, the authority responsible for post-market control is the National Agency of Medicines. For medicines authorised through the Centralised Procedure, the EMEA may introduce amendments to the marketing authorisation, and reassess the risk-benefi t balance of the product at any time277. These actions lead to withdrawal from the market of any medicinal product presenting a negative risk-benefi t balance under normal conditions of use278.Pharmacovigilance means monitoring and reporting of undesirable effects of medicinal products. It falls under the responsibility of operators and authorities. Member States must have a pharmacovigilance system in place, and the EMEA is responsible for coordinating Member States' pharmacovigilance activities. The pharmacovigilance system shall be used to collect information useful in the surveillance of medicinal products, with particular reference to adverse reactions in human beings, and to evaluate such information scientifi cally. Information on misuse and abuse of medicinal products shall also be taken into account.279The marketing authorisation holder shall have permanently and continuously at his disposal an appropriately qualifi ed person responsible for pharmacovigilance. This person shall make sure that all information about adverse reactions received by the company is gathered and accessible at least at one point within the Community. This person shall also prepare reports to the authorities and provide the authorities all the necessary information for the evaluation of the medicinal product.2802.2.4.4 Penalties Used in EuropeAccording to the General Food Regulation, Member States of the EU shall lay down the rules on measures and penalties applicable to infringements of food law. The measures and 275 Medicinal Products Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 101.276 Regulation 729/2004/EC, preamble 31.277 Regulation 729/2004/EC, preamble 30.278 Regulation 729/2004/EC, preamble 29.279 Medicinal Products Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 102.280 Medicinal Products Directive 83/2001/EC, Article 103.-46-penalties provided for shall be effective, proportionate and dissuasive.281 It is similarly stated in medicine law that Member States must determine penalties that are effective, proportionate and dissuasive.282 EU Member States consider fi nes and/or imprisonment as penalties for breaking the rules on safety and effi cacy/marketing or foodstuffs or medicines. In some Member States, the penalties are more stringent than in others. Contrary to the Chinese practice, no precise euro amounts of fi nes are stipulated by legislation. Instead, penalties are defi ned case by case by courts on various levels. Criminal responsibility will be invoked only in exceptional cases, as the authorities will endeavour to settle any breach of the regulations by negotiation or other out-of-court procedures. They may for example issue prohibitions or information orders as discussed above.In Finland, foodstuff misdemeanour is defi ned in the Food Act, section 79. Foodstuff misdemeanours are minor acts contrary to the Food Act, which do not directly cause danger to people's health. This means for example omission of a notifi cation duty, or failure to draft a written plan for in-house control.