(2009) also experienced similar problems of extracting tulsi DNA from multicomponent formulations. The trnH-psbA region was able to amplify more commercial samples in comparison to the ITS region. One of the reasons why the trnH-psbA region might have produced better PCR results for the commercial samples is because it is a shorter fragment; therefore, making it easier to amplify samples which may have been degraded during the manufacturing processes. The nuclear ITS Region The use of the ITS region for producing DNA barcodes to identify various species has been investigated with varying degrees of success (Jurges et al., 2009; Selvaraj et al., 2012); yet little is known about its suitability as a barcode for the Ocimum species. This investigation explored the suitability of the ITS region as a barcode to differentiate between Ocimum species. As little documented data is available, the results from this study can be used to contribute to the gap in the literature. In this investigation the ITS region provided variable quality sequencing data. Of the total 111 samples collected, two samples were excluded from the analysis as they were seeds which failed to germinate and DNA was not successfully extracted. A further 27 commercial samples including: capsules, tablets, shampoos, creams, and soaps were also excluded after several attempts to amplify the samples with no success. Hence, 82 samples were included in this analysis, of which the ITS region was used to successfully identify 35 (43%) samples (Appendix 12); this included the identification of 14 community, 5 commercial, 14 reference, and 1 miscellaneous sample. The ITS region shows a high level of discriminatory power for some species (Li et al., 2011); this was observed for the O. tenuiflorum and O. gratissimum samples analysed. The ITS region is known to be better at discriminating species than some of the plastid regions; however, the limitations associated with the ITS region have a key in influencing the use of these primers (Hollingsworth et al., 2011). As identified by Kress et al. (2005) the reason the ITS region may not sequence as well in some plants is due to the problem of paralogy and issues associated with this highly repeated part of the nuclear genome. It was observed that samples which were either O. tenuiflorum or O. gratissimum were often straight forward to PCR and amplified well; in addition, they produced good quality sequencing data for analysis. The PCR worked better on fresh and dried plant material as opposed to samples which may have been exposed to manufacturing processes (e.g. 189 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra capsules, tablets, and tea bags). For commercial products and other Ocimum species (e.g. O. africanum, O. basilicum, O. citridorum, and O. kilimandscharicum) the PCR results were not as easily obtained. Samples which failed to produce a single bright band on the gel were then subjected to various processes. For example, the PCR was repeated using a lower concentration of DNA by diluting the sample (1 in 10), or an isopropanol clean-up of the DNA sample was carried out to remove any inhibitors in the sample which maybe inhibiting the PCR reaction. Of the 35 samples which gave a positive PCR result with the ITS region, 54% gave a clear PCR result and a good quality sequence on the first attempt; all the others required further optimisation before good quality sequencing data was obtained. Although several samples gave a positive PCR reaction result the data could not be used for the analysis as the quality of the sequencing data was poor. The results from this investigation show that the ITS region could be a potential barcode for authenticating some of the Ocimum species (e.g. O. tenuiflorum and O. gratissimum). But not all of the Ocimum species were successfully amplified; thus, the use of other barcode regions should also be explored. Problems Encountered with the ITS Region Several challenges were encountered while working with the ITS region including: difficulty amplifying and sequencing the region, poor quality sequencing data, and fungal contamination. Multiple Bands Several samples displayed multiple bands on the gel electrophoresis (Figure 4-24). This may indicate the presence of more than one species in the DNA sample; i.e. multiple species if a mixed sample is used, or contamination. The DNA for these samples was extracted from a single plant so there was no chance of the sample being mixed. A DNA ladder was used to estimate the size and quantity of the DNA fragments. In Figure 4-24, the fragments look very similar; Samples with multiple bands . G29 G31 G33 G34 DNA ladder Figure 4-24 Gel Image of Ocimum Samples with Multiple Bands 190 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra this was investigated further by extracting the DNA from the individual bands, repeating the PCR to amplify the DNA, and then sequencing the samples. The DNA sequencing of the individual bands revealed that they had the same sequences. This could be due to the formation of secondary structures (Kress et al., 2005). Poor ITS Sequencing Data Some of the Ocimum species did not sequence as well as O. tenuiflorum and O. gratissimum with the ITS region. The messy DNA sequences may be due to paralogous gene copies; the multiple copies of the ITS region within cells can lead to different variants being simultaneously sequenced (Hollingsworth, 2011). This problem can cause the same species to be given several different identities depending on different laboratory protocols, and chance (Hollingsworth et al., 2011). Poor quality sequencing data may also be caused by the formation of secondary structures by the ITS primer which can interfere with the sequencing (Kress et al., 2005). In addition, the GC content can also be a factor which can affect the quality of the sequence. The GC content is the fraction of Guanine (G) and Cytosine (C) nucleotides in the amplicon. GC rich regions can contribute to the formation of secondary structures, and often require optimisation (e.g. higher annealing temperatures) before suitable amplification can occur (Henke et al., 1997), making sequencing very difficult (Fazekas et al., 2010). A high GC content can increase the possibility of mis-priming; thus affecting the quality of the sequencing date. The GC content for the Ocimum samples varied between 45-72%. Some samples with a high GC content did have poor quality sequence data in comparison to those with a lower GC content. Amplification of Fungal Contamination The sequencing results for several samples revealed fungal DNA had been amplified instead of the plant DNA. This is a well-known problem with the ITS region, as the fungal ITS region is so similar to that in plants it can be unintentionally amplified (Hollingsworth et al., 2011). Various stages were repeated; for example, a new DNA extraction, an isopropanol clean-up of the original DNA sample, another PCR with the original/cleaned/diluted DNA sample. Some of the samples eventually gave a plant species; but, some samples still appeared to amplify the fungal contamination rather than the plant DNA. For example, samples I45 and I49 collected in India were identified as Alternaria alternate (Fr.) Keissl. The results for these samples could not be used. 191 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.6.2.6.1 Application of ITS2 It has been suggested that if the full ITS region is difficult to sequence a portion of it (ITS2) may provide a useful alternative (Li et al., 2011). As the ITS2 region is a smaller fragment of the ITS region it can reduce the amplification and sequencing problems associated with the entire ITS region (Kress et al., 2005; Hollingsworth et al., 2011). Samples which did not give good quality results with the full ITS region (ITS1 and ITS4) were then sequenced with the ITS2 primer. The ITS2 primer is kept as a universal primer by Macrogen, hence several samples were re-sequenced with the ITS2 primer in addition to ITS1 and ITS4 using the Macrogen online ordering facility. However, the results were still not as good as expected as the sequencing data was poor and could not be used for the analysis. The plastid trnH-psbA Region The results from this analysis confirm the high level of interspecific variation amongst the trnH-psbA region in the Ocimum genus. The region amplified and sequenced samples efficiently and produced good quality sequence data. PCR with the trnH-psbA primers was conducted with the 82 Ocimum samples (community, commercial, and reference); of which the species for 66 samples (80%) were identified including: 21 community, 13 commercial, 25 reference, and 6 miscellaneous samples. Reactions were conducted personally and by a Graduate Champion Research Student (Linnette Sleigh) under supervision. The initial PCR and gel electrophoresis results appeared to work more efficiently without the need to clean the DNA or repeat the PCR, unlike with the ITS region. In general, most of the samples gave good quality sequencing data on the first attempt. Some species may have low variability, making it difficult to distinguish between species (Newmaster et al., 2007). This was observed with the two types of O. gratissimum (A and B), where only 3 base differences were identified by trnH-psbA, over 334 bases; whereas, the ITS region identified 21 base differences across 526 bases. If specific primers to distinguish between the two types of O. gratissimum species were to be created using the trnH-psbA results it would be more difficult, because of how similar the sequences are. Similar to results published by Christina and Annamalai (2014) and the British Pharmacopoeia (2016), the trnH-psbA region proved to be useful for authenticating the Ocimum species in this investigation. 4.6.3 Scanning Electron Microscopy Results Several of the reference Ocimum specimens obtained from Professor Peter Nick (Figure 4-25) and some community tulsi samples were analysed using SEM (Figure 4-26), to confirm 192 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra the identity of the samples. The results revealed the unique differences in the surface structures of the samples analysed. The Ocimum species are all aromatic plants; hence, oil glands which secrete the aromatic oils can be found dispersed across all of the leaves (Maimes, 2004). The size and number of oil glands are characteristically different in the Ocimum species, and can be used to distinguish between the samples (Suddee et al., 2005). Differences in hair structure and density were identified. O. africanum, O. basilicum and O. citridorum are described as having hairless leaves (i.e. there are no trichomes on the surface of the leaves) (Paton, 2014); this is evident in Figure 4-25 as the surface of the leaves are glabrous. On the other hand, O. gratissimum and O. tenuiflorum do have hairs on the upper and lower epidermis of the leaves. Differences between the two species can be seen; O. gratissimum has a higher density of trichomes covering the entire surface of the leaf in comparison to the O. tenuiflorum sample. Although O. tenuiflorum does have trichomes, there are fewer of them and they are widely dispersed around the leaf. Figure 4-26 shows the differences in surface structures between fresh and dried Raam and Shyam samples, collected from participants in the UK. Both tulsi samples have numerous oil glands, which are classical characteristics of the Lamiaceae family. However, the Raam tulsi sample has more trichomes covering the leaf in comparison to the Shyam tulsi leaf. These morphological differences can help distinguish between different species. These SEM images confirm the DNA analysis results which found Shyam tulsi was O. tenuiflorum while the Raam tulsi samples was O. gratissimum. Figure 4-25 SEM Image of Ocimum Species SEM images of the lower epidermis of five different Ocimum species (O. africanum, O. basilicum, O. citridorum, O. gratissimum, and O. tenuiflorum) taken at De Montfort University by R. Armitage and S. Bhamra. 193 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra SEM can provide valuable information about the surface structures of different species, which can help differentiate between them. All of the images in Figure 4-25 and Figure 4-26 A + B used fresh leaf samples for the SEM; the surface structures were clear and easier to identify in these images. Dried leaf material imaged by SEM (Figure 4-26 C + D) was difficult to analyse as the structures had dehydrated it was more difficult to identify them. Jacono (2009) observed that when plant material was dried or cut into smaller fragments it became difficult to identify the plant from its morphology; this was observed with the dried samples used in this investigation. Jacono (2009) claims the most reliable way to identify a plant is while it is fresh, either alive in its habitat or having been recently collected; although, adulterants may sometimes resemble the same characteristics as a genuine sample (Joshi et al., 2004). This illustrates the importance of having highly skilled professionals involved in the identification of plants and the use of additional authentication techniques to verify the identification of the species. A = lower epidermis of a fresh Raam tulsi leaf; B = lower epidermis of a fresh Shyam tulsi leaf; C = lower epidermis of a dried Raam tulsi leaf; D = lower epidermis of a dried Shyam tulsi leaf, taken at De Montfort University by R. Armitage and S. Bhamra. Figure 4-26 SEM Comparisons of Raam and Shyam Community Tulsi Samples Collected in the UK A C B D 194 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.7 Tulsi Project Summary 4.7.1 The Current Use of Tulsi by South Asian Communities in the UK The interview results revealed what tulsi plants were being used for, where tulsi plants, products, and seeds were sourced from, and what value the plants had amongst SA communities in the UK. In total 13 interviews were conducted which enabled in-depth data to be gathered and analysed. Most of the interviews were conducted face-to-face by the researcher, although several were done via telephone due to the location. Interviews with participants from across Birmingham, Leicester, and London were conducted, with the collection of tulsi samples for molecular analysis. Two main varieties of tulsi were identified and kept by participants; which were Raam and Shyam (Krishna) tulsi. Raam tulsi was described as having large flat, bright green leaves which often grew quite tall; whereas, Shyam tulsi had distinctly smaller, darker green to purple leaves, and was harder to grow. Of the population surveyed 92% of participants (n=12) claimed to grow their own tulsi plants, with varying degrees of success in the UK. Reference to how the cold and damp climate in the UK was not ideal for the growth and survival of tulsi was noted. Participants who grew their plants from seeds revealed that they had got their seeds from family, friends, and religious institutes; both in the UK and abroad - from Africa or India. The sharing of seeds and cuttings was common practice amongst the SA communities. The different species of tulsi grown and used in the UK may be explained by the different migration and settlement patterns of SA communities. The knowledge of what the plants were used for and how they should be maintained was passed on predominantly by older members of the family (mothers and grandparents), and priests and scriptures from the Hindu religion. Due to the representation of the Hindu goddess Virinda Tulsi, it was evident that the tulsi plants had a prestigious position within Hindu communities. It was observed that the plants were cared for and kept as religious figures in specific locations either in the front or centre of the home, and in temples (mandirs). Participants believed it was a blessing to be able to keep a tulsi plant in the home. The results identified numerous medicinal benefits of tulsi including the use in treating sore throat, cough, diabetes, asthma, and skin conditions. The findings of this research have explored the current position of the tulsi plant amongst SA diasporic communities, in the UK. The range of medicinal, culinary, cultural and religious uses of tulsi makes this plant highly valuable. The vast array of commercial products available on the market are designed to be easy and convenient for people to utilise the health benefits of the plant around the world, even if they do not have access to the plant. 195 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.7.2 Identification of Plant Species Traditional methods of plant identification involve the use of morphological features, where botanists have looked for particular traits to identify plant families and species. Techniques such as Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) have been improved to be able to distinguish microscopic plant features, without destroying the surface structures (Pathan et al., 2008). The SEM images captured during this research were able to illustrate the differences between the species; just as Dr Alan Paton had suggested (Paton, 2014). The O. gratissimum sample had significantly more trichomes (hair like structures) on the leaf surface in comparison to the other Ocimum species; while the smooth, glabrous surface of the O. basilicum leaf was seen clearly in the SEM images. Although, when samples were dried it was difficult for the lay person to distinguish between the different species; with the correct training the results could be better interpreted and understood. SEM images were only taken of some of the reference specimens (i.e. O. africanum, O. basilicum, O. citridorum, O. gratissimum, and O. tenuiflorum) to explore the differences in surface structures between the different species. The results from the SEM analysis were able to support the molecular results; i.e. the different surface structures where characteristic of the different species. The age of the plant, condition of the sample and manufacturing process can affect the characteristics of the samples, making them difficult to identify without the correct knowledge (Jacono, 2009). Likewise, chemical analysis is also affected by the natural variance in plants, growing conditions, processing, and storage (McCutcheon, 2002). This is where DNA analysis provides its unique advantages as it is not affected by the age of the plant, condition (e.g. fresh or dried), growth conditions, or manufacturing processes (e.g. drying and storage).