148 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra material to prevent the accumulation of electrostatic charge, which could reduce the quality of the image produced. However, advances in technology mean the fresh sample can be analysed under SEM without altering the surface properties (Pathan et al., 2008). The technique also allows surface structures to be measured and quantified in three dimensions (Talbot and White, 2013). Chemical Analysis In the early days of botanical identification, the introduction of microscopy was a ground breaking and revolutionary technique used to aid the authentication of plants; later, advances in technologies promoted the use of spectrophotometry and chromatography (McCutcheon, 2002). Since then the chemical profile of plants has been used as a valuable tool for authentication, quality control, and standardisation of medicinal plants (Joshi et al., 2004). Thin layer chromatography (TLC), high performance thin layer chromatography (HPTLC), and high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) are some of the techniques currently used for the identification of plants. TLC is inexpensive, simple and fast to use; however, the poor reproducibility of results and lack of automation are major drawbacks of this technique (Dong, 2013). The refinement of HPLC and HPTLC techniques mean they are more precise, can be automated, and the results are reproducible (Cziczo, 2004; Dong, 2013). One of the main limitations associated with chemical analysis is that the chemical profiles can be affected by the natural variability of plants. This can be affected by the growing conditions (regional variations, soil, climate, and pests), stage of harvesting, drying, storage (treatment with pesticides and preservatives), and processing (McCutcheon, 2002; Joshi et al., 2004; Vlietinck et al., 2009). Currently European Pharmacopoeial standards are based on a plants morphology (macroscopic and microscopic descriptions), and a combination of chemical analysis techniques, for example TLC and HPLC (McCutcheon, 2002; Vlietinck et al., 2009). The use of DNA authentication techniques to identify the plants species could also be used alongside the current standards (Joshi et al., 2004). The British Pharmacopoeia (2016) has recently validated the use of DNA based identification techniques for HMs. 149 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra DNA Authentication of Plants DNA barcoding is a technique used to identify species based on short regions of DNA (Kress et al., 2005). Variations in a defined region of the DNA sequence can discriminate between different species, identify contaminants and adulterants (Joshi et al., 2004; De Mattia et al., 2011). This novel authentication technique was introduced by Paul Hebert in 2003 (Kress and Erickson, 2008). The analogy of a supermarket scanner identifying a product from the black and white stripes on the barcode was used to exemplify how this technique can be used to identify species by their unique genetic sequence (Kress, 2009). To be able to distinguish between species, the target DNA barcode must contain enough variability, but, must also have regions of similarity for the universal primers (Rai et al., 2012). A primer is a short fragment of DNA which is complimentary to the target region of DNA. Plant DNA is stored in the mitochondria, nucleus, and chloroplasts. The mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase gene (cox1) is highly conserved in plants; the low level of sequence variation renders this region ineffective for authentication (Kress et al., 2005). The internal transcribed spacer (ITS) region of the nuclear ribosomal unit is one of the most commonly sequenced regions in plants (Kress et al., 2005). It evolves relatively quickly and can be useful in determining interspecies and sometimes intraspecies relationships (Cullings and Vogler, 1998). The 5.8S rRNA gene evolves slowly, like the other genes for the 18S and 28S rRNA; and is often used as an alignment tool due to its location (Figure 4-5). Although, in certain groups the ITS region has reduced species level variability so may not be as useful (Kress et al., 2005). Several other concerns with the ITS region include: the existence of divergent paralogous copies within individuals, development of secondary structures which result in poor quality sequencing data, and the inadvertent amplification of endophytic DNA in the presence of fungal contamination (Kress et al., 2005). These limitations of the ITS region have led to it being rejected as a core component of the plant barcode (Hollingsworth et al., 2011). Figure 4-5 The ITS Regions in the Nuclear Ribosomal RNA Repeat Adapted from Cullings and Vogler (1998). ITS - internal transcribed spacer; IGS - Intergenic spacer. ITS-1 is located between the 18S and 5.8S ribosomal RNA gene; ITS-2 is located between the 5.8S and 28S ribosomal RNA gene. 150 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra The Consortium for the Barcode of Life (CBOL) have proposed two coding regions from the plastid (chloroplast) genome, matK and rbcL, as "core barcodes" for plants, to be used alongside other regions (Hollingsworth, 2011). The non-coding chloroplast trnH-psbA marker has also been identified as an efficient region for discriminating between species (Vassou et al., 2015). Kress et al. (2005) propose the trnH-psbA region is the best plastid option for sequencing as it has good priming sites, length, and interspecific variation. In addition, as the trnH-psbA region is shorter, it may be useful for damaged or degraded samples (Howard, 2010). DNA analysis can be used as a stand-alone method or in conjunction with traditional methods for the identification of plant species (Chen et al., 2014). DNA barcoding is not restricted by the condition of the plant, as with morphological features which can change and degrade depending on various harvesting, processing, and storage conditions (McCutcheon, 2002). It does not require specialist taxonomic knowledge for identification. Unlike chemical analysis which can vary between plants harvested at different stages (young or mature) DNA analysis is not affected by the age of the plant (Kazi et al., 2013). The genetic composition is not affected by environmental factors or physiological conditions (Joshi et al., 2004). The amount of plant sample required is very small (from as little as 0.02g of dried or 0.1g of fresh plant material), in comparison to other techniques which may require several grams or a full plant for identification. DNA can be extracted from fresh, frozen, dried, or preserved samples. As the sample of DNA extracted is very small (usually 100ul) it is easy to store, compared to bulky plant specimens (Howard, 2010). Nevertheless, there are several limitations with using DNA barcoding including: the amplification of non-target DNA from contaminants, and problems with primer specificity and amplification (Hollingsworth, 2011). Recently the New York State Attorney General Eric Schneiderman's office sent out cease and desist letters to four retailers (GNC, Target, Walmart, and Walgreens) to stop the sales of some herbal supplements sold in New York. As research commissioned by his office found products were substandard according to the DNA testing. They revealed that many of the products (79%) could not be genetically verified or found ingredients not listed on the label (Schneiderman, 2015); for example, Echinacea, Ginseng, and St John's Wort products from the various retailers (e.g. Walmart and GNC) were found to contain contaminants such as asparagus, rice, grass, wheat, and citrus. Schneiderman's results were questioned as he relied on just one technique for species authentication and all the work was conducted in one laboratory. Critics have said that his results should have been validated with microscopic or chemical methods, rather than being used as a stand-alone method for authentication. A statement released by the Chief Science Officer of the American Botanical Council (ABC) Dr Stefan Gafner, and ABC Founder and 151 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Executive Director Mark Blumenthal stated, "DNA testing seldom is able to properly identify chemically complex herbal extracts as little or no DNA is extracted in many commercial extraction processes" (American Botanical Council, 2015). A major drawback to the use of molecular techniques is that the plants DNA may be damaged or degraded during manufacturing and processing stages; however, to try and overcome this problem, primers have been designed to target shorter fragments (Chase et al., 2005). Furthermore, the lack of reliable reference barcodes for species identification may be limiting the use of this technique. This is one of the key issues identified by this research and the aim is to help contribute some new barcodes to the references libraries. The process of DNA authentication involves the extraction of DNA, a polymerase chain reaction (PCR), gel electrophoresis, and sequencing. After this a DNA sequence is generated which can be used to identify and authenticate plant species. The theory behind each stage will help to explain how DNA analysis is conducted and what happens during the processes. DNA Extraction The extraction of DNA from plants (fresh or dried), tablets, capsules, tea bags, and other formulations can be done by using various protocols or commercial kits. Initially the sample needs to be lysed to disrupt the cell wall, cell membrane, and nuclear membrane to access the DNA. This can be done using chemical and physical methods (e.g. manual grinding with a pestle and mortar, or sonication). The DNA is then precipitated ensuring the removal of molecules such as proteins (i.e. using a protease), polysaccharides and lipids (i.e. using a detergent or surfactant), phenols, Ribonucleic acid (RNA) using an RNase and other secondary metabolites which may affect the quality of the purified DNA. Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) A PCR needs to be carried out in order to exponentially amplify the target region of the DNA. The basic components required for a PCR include the DNA template, primers, DNA polymerase, deoxynucleoside triphosphates (dNTPs), and a buffer to maintain optimal conditions for the reaction. Once the reaction mixture is created, it is subjected to repeated cycles of variable temperatures for denaturing, annealing, and extension of the template DNA. Primers are small fragments of DNA which act as a starting point for DNA synthesis. The PCR amplification requires two primers, which act as templates for sequence amplification 152 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra in the forward and reverse direction. The free nucleotides (dNTPs): Adenine (A), Cytosine (C), Guanine (G), and Thymine (T), are attached to the complimentary sequence of the primers template by the DNA polymerase enzyme, which assembles the new DNA strand. MyTaq Red Mix (2x) is a ready to use mixture for PCR reactions; it contains the buffer, DNA polymerase enzyme (Taq polymerase), dTNPs, MgCl2, enhancers, and stabilisers to ensure a robust PCR reaction occurs (Bioline, 2015). Once the PCR mixture is created, it is put in to a thermal cycler for the PCR reaction to commence. The temperature is initially raised up to 95oC to enable the DNA double helix to be unwound, by breaking the hydrogen bonds; this exposes the single strands of DNA. The reaction temperature is then reduced for the annealing step; where the primers bind to specific sites on the single strand of DNA. The temperature is then increased for the final step of elongation, where the Taq polymerase synthesises a new complimentary strand of DNA by adding the free dNTPs. These cycles are repeated to amplify the template DNA. Finally, there is an extension period which ensures the reaction is complete. Gel Electrophoresis Gel electrophoresis is the process of separating and analysing DNA fragments based on their size. An electric current is used to attract the negatively charged DNA fragments towards the anode. Shorter molecules move faster; therefore, they migrate further along the gel. A dye (e.g. SYBR(r) Safe) added to the gel enables results to be viewed under ultra-violet (UV) light in a transilluminator. A single bright band indicates the PCR has amplified the DNA (Figure 4-6). A faint band could indicate a low concentration of DNA in the sample. A smeared band could suggest too much DNA in the sample, DNA degradation or contamination (Palumbi et al., 2002). Multiple bands formed suggest multiple priming sites for the primer on the target DNA (National Diagnostics, 2011); in such cases the bands can be cut out and purified for analysis. If no band is seen it could mean the PCR failed, the quantity or concentration of the DNA template was insufficient, or the presence of contaminants, in such cases the PCR can be repeated after the original DNA sample has been cleaned. A DNA ladder can be used to determine the size of a DNA fragment. A positive control is a known sample which amplifies and is used to ensure the PCR reaction works; while, a negative control (distilled water) is used to ensure there is no contamination during the process. Figure 4-6 Image of a Gel, after PCR Amplification and Gel Electrophoresis of Several Ocimum Samples (A-E), Negative and Positive Controls, and a DNA Ladder 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 Key: 1. Negative Control 2. Positive Control 3. Sample A 4. Sample B 5. Sample C 6. Sample D 7. Sample E 8. DNA Ladder Negative control - distilled water; positive control - DNA sample known to amplify; DNA ladder - Bioline Easy Ladder 1. Size (base pair) 2000 1000 500 250 100 153 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra  Sequencing During the sequencing process a reaction similar to that of the PCR stage is carried out. Primers, DNA polymerase, dNTPs and dideoxynucleotides triphosphates (ddNTPS) are added to the query sample. The ddNTPS lack the 3 prime hydroxyl group required for extension, therefore these act as the terminators of the elongation of the DNA sequence. The ddNTPs representing each of the four nucleic acid bases (A, C, G, and T) are labelled with a different florescent tag which will help with detection. These ddNTPs attach complementarily to the new DNA strands; thus, DNA chains of varying length are produced (Figure 4-7). Capillary electrophoresis is then used to sort the DNA fragments by length. The sample is loaded into a capillary tube which contains a viscous polyacrylamide gel. An electrical current is applied, which pulls the negatively charged DNA through the capillary; the shorter fragments migrate through the gel faster than the larger strands. As the fragments emerge at the end of the capillary they pass a laser beam, this causes the dye to fluoresce. The fluorescence emitted by each base is detected by a photocell which then relays the information into a computer that visualises the data as an electropherogram (Wiley, 2012). This creates the genetic sequence of the sample. Species identification and authentication The Consortium for the Barcode of Life (CBOL) is an international initiative which aimed to develop DNA barcoding as a global standard for the identification of biological species. Genetic reference libraries have been created for sharing DNA sequences, including GenBank and the Barcode of Life Database (BOLD). These databases allow DNA sequences to be shared, managed, analysed, and used for comparisons (De Mattia et al., 2011; CBOL, 2015). Specimens used to create DNA barcodes still need to be authenticated by a taxonomist using the traditional methods of morphology to ensure the correct species is being used for the standard. Once a database is set up, fast and reliable identification can commence. Figure 4-7 DNA Sequencing Summary, from Etheridge 2012 154 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra DNA Authentication of Ocimum Species Several researchers have explored the use of different regions (e.g. nuclear ITS, plastid matK, rbcL and trnH-psbA) for DNA barcoding of the Ocimum species. Some have created reference sequences which are available on databases such as GenBank, while others have used the reference sequences to authenticate fresh, dried and commercial tulsi products. Jurges et al. (2009) identified the difficulties of extracting tulsi DNA from multicomponent formulations and tried to define markers to distinguish between different Ocimum species. The ITS 1 and ITS 2 markers were amplified for eight Ocimum samples, of which five were supposedly O. tenuiflorum. Their results identified three of these samples were truly O. tenuiflorum while the other two samples had been incorrectly identified and were other Ocimum species instead. Their findings were confirmed by microscopic and macroscopic characteristics of the samples. One of the challenges Jurges et al. (2009) found was the different terminology used in Ayurvedic tradition and scientific botany. Although tulsi is the term used for O. tenuiflorum Jurges et al. (2009) claim in different parts of India "tulsi" could be used for other Ocimum species or any kind of basil depending on the origins. Their use of DNA barcoding to identify tulsi samples in commercial samples had limited success; however they were able to produce several reference Ocimum sequences. Christina and Annamalai (2014) claim Ocimum species are morphologically very similar to one another hence easily misidentified. Consumption of the wrong species could have adverse effects or an inappropriate therapeutic effect. To address these issues Christina and Annamalai (2014) used DNA barcodes to validate several "Medicinally important Ocimum species." They looked at the efficiency of three barcodes (matK, rbcL and trnH-psbA) to identify nine Ocimum species from India. They concluded the markers they used showed a high PCR amplification efficiency which enabled the discrimination of the Ocimum species. Of the three markers used, they found the trnH-psbA region was ideal for the authentication of Ocimum species although it was not able to distinguish between the two varieties of O. tenuiflorum - Raam and Krishna tulsi. Anbazhagan et al.