These findings suggests evidence based medicine has become very important in guiding peoples decisions; similar conclusions have been proposed by many researchers including Evans (2008) and Pole (2008). The range of resources available to help people make an informed decision about their healthcare has become easier to access, and these have reinforced the ideas of using medicines which have been clinically approved. Question 17 & 18: Which do you think are more effective for treating minor (Question 18) serious/ long term health conditions (Herbal or Western Medicines)? The final two questions aimed to get an insight into which system of medicine participants believed was more 'effective' for treating minor and serious health conditions. Minor ailments included short term health problems such as a cough, cold, headache or indigestion; whereas, serious illnesses included chronic conditions like hypertension or diabetes etc. Figure 2-27 shows a clear distinction between the perceived effectiveness of HMs and CWM for minor or serious conditions. Most participants (65%, n=125) believed HMs were more effective than CWM for minor health problems. Comments about HMs being natural and therefore safer with less side-effects were noted; as well as the long standing use of herbal remedies amongst participants' families. Although, some participants had their reservations and expressed their concerns of the insufficient evidence to support the use of HMs; for example, Participant 160 claimed, ''the effectiveness of herbal remedies can only be determined if they are well established.'' While others mentioned their lack of knowledge and experience with using HMs so felt they could not comment on the efficacy of HMS, as they had only ever used CWM. 020406080100120140160180Minor illness Serious illnessNumber of ParticipantsHerbal or Conventional Western Medicines for Minor and Serious Health Conditions HerbalMedicinesConventionalWesternMedicinesFigure 2-27 Participants' Views on the Efficacy of Herbal and Conventional Medicines for Minor and Serious Health Conditions 77 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra When participants were asked which type of medicines they thought were more effective for more serious health problems, 93% (n=179) of participants were in agreement that CWM were more effective than HMs. This is supported by findings by Bhopal (1986a) who discovered Asian communities preferred to use Western medicines over traditional herbal remedies; and Johnson et al. (1983) who found that Asians in the West Midlands did not perceive traditional HMs to be superior to CWM, in fact they felt conventional medicines were better. Participants in this research who suffered from long term serious health problems such as diabetes and cardiovascular disorders made reference to feeling obliged to take their prescription medicines; due to fears of what their doctor would say if they did not comply and the health consequences of not taking their medicines. Others expressed their trust in CWM due to the rigorous clinical testing and evidence to prove their safety and efficacy. Despite the mass consensus, a small fraction of participants (7%, n=13) believed that HMs were more effective than CWM even for long term serious health problems. This included participant 122 with end stage liver cancer who said her chemotherapy treatment was making her worse and it was the HMs she was taking that were keeping her strong. Wachtel-Galor and Benzie (2011) found the use of HMs increased in patients with terminal illnesses such as cancer. Some participants in this research sample who were in favour of HMs for minor and serious conditions made references to how valuable HMs were and noted that some CWM were based on traditional HMs. Equipped with the right knowledge, these participants believed they could manage their own health without the need for CWM; they believed that natural remedies were intended to be used to treat illnesses and were safer with fewer adverse effects. Similar results have been observed by other researcher who have looked into the perceived safety and efficacy of HMs and also found that people think HMs are natural and so safer (Ipsos MORI, 2008; Mintel, 2009; Jennings, 2014). There is a clear division in opinions as to which form of treatment is more effective for minor and serious health problems. Most participants felt HMs were effective for minor ailments while CWM were more effective for serious conditions. The results highlight that the research participants had a great wealth of knowledge of HMs which has been passed on through the generations. The use of HMs amongst SA communities in the UK remains prominent and it can be concluded that participants use both HMs and CWM to treat, manage, and maintain their health. 78 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 2.7 South Asian Traditional Medicines Project Summary This research set out to explore the origins, use and transmission of knowledge of HMs amongst SA diasporic communities in the UK. Two hundred surveys were conducted across several locations in Birmingham and Leicester of which 96% (n=192) were used in this analysis. Although the research was conducted in two cities participants from across the UK took part in this questionnaire; hence, the results can be generalised to SAs in the UK. The research sample was composed of people from different age groups, ethnicities, and religions. The methods used to conduct this research enabled the aims and objectives to be successfully achieved. As the questionnaires were all administered by the primary researcher the importance of remaining impartial and not influencing participants responses was imperative; the skills obtained while doing this have been highly valuable. One of the key findings of this investigation was that 66% (n=126) of participants claimed to use HMs to supplement their health; this increased to 72% (n=139) of participants who said they used HMs for minor ailments, by the end of the survey. Participants from all of the different age, religious, and ethnic groups claimed to use HMs. Unlike the Ipsos MORI report (2008) which claimed the use of HMs was more popular with people educated to degree level or above, the use of HMs amongst this research population was not affected by their academic status; participants with no qualifications and those with degrees or above all claimed to use HMs. A difference in the use of HMs for minor ailments was seen between male and female participants; whereby, more female participants (78%, n=103) than male (60%, n=36) said they used HMs for minor ailments. This is supported by the results of the Ipsos MORI report (2008) which found 41% of female compared to 29% male participants claimed to have used HMs. The Mintel report (2009) also highlights that women are more likely to use HMs than men; in addition, Ernst (2000) claims women generally use HMs more than men. When participants were asked if they preferred to use HMs or CWM for minor ailments the vast majority of participants (79%, n=152) said they would prefer to use HMs; several participants did comment on their lack of knowledge of HMs which prevented them from using HMs. HMs were considered to be more effective than CWM for minor ailments by 65% of participants (n=125); whereas, for more serious health problems CWM were deemed more effective by 93% of participants (n=179). Just 7% of participants (n=13) believed HMs were more effective than CWM for serious illnesses. These results signify that both HMs and CWM have an important role in the management of participants' health. The variety of HMs participants used to prevent, treat and maintain their health included: ginger for nausea and colds, fennel for digestion, lemon to lighten the skin and remove scars, karela for diabetes, and cinnamon to reduce high cholesterol. The use of fresh or dried fruits, 79 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra vegetables and herbs, oils, teas, seeds, syrups, creams, and gels were recorded by participants. The most popular item recalled by 109 participants (57%) was turmeric; its immune boosting properties, antibacterial effects for wound healing, and anti-inflammatory action in arthritis were frequently documented by participants. Several formulations of how to take turmeric were noted, the most popular method (cited 45 times) for consuming turmeric orally was to mix a spoon of turmeric in warm milk (with the optional addition of butter or oil, and black pepper). Even though turmeric has been used to treat numerous health conditions long before written records were created, some of the health benefits of turmeric are now being extensively investigated by researchers (Ravindran, et al., 2009; Sikora et al., 2010). Some of the valuable knowledge of traditional HMs from participants has been documented and summarised in Appendix 5. Participants' knowledge of HMs was assessed by calculating the number of different herbal remedies, products or ingredients they recalled throughout the questionnaire. Just 5% (n=10) of participants were unable to list any herbal products; the average number of products recalled per person was ten, while the highest number of items recalled by one participant was thirty six. This data highlighted participants wealth of knowledge of HMs. Results of the independent sample t-test revealed there was a significant difference (p=0.001, 2-tailed) in the knowledge of HMs between male and female participants; the mean (M) number of responses per female participant was 11 (SD = 7.01), while for males M= 7 (SD = 6.18). Throughout history, across different cultures around the world, women have been given the responsibility of the families' health and prosperity (Ehrenreich and English, 1973; Chaudhury and Rafei, 2001; Hegg, 2013); this could be one of the reasons why women have more knowledge of HMs than men. The Mintel report (2009) also claims that females have more knowledge of HMs in comparison to males. A comparison of age and knowledge of HMs was conducted using an ANOVA test (one-way between-groups); it uncovered a statistically significant (p = 0.0003) difference in knowledge between the different age groups, suggesting older participants had more knowledge of HMs than younger participants. Despite this participants from all age groups did have an awareness of the potential uses of many different HMs. The availability of SA ingredients to formulate HMs and commercial HMs is increasing in the UK, making it easier to obtain and use traditional remedies; as portrayed by participants in this study. Asian and Western chain supermarkets, health stores, and online retailers are trying to cater for the needs of migrant communities, in the UK, by stocking ethnic ingredients (Retail Think Tank, 2013). However, some herbal products were identified as being difficult to source in the UK; therefore, participants claimed they had to obtain their ingredients from other places such as the internet or abroad. An example of a plant which 80 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra was difficult to cultivate in the UK was Tulsi (O. tenuiflorum L.). Participants mentioned how dried Tulsi leaves were imported to the UK from India and Africa; or culinary basil (O. basilicum L.) was used as a substitute as this was the closest alternative participants could find in the UK. The import and use of HMs from foreign countries has its own risks, such as accidental or deliberate species substitution or adulteration (Pharmaceutical Press, 2013). As identified in the studies by Seethapathy et al. (2015) and Kumar et al. (2015) who identified that the Indian herbal medicines market is affected by species substitution and adulteration. The applications of DNA barcoding and authentication of herbal medicines in the UK is limited, this research will contribute some important information to this discipline. The significant majority of participants (85%, n=163) said that HMs were part of their traditional family and cultural heritage. It was uncovered that the family remains the primary source for transmitting traditional knowledge of HMs, as 80% (n=101) of participants claimed to have learnt about HMs from their family. In addition, 82% (n=157) of participants said they would seek advice from their family first for minor ailments; this signifies the importance of the family support network which has a vital role in transmitting traditional knowledge of HMs (Chhetri, 1994). Bhatia et al. (2014) recognises that knowledge of HMs has developed through age old experience and has been orally transmitted from one generation to another; hence, if the knowledge of HMs is not communicated with younger generations or documented, there is a risk of it being forgotten. This research has documented some of this important traditional knowledge. Despite the family being the most common way of learning about HMs, some participants (20%, n=25) claimed to have learnt about HMs from their religion, school, friends, the television, radio, internet and social media (Facebook, Twitter and YouTube); these results identified diverse ways of learning about HMs. When participants were asked if they took any regular prescribed medication, 55% of participants (n=106) claimed to take prescription medication for a variety of health conditions such as: asthma, arthritis, cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and thyroid disorders. Participants who consumed HMs alongside their CWM were then asked if they shared this information with their HCPs; 69% (n=73) revealed they did not tell their doctor, while 82% (n=87) said they did not tell their pharmacist. Some participants feared they would be treated differently or not at all if their HCPs knew they were taking HMs at the same time as CWM. A few participants commented on language and cultural barriers which prevented them from sharing information about their use of HMs with their HCPs; concepts such as garam and bhye which do not exist in Western medicine were difficult to explain to HCPs. Heuschkel et al. (2002) revealed that just 24% of patients in their survey initiated conversations with their doctors about HMs; similarly, Bhopal (1986a) found participants did not think it was 81 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra important to tell their HCPs about their use of HMs. During the analysis of the data, several potential interactions between HMs participants used and CWM participants were prescribed were identified. If participants do not tell their HCPs about their use of HMs it could affect their pharmaceutical care (Pharmaceutical Press, 2013). A crucial discovery of this research is that a large number of SA participants do not tell their HCPs about their use of HMs; reasons why they did not share this information were also documented. HCPs perspectives will be considered in the following chapter (Chapter 3). The wide spread use of HMs in developing Asian countries where herbals may be more affordable in comparison to conventional medicines is well known (WHO, 2008); however, in the UK where conventional medicines are often free (i.e. for patients over 60 years old, or people with certain conditions such as diabetes or epilepsy) (PSNC, 2015) HMs may actually be a more expensive alternative. This was identified by some participants in this research who were not interested in using HMs as they received free NHS treatment. It was clear that some participants in this study consumed HMs alongside their prescribed CWM; 78% (n=83) of participants who took prescribed medicines claimed to use HMs intermittently or regularly to supplement their health, treat an ailment, or to counteract side-effects from CWM. When considering the side-effect profiles of CWM and HMs, significantly more participants said they experienced side-effects from CWM (43%, n=46) than from HMs (13%, n=16). Participants commented on HMs being natural, safer and with fewer side-effects, this view has been documented in many other studies too (Ipsos MORI, 2008; Mintel, 2009; Ravindran et al., 2009). Pole (2008) argues that herbals are not safe because they are natural; they are safe because in Ayurveda after the correct diagnosis, the right herbs can be prescribed. This reiterates the importance of having the knowledge to be able to use HMs safely, which some participants in this study felt they lacked. Participants believed if more literature and evidence based research was available to help educate them about HMs it might encourage them to try alternative remedies. Traditional knowledge of HMs has been created via trial and error and has been perfected over time, unlike conventional medicines which have been studiously researched. One issue identified by participants in this study was that the safety and efficacy of HMs has rarely been demonstrated using modern scientific investigations. An evidence-based approach to this issue needs to be employed in order to provide validation for remedies which have been used throughout history (Pole, 2008). Similarly, Evans (2008) explores how evidence based medicine has become influential in decision making; modernisation of HMs could be the way to integrate the two individual systems. Xie (2001) claims traditional medicine contains some valuable elements but there are parts which are no longer applicable and so suggests the need for scientific research to decide which elements to keep. 82 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Similar research to this investigation was conducted by Bhopal (1986a) who explored the relationship between traditional and Western medicine in an Asian community in Scotland. This research was on a much smaller scale, it was limited to an Asian community in Glasgow, and is now very dated. Since then there have not been many other ethnopharmacological surveys to explore the current use of HMs in SA communities, in the UK (Pieroni et al, 2007; Pieroni et al, 2010). The results from this questionnaire have provided a detailed insight into the current use of HMs amongst SA diasporic communities, in the UK. The use of traditional herbal remedies and ethnobotanical research play an important role in scientific developments (Malla and Chhetri, 2009); therefore, it is imperative to record this knowledge. It has been suggested that ethnic people have immense knowledge of HMs which they inherit and pass on from generation to generation, through oral conservations; however, there is a risk of losing this knowledge if not documented (Chhetri, 1994; Thring and Weitz, 2006; Bhatia et al., 2014). The results of this questionnaire have enabled some of this precious information to be recorded. The analysis of the results has revealed several areas which require further investigation; for instance, the identification and authentication of herbal products to ensure the correct species are used in HMs, and HCPs' views and opinions of HMs. These concepts will be explored further in the following chapters. 83 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 3.0 Chapter 3 - Healthcare Professionals' Views of Traditional Herbal Medicines 3.1 Introduction The South Asian Traditional Medicines (SATMED) questionnaire (Chapter 2) revealed some interesting findings about South Asian (SA) people in the United Kingdom (UK) taking traditional herbal medicines (THM) and whether or not they shared this information with their medical doctor or pharmacist, i.e.