The "pomato" is a somatic hybrid ofthe potato and tomato. It produces both tomato fruitsand potato tubers, but both are small and its seed isinferior. On the other hand, when a potato protoplastwas fused with one from a triazine-resistant blacknightshade (both members of the genus Solanum),the somatic hybrid could be grown in soil that hadbeen treated with triazine -- a potent herbicide.Crops that have been regenerated through protoplastfusion include citrus, the sunflower, cassava, clover,millets, cabbage, and asparagus.GENETIC ENGINEERING. The most recent and mostcontroversial technique goes by a variety of names,such as genetic engineering, gene splicing, andbiotechnology. This highly advanced technology allowsus to alter the genetic makeup of plants byintroducing single genes from the nucleus of one plantinto the nucleus of another. The "host plant" thenreproduces new cells that contain the genes that havebeen transferred into its nuclei. The new forms areoften called transgenic organisms, or geneticallymodified or genetically manipulated organisms.In the popular press, they are often called "GM" plantsand animals, or "GMO's. "The process is easy to describe, but it requires rathersophisticated techniques. Identify desired gene and its locationLIsolate gene using restriction enzymesLInsert gene into new host plantLActivate gene in host DNALDesirable feature appearsFirst, you must identify the desired gene and itslocation. Then you isolate the gene and remove itfrom the donor plant by using enzymes that cut achromosome at a specific spot. Finally, you musttransfer the gene into the host plant. This isaccomplished by plucking out the gene with a pair oflittle tiny tweezers and carrying it across thelaboratory to the host plant, hoping that you don'tsneeze or stumble or drop the gene on the floor. Well,not exactly.In most cases, the transfer of the gene isaccomplished by using Agrobacterium tumefaciens,the soil bacterium that causes crown gall disease invarious crop plants. This bacterium has the ability topenetrate host cell nuclei and to introduce fragmentsof its own DNA, called plasmids. The genetic code ofthe plasmid then instructs the host plant to produceexcess hormones. This results in the growth of tumortissue, the crown gall. The bacterium itself finds thistissue to be a suitable home. These days, we takeadvantage of the bacterial plasmid by using it as thevector or carrier of the genetic material that we wantto transfer from one plant to another. In thelaboratory, we culture in a petri dish bacteria thathave had the desired gene inserted into their DNA.The bacteria infect pieces of tissue from the host plant-- the one that will be the recipient of the gene. Thehost cells are now transformed or we say thattransformation has occurred. By the way, thebacterial plasmids have been "disarmed" geneticallyso that they will not cause the crown gall tumortissues to form, as they do in nature. The transformedhost tissues are then moved to a new growth mediumthat kills off the bacteria and that induces theformation of callus tissue, shoots, and eventually awhole new plant. Common examples of crops plants that have beentransformed and regenerated by this techniqueinclude maize, rice, wheat, barley, rye, cotton, flax,soybean, sunflower, beans, peas, lettuce, potatoes,sugar beet, tobacco, tomato, apples, and walnuts.Even newer procedures involve injecting genes into anucleus using microscopic needles and shooting DNA-coated pellets fired into host tissues with DNA particleguns. The latter is the technique favored by theNational Rifle Association.THE MAJOR PLAYERSTHE PLANTS THE ENGINEERSMaizeTomatoSoy beanPotatoCottonTobaccoRapeseedMelons/squashesAlfalfaRiceMonsantoPioneer Hi-Bred SeedCalgeneUpjohnDupontDe KalbU. S. Dept. AgricultureFrito-LayDNA Plant TechnologyTHE RESULTS OF GENETIC ENGINEERINGIn 1996, about 7 million acres of transgenic cropswere grown around the world; in 1997, 31.5 millionacres. In 1998, farmers in this country, Argentina,Canada, Australia, Mexico, Spain, France, and SouthAfrica planted 69.6 million acres of geneticallymodified crops. In the United States, about 40% ofthe corn crop is GM; 27% of the soybeans wereengineered to be herbicide resistant, as was 27% ofthe cotton crop. Three percent of our potato crop hasbeen transformed to have a built-in pesticide.Genetic engineering allows us to produce plants thatcan fix their own nitrogen, which means that they willuse less fertilizer. By increasing their tolerance of heavy metals and salinity, and by increasing droughtand frost resistance, we can grow crops in a widervariety of locations. By increasing resistance toherbicides and by manufacturing their owninsecticides, the competitive advantage of geneticallymodified crops is also enhanced.It is also possible to view crop plants as "molecularfarms," living factories that can be geneticallymanipulated to produce the raw materials of industry-55--- starch, essential and fixed oils, enzymes, and evenhuman medicines. Genetic engineers at Michigan StateUniv. have produced transformed plants that make abiodegradable plastic that would ordinarily have beenmanufactured by the bacterium itself. Belgianscientists have developed a procedure for producinghuman neuropeptides in the seeds of the canola oilplant. In the popular press, the genetic engineeringmedicines are called farmaceuticals.Genetic engineering to produce biopesticides is still inits infancy. These newer techniques promise to bemuch more precise than our traditional "spray andpray" approach to pesticide and herbicide application.Another bacterium, Bacillus thuringiensis, known to itsfriends simply as "Bt," makes a protein that is toxic tocaterpillars that eat various plants. The gene from Btthat makes that protein has been transferred toanother bacterium (Pseudomonas fluorescens) thatlives in the roots of corn plants. When corn seeds thathave been coated with the transformed bacteriumgerminate, they are protected from the caterpillarsthat would have eaten their roots! Last year about 1million acres of Bt corn were planted in the Midwest.Yield went up 10-15%.AN OVERVIEWEcological:Fix their own nitrogenIncreased tolerance of heavy metalsIncreased tolerance of salty soils or salt waterIncreased tolerance of drought/water stressIncreased tolerance of freezing temperaturesDetoxification of contaminated soilsPest and Weed Management by Resistance to:HerbicidesInsectsVirusesFungiBacteriaImproved Post-Harvest Qualities:Delay of ripeningImproved storage capabilityImproved Nutritional Qualities:High starch potatoesSweeter fruits and vegetablesHigher amino acid content (lysine)Plant Cells as Molecular Farms:StarchEssential oilsBiodegradable plasticsFixed oilsEnzymesHuman/veterinary medicinesNEW PLANTS? WHO OWNS THEM?Those of us who are interested in the naming andclassifying of plants will fret over whether these newproducts of genetic engineering should be recognizedas distinct and given their own scientific names.Another group of people who are also very interestedin these novelties are patent attorneys. When acorporation or a university has invested millions ofdollars in perfecting these techniques andregenerating GMO's, when can it patent this new plantor animal to protect its investment, offer it for sale,and earn a profit? This is a very hot issue. In 1930,The United States Congress passed the Plant PatentAct. It covered plants that were asexually propagated.The 1970 Plant Variety Protection Act dealt withsexually reproducing plants -- but not their seeds. In1980, the United States Supreme Court ruled on acase that involved four different plasmids transferredinto a single bacterial cell. It ruled that "novel lifeforms" could be patented, including all parts of theplant. That meant the adult plant itself, along withcuttings, seeds, and tissue cultures. Europeancountries have taken a much more conservativeapproach. The European Patent Convention makes itall but impossible to patent plants or animals or "...biological processes for the production of plants oranimals." Another way to protect your investment has beendeveloped by Monsanto and its partners. It has beendubbed the "terminator gene" or the "suicide seed. "You purchase the GM seed, you plant it, and it yieldsthe crop that you desired. If you attempt to plant theseeds of the crop you have just harvested, you willdiscover that they have been engineered to be sterile.You will have to go back to the seed store to buy moreseed to replant. Developers of the terminator genespoint out that you are not permitted to make copies ofvideos or books that you have purchased. Why shouldthe fruit of their work be any different. It is a geneticform of intellectual property.THE OTHER SIDE OF THE STORYRecent articles in the popular press bear titles such as,"The Great Gene Escape," "Attack of the GeneSplicers," "Agricultural Biotech Faces Backlash inEurope," "The Suicide Seeds," and my personalfavorite, "The Curse of Frankenfood." Here, andespecially in Europe, we are seeing a backlash againstgenetic engineering. It is easy to dismiss some of thecritics as late-20th century versions of Luddites whooppose new inventions and technologies. However,there are a number of well-informed critics who raiselegitimate concerns. These include:Unexpected products of genetic engineering.GMO's can go ahead (on their own) to produce newpathogenic organisms, especially those that haveviruses incorporated into them. We may also becreating "super weeds" without realizing it.Contamination of traditional strains of cropplants. Pollen from GMO's can be carried by the wind,insects, etc. to non-GMO's in adjacent fields.Reliance on so few transformed plants. We areheading down the same path of monoculturing of ourcrops -- millions of acres devoted to one kind of GMcorn, GM cotton, etc. Farmers, especially those in theThird World, will become even more dependent onpatented seeds, associated pesticides and herbicides,which they cannot afford.Loss of traditional varieties of crop plants andtheir wild relatives. We will become so enamored ofthe GMO's that we will not continue to grow the oldstyle plants or worry about their wild relatives assources of genetic material. Gene pools of our cropswill continue to deteriorate.There will be unexpected and undesirableconsequences. Scientists at Cornell University havejust found that corn pollen from plants that have Bttoxin transferred into them will kill monarch butterflylarvae. The pollen had been sprinkled on milkweedplants, a favorite food of the butterfly. A major portion-56-of the butterfly's natural distribution overlaps the"corn belt. "Safety of genetically-engineered foods. TheBritish tabloids call them "Frankenfoods." Are GMO'stoxic? Will they produce allergies in consumers?Nutritional quality. Are they as nutritious as thenon-GMO's? Recent articles suggest that the GMversion of soybeans is lower in phytoestrogens,compounds that may protect us against heart diseaseand cancer.-57- SECTION 5 ! FOOD PLANTS5.1 ! AN OVERVIEW' We are heavily dependent on a handful of cerealsand root crops as the major sources of our food.' How many plants are critical to feeding the world?From about six to one hundred, depending uponthe criteria employed, and which expert you ask.' Most of our food plants are of Old World origin.' While many food plants are important items ofinternational commerce, hundreds of others aregrown and consumed locally and are little-knownoutside the immediate region.' Very few new food plants have come on the scenein the last several thousand years.' Most of the spices and flavorings that we use havebeen around since ancient times.' We devote most of our land to the growing ofcereals.' All great civilizations, past and present, are basedupon the cultivation of cereals.' Several plant families that are important sourcesof food plants are also notorious for their toxicmembers. In fact, many food plants must beprepared properly to rid them of toxins.' Nor is the category "food plant" entirely distinctfrom "medicinal plant" or even "psychoactiveplant."' Many of our most important food plants havesignificant nutritional deficiencies and do not, inand of themselves, provide an adequate diet.' Typically, we see in our markets only a narrowsegment of the spectrum of food plants potentiallyavailable.' We have often been fearful of and resistant toconsuming new foods.5.2 ! AN INTRODUCTION"Tell me what you eat and I will tell you what youare." [J. A. Brittat-Savarin, French epicure]"Not all foods are equal. Some are relished, othersonly tolerated, and still others are loathed, beingeaten only when necessary." [Paul Minnis, 2000]' ' ' ' 'Food plants are those that provide nourishment. Theyprovide us with the materials needed to maintain life,to make new tissue; to grow. Food plants are also thesource of energy needed for the body's variousactivities.HOW MANY FOOD PLANTS?Estimates vary widely. The most recentcomprehensive survey by Kunkel (1984) shows about12,500 species in 400 plant families. Here are the topten families that are the sources of our food plants.01. Rose family - Rosaceae02. Sunflower family - Compositae03. Yam family - Dioscoreaceae04. Bean family - Leguminosae05. Lily family - Liliaceae06. Mulberry family - Moraceae07. Ebony family - Ebenaceae08. Madder family - Rubiaceae09. Myrtle family - Myrtaceae10. Nightshade family - SolanaceaeWHAT PORTIONS ARE EDIBLE?The following outline is adapted from Roecklein &Leung (1987).Entire plant body: algae, fungi, and delicateannuals.Roots: The carrot, dandelion, radish, and sugar beetare swollen taproots. Horseradish, licorice, andsarsaparilla are adventitious roots. Cassava, sweetpotatoes, and the true yam are tuberous roots.Sassafras comes from root bark.Stems: Asparagus and bamboo shoots are youngsprouts. Sugar cane is whole stem. The potato andJerusalem artichoke are swollen tubers. Arrowroot,calamus, ginger, turmeric, and galangal are rhizomes.Taro and water chestnut are corms. Sago palm is pith.Cinnamon and angostura bitters come from stembark.Root and stem: Beetroot, celeriac, swede, turnip,and kohlrabi are combinations of stem and root.Leaves: Bay leaf, cabbage, dill, grape, lettuce, andparsley are whole leaves. Cardoon is just from themidrib. Leek is from the base. Celery and rhubarbcome from the petiole; fennel from the petiole base.Cabbage and Brussel sprouts are leafy buds. Garlicand onion are leafy bulbs.Flowers: Capers and cloves are flower buds. Theartichoke, broccoli, and cauliflower are entire flowerclusters. Roselle is sepals. Saffron comes from just thestigmas and styles.True fruits: Wheat, rice, wild-rice, maize, oats,barley, and rye are grains (caryopses). Okra,cardamon, and vanilla are capsules. Beans, peas,lentils, peanut, carob, and fenugreek are legumes.Anise, caraway, cumin, dill, and coriander are-58-schizocarps. Allspice, banana, peppers, papaya,tomatoes, and grapes are berries. The grapefruit,lemon, lime, orange, and tangerine are hesperidia.The pumpkin, squash, watermelon, cucumber, andchayote are a kind of modified berry called the pepo.Apples, loquats, pears, and quinces are pomes. Theapricot, peach, plum, nectarine, olive, and blackpepper are drupes.False fruits (derived from one flower): Thecustard apple, sweetsop, and bullock's head areaggregations of berries. The blackberry, raspberry,and loganberry are aggregations of small drupes.False fruits (derived from several flowers): Hops,breadfruit, jackfruit, mulberry, and pine-apple areproduced by the coalescing of many flowers atmaturity.Seeds: Sunflower, acorn, chestnut, Brazil nut, poppy,sesame, beans, peas, nutmeg, almond, coffee, pecan,walnut, and pistachio nut are all seeds.Sap: Sugar maple, sugar cane, and sugar palms yieldsugary sap.Latex: Chicle, once the basis of the chewing gumindustry, is the latex of a tropical tree.Gums: Pectins, gum Arabic, guar, gum Karaya, andgum tragacanth are all gums.TOXIC FOOD PLANTSIt would seem reasonable to assume that the category"food plants" would be quite distinct from the category"toxic plants." Even our pre-human ancestors musthave discovered by the process of trial and error thatthis plant is edible, but that plant will make you sickor even kill you. The summary that follows shows youthat there are well-known food plants that have toxicproperties. Sometimes it is a matter of processing; inother instances the toxicity is a function of individualsensitivities or even genetic makeup.Dermatitis: cashew, mango, pineappleGastrointestinal: potato, tomato, rhubarb, horseradish, spinachCirculatory/cardiovascular: fava bean, onions +allies, bananaSkeletal: sweet peaCellular (hydrogen cyanide poisoning): apples,peaches, lima bean, chick pea, cassava, flaxCentral nervous system: nutmegMutagens/teratogens (aflatoxins): peanutFOOD PLANT DETOXIFICATIONMany of our food plants contain toxins that must beremoved or destroyed before we can eat them. Wehave discovered a number of methods foraccomplishing this goal.