They restrict the term to writingsurface prepared from cloth or wood that has beenpulped, which means that the fiber tissues have beensmashed and macerated (soaked in water to softenthem), and then trapped on a screen to form flatsheets of writing material.Papyri have amazing durability. Scholars have accessto texts from the early dynasties that tell us of ancientwars, political matters, day-to-day life, and that alsodocument their uses of plants. It is customary to givethem names. The Ebers Papyrus, discovered inThebes, Egypt in 1872, lists several hundred medicinalplants, along with how they were prepared and used. Papyrus fibers were used to make sails, clothing,mats, and cords. In about the 9th century, it wasreplaced by paper as a principal writing material.COTTON"I wish I was in de land ob cotton, old times dar amnot forgotten. Look away, look away, look away, DixieLand." (Daniel Decatur Emmett, 1859)' ' ' ' 'King Cotton! This is the world's most important fiberplant. In addition, its seeds yield cottonseed oil andthey are used for fodder cake. The mature fruit, theboll, splits open to reveal the fibers, outgrowths ofthe seed surface. These unicellular hairs areessentially pure cellulose. The hairs may be 1000-6000 times longer than they are wide. They occur intwo forms: (1) fuzz, also called linters, that are thickat the base and firmly attached to the seed itself; and(2) lint, with a narrow, delicate base that is easilydetached. Lint can be spun. The linters are removedby special machinery and they are used to make nitro-cellulose and rayon. What do we use nitrocellulosefor? (A hint: it is the N in TNT. )There are three major groups of cotton species, basedon the length of the seed fibers:' Long-staple (2.5-6.5 cm long) cottons are themost difficult to grow, but they yield a fine,lustrous fiber. Examples include sea island, pima,and Egyptian cottons.' Medium-staple (1.3-3.3 cm long). American up-land cotton is an example.' Short-staple (1.0-2.5 cm long) yield coarserfibers that end up in blankets and carpets, orblended with better quality material.PROCESSING. The processing of cotton fibersinvolves several stages, including:' ginning, the removal of the lint fibers from theseeds; ' carding, the straightening of fibers;' combing, which brings the fibers in parallel,equal-sized groups; and' spinning, which is the twisting of fibers into acontinuous thread.SPECIES OF COTTON. Cottons are derived fromvarious species of Gossypium, plants related to okraand the ornamental hibiscus. The genus is representedin both the Old World and in the New World. Theleading Asiatic species are Gossypium arboreum andG. herbaceum. The Old World cottons have 13 pairs oflarge chromosomes. Gossypium barbadense and G.hirsutum, the leading New World cottons, have 26pairs of chromosomes -- 13 pairs of largechromosomes and 13 pairs of small ones.GENETICS OF COTTON. There is some controversyas to the number of species of cotton. About 30 ofthem are diploids (2n = 2x = 26) and four aretetraploids (2n = 4x = 52). Only four of them are ofsignificant economic importance. Gossypium hirsutum(cotton, upland cotton) provides about 95% of ourcotton fibers; G. barbadense (sea island cotton, pima,Egyptian cotton) most of the remaining 5%.AN OVERVIEW OF COTTON SPECIESThey fall into four groups that are recognized at thesubgeneric level:' Australian (C-genome diploids)' New World (D-genome diploids)' African & Arabian (A, B, E, & F genomes)' New World (AD tetraploids)Here is an overview expressed in a little more detail.-128-Genome(s) DistributionDiploids:AA 1 (G. herbaceum); S. AfricaBB 3 in Africa; Cape Verde IslandCC 7 in AustraliaDD 11 in Mexico, U. S., Peru, & GalapagosEE 4, Africa to PakistanFF 1 (G. longicalyx) in East AfricaTetraploids:AADD G. barbadense ( South America)AADD G. hirsutum (C. & S. America; Pacific)AADD G. caicoense (Brazil)AADD G. tomentosum (Hawai'i)Have you noticed that we have a little problem withour New World cottons? There are several with the Dgenome native here. We also have three tetra-ploidcottons with both the D and A genomes. But there areno native New World cottons that could havecontributed the A genome! How an Old World seedsource got to the New World remains an openquestion. Recent molecular studies suggest that theevent occurred only once, about 1-2 million years ago.Most of the cotton in the United States is grownexactly where you suspect, in the southern states.Repeated plantings have depleted the soils, forcingthe farmer to rotate crops in order to replenish them.Until the development of appropriate insecticides, theboll weevil (Anthonomus grandis), introduced fromMexico just prior to the turn of the 20th century, wasa major cotton pest. It is a beetle that lays its eggs inthe fruit, where its larvae hatch and damage theplant. The fruit of cotton and flax is called a boll. Ithink that I was in college before I realized that thebug was not called a "bo weevil. "For centuries, the growing of cotton was intimatelytied to the institution of slavery. The following datafrom Mississippi and Louisiana are instructive.COTTON AND SLAVESYear Pounds Exported # of Slaves1785 5,000 8,0001790 25,000 8,2001800 20,000,000 10,0001820 125,000,000 32,0001858 1,100,000,000 450,000[Source: Kahn, 1985]THE AGAVE FIBERSThese fibers are derived from plants of the agave orcentury plant family (Agavaceae). Most are sterilepolyploids. They are called century plants based onthe mistaken belief that they bloomed every 100years. The agaves yield about 90% of all of the hardfibers used in commerce. About half is derived fromsisal, named after a port city in Mexico. After 3-8years, depending on the species, the plants will haveproduced about 300 thick, juicy, sword-shaped leavesthat are ready to be harvested by machetes or similarimplements.Leaves are inserted into mechanical decorticatorsthat separate the fiber bundles from the softer, pulpyleaf tissues. A decorticator consists of a set of rotatingwheels armed with blunt knives. The fibers aretypically washed, dried on racks in the sun or by hotair, and cleaned. The various agave fibers are used tomake strong, inexpensive ropes and twines. They arealso used in paper, matting, and building panelmaterials. The waste pulp is used as a fertilizer. The sap of other Agave species is fermented to yieldmaguey or mezcal, or distilled to produce tequila. SURVEY OF THE AGAVE FIBERSBahama-hemp Agave sisalinaCantala Agave cantalaHenequen Agave fourcroydesIxtle Agave lecheguillaJaumave ixtle Agave funkianaLecheguilla Agave lecheguillaLetona Agave letonaeMexican henequen Agave luridaMexican sisal Agave fourcroydesSalvador hemp Agave letonaeSisal Agave sisalinaCabuya Furcraea cabuyaCuba-hemp Furcraea hexapetalaMauritius-hemp Furcraea foetidaFique Furcraea macrophyllaPitre Furcraea hexapetalaPalma fiber Samuela carnerosanaAdam's needle Yucca filamentosaAloe yucca Yucca aloifoliaChaparral yucca Yucca whippleiJoshua tree Yucca brevifoliaMohave yucca Yucca schidigeraSoapweed yucca Yucca glaucaTrecul yucca Yucca treculeanaMANILA HEMPManila hemp or abaca comes from a relative of thebanana and plantain, Musa textilis. It is native to thePhilippines. Historically the fibers were highly prizedbecause they do not deteriorate in salt water. Thismeant that they were commonly used in marineropes, ship caulking, and sails. They were also used tomake sacks, coarse fabrics, and wrapping paper.While you may not have heard of Manila hemp, it isprobably more commonly encountered in your dailylife than you realize. It is found in tea bags, cigarettefilters, salami wrappers, and in manila folders andenvelopes (hence the name). In Japan, the fibers areused in the light-weight interior walls of homes.The fibers are extracted from the sheaths at the baseof the banana-like leaves. They are strong, light, andcan be 2-4 meters long! They are the strongest of thestructural fibers.MINOR FIBER PLANTSBARK CLOTH. Early European explorers of the SouthPacific found the natives wearing various article ofclothing that they made from bark fibers. The bestknown of these is tapa or kapa, which is a Polynesianword meaning "the beaten thing." Tapa can be madefrom several plants, including the paper mulberry,breadfruit, milo, and hau tree.-129-PAPER MULBERRY (Broussonetia papyrifera), yieldsthe best known of the bark cloths. It is a tree nativeto southeast Asia. The Polynesians carried the plantwith them as they colonized the South Pacific. Theinner bark of the plants is used, after the outer layerhas been scrapped away. While the fibers are stilldamp, they are spread evenly into strips. Now theyare placed on a smooth surface and beaten with awooden mallet (hence the name, "beaten thing"). Thefibers spread out and mat with one another. Mucilagefrom plants such as the taro and hibiscus is used toincrease adherence of fibers. Sections of tapa areattached to one another by pounding togetheroverlapping edges. In this way, it is possible to createwrap-around garments, mats, and panels ofconsiderable size, and writing materials. Tapa cloth isoften elaborately dyed -- brown, red (from annatto),yellow (from turmeric), and black (from the kukui orcandlenut tree). The patterns are characteristic of thevarious islanders who made them and have assistedanthropologists in determining the sequence ofinhabiting the islands of the South Pacific.KAPOK. The kapok tree (Ceiba pentandra), native tothe American tropics, is the source of valuable stuffingor filling fibers used in life preservers, cushions,mattresses, sleeping bags, and as an insulatingmaterial. The fibers line the interior fruit wall andsurround the seeds. Relatives of the kapok tree whosefibers are used in a similar fashion include the silk-floss tree and the red silk-cotton tree.RAMIE. Ramie or China-grass (Boehmeria nivea) isnative to the Old World, probably to China. The fiberis one of the finest known, but problems in getting itout of the stem and degumming the fibers have madeit difficult to process economically. Ramie has about8X the tensile strength of cotton and 4X that of flax.When you look at our specimen in the subtropicaldome, it may remind you of a large nettle. They are inthe same plant family. Ramie does not sting, however.Most members of the nettle family (Urticaceae) donot.JUTE. Corchorus capsularis and C. olitorius, relativesof our popular basswood tree, come from easternAsia. The latter has become a widespread tropicalweed. About 98% of the world's production comesfrom Asia. Jute is a very widely used fiber, although itis of poor quality. Much of it will be used for packingmaterial and spun into a coarse yarn. About three-quarters of the crop will be used to make sacks.Although you may not have heard of jute fibers, youknow of two products that are made from them --burlap bags and gunny sacks. By the way, what is agunny? How many will fit in a sack? Also, look on theunderside of carpets and linoleum. You may well findjute fibers in the backing.KENAF. Hibiscus cannabinus is a related to theornamental hibiscus, cotton, and okra. Plants weredomesticated first in Africa, probably before 4000B.C.E. Through the millennia, kenaf has been used inthe Old World as a substitute for jute. Shortly afterWorld War II, production increased dramatically.India, China, and Thailand are the main producerstoday.Kenaf is an easily grown, annual crop. One acre ofkenaf can yield 7-10 tons of dry fibers -- five timeswhat an acre of pine trees would produce. The fibersare increasingly popular for paper pulp. The newsprintmade from kenaf is brighter, requires less ink, and theink sticks to the paper better.