This is a minor blessingto those of us addicted to the Los Angeles and NewYork Times.A SURVEY OF FIBER PLANTSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Family Commentsabaca (Musa textilis) Banana Banana relative; cordage, baggingAfrican-hemp (Urena lobata) Mallow Used for fishing nets and cordagearamina (Urena lobata) Mallow New World; jute-like fiberbasswood (Tilia americana) Basswood Used by Native Americans; basketsbolo-bolo (Clappertonia ficifolia) Basswood Africa; used for matsbowstring-hemp (Sansevieria senegambica) Century Plant Africa; nets and bowstringsbroomroot (Muhlenbergia macroura) Grass North & Central America; brushescabbage palmetto (Sabal palmetto) Palm Found from Florida to N. Carolinacabuya (Furcraea cabuya) Century Plant C. America; sisal-like fibercadillo (Urena lobata) Mallow New World; jute-like fibercantala (Agave cantala) Century Plant Used in the PhilippinesChina-grass (Boehmeria nivea) Nettle See: ramieChina-jute (Abutilon theophrastii) Mallow Cultivated in China; used as jutechuchoa (Furcraea andina) Century Plant Native to Ecuadorcocuiza (Furcraea humboldtiana) Century Plant Used in Venezuelacoir (Cocos nucifera) Palm The only major fiber from a fruitColorado River hemp (Sesbania exaltata) Bean Used by Native AmericansCongo jute (Urena lobata) Mallow Kenaf-like fiber; tropicalcotton, Arabian (Gossypium herbaceum) Mallow Unknown origin; fiber quality goodcotton, Egyptian (Gossypium barbadense) Mallow Tetraploid of New World origincotton, Hawaiian (Gossypium tomentosum) Mallow Of no commercial importantcotton, Jamaican (Gossypium hirsutum) Mallow See: upland cottoncotton, Kathiawar (Gossypium obtusifolium) Mallow Widely used in Indiacotton, levant (Gossypium herbaceum) Mallow See: Arabian cottoncotton, sea island (Gossypium barbadense) Mallow Longest cotton fibers (3-5 cm)-130-cotton, short staple (Gossypium herbaceum) Mallow See: Arabian cottoncotton, tree (Gossypium arboreum) Mallow India and Africa; short fiberscotton, upland (Gossypium hirsutum) Mallow Almost all U. S. cotton of this typecrin vegetale (Chamaerops humilis) Palm Mediterranean; leaves usedCuba-jute (Sida rhombifolia) Mallow Tropical; fibers from stemCuban-hemp (Furcraea hexapetala) Century Plant West Indies; lustruous, good fiberdanicha (Sesbania bispinosa) Bean Mostly Old World; also food and forageDecan-hemp (Hibiscus cannabinus) Mallow See: kenafesparto (Stipa tenacissima) Grass Old & New World; fine fiber for paper, etc.fique (Furcraea macrophylla) Century Plant Central America; sisal-like fiberflax (Linum usitatissimum) Flax Stem fiber finer than cottonhemp (Cannabis sativa) Hemp Stem fiber of ancient usehenequen (Agave fourcroydes) Century Plant Used especially on Yucutan Peninsulahenequen, Salvador (Agave letonae) Century Plant Used in El SalvadorIndian-hemp (Apocynum cannabinum) Dogbane Used by Native Americans in e. U. S.Indian mallow (Abutilon avicinnae) Mallow China; jute-like fiberistle (Agave lecheguilla) Century Plant See: lechiguillaixtle (Yucca funifera) Century Plant Mexico; used to make coarse sacksjute (Corchorus capsularis) Basswood Commonly used fiberjute, nalta (Corchorus olitorius) Basswood Tropical; used as jutejute, tossa (tussa) (Corchorus olitorius) Basswood Tropical; used as jutejute, white (Corchorus capsularis) Basswood Commonly used fiberkapok (Ceiba pentandra) Bombax Tropical; fibers from seed surfaceskenaf (Hibiscus cannabinus) Mallow Used like hemp and jutekittul (Caryota urens) Palm Used in Sri Lanka and East Indieslapulla (Triumfetta tomentosa) Basswood Africa; cordage, excellent fiberlechiguilla (Agave lecheguilla) Century Plant Mexico & Texas; brushes and cordagelechiguilla, Juamave (Agave lecheguilla) Century Plant Mexico; used in fine brushesletona (Agave letonae) Century Plant Used in El Salvadorlinden (Tilia americana) Basswood Used by Native Americansmaguey (Agave atrovirens) Century Plant See: sisal maguey, Manila (Agave cantala) Century Plant See: cantalaManila-hemp (Musa textilis) Banana See: abacaMauritius-hemp (Furcraea foetida) Century Plant Old & New World; twine and cordagemezcal (Agave tequilana) Century Plant Also source of alcoholic beveragemuriti (Mauritia vinifera) Palm South America; cordage nettle (Urtica spp.) Nettle Long history of use in EuropeNew Zealand flax (Phormium tenax) Century Plant Widely used by Maoriesozone (Asclepias incarnata) Milkweed Fiber derived from barkpaineira (Chorisia speciosa) Bombax South America; seeds yield fiberspalma ixtle (Samuela carnerosana) Century Plant Mexico; fibers from leavespalmetto (Sabal palmetto) Palm Used in southeastern U. S.palmilla (Yucca elata) Century Plant Used in Mexico and the U. S.palmyra (Borassus flabellifer) Palm Used in the East Indiespalo de borracho (Chorisia insigna) Bombax Seeds yield kapok-like fiberpaper-mulberry (Broussonetia papyrifera) Mulberry Source of tapaPanama hat (Carludovica palmata) Cyclanthus Industry centered in EcuadorParoquet bur (Triumfetta rhomboidea) Basswood Africa; fibers used for bindingpiassaba (Leopoldina piassaba) Palm Used in Amazoniapiassava (Attalea funifera) Palm Used in Amazoniapina (Ananas comosus) Pineapple From leaves of pineapple plantpita floja (Aechmaea magdalenae) Pineapple Fiber resistant to salt waterpiteira (Furcraea gigantea) Century Plant See: Mauritius hemppitre (Furcraea hexapetala) Century Plant Used in Cuba and Hispaniolapochote (Ceiba aesculifolia) Bombax Mexico; fibers from seedsPuerto Rican hat (Sabal causiarum) Palm Leaf fibers for hats and basketsQueensland-hemp (Sida rhombifolia) Mallow See: Cuba juteramie (Boehmeria nivea) Nettle Old World; a strong, fine fiberred silk-cotton (Bombax ceiba) Bombax Mostly grown in Indonesia; water-resistantroselle (Hibiscus sabdariffa) Mallow East Indies; stem fiberscrewpine (Pandanus tectorius) Screwpine Mostly Polynesia; mats, baskets, housingsilk-cotton tree (Ceiba pentandra) Bombax See: kapoksisal (Agave sisalina) Century Plant Mexico; general purpose ropesSpanish broom (Spartium junceum) Bean Wide variety of uses-131-Spanish moss (Tillandsia usneoides) Pineapple A stuffing fibersunn (san) hemp (Crotalaria juncea) Bean Ancient fiber; fish nets and canvastikus (tikug) (Fimbristylis umbellaris) Sedge Asia; basketry, mats, bags, and hatsyaray (Sabal causiarum) Palm See: Puerto Rican hat palmyucca, banana (Yucca baccata) Century Plant Southwestern U. S.; basketryyucca, chaparral (Yucca whipplei) Century Plant U. S. & Mexico; long, white fibersyucca, Mohave (Yucca mohavensis) Century Plant Southwestern U. S.; leaf fibersyucca, soapweed (Yucca glauca) Century Plant Soft, fine fibers from leaveszacaton (zakaton) (Muhlenbergia macroura) Grass Texas to C. America; brusheszamadoque (Yucca funifera) Century Plant Mexico; used in twine and sackszapupe (Agave zapupe) Century Plant Mexico; attractive, but weak fibers8.3 ! WOOD, ITSBYPRODUCTS, & CORKANATOMICAL STRUCTUREWhen we first attempt to describe or identify a plant,we often note whether it is an herb, a shrub, or a tree.This classification has served us well since prehistorictimes. While useful, it is misleading in the sense thatherbs, shrubs, and trees are structurally quite similarto one another. They are composed of the same planttissues. Beginning at the outside and working our wayto the center they are the epidermis, cortex, pericycle,phloem, cambium, xylem, and pith. The differencebetween an herbaceous and a woody plant is notwhether one or more of these tissues is present orabsent, but the degree to which particular tissuescontinue to be produced year after year. In a woodyplant, the incremental growth of the outer four tissues(epidermis, cortex, pericyle, and phloem) constitutethe bark, a tough, protective outer layer. Herbs mayhave a light covering of bark on their stems andbranches, but not to the degree that we encounter inshrubs and trees. These tissues are, for the most part,dead at maturity. Beneath the bark lies the cambium, a living tissue thatcontinues to undergo repeated cell divisions during thelife of the plant. It will produce some additionalphloem tissue to the outside and significant additionalxylem tissue toward the inside. Plant anatomists referto these as the secondary phloem and secondaryxylem, respectively. Xylem and phloem are theplumbing system of a plant. They are the tissuesthrough which water and nutrients flow. Most of thesetissues will also be dead at maturity. The chiefdifference between an herbaceous plant and a woodyone is that the latter continue to build layer upon layerof secondary xylem in annual increments (annualrings). In other words, most of what we call wood issecondary xylem. Also note that when you look at aperfectly healthy, mature tree most of its stem system(the trunk and branches) are composed of dead cells.In fact, xylem tissue will not be fully functional as thewater plumbing system of the stem until it is dead andits cell contents (cytoplasm) have dissolved. Theportion of the xylem tissue that conducts water iscalled sapwood; the portion that is no longerfunctional is the heartwood.Forestry and lumber industry people recognize twomajor categories of woody plants -- hardwoods andsoftwoods. The terms are confusing, because theysuggest some feature of the wood itself; somemeasure of its density or hardness. Instead, they tellus whether the wood comes from a conifer (softwood)or from a flowering plant (hardwood). While it is truethat there are fundamental anatomical differencesbetween the xylem tissues of most conifers and mostflowering plants, they do not lead to a soft wood inone group and a hard wood in the other.CHEMICAL STRUCTUREFrom a chemical viewpoint, wood is primarilycellulose and lignins. Cellulose is a carbohydratepolymer -- a long molecule made of many glucoseresides (C6H10O5) linked to one another. You know ofglucose, a monosaccharide sugar (C6H12O6). Theorganization of these glucose residues becomes quitecomplex. The structure of glucose remains an activesubject of research. Cellulose is found in other partsof the plant, as well. Grass leaves are high incellulose. One of the reasons that we havedomesticated certain animals is that their digestivesystems are able to deal with these molecules,because ours lack the enzymes needed to break downcellulose. Lignin is the other main constituent of wood.A typical wood sample will contain about half as muchlignin as cellulose. It is also a high polymer ofrepeating phenylpropanoid molecules. I do not havethe slightest idea what phenylpropanoid moleculesare. Lignin breaks down even less easily thancellulose. By the way, much of the foul smellassociated with paper pulping mills comes from thelignin residue that is a byproduct of paper making.CHARACTERISTICS OF WOODColor. Woods come in a variety of colors, includingyellow, black, red, white, green, purple, and variousstriped combinations. These result from pigments inthe xylem.Porosity refers to the number, size, and distributionof larger cells (vessels) in the wood. It will determinehow readily a kind of wood takes paint or is resistantto decay. Some trees, such as maple and basswood,have their vessels scattered through the wood(diffuse-porous). Other woods, such as those fromoaks, walnuts, elms, and ashes have vessels that areparallel to the annual rings (ring-porous).Grain is the technical term for the alignment of cellsthat make up the xylem tissue. All of them can beparallel to the vertical axis of the tree, such that across-section cuts neatly through all of them. Some liethat angles so that an oblique cut is produced. Othersare arranged spirally. Grain is a major feature indetermining the aesthetic appeal of a particular wood.Density of a wood is its weight divided by its volume.-132-The industry standard calls for measuring an oven-dried cube of wood 1 cm on each side. Because 1 cm3of water weighs 1 gram, any wood that has a densityof less than 1.0 will float in water; those with adensity of greater than 1.0 will sink. Balsa wood isprobably the lightest, with a density of 0.13grams/cm3. You have probably seen balsa woodwithout knowing it. Think about the thin, light woodused to make model airplanes. At the other end of thescale are lignum vitae and quebracho with densities ofabout 1.25 grams/cm3. Densities for woods fromvarious North American trees include: incense cedar,0.35; Douglas-fir, 0.45; redwood, 0.41; ponderosapine, 0.38; white ash, 0.55; black cherry, 0.47;American elm, 0.46; white oak, 0.60; sycamore, 0.46;and black walnut, 0.51.Durability. Woods vary greatly in the kinds ofchemicals, such as phenolic and terpenoidcompounds, that they deposit in their heartwood. Thisdetermines the durability of the wood. In some trees,such as redwood and bald-cypress, the deposition ofvarious compounds retards the growth of fungi andbacteria that would otherwise decompose the woodover a period of time. On the other hand, basswoodand poplar (usually misspelled and mispronounced"popular") decay comparatively rapidly. Because mostwoods will last much longer if they are kept dry, wehave developed a series of preservatives, such aspaints, varnishes, creosotes, and tar oils that we applyto their surfaces.Moisture content. The amount of moisture in woodranges from about 70% to 7%, with the sapwoodhaving a higher water content than the heartwood. Inmost instances, woods with a lower water content arepreferable to those with more moisture.Mechanical Properties. Cleavability is an index ofhow easily wood can be split. When we want to chopfirewood, we want a wood that cleaves easily. Whenwe are constructing something that requires us to usenails or screws in the wood, we want low cleavability.In addition, there are a number of mechanicalproperties of wood that must be taken into account.They include stiffness, tensile strength, shearstrength, crushing strength, and cross-breakingstrength. The particular use intended for the wood willdetermine which of these features is critical.THE USES OF WOODFUEL. Until the development of alternate energysources, such as coal, oil, gasoline, electricity, andnuclear materials, we burned wood. Even today, about1 billion m3 of wood is consumed by burning it as fuel.In North America, only about 10% of our annualtimber harvest goes for fuel, but in Latin Americanand Africa that figure is much closer to 90%. In thiscountry, wood is a primary fuel in some of the morerural areas. Woods vary considerably in the way thatthey burn. This is a function of their physical andchemical structure. Obviously the density and drynessof the wood are important factors. Most woods willyield about 4 calories of heat for each gram burned.When we burn a piece of wood, the first phaseinvolves evaporation of water. This requires heat.Then comes the vaporization of volatile materials inthe wood at we observe as the flame of the fire. Manyconifers are a problem in this regard because theirwood is impregnated with resins that will formflammable deposits on the interior of stove pipes andchimneys.