SOME BASICTERMINOLOGY"It is a very sad thing that nowadays there is so littleuseless information." (Oscar Wilde)' ' ' ' 'Every field of endeavor has its own specializedvocabulary. Technical terms are required for exactnessand brevity. Consider the following set of directions onhow to harness a horse in Mark Twain's "A TrampAbroad," in which he avoids the use of technicalterms. "The man stands up the horses on each side of thething that projects from the front end of the wagon,and then throws the tangled mess of gear on top ofthe horses, and passes the thing that goes forwardthrough a ring, and hauls it aft, and passes the otherthing through the other ring and hauls it aft on theother side of the other horse opposite to the first one,after crossing them and bringing the loose end back,and then buckles the other thing underneath thehorse, and takes another thing and wraps it aroundthe thing I spoke of before, and puts another thingover each horse's head, with broad flappers to it tokeep the dust out of his eyes, and puts the iron thingin his mouth for him to grit his teeth on, uphill, andbrings the ends of these things aft over his back, afterbuckling another one around his neck to hold his headup, and hitching another thing on a thing that goesover his shoulders to keep his head up when he isclimbing a hill, and then takes the slack of the thingwhich I mentioned a while ago, and fetches it aft andmakes it fast to the thing that pulls the wagon, andhands the other things up to the driver to steer with.I have never buckled up a horse myself, but I do notthink we do it that way. "Botany has an extensive vocabulary, much of itnecessary because we do not have sufficientlyaccurate terms in ordinary English to describe whatwe observe. Much of this terminology is concernedwith the details of classification, structure, andfunctioning of the plant body and it is of interest onlyto a specialist in these areas. I have attempted in thesummary below to review of some basic terms withspecial reference to economic plants. While it mayappear at times to be exhausting, it is by no anymeans exhaustive.GROWTH FORMThe following terms describe the general appearanceor habit of plants. Most plants will fit comfortably intoone of these categories, although some are clearlyintermediate.arborescent: tree-like, as in the bananas and palmsherbs: plants with non-woody aerial stems thattypically die back to the ground each yearherbaceous: having the features of an herb, a plantwith soft, usually featureless stems, with littledevelopment of bark or woodlianas: woody plants with elongate, flexible, non-self-supporting stemsshrubs: woody plants with more than one principalstemtrees: woody plant with a single main stem or trunk;some plants that we commonly call trees, such as thebanana, are arborescentvines: non-woody plant with elongate, flexible, non-self-supporting stemswoody: although not clearly differentiated from theherbaceous plant, a woody plant generally has a muchmore substantial stem system with well-developedbark and wood; the stem often has clearly identifiablesurface features, such as leaf scars, bud scale scars,and air pores (lenticels).DURATION (LIFE SPAN)annual: living for one year or lessbiennial: living for two years, often flowering andfruiting in the second yearperennial: living for three or more years, oftenflowering and fruiting each year-4-ROOTSRoots, generally speaking, comprise the sub-terraneanportion of a plant. It is convenient to recognize fourbasic kinds of roots:fibrous roots: many plants, particularly grasses,have a number of roots of about the same size,forming a dense complicated network. No single rootis obviously larger than the others. Except for theiruse in broom and brush making, fibrous roots are oflittle direct economic importance to us.tap roots: in many plants there is a single centrallylocated root that is dominant. Smaller roots branch offthis tap root. Common examples include the carrotand dandelion.tuberous roots: a tap root that becomes swollenwith food and water is often referred to as a tuberousroot. There is no sharp distinction between the taproot and tuberous root. The sweet potato is a commonexample.adventitious roots: any kind of root that arises froma site other than the true root system, as in the aerialroots and prop roots of maize.STEMSThe stem system is usually the above ground axis ofthe plant body. Stems bear leaves at a region calledthe node. The region between two successive nodesis called the internode. It is basically the nature ofthe stem system that determines the growth form ofa plant. Stems are subject to many modifications:rhizome: a horizontal stem at or below the surface.It is very often confused with a root, but it has nodesand internodes. It is often covered with scaly leaves.Rhizomes serve a propagative function. They may alsostore food.tuber: a thick, fleshy underground horizontal stem. Italso functions in food storage and reproduction.Tubers and tuberous roots are not the same thing.Common examples of the tuber are the Irish potatoand the Jerusalem artichoke.bulb: a vertical underground stem that is essentiallya bud. The edible portion of a bulb, the portion whichmakes up the bulk of the structure, is a series ofoverlapping leaves. Common examples are found inthe onion and tulip.corm: an upright, hard or fleshy underground stemsurrounded by dry, scaly leaves, as in the "bulb" of agladiolus.stolon or runner: an above-ground horizontal stemthat bears ordinary foliage leaves. Like the rhizome,it is useful in propagating the plant. Stolons are seenin the strawberry. They are of little direct economicimportance to us.LEAVESThe leaf is usually a flattened photosyntheticoutgrowth of the stem. It is composed of two basicparts, the blade and the petiole, the stalk thatsupports it. Often the petiole is mistakenly thought ofas a stem; the rhubarb "stem" is actually the petioleof the plant. The leaf blade may be undivided (simple) or dividedinto separate parts (compound). Each segment of acompound leaf blade is a leaflet. We often confuseleaves and leaflets, as in the children's poem aboutpoison oak and ivy, "Leaves of three -- let it be! "Those three "leaves" are the leaflets of a singlecompound leaf.A reduced leaf anywhere on a plant is often called abract.FLOWERSA flower is a stem that typically bears four series ofmodified leaves. The stem axis of the flower is thepedicel. The upper end of the pedicel to which thesemodified leaves are attached is the receptacle. Thecomponent parts of the four series are the sepals,petals, stamens, and carpels. The sepals areusually green. They are of little direct economicimportance. The petals are often brightly colored.They may contain aromatic oils that can be extracted.The stamen is composed of a spore-producing area(anther) and a supporting stalk (filament). Stamensare of no direct economic importance. The carpel isusually differentiated into a basal seed-bearing portion(ovary), a neck region (style) and a terminal areathat is receptive to pollen (stigma). Because thecarpels mature into the fruit of the plant, they are oftremendous economic importance.FRUITSA fruit is a ripened ovary, along with any other floralor vegetative parts that may be associated with it andthat mature at the same time. This botanical definitionapplies to a long list of what we refer to as fruits ineveryday life, but in many cases it does not. The"seeds" of the sunflower, corn, and carrot plants areactually seed-like fruits. And for some strange reason,we call certain fruits "vegetables." Examples includesquash, beans, and the dreaded eggplant.STRUCTUREWhen we cut most fruits in cross-section, they revealthe following features:pericarp: the fruit wall, which may be fleshy, fibrous,woody, or bony at maturity. It consists of an outerlayer (exocarp), a middle layer (mesocarp), and aninner layer (endocarp). The three may be clearlydifferentiated from one another, as in the coconut withits woody exocarp, fibrous mesocarp, and bonyendocarp. In many of our common fruits, the skin orrind is the exocarp, while the mesocarp and endocarpare the fleshy portion and they are notdistinguishable. In the stone fruits (peaches, plums,etc.) the endocarp is the hard, bony layer thatcontains the seeds, the mesocarp is the fleshy edibleportion, and the exocarp is the skin. The structure ofsome fruits is very complex and easily misinterpreted.For instance, the skin of an apple and the rind of asquash are not the exocarp of these fruits. They arederived from the receptacle or floral tube (fused calyxand corolla).locule: the chambers within the fruit. The number oflocules is characteristic of a particular plant and variesfrom one to many.-5-ovules: the immature seedsplacenta: the region or line where the ovules areborne. Fruits of the grass family and the bean familyhave one, the mustard family have two, the lily andsquash familes have three.septum: an interior wall that divides the fruit into twoor more chambers (locules)DIFFERENTIATION OF THE FRUIT WALL (PERICARP)Plant Exocarp Mesocarp EndocarpCoconutDateGrapeTomatoAvocadoOrangeWoody shellSkinSkinSkinSkinRindFibers (coir)Sweet edible fleshSweet edible fleshEdible fleshEdible fleshSpongy layer below rindBony (= seed ? )Thin, bony (= seed ? )Not differentiatedNot differentiatedThin, bony (= seed ? )Fleshy, chambered interiorDEHISCENCEAt maturity, fruits are either dehiscent (opening bymeans of sutures, pores, or caps) or indehiscent (notopening by sutures, etc. ), the seeds being released bythe rotting of the pericarp.FRUIT TYPESThe classification of fruit types is an unholy mess. Thefollowing scheme is a conservative one that is widelyused in general botany textbooks. You will note thattwo major subsets are recognized. True fruits arethose derived from a single flower, in which the ovaryhas a single carpel or two or more of them that arefused to one another. False fruits have been giventhat name because they are made up of true fruitsarranged in such a way that the whole structureappears to be a single fruit. Conjure up the image ofa raspberry or a strawberry. Each of the small, juicyparts of a raspberry is a true fruit; each of the littleseed-like structures embedded on the surface of thestrawberry is a true fruit. These are commonexamples of false fruits derived from the separatecarpels of a single flower. In other words, it I placedfive strawberries or five raspberries in front of you,each would have come from a different flower. Thereare also false fruits that result from the fusion of fruitsfrom separate flowers. Examples include thepineapple, breadfruit, and fig. More about them whenwe get to tropical and subtropical fruits.AN OUTLINE OF FRUIT TYPESTrue fruits (dry when mature):1-seeded; not splitting open at maturity:achene: fruit wall and seed separatecaryopsis (grain): fruit wall and seed fusednut: outer fruit wall hardschizocarp: fruit separates into series of intactsegments2- to many-seeded; splitting at maturity:capsule: a "pod" that opens by slits, pores, or anapical lidsilique: splits lengthwise to reveal central, paperypartitionlegume: 1-chambered, splitting along two seams(sutures)follicle: 1-chambered, splitting along only one seam(suture)True fruits (fleshy when mature):drupe: fruit with outer skin, pulpy flesh, and one hardseed berry: fruit with outer skin and a fleshy interiorpepo: a type of berry with leathery rind as outer layerof fruit wallpome: fruit surrounded by fleshy stem tissue atmaturityhesperidium: fruit with sections lined with juicybladders False fruits (derived from a single flower):accessory: seed-like fruits on surface of rounded,expanded stem aggregate: formed from numerous dry or fleshyindividual fruitship: fruit vase-like, containing several seed-like fruits(achenes)False fruits (derived from a flower cluster):multiple:derived from fusion of fruits of manyseparate flowerssyconium: vase-like fruit with flowers lining interiorwallSEEDSMost plants reproduce by means of structures calledseeds. Flowering plants, conifers, ferns, and fernrelatives are collectively known as "seed plants"because they possess them. Mosses, fungi, and algaedo not. A seed is a mature ovule. It consists of (1) anembryonic plant, (2) stored nutritive material that willtide the plant over until it can germinate and matureto the stage where it can photosynthesize, and (3) anouter protective layer known as the seed coat. It issometimes thin and papery; sometimes hard andbony.Seeds tend to be higher in proteins, fats, and oils thanthe vegetative parts of the plant. These are often ofgreat economic importance.Sometimes a seed is more or less covered by a paperyto fleshy tissue called an aril, as in ackee (a tropicalfruit) and mace (a spice).POLLINATION AND REPRODUCTION-6-Pollination is the transfer of pollen from an anther toa stigma. It is not synonymous with fertilization, theunion of egg and sperm in plants and animals thatreproduce sexually. Pollen grains may be transferredwithin the same flower (self-pollination) or from oneflower to another (cross-pollination). Many speciesof plants have evolved temporal, structural, orphysiological mechanisms to insure self-pollination orcross-pollination. In addition, we have imposedartificial conditions in many of our economicallyimportant plants to make certain that pollination doesnot occur or that it comes about in very preciselycontrolled ways. For instance, we remove the tasselsfrom maize plants to prevent self-pollination. We mayalso exclude pollinators from particular areas.Pollen tubes, carrying sperm cells, will grow throughthe style and into the locules of the ovary. Eventuallythey will penetrate the immature seed (ovule),discharge the male gametes, one of which will fusewith the egg nucleus to form a fertilized egg orzygote. In the flowering plants, another male gametewill fuse with other nuclei within the ovule to initiatethe formation of endosperm, a protective andnutritive tissue. Much or all of the endosperm may beused by the developing embryo. It may also bepresent in mature seeds, in which case we mayconsume it. Some kinds of endosperm are starchy;others have high oil content.Sexual reproduction, which involves the union of eggand sperm nuclei, is not the only mechanism availableto plants. Many species, including some of our mostimportant economic ones, reproduce asexually orvegetatively. The essential part that must be used forvegetative propagation is stem tissue. Cuttings, slips,and grafts all consist of a section of stem, with at leastone bud. Recall that a bud is a much condensed sideshoot that will produce a lateral stem with its ownleaves, flowers, or both. We are able to propagate theIrish potato by planting its "eyes" because they arebuds. If we were to plant a portion of the skin orstarchy interior of the potato, it would not grow into anew plant.In nature, the various kinds of modified stems(rhizomes, stolons, bulbs, corms, and tubers) serve asmeans of vegetative reproduction, in addition to beingstorage organs for the plants. When rhizomes orstolons break apart, each segment is capable ofgrowing into a new adult plant. Keep this in mindwhen you gleefully attack some weed that bearsrhizomes or stolons. Each part that gets left behind ordropped somewhere in the yard can become a newplant. The central or lateral buds can also develop intoindependent daughter plants.The products of asexual reproduction will begenetically identical to the parent plants. Theparticular combination of characteristics (food value,fiber content, oil content, taste, color, medicinalproperties, etc.) will be faithfully reproduced,generation after generation. Therefore, it is notsurprising to learn that many of our most importantcrops are vegetatively propagated. We do not plantthe seeds of potatoes, bananas, sugar cane, orpineapple to get a new crop. All are the products ofasexual reproduction. In fact, a few of our crop plantshave not flowered or set seed in hundreds or eventhousands of years. We maintain them in a strictlyvegetative state.I should also point out that we are not talking aboutan "either/or" situation. Many plants, under naturalconditions or in cultivation, may reproduce sexually byforming flowers, fruits, and seeds and they may alsoreproduce asexually by forming rhizomes, bulbs, etc.We purposefully keep some plants that are perfectlycapable of sexual reproduction in a vegetative state.For instance, we frustrate the poor pineapple bykeeping the required pollinators away from them.One final complication. You might well assume that ifyou see fruits on a plant that they must be the resultof sexual reproduction. After all, a fruit is the ripenedovary of a flower. However, in plants such as thenavel orange and the banana, fruit formation isinitiated by the act of pollination. No union of gametesoccurred and no seeds were formed. Parthenocarpyis the condition of fruits developing without seeds. Notall seedless fruits are parthenocarpic. Some of theseedless grapes are entirely fertile. They lack seedsbecause of a failure of their embryos to develop.Of course, you might suspect that something kinkymight be going on in seedless fruits. But, if there areseeds in that fruit, then fertilization must haveoccurred ... right? Wrong!