Antibodies wereobtained from the following companies: ABCA1, ABCG1, SR-B1 from Novus Biologicals via THP Medical Products GmbH(Vienna, Austria), anti-actin antibody from MP biologicals(Illkirch, France), horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody fromNew England Biolabs (Frankfurt,Germany), horseradish peroxidase conjugated goat anti-mousesecondary antibody from Upstate (Millipore, Vienna, Austria).Cell CultureHuman monocytic THP-1 cells were acquired from ATCC R(c)and grown in suspension in RPMI-1640 medium supplementedwith 2 mM glutamine, 100 U/mL benzylpenicillin, 100 mg/mLstreptomycin, and 10% FBS in T175 flasks. For experiments,differentiation was induced by seeding THP-1 monocytes in 96-,24-, or 6- well plates under treatment of 200 nM PMA for 72 h(seeding cell density of 0.2 x 106 cells per mL). All of the testedcompounds were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) andstored at -20*C. Control cells were always treated with an equalvolume of solvent (DMSO) and its final concentrations did notexceed 0.1%.Cholesterol Efflux AssayThe cholesterol efflux assay (Wang et al., 2015) was adaptedfrom previous studies (Chawla et al., 2001; Chinetti et al., 2001).Briefly, THP-1-derived macrophages were incubated for 24 hwith the compounds at the indicated concentrations [solventvehicle (DMSO), falcarindiol (1-20 uM), the PPARg agonistpioglitazone (10 uM) as positive control] together with [3H]-cholesterol in serum free medium supplemented with 0.1% BSAand 10 ug/mL unesterified cholesterol. On the next day, cellswere washed twice with pre-warmed PBS and incubated withthe same compounds with or without 10 ug/mL apo A1 or1% human plasma dissolved in serum-free medium for 6 h.Extracellular as well as intracellular radioactivity were quantifiedFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 596312Wang et al. Falcarindiol Promotes Cholesterol Effluxwith scintillation counting. The apo A1- as well as humanplasma-mediated cholesterol efflux was calculated as follows:Apo A1mediated cholesterol efflux % =((extracellular cpm)apo A1(total cpm)apo A1-(extracellular cpm)no apo A1(total cpm)no apo A1)x 100Human plasma mediated cholesterol efflux % =((extracellular cpm)plasma(total cpm)plasma-(extracellular cpm)no plasma(total cpm)no plasma)x 100Resazurin Conversion AssayThe viability of THP-1-derived macrophages was assessed byresazurin conversion. The assay was performed as previouslydescribed (Wang et al., 2015) by quantification of the conversionof the low fluorescent resazurin to high fluorescent resorufin.Gel Electrophoresis and ImmunoblotAnalysisTHP-1 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and differentiated intomacrophages with 200 nM PMA for 72 h. The macrophageswere treated with the indicated compounds at the correspondingtime points, as described in detail in each figure legend.Cellular proteins were extracted using NP40 buffer (150mM NaCl; 50 mM HEPES (pH 7.4); 1% NP40; 1% proteaseinhibitor CompleteTM (Roche); 1% phenylmethylsulfonylfluoride (PMSF); 0.5% Na3VO4; 0.5% NaF) and quantifiedwith the Bradford method. For western blot analysis, an equalamount of protein (20 ug) was separated via SDS-PAGE andtransferred onto a PVDF membrane. The membrane wasblocked for 1 h at room temperature with 5% non-fat milk,and then incubated at 4*C overnight with primary polyclonalantibody against ABCA1, ABCG1 or SR-B1 (1:500) or actin(1:10,000). After being washed for three times (15 min eachtime), the membranes were incubated with a secondary antibody[horseradish peroxidase-conjugated goat anti-rabbit (1:500) oranti-mouse (1:10,000)] for 1 h at room temperature. The signalswere detected and visualized using a LAS-3000 luminescentimage analyzer (Fujifilm, Dusseldorf, Germany) using AIDAimage analyzer 4.06 software (Raytest, Sprockhovel, Germany).The indicated protein band intensity was normalized to that ofactin.RNA Extraction and AnalysisTHP-1 cells were seeded in 6-well plates and differentiatedinto macrophages with a 200 nM PMA treatment for 72 h.The macrophages were treated with the indicated compoundsat the indicated time points, which are described in detailin the figure legends. Total cellular RNA was extracted fromthe treated THP-1 macrophages using peqGOLD Total RNAkits (PeqLab, Linz, Austria) according to the manufacturer'sinstructions. One microgram of total RNA was used for cDNAsynthesis according to the protocol of the High CapacitycDNA Reverse Transcription Kit together with RNase Inhibitor(Applied Biosystems). LightCycler R(c) 480 SYBR Green I Masterkit (Roche) was used for quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR) with 40 ng cDNA from each sample for triplicatemeasurements. Amplification cycles were detected using theLightCycler 480 system (Roche). ABCA1 (HS_ABCA1_1_SGQuantiTect primer assay, Cat.no. : #QT00064869, QIAGEN)and 18S (Hs_RRN18S_1_SG QuantiTect Primer assay,Cat.no. : #QT00199367, QIAGEN) primers were used, andthe quantification was performed with the1CT method.Determination of Cathepsin ActivityThe cathepsin activity assays were performed according tothe manufacturer's instructions. In general, THP-1-derivedmacrophages were cultured for 24 hwith solvent control (DMSO)or falcarindiol (10uM). After incubation, cells were washed oncewith cold PBS and lysed with chilled cell lysis buffer. Proteinconcentration was determined using the Bradford method.Hundredmicrograms of protein per reaction in 50uL of cell lysisbuffer was used for the activity measurement. Fifty microlitersof reaction buffer and 2 uL of the respective cathepsin substratewere added to 50 uL cell lysates. The assay plate was incubatedat 37*C for 1 h protected from light. The fluorescence wasquantified with Tecan Infinite 200 R(c) Pro plate reader (Vienna,Austria).Statistical MethodsStatistical analysis was performedwith data acquired from at leastthree independent experiments using GraphPad Prism softwareversion 4.03 (GraphPad Software Inc., La Jolla, CA, USA). Figureswith bar graphs represent mean +- SD. To determine statisticalsignificance, one- or two- way analysis of variance (ANOVA)were performed and p< 0.05 was considered significant.RESULTSFalcarindiol Promotes Cholesterol Efflux inThp-1-Derived MacrophagesIn a previous study, we showed that falcarindiol activatesPPARg in HEK-293 cells transfected with a PPARg-responsiveluciferase reporter (Atanasov et al., 2013). Considering thatPPARg is a known regulator of cholesterol efflux (Chawlaet al., 2001; Chinetti et al., 2001), we aimed to investigatewhether falcarindiol can promote cholesterol efflux in THP-1-derived macrophages. Since apo A1, the nascent and lipid freeform of HDL, is the most significant acceptor for cholesteroleffluxed from macrophages (Du et al., 2015), we first studiedcholesterol efflux mediated by apo A1. Falcarindiol enhancedapo A1-mediated cholesterol efflux in a concentration-dependentmanner when applied at 1-20uM(without effect on cell viability;Figure 1B) with a half maximal effective concentration (EC50)of 5.8 uM (Figure 1C). Moreover, 10 uM falcarindiol alsosignificantly enhanced 1% human plasma-mediated cholesterolefflux (Figure 1D) as plasma containing HDL particles servedas cholesterol acceptors in the process of cholesterol efflux.Pioglitazone, a PPARg agonist known to upregulate cholesterolFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 596313Wang et al. Falcarindiol Promotes Cholesterol Effluxefflux (Ozasa et al., 2011), was used as positive control both inpresence of apo A1 and human plasma (Figures 1C,D).Falcarindiol Enhances ABCA1 ProteinExpressionThe transmembrane proteins ABCA1, ABCG1, and SR-B1 aretransporters mediating cholesterol efflux (Duffy and Rader,2006). Therefore, we investigated protein expression of thesethree transporters upon treatment with falcarindiol in THP-1-derived macrophages. As evident in Figure 2A, ABCA1 proteinlevel significantly increased in response to falcarindiol (10 uM).At the same time, there was no significant upregulation ofABCG1 (Figure 2B) or the bi-directional transporter SR-B1(Figure 2C; Stangl et al., 1999). Next, we investigated whetherincreased ABCA1 protein level is associated with an increase inABCA1 mRNA level. ABCA1 mRNA level indeed significantlyincreased upon falcarindiol (10 uM) treatment (Figure 3B, left).In macrophages, enhanced ABCA1 mRNA level might resultfrom PPARg and subsequent LXR activation (Chawla et al., 2001;Chinetti et al., 2001). We, therefore, asked whether the increasedABCA1 mRNA level induced by falcarindiol might be due toPPARg-activation. To check this possibility, we used the PPARgantagonist, BADGE (50 uM), to block the activity of PPARg inTHP-1-derived macrophages (Hinz et al., 2003). Indeed, BADGEblocked the falcarindiol-mediated increase of ABCA1 protein aswell as mRNA level (Figures 3A,B).Falcarindiol Inhibits ABCA1 ProteinDegradationInterestingly, the ABCA1 mRNA up-regulation by falcarindiolwas significantly lower than the mRNA induction causedby the PPARg agonist pioglitazone (Figure 3B, on the left),while the induction of ABCA1 protein level by falcarindioland pioglitazone was equally potent (Figure 3A, on the left).This inconsistency indicated that an additional effect offalcarindiol might exist, which could enhance ABCA1 proteinlevel besides the increase of ABCA1 mRNA level. To explorethis possibility, we measured the rate of ABCA1 proteindegradation in the presence and absence of falcarindiol. THP-1-derived macrophages were incubated with falcarindiol or solventvehicle (DMSO) for 24 h and were then further treated withcycloheximide (140 uM) to block de novo protein synthesis(Arakawa et al., 2009). As evident in Figure 4, ABCA1 proteindegradation was significantly inhibited in the presence offalcarindiol showing that the compound interferes with theABCA1 protein turnover rate.Falcarindiol Inhibits LysosomalCathepsin-Dependent ABCA1 DegradationTo further explore how falcarindiol inhibits ABCA1 proteindegradation, we first investigated, which protein degradationpathway could be affected by falcarindiol in THP-1-derivedmacrophages. As presented in Figure 5A, the application oflactacystin, an ubiquitin proteasome inhibitor, failed to affectABCA1 protein level in our experimental setting. However, theapplication of calpeptin (a calpain inhibitor) and chloroquine(a lysosome inhibitor) (Figures 5B,C) increased ABCA1 proteinlevel, similarly to falcarindiol. Falcarindiol had an additive effecton ABCA1 protein level upon co-treatment with calpeptin,indicating that its mechanism of action is likely differentfrom the calpain inhibitor calpeptin. However, there was nodifference observed with or without chloroquine in the presenceof falcarindiol, suggesting that falcarindiol might interfere withprotein degradation in the lysosome, mimicking the effect ofchloroquine (Figure 5C).The lysosomal degradation pathway is a well-known regulatorof ABCA1 protein turnover (Neufeld et al., 2001; Santamarina-Fojo et al., 2001; Mizuno et al., 2011) and cathepsins are wellestablished proteases mediating the lysosomal proteolysis ingeneral (Turk et al., 2012; Appelqvist et al., 2013). Therefore,FIGURE 2 | Falcarindiol increases ABCA1 protein level. Differentiated THP-1 macrophages were treated with solvent vehicle control (DMSO), falcarindiol (Fal, 10 uM),or the PPARg agonist pioglitazone (Pio, 10 uM). After 24 h, cells were lysed and 20 ug protein was resolved via SDS-PAGE. Immunoblotting was performed withantibodies against the indicated proteins, ABCA1 (A), ABCG1 (B), and SR-B1 (C) as well as actin as loading control. All experiments were performed four times andvalues are presented as means +- SD and vs. solvent vehicle control (DMSO): **p < 0.01, n.s. not significant (ANOVA/Bonferroni).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org September 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 596314Wang et al. Falcarindiol Promotes Cholesterol EffluxFIGURE 3 | The PPARg antagonist, BADGE, blocks falcarindiol-mediated ABCA1 protein and mRNA induction. Differentiated THP-1 macrophages were incubatedfor 24 h with falcarindiol (Fal, 10uM) or pioglitazone (Pio, 10 uM) with or without 50 uM BADGE. ABCA1 protein (A) and mRNA (B) level were analyzed by westernblotting and qPCR, respectively. All data are mean +- SD (n = 3), *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001, n.s. not significant vs. solvent vehicle control (DMSO)(ANOVA/Bonferroni).FIGURE 4 | Falcarindiol inhibits ABCA1 protein degradation. DifferentiatedTHP-1 macrophages were stimulated with 10 uM falcarindiol (black circles) oran equal amount of the solvent vehicle control (DMSO; white circles). After 24h incubation, cells were treated with cycloheximide (140 uM) and lysed atdifferent time points (0, 10, 20, 40 min). Western blotting was used to monitorthe decline of ABCA1 protein level upon cycloheximide treatment in thepresence or absence of falcarindiol. All data are mean +- SD (n = 3) and vs.solvent vehicle control (DMSO): *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, n.s. not significant(two-way ANOVA/Bonferroni).we investigated whether the proteolytic activity of lysosomalcathepsins is affected by falcarindiol. Figures 6A-E shows thatamong the tested cathepsins (B, D, K, L, S) the activity ofcathepsin B, S, and K were significantly suppressed by 35, 14,and 8%, respectively. Overall, these data indicate that falcarindiolleads to the suppression of ABCA1 degradation and inhibitslysosomal cathepsins.DISCUSSIONIn this study, we describe for the first time that falcarindiol, atypical constituent of Apiaceae vegetables, stimulates cholesterolefflux by promoting ABCA1 gene expression in THP-1-derivedmacrophages. In addition, we show that falcarindiol increasesABCA1 protein stability and inhibits the proteolytic activity oflysosomal cathepsins.Macrophage cholesterol efflux is a process counteractingthe transformation of macrophages into pro-atherogenic foamcells. Thus, the study of this process and molecules that canregulate it is of significance for potential approaches to combatCVD (Rosenson et al., 2012; Du et al., 2015). ABCA1 is themost important membrane transporter for cholesterol effluxfrom macrophages (Du et al., 2015). Treatment of THP-1-derived macrophages with falcarindiol increased ABCA1 proteinexpression (Figure 2). In contrast, the expression level of theother two cholesterol transmembrane transporters, SR-B1 andABCG1, remained unchanged. In THP-1 macrophages, SR-B1was shown to be co-expressed with caveolin-1 and to enhanceselectively cholesterol ester uptake rather than cholesterolefflux (Matveev et al., 1999).