The downregulationof DNA biosynthesis in CAL-27 cells was observed for allpolyphenolic compounds (Figure 2). The obtained results showthat the addition of chrysin resulted in a reduction in DNAbiosynthesis by 46, 80, 83, and 83% whereas the application ofcaffeic acid leads to a reduction of DNA biosynthesis by 14,31, and 52%. Moreover, the similar situation was observed afteradding ferulic acid where the DNA biosynthesis was reducedby 16, 46, 53, and 71%. In the case of using p-coumaricacid, DNA biosynthesis was also reduced by 67, 78, and 83%.These findings of indicate that all polyphenols are inhibitorsof DNA biosynthesis in CAL-27 SCC cells, and the intensityof this process depends on the concentration of the compoundused.To evaluate whether chosen compounds lead to the cell deaththrough the apoptosis pathway involved proline metabolismregulation the western immunoblot assay was performed.For further analysis polyphenols were used at the lowestdoses that contributed to noticeable cytotoxic effects. Appliedconcentrations were as follows: chrysin - 5 ug/mL, caffeic acid -65 ug/mL, ferulic acid - 50 ug/mL, and p-coumaric acid -70 ug/mL.Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 336207fphar-09-00336 April 3, 2018 Time: 17:22 # 5Celin'ska-Janowicz et al. Propolis Polyphenols Induce PRODH/POX-Dependent ApoptosisFIGURE 1 | The cytotoxic effects of polyphenolic compounds on CAL-27 cells. The cells were treated with a specified concentration [ug/mL] of respectivecomponents for 24 h and cytotoxic effects were determined by MTT assay. Cisplatin (CDDP) (10 uM) was used as a positive control. The values representmean +- SEM of two independent experiments conducted six times (n = 12). The stars indicate that value were significantly different (*p < 0.001) compared withcontrol.Selected Polyphenols Activate p53,PRODH/POX, Caspase 9 and 3 in CAL-27Cell LineThe study was conducted applying Western Immunoblot methoddescribed in chapter 2.5. CAL-27 cells were subjected to 24 hexposure to selected concentrations of polyphenols: chrysin(5 ug/mL), caffeic acid (65 ug/mL), ferulic acid (50 ug/mL),and p-coumaric acid (70 ug/mL). To evaluate the course ofapoptosis process the caspases expression were assessed. Thefindings showed the reduction of expression of total caspase 3 inCAL-27 cells incubated with all of the tested polyphenols. Thelargest reduction in the expression of the total caspase 3 formcompared to the control was observed in cells incubated withchrysin (5 ug/mL) and ferulic acid (50 ug/mL) (Figure 3A).Additionally, the obtained data showed reduced expression oftotal caspase 9 in CAL-27 cells incubated with all polyphenolstested. The most significant reduction in the expression of thetotal caspase 9 form was observed in cells incubated with chrysin(5 ug/mL) and ferulic acid (50 ug/mL) (Figure 3C). Moreover,obtained results revealed an increase in cleaved caspases 9 and 3expressions in CAL-27 cells after incubation with each of usedpolyphenols (Figure 3). The highest increase in expression ofactive caspase 9 compared to control was observed in CAL-27 cells exposed to caffeic acid (65 ug/mL) and p-coumaricacid (70 ug/mL) (Figure 3D). Furthermore, the data revealedincreased expression of the active form of caspase 3 in CAL-27cells incubated with each of the polyphenols tested. The mostnoticeable increase in expression of active caspase 3 in relationto control was observed in the case of CAL-27 cells exposed tochrysin (5 ug/mL) and p-coumaric acid (70 ug/mL) (Figure 3B).The following results confirm the pro-apoptotic effect of thepolyphenols. These compounds stimulate the expression of theactive forms of the initiator caspase 9 involved in the activationof the intrinsic pathway of apoptosis and the executive caspase3. The initiation of apoptosis through the activation of the p53protein is accompanied by the induction of proline oxidase(PRODH/POX) expression. It is a mitochondrial enzyme thatcatalyzes the conversion of proline to pyrroline-5-carboxylatewhile transferring free electrons to cytochrome c resulting inFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 336208fphar-09-00336 April 3, 2018 Time: 17:22 # 6Celin'ska-Janowicz et al. Propolis Polyphenols Induce PRODH/POX-Dependent ApoptosisFIGURE 2 | Decreasing effects of polyphenolic compounds on DNA biosynthesis in CAL-27 cells. The cells were incubated with specified concentration [ug/mL] ofrespective polyphenols for 24 h and [3H]-thymidine incorporation into CAL-27 was measured in scintillation counter. Cisplatin (10 uM) was used as a positive control.The values represent mean +- SEM of two independent experiments conducted three times (n = 6). The stars indicate that value were significantly different(*p < 0.001) compared with control.apoptosis. Therefore, to further examination whether observedapoptosis involved the changes in PRODH/POX activity, thewestern immunoblot for PRODH/POX and p53 (the most potentinducer of this protein expression) was conducted. Receivedoutcomes demonstrated the increase in PRODH/POX expressionin all studied cases (Figure 3F). The obtained results coincidewith the p53 expression that was increased in all samples.Nonetheless, the lowest increase was observed in CAL-27 cellspreviously incubated with ferulic acid (Figures 3E,F).The Proapoptotic Effect of Chrysin,Caffeic Acid, p-Coumaric Acid, andFerulic AcidTo confirm induction of apoptosis by the polyphenols the vitalityassay was performed. The cells were subjected to 24 h exposureto tested polyphenols in the following concentrations: chrysin(5 ug/mL), caffeic acid (65 ug/mL), ferulic acid (50 ug/mL), andp-coumaric acid (70 ug/mL). The obtained outcomes revealed asignificant decrease in cellular GSH concentration in treated cellscompared to untreated control (Figure 4). The most noticeableincrease in the cell population with the low level of GSH wasobserved in CAL-27 cells treated with chrysin. The loss ofGSH is broadly known to be directly related to the apoptosisprogression and the assay confirmed our data received from MTTassay.The performed assays confirmed the apoptosis induction intreated cells. To estimate whether chosen compounds leads toapoptosis through the disruption of proline metabolism, furtherstudies were conducted.Chrysin, Caffeic Acid, p-Coumaric Acid,and Ferulic Acid Affect the CellularMetabolism of ProlineProline transformations affect the regulation of cellularmetabolism and apoptosis. The effect of proline on themetabolism of tumor cells seems to be particularly important,Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 336209fphar-09-00336 April 3, 2018 Time: 17:22 # 7Celin'ska-Janowicz et al. Propolis Polyphenols Induce PRODH/POX-Dependent ApoptosisFIGURE 3 | Expression of un-cleaved caspase-3 (A), cleaved-caspase-3 (B), un-cleaved caspase-9 (C), cleaved-caspase-9 (D), PRODH/POX (F) and p53 (E), inCAL-27 cells and the effect of: p-coumaric acid, chrysin, ferulic acid, and caffeic acid on the process. b-Actin was used as a control (data contained inSupplementary Presentation 1). The values represent mean +- SEM of six pooled cell homogenates extracts from three independent experiments (n = 18). The starsindicate which values were significantly different (*p < 0.001) compared with control.where a significant increase in the concentration of thisamino acid is observed in comparison with normal cells.The high concentration of intracellular proline is associatedwith an enhanced ability of tumor cells to metastasize. Theperformed studies showed the pro-apoptotic activity of all testedpolyphenols. The next stage of the study was to determineFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 336210fphar-09-00336 April 3, 2018 Time: 17:22 # 8Celin'ska-Janowicz et al. Propolis Polyphenols Induce PRODH/POX-Dependent ApoptosisFIGURE 4 | The analysis of cellular reduced glutathione (GSH) levels in CAL-27 cells after 24 h exposure to tested polyphenols in following concentrations: (C)chrysin - 5 ug/mL, (B) caffeic acid - 65 ug/mL, (A) ferulic acid - 50 ug/mL, and (D) p-coumaric acid - 70 ug/mL. Cisplatin (10 uM) was used as a positive control.M1 represents the cells with a high GSH levels (high vitality); M2 represents the cells with low GSH levels (low vitality). The graphs present mean values +- SEM fromthree experiments done in duplicates. The asterisks determine values significantly different from control samples (*p < 0.001).the effect of the tested polyphenols on the proline level inCAL-27 SCC cells. For evaluation, if discerned changes mightinduce the adjustments in proline metabolism and hence inits intracellular concentration, the HPLC-QTOF system wasused. Data acquired after chromatographic analysis displayeda significant decrease in the intracellular proline concentrationin case of CAL-27 cells treated with all studied polyphenols(Figure 5).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 336211fphar-09-00336 April 3, 2018 Time: 17:22 # 9Celin'ska-Janowicz et al. Propolis Polyphenols Induce PRODH/POX-Dependent ApoptosisFIGURE 5 | The effect of 24 h exposure to p-coumaric acid (70 ug/mL),chrysin (5 ug/mL), ferulic acid (50 ug/mL), and caffeic acid (65 ug/mL) onintracellular proline concentration in CAL-27 cell culture. The meanvalues +- SEM from three experiments done in duplicates are presented(n = 6). The stars indicate which values were significantly different (*p < 0.001)compared with control.FIGURE 6 | Collagen biosynthesis measured as 5[3H]-proline incorporationinto proteins susceptible to the action of bacterial collagenase in CAL-27 cellculture incubated for 24 h with polyphenols in following concentrations:chrysin - 5 ug/mL, caffeic acid - 65 ug/mL, ferulic acid - 50 ug/mL, andp-coumaric acid - 70 ug/mL. 2-Metoxyestradiol (MOE) (10 uM) was used asa positive control. The values represent mean +- SEM of two independentexperiments conducted three times (n = 6). The stars indicate valuessignificantly different from control (*p < 0.001).The Decline of Collagen Biosynthesis inthe Cells Treated With PolyphenolsCollagen is a most abundant protein in the extracellularmatrix (ECM), where in addition to supporting functions, itparticipates in the modulation of cellular signals by interactingwith integrin receptors. It affects a number of cell processes,including regulation of gene expression, growth, differentiation,and metabolism of cells. It has been observed that in cancercells, this mechanism is disrupted due to the increased activityof metalloproteinases (MMPs), contributing to the increaseddegradation of collagen. The biosynthesis level of this proteinmay reflect changes in metabolic processes in living cells. SinceFIGURE 7 | Prolidase activity in CAL-27 cells treated for 24 h with chosenpolyphenols (chrysin - 5 ug/mL, caffeic acid - 65 ug/mL, ferulic acid -50 ug/mL, and p-coumaric acid - 70 ug/mL). N-Benzyloxycarbonyl-L-proline(Cbz-Pro) (5 mM) was used as a positive control. The mean values +- SEMfrom three experiments done in duplicates (n = 6) are presented. Asterisksindicate differences between studied cells compared to control untreated cellsat *p < 0.001.collagen is reported to be the essential source of proline furtherexperiment was designed to assess the possible disorders ofcollagen biosynthesis after exposure to studied polyphenols. Theassay was performed according to the Peterkofsky's method.Obtained data revealed the decline of collagen biosynthesis in thecells treated with all tested compounds (Figure 6). The reductionof collagen biosynthesis by 36% - p-coumaric acid, 95% - chrysin,44% - ferulic acid, and 43% - caffeic acid, compared to control(100%) was observed. The most noticeable decrease in collagenbiosynthesis was observed in the cells incubated with chrysin.Inhibition of Prolidase Activity by TestedPolyphenolsProlidase [E.C. 3.4.13.9] is a key enzyme involved in theprocess of collagen biosynthesis. This enzyme is involved in thebreakdown of imidopeptides that are degradation products ofcollagen fibers. In the last stage of collagen degradation, prolidasecatalyzes the reaction of the release of proline and hydroxyprolineimidopeptides. The released proline can then be included in thecollagen biosynthesis or other metabolic pathways, e.g., relatedto the process of apoptosis or the neoangiogenesis process. Sinceproline is the major constituent of collagen (it represents themain source of the aminoacids), their metabolism is directlyconnected. Due to this fact, prolidase plays a crucial role in therecycling of proline for collagen biosynthesis. In CAL-27 cellsincubated with test polyphenols (chrysin - 5ug/mL, caffeic acid -65ug/mL, ferulic acid - 50ug/mL, p-coumaric acid - 70ug/mL),a reduction in the activity of prolidase was observed, by 81% -p-coumaric acid, 78% - chrysin, 77% - ferulic acid, 66% - caffeicacid in relation to the control (Figure 7).DISCUSSIONThe SCC is one of the most frequent cancers of the oral cavity.It is associated with high invasiveness and ability to induceFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 336212fphar-09-00336 April 3, 2018 Time: 17:22 # 10Celin'ska-Janowicz et al. Propolis Polyphenols Induce PRODH/POX-Dependent Apoptosisearly and extensive lymph nodes metastases (Carvalho et al.,2004). The lack of advanced pharmacotherapy of SCC requiressearching for new effective pharmacological strategies (Pilch andBouquot, 2005). In this study, we found that selected polyphenolsof propolis induced apoptosis in CAL-27 cells through up-regulation of proline metabolism.Recent studies revealed the enhanced progression of theSCC due to up-regulation of proline level induced by amplifiedgenes expression of ORAOV1 and P5C-reductase (Togashi et al.,2014). Therefore, we considered proline metabolism as a targetfor potential treatment of SCC. In fact, proline bearing reducingpotential is considered as a stress molecule. Its metabolismplays an important role in maintaining energetic and redoxbalance in cells. Free cytoplasmic proline may up-regulatetranscriptional activity of HIF-1a that is considered as pro-survival and inflammatory transcription factor since it inducesexpression of COX-2, VEGF, TNF-a, IL-1, NF-kB (Surazynskiet al., 2008a).Proline could be removed from the cytoplasm byincorporation into collagen. Collagen biosynthesis mayserve as a sink for proline. Up-regulation of collagenbiosynthesis can remove reducing potential, but it maycontribute to tissue cirrhosis usually accompanying prolongedinflammation (Priest and Davies, 1969; Davis and Cowie,1990). Interesting is a fact of significant alterations in collagencontent in SCC tissue. Agarwal and Ballabh indicated a definitealteration in the distribution of collagen type IV with itssignificant loss in poorly-differentiated SCC tissue (Agarwaland Ballabh, 2013), related to increased metastasis. On theother hand, proline is generated from imidodipeptides (derivedfrom collagen degradation products) by imidopeptidase -prolidase. Therefore, the enzyme activity represents animportant factor in the regulation of intracellular prolineconcentration. However, other mechanisms that contribute togeneration as well as, utilization of intracellular proline are aswell-important.A critical pathway of proline utilization is mitochondrialdegradation by proline oxidase - PRODH/POX. During thisprocess ROS and/or ATP are generated. PRODH/POX iswidely distributed in living organisms and is responsible fora number of regulatory processes such as redox homeostasis,osmotic adaptation, cell signaling, and oxidative stress. Recentdata provided evidence that enzyme plays a crucial role ininhibition of carcinogenesis and tumor growth.