Over the years therehas also been a major development in methodologies to detect ad-verse drug reactions and new knowledge and competence needs tobe incorporated into pharmacovigilance. During recent years this alsoincludes communication science and an increased interaction withconcerned stakeholders especially patients and representatives of pa-tient organizations. A tendency for a more holistic view on total pa-tient safety has developed, this also being reflected in the agenda ofmeetings organized by different scientific societies. This holistic viewalso includes the whole life-cycle of the medicinal product develop-ment. Examples of development and efforts of global initiatives are: The"Pharma package" with inclusion of support of patient reporting ofsuspected ADRs (European initiative, EU commission), PV in disease-oriented programmes in resource-limited countries and PV toolkit forresource-limited countries (WHO initiative). Melinda and Bill GatesFoundation (US initiative to financially support safety systems in WHOdisease programmes of Malaria, Tb, HIV etc. ), reflection paper on eth-ical and GCP aspects of clinical trials of medicinal products for humanuse conducted in third countries and submitted in marketing autho-risation applications to the EMA (EMA initiative), efforts of a globalrisk minimisation toolkit (CIOMS).Future needs will be to increase capacity building when it comes to theimplementation of standards and development and maintenance ofpharmacovigilance systems. Furthermore a harmonization in order toavoid duplication of work and reduce costs seems necessary. The useof resources in an effective manner is further strengthened by con-tinuous development of tools for outcome evaluation of risk mini-mization measures. Finally there is a need to find ways of fightingcounterfeit medicines.2PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOPLENARNI PREDAVANjAMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011EUROPEAN LEGISLATION ON TRADITIONALHERBAL MEDICINAL PRODUCTSWerner Knoss Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Bonn, GermanyAlmost everywhere in the world medicinal plants have been used inhealth care since ancient times. In Europe, first manuscripts describ-ing medicinal plants were written more than two thousand years ago.Starting from this traditional use, which was often based on ready-to-use receipts, there was a development towards usage of finishedherbal medicinal products in central Europe during the 20th century.Whereas selection and documentation of manifold receipts have along tradition the formal regulation of herbal medicinal products israther young. In parallel with an increasing scientific knowledge on me-dicinal plants - which included also the identification of highly activepurified compounds of plant origin - a regulatory environment for allmedicinal products has been established in Europe. The basic regula-tory approach is to control the access to the market and to assessquality, safety and efficacy of medicinal products in order to improvepublic health and to facilitate supply with medicinal products. In the European Union national regulations have been replaced stepby step by implementation of European legislation. The basic regula-tory framework for medicinal products is laid down in the Directive EC2001/83 (and its amendments). There are specific definitions for herbalmedicinal products and traditional herbal medicinal products (Direc-tive EC 2004/24). The regulatory framework differentiates betweenmarketing authorization of herbal medicinal products and registra-tion of traditional herbal medicinal products, for which the efficacymust be plausible based on their long-standing use instead of beingproven by clinical trials. Quality, efficacy (or longstanding use) andsafety of these medicinal products have to be proven.A harmonised scientific evaluation in this field is resulting from thework of the Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products (HMPC) at theEuropean Medicines Agency (EMA). The HMPC has drafted andadopted a series of guidelines which are intended to support assess-ment of traditional herbal medicinal products and herbal medicinalproducts considering their particular characteristics. One of the majortasks of the HMPC is to establish community monographs and list en-tries of herbal substances/preparations or combinations thereof. Suchharmonized monographs will facilitate assessment within Europeanprocedures, reduce the workload for national competent authoritiesand contribute to the development of a common market of (tradi-tional) herbal medicinal products in Europe. Currently, about 80 mono-graphs have been finalized and about 20 monographs may be finalizedfurthermore per year. With respect to globalization the application of Traditional Medicinesis not always restricted to specific regions. Some well-known thera-peutic systems (e.g. phytotherapy, homeopathy, Traditional ChineseMedicine) are getting more and more popular all over the world. Gen-erally, according to Directive EC 2001/83 the requirements for quality,efficacy and safety must represent the same standards as usually re-quired for all medicinal products.In conclusion there is a clear European regulatory framework for me-dicinal products (directive 2001/83/EC as amended) providing basicdefinitions and offering two options to bring products into the market:i) registration of traditional herbal medicinal products and ii) market-ing authorisation of herbal medicinal products. Beside applications atthe national level there are also options for European procedures. PATIENTS; BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEENCLINICAL THEORY AND PRACTICAL CARESue C JonesInstitute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, King's College LondonFrom the caring perspective of wellbeing we, as healthcare profes-sionals, exist due to the presence of illness in the world population.More specifically in pharmacy, a major role is to work directly with pa-tients on a number of levels. They may visit a pharmacy with a par-ticular symptom causing some discomfort and worry; here we wouldtriage the patient and recommend a course of action. Commonly,they may have been prescribed some medication for a condition theyare suffering. Whether acute or chronic, our responsibility is to en-sure that the prescribed medication, in all situations, is suitable forthat patient. Being appropriate clinically can have many facets, forexample: >> Is the medication 'safe' in terms of dosing, the patient'spre-existing pathologies, side effects, contra-indications, adverse drug reactions etc? >> Is the medication effective for this condition in this patient? >> How can we be sure this is the most optimum treatmentfor this patient?Whilst all of these questions are important, conventionally it has beenthe domain of the prescriber, usually a medical doctor, to diagnoseand prescribe and therefore address the majority of these areas. Traditionally, the role of the pharmacist has been evolving fundamen-tally from public perception of concocting a recipe to cure all ills to are-professionalisation with expanding roles and with that, additionalresponsibilities. In 1990 Hepler and Strand1 talked about a term 'phar-maceutical care' where they explored how the pharmacist could bemore involved in working with patients to improve health outcomes: 'pharmaceutical care involves the process through which apharmacist cooperates with a patient and other profes-sionals in designing, implementing and monitoring a thera-peutic plan that will produce specific therapeutic outcomesfor the patient...' ibid 539Interestingly, their work sparked research globally1 to expand and en-hance the clinical role of a pharmacist leading to a variety of emergentroles and responsibilities for patient care. Lots of this research showedthat money could be saved in drug choice; health outcome measuressuch as morbidity and mortality of patients reduced using pharmacists;working relationships between pharmacists and other healthcare pro-fessionals improved; communication barriers reduced etc 2,3,4,5,6. Whilst a huge amount of effort has gone into developing standard op-erating procedures, clinical governance agendas and standardizingcare, somewhere in this situation is the patient themselves visible asa unique entity? The United Kingdom (UK) Government suggested(2010)7 regarding patient care that there should be:'no decision about me, without me' ibid 33FIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPLENARY LECTURESMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 20111 A simple search on 'Google Scholar' yielded over 1.42 million 'hits (31st July 2011).In these economic times, making the best use of a diminishing level ofresource will be become more important. In 2010, the spending re-view included a 0.5% increase over a five year period so the issue of en-hancing pharmaceutical care, prescribing costs and treatmentadherence will only become more salient8. Perhaps by understandingpatients better, it could bring about enhanced care effectivenessthrough a reduction in costs, as highlighted in the Wanless Report9.However, over a million patient complaints are received to the NHSabout the standards of care they receive and how they are forgottenin as system that does not work10. Somewhere in this mix of pharma-ceutical care have the basics of dealing with people been forgotten?Being aware and sensitive to the actual needs of the patient as an ho-listic being not just a system of pathologies to be dealt with. There-fore by considering the wider perspective of what the patient might bebringing with them to their healthcare, pharmacy could be in a uniqueposition to influence patient outcomes and medication safety.REFERENCES1. Hepler C D & Strand L M (1990) Opportunities and responsibilities inpharmaceutical care. American Journal of Hospital Pharmacy 47:533-543.2. Kjeldsen L J, Jensen T B & Jensen J J (2011) Physicians' evaluation of clinicalpharmacy revealed increased focus on quality improvement and cost saving.Danish Medical Bulletin. 58(5):1-63. Schumock G T, Butler M G, Meek P D, Vermeule L C, Arondekar B V & Bauman J L(2003) Evidence of the Economic Benefit of Clinical Pharmacy Services: 1996-2000.Pharmacotherapy 23(1):113-132.4. Bond C A, Raehl C L & Franke T (1999) Clinical Pharmacy Services and HospitalMortality Rates. Pharmacotherapy 19(5):556-564.5. McMullin S T, Hennenfent J A, Ritchie D J, Huey W Y, Lonergan T P, Schaiff R A,Tonn M E & Bailey T C (1999) A Prospective, Randomized Trial to Assess the CostImpact of Pharmacist-Initiated Interventions. Arch Intern Med. 159:2306-2309.6. Johnson J A & Bootman J L (1997) Drug-related morbidity and mortality and theeconomic impact of pharmaceutical care. Am J Health Syst Pharm 54:554-5587. Department of Health (2010) Equity and Excellence; liberating the NHS. HMSO.London8. HM Treasury H M (2010) Spending Review 2010. The Stationary Office Limited;London.9. Wanless D & Treasury H M (2002) Securing our Future Health: Taking a Long-TermView. The Stationary Office Limited; London.10. Anon (2011) NHS patients' complaints procedure must be reviewed'immediately' (online). [Available:http://www.guardian.co.uk/society/2011/jun/28/nhs-patients-complaints-review].Accessed 31.07.114PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOPLENARNI PREDAVANjAMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI /OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET /REGULATIVAoralni prezentatsiiPHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS /QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRSoral presentationsPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVONEW LC/MS/MS TECHNIQUES IN PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS Sebastian KujundzicDSP Chromatography d.o.o., Milutina Milankovica120g, Belgrade, SerbiaLiquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) combines thephysical separation capabilities of high-performance liquid chro-matography (HPLC) or ultra-high-performance liquid chromatography(UHPLC) with the mass analysis capabilities of mass spectrometry (MS).LC/MS is used for many applications that require very high sensitivityand specificity, with the goal of specific detection, potential identifi-cation, or quantification of compounds within a complex mixture.UHPLC systems are capable to deliver fast and optimal separations,providing speed, resolution, and sensitivity. These performances ofUHPLC systems create demands on the mass spectrometer to yieldfaster, sensitive MS/MS. This practically means that MS systems musthave excellent mass accuracy, isotopic fidelity, mass resolving powerand acquisition rates. These challenges are met by introducing newtechnologies in every part of the mass spectrometer. All these de-mands are clearly demonstrated on Figure 1.Figure 1 - Clearly Better LC/MS optimizes all analytical dimensionsMultiple Reaction Monitoring (MRM) mode has become the preferredmethod for the quantitative analysis of known or target compoundsusing triple quadruple mass spectrometry. The current solution forMRM analysis uses time segmentation, where a method is divided intoa series of time segments and predefined sets of MRM transitions aremonitored for each segment. As sample complexity increases (e.g.,quantifying very low levels of many of residues in a wide variety of ma-trices), very real practical limitations in the time segmentationmethodology become apparent. A better solution is required. New dynamic MRM methods on Triple Quadrupole instruments createnew capability to tackle large multi-analyte assays and to accuratelyquantify exceedingly narrow peaks from fast LC separations.Several factors cause fast LC/MS/MS method development in the drugdiscovery area to be an arduous task. Combination of ESI/APCI sourcesoffers broad response with multiple ionization modes, but optimiza-tion can be difficult and some sources limit flow rates to 1 mL/min,while others compromise chromatographic performance. The scanspeed of the mass spectrometer needs to be fast enough to acquirean adequate number of data points across the narrow peaks gener-ated using sub-2 mm columns. At typical fast LC conditions, currentHPLC systems (pressure limit ~ 400 bar) would yield back pressuresgreater than the threshold limit. Using an UHPLC system coupled withan Triple Quadrupole mass spectrometer comprising thermal gradi-ent focusing (Jet Stream Technology - JS) ESI to streamline high-throughput bioanalytical method development using in vitrometabolic stability samples. Incubations of the substrates buspirone,verapamil, dextromethorphan, or diclofenac were carried out sepa-rately. JS technology was compared to conventional orthogonal ESIusing generic source values. The UHPLC/MS/MS system, which allowsflow rates up to 2 mL/min, pressures up to 1200 bar, dwell times aslow as 1-2 ms, and polarity switching time of 30 ms, achieved an analy-sis time of less than 1.1 min without sacrificing quantitative data qual-ity. Due to the high data acquisition rate provided by the TripleQuadrupole mass spectrometer, compounds ionizing in positive andnegative modes were analyzed in a single run. An adequate number ofdata points (>10) could be collected across the extremely narrow peaks(Average full width half maximum [FWHM] <1.3 sec) generated by theUHPLC system. JS showed enhanced area response and signal-to-noisein comparison to conventional orthogonal ESI (Figure 2).Figure 2 - Overlaid MRM chromatograms obtained using JS in comparison toconventional orthogonal ESI for the metabolic stability study.This presentation will give an overview of new LC/MS techniques usedto get better results in pharmaceutical analysis e.g. an in vitro meta-bolic stability study and pharmacokinetic assay.REFERENCESClearly Better LC/MS Solutions, Application Compendium, Agilent Technologies,2010.Stone P., Glauner T., Kuhlmann F., Miller K., New Dynamic MRM Mode Improves DataQuality and Triple Quad Quantification in Complex Analyses, Technical Overview,Agilent Technologies, 2009.Fandino S.A., Extended ionization capability of thermal gradient focusing ESI inhigh-throughput in-vitro ADME, Application Note, Agilent Technologies, 2009.Fandino S. A., High-throughput bioanalytical method development usingUHPLC/triple quadrupole mass spectrometry, Application Note, AgilentTechnologies, 2009.6Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVO7CHALLENGES OF QUALITY MANAGEMENTIN ANALYTICAL LABORATORIESL. Ugrinova, K. Brezovska, J. Acevska, A. Poceva Panovska, J. Tonic Ribarska, S. Trajkovic Jolevska, A. DimitrovskaCenter for drug quality control, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, MacedoniaQUALITY SYSTEMHierarchy of quality stages in laboratory is set with the following qual-ity terms: quality control, quality assurance, quality system, quality im-provement and quality management. Quality control covers theoperational techniques and activities that are used to fulfill require-ments for quality and regulatory compliance. Quality assurance is de-fined as planned and systematic activities to provide confidence thatan organization fulfils requirements for quality. Quality system repre-sents comprehensive and coordinated efforts to meet quality objec-tives. Quality improvement emphasis the recognizing opportunitiesfor improvement based on the use of quality indicators. Quality man-agement is management approach centered on quality, focused onlong-term success through customer satisfaction.Legislation is one of two major forces driving the setting up the qual-ity system in analytical laboratories. The second and more importantreason for validation and qualification of analytical laboratory is toimprove the reliability, consistency, and accuracy of analytical results.Well-designed, developed, and validated analytical methods,equipment, and materials, together with motivated and qualifiedpeople are prerequisites to achieve this goal.The challenge for any validation plan is to ensure compliance andquality, but with minimal extra cost and administrative complexity.The optimal validation effort is somewhere between doing nothingand the attempt to validate everything 100% [1].One question that has frequently arisen is: "How much validation isenough?"