Minocycline-induced drug reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndromewith persistent myocarditis. J Am Acad Dermatol 2010; 62: 315-8.LEGISLATION AND RECOMMENDATIONS OFTHE EUROPEAN UNION IN DETERMININGTHE IRRITATION POTENTIAL OF COSMETICINGREDIENTSMilica Stankovic1, Vesna Savic1, ValentinaMarinkovic21Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacy, University of Nis2Faculty of Pharmacy, University of BelgradeINTRODUCTIONIn our country there is no legislation about irritation potential ofcosmetic products. There are only the recommendations of theEuropean Union which help us to determine the irritation potential ofcosmetic products. Every cosmetics product on the market should besafe to use. European Union legislation requires all new products toundergo an expert scientific safety assessment before they arelaunched for sale. Scientific research and development is essential tothe cosmetics industry. The EU Cosmetics Directive protectsconsumers and requires cosmetics to cause no damage to humanhealth when applied under normal or reasonably foreseeableconditions of use [1].ANIMAL TESTINGAnimal models are important tools for studies in skin physiology andpathophysiology. Due to substantial differences in skin characteristicssuch as thickness and number of adnexa, the results of animal studiescannot always be directly transferred to the human situation [2].Efforts to replace the rabbit skin irritation test have been underway formany years. Recently various in vitro tests have been developed,evaluated and validated. A key difficulty in confirming the validity ofin vitro methods is that animal data are scarce which adverselyimpacts their acceptance. The Draize test for skin irritation wasdeveloped in order to predict skin irritation hazard of formulationsthat come intentionally or accidentally into contact with human skin.The rabbit method has been criticised for low predictivity andquestionable relevance towards humans, as well as for high subjectivityassociated with grading of reactions, the omission of distinct irritationend-points because the grading is based only on erythema andoedema, and finally for low reproducibility. Although the animal testproved to be useful in identification of majority of strongly irritatingchemicals, still it was failing to correctly predict human non-responsiveness to compounds slightly irritating in rabbits. Studies onhuman volunteers concluded that the in vivo rabbit test oftenoverpredicts the severity of skin reactions and damage produced byirritants [3]. Animal testing is a highly sensitive subject, particularlywhen it comes to cosmetics. Colipa (the European CosmeticsAssociation) is working to develop alternative testing methods [1].ALTERNATIVE METHODSRecently adopted legislation in Europe has increased the focus thatmust be placed on the development of in vitro alternatives to thetraditional toxicology tests [4]. In vitro or in silico alternatives whichcan identify the significant acute human skin irritants may wellrepresent suitable alternatives [1, 4]. Patch testing with sodium laurylsulphate for the evaluation of skin susceptibility has become a widelyused procedure in studying irritant contact dermatitis. In patch testingeffects of occlusion on hydration and barrier function of the skin must263Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONbe taken into account. The water content of the stratum corneumplays an important role in the skin barrier function and hence in thepenetration of topically applied substances [5]. The human patch testallows avoidance of the use of animals, provides an appropriate routeto accurate classification of skin irritation and generates the qualityof data, which can then be used to validate the in vitro alternativemethods which is demanded by recent EU legislation [4]. Various invitro tests have been developed, but the best results have beenobtained using reconstructed human epidermis (RhE) models. ECVAM(European Centre for the Validation of Alternative Methods) initiateda validation trial with the three most promising in vitro tests: SIFT testand two RhE-based methods. Because the in vivo rabbit skin irritationtest is the regulatory accepted method for classification and labellingof chemicals, the ECVAM decided to use results of this test as the invivo gold standard [3]. For skin irritation, the approach which isrecomended uses human volunteers with the acute irritant responsein skin as the endpoint. The test is robust in terms of interlaboratoryreproducibility and that the results are applicable to all skin types andpopulations tested [4]. The alternative methods like cytotoxicity teston human keratinocytes and fibroblast or human skin models areuseful [6]. Transplantation of human skin on to SCID (Severe CombinedImmunodeficiency) mice might offer a promising tool to performstudies in viable human skin without the direct need for humanvolunteers [2].BIOENGINEERING TECHNIQUESThe in vivo irritation potential of topical products is assessed by themethod of dermatological visual score or applying the objective skinbioengineering techniques (erythema index, transepidermal water lossmeasurements) after the skin occlusion or during the patch test [6].Bioengineering techniques are increasingly being used in order toprovide important useful information on the different aspects of skinfunction. These non-invasive techniques have the advantage ofproducing objective readings in contrast to the subjective nature ofclinical observations [7]. Bioengineering methods indicatinginflammatory responses (measurement of blood flow and skinthickness) are helpful in quantifying the irritant response in general,while bioengineering methods indicating epidermal damage(measurement of TEWL and electrical conductance) are helpful inclassifying the individual irritants [8]. For the assessment of low irritantskin reactions, measurement of the TEWL appears to be the most validbioengineering method quantifying the skin reaction to irritants [5].CONCLUSIONThe knowledge gained by this global research effort and the synergiesthat should appear will allow the development of novel in vitroapproaches for the identification and characterization of skinirritating chemicals. The overall strategic goal is to develop a batteryof in silico / in vitro predictive assays that could be used in concert toidentify and potentially quantify the potential of a novel chemical toinduce skin irritation in human. In this way we aim to generate data tosupport skin irritation consumer safety risk assessment decisions inthe absence of animal testing [9].REFERENCES1. Skin Bioengineering: Techniques and Applications in Dermatology andCosmetology. (Elsner P, Barel AO, eds), Current Problems in Dermatology, Karger,2003: Vol 26.2. Kappes U., Schliemann-Willers S., The quality of human skin xenografts on SCIDmice: a noninvasive bioengineering approach, Br J of Derm 151 (2004) 971-976.3. Jiroval D., Basketter D., Liebsch M., Comparison of human skin irritation patchtest data with in vitro skin irritation assays and animal data, Contact Dermatitis 62(2010) 109-116.4. Basketter D. A., York M., Determination of skin irritation potential in the human4-h patch test, Contact Dermatitis 51 (2004) 1-4.5. Friebe K., Effendy I., Loffler H., Effects of skin occlusion in patch testing withsodium lauryl sulphate, Br J of Derm 148 (2003) 65-69.6. Savic S., Bioavailability and safety of dermatological drugs and dermocosmeticproducts: methods of in vitro/in vivo evaluation, Arh farm 60 (2010) 712 - 713.7. Yosipovitch G. Bioengineering techniques in contact dermatitis. In: ThePrinciples and Practice of Contact and Occupational Dermatology in the Asia-Pacific Region. (Ng SK, Goh CL, eds), World Scientific Singapore, 2001; 217- 221.8. Agner T., Serup J., Skin reactions to irritants assessed by non-invasivebioengineering methods, Contact Dermatitis, 20 (2005) 352-359.9. Pierre A., Takao A., Skin Sensitization: The Colipa strategy for developing andevaluating non-animal test methods for risk assessment, Br J of Derm 45 (2009) 45-53.IN VITRO / IN VIVO CORRELATION BETWEEN TWO LAMOTRIGINE ORAL FORMULATIONS Lalic-Popovic M.1, Golocorbin-Kon S.1,2, Mikov M.31Department of Pharmacy, Medical Faculty, University of Novi Sad, Serbia,2Faculty of Pharmacy, Podgorica, University of Montenegro 3Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Clinical Pharmacology,Medical faculty, University of Novi Sad, SerbiaINTRODUCTIONEpilepsy is a chronic disease that often requires life-long antiepilepticdrug (AED) treatment. The primary goal of AED treatment is theavoidance of seizures with no or minimal adverse effects. When long-term seizure remission has been achieved, even a single breakthroughseizure can have serious clinical and social consequences. Healthcaresystems tend to favor the use of generic drugs in order to reducemedical costs, despite a number of potential disadvantages of genericdrugs. In the treatment of epilepsy, generic formulations of AEDs arewidely used. Although generic substitution of AEDs may beappropriate for many patients, there appear to be a substantialnumber of patients in whom generic substitution may represent asuboptimal level of care. Since 2005, the antiepileptic drug lamotriginehas been present in the market in various generic products, in additionto the original brand of Lamictal(r). The linear pharmacokinetics andwide therapeutic window of lamotrigine enable seizure-free patientsto easily switch from brand to generic antiepileptic drugs. The aim of this study was to investigate the extent of variations inlamotrigine serum concentrations between two immediate-releasetablet formulations. Data were compared with in vitro difference andsimilarity tests on dissolution profiles of the two formulations.METHODSDissolution characteristics of formulations A (reference) and B (test)were evaluated at three points spanning the physiologic pH range (pH1.2, pH 4.5, pH 6.8). A model-independent approach of difference (f1)and similarity (f2) tests were applied to dissolution data. A clinicalstudy was performed with 16 patients who were divided into twogroups - one group received formulation A (n = 9) and the other re-ceived formulation B (n = 7). Lamotrigine steady-state concentrationswere determined by high-performance liquid chromatography on a re-verse-phase column.RESULTSThere were no statistically significant differences in lamotrigine serum264Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOconcentrations between the two groups, although formulation B hadslightly higher mean concentration values (formulation A: 3.97 +- 4.1mg/mL; formulation B: 5.78 +- 2.7 mg/mL). Dissolution profiles of thetwo formulations were similar in the pH 1.2 dissolution medium; how-ever, the dissolution profiles of formulation B were outside the disso-lution limit (>=85% at 15 minutes) in the pH 4.5 and 6.8 dissolutionmedia. The relationship between lamotrigine serum concentration(mg/mL) and lamotrigine dose (mg/kg/day) were linear in both formu-lations (r2 = 0.78484 formulation A; r2 = 0.83417 formulation B). For-mulation A had a lower standard deviation (SD) and data scatteringbecause, as the dissolution data showed, it is less influenced by pHchanges. The test formulation, or formulation B, had a higher datascattering and SD, which corresponds with the higher influence of pHchanges on the dissolution profile.CONCLUSIONSNo significant changes in the serum concentrations of lamotriginewere seen between the two investigated formulations. There is no ev-idence to suggest that the differences in dissolution profiles at pH 4.5and pH 6.8 affect the therapeutic efficacy of the formulations. It isevident that the doses of test formulation given to the patients werehigher as a consequence of common assumption that generic prod-ucts have a lower absorption rate, which is proven unnecessary in thisstudy. This investigation was a pilot study and thus further investiga-tions with a larger sample size are necessary to determine if there is aconnection between dissolution profiles and the therapeutic effectof investigated formulations.This work has been supported by Ministry of Science and Technologydevelopment of Serbia N041012.REFERENCES1. Besag FMC. Is generic prescribing acceptable in epilepsy? Drug Safety 2000; 23:173-822. Kramer G, Biraen A, Carreno M, et al. Current approaches to the use of genericantiepileptic drugs. Epilpsy Behav 2007; 11: 46-523. Sripalakit P, Srichaiya A, Kandee R. Development and validation of a HPLCmethod for a dissolution test of lamotrigine tablets and its application to drugquality control studies. J Liquid Chromatography & Related Technologies 2008; 31:926-394. Lalic M, Cvejic J, Popovic J, et al. Lamotrigine and valproate pharmacokineticsinteractions in epileptic patients. Eur J Drug Metab Pharmacokinet 2009; 34 (2): 93-95. Lue BM, Nielsen FS, Magnussen T, et al. Using biorelevant dissolution to obtainIVIC of solid dosage forms containing a poorly-soluble model compound. Eur JPharm Biopharm 2008; 69: 648-57INFLUENCE OF PARTICLE SIZE ON THE DISSOLUTION RATE OF ATORVASTATIN CALCIUM TABLETSE. Adamova, L. Makraduli, R. Dameska, E. Ris-tevska, L. Ivceska, H. Litovin, D. Dimova, A. Seko-vanic, M. Anevska, D. Lepcevska Replekfarm, Kozle 188, 1000 Skopje, R. MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONAtorvastatin, as a synthetic lipid-lowering agent, is an inhibitor of 3-hydroxy-3- methyl-glutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG - CoA) reductase whichcatalyzes the conversion of HMG-Co A to mevalonate, an early rate-limiting step in cholesterol biosynthesis. According to BCS it belongsto category II - low solubility, high permeability. It is very slightly solu-ble in water, phosphate buffer with pH=7.4 and in acetonitrile. It'spractically insoluble in water solution with pH <= 4. Atorvastatin canexist in an amorphous form and in many crystalline forms (Form I, II, III,IV...) [1]. The bioavailability of atorvastatin is one of the key parametersfor its therapeutic use and is dependent on the form of theatorvastatin calcium to be used in the pharmaceutical formulation(amorphous, crystalline or a mixture of both). It is known that theamorphous form in a number of pharmaceutical substances exhibitdifferent stability and dissolution characteristics and bioavailabilitypatterns compared to the crystalline forms. According to the U.S.Food and Drug Administration's (FDA) summary of approval for Warner-Lambert's LipitorTM, originally atorvastatin was synthesized in theamorphous form [2], but this form was reported to be hygroscopic andunstable when exposed to oxygen. Later a more stable crystalline formof atorvastatin was developed by Warner- Lambert. Due to its betterstability and faster absorption from the GIT, crystalline atorvastatin isbeing used in the marketed formulation of atorvastatin [3]. Differentphysical forms of a drug can affect its absorption. Typically, the crystalor polymorphic form, the state of hydration or solvation, and physicalsize and shape of drug particles may have considerable impact on therate and extent of drug absorption. These polymorphs may havedifferent physical properties, such as dissolution rate and solubility.Particle size and particle size distribution may play a major role indissolution and drug absorption. The effective surface area of the drugis increased enormously by a reduction in the particle size. Smallerparticle size enhances water penetration into the particles andincreases the dissolution rates [4]. Particle size reduction has beenused to increase the absorption by increasing dissolution rates of alarge number of poorly soluble drugs [1].OBJECTIVETo evaluate the influence of particle size and particle size distributionon the dissolution rate of crystalline atorvastatin calcium in apharmaceutical formulation - film coated tablet. To recognize the factthat beside the polymorphic form, particle size and particle sizedistribution is equally important parameter for drugs with low watersolubility like atorvastatin calcium.MATERIALS AND METHODSAPI- Atorvastatin Calcium crystalline (Zydus Cadila Healtcare Ltd.);Dissolution test: According to Ph.Eur. 2.9.3; Apparatus 2- Paddle;Medium- phosphate buffer, pH 6.8, 900 ml; Temperature of themedium: 37 +- 0.5o C; Time: 30 minutes; Rotations: 75 rpm;265Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONSpecification requirement: Min. 80% (Q + 5%) dissolved Atorvastatin(as Atorvastatin Calcium trihydrate) per film coated tablet, expressedin percent of the declared content.