50ml from this solution were injected into the HPLC sys-tem.CHROMATOGRAPHYThe chromatographic separation was performed on Gemini C18,150x4.6 mm, 5mm, Phenomenex analytical column and suitable GeminiC18, 4.0x3.0 mm Phenomenex guard column at 25oC. The mobilephase consisted of buffer solution of 0,01M monobasic potassiumphosphate pH=3.2, acetonitrile and tetrahydrofurane in the ratio80:18:2 was used. The final pH of mobile phase was 3.5. The mobilephase flow was 1 ml/min and the analysis was monitored under thewavelength of 202 nm. The injection volume was 50mL.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONA rapid, simple and sensitive HPLC method for determination of CCAin human plasma was developed and validated according to FDAGuideline (5).The selectivity of the analytical method was determined by compar-ing the chromatograms of the diluents, CCA and internal standards,blank plasma and spiked plasma samples. There were no interferingpeaks at the retention times of CCA and IS. The retention times ofCCA and IS were 6,1 and 7,6 minutes, respectively (Fig.1).Fig.1.Chromatograms of standard solution of CCA (0.2 mg/ml CCA)and pure plasmaLinearity was performed at 10 concentration points (exluding blankvalues) in the concentration range from 0.2 mg/ml to 10 mg/ml intri pli cate, on three different days. The method has shown linear (R2=0.9996). Accuracy was determined by 5 times replicate analysis ofplasma samples at three different concentration levels of CCA, 0.4, 1i 8 mg/ml. Table 1 shows the intra-day accuracy and precision.68Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOTable 1: Intra-day accuracy and precisionTable 2: Intermediate accuracy and precisionRobustness was investigated using Plackett-Burmane experimentaldesign (N=8). Results of robustness testing by means of effect of in-vestigated factors on resolution (Rs) between peaks of CCA and IS areshown in Table 3. The method has shown robust.Table 3: Robustness testingCONCLUSIONThe HPLC analytical method for determination of clopidogrel-car-boxilic acid in spiked human samples has shown parameters of preci-sion, accuracy, linearity, limits of quantification and detection androbustness in the limits of validation criteria. The results of this vali-dation shown that CCA can be analyzed in human plasma in the con-centration range 0.2mg/ml to 10mg/ml and the proposed HPLC methodcan be successfully used for testing relative bioavailability of pharma-ceutical products containing clopidogrel.REFERENCES:1. Lins R, Broekhysen J, Necciani J, Deroubax X: Pharmacokinetic profile of 14C-labelled clopidogrel. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 1999; 25 suppl 2: 29-33.2. Petersen KU: Relevance of metabolic activation pathways: the example ofclopidogrel and prasurel. Arzneimittel forshung 2009; 59(5): 213-27.3. Roden DM and Stein CM: Clopidogrel and the concept of high-riskpharmacokinetics. Circulation 119: 2127-2130, 2009.4. Souri E and Dalvandi A.: Validated HPLC method for determination of carboxylicacid metabolite of clopidogrel in human plasma and its application to apharmacokinetic study. Biomed.Chromatogrph. 20: 1309-1314, 20065. FDA. Guidance for Industry; Bioanalytical Method Validation. U.S. Department ofHealth and human services, Food and Drug administration, Center for DrugEvaluation and Research (CDER), Center for Veterinary Medicine (CVM), May2001(GENERIC).RAZVOJ NA HPLC METOD ZAOPREDELUVANjE NA KLOPIDOGREL-KARBOKSILNA KISELINA KAKONEAKTIVEN METABOLIT NAKLOPIDOGREL VO KhUMANA PLAZMA L. Bogdanovska, N. Nakov, J.Atsevska, S.Trajkovikj-Jolevska, A. Dimitrovska, R. PetkovskaUniverzitet ,, Sv. Kiril i Metodij",Farmatsevtski fakultet, Vodnjanska 17, 1000, Skopje, MakedonijaVOVEDKlopidogrel e prolek koj po peroralna administratsija podlezhina ekstenziven metabolizam vo tsrniot drob do negoviot aktivenmetabolit (1). Prisustvoto na lekot ili negoviot aktiven metabolitvo plazmata ne mozhe da se odredi so zadovolitelna tochnost.Poradi toa, farmakokinetskiot profil na klopidogrel seprotsenuva preku opredeluvanje na serumskata kontsentratsija naglavnata tsirkulirachka komponenta, klopidogrel-karboksilnakiselina koja pretstavuva farmakoloshki neaktiven derivat naklopidogrelot (2,3). Odreduvanjeto na neaktivniot metabolit naklopidogrel mozhe da se izvede so nekolku GC-MS, LC-MS ili HPLCmetodi (4). Tselta na nasheto istrazhuvanje beshe da optimizatsija ivalidatsija na HPLC metod so UV detektsija za opredeluvanje naklopidogrel-karboksilna kiselina (CCA) vo khumana plazma.MATERIJALI I METODIREAGENSI ACN i THF (HPLC-grade); KH2PO4 p.a. ; kolona za tsvrsto-faznaekstraktsija Strata-X-C- 30mg/1ml od Phenomenex; CCA i tiklo pi -din khidrokhlorid (IS) referentni standardni supstantsi.PODGOTOVKA NA PRIMEROKOTNa 0.5 ml plazma od patsienti koi go ordinirale lekot se dodavaat0.5 ml 0.2 N HCl i 50mL rastvor na vnatreshen standard.Primerotsite se meshaat vo 10 s i se podlozhuvaat na tsvrsto faznaekstraktsija (SPE). SPE kolonata se konditsionira so 1 ml 0.1 N HClpo shto sledi nejzino aktiviranje so 1 ml metanol. Eluiranjeto nakomponentite se izveduva so 1 ml 5% amonijak pretkhodno rastvorenvo smesa od metanol i atsetonitril vo odnos 1:1.Eluentot se sobira vo chisti stakleni tsevchinja i se sushi voatmosfera na azot. Suviot ostatok se rekonstituira vo 200 mL sve -69PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011zho podgotvena mobilna faza. 50mL od rekonstituiraniot rastvorse injektiraat vo HPLC sistemot.KhROMATOGRAFSKATA ANALIZA Za khromatografsko razdeluvanje koristena e Gemini C18, 150x4.6mm, 5mm, Phenomenex analitichka kolona i soodvetna Gemini C18,4.0x3.0 mm Phenomenex predkolona i mobilnata faza sostavenaod 0.01M kalium dikhidrogen fosfat so pH=3.2, atsetonitril itetrakhidrofuran vo odnos 80/18/2, Konechnata pH vrednost namobilnata faza e 3.5. Protokot na mobilnata faza e 1 ml/min a UV-detektsija na branova dolzhina od 202 nm. Volumenot na injekti-ranje iznesuva 50ml.REZULTATI I DISKUSIJARazvien e brz, osetliv i pretsizen HPLC metod za opredeluvanje naCCA vo khumana plazma, validiran spored preporakite na FDAvodichot (5). Na khromatogramite na rastvoruvachot, rastvor nastandardna supstantsa, chista plazma i plazma so dodaden lek,koristeni za opredeluvanje na selektivnosta na metodot, ne sezabelezhani interferirachki pikovi na retentsionoto vreme naCCA i IS. Retentsionite vreminja na CCA i IS bea 6.1 i 7.6 minuti,soodvetno (sl.1).Sl.1.Khromatogrami na rastvor na standardnata supstantsija CCA(0.2 mg/ml CCA) i chista plazma Linearnosta beshe opredelena vo kontsentratsisko podrachje od 0.2do 10mg/ml vo 10 kontsentratsiski tochki (trojni primerotsi) na CCAvo tri razlichni denovi (R2= 0,9996). Tochnosta beshe odredena naprimerotsi od plazma vo koja beshe dodadena klopidogrel -karboksilna kiselina, vo tri razlichni kontsentratsii: 0.4, 1 i8mg/ml (Tabela 1) Tabela 1: Tochnost vo eden raboten denIntermediernata pretsiznost beshe odredena preku analiza na 5individualno prigotveni primerotsi na plazma koi sodrzhatdodaden lek vo tri razlichni kontsentratsii (Tabela 2).Tabela 2: Intermedierna pretsiznostAnalitichkiot prinos za CCA vo primerotsi od plazma so leksporeden so vodeni rastvori na CCA iznesuva 95.87%. Robustnostana metodot beshe opredelena so primena na Plackett-Burmaneexperimental design (N=8). Rezultatite od ispituvanjeto narobustnosta, izrazeni kako efekt na ispituvanite khromatografskiuslovi na rezolutsijata megju pikovite na IS i SSA e prikazhana voTabela 3.Tabela 3: Robustnost na metodotOptimiziraniot metod e robusten vo ispituvanoto eksperimen -tal no podrachje na khromatografskite faktori.ZAKLUChOKVrz osnova na postavenite tseli razvien e i optimiziran HPLCmetod za kvantitativno odreduvanje na CCA vo khumana plazma.Metodot gi ispolnuva site kriteriumi propishani vo FDA vodichotza validatsija na bioanalitichki metodi. Rezultatite dobieni privalidatsijata na pokazhuvaat deka metodot mozhe da bide primenet zaopredeluvanje na relativnata bioraspolozhivost na farmatsevtskiproizvodi koi sodrzhat klopidogrel.LITERATURA:1. Lins R, Broekhysen J, Necciani J, Deroubax X: Pharmacokinetic profile of 14C-labelled clopidogrel. Semin. Thromb. Hemost. 1999 ; 25 suppl 2: 29-33.2. Petersen KU: Relevance of metabolic activation pathways: the example ofclopidogrel and prasurel. Arzneimittel forshung 2009 ; 59(5): 213-27.3. Roden DM and Stein CM: Clopidogrel and the concept of high-riskpharmacokinetics. Circulation 119: 2127-2130, 2009.4. Souri E and Dalvandi A.: Validated HPLC method for determination of carboxilicacid metabolite of clopidogrel in human plasma and its application to apharmacokinetic study. Biomed.Chromatogrph. 20: 1309-1314, 20065. FDA. Guidance for Industry; Bioanalytical Method Validation. U.S. Department ofHealth and human services, Food and Drug administration, Center for DrugEvaluation and Research(CDER), Center for Veterinery Medicine(CVM), May2001(GENERIC).70Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOOPTIMIZATION OF METHOD FOR DETERMI-NATION OF ACE INHIBITORS IN HUMANPLASMA BASED ON ENZYME-INHIBITORBINDING ASSAY FOLLOWED BY RP-HPLCL.Bogdanovska, N.Nakov, V. Karcev, A. Dimitrovska,R. PetkovskaUniversity "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Pharmacy, Vodnjanska17, 1000 Skopje, MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONACE inhibitors are drugs that inhibit the activity of angiotensin-con-verting enzyme, thereby reducing hypertension. Determination ofACE-inhibitors, such as lisinopril and fosinopril in biological samples,can be performed by fluorimetric, LC-MS and GC-MS methods with orwithout derivatisation (1,2,3). These methods for direct determinationof ACE inhibitors in human plasma are fast and precise, but lack of re-liability. ACE inhibitors in human plasma can also be quantified usingindirect enzyme-inhibitory binding reaction (4). In our study, we usedenzymatic reaction for degradation of ACE inhibitors in human plasmaand develop, optimize and validate RP-HPLC method for determina-tion of hippuric acid (HA) as a product of enzyme- inhibitory reaction.MATERIALS AND METHODSCHEMICALS AND REAGENTSHipuril-L-Histidil-L-Leucin (as a free base), hippuric acid (as a free acid)and potassium salt of phtalic acid were obtained from Sigma Chemi-cal Co. The substrate, Hipuril-L-Histidil-L-Leucin, was prepared in buffer(100 mM potassium phosphate and 300 mM sodium chloride, pH=8.3).The internal standard solution of phtalic acid was prepared in HPLC-grade methanol.INHIBITOR-BINDING ASSAY The amount of lisinopril and fosinoprilat bound to the enzyme is in-versely related to the amount of hippuric acid (HA) liberated on hy-drolysis from the artificial substrate Hipuril-L-Histidil-L-Leucin (4).Hippuric acid was determined by RP-HPLC method using phtalic acidas an internal standard.CHROMATOGRAPHYThe chromatographic separation was performed on Polar-RP 80ASynergi, 150x4.6 mm, 4mm, Phenomenex analytical column and suit-able Polar-RP Synergi, 4.0x3.0mm, 4mm Phenomenex guard column at25degS. The mobile phase was ammonium acetate buffer (0.02M,pH=4.3) and methanol in ratio 95:5 with flow rate of 1.4 ml/min. UVdetection was performed at 228 nm. The injection volume was 50mL.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONThe validation of HPLC bioanalytical method for determination of HAin human plasma was performed according to FDA Guidance (5). Theselectivity of the method was confirmed by comparing the chro-matograms of the diluents, HA and internal standards, blank plasmaand spiked plasma samples. There were no interfering peaks at the re-tention times of HA and IS.The retention times of IS and HA were 4.1 and 5.6 minutes, respec-tively (Fig.1).Fig.1.Chromatograms of pure plasma, plasma spiked with IS andplasma containing 0,15mg/0.1 ml HALinearity was performed at 10 concentration points in the con cen tra -ti on range from 0.25 mg/ml to 25 mg/ml in triplicate, on three diffe rentdays. The method has shown linear, (R2= 0.9996).