The fact that only 10% to20% of chronic smokers develop severe COPD-related pulmonary func-tion impairment indicates the presence of genetic predisposing fac-tors involved into COPD pathogenesis.The aim of the study was to determine the genotype distribution forthe GSTP1 A313G exon 5 polymorphism, GSTP1 C341T exon 6 poly-morphism and deletions in GSTM1 and GSTT1 genes in samples of 90subjects (COPD and controls) and to investigate the association be-tween GST polymorphisms and COPD. Serum GST activity was evalu-ated as a distinguishable biochemical marker of the diseasepresence/absence. Also, in order to confirm the presence of an in-flammatory process in COPD subjects, serum alpha-1-antitrypsin (AAT)concentration was determined. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activitywas determined in order to test for an increased anaerobic metabo-lism in COPD.The A313G and C341T GSTP1 genotypes were determined by PCR-RFLP, GSTM1 and GSTT1 deletions by a multiplex PCR, GST activityusing spectrophotometric method, LDH and AAT by standard methodsin older male Caucasian Croats with stable COPD (n=30) and sex/agematched controls (n=60; non-smokers, ex-smokers, and smokers).The differences in GSTP1 exon 5, GSTP1 exon 6 and allele frequencies(A/G and C/T) found in the control and COPD group were statisticallysignificant (p<0.05). Of statistical significance, CC/TT odds ratioequalled to 10.000 (p<0.05). The frequency of null GSTM1, null GSTT1and the two lacked statistical significance (p>0.05). Total GST did notstatistically differ either between the controls and COPD patients, oracross smoking-based subgroups. The differences in total AAT con-centrations and LDH activities seen across the two studied groupsreached statistical significance (p<0.05). A statistically significant dif-ferences were obtained for AAT (control non-smokers vs. the entireCOPD arm, p<0.05) and for LDH activity registered in the control vs.COPD non-smokers (p<0.05).The results of serum AAT concentration confirmed the existence ofinflammation and elevated LDH activity chronic hypoxia in stable maleCOPD patients.Our study showed AA and CC genotypes to be COPD-protective, andAG/GG and CT/TT to be COPD-risky. Null GSTM1, null GSTT1 and thetwo were not proven disease-associated. Serum GST and smoking sta-tus were proven mutually independent. Serum GST lacks sufficientpower to discriminate between stable COPD and COPD-free individu-als.141fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsreferences1. Hirvonen A. Gene-environmental interactions in chronic pulmonary diseases. MutRes 2009;667:132-141.2. Zuntar I, Kalanj-Bognar S, Topic E, Petlevski R, Stefanovic M, Demarin V. The glu-tathione S-transferase polymorphisms in a control population and in Alzheimer's dis-ease patients. Clin Chem Lab Med 2004;42:334-339.3. Arruda VR, Grignolli CE, Goncalves MS et al. Prevalence of homozygosity for thedeleted alleles of glutathione S-transferase mu (GSTM1) and theta (GSTT1) amongdistinct ethnic groups from Brazil: relevance to environmental carcinogenesis? ClinGenet 1998;54:210-214.4. Habdous M, Vincent-Viry M, Visvikis S, Siest G. Rapid spectrophotometric methodfor serum glutathione S-transferase activity. Clin Chim Acta 2002;326:131-142.characteristics of the waterin lake ohriD anD biljana sPringsRobertina Tomevska1, Vera Novevska2,Lidija Petrusevska-Tozi31PHO-Pharmacy"Nelifarm",Ohrid2PSI Hydrobiological Institute -Ohrid3Faculty of Pharmacy -SkopjeWater, as a habitat, stands for the basis of life. It acoounts for  3/4 of theplanet's surface,0.5% of which belonging to freshwater. An abundanceof diverse biota has developed in water adjusting to its conditions.Water as a substance features certain physicochemical characteristicsapplicable for the organisms living in it. These arise as bioindicators ofthe quality of the water they inhabit.The beautiful Lake Ohrid -"The Macedonian Freshwater Sea"is situatedin the utmost southwestern part of the Republic of Macedonia,westerly of the intersection at a 41o latitude and 21 degrees longitude,in a tectonically created valley. Its blue waters encompass an area of358 km2, and the transparency is greatest at 288.7m depth. Its vastcoast length ranges to 87 km, with maximum length of 30 km, whereasthe maximum width reaches to 15 km.This work has analysed the physicochemical characteristics of LakeOhrid pelagial water in order to obtain data for its quality during theinvestigated period (June, July, September, October and November2009, as well as January, March and April 2010). Facultativeoligotrophic bacteria have been analysed as bioindicators andaccording to their number a water categorization has been performedfor the respective region in the course of the investigation period.Water samples collected from Biljana Springs outflow have beenconcurrently analysed with those sampled from an end user of theOhrid municipal watersupply. The data have been processed inaccordance with the Regulations for Water Safety -Official Gazette ofthe Republic of Macedonia 46/2008.The obtained results regarding the physicochemical and biologicalparameters, such as oxygen from 5,76 to13,59 mg.lit-1, totalphosphorus ranging from 3,35 to 11,1 ug/lit -1, KMnO4 consumptionfrom 1,88 to 4,68 mg.lit.-1, guide to the conclusion that Lake Ohridpelagial water displays an oligotrophic character. The number of thepresent organotrophic bacteria ranges from 152 bac.ml.-1 water to 12992 bac.ml.-1 water, implying of I and I-II category of water accordingto the limnological criteria.The comparison with the long-term data of the investigations in waterof the coastal (littoral) region has shown that negative anthropogenicimpact is still present and reflected negatively in the water in thisregion. This impact has fortunately not been yet manifested in thepelagial region, which implies that Lake Ohrid water is safe forconsumption, recreation and fishing.The results of the analysed physicochemical and microbiologicalparameters in Biljana Springs outflow in the course of the investigatedperiod showed that the water does not meet the regulations for watersafety according to the Official Gazette of Republic of Macedonia46/2008, due to water being microbiologically unsafe, whereasmunicipal public supply water is safe for consumption according tothe same regulations.referencesAnovski,T.,Naumovski,J,Kachurkov(1980):Prilog kon studijata za utvrduvanje napotekloto na vodite od izvorite kaj Sv.Naum-Okhridsko EzeroBether,G.,1953:Praktikum za hemisko ispituvanje voda.Hig.Inst.Srbije br.3Beograd,str.78Biddanda,B.,Ogdahl,M.,and Cother,J.,(2001):Dominance of bacterial metabolism inoligotrophyc relative to eutrophic waters.Limnol.Oceanogr..,46(3),p:730-739Cvijic,J.,1911:Osnove za geografiju i geologiju Makedonije i stare srbije.SKA.Beogradkw.III:268-1270Matavulj,M. (1986):Nespecificne fosfomonoesterhidrolaze mikroorganizma i njihovznacaj u kruzenju fosfora u akvaticnim stanistama.Doktorska disertacija,Sveucilisteu Zagrebu,Prirodoslovno-matematicki fakultet.Novevska V.,2002:Organotrofnite bakterii kako pokazatel na ekoloshkiot statusna okhridskoto ezero,Doktorska disertatsija,Univerzitet ,,Sv.Kiril iMetodij,,Prirodno-matematichki fakultet,Institut za biologija Skopje.Tumpling,W.,1969:Zur Klassifizierung der Wassereschaffenheit aus BiologischerSicht.Wiss.Z.Univ.Rostock,18:793-798Welch,1948:Limnological methods.Blakiston Co.Philadelphia,p.38Novevska,V.,Otsevski,B.,Mitikj,V.,1986:Nekoi pokazateli za zagaduvanjeto na voditevo reonot na Okhridskiot Zaliv.Sovetuvanje za zashtita na chovekovata sredina priSO Okhrid.Petrovic,G.,1975: Hydrochemical study of Lake ohrid in respect of hismetabolism.Zbornik na rabotite,Khidrobioloshki zavod Okhrid 159(3)(84):1-70KARAKTERISTIKI NA VODATAOD okhRIDSKOTO EzEROI BIlJANINITE IzVORIRobertina Tomevska1, Vera Novevska2,Lidija Petrushevska-Tozi31PZU-Apteka ,,Nelifarm,, Okhrid2JNU Khidrobioloshki Institut - Okhrid3Farmatsevtski Fakultet - SkopjeVodata kako zhivotna sredina, pretstavuva osnova na zhivotot. Taazafakja 3/4 od zemjinata povrshina, od koi samo 0,5% pripagjaat nakopnenite vodi. Vo vodata e razvien buen raznoviden zhiv svet kojse prilagodil na uslovite.vodata kako supstantsa se odlikuva sofizichko-khemiski osobini na koi se prilagodile i zhivite orga-nizmi koi zhiveat vo nea. Tie pretstavuvaat bioindikatori za kva-litetot na vodata vo koja zhiveat.Na krajniot jugozapaden del od Republika Makedonija, zapadno odpresekot na 410 s.g.sh i 210 i.g.d. vo tektonski nastanatata kotlina,se naogja ,,makedonskoto slatkovodno more,,-prekrasnoto OkhridskoEzero. Svoeto sinilo go rasproslalo na povrshina od 358 km2, a ne-govata bistrina e do najgolema dlabochina od 288,7 m. Negoviot raz-granet breg zafakja dolzhina od okolu 87 km, najgolemata dolzhinaiznesuva okolu 30 km dodeka pak najgolemata shirochina 15 km.Vo ovoj trud analizirani se fizichko-khemiskite osobini na vodata142PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiod pelagijalniot region na Okhridskoto Ezero, so tsel da se dobijatpodatotsi za nejziniot kvalitet vo istrazhuvaniot period (juni, juli,septemvri, oktomvri i noemvri-2009 god. i januari, mart i april2010 god.). Fakultativno oligotrofnite bakterii se analiziranikako bioindikatori i spored nivnata brojnost e napravena kla-sifikatsija na vodata od ispituvaniot region vo periodot na is-trazhuvanje.Paralelno se analizirani primerotsi na voda od prelivot kajBiljanini izvori i od kraen potroshuvach na vodovodnata mrezha odgradski vodovod Okhrid. Podatotsite se obraboteni soglasno meto-dite predvideni so Pravilnikot za bezbednost na voda Sl.vesnikna R.Makedonija 46/2008.Dobienite rezultati od fizichko-khemiskite i bioloshkite para-metri; kako shto se zastapenosta na kislorod od 5,76 do 13,59 mg.lit-1, vkupniot fosfor od 3,35 do 11,1 ug/lit -1, potroshuvachkata naKMnO4 od 1,88 do 4,68 mg.lit.-1, dojdovme do zakluchok deka vodata odOkhridskoto Ezero, vo pelagijalniot region se odlikuva so oli-gotrofni karakteristiki. Brojnata zastapenost na organotrof-nite bakterii se dvizhi od 152 bac.ml.-1 voda do 12 992 bac.ml.-1voda, koja spored limnoloshkite kriteriumi ukazhuva na voda soosobini od I i I-II klasa.Sporedbata so literaturnite podatotsi od dolgogodishnite istra-zhuvanja na vodata od krajbrezhniot (litoralen) region pokazha dekaantropogenoto negativno vlijanie e prisutno i se reflektira ne-gativno na vodata od ovoj region. Za srekja ova vlijanie se ushte nee manifestno vo pelagijalniot region, shto znachi vodata od Okhrid-skoto Ezero gi zadovoluva uslovite na voda koja se koristi za re-kreatsija, ribolov, odnosno e bezbedna po zhivotot na nejzinite ko-risnitsi.Rezultatite od analizite na fizichko-khemiskite i mikrobioloshki-te parametri na vodata od prelivot kaj Biljanini izvori vo istra-zhuvaniot period, pokazhaa deka vodata soglasno Pravilnikot zabezbednost na voda Sl.vesnik na R.Makedonija 46/2008, ne odgo-vara za direktna upotreba poradi mikrobioloshka neispravnost,dodeka vodata od gradskiot vodovod (vodovodnata mrezha) odgovaraza upotreba soglasno istiot Pravilnik.lITERATURAAnovski,T.,Naumovski,J,Kachurkov(1980):Prilog kon studijata za utvrduvanje napotekloto na vodite od izvorite kaj Sv.Naum-Okhridsko EzeroBether,G.,1953:Praktikum za hemisko ispituvanje voda.Hig.Inst.Srbije br.3 Beograd,str.78Biddanda,B.,Ogdahl,M.,and Cother,J.,(2001):Dominance of bacterial metabolism inoligotrophyc relative to eutrophic waters.Limnol.Oceanogr..,46(3),p:730-739Cvijic,J.,1911:Osnove za geografiju i geologiju Makedonije i stare srbije.SKA.Beogradkw.III:268-1270Matavulj,M. (1986):Nespecificne fosfomonoesterhidrolaze mikroorganizma i njihov znacaju kruzenju fosfora u akvaticnim stanistama.Doktorska disertacija, Sveuciliste u Zagre-bu,Prirodoslovno-matematicki fakultet.Novevska V.,2002:Organotrofnite bakterii kako pokazatel na ekoloshkiot status naokhridskoto ezero, Doktorska disertatsija,Univerzitet ,,Sv.Kiril i Metodij,,Prirodno-matematichki fakultet,Institut za biologija Skopje.Tumpling,W.,1969:Zur Klassifizierung der Wassereschaffenheit aus Biologischer Sicht. Wiss.Z. Univ.