drug/device, biologic/de-vice, drug/biologic or drug/device/biologic that are physically, chemi-cally or otherwise combined or mixed and produced as single entity..."Here, it is important to note that a drug-drug, biologic-biologic or de-vice-device combinations most concomitant use of drugs, devices andbiologics do not constitute a combination product.Monoclonal antibody combined with a therapeutic drug, devicecoated or impregnated with a drug or biologic as a drug-eluting stent,pacing lead with steroid coated tip, catheter with antimicrobial coat-ing, orthopedic implant with growth factors, transdermal patches, me-tered-dose inhalers, insulin injector pens are some typical examplesof combination products where the components are physically, chem-ically or otherwise combined. (CFR 3.2e).According to the MEDDEV recommendation, the following criteriashould be considered to categorize the product as a medical device ora medicinal product: (i) Intended purpose, including an assessment ofthe way the product is presented, (ii) method by which primary modeof action is achieved, following the manufacturer's claims, labeling andscientific data. A product never can be a medicinal product and haveCE marking. For a medicinal product, authorization by a competentauthority: proof of quality, safety and efficacy are the requirements.As a conclusion: Combination products offer therapeutic benefits andpose challenges for both regulators and industry, regulatory differ-ences derive from underlying product differences. Number and typesof combination products will continue to grow in future.froM hollow PolyMericnanoParticles to entraPPed dnaIvaylo Dimitrov1, Elisaveta Petrova1,Rahila Kozarova2, Margarita Apostolova2,Christo B. Tsvetanov11Institute of Polymers, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,1113 Sofia, Bulgaria2Institute of Molecular Biology, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences,1113 Sofia, BulgariaIt is well known that the administration of naked pDNA leads to rapidenzymatic degradation upon intramuscular, intra-dermal or intra-venous injection [1]. Therefore, gene transfer to humans requires car-riers for the plasmid DNA which can efficiently and safely deliver thegene into the nucleus of the desired cells. Condensation and encap-sulation of DNA into micro and nano-particles is widely used for thedelivery of nucleic acid for both in vitro and in vivo applications [2].The majority of particle formulations are based on electrostatic in-teraction between anionic phosphate groups in DNA and a cationiccarrier, usually composed of building blocks with positively charged ni-trogen atoms. However, the major disadvantage of cationic particlesis their interaction with serum proteins, extracellular matrix compo-nents or blood cells in vivo. This can lead to aggregation or immobi-lization of these systems [3].Recently, polish and bulgarian scientists [4-6] developed a novel syn-thetic strategy for the preparation of hollow nano- and micro-parti-cles that involves three steps: temperature-induced phase transitionof temperature-responsive polymer (TRP), shell formation by seededradical copolymerisation, and a subsequent dissolution of TRP by dial-ysis at lower temperatures. This approach opens a new pathway forthe preparation of mechanically stable polymeric capsules at a widerange of sizes. The method has certain advantages in that it allowsthe TRP template to be partially removed from the matrix under verymild conditions.Based on this finding we have developed a novel method for encap-sulation of nucleic acids into degradable polymer capsules with po-tential applications as gene delivery systems. Herein we present ageneral, one-pot, non-destructive method for polyplex stabilizationunder mild conditions (Figure 1).Figure 1. Schematic illustration of DNA encapsulation via polyplex for-mation followed by stabilization through seeded radical copolymer-ization.Initially, a hybrid block copolymer comprising thermally sensitive blockof poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and polycaionic block ofpoly(L-lysine) was synthesized. The desired number of lysine units inthe block copolymer was achieved applying controlled ammonium-mediated ring-opening polymerization of Z-L-lysine N-carboxyanhy-dride (7). Polyplexes were formed at room temperature by a dropwiseaddition of DNA solution (100g/ml, salmon sperm DNA, 2000 bp) to226PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAoralni prezentatsiiaqueous block copolymer solutions of different concentrations. Sta-ble polyplexes with maximum DNA condensation were obtained atcationic to phosphate groups molar ratio N/P = 5:1. The particle di-ameter was determined to be around 60 nm (Figure 2).Figure 2. Size distribution of polyplex N/P=5:1 (d=56.4 nm; PdI: 0.157;z=43.6 mV) and the corresponding stabilized polyplex (d=102.4 nm;PdI: 0.172; z=13.1 mV)For enhancing the intracellular delivery of the DNA-containingnanoparticles to specific cells, one of the most widely applied ap-proaches is the attachment of cell recognizable targeting ligands. Theuse of targeting ligands allows the uptake of DNA into cells via recep-tor-mediated endocytosis. The folate receptor on the cell membraneis a potential molecular target for tumor-selective drug delivery. Thisreceptor is highly expressed in a number of epithelial carcinomas,while it occurs in a limited number of normal cells (8). Folate targetingmoieties were introduced onto the surface of the stabilized polyplexesthrough a seeded radical copolymerization of NIPAM and heterobi-functional PEG-macromonomer bearing terminal acryloyl and folategroups.To demonstrate the versatility of the proposed method and the po-tential biomedical applications the polyplexes were stabilized withbiodegradable outer polymer shell. The seeded radical copolymeriza-tion was performed in the presence of the disulfide containing cross-linking reagent N,N'-bis(acryloyl)cystamine (BAC). Disulfide bondsdegrade under reducing conditions or via thiol-disulfide exchange oc-curring in the cells and can be applied for intracellular triggered genedelivery (9). The exchange of the common cross-linker BIS with thebiodegradable BAC does not affect the sizes of the stabilized poly-plexes, which is indicative for the versatility of DNA encapsulation ap-proach.Finally, the biocompatibility of the hybrid copolymer and the poly-plexes, both before and after the stabilization step were evaluated.This is an important characteristic for potential biomedical applica-tions. The cytotoxicity was evaluated with HeLa cell culture. It wasfound that there is no apparent cytotoxic effect of block copolymer,unmodified and stabilized polyplexes (cell viability more than 80%).The results indicate that the stabilized polyplexes can be further eval-uated for potential biomedical applications.In conclusion, the outlined versatile approach for DNA encapsulationprovides opportunities to prepare nano-scaled delivery vehicles withvarious functions depending on the particular targeted problem. Wedemonstrated that the complexes between DNA and a hybrid blockcopolymer can be additionally stabilized through the formation ofcross-linked polymer outer shell applying seeded radical polymeriza-tion. All synthetic steps are done in aqueous media under mild condi-tions. Moreover, the DNA containing nanoparticles can be relativelyeasy decorated with targeting moieties. The use of disulfide cross-linker during the seeded radical polymerization imparts biodegrad-ability of the stabilizing polymer shell. We believe that the proposedapproach for DNA encapsulation opens the possibility to tune theproperties of the delivery vehicle in order to find an optimal balancebetween protection and release of DNA.Acknowledgement: This work was supported by the National ScienceFund (Bulgaria) "Ideas" DO 02-247/18.12.2008.referencesHouk B.E., Martin R., Hochhaus G., Hughes J.A., Pharm. Res., 18, (1), 67-74 (2001).De Smedt S.C., Demeester J., Hennink W.E., Pharm. Res., 17, (2), 113-126 (2000).Rupponen M., Ronkko S., Honkakoski P., Pelkonen J., Tammi M., Urtti A., J. Biol. Chem.,276, 33875-33880 (2001).Weda P.,Trzebicka B., Dworak A., Tsvetanov Ch.B., Polymer, 49, 1467-1474 (2008)Dimitrov Ph., Toncheva N., Weda P., Rangelov S., Trzebicka B., Dworak A., TsvetanovCh.B., Macromol. Symposia, 278, 89-95 (2009) Special Issue: Molecular Order and Mo-bility in Polymer SystemsTrzebicka B., Weda P., Utrata-Wesolek A., Dworak A., Tsvetanov Ch.B., J.Polymer Sci.,Part A: Polymer Chemistry, 48, (18) 4074-4083 (2010).Dimitrov, I.; Schlaad, H. Chem. Commun. 2003, 2944-2945.Lu, Y.; Low, P. Adv. Drug Del. Rev. 2002, 54, 675-693.Saito, G.; Swanson, J.; Lee, K. Drug Deliv. Rev. 2003, 55, 199-215.how well do we understandthe behaviour of PolyMer Matrixtablets?Sasa BaumagrtnerUniversity of Ljubljana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Askerceva 7, 1000 Ljubl-jana, SloveniaintroductionModified-release matrix tablets have been extensively used by thepharmaceutical industry as one of the most successful oral drug-de-livery systems. However, the development of innovative formulationsis still very challenging, because the mechanisms regulating drug re-lease are complex and depend on many factors.Critical parameters involved in the release from polymer matrix tabletsare related to drug molecule characteristics (molecular weight, solu-bility, particle size, dose), characteristics of the selected polymer (type,molecular weight, particle size, viscosity, composition of dissolutionmedia, etc.) and formulation parameters (tablet characteristics, man-ufacturing process, etc). Some of these parameters are well studied;meanwhile the others are still the subject of intense research (1, 2). Itshould be pointed out that detailed knowledge of critical parametersis necessary to achieve the final goal: to formulate tablets with de-sired biopharmaceutical and pharmacokinetic properties.Today, there is a growing interest in the research of polymer charac-teristics on the molecular basis, because sometimes this is the onlyway to explain differences in drug release. For this type of investiga-tions sophisticated analytical methods are necessary: atomic forcemicroscopy (AFM), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), confocal laserscanning microscopy (CLSM), application of enzymatic assays etc. (3,4, 5).On the other hand intensive research is going on regarding the physi-ological conditions within GI tract; transit times trough the differentregions, and detailed investigation of the disease condition. There is227fifth congress of PharMacy of Macedonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYoral presentationsa great potential to exploit these conditions as a trigger for drug re-lease (6, 7, 8).It is difficult to present the whole picture of polymer matrix tablet be-haviour. Therefore, the aim of this contribution is to emphasize theresults obtained in basic research of polymers on the molecular levelare reflected on macroscopic scale.reflection of xanthan PolyMer structureon the drug releaseIt is known that non-ionic polymer like HPMC represents a golden stan-dard for formulation of matrix tablets with prolonged drug release (1,4). However, as an alternative natural polymer like xanthan (XAN) issuggested. XAN is an anionic poly-electrolyte that forms differentcomplex secondary structures depending on environmental condi-tions. AFM investigations confirmed that increased ionic strengthchanged the XAN secondary structure (9). These changes were re-flected on macroscopic level, because at increased ionic strength orpH 1.2 swelling of XAN tablets was lower and drug release faster.Swelling was investigated using MRI, where new method for precisedetermination of moving front positions within swollen tablet was de-veloped (Fig.1). Moreover, experiments simulating physiological con-ditions showed that variations of media influenced XAN gel structurerelatively quickly, and consequently affected the drug release kinetics(10).It was concluded that low pH or high ionic strength cause formationof more rigid and dense polymer structure, where interactions withwater are lower, therefore swelling of matrix tablets is lower, theformed gel is more rigid and thinner leading into faster drug release.Fig. 1: Gel layer thickness of xanthan tablets determined by MRI anddrug release from these tablets (10).carrageenans - dual drug release controlCarrageenans (CARRs) are another alternative to non-ionic polymers.They are anionic poly-electrolytes with various number of sulfate moi-eties per disaccharide unit, resulting in formation of different sec-ondary structures. When cationic drug such as doxazosin mesylate(DM) is incorporated into CARRs matrix tablets, interactions betweenDM and CARRs have a strong impact on drug release mechanism. Itwas proven that DM and CARR form complexes in situ. These interac-tions were confirmed by DSC, SEM and zeta potential measurements.Only dual drug release control provided through the combination ofwater-uptake/erosion with in situ complexation, prolonged DM releasefor more than 24 hours. The rate order of release was in accordancewith the number of sulfate moieties per disaccharide unit of CARRpolymers (11).To investigate the type of interactions responsible for DM-CARR com-plex formation, special DM ion-selective membrane electrode wasmade and applied for construction of binding isotherms. Strong elec-trostatic interactions between DM and negatively charged CARRs wereconfirmed, however, cooperativity effects through the hydrophobic in-teractions between bound DM have a major impact on the formationof DM-CARR complexes and on drug release rate (12).conclusionThe structure of polymers and their interactions with drug moleculesis far from being completely understood. Therefore, prediction of poly-mer matrix tablet behaviour in GI tract represents a big challenge forfuture research.refernces1. Colombo P, Santi P, Bettini R, et al. Drug release from swelling-controlled systems,in: D.L. Wise (Ed. ), Handbook of Pharmaceutical Controlled Release Technology, Mar-cel Dekker, Inc, New York, 2000.2. Maderuelo C, Zarzuelo A, Lanao JM. Critical factors in the release of drugs from sus-tained release hydrophilic matrices. J. Control. Release 2011, doi:10.1016/j.jcon-rel.2011.04.002.3. Mikac U, Kristl J, Baumgartner S. Using quantitative magnetic resonance methodsto understand better the gel-layer formation on polymer-matrix tablets. Expert opin-ion on drug delivery. 2011;. 8:. 677-692. S.4. Viriden A, Larsson A, Schegerlof H, Wittgren B. Model drug release from matrixtablets composed of HPMC with different substituent heterogeneity. Int. J. Pharm.2010; 401: 60-67.5. Govedarica B, Baumgartner S, Teskac K, Dolenc A, et al. Atomic force microscopy- a new way of analysis and characterization of pharmaceutical materials. Tehnika(Beogr. ), 2010; 65: 3-8.6. Wilson CG. The transit of dosage forms through the colon. Int J Pharm. 2010; 395:17-25.7. Mandal AS, Biswas N, Karim KM, Guha A, Chatterjee S, et al. Drug delivery systembased on chronobiology - A review. J. Control Release 2010; 147: 314-325.8. Varum FJO, Merchant HA, Basit AW. Oral modified-release formulation in motion:The relationship between gastrointestinal transit and drug absorption. Int. . Pharm.1010; 395: 26 - 36.9. Govedarica B, Sovany T, Pintye-Hodi K, Skarabot M. et al. Prediction of Swellingand Dissolution Rate in Xanthan Matrix Tablets Using Atomic Force Microscopy.Pharm Res, 2011, Submitted manuscript.10. Mikac U, Sepe A, Kristl J, Baumgartner S. A new approach combining differentMRI methods to provide detailed view on swelling dynamics of xanthan tablets influ-encing drug release at different pH and ionic strength. J. Control Release 2010; 145:247-256.11. Pavli M, Vrecer F, Baumgartner S. Matrix tablets based on carrageenans with dualcontrolled release of doxazosin mesylate. Int. J Pharm.. 2010; 400: 15-23.12. Pavli M, Baumgartner S, Kos P, Kogej K. Doxazosin-carrageenan interactions: Anovel approach for studying drug-polymer interactions and relation to controlleddrug release. Eur. J. Pharm Sci.