B. Bauer Petrovska, L. Petrushevska Tozi, Bulletin, 42 (1/2): 21-25 (1996-1997)levels of some trace elementsin some maceDonian thymus sPP.Biljana Bauer Petrovska1, Olga Kirovska Cigulevska21Faculty of Pharmacy, Vodnjanska 17, P.O. Box 36, 1000 Skopje, Mace-donia2JZO IHP, Third Mac. Brigade, P. Box 809, 1000 Skopje, MacedoniaThyme is an aromatic plant that has long time ago been used in tradi-tional medicine and as a culinary spice. Overhead part as an officinaldrug (DAB 10, BHP 1996, Ph. Helv. VII, etc.) comes within certain phy-topreparations because of its expectorant, antiseptic and spazmoliticaction. The effects from the accumulation of metals are very complexand can influence the content of pharmacologically active compoundsin plants. Thus significantly changes the quality, safety and efficiencyof their natural plant products (1). Because of nutritional, pharmaco-logical and toxicological point of view we decided for this research.165fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsmaterial anD methoDsElevated parts of thyme were collected during the spring period of 2011from various localities in the Republic of Macedonia: sredno Vodno,Markov manastir, Markova Susica, villages Gorno Sonje and Orman.Samples were dried at room temperature and homogenousated.After the mineralization with concentrated HNO3 (trace pure, 69%)and H2O2 (extra pure, 30%), samples were dissolved in 2% HNO3. Thequantity of trace elements is determined by the method of atomicemission apparatus ICP-QES.results anD DiscussionResults expressed on dry matter basis (Table 1) indicate that not alltested trace elements: lead, cadmium, chromium, copper and zinc arefound in the analyzed samples of thyme, collected from various local-ities in Macedonia.Table 1 Concetration of some trace elements (mg/kg dry mass) in theThymus spp.Amounts of copper found in almost trace quantities in the samplesfrom Markova Susica and village Orman suggest that probably theplant protection means are used with copper, which otherwise are notregularly found in soil here. According to the values for copper inthyme compared with those of (15.15-24.64 mg/kg) other medicinalplants (i.e. chamomile, lime, lemon balm, mint and St. John's wort)from literature data (3) can be concluded that thyme is not a copperbio accumulator, probably due to under-developed root system.Chromium was only present in the sample of thyme from the villageOrman. The content is very low and insufficient to meet the recom-mended daily dose of biologically active chromium (50-200 mg) that inthe body binding to insulin increases its activity up to 100 times (2).In the sample from the village Orman found content of zinc was in verylow concentrations, insufficient to meet the daily requirements forzinc in humans.Permissible limit recommended by WHO for the content of cadmiumand lead in medicinal plants is 0,3 mg / kg (Cd) and 10 mg / kg (Pb) ex-pressed on a dry plant matter. Under current legislation in the Re-public of Macedonia (4) there is a restriction on the maximumallowable concentration for lead to 0.1 mg/kg and for cadmium to 0.2mg/kg expressed on fresh herbs.conclusionOne glass infusion from the sample of thyme from the village Orman(250 cm3) contains elements in quantities corresponding to: 0.001 %of the recommended average daily intake of zinc, 0.888 % of the rec-ommended average daily intake of copper and 0.550 % of the recom-mended average daily intake of chromium.From the obtained results for the discovered concentrations of leadand cadmium in aboveground parts of thyme can be concluded that allanalyzed regions in Republic of Macedonia has pure soil and unpollutedenvironment, so the thyme from Republic of Macedonia is safe to use.references1. R. Kastoru, Heavy Metals in the Environment, Naucni institut za ratarstvo ipovrtarstvo, Novi Sad, 1997, pp 197-257.2. S. Tojagic, M. Mirilov, Hrana-znacaj i tokovi u organizmu, Matica srpska, Novi Sad,1998,3. J. Raczuk, E. Biardzka, J. Daruk, Rocz Panstw Zakl Hig. 59(1), 33-40 (2008)4. Pravilnik za opshti baranja za bezbednost na hrana, Sl. Vesnik RM 118/05.SODRzhINA NA METAlI VO thymus sPP.OD REPUBlIKA MAKEDONIJABiljana Bauer Petrovska1,Olga Kirovska Tsigulevska21Farmatsevtski fakultet, Vodnjanska 17, P. Fakh 36,2JZO ZZZ, Treta Mak. Brigada, P. Fakh 809, 1000 Skopje, RepublikaMakedonijaMajchina dushitsa e aromatichno rastenie koe odamna se upotrebuvavo traditsionalnata meditsina a i kako zachin vo kulinarstvoto.Nadzemniot del kako ofitsinelna droga (DAB 10, BHP 1996, Ph. Helv.VII i dr.) vleguva vo sostav na odredeni fitopreparati poradinejzinoto ekspektorantno, antiseptichno i spazmolitichno dejstvo.Efektite od akumulatsijata na metalite se mnogu kompleksni imozhat da vlijaat na sodrzhinata na farmakoloshki aktivnite so-edinenija vo rastenijata, a so toa i na znachajni promeni na kvali-tetot, bezbednosta i efikasnosta na nivnite prirodni rastitelnipreparati (1). Poradi toa od nutritiven, farmakoloshki i toksi-koloshki aspekt se odluchivme za ova istrazhuvanje.MATERIJAl I METODINadzemnite delovi od majchina dushitsa bea sobrani vo proletniotperiod vo tekot na 2011 godina od razni lokaliteti vo RepublikaMakedonija: sredno Vodno, Markov manastir, Markova sushitsa, s.Gorno Sonje i s. Orman. Primerotsite bea osusheni na sobna tem-peratura i khomogenizirani.Po izvrshenata mineralizatsija so kontsentrirana HNO3 (trace pure,69 %) i H2O2 (extra pure, 30%), primerotsite bea rastvoreni vo 2%HNO3. Kolichestvoto na metali e opredeluvano so metod na atom-ska emisija na aparat ICP-QES.REzUlTATI I DISKUSIJARezultatite izrazeni na suva materija (Tabela 1) ukazhuvaat na toadeka ne site ispituvani metali: olovo, kadmium, khrom, bakar i tsinkse najdeni vo analiziranite primerotsi na majchina dushitsa sobra-ni od razni lokaliteti vo Republika Makedonija.166PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiTabela 1. Kontsentratsija na nekoi metali (mg/kg suva materija) voThymus spp.Kolichinite na bakar koi se pronajdeni rechisi vo tragovi voprimerotsite od Markova sushitsa i selo Orman ukazhuvaat na faktotdeka verojatno za zashtita na rastenijata se koristeni sredstva sobakar, koj inaku redovno ne se naogja vo pochvata kaj nas. Sporeddobienite vrednosti za bakar vo majchinata dushitsa sporedeni soonie (15,15-24,64 mg/kg) na drugi lekoviti rastenija (kamilitsa,lipa, matochina, nane, kantarion) od literaturnite podatotsi (3)mozhe da se zakluchi deka majchinata dushitsa ne e bioakumulator nabakar, najverojatno poradi nedovolno razvieniot korenov sistem.Khromot beshe prisuten samo vo primerokot na majchina dushitsa odselo Orman. Sodrzhinata e mnogu niska i nedovolna za zadovoluva-nje na preporachanata dnevna doza na bioloshki aktiven khrom (50-200 mg) koj vo organizmot vrzuvajkji se za insulin ja zgolemuvanegovata aktivnost i do 100 pati (2).Vo primerokot od selo Orman najdenata sodrzhina na tsink beshevo mnogu niski kontsentratsii, nedovolni za zadovoluvanje na dne-vnite potrebi za tsink na chovekot.Preporachana dozvolena granitsa spored SZO za sodrzhina na kad-mium i olovo vo lekoviti rastenija iznesuva 0,3 mg/kg (Cd) i 10mg/kg (Pb) izrazeni na suva rastitelna materija. Spored aktuel-nata zakonska regulativa vo Republika Makedonija (4) postoiogranichuvanje na maksimalno dozvolena kontsentratsija za olovo do0,1 mg/kg i za kadmium do 0,2 mg/kg izrazeni na svezhi bilki.zAKlUChOKEdna chasha infuz od primerokot na majchina dushitsa od selo Orman(250 cm3) sodrzhi elementi vo kolichini soodvetni na 0,001% odpreporachan prosechen dneven vnes na tsink, 0,888% od preporachanprosechen dneven vnes na bakar i 0,550% od preporachan prosechendneven vnes na khrom.Od dobienite rezultati za najdenite kontsentratsii za olovo ikadmium vo nadzemni delovi na majchina dushitsa mozhe da sekonstatira deka vo site analizirani regioni vo RepublikaMakedonija ima chista pochva i voopshto nezagadena okolina, pazatoa majchinata dushitsa od Republika Makedonija e bezbedna zaupotreba.lITERATURA1. R. Kastoru, Heavy Metals in the Environment, Naucni institut za ratarstvo ipovrtarstvo, Novi Sad, 1997, pp 197-257.2. S. Tojagic, M. Mirilov, Hrana-znacaj i tokovi u organizmu, Matica srpska, Novi Sad,1998,3. J. Raczuk, E. Biardzka, J. Daruk, Rocz Panstw Zakl Hig. 59(1), 33-40 (2008)4. Pravilnik za opshti baranja za bezbednost na hrana, Sl. Vesnik RM 118/05.Protective role of salivaric ureain cariogenic ProcessesD. Efremova1, M. Spasovska2, S. Neshova3,T. Kadifkova Panovska41DOOEL ,,ReplekFarm", Skopje;2P.Z.U. Pharmacy ,,Prima", Ohrid;3P.Z.U. Pharmacy ,,Naris", Veles;4Faculty of Pharmacy, SkopjeSaliva is a biological environment necessary for the physiology of themouth. It is in dynamic balance with oral tissues and plays a role inpreserving the integrity of the soft as well as the hard tissues. Thereare protective role and is an integral part of the general protectivefunds of the body. The main function of saliva is to maintain physio-logical balance in the mouth and enamel-mucosal barrier. This func-tion is accomplished by dissolving effect, buffer effect andantibacterial protective role of saliva.Many authors give a big and even a major role of saliva in cariogenictooth decay. Caries is initiated (started) under the dental plaque fromacidic organisms (destructive lactobacilli) in the presence of fer-mentable carbohydrates. Critical pH in the oral cavity is 5.1. Abovethis pH, dental plaque contains more calcium and phosphorus, fromsaliva. When you expose your teeth to carbohydrates, the pH in themouth may fall to 4.0 or less for several minutes. This causes dem-ineralization of dental tissue (cavities), or dissolution of minerals fromthe teeth, which demineralization increases as pH decreases the oralenvironment. Therefore, especially important role of saliva is neutral-izing the acids in the oral cavity, its buffer effect. Saliva is neutralizingthe demineralization effect of acids on enamel, which indirectly meansprotecting the integrity of dental tissues. This buffer capacity of salivais provided by buffer systems which saliva possess. Except bicarbonate,phosphate and protein buffer in maintaining the balance of acid-basicoral environment, participating and other compounds and enzymes,such as urea, amylase and salivaric fluorides as prophylactic buffer.The importance of urea in saliva is known a long time. It has a dualrole: it inhibits the metabolism and multiplication of bacteria in thesaliva of one hand and on the other hand indirectly affect neutralizingthe acids in the oral environment, which participates in maintainingthe salivaric balance and it actually owes its buffer capacity. Urea isthe main source of alkali in the mouth and is delivered in all salivarygland secretions at concentrations ranging from 3 to 10 mmol/L inhealthy individuals. Urea entering the mouth is hydrolyzed to carbondioxide and ammonia by bacterial ureases. Ammonia production fromurea metabolism has been identified as a mechanism by which oralbacteria are protected against acid killing; maintain a relatively neu-tral environmental pH that may suppress the emergence of a cario-genic microflora; and derive bioenergetic advantages, includingincreasing pH.Sequence studies have shown that urea increases the pH value of den-tal plaque up to 9 and the addition of 40-50% urea in carbohydratesproducts resulting in regulation pH levels of dental plaque. This effecttriggered the idea of incorporating the carbamide (synthetic urea crys-tals) in sweets and other products containing fermentable carbohy-drates, in order to reduce their cariogenic effect. Urea can be used asa constituent in chewing gum. The effect of urea in chewing gumswithout sugar, was investigated in subjects who chewing a gums withdifferent content of urea. There was established that higher concen-167fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationstrations of urea in chewing gum resulted in the highest values of pH.Hence chewing gums containing urea can be used for the preventionor slowing the cariogenic process.Conclusion: Data from the professional scientific literature indicate asignificantly positive relation to the buffer capacity of saliva throughurea. Urea is increase the pH in the oral cavity and it active protectiveagainst the occurrence of cariogenic processes.references1. Nascimento MM, Gordan VV, Garvan CW, Browngardt CM, Burne RA. Correlationsof oral bacterial arginine and urea catabolism with caries experience. Oral MicrobiolImmunol. 2009 Jun;24(3):264.2. Jens Kreth, Yongshu Zhang, and Mark C. Herzberg. Streptococcal Antagonism inOral Biofilms: Streptococcus sanguinis and Streptococcus gordonii Interference with-Streptococcus mutans. J Bacteriol. 2008 July; 190(13): 4632-4640.3. Gordan VV, Garvan CW, Ottenga ME, Schulte R, Harris PA, McEdward D, MagnussonI. Could alkali production be considered an approach for caries control? Caries Res.2010;44(6):547-54. Epub 2010 Nov 13.4. Lazarchik DA, Haywood VB. Use of tray-applied 10 percent carbamide peroxide gelsfor improving oral health in patients with special-care needs. J Am Dent Assoc. 2010Jun;141(6):639-46.5. Colin Dawes, BSc, BDS, PhD.