Fig.1.SEM image of unloaded xerogel MPsIncorporation of APTES during the hydrolysis combined with TEOSchanged the inner structure of the matrix, resulting with increasedporosity and hydrophilicity of the network, increasing the average par-ticle size and the loading efficiency of 5-FU. Also, addition of APTESinfluenced the type of the active groups at the particle surface, re-sulting with the presence of -amino groups beside -OH groups, simul-taneously affecting the surface charge and mucoadhesive potentialof prepared organically modified particles (Table 1).Table1. Characteristics of prepared formulationResulting differences in the FT-IR spectra of 5-FU, unloaded andloaded particles pointed to the existence of hydrogen bonds between5-FU and the matrix constituents (Fig.2).Fig.2. FT-IR spectra of 5-FU (a), loaded organomodified MPs (b), blankorganomodified MPs (c);The dissolution profiles of prepared MPs are presented in Fig. 3 and 4.Differences in the matrix structure and composition due to organicmodification during the process of hydrolysis contributed to the fasterdrug release rate from organically modified xerogel systems and burstrelease varied accordingly to the % of APTES.Fig.3. In vitro release profile of 5-FU from TEOS based MPs in phos-phate buffer pH 7.4Fig.4. In vitro release profile of 5-FU from organomodified MPs in phos-phate buffer pH 7.4298Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOCONCLUSIONPresented work reveals the potential of TEOS and organomodified mi-croparticles as systems for controlled site specific delivery of hy-drosoluble anticancer drugs, as 5-FU. Due to specific characteriristicsof these carriers in vivo they might be used for site specific controlledlocal colon delivery. REFERENCES1. Z.Wu et al., Effects of surface coating on the controlled releaseof vitamin B1 from mesoporous silica tablets, Journal ofControlled Release119(2007)215-2212. A.Lampprecht et al., Microspheres design for the colonic deliv-ery of5-FU,J.Contr.,Rel.,90(2003)3313. C.A.Santos et al., Correlation of two bioadhesion assays: theeverted sac technique and the CAHN microbalance. J.ControlledRelease 61(1999) 113-122DISSOLUTION STUDIES OF ALPHA LIPOIC ACID CAPSULES D. Dimova, R. Dameska, L. Makraduli, E. Adamova, E. Ristevska,M.Anevska, A. Sekovanic, D. Lepcevska, L. Ivceska, H. LitovinReplek Farm, Kozle 188, 1000 Skopje, R. MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONAlpha Lipoic Acid (a-Liponic Acid; Acidum Thiocticum; Alpha LipoicAcid; Kyselina thioktova; Lipoic Acid; Thioctamidum; Tioctico, acido;Tioktamid; Tioktamidie) is used in the treatment of diabeticneuropathy for its antioxidant effects. There were attempts for appli-cation of Alpha Lipoic Acid in the treatment of liver dysfunction andin subacute necrotising encephalopathy. [1]Most of the metabolic reactions in which Alpha Lipoic Acid participa-tes occur in mitochondria. The oxidation of piruvic acid (as pyruvate)by the pyruvate dehydrogenase enzyme complex and the oxidation ofalpha-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase enzyme complex are two of themetabolic reactions. [2]Ph Eur 6.0; BP 2011: Thioctic Acid is yellow, crystalline powder, veryslightly soluble in water, very soluble in dimethylformamide, freely sol-uble in methanol. Melting point about 61 degC. Protect the solutionsfrom light. USP 32: Alpha Lipoic Acid: Melting point 60 to 620C.OBJECTIVESTo investigate the influence of active substance Alpha Lipoic Acidwith different granulometric caracteristcs - granulate and powder, onthe dissolution rate and the stability of a pharmaceutical dosage form- capsule.MATERIALS AND METHODSAlpha Lipoic Acid (Hengdian Group Homeland Ltd.); Dissolution test:According to USP/NF, Apparatus 1; Medium: water, 900 ml; Time: 60minutes; Rotations:100 rpm. Standard Sieve Analyzator, ErwekaType:VT; Motor type:AR 402; Sieve size: 0,125; 0.25; 0.315; 0,5; 0,6; 0,8;1 and 1.25 mm; Manufacturer: ERWEKA, GermanyRESULTSThe same formulation of Alpha Lipoic Acid capsules was manufactu-red with the active substance in a form of powder and granulate. Allthe excipients were carefully selected to achieve the fill weight in aspecific size of capsule.Granulometic (sieve) analysis of the active substance is performed atthe Research and Developement Laboratory, Replek Farm. The analy-sis results from are presented below:Graph 1 Particle size distribution graph for an active substance in aform of a granulateGraph 2 Particle size distribution graph for an active substance in aform of a powderThe dissolution test of both capsule formulation according to speci-fied pharmacopoeial method is performed. UV spectrophotometricanalysis is performed at wavelehght 220 em. 299Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONTable 1 Results from dissolution testing of capsules filled with AlphaLipoic Acid granulate and powderDISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONAccording to the above cited analysis results it can be concluded thatthe dissolution rate is highly influenced by the different granulome-tric characteristics of the active substance Alpha Lipoic Acid. Capsu-les filled with Alpha Lipoic Acid in powder form have excellentdissolution rate, unlike the capsules filled with granulate, which havelow dissolution rate, according to the specified pharmacopoeial limits.From the stability studies testing results it can be concluded that bothformulations are stable and maintain the same analysis results like theresults from the begining of the stability study. Table 2 Results from stability studies of capsules filled with Alpha Li-poic Acid granulate and powderREFERENCES1. MartinDale 35 CD-ROM:The Complete Drug Reference 20072. PDR Electronic Library3. Zagorka Koricanac, Mira Cakar; Spectrophotometric determination of thiocticacid in water and pharmaceutical prepartaions, Faculty of Pharmacy, University ofBelgrade, 2006ISPITUVANjE NA RASTVORLIVOST NAALPHA LIPOIC ACID KAPSULID. Dimova, R. Dameska, L. Makraduli, E. Adamova,E. Ristevska, M.Anevska, A. Sekovanikj, D. Lepchevska, L. Ivcheska , Kh. LitovinReplek Farm, Kozle 188, 1000 Skopje, R. MakedonijaVOVEDAlpha Lipoic Acid (a-Liponic Acid; Acidum Thiocticum; Alpha LipoicAcid; Kyselina thioktova; Lipoic Acid; Thioctamidum; Tioctico, acido;Tioktamid; Tioktamidie) zaradi silnite antioksidantni efekti sekoristi vo tretmanot na dijabetichna nevropatija. Postojat obidiza primena na ovaa aktivna supstantsija i vo tretmanite na kheparnadisfunktsija i subakutna nekrotizirachka entsefalopatija [1].Najgolemiot broj na metabolichki reaktsii vo koi uchevstvuvakiselinata se sluchuvaat vo mitokhondriite. Tuka e vkluchenaoksidatsijata na piruvinskata kiselina pod dejstvo na enzimskiotkompleks piruvat dekhidrogenaza i oksidatsijata na alfa-ketoglutarat pod dejstvo na enzimskiot kompleks alfa-ketoglutarat dekhidrogenaza[2]. Ph Eur 6.0; BP 2011: Thioctic Acid e zholt, kristalen prashok, mnoguteshko rastvorliv vo voda, lesno rastvorliv vo dimetil formamid,lesno rastvorliv vo metanol. Temperatura na topenje okolu 610C.Rastvorite treba da se zashtitat od svetlina. USP 32: Alpha Lipoic Acid: Temperatura na topenje pomegju 60-620C.TsELIspituvanje na vlijanieto na granulometriskite karakteristiki naAlpha Lipoic Acid - granulat i prashok vrz rastvorlivosta nafarmatsevtskata dozirana forma - kapsula, kako i na stabilnostana preparatot.MATERIJALI I METODIAlpha Lipoic Acid (Hengdian Group Homeland Ltd.); Test zarastvorlivost: spored USP/NF, Aparat 1-korpa vo prochistena voda,900 ml; za 60 minuti i broj na rotatsii od 100 rpm. Standard SieveAnalyzator, Erweka Tip:VT; Motor type:AR 402; Dijametar na otvoritena sitata: 0,125; 0.25; 0.315; 0,5; 0,6; 0,8; 1 i 1.25 mm; Proizvoditel:ERWEKA, Germanija REZULTATIIzrabotena e po edna ista formulatsija na kapsuli so Alpha Lipoic Acidvo oblik na granulat i vo oblik na prashok. Ekstsipiensite se soodvetnoodbrani za da se postigne potrebnata masa na polnenje na kapsuli.Granulometriska (sito) analiza na aktivnata supstantsija eizvrshena vo razvojnata laboratorija. Dobieni se sledniveeksperimentalni rezultati za distributsijata na chestichki: 300Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOGrafik 2 Distributsija na chestitsi po golemina - granulatGrafik 1 Distributsija na chestitsi po golemina- prashokTestirana e rastvorlivosta na dvete probi na kapsuli soodvetnona propishaniot farmakopejski metod . Se vrshi UV spektrofot o -me triska analiza na 220 nm. Tabela 1 Rezultati od rastvorlivost na kapsuli izraboteni soAlpha Lipoic Acid - granulat i prashok Zakluchok: Od dobienite rezultati za rastvorlivost mozhe da sezakluchi deka ima silno vlijanie na razlichnite granulometriskikarakteristiki na aktivnata supstantsija Alpha Lipoic Acid vrzrastvorlivosta. Kapsulite napolneti so aktivna supstantsija vooblik na prashok imaat odlichna rastvorlivost, za razlika od onienapolneti so granulat koi imaat minimum rastvorlivostsporedeno so farmakopejski propishaniot limit na tolerantsija. Rezultatite od studijata na stabilnost pokazhuvaat deka i dveteprobi se stabilni i gi zadrzhuvaat pochetnite rezultati od analiza.Tabela 2 Rezultati od studija na stabilnost na kapsuli izraboteniso Alpha Lipoic Acid - granulat i prashok LITERATURA1. MartinDale 35 CD-ROM:The Complete Drug Reference 2007 2. PDR Electronic Library 3. Zagorka Koricanac, Mira Cakar; Spectrophotometric determination of thiocticacid in water and pharmaceutical prepartaions, Faculty of Pharmacy, University ofBelgrade, 2006301Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONFORMULATION AND CHARACTERIZATIONOF AMINO-FUNCTIONALIZED SILICA PARTI-CLES FOR BUDESONIDE DELIVERYV. Petrovska1, K. Goracinova1, M. Simonoska Crcarevska1, A. Georgieva3, N. Geskovski1, M.Cvetkovska2, M. Glavas Dodov11Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia 2Faculty of Technology and Metallurgy, University of Ss Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Macedonia3Alkaloid AD, Skopje, MacedoniaINTRODUCTIONDuring the past decades a diversity of polymer based pharmaceuticalcarriers have been developed as new means for controlled and site-specific drug delivery. Sol-gel procedure is very attractive to preparesilica particles for biomedical applications. When silica-basedmaterials are used as drug carriers, several factors such as pore sizedistribution, morphology and surface functionality can affect theperformance of the designed systems. Therefore, changes in thereaction conditions during sol-gel processing as well as partialsubstitution of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) as a silica source withprecursor with alkyl substituted alkoxyde could modify the structure,surface properties and chemical reactivity of the designed carrier thusaffecting the dissolution and degradation rate as well (1,2). The aimof this work was to design and evaluate inorganic andorganic/inorganic hybrid xerogel particles prepared with various initialTEOS/water ratios as suitable carriers of budesonide (BDS) withcontrolled release properties.MATERIALS AND METHODSMATERIALSInorganic xerogel NPs and organic/inorganic hybrid particles were pre-pared using TEOS (Sigma, Germany), 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane(APTES; Sigma, Germany), ethanol (Merck, Germany), acetic acid(Merck, Germany), BDS (Crystal Pharma, Spain) and deionised water.All other chemicals were of analytical grade and were used as received. PREPARATION OF THE PARTICLESSilica xerogel NPs containing 2% w/w of BDS were prepared via a onestep acid catalyzed sol-gel process. The molar ratios ofTEOS:water:ethanol:acetic acid were 0.02:5.5:1.71:0.02 and0.02:11.1:3.42:0.02, respectively (samples 1T and 2T). Hydrolyzed silicasol was spray-dried (Buchi 290, Mini Spray Dryer, Swiss) under followingprocess conditions: inlet temperature 135 degC, flow rate 4 ml/min,volume flow 35m3/h and spray flow 600 NL/h. The organic/inorganichybrid particles (samples 1AP and 2AP) were prepared by co-condensation method by partial substitution of TEOS with 2.5 mol%of APTES and were spray dried as described above. Blank particleswere also prepared as comparison.CHARACTERIZATION OF THE PARTICLESSEM of the particles was carried out using a JEOL 6400, Japan. Particlesize analysis was performed using laser diffractometry (HydroG/S/M2000; Mastersizer 2000, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). Zeta potentialdeterminations (Zetasizer Nanoseries, Nano-ZS, Malvern Ins., UK) werebased on electrophoretic mobility of the particles in buffer solutions(pH 2.0 and 7.4) of low molarities and ionic strength. Infrared spectraof blank and BDS loaded particles were recorded with FT-IRspectrometer (Varian 2000 FT-IR, USA) using KBr method. Theencapsulation efficiency (EE%) of BDS in designed formulations wasdetermined by HPLC method (Agilent 1200 with UV detector, columnRP C-18 Lichrocart, Merck, Germany). The dissolution profiles of BDSfrom TEOS based and hybrid particles were studied in buffer solutionat pH 7.4 in closed glass tubes at 37 degC and 50 horizontal strikes/min.At predetermined time intervals, samples were withdrawn, membranefiltered and the content of BDS in the release medium was quantifiedby HPLC.RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONBy varying TEOS/water molar ratio particles with different propertieswere obtained. NPs synthesized from TEOS were spherical withsmooth surfaces (Fig. 1), with mean size between 0.7 and 0.8 nm andunimodal narrow size distribution. Amino-modified hybrid silicaparticles were also spherical, but had a larger mean size and widerparticle size distribution (Table 1).Fig.1.