20 percent have been partially satisifed, and no one hasbeen dissatified.conclusionMost disturbing result of this research is that as many as 40 percent ofpatients have not been informed about adverse effects, especiallywhen one considers the fact the patients are children of age 1 to 10.Role of pharmacists in raising awareness of patients in regard to ob-serving and reporting adverse effects should be reviewed.Fact that two thirds of patients have not observed any adverse effectindicates that montelucast is relatively safe to use. However, this re-search has found that 60 percent of adverse effects belong to nervoussystem/physiatric group. Therefore, warnings published on WHO siteshould not be taken lightly, and should be clearly communicated topatients and their parents.referencesMuijsers RB, Noble S. Montelukast: a review of its therapeutic potential in asthma inchildren 2 to 14 years of age. Pediatric Drugs 2002;4(2):123-39.Cobb DB, Abbott CL, Watson WA, Fernandez MC. Highdose montelukast exposures ina 3-year-old and a 5-year-old child. Veterinary and Human Toxicology 2002;44(2):91-2.Merch Sharp & Dohme Corp. Highlights of prescribing information - SingularR (mon-telukast sodium) tablets, chewable tablets and oral granules Initial U.S. Ap-proval:1998.http://www.who.int/medicines/publications/newsletter/PharmNewsletter09_5.pdfVirchow J. Chr., Bachert C. Efficacy and safety of montelukast in adults with asthmaand allergic rhinitis. Respiratory Medicine 2006;100(11):1952-59.PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOFARMATsEVTSKAKhEMIJA /BIOMOLEKULARNI NAUKIoralni prezentatsiiPHARMACEUTICALCHEMISTRY /BIOMOLECULAR SCIENCESoral presentationsElEctrochEmical monitoringof anticancEr drugs-dnaintEractions by singlE-usEsEnsor platformsArzum ErdemEge University, Faculty of Pharmacy, Analytical Chemistry Department,35100 Bornova, Izmir, TurkeyMany electrochemical approaches have been developed for analyzingor quantification of nucleic acids and its interactions at the beginningof the sixties (1-13).Various type of affinity biosensors as "Genosensor" for nucleic acidrecognition processes have been rapidly developed combined with dif-ferent nanomaterials towards the goal of simple and low-cost point-of-care detection of specific nucleic acid sequences related with geneticand infectious diseases. Eventually, genosensors could be applied toproduce credit card-sized sensor arrays for clinical applications suchas detection of pathogenic bacteria, tumors, and genetic disease, orfor forensics (14).The investigations at chemistry side based on DNA-drug interactionsand DNA hybridization would provide new compounds to be testedfor an effect on a biochemical target, and also to be used as promis-ing hybridization indicators, or would provide new approaches for thedesign of more effective DNA hybridization biosensors based on nano-materials, which will further become DNA microchip systems (6,10-12).rEfErEncEs[1] E. Palecek, Nature, 1960, 188, 656. [2] M. I. Pividori, A. Merkoci, S. Alegret, Biosensors and Bioelectronics, 2000,15, 291. [3] J. Wang, Nucl. Acids Res., 2000, 28, 3011. [4] E. Palecek, M. Fojta, Anal. Chem., 2001, 73, 75A. [5] A. Erdem, M. Ozsoz, Electroanal., 2002, 14, 965. [6] A. Erdem, P. Papakonstantinou, H. Murphy, Anal. Chem. 2006,78, 6656. [7] J. Wang, A.-N.Kawde, A. Erdem, M. Salazar, Analyst, 2001, 126, 2020. [8] A. Erdem, M.I. Pividori, A. Lermo, A. Bonanni, M. del Valle, S. Alegret, Sensors andActuators B: Chem.,2006, 114, 591. [9] J. Wang, D.Xu, A. Erdem, R. Polsky and M. Salazar, Talanta, 2002, 56, 931. [10] A. Erdem, H. Karadeniz, A. Caliskan, Electroanal., 2009, 21(3-5), 464. [11] H. Karadeniz, A. Erdem, F. Kuralay, F. Jelen, Talanta, 2009, 78 (1), 187. [12] A. Erdem, H. Karadeniz, A. Caliskan, Analyst, 2011, 136 (5), 1041. [14] W. G. Kuhr, Nature Biotechnology, 2000, 18, 1042.acknowledgements. A.E would like to express her gratitude to theTurkish Academy of Sciences (TUBA) as the associate member of TUBAfor their financial support. (bEnzamidomEthyl)triEthylammonium chloridE:a mild and VErsatilE rEagEntfor bEnzamidomEthylationEmil PopovskiInstitute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics,Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Arhimedova 5, 1000 Skopje, P.O.Box 162, MacedoniaIn the past, a large number of benzamidomethyl compounds havebeen synthesized which have been used for different purposes. In thefinal decade, in the case of a thiol group, benzamidomethylation wasused for synthesis of ligands for 99Tc complexes, which have been uti-lized as radiolabels. Also, benzamidomethylation was used to obtainsome benzamidomethyl aryl thioethers as intermediates in the syn-thesis of benzothiazines. Among the numerous S-benzamidomethylderivatives there are reports of a S-benzamidomethyl-L-cysteine,which was used in peptide synthesis and some of them are useful forthe treatment of glaucoma. Amidomethyl and benzamidomethyl es-ters were synthesized and evaluated as potential prodrugs of car-boxylic acid agents or amide agents. Also, mechanism of hydrolysisof benzamidomethyl derivatives of phenols indicates that O-benzamidomethyl derivatives of drugs with phenol group can be usedas prodrugs. In the case of an amine group, amidomethylation wasused for synthesis of derivatives of some uracils or thiouracils thatshowed antitumor activity. Zlotin and coworkers investigated someroutes for the synthesis of N-benzamidomethyl derivatives of func-tional derivatives of a-aminoacids and peptides, etc. Furthermore, syn-thesis of benzamidomethyl esters, such as 2-benzamidomethyl-3-oxy-butanoates, which are used as intermediates in preparation of (2R,3S)-2-benzamidomethyl-3-hydroxybutanoates as chiral building blocks forsynthesis of biologically active carbapenems, was conducted.N-(Hydroxymethyl)benzamide (1) and N-(chloromethyl)benzamide (2)are reagents that have been widely used in reactions of benzamido-methylation. Also used, although more seldom, are N-(diethylamino-methyl)benzamide (3), N-(acetoxymethyl)benzamide (4), and diben-zamidomethyl ether (5).In the course of our studies in benzamidomethylation of phenols, (ben-zamidomethyl)triethylammonium chloride (6) was obtained in a reac-334PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA KhEMIJA / BIOMOLEKULARNI NAUKIoralni prezentatsiition of 2 with triethylamine. Compound 6 was successfully used as abenzamidomethylation agent of phenols.Reactions occurred fast, in mild conditions (RT; pH >= 9) and in envi-ronmentally friendly solvent - water.The corresponding benzamidomethyl ethers were obtained in highyields (> 90%) and easily isolated from the reaction mixture by simplefiltration.Alcohols were benzamidomethylated with 6, too, but only in organicsolvents. In these cases, the yields of the products were moderate.In the case of thiols, thiophenols as well as alkylthiols were easily ben-zamidomethylated with 6 in aqueous media and yields of the prod-ucts were also high.Our good results with the benzamidomethylation of phenols and thi-ols using 6, prompted us to investigate the reaction of this compoundwith other compounds with different nucleophilic functional groups.Primary and secondary amines as well as hydrazines and hydrazidesreact fast with 6 in aqueous media giving high yields of correspondingmono-, di-, three- or tetra-benzamidomethyl derivatives.Also, in aqueous media dithiocarbamates can be benzamidomethy-lated plus inorganic nucleophiles such as the hydroxylamine, azide andcyanide anion.Most interesting reactions of 6 are the reactions with enolate and sim-ilar carbanions. Novel carbon-carbon bonds were formed by SN2 re-actions performed in water.Carboxylic acids can be benzamidomethylated with 6 but only in or-ganic solvents. Yields of the corresponding esters were moderate.Amino group in the presence of carboxylic group (at the same molec-ula) can be benzamidomethylated with 6 in aqueous media. However,attempt to benzamidomethylate phenol group in the presence of car-boxylic group in aqueous media failed. The carboxylic group as a weaknucleophile in aqueous media does not react, but it deactivates thephenol group.This phenomenon was used for synthesis of benzamidomethylparebene as a novel potential antimicrobial agent. On the other hand,once the carboxylic group is protected as in benzamidomethylparabene, the phenol group can be easily benzamidomethylated with6 in aqueous media.antiiflammatory actiVityand docking studiEsof somE b-hydroxy-b-arylpropanoic acidsJelena Savic1, Bojan Markovic1, Sanda Dilber2,Marina Milenkovic3, Milena Jovcic4, Brizita Drdevic51 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,University in Belgrade,2 Department of Organic Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,University in Belgrade3Department of Microbiology and Imunology, Faculty of Pharmacy,University in Belgrade4 Pharmacy JovcicPharm, Novi Becej5 Department of Bromatology, Faculty of Pharmacy,University in Belgrade,Six b-hydroxy-b-aryl propanoic acids[(3-hidroxy-3-(4-diphenylil)-butanoic acid, 3-hydroxy-2-methyl-3-(4-diphenylil)-buatnoic acid, 3-hy-droxy-2.2-dimethyl-3-(4-diphenylil)-buatnoic acid, 3-hydroxy-3.3-diphe-nylpropanoic acid, 3-hydroxy-2-methyl-3.3-diphenylpropanoic acid, 3-hydroxy-2.2-dimethyl-3.3-diphenylpropanoic acid] were synthesisedand evaluated for anti-inflammatory activity and gastric tolerability invivo. Due to the fact that these acids belong to the aryl propanoic acidclass of compounds, structurally similar to the NSAIDs, such as ibupro-fen, anti-inflammatory activity is expected. The aim also was to de-termine using docking studies whether alpha methyl substitution hasimpact on COX-2 selectivity.Synthesis of these compounds using modification of Reformatsky re-action has already been reported. The carrageenan induced pawoedema assay was carried out using procedures by Oyanagui and Sato.Male Wistar rats weighing 160-180g fasted overnight with free accessto water were given orally via gavage needle either ibuprofen or testedcompound dissolved in DMSO in different doses: 2.5 mg/kg, 5mg/kg,10mg/kg, 15mg/kg, 20mg/kg. Each dose was given to six animals. Con-trol group received only DMSO. One hour later 0.5% of carrageenansuspended in sterile saline and saline were injected in a volume of0.1ml into the plantar surface of the right and left hind paw, respec-tively. Left paw served as the control one (non-inflamed paw). The an-imals were sacrificed 3 hours after the carrageenin and saline injectionand paws were cut off for weighing. Difference in weight between rightand left paw, active drug-treated versus vehicle-treated (control) rats,served as an indicator of the anti-inflammatory activity of tested drugs(compounds and ibuprofen). When animals were sacrificed, their stom-ach were removed and opened along the greater curvature. Lesionswere examined under an illuminated magnifier (3'). The intensity ofgastric lesions was assessed according to a modified scoring system ofAdami et al. To identify potential anti-inflammatory lead among syn-thesised compounds docking calculations were performed usingAutodock v4.0.1 into the 3D structure of the catalytic site of COX-2 en-zyme (pdb code: 1cx2) and COX-1 enzyme (pdb code: 1eqg).Range of ED50 values is between 136.95 umol/kg and 14.79 umol/kg,while the result for ibuprofen is 51.7 umol/kg. None of tested sub-stances or ibuprofen produced any significant gastric lesions. Thechanges observed were in range of 0-1 according to the Adami's scor-ing scale. Namely, only slight hyperemia or few petechiae registered inrat stomach regardless of given dose.3-Hydroxy-3.3-diphenylpropanioc acid, 3-hydroxy-2-methyl-3.3-335fifth congrEss of pharmacy of macEdonia With intErnational participationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL CHEMISTRY / BIOMOLECULAR SCIENCESoral presentationsdiphenylpropanioc acid and3-hydroxy-2.2-dimethyl-3.3diphenyl-propanoic acid form interactions with amino acid residues into allthree cyclooxygenase anchor sites and they act as selective COX-2 in-hibitors.3-Hydroxy-2.2-dimethyl-3-(4-diphenylil)-buatnoic acid and3-hydroxy-2.2-dimethyl-3.3-diphenylpropanioc acid with two methyl groups at -position possess the weakest anti-inflammatory activity.The results indicate that all compounds possess significant anti-in-flammatory activity after oral administration, but that 2-methyl-3-hydroxy 3,3-diphenyl-propanoic acid has greatest activity comparableto that of ibuprofen, a standard NSAID. Acids prepared from ace-tophenone have exhibited better anti-inflammatory activity than acidsprepared from 4-acetylbiphenyl.rEfErEncEsS.P. Dilber, Z.S. Zizak, T.P. Stojkovic, Z.D. Juranic, B.J. Drakulic, I.O. Juranic. Antipro-liferative activity of b-hydroxy-b-arylalcanoic Acids, Int J Mol Sci 2007; 8: 214-228.S.P. Dilber, S.L. Dobric, Z.D. Juranic, B.D. Markovic, S.M. Vladimirov, I.O. Juranic. Dock-ing studies and Anti-inflammatory Activity of b-hydroxy-b-arylpropanoic Acids, Mol-ecules 2008; 13: 603-615.J.T. Litchfield, F.A. Wilcoxon. A simplified method of evaluating dose-effect experi-ments, J. Pharmacol Exp Ther 1949; 96: 99.E. Adami, E. Marazzi-Uberti, C. Turba. Pharmacological research on gefarnate, a newsynthetic isoprenoid with an anti-ulcer action, Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther 1964; 147:113-145.G.M. Morris, D.S. Goodsell, R.S. Halliday, R. Huey, W.E. Hart, R.K. Belew, A.J. Olson.Automated docking using a Lamarckian genetic algorithm and an empirical bindingfree energy function, J Comput Chem 1998; 19: 1639Y. Oyanagui, S. Sato. Inhibition by nilvadipine of ischemic and carrageenan paw edemaas well as of superoxide radical production from neutrophilus and xanthine oxidase.Arzneimittel-Forsch.