Pregled nakvalitetot na proizvodot e baranje na Dobrata Proizvodna Praksanavedeno vo poglavje 1 od PIC/s DPP vodich za meditsinskiproizvodi koj vazhi od 1 Januari 2006. Pregled na kvalitetot naproizvodot3,4.METODIPostojat 12 tochki vo proizvodot koi treba da bidat opfateni voramkite na eden pregled na kvalitet na proizvodot (PQR)3.Pregledot na vleznite materijali i dopirot na proizvodot soprimarnata ambalazha koi se upotrebuvaat za proizvodot, osobenoonie od novi izvori, pregled na vazhnite protsesni kontroli, irezultatite za gotov proizvod, pregled na site serii koi neodgovaraat na vospostavenata spetsifikatsija i nivno isleduvanje,pregled na site znachajni devijatsii ili neusoglasenosti, nivnitesoodvetni isleduvanja i efektot od rezultatot na prevzemenitekorektivni i preventivni merki, pregled na site promeni koi seodnesuvaat na protsesite ili analitichkite metodi, pregled navarijatsiite na Marketing Avtorizatsiite podneseni / odobreni /odbieni, pregled na site rezultati pri monitoring na stabilnostai bilo kakvi neochekuvani trendovi dokolku gi ima, pregled nareklamatsii koi se odnesuvaat na kvalitetot na proizvodot kako ivrakjanje na proizvodot i isleduvanja sprovedeni na vreme, pregledna soodvetnosta na korektivnite aktsii od pretkhodniot proizvodenprotses ili oprema za novo reshenie za stavanje vo promet i postmarketing zadolzhenija, kvalifikatsioniot status na soodvetnatakritichna oprema i iskoristuvanja, pregled na tekhnichkite dogovoriso tsel da se osigurime deka istite se azhurirani1. Alatkite od Mi-crosoft office se upotrebuvaat da se presmetaat sredna vrednost,27PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011maksimum, minimum, standardna devijatsija i relativna standardnadevijatsija. Statistichkite alatki se koristat za odreduvanje nasposobnost na protses (CP), odnos na sposobnosta (CR), demon st ra -ted excellence (Cpk), korektsionen faktor (K), +-3s granitsi, rezultati(otkrieni, ochekuvani), goren spetsifikatsionen limit (otkrieni,ochekuvani), dolen spetsifikatsionen limit, nagibi na krivata, runtests [(da se otkrijat trendovite ili bilo kakvo nevoobichaenoodnesuvanje na populatsijata). Ova e od pomosh vo otkrivanje naprotses koj se otklonuva od tselta iako niedna tochka ne izleguva odkontrolnite granitsi (3 sigma)], rang. Beshe napravena analiza na Lisinopril tableti 20 mg vo periodot od01.01.2009 - 31.12.2009. Isto taka beshe napravena trigodishna ana -li za na rezultatite upotrebuvajkji gi istite statistichki i Microsoftoffice alatki.DOBIENI REZULTATIVo vrska so pregledot na Lisinopril tabletite 20mg dobienite re -zul tati za vleznite materijali kako i gotoviot proizvod se vogranitsite na spetsifikatsijata. ZAKLUChOKSite podatotsi za lekot Lisinopril tableti 20mg za 2009 zemajkji gi vopred vid i trigodishniot period (2007-2009) i drugi relevantni in for -matsii, mozhe da se potvrdi deka protsesot e vo sostojba na kontrola5. REFERENTsI 1 HEALTH SCIENCES AUTHORITY - Guidance notes on Product Quality Review2 Product Annual/Quality Review: US-EU Comparative Analysis and Interpretations3 PIC/s - Guide to good manufacturing pactice for medicinal products - part I4 Eudralex - The rules governing medicinal products in the European union -Volume 4 EU Guidelines to Good Manufacturing Practice Medicinal Products forHuman and Veterinary use - Part 1 chapter 1 Qualiry Management5Western Electric Rules (zone rules), 1956FIVE YEAR EXPERIENCE IN SPECIAL QUALITY CONTROL IN THE CROATIANAGENCY FOR MEDICINAL PRODUCTS AND MEDICAL DEVICESMikulcic D., Pipic-Kosanovic M., Truban Zulj R., Tomic S.Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical Devices, Zagreb, CroatiaINTRODUCTIONFor the purpose of placing on the market, the quality, efficacy andsafety of each drug product has to be established. Quality control im-plies the procedure for establishing conformity of medicinal productquality with predetermined quality requirements. It can be performedon a regular basis as a special quality control, off shelf quality control,and as quality control in extraordinary cases. Special quality controlmeans that every single batch of blood and plasma derivates and otherbiologicals either manufactured by local manufacturer or importedone has to be analyzed before it could be released on the market.Quality control must be carried out in line with procedures laid downin the accepted medicinal product documentation accompanying theapplication for granting the marketing authorization.MATERIALS AND METHODSDuring the period of five years (2005-2009) data for blood and plasmaderivatives were collected and summarized for an annual surveillanceof circulation of blood and plasma derivatives on the Croatian drugmarket.RESULTSCollected data were analyzed for every year individually over the men-tioned period of time for imported drugs and local manufacturerblood and plasma derivates. They were based on special quality con-trol certificates of first and every batch, off shelf quality control, andas quality control in extraordinary cases. The average ratio of local /imported blood and plasma derivatives examined through these 5years was 52/48. Although the ratio is in favour of local manufacturer,in last two years there is a trend of decrease of local blood and plasmaderivatives (from 87 in 2007 to 45 in 2009) and an increase of the im-ported ones (from 55 in 2007 to 72 in 2009).The number of imported drugs increased for 50% during these fiveyears especially between year 2005 and 2006. During the same timenumber of special quality control certificates issued for local manu-facturer were the highest in year 2007 (87) and decreased in 2009 fora 50%.Number of overall special quality control certificates varied over theselected period of time. From year 2005-2007 there was an increase ofnumber of certificates and it was highest in year 2007 when 142 spe-cial quality control certificates were issued. That number shows aslight decrease of 15-20% through years 2008-2009.CONCLUSIONOver the analyzed period of five years (2005-2009) there was a signifi-cant increase of imported blood and plasma derivatives, but due todecrease of number of certificates for local manufacturer blood andplasma derivates the overall number of certificates decreased too.Role of the special quality control performed by the Croatian Agencyis to ensure that only high quality blood and plasma derivatives arebeing placed on the Croatian market.ANALYSIS OF PURITY IN AMLODIPINETABLETS IN CROATIAG. Benkovic, M. Sokolic, B. Cudina, R. Truban Zulj,S. TomicAgencija za lijekove i medicinske proizvode RH (HALMED), Ksaverska cesta 4, ZagrebINTRODUCTIONIn view of an increasing number of generic drugs emerging, a compar-ative study was performed including the approved amlodipine prepa-rations in the form of tablets marketed in Croatia, to compare purityprofiles of generic drugs versus the original medicinal product. Am-lodipin was selected as the representative of the increasing group ofdrugs sharing the common property of being introduced into the or-ganism on a daily basis for a longer period and that are marketed inCroatia in a large and increasing number of generic preparations.28Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMATERIALS AND METHODSThe samples of the amlodipine tablets were collected from the Croa-tian market. In choosing samples, the principle criterion was the shelflife, aiming to obtain distribution of different batches of the individ-ual drug in the course of its shelf life. Several batches of each individ-ual medicinal product at different stages of their shelf life wereanalyzed. Impurities were determined by means of high performanceliquid chromatography (HPLC).RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONImpurity profiles were demonstrated to be specific for each individualdrug. Levels of total impurities found in the analysed preparationswere ranging from 0.1% to 0.6% per tablet. The highest amount of un-specified impurity was observed at the level of 0.2% in two prepara-tions. All the analyzed drugs meet the specification limits approvedby the Croatian Agency for Medicinal Products and Medical Devices(HALMED) in the procedure of granting marketing authorization in theRepublic of Croatia.Original drug, as compared to its generic copies, settled at the lowestlevels of total impurities. The comparison of impurity profiles and thelevels of total impurities as well as of average values of the same pa-rameters indicates to the existence of differences in manufacturingprocesses, quality of drug substances or formulation's stability.CONCLUSIONAlthough there is a relative discrepancy in purity levels among thepreparations, it can be generally concluded that all the analyzed me-dicinal products are within the ranges of approved specification lim-its. Therefore, it is not expected, in case of amlodipine tablets, for theadministration of any specific preparation, as compared to others, tobe safer for the patient.REFERENCES1. Tomic, S., et al., Granting marketing authorisation for medicines in South EastEuropean countries: The point of view of the authority, Regul Toxicol Pharmacol 57(2010) 325-3322. S. Gorog, Drug safety, drug quality, drug analysis, J Pharm Biomed Anal 48 (2008) 247-2533. A. K. Basak et al., Pharmaceutical impurities - Regulatory perspective for AbbreviatedNew Drug Applications, Adv Drug Deliv Rev 59 (2007), 64-724. S. Gorog, The importance and the challenges of impurity profiling in modernpharmaceutical analysis, Trends Anal Chem 25 (2006) 755-7575. B. A. Olsen, B. C. Castle, D. P. Myers, Advances in HPLC technology for thedetermination of drug impurities, Trends Anal Chem 25 (2006) 796-8056. R. Nageswara Rao, V. Nagaraju, An overview of the recent trends in development ofHPLC methods for determination of impurities in drugs, J Pharm Biomed Anal 33 (2003)335-3777. S. Ahuja, Assuring quality of drugs by monitoring impurities, Adv Drug Deliv Rev 59(2007), 3-118. Y. Gomez, E. Adams, J. Hoogmartens, Analysis of purity in 19 drug product tabletscontaining clopidogrel - 18 copies versus the original brand, J Pharm Biomed Anal 34(2004) 341-3489. European Pharmacopoeia, European Pharmacopoeia, 6, Council of Europe,Strasbourg, (2007), 2277-227910. Act on medicinal products, 2007, Official Gazette of the Republic of Croatia, 71/07.HPLC METHODS COMPARISON FOR RE-LATED AND DEGRADATION PRODUCTS INSKOPRYL (LISINOPRIL) TABLETSCveta Dolikoska, Dafinka Damcevska, BlagicaSamarova-Stoev, Ana Aleksandric, HristinaBabunovskaAD Alkaloid-SkopjeLisinopril is a drug of the angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) classthat is primarily used in treatment of hypertension, congestive heartfailure and heart attacks and also in preventing renal and retinal com-plications of diabetes. Lisinopril is the lysine-analog of enalapril. Lisino-pril is hydrophilic, has a long half-life and tissue penetration, and is notmetabolized by the liver.Our aim was to compare the two different HPLC methods for related anddegradation products of Lisinopril in our finished product Skopryl tablets.The method for related and degradation substances in Lisinopriltablets according to BP -a little bit adjusted for better chromatogra-phy for our internal use-is a simple isocratic method. The column isLiChrospher RP 8 250mm x4 mm 5 mm, the mobile phase is 70% ofKH2PO4 and Sodium hexan sulphonate buffer pH 2 and 30 % of Ace-tonitrile, flow rate of 1ml/min, detection at 215 nm, temperature ofthe column 40degC, injection volume of 20 ml. The diluent is mixture of80% water and 20% of methanol. The system suitability parameterthat is needed is the resolution factor between the peaks due toLisinopril diketopiperazine and Lisinopril that should be at least5.There is only one impurity that is limited by the requirements of thismonograph: Lisinopril diketopiperazine which is detected as one peakand actually is a racemic mixture of S,S,S diketopiperazine or Lisino-pril dihydrate Impurity C and R,S,S diketopiperazine or Lisinopril dihy-drate Impurity D.These are only two impurities from the six specified impurities de-clared in the European pharmacopoeia:>> Impurity A-Process related Impurity>> Impurity B- Process related Impurity>> ImpurityC-S,S,S diketopiperazine - Process related and degra-dation Impurity>> ImpurityD- R,S,S diketopiperazine Process related and degra-dation impurity>> ImpurityE-Lisinopril R,S,S-isomer-Process related Impurity>> Impurity F-cyclohexyl analogue-Process related ImpuritySo that's why we developed and validated additional reliable method,adjusted from the Ph.Eur.method for our finished drug products Sko-pryl 5, 10 and 20mg tablets. The new method has ability to differenti-ate the active ingredient from all closely related process anddegradative impurities.