toward angular methyl groups).Comparing with molecules of the first and the second group,molecules of the third group posses at least one conformation inwhich spatial orientation is moved for the 60o minimum in the properNewmanns' projection formula. The cholic and glicocholic acid belongto the third group as well. Those two molecules structurally (accordingto the orientation of the hydroxyl group) i.e. conformationally do notshow common elements with other molecules from the third group.After implementing PCA method on the same data, on the scatterplot of the scores PC1- PC2 three congeneric groups are formed withidentical elements (molecules) as on the plot a- b. steroid skeleton.Temperature dependence of bile acids' retention coefficient is linear.Parameters of linear dependence (a, intercept, and b, slope) stronglycorrelate to a bile acids' structures and this correlation can be used forgrouping examined bile acid into three cogeneric groups.35PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011The work was financially supported by the Secretariat of Science andTechnological Development, AP Vojvodina, Republic of Serbia, GrantNo.114-451-2113/2011.REFERENCES1. A. Roda, A. Minutello, M. A. Angellotti, A. Finit, J. Lipid Res. 31 (1990) 1433-1443.2. T. Cserhati, J. Biochem. Biophys. Methods 27 (1993) 133.VALIDATION OF CLEANING PROCESS FOREQUIPMENT FOR WET GRANULATIONGordana Evgenievska, Ana Giceva, Miona Man-asova, Vasilka Dubrova, Hristina BabunovskaQuality Control department, ALKALOID AD-Skopje, Pharmaceutial,Chemical, and Cosmetic Company ,Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000Skopje, Republic of Macedonia Cleaning of equipment for manufacturing of pharmaceutical dosageforms is required to ensure the quality of finished products. The goalof cleaning is to remove the residue from previous manufactured phar-maceutical dosage forms , cleaning agents and other residues whichcan be formed in manufacturing process. Validation of cleaningprocess is necessary to be done for all equipment which are in directcontact with pharmaceutical dosage forms and equipment where themanufacturing process of different pharmaceutical products takesplace.The whole concept for cleaning validation includes many aspects ofcleaning cycle: design of manufacturing equipment which should becleaned, cleaning agents, the process which is used for the cleaningand what is most important for this study, the analytical methodswhich are used for determination the present residues.The aim of this paper is to explain the validation the process of re-moving the residues of active substance -Propafenone HCl of phar-maceutical dosage form Propafenon tbl 150 mg from equipment forwet granulation.. Validation of cleaning process is done after manu-facturing of three successive series of product which is chosen to bethe "worst case". For that aim specific HPLC method is used for de-termining the presense of residues of Propafenone HCl and gettingrealible results of present residues which are under acceptable limitsof 10 ppm.Product which is worst case for water cycle is Propafenone tbl 150 mgfor equipment for wet granulation. Sensitivity of the analytical methodshould be low enough to correspond to the calculated limits so thespecial challenge of the analytical method is the opportunity to detectthe contaminants on very low level. The method is carried out on column : RP Select B 250 x 4mm; 5 mm.,with mobile phase : A41 % ( buffer which is a mixture composite of 0.5mg-ml sodium hexane sulphonate and 1 ml/min acetic acid ) : B 48 %( methanol ) : C 11 % ( acetonitrile ) .The flow is 1ml/min, volume of in-jection is 20 mm and wavelength is 250 nm.From obtained results of the validation of the analytical method itcan be concluded that the results are within the acceptable limitsfor the validation of analytical method ,which means that proposedand validated analytical method is appropriate for determinating theresidues of active substances Propafenone HCl of Propafenone tbl150 mg.After estimating the suitability and validation of the analytical methodand after calculation of the acceptable limits of contaminants, thecontrol of the efficiency of the cleaning process is performed. The ef-ficiency of cleaning process is based on obtained results ,from takenexamples after the equipment is cleaned. The examples are takenafter manufacturing of three subsequent series of Propafenon tbl150mg , and after that, it can be estimated that the validation ofcleaning process of equipment for wet granulation is successfully com-pleted.The results from the taken examples from three subsequent series ofsolid dosage forms as worst case from the place which is most diffi-cult to clean , are under acceptable limit for permited contaminationof 10 ppm, which means that it is confirmed that the cleaning processis secured and efficiently for removing the residues.The upper limit fordeterminated residue is 2,32 ppm, after the cleaning of manufactur-ing of the Propafenon tbl 150 mg with water cycle , which is muchlower then permited limit of 10 ppm..The cleaning process is validated , which means that the evidence isobtained for efficiently removal of residues from the manufacturingequipment for of solid dosage forms .The residues are below the ac-ceptable limits, which means that they doesn't affect the security ofthe patients.REFERENCES1.Fourmen G.L and V.Mullen, " Determining Cleaning Validation Acceptance Limitsfor Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations ", Pharm. Technology 54-60 (April 1993).2.LeBlanc D.A., "Sampling Analyzing and Removing Surface Residues Found inPharmaceutical Manufacturing ", Pharm Techology 84-92 (July 1993).3.Gil Bizmuth and Sosh Neumen, "Cleaning Validation-a practical approach",Informa Healthcare USA (2007).4.FDA ,"Guide to inspections of Validation of Cleaning process", Washington (July 1993).5. FDA,MID Atlatnic region inspection quide , "Cleaning validation"(May 1993).VALIDATsIJA NA PROTsESOT NAChISTENjE NA OPREMA ZA VLAZhNOGRANULIRANjEGordana Evgenievska, Ana Gicheva, MionaManasova, Vasilka Dubrova, KhristinaBabunovskaKontrola na kvalitet, ALKALOID AD-Skopje,Farmatsevtska, Khe mi -ska i Kozmetichka Kompanija, Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skop je,Republika Makedonija Chistenje na oprema za proizvodstvo na farmatsevtski doziraniformi e preduslov za obezbeduvanje na kvalitet na gotoviotproizvod. Chistenjeto se izveduva so tsel da se otstranat mozhnitekontaminenti od pretkhodno proizvedenite farmatsevtski doziraniformi, sredstva za chistenje i ostanati kontaminenti koi mozhat danastanat vo tekot na proizvodniot protses. Validatsijata naprotsesot na chistenje e potrebno da se napravi za site opremi shtose vo direkten kontakt so farmatsevtski dozirani formi i vo koise proizveduvaat poveke farmatsevtski proizvodi.Tseliot kontsept za validatsija na chistenje vkluchuva mnogu aspektiod tsiklusot na chistenje i toa : dizajnot na proizvodstvenataoprema shto treba da se chisti, sredstva za chistenje, protsesot shtose koristi za chistenje i shto e najvazhno za ovaa studija, analitichkimetodi shto se koristat za da se utvrdi prisustvo na kontaminentite.36Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOTselta na trudot e da se objasni validiranje na protsesot nachistenje, za otstranuvanje na kontaminenti od aktivnatasupstantsija - Propafenone HCL na farmatsevtska dozirana formaPropafenon tbl 150 mg od opremata za vlazhno granuliranje.Validatsijata na protsesot na chistenje se vrshi po proizvodstvo natri posledovatelni serii na proizvod shto e odbran za najloshsluchaj. Za taa tsel e koristen spetsifichen HPLC metod zaodreduvanje na prisustvo na kontaminenti od Propafenone HCL idobivanje verodostojni rezultati na prisutni kontaminenti koi sepod dozvoleni granitsi od 10 ppm..Proizvod koj prestavuva najlosh sluchaj za voden tsiklus ePropafenon tbl 150 mg za opremata za vlazhno granuliranje.Poseben predizvik za analitichkiot metod e mozhnost za detektsijana kontaminentite na mnogu nisko nivo zatoa shto osetlivosta naanlitichkiot metod treba da e soodveten na presmetanite granitsina kontaminatsija. Metodata e izvedena na kolona : RP Select B 250x 4mm; 5 mm., so mobilna faza : A 41% (pufer koj e sostaven od 0.5mg/L natrium kheksan sulfonat i 1 ml/L otsetna kiselina ) : B 48%(metanol): C 11% (atsetonitril). Protokot e 1ml/min, volumenot nainjektira-nje e 20 mm i branovata dolzhina e 250 nm.. Od dobienite rezultati za validatsija na anlitichkiot metod mozheda se zakluchi deka dobienite vrednosti za ispituvanite parametrise vklopuvaat vo prifatlivite kriteriumi za validatsija naanlitichkiot metod so shto predlozheniot i validiran anlitichkimetod e soodveten za opredeluvanje na kontaminent od aktivnatasupstantsija Propafenone HCL na Propafenone tbl 150 mg. Poutvrduvanje na soodvetnosta i validatsijata na anlitichkiot metod ipresmetuvanje na granitsite na dozvoleno prisustvo nakontaminenti, se vrshi proverka na efikasnosta na protsesot nachistenje. Vrz osnova na dobienite rezultati koi se dobie-ni pozemanjeto na primerotsi otkako e izvrsheno chistenjeto na orematana koja se proizvedeni tri posledovatelni serii na Propafenontbl 150 mg , mozhe da se protseni deka validatsijata na protsesot nachistenje na opremata za vlazhno granuliranje e uspeshnozavrshena.Dobienite vrednosti za rezultatite so ispituvanjeto nazemenite primerotsi od tri posledovatelni serii na tsvrstifarmatsevtski dozirani formi kako najlosh sluchaj i od mesta koise najteshki za chistenje, se pod prifatlivata granitsa za dozvolenakontaminatsija od 10 ppm , so shto se potvrduva deka protsesot nachistenje e siguren i efikasen za otstranuvanje na kontaminenti.Najviskota dobiena vrednost za utvredno prisustvo nakontaminent iznesuva 2,32 ppm, opredelen za voden tsiklus pochistenje na proizvodstvo na Propafenon tbl 150 mg , shto e mnoguponiska vrednost od dozvolenata granitsa od 10 ppm.Protsesot na chistenje na opremata e validiran, shto znachi deka eobezbeden dokumentiran dokaz za efikasno otstranuvanje nakontaminentite od opremata za proizvodstvo na farmatsevtskidozirani formi do prifatlivi granitsi, shto ne vlijaat vrzbezbednosta na patsientot.REFERENTsI 1.Fourmen G.L and V.Mullen, " Determining Cleaning Validation Acceptance Limitsfor Pharmaceutical Manufacturing Operations ", Pharm. Technology 54-60 ( April 1993).2.LeBlanc D.A., "Sampling Analyzing and Removing Surface Residues Found inPharmaceutical Manufacturing ", Pharm Techology 84-92 (July 1993).3.Gil Bizmuth and Sosh Neumen, "Cleaning Validation-a practical approach",Informa Healthcare USA (2007).4.FDA ,"Guide to inspections of Validation of Cleaning process", Washington(July 1993).5. FDA,MID Atlatnic region inspection quide , "Cleaning validation"(May 1993).THE QUANTITATIVE STRUCTURE- RETENTION RELATIONSHIP (QSRR) ANALYSIS OF SOME CENTRALLY ACTINGANTIHYPERTENSIVES AND DIURETICS INCYCLODEXTRIN-MEDIATED CAPILLARYELECTROPHORESISSlavica Filipic1, Katarina Nikolic1, Irena Vovk2, MitjaKrizman3, Danica Agbaba11Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Uni-versity of Belgrade, Belgrade, Serbia2Centre of Excellence, National Institute of Chemistry, Ljubljana, Slovenia3Laboratory of Food Chemistry, National Institute of Chemistry, Ljubljana, SloveniaThe migration behavior of eleven antihypertensive drugs was exam-ined by capillary electrophoresis employing 30 mM phosphate back-ground electrolyte (pH 2) with different concentrations of a, b and gcyclodextrins. The Quantitative Structure-Retention Relationship (QSRR) models ofthe inclusion complexes between the analyzed compounds (ligands)and a, b, and g cyclodextrins (ACD, BCD, GCD) were performed to in-vestigate correlations between electrophoresis migration order andthe constitutional, geometrical, physico-chemical, and electronicalproperties of the molecular models. The theoretical calculations were performed using the Gaussian 98software package. The initial molecular geometries of aCD, bCD, gCD,guest molecules and inclusion complexes were fully optimized usingPM3 methods [1]. The corresponding frequencies were calculated toensure that the obtained stationary points were true minima. The ChemPro, Marvin 4.0.5 Chem Axon and CS Gaussian 98 [B3LYP/6-31G+(d, p), B3LYP/3-21G(d) and HF/3-21G(d) basis set] programs [2, 3]were applied for molecular parameters computation of the optimizedligands and ligand-ACD, ligand-BCD and ligand-GCD complexes. Partial least square regression (PLSR) has been used for calculation ofvariable importance in the projection (VIP) and QSRR model develop-ment. For the regression analysis was employed Soft Independet Mod-eling of Class Analogy SIMCA P+ 12.0 program [4]. The quality of theregression models was estimated using parameters such as the squareof correlation coefficient (R2), root mean square error of estimation(RMSEE), root mean square error of prediction (RMSEP), Q2, F ratio andP values.The developed QSRR models can help in understanding the structuralfeatures that contribute to the electrophoresis retention behavior ofthe investigated antihypertensives in presence of different types of cy-clodextrins and can be used as a fast, easy and reliable tool for elec-trophoretic migration parameters prediction of other relatedantihypertensive drugs.REFERENCES1. M. Filippa, M. Sancho, E. Gasull, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 48 (2008) 969-973.2. E. Yang, X. Zhao, F. Hua, J. Hao, J. Mol. Struc.-Theochem. 712 (2004) 75-79.3. A. A. Rafati, S. M. Hashemianzadeh, Z. B. Nojini, M. A. Safarpou, J. Mol. Liq. 135(2007) 153-157.4. Umetrics AB, Umea, Sweden, SIMCA P+ Program, Version 12.0.0.o.