An already established supplier, deliver informationon all the process/product modifications, changes in corporate struc-ture and distribution of responsibilities, complaints and recalls, pro-duction volume, certificates held, and history of regulatoryinspections. By continuous monitoring of such supplier and its deli-veries made over the 12-month period, namely through the volume ofservices rendered, presence/ absence of complaints, withdrawals/re-calls, returned goods, quality of shipments (shipments are delayed, orincomplete, mixed up, or inappropriately labelled), tracking of the re-alization of corrective measures required, and production/ product/facility, equipment modifications, such supplies becomes classified aseither:>> high-risk supplieraudit frequency every 2 years, or>> medium-risk supplier,to be audited every 3 years, or>> low-risk supplierregularly audited every 4 years The Risk Management System established, implemented in the supp-lier qualification process as an integral part of Alkaloid doo BelgradeQMS, contributed to the following:>> all processes are specified and well documented;>> faster decision making;>> responsibilities are clear and unambiguous;>> potential risk is identified before it becomes critical;>> activities on audit preparation and execution are less, more specific;>> reduced costs, both direct and indirect.CONCLUSIONGeneric pharmaceutical companies build their strategy and marketposition on the partnerships with supplier, where the best supplier forthe company is the one which generates the least costs, and not ne-cessarily the one whose prices are the lowest. The expectations of re-qulatory authorities are clear, the company QMS must clearly definedsupplier qualification program. In Alkaloid doo Belgrade approach tothe supplier audit program is based on the risk identification and con-sidering product quality, production, processes and production facili-ties of the supplier into account. Risk analysis as a tool of auditplanning and execution helped specify the audit frequency, systemsto be audited, as well as identification of audit priorities. Clearly setaudit program has met the management expectations and, by the im-plementation of risk analysis tools, effectively supported the companyQMS, providing evidence to regulatory authorities that Alkaloid dooBelgrade has competence to manage potential market-generated riskseffectively.REFERENCES1. ICH Q9, ,,Quality risk management", 20052. S. Vecerkov Vukmirovic, ,,Pristup kroz analizu rizika - alat za efikasnu kvalifikacijudobavljaca","TQM & Excellence", Vol. 35, No. 1 - 2, 2007, YUSQ ICQ 2007.271Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONPREFORMULATION STUDIES OF ZOLPIDEM TABLETSPacka Antovska, Gjorgji Petrusevski, Sonja Dimcevska, Bosilka Stefanova, Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republic of MacedoniaSolid-state compatibility studies of the compounds proposed fordevelopment of new pharmaceutical formulations, as well as thescreening of the particle size distribution and the morphology of theactive ingredient, is one of the first steps undertaken in thepreformulation studies1.In order to examine the solid-state compatibility between the activepharmaceutical ingredient (API) zolpidem tartrate and the excipients(lactose monohydrate, cellulose microcrystalline, sodium starch gly-colate, hypromellose, magnesium stearate)2,3 proposed for thedevelopment of the formulation Zolpidem film coated tablets,produced by ALKALIOD AD-Skopje, Fourier Transform Infrared (FT-IR)spectroscopy research was employed. AIMThe aim of this experiment was to characterize the API as well as toinvestigate possible solid-state interactions between zolpidemtartrate and the described excipients, based on the induced changesin the infrared spectra of the stressed binary mixtures compared tothe infrared spectra of the pure compounds and initial binary mixture,as consequence of possible solid-state chemical reaction. MATERIALS AND METHODSThe FT-IR spectra were recorded in the region 500-4000 cm-1, usingKBr pellets method at ambient temperature with Varian 660 FT-IRspectrometer. Particle size distribution and morphology wasdetermined on Morphologi-G3S, automated particle size andmorphology analyzer, Malvern Instruments.Two sets of binary mixtures were prepared by mixing the API with eachexcipient in ratio 1:1 (w/w)4. The first set was prepared by mixing ofzolpidem tartrate and each excipient, followed by wet granulation withpurified water, sizing on 2 mm rasp-screen and drying until specifiedLOD (2-4%) was obtained. Dried granulate was sized on 0.63 mm sieve.Second set of binary mixtures was prepared by dry mixing of zolpidemtartrate and excipients. Dry mixtures were passed trough 0.63 mmsieve also.One portion of the binary mixtures was separated and analyzedimmediately after the preparation. The obtained FT-IR spectra of thissample (further in the text labelled as PM - Physical Mixture) were laterused as a reference spectrum for making correlations with the spectraof the samples kept on different temperature/humidity conditions.The other portion was packed on Omar blistering machine (mod.Fantasy standard), in standard package (PVC/Al blister and card box)and left for one month, at stability testing chamber with 30oC/65%relative humidity (further in the text labelled as SM1-Stressed Mixture1) and 40oC/75% relative humidity (further in the text labelled as SM2-Stressed Mixture 2). CONCLUSIONSThe particles of the API are of irregular shape, having wide range ofdifferent forms (Fig. 1). Slight tendencies for agglomeration wereobserved, even when the sample is dispersed at high pressures. Figure 1. Micrograph of the dispersion field of the API obtained withthe integrated light microscope on Morphologi-G3 using 20X opticalmagnification. Table 1. Particle size distribution ranges of zolpidem tartrate:Based on the comparison of the FT-IR spectra (of the pure API andexcipients with the prepared binary mixtures (PM), it can be concludedthat in all cases the most prominent vibrational bands of the API canbe identified. Although, generally being obscured and overlapped bythe strong bands of the API, few stronger bands originating from thepresent excipient can be identified in some of the mixture. Noadditional bands, of unknown origin, were observed. The unchangedpositions of the bands of the API in the FT-IR spectrum of the preparedPM, compared to the FT-IR spectrum of the pure API, confirms theoverhaul solid state stability of the prepared PM.Based on the comparison of the FT-IR spectra of the PM (physicalmixture, obtained by dry mixing) and the stressed samples (SM1 andSM2), of all prepared binary mixtures, it can be concluded that nosignificant spectral changes were observed. Only, minor spectralchanges, in the samples stored at higher temperature/moisture levelswere observed, associated with changes of the stretching (above 3000cm-1) and bending (~1630 cm-1) H-O-H vibrations, originating from thewater/moisture molecules. Therefore, the FT-IR spectroscopy screening of the PM and SM ofZolpidem tartrate and the proposed excipients, leads to conclusionthat they represent only a mechanical mixtures and it proved theoverhaul solid-state stability of these samples (prepared and packedusing the same technological procedure as for the real productionprocess of the corresponding formulation). Further on, it was provedthat there are no difference between the FT-IR spectra of the samples272Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAposter prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOprepared by dry mixing and wet granulation, both being suitable forimplementing in the technological process. REFERENCES1. A. S. Narang, V. M. Rao, K. S. Raghavan, Developing Solid Oral Dosage Forms:Pharmaceutical Therory and Practice, Elsevier Inc, 2009.2. British Pharmacopoeia 7.1 (2011)3. R.C. Rowe, P. J. Sheskey, S. C. Owen, The Handbook of PharmaceuticalExcipients, Pharmaceutical Press and American Pharmacists Association (2006)4. M. S.S. Cunha-Filho, R. Martinez-Pacehco, M. Landin, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 45(2007) 590-598.PRED-FORMULATsIONI STUDII KAJ ZOLPIDEM TABLETIPatska Antovska, Gjorgji Petrushevski, Sonja Dimchevska, BosilkaStefanova, Sonja UgarkovikjIstrazhuvanje i razvoj, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republika MakedonijaKompatibilnosta pomegju ekstsipientite i aktivnata supstantsija votsvrsta sostojba, predvideni za razvoj na nova farmatsevtskaformulatsija, kako i odreduvanjeto na distrubutsija po golemina nachestitsi i morfologijata na aktivnata supstantsija e eden od prvitechekori vo pred-formulatsionite ispituvanja1.Kompatibilnosta pomegju aktivnata supstantsija (API) zolpidemtartarat i ekstsipientite (laktoza monokhidrat, mikrokristalnatseluloza, natrium skrobenglikolat, khipromeloza, magneziumstearat)2,3 predvideni za razvoj na formulatsija na Zolpidem film-oblozheni tableti, proizvedeni od ALKALOID AD-Skopje, besheevaluirana so Furie transformna infratsrvena (FT-IR)spekroskopija.TsELTselta na ovoj eksperiment e karakterizatsija na API i ispituvanjena potentsijalnata interaktsija vo tsvrsta sostojba pomegju zolpidemtartarat i opishanite ekstsipienti, bazirana na eventualnipromeni vo infra-tsrveniot spektar na binarnite meshavini koise izlozheni na stres-uslovi vo sporedba so infra-tsrvenitespektri na chisti ekstsipienti i initsijalnite binarni meshavini,kako posleditsa na mozhna khemiska interaktsija vo tsvrsta sostojba.MATERIJALI I METODIFT-IR spektarot e snimen vo regionot 500-4000 cm-1, so upotrebana metod na KBr tableti, na sobna temperatura na Varian 660 FT-IRspektrofotometar. Distributsijata po golemina na chestitsi imorfologijata na chestitsite se odredeni so Morphologi-G3S,oprema za avtomatsko odreduvanje na golemina na chestitsi imorfologija, Malvern.Pripremeni se dva seta na binarni meshavini koi se pripremeniso meshanje na aktivnata supstantsija so sekoj ekstsipient vosoodnos 1:1 (w/w)4. Prviot set e podgotven so meshanje na zolipidemtartarat so sekoj ekstsipient, prosleden so vlazhna granulatsija soprochistena voda, seenje na 2 mm, rende-sito i sushenje dospetsifitsirana vlaga (2-4%). Suvite meshavini se pominuvaat na sito0.63 mm. Eden del od meshavinite se analizira vednash po prigotvuvanjeto idobienite FT-IR spektri se oznachuvaat kako fizichki meshavini(ponatamu vo tekstot oznacheni so FM) koi podotsna se koristat kakoreferentni spektri za pravenje korelatsii so spektrite dobieni odmeshavinite chuvani na uslovi na razlichna temperatura/ vlazhnost. Drugiot del e spakuvan na Omar oprema za blister pakuvanje (modelFantasy standard), vo standardno pakuvanje (PVC/Al blister ikartonska ambalazha) i se postavuva eden mesets vo komora zastabilnost na slednite uslovi: 30oC/65% relativna vlazhnost(ponatamu vo tekstot oznacheni so SM1) i 40oC/75% relativnavlazhnost (ponatamu vo tekstot oznacheni so SM2).ZAKLUChOKChestichkite na aktivnata supstantsija se so nepravilna forma ipokazhuvaat shirok dijapazon na razlichni formi (Slika 1).Zabelezhana e slaba tendentsija za aglomeratsija na chestichkite,duri i koga primerokot e dispergiran na visoki pritisotsi.Slika 1. Mikrofotografija na disperziono pole na aktivnatasupstantsija dobieno so integriran svetlosen mikroskop naMorphologi-G3 so upotreba na 20X optichko zgolemuvanjeTabela 1. Distributsija po golemina na chestitsi na zolpidemtartaratVrz osnova na sporedbata na FT-IR spektrite (na chista aktivnasupstantsija i ekstsipientite so podgotvenite binarni meshavini(FM)), mozhe da se zakluchi deka vo site sluchai dominiraat lentitena aktivnata supstantsija. Iako, generalno se zabelezhuvaat idominiraat silnite lenti od aktivnata supstantsija, mozhe da seidentifikuvaat nekolku silni lenti koi poteknuvaat odekstsipientite prisutni vo meshavinite. Ne se zabelezhanidopolnitelni lenti od nepoznato poteklo. Nepromenetite pozitsiina lentite na aktivnata supstantsija vo FT-IR spektrite nafizichkite meshavini, vo sporedba so FT-IR spektrite na aktivnatasupstantsija, ja potvrduvaat stabilnosta na fizichkite meshavini.Vrz osnova na sporedbite na FT-IR spektrite na fizichkitemeshavini (dobieni so suvo meshanje) i primerotsite chuvani vokomorite za stabilnost (SM1 i SM2) na site podgotveni binarnimeshavini, mozhe da se zakluchi deka nema zabelezhitelni spektralnipromeni.273Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYposter presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONpromeni.Detektirani se samo minorni spektralni promeni vo primerotsitechuvani na povisoka temperatura/ vlazhnost koi se manifestiraatso promeni vo valentnite (nad 3000 cm-1 ) i deformatsionite (1630cm-1) H-O-H vibratsii, koi poteknuvaat od molekulite na vodata/vlagata prisutna vo sistemite.FT-IR spektroskopijata na na FM i SM na Zolpidem tartarat ipredlozhenite ekstsipienti, vodi do zakluchok deka tie prestavuvaatsamo mekhanichki meshavini i ja potvrduva stabilnosta vo tsvrstasostojba na ovie primerotsi (podgotveni i spakuvani so upotrebana ist tekhnoloshki protses kako i vo proizvodstvo na izbranataformulatsija). Istotaka, se dokazha i deka nema razlika pomegju FT-IR spektrite na primerotsite podgotveni so suvo meshanje i vlazhnagranulatsija, shto ukazhuva na faktot deka i dvete tekhnologii sepogodni za implementiranje vo tekhnoloshki protses.LITERATURA1. A. S. Narang, V. M. Rao, K. S. Raghavan, Developing Solid Oral Dosage Forms:Pharmaceutical Therory and Practice, Elsevier Inc, 2009.2. British Pharmacopoeia 7.1 (2011)3. R.C. Rowe, P. J. Sheskey, S. C. Owen, The Handbook of PharmaceuticalExcipients, Pharmaceutical Press and American Pharmacists Association (2006)4. M. S.S. Cunha-Filho, R. Martinez-Pacehco, M. Landin, J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal.