Koristenabeshe kolona LiChrospher RP Select B 125x4mm so 5um partikli ikoristena beshe nasha interno razviena HPLC metoda zakvantifikatsija koja ne koristi tsvrsti supstantsi za puferiranjekoi treba potoa da se filtriraat.REZULTATI I ZAKLUChOK Posle 5 testirani razlichni organski techni mediumi, utvrdivmemnogu povekje slichni ekstraktsioni efikasnosti na povekje pola r -ni te solventi, otkolku na onie dobieni so poniska polarnost. Ko -ri stenjeto na poniskopolarnite organski solventi, pokraj toa shtone pokazha nikakva prednost vo prinosot na ekstraktsijata pokazhai druga nepovolna strana - nepodobno vlijanie na oblikot napikovite vo khromatogramite i stabilnostite na nivnite baznilinii. Povisokata ekstraktivna efikasnost na povisoko polar ni -te alifatichni alkokholi ni asotsira i ne pottiknuva na kontsep tu -ali ziranje na analitichki metod za kvantifikatsija naDi me khidranat bez koristenje na shtetnite povekjekratni TTE. LITERATURA1, EP 72, Clarke`s Isolation and Characterisaton of DrugsADOLOR GRIPO C AS COLD MEDICINEPREPARATION - A REAL AND PERMANENTANALYTICAL CHALLENGEM.Piponski, T.Rusevska, I.S.Slavevska, B.Vulovska, M.Mindoseva,M.Petreska, G.T.-SerafimovskaPharmaceutical Company Replekfarm-Replek Skopje, Quality ControlDepartment, SkopjeINTRODUCTION A famous pharmaceutical complex preparation known as ColdMedicine formulations, have always been a challenge for analyst`s andprone to further method improvements from the aspects of simplicity,speed, peak shape and resolution and sensitivity of chromatographicseparations, without sacrificing of the accuracy and reproducibilityand ruggedness of the method.AIM OF WORK The employing of chromatographic theory, rules and experience throwconceptualisation of experimental variables, manifested with manyconsidered combinations of buffers, amino modifiers and organicsolvents, to create simplest, fastest and best system suitability HPLCmethod for separation of four components, Ascorbate, Paracetamol,Caffeine an Chlorpheniramine with isocratic elution in solidpharmaceutical dosage forms.METHOD AND INSTRUMENTS Separation optimisations were performed with Varian HPLC systemswith DAD, models ProStar modular and integrated Model 920,controlled with Galaxy 1.9 Version 1.9. Many different mobile phasecompositions were composed of combinations of methanol,acetonitrile, UV-transparent amino modifiers and phosphate bufferswith different concentrations and pH values. Adding and omitting ofamino-modifiers was compared, different RP bonded phases, i.e.columns with C8 and C18 matrixes made from different vendors werechecked and compared, like LiChropsper, Purospher from Merck andDiscovery from Supelco. The chromatogram quality was estimated byfollowing peaks shapes, resolutions, base line stabilities withcalculating their system suitability parameters. All this variables shouldgenerate simple, accurate, sensitive, reproducible and as much aspossible rugged methodRESULTS AND CONCLUSION The best result we got with the column Discovery LC-8 column150x4,6mm with 5um particles, with equal parts of methanol andacetinitrile with dominant part of 25mM phosphate buffer at pH=2.3with 0,2% of diisopropylamine. Since the enormous differences in thepeaks sizes of constituents, especially Paracetamol andChlorpheniramine induced from their molar absorptivity and massparticipation, it was concluded and suggested in aim to achieve highsensitivity and accuracy, the quantification of all 4 components to beperformed with 2 very similar methods which differ in the percentageof organics in mobile phase and monitored UV signal. The samecolumn and buffer are recommended and used. The separation withperfect resolutions and peak shapes is easily achieved one mobilephase, but the accuracy of the method is little jeopardized with thepeak height differences, for Paracetamol 1350 mAU, compared withChlorpheniramine with less than 10mAU.REFERENCES1, USP32-332, BP20113, Clarke`s Drug Isolation and Characterisation of Drugs ADOLOR GRIPO Ts OD GRUPATA NA COLD-PREPARATI; VISTINSKI IPOSTOJAN PREDIZVIK ZA ANALITIChKI ISTRAZhUVANjA M. Piponski, T. Rusevska, I. S. Slavevska, BVulovska, M. Mindosheva, M. Petreska, G.T.-SerafimovskaFarmatsevtska Kompanija Replekfarm - Replek, Sektor za Kontrolana Kvalitet, Skopje, R. MakedonijaVOVED Poznatiot farmatsevtski kompleksen preparat od grupata na Cold-Formulatsii, otsekogash bil analitichki predizvik i podlozhen naponatamoshni metodoloshki podobruvanja od aspekt naednostavnost, brzina, simetrija i rezolutsija na khromatografskipikovi, kako i senzitivnost na metodata bez pritoa da se zhrtvuvatochnosta i reprodutsibilnosta, kako i rigidnosta na samatametoda.TsEL NA TRUDOT So primena na dostiganjata na khromatografskata teorija, pravilai iskustvo, niz kontseptualiziranje na eksperimentalni varijablikako razlichni kombinatsii na puferi, amino-modifikatori iorganski solvent i mikstura, so tsel da se napravi najednostaven,najbrz metod so najdobri soodvetni khromatogramski karakte ri sti -83PHARMACEUTICAL ANALYSIS / QUALITY ASSURANCE / REGULATORY AFFAIRS poster presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011ki vo separatsijata na chetirite komponenti Ascorbat, Paracetamol,Caffeine i Chlorpheniramine vo tsvrsto-dozazhen farmatsevtskipreparat.METOD I INSTRUMENTI Separatsionite optimizatsii bea izveduvani na Varian-ovi HPLCsistemi i toa modularen Pro-Star i integriran model 920 so DAD,kontrolirani od softver Galaxy verzija 1.9. Mnogu razlichnisostavi na mobilni fazi bea kontsipirani i testirani so miksturina metanol i atsetonitril. Koristeni bea i testirani UV-transparentni amino-modifikatori vo razlichni kontsentratsii ipH vrednosti. Dodavanje i izostavanje na aminite beshesporeduvano pri razlichni RP sorbenti vo koloni spakuvani so C8i S18 matriksi proizvedeni od razlichni proizvoditeli.Konkretno bea testirani proizvodite na Merck od tipot naLiChrospher, Purospher Star, Select B i od kompanijata Supelcokolonite od generatsijata Discovery. Kvalitetot na khromatogramotbeshe interpretiran preku oblik i simetrija na pik, rezolutsija,stabilnost na bazna linija, parametri koi se sostaven del naparametrite Sistemska Podobnost. Site ovie varijabli trebasheda generiraat eden ednostaven, tochen, senzitiven, reprodutsibileni kolku shto e mozhno porigiden metod. REZULTATI I ZAKLUChOK Najdobri rezultati se postignaa so kolonata Discovery LC-8 150 x4,6 mm i 5 um partikli, pri ekvivolumensko uchestvo na metanol iatsetonitril vo mobilna faza so dominanten udel na 25 mMfosfaten pufer pri rN=2.3 i dodaden 0.2% diizopropilamin.Poradi enormnata razlika vo goleminata na khromatografskitepikovi na Paracetamol-ot i Chlorpheniramine-ot, uslovena odgolemite razliki vo maseniot udel vo tabletite i razlikite vomolarnite apsorptivnosti dojdovme do zakluchok deka najdobro eovie chetiri komponenti da bidat odreduvani so dve slichni metodi,koi megjusebno se razlikuvaat samo vo jachinata i sostavot namobilnata faza. Ovaa potreba od postoenje na dve metodi e poradienormnata razlika vo visochinata na pikovite na gorespomenatitekomponenti, dodeka Paracetamol-ot izleguva nad linearniot rangna detektorot (1350 mAU), Chlorpheniramine-ot teshko dostignuvadovolno pretsizno i reprodutsibilno nivo (15-18 mAU). Poradiovie detektsioni razliki tri komponenti se odreduvaat so ednamobilna faza so 10-15% pomalku organski solvent i tri patipomal injektsionen volumen, dodeka Chlorpheniramine-ot ima metodso pokhidrofobna mobilna faza, pogolem injektsionen volumen ipogolem protok. Site ostanati varijabli, kontsentratsija na pufer,rN i kolona se identichni vo dvata metodi.LITERATURA1, USP32-332, BP20113, Clarke`s Drug Isolation and Characterisation of Drugs AZITHROMYCINE HPLC QUANTIFICATIONMETHOD - CONCEPTS AND TESTING OF EX-PERIMENTAL VARIABLESM.Piponski, M.Globocki, I.S.Slavevska, T.Rusevska,B.Vulovska, G.Trendovska-SerafimovskaPharmaceutical Company Replekfarm -Replek Skopje, Quality ControlDepartmentINTRODUCTIONA big molecule of Azithromycine always needs maximal precautionsand more care and experience for it's quantification methods. Relativehigh Mw, lack of strong UV chromophore almost without UV spectrum,slow diffusion rate at ambient temperature, strong interaction withRP bonded phases C8 and C18, need excessive care in performinganalytical methods of this analyte.AIM OF WORKIt is always beneficial to test any new ideas and changes in HPLCoperational parameters when Azithromycin comes for chemicalanalysis for continuous improvement of the simplicity, harness,reproducibility, sensitivity and ruggedness of the analytical method,especially when large number of analysis should be done in one day,many batch or lots of series, solubility testing, many newtechnological formulations. Testing of many different and UV-transparent buffering substances with different concentrations, pHvalues, organic solvents and their combination of mixture, differentstationary RP matrix from different vendors, always bears a newmoments and situations, ideas for creating simpler, faster, healthierand cheaper method with better chromatogram and without sacrificeof the main demands of the analysis, accuracy, sensitivity,reproducibility and maximal ruggedness. METHOD AND INSTRUMENTS All chromatographic analyses were performed on two different HPLCsystems Varian, modular edition model ProStar and integrated model920 with DAD, both controlled from Galaxy Version 1.9. We tested andfound very different combinations of mobile phase constituents,organics, buffer substances, an ion-pair reagents and amino-modifiers.A plenty of HPLC columns tested were from stabile RP modified silicaof high purity and broad range of pH use at 1.5-10 even up to 60`C.Our columns were products of Merck, Purospher C8 and C18 from55mm up to 250 x 4 mm with 5 um particles, and Gemini NX-C18 fromPhenomenex with 250x4,6mm, 5um.RESULTS AND CONCLUSION Depending on the target in the Azithromycine determinationsdemands, the column length was chosen for appropriate separationneeds. In our investigation work we found that the cheapest pH andtemperature stable RP bonded phase columns Purosphere C8 and C18generate better chromatogram than the more expensive in ourconditions. The fastest run was for less than 2 minutes was achievedwith Purospher C8eSTAR 55 x 4 mm with 5um, worked at 45`C and 10ulinjection volumes, with peak symmetry AsUSP=1.1. The mobile phasewas dominant mixture of organics, mixed with 25mM phosphate bufferat pH=7.4. The flow rate was 1.4ml/min and peak hight about 130mAUfor determination of content and more than 60mAu for solubility84Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKI ANALIZI / OBEZBEDUVANjE KVALITET / REGULATIVA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOtesting samples. For determination of related compounds anddegradation products, replacement of of C8eSTAR with morehydrophobic and retentive C18eSTAR with longer dimensions 125 to250mm, showed very good separation power, selectivity and stability.These methods can be readily redesigned in situation of lack ofselectivity and resolution, moderating the run length, and maximizingsamples throughput per day. Purospher RP sorbents confirmed theirstability and applicability at extreme working conditions of pH andTemperature, supporting their values with lowest available prices forsuch chromatography matrixes. One of the most important featurewas achievement of perfect peak symmetry for Azithromycine, as aresult of highest purity of silica material for creating bonded RPcolumns, which result in much better sensitivity, accuracy, precision,repeatability and ruggedness of the method.REFERENCES 1. USP332. BP20113. EP7AZITROMITsIN HPLCKVANTIFIKATsIONEN METOD -KONTsPETI I TESTIRANjA NAEKSPERIMENTALNI VARIJABLI M. Piponski, M. Globochki, I.S. Slavevska, T.Rusevska, G.T-Serafimovska Farmatsevtska kompanija Replekfarm - Replek, Sektor za Kontrolana Kvalitet, Skopje, ul Kozle 188, R. Makedonija VOVED Golemiot molekul na Azitromitsin otsekogash baral maksimalnovnimanie, predostrozhnost i iskustvo za negovatakvantifikatsiona metoda.