If we consider dataon the effectiveness of this medicine from other countries where tri-als are conducted and economic calculations according to data avail-able from the Republic of Macedonia we can conclude thatcost-effectiveness ratio is in favor of rivaroxaban.conclusionThe results of a conducted pharmaeconomic study are consistent withthe results obtained in other countries that explicitly confirm phar-maeconomic and therapeutic advantage of rivaroxaban compared toother products intended for the prevention of venous thromboem-bolism. Accordingly and in accordance with the opinion of the evalu-ation committee (ERG - Evidence Review Group) at the NationalInstitute of Health and Clinical Expertise (NICE), rivaroxaban shouldbe recommended as an option for prevention of venous thromboem-bolism in adult patients undergoing surgical operations of total hip ortotal knee replacement.111fifth congress of pharmacy of maceDonia with international participationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACOECONOMY / SOCIAL PHARMACY/ PHARMACOINFORMATICS poster presentationsreferencesTurpie AG, Lassen MR, Eriksson BI, Gent M, Berkowitz SD, Misselwitz F, Bandel TJ,Homering M, Westermeier T, Kakkar AK; Rivaroxaban for the prevention of venousthromboembolism after hip or knee arthroplasty. Pooled analysis of four studies;Thromb Haemost. 2011 Mar;105(3):444-53. Epub 2010 Dec 6Kwong LM. Cost-effectiveness of rivaroxaban after total hip or total knee arthro-plasty. Am J Manag Care. 2011 Feb;17(1 Suppl):S22-6.Kakkar AK, Brenner B, Dahl OE, Eriksson BI, Mouret P, Muntz J, Soglian AG, Pap AF, Mis-selwitz F, Haas S; RECORD2 Investigators. Extended duration rivaroxaban versusshort-term enoxaparin for the prevention of venous thromboembolism after totalhip arthroplasty: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008 Jul5;372(9632):31-9. Epub 2008 Jun 24.Turpie AG, Lassen MR, Davidson BL, Bauer KA, Gent M, Kwong LM, Cushner FD, LotkePA, Berkowitz SD, Bandel TJ, Benson A, Misselwitz F, Fisher WD; RECORD4 Investiga-tors. Rivaroxaban versus enoxaparin for thromboprophylaxis after total knee arthro-plasty (RECORD4): a randomised trial. Lancet. 2009 May 16;373(9676):1673-80. Epub2009 May 4.Duggan ST, Scott LJ, Plosker GL. Rivaroxaban: a review of its use for the preventionof venous thromboembolism after total hip or knee replacement surgery. Drugs.2009;69(13):1829-51FARMAKOEKONOMSKA ANAlIzAzA RIVAROKSAbAN zA PREVENTsIJANA VTE KAJ PATsIENTI PODlOzhENINA ElEKTIVNA zAMENA NA KOlK KOlENOZoran Sterjev1, Ana Petrovska Angelovska2,Kostadinka Gavazova Kozareva21Farmatsevtski fakultet-Skopje2Baer d.o.o. Pretstavnishtvo SkopjeVOVEDRivaroxaban pretstavuva nov oralen visokoselektiven direkteninkhibitor na koagulatsioniot faktor Kha. Inditsiran e vo pre-ventsija na venska trombembolija (VTE) kaj vozrasni patsienti pod-lozheni na golemi operatsii na dolen ekstremitet.TsElOpredeluvanje na tsena-efikasnost na rivaroxaban vs enoxaparin votromboprofilaksa posle kompletna zamena na kolk i koleno vo RM.MATERIJAlI I METODIZa realizatsija na postavenata tsel primeneta e farmakoekonomskastudija tsena-efikasnost. Potrebnite podatotsi za terapevskataefikasnost se prevzemeni od 4 studii od faza III (RECORD 1, 2, 3i 4 ), sprovedeni kaj patsienti so elektivna zamena na kolk i koleno.Troshkovnite podatotsi se dobienni od Javno dostapnite podatotsiod DRG na Fondot za zdravstveno osiguruvanje na RM i ofitsijalni-te podatotsi za tsenata na lekovite objaveni na veb stranata naMinisterstvoto za zdrastvo na R.MakedonijaREzUlTATISprovedenata farmakoekonomska analiza upatuva na minimalnonamaluvanje na materijalnite troshotsi za okolu 5 900 denari popatsient dokolku vo R.Makedonija za preventsija na venska trombem-bolija (VTE) kaj vozrasni patsienti podlozheni na golemi operatsiina dolen ekstremitet se koristi rivaroxaban. Za zhal voR.Makedonija ne postojat soodvetni podatotsi za efikasnosta odterapijata so rivaroxaban i ostanatite preparati nameneti zapreventsija na venska trombembolija (VTE), poradi shto nemozhe dase presmeta ICER kako realen farmakoekonomski pokazatel.Dokolku se zemat vo predvid podatotsite za efikasnosta na ovojlek od drugi zemji kade se vrsheni ispituvanja i ekonomskitepresmetki spored dostapnite podatotsi od R.Makedonija sezakluchuva deka tsena-efikasnost koefitsientot e vo polza narivaroxaban.zAKlUChOKDobienite rezultati od sprovedenata farmakoekonomska studijase vo soglasnost so rezultatite dobieni vo drugi zemji vo koinedvosmisleno se potvrduva farmakoekonomskata i terapevtskataprednost na rivaroksabanot vo odnos na ostanatite preparatinameneti za preventsija na venska trombembolija. Spored toa a i vosoglasnost so mislenjeto komitetot za evaluatsija (ERG - EvidenceReview Group) pri Natsionalniot Institut za Zdrastvo i KlinichkaEkspertiza (NICE), rivaroxaban treba da bide preporachan kakooptsija za preventsija na venski tromboembolizam kaj vozrasnipatsienti podlegnati na khirurshki operatsii na totalna zamena nakolk ili totalna zamena na koleno.lITERATURATurpie AG, Lassen MR, Eriksson BI, Gent M, Berkowitz SD, Misselwitz F, Bandel TJ,Homering M, Westermeier T, Kakkar AK; Rivaroxaban for the prevention of venousthromboembolism after hip or knee arthroplasty. Pooled analysis of four studies;Thromb Haemost. 2011 Mar;105(3):444-53. Epub 2010 Dec 6Kwong LM. Cost-effectiveness of rivaroxaban after total hip or total knee arthro-plasty. Am J Manag Care. 2011 Feb;17(1 Suppl):S22-6.Kakkar AK, Brenner B, Dahl OE, Eriksson BI, Mouret P, Muntz J, Soglian AG, Pap AF, Mis-selwitz F, Haas S; RECORD2 Investigators. Extended duration rivaroxaban versusshort-term enoxaparin for the prevention of venous thromboembolism after totalhip arthroplasty: a double-blind, randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008 Jul5;372(9632):31-9. Epub 2008 Jun 24.Turpie AG, Lassen MR, Davidson BL, Bauer KA, Gent M, Kwong LM, Cushner FD, LotkePA, Berkowitz SD, Bandel TJ, Benson A, Misselwitz F, Fisher WD; RECORD4 Investiga-tors. Rivaroxaban versus enoxaparin for thromboprophylaxis after total knee arthro-plasty (RECORD4): a randomised trial. Lancet. 2009 May 16;373(9676):1673-80. Epub2009 May 4.Duggan ST, Scott LJ, Plosker GL. Rivaroxaban: a review of its use for the preventionof venous thromboembolism after total hip or knee replacement surgery. Drugs.2009;69(13):1829-51assessment report of aDverseDrug reaction receiveDby healthcare professionalsJasmina Babic, Marko Eric, Jelena PilicMedicines and Medical Devices Agency of SerbiaNational pharmacovigilance center is performing assessment of reportedadverse drug reaction. Reported case is estimated from prospective ofseriousness, expectancy and causality (causal relationship between drug-reaction) analyzing available information using relevant literature. In orderdo define this process as good as possible, connection diagram wasimplemented. Connection diagram describes order of activity and decisionswithin the process which were implemented in one organizational unit.Main goal of this connection diagram is precise definition of control pointswithin the process of assessment report of adverse drug reaction receivedby healthcare professionals. Diagram always starts describing the functionof the person and activity with which inputs (incoming elements) are feed112PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMAKOEKONOMIJA / SOTsIJALNAFARMATsIJA/ FARMAKOINFORMATIKA poster prezentatsiito the process and after that diagram contains functions of the personswho are continuing the process, titles of singular activities andunambiguous realization criteria of activity and decisions, deadlines ofwork process realization, as well as outputs (out-coming elements)together with function of the person to whom the outputs are given.In the connection diagram processes are presented with symbols whichare divided into two parts - fields: in upper field we have function of theperson who is responsible, while in the lower field we have title of theactivity (decision). In the diagram making symbols are used for diagramstart and end, activity, decision making process (questionnaire), writtendocument - note (is related to activity within which the document isestablished or changed), diagram connection line (represent connectionsbetween diagram boxes) and diagram direction flow arrow.Connection diagrams are additional document type used for QualityManagement System, used for ambiguous presentation of work processes.Making connection diagram, detailed description of activity and decisionsis presented, which are used in NPC during the process of assessmentdrug reaction.Making connection diagram enables easier monitoring of implementationof all activities related to assessment report of adverse drug reactionreceived by healthcare professionals, better job coordination performedby managers and undisputable responsibility overview of all persons beinga part of the process.referencesEudralex, Volume 9A, Pharmacovigilance-Medicinal Products for Human andVeterinaty Use; ICHE2D: Post-Approval Safety Data Menagment: Definitions andStandards for Expedited Reporting 2003; Law on medicines and medical devices ;Rules defining the manner for reporting, collecting data and monitoring adversereactions of medicinal products.patient package insertVlacho.B, Naumovska.Z, Sterjev.ZUniversity "St.Cyril and Methodius" Faculty of Pharmacy Skopje,Republic of MacedoniaintroDuctionPatient Package Insert (PPI) can be defined as: the necessary quantumof product information prepared from producers, approved by an au-thorized bodies and intended primarily for users of pharmaceuticalproducts. PPI consist a balanced set of information which includes in-formation about correct application of the drug (procedural instruc-tions), warnings (risk-related information) and information about thepotential benefits (benefit information). The contents of the PPI shouldbe designed and adapted for the general population. During preparationof this written document it should be observed following specifics: thecategory of information and specific titles to be discussed, quantum in-formation to be presented in any particular part of the PPI and a totallength of the entire document, style and way of writing which will beapplied in the preparation of the document, document format and tech-nical details (size and type style letters which will be used) educationallevel of writing style that is applied, the organization of document, draft-ing and graphic illustrations. If instructions for use of the drug are welldesigned and readable it will increase number of people who will be ableto use the information, including older, children and adolescents, peo-ple with modest literary skill and those with impaired vision. The regu-lation of the issues related to quality of leaflet is through preparation ofappropriate guidelines for the making of PPI and their implementationwith the European pharmaceutical legislation and regulations in ourcountry is a basic prerequisite to ensure consistent and standardizedquality of PPI. Moreover, it is important to note that these guidelinesshould be seen as a model which contains the minimum standards forpreparation and testing of the patient information leaflet.objectiveThe purpose of this analysis is to assess the quality of the PatientPackage Insert of pharmaceutical products that are available on themarket in our country and to determine their compliance or noncom-pliance with the existing and permanent regulations in R. Macedonia.materials anD methoDsFor the realization of this goals it was designed Assessment Question-naire, consisting of 48 questions that are answerable according to theprinciple of selecting one of several possible answers. By answering thequestions, there were evaluated: the writing style, quantity and qualityof information availability to users, design and layout of information.The evaluation is made of 200 randomly selected internal medicine in-dications from different manufacturers and 100 internal guidelines ofdiet supplements available on the pharmaceutical market in R. Mace-donia. Selection for evaluation of the patient package insert was madeon the most commonly used medicine indications, such as groups ofJ-anti-infective drugs for systemic use, N-nervous system and C-car-diovascular system drugs according to the ATC classification.resultsThe results of the evaluation conducted indicate still insufficient uni-formity and compliance with PPI guidelines legislation recommenda-tion. This phenomenon is particularly apparent in patient informationleaflets for food supplements that are available on the pharmaceuti-cal market in R.Macedonia, which have very important application.referencesBogaert M, Vander Stichele R, Kaufman JM, Lefebvre R, (eds). Patient package insertas a source of drug information. Amsterdam: Excerpta Medica; 1989.Collier J. Patient-information leaflets and prescriber competence. Lancet1998;352:1724.Newby DA, Hill SR, Barker BJ, Drew AK, Henry DA. Drug information for consumershould it be disease or medication specific? Results of a community survey. Aus NZJPublic health 2001; 25:564-570Consumers Association. Patient information. What's the prognosis? Policy report.http://www.which.net/campaings/health/patientinformation/index.html, 2003, ac-cessed 25 Novemeber 2005Guideline on the readability of the labeland. package leaflet of medicinal products forhuman use, 12 Januar 2009VNATREshNO UPATSTVOVlacho.B, Naumovska.Z, Sterjev.ZNatsionalen Farmakoinformativen Tsentar, UniverzitetSv. Kiril i Metodij-Skopje, R.MakedonijaVOVEDVnatreshnoto upatstvo na lekovite i drugite farmatsevtski pro-izvodi koe shto se naogja zapakuvano vo nadvoreshnata ambalazha nafarmatsevtskiot proizvod, mozhe da se definira kako: neopkhodenkvantum na informatsii za proizvodot podgotveni od strana na sa-mite proizvoditeli, odobreni od avtoriziran izvor i nameneti pred113fifth congress of pharmacy of maceDonia with international participationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACOECONOMY / SOCIAL PHARMACY/ PHARMACOINFORMATICS poster presentationsse za korisnitsite na farmatsevtskite proizvodi. Vnatreshnotoupatstvo se sostoi od izbalansiran set na informatsii koj vo sebevkluchuva informatsii za pravilnata primena na lekot (protsedural-ni instruktsii), predupreduvanja (informatsii povrzani so rizikot)i informatsii za potentsijalnite pridobivki (benefit informa-tsii). Sodrzhinata na upatstvoto treba da bide nameneta i prilago-dena za opshtata populatsija.