Kako shto mozhe da se zabele-zhi, karakteristichni spektralni razliki megju izuchuvanite poli-morfi postojat vo povekje regioni: ON i NH valentni vibratsii(nad 3100 cm-1), antisimetrichnata karbonilna vibratsija (~1650 cm-1), podrachjeto na karakteristichnite vibratsii koi poteknuvaat odaromatskite prsteni (1600-1500 cm-1) i dr.Slika 1. FT-ITs spektri na atorvastatin kaltsium: (a) trikhidrat-forma I, (b) bezvoden-forma VIII i (s) amorfenSituatsijata e daleku pokomplitsirana koga se sporeduvaat FT-ITsspektrite na film-oblozheni tableti (Sl. 2). Mozhe da se zabelezhideka pogolem broj od lentite na aktivnata komponenta se tselosnoprepokrieni, so iskluchok na lentite koi poteknuvaat od karbonil-nata grupa i aromatskite prsteni (1670-1500 cm-1). Iako tie sevidlivi vo spektarot na formulatsijata, nivniot intenzitet e mnoguslab, pravejkji ja identifikatsijata na polimorfniot oblik nesi-gurna. Za da se zasili dobieniot signal, beshe presmetan vtor iz-vod za sekoj FT-ITs spektar na chistite polimorfni formi isoodvetnite film-oblozheni tableti. Se zabelezhuva (Sl. 3) dekaderivatsijata na signalot ovozmozhuva podobra rezolutsija megju len-tite od interes vo FT-ITs spektrite na film-oblozheni tableti,chinejkji ja sporedbata so soodvetnite spektri na chistoto FAS po-pretsizna i posigurna.Slika 2. FT-ITs spektri na atorvastatin 80 mg film-oblozhenitableti izraboteni so razlichni polimorfni formi: (a) trikhidrat-forma I, (b) bezvoden-forma VIII i (s) amorfen.Slika 3. Derivativni FT-ITs spektri na atorvastatin 80 mg film-oblozheni tableti, sporedeni so FT-ITs spektri na soodvetnitepolimorfni formi: (a) trikhidrat-forma I, (b) bezvoden-forma VIIIi (c) amorfen4. zAKlUChOKDobienite rezultati pokazhuvaat deka derivativnata FT-ITsspektroskopija mozhe uspeshno da se primenuva za direktna identi-fikatsija na izuchuvanite polimorfni formi na atorvastatin kal-tsium vo film-oblozheni tableti.lITERATURA[1] D. Skorda, C. G. Kontoyannis, Talanta, 74 (2008) 1066-1070. [2] V. M. Sonje, L Kumar, C. L. Meena, G. Kohli, V. Puri, R. Jain, A. Bansal, H. G. Brittain,Profiles of Drug Substances, Excipients, and Related Methodology, Volume 35, 2010,Elsevier Inc.[3] G. Petrusevski, S. Ugarkovic, P. Makreski, J. Mol. Struct. 993 (2011), 328-335.Molecular interactions betweenselected sodiuM salts of bile acidsand MorPhine hydrochlorideJanos Canadi1, Mihalj Posa2, Gyula Batta31Department of Chemistry, Biochemistry and EnvironmentalProtection, Faculty of Sciences, University of Novi Sad,Trg Dositeja Obradovica 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia,2Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, Universityof Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia,3Department of Chemistry, University of Debrecen,H-4032 Debrecen, Egyetem ter 1, HungaryOur research interest concerns to the investigation of the interactionsbetween certain bile acids derivatives and morphine. The objective ofthis study was to explain at a molecular level the prolonged analgesicaction of morphine hydrochloride observed in the presence of sodium12-oxochenodeoxycholanate. It is assumed in the literature that this232PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAoralni prezentatsiiphenomenon is due to the formation of aggregates between themolecules of bile acids and morphine in the intracellular solution [1].In addition to the salt of the mentioned bile acid, the investigationencompassed also sodium salts cholic and 7-oxodeoxycholic acids.Saturation transfer difference NMR experiments showed that the aggregatesbetween the tested drug and bile acid are formed provided theconcentration of the bile acid salt is close to the critical micellarconcentration (CMC). It was found that morphine molecule binds to thebile acid micelle via its H1 and H2 aromatic protons. The values of spin-lattice relaxation times [2,3] (T1) of these protons decrease significantly inthe presence of micellar solutions of the investigated bile acid salts, themost pronounced decrease in T1 being observed for sodium 7-oxode-oxycholate. Diffusion-ordered NMR experiment suggested that the inte-raction with morphine hydrochloride is possible only in the case of themicellar solution of sodium 7-oxochenodeoxycholate. In the presence ofbile acids, the transfer rate constant (k12) of morphine hydrochloride fromthe buffered aqueous solution to chloroform (model of the cell membrane)shows a decrease [4]. A significant decrease of the k12 was also observedin the presence of micellar solutions. Kinetic measurements indicated that,in addition to micellar interaction between morphine hydrochloride andsodium salts of bile acids, a complex may be also formed in chloroform viahydrogen bonds established between the drug and bile acid molecules.The work was financially supported by the Secretariat of Science and Tech-nological Development, AP Vojvodina, Republic of Serbia, Grant No.114-451-2113/2011. Support for the NMR measurement time from the East-NMRProject No. 228461 is also acknowledged.referencesI. Kuhajda, M. Posa, V. Jakovljevic, V. Ivetic, M. Mikov, Effect of 12-monoketocholicacid on modulation of the analgesic action of morphine and tramadol, EuropeanJournal of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics 34 (2009) 73-78.M. Posa, V. Guzsvany, J. Csanadi, Determination of critical micellar concentration oftwo monoketo derivatives of cholic acid, Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces 74(2009) 84-90.M. Posa, V. Guzsvany, J. Csanadi, J. Borbas, F. Gaal, Study of Assotiation of 12-Monoke-tocholic Acid by 1H NMR Relaxation Method, Acta Chimica Slovenica 56(4) (2009) 807-814.M. Posa, V. Guzsvany, J. Csanadi, S. Kevresan, K. Kuhajda, Formation of hydrogen-bondedcomplexes between bile acids and lidocaine in the lidocaine transfer from an aqueousphase to chloroform, European Journal of Pharmaceutical Sciences 34 (2008) 281-292.swelling and drug releaseProPerties of naProxen-loadedca-alginate MicroParticlesreinforced with chitosanoligosaccharideB. Calija1, N. Cekic2, S. Savic1, B. Markovic3,J. Savic3, J. Milic11Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Cosmetology,Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Serbia;2DCP Hemigal, Leskovac, Serbia;3Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy,University of Belgrade, SerbiaintroductionChitosan can be effectively used to improve stability and drug releaseproperties of Ca-alginate microparticles. However, high molecularweight and high viscosity of chitosan solutions hinder formation ofpolyelectrolyte complex (PEC) between chitosan and alginate [1,2].Furthermore, high viscosity of chitosan solution affects sphericalshape of microparticles, and microparticles formed in such environ-ment tend to agglomerate permanently [3]. On the other hand, thehydrolyzed products - chitosan oligosaccharides (COS) are readily sol-uble in water and capable of forming low viscous water solutions dueto shorter chain lengths and free amino groups in D-glucosamine units[4]. These advantages alongside with its polycationic nature proposeCOS as a potential crosslinking agent for Ca-alginate microparticles.obJectivesWe aimed to investigate the influence of COS on swelling character-istics and the in vitro drug release profiles of the Ca-alginate mi-croparticles.exPeriMental MethodsMaterialsManugel GHB, sodium alginate with high guluronic acid content waskindly donated by FMC BioPolymer (USA). COS (molecular weightaround 3 kDa and deacetylation degree >85%) was purchased from FuZhou Corona Science & Technology Development CO (China).Naproxen was provided by Chemo (Switzerland). All other chemicalsand reagents were of analytical grade.MethodsMicroparticles preparationFive different formulations of microparticles were prepared accordingto the well known two-step procedure using a custom made air-jet de-vice (Table I) [3].Table I. Composition of investigated microparticles formulation (F1-F5) treated and non-treated with COS.swelling studiesSwelling properties of the microparticles were determined by im-mersing the exact amount of dried microparticles in 20 ml of mediasolution: 0.1 M HCl (SGF) and USP phosphate buffer pH 6.8 (SIF) at37oC. At specific time intervals microparticles were carefully removedfrom swelling media, blotted on filter paper to imbibe excess of waterfrom surface and weighed immediately. Swelling ratio (SR) of each for-mulation was calculated from the equation: SR=100(Wt-Wi)/Wi; whereWt is the weight of the swollen microparticles at time t and Wi is theinitial weight of the microparticles.in vitro drug release studiesThe release of naproxen from microparticles was performed using aDFZ 60 flow-through cell dissolution tester (Erweka, Germany) under amedium flow rate at 1 ml/min. SGF and SIF were used as dissolutionmedia. At scheduled time intervals, samples were withdrawn, filtered233fifth congress of PharMacy of Macedonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYoral presentationsand assayed using Evolution 300 spectrophotometer (Thermo FisherScientific, UK) at 330 nm.results and discussionAs shown in Fig. 1, swelling ability of microparticles in SIF graduallydecreased with increasing COS content, while in SGF the effect of COSwas opposite. Furthermore, rapid swelling of Ca-alginate microparti-cles (F1) in SIF was followed by complete degradation for less than 2h, while only F2 formulation among COS treated microparticlesstarted to erode during 4 hours of experiment.Figure 1. Swelling ratios of microparticles in: a) 0.1M HCl and b) phosp-hate buffer pH 6.8.These results were in accordance with the results of drug release stud-ies. In general, drug release was slow in SGF (Fig. 2a), with tendency toincrease slightly with increasing COS content. In SIF (Fig. 2b), drug re-lease was faster, decreasing with increased COS content in hardeningsolution up to 2% m/m (F4).Figure 2. Naproxen release profiles from microparticles in: a) 0.1M HCland b) phosphate buffer pH 6.8.conclusionThis study proved the COS as prospective effective crosslinking agentfor improvement of Ca-alginate microparticles stability in SIF, allowingprolonged/delayed release of encapsulated drug.acKnowledgeMentsThis study was done under projects TR-34031 and OI-172041 sup-ported by the Ministry of Education and Science, Republic of Serbia.referencesPolk, A., Amsden,B., Yao, K. D., Peng, T., Goosen, M. F. A., Controlled release of albuminfrom chitosan-alginate microcapsules. J. Pharm. Sci., 83, 178-185 (1994).CY, C. Y., Zhang, X. C., Zhou, F. Z., Zhang, X. Z., Cheng, S. X., Zhuo, R. X., Sustained re-lease of antineoplastic drugs from chitosan-reinforced alginate microparticle drugdelivery systems. Int. J. Pharm., 357, 15-21 (2008).Fernandez-Hervas, M. J., Holgado, M. A., Fini, A., Fell, J.T., In vitro evaluation of algi-nate beads of a diclofenac salt. Int. J. Pharm., 163 23-34 (1998).Jeon, Y. J., Shahidi, F., Kim, S. K., Preparation of chitin and chitosan oligomers andtheir applications in physiological functional foods. Food Rev. Int., 61, 159-176 (2000).234PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011FARMATsEVTSKA TEKhNOLOGIJA I BIOFARMATsIJAoralni prezentatsiicoMParison of characteristicsof granules and tablets Producedin low shear and high sheargranulatorSunchica Jordanoska,Krume Toshev, Natasha A. Sto-janovska, Ivana Mickoska, Tina Mitrulovska, SonjaUgarkovicResearch and Development, ALKALOID AD, Aleksandar Makedonski 12,1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedoniaintroduction and aiMWet granulation is still a very common process in the formulation oftablets. For drugs that lack compressible characteristics this methodis preferred over direct compression. Nowadays, the high shear mixeris most often used in wet granulation. More conventional alternativesexist in forms that generate less shear and they are also still widelyused. Experience has shown that a product's characteristics may behighly influenced by the type of granulation equipment used. Someparameters that are noted as mostly affected are bulk density, poros-ity and particle size of granules.Our aim was to compare the effects of different type of granulator(low shear vs. high shear) on the control parameters of granules andtablets.MethodologyThis study was conducted in the facility of Research and Development,Alkaloid - AD. For our purpose, two formulations of tablets with highAPI content of cca 60% per tablet were made with the exact samecomposition (Fig. 1). The API has pKa value of 2.5 and belongs to BCSclass IV. Formulation 1 was granulated in a low shear granulator -laboratory kneader (model: Erweka LK5) and a high shear mixer gran-ulator (model: Diosna P 1/6) was used for the granulation of formula-tion 2 (Table 2). Afterwards the obtained wet granulates were milled inan oscillator mill (1.5 mm). Then the granulate 1 was dried in an oven.In comparison, granulate 2 was dried in a fluid-bed dryer. Both granu-lates were dried until a remaining moisture content of less than 10%was achieved. After the completion of the drying process the dry gran-ulate was passed again through an oscillator mill (0.8 mm).Table 1. Components of the formulationsTable 2. Processing steps and type of equipment used for the formu-lationsresults, discussion and conclusionFrom each formulation a representative sample of the granules andtablets was taken and examined for the control parameters: bulk andtapped density, flow characteristics, porosity, particle size distribu-tion of granules, hardness, thickness, and disintegration. A dissolutiontesting was also performed in media with two different pH values. Theresults are presented in Table 3:Table 3. Key control parameters of granulates and tabletsThe results show that the granules produced in a low shear granulator(formulation 1) are of lower bulk density and tapped density. The flow235fifth congress of PharMacy of Macedonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011PHARMACEUTICAL TECHNOLOGY AND BIOPHARMACYoral presentationscharacteristics are similar while the Hausner ratio and the Carr indexremain the same for both formulations, which shows that thecompressibility characteristics are not affected. The granules offormulation 1 are also of larger size than those of formulation 2, asshown with the comparison of the size distribution curves in Fig. 1.