Moreover, given that the terms holism and holistic health now have such a fluid interpretation in common parlance, and are used with such frequency, these criticisms seem to have lost their relevance, except within academic theoretical discussion. The idea of responsibility is taken up again in Chapter 6. The two theories of holism have quite distinct beliefs and are markedly different from each other. It seems, however, that ideas about holism and holistic health have been adopted in a form that has become distanced from either of these defined theoretical origins and has taken on a much more diffuse understanding. The variety of ways that holistic health is interpreted appears to defy efforts at defining it (Goddard, 1995; McEvoy & Duffy, 2008) and to demonstrate 80 precisely what Derrida meant about the futility of attempting to pin things down into a fixed state. Deconstructing holistic health shows a range of diverse discourses being applied across a wide spectrum. They have similarities around themes of connectedness, integration, balance, harmony, and wholeness. However, holistic health is also being stretched to accommodate competing nuances that range from the mysterious healing power of tonics to the statements of the Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners about the way the health care services they provide are organised. With the term 'holistic' being applied to almost anything, it might seem that it has become no more than a feel-good buzzword' (Cornwall, 2007) in danger of dissolving into "multiplicity and disassociation" (Derrida 1997: 13). On the other hand, it may be that its very ambiguity and vagueness (Davis, 2008: 69) allows the overall concept to evolve in new ways that produce change and development. Whatever the future, however, the important point is that all the different discourses about holistic health were being discussed and were interconnecting with the many other actants in the rhizomatic assemblage, changing and being changed in a constant process of becoming. Quite different from the vagueness of holistic health, however, were the very specific ideas about risk that the participants held. Every one of them had something to say about risk, had clearly thought about risk in some detail. As Zinn (2008: 3) comments, "risk looms large in present day society", with new risks highlighted daily across a vast spectrum of scientific and everyday situations. Risk drives both societal and individual actions in responses that seek to measure it, contain it, eliminate it, or even in some circumstances, to embrace it. The next section outlines the way the participants viewed risk. Safety from risk: the body under siege Participants connected their supplement use directly with efforts to address the risks that they believed they might have been exposed to or were a continuing concern in the lives. Jordan for example, told me that: Twenty five years ago I would have told you that supplementation was a complete waste of time. That all you needed was a good diet. Then someone challenged me to go and investigate what's actually in our food. I now take up to 25 supplements a day. (Jordan) Safety and risk are two sides of the same coin as people seek certainty in an uncertain and insecure world (Tierney, 1999; Walklate, 2004). But risk tends to be by far the more dominant discourse (Derby & Keeney, 1981; Spencer & Triche, 1994; West, 2000). The predominance of risk across so many aspects of life has led to what Lupton describes as "an apparatus of expert 81 research, knowledge and advice [about risk] ... in areas as far-ranging as medicine and public health, finance, the law, and business and industry" (2013: 10). There are two main approaches to investigating risk. Realist perspectives use statistical methods to quantify the current and future likelihood and magnitude of events or dangers occurring and model what actions can be taken to reduce such risks. In health care, for example, they may measure a person's risk of heart disease or diabetes, and to what extent the risk might reduce if certain interventions are made (Agborsangaya et al., 2013; Finegold et al., 2013). Constructionist approaches, on the other hand, examine the different contexts in which risks come to be understood (Lupton, 2013; Zinn, 2008), seeing risk as always being mediated through social and cultural views and experiences. Some constructionist approaches propose that the emphasis placed on risk is a general social response to the uncertainty of modern times and a growing distrust by the public in the capability of science and technology to address the problems that they have created or recognise new ones that emerge. The concept of an overall social response is fundamental to the idea of modernity as a "risk society" (Beck, 1992, 2000; Giddens, 1990). A more individualised and nuanced approach to risk was taken by Lupton (1999) and Tulloch and Lupton (2003), who demonstrated that rather than being generalised as an overall public response, risk perceptions are strongly shaped by individual factors such as cultural background, gender, and nationality. Moreover, that responses to risk change over time as a person moves through life, depending on their experiences, their social standing, their access to resources, and the people they come into contact with. The participants' comments on risk were consistent with this latter approach. Most of them drew on current social discourses about risk, and some of them also cited statistics that drew on realist understandings, but it was clear that they saw risk as personal and contextual to their own lives. They might couch their initial comments in general terms, for example, speaking about the risk that environmental contamination posed to health, but then go on to explain in more detail the personal or family health problems which they believed had come about because of the risks they had experienced and actions they had taken. Their reactions to risk were selective and individualised, illustrating Zinn's comment that the way people handle risk is as much about "different values and lifestyles, power relations and emotions" (Zinn 2008: 4) as it is about any 'reality' of risk. While the risks that the participants raised were mostly related to personal health, they also ranged more widely, particularly into adjacent issues of food safety and quality, environmental contamination, and potential risks to global security. Each person had a different story to recount as to how they had arrived at their particular position where health risk intersected with 82 supplements, but common to them all was the idea that the positive 'naturalness' of supplements was one avenue that could be mobilised to offset the negative health risks that concerned them. Bernie described occupational exposures that had influenced his present views: ... ten years working in very chemically intensive environments and huge amount of stress as well. There were lots of tests, some of those were sent over to America, and some of those came back as quite chronic deficiencies in quite a few areas. So nothing else had actually worked medically, so we were using nutritional supplements to get me back on my feet again. (Bernie) As a result of his experiences, Bernie had undergone a series of training courses to become knowledgeable about supplements and was now an owner-operator of a health food store with several staff. As well, he grew his own vegetables and ensured that any other produce he consumed was 'spray-free' so that he reduced exposure to any pesticide residues. Importantly, the risks participants talked about were not just those they knew were definite, and those which they suspected were possible or likely, but they also had an awareness that there may be other unknown risks 'out there' which they as yet could not even imagine. As Daase and Kessler (2007: 411) have described, the spectrum of risk encompasses everything from the immediate and specific to those which are entirely unsuspected: We might have reliable methods of identifying observable facts, thus producing known knowns. But we might also have some methods of dealing with phenomena that we are not 100% sure of, thus creating known unknowns. On the other hand, we must accept that there might be things we do not even dream of and have no method of anticipating; these are the unknown unknowns. This excerpt comes from the apparently unrelated sphere of global terrorism, but it exactly parallels the categories of risk that the participants raised. These included health problems they already had and feared could worsen; those they did not yet have but felt they might be at risk of developing; and those that may well exist 'out there' somewhere, even though as yet they were unknown and unsuspected. They also differentiated between external risks that might invade them from outside the body, and those that they might be carrying already within themselves and which were lurking there ready to make themselves evident. Using supplements was a defence strategy that could be mobilised in all these categories. 83 Repelling external invaders The most obvious of the risks that participants spoke about were the viruses and temporary ailments that might invade the body and take hold at an inconvenient time. Participants used supplements to try and ward off risks that seemed imminent, in the hope that they would be able to keep on with their work commitments, continue to run a business or take care of their family's needs: All the staff were sick, coughing over me, and I started having a sore throat. I thought, oh no, ... I cannot get sick if I'm going off on a trip like that so I took the prescribed dose of this particular Echinacea product and OK, maybe my body got on top of it or what but I went on the trip, was fine, came back to find that I had no more symptoms or anything and they were still sick when I came back. (Lou) Fortifying themselves with supplements was an easily mobilised strategy that people could employ as an attempt to protect against illness, which at best would be an interruption to usual activities or at worst, cause financial hardship. Rather than the familiar hazard of being laid low by a virus, it was the risk of exposure to environmental contamination through air, soil, and water that the participants raised more frequently as a concern. Several spoke heatedly about the lack of control that individual members of the public like themselves had over these dangerous substances that were everywhere and were constantly threatening to invade their bodies and make them ill: .... we have 27,000 chemicals left over from the Vietnam war, only five of which have been tested in singularity for safety and these are being used now in the agricultural industries. We've got the timber industry; we've got the dairy industry and other industries, all these toxins that we've been exposed to, many of which have in some ways unknown effects on our DNA especially when they are given in combinations. ... I believe the reason that a lot of chronic diseases are on the increase is because of chromosomal mutations, and I believe that's why things like cancers are rife, and diabetes and all these other things. (Jordan) Jordan suggests that these invaders may be operating at an insidious and unknown level, attacking the very building blocks of the body, its DNA. Bernie, too, was also concerned about being exposed to environmental contamination. He also had statistics at hand, telling me "there are nine new chemicals released every day untested and there are huge amounts of chemicals in 84 our food." Noticeably, they both draw attention to the lack of testing, implying that harm to health is already happening and yet there is a cavalier disregard on the part of the unnamed authorities they consider responsible. The concerns Jordan and Bernie express are not unusual; they align with wider societal concerns about environmental contamination causing health risks (Werner, 2014) as well as the level of uncertainty as to how these hazards can be managed (Campbell-Lendrum et al., 2015; Costello et al., 2009; Springmann et al., 2016) Bernie and Jordan's comments drew on realist ideas of risk, citing statistics and indicating that they believed the risks ought to be better quantified and controlled by those in authority. Yet while their statements were put forward as resulting from their cognitive reasoning, both Bernie and Jordan also described personal health problems which they attributed to environmental exposures, and which had clearly influenced their views. Moreover, they indicated that they were making their own assessment about risk without waiting for any official announcement. They both went on to speak of the strategies they used, including taking supplements, to respond to the risks they believed were important. This reaction is what Beck (1992) termed 'reflexive modernisation', that is where individuals feel they cannot trust science or governments and are left to their own devices to decide what is risky and what is not and then take action accordingly. As well as concerns about contamination from chemicals in the environment, many participants also worried about substances that were deliberately added to foods during processing: ...it is almost like we are getting attacked through the foods we eat and the chemicals we take [in]. ... To me, the best way is to get everything as foods and eat well but with everything being processed so much now ....there is sort of a lot of stuff to say that food, processed foods, all these chemicals, all these numbers ... and that's not good. (Cliff) The 'numbers' Cliff refers to are the E-codes used by the International Numbering System for identifying Food Additives (World Health Organisation & Food and Agricultural Organisation, 2019). The list of synthetic and natural additives is itself a diverse and moving assemblage; new substances are added and deleted over time, and each country has their own regulatory regime which stipulates which ones are allowable in foods manufactured and consumed there (Carocho et al., 2014). These additives were a welcome advance in health and food safety when they were first introduced in the early 20th century and enforced by regulations to prevent spoilage of food (Carocho et al., 2014; Doyle & Glass, 2010; Holzapfel et al., 1995; Shahidi & Zhong, 2010). Today, however, when food safety tends to be taken for granted, additives and preservatives have 85 become unnatural 'undesirables', viewed with suspicion and mistrust by an increasing number of consumers (Cox et al., 2004) whether or not they are officially approved as safe (Carocho et al., 2014; Devcich et al., 2007). Indeed caution about additives is growing in scientific writing as well, as a recent study of the association between 'ultraprocessed' foods and mortality shows (Schnabel et al., 2019). Along with environmental contaminants and food additives, prescribed medicines were constructed by some participants as a separate category of dangerous external invaders. None of them were opposed to pharmaceuticals in principle, but many had become wary about taking prescription medicines because of previous negative experiences. Several suggested that doctors were too ready to prescribe drugs without cautioning them about possible harm of long term use or following up to check how they were reacting: ... it was the pharmaceuticals, sadly, that got my children into trouble. My eldest son went on to a product called Roaccutane. ... And he developed depression. And kids that have a face that looks like a pizza, actually tend to get depression, and Roaccutane can actually push them over the edge with suicidal tendencies. And that's what it did. I didn't lose him but I came close a few times and he was never monitored properly. (Lesley) Moreover, some had found that if they raised their concerns with their doctor, they might simply be offered more of the same medicines or different ones rather than be given any suggestions for non-pharmaceutical treatments. Trudy reported that a family member had been prescribed "stronger and stronger pain medication ... to the point where he couldn't function. It's not safe". Another participant found the tendency to simply escalate the dose of medication if it did not seem to be working was concerning, particularly in the light of her own experiences; she had become dependent on pain medication after a sports injury: ... my GP would just write me out some more prescriptions if I needed it and I was just - no I don't want it, I'm coming off it. ... The specialist offered to give me anti-depressant pills which would help relax my nerves and help me sleep. But he said oh, they're really terrible and lots of people have lots of issues with this one but we won't really know until you try it. (Tracy) She went on to relate how she realised that her doctors either could not, or were not interested, in helping her overcome her dependence and she would have to take the initiative herself and use strategies outside of formal medicine. With the help of a pharmacist who suggested 86 gradually reducing her dose and adding a natural sleep remedy she reported she was able to gradually wean herself off the prescription drugs and cope with the withdrawal symptoms, but it had left her disillusioned with medical experts and sceptical about all prescribed drugs, particularly if they were taken over a long period. Other participants with chronic conditions such as diabetes, cardiovascular or joint problems were also uneasy about some of the medications that they depended on. Several of them mentioned that, knowing the side effects of the drug they took, they were anxious to maintain their dose at the lowest possible level and supplements were a strategy that they believed could help do this: I take vitamin B12 because of the metformin that is used to treat diabetes. .... Doing the research on the 'net about that I discovered that metformin was one of the reasons you have low B12 levels ... I just brought it up on the smartphone and was reading through it and discovered the link to metformin and I thought gee ... (Paul) Participants such as Tracy and Paul found it disturbing that they had not been given any warnings about possible negative effects of the drugs they were prescribed and were taking long term. They indicated that they felt let down by what they perceived as the lack of care on the part of health professionals they had trusted to have their best interests at heart. If they had known, they suggested, they would have been alert to the risk from the start and would have taken steps themselves to counter it. Situations like these create a lack of trust in those who have experienced them. Some commentators have blamed the popular media for the distrust of health risk experts; they maintain that the media has over-emphasised unusual and exotic health risks and downplayed those that are more mundane, such as poor diet and smoking, to the point that it has "...undermined [the general public's] view of their own health, [and] increased their worries about environmental causes of poor health and fostered a migration to complementary medicine" (Petrie & Wessely, 2002: 690). Lupton however, takes the opposite view, finding that being sceptical of official advice and making up one's own mind about what is risky and what is not, is a "highly rational response to the failure of technico-scientific rationality in late modernity" (Lupton, 1999: 68). The participants appeared to be thinking along the same lines and acting accordingly, particularly when their lack of trust was grounded in personal experience.