As Rose (1996) writes, the conjunction of individuals seeking to have improved quality of life and professionals claiming to provide objective rational answers, is an alliance: The mechanism of this alliance is the market, the 'free' exchange between those with a service to sell and those who have been brought to want to buy (156-157). Terminating the relationship with a doctor in a "patient walk out" (Stokes et al., 2004: 512) as happened with Murray, is a signal to the provider that this alliance has broken down. The willingness of participants to assert themselves in this way also demonstrated the confidence that they gained through their growing expertise in deciding what health care options they would use and under what circumstances. So far the discussion has focused on individual expertise and decisions about selecting personal care options. Considerably more complex is the position of those who offer their expertise as sellers of supplements and advice on how to use them. They comprise a network of 'alternatives' that ranges from the pharmacists, on the one hand, who are credentialed as part of the orthodox health system to those whose expertise is based only on their own claims to know more than the general public. This space is busy, even cluttered, and hotly competitive with a diverse collection of providers all claiming various types of expertise that can help individuals. They compete not only with one another but also with orthodox medicine, demonstrating once again the tensions at work in the neoliberal economy which, though it officially endorses the primacy of 'experts' in orthodox medicine, also upholds a parallel universe of economic opportunities for marketing alternatives even if they be counter to the orthodox line. A number of the participants in the study were directly engaged as 'alternative providers' as well as consumers in this market and therefore had perspectives on expertise from both angles. The next section looks at how being on the other side of the consumer/provider divide affected their practices and the range of conduct and counter-conduct that they too were able to mobilise in their position. 167 Becoming expert enough to advise others Among the participants there were pharmacists, pharmacy technicians, health store managers, and those who offered different modalities of alternative therapy. They were a diverse group, but had two noticeable characteristics in common. Firstly, all of them ultimately made their living from marketing their products, expertise, or both. Secondly, that once on the other side of the customer/provider divide, all of them were convinced that the public needed their advice. Each of them offered a different 'assemblage' of orthodox and non-orthodox expertise which they used to justify their claim to the particular section of the public - and the market - that they advised. The pharmacists were the most 'expert' in biomedical terms, but arguably also the most likely to have difficulty balancing their practice with alternative health products so it did not conflict with their role in dispensing medicines prescribed by a doctor. Pharmacists are considered to be a key part of the primary health care team (Lloyd et al., 2010; Smith, 2012). They rely on the doctors whose prescriptions they dispense having confidence in their expertise and professionalism, but are generally seen as lower in the health hierarchy compared to the doctor in spite of their greater knowledge of pharmaceuticals (Bradley et al., 2018; Hughes & McCann, 2003; Weiss & Sutton, 2009). Their position has been somewhat unflatteringly compared to that of 'sheepdogs' by Waring and Latif (2018) who drew from Foucault's work on pastoral power, to suggest that: ... the docile patient (sheep) [is] herded and checked by the pharmacist (sheepdog) and ... both patient and pharmacist are supervised and directed from a distance by the GP (shepherd) (Waring and Latif, 2017: 8). All pharmacists in the study referred to their biomedical training and put it forward as the special level of expertise they could offer to the individuals who came to their premises seeking advice. In addition, they noted that they were able to access the records of all medicines that their regular customers had been prescribed by doctors, and therefore they were able to provide an extra level of safety regarding possible interactions. They largely avoided negative depictions of their customers as poorly informed and focused much more on the positive advice they could offer. As the following excerpt shows, however, there were a number of underlying tensions in their role: If I put my hand on my heart and say I'm a white coat health professional - which I consider myself - that's part of what makes me who I am, then I think we are going to 168 run the risk of actually not helping patients if we say, I don't actually know about that [supplements/herbal medicines]. ...we do need to know what we are talking about and I do actually think that some of the natural health products do have a lot of validity. ...by using natural health people see that they can do that without the middle man. But at times that's where exactly it is crucial to have a middle man such as a pharmacist because the reality is it is not quite as straightforward - you know - this should work for this or this may work for this so I will take that. (Jo) Much is implied in this comment. There is an initial alignment by this pharmacist with orthodox expertise, and one that deals with 'patients' rather than consumers. However, because these 'patients' do come directly to the pharmacy, and avoid the 'middle man' (i.e. the doctor), we (now speaking on behalf of pharmacist colleagues in general), cannot opt out of giving informed advice. Instead, they have a responsibility to occupy the position of the expert intermediary, offering advice directly to people who come to them for guidance, not on behalf of a doctor (as they do with prescribed medicines), but directly. All the pharmacists interviewed in the study positioned themselves in this way as being responsible and knowledgeable experts needed by members of the public to steer them in the right direction with the correct use of supplements and herbal medicines. The information is available there but is the person qualified to understand the information? ...this is where I have always believed in pharmacy ...So if somebody wants to go down that track [researching their own information] they actually need someone who's qualified. (Jordan) Both Jo and Jordan are enacting a form of counter conduct to the 'sheepdog' role who merely chases up the sheep when the shepherd instructs them. As Waring and Latif (2017) note, there are tensions in the relationship between doctors and pharmacists and the latter may resent the way that they are viewed as someone who is merely there to carry out what is delegated to them by a 'superior' profession. These include comments about pharmacists which discount their professional qualifications and refer to them as 'shopkeepers' (Hughes & McCann, 2003), or compare them to "firms that sell computers or mobile phones" (Clarke, 2014: 148). They all reported taking on the role of the shepherd by 'prescribing' directly when they were asked for help, and, in doing so, they were by implication, also distancing themselves from the authorised view that supplements are largely unnecessary and/or ineffective: 169 What are you going to give the woman who is four weeks pregnant? What are you going to do for the 97 year old frail 47 kilo lady who is on 17 medications? ... Are you just going to say, sorry love, go home and put up with the symptoms because I have nothing to give you. (Jordan) All these excerpts from pharmacists appeared to be drawing on the concept that pharmacists have a duty to give 'best advice' according to their professional judgement (Roche & Kelliher, 2014). Pharmacists also commented on issues around the sufficiency of evidence, noting that levels of 'evidence' derived from trials were not clear cut and had been challenged in orthodox medicine itself (Ioannidis, 2008; Kennedy-Martin et al., 2015). Lyndsay remarked in particular on the blurriness around how much evidence was needed to be sufficient: So it's not black and white; it's pretty grey. And so, I mean what's acceptable evidence if you've got something that has a series of positive double blind studies involving a reasonable number of people that have been positive. Is that acceptable evidence? Or do you need a meta-analysis involving 100,000 people. Glucosamine is a classic example of that in that originally there were quite a large number of positive studies and then there is a meta-analysis but then the meta-analysis can be criticised as well. So often evidence is pretty murky on its own. (Lyndsay) Pharmacists were also aware, however, that their orthodox training had not prepared them for the position that they found themselves in between needing to know enough about supplements to answer the requests for advice they received, yet in doing so they faced the general disapproval of their medical colleagues whose prescriptions they dispensed. Kerry, a pharmacy technician pointed out that the perception of superior expertise of pharmacists about supplements was not necessarily well founded: They [pharmacists] don't know any more. They know more about the [prescribed] drugs but they have had no training [in other products]. But because they are the pharmacist they are seen to have that - look I am not dissing them - it's their responsibility at the end of the day. (Kerry) All of the pharmacists had taken steps to learn more but it appeared they got no help from their own professional association and had to turn elsewhere to become more knowledgeable. One of them mentioned he was completing an international qualification in natural medicines and others had found that the product companies were the most readily available source for upskilling themselves: 170 Well at the beginning I felt quite ignorant about it. .... I thought, this is silly because I should be able to at least give them [customers/patients] an account or know where to look properly to find some good information for them. ... So we then, with the suppliers that we were dealing with ...they linked me up with seminars that were going on with one of the companies to look at certain aspects of alternative medicines for a particular condition or conditions. (Lou) So the pharmacists, too, were drawing from an evolving assemblage of expertise, adding to their orthodox training, their many interactions with the public, the feedback they received, the information from product companies, and, for some who were willing to discuss it, their own experience with taking the products. They undertook these educational activities outside their usual realm at the risk of attracting the negative discourse that pharmacists have often received as suppliers of supplements and herbal products. A different situation existed for those participants who offered alternative therapies in acupuncture, homeopathy, and medical herbalism, all of whom also either provided or recommended supplements to their clients. Each of them had a New Zealand recognised qualification in the modality they practised, but were not eligible to practise within the public health system.13 This, however, avoided the tension faced by pharmacists in maintaining working relationships with orthodoxy. They simply presented themselves as well qualified in their modality and able to offer an alternative to the biomedical approach to anyone who wished to consult them and was able to pay for it. They did, however, share the view of the other providers that members of the public could go astray without their guidance: I believe that people often will have an idea of what might be good for them or what might work for them. I see that as an OK thing to do in the short term. I see that problems start happening when people decide to take something and then they take it for five years- the same supplement for maybe five years - and they've got these really unusual symptoms because they've taken the supplement for such a long time that they've made some kind of disharmony in the body... (Bryony) The three participants who managed health stores were different again. None was able to call on the same level of officially approved educational or orthodox health expertise as the 13 The Accident Compensation Commission (ACC) does fund acupuncture, chiropractic and osteopathy treatments, but these are limited to people who meet the accidental injury criteria (ACC 2019), and have treatment from a therapist that ACC has approved 171 pharmacists or alternative therapists. However, they all made unprompted comments assuring me of the wealth of resources they drew on for support. They reported that they or someone on their staff had undertaken training either through their parent company, or they employed a staff member who was qualified in one of the alternative modalities, usually herbalism. More than the other 'seller' participants, they went into detail, emphasising their awareness of interactions between supplements and prescription drugs, their protocols for questioning people about the prescribed medicines they took and the references they kept on hand. They stressed their readiness to refer outside the business, for example, to medical herbalists, if they were unsure of what to advise and believed customers should get a second opinion. We pride ourselves and [name of business] on giving people accurate information based on research. (Pat) Their seemingly over-emphatic reaction appeared to me to be a way of constructing themselves as running a serious, well-informed, ethically sound, and responsible business, possibly in an unspoken acknowledgement of the unfavourable way health stores are often portrayed in the academic literature as being profit-driven providers of poor advice (Coon et al., 2015; Gotay & Dumitriu, 2000; Sarino et al., 2007; Temple et al., 2009). A particular aspect that the health store providers mentioned was their special niche in providing hope for those who felt let down by the orthodox health system and had 'given up' believing that they would get any help except from sources they explored themselves: Very, very rarely do people with serious illnesses and long term health problems, very rarely do they come and see us first. (Bernie) Pat and Lesley also made comments in a similar vein, with Lesley suggesting that people had lost faith in conventional treatment: They're not actually getting the fix that they initially thought they should get from the doctors. Once upon a time he was God; he knew how to fix it. (Lesley) This overt use of religious imagery recalled the notion of the doctor as the shepherd or pastor that was noted earlier (Jones, 2018; Waring & Latif, 2018) and the vacuum in guidance that the health stores presented themselves as being able to fill. An interesting feature of the health store managers was their uniformly low opinion of the public's ability to know what was good for them and that they, as health store managers, needed to step in and provide their greater level of expertise: 172 No health shop likes the internet. We hate it with a passion .... It's hugely frustrating ....people walk in with bags of stuff they've bought off the internet and they're going for an operation in two days and they say I've been taking this, and this - and it's completely wrong what they've been taking. I wish they could turn it [the internet] off sometimes. (Bernie) Even though all those who provided advice on supplements felt that the public needed a degree of guidance from them, the health store managers were by far the most emphatic in their insistence that people would go astray without their help. Their comments appeared to fall back on precisely the same discourse as that used by orthodox medicine; the construction of the general public as an ignorant bloc, who were 'at risk', and needed to be more 'disciplined' and submit to their guidance. I interpreted this an attempt by the health store managers to counter the perceptions of them as being commercially motivated (Temple, 2012), emphasise their altruistic intentions and shore up their own place in the provision of expertise. In contrast, the pharmacists and alternative therapists, who also believed that their customers needed their guidance, were much more positive about them and did not speak about them in such strongly negative terms. In summing up this section on expertise, its principal characteristic was just how complex and generally 'messy' it was. The participants' accounts showed that the care options they chose were "dispersed, heterogeneous and variegated" (Death, 2010: 235) not a binary opposition of alternative versus orthodox care. All participants readily mixed both, drawing from their own experiences and background knowledge derived over their life to this point. They used diverse sources of information they could call on through online searching, media and advertising, then added in what they learned from people they came across, and combined it all with their first hand experiences of the products they took. The convenient dichotomies of expert versus lay, normative versus non-normative, orthodox versus alternative, or care versus commerce were blurred; all participants bridged and muddled these divides and moved beyond them to a state where each of them had developed their own assemblage of expertise that was relevant to their own unique context. Moreover, the interconnections in the assemblage around their supplement practices that had led to the participants developing their new skills and knowledge had become woven into their process of 'becoming' as they moved through their life journey. 'Becoming' is an active, creative process, driven by the "capacity to form new relations and the desire to do so" (Buchanan, 1997: 83) and it creates the conditions for ongoing identity formation, (Fox and Ward (2008), as the next section explores. 173 Supplements and evolving identity When they spoke about supplements, the participants provided many examples of their own processes of 'becoming', the unexpected twists and turns during their lives, the multitude of interconnected but unplanned relations that they had formed with people and things, and that were continually evolving and changing. Their accounts demonstrated the unpredictability of the connections that take place in a person's life and their capacity "...to form new relations and in turn enable other new relations" (Buchanan, 1997:82), as their life progressed. The chance encounters and the variety of incidents that had proved to be influential reflected the randomness of the rhizomatic assemblage with its many connections "always branching and twisting, in flux and reassembling in different ways"(Fox, 2012: 67). Each of the participants' stories as they explained how crucial events in their lives had unfolded contrasted with "the modern fantasy of the body as a stable, unified, bounded entity" (Malins, 2004: 85). Their accounts revealed the constant developments that come about in people's lives, the many connections that they make and the decisions they take to follow one path or another. Sections of Bob's story showed how this could happen. Bob had been involved in competitive running for more than 50 years, ever since he had been singled out for special running coaching as a schoolboy. At a point in his fifties (he was now almost 70), he started to find running was becoming more difficult: ...your legs start to react especially when you are in your mid 50s and then I gave up running on the track and I was still running and then I was thinking, oh, my running is coming to an end and I don't want it to.