Moreover, because health and morality are so intertwined (Brandt & Rozin, 1997; Conrad, 1994; Crossley, 2003; Metzl & Kirkland, 2010), there is an implication that 'virtuous' people will manage to fight off disease, overcome disability and achieve 'successful' ageing (Cosco et al., 2014; Geard et al., 2018; Lamb, 2014), while those who do not manage to do so have failed to take responsibility for themselves and are now paying the price (Agborsangaya et al., 2013; Lakerveld et al., 2013). Nevertheless, just as everyone must face death eventually, no matter how virtuous or responsible they have been about their health, so ultimately, everyone must, sooner or later, fail at the moral task of being healthy, for "there is no escaping the tragedy of life; that we are all aging from the day we are born" (Gawande, 2014: 8). 194 Rather than doing nothing and simply hoping that this will not happen, supplement practices are an outward and visible enactment each day that confirms for the users their responsibility and vigilance and symbolises their determination to defer disability and the stigma of moral failure. Their practices are a personally constructed and controlled form of 'conduct of conduct' through which they resist being drawn into the cul-de-sac of "patienthood" (O'Mahony, 2019: 1799) where they have no agency and decisions about them will be guided by 'experts' who will decide what is best. The daily ritual of taking the material products down from the shelf and swallowing them allows their users to continue their narrative in "the voice of the healthy" (Hyden, 1997: 62) who are able to look forward confidently to having power and control over their future. While these rituals may "bypass the frameworks of rationalism and functionalism" (Bell, 1990: 300), they nevertheless create effects. They provide certainty, meaning, and continuity to people's lives (Horner, 2000; Markson & Fiese, 2000) and cannot be dismissed as irrational or merely placebos (Gale, 2014). Rituals tend to be associated with religious practices and superstition, and therefore may be considered to have no place in the modern, scientifically-enlightened world (Quack and Sax 2010). Nevertheless, contemporary life is still punctuated with many kinds of normalised rituals, even if they are not recognised or described as such (Islam & Zyphur, 2009). The public rituals of state memorials and the quasi-religious rituals of competitive sport (Brevers et al., 2011; Hutchinson, 2009; Jackson & Baker, 2001; King, 2010; Schippers & Van Lange, 2006), the structured rituals of professional practice, for example, in law and medicine (Arluke, 2018; Parissopoulos et al., 2013; Robinson, 2001; Robinson, 2006) and the many personal and family rituals in the small activities of everyday life (Hammerschlag, 1997; Hannam, 1997; Morris, 2017; Thomson & Hassenkamp, 2008; Verma, 2013). In short, rituals bring structure, continuity and order into people's lives on both a large and small scale: Rituals are conscious, intentional and often repetititive bodily actions that attempt to impose meaning on one or other aspect of the world ....a body acting out of what sort of situation one is in and what ought to be done about it. (Brody, 2010: 153) Rituals across the many different areas of human experience can be seen as enactments, in which material things, discourses, and the power of meaning are brought together for those that enact them and those for whose benefit they are enacted. Not only do they involve material things - for example the wreaths of poppies at war memorials or the birthday cake at family celebrations - but they also draw on intuitive connections to modes of thought that are beyond scientific rationality. They have performative, aesthetic, and cultural components that go 195 beyond their cognitive elements, linking to the imagination, the unique meanings they carry for each individual and their placement both within and outside linear time (Wulf et al., 2010). Rituals connect to another dimension alongside the world of 'reality', where "rites and myths help people face the unspeakable ... to cope with the problematic human predicament" (Armstrong, 2005: 6), that is, the inevitable prospect that life ends in extinction and nothingness. Supplement rituals can be seen in the same way, as a bringing together of discourse, materiality and power in rituals that enact personal, cultural and symbolic meanings which far exceed their mundane appearance and the simple act of swallowing them each day. The products themselves compel attention as projecting a certain type of power in which "symbolic images and gestures exercise a particularly persuasive effect on the participants' sense of identity and social reality" (Bell, 1990:299). The specially assigned spaces that containers of supplements occupy in people's homes also serve to point up their ritual agency. Almost always stored in the more private areas of the kitchen or bedroom rather than the rooms where guests are admitted and entertained, the supplement space is thus the site of a private daily 'devotion', but rather than the flowers, incense and prayers offered on other altars, the supplement ritual is an offering on the altar of personal responsibility that holds the hope of preserving the future from decline and decay. The ritual act of swallowing them may take place at a moment of linear time but also within the dimension of "spacetimemattering" described by Barad (2014:176). Bound up in the present action are the past events that have been continually evolving towards that point and the hopes and desires for the continuation of possibilities into an expanding future (Neale & Flowerdew, 2003: 193). Maintaining the ritual is a sign of a belief that by continuing to observe it, they will be able to "keep on keeping on" (Lundberg, 2019: unpaged) doing what they want to do and warding off disability and decay for at least another day. Supplement practices can thus be seen as ongoing ritual enactments that help provide a sense of predictability and independent agency in users' lives as they seek to keep control over their health and avoid disruptions to the future they plan for themselves (Morden et al., 2017: 369). The difference between supplement users and others is that they have chosen supplements as their preferred method of assuming control over the risks they perceive as being the most relevant to their own context. Others may choose a different ritual, for example, the socio- material practice of surgical mask wearing in Japan as a "risk ritual" that acts as a "safety blanket" against the threat of illness and disease for the wearer (Burgess & Horii, 2012: 1193). Health rituals such as these have been interpreted as a symbolic way of ordering and gaining power over the "inherently untidy experience" of illness and disease (Williams, 1998: 449) and 196 calming "the escalating spiral of control and anxiety" Crawford, 2004: 506) that is generated by a contemporary culture that identifies more and more risks to health. This is not to suggest that the supplement ritual is the central activity around which those who use them live their lives. It is rather a means to an end, something that allows them to defuse their anxiety about risks with confidence about the future and control anxiety over its uncertainty and to focus on other, more enjoyable and meaningful aspects of their life instead. By undertaking the supplement ritual each day, they can then feel they have 'done something' to deal with their concerns and can set them aside so they can get on with the activities and relationships which are meaningful to them as their life journey evolves in its continual 'becoming'. The supplement enactments become an additional thread that is woven into and enriches their personal narrative as it evolves over time (Jones et al., 2008; Lindgren & Wahlin, 2001; Morrison, 2000). They come to see themselves as being 'someone who knows' about these things (supplements and their effects), and can pass on what they know to others, hence the trajectory for some supplement users into roles where they advise others. McAdams and McLean (2013: 234) give seven examples of "life story constructs" that people use in identity stories. Of these, supplements users' accounts of their experiences are strongly connected to constructs of agency (control over circumstances) and meaning making (learning something and gaining insight about their life). While the coherent accounts supplement users present may have been honed and smoothed through reflection and reconstruction over months or years by the time they are related to a researcher (McLean, 2008), they nevertheless identify events and experiences which the people telling their story have selected as being important and meaningful to them. Each of these stories, unique narratives by "self-conscious language wielding humans" (Bennett 2010: 120) provides insight into the way supplement users convey "...to the self and others, who they are now, how they came to be there and where they think their lives may be going in the future" (McAdams & McLean, 2013: 233). Supplements primarily appear in these accounts, as the 'vital matter' that has given them the power to overcame a hurdle, and thereby set off a chain of events, creating an intra-action between the non-human products, the many other actants in the assemblage and the world views of the individuals themselves. Moreover, the strength of the personal narrative is that it does not have a particular destination or foreseeable end but is always in process, open to the pursuit of many possible future meanings that might be made in the life yet to come. Even at the most pragmatic and widely understood level of protecting and maintaining health, supplements are infused with meanings that link to ideas about the potential that the future 197 holds to engage in activities and experiences that an individual desires to pursue. Their supplements are enablers on the life quest, the journey in which individuals are their own 'hero' and through which they find meaning and purpose in their lives and build their identity narrative. For the life quest, whether in Greek mythology or in the 21st century, is a universal story whereby the protagonist gradually moves through life in a process of evolving and changing as they go, "becoming" in the Deleuzian sense. The transformational narratives that came from the discussions, echoed one of the universal themes from the hero's journey; the helping substance which gives the protagonist the power to resist and overcome difficulties, to be or do more than they could unaided (Applegate & Grivetti, 1997: 869S). Supplement users appear to have this sense of quest in their lives, not to reach the 'golden fleece' of Jason and the Argonauts, or the 'water of life' of Polynesian legend by doing extraordinary deeds. It is rather that their daily practices with supplements symbolise their continuing involvement "in the divine game" of existence" (Bearn, 2013:54) without coming up against the barriers of illness and disability that will stop them participating. Whether Odysseus in the ancient world, Alice and her adventures in Wonderland, or the modern day-to-day adventures of the 21st century citizen, the point is not necessarily the destination, but for the journey itself to be meaningful along the way. Supplements, like the magic potions or reviving waters of myth and legend are enablers to this end - the desire to pursue enjoyment, meaning and purpose in life, rather than to merely stay alive.