Another, rather than giving a personal view, cited the general approach of their workplace in neutral terms: We operate in what I would say is a traditional pharmacy way that everyone knows most things... so any member of staff has to be able to help with any area, but we do have a member of staff who primarily looks after that area [natural health products]... (Jo) The use of 'we' rather than 'I' which was noticeable among this group of participants, seemed to be a way of contributing to the discussion but remaining non-committal. As Morison and MacLeod (2014: 696) point out, words that are used to cover a 'silence' may serve to mask an unwillingness to talk about a potentially sensitive topic, but also give hints about concerns which are unacknowledged. The comments were carefully neutral, acting as means of being cooperative with the study, and saying something, but ensuring that their own attitude as to 103 what supplements might or might not do was not stated. To me, this silencing of the personal, much in contrast with the behaviour of the other participants, highlighted the tension involved in balancing a proactive health professional role with the commercial drivers of working in a retail business (Thompson & Bidwell, 2015). The viability of such a business depends on being able to sell 'things' and retain customers, but these same things may be an uncomfortable fit with the need to retain the respect of their medical and research colleagues who are generally unenthusiastic about the sale of supplements directly to the general public (Jefferies et al., 2012; Martinez et al., 2012; Slashinski et al., 2012; Ventola, 2010). Their distancing suggested, not that they were indifferent or uninterested, but that the products they sold also had a complementary 'thing' power that potentially threatened their professional identities. Nevertheless, whether participants were deeply engaged with their products like the majority, or took care to 'silence' them like the few, it was clear that the material supplements had the power to cause effects for those who engaged with them. The next section of the chapter looks at the participants' reports of the physical and psychological effects they had experienced from the supplements that they took. Things for the body and mind The lived body crosses both the biological and social worlds. People have a body, a physical entity, but their body is also who they are, how they interact with the world, how they feel and experience sensation, how they think, reflect and act (Fox, 2012; Sointu, 2013): The possession of a physical body, its mediation between the world around us on one hand and our internal world of thoughts, feelings and sensations on the other, is fundamental to the human experience (Fox 2012:1) When the body is in robust health, it tends to be taken for granted (Corbin, 2003). Only when something goes awry, such as pain or illness, is attention suddenly brought to bear on the body and what it can or cannot do (Fox, 2012; Lawton, 2003). Chronic conditions that cannot be permanently 'fixed' but must be lived with, in particular, bring attention to a body that is reluctant to cooperate with what an individual would like to do (see Fox 2012: 27-30). A number of participants (though far from all of them) were in this category; some had conditions that had been medically diagnosed such as diabetes, arthritis, or hypertension, others had more nebulous concerns like unexplained abdominal pain, sleep issues, pain from old sports injuries or recurring bouts of low mood. Some of these participants had been through medical investigations or treatment while others had not, but all of them appeared to have become aware that their 104 bodies were imperfect and they would need to cope with living with them as best they could. It was this realisation that seemed to have been the connection with one of the tangled threads of the assemblage surrounding the supplement 'thing'; it offered an avenue to explore in the hope that they might find a way of managing a condition they could not change. Some of them reported considerable success, outlining in our discussion how these 'things' had effected improvements for them once they made the decision to take them. Murray, for example, had been involved in running and rowing for years when younger and was a keen tennis player. He had developed joint problems over the years and had a 'bad hip' but reported that he had found products through a network marketing company had been able to keep him fully active in spite of his initial scepticism about them: A friend of mine .... was interested in alternative health and so on ... he told me. So as I say, the rest's history...I didn't believe in them [supplements] in the 90s but I've got osteoarthritis in the right hip and it was bothering me and so for the last fifteen and a half years I've been on their products and I lead a normal life. It won't cure it but I've got quality and comfort level that is sustainable and not bothersome. (Murray) Caro had a history of leg cramps, especially at night which had become so bad that they disrupted her sleep and that of her husband as well: I'd gone into one of those health shops and I heard the lady talking to the shop assistant about this, so I said to the lady, tell me about it. Because people say you've got to take magnesium. .... whether I'm doing right, I don't know but it's working for me. ... And I don't even have to tell my husband and push him out of bed anymore! So that's how bad I was. I mean, I cramp, but I can feel it and I can manage it. I'm managing it. (Caro) The material product, as she reported, had created a positive effect, and the interconnection with what she had heard 'people say' appeared to reinforce for her that she was managing something that had previously been troublesome. She does not suggest her problem has disappeared, but only that she can now cope with it better. Some of these reports had elements of the 'transformation narratives' that occur in accounts of religious conversion (Popp-Baier, 2001), or turning one's life around after a criminal past (Liem & Richardson, 2014). In the case of the participants, it was the supplement product which appeared in the right place at the right time, and acted as a catalyst to change (Bennett 2010: 9). As with these reports from other areas of life, the central idea in participants' stories seemed to be the preservation of a core sense of self and the regaining of a sense of control and agency over the future that the 'thing power' of 105 the supplements had given them. While some of their narratives mentioned particular supplements which they had found helpful, the key point was less about a particular product and more focused on being enabled to overcome a barrier that was in their way and "get on with life" (Cartwright, 2007: 1692). This increased optimism and coping parallels reports in other studies of supplement users (Joos et al., 2012; Oldham et al., 2004; Sointu, 2013). The physical problems that the participants talked about, however, were far outnumbered by the number of times they focused on stress and their need to have a physical 'thing' that would deal with it. Supplements seemed to be particularly valued for stress, partly because of their naturalness, as outlined in the previous chapter, but also because they were a thing that could be grasped to fill a gap where there were few alternatives. Almost every participant raised the issue of stress at some point; most often it was not related to any particular circumstance, illness, or injury, but a low-level, undefined feeling of being worn down from meeting the expectations that they had set for themselves in daily life: They spoke of stress as if it were self- explanatory, taking it for granted that I knew and understood what it was: ...when you're stressed ... when you're rushed you're eating not as good as you normally would ... you're not getting as many nutrients as your body needs but you are also not taking that time out to help it repair ... and that goes on continually ... making bad choices round food, that add to the stress and not feeling well and that's when I have .... look[ed] at the bottle and it says, this will help you feel more energetic ... you know, balance up everything because you're kind of thinking maybe I'm not balanced in what I'm taking in. (Tracy) Tracy here draws on ideas of nutritional imbalance and modern life as being too busy, resulting in an unease about 'bad choices' that keep happening because she is rushed. However, she finds a suitable 'thing' to take as a way of countering the rushed and inadequately nutritious meals and setting at rest the feeling of stress she has about not taking care of herself when she knows that she should be. She verbally sketches out an easily imaginable vignette that portrays her in a shop looking at the bottle - a graspable, material thing - that she hopes will do something to help. It seems that in her mind she already attributes these 'things' with the "active power to affect and create effects" (Bennett 2010: 49) and that will take care of the balance in her diet. Stress has been conceptualised in a range of different ways: as physiological (Rees, 1976; Selye, 1973); as a psychological reaction to negative experiences (Somerfield & McCrae, 2000); or as a 106 mind/body interaction that contributes to conditions such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, auto-immune disease and slow wound healing (Chida et al., 2008; Cohen et al., 2007; Reiche et al., 2004; Thaker et al., 2007). A feature of stress is the "strange circular way [it] seems to stand on its own as a plausible, complete, self-contained explanation" (Monroe, 2008: 47) in both scientific and popular literature: Everybody knows what stress is and nobody knows what it is... although it has become part of our daily vocabulary. Is it effort, fatigue, pain, fear, the need for concentration, the humiliation of censure, loss of blood, or even an unexpected success that requires complete reformulation of one's life? ... Every one of these conditions can produce stress, and yet none of them can be singled out as being 'it' (Selye 1973: 692). The indeterminate and subjective nature of stress makes it resistant to being 'fixed' particularly when the conditions that produced the stress cannot be changed. However, it seemed that the 'thing power' of supplements is something that can be mobilised to fill this gap. Kerry, who managed a 'natural health' section in a pharmacy, reported that many of her customers found supplements to be an appealing method for addressing concerns about the constant effect of stress on their health: It doesn't matter whether you think it's stressful and I don't think it's stressful, it's how you perceive it and at what level you cope with it. It's quite a big thing and it does open you up for multivitamins, sleeping, something to help with that... (Kerry) Kerry's remark here draws attention to the individuality of stress and that it is not up to her to judge what is stressful that matters, but whether the person she is assisting finds supplements to be a useful way of dealing with what is bothering them. Parents of young children in particular often featured in the discussions about stress. The participants who worked in health stores and pharmacies reported that they were often asked for advice by busy parents who appeared to be stressed by the dual demands of being under pressure at their workplaces and not wishing to take time off, but also caring for children who had to be kept away from school or day care when they were sick with coughs and colds especially during winter. Interestingly, although it was the parents who appeared stressed, the supplement products they bought were for their children; 'immunity boosters' to help prevent illness, (homeopathic) 'sleep drops' for babies to try to help the household get some rest, and herbal products for soothing children's coughs and colds. Neither the parents nor the retailers seemed convinced that the products were particularly effective; indeed, several participants noted that for coughs at least, the 107 traditional lemon and honey drinks were likely to be just as good. However, the 'thing power' of the bought product appeared to be more sought after than the 'thing' that could be made at home. It appeared that by searching out and finding a product, parents could feel they had done everything possible to keep their child well. For their part, the pharmacists and health store staff also had a concrete product - a material thing - to offer, and one that could be used immediately. You [the parents] feel better because you have done something. You feel better and that child feeds off that and feels better. I think there is an element of that ...so much of what we [the staff] are dealing with here is reassurance particularly for parents. (Jo) Providing simple advice, even if the home remedy was potentially as useful as the commercial product, would mean that the people seeking help would be sent away empty handed (without a 'thing') and, moreover, add to their stress by having the additional burden of going elsewhere to buy the lemons and honey if they were not already in stock and then making them up when they arrived home. Participants who sold these types of products noted that they provided only those which they were confident would not do any harm, and that the main benefit was likely to be reduced anxiety and eased tension for individuals or households. The effect of the 'thing' they bought could not necessarily be explained in material terms but seemed to 'work' all the same, even though the product filled a different role for the parent and child respectively. That is not to discount the possibility that the properties of particular substances remain to be discovered, given the fact that many are poorly researched and that new evidence emerges from time to time about the properties of even the most common of vitamins and minerals (Aghajanian et al., 2015; Carr & McCall, 2017; Lapillonne, 2010; Nowson et al., 2012). As Marchant (2016: 298) points out, "the medicine we end up with depends on the trials that are carried out", so that if no trials have been done on a substance, then it will ipso facto be considered ineffective. When the mechanism of effect cannot be explained, the placebo response is often invoked. At one time thinking about placebos implied that they were a "treatment for neurotic patients when the clinician has nothing better to offer" (McQueen et al., 2013: 162). Current thinking, however, has moved beyond this dismissive attitude, with more nuanced concepts being put forward. One of them, expectancy theory (McQueen et al., 2013; Schwarz et al., 2016), has been proposed as a way of explaining why a certain proportion of people in the placebo arm of 108 drug trials will improve in spite of not receiving any active components. However, as several participants pointed out, this does not explain the effect in babies or animals: We had a dog where we used homeopathics and their psoriasis disappeared. The dog didn't believe it. We had a baby who had some issues and we used homeopathics and the baby improved; the baby didn't believe it. (Jordan) Recent investigations of the placebo effect have reported that it may be the result of natural opioids that are released from the brain, indicating that people are effectively self-medicating (Wager et al., 2007: 11060). But even these studies have concluded that the full picture is not yet understood and that the placebo effect is likely to be a diverse group of phenomena rather than having a single explanation (Marchant, 2016; Wager & Atlas, 2015). A number of participants commented on the placebo concept as a possibility for the effects they reported experiencing from their supplements, but went on to remark that, even if that were the case, they considered it to be unimportant. Tessa, for example, was well aware that the homeopathic remedy she used was unsupported by 'evidence', but found it irrelevant, saying that "I swear rescue remedy works for me". As one participant remarked, If people think it works, then it does work for them. If it makes them sleep better and they feel better then that's fantastic. Isn't that what we want? (Kerry) It could also be argued that reassurance and the handing over of a 'thing' from a pharmacy or health store borrows from the function of the paper prescription for medicines that is handed to the patient by the doctor at the end of a medical consultation and then dispensed by a pharmacist. The paper prescription has been described by Cooper (2011) as a 'boundary object', that is, it has equal salience across the worlds of the prescriber, the patient and the pharmacist. It symbolises the professional authority of the doctor, while also serving to instruct the pharmacist what to dispense and reassure the patient their concerns have been taken seriously and the doctor has 'done something'. Boundary objects act as a 'common coin' that works within the "constraints of the parties employing them but are robust enough to maintain a common identity across all of them" (Star & Griesemer, 1989: 393). In the case of supplements, handing over of 'things' to be taken as capsules, tablets or liquid in a pharmacy or health store, even though there is no doctor or paper prescription involved, may be seen as acting in a similar way, bridging the culturally defined boundary between the spheres of orthodox and alternative health practice (Derkatch, 2008; Fox, 2011: 70; Owens, 2015). The supplement products may be invested with the same expectations that are associated with a 109 prescribed medicine, particularly if the individual buys their supplies from the same pharmacy where they have their medicines dispensed. Moreover, the people buying supplements in pharmacies may already know the pharmacist who gives them advice about both prescribed and over-the-counter products for their health needs and therefore view them as trustworthy based on previous experience. A number of participants acknowledged that the reassurance of 'doing something' was at least partly responsible for a sense of improvement. A few of them talked about a special person or business that they trusted - a pharmacist, natural therapist, or health store manager - from whom they took advice that they had always found helpful. However, most others, in contrast, simply shopped around for products they had read or heard about, whether in a walk-in store or online, and were satisfied with being able to have independent and immediate access to the 'thing' without the mediation of any advisor or 'gatekeeper' to recommend it or provide guidance and reassurance.