With or without advice, however, it required more than just reassurance alone; a material product appeared to be indispensable for participants to feel that they were 'doing something'. As one participant commented, if simple reassurance that one was 'doing something' worked, then why would supplements work for some people when pharmaceuticals prescribed by a doctor had failed to? ... if the placebo thing was going to have an effect it would have an effect with the doctor and the medical agents, because that's their [my customers'] strong belief. They didn't come to me first. They gave up, walked in the door and said, "what have you got here?" (Bernie) Here Bernie constructs himself as being a place of last resort for those who have 'given up' on formal medical intervention. However, rather than suggesting that he too can provide such reassurance, he went on to talk in detail about the specific 'things' he was able to offer that others did not, including particular products, special tests that were sent for analysis and referrals to a medical herbalist who was more qualified than he, and able to prescribe things he could not. None of the participants appeared to be concerned about finding a definitive explanation for how or why their supplements created the effects they reported. They seemed to be open to supplements being more than simply for physical and mental wellbeing but also having a calming spiritual effect. Being spiritually at ease is acknowledged to be an important part of being truly healthy (Egan, 2010; Goddard, 1995; Holmes, 2010). Spirituality has been described as "'the 110 primordial thing'...the engine that propels the search for connectedness, meaning, purpose and contribution. ...it speaks to what it means to be human" (Benson & Roehlkepartain, 2008). The following section looks at the various ways the participants linked this 'primordial thing' with their material supplement products. Things for the spirit Participants commented both directly and by implication that a spiritual aspect was linked to their supplement taking. Cliff, for example, who sent away for the etherium gold product mentioned in the previous chapter as being linked to the Pharoahs, found that taking it was 'a very spiritual thing." More numerous, however, were those participants who did not overtly speak of spirituality as such but indicated they were searching for something beyond physical or mental health; a longing for a sense of purpose, an existential need to come to terms with their own imperfect condition, to find some 'thing' that would fill an empty space in their lives even though they lived with every material comfort: We think we should be perfect; we think our life should be perfect. Because, look, we've got everything at our disposal. And then we get really shocked when life isn't quite like that. We have money to spend, we have all this stuff going for us, and yet we're still not happy. ... Inner peace, inner calm ... I think people are searching for that and they're not sure how to embrace it without - maybe going to church. You know, how do I live a spiritual life that isn't based on whether I'm an Anglican or a Methodist, or becoming a Buddhist nun? (Tessa) Ingested substances have been interwoven with spiritual practices since ancient times (Berlant, 2005; Sayin, 2014); traditions of fasting from foods, offering or sacrificing foods to a higher being, religious rituals to be observed before eating, prohibited foods, and symbolic foods that represent deeper spiritual realities are found in most belief systems (Dietler, 2011). Depriving the physical body by abstaining from foods in order to reach a purer state of spiritual enlightenment is found in a number of religions (Lambert, 2003); ingesting herbal substances accompanied by prayers or incantations are used in others, and sometimes the two approaches are combined (Jones & Olsan, 2015). The idea that greater spiritual insight is achieved by depriving the body of comfort tends to construct the body and soul as opposing forces; the body as a source of sin and a barrier to salvation of the soul (Glucklich, 2001). Contemporary spirituality, in contrast, tends to view the perfect body as a spiritual force in itself, harmonious and serene, rather than being conflicted between the desires of the body and the aspirations of 111 the spirit (Giordan, 2009). Therefore ingesting things with the aim of perfecting the body becomes an end in itself. In essence, however, the two approaches share the same idea of being on a quest towards perfection, and to overcome the limitations of the body bound by physical illness or psychological dysfunction. Non-human things, often including the taking of substances, have always been implicated in this quest. The idea that inanimate things have spiritual force is found in many indigenous belief systems (Donald, 2012; James, 2015). For Maori too, whakapapa (geneology) links animate and inanimate, known and unknown phenomena in the terrestrial and spiritual worlds (Roberts et al., 1995; Taonui, 2014). Entities are not separated into human and non-human but everything in the universe is considered to be connected, with each individual being connected to things in the natural environment: Belief in God is one reflection of wairua [spirituality] but it is also evident in relationships with the environment. Without a spiritual awareness and a mauri (spirit or vitality, sometimes called the life force) an individual cannot be healthy and is more prone to illness or misfortune. Land, lakes, mountains, reefs, have a spiritual significance ... [access to] the natural environment is considered integral to identity and fundamental to a sense of wellbeing (Durie, 1994: 71). The non-human environmental features of their birth place are part of identity for all Maori people. Spirituality or wairua is one of the four cornerstones of health in the Maori world view along with physical, mental, and family health (Durie, 1994). All of these are equally important for a healthy individual, family and society as a whole. The substances used in traditional Maori medicine (rongoa) are therefore always considered to have an intrinsically spiritual aspect. Several of the participants spoke about the interconnectedness of medicinal substances, spirituality, and health. Caro, for example, who was familiar with Maori rongoa, spoke about her belief that swallowing any kind of medicine in isolation from other aspects of a person's life was unlikely to 'fix' anyone's problems, whether Maori or non-Maori. She referred to the way rongoa had been used in her family, which had always been "about the pre-prayer and your whole holistic being." These ideas are connected to the concept of the life-force that unites all things (Erickson, 2007; Ricard, 2011), and which is central to one view of holism, as discussed in the previous chapter. In this view, non-human things can generate healing but cannot be expected to do so unless embedded in a wider context of spiritual awareness about the interconnectedness of all things, 112 both human and non-human. Lou spoke about his conception of the interconnectedness between the body and spirit that mobilised the power of things to have effects on people ingesting substances: ... if you try to divorce the spiritual side of somebody and put that in a little box and say that's not relevant because we are trying to treat the body here, to my mind that is actually duping yourself really because a person's belief will start spiritually and affects the whole way they're taking the medicine, respond to it. (Lou) Other participants too, referred to the essential part that spirituality played in health. Tracy likened a person without spirituality to a chair or table with one leg missing so that even if the problems of the physical body were treated with things, there would always be an incompleteness and a lack of balance within that person. The feeling of incompleteness is also prominent in religious thought, reflecting the idea of the lifelong search for God, or Nirvana, or however a particular religion conceptualises ultimate Being. As the early Christian Saint Augustine wrote, "our heart is restless, until it rests in you, O God" (Kreeft, 2016: 21). Some researchers have argued that material prosperity has created dissatisfaction if there is nothing to fill the vacuum created by the formal religious belief. The wish to experience something beyond the mundane is therefore behind the surge in popular interest in exploring forms of spirituality that derive from ancient belief systems unfamiliar to people in developed countries. These include Ayurdevic, indigenous and traditional Chinese medicines, but can also include 'New Age' spirituality, pantheistic religions, and metaphysical traditions (Cobb et al., 2012). The 'things' of these religions appear to be part of the appeal, linked to ideas of the exotic, 'other' that were outlined in the previous chapter. One participant drew attention to this point, noting that, in his view, a focus on the 'things' themselves without the wider context of spirituality was ultimately unsatisfying: I would say some people want a pot pourri. My meaning is that they will get those traditional medicines if they are going to help a bit; they'll get natural medicines; they'll go to a meditation class; they'll do something else - the aim being some of this must help so I will go for all I can do to get help, excluding the fact that actually maybe a really consistent spiritual side might be the answer to what they need anyway. (Lou) The attraction of these alternative healing therapies has been interpreted as part of "post- Christian" spirituality in Western countries, presenting an alternative to both Christian faith and secular rationalism, perfecting the body in order to "become better versions of [themselves] 113 emotionally and spiritually..." (Brownell, 1991; Cederstrom & Spicer, 2015: 12; Marzano-Parisoli, 2001; Sheldon, 2010). Although bodily perfection tends to be viewed as a recent phenomenon, the body as a spiritual project can be traced back to the early Christian era and to classical antiquity (Shilling, 2002). In the late modern age, however, what was once a nearly universal belief in the soul's progress towards the divine 'other' as the purpose of life on earth has come to be replaced by a belief in "the body the starting point for accessing the spiritual dimension of experience" (Giordan, 2009: 230). Those involved do not pursue meaning and identity from pre-given authoritative sources, located outside the self (e.g., the answers offered by science and the Christian churches), but want to rely on an internal source, located in the self's deeper layers... the late-modern condition conjures up nagging questions that haunt the late-modern self: What is it that I really want? Is this the sort of life I want to live? What sort of person am I really? (Houtman & Aupers, 2007: 307,309). A number of participants reflected this idea of a missing dimension in their life, but they were unable to pinpoint it to anything specific that was wrong. Though they did not refer directly to the lack of a spiritual dimension themselves, what they said implied to me that they felt a gap in their lives and were searching for something meaningful to fill it and make their lives feel complete. Turning to material things appeared to be one avenue that they were exploring; finding 'things' that might fill the gap and hoping that these ingested substances would address the nebulous feeling that something in their life was lacking or out of place: ... if I feel like I might be lacking in something ...It's probably just from reading bits and pieces and thinking, oh, that makes sense. You think, well, we are full of minerals and vitamins and all sorts of things, if something's a bit out of kilter to me it makes sense that if you are lacking in something you may well need a top up of something else. (Frances) Frances' comment here has echoes of the idea that Tracy put forward of being 'out of balance', that is, missing some kind of important element that is needed to make up the whole person. These ideas are clearly linked to holism and to have an underlying spiritual dimension but Frances here focuses on the physical body. It appears, from her comment, that she has nothing overtly wrong, but she still feels she is 'lacking' and a product with vitamin and mineral 'things' that she can ingest to 'top up' , is a way of satisfying this feeling of incompleteness. Another motif in participants' comments was the attraction of ingesting 'things' that cleansed. The notion of 'dirt' within the body that needs cleansing is a profoundly spiritual concept linking 114 back to ancient ideas of ritual purity and defilement, with 'dirt' being an ancient symbol of ambiguity, disorder and danger (Douglas, 1966), that is, something with negative 'thing' power. Seeking cleansing in a spiritual sense is deeply ingrained in many ancient traditions. Maori tikanga (the correct way of doing things) for example designates all things as either sacred (tapu) or profane/ordinary (noa) and prescribes rituals for the correct way to behave, for example, with body waste or the handling of human tissue, that are still powerful and observed today (Cheung et al., 2007). The Jewish and Christian traditions both feature the need for purification and cleansing from sin; in Christianity the water of baptism washes away original sin, and in the Old Testament of the Bible, the Psalmist proclaims the need to be cleansed: God in your goodness wash me clean of my guilt, purify me from my sin ...wash me until I am whiter than snow (Psalm 51:2,6). Some of the participants' comments on cleansing clearly invoked a spiritual dimension, providing additional and complementary insights to those that raised cleansing as a protection against risk which were discussed in the previous chapter. Cleansing in this context had characteristics of a ritual undertaken for its own sake, intrinsically worthwhile, rather than in response to any kind of risk. Cleansing was a special feature of a range of products from a network marketing company that Molly used herself and also sold to others: They [the company] talk about cleanses a lot... we are of the understanding that our body needs a break from time to time and that is why you have these cleanse days, or they talk about you have a "cleanse for life" once a day, which is just a drink and you drink that. I love the idea of a cleanse ... (Molly) The appeal of the "cleanse for life" here, though clearly more commercialised and centred around a 'thing', echoes the themes of purity and ritual cleansing that, according to Lupton, live on in modern obsessions about hygiene, and anxiety about viruses and infections which "reveal deeper concerns about the integrity of the body in an age where potential contaminants are invisible" (Lupton 2013: 36). The fear of having others see you as 'dirty' and unable to control your bodily wastes (Lupton 2013: 187) appears to lie behind the promotion of the many products that are sold to reduce body odours, or sanitise parts of the body in contemporary society. Moreover, what is 'dirty' and therefore in need of cleaning/cleansing is socially and culturally constructed across different societies and different epochs in the same society; "what is unclean in relation to one thing may be clean in relation to another, and vice versa" (Douglas, 1966: 9). 'Dirty' as an insult, has a long history in many cultures and its use seldom relates to 115 being physically dirty, but is more often directed at people who stand out from the social norm by their behaviour, different appearance (Douglas, 1966), or are thought of as inferior, uncivilised or unfit to participate in society (Boullosa & Schnee, 2013; Colloredo-Mansfeld, 1998; Guimares, 2003; Paredes, 2007). Closely related to cleansing is the idea of 'toxins', another currently popular way of expressing fear of inner dirt and contamination. Rather than ideas of physical risk, as discussed previously, the idea of inner toxins that must be purged appears to relate to spiritual rather than physical unease (Rindfleish, 2005; Russo-Netzer & Mayseless, 2017). Dozens of recipes for detoxing things - pills, or drinks to 'flush your liver' - can be found with the most casual of online searches, (Pelton, 2014). The biomedical explanation is that these ideas stem from misplaced beliefs that toxins in the intestine can enter the circulation and poison the body (Acosta & Cash, 2009; Richards et al., 2006). Koteyko and Nerlich see this as a replacement for the fear of infectious organisms, which has waned in the age of antibiotics, and substituting 'detoxification' as a means of "strengthening the body's internal armour" (2007: 22). However, this seems a limited explanation for the persistence of the phenomenon and the "current of disgust" (Kjaer, 2019: 136) that is associated with the fear of bodily imperfections, and inner 'dirt'. It also misses the point of the symbolism and ritual purification that people appear to be seeking in these practices and the need for a physical 'thing' as an enabler. The spiritual focus to detoxification becomes clear in its association with fasting, a practice long associated with expiation of sin and the search for spiritual cleansing and purity in many forms of religion (Brick, 2010; Morinis, 1985). The Jain religion in India shows its most extreme form in that people who have fasted to death are held up as the most advanced examples of holiness and spirituality (Laidlaw, 2005). It was clear that Molly's cleanses were a form of fasting, though she did not refer to them as such; she went to some lengths to emphasise that she took great care that her young son did not realise that she and her husband were going without meals. They "always, always have a little bit of toast or something like that just so he sees it because kids are always watching you." This kind of food restriction with 'fast days' is advocated in some quarters as an avenue not only to better health, but to the quest for spiritual enlightenment. Nash (2006: 310) describes the fasting body as "...an expanded field of energetic confluences" that seeks to overcome the hunger for material food and replaces it with the "hunger for pure immanence" that is, the desire to achieve a sense of integrated unity with what lies beyond the physical plane. 116 An alternative and more exotic route to spiritual enlightenment in both ancient and modern traditions is the pilgrimage.