94 Conclusion This chapter has endeavoured to examine and unsettle the concepts that are deeply embedded behind the everyday discourse about supplements and herbal medicines. Naturalness, holistic health and keeping safe from risk have been discussed at some length to show the wide variety of understandings that the participants expressed in their comments. The assemblage of ideas and practices generated from the discussion about these three concepts showed that participants expressed views ranging from repeating uncontested assumptions to putting forward thought-provoking insights about competing meanings that they observed in their own or others' practices. Deconstructing these three discourses in the light of the data from the participants, has revealed a number of new insights about that go beyond the previous understandings of how naturalness, holistic health and risk are related to supplement use. Firstly, the discussion has shown how individualised and fluid the concepts are; that every participant saw them in a slightly different light. Rather than simply being gradations of the one idea, the viewpoints put forward stretched and contested general assumptions in widely different ways, depending on the individual participant's background experiences, their own interpretations of the discourses of the present and their concerns about the future. The variety of perspectives provided by the participants demonstrates how inadequate it is to treat supplement use as a single phenomenon, where both products and their users are "lumped together, indistinguishable from each other" (Lewis, 2019: 840). Secondly, this chapter has highlighted the way that the concepts of naturalness, holistic health, and risk are never static, but always open to something new and different in relation to supplement practices. They are mobilised by users and sellers in an ever-changing scene of ideas, interpretations, therapies and products that draw from the past and are constantly evolving into the future. Thirdly, although the discourses in question have been deconstructed separately here for the purposes of the analysis, all three concepts are deeply interconnected; their entanglement forms a network of random and rich connections that adds to the complexity of the assemblage of actants around supplements and their use. Finally, it is important to recognise that even though the surface assumptions around these common discourses can easily be deconstructed to show that each one is diffuse and contested, yet the ideas of naturalness, holistic health, and risk retain their salience as descriptors around which supplement users and sellers can frame their practices as meaningful to them and others. Within this vast assemblage, it is the material products of the supplements themselves which provide the connecting point in the network and without which there would be no discussion. 95 The next chapter now turns the spotlight directly on these products and examines the part they play in the assemblage. 96 Chapter 5: Supplements as lively matter: the importance of material things Introduction The previous chapter looked at characteristics that people attribute to supplements. This chapter takes a different angle, examining the capacity of these material products - supplements and herbal medicines - to have their own power and presence that create effects in the lives of contemporary individuals. In my interviews with the participants my attention was drawn to the importance that they seemed to place on the physical presence of their supplements, which many had specially assembled for me to view. This happened in all the settings where I conducted interviews, whether private homes, health stores and pharmacies, or in other places where participants brought them along to show me. These instances were enacted so many times during the interviews that they compelled me to take more notice of the physical matter of the supplements and their containers as things of importance in their own right, not merely inert objects that were a means to an end in the individuals' health practices. This chapter uses materiality thinking from writers such as Coole and Frost (2010), Maclure (2015), and especially Bennett (2010) to examine the agency of 'things' to change events and create effects in people's lives. Thinking about things in this way contests the "notion of nature as merely the backdrop for the humanist adventure of culture, or of matter as 'dumb' and passive until awakened to meaning by human interest and interpretation" (MacLure, 2015: 96). Materiality thinking views the dualistic idea that considers humans as having agency and matter as inert to be anthropocentric and artificial (Bennett, 2010; Law, 1999: 3). It brings back non- human things into contention, not just as being important in the assemblage of actants, but having their own agency and energy to: Act as quasi agents or forces with trajectories, propensities, and tendencies of their own....What if they could be considered not simply as a resource, commodity or instrumentality but as an 'actant', something, whether human or non-human, which has efficacy, can do things, has sufficient coherence to make a difference, produce effects, alter the course of events (Bennett, 2010: viii) The renewed interest in materiality in recent decades has been driven, at least in part, by the development of artificial intelligence, advanced biological techniques, and virtual communication technologies which have forced humans to recognise that "objects do not exist 97 in ontological isolation" (Fraser et al., 2005: 5) but have the power, whether welcome or unwelcome, to create an impact on humans. The problem with writing about 'things' is that any argument put forward is always open to the criticism that things are interpreted by a person, "a self-conscious, language wielding human" (Bennett, 2010: 120). Attributing agency to the non-human, therefore, is elusive and difficult. The traditional tools provided by language seem to be inadequate for the task of understanding non-human agency. Bennett herself, has written about the difficulties she encountered in trying to write about why things matter, describing it as "both necessary and impossible" because language always assigns "activity to people and passivity to things" (Bennett, 2010: 119). One approach, according to Coole and Frost (2010), is to engage in a detailed analysis of the material objects which are part of the daily environment. This chapter, therefore, treats the containers of supplements and herbal medicines that participants showed me as vital matter, enmeshed with human discourse and activity, but also having their own "emergent, generative powers and agentic capacities" (Coole & Frost, 2010: 9). Supplements, moreover, are a special category of actant that differ from most other types of non-human matter because they are designed to be ingested into the human body. Bennett considers edible matter to be a special category of non- human actant because it enters into what we become as it is metabolised; "the outside and the inside mingle and recombine... it reveals the swarm of activity subsisting below and within formed bodies and recalcitrant things, a vitality obscured by our conceptual habit of dividing the world into inorganic matter and organic life"(2010: 50-51). Like foodstuffs, the taking of supplements results in a process where "human and nonhuman bodies recorporealise in response to each other; both exercise formative power and both offer themselves as matter to be acted on" (Bennett: 2010: 49). The power of edible substances to do good or ill is not difficult to understand; what to ingest and what not to, has been an enduring motif throughout history and continues to be scrutinised intensely from all points of view today. In religion, folk tales and fairy stories throughout the ages eating or drinking some kind of substance often catalyses forward action (Pinsent, 2002; Reddan, 2016); these non-human things may bring magical powers to the human protagonists, promote healing, give access to new visions of the world and allow personal growth or alternatively they can be a force for evil, corruption, and death. Outside the realm of myth and fairy tale, ingested substances have been the subject of health advice from ancient times (Totelin, 2015) and throughout recorded history right up to the present day. Contemporary scientific literature abounds with a wide range of conflicting advice about the things that should 98 or should not be eaten or drunk for good health (Archer, 2015; Lifschizt & Lifschitz, 2014). There is a daily "cacophony of voices" (Mayes 2015: 6) across all media, ranging from medical journals citing 'alarm' about rising rates of child obesity or diabetes (Cefalu et al., 2014; Wang et al., 2017) to popular websites issuing dramatic warnings about the "16 cancer causing foods you should avoid completely" (Bayard, 2019) or the reassuring "top 10 supplements for preventing and reversing Alzheimers"(Rona, 2018). The intense interest shown by such a diverse range of sources suggests that edible things have a particularly potent influence on human lives that goes beyond their analysable nutritional or medicinal components; that these non-human 'things' have their own power and energy to generate effects in people's lives. To expand and further develop the concept of the assemblage of actants in which the participants and their supplement 'things' were enmeshed I have again turned to Deleuze and Guattari's (1987) metaphor of the rhizomatic assemblage with its tangled network of nodes, connections and random lines of flight. In the assemblage material things and discourses about them are entangled and interconnected; the containers with their capsules, tablets and liquids, promotion and marketing activities and discourses, retail outlets, and regulatory regimes, together with an individual's biological make up, their past and present experiences, their interpersonal contacts, their cultural background, spiritual beliefs, personality traits, health practices, the communication and information sources they use, their shopping habits and income. It is necessary and important to tease out some of the threads of the assemblage to gain some partial insights into how they create effects. The challenge is, however, to do so in a way that does not make them appear linear, isolated, at risk of being reduced to merely a list of this component or that, but retains the idea of their inter-relationship in a dynamic and evolving network of connections. The first half of this chapter focuses on the 'things' that made up the supplement displays presented by the participants: the containers of products and the other material things that the participants brought to my attention, as well as the physical surroundings where they were arranged. I move on to analyse what the participants told me about the physical and psychological effects on their wellbeing that they ascribed to these 'things.' I revisit the concept of the life force in all things, this time to reflect on what was said and implied about things as enablers to spiritual or transcendent experiences and how this linked with participants' remarks about their wellbeing, and their purpose in life. 99 I draw briefly on Bourdieu's (1990) concept of the habitus to look separately and in combination at the cultural histories and social discourses about material things that participants reported they had used in self-care remedies. In general terms, the habitus has been described as: ...a system of schemes of perception and discriminations embodied as disposition reflecting the entire history of the [cultural] group and acquired through the formative experiences of childhood. The structural code of the culture is inscribed as the habitus and generates the production of social practice (Nash, 1999: 177). For individuals, the notion of the habitus refers to the embedded cultural capital that underlies beliefs and assumption about how to behave (Bourdieu, 1990; King, 2000). The habitus has been seen as deterministic, limiting and constraining, and a means of social control (Garnham & Williams, 1980), that is, entirely contrary to the concept of the tangled rhizomatic assemblage which is always unpredictable, changing and becoming. The two are, however, not necessarily opposed; according to McNay (1999), the habitus should not be read in this way, but as a generative structure which "establishes an active and creative relation" between an individual and the world, giving rise to a wide variety of behaviour patterns, though remaining only "relatively unpredictable" (McNay 1999: 100-101). Dovey (2011) directly links Bourdieu and Deleuze and Guattari's thinking, showing how the two, although they have differences, are conceptually connected: Both habitus and assemblage are immanent to everyday life rather than transcendent abstractions; the rules of the habitus can be read as codes of the assemblage. .... the major contrast is that Bourdieu stresses the inertia embedded in the habitus, whereas Deleuze and Guatarri stress flow, change and potential (Dovey 2011: 350-51). While the supplements remain the 'things' of key focus, in the second half of the chapter I look at a range of other actants that were prominent in the evolving assemblage and were connected with the participants and their supplement practices. These include the cell phones and computers that participants used to find what they wanted to know about products and where to get them, or to search for information about the kind of treatments that might be useful for particular health needs they had. They also include the online systems that track what individuals are looking for and amass sets of data that allow companies to target them with promotions for products they are likely to find relevant. I note the way the participants were engaged in different ways with all these actants, but at the same time were actants in the 100 assemblage themselves, caught up in a dynamic process of evolution that linked the human and non-human. The power of the material product By far the majority of my interviews for the study took place in the participants' homes and nearly all of them invited me to view a display of their supplements. Often the person I was interviewing had arranged their bottles and jars on a table or other surface in a relatively public space of their home apparently specially for our meeting (see Figure 1 below). These were often accompanied by offers of hospitality. Others showed me in to more private areas of their kitchen or bedroom to point out their supplements in their usual place in a pantry or on a shelf. A few of the participants who had chosen to meet me in my office or a cafe also brought their products along to show me. As if following a script known to them all (although none of them knew one another) they pointed to them or picked them up one by one, telling me where they bought each one, which brand they favoured and why. Figure 1: Supplement products arranged for showing. Author's photo simulation. 101 A similar phenomenon on a parallel scale occurred in most of the health stores and pharmacies I visited. While these were shop displays for the public rather than a private home, the participants who showed me round demonstrated that they were just as personally invested in their products as the people I had visited at home. The person I was interviewing would invite me on a viewing tour of their 'natural health' section. They walked me through it, explaining why they stocked the particular ranges, the brands they preferred and why, and the emphasis they placed on the quality of the various products they sold. There was the same focus on the supplements' materiality, the packages of 'things'. This was in spite of the information I had sent out to all participants explaining that I was interested in how and why people came to be regular supplement users or sellers, and not in the details of what they took or what they sold. Initially I considered these displays to be a distraction I needed to get past so I could ask the questions I had formulated, but as it happened again and again, I realised I was in danger of overlooking something vitally important about the power and presence of these material 'things' in the participants' lives; that they represented people's "hopes, imaginings and desires... an element in identity construction, moralities, routines, relationships, care, healing and home making" (Hodgetts et al., 2011: 353). An interesting aspect of the displays was that the supplements and their containers appeared to be one and the same thing. In the entire course of the study, not one of the participants ever opened up a container to show me the contents and no one commented on the respective formats (tablets versus capsules or liquids), the type of coating, or any other characteristic. The physical appearance or the texture of the 'things' that were ingested appeared to be a matter in which no one was interested. Later, when reflecting on this, I found that the same phenomenon held true for the marketing and promotional literature that I collected during the study; there were no images of the tablets, capsules or liquids, either on their own, or being taken by people. The container and its contents appeared to be synonymous - a total package, but one that was loaded with meaning beyond its mundane appearance. The package and the understanding about its contents seemed to symbolise meaningful experiences and events in the individual participant's life that had come together in these material things and which formed an important part of their story that they wanted me to hear. The communicative and symbolic power of packaging is well recognised: Packaging is tangible in nature, a three dimensional marketing communication vehicle that is integrally tied to the product offering. The package resides in the home [or on 102 the shelf] potentially becoming part of the consumer's life; a phenomenon that represents a type of lived experience (Underwood, 2003: 62). Compelling product packaging, however, seemed to be only a partial and largely unsatisfactory explanation for what I had witnessed in my visits to the participants. Their displays of products also brought to mind the incense, flowers, fruits and other everyday objects I had seen displayed on altars in Hindu or Buddhist households, or descriptions I had read of the altars to the household gods of the Romans - the Lares and Penates - where offerings such as wheat, honey, and wine were placed as part of private religious practices (Bodel, 2008). I experienced the same feeling of 'thing power' that Bennett (2010: 4) has described; the containers of supplements "issued a call ... I caught a glimpse of an energetic vitality inside each of these things, things that I generally conceived of as inert". While these displays were one way that the 'thing power' showed itself in the study, it was not the only one. Quite a different manifestation occurred in a small group of participants, all of whom were involved in a professional capacity with selling products and providing advice or therapy to members of the public. In contrast to the majority of participants who were so clearly positively engaged with their supplements, these few took pains to distance themselves from any personal investment in the 'things'. Their comments seemed to be designed to construct themselves to me as being only peripherally engaged with the supplement side of their workplace. One referred several times to having a hands-off approach to the 'natural health' side of the business, and that the day-to-day activities were left to "the girls" (Lyndsay) to manage.