As recently argued by the British Pharmacopoeia Commission, a "monograph, taken as a whole, should provide a reliable basis for making an independent judgement as to the quality of the substance in the 43 It should be noted that while the United Kingdom's 1968 Medicines Act did end up exempting from licensing those non-industrially produced herbal remedies sold without any written recommendations as to their use, manufacturers of herbal remedies were not exempt and were thus in urgent need of a scientific reference book to which they could refer in applications for product licenses (see Griggs 1997: 281-85). 44 As was the case in the UK, the 1965 European Council directive on medicinal products sparked a national review of medicines regulation in Germany, eventually leading to the passing of a Second Medicines Act in 1976. In order to ensure that all medicines sold on the German market were in compliance with this new act, the German Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices (BfArM) established 15 commissions to review available quality, safety and efficacy data, the so-called Commission E being responsible for the review of herbal medicines. 94 interests of the protection of the public" (British Pharmacopoeia Commission 2004). Hence, the ordering and updating of information on medicinal plants and herbal remedies as witnessed in the mapping out efforts of scientists in Vietnam, the United Kingdom and indeed throughout the world - i.e. the conversion or updating of herbals and treatises into monograph-based pharmacopoeias - has been a prerequisite first step in the normalisation of herbal medicines. The natural, the contaminated and the counterfeit As already noted, herbal medicine is often presented as a gentler, kinder and more 'natural' alternative to modern pharmaceuticals, not least in terms of the marketing of herbal medicinal products today. Advertisements and packaging labels often hail these products as '100% natural! ', 'organic', 'conventionally grown' or 'wild crafted', while citing evidence of low toxicity and good efficacy from published scientific research and clinical trials. Indeed, what could be more natural than the plants that grow around us? Moreover, herbalists also point to long histories of use as a sound indication of both safety and efficacy (why otherwise would these remedies still be around today, they ask), an argument that has not gone unheeded in recent regulatory efforts aiming to regularise the sale of herbal medicinal products. But a lot has happened since the days of Tue Tinh, John Gerard, Nicholas Culpeper and Lan Ong. Perhaps most significantly, while herbal medicine has long been a commercialised field of patent medicines and medicinal plant markets, over the past century or so it has transformed into a highly-technologised, multi-million dollar industry. Inspired by the pioneer work of German natural products chemists and companies in the 1920s and 1930s,45 the industrialisation of medicinal plants into what have come to be known as 'phytomedicines' has developed into a global activity with supply chains spanning all the world's continents. Indeed, the late 20th century 'boom' in herbal medicine, often cited as evidence of the growing popularity of alternative and traditional medicines, refers in large part to rapid rises in the sales figures for phytomedicines throughout the 1980s and 1990s (see Gaedcke and Steinhoff 2002; Richter 2003). For this reason, a good part of recent regulatory attention has been directed at industrially produced herbal medicines, rather than the dried, comminuted or crushed starting materials (leaves, buds, 45 See Timmermann (2001) and Kenny (2002) for discussions on how companies like Madaus, supported by the National Socialist regime took the lead in researching and industrially developing herbal medicines. 95 flowers, stems, bark, etc.) from which extracts are prepared and active ingredients isolated and purified for industrial mass production. Nevertheless, growing interest in herbal medicine has meant that all parts of the herbal medicine production chain have come under renewed regulatory scrutiny. If we look at the past few decades worth of measures to regulate the production and sale of herbal medicinal products in both the United Kingdom and Vietnam, it is clear that safety and quality concerns have been at the fore, much more so than the purported (lack of) efficacy of these products. This regulatory focus on safety and quality issues has no doubt been a bi-product of the increased demand for herbal medicines that both countries have experienced since the 1960s,46 coupled with the increasing industrialisation of these herbal medicines into tinctures, capsules or tablets, augmenting risks of contamination and adulteration. In the wake of these global trends and in contrast to claims of a gentler, kinder and more natural herbal medicine, regulatory authorities are increasingly advising consumers, firstly, that 'natural does not necessarily mean safe' and, secondly, that in some cases these medicines are turning out to be 'not so natural after all'. A report from the UK Herbal Medicine Regulatory Working Group outlines the reasons why: For a long time... medicines law... left herbal medicine essentially unregulated in terms of quality and safety... But in recent years, along with a rapid expansion of the herbal sector, questions have arisen about the quality and safety of some herbal products. These questions have been variously associated with (a) adverse effects resulting from the inherent toxicity of certain herbal ingredients (natural does not always mean safe); (b) misidentification or substitution of one plant species for another, in some cases leading to the substitution of a safe with a toxic species; (c) adulteration of herbal medicines with prescription-only drugs or heavy metals; (d) microbial or fungal contamination of herbal remedies; (e) discovery of possible herb-drug interactions which may interfere with or confuse the results of treatment; (f) insufficient information provided to the consumer concerning the safe use of a herbal medicine. (Great Britain. Department of Health. European Herbal Practitioners Association. Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health. 2004: 142) It seems, then, that the (re)popularisation and industrialisation of herbal medicines has been a bitter-sweet process. Notwithstanding improvements in quality, dosage-consistency and 46 Although herbal medicine has clearly never been marginalised in Vietnam to the extent it has been in the United Kingdom, as noted in the previous chapter, colonial policies had a definite negative impact on the supply and practice of traditional medicine in Vietnam, especially in urban areas. As a result, commentators in Vietnam often refer to a 'revival' in interest and use of traditional medicine that started somewhere around the 1960s (see Hoang, et al. 1999; Vietnam News 2003) 96 shelf-life, the development of phytomedicines has also removed both patient and practitioner from the vicinity of the 'naturally growing' medicinal plants themselves, thereby increasing opportunities for the contamination, adulteration and violation of the 'natural', as these medicinal plants are increasingly mass-cultivated, harvested, dried, transported, extracted, treated, manufactured into tablets and then packaged before they reach practitioner or user. So, while some oft-used herbal medicine ingredients such as ephedra47 have been charged with causing adverse reactions in their unadulterated, 'natural' forms due to an inherent toxicity,48 it is by far the industrially relevant problems of substitution, contamination and adulteration that have come to shape the regulation of herbal medicinal products in recent years. So much so that documenting a herbal medicine's long history of use is no longer necessarily a sufficient indication of safety, a point that was highlighted in the European Council's first directive on traditional herbal medicinal products from 2004, due for implementation in the UK in 2005: Even a long tradition does not exclude the possibility that there may be concerns with regard to the product's safety, and therefore the competent authorities should be entitled to ask for all data necessary for assessing the safety. [Moreover,] the quality aspect of the medicinal product is independent of its traditional use so that no derogation should be made with regard to the necessary physico-chemical, biological and microbiological tests. (European Council 2004: SS5) Even in a country like Vietnam, where the majority of herbal medicine users continue to live in rural settings often growing medicinal plants in their own gardens, safety concerns brought on by the global industrialisation of herbal medicine have not gone unnoticed. In large part, this is because the strategy to modernise Vietnamese traditional medicine launched by President Ho Chi Minh in the 1950s has included a large-scale programme to industrialise a great number of the most used and most relevant herbal remedies in the country: of the over 10,000 medicines that had been authorised for sale on the Vietnamese market by 2004, over 2,000 were classified as herbal medicines (Vietnam. Institute of Drug Quality Control. 2004); the Institute of Materia Medica whose mandate it has been to 47 Ephedra is a "naturally occurring substance" that was banned by the Food and Drug Administration in December 2003 for presenting an "unreasonable risk" to the public on the basis of adverse reaction reports that suggested ephedrine-alkaloids were responsible for raising blood pressure and stressing the body's circulatory system (United States. Food and Drug Administration. 2003). 48 And in fact, when inherent toxicity is to blame for adverse reactions this has often come about because of an initial misidentification and substitution of medicinal plant species (cf. Great Britain. Department of Health. European Herbal Practitioners Association. Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health. 2004) 97 modernise traditional medical formulations has developed "thousands" of industrially produced herbal remedies since the 1960s (Bui 2004); and, finally, the harvesting and cultivation of medicinal plants for both export and national use has become a lucrative business (Vietnam Economy 2003b). It was for these reasons that the Ministry of Health, after consultations with the WHO and other national health authorities in the region, approved Decision 371/BYT-QD on the 12th of March 1996 introducing new requirements for the safety and efficacy of herbal medicines (Vietnam. Ministry of Health. 1996). These regulations require that any new herbal medicine applying for marketing authorisation must undergo a series of tests to see whether the product meets quality, safety and efficacy standards. Product samples must be sent to the national Institute of Drug Quality Control (IDQC), where one out of four quality control laboratories is specifically dedicated to herbal medicines. Laboratory scientists will then carry out tests to authenticate (as best as possible) declared plant species and composition, chemical analysis, microbial and heavy metal contamination tests, chronic toxicity tests, sub toxicity tests and pharmacological studies. One of the major safety concerns to have come out of the industrialisation of herbal medicines in Vietnam has been the deliberate, illegal lacing of traditional herbal medicines with synthetic medicines for increased potency. Such blends are classed as "counterfeit drugs" in Vietnam, and their manufacturers are the target of counterfeit-combating programmes, whereby detection of adulteration at the laboratories of the IDQC can lead to an immediate product recall by the Ministry of Health as well as fines to the manufacturer (Vietnam. Institute of Drug Quality Control 2003). At the same time, however, the mandate of the IDQC is not limited to industrially manufactured herbal medicines, but also includes the "raw materials" or starting materials of herbal medicine. The IDQC laboratories receive samples from a number of markets for medicinal plants on a weekly basis, the quality of which is checked against 'control profiles' that have been compiled over the years. The IDQC can also, in principle, make unannounced calls on the dispensaries of traditional herbalists in order to control the quality of herbal ingredients being prescribed to patients, especially in terms of pesticide or heavy metal contamination, as many of the most popular herbs are by now mass-cultivated using modern agricultural techniques. The clandestine import of significant quantities of medicinal herbs and products from China and other parts of the region, which have not been subject to any quality controls, has also been identified as a safety concern (see World Bank 1993: 46). 98 The point here is not that a once 'natural' practice of taking herbal medicines in Vietnam has now become saturated with rules and regulations where regulators leave no stone unturned, from the urban centres to the remotest of rural villages (if for no other reason than lack of resources).49 Rather, it is to demonstrate how problematisations of the safety and quality of otherwise "less aggressive and less toxic" traditional herbal medicines of Vietnam are being played out in very concrete terms in the face of global industrialisation. This has happened through the introduction of such normalising measures as the Ministry of Health's new safety and efficacy requirements for herbal medicines, Good Manufacturing Principles to be followed by herbal medicine manufacturers, as well as sustainable cultivation and harvesting programmes to preserve medicinal plant species (see Nguyen 1999). If the safety and quality of herbal medicine is going to be ensured and improved in Vietnam, former Director of the Institute of Materia Medica, Prof. Dr. Nguyen Van Dan argues that "as well as traditional methodology we need to utilize new processing methodology with modern facilities and technology and the most advanced methods of quality control" (Nguyen 1999: 48). Three decades after the 1941 Pharmacy and Medicines Act had revoked the right of herbalists in the United Kingdom to supply herbal medicines to patients on the grounds of protecting the public, the 1968 Medicines Act50 ended up reversing this decision by exempting herbal medicines from the need for marketing authorisation if one of two specific sets of conditions were met. Section 12.1 of the Act exempted non-industrially manufactured herbal remedies that were assembled or combined on the premises of a herbalist as a direct consequence of a one-to-one consultation. Moreover, the plants included in these remedies could only be dried, crushed or comminuted, the remedy could not be sold with any written instructions as to its use, and the remedy designation could only specify the plant or plants included and possibly the process of their combination. 49 Indeed, even following the introduction of the 1996 safety and efficacy requirements, the vast majority of licensed herbal medicines on the Vietnamese market have not been controlled against these standards (Bui 2004). 50 While it is outside the scope of this dissertation to discuss this in detail, it is important to note that an increasing focus on safety and efficacy in herbal medicine should be understood in the context of the Kefauver-Harris Amendments of 1962 in the United States, the European Council Directive 65/65/EEC on medicinal products from 1965 and the 1968 Medicines Act in the UK, all of which arose on the back of the thalidomide scandal of the early 1960s. The subsequent rise of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) into a 'gold standard' as well as evidence based medicine (EBM) are also key (see Griggs 1997; Kaptchuk 1998a; Willis and White 2004). 99 There was also an exemption in section 12.2 for pre-prepared herbal remedies that were "non-industrially" produced according to traditional methods (drying, crushing or comminuting), which could be sold over-the-counter provided that no brand name, curative claims or usage information was written on the product. These exemptions were possible because of a 1965 European Council directive definition of medicinal products as "industrially produced" products that were either "presented for treating or preventing disease in human beings or animals", or that "may be administered to human beings or animals with a view to making a medical diagnosis or to restoring, correcting or modifying physiological functions in human beings or in animals" (European Council 1965: Article 1.2), as well as following the work being carried out by the BHMA Scientific Committee to produce medicinal herb monographs. If an industrially produced herbal medicine did fall under the Council's definition, and this was the case for an increasing number of phytomedicines, then the product would have to apply for a marketing authorisation in the same costly and time-consuming manner that conventional medicines did, if not it would be exempt. However, as sales of herbal medicines began climbing from the 1970s onwards, regulatory authorities in the UK began voicing concerns over the lack of quality controls in the unlicensed herbal sector, i.e. those herbal remedies that were being sold via the section 12 exemptions. Apart from sales restrictions on certain toxic plants, no regulatory measures existed to ensure the safety and quality of those herbal remedies being provided through one-to-one consultations with herbalists, or of those traditionally prepared herbal remedies being sold over-the-counter. Moreover, production methods for section 12.2 over-the-counter herbal medicinal products were becoming increasingly sophisticated, bringing into question the distinction between non-industrially and industrially produced products (Great Britain. Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency. 2004a: 26). By the 1990s, a number of reports of adverse reactions resulting from the intake of (especially contaminated and adulterated) herbal medicines were being published in scientific journals and media, ultimately leading to the enforced prohibition or recall of certain herbal medicinal products in many different countries.51 The situation was deemed sufficiently 51 For example, in 2003, herbal products containing ephedrine were prohibited by the Food and Drug Administration in America, products manufactured by Pan Pharmaceuticals in Australia were recalled following a number of reports of adverse effects (the largest product recall ever in Australia), and in the United Kingdom the unlicensed sale of Kava-kava was prohibited by health authorities. 100 critical by 2002 for the Medicines Control Agency to announce that it had finally "reached a wide measure of agreement with the UK herbal sector that the current arrangements for unlicensed herbal medicinal products do not afford sufficient protection for public health and that there is a need to improve the regulatory position" (Great Britain. Medicines Control Agency. 2002: SS4). How exactly to improve this regulatory position has been the subject of a great deal of debate and disagreement between herbalists, health authorities, herbal manufacturers and consumers. And although it is difficult to predict what the final outcome of a new herbal regulatory regime will look like, a few initiatives have already been implemented suggesting a provisionally threefold classification of herbal medicines. Industrially produced herbal medicinal products that fit under the European Council's definition of a medicinal product in the updated "Directive 2001/83/EC on the Community code relating to medicinal products for human use" will have to apply for marketing authorisation on the basis of the same kind of safety, quality and efficacy documentation that is required of conventional pharmaceutical products. However, with the adoption of Directive 2004/24/EC on "traditional herbal medicinal products", a new class of herbal medicines and consequently a new form of authorisation has been introduced, which is currently in the process of superseding the section 12.2 exemption for over-the-counter herbal remedies in the United Kingdom.