On the appropriate, safe and responsible practice and use of TM and CAM At the twenty-second World Health Assembly of the WHO, held in Boston in July 1969, a resolution was passed expressing "concern... about the hazards and economic wastage connected with the empirical use of [traditional medicines] as long as their efficacy and safety have not been established" (WHO 1969). The resolution did go on, however, to request that the Director-General of the WHO study and report back on this "widespread use of various traditional medicines", leading to the formation of a Working Group on Traditional Medicine which in turn would eventually become the Traditional Medicine Programme of the WHO. Not least as a result of the efforts of this working group in the 1970s, the "concern" that had been expressed by the World Health Assembly in 1969 had 33 For example, the Foundation for Integrated Health gives this caution to potential CAM users: "A friend of yours may tell you that her arthritis got better after she was treated with a particular complementary therapy. This is interesting and good news for your friend, but you should really have more information before you make a decision about which complementary therapy to use" (Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005: 9). 79 by 1977 turned into "recogni[tion] that traditional systems of medicine in developing countries have a heritage of community acceptance, and have played and continue to play an important part in providing health care" (WHO 1977). This, some might argue, reluctant shift in WHO strategy was finally cemented at a meeting held in Geneva from 28 November to 2 December 197734 on "the promotion and development of traditional medicine" (WHO 1978). The challenge addressed at this meeting was no longer how to discourage traditional medicine and its practitioners, but rather how to ensure that traditional medicine and its practitioners contributed to rather than hindered national public health objectives.35 Two decades later, in 2001, following countless consultations and studies in member states, an answer to this new question was forthcoming: Recognizing the widespread use of traditional and complementary/ alternative medicine and the tremendous expansion of international markets for herbal products, it is all the more important to ensure that the health care provided by traditional and complementary/ alternative medicine is safe and reliable; that standards for the safety, efficacy, and quality control of herbal products and traditional and complementary/alternative therapies are established and upheld; that practitioners have the qualifications they profess; and that the claims made for products and practices are valid. These issues have become important concerns for both health authorities and the public. National policies are a key part of addressing these concerns. (WHO 2001: 4, my emphasis) Within this short summary of what have been identified as the key obstacles to the further mobilisation of TM and CAM in public health delivery lies the sketch of a new public health rationality. Gone is the provocative colonial language of 'quackery', 'backwardness', 'sorcery' or 'witchcraft', only to be replaced by a new normativity of 'responsible practice', 'appropriate use' and 'safe and effective therapies'. And by extension it is in the irresponsible practice, inappropriate use as well as unsafe and ineffective therapies that I argue we can once again identify a quackery with a difference today. What I mean by this is that the kind of dividing practices that in the past were often mobilised to separate a biomedical 'us' from a shady non-biomedical 'them' have been 34 The same year, incidentally, that the Dutch Commission on Alternative Systems of Medicine was formed as one of the first in Europe. 35 It is telling to note that while the role of traditional medicine in providing healthcare to the populations of 'developing countries' was recognized in the aforementioned 1977 World Health Assembly resolution on the "Promotion and development of training and research in traditional medicine" (WHO 1977), it was at the same time emphasised that "primary health care in developing countries has not reached the bulk of populations", suggesting that even if the majority of people (60-80% by their own estimates) were relying on an unregulated and unsupervised traditional medicine sector for their health needs, this did not constitute "primary health care". 80 internalised into a multiplicity of different therapies and treatments. Just as qualified biomedical practitioners have long been distinguished from unqualified persons, today TM and CAM practitioners are being mobilised to distinguish the qualified from the unqualified and the competent from the incompetent within their own individual forms of therapy. In the following chapter, I will address the ways in which the products, practitioners and patients of British and Vietnamese herbal medicine have each become objects of public health problematisation in recent decades. For now, I will focus on how the irresponsible, incompetent or dangerous practice of TM and CAM in general has come to be problematised and tackled through targeted public health interventions in the two countries under scrutiny here. It is possible to identify two general priorities in ongoing efforts to ensure the safe and responsible practice of TM and CAM in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom. The first has been a concerted effort to encourage the unification and organisation of practitioners of particular therapies into accountable, transparent and representative Associations. In the UK, where homeopaths and herbalists, for example, have a long history of self-organisation dating back to the 19th century, underscoring their premise that good CAM regulation helps the public know where to look, the House of Lords Select Committee argued that "the public cannot have full confidence in those therapies where there is considerable professional fragmentation" and consequently recommended that "in order to protect the public, professions with more than one regulatory body make a concerted effort to bring their various bodies together and to develop a clear professional structure" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 5.12). It is without doubt the case that both historically and contemporarily, many forms of CAM in the UK have been characterised by such fragmentation, with a wide array of organisations representing not just different CAM therapies, but also different groups of practitioners within each individual therapy.36 Osteopaths and chiropractors were the first to be given statutory recognition through Parliamentary Acts, in 1993 and 1994 respectively, in return for a commitment to self-regulate their own practitioners by establishing a unified register of qualified practitioners as well as ensuring strict education and curriculum criteria. Herbal medicine and acupuncture are currently next in line for 36 See chapter 4 for a discussion of such fragmentation as regards herbal medicine. 81 statutory recognition since, as argued in the Select Committee report, the practice of "both acupuncture and herbal medicine do carry inherent risk, beyond the extrinsic risk that all CAMs pose, which is the risk of omission of conventional medical treatment" (Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 5.54). Practitioners of other therapies have also been encouraged to join forces under single umbrella organisations, although at this stage not with an imminent prospect of statutory recognition. In Vietnam, practitioners of traditional medicine have also had a long history of organisation dating back to at least the 15th century Royal Court of Medicine of the Ho dynasty (Nguyen 1965: 23). In more recent times, as already pointed out, the National Association of Traditional Practitioners has mushroomed into numerous provincial and district level chapters throughout the country. From its beginnings, the national strategy to combine traditional and modern medicine has worked "to integrate [these associations] progressively into the socialist medical organisation" (ibid. : 30). It is these associations, as we will see later, that have become pivotal in a recent push to mobilise apprentice-trained, rather than university-educated, traditional practitioners by developing a licensing system at the district level. The second, and in many ways most important, priority in efforts to ensure the safe and responsible practice of TM and CAM has been to specifically target the qualifications and competencies of its practitioners. Indeed, if there is one feature one were asked to highlight from the ongoing transformations in quackery that I am accounting for in this chapter, it would have to be the mapping out of practitioner subjectivities as a concrete sight of public health intervention. For if the public is to be safeguarded and their health promoted, then it is clear that the public must be protected from what in recent TM and CAM regulatory initiatives have variously been called the "incompetent and dangerous practitioners", the "unskilled or unscrupulous practitioners" and the "unqualified individuals" of these therapies (British Medical Association 1993; European Parliament. Committee on the Environment 1997; Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000). To tackle this pressing objective, which it must be stressed has in no way been unique to TM and CAM but rather has with equal urgency obligated 82 biomedical practitioners,37 a number of practical initiatives have been launched as a means to install what the UK's Herbal Medicine Regulatory Working Group has called "procedures to protect patients and the public from individuals it deems unfit to practise" (Great Britain. Department of Health. European Herbal Practitioners Association. Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health. 2003: 19).38 Based on its own experiences, the British Medical Association has argued that five important areas should be covered by these procedures: To provide a code of conduct, a disciplinary procedure, and a complaints procedure; to provide minimum standards of training and to supervise training courses and accreditation; to understand and advertise areas of competence, including limits of competence within each therapy; to keep an up to date register of qualified practitioners; and to provide and publicise information on CAM. (cited in Great Britain. Parliament. House of Lords. Select Committee on Science and Technology. 2000: 5.14) And as Clarke et al. (2004) have suggested, one might well conceptualise such a task in terms of a Foucauldian understanding of ethics, since such procedures propose very specific modes of relating to oneself which, in turn, make available a whole range of technologies and techniques of the self to carry out desirable forms of ascesis on oneself. In other words, a relationship with oneself that incites a kind of permanent self-scrutiny and self-fashioning, in this case fashioning into a 'competent' and 'responsible' TM or CAM practitioner, not only by securing minimum competency and thereby registration as a qualified practitioner, but also by an ongoing engagement with what is increasingly referred to as 'continuing professional development'.39 As argued by the WHO, it is about "improving their skills in... prescribing and utilizing medicines in safe and consistent ways" as well as "[e]xpanding the knowledge and skills of traditional health practitioners 37 While it is outside the scope of this dissertation to dwell on this point, it is more than relevant to highlight that the biomedical profession has itself since the mid-20th century seen a considerable rise in cases of "(un)fitness to practice" as well as of "serious professional misconduct" (see Bradby, et al. 1995; Stacey and General Medical Council 1992). Also in Vietnam, the Communist Party has recently argued that "the seamy side of a market economy involves the risk of fading away the noble ethics of the physician" (Vietnam. Communist Party of Vietnam. 2005). 38 It is interesting to learn that just as biomedicine has had its 'deviant insiders' and 'heretics', the establishment of educational requirements and disciplinary procedures is increasingly allowing for the emergence of 'alternative heretics' and 'deviants', i.e. those alternative practitioners who do not fully concur with or practice according to the standards and criteria of an established occupational/professional organisation (see Clarke, et al. 2004; Welsh, et al. 2004). 39 See Clarke et al. (2004, especially pp. 336-7) for an empirical discussion that situates Foucault's notion of 'techniques of the self' in the contrasting experiences of an association of Chinese herbalists and an association of chiropractors in their quest for statutory self-regulation in the United Kingdom. 83 so they can assume more responsible roles in primary health care programmes" (WHO 1995: 47, 9). For TM and CAM practitioners, these professional procedures and the techniques of the self they demand of their members become a kind of (self-)policing mechanism, as they stipulate the minimum qualifications, kinds of conduct, professional training requirements and annual fees that are demanded of them and fellow practitioners if they are to be authorised as registered practitioners of their particular healing profession. In return, they are given access to various kinds of support in their continuing professional development, the right to use a certain protected titles such as 'herbalist', 'traditional medicine physician', 'acupuncturist' or 'chiropractor', as well as guidelines on how to act in challenging clinical situations (e.g. when to refer a patient to a biomedical doctor). But it is also these self-policing mechanisms that have proven contentious in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom as they inevitably generate grounds for an entire range of exclusionary practices. At risk of exclusion in the UK are all those practitioners who, for whatever reasons, either cannot live up to the requirements of their Associations or, once registered, breach codes of conduct. The prospects for this outsider group are that while they will share a common lack of access to a protected title and register, their reasons for being excluded can be as varied as not being able to afford Association membership dues and post-registration exclusion because of "unacceptable professional conduct" (Great Britain. Department of Health. European Herbal Practitioners Association. Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health. 2003: 121). In Vietnam, the Association of Traditional Practitioners has yet to introduce any kind of formalised minimum requirements for membership nor has it agreed upon a binding code of conduct. Nevertheless, as we will be seeing in the following chapter, ever since the early 1990s when Vietnam's fourth constitution made it "strictly forbidden for private organisations and individuals to dispense medical treatment, or to produce and trade in medicaments illegally, thereby damaging the people's health" (Vietnam. 1992: Article 39), a licensing system for private practitioners of traditional medicine has been developed in cooperation with local chapters of the Association of Traditional Practitioners. Moreover, the Ministry of Health has also introduced an "Ordinance on the Practice of Private Medicine and Pharmacy" in October 1993, and more recently "Circular No.13/1999/TT-BYT guiding the implementation of the ordinance on the practice of private medicine and 84 pharmacy, regarding the traditional medicine and pharmacy" in July 1999. According to these new regulations "those who wish to be granted the certificates of general or specialised traditional medicine physician or of traditional medicine pharmacist... shall have to pass an examination organised by the Ministry of Health" (Vietnam. Ministry of Health. 1999a). What members of the public as well as health authorities get from such procedures of (self-)policing is what might be thought of as a whole range of practices of assurance from the TM and CAM practitioners they consult or sanction. They are assurances of accountability, competency and ethical conduct, with all the debates over just what constitutes 'safety', 'quality' and 'efficacy' that have unavoidably followed. Debates we will be returning to time and again in the following chapters. As summarised in a recent British consumer guide on CAM, these practices of assurance serve to provide the public with clear information on "how to find a properly qualified and competent complementary practitioner [and] what to do if you are unhappy with treatment" (Prince of Wales's Foundation for Integrated Health 2005: 7). In Vietnam, where the government has been actively integrating traditional medicine into national health delivery for many decades now, such practices of assurance have especially focused on educating both traditional and modern practitioners about each others' theories and practices of healing. In more recent years, however, there has been a specific push to upgrade the qualifications of apprentice-trained herbal practitioners with the help of local Associations of Traditional Practitioners and the above-mentioned licensing system (see chapter 4). As has been argued by Vietnam's Communist Party, in Vietnam, regardless of whether specialised in traditional or modern healing practices, "each and every health official and worker must always uphold medical ethics and improve his/her professional capacity to deserve the trust and praise of society" (Vietnam. Communist Party of Vietnam. 2005: 1.5). Conclusion: a quackery with a difference Whether it is with the prime objective of promoting or protecting public health, the mobilisation of TM and CAM in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom continues to gather pace today. This, I have argued, is markedly at odds with early 20th century strategies of marginalisation, subordination and exclusion, which ironically enough were also justified as concrete means to protect and promote the public health. It is the form of the problem that has changed. In no way unique to the two countries in question here, this 85 change in tactics has perhaps most succinctly been summarised by the White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine, who in 2002 argued that: the question is not, 'Should [people] be using complementary and alternative medicine modalities?' as many - perhaps most - already are doing so... Until recently, the primary response of Federal, state, and local health care regulatory agencies to this phenomenon was to restrict access to and delivery of Complementary and Alternative Medicine services to protect the public from unproven and potentially dangerous treatments. Since the early 1990s, however, scientific evidence has begun to emerge suggesting that some CAM approaches and products, when used appropriately, can be beneficial for treating illness and promoting health. (United States. White House Commission on Complementary and Alternative Medicine 2002, my emphasis) To this summary we can now also add 'when practiced responsibly'. The shift is conspicuous. Rather than marginalise, exclude or restrict access to practitioners of traditional and alternative medicines (as happened in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom in the early 20th century), the aim of contemporary efforts to regulate TM and CAM has been recast into what might be termed a normalisation of its practice and use. And in the process, it seems that we are once again witnessing the emergence of a quackery with a difference. Whereas in the 18th and 19th centuries a large part of the battles against quackery were fought out in a commercial field of miracle cures and patent medicines and in the late 19th and early 20th centuries this battleground expanded into an epistemological field of competing theories of health and illness, in both Vietnam and the United Kingdom today the battlefield it seems is once again shifting, this time into an ethical field of practitioner competency, qualifications, conduct, responsibility and personal professional development. This is not to say that the fraudulent sale of miracle cures has ceased or that the exaggeration of practitioner abilities has entirely disappeared. This much will become clear in the following chapter. Neither is it to suggest that all forms of TM and CAM have been welcomed 'into the fold' in either country.