(Craig 2002: 213, 160) What is needed instead, Craig suggests, is a symbiosis of global and local rationalities where global drug regulations "mimic the modalities of existing household drug regulation by taking on, for example, the simple formulism of popular drug mnemonics, so they can travel within local, oral discursive formations" (ibid. : 214). In this way, incommensurability can be approached as a practical hurdle, amenable to technical interventions aimed at human subjectivities - awareness campaigns, localised strategies to encourage proper drug use, programmes to re-educate Vietnamese subjects about the proper use of traditional medicine, etc. - in ongoing efforts to harmonize Eastern and Western medicine. This is what I argue can be seen as part of an ongoing governmentalisation of individual and collective lifeworlds, where the cognitive and symbolic frameworks of individuals and populations come to be circumscribed and indeed harnessed in efforts to optimise life. A final important point to make is that, as already suggested, traditional medicine is increasingly being recruited in the treatment of the chronic and lifestyle-related diseases seen to result from Vietnam's ongoing modernisation, industrialisation and epidemiological transition. As diagnoses of addiction, musculoskeletal afflictions and mental illnesses have become more widespread, so too have traditional remedies for their treatment such as Heantos, the duong sinh vitality preservation method (see Table 5), as well as various acupuncture and massage regimens. Traditional treatments are often seen as more time consuming than modern medicines, yet perhaps for good reason, as they are seen as a means to address the underlying roots of a condition by restoring vital harmony and balance. In this way, just as is the case in the United Kingdom, ingesting certain herbal remedies is but one part of an overall task of health promotion, as traditional medicine also 217 aims to provide advice on nutrition, promote a healthy "mental life" and encourage balancing periods of work with sufficient rest (Hoang 1999). Table 5: Duong sinh vitality method130 These urban forms of grassroots techniques for coping with the vicissitudes of modern living in Vietnam often derive from symbolic frameworks provided by Sino-Vietnamese theories, where, as we saw earlier, illness is seen as "the result of an imbalance in vital energy - excess or insufficiency - in certain organs [and] the art of treatment consists, therefore, of strengthening, dispersing or normalizing the circulation of vital energy around the sick organ" (Hoang, et al. 1999: 6). Consequently, a multiplicity of techniques of the self are available for the management of this circulation of vital energy, including specific herbal remedies mixed together by herbalists in their shops, dietary advice given at a consultation with traditional practitioners or by family members, exercise techniques practiced by many on pavements as each new day breaks, as well as massage and acupuncture techniques offered by practitioners in their surgeries. Each of these is a component of what is considered a 'healthy lifestyle' (we might say 'anti-imbalance lifestyles') in Vietnam, aimed at promoting both longevity and quality of life through strategies of vitality preservation. 130 From Hoang (1999: 228). 218 And so, we can see how important ethical work on Vietnamese subjectivities has been to the promotion of health and traditional herbal medicine in the past few decades. To begin with, ethical pathologies of docility, passivity and inferiority attributed to decades of colonisation were actively counteracted through techniques of cultural revival and emancipation, which included a national project to collect and celebrate the experiences of traditional herbal practitioners throughout the country. Secondly, it has entailed addressing a certain perceived 'backwardness' of especially rural populations in Vietnam through targeted health education and hygiene programmes - an important part of which has been a much heralded "re-education" of Vietnamese populations in the 'appropriate' practice and use of their traditional herbal medicine,131 but not, for example, mediumship and healing. Also, "irrational" medicine use in a situation where modern and traditional medicines are freely available has recently been identified as a public health problem to be addressed through public health campaigns - "empowerment of the people, mothers in particular, is the key for success in promoting the proper use of drugs" (Okumura, et al. 2002: 1885). Thirdly, a diagnosed disorientation, confusion and cultural erosion stemming from economic, cultural and social forces of globalisation has been practically addressed through the mapping out and harnessing of traditional practices and folk beliefs (including traditional medicine) in the mooring of a Vietnamese national identity. Finally, traditional medicine therapies and techniques have recently come to be mobilised as central components in the promotion of healthy lifestyles in the face of pressures resulting from urbanisation, modernisation and industrialisation. And whatever the incommensurability of the multiple cognitive frameworks that are available to herbal medicine users in Vietnam, it is clear that life optimisation with the help of traditional herbal medicine in Vietnam is a matter of not only increasing life expectancy, but also of attending to quality of life aspects such as vitality, balance, wellbeing, coping and harmony. Conclusion: quality and quantity in temporal life In much the same way that life and its mechanisms - the body as organism and as species - came into a realm of explicit calculations from the 18th and 19th centuries onwards, what I have argued (taking my cue from Rose (1999), Rabinow (2003), Hacking (2002) and 131 This is an important point since even if herbal medicine use has never been close to being eradicated in Vietnam and the vast majority of households have used and continue to use them in their daily healthcare practices, "re-education" has been deemed necessary since there are 'inappropriate' ways of cultivating, preparing and consuming herbal medicines - just as there are 'irrational' ways of using antibiotics (see chapter 4). 219 Armstrong (2002)) in this chapter is that so too have human subjectivity and its mechanisms through a kind of governmentalisation of human subjectivities, both as individual lifeworld and as collective consciousness. Knowledge-power remains a potent agent of transformation of human life, but what I have shown here is that power exercised at the level of life in efforts to mobilise Vietnamese and British herbal medicine relies not just on anatomical and biological knowledge about its mechanisms (whether vitalistic or mechanistic), but also on psychological, sociological and anthropological knowledge about the mechanisms of human subjectivity. This interlinking of a politics of life itself with a politics of human subjectivity itself in a particular configuration is what I have called a neo-vitalisation of life, which in turn has contributed to the inauguration of quality of life as a crucial site of therapeutic intervention; accessible via technes (practical rationalities) of 'holistic healing' and yielding to a whole range of ascetic practices for working on the self - body and subjectivity - as a means to optimise subjects' quality and length of life. In this and previous chapters, I have argued that biology and anatomy are not somehow the exclusive domains of 'biomedicine', but rather can be seen as fields where varying theories and accounts of life and its mechanisms vie for plausibility, some of which are described as 'vitalistic' (e.g. those based on Sino-Vietnamese medicine) others as 'mechanist' (e.g. neuropharmacology). The ongoing debates, controversies, practices and transformations within these fields - the games of truth or battles for epistemological authority - are what have come to be referred to as the 'politics of life itself'. I have also argued that with the emergence of 'quality of life' out of modernisation critiques there is more to modern life than 'mere' subsistence. Vitality in Vietnam and the United Kingdom today, at least as pertains traditional herbal medicine, concerns both the subsistence and the existence of individuals and populations. And so, while longevity, mortality, disease and morbidity pertain to a temporal bio-physiological life; well-being, illness, coping, awareness, self-esteem and reflexivity are concepts that relate to an equally temporal quality of life - the ways in which bio-physiological life is experienced, taken advantage of, negotiated and coped with. And it is ongoing games of truth within this field of human existence that I suggest can helpfully be thought of in terms of a 'politics of human subjectivity itself'. As expert bodies of knowledge, anthropology and sociology have a lot to say about human subjectivities. Indeed, these subjectivities are one of the primary objects that these bodies of knowledge have ethnographically sought out in order to chart and describe in terms of 220 cultural values, understandings, identities, beliefs or drives. While some of the first anthropological and sociological theories and concepts accounted for a civilising subject (i.e. a subject who could free himself from immaturity via mechanisms of civilisation) as well as an emancipating subject (i.e. a subject who had become repressed, alienated and ossified yet who could be freed via mechanisms of emancipation), what has emerged out of 20th century sociology and anthropology (especially its medical sub-disciplines) has been a coping subject; a subject who upon becoming disoriented could regain coherence, balance and grounding via mechanisms of coping. It is these civilising, emancipating and coping subjects who time and again have been reconfirmed or disputed through what can only be described as an unprecedented stream of ethnographies throughout the 20th century. As Latour (1993) has suggested, having first travelled to the tropics of 'primitive' lands, ethnographers eventually returned home to subject their own cultures and peoples to the same kind of ethnographic inquiry that so-called 'peoples of rude cultures' had been. What I have shown in this chapter then, is how different sociological and anthropological ways of thinking about subjects have (re)surfaced and informed efforts to mobilise traditional herbal medicine in both Vietnam and the UK. Not that these have in any way been the only ways of thinking to have infused the practices of practitioners, researchers, regulators and users of herbal medicine, but they have certainly been present in very practical ways. And so what I am suggesting is that sociological and anthropological problematisations have actively contributed to the making up of the 'whole person' subjectivities that herbal medicine so crucially rely on by providing very specific theories of subjectivity formation - sociology and anthropology have looping effects. If this is so, is what I have described then not but a reaffirmation of the kind of westernised hegemonic dominance that many anthropological studies have exactly sought to undermine by pointing out the local particularities and rationalities of household knowledge? Where are the 'epistemologically incommensurable' bodies of knowledge rooted, for example, in indigenous Western herbalism or Sino-Vietnamese teachings on life and its optimisation? According to my analysis, they remain very much in circulation and operation in the laboratories of phytochemists, in patient consultations with herbal practitioners, in self-help and consumer awareness literature about herbal medicine, as well as in the daily health practices of herbal medicine users who more often than not use an eclectic range of medicines and treatments. Indeed they have actively been harnessed in quests for quality of 221 life. But these so-called 'epistemologically incommensurable', 'esoteric', 'folk' or subjugated bodies of knowledge are neither static nor alone, they are joined by biomedical, psychological, sociological and anthropological styles of reasoning, and it is exactly this multiplicity of rationalities and symbolic frameworks that has become amenable to mobilisation and/or problematisation when dealing with particular health issues. Indeed, it is this multiplicity that is time and again highlighted as the predominant characteristic of our so-called 'late' or 'high modern' condition, whether consulting an acupuncturist in London or a biomedical doctor in Hanoi. Yet, rather than suggest that we should distinguish emancipating and coping subjects as somehow more self-reflexive (than say 'early modern' or 'civilising' subjects), I would argue that it is the 20th century neo-vitalisation of life with quality of life that has obliged modern subjects to a particular kind of permanent self scrutiny as a matter of ascesis (cf. Rose 1999). It is a configuration of life optimisation that makes space for, even celebrates, a multiplicity of rationalities and cognitive frameworks (logoi) for working on and optimising the bodies and subjectivities that sustain the quality and length of one's life. Yet, it is also a configuration that requires one to subject these rationalities and the practices they promote to scrutiny, to constantly monitor them and see how they hold up, to ensure that they are "rational" and "appropriate", to check whether or not they are in fact helping one to improve one's self as a matter of ethos; which is to say it is an always unfinished task (cf. Rabinow 2003). If not, one can be sure that awareness raising campaigns to promote the "appropriate" use of herbal medicines or the "rational" use of antibiotics will be formulated and implemented. It is this that I have alluded to when speaking of the contemporary making up of 'petty engineers of modern life' in Vietnam and the UK through grassroots techniques of awareness-raising, coping and emancipation. Subjects are to be empowered into taking care of their selves, but are also to know when it is appropriate to seek the assistance of a qualified practitioner, whether biomedical, herbal or other. Subjects are also to manage their lifestyles and to adjust behaviours so as to optimise not just their longevity but also their well-being, cognitive coherence, ontological security, vitality, balance and harmony. * * * 222 With this chapter we have come full circle. What started as an inquiry into the debilitating effects that modernity has been charged with exerting on our bodies and subjectivities and into the ways in which herbal medicine in Vietnam and the United Kingdom has been mobilised to ameliorate and overcome these side effects, has ended with a discussion on how human subjectivity itself has been governmentalised as yet another one of modernity's many side effects. Central to the revival and renaissance of herbal medicine, I have argued, has been not just the normalisation and disciplining of herbal medicine but also the self-techniques of awareness-raising, emancipation and coping, which have their particularities depending on the ways in which demographic, epidemiologic, socio-economic, biological (including so-called 'esoteric', East Asian or vitalist forms of it), anthropological, sociological and psychological ways of knowing (moralities) come to be assembled and invoked in the formulation of sound advice about how individuals can optimise their (quality of) life, providing them with specific ways in which to understand, relate to and act upon themselves (ethics). These multiple and interlinked ways of knowing and being permeate both Vietnamese and British cities, villages and hamlets, available not only through 'government-led' health programmes, but just as importantly through popular media, word-of-mouth, family exchanges, herbal practitioner consultations and the like. In both Vietnam and the United Kingdom, as the exigencies of temporal subsistence are joined and perhaps superseded by the vicissitudes of modern living, herbal medicine users are being encouraged and provided with the means to become 'petty engineers of modern life' by way of adopting cognitive meaning frameworks, making 'rational' healthy choices in their daily lives, and planning healthy (be they anti-depressant or anti-imbalance) lifestyles in the name of both longevity and wellbeing. In both countries, herbal medicine has come to be harnessed to treat the side effects of history. 223 8 Conclusion Is herbal medicine modernity's latest casualty? We have certainly seen how, during the course of the 20th century and into the current century, the practice, production and use of herbal medicine in both the United Kingdom and Vietnam came to be normalised. In Vietnam, this normalisation has made space for an estimated corps of apprentice-trained traditional practitioners that is comparable in size to that of biomedically-trained doctors. The vast majority of the national population continues to use herbal medicine as a routine part of their medical practices, with age-old herbal remedies passed on from generation to generation, especially by mothers and grandmothers. Village markets stock steady supplies of fresh and dried medicinal herbs and many families grow their own supplies in a corner of their vegetable gardens. Urban pharmacies sell antibiotics side-by-side with industrially-produced herbal remedies and tonics. Official policy is to encourage the use of herbal medicine as a means of not only public health promotion in both rural (against infectious diseases) and urban (increasingly against lifestyle-related diseases) areas, but also to promote national identity formation - Vietnamese medicine for Vietnamese people. Its practice and use are intimately intertwined with theories and concepts that have their roots in a rich archive of ancient Sino-Vietnamese medical texts, even if in more recent centuries biomedical concepts, norms and products have increasingly come to be deployed in national health programmes. Indeed, so much so that contemporary Vietnamese subjects are described as having to negotiate a dizzying plurality of health rationalities and practices on a daily basis. By contrast, herbal medicine in the United Kingdom is a medicine of the minority. Although supermarket shelves and drugstore counters are packed with 'natural' herbal supplements and remedies, and although the number of practicing herbalists is on the rebound, the practice and use of herbal medicine is nowhere near as prevalent as in Vietnam. Government policy is to mobilise herbal medicine, primarily as a means of public health protection (as opposed to promotion) but perhaps also as a way of ensuring increased individual choice in the pursuit of wellbeing and good health. Consumers of herbal medicines are encouraged to be vigilant and wary of any outlandish claims by unscrupulous manufacturers or practitioners. And although herbal medicine is one of the most popular forms of CAM, it is but one of an entire plethora of CAM therapies that have recently been 224 catalogued and hierarchised by various agencies as an urgent public health service in an age of new medical pluralism. The typical CAM user is often referred to as a health consumer, intent on taking matters of health firmly into his or her own hands by shopping around for appropriate solutions to especially chronic and lifestyle-related diseases. Notwithstanding these marked differences, which cannot be overemphasised, the foregoing analysis has also identified a number of common lines of problematisation. In coming to be remobilised in both countries for the different reasons pointed out, it seems that the practice and use of Vietnamese and British herbal medicine have become a modern affair. In recent decades, herbal medicine has been transformed into a discipline - an expert body of knowledge and a more or less formalised system of training and educating. Concrete measures of modernisation, professionalisation, industrialisation, rationalisation and commodification of herbal medicine have been initiated in both countries. Yet, bearing in mind the modernisation critiques that provided the platforms on which the revivals of Vietnamese and British herbal medicine were launched, this has been a modernisation that has actively sought to defuse risks of alienation and degeneration by insisting on a 'human' or 'holistic' modernisation.