2018, 139, 347-356.Acknowledgment: This research has been partially co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation under the call RESEARCH - CREATE - INNOVATE (project code:T1EDK-04174)>> and by the project "Upgrading the Plant Capital (PlantUp)" (MIS 5002803), which is implemented under the Action "Reinforcement of the Research and Innovation Infrastructure", funded by the Operational Programme "Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation" (NSRF 2014-2020) and co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org10420th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP002. Investigation of Eleutherococcus gracilystylus adulteration / substitution with Periploca sepium using High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography. M. Fitzgerald1, A. Booker1,2, M. Heinrich21 Herbal and East Asian Medicine Group, School of Life Sciences, College of Liberal Arts and Sciences, University of Westminster, 115 New Cavendish Street, London, W1W 6UW2 Centre for Pharmacognosy and Phytotherapy, UCL School of Pharmacy, 29-31 Brunswick Square, London, WC1N 1AX As the consumption of herbal medicines has increased globally, so too has the incidence of adverse events associated with such products [1] often linked to poor quality or adulteration. Further cases may be prevented through preemptive investigation and dissemination. One such example is the under-reported but widespread adulteration of Eleutherococcus nodiflorus (Dunn) S.Y. Hu (better known under the synonym: Eleutherococcus gracilystylus (W.W.Sm.) S.Y. Hu) with Periploca sepium Bunge, a medicinal plant containing cardiac glycosides. To investigate and disseminate the widespread adulteration / substitution of medicinal plant E. gracilystylus with P. sepium using High Performance Thin Layer Chromatography (HPTLC), analysis. 31 Samples were purposefully, convenience sampled in 10 markets and pharmacies throughout China and analysed using HPTLC Association Method (adapted from Monograph 2432, Ph.Eur. 8.0). HPTLC analysis resulted in clear separation and differentiation of all samples and standards. 74% of the samples showed evidence for adulteration/ substitution. 52% with P. sepium and 10% with E. senticosus, 12% unidentified and 26% were found to be E. gracilystylus.E. gracilystylus adulteration / substitution is common and if left unchecked has the potential to create a serious adverse event. [1] Izzo A, Hoon-Kim S, Radhakrishnan R, Williamson E. Phytother Res 2016; 30: 691-700.Acknowledgements: We are grateful to Brion Research Institute of Taiwan (Sun Ten Group) and Herbprime Ltd UK, for funding a PhD Studentship and the RCHM, UK for a donation towards the analysis.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 10520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP003. A Headspace Gas Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry method for the analysis of lavender essential oils' volatile content.C. Virgiliou1,2, C. Zisi1,2, A. Nakas3,4, A. Iakovakis2,5, V. Varsamis6, K. Kontogiannopoulos3,4, A.N. Assimopoulou3,4, H. Gika2,71 Department of Chemistry, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki2 Center for Bioanalysis & Omics (BIOMIC_AUTH), Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki3 Organic Chemistry Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece4 Natural Products Research Centre of Excellence (NatPro-AUTH), Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation (CIRI-AUTH), Balkan Center, Thessaloniki, Greece5 Agrolab RDS Integrated laboratory and Consultancy Solutions, Industrial Area of Thessaloniki 57022 Sindos, Greece6 Vessel Essential Oils, Neo Rysio, Thessaloniki, Greece7 Department of Medicine, Aristotle University of ThessalonikiIn this project, we aimed to develop a comprehensive profiling method for the study of the volatile content of different lavender essential oils by static headspace gas chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry (HS-GC-MS). Analysis was performed using an EVOQ GC-TQ Bruker system with a CTC-PAL autosampler, in full scan mode (50-500 amu). Chromatographic separation was performed on a HP-INNOWax (60 m x 0.25 mm x 0.25 mm) column by applying the following temperature program: 52oC (2 min), 5oC/min to 80oC (4 min), 4oC/min to 250oC (1 min), helium constant flow rate 1 ml/min. In order to identify the optimum parameters in terms of chromatographic separation and signal intensity, a screening Design of Experiment process was employed. More specifically, Plackett-Burman experimental design was applied using seven headspace injection parameters: incubation equilibration temperature (X1) and time (X2), agitator vortex speed (X3), post injection dwell time (X4), inlet temperature (X5), split ratio (X6) and injection flow rate (X7). Three responses (number of identified compounds, Y1; area of identified compounds, Y2; and total area of chromatographic peaks, Y3) were assessed in a representative pooled sample of lavender essential oils. Furthermore, sample volume and sample dilution ratio were studied to achieve efficient peak shapes, peak resolution and to avoid detector saturation. Data were processed by (i) MSWS Software (Bruker) and NIST 17 library and (ii) GAVIN software (MATLAB 2019b) after data treatment with AMDIS. ANOVA results showed that equilibration temperature, dwell time and injection flow rate were the most statistically significant factors affecting chromatographic efficiency and were further tested for a more detailed optimization. With the developed method we were able to identify more than 40 volatile compounds in a representative pooled sample containing equal volumes of all 12 lavender essential oils.Acknowledgment: This research has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH - CREATE - INNOVATE (project code: T1EDK-04174, AROMADISTIL).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org10620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP004. LC-MS analyses & biological properties of three Boraginaceae plants from Mediterranean area, Cynoglottis barrelieri, Phyllocara aucheri and Symphytum anatolicum.E.-F. Varvouni1, G. Zengin2, K. Graikou1, C. Ganos1, T. Mroczek3, I. Chinou11 Section of Pharmacognosy & Chemistry of Natural Products, Department of Pharmacy, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece2 Department of Biology, Science Faculty, Selcuk University, University Campus, Konya, Turkey3 Department of Pharmacognosy with Medicinal Plant Laboratory Unit, Medical University, Lublin, PolandBoraginaceae is a widespread family including plants with pharmacological and medicinal value (Borago, Symphytum). It is also well-known for the biosynthesis of pyrrolizidine alkaloids (PAs) in all its plant species. PAs are notorious for their carcinogenic and hepatotoxic effects. In the framework of our research on this family (1, 2, 3) we report herein the survey of phytochemical composition and biological effects on three endemic plants from the Mediterranean area: Cynoglottis barrelieri, Phyllocara aucheri and Symphytum anatolicum, not previously studied. The methanolic extracts were subjected to qualitative LC-MS analysis, where nineteen phenolic metabolites have been identified as caffeic acid and its derivatives and flavonol glycosides. Moreover, six constituents have been also isolated and structurally elucidated as: caffeic acid, rosmarinic acid, isoquercitrin, rutin, astragalin and nicotiflorin. Next step in our phytochemical study was the PAs analyses through LC-MS, through which eight PAs in the form of bases and/or N-oxides (PANOs) have been identified, while two of them, heliotrine and lycopsamine N-oxide, have been also isolated. The total phenolic (TPC) and flavonoid contents (TFC) were determined in methanol extracts, which were further evaluated for their antioxidant activities by different methods, including free radical scavenging (DPPH, ABTS), reducing power (FRAP and CUPRAC), as well as metal chelating and phosphomolybdenum. Enzyme inhibitory activities were also analyzed on acetylcholinesterase (AChe), butyrylcholinesterase (BChe), a-amylase and a-glucosidase. The rich phytochemical profiles, as well as the good antioxidant (e.g 80.10- 151.97 mg TE/g extract for DPPH), neuroprotective (e.g 1.71- 2.24 mg GALAE/g extract for AChe) and potential antidiabetic (e.g 2.36- 3.91 mmol ACAE/g extract for a-glucosidase) activity of all three studied species suggest safe potential herbal sources for further phytotherapeutic applications, after the chemical elimination of their PAs content, according to European limits for safe use. [1] Marini, G., Graikou, K., Zengin, G., Karikas, G. A., Gupta, M. P., & Chinou, I., 2018. Phytochemical analysis and biological evaluation of three selected Cordia species from Panama. Industrial Crops and Products, 120, 84-89. [2] Orfanou, I. M., Damianakos, H., Bazos, I., Graikou, K., & Chinou, I., 2016. Pyrrolizidine Alkaloids from Onosma kaheirei Teppner (Boraginaceae). Records of Natural Products, 10(2), 221-227. [3] Tufa, T., Damianakos, H., Zengin, G., Graikou, K., Chinou, I., 2019. Antioxidant and enzyme inhibitory activities of disodium rabdosiin isolated from Alkanna sfikasiana Tan, Vold and Strid. South African Journal of Botany, 120, 157-162.Acknowledgment: Ms. Varvouni on behalf of the authors, is grateful to the Hellenic Society of Ethnopharmacology for funding her participation in this Congress, through personal grant.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 10720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP005. Determination of cannabidiol potency, compared to the labelled value, on commercially available hemp products.K. Atsopardi1, K. Mesiakaris1, G. Setton3, R. Attali3, Y. Drimer3, O. P. Kastner3, F. N. Lamari2, V. Magkafa2, K. Poulas11 Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, Greece2 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, Greece3 GemmaCert Ltd., 8 Ha'Masger St., Raanana 4365707, Israel.The use of cannabis for healing purposes has been mentioned since antiquity. The biological activity of the plant is coming from a class of compounds called cannabinoids. Cannabidiol is one of the main cannabinoids in which intense research for its properties has been conducted in the recent years. While more than 113 different cannabinoids can be isolated from C. sativa, the primary psychoactive compound is 9 D9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC). Cannabidiol is another major cannabinoid and accounts for up to 40% of the plant extract. Due to its safety profile and lacking psychotropic action, the CBD is cannabinoid of interest, with many references to pharmacological effects in various pathological models, ranging from inflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases, such as epilepsy, multiple sclerosis, autoimmune diseases and cancer. Due to a recent reduce to the restrictions of the legislation, a wide range of hemp products are launched to the market. The aim of the present study was to assess the differences between the potency of CBD, indicated on the commercially available product and the real value, using an analytical methodology. The product samples were purchased from the Greek market and comply with the requirements of Greek law. We developed an analytical methodoly of analysis, by extracting the flowers and analyzing the extractions with HPLC analysis. We also analyzed the flowers using GemmaCert(r), a novel machine for determining THC and CBD potency on flowers and grinds, using Near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS). The results show a significant deviation between the labeled and the measured CBD potency, raising consumer protection concerns.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org10820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP006. Metabolomic analysis of Greek and Cretan sage populations and investigation of their anti-glycation activity.M. D. Gkioni1, K. Zeliou1, V. D. Dimaki1, P. Trigas2, F. N. Lamari11 Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, Patras, Greece2 Department of Agricultural Biotechnology, Agricultural University of Athens, Athens, GreeceGreek sage, SF (Salvia fruticosa Mill.) and Cretan sage, SP (Salvia pomifera L.), have been used for culinary and therapeutical purposes for millennia. In this study, we analyzed metabolomically two populations of SF (Rodini Achaia, Fournoi Ikaria), two populations of SPsP (SP subsp. pomifera) (W Crete) and one population of SPsC (SP subsp. calycina) (Attica). Their dry leaves (2g) were subjected to ultrasound-assisted extraction using petroleum ether and subsequently 70% (aq.) methanol. The qualitative and % quantitative determination of the volatile constituents of the non-polar extract were carried out with GC-MS (gas chromatography-mass spectrometry), while the polar extracts were analyzed by UHPLC-DAD-MS (ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-diode array detector-tandem mass spectrometry). The extracts of SF populations had high concentrations of 1,8-cineole (34.8-39.0%) while SP ones had greater amount of a-thujone (19.7-41.0%) and b-thujone (6.0-39.1%) with distinct differences between the two subspecies. UHPLC-DAD-MS demonstrated the presence of a total of 86 compounds; 12 were present in all populations. Quantification of rosmarinic acid (RA) and carnosic acid (CA) was performed in methanolic extracts with external standards. CA was determined only in SF (21.2-39.7 mg/gextract). RA concentration ranged from 36.4 to 142.1 mg/gextract; the lowest values were noted in SPsP. Furthermore, we investigated their ability to inhibit the reaction of glycation of bovine serum albumin and ribose with a fluorometric method. All extracts showed inhibitory activity of at least 78% at 100 mg/mL concentration. In summary, we present the differences of secondary volatile and polar metabolites of Greek and Cretan sage populations with a novel methodology and illustrate the promising anti-glycation activities of the methanolic extracts.Acknowledgements: We acknowledge support of this work by the project "PlantUP" (MIS 5002803) which is implemented under the Action "Reinforcement of the Research and Innovation Infrastructure", funded by the Operational Programme "Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation" (NSRF 2014-2020) and co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 10920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP007. Essential oil of different populations of Salvia officinalis from Pindus mountain, Greece.A. Mavrogianni1, N. Karanasiou1, P. Leontaritou2, M. Karadedou2, G. Iatrou2, F.N. Lamari11 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, Greece2 Department of Biology, University of Patras, Patras, GreeceSalvia officinalis L., also called common sage, has been known for its use over the centuries in cookery and in traditional medicine; principally as an anti-inflammatory, gastroprotective and antispasmodic agent. Its' essential oil is of known commercial value and numerous distinct chemotypes have been described.