Selective COX-2 inhibitors are more useful for the treatment of inflammatory conditions as they do not inhibit COX-1, leading to less side effects like ulcer and bleeding. Isolation and characterization of the active constituents will be reported. [1] Uniyal, S.K., Singh, K., Jamwal, P. Lal, B. 2006. Journal of Ethnobiology Ethnomedicine 2, 1-8. [2] Ajaib, M., Kan, Z., Khan, N., Abbasi, M.A., Shahwar, D., Wahab, M., Saddiqui, M.F. 2011. Pakistan Journal of Botany 43(1), 579-585. [3] Todoric, J., Antonucci, L., Karin M. 2016. Cancer Prevention Research 9, 895-905www.ethnopharmacology2021.org22820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP116. Screening for tyrosinase inhibitors from actinomycetes; Identification of trichostatin derivatives from Streptomyces sp. CA-129531 and scale up production in bioreactor.K. Georgousaki1, N. Tsafantakis1, S. Gumeni2, I. Gonzalez3, T. A. Mackenzie3, F. Reyes3, C. Lambert4, I. P. Trougakos2, O. Genilloud3, N. Fokialakis11 Department of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece2 Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece3 Fundacion Medina, Granada, Spain4 Givaudan France, Active Beauty, Pomacle, FranceIn the frame of MICROSMETICS EU project 56 potential candidate actinobacteria strains of global biodiversity were selected to be studied using OSMAC strategy. In total 614 extracts were produced and evaluated for their skin-whitening bioactivity. Among them, the EtOAc extract of the fermentation broth of the strain Streptomyces sp. CA-129531 originated from Martinique, exhibited in cell free and cell-based assays the most promising activity (IC50 63 mg/mL).The scale-up production of the strain was performed in a bioreactor Biostat C+ using the culture medium DNPM with some modifications in order to adhere to the industry regulations. Chemical investigation and bioguided isolation of the extract, led to the isolation of one new trichostatic acid analogue, namely trichostatic acid B, along with six known trichostatin derivatives, four diketopiperazines, two butyrolactones and one hydroxamic acid siderophore. Among them, trichostatin A (TSA) showed six times stronger anti-tyrosinase activity (IC50 2.18 mM) than kojic acid (IC50 14.07mM), while deoxytrichostatin A displayed also strong inhibitory activity (IC50 19.18 mM). In order to investigate the mechanism of mushroom tyrosinase inhibition by TSA, kinetic studies were conducted based on the Lineweaver-Burk and Dixon plots. Moreover, for the monitoring of TSA production, its evolution was investigated in a 30 L bioreactor until dextrose exhaustion, showing that its production started together with the exponential phase of growth (day 4) and the maximum concentration was reached at day 9. Despite the cytotoxicity of some individual components, the EtOAc extract showed no cytotoxic effect on HepG2, A2058, A549, MCF-7 and MIA PaCa-2 cell lines and against BJ fibroblasts at the concentrations where the whitening effect was exerted, reassuring its safety and great tyrosinase inhibitory potential.Acknowledgements: This work has been financially supported by the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI) and the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GSRT), under the HFRI PhD Fellowship grant (GA. no. 2369); Part of this work has been supported by EU in the frame of the MICROSMETICS project (FP7-PEOPLE-Industry-Academia Partnerships and Pathways; Grant agreement No. 612276).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 22920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP117. Identification of new phytochemicals that inhibit a-synuclein fibrilization to prevent or delay the progression of Parkinson disease.G.G. Kordopati1, E. Zingkou1, G. Angelis2, I. Stefanis2, A. Karioti2, AR. Bilia3, O. Tsiftsoglou2, R. Chafouz2, D. Lazari2, K. Vekrellis4, P. Magriotis1, G. Sotiropoulou1, G. Pampalakis21 Department of Pharmacy, School of Health Sciences, University of Patras, Greece2 Department of Pharmacognosy-Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece3 University of Florence, Department of Chemistry, Florence, Italy4 Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens, Athens, GreeceAlpha-synuclein is a 140 amino-acid residue protein that is naturally unfolded. Aggregates of a-synuclein are found in Lewy bodies, a defining neuropathological characteristic of Parkinson's disease (PD) and other synucleinopathies (Vekrellis et al. Lancet Neurol 2011). A-synuclein transmits PD pathology cell-to-cell with a prion-like mechanism. Thus, the identification of compounds that inhibit a-synuclein fibrilization or induce the depolymerization of aggregates to prevent PD progression would be of great interest for pharmacological intervention. Here, natural compounds from various classes (steroids, flavonoids, terpenes and terpenic acids) were screened to identify specific inhibitors of a-synuclein fibrilization. For screening assays, we expressed recombinant a-synuclein in E. coli BL21 and purified it by two-step FPLC. The purified recombinant a-synuclein was aggregated to fibrils in PBS at 37oC under intense agitation for 7 days (Patterson et al. JoVE 2019). We confirmed that these fibrils are biochemically and cellularly active and when injected into the striatum of mice, they evoke phosphorylation of the endogenous a-synuclein. All compounds tested were purified from various plants and characterized by LC-MS, 1H-NMR. Inhibition of a-synuclein was assessed: [1] by reading the OD600 vs time and [2] by the thioflavin T fluorescence assay, that both measure the formation of a-synuclein fibrils. Further, the antioxidant potential of the compounds was assessed with the Briggs-Rauscher reaction and correlated with their potential fibril inhibition effect. The results on the inhibition on a-synuclein fibrilization will be presented. 15N/13C-labelled a-synuclein is generated to shed light on the binding site of lead compound(s) onto a-synuclein associated with inhibition of fibril formation. The isolated compounds can potentially be used as new nutraceuticals to prevent or delay PD.This project has received funding from the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI) and the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GSRT), under grant agreement No 1876.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org23020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP118. Extracts from felina 32 hemp inflorescences in cancer: an in vitro study.S. Di Giacomo1, A. Mariano2, C. Fraschetti3, A. Filippi3, L. Mannina3, G. Mazzanti1, A. Scotto D'Abusco2, A. Di Sotto11Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy2Department of Biochemical Sciences, Sapienza University, Rome, Italy3Department of Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Technology, Sapienza University, Rome, ItalyCannabis sativa L. is a plant traditionally cultivated as a source of fibers and nutrients. Recently, the interest toward its medical uses is growing, owing to the highlighted therapeutic potential of its numerous phytoconstituents, including anticancer properties [1]. In this context, our work aimed at evaluating the antiproliferative properties of C. sativa var. Felina 32 inflorescences, collected in June and September, in relation to non-psychoactive cannabinoids and caryophyllane sesquiterpenes content.Inflorescences were subjected to Bligh-Dyer extraction, to obtain two terpenoid-rich organic fractions, namely JOF (June Organic Fraction) and SOF (September Organic Fraction). Extracts were analysed by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry (GC/MS) to determine the major non-psychoactive cannabinoids and caryophyllane sesquiterpenes. The cytotoxicity of JOF, SOF and the major compounds detected at GC/MS, alone or in combination, was evaluated in different cancer cell lines. The endocannabinoid system involvement in the antiproliferative effects of the samples was assessed using CB1 and CB2 receptor inhibitors. Immunofluorescence and western blotting analysis were performed to confirm the mechanistic hypothesis.Results highlighted cannabidiol, cannabichromene, b-caryophyllene, b-caryophyllene oxide and a-humulene as the major compounds, with higher amount in SOF compared to JOF. The extracts and the pure compounds inhibited cancer cell proliferation, with higher potency towards MDA-MB-468 cells. Interestingly, the pure compound combinations induced cytotoxic effects similar to those of the extracts. After treatment with CB1 and CB2 inhibitors, the cytotoxicity of JOF, SOF and cannabidiol was not reduced; conversely, a slight lowering of b-caryophyllene and cannabichromene cytotoxicity was highlighted, thus suggesting that CB2 receptor activation can partly contribute to their activity. This hypothesis was deepened by evaluating the effect of JOF, SOF and pure compounds on the CB2 protein expression.In conclusion, Felina 32 hemp inflorescences can be an interesting bioactive phytocomplex with antiproliferative properties, likely due to the synergistic interactions between nonpsycoactive terpenoids and caryophyllane sesquiterpenes. [1] Afrin F, Chi M, Eamens AL, Duchatel RJ, Douglas AM, Schneider J, Gedye C, Woldu AS, Dun MD. Can Hemp Help? Low-THC Cannabis and Non-THC Cannabinoids for the Treatment of Cancer. Cancers 2020; 12(4):1033.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 23120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP119. Evaluation of the antiproliferative/cytotoxic action of olive oil phenolic ingredients on human breast cancer.A. Papakonstantinou1, P. Koumarianou1, E. Melliou2, P. Magiatis2, H. Boleti1,31 Intracellular Parasitism Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, Greece2 Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece3 Light Microscopy Unit, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, GreeceOlive oil consumption has been associated with the protective effect towards several malignancies, especially breast cancer. This chemopreventive activity has been attributed to olive oil polyphenols (OOPs) such as hydroxytyrosol and tyrosol, along with their derivatives oleuropein aglycone, ligstroside aglycone, oleacein and oleocanthal. Several studies have demonstrated that certain of these compounds inhibit breast cancer cell proliferation by inducing apoptosis, while in combination with chemotherapeutic drugs improve the sensitivity to treatment. However, further investigation is necessary to clarify cytotoxicity and the mechanism of action not only of single OOPs, but also of their combination as isolated compounds and in natural extracts. We evaluated the antiproliferative action of OOPs on three human breast cancer cell lines (MDA-MB231, MCF7 and SKBR3) and a non-cancer cell line (MCF10A). Two-dimensional cultures were treated with increasing concentrations of each OOP (10-100mM) and cytotoxicity was determined by an adenosine-triphosphate (ATP)-based luminescence assay. Half-maximal effective concentrations (EC50) were calculated in conditions of atmospheric O2 (20% v/v). Combinations of two, three or four different OOPs were examined for synergistic effect through 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) method. Finally, olive oil extracts of determined OOPs content were tested in order to simulate the olive oil effect on cell proliferation.Our results reveal that single OOPs suppress cancer cells proliferation in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Specifically, oleocanthal, oleuropein aglycone and ligstroside aglycone were the most effective polyphenols among the OOPs tested. Oleocanthal and oleuropein aglycone caused the highest cell inhibition with EC50 values lower than 30mM, while ligstroside aglycone presented EC50 lower than 60mM. Most combinations of OOPs had a synergistic inhibitory effect, whereas OOPs' extracts showed a significant antiproliferative effect in all cancer cell lines. The triple negative MDA-MB231 cells showed the highest sensitivity to polyphenolic treatments. The mechanism of action of OOPs and polyphenolic extracts are currently under investigation.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org23220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP120. Evaluation of antiproliferative/cytotoxic action of olive oil phenolic ingredients on human melanoma cancer.P. Koumarianou1, A. Papakonstantinou1, E. Melliou2, P. Magiatis2, H. Boleti1,31 Intracellular Parasitism Laboratory, Department of Microbiology, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, Greece2 Department of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece3 Light Microscopy Unit, Hellenic Pasteur Institute, Athens, GreeceOlive oil polyphenols (OOPs) have been associated with the prevention of many types of cancers. Recent studies have demonstrated that certain of these compounds such as hydroxytyrosol, oleocanthal, oleacein and oleuropein, inhibit cell proliferation and induce apoptosis in human melanoma, a highly invasive skin cancer. Due to the need for an effective treatment, we aimed to clarify the cytotoxic potential and the mechanism of action of single OOPs and their combination as isolated compounds and natural extracts.We evaluated the antiproliferative/cytotoxic effect of OOPs on two metastatic human melanoma cell lines (SK-MEL-28 and A2058) as well as on normal human keratinocytes (HaCaT). Two-dimensional cell cultures were treated with increasing concentrations of oleuropein aglycone, ligstroside aglycone, oleacein, oleomissional and oleocanthal (10-100mM) and cytotoxicity was determined by an adenosine-triphosphate (ATP)-based luminescence assay. Half-maximal effective concentrations (EC50) were calculated in conditions of atmospheric O2 (20% v/v). Then, combinations of two, three or four different OOPs were examined for synergistic effect through 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) method. Finally, polyphenolic extracts of determined OOPs content were tested in order to simulate the olive oil effect on cell proliferation.Our results reveal that single OOPs suppress proliferation of melanoma cells in a time- and concentration-dependent manner. Specifically, oleocanthal, oleuropein aglycone and ligstroside aglycone showed the strongest inhibitory effect among the OOPs tested. Interestingly, oleocanthal was the most effective polyphenol (EC50 <20mM), while aglycone oleuropein was the second one (EC50 <40mM). Most combinations of OOPs showed a synergistic inhibitory effect, whereas polyphenolic extracts had a significant antiproliferative effect on both cancer cell lines. The highly metastatic A2058 cells were more resistant to the effect of OOPs compared to SK-MEL-28. The mechanism of OOPs' action and polyphenolic extracts starting with early apoptosis and ending by the following necrosis, as well as actin cytoskeleton polymerization state, are currently under investigation.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 23320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP121. Unrevealing the hypoglycemic mechanism of Eryngium cymosum F. Delaroche.F.A. Espinoza-Hernandez, A. Andrade-CettoLaboratory of Ethnopharmacology, School of Sciences, National Autonomous University of Mexico, MexicoType 2 diabetes (T2D) is a complex disease that negatively impacts overall metabolism due to insulin malfunction and deficient insulin secretion, leading to chronic hyperglycemia.