When the flower is collected, it contains about 65% mois-ture that is active and should be lowered to 12% during the drying process, percentage of moisture that allows the chamomile to be stored in various packages, where the dry-ing process continues, and does not harm while is stored, kept, transported or used.2. Techniques and technologies for chamomile dryingChamomile can be dried as flower or as whole plant with the stem and the flower together. From thermal as-pect, and mechanical laws, especially thermodynamics, the drying is done by thermal energy along with cold and hot air circulation. That is the essence of chamomile drying as a culture, because chamomile contains active and hidden moisture and needs strictly defined principle of regulation by temperature amplitudes and air circulation amplitudes, depending on that, time duration of the drying and the con-sumed energy we get the price of cost of this working pro-cess, and the quality as general (Dimov, 2014).The driers are placed in Ltd. "Koro Company" in Sko-pje which is a company main activity that deals with cul-tivation and processing of medical and aromatic plants. The first drier was with smaller dimensions, 5.8 meters in length, 1.55 meters width and 2 m height, 18 m3 cover 12 000 m3 air. The heaters' energy (capacity) was 60 calories. The second drier was with the following dimensions: 5.8 meters in length, 3.4 meters width and 2 m height. The fan was with 26000 m3 capacity and the heaters had maximum capacity of 160 kg calories.There is proportion of the dimensions of the drier with thermodynamic laws and there was quality drying neces-sary for balance of the inflow, entrance air circulation for time unit and entrance energy which are 2 essential factors for drying, and if the driers have different dimensions, also it is necessary to modify the values of the heaters and the fan that are basic parameters.Materials and methodsMethods - Machines with special constructed combine harvester or it is done manually. Materials - The term Chamomile actually refers to a S8 PP 316662Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 661 - 662 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationsrange of different daisy-like plants, which are a member of the Asteraceae family. There are many different species of chamomile, the two most commonly being German chamo-mile (Marticaria recutita) and Roman chamomile (Chamae-melum nobile). They have been used since Ancient times for their calming and anti-inflammatory properties and each offer their own additional health benefits (Dimov, 2014).The chamomile stem is procumbent, and the leaves are alternate, bipinnate, finely dissected, and downy to gla-brous. The chamomile flowers are held in solitary, terminal flowerheads, rising 8-12 inches above the ground. Chamo-mile flowers consist of prominent yellow disk flowers and silver-white ray flowers. The flowers are arranged in con-ical centre (having 18 white rays), receptacle, on which the yellow, tubular florets are placed. Chamomile flowers bloom during the months of June and July. The Chamomile is from from Northeastern Region of Macedonia in Munic-ipality of Rankovce. Results and discussionFrom the obtained results, it can be noticed that dif-ferent volume of the driers 1 and 2, receive different green mass, which in our case is in the center of attention, the factor of height green mass (layer thickness) that are aver-age 45 centimeters.During the measurements it was noticed that chamo-mile layer of 40 cm with three switches had duration for drying of about 24 hours with constantly turned on heaters, and in the case with layer bigger than 45 cm, drier of 2 me-ters height, the process of drying shall be prolonged to 30 hours, with 4 or 5 switches.Only the flower was dried which has structure like this: flower is 70% green mass, and 30% flower lattices. We no-ticed that by each switching, the green mass was damaged and quality lowered. While measuring in both driers, we came to a conclusion that the layer of spread mass should not exceed 40 cm spread on the floor, without any shelves. That conclusion is due to the fact that each harvest has to be done in appropriate weather conditions on temperature above 20 degC with average air humidity of 40%, which are ideal climate conditions for chamomile harvesting.That was the reason for such measurements and mon-itoring of this issue and we gained wide knowledge for quality of chamomile production and regime of drying and that the quality itself and economy of the final product de-pends on it.ConclusionOur results are contribution in understanding of this medical plant and its process of drying. Obtained results have a contribution in the pharmaceutical industry and give opportunity for future research. It will be worthwhile to perform further studies in order to confirm these results. Acknowledgments The authors would like to acknowledge "Koro" Com-pany Ltd., Blvd. Boris Trajkovski bb, 1000 Skopje ReferencesDimov, Z., 2014. Industrial cultures, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food, Skopje.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 663 - 664 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.22Short communicationDevelopment of microsponges as drug delivery carriers: Optimization of formulation variables using sequential experimental strategyElena Markova*, Monika Kostovska*, Tanja Kjurkchieva Olumcheva, Marija Glavas Dodov, Maja Simonoska CrcarevskaInstitute of Pharmaceutical Technology and Center of pharmaceutical nanotechnology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of ''Ss. Cyril & Methodius'', Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* elena.salvatore9@yahoo.com, moni-kostovska@hotmail.comIntroductionQuality by design (QbD) principles are implemented into the design and development of microsponges as drug delivery carriers (MDDC) with potential to be incorporat-ed into gel as semi-solid dosage form for topical applica-tion. As a stand for identification and optimization of crit-ical material attributes (CMA) and critical process param-eters (CPP), MDDC particle size was used as it is criti-cal for their encapsulation efficiency, drug loading capaci-ty and drug release profile (properties related to drug prod-uct efficacy and safety). In the previous work of Crcarevs-ka et al. (2015) CMA and CPP were identified using Qual-ity Risk Management (QRM) analysis and hence CPP were further optimized using design of experiments stud-ies. Optimal process conditions for minimal particle size (D10, D50, D90) and minimal distribution (Span factor) were determined to be rotation speed of 24000 rpm and ro-tor-stator homogenizer as type of stirrer used for evapo-ration of organic phase for MDDC preparation by double emulsion-solvent-diffusion technique. Amount of chitosan (CTS), ethylcelulose (EC), span 80 (S80), tween 80 (T80), acetone (ACT), dichlormethane (DHM) and internal water phase (W1) were identified as potentially significant CMA. In this work factorial design of experiments (DoE) was ap-plied for rationalization of previously identified potential-ly significant formulation variables. Afterwards formula-tion optimization of MDDC loaded with clindamycin hy-drochloride was carried out using Central Composite (CC) Response Surface Method (RSM) DoE.Materials and methodsMaterialsEC was purchased from Sigma, USA. CTS (high vis-cous) was supplied from Aldrich, Island. T80, S80 and DHM were obtained from Merck, Germany; while ACT was purchased from Alkaloid, Macedonia. Clindamycin hydrochloride (CM-HCl) was kindly donated by Higija Farm, Bitola, Macedonia. All other used chemicals and re-agents were with analytical grade and were used without any modifications.Methods Determination of statistical significant influence of previously identified CMA (Crcarevska et al., 2015) on particle size (D50) and particle size distribution (Span fac-tor) was carried out using 2 IV7-3 factorial DoE (Design-Expert V8 trial, Stat-Ease, Inc., Minneapolis, USA). All formulation variables were varied on two levels, with 8 central points. The total of 24 experiments was carried out. Low and high levels of actual values for studied variables were as follows: for factor A: CTS (0.8%) - 0.1 to 0.5 ml, factor B: W1 - 1.5 to 3.5 ml, factor C: ACT - 0.2 to 1 ml, factor D: S80 - 0.03 to 0.13 g, factor E: EC - 0.03 to 0.13 g, factor F: DHM - 6 to 12.5 ml and factor G: T80 - 0.15 to 0.45 g.In order to optimize formulation variables for prepa-ration of MDDC with desired particle size and distribu-tion, as well as drug content and encapsulation efficien-cy, formulation factors identified with factorial DoE, were varied in the relevant design space. For this purpose a to-S8 PP 317664Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 663 - 664 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationstal of 40 experiments were created using face centered CC type Min Run Res V - RSM DoE (Design-Expert V8 tri-al, Stat-Ease, Inc., Minneapolis, USA). The design ma-trix was constructed in one block where each studied fac-tor was varied at 5 levels (low and high level of factorial and axial points and center point). Used low and high ac-tual values of studied factors were as follows: factor A1 (W1) - 1.5 to 3.5 ml, factor B1 (ACT) - 0.2 to 1 ml, factor C1 (S80) - 0.03 to 0.13 g, factor D1 (DHM) - 6 to 12.5 ml and factor F1 (CM-HCl) - 0.03 to 0.13 g. CTS (0.8%) and T80 amounts were fixed at 0.1 ml and 0.45 g respectively. MDDC were prepared using previously optimized double emulsion-solvent diffusion technique and charac-terized in means of particle size (D10, D50, D90) and parti-cle size distribution (Span factor) (Crcarevska et al., 2015). Results and discussionMDDC were prepared by double emulsion solvent dif-fusion technique using rotor-stator homogenization tech-nique. In the previous work of Crcarevska et al. (2015) for-mulation and process variables that might have critical in-fluence upon drug product quality were identified. Having in mind number of variables identified a sequential strat-egy in the further development of MDDC was selected. Process variables were optimized, and hence the current work is related to detailed characterization of influence of formulation variables on MDDC properties. Results from factorial design studies enabled identification of variables with statically significant influence on D50 and Span fac-tor. D50 of prepared MDDC was in a range of 15.255 +- 0.37 um to 220.816 +- 5.23 um, while Span factor ranged from 2.612 +- 0.28 to 16.092 +- 0.45. Mathematical mod-els of inverse function of D50 square root and inverse function of Span factor and studied variables were estab-lished. One way ANOVA pointed that factors B (W1), C (ACT), D (S80), E (EC), F (DHM) and factors interaction AF (W1*DHM) and AG (CTS*T80) are significant model terms in case of D50. W1 was determined to be statistical-ly significant in case of Span factor.Based on the obtained results for further studies re-lated to optimization of formulation of MDDC CM-HCl loaded, variables W1, ACT, S80, EC and DHM were se-lected. Also, amount of CM-HCl was considered as for-mulation variable that might influence MDDC properties. Results from CC-RSM studies permitted detailed charac-terization of influence of studied variables on particle size (D10, D50, D90) and particle size distribution (Span fac-tor). D10 of MDDC CM-HCl loaded was in range of 1.375 +- 0. 64 to 64.538 +- 3.22 um. Mathematical modeling of log10 (D10) resulted with linear model. One way ANOVA pointed that S80 and EC are statistically significant mod-el terms. D50 for MDDC CM-HCl loaded was in range of 6.582 +- 0.85 um to 338.146 +- 8.72 um. Reduced qua-dratic model for square root of D50 was established. Vari-ables W1, S80, EC, S80*EC, (EC)2 and (CM-HCl)2 were found to be statistically significant in case of D50. D90 was in a range of 53.104 +- 2.35 um to 1235.82 +- 15.46 um. Influence of investigated variables on D90 of MDDC CM-HCl loaded could be described by reduced quadrat-ic model. Statically significant model terms were DHM, W1*ACT, W1*DHM, ACT*EC, ACT*CM-HCl, S80*EC, S80*DHM and (ACT)2. Span factor ranged from 1.546 +- 0.37 to 13.841 +- 2.62. Inverse function of square root of Span factor was also modeled by reduced quadratic mod-el. Variables ACT, EC, CM-HCl and interaction terms W1*S0, EC*DHM, DHM*CM-HCl as well as (S80)2 were determined as statistically significant model terms in case of Span factor.ConclusionA sequential experimental strategy was applied in the development of MDDC-CM-HCl loaded. Screening DoE (2 IV7-3 factorial design) was employed for identifi-cation and rationalization of significant formulation vari-ables. Detailed characterization of variable influence upon parameters of interest was performed using Central Com-posite (type Min Run Res V) - Response Surface Meth-od DoE. In the current study results related to particle size and particle size distribution were presented. MDDC-CM-HCl loaded will be further characterized in means of drug content (DC) (mg CM-HCl/g EC +- SD, and encapsulation efficiency (EE%) (percentages of mass of entrapped CM-HCl compared to used CM-HCl for preparation of MDDC (%) +- SD). Obtained results will be used for formulation optimization.ReferencesCrcarevska, M.S., Dimitrovska, A., Sibinovska, N., Mladenovska, K., Slavevska, R.R., Dodov, M.G., 2015. Implementation of quality by design principles in the development of microsponges as drug delivery carriers: Identification and optimization of critical factors using multivariate statistical analyses and design of experiments studies. Int. J. Pharm. 489, 58-72.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 665 - 666 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 614.27Short communicationPharmacovigilance practice in community pharmaciesAleksandar Spirov*, Aleksandra Kapedanovska Nestorvska, Aleksandra Grozdanova, Zoran Sterjev, Zorica NaumovskaInstitute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* arspirovbt@gmail.comIntroductionPharmacovigilance is the science that allows systemat-ic detecting, gathering, monitoring and evaluation of new data on drug safety and risk/benefit ratio in their use. It is in continuous upswing and it is represented as a control tool which is vital for providing safe, effective and high qual-ity drugs for human use. The specific targets for pharma-covigilance include better patient care and increased safe-ty in the use of drugs, better public health, giving its con-tribution in the assessment of the benefit, hazard, risk and the effectiveness of the use of medicines, encouraging their safe, rational and efficient use and providing education and clinical practice for pharmacovigilance for the public.The new pharmacovigilance legislation came into ef-fect in July 2012 and it was the biggest change to the reg-ulation of human medicines in the European Union since 1995. This new legislative had significant implications for applicants, as well as for patients, healthcare professionals and regulators.The National center for pharmacovigilance in Repub-lic of Macedonia is founded in 1997 in the Institute for preclinical and clinical pharmacology, Medicinal Facul-ty, Skopje. Since 2015 National PV center is transferred in Macedonian agency for Drugs and Medical Devices (MALMED). This center works in accordance with the Na-tional regulative for pharmacovigilance, which has adopt-ed main recommendations from European Union legisla-tion. Since 2002 Macedonia is full member in the Uppsala monitoring center. Although the National center for phar-macovigilance exists for almost twenty years, the aware-ness for reporting adverse drug reactions (ADR) by the healthcare professionals, especially the community phar-macists is on a minimal level.