Testing of air flow pattern is performed in order to check the interference due to turbulence eddies in unidi-rectional airflow area, like sampling and dispensing booth and under laminar airflow in microbiological area (Kit-ain, 2010) Visualizing the air patterns at numerous points in room is performed by Titanium Tetra chloride sticks. In several cases the test is done by operating the HVAC sys-tem of the sterile area and releasing smoke into unidirec-tional air stream at selected sites. There is no minimum GMP requirement for air changes per hour. Air flow into and out of a space should be based on providing the re-quired cooling, heating, relative humidity, pressurization, particulate control, ventilation. These factors generally re-sult in air change rates between 4 and 20. There is also no numerical requirement for relative pressurization in clean-room. The velocity and direction of airflow between spac-es should be adequate to reduce counter flow of airborne particulates or vapour contaminants for spaces where air-borne cross contamination is a concern (EU GGMP, 2008).All HEPA filters installed in the facility are tested for filter integrity test by using PAO (Poly-alpha-olefin) aero-sol into supply duct to the HEPA filter. Sampling of stream challenge is done with photometer and the instrument is set for this challenge. Cross contamination can originate from both the internal and external facility environment. In all air handling systems, the filtration should be evaluated for adequate arrestance of outdoor particulates. Any suitable particle counter instrument can be used for the measure-ments, with no effect of the measurement principle used. During the operation an air flow rate should be 0.03 m3/min. Measurement should be done at minimum 10 differ-ent representative room locations for one minute at each location at 1 meter height from the floor. It must cover the central location of personal traffic during normal produc-tion process (WHO, 2011). Measurements should obtain S4 PP 179380Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 379 - 380 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsinformation about concentration of two different ranges of particles: particles with size >= 0.5 um as well as particles with size >= 5 um (5 um particles for ISO 5 class has been excluded from the limit value table), at each location (DIN EN ISO 14644-1, 2015; DIN EN ISO 14644 - 2, 2015).Room temperature variation often can be a critical pa-rameter in production processes. Most products, materials and processes can handle a wide range in temperature. The width of this range decreases as the exposure time increas-es. Existing HVAC system had designed for 24 +- 2 degC to all critical area in manufacturing, warehouse and Quality Control department. Sometimes, for some products, in-processing temperature requirement shall be maintained 18 degC +- 2 degC. Relative humidity may affect exposed product or materials that are sensitive to air moisture. Relative humidity generally has effect on aqueous product. Liquid product can lose moisture to a low humidity room over an extended period. HVAC system in sterile area is designed to maintain the required humidity. Relative hu-midity is checked by using calibrated humidity meter from different locations (DIN EN ISO 14644-1, 2015; DIN EN ISO 14644 2, 2015).Microbial monitoring of manufacturing clean rooms should include compressed gases, surfaces, room and en-closure air and any other materials and equipment that may produce a risk of contamination. Monitoring of the air should be performed on meter cubic air (active or pas-sive sampling) by using special instruments or settle plates which are opened for 4 hours and after that incubated. Sur-face sampling is conducted by using swab or contact plat, collecting the microbiological contamination from approx-imately 25 cm2 surface from numerous defined locations. Taking samples for microbiological monitoring of the area should be performed for a period of one year routine pro-duction in accordance with the sampling plan. Noise level may be present in the facility due to operation of variety of equipment, during processes etc. Requirements when per-sonnel noise exposure exceed an eight hours time weighed average sound level of 85 dBa. HVAC system has designed not to generate more than 70 dBa noises in critical area during its normal operation (Kitain, 2010).ConclusionClean environments should be certified as described in ISO 14644 series in order to meet their design classifi-cation requirements. The design, construction, and opera-tion involved in clean rooms and advanced aseptic clean rooms operations vary greatly, so it is difficult to general-ize requirements for parameters such as filter integrity, air velocity, air patterns, air changes, and pressure differen-tial. In particularly critical applications such as aseptic pro-cessing, a structured approach to physical risk assessment might be appropriate.Situations where some of the parameters are out of range with values defined by guidelines of pharmaceutical products manufacturing undoubtedly are reason for devia-tion. After researching the presumable causes, the goal is finding solution for solving the problem, its future preven-tion and reseting the qualified conditions of the cleanroom. Clean-room operators, particularly those engaged in aseptic processing, must strive to maintain suitable envi-ronmental quality and must work toward continuous qual-ity improvement of personnel operations and environmen-tal control. In general, fewer personnel involved in aseptic processing and monitoring, along with reduction in inter-ventions, reduces risk from contamination.ReferencesEU GGMP, European Guidelines to Good Manufacture Practice, 2008. Annex 1 - Manufacture of sterile medicinal products, European Commission Enterprise and Industry Directorate - General. 4, 1-16. WHO, 2011. Annex 5 - Supplementary guidelines on good manufacturing practices for heating, ventilation and airconditioning systems for non-sterile pharmaceutical dosage forms. World Health Organization, WHO Technical Report Series. 961, 215-259. DIN EN ISO 14644-1, 2015. Classification of air cleanliness by particle concentrationDIN EN ISO 14644-2, 2015. Monitoring to provide evidence of cleanroom performance related to air cleanliness by particle concentration.Kitain, M., 2010. Cleanrooms in pharmaceutical production. Bachelor's thesis. Mikkeli University of Applied Sciences, Finland, https://publications.theseus.fi/bitstream/handle/10024/13196/Kitain_Mikhail.pdf?sequence=1 (accessed on 14 March, 2016).Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 381 - 382 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.2:635.655Short communicationEffect of formulation and process variables on probiotic viability after microencapsulation by spray-drying in soy protein-alginate microparticlesJasmina Hadzieva1*, Maja Simonoska Crcarevska1, Simona Dimceska1, Nikola Geskovski1, Marija Glavas Dodov1, Katerina Goracinova1, Tanja Petreska Ivanovska2, Lidija Petrushevska2, Nadica Vanova1, Milena Nikolovska1, Kristina Mladenovska11Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Institute of Applied Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* hadzievaj@yahoo.comIntroductionConsumption of probiotic products has been linked to improvement of a variety of health conditions such as hy-percholesterolemia, hypertension, inflammation and lac-tose intolerance and reducing health risks, including aller-gy and even some forms of cancer. However, for probi-otics health benefit to be exerted, it is estimated that they should be administered in a therapeutic minimum of 10-6 to 10-7 CFU live probiotic cells per g final product (FAO/WHO, 2006). Providing and maintaining at least this num-ber of viable cells is a great challenge due to their sensi-tivity to the harsh processing and GI conditions prior tak-ing their place of action in the low intestine and delivering the claimed health benefits. For incorporation of probiotics into food or pharmaceutical products, the microencapsula-tion offers protection to the fine particles produced during freeze- or spray-drying of probiotic concentrates. Among the many techniques for microencapsulation, spray-dry-ing is one of the most challenging because of the low cost, industrial application, stability and throughput in cellular integrity while drying when optimized correctly. Howev-er, the spray-drying process parameters might have nega-tive impact on the outcome of viable cells. In addition, the choice of carrier material and its interaction with the bac-teria have importance on protection efficacy and affect the probiotic delivery. In search for novel probiotic microen-capsulated formulation that will combine favorable prop-erties of alginate (ALG) and polymer that will provide controlled and targeted release of viable probiotic cells in the lower intestine, we have encapsulated the probiotic L. casei 01 in ALG and soy protein isolate (SPI) matrix by spray-drying. The aim of this study was to evaluate the ef-fect of the critical formulation and process variables on vi-ability of the probiotic after spray-drying.Materials and methodsFD-DVS/Lactobacillus casei 01 was supplied from Chr. Hansen (Copenhagen, Denmark), SPI from Soja-protein AD (Becej (Serbia), whereas ALG (10/60 LS, fG 35%-45%) was kindly donated from Protanal FMC Bio-polymers (Ayrshire, UK). CaCl2, de Man, Rogosa, Sharpe agar and broth as well as peptone water were purchased from MerckKGaA (Darmstadt, Germany). Aqueous mixture of ALG and SPI was inoculated with bacterial suspension (cell load ca. 12.5 log10 CFU/g), acti-vated as previously described (Petreska Ivanovska et al., 2014; Smilkov et al., 2014). The resulting mixture was in-fused into a spray-dryer nozzle unit of Buchi Mini Spray Dryer B-290 (Buchi Laboratorius-Technik AG, Switzer-land) and continuously sprayed at following conditions: S4 PP 180382Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 381 - 382 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsnozzle diameter 0.7 mm, aspirator pressure 90%, atomiz-er pressure 600 Nl h-1, flow rate 5 mL/min. SPI-ALG mic-roparticles (MPs) with encapsulated L. casei that were fur-ther subjected to additional cross-linking by CaCl2 were prepared by consequent introduction of the MPs obtained by spray-drying into aqueous solution of CaCl2, followed by continuous stirring at room temperature (1 h). MPs thus obtained were removed from the solution of CaCl2 by cen-trifugation (1000 rpm, 5 min), washed three times with sterile water, frozen at -20 degC and freeze-dried at 0.070 mbar and -50 degC for 24 h (Freeze-Dryer, Labconco, USA). Critical material attributes (concentration of ALG, SPI and CaCl2) and process parameters (inlet temperature, IT) were previously identified varying one parameter at time, while the influence of critical variables on viability of the probiot-ic after preparation was evaluated using face centered CC-RSM design (Design-Expert(r) V8, Stat-Ease, Inc., USA). The total of 30 experiments were designed and carried out, with the following actual levels of studied variables: ALG (A, 1 and 4%w/v), SPI (B, 1 and 4%w/v), CaCl2 (C, 0 and 5%w/v) and IT (D, 90 degC and 150 degC). Viability of the en-capsulated L. casei 01 in SPI-ALG MPs was assessed after dissolution of 1 g MPs in 9 g PBS (1 mol/L, pH 8.0), using the plate-count method as previously described (Petreska Ivanovska et al., 2014; Smilkov et al., 2014).Results and discussionViability of L. casei 01 in designed formulations after preparation was in range of 8.67-13.09 log10 CFU/g or ex-pressed in % related to initial L. casei 01 cell count from 68.38 to 99.61%. Influence of examined variables upon this response in terms of coded factors was described by reduced cubic model with the following equation:Viability(after preparation) (%) = + 86.78 + 0.95 x A - 2.36 x B + 1.78 x C - 3.29 x D + 1.76 x A x C + 3.72 x A2 - 6.84 x A2 x CFrom the equation one can clearly see that the viabil-ity after preparation positively correlated with the factors A, C, AC and A2 and inversely with B, D, and A2C. With increase in ALG and CaCl2 concentration, the viability of the probiotic increased, while oppositely was observed with increase in concentration of SPI, suggesting compe-tition between the probiotic and SPI for the same bonding sites in ALG molecules. According to the literature data (Rajam et al., 2012), modification of the compactly folded protein molecules from their native form allows SPI-ALG interactions via hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions and hydrogen bonding as well. At the same time, a trend to segregation of SPI and ALG into separated microdomains can occur, which has also been confirmed when whey pro-tein as complexation agent was used (Smilkov et al., 2014). One way ANOVA indicated that variable D is significant model term, meaning that increase in the IT significantly decreases probiotic viability after preparation. The loss of probiotics during thermal processing is the main disadvan-tage of MPs production by spray drying and it is related to cellular injuries (e.g. denaturation of DNA and RNA, dam-age of ribosomes, dehydration of cytoplasmic membrane, lipid peroxidation and rupture of cell membrane) due to water removal resulting from the combined effect of heat and mechanical stress (Soukoulis et al., 2013). Thus, pro-tection from the IT of the spray-dryer, as a critical point in this method of microencapsulation, is required. In addition, the probiotic bacteria must be alive at the time of consump-tion of the product and also capable of reaching the large intestine in quantities that are sufficient to facilitate coloni-zation and proliferation. Therefore, probiotic loaded MPs should be customized in respect to their physicochemi-cal and biological/biopharmaceutical properties as well to make them suitable for incorporation into food or pharma-ceutical product as well as for administration in healthy in-dividuals and/or individuals with specific disease.ConclusionL. casei 01 loaded SPI-ALG MPs were prepared using spray-drying method, with viability of the probiotic after preparation significantly exceeding the minimal therapeu-tic value. Process and formulation parameters should be further optimized to obtain probiotic MPs with both, high viability after preparation and in simulated GI conditions. ReferencesBurgain, J., Gaiani, C., Linder, M., Scher, J., 2011. Encapulation of probiotic living cells: From laboratory scale to industrial application. J. Food Eng. 104, 467-483.Food and Agriculture Organization/World health organization, 2006. Probiotic in food, health and nutritional properties and guedlinesss for evaluation. FAO Food and Nutrition Paper. 85.Petreska Ivanovska, T., Petrushevska-Tozi, L., Grozdanov, A., Petkovska, R., Hadjieva, J., Popovski, E., Stafilov, T., Mladenovska, K., 2014. From optimization of synbiotic microparticles prepared by spray-drying to development of new functional carrot juice. Chem. Ind. Chem. Eng. Quarterly. 20, 549-564. Rajam, R., Kartnik, P., Parthasarathi, S., Joseph, G.S., Anandharamakrishnan C., 2012. Effect of whey protein- alginate wall systems on survival of microencapsulated Lactobacillus plantarum in simulated gastrointestinal conditions. J. Functional Foods 4, 891-898.Smilkov, K., Petreska Ivanovska, T., Petrusevska-Tozi, L., Petkovska, R., Hadzieva, J., Popovski, E., Stafilov, T., Grozdanov, A., Mladenovska, K., 2014. Optimization of the formulation for preparing L. casei loaded whey protein-Ca-alginate microparticles using full-factorial design. J. Microencapsul. 31, 166-175. Soukoulis, C., Behboudi-Jobbehdar, S., Yonekura, L., Parmenter, C., Fisk, I.D. 2014. Stability of Lactobacillus rhamnosus GG in prebiotic edible films. Food Chem. 159, 302-308.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 383 - 384 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.322:547.949.4Short communicationPreparation of curcumin loaded nanoparticles: physicochemical characterization and in vitro evaluationElena Drakalska1,3*, Denitsa Momekova1, Stanislav Rangelov2, Nikolai Lambov11Faculty of Pharmacy, Medical University-Sofia, 2 Dunav Str., 1000 Sofia, Bulgaria2Institute of Polymers, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Acad.