Results and discussion The TRIPS does not limit the grounds for granting compulsory licenses; however it provides that countries can only use those grounds which are allowed by their national legislation. The conditions under which a compulsory license is granted are to be regulated in the national legislation in accordance with the TRIPS (Article 31). This possibility is seen as one of the TRIPS' flexibilities (Van Zimmeren and Van Overwalle, 2011)Countries, including Macedonia, have specified dif-ferent grounds for issuing compulsory licenses (Article 97 par. 1 and 2) and these include public health reasons. The LIP further details the compulsory license for the needs of public health, specifying in Article 102 par. 1, that the court (that is the curt with jurisdiction for settlement of dis-putes in the field of industrial property, may grant compul-sory patent license i.e. a supplementary protection certifi-cate for the needs of production and sale of pharmaceutical products, where such a product is intended to be exported in the importing countries with problems in public health. The LIP, in this context, defines pharmaceutical product as any product in the pharmaceutical industry, including the medications for human use, which include any substance or mixture of substances designed for treatment or preven-S1 PP 2464Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 63 - 64 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationstion of human diseases including any substance or mixture of substances which may be applied to people in terms of renewal, improvement, or adjustment to their physiologi-cal functions by causing pharmaceutical, immunological, or metabolic effects or by giving the medical diagnosis, including active components and accessories to diagnose outside the alive human body (Article 102, par.3). When deciding upon issuing compulsory license, as per Article 102, par. 2 of LIP, the court is obliged to take into consideration the WTO General Council Decision of 30 August 2003 on the implementation of par. 6 of the Declaration on the TRIPS agreement and public health of 14 November 2001 (hereinafter: Council Decision and Doha Declaration respectively). The Doha Declaration in par. 6 recognizes that WTO members with insufficient or no manufacturing capacities in the pharmaceutical sector could face difficulties in making effective use of compulsory licensing under the TRIPS Agreement, and instructs the Council for TRIPS to find an expeditious solution to this problem. Following this the General Council made a Decision, noting that, exceptional circumstances exist justifying waivers from the obligations set out in paragraphs (f) and (h) of Article 31 of the TRIPS with respect to pharmaceutical products, establishes the system for granting compulsory licenses for pharmaceuticals. The use of this special compulsory license requires formal notification to the WTO. There are three types of notification: 1. importing member's one-off general notification of intention to use the Par. 6 System (not required for least-developed country members); 2. importing member's specific notification of the details of the needed pharmaceutical products and other details required under the Par. 6 System; and 3. exporting member's notification of grant of a compulsory licence for export and conditions attached to it. The features of the system have been adequately transposed in LIP (Article 103-115). The Council Decision will be replaced by the amendment to the TRIPS i.e. introduction of Article 31bis, when it is accepted by two thirds of the membership (the deadline is set to 31.12.2107; Macedonia accepted it on 16.03.2016).ConclusionAs noted by the General Council Chairperson's statement inter alia the established system for compulsory license for pharmaceuticals should be used in good faith to protect public health and, without prejudice to par. 6 of the Decision, not be an instrument to pursue industrial or commercial policy objectives. It is seen that compulsory license may also constitute an important tool to promote competition and increase the affordability of drugs, while ensuring that the patent owner obtains compensation for the use of the invention (Correa, 2000). It is also argued however, that the present system as such creates a series of obstacles preventing effective access to drugs (Gupta, 2010). When assessing the functionality of the system one must take into consideration the opposing views and of the pharmaceutical companies (Reichman, 2009). It is to be noted that, as per available literature none of the SEE countries have granted compulsory licenses for the public health (Mesevic, 2014). ReferencesAgreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, World Trade Organization (WTO), 1994.Correa, C., 2000. Integrating Public Health Concerns into Patent Legislation in Developing Countries, South Centre, Geneva. Dabovic - Anastasovska J., 2009. License agreement - Way of doing business [Dogovor za licenca - nachin na vodenje biznis]. CEPPE, Skopje.Dabovic-Anastasovska, J. and Pepeljugoski, V., 2012, Intellectual Property Law [Pravo na intelektualna sopstvenost], Akademik, Skopje.Decision of the General Council of 30 August 2003 on the Implementation of paragraph 6 of the Doha Declaration on the TRIPS Agreement and public health, WT/L/540 and Corr.1. Declaration on the TRIPS agreement and public health of 14 November 2001, WT/MIN (01)/DEC/2General Council Chairperson's statement, 13 November 2003 WT/GC/M/82.Gupta, R., 2010. Compulsory license under the TRIPS: How far it addresses public health concerns in developing nations. Journal of Intellectual Property Rights 15, 357-363. Law on Industrial Property [Zakon za indsutriskata sopstvesnot]. "Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia" No. , No. 21/09, 24/11, 12/14, 41/14 and 152/15.Mesevic, I.R., 2014. International Scientific Conference on Regional and EU Intellectual Property Challengers, Social Perspectives, Sarajevo. Reichman, J., 2009. Compulsory licensing of patented pharmaceutical inventions: evaluating the options. J. Law Med. Ethics. 37(2), 247-263.Van Zimmeren, E. and Van Overwalle, G., 2011. A Paper Tiger? Compulsory License Regimes for Public Health in Europe. International Review of Intellectual Property and Competition Law (IIC). 42(1), 4-39.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 65 - 66 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.15:614.254Short communicationAttitudes of pharmacists about professional practice and work with patients in regard to reaching high level of adherenceMilica Zekovic1*, Dusanka Krajnovic2, Valentina Marinkovic2, Tatjana Stojkovic2, Ljiljana Tasic21Center of Research Excellence in Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Medical Research, University of Belgrade, Tadeusa Koscuska 1, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia2Department of Social Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Legislation, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia* zekovicmilica@gmail.comIntroductionAdherence is exceptionally important for efficacy and safety of pharmacotherapy and has significant impact on clinical, economic and humanistic therapy outcomes. In-adequate level of adherence is a widespread and everlast-ing problem with possible immense and long-term conse-quences affecting not only patient but also the health care system. For that reason the issue of adherence remains con-siderable challenge for health care professionals in clinical practice. Community pharmacists, being most accessible to the public, are perfectly positioned to help patients un-derstand the value of their medications, the importance of prescribed regimens and to underline the need for adher-ence. A survey research has been conducted with an objec-tive to examine attitudes of pharmacists about professional practice and work with patients in regard to reaching high level of adherence.Materials and methodsThe cross-sectional survey has been conducted in April and May 2014 during courses for pharmacists' profession-al education organized at the Faculty of Pharmacy, Uni-versity of Belgrade. Validated questionnaire named Scale of general attitudes and beliefs of pharmacists regarding their work with patients was applied. (Jocic and Krajnovic, 2014). The questionnaires have been distributed to phar-macists while they were registering for the course and they could submit them at a place specially intended for that purpose all the time while the lectures lasted. Participants completed questionnaires anonymously and all gave their informed consent for taking part in the survey. Statistical analysis has been performed with a software package IBM SPSS Statistics 21. Since it has been determined that distri-butions of all numerical data deviate from the normal ones, statistically significant difference and correlation has been analyzed by adequate non-parametric methods of inferen-tial statistics (Mann-Whitney test, Kruskal-Wallis ANO-VA test, Spearman's rank correlation). Threshold of statis-tical significance has been set at the conventional level of p<=0.050 for all analyses. This study has been approved by the Ethics Committee for Clinical Trials of the Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Belgrade.Results and discussionA total of 483 questionnaires have been distributed while 447 have been returned. Nevertheless, 14 question-naires have been excluded since they were partially or in-adequately completed, thus the total sample of survey par-ticipants in the research represents 433 pharmacists, the re-sponse rate 89.64%. There were 312 survey participants (72.05%) who were employed in state owned community pharmacies and 121 participants (27.94%) employed in pri-vately owned ones. The average age of survey participants was 34.7+-9.8 years. Although there were predominantly females (374 or 86.37%), pharmacists in this research did not significantly differ regarding age (ZU=-1.19; p=.234), nor the work experience in pharmacies (ZU=-.86; p=.390). The total of 83.60% of survey participants deemed that patients were interested to be educated about medi-S1 PP 2566Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 65 - 66 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationscines, medical devices or health products which they uti-lize, while 76.75% of pharmacists claimed that they co-operate with patients in regard to prescribed therapy. One of the pharmacists' responsibilities and an important part of professional activities in a pharmacy is the provision of information and expert advice to public. In accordance with this, 87.43% of survey participants have stated that they always explain patients how to use certain medicine or medical device when dispensing them in a pharmacy, while 83.60% of them claimed to give information regard-ing health maintenance and improvement on daily basis. Information, valuable pieces of advice and instructions which are given by pharmacists must be relevant, accurate, timely, objective and completely adapted to needs, specif-ic characteristics and state of a particular patient. An ef-fective patient education and counseling process optimizes the chance that patients will make informed decisions, use medications properly, and meet therapeutic goals. In the conducted survey, pharmacists employed in state owned and privately owned pharmacies have not demonstrated significant discrepancies in agreeing with the following statement "Patients understand my instructions as to use of medicines and medical devices" (ZU=-1.37; p=.171). Av-erage survey participant in both groups has answered that he mainly agrees with this claim.The majority of study participants have demonstrated a relatively high degree of agreement with claims from the questionnaire which relate to the importance of the role of pharmacists as members of a team of health profession-als. Actually 94.70% of survey participants agreed with the claim "Patients rely on pharmacists more and more regard-ing the use of medicines". Statistically higher degree of agreement has been recorded (ZU=-7.91; p<.001) in the group of pharmacists employed in privately owned phar-macies with the claim "Information which I give to pa-tients are of high significance for the therapy outcomes" in comparison to their colleagues from state owned phar-macies, although it should be stressed that average survey participant in both groups has responded that he complete-ly agrees with this claim. Survey results indicate that pharmacists are aware that successful development of adequate interpersonal relation with patients highly depends on their professional commu-nication skills. Inadequate verbal and/or non-verbal com-munication, confusing messages, insecurity and lack of consistency all have a negative impact on the quality of pharmaceutical care and can significantly endanger the re-alization of the desired degree of adherence. Therefore, it is important for pharmacists to realistically evaluate their communication skills and continuously improve them in the course of professional practice. Although most phar-macists have shown a high degree of agreement with the claim "I think that my behavior during our interaction in-fluences the patient motivation" by Spearman's rank corre-lation it has been determined that with higher age and lon-ger work experience the degree of agreement with the stat-ed claim decreases (r=-0.196; p<0.001). During pharmacist-patient interaction some disagree-ments or differences in approaches to solving certain situ-ations or problems are inevitable. Researchers have shown that there is a correlation between professionally negative characteristics of pharmacists (such as aggressiveness, in-sensitiveness, tendency to conflicts) and low level of satis-faction and adherence of the patient (Ranelli, 2000). Sur-vey participants have on average responded that they com-pletely disagree with the claim "I have conflicts with pa-tients on daily basis". Furthermore, pharmacists employed in state and privately owned pharmacies did not differ when agreeing with the claim "I think that I do not have much understanding for patients" (ZU= -.65; p=.513). Av-erage survey participant in both groups has expressed com-plete disagreement with this claim.ConclusionDue to specific competences and unique position of the most accessible health professionals pharmacists have an especially significant role in adherence optimization. They have a professional and ethical obligation to perform expert review of the overall patients' therapy, give infor-mation and council, identify potentially existing factors predisposing low adherence level, apply individually tai-lored strategies for adherence enhancement and continu-ally monitor patient cooperation and therapy outcomes. In order to empower them to successfully fulfill all those re-sponsibilities it is necessary to insist on the development of adherence-related competences within the educational and programs of continual professional training, as well as to evolve consciousness about the significance of that aspect of the therapy management. It is necessary to pay special attention to improvement of communication skills and pro-fessional virtues which could contribute to establishment of successful relations with patients based on cooperation, trust and mutual respect.ReferencesJocic, D., Krajnovic, D., 2014. Development and initial validation of a scale to measure attitudes and beliefs of pharmacists toward their work with patients.Vojnosanit. Pregl. 71(4), 373-382.Ranelli, P.L., 2000. Patient communication, in: Gennaro ,A.R., Marderosian, A.H.D., Hanson, G.R. et al (Eds. ), Remington: The Science and Practice of Pharmacy, University of the Sciences in Philadelphia, Philadelphia, pp. 1957-1964.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 67 - 68 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.88-053.6:614.2-051Short communicationThe role of pharmacists and other health professionals in promotion of reproductive health of young peopleBijana Vasic1,3*, Dragana Duricic2,31 School of Pharmacy and Physiotherapy, Donska 27- 29,11000 Belgrade, Serbia2 Medigrooup General Hospital, Milutina Milankovica 3, 11070 Belgrade, Serbia3Association of pharmacists in education, Mileve Maric Ajnstajn 74/27, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia* bixy74@gmail.comIntroductionMany studies that have been conducted indicate the necessity of educating the youth on reproductive health. Promotion of youth reproductive health includes all mea-sures, activities and efforts of the health service and the en-tire community to protect, maintain and improve health. Health workers have a special place in preservation of re-productive health. The aim is to highlight the importance of the role of pharmacists and other health workers in the education of young people about the importance of reproductive health. Based on these methods, opportunities for further develop-ment and improvement of health literacy of young people about reproductive health have been analyzed.Materials and methodsFor analysis we used results of survey conducted on 240 students of Pharmacy and Physiotherapy school dur-ing school year of 2013/2014 and also surveys that were about knowledge and opinions of youth on reproductive health from project "Health education on reproductive health".Results and discussionYoung people, through teaching, acquire information and knowledge about reproductive health, as well as the awareness of active participation in decisions related to it. School has to achieve educational and behavioral goals on reproductive health, through the contents of the basic, nec-essary and optional subjects. Young people learn to analyze information, and based on them develop critical thinking. The conducted study suggests that most students of first and fourth grade of secondary school of Pharmacy and Physio-therapy have basic knowledge of reproductive health and use of emergency contraception (Vasic, 2015). The worst results were in matters related to the efficacy and mecha-nism of action of emergency contraception. The synergy of the education and the health systems achieves preserva-tion of reproductive health of youth. The role of the carrier of the activities related to the reproductive health of young people is assigned to counselors within the school health centers. Private health centers should be specially engaged in education of youth. Counseling centers perform medi-cal and educational work with young people. The acquisi-tion of knowledge, attitudes and skills of young people on reproductive health is carried out through group work, un-der special programs. Through multiple levels, in a short period of time and by active learning, training on the top-ics of risk behavior, lifestyles, is carried out. Preventive counseling activities can be conducted through brochures and manuals. Counseling centers for young people pro-vide a sense of security, privacy and confidentiality. Con-fidentiality gives a special sense of security.