Available data on neurotoxicity showed/suggest-ed that: animals treated chronically with OPs exhibit re-duced sensitivity (adaptive responses), probably due to down-regulation of ACh receptors and reduced synthesis of ACh, so that the presynaptic release is restricted; sub-lethal or subclinical doses of OPs can produce apoptotic neuronal cell death and involve oxidative stress due to an increase of the excitatory neurotransmitter, glutamate and subsequent increase in intracellular calcium; genetic sus-ceptibility (genetic variation in paraoxonase) could be re-lated to OPs neurotoxicity; inhibition of brain CarbE, the activity of which appears to be unrelated to the liver and plasma type, and/or even other non-target enzymes such as carboxyamidase, whose endogenous function is unknown although it has been suggested that it has a role in xenobi-otic metabolism, may play a role in explaining the mech-anism of cognitive dysfunction; behavioral changes could be induced by the effects of OP compounds on neuropep-tide metabolism due to inhibition of acylpeptide hydrolase, the enzyme which is responsible for the removal of N-acet-ylated amino acids from the N-terminus of short peptides.Several low dose studies as well as some epidemio-logical studies did not identify any link between neurolog-ical disorder and erythrocyte and/or plasma cholinesterase activity. The mechanisms of OPs - induced chronic neu-rotoxicity have yet to be established. An important conse-quence of this is that non-cholinergic mechanism can be expected to show different structure-activity relationship to those established for conventional end points such as acute toxicity (Vucinic at al., 2014). ConclusionIn conclusion, based on the available data, their qual-ity and quantity, and the fact that inhibition of AChE is both the most specific and one of the most sensitive mecha-nism of OPs action, it seems that inhibition of AChE is still the most reliable parameter to predict absolute and relative potency with regard to long-term low-level exposure and neurodevelopmental toxicity produced by OPs.ReferencesCasida, J.E., Quistad, G.B., 2004. Organophosphate toxicology: Safety aspects of nonacetylcholinesterase secondary targets. Chem. Res. Toxicol. 17(8), 983-992.Antonijevic, B., Stojiljkovic, M.P., 2007. Unequal efficacy of pyridinium oximes in acute organophosphate poisoning. Clin. Med. Res. 5(1), 71-82.Vucinic, S, Antonijevic, B, Brkic, D., 2014. Occupational and Environmental Aspects of Organophosphorus Compounds. In: Basic and Clinical Toxicology of Organophosphorus Compounds. Eds: Balali-Mood, Mahdi, Abdollahi, Mohammad, Springer-Verlag, London, 213-245. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 313 - 314 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.12-009.72-074Short communicationThe role of cardiac markers in the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction and angina pectorisEmilija Kostoska1*, Aleksandra Crvenpanova1, Tanja Angjuseva1, Zan Mitrev1, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska21Special Hospital for Surgical Diseases Filip Vtori, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University,Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* emilija.kostoska@filafarm.com.mkIntroductionAcute myocardial infarction (AMI) is a life-threaten-ing condition which diagnosis must be established right away and to be currently treated. Early identification and confirmation of acute myocardial infarction is quite impor-tant for the patient care and making the right decisions. The acute myocardial infarction belongs within the spectrum of acute coronary syndromes, including unstable angina pec-toris, acute myocardial infarction without elevation of ST-segment (NSTEMI) and acute myocardial infarction with elevation of ST-segment (STEMI). Acute myocardial in-farction is a major cause of morbidity and mortality world-wide (Atman et al., 2000).Angina pectoris is the medical term for chest pain or discomfort caused when the heart muscle doesn't get enough oxygen-rich blood. But, angina is not a disease. It is a symptom of an underlying heart problem, usually coro-nary heart disease (CHD). There are many types of angina, including stable and unstable angina. In fact, unstable angi-na is a pre-infarction syndrome (Braunwald, 1990).Diagnosis on an electrocardiogram (ECG) is not an ab-solute criterion, particularly in the case of small infarctions. Cardiac markers are used in the diagnosis and risk stratifi-cation of patients with chest pain and suspected acute cor-onary syndrome (ACS) (Higgins et al., 1999). The mea-surement of cardiac markers in the blood is the basis of the diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction for more than 50 years. The release of biomarkers in the bloodstream in higher than normal amounts, suggests a pathological pro-cess. Thus, the detection of elevated concentrations of car-diac biomarkers in the blood is a sign of cardiac injury that may be due to toxic effects or hemodynamic stress. Tradi-tional cardiac markers (CK-NAC, LDH) have many dis-advantages: they secrete into the circulation very late (12 hours after necrosis of the heart muscle), thus preventing the early diagnosis. To overcome this situation, for detec-tion of cardiac necrosis, there are introduced new biochem-ical markers from the circulation, CK-MB and troponin (Rajappa and Sharma, 2005).CK-MB rise twice higher than normal after 6 hours of the infarction, to reach its maximum after 24-48 hours, when its concentration decreases, therefore it can't be di-agnosed cardiac necrosis quickly. Troponin I appears in the serum relatively early after the infarction (approximately 4 hours), reaches its maximum 12-48 hours after necro-sis, and remains in the circulation up to 14 days later. The cardiac troponins, in particular, have become the cardiac markers of choice for patients with acute coronary syn-drome (Thygesen et al., 2010).The aim of the study was to evaluate the clinical value of cardiac Troponin I over CK-MB as essential marker in early assessing myocardial cell damage.Materials and methodsBlood samples (serum and heparinized plasma) were taken from 38 patients (29 males and 9 females) with com-plain on chest pain at the Special Hospital for Surgical Dis-eases "Filip Vtori" Skopje. According to their age, the pa-tients were divided into 3 groups (from 31-50; 51-70 and over 70 years old) in order to prove which will be the most risk group in regards of cardiovascular diseases.Daily measurements of Troponin I and CK-MB levels were made in all patients with no history of coronary heart disease. Regardless the values, the measurements were re-S3 PP 147314Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 313 - 314 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationspeated every 4 hours in order to conceive the trend line of the markers. Also, on the receipt day of the patients, the ECG tests were made, respectively.Determination of these markers was made with Im-munoassay System -Advia Centaur XP by of chemilumi-nometric immunoassay method. Minimum concentration limit ("cut off" value) for Troponin I is 0.78 ng/ml and the referent values for CK-MB are from 0-15 ng/ml. There-fore, any increase of the concentration of these markers, indicates the condition of acute myocardial infarction. If there is no increasing above the baseline value of Tropo-nin I and if ECG tests are normal, it's a question of angi-na pectoris.Results and discussionIn regards of age group, the obtained results indicated that the risk group in terms of cardiovascular diseases (in this case AMI) is the group from 51-70 years (29 patients).As expected, serum Troponin I levels increased in 30 from all 38 patients (79%). Thus, these increased concen-trations of cardiac troponin (cTnI) which deviate from nor-mal values, indicate of acute myocardial infarction. There-fore, 20 patients of them (67%) had elevation of ST-seg-ment (STEMI) on ECG test which can confirm the diagno-sis. There were no signs of myocardial infarction on ECG test (NSTEMI) on the rest 10 patients (33%), only the con-centration of Troponin I was elevated. In this case, Tropo-nin I is the leading biochemical parameter which affirms that these patients had AMI, which is very important.CK-MB was elevated only in 9 of the 38 patients and according to literature data (that this marker stays elevat-ed in the blood up to 72 hours), it appears in blood after 6-9 hours after the onset of chest pain, unlike the Tropo-nin which was already increased. Just to confirm the low-er sensitivity of CK-MB compared with Troponin I, when the second tests were made (after next 4 hours), only on 5 patients the concentration of CK-MB started to elevate. On the other side, the elevated CK-MB levels on those 9 pa-tients, appeared to be decreasing next day (the concentra-tions were in the referent values), unlike Troponin I which concentration was still over the "cut off" value.In the rest 8 patients (21%) the ECG findings were nor-mal and the results for Troponin were in the referent val-ues, which indicate that these patients were with angina pectoris. If their symptoms become worse over time, test for Troponin must be ordered, because it can lead to a heart attack.ConclusionCardiac Troponin I appears to be diagnostically superi-or to CK-MB due to its high sensitivity (appears very early after infarction) and specificity.Therefore, Troponin I is considered as "gold standard" in the early detection of myocardial infarction and is nec-essary in setting the correct diagnosis. Thus, the use of test for Troponin enables early noninvasive diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction.ReferencesAntman, E.,Bassand, J.P., Klein, W.,Ohman, M., Lopez, S. J.L.,Ryden, L., MD; Simoons, M., Tendera, M., 2000. Myocardial infarction redefined - A consensus document of the joint european society of cardiology/american college of cardiology committee for the redefinition of myocardial infarction. Journal of the American College of Cardiology. 36(3), 959-969. Braunwald, E., 1990. Unstable angina: A classification. Editors: Bleifeld, W., Hamm,C., Braunwald, E., Springer-Verlag. 103-111.Higgins, S., Turner, A. and Wood, J., 1999. Biochemistry for the medical science. Chest pain. Indian J. Clin. Biochem. 19(1), 113-117.Rajappa, M., Sharma, A., 2005. Biomarkers of cardiac injury: An update. Angiology 56(6), 677-691.Thygesen, K., Mair, J., Katus, H., Plebani, M., Venge, P., Collinson, P.,Lindahl, B., Giannitsis, E.,Hasin, Y., Galvani, M., Tubaro, M., Alpert, J.S.,Biasucci, L. M., Koenig, W., Mueller, C., Hube,r K., Hamm, C., and Jaffe, A. S., 2010. Recommendations for the use of cardiac troponin measurement in acute cardiac care. European Heart Journal. 31(18), 2197-204. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/ehq251. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 315 - 316 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.212.7.074:340.66Short communicationChallenges in interpretation of forensic toxicological findings for opiates: case report and a literature reviewMarija Bujaroska*, Natasa Bitoljanu, Ljupco Cakar, Renata Jankova-Ajanovska, Zlatko Jakjovski, Verica Poposka, Aleksej Duma Institute of Forensic Medicine, Criminology and Medical Deontology, Medical Faculty, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia* bujaroska_m@yahoo.comIntroductionThe routine screening in the Laboratory of Forensic Toxicology encompasses assays for determination of psy-choactive substances, commonly used drugs and presence of ethanol. The positive finding on opiates does not always imply the presence of heroin (HER) and/or its metabo-lites because various drug formulations contain an opiate as an active substance. The detection of HER and its main metabolite 6-monoacetylmorphine (6-MAM) as a gener-al marker of HER use, poses some analytical challenges, mainly due to their short half-lives (Goldberger et al.,1994; Paterson and Cordero, 2006; Rook et al., 2006). The scope of this study includes 3 forensic cases with positive find-ings on opiates, where the presence of HER and 6-MAM could not be detected, but some additional markers of HER use were identified.Materials and methodsThe analyses which are subject of this study were con-ducted by routine screening for the presence of psychoac-tive substances, using fluorescence polarization immuno-assay and/or biochip array technology for urine and blood samples, respectively. The positive results were confirmed by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS), af-ter previous sample preparation using ion exchange solid phase extraction (SPE) columns. In the case of urine sam-ples, acid hydrolysis was performed prior to SPE, in order to determine free opioid alkaloids. ResultsCase 1: The routine screening of the postmortem urine samples did not show positive results for the presence of psychoactive substances. However, further analyses us-ing GC-MS were conducted due to the information on the presence of a syringe and an unknown powdered substance near the body of the deceased. The GC-MS analysis of the serum revealed the presence of the following substances: caffeine, morphine (MOR), acetaminophen and traces of noscapine, papaverine and hydrocodone. In the unknown powder sample and the syringe, acetaminophen, caffeine, codeine (COD), 6-MAM, papaverine, MOR and noscap-ine were detected.Case 2: Positive results on the presence of opi-ates and methadone in postmortem blood and urine sam-ples were obtained during the routine screening. Further GC-MS analyses of the biological samples were conduct-ed and the following substances were identified in the se-rum: nicotine, cotinine, caffeine, theophylline, theobro-mine, paracetamol, methadone and its metabolite 2-ethyl-idene-1,5-dimethyl-3,3-diphenylpyrrolidine (EDDP), met-amizol, MOR, meconine and traces of COD. The same substances were identified in the urine sample, along with noscapine, hydrocotarnine and desmethylpapaverine.Case 3: Screening of postmortem urine samples showed positive finding on opiates, whereas postmortem blood screening showed presence of opiates, methadone, benzodiazepines and cannabinoids. The GC-MS analy-sis confirmed the presence of caffeine, nicotine, tramad-ol, methadone and meconin in serum. The same substances were detected in the urine sample, along with COD, MOR, papaverine, hydrocotarnine and paracetamol.S3 PP 148316Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 315 - 316 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationsDiscussionHER is quite unstable in aqueous medium and is rap-idly converted to 6-MAM due to spontaneous hydrolysis (Knight et al., 2014; Rook et al., 2006). This can be no-ticed in the results of the first case presented, where only 6-MAM was detected in the extracts from the syringe and the unknown powdered substance. The same hydrolysis occurs in the serum, resulting in the deacetylation of HER to 6-MAM, which is further metabolized to MOR (Rook et al., 2006). Different data on the half-lives of HER and 6-MAM have been reported in the literature. It is thought that HER can be detected in blood 10-40 min after intrave-nous administration, while 6-MAM 1-3 h, reaching max-imum plasma concentration immediately after injection (Rook et al., 2006). In our cases, larger number of opi-oid alkaloids and their metabolites were identified in urine rather than in blood. Several studies conducted using post-mortem biological samples suggest that the most suitable medium for detection of 6-MAM is the cerebrospinal flu-id (CSF), while others consider the vitreous humor to be the sample with the greatest number of positive findings on 6-MAM compared to other fluids and tissue samples from the same forensic cases, with CSF having the sec-ond greatest number of positive results (Goldberger et al., 1994; Pragst et al., 1999; Wyman and Bultman, 2004).