Lower solubility of these newly synthesized compounds can be explained by the lipophilic and inductive character of the (benzoylamino)methyl moi-ety that disfavors ionization. There was no agreement be-tween the predicted and experimentally determined data for solubility both in water and PBS (pH 7.4) for all the compounds. pKa values were readily determined by inspection of the second-derivative plot. The experimental values ob-tained for norfloxacin as well as calculated ones did not differ significantly from those reported in the literature (Qiang and Adams, 2004). For all the synthesized com-pounds, three pKa values were determined (around 4, 5 and 14), suggesting preservation of the zwitter ionic char-acter of the synthesized compounds.ConclusionFive derivatives of norfloxacin were synthesized. All the synthesized compounds have lower water solubility and potentially higher lipophylicity than the leading com-pound norfloxacin. The experimental pKa values obtained for the leading compound as well as calculated ones did not differ significantly from those reported in the literature for norfloxacin.ReferencesAndriole, V.T., 2000. The Quinolones thrid edit. V. T. Andriole, ed., San Diego: Academic press.Breznica-Selmani, P., Mladenovska, K., Kavrakovski, Z., Mikhova, B., Draeger, G., Popovski, E., 2015. [(3-Chlorobenzamido)methyl]triethylammonium Chloride. Molbank 2, M851. Dua, K., Ramana, M.V., Singh Sara, U.V., Himaja, M., Agrawal, A., Garg, V., Pabreja, K., 2007.Investigation of enhancement of solubility of norfloxacin beta-cyclodextrin in presence of acidic solubilizing additives. Current drug delivery 4, 21-5.Qiang, Z., Adams, C., 2004. Potentiometric determination of acid dissociation constants (pKa) for human and veterinary antibiotics. Water Res. 38, 2874-2890.Riley, C.M., Kindberg, C.G., Stella, V.J., Fernandes, P.B., 1989. The physicochemical properties of quinolones antimicrobials variously substituted at C-7. Implicationes in the development of liuid dosage forms. In International Telesymposiumon Quinolones. Barcelona: Prous Science Publishers, pp. 21-36.Zhang, C-L., Wang, Y., 2008. Aqueous solubilities for ofloxacin, norfloxacin, lomefloxacin, ciprofloxacin, pefloxacin, and pipemidic acid from (293.15 to 323.15) K. J. Chem. Eng. 53, 1295-1297.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 575 - 576 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.72Short communicationPhysicochemical properties of novel derivatives of norfloxacin: distribution coefficientPranvera Breznica-Selmani1,2*, Emil Popovski2,5, Bozhana Mikhova3, Arlinda Daka4, Dashnor Nebija4, Blerina Koshi4, Maja Stevanoska1 and Kristina Mladenovska1,2 1Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia2Research Center for Environment and Materials, Macedonian Academy of Sciences and Arts, Krste Misirkov 2, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia3Institute of Organic Chemistry with Centre of Phytochemistry, Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, Akad. G. Bonchev 9, 1113 Sofia, R. Bulgaria 4Faculty of Medicine, University "Hasan Prishtina", Mother Theresa 10 000, Prishtina, R. Kosovo5Institute of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Arhimedova 5, PO Box 162, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* pranvera.breznica@uni-pr.eduIntroductionN-Mannich bases are of particular interest in drug chemistry because of their potential to be used as prodrugs of NH-acidic drugs containing amide, imide, ureide and amine moieties (Bala et al., 2014; Stella et al., 2007). With respect to the amines, N-Mannich bases are useful when an increase in their lipophilicity is required. Lipophilicity is one of the most important determinants of the pharmaco-kinetic characteristics of a drug since it is related to its ab-sorption as well as distribution to the target site. Lipophi-licity of the quinolones as an important factor in the qui-nolones intestinal absorption is considered responsible for the poor relationship between their in vivo and in vitro ac-tivity (Cabrera Perez et al., 2002). Therefore, in these com-pounds, formation of N-Mannich base could suppress the pKa, which means that an important proportion could re-main unionized at the pH of intestine. With an aim to increase lipophylicity of norfloxacin, we have synthesized five different derivatives of norflox-acin [1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4[(benzoylamino)methyl]pi-perazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxyl-ic acid (1a), 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(4-methylbenzoylami-no)methyl]piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1b), 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(3-meth-ylbenzoylamino)methyl] piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-di-hydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1c), 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(2-chloro-benzoylamino)methyl] piperazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1d) and 1-ethyl-6-fluoro-7-{4-[(3-chlorobenzoylamino)methyl]pi-perazin-1-yl}-4-oxo-1,4-dihydroquinoline-3-carboxylic acid (1e)], by incorporating (benzoylamino)methyl func-tions on the free nitrogen of the 7-piperazinyl group. In ad-dition to the structural characterization of these novel com-pounds as potential N-Mannich base prodrugs of norfloxa-cin, distribution behavior of these compounds between n-octanol and buffer solution (pH 7.4) was mater of inter-est. In addition, logD7.4 values, experimentally obtained, were compared with the predicted ones by computation-al method developed by ChemAxon (http://www.chemi-calize.org//).Materials and methodsNorfloxacin and 1-octanol were purchased from Flu-ka (Sigma-Aldrich Chemie Gmbh Munich, Germany). The compounds for preparation of phosphate buffer saline (PBS), NaH2PO4, NaOH and KH2PO4, were purchased from Merck KgaA (Germany). The experimental partition coefficient (D) between n-octanol and PBS (pH 7.4) was determined by shaking flask method described by Abuo-Rahma et al. (2009). Stock so-lutions of (benzoylamino)methyl derivatives of norfloxa-S6 PP 275576Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 575 - 576 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationscin in PBS (pH 7.4) were prepared in concentration of app. 0.2 mg/mL for all tested compounds, respectively. After-wards, equal volumes of each solution and n-octanol were mixed, vortexed for 3 min and agitated for 12 h in a shak-ing water bath at 25 +- 0.1 oC. The test tubes were protected from light by wrapping in aluminum foil. Before a partition coefficient was determined, the organic and aqueous phase was mutually saturated by shaking for 24 h at the temper-ature of the experiment. After equilibration, the octanol phase was removed with a Pasteur pipette and both phases were assayed spectrophotometrically at lmax 270-280 nm. The experimental partition coefficient D was determined from equation: D = Ci- Cw/Cw* Vw/ V0, where Ci rep-resents the total concentration of solute in both phases af-ter distribution, Cw the solute concentration in the aqueous phase after distribution; Vw represents the volume of the aqueous and Vo the volume of the organic phase. All par-tition coefficient determinations were made in triplicate. The logDcalc was calculated by online ChemAxon's soft-ware (www.chemicalize.org/), where both logP and logD predictions are based on a modified version of the meth-od of Viswanadhan et al. (1989). The predicted partition coefficients are composed of the molecules' atomic incre-ments and the applied modifications include the redefini-tion of selected atom types to accommodate electron delo-calization and the addition of contributions of ionic forms. The logP value of zwitterions is calculated from the logD at the isoelectric point. Also, the effect of hydrogen bonds on logP is considered if the formation of a six membered ring between suitable donor and acceptor atoms can take place. As the logD values are pH-dependent, the logD cal-culation relies on the pKa prediction process.Results and discussionGenerally, the experimentally obtained distribution coefficients of norfloxacin derivatives were higher than the one of the corresponding leading compound, with the logD7.4exp ranging from -0.91 to 0.58 (vs. logD7.4exp -0.89 for norfloxacin). To reveal a correlation between the experimental and calculated values, a linear regression was performed. Weak correlation R2=0.046 between the calcu-lated and the experimental values for all synthesized com-pounds was observed. Similar data were reported from oth-er researchers as well (Abuo-Rahma et al., 2009). One of the reasons for this weak correlation may be zwitterion-ic nature of the fluoroquinolones at physiological pH. It is clear that at pH corresponding to the isoelectric point, zwit-terions and neutral molecules are present at their highest concentrations. Therefore, this ratio is remarkably impor-tant feature to describe the lipophilicity of fluoroquinolones (Bakhotmah et al., 2011). Our results revealed that the iso-electric points of the synthesized compounds are around pH 5-7. According to Kujawaski et al. (Kujawski et al., 2012), predicted logD is calculated only for neutral com-pounds. Programs for calculating logD are based on break-ing molecules into fragments and summing these constant fragment values plus certain correction factors. Consider-ing that, polyprotic equation becomes more complicated and potentially accumulates errors due to the logD and pKa predictions (Kujawski and Popielarska, 2012). This may be a reason for flimsy correlation between the predicted and experimental values of logD7.4 for the synthesized com-pounds in our study.ConclusionNovel (benzoylamino)methyl derivatives of fluoroqui-nolones were synthesized in one step and in high yields, starting from the leading compound norfloxacin. Addi-tion of (benzoylamino)methyl functions in the piperazinyl ring of the leading compounds by substitution of hydrogen atom at position 4 resulted in formation of potentially use-ful antimicrobial compounds. The structures of the synthe-sized derivatives were confirmed by different spectroscop-ic techniques. The lipophilicity of the synthesized deriva-tives was higher than the ones of the leading compound, in-dicating possibility for improved bioavailability and pene-tration into bacterial cells.ReferencesAbuo-Rahma, Gel-D., Sarhan, A., Gad, G.F., 2009. Design, synthesis, antibacterial activity and physicochemical parameters of novel N-4-piperazinyl derivatives of norfloxacin. Bioorg. Med. Chem. 17, 3879-3886. Bakhotmah, D.A., Rahmanr, R.A., Makki, M.S., El-Zahabi, M.A., Suliman, M., 2011. Synthesis, physiochemical properties, photochemical probe, and antimicrobial effects of novel norfloxacin analogues. ISRN, Article ID 184754, 11 pages, dx.doi.org/10.5402/2011/184754.Kujawski, J., Bernard, M., Janusz, A., Kuzma, W., 2012. Prediction of log P: ALOGPS application in medicinal chemistry education. J. Chem. Educ. 89(1), 64-67.Bala, S., Sharma, N., Kajal, A., Kamboj, S., 2014. Design, synthesis, characterization and computational studies on benzamide substituted Mannich bases as novel, potential antibacterial agents. Sci. World J. Article ID 73214, 1-9.Stella, V.J., Guarino, V.R., 2007. Prodrugs of amides, imides and other NH-acidic compounds. Stella, V.J., Borchardt, R.T., Hageman, M.J., Oliyai, R., Maag, H., Tilley, J. (Eds.). In Prodrugs, challenges and rewards. 1st Ed. Springer, New York, pp. 833-87. Cabrera Perez, M.A., Gonzalez Diaz, H., Fernandez Teurel, C., Pla-Delfina, J.M., Bermejo Sanz, M., 2002. A novel approach to determining physicochemical and absorption properties of 6-fluoroquinolone. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm. 53, 317-325.Viswanadhan, V.N., Ghose, A.K., Reyankar, G.R., Robins, R.K., 1989. Atomic physicochemical parameters for three dimensional structure directed quantitative structure-activity relationships. 4. Additional parameters for hydrophobic and dispersive interactions and their application for an automated superposition of certai. J. Chem. Inf. Comput. Sci. 29, 163-172.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 577 - 578 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.277Short communicationMethotrexate - an old drug with new pharmaceutical formulations and new indicationsSvetlana Golocorbin-Kon1, Nebojsa Pavlovic1*, Bojan Stanimirov2, Sasa Vukmirovic2, Boris Milijasevic2, Hani Al-Salami3, Momir Mikov21 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad, Serbia2 Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Hajduk Veljkova 3, Novi Sad, Serbia3 School of Pharmacy, Curtin University, Kent Street Bentley WA 6102, Perth, Australia* nebojsa.pavlovic@mf.uns.ac.rsIntroductionMethotrexate (MTX), also known as amethopterin is an antifolate and an antimetabolite drug, a chemical ana-logue of folic acid developed by Yellapragada Subbarao of Lederle (Rossi, 2013). MTX was first administered to chil-dren with acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in 1948. MTX became the first drug that induced remission. Remis-sions were short, but the principle was clear, antifolates could suppress proliferation of malignant cells, and could thereby re-establish normal bone-marrow function. MTX received FDA approval in 1953. Since that time it has been used worldwide for a variety of medical interventions.Firstly, MTX has been used as a parenteral formula-tion for cancer treatment. The use of MTX in the treatment of psoriasis and rheumatoid arthritis dates from the 1960s. From the late 1970s to the early 1980s, many rheumatol-ogists were reporting their experiences with MTX use in rheumatoid arthritis treatment (Ward, 1985). MTX can be given orally or by intravenous, intramuscular or subcuta-neous injection (Jundt et al, 1993). Intramuscular, intrave-nous or subcutaneous administration is usually reserved for patients with poor oral bioavailability of the drug or poor adherence to oral therapy, or when the cost is an is-sue. Weekly dosing of MTX is recommended. More fre-quent administration than weekly increases the risk of tox-icity. The entire dose can be administered at once or divid-ed into three doses taken over a 24-hour period (i.e., every eight hours). MTX should never be given in daily doses. During the 1980's and 1990's many studies were done with MTX to determine if it could suppress the growth of a tub-al or ectopic pregnancy. Researchers discovered that MTX could be given as a safe treatment for the ectopic pregnan-cy treatment cured without surgery. Further research found that MTX could also be used to induce a chemical abor-tion. A small percentage of the cases required surgical in-tervention. The benefit of a MTX-induced abortion is that if there is an unknown tubal pregnancy it will be treated.