Ethanol-drug absorption interaction: potential for a significant effect on the plasma pharmacokinetics of ethanol vulnerable formulations. Mol. Pharm. 6, 1429-1440.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 387 - 388 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.275.031 615.212.031Short communicationSmall scale production of gel with menthol, benzocaine and procaine HClSlavica Maleska Stojadinovik1*, Bistra Angelovska21Public Hospital -Ohrid, Dimitar Vlahov St. 33, 6000 Ohrid, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Medical Sciences, University "Goce Delcev", 2000 Stip, Stale Popov 92/55 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* slavica.maleska@yahoo.comIntroductionAntirheumatic and analgesics drugs are the most com-monly used drugs to treat diseases of the musculoskele-tal system and to alleviate all sorts of pain that are caused from different origins. Their systemic use causes long se-ries of side effects, so combination therapies of drugs with systemic and local action or only medicinal products in-tended for topical use wherever possible, especially in physical therapy, would be treatment of choice.Various formulations of dosage forms, by composition and consistency, allow different therapeutic approach, suit-able for achieving the desired therapeutic effect and for be-ing capable to adapt to the physiotherapist treatment. According to the regulations of the pharmacopoeia or to other regulations, the galenic drugs are made in small batches in a galenic laboratory, which are intended to be administrated directly to a pharmacy or a health institution. According to the health requirements, the preparation of pharmaceutical dosage forms in a galenic laboratory, mainly aims to provide a dosage form, which is designed as an opportunity for changes in the composition and con-sistency of the product. Therefore, it can be provided a product with a modified properties, compared with a fin-ished and fixed composition of the medicinal and an aux-iliary substances, or with the already existing traditional products, which have the same composition of active com-ponents, satisfying the needs of the healthcare profession-als who work with them and also allowing a simultaneous comfort and a therapeutic effect for the patients. The usage of this drug, immediately after the prepa-ration, reduces the need for adding more funds to stabilize and to ensure longer shelf life. Obtaining the quality of this drug product, that satis-fies the standards and maintains or enhances the therapeu-tic properties, requires appropriate conditions for a prep-aration and knowledge of all the components properties, technological process and requirements for the finished product as well. The usage of the traditional liquid, a pharmaceutical product known as "Russian water", which contains: alco-hol, menthol, procaine hydrochloride and benzocaine, is well received and accepted by the patients and the phys-iotherapists, but it also has some negative sides, such as, short effect, it is easily volatile, it acts surface and cannot be recommended as a massage supplement. On the other hand, gels are a dosage forms for external use that can be applied easily, to tie up to the skin and to enable the drug to heal the affected area,it can realize deep action, such as the ability to quickly penetrate multi-layers on the skin, to be easily rinsed from the site of application and general-ly does not irritate the skin, which is largely satisfying for our requirements. The aim of this study was to formulate and prepare gel formulation from the pharmaceutical composition named "Russian water", with the ingredients: menthol, benzo-caine, procaine HCl, which is easy and pleasant to apply on the painful area, also effective to reduce the pain and the inflammation. Formulation challenge was slight solubility of some of the components, getting a stable product with a proper consistency, ensuring the release of the active ingre-dients, their affection on the skin and a prolonged action.Materials and methodsIn the formulation and preparation the following ac-tive substances were used: menthol (Alkaloid), benzocaine S4 PP 183388Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 387 - 388 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentations(Sigma Aldrich), procaine HCl (Sigma Aldrich), at the rec-ommended doses and ingredients, carbopol 940 (Sigma Al-drich), glycerol, (Alkaloid), triethylene tetramine (Sigma Aldrich) and aqua distillate.Gel with menthol, benzocaine and procaine HClwas prepared in the galenic laboratory in Ohrid -General Hos-pital.Used ingredients and a compounding procedure de-scribed in a rational manner are:menthol 4.0, benzocaine 2.0, procaine HCl 2.0, base gel ad 200.0. Basic gel was made with the following proscription:Carbopol 940 2.0, glicerolum 7.5, triethylene tetramine 2.5, aqua destilata 190.0.In the step 1, preparation of base gel, Carbopol 940 and aqua distillate 50 mL were left to bulge. Then glycer-olumwas gradually added and mixed to achieve good ho-mogenization. After that, triethylene tetraamin was add-ed and mixed again until thick gel was obtained.In the step 2, preparation of healing gel, the menthol was grind-ed through a sieve, and it was measured in the prescribed amount. It was mixed with the same amount of prepared basic gel to complete uniformity of the mixture. The ben-zocaine was grinded, sieved and measured at the prescribed amount and mixed with equal quantity of earlier prepared gel with menthol.The prescribed amount of procaine hydrochloride was measured and dissolved in distilled water 10mL. Then, the solution was gradually added to the gel with menthol and benzocaine, whileconstantly stirred.The remaining amount of distilled water was added, gradually and with constant stirring, to the homogeneous gel to obtain a homogeneous product.Results and discussionThe obtained gel is a homogeneous product with milk appearance. The high degree of pulverization of the com-ponents should improve solubility and ensure uniform dis-tribution of insoluble components in the mixture. The pro-cess of mixing equal amounts of the basic mixture and pul-verized substance also provides uniform distribution of the components, and the high density of the base gel reduces the possibility of their sedimentation (Allen, 2002; Jova-novic and Sekulovic, 1987; Racev and Lambov, 2005; Si-mov et al., 2001; Winfeld and Richards, 1998). Menthol is practically insoluble in water and because of its sole dis-tribution in the preparationit was pulverized and a special way for its incorporation into the system was applied.Ben-zocaine is poorly soluble in water and an appropriate pul-verization and mixing improved solubility and its uniform distribution in the product.The procedure of mixing and gradual addition of a small amount concentrated procaine hydrochloride solution reduces the possibility of decom-position of the gel structure under the influence of the po-tential ionic solution (Jackson and Lowey, 2010; Simov et al., 2001). The obtained gel is packaged in plastic recipients of 200 mL, closed with a suitable stopper and signed with red signature marked "For external use. "It is used topically by applying to the affected area and/or with good rubbing in physical therapy.The product has a short shelf life and is prepared immediately before use, and to ensure the qual-ity of the product it is recommended to be kept at a room temperature in well-closed recipients.During application it gives pleasant cooling sensation and pain relief and easi-ly rinse out with water. It is not toxic and does not cause skin irritation.The product can be prepared in galenic laboratory, and easy application and efficiency makes it acceptable to pa-tients (Jackson and Lowey, 2010). It has been retained at the administration site longer than the expected, and has longer actions regarding to the liquid alcohol solution, which is with the same components. ConclusionThe results of the treatment of patients according the investigation of the staff that operated and the practical pa-tients show that this gel is with a prolonged analgesic ac-tivity compared to the liquid preparation, with an easy and safe application, a pleasant cooling sensation and a pain re-lief, also an easy flushing and with an increased satisfac-tion of therapists and patients.ReferencesAllen, L.V., 2002.The art, science and technology of pharmaceutical compounding, 2nd Ed.Jackson, M., Lowey, A., 2010. Handbook of extemporaneous preparation, Pharmaceutical Press.Jovanovic, M., Sekulovic, D., 1987. Pharmaceutical technology II with cosmetology, Belgrade, Serbia.Racev, D., Lambov, N., 2005. Pharmaceutical technology, Plovid, Bulgaria.Simov, A., 2001. Pharmaceutical technology, Kultura, Skopje, Macedonia.Winfeld, A.J., Richards, R.M.E., 1998. Pharmaceutical practice.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 389 - 390 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.37.074Short communicationApproaches in evaluation of freeze-dried antibody conjugatesKatarina Smilkov1*, Darinka Gjorgieva Ackova1, Petre Makreski2, Icko Gjorgoski2, Emilija Janevik- Ivanovska11Faculty of Medical Sciences, Goce Delcev University, Krste Misirkov No.10-A P.O 201, 2000 Stip, R. Macedonia2Faculty of Natural Sciences and Mathematics, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Arhimedova Str. No. 3, PO Box 162, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* katarina.smilkov@ugd.edu.mkIntroductionAntibodies, proteins and other biotechnological prod-ucts are often challenging in terms of their in-solution sta-bility. Various physical and chemical changes occur dur-ing their in-solution storage, leading to shorter shelf-life. Freeze drying is often proposed as a method of choice, since removal of water has been reported to greatly re-duce the rate of degradation, both in physical and chemi-cal terms. Still, during freeze-drying antibodies and other protein pharmaceuticals can experience in-process chang-es that may reduce their physicochemical biological and/or pharmacological properties. In this context, many attempts have been made to reduce these changes, both in optimi-zation of the freeze-drying process and in optimization of solution formulation, adding various buffers, cryoprotec-tants, etc. The presented experience was in freeze-drying of monoclonal antibody - rituximab, conjugated with three types of bifunctional chelating agents, p-SCN-Bn-DOTA, p-SCN-Bn-DTPA, and 1B4M-DTPA, and evaluation of possible changes in post-freeze-drying phase. In order to assess possible defragmentation of the antibody, protein in-tegrity test was performed, using SDS-PAGE electrophore-sis and the analysis of several structural elements of FT-IR and Raman spectra pre- and post- freeze-drying process, provided an insight in possible changes in the structure. Materials and methodsCommercially available rituximab (Mabthera(r)) was conjugated with three bifunctional chelating agents, p-SCN-Bn-DOTA, p-SCN-Bn-DTPA, and 1B4M-DTPA (Macrocyclics Inc. USA). The conjugates were synthesized, purified, adjusted to concentration of 1 mg/mL and freeze dried, using Labconco Free Zone Stoppering Tray Dry-er (USA), as previously described (Smilkov et al., 2014). The protein integrity was assessed using SDS-PAGE that was performed in about 5 uL of reconstituted samples and 1 mg/mL purified, commercial rituximab (Mabthera(r)). Samples were mixed with sample buffer and boiled 5 min at 95 degC. Approximately 5 uL of each preparation was applied in 12% bisacrylamide under reducing conditions. Visualization of the bands was enabled using Coomassie Brilliant Blue R-250 (Sigma, USA). For comparison, low molecular weight marker (Amersham GE Healthcare, UK) was used. For determining protein structure, FT-IR spectros-copy was conducted on PARAGON 1000 (Perkin Elmer, USA) spectrophotometer in the spectral range 2000-500 cm-1. Attenuated Total Reflectance (ATR) spectra were ac-quired at a resolution of 4 cm-1. The obtained data was processed with Grams_32 software (Thermo Scientific). Raman spectra (2000-400 cm-1) were recorded on a mi-cro-Raman multichannel spectrometer Horiba JobinYvon LabRam 300 Infinity, using He:Ne laser. The spectral reso-lution was set to 4 cm-1. The acquisition time and the accu-mulation number were set to 10 s and 10 scans, respective-ly (Gjorgieva Ackova et al., 2015).Results and discussionUsing SDS-PAGE electrophoresis it is possible to de-termine the purity and, therefore possible defragmentation. The electrophoresis in reducing conditions resulted in two distinct Mw species which migrated in two bands in all S4 PP 184390Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 389 - 390 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsthree rituximab conjugates. The upper band corresponded to ~50 kDa and the lower band to ~25 kDa. This migra-tion pattern is characteristic of IgG antibodies that have two identical subunits, each composed of two polypeptide chains: two heavy and two light chains, linked via four di-sulfide bonds. Under the action of the reducing agent DTT, the antibody is separated to heavy and light chains, with molecular weight corresponding to the two formed bands (Maleki et al., 2013; Nebija et al., 2011). The lyophiliza-tion protocol used did not affect structure properties and caused no post-lyophilization modification, as shown in the reducing SDS-PAGE lane patterns, compared to com-mercially available rituximab sample. Spectroscopy studies can reveal information to wit-ness preserved secondary structure upon freeze-drying, a mandatory prerequisite for immunoconjugates. Protein de-naturation upon lyophilization is usually monitored by IR spectroscopy (Murphy et al., 2012), although Raman spec-troscopy can also be applied (Wen, 2007). The IR spectra of all three rituximab conjugates re-vealed higher percentage of b-sheet conformation (antipar-allel and parallel) in the structure (strong band in the region between 1612 and 1640 cm-1, followed by a weaker band around 1685 cm-1), followed by a-helices (bands at 1655 or 1656 cm-1), as obtained in the band frequencies for am-ide I, II and III bands which are used as diagnostic bands. We observed that the freeze-dried rituximab conjugates re-gain their native conformation upon rehydration (revers-ible unfolding). Thermally-induced aggregation processes of the ma-jority of proteins can also be studied by FT-IR and Raman spectroscopy. Strong absorption bands below 1620 cm-1 can be correlated with aggregation, usually associated with the formation of new strong beta-sheet structures (Schule et al., 2007). With the lowest frequency band detected at 1620 cm-1 (in all samples analyzed), we concluded no ob-vious aggregation in all three freeze-dried antibody con-jugates. ConclusionAmong the many techniques available for evaluation of the structure and stability of freeze-dried antibody con-jugates, SDS-PAGE electrophoresis, FT-IR and Raman spectroscopy can be employed in assessing structural prop-erties as well as in determination of stability of these poten-tial drug candidates. ReferencesGjorgieva Ackova, D., Smilkov, K., Janevik-Ivanovska, E., Stafilov, T., Arsova-Sarafinovska, Z., Makreski, P., 2015. Evaluation of non-radioactive lutetium- and yttrium-labeled immunoconjugates of rituximab - A vibrational spectroscopy study. Maced. J. Chem. Chem. Eng. 34, 351-362.Maleki, L.A., Majidi, J., Baradaran, B., Abdolalizadeh, J., Kazemi, T., Maleki, A.A., Sineh Sepehr, K., 2013. Large scale generation and characterization of anti-human CD34 monoclonal antibody in ascetic fluid of Balb/c mice. Adv. Pharm. Bull. 3, 211-216.Murphy, B.M., Zhang, N., Payne, R.W. Davis, J.M. Abdul-Fattah, A.M., Matsuura, J.E., Herman, A.C., Manning, M.C., 2012. Structure, stability, and mobility of a lyophilized IgG1 monoclonal antibody as deter-mined using second-derivative infrared spectroscopy. J. Pharm Sci. 101, 81-91.Nebija, D., Kopelent-Frank, H., Urban, E., Noe, C.R., Lachman, B., 2011. Comparison of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis patterns and MALDI-TOF MS analysis of therapeutic recombinant monoclonal antibodies trastuzumab and rituximab. J. Pharmaceut. Biomed. 56, 684-691. Schule, S., Friess, W., Bechtold-Peters, K., Garidel, P., 2007. Conformational analysis of protein secondary structure during spray-drying of antibody/mannitol formu-lations. Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm.