This problem is even big-ger with respect to biosimilars because they are relatively new drugs and very different from the non - biosimilars in terms of generics.For these reasons we are established a questionnaire that evaluates the main PV questions and accesses the awareness, the knowledge and the methods of application of pharmacovigilance among pharmacists in the communi-ty pharmacies (Meher et al., 2015).Materials and methodsStudy designThis is a questionnaire based study.The study settingThis study is conducted in over 20 community phar-macies in Skopje, Republic of Macedonia.The study populationThis is a non - interventional, but required and useful study which is done among the post graduated pharmacists who work in the community pharmacies. Those who are not willing to participate and those who will not return the questionnaires, are going to be excluded from this study. The study instrumentThe study instrument is validated and predesigned questionnaire which is structured by following other ques-tionnaires from similar studies. This study questionnaire is designed to evaluate the awareness, knowledge and the methods of application of pharmacovigilance in the com-munity pharmacies. S8 PP 318666Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 665 - 666 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentations- The term 'awareness' mean the perception of a situation or a fact.- 'Knowledge' mean the theoretical or practical application of pharmacovigilance.- 'Method of application' is the practical applica-tion of pharmacovigilance.This questionnaire is comprised of 20 questions (awareness - 7, knowledge - 7, methods of application - 6) (Hema et al., 2012)DiscussionThe main aims of pharmacovigilance are the early de-tection of the adverse reactions and interactions, monitor-ing their frequency and identification of the risk factors for the adverse reactions of the drugs and especially of the bi-osimilars. Because of this, active involvement by the com-munity pharmacists is needed in coordination with other healthcare professionals and medical institutions (Hema et al., 2012).With this study we access the awareness, knowledge and the methods of application of pharmacovigilance among the postgraduate pharmacists and pharmacy tech-nicians who work in community pharmacies. We consider that with this study we can provide information which will be significant for the proper education and training for the pharmacists in the future, as well we will gather informa-tion about the real gap between the knowledge and the real experience for reporting adverse drug reactions, especially for biosimilars (Gupta et al., 2015). Also we will determine the factors responsible for under reporting the adverse drug reactions, although we think that a proper education is the most essential factor. For this, the most appropriate time to do so is during the undergraduate and postgraduate train-ing of the pharmacists.To facilitate the activity of phamacovigilance, a cul-ture of learning about it should start early in the profes-sional training of the pharmacy students and postgraduat-ed pharmacists. This will enable the pharmacists to realize that all medicines, including biosimilars can cause adverse drug reactions and learn about the procedures for proper reporting (Hema et al., 2012).ConclusionNowadays, in the well developed countries the need for an efficient pharmacovigilance system has been real-ized more than ever to ensure the safe use of medicines, but that is not the case with the non - developed countries like ours. For that, after this study there will be an education-al intervention with lectures and workshops on pharmaco-vigilance to understand the importance of pharmacovigi-lance and the necessity of reporting adverse drug reactions.ReferencesGupta, S.K., Nayak, R.P., Shivaranjani, R., Vidyarthi, S.K., 2015. A questionnaire study on the knowledge, attitude and the practice of pharmacovigilance among healthcare professionals in a teaching hospital in South India. Perspect Clin. Res. 6(1), 45-52.Hema, N.G., Bhuvana, K.B., Sangeetha., 2012. Pharmacovigilance: the extent of awareness among the final year students, interns and postgraduates in a government teaching hospital. J. Clin. Diagn. Res. 6(7), 1248-1253.Meher, B. R., Joshua, N., Asha, B., Mukherji, D., 2015. A questionnaire based study to assess knowledge, attitude and practice of pharmacovigilance among undergraduate medical students in a Tertiary Care Teaching Hospital of South India. Perspect Clin. Res. 6(4), 217-221. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 667 - 668 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 543.07:061.64Short communicationQuality assurance of volumetric glassware in analytical laboratoryBlagoj Achevski*, Vasil Karcev, Katerina BrezovskaInstitute of Applied Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodious", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* blagojachevski@gmail.comBackgroundAccording to ISO/IEC 17025:2005 any analytical equipment used in a testing laboratory should comply to required specifications and perform suitably for its intend-ed purpose to be capable of achieving the required accu-racy for the tests performed, including volumetric glass-ware if it's use has significant influence on the test result, or the volumetric accuracy is critical to the performance of the method.Volumetric glassware used in analytical laborato-ry may either deliver volume (burettes and bulb burettes, single volume pipettes, one-mark pipettes, bulb burettes, graduated pipettes, including blow-out pipettes) or con-tain a stated volume (one-mark volumetric flasks, graduat-ed measuring cylinders). Most items of volumetric glass-ware are available commercially in two classes, Class A or AS and Class B. The distinction between the two Classes is based principally on the tolerance limits of the nominal vol-ume of the glassware as specified in the relevant Standards. Normally, for a given volume, the tolerance for Class B is twice that for Class A. When the laboratory acquires class A and AS volumetric glassware, it is supplied with a batch calibration certificate, where the tolerance and the error of the material is traceable to an international standard. If the item has been calibrated in-house, the laboratory shall have a documented record of the calibration data showing trace-ability to national standards (UKAS, 2009). The laboratory should identify the needs for calibra-tion and/or verification and develop a policy for manage-ment of the appropriate volumetric glassware. Before be-ing placed in use, laboratory glassware should be calibrat-ed or checked to establish that it meets the laboratory's re-quirements and complies with the relevant standard spec-ification. Intermediate checks may be needed to maintain the confidence in the calibration status of the glassware, which should be carried out according to a defined proce-dure (ISO/IEC 17025:2005).Marking of volumetric glasswareCommercially available volumetric glassware may be manufactured either from sodalime glass or borosilicate glass and should be marked in accordance with the nation-al/international standard to which it is purchased, with re-gards to the tolerance (Class A or B), capacity in volume unit, reference temperature (i.e. calibration temperature), time of flow/delivery time (for verification or certification purposes for legal metrology) and identification number (Class A). The volumetric glassware should bear also co-lour code (pipettes complying with BS 700 and BS 1583 may be colour coded, in which case the coding shall com-ply with BS 3996), manufacturers and/or vendor's name or mark (UKAS, 2009).Cleaning of volumetric glasswareThe volume contained in or delivered from volumet-ric glassware depends on cleanliness of the entire internal surface to ensure uniform wetting and performing a well shaped meniscus Cleaning procedures, storage and segre-gation of volumetric equipment may be critical, particular-ly for trace analyses where leaching and adsorption can be significant. The laboratory should establish procedures for the cleaning of the glassware (for hand washing or washing with the washing machine), including cleaning validation protocol considering the possibility of the poor/deficient washing or the cross contamination with cleaning agents, like detergents (ISO 4787, 2010).S8 PP 319668Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 667 - 668 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationsAccording to ISO 4787 it is recommended that vol-umetric instruments should not be heated to a tempera-ture considerably above 180 degC. Washing and drying the glass material for volumetric purposes should be made to a temperature below 90degC; above 150degC may be signifi-cant changes in borosilicate glass volumetric capacity of the material and above 90degC for the soda-lime glass.Qualification of volumetric glasswareQualification of equipment refers to actions of prov-ing and documenting that any analytical equipment com-plies with the required specifications and performs suitably for its intended purpose. The performance of volumetric equipment should be verified at appropriate intervals ac-cording to a plan and procedures established by the labo-ratory, taking into account the type of equipment, the ex-tent of use and supplier's recommendations (WHO, 2010). The initial level of the qualification of the volumetric glassware should include selection of the volumetric glass-ware that is manufactured according to the requirements of the corresponding ISO standard (ISO 385, ISO 648, ISO 1042 and ISO 4787). The second level of the qualification of the volumetric glassware should include establishment that it meets the laboratory's requirements and complies with the relevant standard specification, by performing visual inspection of the glassware (compliance with marking requirements), checking the batch calibration certificate of the supplied equipment, or in the cases where certificate is not avail-able, calibration of the volumetric glassware should be per-formed prior use. The need for the calibration of the laboratory glass-ware before first use depends of the volumetric accuracy that is critical to the performance of the method, for which the glassware is intended to be used. The criteria for per-forming the calibration of the volumetric glassware, re-garding the maximum permissible overall error in the test-ing method and maximum specified tolerance for the vol-umetric glassware should be established by each laborato-ry in accordance to the requirements of the corresponding ISO standard (ISO 385, ISO 648, ISO 1042 and ISO 4787).Calibration of the laboratory glassware may be per-formed internally by the authorized (experienced and trained) personnel, according to the suitably documented procedure, developed by the laboratory, or externally by the accredited institution.According to ISO 4787, the general procedure for cali-bration of laboratory glassware is based upon a gravimetric method, for determination of volume of water, either con-tained in or delivered by the volumetric instrument. This volume of water is based upon knowledge of its mass un-der consideration of buoyancy and its tabulated density. The third level of the qualification of the volumetric glassware should include verification of the calibration sta-tus, by performing calibration on the glassware, at regular intervals, depending on the extent and the nature of usage. The initial calibration intervals should be at least once a year. If justified, these intervals may be extended. The fourth level of the qualification of the volumet-ric glassware should include visual inspection of the glass-ware before each use (glass surface shall be free from ob-vious damage, the graduations and inscriptions shall be clearly readable and especially with instruments adjusted to deliver the jet shall be free from damage and allow an unrestricted outflow of liquid). Careful visual inspection of the material in use is made to check for signs of deteriora-tion or attack, such as, scratches, blur glass, broken glass, chipped glass, scale or calibration mark not visible; the de-teriorated material must be rejected (if it would compro-mise the safety of personnel or the purposes for which it intended), or segregated and used for qualitative work or tasks which are compatible with their status. In the case of aggressive uses of this material, such as the use of hydro-fluoric acid or other corrosive substances, thermal shock, mechanical shock, visual inspection should be performed after cleaning and before storing the glassware.ConclusionAnalytical laboratories should confirm the traceabili-ty of volumetric measurements used in support of testing and calibration activities, by establishing procedures for calibration and check of the laboratory glassware used in volumetric measurements. Different national accreditation bodies (NAB) establish different minimum requirements for the volumetric glassware used in a laboratory, with re-gards to the validity of the calibration and the frequency of the verification of the suitability of the volumetric glass-ware. The intervals, methods and the specification criteria for qualification of volumetric glassware are established by each laboratory, taking into account the type of equipment in accordance with the relevant standard requirements.ReferencesISO 385:2005 Laboratory glassware - Burettes, International standard.ISO 648:2008 Laboratory glassware - Single-volume pipettes International standard.ISO 1042:1998 Laboratory glassware - One-mark volumetric flasks. International standard.ISO 4787:2010. Laboratory glassware - Volumetric instruments - Methods for testing of capacity and for use, International standard.UKAS, 2009. Traceability: Volumetric Apparatus, LAB15, Edition 2, United Kingdom. ISO/IEC 17025:2005. General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration laboratories, International standard.World Health Organization (WHO), 2010. WHO good practices for pharmaceutical quality control laboratories. WHO Technical Report Series, No. 957, Annex 1.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 669 - 670 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613 292:543.4/.5Short communicationApplication of AAS vs ICP-OES in determination of macro and microelements in dietary supplementsRosana Trpeska*, Matilda Petrova, Liljana Bogdanovska, Aneta Dimitrovska, Rumenka PetkovskaInstitute of Applied Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* Rosana_Trpeska@hotmail.comBackgroundDietary supplements are complex products intended to supplement human diet with nutrients such as vitamins, minerals, herbs, amino acids, extracts or combination of the mentioned ingredients (Sander et al., 2006). The min-erals are inorganic nutrients which are divided in two cate-gories: macro-elements (Na, K, Ca, Mg, P and Cl) and mi-croelements which are also classified as "trace elements" because of their essentiality at low quantities in humans (Cu, Fe, Ni, Zn, Mn, Se, Co, Cr, Mo, V, F and I) (Gupta and Gupta, 2012). Since the human body cannot synthe-size them, macro and microelements must be supplied by food or dietary supplements (Lesniewiecz et al., 2006).One of the most important characteristics of a di-etary supplement, from a nutritional point of view, is "how much" macro and microelements are present in the prod-uct. They can be regarded as essential or harmful depend-ing on the concentration, speciation (the distribution among the different chemical compounds) and the presence or ab-sence of other elements (Korfali et al., 2013). Additional-ly, dietary supplements are regulated as food and in many countries they are not subjected to quality control in the same manner as pharmaceutical dosage forms, which is a potential threat to public health (Tumir et al., 2010; Marer-ro et al., 2013). The increased consumption of these prod-ucts, especially in developed countries requires monitor-ing of elemental concentration with emphasis on harmful or potentially harmful elements for human health. There-fore, a multi-element analysis method applicable to vari-ous types of dietary supplements should be used for deter-mination of element content. This review covers the appli-cation of atomic absorption (AA) techniques vs. ICP-OES for determination of macro and microelements in dietary supplements. Comparative assessment of the application of AAS vs. ICP-OES in the analysis of macro and microelements in di-etary supplements The determination of macro and microelements in di-etary supplements has been made utilizing different meth-ods such as X-ray fluorescence, capillary zone electro-phoresis, flame atomic absorption spectrometry (FAAS), graphite furnace atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS), inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spectrome-try (ICP-OES) and inductively coupled plasma-mass spec-trometry (ICP-MS). The choice of the method mainly de-pends on the type of dietary supplement and the compo-nents in the matrix. However, the applied methods must have sufficient selectivity and sensitivity, therefore ana-lysts may find that GFAAS, ICP-OES or ICP-MS are the most suitable (Abernety et al., 2010). GFAAS is a frequently used technique for determina-tion of macro and microelements as well as trace metals in biological, clinical, food, environmental or geological ma-trices. It is capable of detecting low concentrations (parts per billion, ppb, w/w) in microliter quantities of the sam-ple (Lewen, 2011). Although this technique is relatively in-expensive, it can be used only for single-element analy-sis. Also, non-metals cannot be determined because their atomic absorption wavelengths are in far UV range which is not suitable for analysis due to absorption of air compo-nents (Baysal et al., 2013). Plasma-based techniques have gradually gained im-portance in verifying whether food specimens, dietary sup-plements and pharmaceutical products comply with health requirements and/or national or international regulations. These techniques can be applied to all possible matrices S8 PP 320670Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 669 - 670 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationsand analytes.