In contrast, for ZDG, microscopic examination suggests that the emul-sion structure does not break down to the same extent and manner as DBG. ConclusionPresented work has shown that simple visual inspec-tion of the physical structures of two emollient gels be-fore and after interaction with salts can reveal important differences between two products that may have implica-tions for their effectiveness and patient acceptability. The two emollient gel formulations studied have quite different visual appearances and behave very differently in circum-stances mimicking contact with salts on the skin. In con-trast to ZDG, DBG is a homogeneous gel that completely breaks down in the presence of salts, releasing the oil drop-lets from the emulsion. This has very important implica-tions in relation to clinical performance and patient pref-erence, where the ease with which the oily ingredients can be spread, irreversibly delivering a uniform and occlusive barrier over the skin, are crucial. These results therefore point to qualitative differences between the formulations and very likely reflect important differences between their respective manufacturing methods and ingredients. ReferencesDederen, C., Donahue, J., Verboom, C., 2013. Visualizing the impact of emulsifiers on emulsion perception. Cosmetics & Toiletries 128, 884.Ersser, S., Maguire, S., Nicol, N., Penzer, R., Peters, J., 2007. Best practice in emollient therapy: a statement for healthcare professionals. Dermatology Nursing 6, 2-19.Herman, S., 2007. Skin Care: The importance of feel. Chemical Reaction. GCI Magazine. December issue 2007, 70-74. Inoue, Y., Maeda, R., Furuya, K., Isamu, M., Masayuki, K., Kanamoto, I., 2013. Relationship between the usability and physicochemical properties of triamcinolone acetonide ointments. Results in Pharma Sciences 3, 15-19.Moncrieff, G., Cork, M., Lawton, S., Kokiet, S., Daly, C., Clark, C., 2013. Use of emollients in dry-skin conditions: Consensus statement. Clinical and Experimental Dermatology 38, 231-238.Noveon, 2002. Technical note TDS 54.Stojiljkovic, D., Arsic, I., Kostov, M. T., Jovanovic, Z., Tadic, V., Dordevic, S., 2013. Investigation of the effects of different emollients on the structure and skin moisturizing potential of the cosmetic creams. Acta Facultatis Medicae Naissensis 30, 193-200.Voegeli, D., 2011. The vital role of emollients in the treatment of eczema. British Journal of Nursing 20, 74-80.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 359 - 360 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.454.1:615.262.2Short communicationEmollient gels: Characterisation of textural properties and behaviour in the presence of saltsSamuel Owusu-Ware, Beatriz Sanchon-Lopez and Milan D. Antonijevic* Faculty of Engineering and Science, University of Greenwich, Chatham Maritime, ME4 4TB, UK* M.Antonijevic@gre.ac.ukIntroductionTopical leave-on emollient gel formulations are one of the most cosmetically acceptable therapeutic moisturisers, because of their non-greasy feel (Ersser et al., 2007). These oil-in-water (O/W) dispersions use carbomer as both the gelling and emulsifying agent. Whilst the carbomer acts to physically stabilise the dispersed oil droplets and thus pre-vent phase separation, its ability to deconstruct once ap-plied to the skin is an important indicator of the effective-ness of these formulations. Deconstruction/breakdown of the gel matrix, due to contact with salts in the skin, results in phase separation of the oil from the aqueous phase, al-lowing the emollients (oils) to spread easily and form a uniform occlusive barrier over the skin surface. This also has the impact of prolonging the emollient retention on the skin by rendering the oily ingredients resistant to re-emul-sification (Ersser et al., 2007). When applied, the ability of the gel formulation to spread easily and leave a uniform occlusive layer of emol-lients on the skin is reliant on the textural properties i.e. firmness/stiffness of the gel matrix. These textural prop-erties also have an important impact on the cosmetic ac-ceptability of the formulation, such as the stickiness of the gel, which may influence the patient's willingness to gen-erously apply the product, and therefore obtain the maxi-mum benefits. Interaction with salts causes the carbomer gel matrix to break down and it is therefore expected to have an impor-tant influence on the textural properties (Noveon, 2002). Characterizing the textural properties before and after in-teraction with salts could be an important indicator for the performance of the product during application. The purpose of this investigation was to compare the textural properties of two marketed emollient gel prod-ucts, namely Doublebase Gel (DBG) and Zerodouble Gel (ZDG) marketed in the UK, before and after interaction with salt (NaCl).Materials and methodsFirmness/stiffness and Stickiness by Texture Analysis (TA)50 g of commercial samples of DBG and ZDG were weighed into a beaker and subjected to compression using 35 mm diameter cylindrical probe (Stable Microsystems TA-HD plus) to measure firmness/stiffness and stickiness.The force was measured as the probe compressed the sample by 15 mm distance after an initial trigger force (0.5 N) at a rate of 0.5 mm/sec.When 15 mm target distance was reached the probe moved back to its starting position at 10 mm/sec recording the force required to separate the probe from the sample. This force is an indicator of stickiness. Samples were ana-lysed in triplicates.Spreadability by TA1.1 +- 0.1 g of samples were compressed between two glass plates using predetermined forces, namely 1, 5, 20, 40 and 50 N. At each force the area of spread was marked out and calculated.Different samples were used for the measurements of speadability at each force applied.Behaviour under the influence of saltsNearly 10% w/w salt (NaCl) to the gel were prepared by sprinkling 2.0 +- 0.1 g of NaCl onto 20 +- 0.4 g of each formulation and gently mixed by folding the sample on it-S4 PP 169360Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 359 - 360 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsself ten times using a spatula. Firmness/stiffness, stickiness and spreadability of these samples were determined in the same manner as pre-treated samples.Results and discussionFirmness and stickiness of moisturisers are impor-tant sensory characteristics for consumers (Herman, 2007). Furthermore, firmness of the formulations contributes to the ability of the material to spread. These properties of the products were investigated using texture analysis, which allows for the determination of the force required to com-press the formulation (a measure of firmness) and the force required to separate the probe from the sample (a measure of stickiness).Considerable differences were observed between the two untreated formulations in terms of firmness and stick-iness. ZDG appears to form a significantly firmer (3.6 +- 0.1 N) and more sticky (3.7 +- 0.2 N) polymeric structure in comparison to DBG formulation (2.6 and 2.5 N for firm-ness and stickiness respectively). Upon treatment with salts, the DBG polymeric struc-ture readily breaks down, resulting in extensive loss of firmness. In contrast, significant firmness of the ZDG structure was maintained after exposure to salts. The stick-iness of the products could not be differentiated after salt treatment.Important differences in spreadability were observed between the two emollient gels under applied force. The DBG formulation spread more easily than ZDG. For ex-ample at 20 N of applied force, the untreated DBG formu-lation spread over an area of 24.6 +- 0.1 mm2, whereas the ZDG formulation spread over an area of 16.2 +- 0.1 mm2. The capability of DBG to spread was greatly increased when exposed to salts and demonstrates a 27 % increase in area of spread. Interestingly, no such effect was observed for ZDG as no substantial difference was observed be-tween the ZDG samples prior to and after being exposed to salts (15.4 mm2 area of spread obtained).ConclusionThe presented work shows that these two emulsified gel formulations have different textural characteristics, with DBG being a less firm and less sticky gel that spreads more easily in comparison to ZDG. These two gels also be-have very differently in circumstances mimicking contact with salts on the skin. In contrast to ZDG, the DBG poly-meric structure readily breaks down when exposed to salts, resulting in extensive loss of firmness and increased ability to spread. The study data highlights important qualitative differences between emollient gel products, which may have resulted from differences in their respective manufac-turing methods and ingredients. This may in turn, have im-portant implications for clinical performance and patient preference. Furthermore, this type of study points out the need for more comprehensive analysis of products as pa-tient and prescriber perceptions may lead them to select products that sometimes may not be as beneficial as they believe. Development of new methodologies for the as-sessment of emollient gel products is therefore necessary to fully assess the potential performance of such products. ReferencesErsser, S., Maguire, S., Nicol, N., Penzer, R., Peters, J., 2007. Best practice in emollient therapy: a statement for healthcare professionals. Dermatology Nursing 6, 2-19. Herman, S., 2007. Skin Care: The importance of feel. Chemical Reaction. GCI Magazine. December issue, 70-74. Noveon, 2002. Technical note TDS 54.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 361 - 362 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33:[618.3:616.379-008.64 615.33:[618.3:616.12-008.331.1Short communicationInfluence of diabetes and hypertension on cefuroxime permeation across placenta in pregnant womenMladena Lalic-Popovic, Svetlana Golocorbin-Kon, Nebojsa Pavlovic*, Jovana Paunkovic, Zorica Grujic, Momir MikovFaculty of Medicine, University of Novi Sad, Serbia, Hajduk Veljkova 3, 21000 Novi Sad, Serbia* nebojsa.pavlovic@mf.uns.ac.rsIntroductionThe present study investigated the transcellular and placental permeation of cefuroxime, an antibiotic used in cesarean sections, in pregnant women with diabetes and hypertension. Previous studies have shown that infections after cesarean section could be decreased using preop-eratively an antimicrobial agent (Chelmow et al., 2001). However in order to achieve therapeutic concentrations in both maternal and fetal serum and amniotic fluid, antibiot-ic have to pass placental barrier. It is proven that a single dose of intravenously administered antibiotic is as effec-tive as multiple doses given perioperatively (Lamont et al., 2011). Accordingly, single doses of cefuroxime have been widely used for antimicrobial prophylaxis during cesare-an delivery. Previous studies have shown that cefuroxime concentrations in amniotic fluid and in umbilical cord plas-ma are sufficient to combat most microorganisms. Howev-er, diseases such are hypertension and diabetes could alter placental transferto the extent that the prophylactic effect is lacking in both the mother and fetus. Therefore, the aim of this study was to determine the effects of diabetes and hy-pertension on the transplacental permeation of cefuroxime.Materials and methodsFifty-three women scheduled for cesarean section were divided into three groups: healthy women (n = 18), wom-en with arterial hypertension (n = 21), and women with gestational diabetes (n = 14). All women received 1.5 g, intravenously cefuroxime. Study was conducted in accor-dance with international ethical guidelines (CIOMS) and the study protocol was approved by Ethics Committee of the Gynecology and Obstetric Clinic of Clinical Centre of Vojvodina (no. 100-08/9). Informed consent was obtained from each woman before enrolment in the study. The study was designed as an open-label study. Each intravenous in-jection of cefuroxime was completed in less than 1 min. Sampling points were chosen in order not to disturb reg-ular cesarean section procedures in the clinic. Blood sam-ples were collected from mothers after administration of cefuroxime before delivery (t1), at the time of delivery (t2), and after delivery (t3). At delivery, umbilical venous and arterial samples were obtained from a section of umbili-cal cord (cross-clamped at delivery). Estimated gestation-al age at birth, weight, length and 1and 5 min Apgar scores were recorded. Concentration of cefuroxime was measured using a modification of an HPLC method described previ-ously (Szlagowska et al., 2010). Pharmacokinetic parame-ters were calculated for each woman using plasma cefurox-ime concentration data with WinNonLin version 4.1 (SCI software, Pharsight Corporation, Gary, NC, USA). The ef-fects of diabetes and hypertension on cefuroxime placen-tal-permeation were assessed by the fetomaternal plasma concentration ratios (Cv/Cm) and umbilical cord venous blood (Ca/Cv). Results were compared using ANOVA test (p<0.05).Results and discussionNeonates born to women in the hypertensive group had significantly lower body surface area (BSA), weight, 5-min Apgar score, and gestational age than neonates born to women in the control group. Neonate characteristics in the diabetic group did not differ significantly compared with either the hypertensive or control groups.S4 PP 170362Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 361 - 362 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsTthe Ca/Cv ratio in all three groups was near 1, with no significant differences among the control, hypertensive, and diabetic groups (1.01+-0.16, 1.06+-0.23, and 0.95+-0.34, respectively). This correlates with the physicochemical characteristics of cefuroxime, which is a very hydrophil-ic weak acid (Log Poctanol/water 0.4) and is almost com-pletely dissociated at blood pH (7.4) (Holt et al., 1993). Thus, the slightly acidic pH of neonatal compared with ma-ternal blood would not lead to the accumulation of cefurox-ime in neonates. In the present study, neither hypertension nor diabetes had any significant effect on cefuroxime accu-mulation in neonates. The Cv/Cm ratios were significantly lower in the diabetic compared with the control and hyper-tensive groups (0.36+-0.13 vs 0.71+-0.46 and 0.59+-0.40, re-spectively). However, there were no significant differenc-es between the control and hypertension group and because gestational age was significantly lower in the hypertensive than control group, the findings confirms those of a pre-vious study that reported that gestational age had no ef-fect on cefuroxime crossing the placental barrier (Holt et al., 1993). Pharmacokinetic parameters, such as drug plas-ma concentrations at zero time (C0), mean resident time (MRT0-t3) and areas under the time-concentration curves to infinity (AUCinf) were not significantly different among the three groups. The elimination half-life (t 1/2) was signifi-cantly shorter in the hypertensive than control and diabetic groups because the constant of elimination (lz) was higher in the former group compared with the latter groups. Ap-parent volume of distribution and clearance were signifi-cantly lower in the diabetic group compared with the con-trol and hypertensive groups. Lower transplacental transfer in the diabetic group compared with the hypertensive and control groups could be also due to lower volume of distri-bution and clearance.ConclusionHypertension had no significant effect on the perme-ation of cefuroxime nor on its pharmacokinetics. Diabetes led to decreased placental transfer of cefuroxime, as well as volume of distribution and clearance, but did not affect other pharmacokinetic parameters. Prophylactic concen-trations of cefuroxime were reached in all groups, but the dosing time of cefuroxime should not be less than 30 min or greater than 2 h prior to delivery.AcknowledgmentThis work was supported by the Ministry of Educa-tion, Science and Technological Development of Serbia (III41012).ReferencesChelmow, D., Ruehli, M.S., Huang, E., 2001. Prophylactic use of antibiotics for nonlaboring patients undergoing cesarean delivery with intact membranes: meta-analysis. J. Obs. Gyn. 184, 656-661.Lamont, R.F., Sobel, J.D., Kusanovic, J.P., Vaisbuch, E., Mazaki-Tovi, S., Kim, S.K., Uldbjerg, N., Romero, R.,2011. Current debate on the use of antibiotic prophylaxis for caesarean section. BJOG.