They are rich in phytochemicals that are natural antioxidants, of which phenolic diterpenes, flavonoids, fla-vanols, alkaloids, tannins and phenolic acids are the most prominent. Compared to other food products, herbs and spices used in diet are shown to manifest highest antiox-idant capacity. Additionally, the antioxidant capacity has shown to be concentration dependent, to a degree where the naturally occurring phytochemicals with antioxida-S3 OP 121262Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 261 - 262 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationstive properties are not manifesting their prooxidative ef-fects. These results are of great importance in many re-search areas especially for the possibility of isolation of single compounds and their utilization in medicinal pur-poses (Charles, 2013).In many research papers it is pointed out that the in-take of herbs is a significant contributor to the antioxidant intake in general. Dragland et al. (2003) declare a 1000-fold difference among antioxidant concentrations of vari-ous herbs, indicating the enormous diversity of their phyto-chemical composition. Furthermore, they recommend the use of herbs as a better source of dietary antioxidants than many other foods including fruits, berries, cereals and veg-etables.Quantification of the antioxidant capacity Many commercially available herbs are regularly used as teas, extracts, infuses, decocts or aromatic herbs for taste improvement of food. Therefore, their antioxidant prop-erties are already affecting the population that consumes them. The quantification of their antioxidant potential is very important, in order to evaluate their impact on the re-dox processes in the organisms. Various methods are used to investigate the antioxidant properties of plant samples. In general, antioxidant assays are classified as in vitro and in vivo methods, with a highlight on the first group of tests since they are relatively straightforward to perform and most of them are fast and inexpensive, compared to in vivo methods. Among the in vitro methods, the most common-ly used are DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) method, FRAP (Ferric Reducing Antioxidant Power) assay, TRAP (Total radical-trapping antioxidant parameter) method, TEAC (Trolox equivalent antioxidant capacity) method, NRD and SRD (Nonsite Specific and Site Specific Hydrox-yl Radical-mediated 2-deoxy-D-ribose Degradation) meth-ods, TBA (Thiobarbituric acid) method, H2O2 (Hydrogen Peroxide Scavenging) assay, etc. Additionally, Folin - Ci-ocalteu method for the determination of total phenols and AlCl3 method for the determination of flavonoids in plant samples are most commonly used assays along with the previously mentioned antioxidant assays, since many stud-ies showed the positive correlation between antioxidant ca-pacity of plant extracts and their total phenolic content. Cytotoxicity testing On the other hand, many herbs that possess antioxi-dant properties can also manifest toxic effects under cer-tain conditions. According to Paracelsus' maxim: "Dosis sola facit venenum" (The dose makes a substance poison-ous), any substance could be defined as a toxic substance if administered in high doses. An excellent in vivo prelim-inary model for the discovery of potential toxic agents is the Brine Shrimp Lethality Assay (BSLA). This is a conve-nient, fast and technically feasible method for the determi-nation of LC50 of herbal extracts (Meyer et al., 1982). The method determines the percentage of dead Artemia salina nauplii after their exposure to the tested plant extract. Us-ing probit regression analysis (Finney, 1952), the LC50 val-ues are calculated and expressed for each herbal extract, which are later compared to the LC50 values of confirmed toxic substances (such as potassium dichromate, emetine hydrochloride etc). The classification of the examined plant extracts is achieved according to the obtained LC50 using different classification scales, of which the Meyer's scale (Meyer et al., 1982) and the Clarkson's scale (Clark-son et al., 2004) are most commonly used.Plant extracts as cytotoxic agentsMany herbs which have proven toxic potential in cer-tain doses, are promising cytotoxic agents. Their wide range of properties (antioxidant, antimicrobial, hepatopro-tective, anticancer) makes them promising candidates for a formulation of chemo protective agents. This means a new opportunity for the clinical practice for the treatment of nu-merous diseases, either in a way of preventing their onset or reducing the extent of their progression. However, not all toxic substances possess cytotoxic properties. The pre-condition for a cytotoxic effect is the selectivity towards the tumorigenic cells of the substance itself. Therefore, po-tential cytotoxic agents are the compounds which specifi-cally act on cancer cells, leaving out viable cells as intact. Although BSLA cannot estimatethe cell selectivity of the potential toxic herbs, it is still an excellent predictive tool that preliminary filters the potential candidates for a more detailed cytotoxicity research. ReferencesCharles, D., J., 2013. Sources of natural antioxidants and their activities, in: Charles, D. J., (Ed.) Antioxidant properties of spices, herbs and other sources. Springer, pp. 65-138.Clarkson, C., Maharaj, V.J., Crouch, N.R., Grace, O.M., Pillay, P.,Matsabisa, M. G., Bhagwandin, N., Smith, P.J., Folb, P.I., 2004. In vitro antiplasmodial activity of medicinal plants native to ornaturalized in South Africa. J. Ethnopharm. 92, 177-191.Dragland, S., Senoo, H., Wake, K., Holte, K., Blomhoff, R., 2003. Several culinary and medicinal herbs are important sources of dietary antioxidants. J. Nutr. 133(5), 1286-1290. Finney, D., 1952. Probit analysis: a statistical treatment of the sigmoid response curve. Cambridge University Press,Cambridge.Meyer, B.N., Ferrigni, N.R., Putnam, J.E., Jacobsen, L.B., Nichols, D.E., McLaughlin, J.L., 1982. Brine Shrimp: A convenient general bioassay for active plant constituents. Planta Medica 45, 31-34.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 263 - 264 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.25:613.71/.73(437.6)Short communicationTrend of obesity, sport and nutrition Simona Bernatova1*, Zuzana Hegedusova1, Katarina Dostalova1, Sona Wimmerova1, Zora Gerova2, Eva Horvathova1, Stefania Moricova11Department of Preventive and Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Public Health, Slovak Medical University, Limbova 12, 833 03 Bratislava, Slovakia2Health Promotion, Regional Public Health Institute, Ruzinovska 8, 820 09 Bratislava, Slovakia * bernatova.simona@gmail.comIntroductionLifestyle of our population with the advent of science and new technologies adversely changes, reduces physi-cal activity and develops negative eating habits. Shift from malnutrition and infectious diseases to chronic diseases (cardio metabolic diseases, cancer, diabetes mellitus) is typical for current epidemiological situation (Riecansky, 2009). Obesity leads to a worse quality of life and short-er life expectancy. Mortality of cardio metabolic diseas-es is 2.5 times higher than the average in European coun-tries. This current epidemiological situation in overweight and obesity is alarming. Compulsory school physical ed-ucation is the only place for physical activity for a lot of children. And the number of these children is increasing. The research is based on project "Respect for Health". We analysed the relationship between participation in com-pulsory PE and cardio metabolic risk factors (blood pres-sure, weight and body mass index). The project "Respect For Health" is monitoring the situation in the cardiovascu-lar health of secondary school students. Assessment of car-diovascular risk factors and physical activity (compulsory physical education (PE) and extra-curriculum sport activi-ties) in secondary school children is followed by education in effective lifestyle measures.Materials and methodsTarget group in evaluating the relationship of partic-ipation in compulsory school physical education and risk factors for cardio metabolic diseases consisted of 760 stu-dents of which 295 boys and 465 girls. In respect of par-ticipation in extra-curricular sports activity and selected risk factors consisted of audience of 211 pupils, 119 boys and 92 girls from 55 secondary schools in Bratislava re-gion aged 15-18. Data were collected by 2 types of ques-tionnaire (questionnaire of parent and questionnaire of stu-dent). We measured anthropometric parameters (neckline, chestline and hipline), blood pressure and tested physical ability by Ruffier test.Project: "Respect for Health" monitoring the situation in the cardiovascular health of secondary school students. The project was initiated by Bratislava Region in collabo-ration with the Regional Public Health Institute in Bratisla-va. The main idea of the project is based on the recogni-tion that risk factors for cardiovascular diseases can oc-cur at a young age. Elimination of a risk is possible thanks to prevention and change of eating habits. The project was implemented by the Regional Institute of Public Health in Bratislava with Public Health students of Slovak Medical University.Results and discussionFor evaluation of the relationship of participation in compulsory school physical education and risk factors for cardio metabolic disease, we found out that students who regularly attend compulsory PE are more physically profi-cient than those who avoid it according to the Ruffier in-dex. Students who spend more hours per a day at the com-puter during the week are physically less proficient than those who spend fewer hours at the computer during the week, according to the Ruffier index. All these relations were statistically significant (p <0.05). We found out that smoking students avoid compulsory PE twice as much as non-smokers. The current problem is smoking in young children and the number of smokers in young age are mul-S3 OP 122264Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 263 - 264 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationstiple (Cvopova et al., 2011). The number of smoking girls is 1.2 times higher than the number of smoking boys. This is really a good example of how one negative habit picks on another and they multiply. For other indicators, a statis-tically significant difference was not confirmed, but more favourable results in blood pressure, weight and body mass index (BMI) were shown for regularly participating stu-dents at the compulsory PE. In respect of participation in extra-curricular sports activity and selected risk factors, we confirmed that the active Ruffiers' test of sport active chil-dren testified better shape of these students (p = 0.048). We also demonstrated a statistically significant relationship be-tween regular supply of food and BMI values (p = 0016). Extra -curricular sports activity leads to better fit children. Regular diet directly affects BMI. Because of physical ac-tivity they feel their life filled with experiences and activ-ities.ConclusionLack of physical activity is one of the major risk fac-tors of cardio metabolic diseases, with significant impact on years of disability adjusted life (DALYs) in the Europe-an region (WHO, 2006). Compulsory physical education and in the same way extra-curricular sports activities of secondary school children have a positive impact on car-diovascular risk factors. The results of our thesis confirmed the positive impact of compulsory PE for the child's body, and therefore the importance of taking measures for the de-velopment of physical activity in schools, in the family and beyond. Negative habits (avoid the PE and smoking) of lifestyle in young people often multiply. Qualified profes-sional teachers of PE and as well as parents play a key role in creation of positive attitude towards physical activities in children. "The movement is life" and in case of cardio-vascular prevention this true are multiple (Farsky, 2010). Parents should be an example for their children in a choice of extra - curricular sport activity. They should support children in sport activity with enthusiasm (Rackova, 2011)ReferencesCvopova, A., Cizmarova, E., Minichova, J., 2011. Searching for risk factors in adolescents, detection of hypertension in adolescents as primary prevention of cardiovascular disease in adolescents. Bratislava: Physical development of children and youth in Slovakia Results of IV. National research in 2001, Regional Public Health Institute in Slovakia, Bratislava, 2004,in: Scientific conference 36. MUDr. Ivan Stodola's days of health education, pp. 9. Farsky, S. 2010. Physical activity in the prevention of cardiovascular diseases. In: Kamensky, G., Pella, D. 2010. Healthy lifestyle. Bratislava: Edition of educated patient. pp. 143.Rackova, A. 2011. Physical activity as prevention of obesity in children of young school age. Bratislava: Regional Public Health Institute in Slovakia, in: Scientific conference 36. MUDr. Ivan Stodola's days of health education, pp. 5Riecansky, I. 2009. Atherosclerotic diseases. Bratislava :Herba, pp. 244.WHO Regional Office for Europe, 2006. Physical activity: a basic requirement for health. Copenhagen: WHO Regional Office for Europe, 17.11.2006. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 265 - 266 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 613.2-047.22P(560)\Short communicationTurkey's highlights within inprofood (FP-7) projectSelenYegenoglu*, Bilge Sozen SahneDepartment of Pharmacy Management, Faculty of Pharmacy, Hacettepe University, Sihhiye, 06100 Ankara, Turkey* selen.yegen@gmail.comIntroductionAs known by almost everyone in many EU countries' agenda food and health are in the first place especially in the last decade. The rationale for this trend is there is an in-crease both for obesity and for nutrition related disorders those cause diabetes and cardiovascular diseases (Gallus et al., 2015; van Vliet-Ostaptchou et al., 2014; WHO, 2009). Thus tailoring the nutrition system in parallel to the com-munity's need, it's being reliable; effective and flexible are becoming more and more important each day.Awareness rising on healthy eating has not led to sig-nificant changes in patterns of food purchase and consump-tion so far.Bringing together industry, science, and the civil soci-ety in a meaningful exchange is essential to success in ad-dressing this pivotal challenge.Materials and methodsAs a first step all the food related and patient related organizations belonging to governmental, non-governmen-tal and business sector were tried to be determined. In the second phase the ones those will be enrolled to the Europe-an Awareness Scenario Workshops (EASWs) were select-ed randomly.European Scenario Workshop, also known by the ac-ronym EASW, is a qualitative research method which has been born in Denmark with purpose to find an agreement between the different group of actors at local level with the aim of reaching a consensual definition of city sustainable. It promotes discussion and participation. An EASW serves to foster democratic participation in decisions related to the improvement of living conditions in communities.EASW methodology is particularly suited to:* encourage dialogue and participation of the various components of society;* creating a balanced relationship between envi-ronment, technology and society;* enable a sustainable development while re-specting the needs and aspirations of members of a local community (http://toolbox.climate-protection.eu/list-of-all-methodologies/ ).According to its application, the EASW method could be a tool for:* information and learning,* understanding and participation in the decision making process, common planning for the fu-ture* identifying responsibilities and priorities or just any combination of the above.An EASW is built on three main activities:a.the development of scenariosb.stakeholder mapping c.EASW workshop for the development of visions and ideas The workshop typically lasts two days and goes through three phases: critical analysis phase, visionary phase and implementation phase (http://www.cipast..org/cipast.php?section=1012). Results and discussionIn the capital of Turkey we conducted three EASWs (one in 2012 October and two in 2013 June and Septem-ber). Totally 47 representatives from non-governmental, S3 OP 123266Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 265 - 266 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationsgovernmental and business sector participated in our Sce-nario workshops.In those EASWs the following were discussed:a.How research management and policy should be on food and health?b.In this sense should every kind of research be fund-ed?c.Which type of research should be supported? : Basic or practical research aiming contemporary issues?d.How research politics will be determined and shaped on innovative food production? Under these topics the following were found in terms of "Nutrition and Innovative Approaches on Food Produc-tion" for Turkey among NGO, business sector and govern-ment sector participants respectively:Change in living conditions (global warming, popu-lation growth, GMO, etc.) is a significant factor. Civil so-ciety opinion is ignored while doing research on innova-tive food production. Resources are being used ineffective-ly while doing food research. There is a lack of informa-tion on healthy nutrition among the society. Scientific re-search outcomes are not reflected to the policies. As the in-equalities become deeper, hunger; obesity; and social prob-lems become more. The media directs the individuals in a wrong way. Use of agricultural land(s) for different aim(s) is a big problem. There is a lack of inspection in food sec-tor. Healthy food options are expensive. Although the Con-sumer Protection Act exists there is a violation of consum-er rights.Resources are being wasted unwisely in researches.