Eurasian J. Anal. Chem. 10(2), 84-105.Mohammad, A.Al-M. and Zaynab, M., 2014. Studying the accelerated photostability of Ciprofloxacin and Lomefloxacin in tablets and eye drops. IJPSR 5(9), 3646-3652.Umme, B., Nazmul, Md.H., Mehedi, M., Zakir, Md., Asma, R., 2013. Study of forced degradation of ciprofloxacin HCl indicating stability using RP-HPLC method, Der Pharma Chem. 5(6), 132-137.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 233 - 234 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.214.2.074:543.544.5.068.7Short communicationInvestigation of chromatographic behavior of aripiprazole and its five impuritiesNevena Maljuric, Ana Protic, Biljana Otasevic, Jelena Golubovic*, Jovana Krmar, Mira ZecevicDepartment of Drug Analysis, University of Belgrade, Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia* golub@pharmacy.bg.ac.rsIntroductionAripiprazole is an atypical antipsychotic drug, recently approved for the treatment of acute manic and mixed epi-sodes associated with bipolar disorder and as an additional treatment of depression (Thakkar et al., 2011). It acts pri-marily as partial agonist of D2 receptors. It is also a partial agonist of the 5-HT1A receptors, and like other atypical antipsychotics displays an antagonist profile binding to the 5-HT2A receptors. Aripiprazole has moderate affinity for histamine and alpha adrenergic receptors, and no apprecia-ble affinity for cholinergic muscarinic receptors 1-2 (Ra-vindra et al., 2014). Chemically, it is 7-[4-[4-(2, 3-dichlo-rophenyl) piperazin-1-yl] butoxy]-3, 4-dihydro-1H-quino-lin-2-one. Organic impurities can arise during the manufactur-ing process or storage of a drug substance, and include starting materials, intermediates and degradation products (ICH, 2006). In this study, retention behavior of aripipra-zole and its five impurities was investigated. The follow-ing impurities were analyzed: hydroxy quinoline impuri-ty (Impurity A): 7-hydroxy-3,4-dihydro quinolin-2 (1H)-one; piperazine impurity (Impurity B): 1-(2,3-dichloro-phenyl)piperazine hydrochloride; diquinoline impurity (Impurity C): 7,7'-(butylenedioxy)di-3,4-dihydroquino-lin-2(1H)-one; chlorobutoxyquinoline impurity (Impuri-ty D): 7-(4-chlorobutoxy)-3,4-dihydroquinolin-2(1H)-one and N-oxide impurity (Impurity E): N-oxide-7-[4-{4-(2,3-dichlorophenil)-1-piperazinyl}butoxy]-3,4-dihydroquino-lin-2(1H)-one. b-Cyclodextrins (b-CDs) are macrocyclic oligosaccha-rides composed of seven a-D-glucopyranose units joined in a cone-shaped structure (Chen et al., 2004). They exhib-it a hydrophobic cavity delimited by two rims, a wide and a narrow one, composed of secondary and primary hydroxyl groups (Fifere et al., 2012). This structure enables b-CDs to generate inclusion complexes with a wide variety of hy-drophobic organic compounds in aqueous solutions. In an-alytical chemistry b-CDs could be used as mobile phase additives, in order to reduce the amount of organic solvents and introduce the concepts of green chemistry.The aim of the present study was to investigate the re-tention behavior of aripiprazole and its five impurities us-ing High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) method and applying the concepts of green analytical chemistry. The influence of b-CD on retention behavior of aripiprazole and its five impurities was examined, in order to shorten retention times with smaller percentage of ace-tonitrile, as an organic modifier.Materials and methodsAll experiments were carried out on Thermo Scientif-ic, Dionex Ultra 3000 equipped with PDA detector. Chro-matographic separation was performed at non-polar C18 analytical column Chromolith RP-18e column (100 mm x 4.6 mm, macropore size 2 um, mesopore size 13 nm) at temperature varying from 25 degC to 40 degC. Injection volume was 5 mL. Mobile phase was prepared by dissolving an ap-propriate amount of b-CD in water to achieve 10 mM and 15 mM b-CD solutions. The pH was adjusted using formic acid. The mobile phase was degassed in ultrasonic bath and filtered through membrane filter prior to use. The flow rate was 1 mL/min. The detection was performed at 235, 254 and 285 nm using PDA detector. Stock solution of aripiprazole was prepared by dis-S2 PP 108234Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 233 - 234 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationssolving 500 mg of standard substance in 1 mL of HPLC wa-ter. Working solution was prepared from appropriate vol-ume of stock solution and mixture of b-CD and acetonitrile (80 : 20, v/v). The same procedures were used for prepar-ing stock and working solutions of the impurities, but the concentration of stock solutions was 100 mg/mL. All the re-agents used were of analytical grade except water and ace-tonitrile which were of HPLC grade.Results and discussionInvestigation of retention behavior of aripiprazole and its five impurities was done by varying the pH value of the mobile phase in the range from 2 to 4, the b-CD concen-tration from 10 mM to 15 mM, column temperature from 25 degC to 40 degC and acetonitrile as an organic modifier from 25% to 30%. Under the chosen acidic conditions, aripira-zole was in cationic form, as well as its impurity B and impurity E. Impurity A was in molecular form, but its re-tention time was short, which could be explained by the polarity of a molecule (logP = 1.28). Impurities C and D were in molecular forms, which probably caused longer retention times. Percentage of acetonitrile was the factor with the most significant impact on retention times of an-alyzed compounds. Although aripiprazole is a lipophilic compound (logP = 4.79), its satisfactory elution time was achieved with 25% of acetonitrile. The same amount of acetonitrile was used for impurities, which were also most-ly lipophilic. LogP values of impurities B, C, D and E are 2.79, 2.95, 2.52 and 4.18, respectively. It was recognized from the recent literature reports that reducing the consumption of organic solvents intro-duces an environment-friendly approach to drug analysis (Cielecka-Piontek et al., 2013). The mobile phase consist-ing of b-CD could play an important role in reducing the amount of acetonitrile. Taking into consideration the struc-ture of b-CD, there was a possibility for building inclusion complexes with aripiprazole or its impurities, which could shorten the time of analysis. The higher column tempera-ture also shortens the retention times of all the analyzed compounds. The change in b-CD concentration from 10 mM to 15 mM did not have a significant influence on the retention times. Based on all described facts it was decid-ed to work with 15 mM b-CD. Also, it was decided that the percentage of acetonitrile could be 30% and the col-umn temperature should be set at 40 degC. Retention time of aripiprazole under these circumstances was 5.343 min, impurity A 1.717 min, impurity B 2.067 min, impurity C 10.917 min, impurity D 10.773 min and impurity E 5.940 min. From the obtained UV spectra the most appropriate wavelength for monitoring the compounds was decided to be 254 nm. Finally, although aripiprazole and its five im-purities differ in structure and polarity, using HPLC meth-od with b-CD solution as mobile phase additive, they could be separated in single analytical run.ConclusionThe present study shows that b-CD has an important influence on retention behavior of aripiprazole and its five impurities. Reducing the amount of organic solvents by using b-CD solutions as mobile phases is a great advan-tage and step forward to limit the exposure to toxic agents, without decreasing the sensitivity and resolution of deter-mination. Under these circumstances the proposed HPLC method could be successfully used for separation of aripip-razole and its five impurities. Besides, another advantage of proposed method is the compliance with the novel trend in analytical method development according to which it is recommended to use methods suitable for adopting the en-vironment-friendly approach to pharmaceutical analysis.AcknowledgmentThese results are part of the Project no. 172033, fi-nanced by the Ministry of education, science and techno-logical development of the Republic of Serbia.ReferencesChen, D., Jiang, S., Chen, Y., Hu, Y., 2004. HPLC determination of sertraline in bulk drug, tablets and capsules using hydroxypropyl-b-cyclodextrin as mobile phase additive. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 34(1), 239-245.Cielecka-Piontek, J., Zalewski, P., Jelinska, A., Garbacki, P., 2013. UHPLC: The greening face of liquid chromatography. Chromatographia 76(21-22), 1429-1437.Fifere, A., Marangoci, N., Maier, S., Coroaba, A., Maftei, D., Pinteala, M., 2012. Theoretical study on b-cyclodextrin inclusion complexes with propiconazole and protonated propiconazole. Beilstein J. Org. Chem. 8(1), 2191-2201.International Council on Harmonization on Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), 2006. Q3A (R2) Impurities in new drug substances, Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Switzerland. Ravindra, N., Singhvi, I., Kumara Swamy, G., 2014. New RP-HPLC method for the estimation of aripiprazole in bulk and in pharmaceutical dosage forms. Indo. Am. J. Pharm. Res. 4(4), 1842-1849.Thakkar, R.S., Saravaia, H.T., Ambasana, M.A., Kaila, H.O., Shah, A.K., 2011. A chromatographic determination of Aripiprazole using HPLC and UPLC: A comparative validation study. Indian J. Pharm. Sci. 73(4), 439-443.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 235 - 236 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.015:663.81Short communicationAlcohol induced dose dumping for prolonged-release drug productElena Davitkovska*, Blagica Manchevska, Dusica Angelovska, Irena Brasnarska, Packa Antovska, Biljana Sapkareva, Sonja UgarkovicResearch and Development Institute, ALKALOID AD, blvd Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* edavitkovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionAlcohol Induced Dose Dumping (ADD) is a term that describes the unintended, rapid release in a short period of time of the entire amount or a significant fraction of the drug contained in a prolonged-release dosage form. De-pending on the therapeutic indication, the therapeutic in-dex and other characteristics of the drug, dose dumping can pose a significant risk to patients, either because of safe-ty issues or diminished efficacy or both. Generally dose dumping is observed as a result of an impairment of the release-rate-controlling mechanism. Some prolonged-re-lease oral dosage forms contain drugs and excipients that exhibit higher solubility in ethanol solutions compared to water solutions. Such products can be expected to exhibit a more rapid drug dissolution and release rate in the pres-ence of ethanol. Therefore, when a prolong-release prod-uct is consumed with alcohol, the prolong-release mecha-nism could be adversely affected, which could lead to dose dumping.Where appropriate, based on the risk of dose dumping when a prolonged-release drug product is consumed with alcohol, the prolonged-release drug products labeling in-cludes warnings against the consumption of alcohol while taking the drug product. Even with significant warnings in the labeling, the consequences of concomitant alcohol use need to be considered for certain drug products because alcohol use may still be likely and such alcohol use may lead to dose dumping, which could result in serious ad-verse events especially for certain narrow therapeutic in-dex drugs.Mitigating the risks of alcohol-induced dose dumping is an issue that puts great demands on formulators, regula-tory agencies and the industry at large. Over the last few years, the pharmaceutical industry has become increasing-ly concerned with the topic of alcohol-induced dose dump-ing, which can lead to dangerous or even potentially lethal side effects. The goal of the regulatory approach should be to minimize the risk of alcohol-induced dose dumping from prolonged-release dosage forms, irrespective of any warnings on product labeling and instructions by health care providers (Meyer et al.,2005). To address the prob-lem, regulatory guidelines have been implemented, result-ing in the need for new formulation approaches.Guidelines in Europe and the United States In the European Union, all prolonged-released formu-lations must be evaluated for alcohol-induced dose dump-ing risk. Effects of alcohol for generic oral formulations, in vitro studies of the release in alcohol solutions should be performed. Where accelerated active substance release is seen in vitro either at high or low alcohol concentrations over a short period of time or at lower alcohol concentra-tions over a longer period of time, the product should be re-formulated. If the alcohol effect cannot be avoided and it is present also in the reference product, the applicant should justify / demonstrate that it lacks of clinical relevance or discuss the possible clinical relevance in comparison to the reference product. EMA guidelines show a path for deci-sion-making for formulators (Friebe et al., 2005). Differences are present in US and EU regulations. Ac-cording to EMA guideline the prolonged-released product must undergo in vitro testing in the presence of 20% al-cohol concentration (EMA, 2014). On the other hand, the United States' Federal Drug Administration (FDA, 2015), requires in vitro testing in concentrations up to 40% alco-S2 PP 109236Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 235 - 236_ (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationshol for a list of defined generic formulations (Friebe et al., 2005). Nevertheless, the applicant should discuss the signif-icance of any out of specification results, particularly at the early time points, together with consideration of the risks of dose dumping and accelerated release. Appropriate warnings in the summary of product characteristics should be proposed and justified (EMA, 2015).With respect to increasing globalization of pharmaceu-ticals, harmonization of the regulatory guidelines for in vi-tro ADD resistance testing is highly desirable. It should be based on a common understanding of the physiological im-pacts of alcohol consumption and realistic exposure times.Materials and methodsComparative dissolution tests of prolonged-release tablets containing BCS Class I active substance in three different media have been performed: buffer pH 6.8 (solu-tion of sodium hydroxide and potassium dihydrogen phos-phate in water R) also proposed for routine testing, buffer pH 4.5 (solution of sodium acetate R and acetic acid in wa-ter R) and medium pH 1.2 (solution of hydrochloric acid and sodium chloride in water R), each of them with and without 20% ethanol. The level of alcohol in the medium mimics level that can be reached in the fluids of the gastro-intestinal tract following alcohol consumption.Dissolution tests have been performed, using basket apparatus (Apparatus I) at 100 rpm, in 500 ml aforemen-tioned media at 37+-0.5 degC for a total period of 24 hours. Dissolution profiles were obtained with sampling at 8 time points on 12 individual units. The dissolution rate of the prolonged-release drug product has been determined using in-house validated HPLC method. Results and discussionIn vitro dissolution studies with alcohol have been per-formed to evaluate whether ethanol ingestion may modify the release characteristics of the drug product.To demonstrate in vitro similarity of the dissolution profiles performed in media with and without ethanol, f2 statistic method was employed.The results of the performed comparative dissolution tests of prolonged-release tablets in the dissolution medi-um proposed for routine testing, but with alcohol, are with-in the specification limits.Furthermore the f2 statistic method indicates similar-ity between the dissolution profile in the presence of al-cohol and the dissolution profile of the same batch in the same media in absence of alcohol, for all three dissolution media. ConclusionThe conducted in vitro dissolution studies demonstrate that there is no potential risk of alcohol-induce dose dump-ing for the tested prolonged-release drug product.ReferencesCommittee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP), 2014. Guideline on the Pharmacokinetic and Clinical Evaluation of Modified Release Dosage Forms. European Medicines Agency.