As the sequence recognized by an MLPA probe is only 50-70 nucleotides long, this assay is very use-ful for detection of deletions or amplifications of single ex-ons (Schouten et al., 2002). The high specificity of MLPA is due to the ability of this method to distinguish sequenc-es differing in length by only one nucleotide. Another ad-vantage of this method is also the low amount of input DNA (minimum of 20-50 ng) required for a successful MLPA re-action (Schouten et al., 2002). Up to 40-50 small specific probes are directed at DNA regions of interest and to ref-erence regions not associated with the disease, providing a resolution greater than FISH or BAC - based aCGH (Do-nahue et al., 2011). Each probe consists of two oligonu-cleotides (5'and 3'end-probes), that hybridize to adjacent sites of the target sequence. The short oligonucleotide con-tains a target-specific sequence and a universal PCR primer X. The long probe consists of a target-specific sequence, a universal PCR primer Y and a stuffer sequence of variable length in between (19-370 nucleotides) to generate the size differences necessary for electrophoretic resolution (Dona-hue et al., 2011; Sellener and Taylor, 2004). The MLPA re-action comprises five steps and requires a thermocycler and automated genetic analyzer for fragment analysis by capil-lary electrophoresis. A crucial step of the MLPA assay, es-pecially when used in the diagnostic setting (i.e. gene dele-tion or when used in the diagnostic setting (i.e. gene dele-tion or and interpretation of results. The most widely used is the Coffalyser software, an Excel-based program able to perform data normalization steps and necessary corrections (Coffa et al., 2008; Jankowski et al. 2008). The results in-terpretation is based on the mathematical comparison be-tween relative quantities of target DNA amplified from a tested (patient) sample vs. those of a normal (control) sam-ple (Abdool et al., 2010). In general, signals are interpret-ed as aberrant at cut-off values below 0.7 (deletion) and above 1.3 (duplication/ amplification) (Eijk-Van Os et al., 2011). The utility of MLPA assay in the testing of acute leu-kemias and myelodysplastic syndromes has been analyzed, confirming excellent accuracy and specificity of MLPA as compared to FISH (Stippia et al., 2012). Materials and methodsOur cohort consisted of 70 patients (pts) with 'de-no-vo' and therapy-related MDS (t- MDS), diagnosed at the University Clinic of Hematology, "Ss Cyril and Methodi-S6 PP 278582Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 581 - 582 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsus" University, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia in the pe-riod of 52 months. Patients signed informed consent for entrance in the study. From each patient was collected 1 mL of material, obtained by bone marrow biopsy (BMB) and put in the test tube with an anticoagulant - K3ED-TA. Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was isolated with stan-dard phenol chloroform extraction in the Faculty of Phar-macy, Department of biomolecular sciences, Skopje, Re-public of Macedonia. The material from BMB was cen-trifuged at 3000 rpm, 4degC, 5 min. The watery upper layer was decanted, and the precipitated cells were washed with 0.9%NaCl, and later washed with lysed solution (1.55M NH4Cl, 0.1M NH4HCO3 and 1mM EDTA Ph 7.4, final concentration), centrifuged at 3000 rpm, 4degC, 5 min, in or-der to lyse the rest of red cells. The rest of the other cells were digested over night at 37degC with 0.1M NaCl, 0.05 M Tris, 1mM EDTA in final concentration. The next day was performed fluid-fluid extraction with saturated phenol (pH=8) and Chloroform : Isoamyl alcohol 24:1, after cen-trifugation at 3000 rpm, 4degC, 5 min. and removal of the up-per watery layer, the precipitation of the DNA with cold 100% ethanol was performed and dissolved with TE puffer (Tris 10mM i EDTA 1 mM, final concentration). The iso-lated DNA was incubated overnight on 37degC for homoge-neous dissolution in the puffer. The intactness of the isolat-ed DNA was examined on gel electrophoresis. With Nano-Drop 2000 spectrophotometer (Thermo Scientific) was de-termined the concentration of the isolated DNAs. The SALSA MLPA MDS kits (P144 and P145, MRC Holland) were used to detect chromosomal abnormalities commonly associated with MDS. The probe mix contained probes for chromosomes 5, 7, 8, 11, 12 (ETV6), 17 (TP53), 20 and 21 (RUNX1). Analyses were performed with the application of P414-A1 MDS MLPA kits of MRC Holland, according to their protocol. The analysis of the results was performed by software - Coffalyser.Results and discussionOf 70 patients (pts), 33 women (47.1%) and 37 men (52.9%) participated in the study, aged 64.3 years (range 22-86 years). With primary MDS were 66 pts and with 4 pts with t- MDS. Chromosomal abnormalities were de-tected in 32.9% pts (5p+, 5q-, 7p-, 7q-, 8p+, 8q+, 11p-, 12p-, 17p-, 17q+, 19p+, 19p-, 20q- in different combina-tions), while 67.1% pts had normal findings. According to the WHO patients were classified as follows: RCMD - 34, RCED - 5, 5q syndrome - 1, RARS -1, RAEB 1- 6, RAEB -2 - 6, CMML-1 - 2, CMML-2 - 3, t-MDS - 4, MDS-u - 2, AML- 6 pts. According to IPSS, distribution was as fol-lows: with low risk - 16 pts (22.9%), with intermediate 1 - 37 (52.9%), with intermediate 2 - 8 (11.3%), with high risk - 9 (12.9). According to R-IPSS, distribution was as follows: with very low risk - 5 (7.1%), with low risk 22 (31.4%), with intermediate risk - 24 (34.3%), with high risk - 10 (14.3%), with very high risk - 9 (12.9%) pts. Patients were treated based on IPSS and R-IPSS. Transformation in AML was registered in 24.3%, after 9.2 months. Over-all survival (OS) was 30.2 months. In pts with chromosom-al abnormalities OS was 25.7 months and in those without chromosomal abnormalities OS 34.2 months, but the dif-ference was not statistically significant (p =0 .13101). 22 patients died.ConclusionMDS MLPA assay is sufficiently specific and repro-ducible to be used in routine diagnostic settings as the first-line genetic screening tool. Data concerning chromosomal abnormalities in MDS enable physicians to make treatment strategy at diagnosis. There are different treatment options for different risk groups including allogeneic transplanta-tion for high and very high risk patients.ReferencesAbdool, A., Donahue, A.C., Wohlgemuth, J.G., Yeh, C.H., 2010. Detection, analysisand clinical validation of chromosomal aberrations by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification in chronic leukemia. PLoS One 5, e15407.Coffa, J., van de Wiel, M.A., Diosdado, B., Carvalho, B., Schouten, J., Meijer, G.A., 2008. MLPAnalyzer: data analysis tool for reliable automated normalization of MLPA fragment data. Cell Oncol. 30, 323-335.Donahue, A.C., Abdool, A.K., Gaur, R., Wohlgemuth, J.G., Yeh, C.H., 2011. Multiplexligation-dependent probe amplification for detection of chromosomal abnormalities in myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia. Leuk. Res. 35, 1477-1483.Eijk-Van Os, P.G., Schouten, J.P., 2011. Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA(R)) for the detection of copy number variation in genomic sequences. Methods Mol. Biol. 688, 97-126. Fabris, S., Scarciolla, O., Morabito, F., Cifarelli, R.A., Dininno, C., Cutrona, G., Matis, S., Recchia, A.G., Gentile, M., Ciceri, G., Ferrarini, M., Ciancio, A., Mannarella, C., Neri, A., Fragasso, A., 2011. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification and fluorescence in situ hybridization to detect chromosomal abnormalities in chronic lymphocytic leukemia: a comparative study. Genes Chromosomes Cancer 50, 726-734. Jankowski, S., Currie-Fraser, E., Xu, L., Coffa, J., 2008. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis on capillary electrophoresis instruments for a rapid gene copy number study. J. Biomol. Tech. 19, 238-243.Schouten, J.P., McElgunn, C.J., Waaijer, R., Zwijnenburg, D., Diepvens, F., Pals, G., 2002. Relative quantification of 40 nucleic acid sequences by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. Nucleic Acids Res. 30, e57.Sellner, L.N., Taylor, G.R., 2004. MLPA and MAPH: new techniques for detectionof gene deletions. Hum. Mutat. 23, 413-419.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 583 - 584 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 614.253.84:342.721Short communicationRegulatory aspects of data protection and privacy requirements in interventional biomedical studiesMilica Zugic1*, Kristina Mladenovska21Ewopharma AG, Representative Office, Anton Popov 1-2/3, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss Cyril and Methodius University, Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* milicazugic@hotmail.comIntroductionIn order to obtain accurate, reliable and traceable re-sults from the interventional biomedical studies, including clinical trials, and to come up with effective and safe me-dicinal products, and in the same time, to protect the confi-dentiality of personal health data, it is necessary to have a regulated access to the health information of the individu-als. Data protection and privacy requirements are given in the Declaration of Helsinki (1964-2013) which states: "It is the duty of physicians who are involved in medical re-search to protect the life, health, dignity, integrity, right to self-determination, privacy, and confidentiality of personal information of research subjects." All precautions should be taken to protect the privacy of the subjects participat-ing in biomedical research and to minimize the impact of study on their mental, physical and social integrity. Article 24 states: "Every precaution must be taken to protect the privacy of research subjects and the confidentiality of their personal information". One of the basic principles in the Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R1) (1996), sec-tion 2:11 states: "The confidentiality of records that could identify subjects should be protected, respecting the priva-cy and confidentiality rules in accordance with the appli-cable regulatory requirement(s)." To this end, each subject that has been enrolled in a clinical trial is assigned a unique identification number in order to protect his/her identity. This identification number is used instead of the name of the entity when the investigator submits reports of adverse events and/or other information related to the clinical tri-al. Personal data protection is a mandatory part of the In-formed Consent, introduced as a compulsory element by the Nuremberg code. In the Informed Consent it is clearly stated that all medical records which contain personal pa-tient data will be kept confidential within the limits of ap-plicable laws and regulations and will not be available to the public. If the study results are published, the identity of the subjects will remain protected. Data protection in EUIn the EU, personal data may be collected only under strictly controlled conditions and for legitimate purposes. Harmonized legislation is established among EU Member States regarding the protection of personal data. In addi-tion, the European Commission keeps constant dialogue with non-EU countries to achieve high level of protection of personal data. Personal data protection in the EU is cur-rently regulated by Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of personal data (1995) and Directive 2002/58/EC on the processing of personal data and the protection of privacy in the electronic communication (2002). Directive 95/46/EC provides the legal framework which strives to find the balance between the high level of protection of personal data and the free movement of personal data within the EU. The Directive sets strict limits on the collection and use of personal data and requires each Member State to ap-point an independent national body responsible for the pro-tection of personal data. Directive does not deal explicitly with biomedical research, but it is the basis for principles of protection of personal data in biomedical research. Di-rective 2002/58/EC provides an equivalent level of protec-tion of fundamental rights and freedoms and especially of the right to privacy with regard to the processing of person-al data in the electronic communications sector and the free movement of such data and the equipment for electronic communications and services in EU.Rapid technological development and related regula-tory challenges of privacy protection caused the Europe-an Commission to propose a new regulation on the pro-S6 PP 279584Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 583 - 584 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationstection of individuals with regard of the processing of per-sonal data and their free movement - Data Protection Reg-ulation ("DPR") (2015). After intense lobbying, the final text of DPR has been agreed on 17th of December 2015. It is expected to come into force in 2018. DPR will re-place the current legislation and the various inconsistent national laws on data protection, with a transitional peri-od of two years. Considering that the collection, process-ing and transfer of personal data, particularly the records of individual subjects/patients in accordance with applica-ble laws are critical to the success of biomedical research, the adoption of this regulation will affect sponsors, inves-tigators and other participants in biomedical research/clin-ical trial. DPR mainly refers to: the unification/qualifica-tion of key-coded data of the subject/patient with which the subject/patient can be identified, clearer definition of the roles and responsibilities of the sponsor and the con-tract research organizations as responsible for the process-ing and control of data, clarification of the guidelines on existing restrictions on the transfer of data from the EU to parties outside the EU, the introduction of legal sanctions for violating laws on data protection, as well as adminis-trative penalties.Data protection in USAIn the USA, the medical information is regulated by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). HIPAA applies to health workers dealing with the processing of medical data and all other entities that come into contact with medical information. Standards for privacy of individually identified health information are given inthe HIPAA Privacy Rule and reffer to the col-lection, use and protection of health information or medi-cal records. However, HIPPA-rules are related to defined entities only, they protect electronic data only and many of the entities are not or cannot be harmonized with the HIPPA safety requirements. Additionally, there are many guidelines that have been developed by government agen-cies and industry associations, which are not legally bind-ing, used only for self-regulation and are considered "good practices".Data protection in the Republic of MacedoniaIn Macedonia, the Law on Personal Data Protection (2008) regulates the protection of personal data as funda-mental rights and freedoms of individuals. The principles of this law are implemented in biomedical research. Arti-cle 2 defines special categories of personal data "data con-cerning health, including genetic data". Article 8 prohib-its the processing of special categories of personal data, but an exception is made if "it is necessary for the purposes of medical diagnosis, treatment or management of a health in-stitution and if it is carried by a person whose profession is to provide medical care under oath of secrecy of the infor-mation revealed to him in the course of his profession and if an appropriate safeguards are established in order to per-form activities of public interest determined by law or by decision of the Directorate". In addition, according to the Article 31, the personal data shall be transferred in another state only if the second one provides the same level of pro-tection. With this being stated it is safe to conclude that if biomedical research is performed in accordance with this Law, the code of ethics of health workers and an appropri-ate level of protection is provided and there is no barrier for scientific research.ConclusionIt is clear that different countries have different ap-proaches to personal data protection in clinical studies. In the USA there is no comprehensive national law regulat-ing the collection and use of personal data.