The ICER for FOLFOX plus bevacizumab was EUR90580.374 per QALY.Sensitivity analysisAccording to the sensitivity analyses results, the base case model is robust to alternative parameters and assumptions. The parameters with the greatest influence on the ICERs were median OS and PFS for each regimen, drug cost of bevacizumab, and utility values for living with mCRC. The discount factor had a minor influence on the ICER in the first-line model. The PSA indicate that 82% of simulations performed showed bevacizumab plus FOLFOX to be more effective and more costly than FOLFOX chemotherapy alone.ConclusionBased on the model projections, the introduction of bevacizumab to the standard FOLFOX chemotherapy protocols for mCRC treatment resulted in longer survival and greater QALYs than FOLFOX alone at an incremental cost of EUR 90580.374 per quality adjusted life-year gained.ReferencesGraham, C.N., Hechmati, G., Hjelmgren, J., de Liege, F., Lanier, J., Knox, H., Barber, B., 2014. Cost-effectiveness analysis of panitumumab plus mFOLFOX6 compared withbevacizumab plus mFOLFOX6 for first-line treatment of patients with wild-type RASmetastatic colorectal cancer. Eur. J. Cancer. 50(16), 2791-2801. Lange, A., Prenzler, A., Frank, M., Kirstein, M., Vogel, A., von der Schulenburg, J.M.,2014. A systematic review of cost-effectiveness of monoclonal antibodies for metastatic colorectal cancer. Eur. J. Cancer. 50(1), 40-49.Ramsey, S.D., Andersen, M.R., Etzioni, R., Moinpour, C., Peacock, S., Potosky, A., Urban, N.,2000. Quality of life in survivors of colorectal carcinoma. Cancer 88, 1294-1303.Ramsey, S.D., Berry, K., Moinpour, C., Giedzinska, A., Andersen, M.R., 2002.Quality of life in long term survivors of colorectal cancer. Am. J. Gastroenterol. 97, 1228-1234.Saltz, L.B., Clarke, S., az-Rubio, E., Scheithauer, W., Figer, A., Wong, R., Koski, S., Lichinitser, M., Yang, T.S., Rivera, F., Couture, F., Sirzen, F., Cassidy, J., 2008. Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as first-line therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomized phase III study. J. Clin. Oncol . 26, 2013-2019.Van Cutsem, E., Nordlinger, B., Cervantes, A., 2010. ESMO Guidelines Working Group. Advanced colorectal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for treatment. Ann. Oncol. 21(. 5),v93-97. Yabroff, K.R., Borowski, L., Lipscomb, J., 2013. Economic Studies in Colorectal Cancer: Challenges in Measuring and Comparing Costs. J. Natl. Cancer. Inst. Monogr. (46), 62-78.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 107 - 108 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.2:339.187(497.7)Short communicationThe advertising influence on pharmacist recommendations and consumer selection of over-the-counter drugs Aleksandra Kapedanovska-Nestorovska*, Zorica Naumovska, Zoran Sterjev, Ljubica Suturkova, Aleksandra GrozdanovaFaculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, MajkaTereza 47, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* alka@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionOver-the-counter (OTC) drugs are medicines that can be used safely and effectively by the general public with-out a prescription. Available for sale directly to a consum-er, they are one of the most important and easily accessible public health aids for the treatment of common conditions or symptomatic relief (Hakonsen, et al., 2016; Halvorsen et al., 2016). In the last 10 years, many medicines that were originally prescription only have now become available over the counter (OTC), either from pharmacies or oth-er general retail outlets (Bond et al., 2003). However, cer-tain cases of misuse or overuse of OTC drug products re-sulting in adverse drug events have been recorded, lead-ing to the conclusion that they may not be totally harmless. Although there are different means of providing the con-sumers with drug information, the advertising, used by the pharmaceutical companies, is one of the best and power-ful methods for information broadcasting and introducing these products to the consumers (Hanna et al., 2010 Major, et al., 2010). Thus, trying to make appropriate recommen-dations and decisions regarding OTC medications can be tempting for the community pharmacists and daunting and confusing for patients (Cooper et al., 2013).The aim of this study was to examine the advertising influence on pharmacist and consumers attitudes in selec-tion of OTC medicines.Materials and methodsThe multicenter, observational cross-sectional study was conducted at 70 randomly selected community pharma-cies in Skopje, R. Macedonia. Data were collected during one shift at each pharmacy. The instrument used for investi-gating the research questions in this the study is a previous-ly validated survey available in the literature (Potnis, 2012). Pharmacists were provided with a printed copy of survey. Variables measured in this study are the cumula-tive scores for pharmacists' perceptions of OTC drug ad-vertising concerning their recommendations and consum-er selection of over-the-counter drugs. The questionnaire included 27 items divided into 2 sections. Section I of the questionnaire was comprised of seven questions measur-ing the demographic variables (gender, years of practicing as a pharmacist, practice setting, location of the pharmacy, frequency of exposure on OTC drug advertisements, aver-age weekly OTC prescription volume and medium of OTC drug advertisements) related to the pharmacists' practice. Section II was comprised of 20 questions (divided in 4 subsections), measuring pharmacists experience regard-ing: 1) pharmacists' beliefs about the effects of over-the-counter drug advertising, 2) impact of OTC drug adver-tising on pharmacists' recommendations, 3) influence of OTC drug advertising on patients' choice of the drug prod-ucts, 4) Effect of over-the-counter drug advertising on pa-tient pharmacist interactions. The subsection 1 and 2 con-sisted of 4 questions, while sections 3 and 4 comprised of 6 questions. All questions from section II were measured on a 5-point Likert scale (items rated from one to five; '1' denoting 'Strongly Agree' and '5' denoting 'Strongly Dis-agree'). With each item having a maximum possible score of five, the highest score for the beliefs measure, consisting of four or six questions, was 20 or 30, respectively. Phar-macists, whose cumulative score for the above items was found to be less than or equal to 10 or 15 were consid-ered to believe that over-the-counter drug advertising has a great effect on the measured variable. The obtained data were descriptively analyzed.S1 PP 46108Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 107 - 108 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsResults and discussionAll of the participants were females (100%) work-ing in large chain pharmacies, previously defined as phar-macies with more than or equal to 12 stores (61.1%). Ap-proximately 33.3% of the pharmacist worked in small chain pharmacies (with 1-12 stores). Most of the phar-macists were working in pharmacies located in urban re-gions (81.5%) with most of them practicing for 1-10 years (70.6%). Approximately 59.3% of the surveyed pharma-cists mentioned coming across over-the-counter drug ad-vertisements/informations for 1- 5 times a week. Mar-keting representatives, as reported by 45% of the partic-ipants, were found to be the medium where the pharma-cists gain most of the over-the-counter drug informations, followed by internet (33.3%). A large number of pharma-cists (31.4%) were working at a pharmacy with a volume of prescriptions between 100-150 and more than 200 OTC drugs /week.A majority of the surveyed pharmacists (61.5%) were found to have a cumulative score of 8 and thus believe that over-the-counter drug advertising has a great effect on pa-tients. Approximately 77.7% of the pharmacists had a cu-mulative score of 12 and agreed that over-the-counter drug advertising does not impact on pharmacists' recommenda-tions. A large number (81.4%) of pharmacists, based on a score of 14 agreed that the patients choice of the drug prod-ucts was largely influenced by over-the-counter drug ad-vertising. In all, 51.8% of the pharmacists, with a score of 12, were of the opinion that patient - pharmacist inter-actions were increased as a result of the over-the-counter drug advertising.ConclusionThese findings serve as a starting point for addition-al research in the field of over-the-counter drug advertising in our country. Although pharmacists use marketing adver-tisement as a means of information about over-the-coun-ter drugs they strongly believe that their role is to offer patients the best care at the least possible cost and to en-sure that the recommendations regarding OTC drug pro-vides enough revenue to maximize its value to the patient. Considering that patients choice of the OTC drug products is greatly influenced by over-the-counter drug ad-vertising in order to promote a rational usage of the OTC drug the advertisement has to contain all necessary patient information in a way that is clear and understandable and to encourage patients to carefully read the package leaflet or instructions. In view of the fact that in recent years, di-rect-to-consumer advertising of OTC drugs has increased all advertisements must give a clear message that the ad-vertised product is a medicinal product.ReferencesBond, C., Hannaford, P., 2003. Issues related to monitoring the safety of over-the-counter (OTC) medicines. Drug Saf. 26(15), 1065-1074. Cooper, R., 2013. Surveillance and uncertainty: community pharmacy responses to over the counter medicine abuse. Health Soc. Care Community. 21(3), 254-262. Hanna, L.A., Hughes, C.M., 2010. 'First, do no harm': factors that influencepharmacists making decisions about over-the-counter medication: a qualitative study in Northern Ireland. Drug Saf. 33(3), 245-255. Halvorsen, M.M., Clench-Aas, J., Patil, G., Lundqvist, C., 2016. Changes over time of prescription and non-prescription analgesics for headache with or without other somatic pain Effects of prescription regulatory changes. J. Pain. doi: 10.1016/j.jpain.2016.02.016. Hakonsen, H., Sundell, K.A., Martinsson, J., Hedenrud, T., 2016. Consumer preferences for over-the counter drug retailers in the reregulated Swedish pharmacy market. Health Policy (3), 327-333. Major,C., Vincze, Z., 2010. Self-medication in Hungary, from the perspective of pharmacy workers. Acta Pol. Pharm.67(5), 547-554. Potnis, Priyanka S., 2012. "Ohio pharmacists' perceptions of over-the-counter drug advertising" Theses and Dissertations. Paper 406.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 109 - 110 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.1:340.13Short communicationThe relationship of law and pharmacyKaterina Anchevska Netkovska*, Aleksandra GrozdanovaFaculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* kaan@ff.ukim.edu.mkBackgroundParallel with the development of pharmaceutical sci-ence and legal regulations (law on medicinal products and medical devices, law on health care), this area is gain-ing greater recognition in national and international level. Pharmacy, unlike chemistry and biology is not just science, rather, it is a profession that encompasses a broad range of academic and professional disciplines that are based on science, business, sociology and law. Pharmaceutical law as a discipline of recent date, although its foundation and academic profiling is an area that legally has be present in order to develop different approached to problems, and to cooperate with pharmaceutical science and practice (Ap-pelbe and Wingfild, 1997). The rules in pharmaceutical laws may be universally agreed and respected or may be controversial and applied only in part or only by some of those concerned, so this article seeks to provide an outline of the law that affects the pharmacy.Pharmacy lawInterdisciplinary is a kind of cooperation where experts from various academic disciplines work in order to achieve common outcomes. The past decade has witnessed an un-precedented interest and controversy surrounding in ethi-cal and legal aspects of health, including pharmaceutical care. One reason for the establishment and development of such program as pharmaceutical law, is the conviction that traditionally established disciplines individually are unable to solve key problems. What is more there are many oth-er areas of law and regulation affecting the industry, con-cerning, for example the pricing of medicines, the conduct of clinical studies, the health protection and health care in-surance (Dukes, 2006). In some fields it is hardly impos-sible to maintain standards through regulation. So we can freely say that the manner and quality of the relationship on both sides (pharmacy and law) depends on boosting over-all pharmaceutical activity and protection. This suggests that the pharmacy and law although at first glance are two mutually different areas, still they have numerous and im-portant common ground. Considering that, interdisciplin-ary approach of pharmaceutical law is very complex and requires knowledge of the lawyers in the pharmaceuticals-but also demands from pharmaceutical professionals bet-ter knowledge of the legal institutions whose application refers to them.This pharmacy-law relationship puts the task of phar-macists not only in the implementation of regulations re-lated to pharmaceutical law, but also needs the right ap-proach to shape legal institutions to regulate rights and ob-ligations, which requires a very serious approach by legal experts. The pharmacists work reaches out to entire com-munity. Pharmaceutical law in an objective sense consti-tute a set of laws governing pharmaceutical activity, regu-late the rights and obligations of health professionals and their relationship to the beneficiaries. It is especially im-portant to emphasize that this discipline also called, "law for drugs" covers the legal definition and corresponding action to the pharmaceutical care of the individual in the health care system (Mujovik-Zornik, 2008). It covers parts of the regulation for legal issues relating to the manufac-ture, trade and use of drugs in the context of health care. For this reason pharmaceutical law is broadly viewed as an integral part of health law or legislation. Pharmaceutical law as a discipline is recognizable recent, and appears separately in order to identify first of all regulatory aspects in the definition and implementation of health legislation. The need and the existence of these S1 PP 47110Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 109 - 110 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationstwo disciplines (medical and pharmaceutical law), on the one hand requires their integration and harmonization, and on the other hand allow consideration of legal problems from different aspects.For example, from the perspective of medical law separates the part of pharmaceutical regulation under which person (patient) consumed drugs comes into contact with them, but again portions over a health or medical procedures undertaken in connection therewith. This will also mean that aspects of pharmaceutical law, which relate to public or rather socially significant issues associated with the production of pharmaceuticals, intellectual property rights, and advertising may appear as second.Unlike traditional branches of law, pharmaceutical law is not specifically codified but is defined by the field governed not uncommon liaison with ethical norms associated with this regulated profession, because it is a limited legal area, which refers to a profession and those who use its services. This arises and specificity of pharmaceutical law and its sources are simultaneously multiple of a different nature, legal and professional (intellectual property rights and norms associated with putting drugs on the market, quality and safety of medicines and other pharmaceutical products, health care insurance, competition, advertising, ethical codes, etc. ).Therefore, all legal norms and regulations of pharma-ceutical law recognize and affect each other, because a de-cision to bring a specific legal issue entails application of the regulation and other areas of law (Junod, 2006). This indicates that the rules of pharmaceutical law have their own specifics, but when it comes to legally relevant com-plex cases, its use is public law and regulation, private and often even criminal character. Considering the consti-tutionally guaranteed right to health as a universal value, (The Constitution of the World Health Organization-1946 states that the "enjoyment of the highest attainable stan-dard of health is one of the fundamental rights of every hu-man being without distinction of race, religion, political belief, economic or social position ") pharmaceutical law as part of health activity has the same characteristics.Although still in development in our country the national legislation related to these issues is in the process of harmonizing with the standards as in the other EU member states. Promotion of pharmaceutical law as a discipline and the ongoing debate on current issues of legal theory and practice is of great scientific and professional importance. Presence as a special study program at a growing number of faculties, slowly gaining status, along with medical law as a scientific discipline that is taught and continually exploring.ReferencesAppelbe, G. E, Wingfild, J., 1997. Pharmacy law and ethics, The Pharmaceutical press, third ed.Mujovik-Zornik, H., 2008.