IOJES 4(1), 225-242.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 47 - 48 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.2:614.39(497.7)Short communicationActivities of Macedonian Agency of medicines and medical devices in the improvement of rational use of medicinesMerjem Hadjihamza* Marija Darkovska Serafimovska, Mirjana DoncevaAgency for Medicines and Medical Devices, "St.Cyril and Mehtodius" no.54, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* merjem.haxhihamza@ malmed.gov.mkIntroductionThe enormous development of new medicines and their permanent introduction in the pharmaceutical market as well as permanent raising of medicines consumption on global level are very challenging and they are not so easy to face with. In particular it is not so easy for developing countries which have low health budgets and rationality in managing this budget is of strategic importance. Most countries are interested to enable access to medicines for their population but at the same time they must establish policies that will promote their rational use.In Republic of Macedonia the improvement of rational use of medicines is a part of the Health strategy and the Na-tional strategy for medicines. Considering the above men-tioned findings and being aware that the trend of increas-ing medicines consumption often caused by their irratio-nal use may affect the public health, the last few years the health authorities in the country, including all stakehold-ers and the medical experts, have conducted activities at all levels of health care in order to improve the rational use of medicines and public health as well. These activities were preceded by a situational analysis that detected and located the causes of irrational use of medicines, after which Ac-tion plan at government level (AP, 2014) were approved. These activities included the educational, social and regu-latory dimension of the issue. In this regard, the Agency of medicines and medical devices conducted inspections in community pharmacies throughout the country.ObjectivesThe main purpose of this activity was to check whether the regime of medicines dispensing is in compliance with the legal provisions (LP, 2016) and according to the ap-proved action plan to share educative materials regarding medicines use intended for patients.MethodsIn the first half of 2014 (from January to June) 880 community pharmacies across the country were inspect-ed. Target pharmacotherapeutic groups of medicines to be checked were: antibiotics, anxiolytics, sedatives and anti-depressants. The inspection was repeated in the second half of 2014 and the results evaluated. Results and discussionInspection conducted in the first half of 2014 (from January to June) in 880 pharmacies state wide showed that a significant amount of the medicines that belong to above mentioned therapeutic groups were being dispensed with-out a prescription. These findings were very worrying. The highest consumption was marked in anxiolytics, more pre-cisely medicines that belong to the group of benzodiaze-pine derivates, followed by sedatives and antidepressants. At the third place were antibiotics (all medicines were for oral use).The medicines that lead regarding antibiotic consump-tion are combination of penicillins' including beta lacta-mase inhibitors more precisely the combination of amox-icillin and clavulanic acid, followed by cephalosporin of first generation (cephalexin) than amoxicillin and cipro-floxacin.S1 OP 1648Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 47 - 48 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsWhat were the most often causes stated by the pharma-cies for these worrying data?The pressure from the patients who demanded to buy the medicine because:- The elder cannot visit their doctors to take pre-scriptions for medicines that they use continu-ously (for example sedatives and anxiolytics)- People that work, state that they cannot wait to take prescriptions from their doctors, because they know which antibiotic is going to be pre-scribed to them ( most often amoxicillin + cla-vulanic acid or cephalexin )- Relatives and friends insisting to get the med-icine because they have used it before and got betterDuring the checkups that have been conducted in the first half of 2014, for all pharmacies where medicines were dispensed without a prescription, a data-record has been written about the established findings and it was pointed out that every pharmacy should work in compliance with the regulatory demands. Educative brochures regarding rational use of medi-cines in particular of antibiotics, sedatives and anxiolytics were prepared for patients so they can be informed through their community pharmacies. Considering the low level of health literacy in majority of patients, these brochures con-tained very clear and simple messages regarding the risks they take by using medicines without medical advice.During the second half of 2014 Agency of medicines repeated the checkups (from July to December). In most pharmacies it was not recorded at all dispensing of antibi-otics, sedatives and anxiolytics without prescription. The comparative analyzes showed the following results: The dispensing of anxiolytics without prescription in particu-lar dispensing of benzodiazepine derivates was decreased for approximately 93% to 95% for all strengths, dispens-ing sedatives (zolpidem) was decreased for 95% and dis-pensing of antidepressants (amitriptyline) was decreased for 99.5%. Dispensing without prescription of antibiotics more precisely combination of penicillin's including beta lacatamase inhibitors, (combination of amoxicillin and cla-vulanic acid 875/125 mg) was decreased for 99% , amox-icillin 500 mg - 97.5% while dispensing cephalosporin's of first generation (cephalexin 500mg) was decreased for 95% which means that conducted comparative analyzes showed significant improvement in proper dispensing of prescription only medicines.ConclusionThe role of pharmacists is not only dispensing of med-icines, the pharmacists are health professionals responsi-ble for improving public health by giving appropriate in-formation to their patients, in order to raise their aware-ness on the safety risks of improper and irrational use of medicines, educating them and advising on what is best for their well being. The legal provisions must be respect-ed and they are legally binding. The Agency of medicines is very confident that this kind of checkups in community pharmacies should be a continuous process until achieving full implementation of legal provisions. These regulatory and educational activities related to dispensing and rational use of medicines does not mean that the problem of irratio-nal use of medicines is solved once and for all. But on the other hand, exactly these activities are crucial steps in the path of eradication of bad attitude related to medicines use.References AP (Action plan approved at government level), 2014 (internal document).LP (Legal provisions), 2016. www.malmed.gov.mk (accessed 21-st of March 2016).Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 49 - 50 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.2:659.2(474.5)Short communicationSources of medicines information used by Lithuanian community pharmacy patientsPaulius Brazauskas1, Jurgita Dauksiene1*, Romualda Gauryliene2, Raimondas Radziunas11 Lithuanian University of Health sciences, Academy of Medicine, Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Drug technology and Social pharmacy, Sukileliu 13, LT-50009 Kaunas, Lithuania2 Kaunas University of Applied Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, Department of Pharmacy, K. Petrausko g.15, LT-44162 Kaunas, Lithuania* jurgita.dauksiene@gmail.comIntroductionAppropriate and objective information how to make right decision by choosing and using the medication is vi-tally important (FIP, 2008). The times when health care professionals were expected to take decisions on treatment or new medication without explanation are gone (Coulter, 1999). Nowadays patients access a variety of human, print and electronic sources. It is very important to get know the sources there they pick the information. Given that some of medicine information sources available for the patients could provide misinformation, it is important that patients and health care professionals discuss the medications ful-ly before making decisions. The primary purpose of patient medicines information is to assist the patient and health professional in achieving safe and effective use of medi-cines. This includes providing information that allows the patient to make an informed decision as to the appropriate selection and use of medicines. Information about medicines and treatment is avail-able from healthcare professionals, mostly doctors and pharmacists. Other medicine information sources where patient seeks for information are Patient Information Leaf-lets (PILs), various media sources, etc. Most patients ac-cess information from sources that are convenient for them without considering if the information they get is enough confident. It is becoming increasingly important to better understand what places patients report as their sources of drug information (Hamrosi et al., 2014). The aim of the study was to determine the use and perceived reliability of different medication information sources among Lithua-nian community pharmacy patients. Materials and methodsThe 385 community pharmacy patients who visit-ed pharmacy to obtain medications or came for consul-tation in pharmacies in different Lithuanian regions were asked to participate in the study. A method of questionnaire was chosen. The questions about reliability and usability of different medication information sources were includ-ed. 60.8% of participants lived in the city (or center of re-gion), 23.6% of participants lived in town and 15.6% lived in village. 73% of respondents were women and 27% were men. The youngest participant in the survey had age of 18 years and the oldest was 84 years. To evaluate results all respondents were categorized in three age groups: 18-40 years old, 41-65 years old and 66-84 years old. The statis-tical analysis was performed using SPSS (Statistical Pack-age for Social Science) 17.0. Descriptive statistics were calculated to summarize the data. T test and chi-square test were used to analyze differences among groups. Results were considered statistically significant when the p value was less than 0.05.Results and discussionAll participants were asked about reliability of med-ical sources that they use and whether these sources are S1 PP 1750Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 49 - 50 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsreliable and confident. Doctor and pharmacist seemed to be most reliable sources among all age groups. Almost all respondents in all age groups (Reliability and usability of both medical information sources were evaluated more than 95% in each age group!) use these sources to receive medical information they require. According to results in the third place little less reliable medical source is phar-macy technician. Mostly it's being used and looks confi-dent for respondents between 66-84 years old. 88.6% of these respondents reported this source as usable and reli-able compared to 77.5% in 41-65 years and 81.2% in 18-40 years groups. Patient information leaflet takes fourth place however is the first one among all written medical infor-mation sources. Only 50% of respondents in age group be-tween 66 years and 84 years claimed this source as reliable and 25.3% of respondents in same age group reported not using this source of information at all. 84.8% of respon-dents in 18-40 years age group find this source reliable. Books, family and friends, commercials, magazines, tele-vision and internet are less reliable sources to patients. Al-most half of all respondents answered they use internet as a source, but information is not reliable. Older patients (age group 66-84) do not use this source to search for medical information. Results of our survey shows that patients are tended to trust healthcare professionals and identifies them as their first choice to receive confident medical informa-tion about treatment, taken medications, etc. More than 95% of respondents in all age groups indicate that they use doctors and pharmacists as their sources of medical infor-mation and that these sources are reliable. Both sources give accurate and constructive information targeted to pa-tient, his condition and his needs in medical treatment. Survey revealed that among healthcare professionals pharmacy technicians are to be treated positively due to their interactions with patients. 88.6% of respondents in age group between 66-84 years reported this source as reliable. There are not many studies where importance of their role in consulting patients is investigated however we assume that this specialist plays an important role in providing patient with specific and needed medical information. Patient information leaflets were indicated as reliable sources. More than 80% of respondents in age groups of 18-40 years and 41-65 years reported to use this source.ConclusionCommunity pharmacy patients reported general practitioner and pharmacist as most reliable and mostly usable sources. Patient information leaflet remains in line with other most usable medical information sources and is number one among all written medical information sources. It is necessary to better adopt patient information leaflet to older patients. As reliability of other written medical information sources is uncertain it is necessary to overview and to control this information. ReferencesCoulter, A., 1999. Paternalism or partnership? Patients have grown up - and there's no going back. Br. Med. J. 319, 719-720.FIP, 2008. FIP statement of policy Medicines information for patients. Basel, Swizerland.Hamrosi, K., Raynor, D.K., Aslani, P., 2014. Enhancing provision of written medicine information in Australia: pharmacist, general practitioner and consumer perceptions of the barriers and facilitators. B.M.C. Health Serv. Res. 14(1), 183.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 51 - 52 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.214(496.5)"2006/2015"Short communicationCharacterization of typical and atypical antipsychotics use in Albania, 2006-2012Elda Hoxha1*, Vilma Papajani21Profarma, sh.a, Rr: "Myslym Keta", 1000 Tirana, Albania.2University of Medicine, Tirana, Faculty of Pharmacy, Dibra Str., Nr. 371, 1005 Tirana, Albania* eldajano@yahoo.comIntroductionAntipsychotics are used to treat psychotic symptoms, agitation and diseases such as schizophrenia and mania (Freudenreich and Goff, 2010).Nowadays antipsychotics may be classified in two groups, typical and atypical antipsychotics. Typical anti-psychotics have been used since the 1950s, while atypical drugs are newer drugs approved for use between 1990 and 2000. Atypical antipsychotics have certain superior thera-peutic characteristics compared to typical drugs in terms of efficacy and side effect profile. However, certain clinical trials have failed to prove any superiority in effectiveness. This is because the newer atypical drugs have their own disadvantages, too (Schatzberg et al., 2011).Atypical drugs are much more expensive than the old-er typical drugs. Statistics in Albania have revealed that risperidone, an atypical antipsychotic, is among the top ten most expensive drugs (Kola, 2009).Since their approval, there has been an increase of use of atypical antipsychotics as compared to typical antipsy-chotic use (Verdoux et al., 2010). Meanwhile, in Albania there are few reports on antipsychotic use. This study's ob-jective is to characterize the use of antipsychotics in Al-bania.Materials and methodsData from National Compulsory Health Care Insurance Fund were used for the study. The Compulsory Healthcare Insurance Fund (the Fund) is a government entity which provides healthcare to insured Albanian citizens and keeps records on medications purchased at community pharma-cies by insured citizens (pharmacy claims data). Every citi-zen who pays a monthly health care contribute to the Fund can purchase medications at a lower price. The total cost of a drug is partially reimbursed by the Fund (reimbursement cost) and partially paid by the patient (patient cost/price). Nationwide antipsychotic pharmacy claims data collected from the Fund from 2006 to 2012 were used for the study. In the obtained data, antipsychotics were defined by their ATC (Anatomical-Therapeutic-Chemical) code. ATC codes for antipsychotics were used to identify antipsychot-ics in the pharmacy claims data. Quantities of antipsychotics were determined as de-clared in the data, i.e., by their dosage forms, such as cap-sules, tablets, flacons, ampoules, etc. The amount of typ-ical, atypical and total antipsychotics was calculated for each year of data. For a more accurate estimation of utilization of anti-psychotics, the number of defined daily doses (DDDs) was estimated for each antipsychotic medication. The defined daily dose is the average maintenance dose per day for a drug used for its main indication (World Health Organiza-tion, 2003). DDDs were determined using the maintenance daily doses referred to in the British National Formulary. The number of DDDs per 100 000 inhabitants per day was calculated for each antipsychotic every year using the mil-ligrams of antipsychotics utilized. Reimbursement costs in Albanian Lek (ALL) and the mean costs paid by the patient were also estimated. Data were analyzed with Microsoft Excel and SAS statistical software package, version 9.1.Results and discussionTypical antipsychotics covered by the Compulsory Healthcare Insurance Fund during 2006-2012 were Chor-promazine, Fluphenazine, Haloperidol, Levomeproma-zine. Atypical antipsychotics were Clozapine, Olanzapine, S1 PP 1852Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 51 - 52 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsRisperidone. Lithium is considered as a distinct drug cate-gory in the antipsychotics group.All antipsychotics were available in either one of the oral dosage forms such as capsules, tablets, or oral drops solutions. Fluphenazine and chlorpromazine also existed as solutions for injection of immediate release.