On the website of the Food and Veterinary Agency there are clearly set of infor-mation of public interest for implementation of the mar-keting authorization process for the interested parties, but some of them had trouble in their availabilityThis research indicated satisfactory level of the imple-mentation of the law in practice, identified, as follows: the existence of publicly available written information about the procedure of marketing authorization of veterinary me-dicinal products, formally established commission for re-view of applications for registration, the existence of a for-mal system for submitting complaints commission fea-ture. There are some weaknesses in the process of market-ing authorization, such as: an official national essential list for veterinary medicinal products is not amended by 2012, absence of timed deadline for providing official informa-tion on the status of application for approval for marketing, absence of publicly available pharmacovigilance system, and additionally, not always satisfactory level of applica-ble knowledge on the process and issues connected with the process by the veterinary medicinal products wholesal-ers' representatives. ConclusionIn this paper all aspect of the issue of marketing au-thorization of veterinary medicinal products in Macedonia were studied and critically analyzed. On the basis of the collected data, the existing legislation, as well as, admin-istrative procedures of marketing authorization and post-marketing authorization of veterinary medicinal products can be revised and adjusted providing better efficiency and transparency. Furthermore, although the cooperation be-tween the wholesalers and Agency of Food and Veterinary was found to be satisfactory, improvement of communica-tion could be the added value.ReferencesAssembly of the Republic of Macedonia, 2010. Law on Veterinary Medicinal Product. Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia 42/2010.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 177 - 178 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.273.074Short communicationTransfer of analytical procedures for quality control of Cilostazol 100 mg tabletsCveta Dolikjoska Trajkova*, Nikola Pavleski, Ana Giceva - Pepovska, Blagica Samarova Stoev, Silvija Saveska, Maja Stojkovska, Hristina BabunovskaALKALOID AD-Skopje, Pharmaceutical, Chemical and Cosmetics Company, blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* cdolikoska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionThe transfer of analytical procedures (TAP), also re-ferred to as method transfer, is the documented process that qualifies a laboratory (the receiving unit, RU) to use an analytical test procedure for quality control, that is fully validated in another laboratory (the transferring unit, TU) (USP, 2012). Usually, the most common need for this pro-cedure is transferring methods developed and validated in the research and development department to the quality control unit in the same or different site. In the last years, with widening the business strategies of the pharmaceuti-cal companies, necessity for different types of transfer oc-curs. Transfer activities are required between Quality con-trol laboratories of the manufacturers and different batch release laboratories: laboratories of the contactor suppli-ers, contract laboratories and European Union batch re-lease testing sites.The presented paper describes the process of Analyti-cal method transfer for Cilostazol 100 mg tablets in which Alkaloid QC laboratory is involved as receiving laboratory. Materials and methodsAnalytical method transfer protocol is created, re-viewed and approved by both laboratories, prior to exper-imental performing of the methods (Eudralex, 2014). Ac-cording the protocol, assessing the sort of test and the ex-perience of the receiving laboratory, the methods to be transferred have been determined: - The method for Dissolution - UV Spectropho-tometry method;- The method for Assay of cilostazol - gradient HPLC method with UV detection;- The method for Identification of cilostazol - as-sessed in Assay;- The method for Related and degradation sub-stances - gradient HPLC method with UV de-tectionMethods for all the rest specification parameters: ap-pearance, uniformity of mass, subdivision, water content, Uniformity of dosage units by mass variation don`t need to be transferred. Microbial examination method should be verified but it is not part of this protocol. One batch of Cilostazol tablets 100 mg was tested in both laboratories. Results and discussionIn the analytical procedure for dissolution test, follow-ing system suitability acceptance criteria are set: no sig-nificant blank absorbance is noticed, RSD% of 6 replicate measurements of cilostazol standard 1 should be <= 2.0%, cilostazol standard 2 recovery should be between 98.0 - 102.0%. System suitability criteria are met in both labora-tories. The analysis for dissolution was performed on six samples in the TU and on 12 samples in the RU involv-ing different days, instruments and analysts. The results were compared at the specification time limit of 60 min-utes. The obtained results for inter-laboratory repeatability: mean values of 96.33% and 91.81% are within the limits of not less than 85% (Q=80) in 60 minutes. Absolute differ-ence between 6 samples per each laboratory is 1.80% and 3.80% respectively, absolute difference between the labo-ratories is 4.52%. All differences are below 5% which is set S2 PP 80178Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 177 - 178 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsas acceptance criteria (Medsafe, 2007; WHO, 2011). The obtained results for intra-laboratory repeatability (repro-ducibility in RU): absolute difference between each anal-ysis of 6 samples is 3.80% and 1.80% respectively, abso-lute difference between 12 samples is 1.24%. All differenc-es are below 5% which is set as acceptance criteria. The linearity of the method in the concentration range for cilo-stazol from 20 % to 120 % of the theoretical sample solu-tion concentration is proved in the RU. Acceptance crite-ria for Linearity are accomplished: correlation coefficient >= 0.999, Y-intercept confidence interval includes zero, re-sidual plot presents no particular trend, RSD (%) of the re-sponse factor <= 2.0%. In the analytical procedure for assay following system suitability acceptance criteria are set: no blank interference is noticed at the cilostazol elution time, RSD of the areas of cilostazol peak of 5 consecutive injections should be <= 2.0%, symmetry factor (As) of cilostazol peak should be <= 2.0, cilostazol standard 2 recovery should be between 98.0 - 102.0%. System suitability criteria are met in both labo-ratories. The analysis for assay was performed on six sam-ple preparations in the TU and on 12 sample preparations in the RU involving different days, instruments and ana-lysts. The obtained results for inter-laboratory repeatabili-ty: mean values of 100.18% and 99.59% are within the lim-its for cilostazol content of 95.0 - 105.0%. Absolute differ-ence between 6 samples per each laboratory is 1.20% and 0.80% respectively, absolute difference between the labo-ratories is 1.50%. All differences are below 3% which is set as acceptance criteria (Medsafe, 2007; WHO, 2011). The obtained results for intra-laboratory repeatability (re-producibility in RU): absolute difference between each analysis of 6 samples is 0.8% and 0.5% respectively, abso-lute difference between 12 samples is 1.8%. All differenc-es are below 3% which is set as acceptance criteria. Iden-tification is confirmed by obtaining similar retention times for cilostazol in sample and standard solution. The lineari-ty of the method in the concentration range between 80 % of the theoretical sample solution concentration to 120% is proved in the RU. Acceptance criteria for linearity are accomplished: correlation coefficient >= 0.999, Y-intercept confidence interval includes zero, residual plot presents no particular trend, RSD (%) of the response factor <= 2.0%. In the analytical procedure for Related substances fol-lowing system suitability acceptance criteria are set: reso-lution between peaks of impurity B and cilostazol > 1.5, no blank interference is noticed during the cilostazol elu-tion time, RSD of the areas of Cilostazol peak of 5 consec-utive injections <= 2.0%, Standard 2 recovery should be be-tween 95.0 - 105.0%, As of Cilostazol peak should be <= 2.0. System suitability criteria are met in both laboratories. Limit of quantification (QL) is determined and confirmed in the RU. 0.01% cilostazol standard solution gives S:N ra-tio of 14 which is >= 10:1. The obtained RSD at QL level is 7.83% which is lower than the acceptance criteria <= 15.0% (ICH, 2005). The analysis for related substances was per-formed on six sample preparations in the TU and on 12 sample preparations in the RU involving different days, in-struments and analysts. Acceptance criteria for inter and intra laboratory repeatability are set: the % impurity should comply with the release specification Impurity B <= 0.2%, unknown impurities <= 0.2%, total impurities <= 0.5%. Ob-serving chromatographic profiles and results obtained by both laboratories, it can be concluded that they are qualita-tively and quantitatively similar. The linearity of the meth-od in the concentration range between QL and 0.20% is proved in the RU. Acceptance criteria for linearity are ac-complished: correlation coefficient >= 0.999, Y-intercept confidence interval includes zero, residual plot presents no particular trend, %RSD of the response factor <= 10.0%. ConclusionFrom the comparison of the obtained results from both laboratories it can be concluded that all results are meet-ing the predetermined acceptance criteria limits. No devia-tions from the protocol were observed. Analytical method transfer report is generated by the transferring laboratory, reviewed and approved by both laboratories. The success-fulness of the transfer is confirmed. The analytical trans-fer report qualifies Alkaloid QC laboratory to use the Ci-lostazol 100 mg tablets finished product methods of anal-ysis, ensuring that the receiving laboratory has the proce-dure, knowledge and ability to perform it. ReferencesEudraLex, 2013. Volume 4, EU guideline for GMP, Part1, Chapter6: Quality Control. European Commission. Brussels.International Conference on Harmonisation (ICH) of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use, 2005. Guideline on Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and Methodology Q2(R1), ICH harmonized tripartite guideline.Medsafe, 2007. Guidelines and Codes, Guideline for the transfer of analytical test procedures. The United States Pharmacopeial Convention, 2012. United States Pharmacopoeia 35 - National formulary 30, General Chapters, Chapter <1224> Transfer of Analytical Procedures, pp. 876-879.World Health Organisation (WHO), 2011.Technical Report series No961, Annex 7, Guideline on transfer of technology in pharmaceutical manufacturing, pp. 301-305.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 179 - 180 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 343.52:615.2Short communicationCounterfeit medicines - threat to worldwide public health Biljana Petrovska Jakimovska*, Biljana Nanova, Milkica GligorovaPackaging department, Alkaloid AD-Skopje, Blv. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* bjakimovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionPharmaceutical counterfeiting is an expanding threat to worldwide public health. It crosses geographic boundar-ies and impacts patients suffering from a variety of diseas-es. It is a crime that generates large profits for the counter-feiters even as it steals one of medicine's most important ingredients: trust. According to the World Health Organi-zation (WHO), a counterfeit medicine is one that is delib-erately and fraudulently mislabeled with respect to identi-ty and/or source. Counterfeiting can apply to both branded and generic medicines and counterfeits may include prod-ucts that are fraudulently packaged or mislabeled with re-spect to identity and/or source; contain no active ingre-dient, incorrect quantities or an undeclared active ingre-dient; contaminated with other materials; past their expi-ry date; contain no or incorrect patient information leaf-lets (WHO, 2010). The most counterfeit medicines are can-cer medicines, cholesterol lowering medicines, antibiotics, hypertension medicines, hormones, steroids and copies of many commonly used pain killers and antihistamines. In developing countries, counterfeit medicines are drugs for the treatment of life-threatening conditions such as malar-ia, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS.Counterfeit medicines - reason and consequences There are several reasons for counterfeiting. One of the main reasons is profit, because manufacturing of coun-terfeit medicines is very low cost and doesn't meet quali-ty and safety standards. Inadequate legislation, regulations and enforcement results in supply systems vulnerable to counterfeit products and extremely low capacity to uncov-er and punish counterfeiters. The costs of legitimate med-icines, both original and generic, may be too high for pa-tients, and is one of the reasons why patients buy cheaper medicine with dubious quality. The consequences of counterfeit medicines could be divided into three groups: consequences for the public and patients' health, consequences for pharmaceutical compa-ny and consequences for the country. Consequences for the public and patients health are life-threatening effects, does not provide effective treatment, needs prolonged hos-pitalization, cause direct damage or toxic effects. Counter-feit medicines cause direct financial losses for the compa-ny and loss of reputation and trust of patients. The conse-quences for the country include evading payment of taxes and customs duties and higher costs in the health system.Activities of the pharmaceutical industry against counterfeiting of drugs Pharmaceutical industry is one link of the chain that is fully committed in combating counterfeiting medicines and takes actions to protect their products. There are two main forms of product security and those are traceabili-ty and authentication. Traceability means ability to track drugs cheaply, securely, and efficiently across the globe, from manufacturer to patient, thus improving the safety of medicines. Tracking technologies allows pharmaceutical products to be tracked and monitored as they move from the manufacturer to the patient. The synonym for tracking technologies is " Track and Trace", and it incorporates se-rialization and pedigree. This technology implies an abili-ty of the system to know where a product went (track) and where it came from (trace). Serialization is simply a pro-cess of assigning a unique number to a unit of production such that it can be identified later. Pedigree is process of re-cording most or all of the product history.There are various authentication technologies that can be used at different levels of packaging and in different circumstances. Most security-printing deterrents can be grouped into three categories: overt, covert, and forensic. S2 PP 81180Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 179 - 180 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsOvert features are easy to detect by sight, touch or smell. Examples of overt security-printing deterrents include col-or-shifting inks, alignments that are difficult to replicate, microprinting, optically variable microstructures (also known as holograms) and visible watermark. Covert fea-tures can be detected by machines but are not visible to the naked eye. Examples of covert security-printing de-terrents include invisible inks (such as those visible only when exposed to ultraviolet light), magnetic printing, en-crypted codes, hidden overprints, micro-displacement of glyphs and metal fibers. Forensic features require laborato-ry testing in order to be detected. Examples of forensic se-curity printing deterrents include various embedded chem-ical compositions known as chemical taggants that are de-signed to uniquely identify an object (Davison, 2011) Combining track-and-trace with secure printing dra-matically improves protection against counterfeiting and increases efficiencies in product recalls and other supply chain challenges.Global activities in combating counterfeit There are three strategies that are applied globally in order to combat counterfeiting of medicines* Providing tools, international norms, standards and guidelines to assist that medicines circulating in nation-al and international commerce are safe, efficacious and of good quality* Providing support to non EU and EU Member States to build national regulatory capacity * Developing global activities to combat counterfeit medicines, in collaboration with all relevant stakeholdersIn 2006, World Health Organization established Inter-national Medical Products Anti Counterfeiting Taskforce (IMPACT) and the main conceptual approach is a volun-tary coalition of partners, with the purpose of coordinat-ing international activities aimed at combating counter-feit medical products. IMPACT partners reflect the fact that combating counterfeiting of medical products can-not be successfully achieved by the health sector alone but requires a coordinated effort and effective collabora-tion among health sector, enforcement, border control, jus-tice (all at different administrative levels), as well as health professionals, manufacturers, importers, distributors, me-dia, and patients/consumers. IMPACT outputs include rec-ommendations, policy advice and training materials that reflect consensus reached among IMPACT partners (IM-PACT, 2010).ReferencesDavison, M., 2011. Pharmaceutical anti-counterfeiting combating the real danger from fake drugs, first ed. John Wiley & Sons, Inc. IMPACT, 2010. Available at: http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/84/9/06-010906/en/ (accessed 06.04.2016).World Health Organization, 2010. Counterfeit medical products: Report to the secretariat, Document A63/23. WHO, Geneva.