The novel DPR in EU is expected to be directly applicable to all Mem-ber States, to provide comprehensive and consistent lev-el of protection, to be unique regimen for protection and in the same time simple but stronger executive framework in all Member States. When entering into force it is expected to affect national regulations, including the one in Mace-donia. ReferencesDirective 2002/58/EC; http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX: 32002L0058:en:html, accessed on 01.02.2016.Directive 95/46/EC; http://eur-lex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX: 31995L0046:en:html, accessed on 01.02.2016.Health insurance portability and accountability act of 1996; https://www.cms.gov/Regulations-and-Guidance/HIPAA-Administrative Simplification/HIPAAGenInfo/downloads/hipaalaw.pdf, accessed on 25.11.2015.ICH-Harmonized Tripartite Guideline. Guideline for Good Clinical Practice E6 (R1) June 1996. http://www.ich.org/fileadmin/Public_Web_Site/ICH_Products/Guidelines/Efficacy/E6/E6_R1_Guideline.pdf, accessed on 20.02.2016.Law on Protection of Personal Data ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia" No.7/05; 103/08).Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation) http://eur-lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/PDF/?uri=CELEX:52012PC0011&from=EN, accessed on 10.07.2015.WMA, 2008. Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical Principles for Medical research Involving Human Subjects; http://www.wma.net/en/30publications/10policies/b3/17c.pdf, accessed on 24.02.2016.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 585 - 586 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616-036.22:614.253.84]:342.721(497.7)Short communicationProtecting personal data in (pharmaco)epidemiological research: international regulation and macedonian lawMilica Zugic1* and Kristina Mladenovska21Ewopharma AG, Representative Office, Anton Popov str. 1-2/3, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Mother Theresa 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* milicazugic@hotmail.comIntroductionThe goal of the epidemiological research is to explain the natural causes of various diseases and conditions, their prevalence and the burden that they represent for society. Pharmacoepidemiology as a science evaluates the risks and benefits of drug use in large numbers of patients in everyday practice. Although (pharmaco)epidemiological studies are non-interventional there is still a risk of dis-closure of sensitive medical information. The Internation-al Pharmacoepidemiological Society (ISPE) recognizes the need for balance between the protection of personal and medical data of patients and the necessity of relevant sci-entific and medical information to be used to solve medical and other problems related to public health. ISPE recom-mendations are based on existing laws on data protection and ethical guidelines, including inspection and approval by ethics committees. In accordance with these recommen-dations: (a) the studies should be designed in a way to pro-tect the personal and medical information and confidenti-ality of medical records; (b) ISPE and other professional societies should continue to develop codes of conduct and "good practices" for epidemiological research and should encourage the researchers to follow them; (c) all pharma-coepidemiological studies that use personal data should be approved by ethics committees before commencing the study; (d) ethics committees may waive a requirement for written informed consent in cases where the direct harm to individuals is unlikely and individually identifiable data are not published; (e) the use of sophisticated informa-tion technology should be encouraged to ensure, where ap-propriate, that no identifying information remains on re-search datasets; (f) secondary research and statistical anal-ysis of data already collected for other purposes should be approved, provided that the secondary research serves the public health and appropriate measures are implemented to protect personal data; (g) ISPE supports the notion that re-search using completely anonymize databases should not require IRB approval or specific patient authorization for each use of the data; (h) ISPE supports the development of guidelines and techniques for the anonymization of datas-ets; (i) the international transfer of data should be permit-ted under the condition that either a comparable legal lev-el of data protection exists in the recipient country or spe-cial provisions are made by the person responsible for the data to ensure the same level of data protection exists in the country from which the data are transferred; and (j) unau-thorized access to or distribution of personal and medical data should be subject to legal penalties sufficient to act as an obstacle (http://www.pharmacoepi.org/).Data protection in EUIn January 2012, the European Commission present-ed the draft of a new General Data Protection Regula-tion (GDPR) to the European Parliament and the Coun-cil of the EU. The GDPR is planned to replace the Direc-tive 95/46/EC (1995), which constitutes the present Euro-pean legal framework for processing of personal data. The first Articles with specific relevance for scientific research are concerned with general principles (Article 5) and law-fulness (Article 6) of personal data processing. Article 5b lays down that personal data shall be collected for speci-fied, explicit and legitimate purposes and may not be fur-ther processed in a way incompatible with those purpos-es. This corresponds to the same principle in the current Directive 95/46/EC. However, in the Directive 95/46/EC there is an exemption for research i.e. that further process-S6 PP 280586Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 585 - 586 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsing of data for historical, statistical or scientific purposes is not to be considered as incompatible with the original pur-pose as long as Member States provide appropriate safe-guards. This exemption was omitted in DPR, significant-ly reducing the scope for data sharing between research groups and severely restraining the use of retrospective study designs. If taken literally, the omission of the exemp-tion threatens the (pharmaco)epidemiological research. In the final version of the DPR that has been agreed upon on 17th of December 2015 Article 5b has been extended: "fur-ther processing of personal data for archiving purposes in the public interest, or scientific and historical research pur-poses or statistical purposes shall, in accordance with Ar-ticle 83(1), not be considered incompatible with the initial purpose". Introducing this exemption gives a legal basis for the (pharmaco)epidemiological research, especially the retrospective study designs. Data protection in USADepartment of Health and Human Services (HHS) have realized that it is not always possible to get an au-thorization to use protected health information for research purposes, especially in research relating to public health and (pharmaco)epidemiological research.The HIPAA Pri-vacy Rule (2004) acknowledges the possibility of selection bias if an authorization is sought. Due to these reasons, the Department of HHS decided that there are certain circum-stances under which protected health information for re-search purposes can be used without an authorization, but certain criteria must be met and strict safeguards should be established. For the authorization waiver to be granted by the Ethics committee the following criteria should be met: (a) the research cannot be conducted without the waiver; (b) the research cannot be conducted without access to the protected health information; (c) use and disclosure of pro-tected health information has minimal risk of disclosure of the privacy of the subject; (d) there is an appropriate plan to protect data from misuse and disclosure; (e) there is an appropriate plan for the destruction of all identifiers con-tained in the protected health information as soon as pos-sible and in accordance with the research; (f) there is an adequate written assurance that the protected health infor-mation shall not be used or disclosed again to another in-dividual or legal entity, unless required by law, in cases of authorized oversight of the research or for other research which has a license to use and disclose the protected health information.Data protection in the Republic of MacedoniaIn Macedonia, the Law on Protection of Personal Data ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia" No.7/05, 103/08) regulates the protection of personal data as funda-mental rights and freedoms of individuals. Article 5 states: "secondary data processing for historic, scientific or sta-tistical research shall be deemed in compliance with the primary purposes for collecting data, provided that appro-priate safeguards are established which are in accordance with the law". This clearly shows that the use of person-al medical data for purposes of (pharmaco)epidemiolog-ical research is justified and by this law allowed. Article 11 states: ,,Notwithstanding paragraph 1 of this Article, the controller has no obligation to inform the data subject about the processing of personal data for historical, scien-tific or statistical purposes, if it is impossible or requires a disproportionate effort or expense". This allows for the personal data to be used without Informed Consent if ap-propriate safeguard of the personal data is in place. The ob-jectives of the (pharmaco)epidemiological research are by all means scientific and the methods of data processing are mostly statistical and the research itself serves the public health which deems (pharmaco)epidemiological research in compliance with this Law.ConclusionNon-interventional studies represent a significant por-tion of the combined (pharmaco)epidemiological litera-ture and are of great public health significance. Restric-tive interpretation of regulation could have devastating consequences for large (pharmaco)epidemiological stud-ies where obtaining Informed Consent is not possible, or where non-participation in the study is a threat to impar-tiality and accuracy of the results.ReferencesDirective 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data; http://eurlex.europa.eu/LexUriServ/LexUriServ.do?uri=CELEX:31995L0046:en:html, accessed on 01.07.2015.International Society for Pharmacoepidemilogy ISPE. http://www.pharmacoepi.org/, accessed on 25.11.2015.Law on Protection of Personal Data ("Official Gazette of the Republic of Macedonia" No.7/05, 103/08).Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on the protection of individuals with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (General Data Protection Regulation); http://statewatch.org/news/2015/dec/eu-council-dp-reg-draft-final-compromise-15039-15.pdf, accessed on 18.03.2016.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services National Institutes of Health. Clinical Research and the HIPAA Privacy Rule. February 2004; https://privacyruleandresearch.nih.gov/clin_research.asp, accessed on 20.07.2015.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 587 - 588 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.33-02:615.276.036.8]:599.323.4Short communicationOxidative stress index in rat stomach as a measure of gastric tolerability of newly synthetized anti-inflammatory compoundsJelena Savic1*, Marina Milenkovic2, Jelena Kotur-Stevuljevic3, Zorica Vujic1, Sote Vladimirov1 and Jasmina Brboric11Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Belgrade-Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia2Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Belgrade-Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia3Department of Medical Biochemistry, University of Belgrade-Faculty of Pharmacy, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221, Belgrade, Serbia* jelena.savic@pharmacy.bg.ac.rsIntroductionCyclooxygenase (COX) is an enzyme responsible for the initial step of arachidonic acid metabolism and pros-taglandin production. There are two isoforms of COX: COX-1 which is considered to be physiological and con-stitutively expressed in many tissues and COX-2 which is considered to be inducible and pathological due to the fact that this isoform catalyzes production of prostaglandins which are mediators of pain and inflammation (Kiefer and Dannhardt, 2004; Goodsell, 2000). While the inhibition of COX-2 isoform is beneficial, the inhibition of COX-1 is considered to be associated with many side effects, but especially with gastric side effects. Conventional Nonste-roidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs (NSAIDs), like ibuprofen are non-selective and they inhibit both COX isoforms, thus producing gastric side effects which may vary from mild, like gastrointestinal irritation to very serious, like ulcer-ation and bleeding (Radi and Khan, 2006). Ibuprofen is of-ten an inspirational drug for developing novel compounds with anti-inflammatory activity, and often is used as a ref-erence drug for comparison of anti-inflammatory activity.We have previously reported that simple derivatives of b-aryl-b-hydroxyalkanoic acids exhibit good anti-in-flammatory activity and good gastric tolerability (Savic et al., 2011). These compounds are interesting because their structure deviate from the usual structure of selec-tive COX-2 inhibitor: their structure is simple, they con-tain carboxylic acid moiety and they lack sulphonamide or sulphone group. It is expected that these agents have com-parable efficiency to ibuprofen, but a better safety profile.Gastric tolerability can be assessed by method of Ad-ami et al. (1963). Macroscopic observations can be sup-ported by biochemical parameters which are oxidative stress markers: malondialdehyde (MDA) and glutathione (GSH).It has been reported in literature that compounds show-ing less ulcerogenic activity also showed reduced MDA content, a byproduct of lipid peroxidation (Pohle et al., 2001). Therefore, MDA levels were determined in stom-ach tissues of animals which were treated with the highest dose of investigated compounds and obtained results were compared with result for ibuprofen. GSH is a tripeptide, a superoxide radical scavenger and it protects thiol protein groups required for maintaining the integrity of cell against oxidation. GSH is present in the stomach at high concen-trations and plays an important role in maintaining the in-tegrity of gastric mucosa (Hirota et al., 1989), so it is im-portant to determine levels of this parameter in rat stom-ach. Quotient of GSH and MDA (in arbitrary units, AU) is referred as oxidative stress index (OSI) and can efficiently point out the compound exhibiting the best gastric tolera-bility (Petrovic et al., 2014). It is very convenient to intro-duce this index in order to precisely understand the results regarding compounds influence at oxidative stress mech-anisms. S6 PP 281588Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 587 - 588 (2016)Clinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesPoster presentationsMaterials and methodsIn order to assess the anti-inflammatory activity carra-geenan-induced rat paw edema test was performed on adult male Wistar rats. After the animals were sacrificed, their stomach was removed, opened along the greater curvature and washed out with saline. Lesions were examined using illuminated magnifier (3X) in order to assess gastric dam-age according to a modified scoring system of Adami et al (1963). These stomachs were immediately frozen and stored at -80degC until determination of total protein con-tent, MDA and GSH. To prepare the tissue homogenates, unfrozen stomach tissues were roughly chopped with liq-uid nitrogen using a pestle and mortar. The fragmented tis-sues (0.5 g each) were mixed with 4.5 ml of homogeni-zation tris-buffer (10 mM, pH 7.4), homogenized on ice using an Ultra-Turrax homogenizer, filtered and centri-fuged at 1000 g at 4 degC for 20 min. The supernatants were then used to determine the enzymatic activities (Mei et al., 2012). Both MDA and GSH are determined according to methods used by Uskokovic-Markovic et al. (2007).Results and discussionSeven acids [3-hydroxy-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-3-phenyl-propanoic acid (1); 3-(4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-3-hy-droxy-3-phenylpropanoic acid (2); 3-(4-chlorophenyl)-3-hydroxy-3-phenylpropanoic acid (3); 3-hydroxy-3-(4-methylphenyl)-3-phenylpropanoic acid (4); 3-(3-(trifluo-romethyl)phenyl)-3-hydroxy-3-phenyl-propanoic acid (5); 3-(3-chlorophenyl)-3-hydroxy-3-phenylpropanoic acid (6); 3-(3-methylphenyl)-3-hydroxy-3-phenylpropanoic acid (7)] were synthesized using already reported modification of Reformatsky reaction additionally optimized by increas-ing temperature of reaction to 65-69degC (Savic et al., 2011).