Pharm. J. 273, 351-353. Cork, M.J., 2007. The importance of complete emollient therapy. Medicine Matters in Primary Care 142, 1-8. Cork, M.J., Carr, J., Young, S., Holden, C., 2003. Using emollients for eczema. Br. J. Dermatol. Nurs. 7, 6-7. Ersser, S., Maguire, S., Nicol, N., 2007. A best practice statement for emollient therapy. Dermatol. Nurs. 6, 4-19. Loden, M., 2003. The skin barrier and use of moisturizers in atopic dermatitis. Clin. Dermatol. 21, 145-157.NICE quick reference guide, 2007. Atopic eczema in children - Management of atopic eczema in children from birth up to the age of 12 years. Clinical guideline 57, 1-20. Rawlings, A.V., Canestrari, D.A., Dobkowski, B., 2004. Moisturizer technology versus clinical performance. Dermatol. Ther. 17, 49-56. Sidbury, R., Poorsattar, S., 2006. Pediatric atopic dermatitis: should we treat it differently? Dermatol. Ther. 19, 83-90. Simpson, E.L., 2006. Atopic dermatitis prevention. Dermatol. Ther. 19, 108-117. Watkins, P., 2008. Using emollients to restore and maintain skin integrity. Nurs. Stand. 22, 51-57.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 351 - 352 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.5-003.829-085.26Short communicationImplementation of mexametry in periorbital hyperpigmentations studiesDragomirescu Anca Octavia*, Simu Georgeta-Maria, Dehelean Cristina"Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., RO-300041, Timisoara, Romania* ancadrag65@yahoo.comIntroductionUsually known as Periorbital Hyperpigmentation (POH), this deficiency seems to have in literature many other denominations, such as: Idiopatic Cutaneous Hyper-chromia in the Orbital Region, Infraorbital dark circles, Cutaneous idiopatic hypercromia of the orbital region or Periorbital melanosis. The lack of a unique denomination should not be a serious problem, but behind these incon-sistencies are usually some different approaches concern-ing the ethiopathogeny, as well as the targeted pathogenic treatment by default. The literature data originating from European authors, as well as some articles of North Americans ones include the periorbital hypercolorations into the chronologic ag-ing process, with implications resulted from vascular and sanguine deficiencies. In other words, it is considered that this deficiency is not necessarily originating from a genet-ic anomaly. This point of view is due to the fact that most of the subjects from this geographic area are of pale or fair skin phototype (I, II or II phototypes). According to Suppa et al. (2011) the determinants of periorbital pigmentations and of the skin ageing processes are: UV exposure, smok-ing, vascular problems. Lupo et al. (2011) consider the in-trinsic aging role in the periorbital hyperpigmentations pa-thogeny and suggest a new topical treatment based on hu-man growth factors, cytokines, caffeine and glycyrrhetin-ic acid.On the other hand, literature data attributed to Asian or South American authors indicate that the primary cause of periorbital hypercolorations pathogeny should be rath-er melanic, constitutional, and they refer to as subocular melanosis. This is probably due to the dark skin phototype (IV, V and VI phototypes), specific in these geographic ar-eas. Some authors point-out the post-inflammatory pig-mentations' role onto color intensification of this pathoge-ny, while in other situations it is exclusively assigned to the melanic cause of this process (Kanika and Kassir, 2013). In the same time, in the case of subjects with dark skin pho-totype, it was stipulated that the main causes of periorbit-al hyperpigmentation could be melanic, without excluding the aging specific endogeneous processes as aggravating factors. Corroborating these different approaches, one could consider that the main determinants of periorbital hyper-pigmentations, for any skin phototype could be: the genet-ic melanic pigmentation, the post-inflammatory hyperpig-mentation, a tegument periorbital atrophy due to chrono-aging, the venous congestion, hemoglobin and oxygenated hemoglobin accumulations, hemosiderine deposit, as well as some other anatomic causes. Materials and methodsThe chemicals used in this study were of high puri-ty grade. Acetyl tetrapeptide-5 (trade name EYESERYL(r)) was obtained as a gift from Lipotec S.A. (Isaac Peral, 17 Pol. Ind. Cami Ral; E-08850 Gava Barcelona, SPAIN) as 0.1% aqueous solution. An o/w microemulsion was used as vehicle for the transport of acetyl tetrapeptide-5 through the skin. The main ingredients of the microemulsion were: deionised water, glycerol, liquid paraffin, vaseline, jellify-ing and lubricant mineral agents, emulsifying agent (Mon-tanov L), preservative agents, and acetyl tetrapeptide-5. The rheological properties of the microemulsion were as-sessed using the Rheometer RC1 (Rheotec), and two type of probes: CC8 and C25-1. The study was carried-on on 2 test groups of healthy women volunteers aged of 22 to 64 years. The first group applied on both (right and left) eyes hemispheres the o/w S4 OP 165352Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 351 - 352 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsemulsion containing 0.1% peptidic complex, twice dai-ly, during 60 days. The second group (control) applied the cosmetic emulsion containing 0.1% acetyl tetrapeptide-5 only on the right eye suborbital area, while the left eye was treated with the simple cosmetic formulation. The effects of the cosmetic emulsion were evaluated every 15 days, both by clinical and instrumental methods. The instrumen-tal evaluation was performed by Mexametry, using the MX 18 Mexameter (Courage-Khazaka), which is able to mea-sure two components, mainly responsible for the color of the skin: melanin and haemoglobin (erythema). The aim of the present work was to study in vivo the efficiency of the acetyl tetrapeptide-5 in the treatment of periorbital hyperpigmentations and eye puffiness, using mexametry as one of the most recent non-invasive meth-od of evaluation of the coloration's intensity of the sub-or-bital area.Results and discussionIn our study, the melanin parameter was excluded due to the fact that acetyl tetrapeptide-5 is not considered as a melanic depigmentant, lacking any tyrosine inhibitor in this composition. Considering that periorbital hyperpig-mentations are dependent by individual metabolism, the relevant parameter used as a measure of suborbital color-ation was the erythem one.In the case of the control group, a significant reduction of the erythem values was obtained for the right eye, while for the left eye, the reduction of the erythem corresponding values was quite slight, or (in some cases) none, even at the end of the eight weeks of treatment. In the case of the study group which applied the o/w cosmetic emulsion containg the peptidic complex on both eyes hemispheres, significant reduction of the erythem values was recorded, in some cas-es even after 15 days of treatment. For this group, 25% of the volunteers showed a slight reduction, 30% a fairly good reduction, and 40% a good one.ConclusionIn conclusion, mexametry was successfully used as in-strumental non-invasive method for the investigation of periorbital hyperpigmentations as consequence of a spe-cific cosmeceutic treatment. The obtained results showed that the cosmetic formulation containing different amounts of acetyl tetrapeptide-5 was well tolerated at the tegument level and visible results were obtained, even after only 15 days of treatment. Moreover, 95 % of the volunteers showed a significant reduction of the periorbital hyperpig-mentations and eye puffiness after the treatment with the cosmetic preparation containing acetyl tetrapeptide-5. ReferencesKanika, S., Kassir, M., 2013. Dermafrac(tm): An innovative new treatment for periorbital melanosis in a dark-skinned male patient. J. Cutan. Aesthet. Surg. 6(3), 158-160.Lupo, M.L., Cohen, J.L., Rendon, M.I., 2007. Novel eye cream containing a mixture of human growth factors and cytokines for periorbital skin rejuvenation. J. D. D. 6(7), 725-729.Suppa, M., Elliott, F., Mikeljevic, J.S., Chan, M., Leake, S., Haynes, S., Bakker, E., Peris, K., Barrett, J.H., Bishop, D.T., 2011. The determinants of periorbital skin ageing in participants of a melanoma case-control study in the U.K. Br. J. Dermatol. 165(5), 1011-1021.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 353 - 354 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.26:577.115Short communicationA novel natural mixed emulsifier of alkyl polyglucoside type as liposome and skin-friendly cosmetic ingredientMila Filipovic1*, Milica Lukic2, Sanela Dordevic2, Gordana Vuleta2, Snezana Savic21Higher Education School of Professional Health Studies, Cara Dusana 254, 11080 Belgrade, Serbia; 2University of Belgrade-Faculty of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Technology and Cosmetology, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11221 Belgrade, Serbia* millatrbovic@hotmail.comIntroductionLiposomes are phospholipid-based vesicular carri-ers that still attract great attention of formulators. Howev-er, the selection of an appropriate carrier for liposomes re-mains one of the most important issues. Although, gels are still considered as the most suitable bases for liposomes (Kulkarni, 2005), they are usually not appropriate, neither for the long-term care nor for all skin types. Therefore, emulsion systems are believed to be more convenient car-riers. On the other hand, formulation of an emulsion with liposomes entails another problem: selection of suitable emulsifier(s) necessary for system stabilization, consider-ing the fact that emulsifier may interfere with the mechan-ical stability of vesicles and may enhance propensity for fusion or lead to their solubilization (Kulkarni, 2005). An interesting and highly promising group of novel emulsifi-ers which could be used for development of emulsion car-riers for liposomes are alkyl polyglucosides (APGs). Due to their favorable toxicological and dermatological proper-ties they are considered as environment- and skin-friendly (Lukic et al., 2013). Therefore, our aim was to investigated whether a nov-el APG emulsifier, hydroxystearyl alcohol & hydroxystea-ryl glucoside, could be considered as an appropriate stabi-lizer for emulsions containing liposomes. To accomplish this, a model emulsion carrier with liposomes was formu-lated and characterized first. Additionally, the in vivo irri-tation potential of the developed formulation was assessed, as a certain aspect of safety of the used emulsifier.Materials and methodsHydroxystearyl alcohol & hydroxystearyl glucoside was used for samples' preparation with ARSC-liposomes-stem cells of alpine rose leaves in liposomes as an active.Two oil-in-water (o/w) creams (placebo Fp and active cream F1a containing 0.4% (w/w) of ARSC-liposomes) were developed and characterized by means of: polariza-tion microscopy, rheology, differential scanning calorime-try and thermogravimetric analysis as described (Lukic et al., 2013). Afterwards, an in vivo study with investigated creams and commercially available cream containing the same active was conducted. Skin hydration (EC), transepi-dermal water loss (TEWL), and erythema index (EI) were measured in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki and relevant guidelines on 16 healthy volunteers.Results and discussionMicrographs taken after 7 days revealed randomly dis-tributed distorted Maltese crosses and birefringence at the oil droplets border ("onion rings") within both samples (Fp and F1a), indicating lyotropic interaction of lamellar type (Lukic et al., 2013) and remained relatively unaltered after 30 days. However, obtained micrographs showed the no-ticeable difference in the colloidal structure between the placebo Fp and the active cream F1a. Considering that li-posomes are also visible under polarization microscopy, it seems that liposome-similar structures could be observed near the lamellar phase gel network i.e. close to the "on-ion rings" in the continual aqueous phase. Intact vesicles were apparently immobilized within the network of lamel-lar phase of the system and as such are mechanically stabi-lized, hence their interaction and fusion are limited.S4 OP 166354Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 353 - 354 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsContinual rheology has shown that both samples ex-hibited "shear-thinning" (pseudoplastic) flow behavior with pronounced thixotropy. The obtained flow curves and calculated hysteresis area values showed that the addition of the 0.4% (w/w) of ARSC-liposomes has led to a slight increase in viscosity and thickening of the placebo cream, but rheological behavior of both creams stayed rather sim-ilar. Oscillation frequency sweep test has shown preva-lence of the elastic over the viscous component as the one of the general characteristics of lamellar phase (Lukic et al., 2013) for both samples. Active sample (F1a) had high-er elastic-storage modulus (G') and viscous-loss modulus (G'') compared to the placebo (Fp) which is in accordance with the result of continual rheological measurements. In-crements in all the assessed rheological parameters upon the addition of ARSC-liposomes, could be due to lamellar phase promotion by the cosmetic active and the change in orientation of the lamellae under shear stress or due to the presence of intact liposomes themselves.Thermal behavior of the investigated samples (Fp, F1a) was similar in terms of the shape of the obtained pro-files with one marked peak. The addition of the liposome-encapsulated active (sample F1a) induces a subtle shift of the curve towards higher peak temperature values. Al-though such results may imply the promotion of the lamel-lar phase (Lukic et al., 2013), considering the polarization micrographs and the rheology results, it is more likely that the detected thermal behavior is due to ARSC-liposomes themselves.Regarding TGA results, upon the addition of the ac-tive, amounts of the lost water decreased in the first tem-perature range (25-50 degC, corresponds to the free water in the system) and increased in the third temperature range (70-110 degC, corresponds to interlamellar water) (Lukic et al., 2013). After the addition of ARSC-liposomes there was no change in the percentage of lost water in the sec-ond temperature range (50-70 degC, corresponds to the wa-ter bonded within the lipophilic gel phase). Based on all results, we assume that vesicles packed near the lamellar crystalline phase around the oil droplets and their inherent water-binding capacity jointly led to the observed transport of the water within the system. In order to assess the in vivo irritation potential of samples (Fp, F1a and Fc) and the investigated emulsifier, EI was monitored. Additionally, the potential skin barrier impairment was assessed via TEWL and EC. After the 24-hour occlusion, EI was not significantly changed compared to the baseline values for any tested cream. TEWL was sig-nificantly decreased for the creams Fp and F1a compared to the baseline. Considering that TEWL was not significantly changed for the commercial cream Fc (the same active, but different carrier), it could be speculated that these results can be attributed to the carrier itself (system with the liquid crystalline structure) and the used emulsifier. Assumption is in accordance with the reported results concerning skin mildness of this type of emulsifiers (Lukic et al., 2013). Regarding EC, it was significantly increased compared to the baseline values in all the treated sites, apart from the placebo sample Fp where merely a trend of increase was observed. Since there was no significant change in the EC for the untreated control under occlusion, the obtained re-sults cannot be attributed to the occlusion.