Previous studies examin-ing pharmacy students' interventions in a variety of prac-tice settings have documented their clinical and econom-ic benefits; however, there are differences regarding study scope, design, and level of detail (Divall et al., 2010; Mers-felder and Bouthillier, 2012; Shepler, 2014; Shogbon and Lundquist, 2014; Woolley et al., 2013). Although studies quantify and categorize student interventions, few provide specific details or discuss trends and the impact of clinical pharmacy preceptors on pharmacy students' clinical con-tributions (Divall et al., 2010; Mersfelder and Bouthilli-er, 2012; Woolley et al., 2013).Clinical preceptor - impact on pharmacy student interventionsThis presentation focuses on the daily practice of a clinical pharmacy preceptor and academician in a large teaching institution in educating future pharmacists to pro-vide clinical pharmacy services, specifically through iden-tifying and communicating pharmacotherapeutic interven-tions and consults and documenting their outcomes. It includes the results of a recent study assessing the quantity, characteristics, and acceptance rate of 1172 inter-ventions performed by 30 pharmacy students at an inpa-tient institution under the guidance of this preceptor (Tal-bot et al., 2015).S6 OP 247* dorothea.rudolf@mephs.edu520Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 519 - 520 (2016)Oral presentationsClinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular SciencesStudy methodsDuring their mandatory 6-week inpatient advanced practice experiential rotations, pharmacy students accom-panied medical teams on daily rounds, seeing patients on one of three general medicine floors. Under the direct su-pervision of the same preceptor, the students suggested drug therapy-related interventions, modifications of phar-macotherapy to enhance patient care and safety. Students documented their interventions in a detailed log, including date, brief summary of the clinical situation, description of suggested intervention with evidence-based justification, and medical team's acceptance or rejection. Each inter-vention was reviewed for appropriateness by the preceptor. Intervention data was categorized by acceptance/rejection, stratified into specific intervention types, and qualified by therapeutic classes and specific medications involved. De-scriptive statistics were used in the analysis. Study resultsThe mean number of interventions/student/rotation was 39 (range: 8-83). Overall, the medical team accept-ed 84% of suggested interventions; 4% were partially ac-cepted. Most common intervention types were: adjusting dose/frequency/duration to match indication (17%), initi-ating indicated medication (12%), renally adjusting dose/frequency/duration (10%), changing administration sched-ules to prevent interactions (6%), and discontinuing non-indicated medications (6%). Therapeutic classes most fre-quently involved were: antibiotics (24%), gastrointestinal agents (22%), cardiovascular drugs (13%), supplements (10%), and CNS medications (9%). Overall, 214 unique medications were associated with interventions, most com-monly omeprazole (12%), vancomycin (7%), warfarin (3%), ciprofloxacin (3%), and cefepime (2.3%). Students' weekly intervention rate increased as rotations progressed. Study conclusionIt was concluded that the high number of clinical inter-ventions cataloged by this study emphasizes the significant impact that Pharmacy students can have on educating pro-viders and enhancing patient care. The increasing weekly intervention suggestion rate is likely related to students de-veloping familiarity with the medical team, gaining aware-ness of therapeutic problems, and building confidence in initiating and substantiating interventions. The high accep-tance rate may be indicative of the medical teams' past pos-itive experiences with the students' valuable clinical phar-macy contributions. The quality of these beneficial inter-ventions was likely augmented by consistent preceptorship. ReferencesACCP (American College of Clinical Pharmacy), 2008. The definition of clinical pharmacy. Available on http://www.accp.com/docs/positions/commentaries/Clinpharmdefnfinal.pdf (accessed on 17.03.2016).Alderman, C.P., Farmer, C., 2001. A brief analysis of clinical pharmacy interventions undertaken in an Australian teaching hospital. J. Qual. Clin. Pract. 21(4), 99-103.Anderson, S.V., Schumock, G.T., 2009. Evaluation and justification of clinical pharmacy services. Expert Rev. Pharmacoeconomics Outcomes Res. 9(6), 539-545.Davis, L.C., Covey, R.B., Weston, J.S., Hu, B.B., Laine, G.A., 2016. Pharmacist-driven antimicrobial optimization in the emergency department. Am. J. Health-Syst. Pharm.73(1), S 49-56.De Rijdt, T., Willems, L., Simoens, S., 2008. Economic effects of clinical pharmacy interventions. Am. J. Health-Syst. Pharm. 65, 1161-1172.Divall, M.V., Zikaras, B., Copeland, D., Gonyeau, M., 2010. School-wide clinical intervention system to document pharmacy students' impact on patient care. Am. J. Pharm. Educ. 74(1), 14.Gallagher, J., McCarthy, S., Byrne, S., 2014. Economic evaluations of clinical pharmacist interventions on hospital inpatients: a systematic review of recent literature. Int. J. Clin. Pharm. 36, 1101-1114.Kjeldsen, L.J., Birkholm, T., Fischer, H., Graabaek, T., Kibsdal, K.P., Ravn-Nielsen, L.V., Truelshoj, T.H., 2014. Characterization of drug-related problems identified by clinical pharmacy staff at Danish hospitals. Int. J. Clin. Pharm. 36, 734-741.Lada, P., Delgado, G. Jr., 2007. Documentation of pharmacists' interventions in an emergency department and associated cost avoidance. Am. J. Health Syst. Pharm. 64(1), 63-68.Mersfelder, T.L, Bouthillier, M.J, 2012. Value of the student pharmacist to experiential practice sites: a review of the literature. Ann. Pharmacother. 46(4), 541-548.Rathbun, R.C., Hester, E.K., Arnold, L.M., Chung, A.M., Dunn, S.P., Harinstein, L.M., Leber, M., Murphy, J.A., Schonder, K.S., Wilhelm, S.M., Smilie, K.B., 2012. Importance of direct patient care in advanced pharmacy practice experiences. Pharmacotherapy 32(4), 88-97.Rotta, I., Salgado, T.M., Silva, M.L., Correr, C.J., Fernandez-Llimos, F., 2015. Effectiveness of clinical pharmacy services: an overview of systematic reviews (2000-2010). Int. J. Clin. Pharm. 37, 687-697. Shogbon, A.O., Lundquist, L.M., 2014. Student pharmacists' clinical interventions in advanced pharmacy practice experiences at a community nonteaching hospital. Am. J. Pharm. Educ. 78(3), 50.Shepler, B.M, 2014. Cost savings associated with pharmacy student interventions during APPEs. Am. J. Pharm. Educ. 78(4), 71. Talbot, C., Stachulski, N., Seoane-Vazquez, E., Rudorf, D., 2015. Therapeutic Interventions: A comprehensive analysis of pharmacy student contributions at an inpatient teaching facility. ASHP Midyear Clinical Meeting, New Orleans, LA, USA.Touchette, D.R., Doloresco, F., Suda, K.J., Perez, A., Turner, S., Jalundhwala, Y., Tangonan, M.C., Hoffman, J.M., 2014. Economic evaluations of clinical pharmacy services: 2006-2010. Pharmacotherapy 34(8), 771-793. Westerlund, T., Marklund, B., 2009. Assessment of the clinical and economic outcomes of pharmacy interventions in drug-related problems. J. Clin. Pharm. Therap. 34, 319-327.Woolley, A.B., Berds C.A., Edwards, R.A., 2013. Potential cost avoidance of pharmacy students' patient care activities during advanced pharmacy practice experiences. Am. J. Pharm. Educ. 77(8), 164.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 521 - 522 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615(497.4)Short communicationStatus of clinical pharmacy in Slovenia Ales Mrhar Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Askerceva 7, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia* ales.mrhar@ffa.uni-lj.siIntroduction and objectiveClinical pharmacy in Slovenia includes all services performed by pharmacists practising in clinics and hospi-tals, community pharmacies, community health centres, nursing homes and other settings where medicines are pre-scribed and used. Its main mission is to move the focus of attention from the drug to the single patient or population receiving drugs.Clinical pharmacists in Slovenia are following the overall goal of clinical pharmacy activities, i.e., to promote the correct and appropriate use of medicinal products and devices. These activities aim to:* maximize the clinical effect of medicines, i.e., us-ing the most effective treatment for each individual patient,* minimize the risk of treatment-induced adverse events, i.e., monitoring the therapy course and the patient's compliance with therapy, and* minimize the expenditures for drug treatments, i.e., trying to provide the best treatment alternative accompa-nied by the cost-effective use of drugs for the greatest num-ber of patients.The aim of this contribution is to present recent achievements and perspectives of clinical pharmacy in Slovenia in terms of professional, educational and research activities.MethodsClinical pharmacists in Slovenia have carried into ef-fect all well established methodological approches to im-plement clinical pharmacy activities at primary, secondary and tertiary level of the healthcare system. The term "clini-cal" describes the type of activities which are related to the health of the patient(s) in general and as such does not nec-essarily imply an activity implemented only in a hospital setting but also in the community care. ResultsProfessional activities at primary levelThere are two types of services that are devoloping currently in community care: first, offering medication re-view in community pharmacies and second, establishing the practice of pharmacist-consultant on ambulatory (out-patient) basis in community health centres and in nurs-ing homes. Medication review, performed in community pharmacies, evaluates patient's medicines with the aim of managing the risk and optimizing the outcome of medi-cine therapy by detecting, solving and preventing drug-re-lated problems. It helps patients use their medicine more effectively by improving knowledge, concordance and use of medicines. It is offered as Medication use review which includes medication history and patient information, and Advanced medication review which is based on med-ication history, patient information and clinical informa-tion. Clinical information is obtained from patient's medi-cal records and direct contact between dispensing pharma-cist and attending physician. Medication use review is per-formed by pharmacist with competences, while Advanced medication review should be carried out only by specialist clinical or community pharmacist with appropriate com-petences. The practice of pharmacist-consultant, performed on ambulatory (outpatient) basis has been introduced at the end of 2012 as a project run by Health Insurance Institute of Slovenia. The main purpose of the project is to bring to-gether general practitioners and pharmacists to work close-ly in order to ensure proper use of drugs in clinical prac-tice. Multistep procedure is started by general practitio-ner who identifies either patients with potential drug ad-verse reactions or patients with potential drug-drug inter-S6 OP 248522Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 521 - 522 (2016)Oral presentationsClinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular Sciencesactions in the case of polypharmacotherapy. These patients and their medical records are referred to the pharmacist who works on the basis of Advanced medication review. The pharmacist's report is sent back to the general practi-tioner who optimizes the pharmacotherapy in accordance with the patients. The acceptance rate of pharmacist's pro-posals is approximately 70%. As the 3 year project clearly showed significant decline of drug-related problems, Min-istry of Health of Slovenia has decided in 2016 to intro-duce the practice of pharmacist-consultant in the regular health program financed by the Health Insurance Institute of Slovenia.Professional activities at secondary and tertiary levelA full scale model of clinical pharmacy activities in Slovenian hospitals has been introduced in 2007. They are performed in the wards at the patients' bedside and in the hospital management system. Clinical pharmacists partic-ipate in medical rounds, perform Advanced medication re-views, implement medication reconciliation process, per-form therapeutic drug monitoring activities and prepare drug formularies. Additionally, they participate in hospital committees for drugs, antibiotics and hospital infections, take an active role in creating pharmacotherapeutic guide-lines and start setting up clinical pharmacy departments.Three cases of good clinical pharmacy practice in Slo-venian hospitals are presented. Clinical pharmacists in General hospital Murska Sobota participate at healthcare meetings and ward rounds, they run medication reconcil-iation at hospital admissions and discharges and perform Advanced medication reviews in appointed patients. Clin-ical pharmacists at the University clinic Golnic are inte-grated in the treatment of patients at higher risks for ad-verse drug reactions (those with decreased renal function, prescribed with strong inhibitors or inducers of drug en-zymes and drug transporters, prescribed with strong opi-oids, prescribed with drugs where TDM is performed and prescribed medicines with a feeding tube), oncology pa-tients, patients with tuberculosis and patients with hered-itary angioedema. Additionally, clinical pharmacists suc-cessfully implemented on a full scale a medication recon-ciliation model for all oncological patients admitted to the clinic and introduced TDM service for theopylline (Ru-gelj et al., 2015). Moreover, recently, a randomized, dou-ble-blind, controlled trial on clinical pharmacist's inter-vention reducing clinically relevant drug-drug interactions in patients with heart failure, was completed at the Uni-versity clinic Golnik and published (Roblek et al., 2016). And finnaly, clinical pharmacists at the University Medi-cal Centre Maribor successfully introduced on a full scale TDM for vankomycin, gentamicin, methyldigoxin and val-proic acid. All patients receiving above-mentioned narrow therapeutic index drugs are entitled to TDM service.Education activitiesSlovene Chamber of Pharmacies runs specialistic courses on clinical pharmacy and community pharmacy. Currently, in Slovenia there are 60 specialists all together, by 2020 additional 90 specialists with competences will be available to perform clinical pharmacy activities in Slove-nian healthcare system.Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana runs PhD course on clinical pharmacy. By 2020 we expect 20 graduates able to design and conduct research activities in the area of clinical pharmacy.Additionally, clinical pharmacists collaborate in under and postgraduate pharmacy courses and courses for physi-cians and nurses,and finnally, clinical pharmacists organize pharmacokinetic courses in the hospital wards for physi-cians and nurses.Research activitiesClinical pharmacists perform clinical studies and run outcomes research in terms of examine closely clinical, hu-manistic and economic outcomes, and publish original and review research articles in peer-reviewed journals.ConclusionClinical pharmacy is implemented successfuly in ma-jority of Slovenian clinics, hospitals, pharmacies and com-munity health centres, it is incorporated in international co-operation on many levels, and finnally, it is on a good way to grow up as an essential part of the Slovenian healthcare system. It is our aim to create a strong team of academ-ic and professional clinical pharmacists with specializa-tions and doctorates in clinical pharmacy, able to run qual-ificative routine clinical practice and advanced clinical re-search, both in favour of the patients. ReferencesRugelj, N., Trobec, K., Pislar, M., Mesko Brguljan, P., Kosnik, M., Mrhar, A., 2015. Evaluation of theophylline therapeutic drug monitoring service. Slov. Med. J. 84, 191-202.Roblek, T., Deticek, A., Leskovar, B., Suskovic, S., Horvat, M., Belic, A., Mrhar, A., Lainscak, M., 2016. Clinical-pharmacist intervention reduces clinically relevant drug-drug interactions in patients with heart failure : a randomized, double-blind, controlled trial. Int. J. Cardiol. 186, 647-652.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 523 - 524 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.213.015Short communicationPopulation pharmacokinetic modeling of therapeutic drug monitoring data from patients with epilepsyDaniela Milosheska*, Tomaz Vovk, Iztok GrabnarFaculty of Pharmacy, University of Ljubljana, Askerceva 7, 1000 Ljubljana Slovenia* daniela.milosheska@gmail.comIntroductionTherapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) is a clinical spe-cialty that aims at improving patient care by dose individ-ualization of drugs for which clinical experience or clini-cal trials have shown an improved outcome in the gener-al or special populations. TDM can be especially beneficial for dose adjustments for drugs with dose-dependent phar-macokinetics, as an aid in the diagnosis of clinical toxicity, for evaluation of drug-drug interactions and drug compli-ance (Milosheska et al., 2015). Clinical pharmacokinetics in practice is applied to TDM for drugs that are characterized by a narrow thera-peutic range and a large variability in pharmacokinetics. Moreover, population modeling is a powerful tool to quan-titatively evaluate the influence of various clinical, bio-chemical, demographic factors and other sources of vari-ability on the dose-concentration relationship. TDM in clinical practice is initiated for a number of antiepileptic drugs (AEDs) particularly due to the episodic nature of the condition and difficulties to assess the clinical efficacy of AEDs.