1(3), 3-26.European Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2014. European Pharmacopoeia 8th edition. Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare of the Council of Europe (EDQM). Strasbourg, France.Lira, A.M., Araujo, A.A.S., Basilio, I.D.J., Santos, B.L.L., Santana, D.P., Macedo, R.O., 2007. Compatibility studies of lapachol with pharmaceutical excipients for the development of topical formulations. Thermochim. Acta 457, 1-6.Patel, P., Ahir, K., Patel, V., Manani. L., Patel, C., 2015. Drug-Excipient compatibility studies: First step for dosage form development. Pharma Innovation 4(5), 14-20.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 221 - 222 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.074:543.544.5Short communicationA quality by design approach for liquid chromatography method development for determination of assay of drug productTina Achkoska*, Ivana Mitrevska, Marija Petrovska, Irena Brasnarska, Sonja UgarkovicResearch & Development, Alkaloid AD-Skopje, Blv. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* tachkoska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionAnalytical method development can be a time-con-suming process that can last a long time. Methods are com-monly developed using the traditional approach called "one-factor-at-a-time" (OFAT) which is carried out by se-lecting one instrument parameter to study while holding all other parameters constant. The best performing level of the study parameter is identified by visual inspection of the tri-al chromatograms. The parameter is then constant at this level, and a new instrument parameter is selected for the next trial. The OFAT process is repeated parameter by pa-rameter until an adequately performing instrument method is obtained (Krull et al., 2008). This type of development may create an adequate method but provides a limited un-derstanding of method capabilities and method robustness.Another, systematic screening approach that evaluates a number of stationary phases, pH ranges and organic mod-ifiers provides a more thorough approach to method devel-opment. A Quality by Design (QbD) approach to method development uses statistical design of experiments (DoE) to develop a robust method 'design space'. The design space defines the experimental region in which changes to method parameters will not significantly affect the results (ICH, 2009; Lukulay et al., 2009). This approach builds-in robustness to the method as the method is being developed. A better understanding of the overall method capabilities and limitations in development ensures a greater chance of successful method validation, transfer and routine use (Heyden, 2006). Method development using software af-fords considerable time savings for the analyst and the use of quality by design can produce a significantly more ro-bust and quality submission to regulatory authorities.In this study, a quality by design approach using meth-od development software for determination of assay of drug products is presented. Materials and methodsThe study was carried out on an Agilent 1290 infini-ty system equipped with a 6-position column manager and solvent selection valve to allow for automated exploration of a wide range of conditions. Fusion AE Method Develop-ment software was used in conjunction with Chemstation to facilitate a more comprehensive QbD approach meth-od development. For the first phase of initial screening 6 different columns were used: Sun fire C8, 150 x 4.6 mm, 5 um; Halo Phenyl-Hexyl 150 x 4.6 mm, 5 um; Zorbax Eclipse XDB C18 150 x 4.6 mm, 3.5 um; Zorbax SB AQ 150 x 4.6 mm, 3.5 um; X Select CSH Fluoro-Phenyl 150 x 4.6 mm, 3.5 um and X Select HSS C18 100 x 4.6 mm, 3.5 um. Organic modifiers acetonitrile and methanol were varied from 5 to 30 percent. The buffer solution which in-cluded a 5 mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate monohy-drate and a 10 mM 1-pentasulphonic acid sodium salt was varied in pH range from 3.0-8.0. The column temperature (25 degC), flow rate (1 mL/min), injection volume (20 uL) and wavelength (233 nm) were maintained constant. The samples were prepared by spiking placebo, active sub-stance and all known impurities of the active substance in a concentration of 1.0 percent of the concentration of the active substance. The samples were diluted with the buffer solution with pH value depending on the pH value of the mobile phase of the experiments in order to avoid eventual peak distortion or other chromatography problems caused by differences in sample solvent and mobile phase. S2 PP 102222Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 221 - 222 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsResults and discussionAfter defining the variables of interest and the region of variation, an experimental design was generated within Fusion AE. A partial factorial statistical design was select-ed by the software to obtain the maximum amount of infor-mation with the least number of experimental runs (Hey-den and Dejaegher, 2007). The experimental design was then transmitted to Chemstation software where all meth-ods were automatically generated and ready to run. After the end of all the experiments the chromatograms were in-tegrated and the results were imported back into Fusion AE which was used to model the data and to generate an initial method for subsequent optimization. The critical quality attributes (CQA), like retention time (3-8 min), Max Peak-Resolution (>1.5) and USP peak tailing (0.9-2.0) were es-tablished and the software carried out some possible solu-tions.The contour plots of the modeled data show the un-shaded (white) region as the acceptable region where all the critical quality attributes (CQA) are within the above designated criteria. By choosing the contour plot for each column, the type of organic modifier and changing the fac-tors on each axis, the software gives predictions how the critical attributes are changing as a function of the factors on x and y axis. With the usage of the point prediction tool the most optimal method conditions which were located in the unshaded region of the contour plot were selected. These conditions were then exported to chromatography data system and additional experiments were performed. The best chromatography and the "widest" unshaded re-gion was obtained with column Sun Fire C8 150 x 4.6mm with particle size of 5 um with acetonitrile as organic mod-ifier. The optimal percent of the organic modifier was 5 percent and the pH value of the buffer was 3.0. The DoE contour plot helped to determine the settings for the next phase of the development of the method when the concentration of buffer solution was tested. For this purpose a 20 mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate monohy-drate and a 5 mM 1-pentasulphonic acid sodium salt buffer with pH value of 3.0 was used and analyzed with the above specified chromatographic conditions. It can be seen that with a higher concentration of sodium dihydrogen phos-phate monohydrate and lower concentration of 1-penta-sulphonic acid sodium salt a better resolution between the peak of the active substance and the nearby eluting impu-rity is observed. ConclusionChromatographic analytical method development nor-mally begins with selection of the analytical column, the pH of the mobile phase and the organic solvent type. When using the OFAT approach in the initial phase of develop-ment, there is a possibility that this approach will provide limited coverage of the design space and there will be no understanding about the interaction effects between the in-strument parameters. On the other hand a quality by de-sign approach employs a statistically designed experiment to address the design space comprehensively and enables all important variable effects to be understood.The initial column-solvent screening experiment car-ried out by using the quality by design approach and soft-ware capabilities can identify the correct analytical col-umn, pH, and organic solvent type to use in the next phase of method development. The chromatographic conditions for the determination of the assay of drug substance set in this phase of the method development were: column Sun Fire C8 150 x 4.6 mm with particle size of 5 um; mobile phase (buffer 20 mM sodium dihydrogen phosphate mono-hydrate and a 5 mM 1-pentasulphonic acid sodium salt buffer with pH value of 3.0 with acetonitrile in ratio of 95 : 5 percent); flow rate (1.0 mL/min); column tempera-ture (T=25 degC), injection volume (20 uL) and wavelength (l=233 nm). The automated method development approach using Fusion AE software provides a better performing and more robust method in less time compared to manual method de-velopment. ReferencesHeyden, V.Y., 2006. Experimental design approaches in method optimization. LCGC Europe 19(9), 469-474.Heyden, V.Y., Dejaegher, B., 2007. Screening designs (Part 1) - Types and properties. LCGC Europe 20(10), 526-532.International conference of harmonization of technical requirements for registration of pharmaceuticals for human use (ICH), 2009. Pharmaceutical development Q8(R2). ICH harmonized tripartite guideline.Krull, I., Lukulay, P.H., Verseput, R., Turpin, J., Swartz, M., 2008. A Quality-by-Design methodology for rapid LC method development, Part I. LCGC North America 26, 1190-1197.Lukulay, P.H., Verseput, R., Turpin, J., Swartz, M., Krull, I., 2009. A Quality-by Design methodology for rapid LC method development, Part III. LCGC North America 28(4), 328-339.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 223 - 224 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.357:577.175.3].076Short communicationComparison of method A and method B described in Ph.Eur. for determination of bacterial endotoxins in pharmaceutical preparation containing somatropine Branislava Janeva, Sandra Zinoski, Katerina Starkoska*Institute for Public Health of the Republic of Macedonia, Medicines Quality Control Department, "50 Divizija" No 6, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* k.starkoska@iph.mkIntroductionThe test for bacterial endotoxins is used to detect or quantify endotoxins originating from gram-negative bac-teria using amebocyte lysate from horseshoe crab (Limu-lus polyphemus or Tachypleustridentatus). There are three techniques for this test: the gel-clot technique, which is based on gel formation; the turbidimetric technique, based on the development of turbidity after cleavage of an endog-enous substrate; and the chromogenic technique, based on the development of color after cleavage of a synthetic pep-tide-chromogen complex (Ph.Eur., 2014).Material and methodsThe testing was performed in accordance with Ph.Eur 8.0/2.6.14 by using Method A. Gel-Clot method: limit test and Method B. Gel-Clot method: quantitative test where permissible endotoxin limit concentration (ELC) in phar-maceutical preparation containing somatropine is < 5IU/mg. The maximum valid dilution (MVD) is 1:400. One In-ternational Unit (IU) of endotoxin is equal to one Endotox-in Unit (EU). The following reagents, equipment and inventory were used in the test: Limulus amebocyte lysate (LAL), Reagent, l = 0,125 EU/ml from Charles River Endosafe, USA; En-dotoxin control standard, E.coli 055:B5 from Charles Riv-er Endosafe, USA; LAL water from Charles River Endo-safe, USA; Thermoblock for incubation (37 +- 1 degC) from Lab-Line Instruments, USA; Vortex mixer from Barnstead, USA; Micropipettor from 5-50 ml; 50-200 ml and 200-1000 ml from Socorex, Switzerland; sterile and apyrogen exten-sions for multipipettors from Socorex, Switzerland; ster-ile and apyrogen glass test tubes from Charles River Endo-safe, USA; sterile and apyrogen glass test tubes for dilution from Charles River Endosafe, USA and universal indicator paper pH 0-14 from Sigma-Aldrich.Method ADiluting used for preparation testing, which is not higher than MVD is 1:300.The following test solutions were prepared:Solution A: Diluted test solution being diluted less than MVD (1:300).Solution B: Calibration curve of the endotoxin control standard (CSE) and diluted test solution (1:300) - concen-trations equivalent to 2l, l, l/2 and l/4 (test for interfer-ing factors).Solution C: Calibration curve of the control endotoxin standard (CSE) and LAL water-concentrations equivalent to 2l, l, l/2 and l/4 (Confirmation test for the declared ly-sate sensitivity).Solution D: LAL water as a negative control.Procedure: Preparation tested on MVD (1: 400) - so-lutions 1, 2, 3 and 4.The test is valid if the following condition is met:The both replicates in the solutions 2 and 3 of the pro-cedure are positive, while being negative in the solution 4. The tested preparation meets the test if there is a nega-tive result for both replicates in solution 1. If a positive re-sult is obtained on both replicates of solution 1diluted on MVD, it does not meet the test. If a positive result is ob-tained on both replicates of solution 1 diluted to dilution less than the MVD, the test will be repeated with dilution which does not exceed the MVD or at the level of MVD.S2 PP 103224Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 223 - 224 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsMethod BDilutions for preparation testing, and which are not higher than MVD 1:1; 1:2; 1:4; 1:8; 1:10; 1:100; 1:200 and 1:400.The following test solutions were prepared:Solution A: Test solution diluted lower than MVD (test for interfering factors).Solution B: Undiluted test solution containing CSE at the concentration of 2l (Positive Product Control).Solution C: Calibration curve of the endotoxin control standard (CSE) and LAL water - concentrations equivalent to 2l, l, l/2 and l/4 (Confirmation test for the declared ly-sate sensitivity).Solution D: LAL water as a negative control.The test is valid if the following three conditions are met:1. The both replicates of solution D (negative control) are negative.2. The both replicates of solution B (positive product control) are positive.3. Geometric mean of the final points in solution C is in the range of 2l to l/2.Results and discussionMethod AThe obtained test results in Solution A are satisfactory i.e. the preparation does not contain detectable endotoxins. In Solution B with the dilution of 1:300 the interference factors exceeded, while the obtained result 0.2102 EU / ml is within the permissible limits of 2 l to l/2 (0.25 EU / ml to 0.0625 EU / ml). The declared lysate sensitivity in solu-tion C is confirmed and the obtained result 0.2102 EU/ml is within the limits of 2 l to l/2 (0.25 EU/ml to 0.0625EU/ml). The obtained negative results in Solution D satisfy the test. In the mentioned procedure, both replicates in solution 2 (Positive Product Control) and solution 3 (Positive Water Control) are positive, while the both replicates in solution 1 (Negative Product Control) and solution 4 (Negative Wa-ter Control) are negative.Method A The obtained result 0.003525 EU/ml i.e. 0.0003525 EU/mg (allowed < 5IU/mg) in Solution A meets the quali-ty specifications and the preparation does not interfere with the test. The obtained results of the both replicates in so-lution B (Positive Product Control) are positive and the results satisfy the test. Declared lysate sensitivity in solu-tion C was confirmed and the obtained result 0.0884 EU/ml is within the limits of 2 l to l/2 (0.25 EU/ml to 0.0625 EU/ml). The obtained results of the both replicates in so-lution D (Negative Water Control) are negative and the re-sults satisfy the test.ConclusionThe obtained value of the lysate sensitivity determined by Method A.Gel-Clot method: the limit and test method B.Gel-Cloth method:quantitative test is within the limits of 2l to l/2.The advantage of Method B compared to Method A is the option it has to determine concentration of endotox-in on unknown sample (a sample with unknown composi-tion declaredand endotoxin limit concentration not listed).Using the Method A, with dilution of 1:300, the inter-ference factors exceeded and the preparation meets the test i.e.