Imaging 58, 45.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 539 - 540 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.833-097:579.835.12Short communicationGuillain Barre syndrome (GBS): new insights in the molecular mimicry between C. jejuni and human peripheral nerve (HPN) proteinsAida Loshaj - Shala1,2*, Luca Regazzoni3, Armond Daci2, Marica Orioli3, Katerina Brezovska1, Ana Poceva Panovska1, Giangiacomo Beretta3, Ljubica Suturkova11Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Skopje, Blv. "Mother Theresa" 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University Hasan Pristina", Mother Theresa 10 000, Prishtina, Kosovo3Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences DISFARM, University of Milan, University of Milan Via Mangiagalli 25, 20133 Milan, Italy* aidashala@gmail.comIntroductionThe Guillain-Barre Syndrome (GBS), is an acute in-flammatory disorder inducing arms and legs muscle weak-ness (tetraplegia), as well as the loss of deep tendon reflex-es (areflexia).The development of GBS is mainly associated with an antecedent infection caused by Campylobacter jejuni (C. jejuni). These infections are not uniquely associated with any clinical subtype, but severe axonal degeneration is more common following C. jejuni (Hughes et al., 1999). Experimental evidence implicates concomitant production of specific serum antibodies against several types of gan-gliosides that was thought to play an important role in the development of the disease (Willison and Yuki, 2002). On the other hand, proteins belonging to the family of heat shock proteins (HSP) are also believed to be etiological factors in many autoimmune diseases whose pathophysiol-ogies are thought to stem from immune responses against HSP (Yonekura et al., 2004).Hence, to shed further light on the mechanisms that trigger the immune responses in post infectious autoim-mune diseases such as GBS, the aim of this study was to investigate the profiles and immunoreactivity of proteins from human peripheral nerve (HPN) tissue, the main path-ological target of the disease, and from C. Jejuni (O:19), as the most often causative agent for GBS. Materials and methodsIn the first part of the study, proteins were isolated from HPN and C. Jejuni (serotype O:19, ATCC 43446). Human peripheral nerve was obtained at autopsy within 8 hr after death from patients who died from non-neuro-logical disease (Department of Forensic Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Skopje, Macedonia). Afterward proteins were extracted, separated by 1D SDS-PAGE using a Protean IIxi electrophoresis cell (Protean IIxi, BioRad), and their potential cross reactivity identified by Western blotting. The electrophoretic bands containing the proteins of interest were isolated, subject-ed to trypsin digestion, the resulting peptides submitted to nHPLC-nESI-MS and MS/MS (Dionex UltiMate3000 nanoflow LC system connected to an LTQ-Orbitrap XL) analysis and the results elaborated using SEQUEST algo-rithm (Proteome Discoverer 1.3, Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rodano, MI, Italy) for proteins identification and evalua-tion of their similarities.Results and discussionWestern blot analysis of the immunoreactivity of iso-lated proteins to sera from patients with GBS, revealed sig-nals for at least 8 immunoreactive bands for HPN and 8 for C. jejuni O:19 - GBS. Bands corresponding to proteins associated to the strongest immunogenic response (60-70 S6 OP 257540Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 539 - 540 (2016)Oral presentationsClinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular ScienceskDa) and bands that revealed positive but weaker signal (45 kDa), were subjected to proteomic analysis.For C. jejuni, no proteins were identifiable with suffi-cient confidence level in the band corresponding to Mw~45 kDa, while at Mw~60-70 kDa, 11 proteins were identified. Among them, 2 out of 3 and 7 out of 11 proteins respective-ly, were proteins previously identified in microorganisms from the genre Campylobacter, while the remaining pro-teins were in the overall from other microorganisms. All these proteins were from the family of chaperone/co-chap-erone proteins (GroEL, DnaK and HtpG). By contrast, the main proteins identified in the corre-sponding 45 kDa HPN band were enzymes and structur-al proteins. In HPN, proteins identified in the mass range around 70 kDa (the SDS-PAGE band associated to the strongest immunogenic response) were human serum al-bumin (HSA) neurofilament light peptide and different forms of cytoskeletal keratin. Three proteins from the HSP 70 family (heat shock 70 kDa protein 1A/1B mw=70KDa, heat shock cognate 71 kDa protein mw=70.9 KDa, and heat shock-related 70 kDa protein 2 mw=70 KDa) were found, as well as HSP 60 (mw=60 KDa). Cross verification of these proteins in UniProt bacterial proteins database ren-dered as reliable matching proteins (similarity score above 45%) those belonging to bacterial chaperone DnaK pro-teins.In a recent study, de Jong and colleague reported the identification of seven epitopes present at different posi-tions along the in constitutive self HSP 70 (De Jong et al., 2014). Alignment of these peptides with the corresponding sequences in the above selected chaperones from different Campylobacter species (Mw~70 kDa) and human HSP 70, showed that two of those epitopes showed ~100% of se-quence homology.In analogy to what done for HSP 70, the presence of the HSP 60 consensus sequence L256xxLxxNxLxxxxxxx-AVKAPGFGDxRKxx reported by Elfaitouri et al. (2013) was verified after alignment of mitochondrial 60 kDa heat shock protein identified in HPN with GroEL chaperone and with 60 kDa chaperonin (both proteins share around 50% of similarity with HSP 60). In the cases of GroEL chaperone there was total coincidence of all key amino ac-ids, while for 60 kDa chaperonin only lys264 was replaced by an isoleucine residue.Therefore, the microbial chaperone proteins DnaK (~70 kDa) and the different forms of HSP 70 in HPN iden-tified in this study, as well as bacterial GroEL an human HSP 60, reciprocally share high primary sequence homol-ogy and conservation of their known epitopes. C. jejuni chaperone proteins (~70 kDa) can be suggest-ed as possible antigens determining the induction of auto-immune disorders such as GBS or, at least, to play a rel-evant role in these diseases, possibly through a molecular mimicry mechanism (Elfaitouri et al., 2013).In particular, in our case, it can be speculated that the HSP neuroprotective effect (after activation of the heat shock response in consequence of infection) may be inhib-ited due to the interference of specific anti-HSP antibodies, eliciting the neurodegenerative effect of anti-GM1 autoan-tibodies on the peripheral nervous system.ConclusionTo the best of our knowledge, this is the first study in-vestigating the molecular identity of cross reacting, immu-nogenic proteins involved in GBS. The high resolution and mass accuracy provided by the Orbitrap analyzer, allowed to obtain an extensive, although presumably incomplete, identification of candidate proteins such as human and bac-terial HSP. The results of this study confirmed that C. jejuni DnaK (~70 kDa) and human peripheral nerve HSP 70, and bacterial GroEL and human HSP 60 share high sequence homology, in good accordance with the massive amount of work showing that HSP are highly conserved in evolution, leading to magnificent similarities in structure and com-position between mammalian HSPs and their homologues in microorganisms. Taken altogether, these results strong-ly suggest a potential involvement of chaperone molecules in the development of the autoimmune response associat-ed to GBS.Hence, further studies that could help identify new molecular targets in inflammatory and autoimmune condi-tions such as GBS should be focused on the better under-standing of the multifaceted contribution of HSPs in im-mune response and inflammation, thus to allow the devel-opment of new diagnostic, therapeutical and pharmaceuti-cal tools for the treatment of these harmful diseases.ReferencesDe Jong, H., Koffeman, E.C., Meerding, J.M., Scholman, R.C., Wieten, L., De Jager, W., Klein, M., Otten, H., Van Wijk, F., Van Der Zee, R., Bijlsma, J.W.J., Broere, F., Van Eden, W., Prakken, B.J., 2014. T cell recognition of naturally presented epitopes of self-heat shock protein 70. Cell Stress Chaperones 19, 569-578.Elfaitouri A, B, H., Bolin-Wiener, A, Wang, Y., Gottfries, C.G., Zachrisson, O., Pipkorn, R., Ronnblom, L., Blomberg, J., 2013. Epitopes of microbial and human heat shock protein 60 and their recognition in myalgic encephalomyelitis. PLoS One 8.Hughes, R. a, Hadden, R.D., Gregson, N. a, Smith, K.J., 1999. Pathogenesis of Guillain-Barre syndrome. J. Neuroimmunol. 100, 74-97.Willison, H.J., Yuki, N., 2002. Peripheral neuropathies and anti-glycolipid antibodies. Brain 125, 2591-2625. Yonekura, K., Yokota, S.I., Tanaka, S., Kubota, H., Fujii, N., Matsumoto, H., Chiba, S., 2004. Prevalence of anti-heat shock protein antibodies in cerebrospinal fluids of patients with Guillain-Barre syndrome. J. Neuroimmunol. 156, 204-209. Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 541 - 542 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.348/.35-006.6-085.277Short communicationImpact of KRAS mutations on capecitabine adjuvant monotherapy in CRC patientsNadica Matevska-Geshkovska1*, Marija Staninova1, Ivana Trajkovska1, Aleksandar Eftimov1, Milco Panovski2, Natalija Petrushevska-Angelovska3, Biljana Grozdanovska3, Aleksandar Dimovski11Center for Biomolecular Pharmaceutical Analyses, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia2University Clinic for Abdominal Surgery, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia3University Clinic for Radiotherapy and Oncology, University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Vodnjanska 17, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* nmatevska@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionColorectal cancer (CRC) is a common, heterogeneous disease that arises through the aggregate effects of multi-ple genetic mutations and epigenetic alterations involving genes that regulate cell growth and differentiation (Croce, 2008). In addition, CRC tumors are often comprised of cytogenetically different clones that arise from the initial transformed cell through different secondary or tertiary ge-netic alterations. This significant molecular heterogeneity of CRC leads to differences in the clinical presentation and response to the therapy, and therefore affects the clinical management of the patients.The vast majority of the CRC cases (~75%) is described as sporadic CRC and has no apparent predisposing etiology. However, in recent years, a couple of particular morpholog-ical subtypes of sporadic CRC have been recognized (Jass, 2007). All of these subtypes present rather different clini-cal features and molecular signatures and potentially have different underlying molecular origins. Sporadic microsat-ellite stable (MSS) tumors usually arise through the clas-sical adenoma-carcinoma pathway and demonstrate a high level of chromosomal instability (CIN) and mutations in genes as APC, KRAS, TP53, TGFBR2, PI3KCA etc. Muta-tions in KRAS (predominantly point mutations in codon 12 and 13) lead to a constitutively active GTP-bound protein and subsequent downstream activation of the MAPK sig-naling cascade rising to unregulated proliferation and dif-ferentiation of the cancer cells. Moreover, somatic chang-es in KRAS are thought to be an early event in colon carci-nogenesis and appear concordant between primary tumor and metastatic sites (Artale et al., 2008). Their role as neg-ative predictive biomarkers for anti-EGFR targeted therapy (cetuximab, panitumumab) is well established (Javle and Hsueh 2009). However, the data from the studies explor-ing the potential role of the KRAS mutations as prognostic biomarkers or as predictive biomarkers for standard 5-flu-orouracil based adjuvant therapy are less consistent, which in part can be due to the significant heterogeneity of the as-say methodology and the datasets that are analyzed. Hav-ing that in mind, we conducted a prospective study in order to evaluate the possible prognostic effect of the KRAS mu-tations in patients treated with capecitabine adjuvant mono-therapy and to better understand the relationship between KRAS-mutation status and survival after CRC diagnosis.Materials and methodsStudy population A total of 97 patients with histologically proven stage III or high-risk stage II colon cancer were included in the study. All recruited patients underwent a surgical resection of the tumors and were submitted to capecitabine adjuvant therapy according to standard protocol. After the completion of the therapy, follow-up visits were scheduled for a total of 5 years. MSI analysis Microsatellite instability in tumor samples was ana-lyzed with multiplex fluorescent polymerase chain reaction S6 OP 258542Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 541 - 542 (2016)Oral presentationsClinical Pharmacy / Pharmaceutical chemistry / Biomolecular Sciencesfollowed by capillary electrophoresis on 3500 Automat-ed Genetic Analyzer (Life Technologies, USA). MSI sta-tus was determined using 9 STR markers: BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S107, D5S346, D17S250, D18S58, D18S61 and D18S535 derived from the panel of microsatellite loci defined by the NCI (Boland et al., 1998). The tumor sam-ples were classified as MSI if instability was present at more of 30% of the loci screened.KRAS mutation analysis KRAS mutations were analyzed in tumor samples us-ing custom designed assay. Exon 2 of the KRAS gene was amplified using the following primers: AAGGCCTGCT-GAAAATGACTG and AGAATGGTCCTGCACCAG-TAA. Bi-directional sequencing was performed using Big-Dye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit. Sequencing products were purified using BigDye XTerminator(r) Pu-rification Kit (Life Technologies, USA) and analyzed by a capillary electrophoresis on a 3500 Genetic Analyzer (Life Technologies, USA).Statistical analysis Differences in the demographic and clinical character-istics of the patients were tested using unpaired Student t-test (continuous variables) or Fisher's exact test (categori-cal variables). The primary end-point of the study was dis-ease-free survival (DFS), defined as the time from end of the adjuvant therapy to the first recurrence diagnosis. Sur-vival curves were generated according to the Kaplan and Meier method and survival distributions were compared with the use of the log-rank test. Hazard ratios and 95 per-cent confidence intervals were computed with the use of Cox proportional-hazards regression model.Results and discussionA mutation in exon 2 of the KRAS gene was observed in a total of 26 (26.8%) patients, of which 21 (21.6%) in co-don 12 and 5 (5.2%) in codon 13. The most common muta-tion was Gly12Asp which accounted for 38.5% of all KRAS mutations. There was no statistically significant association between the KRAS mutations and the clinical features of pa-tients, although there was a trend towards higher incidence of KRAS mutations in patients with stage III CRC (p=0.07). The survival analyses showed an association of the KRAS mutations with a shorter DFS; the five-year survival of pa-tients carriers of KRAS mutation was 42.3% versus 73.2% in patients with wild-type KRAS (p=0.004). The multivari-ate analysis adjusted for the gender, stage and tumor localiza-tion, showed that the presence of KRAS mutation is an inde-pendent predictor for poor prognosis in patients treated with adjuvant capecitabine monotherapy (HR 2.48; 95% CI 1,23-5,01; p=0.011). This leads to a conclusion that only wild-type KRAS CRC patients could benefit from adjuvant capecitabine monotherapy.