Ultimate-ly a method should be found for which there are no false negatives at the cost of several more false positives. For il-lustration, obtaining a false positive result during the API fingerprinting, means further more detailed analytical test-ing of the substance suspected to be falsified. But the risk of obtaining a false negative result must be completely re-moved, as it is unacceptable to pass a falsified API to mar-ket. Perspective There are several milestones (sampling, choice of an-alytical and statistical methods, and dissemination of re-sults) that need to be challenged. Sampling is mainly based on a goodwill of the manu-facturers/MAHs; the regulatory frame need to be strength-en for sampling can be possible on each step where tam-pering of substance or information of its origin might oc-cur (manufacturing site, distribution, brokers if any, FDF manufacturer, APIs used for preparations in pharmacies).Number of samples is often insufficient for robust sta-tistical evaluation of results; wider involvement of OMCLs and regulatory authorities (including customs and police) is expected for more efficient sampling process.Manufacturer's specification is not sufficient for API fingerprinting; an overall strategy against falsification in-cluding wide analytical window in combination with PRT should be implemented by competent authorities. Dissemination of the results is sometimes burdened by intellectual or industrial property issues and therefore sometimes is only used by API manufacturer for protection from competition; in order for results to be used for better control of the APIs used for the medicines available on the market, proper agreement between industry and competent authorities should be in place. ReferencesAcevska, J., Stefkov, Gj., Cvetkovikj, I., Petkovska, R., Kulevanova, S., Cho, J.H., Dimitrovska, A., 2015. Fingerprinting of morphine using chromatographic purity profiling and multivariate data analysis. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 109, 18-27.Adams, M.J., 2004. Chemometrics in Analytical Spectroscopy, 2 ed., Royal Society of Chemistry Analytical Spectroscopy Monographs. Bylesjo, M., Rantalainen, M., Cloarec, O., Nicholson, J.K., Holmes, E., Trygg, J., 2006. OPLS discriminant analysis: combining the strengths of PLS-DA and SIMCA classification. J. Chemometrics 20, 341-351.Degardin, K., Roggo, Y., Margot, P., 2014. Understanding and fighting the medicine counterfeit market. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 87, 167-175.Gonzalez, A.G., 2007. Use and misuse of supervised pattern recognition methodsfor interpreting compositional data-a review. J. Chromatogr. A 1158, 215-225.Petrusevski, Gj., Acevska, J., Stefkov, Gj., Poceva Panovska, A., Micovski, I., Petkovska, R., Dimitrovska, A., Ugarkovic, S., 2016. Characterization and origin differentiation of morphine derivatives by DSC/TG & FTIR analysis using pattern recognition techniques. J. Therm. Anal. Calorim. 123(3), 2561-2571.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 133 - 134 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.2-027.512:615.11Short communicationOrphan drugs - comparative review of FDA and EMA regulations Zoran Nakov1*, Jasmina Tonic-Ribarska2, Suzana Trajkovic Jolevska21Novo Nordisk Pharma DOOEL, blvd.Oktomvriska Revolucija 18, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, University"SS Cyril and Methodius", Mother Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* zona@novonordisk.comIntroductionOrphan drug is a drug intended for treatment of rare (orphan) diseases. No single definition for an orphan disease exists worldwide, but it is generally a disease that affects a small portion of the population. Today, there are more than 6,000 to 7,000 known rare diseases, 80 percent of which have been identified as genetic in nature, with incidence of less than one in 2,000 people. Symptoms of some rare diseases may appear at birth or develop later in childhood or even during adult life. Other rare diseases are a result of infection (bacterial or viral), allergies or are caused by degenerative and proliferative conditions (Orphaned, 2012). Currently, the number of rare diseases for which there is no available treatment is estimated to be around 4,000 - 5,000 worldwide (Morin et al., 2013). The objective of this paper is to compare the regulation for orphan drugs defined by Food and Drug Agency (FDA) and European Medical Agency (EMA), in the United States and EU, respectively. These two regulatory agencies stimulate processes of a parallel application for orphan designation appropriate, when dealing with potential orphan drugs.FDA regulations for orphan drugsThe first regulation for orphan drugs in USA was introduced in 1983. According to the FDA guidelines, orphan drug is a drug that is intended for treatment of disease or condition which affects less than 200,000 people in the USA or more than 200,000 in case when there is no reasonable expectation that the cost of developing and making available this drug in the USA will be recovered from it sales (Morin et al., 2013). Today, in USA there are three laws that apply to orphan drugs, as follows:1. Orphan Drug Act (first regulation for orphan drugs) - legal act which aims to protect every orphan drug, produced and placed on the market in the USA by the pharmaceutical company, domestic or international. This regulation assumes that the drugs intended to treatment of rare diseases need patent protection, because basically this class of drugs is characterized by lower return of invested funds (Abramowicz, 2010).2. Protection from generic competition - reference this legislation, when one drug is designated as "orphan" drug, FDA cannot give designation to a generic drug for the period of five to seven years. The main purpose of this legislation is to discourage the idea of development of non-patented drugs. This legislation allows better protection from generic competitors than the Orphan Drug Act, and the same applies for drugs intended for treatment of diseases that affect more than 200,000 people but the costs of research and development will not be cover by their projected sales (Abramowicz, 2010).3. Hatch-Waxman Act is regulation for stimulating the generic competition. Under this act, a generic drug company that challenges the pioneer drug with patent protecting receives 180 days exclusivity period, meaning that no other generic drug manufacturer can enter the market during that time. The main goal is to accelerate the generic competition. The authorized generic manufacturer can charge considerably above marginal cost, allowing it to earn a profit and providing it an incentive to challenge pioneer patents (Abramowicz, 2010).According to the FDA regulation, orphan drugs have market exclusivity for period of five to seven years, shortened procedure of registration; the company owner of orphan designation receives a tax incentives, protocol assistance as well as exemption from payment of certain fees (Morin et al., 2013).S2 OP 58134Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 133 - 134 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsOral presentationsEMA regulations for orphan drugsThe regulation for orphan drugs in EU legislation was first time adopted in 1999. According to EMA rules, orphan drug is designated drug which is intended for treatment of rare disease or condition which affects not more than 5 in 10,000 people in the EU. Most of these people suffer from diseases affecting less than 1 in 100,000 people (EMA, 2015). At the European Union granting of orphan designation can be made only by the European Commission. The application is evaluated by the EMA's Committee for Orphan Medicinal Products (COMP), which provides its opinion on whether or not the medicine qualifies as orphan medicines for the treatment, prevention or diagnosis of a rare disease. If the COMP issues a positive opinion, the European Commission may then grant the medicine orphan status (EMA, 2015). Rules for obtaining the orphan designation at EMA are defined by six regulations and two additional guidelines (EMA, Legal background). To qualify for orphan designation, a medicine must meet a number of criteria: it must be indicated for the treatment, prevention or diagnosis of a disease that is life-threatening or chronically debilitating, the prevalence of the condition in the EU must not be more than 5 in 10,000 or it must be unlikely that marketing of the medicine would generate sufficient returns to justify the investment needed for development or there is no satisfactory method of diagnosis, prevention or treatment of the condition concerned can be authorized or if such a method exists, the new medicine must be of significant benefit to those affected by the condition. Drugs that meet the EMA's requirements for orphan designation received protocol assistance, access to centralized approval procedure for marketing authorization, a period of ten years market exclusivity in the EU with the possibility of additional two years market exclusivity for drugs that have valid and approved pediatric research plan (pediatric investigation plan). Additionally, all drugs with orphan designation by EMA received further compensate for micro, small and medium-sized companies, reduction of costs, grants and national compensate in the EU Member States (EMA, Activities after orphan designation).Instead of conclusionThe comparative review of FDA / EMA regulations showed that FDA and EMA permit shortened registration procedure and both regulatory agencies allow exemption from payment of certain fees and provide protocol assistance. There are three main differences between FDA and EMA. The first difference is period of market exclusivity, noted that the period of market exclusivity in the USA could be from five to maximum seven years, apart from EU where market exclusivity for drugs with orphan designation is ten years, with additional two years for orphan drugs with valid and approved pediatric research plan. The second difference is in terms of tax incentives and exemptions, which are currently permitted in general in the all the USA countries by the FDA, as opposed to the EU, where EMA gives general tax incentives and exemptions, but each EU Member State has the possibility to provide additional national exemptions and incentives for some orphan drugs. And the third difference exists in terms of grants. In the USA they're getting from the part of the FDA Orphan products grants program. Unlike the FDA, EMA does not offer any additional grants from its budget for research and development of new orphan drugs. However EMA makes funds available through the European Commission such as Horizon 2020, The EU Framework Programme for Research and Innovation E-Rare, a transnational project for research programmes on rare diseases International Rare Diseases Consortium (IRDIRC).ReferencesAbramowicz, M., 2010. Orphan business models: Toward a new form of intellectual property. Harward law review 124, 1362-1392.European Medicines Agency, 2015. Orphan medicinal product designation. Available at:http://www.ema.europa.eu/docs/en_GB/document_library/Brochure/2011/03/WC500104234.pdf) (accessed on 3 February 2016).European Medicines Agency. Legal backround. Available at:(http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/r e g u l a t i o n / g e n e r a l / g e n e r a l _ c o n t e n t _ 0 0 0 5 5 2 .jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058061ecb7 (accessed on 3 February 2016).European Medicines Agency. Activities after orphan designation Available at:http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/regulation/general/general_content_000554.jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058061ecbb (accessed on 3 February 2016).Morin, R., Flynn, K., Chen, F., Marandett, E., 2013. Adopt IP protection to ensure regulatory exclusivity for orphan drugs, Association of corporate counsel. Available at:www.acc.com (accessed on 15 December 2015).Orphaned, 2012. About rare disease. Orphaned Available at:http://www.orpha.net/consor/cgi-bin/Education_AboutRareDiseases.php?Ing=EN) (accessed on 15 December 2015).Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 135 - 136 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.4Short communicationDevelopment of cleaning validation master plan, including cleaning validation protocolNade Dimovska*, Nena Smiljanovska, Marina Petreska, Keti Shapkovska, Stojne TanevskaBionika Pharmaceuticals, Skupi 15, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* nade.dimovska@bionikapharm.comIntroductionDevelopment and validation of effective cleaning pro-cedures are of a great importance to Quality Assurance Sys-tem and these activities are described in the current GMP and FDA regulations.In many cases, the same equipment may be used for manufacturing of different products. It is therefore essential to develop adequate cleaning procedures, in order to avoid cross contamination. Pharmaceutical products and active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) can be contaminated by other pharmaceutical products, by cleaning agents, micro-organisms or by other material (i.e. airborne particles, dust, raw materials, products of degradation (EudraLex, 2014).The cleaning validation is a very complex task, and the implementation requires a carefully elaborated plan. The Cleaning Validation Master Plan is a basic document ac-cording to which the validation is performed. It presents an overview of the scope of the project, establishes essen-tial requirements, such as acceptance criteria, sampling pro-cedures, methods of analysis and is used as a planning and monitoring instrument (EudraLex, 2015). Establishing a cleaning validation programWritten cleaning procedures must be established for all equipment parts and surface which come into contact with the medicinal product. Responsible stuff has to be trained on the cleaning procedures. The critical parameters of the cleaning procedures can be determined by the risk-analy-sis. The risk-analysis should evaluate the influence of the product, equipment and process specific parameters on the cleaning objective (Hiob and Gomez, 2011).Important phase during effective planning of clean-ing validation study is selection of the worst-case prod-uct, manufactured in each equipment line. To assure effec-tiveness under worst-case conditions, the worst case must be defined in more exact terms. The first thing to be deter-mined is whether all the products made using the equip-ment, can be cleaned according the same procedure, or sev-eral cleaning procedures are required due to different prod-uct properties. Within each group of products, for which an individual cleaning procedure is required, the product which is the most difficult to clean represents the worst case. If the cleaning procedure is designed in such a way that this product can be cleaned in a reliable manner, the ef-fectiveness of the cleaning procedure is assured for all other products which are easier to clean and are in the same group as well (Haider and Asif, 2010a).In the selection of worst-case product, the solubility of the ingredients, the tendency of the product towards crust formation and where relevant, residues left by colored in-gredients should be reviewed as being critical factors to the success of the cleaning. The pharmacological characteris-tics and toxicity data of drugs have a significant impact on the selection of worst-case product also. During the optimization phase the following informa-tion must be defined: maximum hold time for uncleaned equipment and clean hold time.Analytical testing and reporting phaseDirty hold time is defined as the time between the end of manufacturing process of the product batch and the be-ginning of the cleaning process. Clean hold time is the time between the completion of cleaning of the equipment and the initiation of the subsequent manufacturing operation, if in the production area the conditions are appropriate.S2 OP 59136Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 135 - 136 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsOral presentationsAcceptance criteria must be defined before the valida-tion begins. A limit is an actual numerical value and is one of the requirements of the acceptance criteria of a clean-ing validation protocol. Compliance with limits can be as-sured by direct (swab test) or indirect sampling (rinse test). Sampling (by swab) should be performed from the criti-cal areas of the production equipment. These critical areas of the production equipment are usually difficult to access during cleaning and/or are very difficult to see during the final checks. These areas, as well as dirty and clean hold times, should be included in the cleaning Standard Opera-tional Procedures (FDA, 2011). Maximum Allowable Carryover (MACO) - maximum quantity of acceptable transferred residue from the active substance of the previous product is calculated by thera-peutic dose criteria or by permitted daily exposure criteria.The quantitative determination of residues of the sub-stances, cleaning agent and microbiological contamination that should be carried out after sampling, will require val-idated analytical methods with sufficient specificity and sensitivity to be able to detect the results at or below the established acceptance limits.Validation of analytical methods are carried out on the parameters: Limit of Detection (LOD), Limit of Quantifi-cation (LOQ), Specificity, Selectivity, Recovery, Precision, Range and Linearity (Borchert and Gomez, 2011a). Validation of the cleaning procedure should be per-formed analytically after the approval of visual inspection (absence of stains or any materiel residue). Selecting a method to detect cleaning agent be per-formed analytically after the approval of visual inspec-tion (absence of stains or any materiel residue).overyraphy (HPLC), ion selective electrodes, flame photometry, deriv-ative Ultraviolet (UV) spectroscopy, Thin Layer Chroma-tography, enzymatic detection, and titration. It can also involve non-specific methods that detect the presence of a blend of ingredients such as: TOC, pH, and conductivity. The regulators prefer specific methods, but will accept non-specific methods with adequate rationales for their use.