The droplet size, polydispersity index (PDI), and z-potential were measured with Zetasizer Nano ZS (Malvern Instruments Ltd, United Kingdom) 24 h after the emulsion preparation.Spontaneous emulsification in three step process method was employed (Schuh et al., 2014). In the first step organic and aqueous phase were prepared. The homoge-neous organic phase contained oregano essential oil, lipo-philic surfactant Span 80, and ethanol as water miscible solvent, while aqueous phase was composed of water and hydrophilic surfactants, Tween 20 or Tween 80. In the sec-ond step organic phase was injected into the aqueous phase by stirring on the magnetic stirrer for 30 min at 750 min-1to reach phase system equilibrium. In the third step, etha-nol was evaporated on a BUCHI rotary evaporator system type R-114 and vacuum controller B-721 (Switzerland) at 40 degC, 250 bar, 1 h. The influence of the surfactant mix-ture (Tween 80 and Span 80 or Tween 20 and Span 80) and the surfactant to oil ratio on the droplet size, polydispersity index (PDI), z-potential, the particle size distribution, and average particle diameter were determined 24 h after the emulsion preparation.Results and discussionIn the phase diagrams constructed using the oil, Tween 80, and a surfactant mixture of Tween 80 and Span 80 in the ratio of 2:1 w/w and 1:1 w/w, the effective surface of formed nanoemulsion was smaller. The maximum amount of water incorporated in the system was 23%. As a result of the small amount of water, as well as the high nanoemul-sion density, the preparation of water based nanoemulsion was disabled. Substituting Tween 80 with Tween 20 and changing water with a mixture of water and PG in the ra-tio of 1:1 w/w, nanoemulsion surface increased. When the oil and the Smix in the ratio of 1:9 w/w were used, the formed nanoemulsion could be fully diluted with water without the formation of turbid-white emulsion. The av-erage droplet size measured 24 h after preparation was 44 nm, while PDI was 0.349. Transparent emulsion was not formed when mixture of Tween and Span 80 in the ratio 1:2 w/w was used.The droplet size of the nanoemulsion prepared using the spontaneous method influenced by the surfactant mix-ture (Tween 80 and Span 80 or Tween 20 and Span 80) and the ratio of the mixed surfactants and oil (the weight ratio of Smix:oil was 0.5, 1 and 1.5 w/w). The droplets with 160 nm particle size, 0.097 PDI, and -26 mV z-potential was obtained using a mixture of Tween 20 and Span 80 mixed with the oil in ratio of 0.5. Using the surfactant mixture of Tween 80 and Span 80 in the proportion of 0.5 with the oil, the droplets with 180 nm particle size, 0.134 PDI, and -20 mV z-potential were obtained. Increasing the Six to oil ra-tio at 1 and 1.5, nanoemulsions with bigger droplets were obtained. The average droplet size of Tween 20 or Span 80 mixture oil in the proportion of 1.5 was 361 nm, while PDI was 0.071 and a low z-potential value was recorded (-2.69 mV). ConclusionThe low energy methods, aqueous titration and spon-taneous emulsification method can be used in order to pro-duce fine droplet nanoemulsions of wild oregano essential oil. Aqueous titration method requires high concentration of surfactants at low oil concentration. Spontaneous emul-sification method can only be applied when low oil con-centration, less than 1%, is used. In order to improve the emulsification efficiency of the essential oil with high con-centration of carvacrol as a biological active compound and to increase the stability of the nanoemulsions prepa-ration using aqueous titration and spontaneous emulsifica-tion method, the process and working parameters should be optimized. ReferencesBilia, A.R., Guccione, C., Isacchi, B., Righeschi, C., Firenzuoli, F., Bergonzi, M.C., 2014. Essential oils loaded in nanosystems: a developing strategy for successful therapeutic approach. Evid. Based Complement. Alternat. Med. 1-14.Husnu Can Baser K., Buchbauer G., 2010. Handbook of essential oils: science, technology, and applications, CRC Press; Taylor and Francis Group, Boca Raton, London, New York.Shaaban, A.H., Edris, A.E., 2015. Factors affecting the phase behavior and antimicrobial activity of carvacrol microemulsiones. J. Oleo Sci. 64, 393-404.Schuh, R.S., Bruxel, F., Teixeira, H.F., 2014. Physicochemical properties of lecithin-based nanoemulsions, obtained by spontaneous emulsification or high-pressure homogenization. Quim. Nova 7, 1193-1198.Sole, I., Solans, C., 2013. Nanoemulsions, in: Tadros T. (Ed. ), Encyclopedia of colloid and interface science. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 733-747.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 399 - 400 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.8Short communicationRisk assessment in blister packagingMarija Cveevska*, Irena Zdraveska, Biljana Nanova, Milkica GligorovaAlkaloid AD Skopje, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* irenakocevska@gmail.comIntroductionEvery product and every process has an associated risk. Every enterprise should have a methodology for iden-tifying and evaluating the risks it faces and it should have a process for generating intervention plans to reduce the risks to an acceptable level. This process is generally re-ferred to as a Quality Risk Management (QRM). QRM is a systematic process for the assessment, control, commu-nication and review of risks to the quality of the medicinal product across the product lifecycle. Early in development, the purpose of the QRM process may be to acquire suffi-cient product and process knowledge to assess risks asso-ciated with formulation development of the finished phar-maceutical product according to the quality target product profile. As development progresses, in addition to support-ing that development, the purpose of the QRM process is to determine and manage risks to bioavailability, safety, ef-ficiency and product quality.Risk assessment is a systematic process of organizing information to support a risk decision to be made within a risk management process. It consists of the identification of hazards and the analysis and evaluation of risks associ-ated with exposure to those hazards. Packaging represents a critical manufacturing op-eration requiring strong Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) and quality oversight to ensure sustained and ro-bust compliance. Historically, inadequate packaging prac-tices have been a meaningful ongoing contributor to prod-uct recall actions industry-wide. A strong understanding of the compliance risks associated with product packaging is a necessary and important component of a good quali-ty system. The goal of risk assessment is to further enhance the quality assurance of existing packaging operations and practices (Guidance for industry "Q9 Quality Risk Manag-ment", 2006) (Quality Risk Management Q9, 2005).Risk assessmentThe aim of risk assessment in blister packaging is to identify, analyse and evaluate risks during blister packag-ing process validation and the manufacturing processes.Risk identification is a systemic use of information to identify potential sources of harm referring to the risk or problem. Information can include historical data, theoret-ical analysis, and the concerns of stakeholders. Risk iden-tification addresses the "What might go wrong?" question and provides the basis for further steps in the quality risk management process (Reddy et al., 2014). Risk analysis is the estimation of the risk associated with the identified hazards. It is the qualitative or quantita-tive process of linking the likelihood of occurrence and se-verity of harms (detectability) is also a factor in the estima-tion of risk (Reddy et al., 2014). A team is assembled to collect relevant data about the packaging line. All operations involved with the line func-tion (equipment, procedures, etc.) and all corresponding potential failures are listed. For each potential failure, the team works to understand its potential impact on packaging operations and then respectively to assign a severity cate-gory. Following severity classification, the team is review-ing all dominant causes relevant to the defined potential failure and then assigning a frequency category. For each potential failure, all safeguards (e.g. detection capabilities) are reviewed and a detection capability is assigned. For Se-verity Frequency and Detection determination, all relevant data is taken into consideration, to include maintenance and operation logs, batch records, deviation investigations, customer complaint records, etc. (Reich et al., 2011). The determined parameters and operations are: the environ-mental conditions during the process of primary packag-ing, issuing packaging material, issuing bulk product, blis-ter forming, filling tablets into blisters, testing tablet pres-ence in the blister, text printing on the aluminum lidding foil, blister sealing, embossing batch number and expiry S4 PP 189400Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 399 - 400 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentationsdate on the blisters, the blister perforation, the blister cut-ting, insertion of proper number of blisters, leaflets fold-ing, pharma code reading on the boxes, pharma code read-ing on the leaflet, embossing batch number and expiry date on the boxes, leaflet presence, weight check, determination of yield. For all parameters and operations potential risks are defined, consequences (severity of consequences, prob-ability of occurrence, the possibility of detection). The as-sessment effort requires that potential product defects from any given packaging operation is defined and graded for severity, frequency and on the ability of the operation and/or an operator to detect the defect (Internal procedure: List of evidence for identification of risk, 2009)Risk evaluation compares the identified and analyzed risk against given risk criteria. The output of a risk assess-ment is estimated as quantitative description of a range of risk. A numerical probability is used. Defect detection is categorized and graded on a 1-to-4 scale to reflect a detec-tion capability of "none" (unable to detect) to "always" de-tect. For each potential failure, all precautions are reviewed and a detection capability is assigned. For determinations of severity, frequency and detection, all relevant data is taken into consideration, including maintenance and oper-ation logs, batch (Internal procedure: List of evidence for identification of risk, 2009).ConclusionThe risk of blister packaging process is reduced to an acceptable level. According to the results of the risk as-sessment on blister packaging on the IMA C80/A81 blis-ter packaging line, we can conclude that the blister pack-aging process is with low risk and the process is capable to perform effectively and gives reproducible products with quality that matches with the regulatory specifications and quality attributes.ReferencesGuidance for industry, Q9 Quality Risk Management, June 2006.U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Food and Drug Administration.Internal procedure, List of evidence for identification of risk, 2009.Reich, S., Sanchez, E., Creekmore, R., Murray, K., Hasselbalch, B., Obeng, K., 2011.PQRI Case Study (6): Packaging Line GMP Optimization. Retrieved 3 23, 2016, from PharmTech Advancing Development and Manufacturing: http://www.pharmtech.com/pqri-case-study-6-packaging-line-gmp-optimization.Reddy, V.V., Gupta, N.V., Raghunandan, H.V., Kashyap, U.N., 2014. Quality risk management in pharmaceutical industry:A review. Int. J. Pharm. Tech. Res. 6, 908-914.Quality Risk Management, Q9 November 2005. International Conference on Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 401 - 402 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.272:616.892.3Short communicationCurrent therapeutic options and trends in drug development for Alzheimer's disease Maja Simonoska Crcarevska*, Renata Slaveska Raicki, Marija Glavas DodovInstitute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril & Methodius University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* msimonoska@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionDementia is characterized by persons` significant cog-nitive decline and interference with everyday life indepen-dency. There are several types of dementia, but Alzheim-er's disease (AD) is most common form. AD a neurode-generative disease is characterized by decline in memory, language, problem-solving and other cognitive skills that affects a person's ability to perform everyday activities (Alzheimer's, 2015). Currently there are only 5 drugs approved for AD treatment and all are targeted towards metabolic disor-ders associated with the disease. Four of them, tacrine, do-nepezil (DON), rivastigmine (RIV) and galantamine (ap-proved in 1993, 1996, 1998 and 2001, respectively) are in group of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEi) and one, memantine (MEM), approved in 2003, is N-methyl-D-as-partate (NMDA) receptor antagonist (Cummings et al., 2014). Although AD drugs are frequently used for more than 20 years there are evidences about controversies re-lated to their efficacy and clinical significance (Lanctot et al., 2009). The aim of the current study was to analyze safety and efficacy of dosage forms of AD most commonly used drugs with focus on meta-analysis as well as to identify trends in AD treatment. Current therapeutic optionsOral solution, hard capsules and transdermal patches with RIV, for treatment of mild to moderate dementia asso-ciated with AD and Parkinson's disease are present on the market. Latest Cohran`s collaboration review is address-ing RIV clinical efficacy/safety in treatment longer than 12 weeks (any dose and administration route) in patients with AD dementia compared to placebo as well as compar-ison of RIV patches and capsules given at the manufactur-er's recommended dose (Birks and Grimley Evans, 2015). Results from the study indicated that RIV use is associat-ed with some benefits on some outcomes (cognitive func-tion, activities of daily living and clinician rated global im-pression) and no differences in behavioural symptoms and quality of life of carers compared to placebo. No difference compared to placebo for withdrawals before the end of the treatment and at least one adverse effect was identified for RIV lower dose (1-4 mg/day), while for higher dose (6-12 mg/day) results favoured placebo. Fewer side effects re-lated to nausea, vomiting, dizziness, effect on decreased appetite and asthenia for 9.5 mg/day patches compared to capsules were identified (Birks and Grimley Evans, 2015). DON for the treatment of mild to moderate AD is ap-proved in form of film coated and dispersible tablets. Ef-fects of DON (any dose) in mild, moderate or severe de-mentia in AD treatments longer than 1 day compared to placebo were assessed by Birks and Harvey (2006). Re-sults were similar as for RIV (Birks and Grimley Evans, 2015) with the exception of positive findings for DON ef-fect on behaviour. Dose of 5mg/day DON was found to be more cost-effective as 10 mg/day dose was associated with more adverse effects and only marginally higher effects.Comparison of safety and efficacy of AChEi for AD was done by Birks (2006). Four studies were identified, but only one (DON vs RIV) met criteria for inclusion in meta-analysis. No differences in efficacy were observed, but DON was associated with less adverse effects, particu-larly nausea, vomiting, anorexia, weight loss, event of fall and hypertension. However, conducted meta-analysis sug-gested that their tolerability might be match if RIV is care-fully and gradually titrated for more than 3 months (Birks, S4 PP 190402Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 401 - 402 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyPoster presentations2006).MEM is marketed in form of film-coated tablets for treatment of moderate to severe AD dementia. McShane et al. (2006) meta-analysis was related to efficacy and safe-ty of MEM (any dose and any route of administration) for people with AD, vascular and mixed dementia. Clinically significant reduction of deterioration in patients with mod-erate to severe AD dementia was determined when MEM in dose of 20 mg/day for at least 28 weeks was compared to placebo. In general, MEM was well tolerated with low in-cidence of adverse effects (McShane et al., 2006). Latest FDA approved drug for treatment of AD de-mentia (in 2014) is Namzaric (memantine hydrochloride extended-release + donepezil hydrochloride). Trends in Alzheimer's disease drug development Having in mind that we are facing with lack of effi-cacious therapeutic options for prevention and treatment of dementia and specifically for AD and associated behav-ioral and physiological symptoms there is extensive sci-entific research in this field. For ex.