Toxicity studiesOne of the most essential steps in the evaluation of a potential diagnostic/therapeutic antibody is determination of the toxicity of an antibody (often radiolabelled) and the ratio of antibody uptake in the tumor versus normal tissues. This information is essential for the rational design of an-tibody conjugates therapy, where uptake of antibodies by normal tissues is crucial for predicting toxicity on one side, but also is crucial for defining dose regimen where optimal tumor concentration of the antibodies will be achieved on the other. S3 OP 119258Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 257 - 258 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationsNormal and tumor tissue distribution can be quanti-fied and evaluated by toxicity studies in animal models, where kinetics, distribution and induced effects in mice/rats or other nonrodent species, with or without implanted tumor are followed. These studies include administration of selected doses of radiolabelled mAbs and monitoring of tumor growth or survival of animals over time (Reilly et al., 2006). A control group of animals receives only the sol-vent of the formulation or non-specific radiolabelled mAbs of the same class. Generalized and gastrointestinal toxici-ty is followed by the weight monitoring (significant weight loss > 10-20%), while bone marrow toxicity is assessed by hematology analyses including leukocyte (WBC), erythro-cyte (RBC), and platelet counts as well as hematocrit (Hct) and hemoglobin (Hb) concentrations. Biochemistry anal-yses included serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT) for liver toxicity and creatinine (Cr) levels for renal toxicity. In addition, samples from different tissues (liver, kidneys, etc) are obtained for hystopatological examination by light or electron microscopy. Potential radiotherapeutic agent should demonstrate specific anti-tumor effects targeted only tumor tissue with only minimal to moderate toxici-ty to normal tissues. ConclusionsVaried and newly designed antibody conjugates are currently directed toward various tumor targets in clinical trials, and more are nearing clinical trial. Before reaching any possibility for patient's treatment, successfully passed preclinical phase is essential. The future development of antibody conjugates as therapeutics in cancer treatment is dependent on data from laboratory studies, on applying in-novative approaches to target and antibody selection and on appropriate development strategies, leading at the end, to clinical benefit in cancer patients.Referencesde Bono, J. S., Ashworth, A., 2010. Translating cancer research into targeted therapeutics. Nature 467, 543-549.Maloney, D., Morschhauser, F., Linden, O., Hagenbeek, A., Gisselbrecht, C., 2010. Diversity in antibody-based approaches to non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Leuk. Lymphoma 51(1), 20-27. Reilly, R.M., Chen, P., Wang, J., Scollard, D., Cameron, R., Vallis, K.A., 2006. Preclinical pharmacokinetic, biodistribution, toxicology and dosimetry studies of 111In-DTPA-Human epidermal growth factor: An auger electron-emitting radiotherapeutic agent for epidermal growth factor receptor-positive breast cancer. J. Nucl. Med. 47, 1023-1031.Scott, A.M., Wolchok, J.D., Old, L.J., 2012. Antibody therapy of cancer. Nat. Rev. Cancer 12, 278-287.Teicher, B.A., Chari, R.V.J., 2011. Antibody conjugate therapeutics: Challenges and potential. Clin. Cancer Res. 17, 6389-6397. Weiner, L.M., Surana, R., Wang, S., 2010. Monoclonal antibodies: Versatile platforms for cancer immunotherapy. Nature Rev. Immunol. 10, 317-327.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 259 - 260 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.276.036.8Short communicationThe pro-inflammatory effects of the organic phase obtained during Cosorb process observed in different animal strainsCristina Adriana Dehelean1*, Codruta Soica2, Georgeta Simu3, Iulia Pinzaru1, Dorina Coricovac11Department of Toxicology, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., RO-300041, Timisoara, Romania2Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., RO-300041, Timisoara, Romania 3Department of Physical Chemistry, "Victor Babes" University of Medicine and Pharmacy Timisoara, Faculty of Pharmacy, 2 Eftimie Murgu Sq., RO-300041, Timisoara, Romania* cadehelean@umft.roIntroductionAnimal models are used intensively in scientific stud-ies regarding cancer, immune or autoimmune diseases as a relevant resource for gathering data concerning the appari-tion, the development and the progression of these diseas-es. In the field of environmental toxicology, the animals, also, play important roles in establishing the degree of tox-icity of the potential toxic agents. In the scientific research the mice are preferred as ani-mal models. The strain of mice is chosen by respecting dif-ferent conditions, such as: the type of experiment that will be performed, the susceptibility of the mice to develop the pathology or the signs specifics to the model desired, the mouse genetics, the lifespan and other factors experiment-related.The Cosorb process is known as the process used for the recovery of carbon monoxide (CO) from gas mixtures. This method requires an equimolar amount of CuCl and AlCl3 that will be added to an excess of toluene and the re-sult will be the formation of a CuAlCl4-toluene complex that is capable to fix CO (Foster, 2007). The objective of this study was to evaluate the pro-in-flammatory effect of the organic phase resulted during the Cosorb process by the means of ear-inflammation mouse model using 3 different strains of mice: Balb/c, SKH-1 and C57BL/6J mice. Materials and methodsFor this experiment there were used male Balb/c, SKH-1 and C57BL/6J mice weighing between 23-35g, purchased from Charles River Labs, Budapest, Hungary and housed in standard conditions in the Animal house Fa-cility from our University.The organic phase composition consists of the follow-ing aromatic volatile compounds: toluene (84.46%), xy-lems (5.3%) and benzene (0.1%). The ear-inflammation mouse model protocol proposed in this study was per-formed as described in the literature (Dkhil et al., 2010; Iyadomi et al, 2000) with several modifications. In brief, different volumes of the organic phase (20, 40 and 80 ul) were applied using a micro-pipette on the skin of the front and back of the right ear and the left ear was untreated in order to be used as control. The ear swelling was monitored for 24h post-application and at different time points: 2h, 4h, 8h and 24h were taken photos and the mice were weighed. At every time point mentioned, the mice were sacrificed under anesthesia and the both ears were cut off, sized and weighed. The increase in ear's weight determined by the organic phase application which represents the intensity of ear edema was calculated by subtracting the weight of the treated ear from that of the left ear, untreated, used as con-trol (Dkhil et al., 2010; Wang et al., 2011).Samples from control and treated ears of mice were collected and fixed in formalin solution for histopathologi-cal analysis. The samples will be stained with hematoxylin and eosin and analyzed. S3 OP 120260Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 259 - 260 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionOral presentationsResults and discussionThe aim of our study was to evaluate the pro-inflam-matory effects of the compounds found in the organic phase: toluene, xylene and benzene as a mixture of organic solvents by using animal models of ear inflammation. We decided to use three different strains of mice (Balb/c, SKH-1 and C57Bl/6J mice) to verify if the species variability in-fluences the effects of these compounds at skin level.Our data indicated the presence of erythema, swelling and edema, first signs being observable earlier than 2 hours post-application of the organic phase in all three strains of mice. The weights of the right ears treated with the organ-ic phase solution were bigger as compared to the left ears untreated used as controls, a marker of ear edema intensity. The capacity of inducing ear edema was dose dependent, the intensity of the effects being higher at the highest vol-umes added. In a previous study, we showed that topical applica-tion of organic and inorganic phases induced modifications in the physiological cutaneous parameters (hydration, tran-sepidermal waterloss and erythema) in a hairless SKH-1 mouse model (Coricovac et al., 2015; Simu et al., 2016). The use of xylene as an inducer of ear edema mouse model was associated with acute inflammation character-ized by severe vasodilation, edematous changes at skin level and infiltration of inflammatory cells (Igbe et al., 2010). Another signs of xylene toxicity at skin level after topical application were: increased vascular permeability, swelling within the dermis and proliferation of keratino-cytes (Dkhil et al., 2010). Iyadomi and coworkers showed that application of toluene to the ear skin of Balb/c mice induced ear swelling and skin irritancy in a dose depen-dent manner (Iyadomi et al., 2000). Similar results were observed in our study, too.Toluene is an aromatic organic solvent known as an environmental toxicant. Inhalation of toluene was associat-ed with airway inflammation and neurotrophin production in hippocampus of mice. Benzene and xylene induce irri-tation of the airway and dizziness in humans. Volatile or-ganic compounds as toluene, benzene and xylene were de-scribed as substances able to determine inflammatory re-sponses at pulmonary level, but also to modulate neurolog-ical responses in brain (Wang et al., 2012).According to the literature, Balb/c mice are suscepti-ble to develop tumors, like mammary and colon cancer, to infection diseases and as animal models for ear edema studies by the dermal application of different inflammatory agents (Chen et al., 2005; Iyadomi et al., 2000).SKH-1 hairless mice are a strain used very often in studies concerning the development of skin cancers and, in pathologies involving skin changes, due to the fact that the lack of hair offers a better observation of the changes that occur.ConclusionOur preliminary data indicate that the application of the organic solvents mixture induced ear inflammation in all three strains of mice used in the study. The information obtained in the present study is valuable, especially from the point of toxicity that might develop by the workers in the industry of CO recovery and, in addition, this mixture could be used as an agent for animal model of ear edema in order to test the anti-inflammatory effects of different compounds.AcknowledgmentThis research was supported by the PN-II-PT-PC-CA-2013-4-0612 grant, nr. 110/2014 (REMACAT).ReferencesDkil, M.A., Abdel-Baki, A.S., Al-Quirashi, S.,Al-Khalifa, M., 2010. Anti-inflammatory activity of the venom from samsum ants Pachycondyla sennaarensis. Afr. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 4(3), 115-118.Iyadomi, M., Ichiba, M., Zhang, J., Enoki, M., Tomokuni, K., 2000. Evaluation of skin irritants caused by organic solvents by means of the mouse ear thickness measurement method. J. Occup. Health 42, 44-46.Wang, Y.F., Shao, S.H., Xu, P., Yang, Q., Qian, L.S., 2011. Catechin-enriched green tea extract as a safe and effective agent for antimicrobial and anti-inflammatory treatment. Afr. J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 5(12), 1452-1461.Foster P.J., 2007. Thesis - Continuous co separation by liquid absorption in aqueous cuprous chloride (CuCl) and magnesium chloride (MgCl2) solution. Department of Chemical Engineering Brigham Young University.Igbe, I., Ching, F.P., Eromon A., 2010. Anti-inflammatory activity of aqueous fruit pulp extract of Hunteria umbellata k. schum in acute and chronic inflammation. Acta Pol. Pharm. Drug Res. 67(1), 81-85.Wang, F., Li, C., Liu, W., Jin, Y., 2012. Effect of exposure to volatile organic compounds (VOCs) on airway inflammatory response in mice. J. Toxicol. Sci. 137(4), 739-748.Coricovac, D., Dehelean, C., Pinzaru, I., Ionescu, D., Soica, C., Simu, G., 2015. Toxicological evaluation of the effects induced by the organic phase obtained via Cosorb process on skin physiological parameters Toxicol. Lett. 238(2S), S264.Simu, G.M., Coricovac, D., Cseh, L., Soica, C., Borcan, F., Ionescu, D., Andoni, M., Dragos, D., Dehelean C., 2016. Assessment of skin injuries induced by organic and inorganic phases of the Cosorb process by means of non-invasives techniques. Rev. Chim. (Bucharest) 62(2), 291-296.Chen, X., Oppenhelm, J.J, Howard, O.M.Z., 2005. BALB/c mice have more CD4CD25 T regulatory cells and show greater susceptibility to suppression of their CD4CD25- responder T cells than C57BL/6 mice. J. Leukoc. Biol. 78, 114-121.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 261 - 262 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.322.015.3Short communicationAntioxidant versus toxic capacity of selected herbal productsBlagica Jovanova*, Marija Hiljadnikova-Bajro, Tatjana Kadifkova PanovskaInstitute of Applied Biochemistry, Department of Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Ss. Cyril and Methodius University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* blagicajovanova@hotmail.comROS and antioxidant defense In the past 20 years numerous achievements were made in the area of testing the cellular damage caused by the excessive production of free radicals. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are strongly related with the onset of dis-eases such as cancers, atherosclerosis, neurodegenerative diseases, infections, chronic inflammatory diseases, diabe-tes, autoimmune diseases, hypertension, idiopathic pulmo-nary fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and asthma.ROS are produced from molecular oxygen as a result of the normal cellular metabolism in living organisms or as a result of environmental factors. The three major types of ROS that are of physiological significance are superox-ide anion, hydroxyl radical and hydrogen peroxide. They are essential for the physiological signaling pathways and other cell processes. However, these highly reactive mol-ecules, if present at high concentrations, damage the cell structures (such as lipids, proteins, nucleic acids) and al-ter their functions. The disbalance between the oxidant and antioxidant effects inside a viable cell in favor of the oxi-dants is described with the term "oxidative stress". Oxida-tive stress occurs when the balance between antioxidants and ROS is disrupted because of either depletion of anti-oxidants or accumulation of ROS. Consequently, high con-centrations of ROS result in a higher degree of oxidative stress leading to many pathological conditions.Aerobic organisms have integrated antioxidant sys-tems that are usually effective in blocking the harmful ef-fects of ROS. If present in small quantities, antioxidants are powerful agents that can prevent or reduce the oxida-tive destruction of biomolecules. Generally, antioxidants can be divided in two categories: enzymatic and nonen-zymatic. The major enzymatic antioxidants are superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, thioredoxin, peroxiredoxin, glutathione transferase. Nonenzymatic an-tioxidants include vitamins C and E, b-carotene, uric acid, and glutathione. However, in pathological conditions, the antioxidant systems can be overwhelmed, causing disbal-ance of ROS/antioxidant index. Consequently, additional source of antioxidants is essential, to enhance the metabo-lism against the excess of free radicals.Natural sources of antioxidantsBeside the many benefits of the plant utilization for different reasons, herbs have been identified as sources of various phytochemicals, many of which cause antioxidant effects. For a very long time, herbs were the only medici-nal therapy that people used in the treatment of various dis-eases. Although synthetic drugs were developed in the 19th century and replaced herbal therapy in many fields of treat-ment, herbs are still found in 40% of prescription drugs. Additionally, herbs are also used in the cosmetics industry, food industry and chemical industry. Herbs and spices are reliable sources of potential bio-active compounds in human diet. Research indicates that these bioactive components may act alone or in combina-tion with other bioactive moieties to reduce disease risk through their antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antirheu-matic, hepatoprotective, antimutagenic, and anticancer ac-tivities.