In the last decade, several new AEDs have been licensed around the world (Krasowski, 2010). Considering the variable nature of epilepsy, patient's pathophysiologi-cal features, co-medications, AED therapy must be careful-ly optimized for each patient by the aid of therapeutic mon-itoring (TDM), concerning both therapeutic and toxicolog-ical profiles. In many cases TDM facilitates drug treatment by increasing clinical effectiveness and safety while mini-mizing adverse effects, as well as reducing treatment costs. The availability of a simple, validated and inexpensive ana-lytical method for reliable measurements of drug concentra-tions in biological fluids is pivotal for its successful utiliza-tion in pharmacokinetic and bioequivalence studies, and for therapeutic drug monitoring in different clinical situations. Various analytical methods have been reported for measure-ment of AEDs in biological fluids, including immunoassays and chromatographic methods (gas chromatography and high-performance liquid chromatography). Immunoanaly-sis techniques are specifically designed to analyze a single drug but the chromatographic methods can allow for the si-multaneous separation and quantitation of many compounds in a single run which is important when is need the simulta-neously monitoring the AEDs in polytherapy, which is giv-en very common to patients (Aldaz et al., 2011)The aim of this study was to develop a sensitive and fast bioanalytical method for simultaneous determine the plasma concentration of recent old and new AEDs used in the current clinic practice: lamotrigine (LTG), leveti-racetame (LEV), carbamazepine (CBZ), the active metab-olite carbamazepine -10,11-epoxide (CBZ-EP) and valpro-ic acid (VPA). Materials and methodsChemicals and reagentsLTG, LEV, CBZ, CBZ-EP, VPA and nitrazepam (in-ternal standard,IS), were purchased from Sigma Aldrich, USA. Methanol and acetonitrile, HPLC grade, were pur-chased from Merck, Germany. Potassium dihydrogen phosphate and phosphoric acid for buffer preparation were analytical grade and were also obtained from Merck, Ger-many. For all analyses HPLC grade water purified with a TKA_LAB Reinstwasser system (Niederelbert, Germany) was used. OASIS HLB cartridges (30 mg/1 ml) used for sample preparation were supplied by Waters, USA.Human plasma samplingPlasma was collected from healthy volunteers (drug-free plasma for the method validation) and from the epilep-tic patients undergoing chronic AEDs therapy. Blood sam-ples were collected in the morning, just before the first dai-ly drug administration, into heparinized tubes and centri-fuged at 3000 rpm for 15 min. The supernatant plasma was transferred into test tubes and frozen at -20 degC until analy-sis. The Ethics Committee at the Faculty of Pharmacy and the Faculty of Medicine, Ss. Cyril and Methodius Univer-sity - Skopje, approved the research protocol for this study S2 PP 73164Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 163 - 164 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsand all volunteers signed the Study Informed Consent form. Chromatographic conditionsThe assay was performed on Shimadzu LC-30 Nexera, using Zorbax Eclipse XDB C-18 (150 x 4.6 mm; 5 um) col-umn, using gradient elution with acetonitrile and phosphate buffer (pH 3.0), as a mobile phase. The analyses were run at a flow rate of 1 mL/min, volume of injection 50 uL, temper-ature 25 oC and UV detection was set at 210 nm. Experimental design (Fractional factorial 34) was used for the optimization of chromatographic conditions. The influence of four experimental factors (pH of buffer solu-tion in the mobile phase, initial and final content of ace-tonitrile in mobile phase during gradient elution and the gradient time) was investigated at three factor levels. All remaining factors such as the flow rate of mobile phase, wavelength of UV detection, temperature of the column and volume of injection were kept at constant level. The method was validated according to the EMA Guideline on validation of bioanalytical method (EMA, 2011). Preparation of standards and quality control standardsStock solution of analytes (500 ug mL LTG, 500 ug/mL LEV, 500 ug/mL CBZ, 500 ug/mL VPA, 200 ug/mL CBZ-EP) and the IS (500 ug/mL ) were prepared by dis-solving appropriate amounts of each compound in metha-nol. Working solutions were prepared daily from stock so-lutions by dilution with purified water. Calibration stan-dards were made by spiking the blank plasma aliquots with appropriate volume of working solutions of LTG, LEV, CBZ, VPA and CBZ-EP at 7 different concentrations con-taining the IS at constant concentration 10 ug/ml. The re-sulting plasma concentration ranges were: 1.0 - 25.0 ug/mL (LTG); 3.0 -70.0 ug/mL (LEV); 1.0 - 25.0 ug/mL (CBZ); 0.5 -15.0 ug/mL (CBZ-EP); 25.0 - 250 ug/mL (VPA). Four levels of quality control (QC) samples were prepared at the concentration range of: 1.0; 5.0; 10.0; 20.0 ug/ml for LTG; 3.0; 7.5; 30.0; 60.0 ug/ml for LEV; 1.0; 5.0; 10.0; 20.0 ug/ml for CBZ; 0.5; 2.5; 5.0; 10.0 ug/ml for CBZ-EP and 25.0; 100; 150; 200 ug/ml for VPA, in same way as de-scribe above and stored at - 20 oC until analysis.Sample preparation The sample preparation step is an important compo-nent of bioanalytical method i.e determination of plasma concentration of AEDs. To find the most efficient method, sample pre-tretment methodology was initially investigat-ed by protein precipitation (PP) and than a solid- phase ex-traction (SPE) using Oasis (r) HLB cartridges.Results and discussionUnder the proposed chromatographic conditions, no interfering peaks were observed in the retention times of analytes. Calibration curves were constructed by means of the least-squares method, obtained by plotting the analyte - IS peak area ratios versus the respective analyte concen-trations. The correlation coefficients were 0.9989 for LTG, 0.9979 for LEV, 0.9986 for CBZ, 0.9978 for CBZ-EP and 0.9978 for VPA, respectively. The results for within-run and between-run accuracy and precision were within rec-ommended limits. The pretreatment of plasma samples by protein precipitation, gave no profitable results because the processed samples were relatively unclean with low recov-ery. Since SPE procedures are usually associated to high and reliable extraction of AEDs from human plasma, sev-eral SPE conditions were tested, including washing steps and eluting solvents. The use of SPE procedure (loaded a 200 uL of sample, washing with 1ml water and 1 ml 5% methanol and eluting with methanol) demonstrated to be the best option as it allowed a more effective elimination of interfering substances with good recoveries. The abso-lute mean recoveries for determined AEDS and metabo-lite ranged from 85.2% to 99.6% while mean recovery of IS was 98.9% for SPE. The stability studies analytes indi-cate that stock solutions and plasma samples were stable under different storage conditions and that no stability re-lated problems would be expected during the routine plas-ma sample analysis.The proposed method gives satisfactory results when was applied to plasma samples collected from epileptic pa-tients simultaneously treated with carbamazepine and le-vetiracetame; lamotrigine and valproate; or in combination levetiracetame, lamotrigine and carbamazepine. ConclusionA simple, sensitive, precise and accurate HPLC meth-od has been developed for simultaneous determination of LEV, LTG, CBZ, CBZ-EP and VPA in human plasma sam-ples. Time of analysis and resolution were simultaneously optimized by applying Fractional factorial 34 design. To-tal chromatographic analysis time per sample was approx-imately 15 min. The proposed method can be applied suc-cessfully in routine analysis for the estimation of therapeu-tic concentration of LEV, LTG, CBZ, CBZ-EP and VPA in human plasma.ReferencesAldaz, A., Ferriols, R., Aumente, D., Calvo, M.V., Farre, M.R., Garcia,m B., Marques, R., Mas, P., Porta, B., Outeda, M., Soy, D., 2011. Pharmacokinetic monitoring of antiepileptic drugs. Farmacia Hospitalaria 35, 326 - 339.European Medicines Agency, 2011. Guideline on validation of bioanalytical methods. Committee for Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP).Krasowski, D.M., 2010. Therapeutic drug monitoring of the newer anti epilepsy medications. Pharmaceuticals 3, 1909-1935.Vajda, F.J., 2007. Pharmacotherapy of epilepsy: new armamentarium, new issues. J. Clin. Neurosci. 14, 813-823.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 165 - 166 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.212.7.014.4Short communicationTrend analysis in stability data for Caffetin Cold film coated tabletsSanja Despotovska*, Milena Dobrkovic Shotarovska, Mena Ivanoska, Ana Aleksandric, Marina Mandzukovska, Dragana Kafedziska, Vasilka Dubrova Koceva, Hristina BabunovskaALKALOID AD-Skopje, Pharmaceutical, Chemical and Cosmetics Company, Aleksandar Makedonski 12, Skopje, Macedonia* sdespotovska@alkaloid.com.mkIntroductionHigh-quality stability data is crucial to pharmaceutical industries around the world. These data form the basis for justifying specification limits (Huynh-Ba, 2008). The stability data, combined with the specification limits, are used for setting and/or extending product shelf life and for establishing product storage conditions. Stability studies are initiated annually and may be used to support product or process modifications (ICH, 2003). These studies are vital for ensuring the continuous quality of production batches. In order to identify potential issues and to ensure data quality, it is often advantageous to use objective and statistical methods for trend analysis of stability data. The presented paper describes trending of stability results for pharmaceutical product Caffetin Cold film coated tablets. This paper will provide an overview of one statistical approach for trending stability results. According to ICH Q1E guideline (ICH, 2003), evaluation of the stability data, after the assessment of the shelf life, should progress through the trends and variability of the long-term stability data (Yoshioka and Stella, 2000). The evaluation of stability data (not necessary statistical) is done in order to identify the trends and their impact on the stability of the product (Yoshioka and Stella, 2000).Materials and methodsIn order to evaluate stability data and find the pattern of data that indicates change over time, stability studies for Caffetin Cold film coated tablets were subjected to trend analysis. The trending analysis was performed to evaluate whether the data demonstrates increasing or decreasing trend (change of mean) for the stability indicating parameters over time or the data indicates no discernible change at all. In order to evaluate trends and variability of the long-term stability data, we evaluated three stability indicating parameters: assay, dissolution rate and related and degradation products. In order to assess the trend of the parameters Paracetamol assay, Paracetamol dissolution rate, Dextromethorphan assay, Dextromethorphan dissolution rate, Pseudoephedrine assay, Pseudoephedrine dissolution rate, Ascorbic acid assay, Ascorbic acid dissolution rate and related and degradation products, we collected all the stability data obtained for this parameters through the years and graphically presented them. The results are presented both as a table and as a graph.Results and discussionCaffetin Cold film coated tablets is a pharmaceutical product with long manufacturing history with the same manufacturing route, on the same manufacturing site and following described manufacturing procedure in Alkaloid AD, Skopje and with well-established stability. Ongoing stability studies in Alkaloid AD, Skopje are performed on one batch annually for long term stability testing, including the batches from years of 2010, 2011, 2012, 2013, 2014 and 2015.Evaluation was conducted using one common statistical graph (scatter plotting of the results) in order to compare the obtained results. The obtained results were S2 PP 74166Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 165 - 166 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsincorporated into respective trends. The suitable trends for all stability indicated parameters were defined from the collected stability data. The evaluation of stability data was conducted in non-statistical way in order to identify the trends.Parameters such as Paracetamol assay, Paracetamol dissolution rate, Dextromethorphan dissolution rate, Pseudoephedrine dissolution rate and Ascorbic acid dissolution rate indicate no discernible change. All the results retain almost constant around the initial result value. Results for this investigated parameter remain within the shelf-life requirements. Parameters Dextromethorphan assay and Ascorbic acid assay indicate mild decreasing trend, but results remain within the limits for shelf life specification. Parameter Pseudoephedrine assay indicate a trend in which a single result within a batch is resulting in atypical trend compared to the other batches. This situation shows a single atypical result within a study that cannot yet form a trend and needs further investigation in the following frequencies of testing (in order to avoid false alarm). For all other collected data we find that they indicate mild decreasing trend, but results remain within the limits for shelf life specification. Parameters 4-aminophenol, unknown impurity and total impurities indicate no discernible change.Parameter Paracetamol assay indicates no discernible change. All results retain almost constant around the initial result value. Results for investigated parameter Paracetamol assay remain within the shelf-life requirements. Parameter Paracetamol dissolution rate indicates no discernible change. All the results retain almost constant around the initial result value. Results for investigated parameter Paracetamol dissolution rate remain within the shelf-life requirements. Parameter Dextromethorphan assay indicates mild decreasing trend, but the results remain within the limits for shelf life specification. Parameter Dextromethorphan dissolution rate indicates no discernible change. All the results retain almost constant around the initial result value. Results for investigated parameter Dextromethorphan dissolution rate remain within the shelf-life requirements. Parameter Pseudoephedrine dissolution rate indicates no discernible change. All the results retain almost constant around the initial result value. Results for investigated parameter Pseudoephedrine dissolution rate remain within the shelf-life requirements. Parameter Pseudoephedrine assay indicate a trend in which a single result within a batch is resulting in atypical trend compared to the other batches. This situation shows a single atypical result within a study that cannot yet form a trend and needs further investigation in the following frequencies of testing (in order to avoid false alarm). For all other collected data we find that they indicate mild decreasing trend, but results remain within the limits for shelf life specification. Parameter Ascorbic acid assay indicates mild decreasing trend, but results remain within the limits for shelf life specification. Parameter Ascorbic acid dissolution rate indicate no discernible change. All the results retain almost constant around the initial result value. Results for investigated parameter Ascorbic acid dissolution rate remain within the shelf-life requirements. Parameters 4-aminophenol, unknown impurity and total impurities indicate no discernible change.ConclusionFrom the presented results it could be observed that the parameters assay, dissolution rate and related and degradation products, considered as critical quality attributes, reveal very similar profile for all batches tested at the same conditions. The results of all batches follow a trend suggesting that there is no statistically significant difference in parameters trends.ReferencesHuynh-Ba, K., 2008. Handbook of stability testing in pharmaceutical development: Regulations, methodologies, and best practices. Springer Science & Business Media, (ISBN: 978-0-387-85626-1) pp. 303-320.International Conference on Harmonization on Technical Requirements for Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use (ICH), 2003. Guideline on Evaluation for stability data, Q1E, Step 4, Harmonized Tripartite Guideline, ICH, Geneva, Switzerland.Yoshioka, S., Stella, V.J., 2000. Stability study of drugs and dosage forms. Kluwer Academic Publishers, (ISBN-0-306-46404-7) pp. 61-120.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 167 - 168 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.322:659.1(497.7) 615.322:659.1(497.11)Short communicationComparative analysis of advertising and promotion of traditional herbal medicine and food supplement at different markets - case studyMarjan Dzeparoski1*, Suzana Trajkovic-Jolevska21Bionika Pharmaceuticals, Skupi 15, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* marjan.dzeparoski@bionikapharm.comIntroductionMacedonia and Serbia fully follow EU regulation of medicines. Herbal medicines in Macedonia are regulated by the Law on Medicines and Medical Devices (2007) and the Regulation on the registration of traditional herbal me-dicinal products from 2008.