The direct addition of spices to food is the most com-mon technological method, in order to improve its taste, smell and organoleptic effect, to increase the freshness of products and at least to preserve the products in a proper way (Kostic-Nikolic, 2013). However, these days numer-ous efforts have been made to find alternative solutions to the aim of avoiding undesirable inactivation, and adultera-tion of the smell and taste. Spraying, dipping, and coating treatment of food with active natural principles are current-ly applied to product prior to packaging as valid options (Ahmed and Ismail, 2010). Therefore the aim of this study was to assess the us-age of some Lamiaceae spices and its respective prepara-tions and formulations as natural preservatives in treatment of processed meat products, as well as developing novel technological formulation (active packing) to maintain the food quality and to prolong their shelf-life.Materials and methodsDry leaves of Salvia officinalis and Rosmarinus offici-nalis were purchased from Herbal Pharmacy-Alkaloid AD, Skopje. Dry leaves, essential oils (EO) and dry extracts (wa-ter, alcoholic) were prepared according to the methods list-ed in the monographs in the European pharmacopoeia or in the Cvetkovikj et al. (2013) paper, and added in differ-ent meet products (minced meat, kebabs, and sausages) as preserving agents. The different plant preparations were chemically char-acterized by Agilent HPLC-DAD and HPLC-DAD-ESI-MSn to examine the polyphenols and for the volatile com-pounds characterization Agilent GC-FID-MS system was used. Chitosan/sodium-triphosphate/pectin microparticles containing extract from sage were prepared using spray drying technique (Buchi B-290, Flawil, Switzerland).Microbial strains: Staphylococcus aureus ATCC 25923, Staphylococcus epidermidis ATCC 12228, Clos-tridium sporogenes ATCC 19404, Escherichia coli ATCC 25992, Klebsiella pneumoniae ATCC 700603 and clinical S5 OP 221466Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 465 - 466 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsOral presentationsisolates from patients (Listeria monocytogenes, Salmonel-la enteritidis) were used. Disc diffusion (the zone of inhibition was determined, expressed in mm) and disk dilution (the minimal inhibi-tory concentration-MIC was determinate) methods were used in order to investigate the antimicrobial activity of the preparations. To assess the antioxidant potential of the plant prepa-rations and formulation, b-carotene linoleic acid assay was performed according to Wettasinghe and Shahidi (1996), with small modifications, while the thiobarbituric acid (TBA) test for secondary products of lipid oxidation sug-gested by Tarladgis et al. (1960), and modified by Shahidi et al. (1987) was used.Results and discussionWith HPLC-DAD-ESI-MSn qualitative analysis of the extracts were performed and 27 different compounds were detected. The identified compounds were classified in four groups: nine hydroxycinnamic acid derivates, 10 flavone glycosides of luteolin and apigenin, two flavanone glycosides of hispidulin and six phenolic diterpenes, deri-vates of carnosol. Rosmarinic acid was predominant com-pound, present with more than 40% in the analysed sam-ples. On the other hand, the ratio of the flavanone glyco-sides and the phenolic diterpenes was almost equal.The EO yield was 1.65% and complies with the min-imal requirements of the European Pharmacopoeia. With GC/FID/MS in total 32 constituents were detected. The identified compounds were classified in three groups: ox-ygenated monoterpenes (68.76%), followed by the mono-terpenes fraction (12.91%) and oxygenated sesquiterpenes (7.36%). The sesquiterepene fraction and the diterepenes were detected in amounts < 3.00%. As principal EO con-stituents were considered: camphor, 1,8-cineole, cis-thu-jone, trans-thujone, camphene and viridiforol. The chem-ical composition of the EO did not comply with the ISO 9909 and GDC standards.The gas chromatographic analysis of the dry extract revealed four different classes of terpenes compounds (ox-ygenated monoterpenes, diterpens, oxygenated sesqutere-penes and sesquterepenes). When compared to the EO it is evident that in the methanolic extracts the highly volatile monoterepenes were not detected. The activity of the preserving additives (dry minced leaves, dry extracts, essential oil and microparticles load-ed with extract) - was evaluated by the growth inhibition and MIC for food borne microorganisms (four Gram-posi-tive and three Gram-negative bacteria). Generally all addi-tives showed better activity towards Gram-positive bacte-ria that is in accordance with the literature. The most potent antimicrobial activity posses the EO, with lowest MIC (mg/mL) determinate towards five microorganisms (S. aureus, S. epidermidis, L. monocytogenes, E. coli and K. pneumonia) that can be attributed to the presence of oxygenated mono-terpenes (60% of EO), which is in correlation with the on-line available data (Pierozan et al., 2009). The microparti-cles showed antimicrobial activity alike EO. On the other hand, the extract incorporated into mic-roparticles (1 mg/mL), showed strong antioxidant activi-ty thus inhibiting 90% of the oxidation of the linoleic acid compared to the extracts that can be probably attributed to the synergistic action between the dry extract and the formulation properties of the designed carrier system. Ad-ditionally, performing the TBA test, this formulation pos-sesses the potential to protect the product from lipid ox-idation, and to provide longer shelf-life storage with low TBA number (0.2029) compared with the other investigat-ed preparations (Valesco and Williams, 2011).ConclusionDifferent preparations of dry plant leaves from sage and rosemary, showed antimicrobial and antioxidant activity that have potential to be used as natural preservatives for processed meat products. Additionally, novel technological approach was investigated in order to diminish the adulteration of the taste, smell and color on the meat as most common side effect of adding of natural additives. The obtained results suggest that the dry extract incorporated into microparticles can be considered as promising technological solution in preserving food.ReferencesAhmed, A.M., Ismail, T.H., 2010. Improvement of the quality and shelf-life of minced beef mixed with soyprotein by Sage (Salvia officinalis). Afr. J. Food Sci. 4, 330-334.Cvetkovikj, I., Stefkov, Gj., Acevska, J., Petreska-Stanoeva, J., Karapandzova, M., Stefova, M., Dimitrovska, A., Kulevanova, S., 2013. Polyphenolic characterization and chromatographic methods for fast assessment of culinary Salvia species from South East Europe. J. Chrom. A. 1282, 38-45.Kostic-Nikolic, S., 2013. Technological Innovation and Justification of Use Essential Oils in Meat Industry. Human and Social Sciences at the Common Conference 1, 17-21.Pierozan, M.K., Pauletti, G.F., Rota, L., Atti dos Santos, A.C., Lerin, L.A., Di Luccio, M., Mossi, A.J., Atti-Serafini, L., Cansian, R.L., Oliveira J.V., 2009. Chemical characterization and antimicrobial activity of essential oils of Salvia L. species. Ciencia e Tecnologia de Alimentos 29, 764-770. Shahidi, F., Rubin, L.J., Wood, D.F., 1987. Control of lipid oxidation in cooked ground pork with antioxidants and dinitrosyl ferrohemochrome. J. Food Sci. 52, 564-567.Tarladgis, B.G., Watts, B.M., Younathan, M.T., Dugan, L.R., 1960. A distillation method for the quantitative determination of the malonaldehyd in rancid foods. J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc. 69, 1371-1376. Velasco, V., Williams, P., 2011. Improving meat quality through natural antioxidants. Chil. J. Agric. Res. 71, 313-322.Wettasinghe, M., Shahidi, F., 1996. Oxidative stability of cooked comminuted lean pork as affected by alkali and alkali-earth halides. J. Food Sci. 61, 1160-1164.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 467 - 468 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 633.8:581.135.5(497.115)Short communicationEssential oils from Kosovar aromatic plants Avni Hajdari1, 2*, Behxhet Mustafa1,21 Department of Biology, Faculty of Mathematical and Natural Science, University of Prishtina "Hasan Prishtina", Mother Theresa St.,10000 Prishtine, Kosovo.2 Institute for Biological and Environmental Researches, Faculty of Mathematical and Natural Science, University of Prishtina "Hasan Prishtina", Mother Theresa St.,10000 Prishtine, Kosovo. * avni.hajdari@uni-pr.eduIntroductionKosovo retains a great biological diversity, current-ly around 1 800 plant species known to make up the flo-ra of Kosovo, and these are deposited at the Herbarium of the Faculty of Mathematical and Natural Science of the University of Prishtina. However, the actual total flora of Kosovo is estimated to comprise more than 2 500 plant species (Krasniqi, 1998), which accounts for about 30% of the entire Balkan flora and 16% of the European flora, al-though Kosovo covers only 2.3% of the Balkan land area (Mustafa, 1998). The diversity of aromatic plants in Koso-vo isn't fully known, as up to now no detailed studies were carried in this regard. It is estimated that in Kosovo are present more than 100 aromatic plant species which can serve as a source of essential oils.Materials and methodsThis review focuses on the phytochemical composi-tion of essential oils obtained from wild population of aro-matic plats in Kosovo and on their biological activity (an-timicrobial and antioxidant activity). For that, previously published papers related to the chemical composition of the essential oil originated from Kosovo and their biologi-cal activities were used to produce this review. Results and discussionSeveral researches on chemical composition and/or their biological activity of the essential oil originated from Kosovo were carried by different working groups. The in-vestigated species belong to different family as follow: Cupressaceae (Juniperus communis L., J. communis subsp. alpina (Suter) Celak and J. oxycedrus L.), Pinaceae (Ab-ies alba Mill., A. borisii-regis Mattf., Pinus mugo Turra, P. peuce Griseb., P. heldreichii H. Christ, P. sylvestris L. and P. nigra J. F. Arnold, Picea abies (L.) H. Krasr. ), Lamiace-ae (Betonica officinalis L., Hyssopus officinalis L., Micro-meria albanica (Griceb. ex K. Mal) Silic), Origanum vul-gare L., Satureja montana L., Stachys sylvatica L., Thymus jankae Celak., Th. pulegioides L. subsp. montanus, Th. to-sevii Velen., Th. longicaulis Presl. ), Hypericaceae (Hyper-icum perforatum L.), Anacardiaceae (Pistacia terebinthus L.), Asteraceae (Achillea alexandri-regis Bornm. & Rud-sky, A. chrysocoma Friv., A.millefolium L., A. holosericea Sm., A. lingulata Waldst. & Kit., Artemisia absinthium L., A. vulgaris L., A. alba Turra., Tanacetum larcatum (Gris.) Kanitz.). Betulaceae (Betula pendula Roth), Tiliaceae (Til-ia cordata Mill.). Except chemical screening of the essential oil, in the plant species J. communis, J. oxycedrus, Pinus mugo, P. peuce, B. officinalis, S. sylvatica, S. montana, H. perfora-tum, P. terebinthus the chemical variability of the essential oil among different population were analysed too (Hajdari et al. 2012a; 2012b; 2014a; 2014b; 2015). Essential oil ob-tained from the following species: J. communis, P. mugo P. peuce, P. heldreichii, P. sylvestris, P. nigra, T.s longicaulis, M. albanica and P. terebinthus were tested for their antimi-crobial, while essential oil obtained from P. mugo P. peu-ce, P. heldreichii, P. sylvestris, P. nigra were tested for their antioxidant activity too. In scientific aspect the most inter-esting analysed taxa for their essential oils are M. albanica and A. alexandri-regis, which are local endemic of Koso-vo and are characterized with limited population size. Oth-er threatens aromatic plant species are A. alba, P. peuce, S. S5 OP 222468Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 467 - 468 (2016)Medicinal and aromatic plantsOral presentationsscardica and T. cordata, because of their uses as biological resource (listed in the IUCN Red List).ConclusionThe group of aromatic plant species in Kosovo rep-resents important natural resources in term of economi-cal aspects, in other hand aromatic plants represent anoth-er group of plants that are particularly threatened by over-exploitation. ReferencesHajdari, A., Novak, J., Mustafa, B., Franz, C., 2012a. Essential oil composition and antioxidant activity of Stachys sylvatica L. (Lamiaceae) from different wild populations in Kosovo. Nat. Prod. Res. 26, 1676-1681.Hajdari, A., Mustafa, B., Franz, C. Novak, J., 2012b. Variability of essential oils of Betonica officinalis (Lamiaceae) from different wild populations in Kosovo. Nat. Prod. Commun. 6, 1343-1346.Hajdari, A., Mustafa, B., Gashi, V., Nebija, D., Ibraliu, A., Novak, J., 2014a. Chemical composition of the essential oils of ripe berries of Juniperus oxycedrus L., growing wild in Kosovo. Biochem. System. Ecol. 57, 90-94. Hajdari, A., Mustafa, B., Nebija, D., Widelski, J., Glowniak, K., Novak, J., 2014b. Essential oil composition and variability of Hypericum perforatum L. from wild population in Kosovo. Curr. Issues Pharm. Med. Sci. 27, 51-54.Hajdari, A., Mustafa, B., Ahmeti, G., Pulaj, B., Lukas, B., Ibraliu, A., Novak, J., 2015. Essential oil composition variability among natural populations of Pinus mugo Turra in Kosovo. SpringerPlus. 4, 828. Krasniqi, F., 1998. Vecorite e flores dhe te vegjetacionit te Kosoves dhe problemi i mbrojtjes se tyre. Kerkime. 6, 51-66 (in Albanian).Mustafa, B., 1998. Basic characteristic of flora and vegetation of Kosovo and danger of their disappearance. Albanian. J. Nat. Tech. Sci. 5, 115-121.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 469 - 470 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.85.015.32Short communicationHomeopathic remedies - classical and complex homeopathy in SerbiaSnezana Cupara*, Olivera Milovanovic, Ana BarjaktarevicPharmacy Department, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University of Kragujevac, Svetozara Markovica 69, 34000 Kragujevac, Serbia* snezanacupara@yahoo.comHomeopathy uses medicines made of plants, animals or minerals. During preparation these remedies are repeatedly diluted and vigorously shaken at each stage of dilution. Their final potency is described in decimal (D) or centesimal (C) scale of dilution. There are low, medium and high potencies within each scale, while all D potencies are weaker then C potencies. Though, opinions on categorization of potencies may differ, potencies up to six are generally considered low potencies (6D or 6C). Classical homeopathic treatment involves taking a history of the case and a detailed examination. It differs from conventional treatment since it uses principle of treating the whole patient rather than individual symptoms. Improvement is seen as bothering symptoms are diminished or absent and patient reports more energy, better sleep and mood.