Oncotarget 6, 969-978.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 347 - 348 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.373Short communicationRecombinant monoclonal antibody rituximab - medical uses and structural characterizationDashnor Nebija1*, Christian Noe2, Bodo Lachmann2, Kristina Mladenovska3, Arlinda Daka3, Pranvera Breznica31Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina, Bulevardi i Deshmoreve 10000 Prishtina, Kosovo2Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Vienna, Althanstrasse, 14, 1090 Vienna, Austria3Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", "Mother Theresa" 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* dashnor.nebija@uni-pr.eduIntroductionThis paper addresses current topics related to CD-20 depleting agent rituximab, which has been widely used as a targeted therapy in the fields of oncology and rheumatol-ogy. Apart from its structure and function, relevant issues regarding the analytical methodologies applied for the as-sessment of the quality of this complex drug will be high-lighted as well. Rituximab is the first approved targeted biologic ther-apy for the treatment of haematological malignancies and it took very short time from its first description until the approval and clinical application. In USA it was approved in 1997, whereas in EU in 1998. Approved clinical indi-cations of rituximab include non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, rheumatoid arthritis and granulomatosis with polyangiitis and microscopic polyan-giitis (European Medicines Agency-EMA, 2016). Since the patents on MabThera and Rituxan expire in 2016 in USA and have already expired (2013) in EU, there are some bio-similars of rituximab in the late stages of clinical trials de-veloped by companies worldwide, whereas 'non-origina-tor biologicals' of rituximab are approved in some South American and Asia countries (GaBI, 2016). Pharmaceuti-cal formulation (Rituxan or Mabthera) is administered in-travenously and supplied at a rituximab concentration of 10 mg/ml in either 10 ml or 50 ml single-use vials.Structure - activity relationship Rituximab is genetically engineered chimeric mono-clonal antibody (mAb) that is produced in mammalian cell culture using Chinese hamster ovary cells. This IgG1an-tibody contains murine light and heavy chain variable re-gions, and human gamma 1 heavy chain and kappa light chain constant regions. During the chimerization pro-cess, murine variable domain of heavy and light chain was cloned into the human IgG1 immunoglobulin framework. In the chimerised version only variable domains have mu-rine origin (around 30%). The rest of molecule is human (around 70%). Rituximab binds specifically to the antigen CD20, which is found on the surface of normal and malig-nant B-lymphocytes (Reff et al., 1994), which in addition play a role in the pathogenesis of rheumatoid arthritis. The Fab domain of rituximab binds to the CD20 antigen on B lymphocytes, and the Fc domain recruits immune effector functions to mediate B-cell lysis through complement-de-pendent cytotoxicity (CDC), antibody-dependent cell me-diated cytotoxicity (ADCC) and apoptosis. As all biological drugs, rituximab has very complex na-ture, it contains 1328 amino acids with theoretical Mw of non- glycosylated form 144.54 kDa. It contains two identi-cal heavy and two identical light chains linked via disulfide bridges. Each heavy chain contains 451 amino acids (49.2 kDa) and pI 8.67, whereas each light chain contains 213 ami-no acids (23.06.kDa) and pI 8.26. The apparent Mw of ritux-imab is higher than 144.54 kDa, due to the presence of N-linked oligosaccharides attached in the N-glycosilation site at conserved asparagines N-301. Variable regions of both chains comprise complementarity determining regions (CDR1-3), being responsible for antigen recognition and binding. On the other hand, human Fc g1 (IgG1) fragment is responsible for ADCC and CDC. Heavy chains are linked via two interchain disulfide bonds at the flexible hinge region, while heavy and light chains are linked with a disulfide bridge. S4 OP 163348Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 347 - 348 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsStructural characterization As all biopharmaceuticals, especially mAbs, rituximab is extremely complex and heterogeneous drug. The main source of the antibody heterogeneity results from differenc-es in protein glycosylation which is one of the most common post-translational modifications of proteins produced in eu-karyotic cells although, primary structure variations, deami-nation, deamidation, lysine truncation, methionine oxidation, sulfation and phosphorilation can create additional IgG vari-ants. The characterization and stability study of rituximab are extensive and require a battery of orthogonal techniques as amino acid analysis, amino-terminal sequence analysis, peptide mapping, and analysis of oligosaccharides, ion-ex-change chromatography (IEC), cIEF, SDS-PAGE, and circu-lar dichroism (CD), UV spectroscopy, size exclusion chro-matography (SEC), cellular mediated cytotoxicity (CMC). The oligosaccharide structure was investigated by CZE and MALDI-TOF after isolation from HPAEC-PAD (Eu-ropean Medicines Agency-EMA, 2016). Two-dimension-al gel electrophoresis (2-DE) complemented with MALDI TOF MS analysis was used for the characterization of iden-tity, purity and structural integrity of rituximab. Experimen-tal data revealed typical migration behavior of mAbs, result-ing in poorly resolved spots with different isoelectric points and very small differences in Mw. Heavy chains migrated at about 50 kDa and light chains at about 23 kDa. After tryp-tic digestion of 2-DE separated proteins, peptide mass fin-gerprinting analysis was also used for the identification of rituximab heavy and light chains (Nebija et al., 2011). Gly-cosylation of IgG is critical for effector functions including complement fixation, Fc receptor binding on macrophages and ADCC. In addition clearance of IgG-antigen complexes from circulation is influenced by IgG glycosylation. It was shown that predominantly N-linked oligosaccharides pres-ent in rituximab belong to asialo, neutral complex biannte-nary oligosaccharide type different terminal galactose resi-dues, whereas terminal sialylated oligosaccharides are pres-ent only in minor amounts (Kamoda et al., 2004).Manufacturer of pharmaceutical product MabThera(r) as primary assay for characterization and lot release of N-linked glycans on glycoprotein drugs employed CE-LIF. A method for direct characterization of glycans using CE-LIF/MS has been reported, as well. Apart from major gly-can components this method allowed accurate identifica-tion of minor glycans such are asialo- and afucosylated spe-cies. Since the fucosilation affects biological activity and sialylation affects the pharmacokinetics of glycoprotein drugs, the identification of these species is of particular sig-nificance for the characterization of rmAbs. Charged vari-ants of rmAbs can be studied with different methods such as IEC, IEF, CZE. A simple and rapid method for determi-nation of relative amounts of rituximab glycoforms differ-ing in terminal galactose was reported. Most abundant ions corresponding to the glycoforms found on the rituximab heavy chain were monitored by mass selective detection in the selected-ion monitoring mode (Nebija et al., 2011).Lot release testing of the pharmaceutical product Rituxan included physicochemical and biological meth-ods, such as SDS-PAGE, peptide mapping, fragment IEC-HPLC, SECHPLC, glycan content, cIEF, CDC, UV-VIS. Validated human CDC assay was used for the determina-tion of potency. Galactose content on the heavy chain oli-gosaccharide was found to be critical parameter for biologi-cal activity, therefore another release test for glycan content was developed (CE-LIF). cIEF was used to positively iden-tify rituximab from other recombinant mAbs made by the manufacturer (US FDA CDER, 2016; Zhang et al., 2016).ConclusionAs a conclusion, since rituximab belongs to rmAbs, class of drugs obtained by rDNA technology, biological processes are involved in its production. Therefore it dem-onstrates high degree of inherent heterogeneity and com-plexity and the combination of different techniques should be used for the extensive characterization of its quality attri-butes, including identity, structural integrity, purity and sta-bility. This is of primary importance for the safety and effi-cacy of this class of drugs. In this regard, it was shown that gel electrophoresis and peptide mass fingerprinting analy-sis may represent an important strategy for the assessment of the quality of rituximab and other biopharmaceuticals. ReferencesEMA, Summary of the European public assessment report (EPAR) for MabThera, 2016. Available at: http://www.ema.europa.eu/ema/index.jsp?curl=pages/medicines/human /med ic ines /000165 /human_med_000897 .jsp&mid=WC0b01ac058001d124, accessed on April, 2016.GaBI Online - Biosimilars of rituximab. Available from: http://www.gabionline.net/Biosimilars/General/Biosimilars-of-rituximab, accessed on April, 2016.Kamoda, S., Nomura C., Kinoshita, M., Nishiura, S., Ishikawa, R., Kakehi, K., Kawasaki, N., Hayakawa, T., 2004. Profiling analysis of oligosaccharides in antibody pharmaceuticals by capillary electrophoresis. J. Chromatogr. A 1050, 211-16.Nebija, D., Kopelent-Frank, H., Urban, E., Noe, C.R., Lachmann, B., 2011. Comparison of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis patterns and MALDI-TOF MS analysis of therapeutic recombinant monoclonal antibodies trastuzumab and rituximab. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 56, 684-691.Reff, M.E., Carner, K., Chambers, K.S., Chinn, P.C., Leonard, J.E., Raab, R, Newman, R.A., Hanna, N., Anderson, D.R., 1994. Depletion of B cells in vivo by a chimeric mouse human monoclonal antibody to CD20. Blood 83, 435-644.USA FDA CDER. Available at http://www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/DevelopmentApprovalProcess/HowDrugsareDevelopedandApproved/ApprovalApplications/TherapeuticBiologicApplications/ucm107743.pdf; accessed on March 2016.Zhang, Z., Perrault, R., Zhao, Y., Ding, J., 2016. SpeB proteolysis with imaged capillary isoelectric focusing for the characterization of domain-specific charge heterogeneities of reference and biosimilar Rituximab. J Chromatography B 1020, 148-157.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 349 - 350 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.262.2(410)Short communicationComparison of emollient efficacy - a single centre, randomised, double-blind, bi-lateral comparison of two emollients prescribed in the UK for the management of dry skin conditions such as atopic eczema Jasmina Gallagher*, Phil RosherDermal Laboratories Ltd, Tatmore Pl/Preston Rd, Hitchin SG4 7QR, United Kingdom* jasmina.gallagher@dermal.co.ukIntroductionIn the UK, the National Institute of Clinical Excellence (NICE) clinical guidance on atopic eczema management in children from birth to the age of 12 years establishes emollient therapy as the treatment modality that should un-derpin all else (NICE quick reference guide, 2007). The guidance recommends continuing emollient therapy even when the skin appears healthy. Healthcare profession-als are advised to offer children with atopic eczema a re-gime of 'complete' emollient therapy involving a choice of non perfumed emollients to use every day, both as leave on moisturisers and as soap substitutes for routine wash-ing and bathing.Emollient formulations suitable for such use typically contain both oily occlusive substances, such as petrolatum, paraffin or mineral oil, which form a water impermeable film over the skin to decrease evaporation of physiologi-cal water from beneath, and humectant substances, such as glycerol and urea, which attract water to the skin (Cork, 2007; Loden, 2003; Rawlings et al., 2004; Watkins, 2008). In order to encourage treatment concordance, however, it is also crucially important that these products are formulat-ed in such a way that their physical characteristics render them appealing for patients to use over large surface areas and for long periods (Cork et al., 2003).Ideally, emollients should exert their skin softening and moisturising effects within the upper layers of the skin. Thick, greasy ointments undoubtedly exhibit good emollient characteristics, but are not very popular with pa-tients because they are not well absorbed into the skin and leave an oily residue which can feel uncomfortable and has a tendency to soil clothing and bed linen (Cork, 2007; Sidbury and Poorsattar, 2006). More popular emollients are formulated as oil-in-water creams or lotions to make them 'feel' lightweight and to encourage better absorption into the skin (Ersser et al., 2007). However, these dosage forms are less effective than ointments owing to their low-er oil content, resulting in reduced occlusive capabilities (Clark, 2004) Moreover, cream and lotion formulations ex-hibit poor substantivity and have a tendency to be easily rubbed off onto clothing, so they necessitate more frequent re-application than would be practicable for many patients. Emollient gels are alternative pharmaceutical presentations for atopic eczema sufferers and usually contain high con-centrations of oily ingredients in semi-solid aqueous sys-tems. To achieve maximum benefit, some of these gels, just like other emollients, need to be applied regularly and fre-quently.Performance evaluation methods for emollients and moisturisers are mainly focused on sensory aspects, skin visual appearance, perceived efficacy, and measurements of skin barrier hydration and integrity (Rawlings et al., 2004). However, few studies have involved patients di-rectly comparing the effectiveness of different emollients by using them concurrently or under conditions mimick-ing normal therapeutic use (Clark, 2004; Simpson, 2006). Consequently, the aim of this study was therefore to compare the effects on skin hydration of two emollients prescribed in the UK, DELP gel and ZB cream, and us-ing a dosage regimen consistent with most patients' prac-tical circumstances which limits their use of emollients to twice daily only. S4 OP 164350Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 349 - 350 (2016)Pharmaceutical technology and biotechnology / Cosmetology / BiopharmacyOral presentationsMaterials and methodsThis was a single centre, randomised, double blind, concurrent bi-lateral (within-patient) comparison in 18 fe-males with atopic eczema and dry skin of similar severity on their lower legs. Following 7 days' run-in with no use of emollients or moisturisers on the lower legs, DELP gel and ZB cream were each applied to one lower leg twice daily (approximately at 9am and 9pm) for 4 days and on the morning only on day 5. Washing of the lower legs was permitted only during the evening on days 2 and 4. The efficacy of both products was assessed by hydration mea-surements using a Corneometer CM825 probe (Courage-Khazaka electronic). The measurements were made on days 1 to 5 at approximately 9am immediately prior to the first daily application (the measurement on day 1 being baseline), and around 1pm and 5pm. The primary efficacy variable was the area under the curve (AUC) of the change from baseline corneometer readings over the 5 days. Results and discussionThe two emollients showed very different effects on skin hydration. The AUC for DELP gel significantly out-performed ZB cream. For DELP gel, the skin hydration ef-fect was substantial, long lasting and cumulative, with the readings each day generally increasing over the treatment period. Even the morning readings on days 3 and 5, fol-lowing washing the previous evening, were significantly better than baseline. In contrast, for ZB cream, skin hy-dration was not significantly different from baseline at any time point.ConclusionThis study, performed by subjects with atopic ecze-ma and dry skin using a dosage regimen simulating nor-mal/practical use, has demonstrated very significant per-formance differences between two marketed emollients. Whereas DELP gel achieved substantial, long lasting and cumulative skin hydration, ZB cream achieved no measur-able improvement compared to before treatment. Health-care professionals should be aware of this when prescrib-ing these products. ReferencesClark, C., 2004. How to choose a suitable emollient.