Acid and alkali degradation was performed using 23 factorial design (three variables considered at two levels: 0.01M and 0.1M HCl/ NaOH heated at 25 degC and 60 degC for 60 and 120 min) was conducted to set up eight experi-ments for each stressor. For oxidative degradation two variables were consid-ered at two levels (the high level for H2O2 and time was 30% and 24 h, and the low level was 3% and 2 h, respec-tively), a 22 factorial design was conducted to set up four experiments. 22 factorial designs was conducted to set up thermal degradation where the high level values were 105degC and 5 h and the low level were 80 degC and 3 h, respectively. Photo degradation study was performed by exposing the drug powder, spread as a thin film in a covered petri plates and exposed to direct sunlight for 3, 5 and 12 h. Ad-ditionally, control study in dark was run simultaneously. All stress studies were performed at an initial drug con-centration of 1 mg/mL in amber color glassware in order to protect the solutions from light degradation.Results and discussionUnder the proposed chromatographic conditions, sat-isfactory separation (Rs >1.5) of SIM and all seven impu-rities stated in the European pharmacopeia was achieved proving the stability-indicating power of the method. Ac-cording to the results obtained from the degradation study SIM is susceptible to degradation under acid, alkali, oxi-dative and photolytic conditions. The applied factorial de-sign, determine significant factors responsible for degra-dation and provides prediction of the optimal conditions.The relationship between each factor and their interac-tion were evaluated by creating Pareto chart. These analy-sis indicated that under acidic condition, strength of HCl and temperature were most significant factors and for alka-line condition, temperature and time of exposure. Further-more, desirability plots were generated for acid and alka-li conditions, providing prediction of conditions for opti-mum degradation. It was suggested that for acidic stress, 10% degrada-tion would be achieved by treating with 0.1 M HCl at 25 degC for 60 min. When these conditions were adopted in practice, the resulting degradation was 10.78%. Also, for alkaline degradation 10% degradation would be achieved by using 0.1M NaOH heated for 10 min. at 25 degC. The actual degradation, when these conditions were adopted in practice was 11.12%.For oxidative degradation, it has been observed that 18.75% degradation can be achieved with 30% H2O2 at 25 degC for 60 min. For photolytic conditions about 3.9% degradation has been obtained after exposure of UV light for 12h.The desirability plots obtained from thermal degra-dation study demonstrated that an increase in temperature from 80 degC to 105 degC favored the degradation significantly. The targeted drug degradation was obtained heating the so-lution at 80 degC for 5 h.Thus, factorial design approach was successfully used to achieve optimum degradation conditions for SIM and simple, specific, stability-indicating LC/MS method was developed.ConclusionThis study highlights significant utility of DoE in op-timization of forced degradation conditions. Using 2n full factorial design degradation conditions were optimized to obtain the targeted level of degradation. The use of DoE to identify theoretical values of variables for optimum deg-radation was successful, because when these parameters were put in practice, the % degradation obtained matched the predicted degradation. This suggests that factorial de-sign approach can replace the trial and error approach used to achieve optimum degradation in forced degradation studies.ReferencesDolan, J.W., 2002. Stability-indicating assay. LCGC North America. 347-349.International conference on harmonisation of technical Requirements for registration of pharmaceuticals for human use (ICH). 2003. ICH Q1A. Stability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products. Harmonized tripartite guideline.Kurmi, M., Kumar, S., Singh, B., Singh, S., 2014. Implementation of design of experiments for optimization of forced degradation conditions and development of a stability-indicating method for furosemide. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 96, 135-143. Klick, S., Muijselaar, P.G., Waterval, J., Eichinger, T., Korn, C., Gerding, T.K., Debets, A.J., Sanger-van de Griend, C.E., van den Beld, C., Somsen G.W., De Jong, G.J., 2005. Towards generic approach for stress testing of drug substances and drug products. Pharm. Technol. 29, 48-66.Singh, S., Junwal, M., Modhe, G., Tiwari, H., Kurmi, M., Parashar, N., Sidduri, P., 2013. Forced degradation studies to assess the stability of drugs and products. Trends. Anal. Chem. 49, 71-88.Singh, S., Bakshi, M., 2002. Development of validated stability-indicating assay methods - critical review. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 15, 1011-1040.Singh, S., Bakshi, M., 2000. Guidance on Conduct of Stress tests to determine inherent stability of drugs. Pharm. Technol. 4, 1-14. Sonawane S., Gide P., 2011. An experimental design approach for the forced degradation studies and development of a stability-indicating LC method for eplerenone in tablets, J. Liquid Chromatogr. Relat. Technol. 34, 2020-2031. Lundstedt, T., Seifert, E., Abramo, L., Thelin, B., Nystrom, A., Pettersen, J., Bergman, R., 1998. Experimental design and optimization. Chemom. Intell. Lab. Syst. 42, 3-40.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 149 - 150 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.014.2:544.351-145.82]:615.074Short communicationResidual solvent profiling in active pharmaceutical ingredients; approaches in sample preparation and method optimizationAna Poceva Panovska*, Jelena Acevska, Katerina Brezovska, Rumenka Petkovska, Aneta DimitrovskaInstitute of Applied Chemistry and Pharmaceutical Analysis, Faculty of Pharmacy, University Ss. Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* anpo@ff.ukim.edu.mkIntroductionOrganic solvents are widely used in the manufacturing process of pharmaceutical products. Their application in the synthesis of active pharmaceutical ingredients (APIs) is of exceptional importance as the use of appropriate solvents may enhance the yield or determine characteristics such as crystal form, purity and solubility (Grodowska and Parcze-wski, 2010). The European Pharmacopoeia (Ph.Eur., 2015) limits the amount of residual solvents (RS) in pharmaceuti-cals, considering the ICH guideline for RS (Q3C). Beyond the influence on safety and quality of the active pharmaceu-tical ingredients, the residual solvent profile indicates their manufacturing history. This core parameter for API finger-printing allows for authentication and identification of the API origin (Poceva-Panovska et al., 2016). MethodologyThe main technique employed in RS analysis is gas chromatography (GC) because of its suitability for anal-ysis of volatile samples and substantial separating capa-bility of capillary columns. European Pharmacopoeia (Ph.Eur.) in the general chapter recommend GC coupled with headspace (HS) sampling system for qualitative and quan-titative determinations of residual solvent. This technique is robust, convenient and readily automated and it is the method that is generally used for the control of residual solvents. As reported in 80% of the literature citations for GC procedures on RS testing, flame ionization detector (FID) is most commonly used for the detection of resolved compounds because of its low detection limits, wide lin-ear dynamic range, robustness, ease of operation, and gen-eral reliability and utility, especially for trace organic com-pounds (Camarasu et al., 2006). However profiling of the RSs in practice using the GC-FID method, usually require additional identification tool because of the co-elution and possible misinterpretation of the RS peaks. In order to confirm identifications and solve co-elutions Ph. Eur. proposes conformation analysis to be performed on a second chromatographic column coated with different stationary phase.Another more convenient approach to solve possi-ble misinterpretation of the RS peaks is the use of GC-FID/MS, since the mass spectrometer adds an additional spectrometric dimension to the identification. Mass spec-trometry also excels for determination of co-eluting peaks through use of extracted ion or SIM ion chromatograms, thereby eliminating the need of additional analysis on dif-ferent columns (Poceva-Panovska et al., 2016). Sample preparationAlthough pharmacopoeias propose their methods for control of residual solvents, practically and through the lit-erature they are found to be disadvantageous due to their long equilibration and analysis time, relatively complex sample preparation and quantification problems. In order to solve these issues, different aspects of method develop-ment and sample preparation have to be considered. Opti-mized sample preparation conditions, including HS condi-tions and dilution media, are crucial for the reliability of the residual profiling results.S2 PP 66150Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 149 - 150 (2016)Pharmaceutical analysis / Quality assurance / Regulatory affairsPoster presentationsInternal standardThe proposed Ph. Eur. methodology for RS analysis does not utilize internal standard (IS) for quantification. The use of IS in RS analysis can be beneficial since it ac-counts for routine variation in the response of the GC sys-tem and can considerably improve the precision of quanti-tative analysis. When choosing IS for HS-GC analysis, be-side the chromatographic and physico-chemical character-istics, it is mandatory to consider the stability and reactiv-ity of the compound candidate for the IS. Many of the or-ganic compounds have functionalities that may be reactive at elevated temperatures and different pH values during the equilibration time. IS decomposition or formation of a new product can lead to misinterpretation of the results and poor quality of the analysis (Poceva-Panovska et al. 2016). Optimization of headspace parametarsVial equilibration temperature and time are major HS parameters that can be used to improve the transfer of vol-atile analytes from the sample into the HS of the vial. The equilibration temperature has a profound effect on the sensitivity of the method because temperature has a di-rect impact on the equilibrium concentration of the RS in the HS of the sample vial. However, effect of the temper-ature is specific for the RS tested. The increase of the tem-perature enhances the headspace sensitivity for the polar compounds with high partition coefficients (K) only, while the non-polar compounds with low K were practically not affected, since temperature affects the fraction of the ana-lyte (RS) in the condense fraction only. Sufficient time is also crucial in order to achieve con-stant state of equilibrium. Equilibration times should be set to optimal as they can considerably shortened overall method analysis time.According to our recent study (Poceva Panovska et al., 2016) the increase of equilibration temperature and equil-ibration time generally resulted in better sensitivity, al-though the effect of equilibration time was not as profound as temperature. For equilibration times longer than 20 min, no significant increase in the chromatographic responses of RS was observed. This observation has considerably short-ened the overall time for RS analysis when compared to the official Ph.Eur. method.Dilution mediaAnother approach to increase the sensitivity in the RS analysis is by selecting suitable dilution media as it has di-rect influence on partition coefficient. Organic solvents used as dilution media (DMSO, DMF etc.) offer higher partition coefficient values for most of the RSs when compared with water and consequently lower the concentration of the RS in the gaseous (HS) phase. According to the Ph.Eur., the choice of sample preparation technique is dependent on sample sol-ubility in the dilution solvent. For water soluble substances water is used and for water insoluble substances an alterna-tive sample preparation is considered, using DMF as solvent. The use of single sample preparation for water soluble and water insoluble substances is highly practical and bene-ficial. A mixture that includes DMSO, as a solvent with ex-ceptional properties for organic and inorganic chemicals and low toxicity (class III), and water that is crucial for better sensitivity, in a suitable ratio usually offers satisfactory re-sults as dilution media. Additionally the sensitivity of the analysis can be increased with the decrease of the percentage of organic dilution media (DMSO). A mixture of DMSO/wa-ter in ratio 1:4 (V/V) can be used as a dilution media regard-less of the sample solubility (Poceva-Panovska et al. 2016).Chemometric approach in optimization of analytical methodsDevelopment and optimization of methods for RS pro-filing require a well-designed strategy for efficient data pro-cessing in an economical and timesaving manner. For exact determination of the relationship between the sample prep-aration conditions and the chromatographic response of the analytes, design of experiments (DoE) can be effectively em-ployed since it enables the maximum utilization of data from previously planned experiments. Furthermore, by conducting the optimization of the method in very rational manner us-ing DoE, a great deal of excessive and unproductive labora-tory research work can be avoided. Response surface meth-odology (RSM) can be used to optimize experimental values for important experimental factors (Lundstedt et al., 1998).ReferencesCamarasu, C., Madichie, C., Williams R., 2006. Recent progress in the determination of volatile impurities in pharmaceuticals. Trends Anal. Chem. 25(8), 768-777.Grodowska, K., Parczewski, A., 2010. Analytical methods for residual solvents determination in pharmaceutical products. Acta Pol. Pharm. 67(1), 13-26.European Pharmacopoeia Commission, 2014. European Pharmacopoeia 8th Edition , 2.4.24. Identification and Control of Residual Solvents, Directorate for the Quality of Medicines & HealthCare of the Council of Europe (EDQM). Strasbourg, France.International Conference on Harmonization (ICH) of Technical Requirements for the Registration of Pharmaceuticals for Human Use, 1997. Q3C: Impurities: Guidelines for Residual Solvents. Harmonized tripartite guideline.Lundstedt, T., Seifert, E., Abramo, L., Thelin, B., Nystrom, A., Oettersen, J., Bergman, R., 1998. Experimental design and optimization. Chemometr. Intell. Lab. Syst. 42, 3-40. Poceva-Panovska, A., Acevska, J., Stefkov, G., Brezovska, K., Petkovska, R., Dimitrovska, A., 2016. Optimization of HS-GC-FID-MS method for residual solvent profiling in active pharmaceutical ingredients using DoE. J. Chromatogr. Sci. 54(2), 103-111. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 151 - 152 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.28:614.2(497.774)Short communicationDetecting the weakness in the hygiene - a mean for prevention of the health care-associated infections and improvement of the patients' health care in the Clinical hospital BitolaTatjana Dimitrovska Manojlovikj1*, Dona Trombeva1, Lenche Najdovska1, Magdalena Vrchkovska2, Angjela Delova3, Marta Ivanovska3, Ljupcho Anastasovski41Clinical Hospital "D-r Trifun Panovski", ul. Partizanska bb, 7000 Bitola, R. Macedonia2"Karta Medika" Pharmacy, ul. Partizanska bb, 7000 Bitola, R. Macedonia3Centar for Public Health, Bitola, ul. Partizanska bb, 7000 Bitola, R. Macedonia4Alkaloid AD Skopje, Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski 12, 1000 Skopje, R. Macedonia* tatjanadm@yahoo.comIntroductionHealth care-associated infections or nosocomial infec-tions can be defined as those occurring within 48 hours of hospital admission, 3 days of discharge or 30 days of an operation. Hospital-acquired infection is an infection that is contracted from the environment or staff of a healthcare facility. It can be spread in the hospital environment, nurs-ing home environment, rehabilitation facility, clinic or oth-er clinical settings. Infection is spread to the susceptible pa-tient in the clinical setting by a number of means (Inwereg-bu et al., 2005; WHO, 2007). Nosocomial infections are huge problem all over the world. They are a major problem in health care facilities, resulting in extended durations of care, substantial morbidity and mortality, and excess costs. Effective hand hygiene of the health care workers remains the single most important and economical means of con-trolling the nosocomial infections. Every health care work-er is responsible for maintaining high personal standards of hygiene and hand cleanliness (WHO, 2007). The etiol-ogy of nosocomial infections, the frequency of contami-nated hands with the different nosocomial pathogens, and the role of health care workers' hands suggest that spe-cial attention should be paid on selection of hand hygiene preparations as well on the compliance to the hand disin-fection protocols.