In cases where the risk was highest was recommended seeking medical care.The risk factors considered for diabetes were: age above 45 years old, overweight (BMI> 25 kgm2) or obese (BMI> 30Kgm2), waist circumference more than 94 cm for men or 80 cm in women , sedentary lifestyle (less than 30 minutes a day of physical activity), family history of dia-betes in first grade, hypertension or dyslipidemia, previ-ous history of cardiovascular disease, blood glucose ab-normalities in fasting and previous impaired glucose tol-erance, prior gestational diabetes, and use of drugs predis-posing to diabetes.The data presented after performed the statistics anal-ysis include descriptive information from the patients and the narratives of qualitative data.Results and discussionIn these two weeks, we included 85 patients. The sam-ple was mostly formed by women, 69.7%. There were 26.7% patients younger than 45 years old, 27% had be-tween 45 and 54 years old and 46.6% were over 55 years old. It was found that 51.1% had a BMI lower than 25kgm2, but 63.3% of women had a waist circumference exceeding 88 cm and 34.6% of men exceeding 102 cm. As for physi-cal activity 50% of men said to practice at least 30 minutes a day and only 41.6% of women did it. However 93.0% ate any vegetables or fruit every days. About 43% of the sam-ple was taking anti hypertensives. As for family history of diabetes type 1 or type 2, 48.8% of subjects had no history and 48.8% did not report any episodes of high blood sug-ar in any health examination. However we obtained 18.6% of patients with very low risk, 39.5% with low risk, 20.9% with moderate risk, 18.6% with high risk and 2.3% with very high risk. This assessment score has potential as a tool to iden-tify a high risk group of DM2/pre-DM2 among communi-ty pharmacy patients, especially, when used together with information from health care providers. There is evidence that intensive lifestyle and various pharmacotherapeutic interventions decrease the incidence of DM2 or even can delay the progression of DM2 among persons with predi-abetes Therefore this population mainly formed by women with a sedentary lifestyle and overweight may gain if mod-ify their lifestyles. Since they have non-modifiable fac-tors such as age and gender, pharmacist can help in order to persuade the patient to lose weight and decrease of ab-dominal circumference. With a non pharmacological inter-vention this patients can improve their diabetes assessment and also the pharmacist may give a good help to obtain this objective. ConclusionThe participation of pharmacy, translated into a large number of patients at risk of diabetes evaluated in this ini-tiative is a critical success factor for the demonstration of Pharmacy relevance in the development of new forms of collaboration recoverable by the health system. Besides the contribution of this initiative to combat diabetes, we are also making an important step in the development of dif-ferentiating initiatives pharmacy as indispensable to a net-work of modern health care, efficient and citizen-centeredThere was a strong recommendation for medical con-sultation of patients with high risk and very high of type 2 diabetes and was intended to sensitize the population to the problem of diabetes. Information and education about the risk factors of diabetes is one way to avoid in the future more diabetic patients and to avoid the excessive waste of money with their treatment. Having a better understanding about the disease, the evaluation of the risk factors to pre-vent the illness and also to control it, have certainly phar-macoeconomical repercussion in the wastes of national health systems economy and mainly advantage for the pop-ulation that use the pharmacy services and accepts the dai-ly work of the pharmacists. References DGS (Direccao-Geral da Saude), 2008. Ministerio da Saude Programa Nacional de Prevencao e Controlo da Diabetes Mellitus. Lisboa, Portugal: Direccao-Geral da Saude, p. 22 [Ref. in Portuguese]Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 99 - 100 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.33(497.115)Short communicationA study of the public knowledge of use of antibiotics in KosovoArijana Deshishku1*, Merita Berisha2, Linda Duraku3, Arjeta Deshishku4, Bujar Fetahu5 1 Pharmacy "Reis Pharm-A", Hasan Prishtina Rd., Obiliq , Kosovo2 Institute of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of Prishtina, Kosovo3 Pharmacy "Pentagon" Mitrovca - Kosovo4 Dental Clinic "B.F.", Fushe Kosove - Kosovo5 Main Center of Family Medicine, Fushe Kosove, Kosovo* anadeshishku@gmail.comIntroductionInfections posed a serious threat to human life, kill-ing millions of people until the discovery of antibiotics. The term antibiotics, which means ''against life'', is de-rived from the fact that an antibacterial drug is extracted from living things and used to kill or attenuate bacteria. However, there is a tight correlation between longer dura-tion and multiple courses of antibiotic uptake and higher rates of bacterial resistance.In recent decades, the emergence and spread of bac-terial resistance to antibiotics is an ongoing threat world-wide, which presents a significant threat to public health globally in the 21st century. The increase of antibiotics re-sistance will decrease their therapeutic effectiveness, in-crease treatment failures and, as a result, lead to longer and more severe illness episodes with higher costs and mortal-ity rates.As more strains of bacteria become resistant to an ev-er-larger number of antibiotics, our drug choices will be-come increasingly limited and expensive and, in some cas-es, nonexistent. If this trend continues unchecked, a wide range of modern medical procedures, from basic dental care to organ transplants, likely would be accompanied by a much greater risk of developing a difficult-to-treat or un-treatable antibiotic infection. The safety of many modern medical procedures is dependent on the ability to treat bac-terial infections that can arise as post treatment complica-tions. The aim of this study is to measure the levels of knowl-edge of the population about the effectiveness of antibiot-ics and risks associated with their unnecessary use.Materials and methodsA cross sectional survey using a validated question-naire, conducted among the general public in Kosovo, during the months of October and November 2014. The English version of the questionnaire from Eurobarometer (2008) (Special Eurobarometer 407, Antimicrobial Resis-tance, May - June 2013), was adapted and translated into Albanian. A random convenience sample of 392 people was included in this study. The questionnaire consisted of 6 questions.The respondents in the sample are mainly from Prishti-na as the largest city, the capital of Kosovo that has a va-riety of locations, people from the town or villages. The questionnaire application was made in different places like in some private pharmacy, family medical centers and lab-oratories, people on the streets, in some Dental Clinics, Medical Private Clinics, Homes and the University. The data was digitally stored and analyzed using Microsoft Ex-cel. Descriptive statistics were carried out by providing the number and percentage of each of the demographic vari-ables as well as knowledge about the questions of antibi-otics.Results and discussionFrom 392 patients, 194 were males (49.49%) and 198 females (50.50%). Median age is 51 years (range 15 - 74 years).The subjects in the survey were asked to rank from their knowledge of antibiotics as low, middle or high. From 392 respondents 184 (46.94%) said that they knowledge of antibiotics is middle, 149 (38.01%) said that they have low S1 PP 42100Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 99 - 100 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationPoster presentationsknowledge of antibiotics and 59 (15.05%) said that they have high knowledge of antibiotics.The study also has one declaration and asked the re-spondents if they 'agree' 'disagree' or 'don't know' that all of us have a responsibility towards the effectivity of anti-biotics. 249 (63.52%) of the respondents agreed with this declaration, 86 (21.94%) said they did not know and 49 (12.50%) did not agree with this declaration. A further 8 (2.04%) respondents did not want to answer this question.Respondents were asked if each of the following four statements about antibiotics (Antibiotics kill viruses; Anti-biotics are effective against colds and flu; Unnecessary use of antibiotics makes them become ineffective; Taking an-tibiotics often has side-effects, such as diarrhea) was 'true' 'false' or 'don't know'.Almost half of the respondents 176 (44.90%) said that it is true that antibiotics kill viruses, 116 (29.59%) said that it is false that antibiotics do not have effectiveness on viral infection and 100 (25.51%) responded they do not know if antibiotics kill viruses. A large majority 210 (53.57%) of those polled gave the correct answer that the overuse of antibiotics reduc-es their effectiveness. Just 71 (18.11%) gave us the wrong answer that it is 'false' and 111 (28.32%) 'do not know' if that is true or not.Antibiotics are effective against cold and flu which is 'false'and the right answer to this question was obtained from only 116 (29.59%) of respondents. More than half of the respondents answered wrong by stating that is 'True' that antibiotics are effective against the cold and flu 220 (56.12%) whereas 56 (14.29%) others answered that they don't know.Respondents were asked whether taking antibiotics of-ten has side effects such as diarrhea. 241 (61.48%) of the respondents gave the correct answer that antibiotics can produce side-effects. There is more uncertainty over this issue than the preceding ones: 130 (33.16%) of the respon-dents were unable to give an answer to this question. A slightly smaller proportion 20 (5.10%) gave an incorrect answer. This is in accordance with several other studies (Awad and Aboud, 2015; Mouhieddine et al., 2014; Sirijo-ti et al., 2014; Widayati et al., 2012;)ConclusionThe finding in this study showed that the majority of the population had a moderate level of knowledge and attitudes in relation to antibiotics, by using them for wrong reasons and in the wrong way. We believe that this study may be useful in increasing people's knowledge for the correct use of antibiotics and their awareness concerning the risks of inappropriate use of them, because of the developing resistance of antibiotics. ReferencesCostelloe, C., Metcalfe, C., Lovering, A., Mant, D., Hay, A.D., 2010. Effect of antibiotic prescribing in primary care on antimicrobial resistance in individual patients: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ. 340, 2091-2096.Special Eurobarometer 407, Antimicrobial Resistance. May - June 2013. http://ec.europa.eu/health/antimicrobial_resistance/docs/ebs_407_en.pdf Mouhieddine, T.H., Olleik, Z., Itani, M.M., Kawtharani, S., Nassar, H., Hassoun, R., Houmani, Z., El Zein, Z., Fakih, R., Mortada, I.K., Mohsen, Y., 2015. Assessing the Lebanese population for their knowledge, attitudes and practices of antibiotic usage. J. Infect. Public Health 8(1), 20-31.Sirijoti, K., Hongsranagon, P., Havanond, P. , Pannoi, W., 2014. Assessment of Knowledge Attitudes and Practices Regarding Antibiotic use in Trang Province. Thailand. J. Health Res. 28(5), 299-307.Awad, A.I., Aboud, E.A., 2015. Knowledge, attitude and practice towards antibiotic use among the public in Kuwait. PloS one, 10(2), p.e0117910, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0117910.t004.Widayati, A., Suryawati, S., de Crespigny, C., Hiller, J.E., 2012. Knowledge and beliefs about antibiotics among people in Yogyakarta City Indonesia: a cross sectional population-based survey. Antimicrob. Resist. Infect. Control. http://www.aricjournal.com/content/1/1/38.Oral presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 101 - 102 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 616.895.4-052:[615.15:614.254Short communicationPharmaceutical care for people with depression: experiences and challengesZahida Binakaj1*, Svetlana Stojkov2, Bistra Angelovska3 1Pharmaceutical Chamber of Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina, Tuzlanska bb, Sarajevo 71000, Bosnia and Herzegovina2Pharmaceutical Chamber of Serbia, Mutapova 25, Belgrade, Serbia, 3Pharmaceutical Chamber of Macedonia, 50 Divizija 34, 1000 Skopje, Macedonia* hida_b123@hotmail.comIntroductionOne of the most significant health issues are the dis-orders of mood because they have a significant effect on the quality of life of the patients, their families, their work-ing and wider social surroundings. According to the World Health Organization (WHO, 1992; WHO, 2001), mood disorders are the fourth cause of morbidity and mortality with a tendency to move to the second place by the 2020. The prediction that there is going to be an increase in the number of ill in the future comes from the facts that the factors of risk, like stress, are in constant rise, that the de-mographic image (ageing of the population) is changing which has an effect on the rise of comorbidity of these ill-nesses with the chronic illnesses of the elderly population and that the incidence of genetically predisposed depres-sions increases etc. Patients with depression are often not in a state to cor-rectly apply the prescribed pharmacological therapy which leads to cessation/disruption of therapy, inadequate treat-ment of depression which as a consequence has frequent hospitalizations, incapability to work and are marginalised and stigmatised by the community. That is why a pharma-cist through an interdisciplinary approach and appliance of pharmaceutical care can affect the proper selection of ther-apy and can also make a follow up of the patient, counsel him/her about the side effects and interactions, and final-ly improve the quality of life of the patient suffering from depression which is the final goal of including pharmacists and pharmaceutical care into a multidisciplinary team (Bi-nakaj, 2015). Keeping track of compliance and concor-dance in use of the medication for the nervous system is of special importance. The development of pharmaceuti-cal studies, increase of pharmaceutical industry as well as the changes in healthcare systems and policies sets addi-tional challenges which include continuous monitoring of the needs of patients as well as the trade and consumption of medications for the sake of rational medication admin-istration. To define, describe and question the role of pharma-cists in the treatment of patients suffering from depression, as well as measure the impact of pharmaceutical care on significant parameters in treatment of depression like the selection of appropriate therapy according to the guide-lines, adherence of the patient, quality of life, work capa-bility, anxiety, side-effects and interactions.Materials and methodsThe study is a randomised controlled clinical study in which a psychiatrist in General Hospital Tesanj will ran-domise patients according to the methods of random se-lection and the criteria of inclusion and exclusion defined in the protocol. The target population is adult patients 18 to 75 years old who suffer from diagnosed depressive ep-isodes (according to the criteria set up for the diagnosis) and who are treated in General Hospital Tesanj (Bosnia and Herzegovina). A pharmacist will set up monthly appoint-ments for the patients and educate them about depression and medications with a special review of side-effects and interactions of medications. During this study the pharma-cist and the doctor will have two meetings where they will analyze observations of the pharmacist and evaluate the impact of pharmaceutical care with the intervention group. S1 PP 43102Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 101 - 102 (2016)Pharmacoeconomics / Social pharmacy / Drug informationOral presentationsThe standard group will only fill in the questionnaire about quality of life during their regular visit to the doctor at the beginning of the study, after three months and after six months of the study. The gathered data will be analyzed with the SPSS software for statistical analysis of data and it will include qualitative and quantitative elements.Results and discussionForty eight patients were monitored in this research, 11 men and 37 women, where we notice that the incidence of depression is more frequent in women, which is also vis-ible in the research of WHO 2008.During this research three tests were conducted using which we gathered information which showed us the sig-nificance of a pharmacist in the treatment of patients suf-fering from depression. Consideration of the anxiety test showed that the treatment with a team which includes a pharmacist compared to a team without a pharmacist shows progress in the treatment because there was a sig-nificant decrease in irritability and anxiety. 56% of the pa-tients had these symptoms during the first visit while this figure in the third visit was 4.3%. When considering the questions from the life quality test we didn't get significant results which showed us progress in the patient's depres-sion treatment with the presence of a pharmacist in an in-terdisciplinary team. Also, the patients' life test showed us the contribution of the pharmacists in the treatment of pa-tients with depression.These results showed us that the pharmacist should be included in the interdisciplinary team which takes care of the treatment of patients with depression and by further ed-ucating the pharmacist in the area of mental disorders, es-pecially depression; even better results would be achieved.