Figure 4-20 Electropherograms of trnH-psbA Sequences of Three Reference Ocimum Species 181 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Table 4-3 Reference Ocimum Specimens Sequencing Summary Sample ID: Sample source: Type of tulsi specified: ITS sequence: trnH-psbA sequence: G26 PN O. tenuiflorum / / G27 PN O. tenuiflorum / / G28 PN O. africanum x / G29 PN O. citridorum x / G30 PN O. gratissimum / / G31 PN O.kilimandscharicum x / G32 PN O. gratissimum / / G34 PN O. basilicum / / G36 PN O. tenuiflorum / / G37 PN O. tenuiflorum / / G38 PN O. tenuiflorum / / G39 PN O. tenuiflorum x / C81 Kew O. gratissimum / / C82 Kew O. selloi / x C84 Kew O. tenuiflorum x / C85 Kew O. americanum x / V86 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum x / V87 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum x / V88 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum x / V90 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum x / V92 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum x / V93 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum / / V94 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum / / V96 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum x / V98 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum / / V99 CAMAG O. tenuiflorum / / Key: PN = Professor Peter Nick (Botanical Institute Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany); Kew = The Royal Botanic Gardens Kew - DNA bank; CAMAG = Dr. Eike Reich (CAMAG Laboratory, Switzerland); x = No DNA sequence obtained; / = DNA sequence successfully obtained. 182 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 4.6.2.3.1 Ocimum gratissimum Reference Specimen Three O. gratissimum reference specimens were obtained: G30 and G32 from Professor Peter Nick (Botanical Institute Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Germany), and C81 from The Royal Botanic Gardens Kew - DNA bank (Chase, M.W.). As all three samples have been identified by highly skilled botanists and identified as O. gratissimum, the sequence data of all three samples should align closely in a multiple alignment. Two samples G32 and C81 aligned together with no differences across 526 bases with the ITS region (Figure 4-21) and 336 bases with the trnH-psbA region (Figure 4-22); whereas, sample G30 did not match the other two references. The results were confirmed when the DNA samples were amplified and sequenced by both the ITS and trnH-psbA regions. To further validate these findings reference DNA sequences were obtained from GenBank and used in the analysis. ITS Sequencing of Ocimum gratissimum Reference Specimen Five O. gratissimum reference sequences obtained from GenBank were used to compare with the query samples (Figure 4-21). The alignment suggests there are two distinct varieties of O. gratissimum (A and B) which have not been differentiated. Across the entire sequence length ranging from 393-515 bases, for the ITS sequences, there are 14 bases which differentiate the two types of O. gratissimum (Appendix 13). A large number of base differences in not commonly seen in a species; but, could be explained by the high variability in the ITS region within the Ocimum species. To verify the difference was genuine the analysis was repeated using a different primer region (trnH-psbA). A B The multiple alignment represents several reference O. gratissimum sequences. Samples G30 and G32 from Professor Peter Nick, C81 from Kew DNA bank and five sequences from Genbank have been used to create this alignment which identifies there are two distinct types of O. gratissimum (A and B). Figure 4-21 Section of a Multiple Alignment of Reference O. gratissimum ITS Sequences 183 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra trnH-psbA Sequencing of Ocimum gratissimum Reference Specimen When searching for trnH-psbA reference samples, three O. gratissimum sequences were found on GenBank and used to compare the three reference specimens in question (G30, G32, and C81). Figure 4-22 highlights that sample G30 (A) has a perfect match with the three reference sequences from GenBank; while G32 and C81 (B) still align with each other, but are slightly different from the other four sequences. Across the 319 bases in the alignment there are just 3 base differences. Although there are not as many base differences seen with the trnH-psbA region, in comparison to the ITS region, the differences observed were valid. For each of the reference samples, three independent sequences were aligned in a contig to ensure a reliable consensus sequence was produced; therefore, the results from this investigation are reliable. It can be confirmed the quality of the sequence data for samples G32 and C81 was good, with clean single peaks at the base positions where the difference were found. Summary of Ocimum gratissimum Results Using both the ITS and trnH-psbA regions two varieties of O. gratissimum were identified; these were discriminated by several base differences. Although the ITS region showed greater variability between the two varieties, the trnH-psbA sequences were of high enough quality to support these findings. Using two regions has proved to be valuable in this investigation, as they have helped to verify the results. This study identifies the possibility of having different varieties of the same species; these may be referred to as cryptic or sibling species as they are morphologically identical but their genetic barcode may be significantly different (Saez and Lozano, 2005). A B A B The multiple alignment represents several reference O. gratissimum sequences. Samples G30 and G32 from Professor Peter Nick, C81 from Kew DNA bank and three sequences from Genbank have been used to create this alignment which identifies two O. gratissimum subgroups (A and B). Figure 4-22 Section of a Multiple Alignment of Reference O. gratissimum trnH-psbA Sequences 184 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Community Tulsi Samples A total of 26 community tulsi samples were collected from participants encountered throughout the research period. The species for 84% (n=22) of the samples were identified using either one or both of the barcoding regions - ITS (n=15) or trnH-psbA (n=22). The results have been summarised in Table 4-4 which details the sample identification number, where samples were originally obtained from (donor), the donor location, reported country of origin, the type of tulsi (i.e. Raam, Shyam or unknown), and the species identification after amplification of the ITS and trnH-psbA regions. The different species identified have been colour coded to easily identify the species of the tulsi samples collected. As previously highlighted there are two varieties of O. tenuiflorum commonly known as Raam and Shyam tulsi (Joshi et al., 2012). The results from this analysis revealed that most (n=10) of the Shyam tulsi samples collected from the UK and India were O. tenuiflorum; however, Raam tulsi (n=8) samples from the UK and Africa were identified as being O. gratissimum instead. Just one Raam tulsi sample (B102c) collected in India by participant B102 was correctly identified as O. tenuiflorum. One Raam tulsi sample (B04) collected from Birmingham which was a cutting passed on from a friend matched closely to O. basilicum. These results indicate the species of the tulsi plants are different to what they are expected to be (i.e. tulsi should be O. tenuiflorum). Issues with nomenclature were also identified by Jurges et al. (2009) who found that tulsi may be used to refer to any type of basil rather than a specific species. Whether or not the species of tulsi is important to people who keep tulsi is not known, but could be explored further in the future. Of the 8 samples which were identified as O. gratissimum, five samples were specifically identified as being Raam tulsi by participants. Just one participant B02b thought her tulsi was a Shyam tulsi plant but instead it matched with the Raam tulsi samples identity of O. gratissimum. These results confirm the findings which suggest that O. gratissimum species may be kept as a substitute for O. tenuiflorum in the UK. Three samples matched closely to O. basilicum reference sequences from GenBank including B04, L11 (the origins of these samples were unknown), and Li80 who noted that the sample was a basil collected from a friend's garden (Table 4-4). The species for four of the samples could not be authenticated. Two of these were seed samples (B12 and B105) which failed to germinate, while samples B09 and B101 failed to amplify with the ITS and trnH-psbA regions. Interestingly one sample (B03) from India was identified as a Veronica species. The seeds were germinated in a petri dish and re-grown in autoclaved soil to rule out the possibility of contamination in the soil but the same results were obtained. This could 185 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra suggest the seeds collected by this participant were not tulsi seeds and may have been wrongly identified. Table 4-4 Community Tulsi Samples Species Identification Summary Participant ID: Sample ID: Tulsi originally from (donor): Donor Location: Reported country of origin of tulsi: Type of tulsi specified: Species identification -ITS: Species identification -trnH-psbA: B01 B01 Friend Birmingham - Unknown O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B02 B02a Friend Birmingham - Raam O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B02b Aunty Leicester - Shyam O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B03 B03 Mother Amritsar India Unknown Veronica species Veronica species B04 B04 Friend Birmingham - Raam O. basilicum1 O. basilicum2 B05 B05 Friend Leicester - Raam O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B06 B06 Friend Leicester - Shyam O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum B06g Friend Leicester - Shyam O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum B07 B07 - - - Raam O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B07g - - - Raam O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B09 B09 Bought from India Punjab India Unknown - - L10 L10 Cousin India India Unknown O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum L11 L11 - - - Unknown O. basilicum3 O. basilicum4 B12 B12 Mother India India Unknown - - A14 A14 Mother-in-law Durban, South Africa Africa Unknown O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B15 B15a Temple Birmingham - Raam O. gratissimum O. gratissimum B15b Temple Birmingham - Shyam O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum Li79 Li79 Mother Leicester - Unknown - O. tenuiflorum Li80 Li80 Friend Coventry - Basil - O. basilicum5 U100 U100 - - USA Unknown - O. tenuiflorum B101 B101 - - - Unknown - - B102 B102a Mother Gujarat India Shyam - O. tenuiflorum B102b Mother Gujarat India Shyam - O. tenuiflorum B102c Mother Gujarat India Raam - O. tenuiflorum B102d Mother Gujarat India Unknown - O. tenuiflorum B105 B105 Mother India India Unknown - - Key: Colour of the text Blue = O. gratissimum; Green = O. tenuiflorum; Red = O. basilicum; Black = not identified; Grey = not an Ocimum species; A = Africa; B = Birmingham; L = London; Li = Leicester; U = USA. 1 94% match with reference O. basilicum sequence from Genbank (DQ667240.1) 2 98% match with reference O. basilicum sequence from Genbank (JQ339256.1) 3 91% match with reference O. basilicum sequence from Genbank (DQ667240.1) 4 99% match with reference O. basilicum sequence from Genbank (FR726106.1) 5 99% match with reference O. basilicum sequence from Genbank (FR726106.1) 186 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Species Substitution The two main types of tulsi recognised in traditional texts are Raam and Shyam (Krishna) tulsi which are considered to be varieties of O. tenuiflorum (Joshi et al., 2012). A number of tulsi samples collected from SA communities in the UK and a sample posted from South Africa were labelled as Raam tulsi (Appendix 12). Upon identification of the species using the reference DNA barcodes, it appeared that Raam tulsi samples matched with the O. gratissimum reference sequences instead of O. tenuiflorum. This suggests that the species of Raam tulsi plants has been confused and substitution has occurred. Migration of SA communities from India to Africa and then to the UK may have affected the transfer of seeds and caused confusion of species. O. gratissimum is native to Africa and known to grow abundantly even in the wild; whereas, it is difficult to find in India and does not grow as well. Due to similar morphological features, it may have been misidentified by people or kept as a substitute as the preferred type was not available. Findings from the interviews for this research suggest Raam tulsi was easier to germinate and grow in comparison to Shyam tulsi, in the UK. The results suggest species substitution has occurred for Raam tulsi which appears to be O. gratissimum instead of O. tenuiflorum. Although reference specimens G32 and C81 were identified as O. gratissimum they appeared to be different to reference G30 (Figure 4-23), which aligned with all the community tulsi samples identified as Raam tulsi. From this analysis it can be concluded that two varieties of O. gratissimum were identified. Two community tulsi samples (B04 and L11) matched closely to O. basilicum reference sequences instead of O. tenuiflorum. This further supports the results which suggest the species of tulsi plants kept in the UK may have been substituted by alternative Ocimum species. O. gratissimum B O. gratissimum A The multiple alignment represents the two types of reference O. gratissimum sequences (A and B) aligned with several community tulsi samples for which the species were unknown (Oci_unk). Key: Oci_unk_extraction number_sample identification code_region amplified Figure 4-23 Section of a Multiple Alignment of ITS Sequences of Unknown Tulsi Samples with Authenticated O. gratissimum Samples A and B 187 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra Commercial Tulsi Samples A range of commercial products were brought from around the UK, India, and online. In total 47 samples including: capsules, creams, soaps, syrups, shampoos, teas, tablets, oils, toothpaste, and a tulsi rosary were bought. Raw tulsi material used by Pukka Herbs was also included in this collection. Table 4-5 summarises the species identification for the samples which were identified using the ITS and trnH-psbA regions. Just 5 commercial samples were identified using ITS primers (ITS 1 and ITS 4), while 13 samples were identified with the trnH-psbA region (complete list of the commercial products used in this analysis can be found in Appendix 12). Table 4-5 Commercial Tulsi Samples Species Identification Summary Sample ID: Sample source: Type/ Species of tulsi specified: Type of Sample used for DNA extraction: Species identification -ITS: Species identification -trnH-psbA: B00 Basil plant from Tesco O. basilicum Fresh leaves O. basilicum O. basilicum C08 Pukka three tulsi tea bag Species not specified. Raam, Shyam & lemon tulsi Dried leaf material from inside a tea bag - O. tenuiflorum C13 Tulsi seeds from ebay O. tenuiflorum (Shyam) Seeds - germinated. DNA extraction from leaves O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum C16 Akamba garden centre O. basilicum Fresh leaves O. basilicum O. basilicum I44 Market in Fort Kochi, India - Dried leaves O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum I45 Phalada Agro farm O. tenuiflorum Dried leaves - O. tenuiflorum I46 Phalada Agro farm O. tenuiflorum Dried leaves O. tenuiflorum O. tenuiflorum I47 Phalada Agro farm O. tenuiflorum Dried leaves - O. tenuiflorum I48 Phalada Agro farm O. tenuiflorum Dried leaves - O. tenuiflorum C73 Pukka Herbs Species not specified. (Raam) Dried leaves - O. tenuiflorum C74 Pukka Herbs Species not specified. (Raam) Dried leaves - O. tenuiflorum C76 Pukka Herbs Species not specified. (Shyam) Dried leaves - O. tenuiflorum C78 Pukka Herbs Species not specified. (lemon Vana) Dried leaves - O. basilicum Despite the samples being subjected to various procedures to try and produce a positive PCR result (e.g. a new extraction of the sample, an isopropanol clean up, or diluting the DNA) the 188 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra species for many (n=34) of the commercial products could not be identified. Jurges et al.