3 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 1.4.1 The Origins of Traditional Herbal Medicines Human beings have evolved alongside plants, which have been used as food and medicine for millennia (Chevallier, 2007). People learnt by trial and error which plants, seeds, berries and fruits were good to eat; as a consequence they became aware of the potential health benefits. Hatfield (2007) suggests the precise origins of HMs are unclear, but it is likely to have occurred as a by-product of the use of plants in other ways; for example, chewing the leaves of a particular plant may have caused the mouth to feel anaesthetised, leading to the plant being used for toothache, or a plant rubbed on the skin to wipe a wound may have helped it heal establishing its use in wound healing. The knowledge of which plants are medicinally beneficial comes from their use as food and traditional cultural backgrounds (Chevallier, 2007). Folk practice of medicine, using plants to treat and prevent diseases, began as an oral tradition and has been passed down generations, long before written records were created (Hatfield, 2007). Around the world there are many different cultures which have created their own system of traditional medicine to diagnose, prevent and treat illnesses (Wachtel-Galor and Benzie, 2011). Ayurveda, a traditional Indian medical system, is believed to be more than five-thousand years old, and is said to be one of the oldest medical systems known; it is a holistic approach to managing health and preventing disease (Williamson, 2002; Sharma et al., 2007). Ancient Chinese traditions dating back to the Stone Age claim that man gradually learnt to recognise the properties of plants, and then used them as medicine (Hong, 2004). Egyptian papyrus scripts as early as 3000 BC found preserved, contained hundreds of hieroglyphics detailing specific medical conditions and herbal treatments (Ehrlich, 2011). Pedanius Dioscordes the famous Greek physician published the first European herbal pharmacopoeia, around 65 AD, called De Materia Medica. Dioscordes organised all the plants in a systematic manner, grouping plants with similar pharmacological actions together (Isely, 1994). More recently Saslis-Lagoudakis et al. (2011) demonstrated the applications of phylogeny in mapping the pharmacological properties of ethnomedicinal plants and bioscreening. Their phylogenetic study comparing cross cultural uses of ethnomedicinal plants uncovered that similar traditional uses were found in different areas where the related species were available. Throughout history and across the globe plants have been used as the primary source of medicine (Hatfield, 2007). According to the World Health Organisation (WHO, 2003), "Traditional medicine refers to health practices, approaches, knowledge and beliefs incorporating plant, animal and mineral based medicines, spiritual therapies, manual techniques and exercises, applied singularly or in combination to treat, diagnose and prevent illnesses or maintain well-4 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra being". WHO (2008) clarifies that the terms complementary/ alternative/ non-conventional medicines are used interchangeably when referring to traditional medicines, and the terms allopathic/ conventional are used to refer to Western medicines. Herbal medicines form an integral part of Complementary and Alternative Medicines (CAM), which is a broad term used to describe hundreds of therapies including: massage, nourishment, exercise, and HMs (Kayne, 2002). For the purpose of this study the terms herbal medicine(s), traditional herbal medicine(s), herbal remedy/remedies, and traditional herbal remedy/remedies will be used interchangeably. 1.4.2 Herbal Medicines as Drug Leads Approximately 25% of drugs prescribed worldwide are derived from plants (Sahoo et al., 2010); for example, aspirin based on the chemicals found in willow bark (Salix spp.) is used for pain relief and anti-platelet effects, and digoxin from the foxglove plant (Digitalis lanata Ehrh.) is used for cardiac disease (Hartmann, 2007; Li and Vederas, 2009). Metformin, an oral anti-diabetic drug, often the first line treatment for type 2 diabetics is also derived from plants. It originates from French lilac or Goat's rue (Galega officinalis L.) a plant used in traditional medicine for centuries, with the first references documented in 1500 BC by Egyptian physicians (Witters, 2001). The use of papaverine from the opium poppy (Papaver somniferum L.) as a vasodilator led to the development of verapamil for hypertension. More commonly known are the opioid analgesics codeine and morphine for pain relief which are also derivatives of the opium poppy (Cragg and Newman, 2013). In 1820 French pharmacists Pierre Joseph Pelletier and Joseph Caventou isolated and purified quinine from the bark of the cinchona tree (Cinchona officinalis L.) which was used to treat malaria. The traditional use of quinine for treating fever and infectious disease dates back to the 1600s (Achan et al., 2011). Since then quinine has formed the basis of the development of other anti-malarial drugs such as cholorquine and mefloquine. More than 60% of cancer drugs on the market or being researched are based on natural products (Wachtel-Galor and Benzie, 2011); including the vinca alkaloids vinblastine and vincristine isolated from the Madagascar periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus L.) (Cragg and Newman, 2013). Over the past hundred years developments in technology have revolutionised health care across most parts of the world, where once HMs were the only source of medication (Wachtel-Galor and Benzie, 2011). Plants have the ability to synthesise a variety of chemical compounds which can be consumed by humans for maintaining health, treatment and prevention of disease. Advances in chemistry have made it possible to extract, isolate, and 5 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra synthesise compounds from natural products. This has been a contributory factor to the decline in use of plants for primary care and a rise in the use of synthetic drugs (Sahoo et al., 2010; Dias et al., 2012). Nevertheless, the search for potential therapeutic agents continues, with nearly half of the small molecules approved in this decade having originated from natural products (Kong et al., 2009; Pandikumar et al., 2011). As the process of drug discovery is becoming more expensive, reverting back to traditional remedies may provide a cheaper alternative for pharmaceutical companies (Patwardhan and Khambholja, 2011). Patwardhan and Mashelkar (2009) claim that as natural products have been used for a long time, there is more information available on tolerance and safety compared with the development of novel synthetic drugs which have never been used before. However, most of this traditional knowledge is still not documented or supported by clinical trials. Patwardhan and Mashelkar (2009) propose a "reverse pharmacology approach" whereby products traditionally known to have clinical effects are scientifically tested; they go on to say, "The novelty of this approach is the combination of living traditional knowledge such as Ayurveda and the application of modern technology and processes to provide better and safer leads." Natural resources which have been traditionally used by indigenous people have been commercially exploited by corporations; this is known as biopiracy (Robinson, 2010). Several high profile cases of biopiracy including basmati, neem and turmeric have led to the development of guidelines to protect indigenous knowledge and resources (Robinson, 2010). In 1995 two scientists in America got a patent for the use of turmeric in wound healing. The patent was revoked in 1997 after a complaint was filed by India's Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, who highlighted that turmeric had traditionally been used in wound healing for thousands of years (Nobel, 2014). Since then a database (Traditional Knowledge Digital Library) to document traditional knowledge of medicinal plants and ancient formulations has been developed by the Indian Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, Ministry of Science and Technology, and the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) to protect traditional knowledge from being exploited by biopiracy (Gupta, 2011). Patenting laws to protect indigenous species have been introduced in several countries including China, India, Peru and the Philippines (Robinson, 2010). Scientists are continuously exploring the benefits natural products offer in anticipation of discovering new drug leads and developing novel drugs. Ayyanar and Ignacimuthu (2011) suggest further ethnopharmacological studies are required for discovering potential new drugs. 6 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra 1.4.3 The Use of Herbal Medicines Hatfield (2007) declares that the use of medicinal plants is part of our heritage, but fears this valuable knowledge is on the brink of extinction. Despite this, it is estimated that in some developing countries more than 80% of the population depend on HMs for primary health care (WHO, 2008). Up to 90% of the population in Africa and 70% in India depend on traditional medicine to meet their healthcare needs (WHO, 2005). This could be due to poverty, a lack of access to or knowledge of modern medicine (Ayyanar and Ignacimuthu, 2011). In India the HMs market is immense; 960 medicinal plants have been widely incorporated into the HMs industry, of which 178 have been identified as high volume due to popularity and demand (Sahoo et al., 2010). However, the use of HMs is not limited to developing countries; over the past few decades interest in HMs in developed countries has been rising (Ernst and White, 2000; Pharmaceutical Press, 2013). In Europe, Germany and France are leading in over-the-counter (OTC) sales of HMs, which are readily available even in conventional pharmacies (Wachtel-Galor and Benzie, 2011). The WHO (2003) factsheet on traditional medicines claims that in Germany 90% of the population have used a natural remedy at some time in their life. The HMs market value is steadily growing; the annual expenditure on CAM in Australia, Canada and the UK, was estimated to be worth US$ 80 million, US$ 2400 million, and US$ 2300 million respectively (WHO, 2002a). In the United States of America (USA) the use of CAM has been steadily increasing since the 1950s (Kessler et al., 2001); in 2011 the annual retail sales value of HMs in the USA was estimated to be over US$5.2 billion (Blumenthal, 2012). According to market research conducted by Mintel (2009), complementary therapies including Ayurvedic medicines, Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM) and homeopathic remedies are becoming more popular in the UK. The report titled 'Complementary medicines- UK, December 2009,' (Mintel, 2009) identified that the number of people trying complementary medicines was increasing, with over twelve-million people reported to have used them in the UK in a single year. In 2009 the UK's complementary medicines market was worth PS213 million, and a 20% growth was predicted for the next two years (Mintel, 2009). A survey to explore the publics' perceptions of HMs in the UK in 2008 was commissioned by the Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency (MHRA). The results uncovered that 35% of the population surveyed claimed to have used HMs (Ipsos MORI, 2008). In 2013 a review of ten surveys based on UK patients and HMs consumers indicated that on average 37% of the population used HMs (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2014). The UK HMs market is relatively strong, especially with a diverse ethnic population that is interested in non-Western alternatives (Ministry of Foreign Affairs, 2014). Wachtel-Galor and Benzie (2011) suggest some of the reasons people use HMs include: cost (i.e. 7 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra more affordable than conventional therapies), part of traditional background, HMs perceived to have less adverse effects than chemical alternatives, to replace or supplement CWM, and the notion of natural medicines being safer. 1.4.4 Potential Problems with Herbal Medicines Destruction of Natural Resources There may be important implications for the sustainability of natural resources; as the increasing demand for HMs could lead to overharvesting of endangered species and destruction of natural resources (Wachtel-Galor and Benzie, 2011; Booker et al., 2012). Alam and Belt (2009) claim, "Medicinal plant species are depleting at a rapid pace due to large-scale, unsustainable collection from their natural habitats." According to one estimate over four thousand economically important species are threatened with extinction due to commercial over-harvesting to meet manufacturers demands (Schippmann et al., 2002). There are approximately 29,000 plant species protected by the Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species (CITES) (Hollingsworth et al., 2011); for instance, American Ginseng (Panax quinquefolius L.) is native to the USA and can only be legally harvested in nineteen states with special restrictions controlling the growth, harvesting, sales, and export (US Fish and Wildlife Services International Affairs, 2015). In Europe there are several plant species which are listed as European Protected Species (EPS) under the European Habitats Directive, including shore dock (Rumex rupestris Le Gall), traditionally used as an astringent, and marsh saxifrage (Saxifraga hirculus L.) (Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs, 2014). The conservation of medicinal plants is of paramount importance as they remain an important source for natural ingredients for HMs, and there are potentially many more active compounds yet to be screened (Alam and Belt, 2009). Standardisation of Herbal Medicines Due to natural variance in the chemical composition of plants it can be difficult to standardise HMs (Wachtel-Galor and Benzie, 2011). Factors such as the climate, soil, genotype, parts of the plants used, time the plants are harvested, storage, drying, and manufacturing process can all affect the chemical composition of medicinal plants (Shaw et al., 2012); making it difficult to ensure the reproducibility of HMs (Pharmaceutical Press, 2013). Manufacturers of HMs are required to standardise and quantify the active constituents 8 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra in formulations according to Pharmacopoeia standards (Waimer and Schwabe, 2011); however, if the raw plant material is consumed or unregulated formulations are used it is difficult to ascertain the chemical composition of the herbal remedy. HMs used in the UK come from all over the world, from a range of traditional medical systems including TCM and Ayurveda; therefore, problems with nomenclature and standardisation of names can occur (Shaw et al., 2012). In the USA and Europe the Latin binomials names are used as the official way of referring to plants; however, traditional names may be different and could lead to confusion when selecting the plant species. For example, in the Philippines ginseng was popular for its use as a male aphrodisiac but this "ginseng" was not the same as the ginseng which belongs to the genus Panax; instead it was Jatropha podagrica Hook. commonly known as the Buddha belly plant (Begg and Gaskin, 1994; Bareja, 2010). It remains unclear how the Buddha belly plant was used instead of ginseng; it may have occurred as the plants looked similar, or due to the commercial value of ginseng whereby the Buddha belly plant was a cheaper alternative. When the traditional and binomials names of species are different it increases the risk of species substitution and adulteration, which may be accidental or deliberate. The Royal Botanical Gardens, Kew, has created a database called the 'Medicinal Plants Names Service' which is a resource for searching information about medicinal plant names. As different names may be used for the same plant (i.e. in different countries, communities, and languages) and even the Latin binomials themselves change; this database has collated all the relevant published information about medicinal plant names enabling more accurate communication and identification of medicinal plants (Medicinal Plants Names Service, 2015). Species Substitution and Adulteration Reports of commercially valuable species being substituted for cheaper alternatives have been documented (Vassou et al., 2015). Ginseng (Panax ginseng C.A.Mey) has numerous health benefits; it has been used for fatigue, enhancement of mental and physical performance, and as a male stimulant (Chevailler, 2007). The rising demand for ginseng has led to an increased commercial value and a decline in natural resources. Dharmananda (2002) identified several cheaper and more abundant species which were used as substitutes for ginseng in TCM including: Codonopsis pilosula Nannf. (also known as dang shen or poor mans' ginseng) which is unrelated to ginseng but believed to have a similar action, Rumex madaio Makino and Talinum paniculatum (Jacq.) Gaertn. which look similar to ginseng roots. 9 Sukvinder Kaur Bhamra A Chinese slimming aid in which Stephania tetrandra S.Moore had been substituted by Aristolochia fangchi Y.C.Wu ex L.D.Chow & S.M.Hwang caused renal damage in over one hundred patients in Belgium (Vanherweghem, 1998). Stephania tetrandra is traditionally referred to as 'Fangchi' or 'Fangji', while Aristolochia fangchi is referred to as 'Mu Fangchi' or 'Mu Fangji'; the similar traditional names may explain how the confusion of the species occurred (Sim et al., 2013). The chemical composition of the two species is very different; aristolochic acids found in Aristolochia species have been known to be nephrotoxic, mutagenic, and carcinogenic. The use of Aristolochia species has since been restricted and prohibited in several countries including Australia, Canada, Germany, and the UK (Vanherweghem, 1998; Michl et al., 2014).