Hedescribed the Aztec game balls, "... made of the juiceof certain herbs ... (which) being stricken upon theground but softly (bounced) incredibly into the ayer. "Although there is still some question, the rubber treesthat the Spaniards saw and the samples that werelater sent back to France were from the Panamarubber plant (Castilla elastica), a member of themulberry family. Uncertainty as to identification andconflicting reports of the latex content of trees werefinally settled by later expeditions into South America.We now know that the principal latex trees of theAmazonian basin are various species of Hevea,especially H. brasiliensis.Rubber remained relatively unknown in Europe untilthe French astronomer Charles Marie de la Condaminesent samples of "caoutchouc" from Peru to France in1736. At first the latex was regarded as nothing morethan a curiosity. Joseph Priestley used it to rub outunwanted pencil marks and supposedly gave the latexits common name of rubber.Although the potentials of rubber latex were realizedby workers of the late 18th and early 19th centuries,it remained an unimportant commodity. There weredefinite drawbacks to the use of rubber. It got brittleand cracked when exposed to the cold, it becamesomewhat fluid and sticky on hot days, and it had amost unpleasant aroma. Caoutchouc became ahousehold item when Macintosh rediscovered that thelatex could be dissolved in naphtha cheaply andefficiently. This made it possible to waterproofgarments. In England, a raincoat is still called amackintosh.The technological discovery that made rubber criticallyimportant was vulcanization. Charles Goodyear orThomas Hancock (accounts vary, depending uponwhether you are American or English) discovered thatby treating the latex with sulfur at high temperatureand pressure, these troublesome changes in itsconsistency could be overcome. Carbon black and zincoxide are added, together with antioxidants to retarddeterioration caused by oxygen and ozone. It wasrecently dis-covered that irradiation with cobalt-60can replace the use of sulfur.Vulcanized rubber was used in the pneumatic tiresreinvented by John Lloyd Dunlop in 1888. AndreMichelin in France and Benjamin Franklin Goodrich inthe U. S. began making automobile and bicycle tireson a commercial scale. The need for rubber latex wasnow immense!A few farsighted individuals had seen that thehaphazard methods of collecting the latex from wildtrees of the Amazon Basin would not be sufficient tomeet these new demands. They saw, instead, hugeplantations where rubber trees could be grown andharvested under precise control. Starting such anoperation would require getting thousands of seedsout of South America. But, the Brazilian governmentclamped heavy restrictions on the export of rubbertrees, seedlings, and seeds in an attempt to keepabsolute control of the latex market. They were notaltogether successful. Farris sent 2000 seeds back tothe Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew in 1872. Four yearslater Henry Wickham "acquired" 70,000 seeds andsent them home to Kew. They were germinated andthe seedlings then sent to the English colonies in theFar East where plantations were begun. A gratefulQueen Victoria would make him Sir Henry Wickham.Today over 90% of all rubber comes from SoutheastAsia and rubber's ancestral home in Brazil is ofsecondary importance.PROCESSINGRubber plantations are a marvel of organization andefficiency. Work begins very early each day. Theworkers tap the trees by making cuts into the trunk,just deep enough to sever the ends of the latexvessels that lie in the inner bark. Cuts made toodeeply will damage the underlying tissues of the tree.The herringbone pattern of cuts soon begins to oozethe rubber latex. It is collected and taken to a factoryfor processing. The latex is cleaned, filtered, anddiluted. It is also coagulated in large tanks of formic,acetic, or sulfuric acid. A liquid phase, the serum(accounting for about 70% of the latex) is drained off.The latex is then sent to mills to be rolled into sheets.Processing is far from finished. The latex sheets arewashed, freed from impurities, and dried. They areput into large machines called masticators that chewthem up into small chunks of latex. The next stageinvolves mixing the latex with a wide variety of fillers,antioxidants, plasticizers, and coloring materials. Thisstage is critical and the exact proportions are a closelyguarded secret of each company. The treated latex isnow put into a machine that produces sheets of stockof a desired size and thickness. If strips of rubber ortubes are wanted, then the treated latex is putthrough an extruder. It is then vulcanized.-139-PROCESSING OF LATEX[Initial Processing]Tap treesLCollect latexLAdd ammonia to prevent coagulationLDilute with water, filterLCoagulate(old: over a fire)(new: acetic/formic acid)LConcentrate latex(evaporation or centrifugation)LRoll into sheetsLWash, clean, & dryLSmokeLGradeLStore or transport[Final Processing]Mastication(machines reduce stored latex)LBlendLAdditives(carbon black, plasticizers, coloring agents)LVulcanizationNATURAL RUBBER PRODUCTION(metric tons)1826 161870 15,0001900 52,0001920 302,0001940 1,127,0001947 1,275,0001950 1,750,0001960 2,095,0001970 2,986,3001980 3,748,1081990 5,223,8852000 6,825,4752003 7,437,129NATURAL ALTERNATIVES TO PARA RUBBERDuring the Second World War, rubber sources werecut off from us because of the occupation of certainAsian countries. Our government became intenselyinterested in two alternatives -- other latex sourcesand the development of synthetic rubber. Other plantsinvestigated were:guayule (Parthenium argentatum), a shrub of thesunflower family native to Texas and adjacent Mexico;Russian dandelion (Taraxacum koksaghyz), ofCentral Asia, which the Russians had been working onsince the 1930's; and therubber vine (Cryptostegia spp. ), native to the OldWorld, but introduced into Mexico and North America.MINOR LATEX-BEARING PLANTSAFRICAN OR RED RUBBER. Landolphia gummiferaand other species of the same genus yield red rubber.It is also called African and Madagascar rubber. Thelarge woody vines are members of the dogbane family(Apocynaceae). The fact that they produced a latexwas discovered in 1850 by T. L. Wilson, a missionaryto Africa. By the turn of the century, the profits fromthese vines would finance the first stage of formalcolonial rule in Central Africa.One of the more horrendous chapters in the history ofthat continent involves Leopold II, King of theBelgians, who personally owned most or all of tropicalwest Africa. The region may have been called theBelgian Congo, but the land belonged to the King, notthe country. He leased huge portions of it to outsidecommercial interests. Those folks paid him tribute andtaxes. It is estimated that Leopold received 1/5 of allthe profits made on ivory tusks and red rubber.Villages had quotas of latex assigned to them. Thenative Africans who failed to meet their quotas wereflogged, tortured, mutilated by having their hands cutoff, or simply killed. The wives and children of themale workers were held as hostages. This happenedto tens of thousands of Africans. In 1908, the Belgiangovernment, reacting to world outrage, confiscatedthe holdings of King Leopold. "The worst feature in connection with this particularrubber industry, however, was the barbaroustreatment of the natives. The story of the operationsin the Belgian Congo during the reign of Leopold II willalways remain one of the bleake(sAt lpbaegrte sF .i nH ihlli,s t1o9r5y2.")GUAYULE. Parthenium argentatum is the only nativeU. S. plant that has been used commercially as a latexsource. It was studied intensively during World War II.The latex is much inferior to its competitors,principally because of its resin content. The juice isextracted by macerating the plants.CHICLE. Manilkara zapota is native to the New Worldtropics. It used to be the principal source of chewinggum latex. The industrial demands were so great thatother sources were also used. Today's chewing gumuses polyvinyl acetate and microcrystalline waxesinstead.The chewing gum industry is an offshoot of the rubberindustry. According to one account, the manresponsible for chewing gum is none other thanGeneral Antonio Lopez de Santa Ana. A few yearsafter his defeat by Sam Houston, the General went toNew York with a piece of chicle that he thought wouldbe a good rubber substitute. There he met ThomasAdams, who was not that impressed by a series ofless than successful demonstrations. Adams did note,however, that during their conversations the Generalchewed the latex. The rest is history.GUTTA-PERCHA. Palaquium gutta is native to theMalayan region. The trees are usually cut down duringthe extraction process. The latex is hard at roomtemperature, oxidizes rapidly, and should be keptunder water. It is a very poor conductor of electricity.Gutta-percha is used to insulate submarine cables, ingolf ball centers, and in dentistry. If you have had rootcanal work, you probably have some gutta percha inyour mouth.-140-SYNTHETIC RUBBERNo other natural latex source has proven satisfactory.Synthetic rubber, on the other hand, has been a greatsuccess. Chemists found that butadiene and styrenecan be combined to form a polymer much like that ofnatural rubber. Both molecules can be obtained fromcoal, petroleum, and alcohol. Much of what wepurchase today is a mixture of natural and artificialrubber. It is often referred to as "SBR," styrenebutadiene rubber.As you will note from the following data, there was adramatic increase in synthetic rubber productionbeginning in the 1940's. This was obviously linked tothe need for rubber by the U. S. military and theoccupation of the plantations of Southeast Asia by theJapanese.SYNTHETIC RUBBER PRODUCTION(metric tons)1940 43,0001945 800,0001950 583,0001960 2,021,0001980 8,690,0002002 10,880,000LATEX-BEARING PLANTSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Family CommentAssam rubber (Ficus elastica) Mulberry Another name for India rubber plantbalata (Manilkara bidentata) Sapote Especially good for machine beltsBorneo rubber (Willughbeia coriacea) Dogbane Malaysian; coagulated by salt watercastilla rubber (Castilla spp.) Mulberry C. America; once important sourcecaucho (Castilla ulei) Mulberry Amazon; tree cut down and bledcaura (Micrandra spp.) Spurge Native to Venezuelaceara rubber (Manihot glaziovii) Spurge Brazil; widely cultivatedchicle (Manilkara zapota) Sapote Once basis of our chewing gumschilte (Cnidoscolus spp.) Spurge New World; used to mold small itemschrysil (Chrysothamnus spp.) Sunflower North American speciescow tree (Brosimum utile) Mulberry Latex chewed and drunk!false rubber tree (Funtumia africana) Dogbane Noncoagulating rubber; Africagaucho blanco (Sapium spp.) Spurge South American speciesgetah ago (Hunteria corymbosa) Dogbane Used in the Malaysian regiongoldenrod (Solidago spp.) Sunflower Thomas Edison investigated itguayule (Parthenium argentatum) Sunflower Only native commercially exploitedgutta djelutung (Alstonia eximea) Dogbane Added to gutta perchagutta gum (Couma spp.) Dogbane Used in American tropicsgutta malaboeai (Alstonia grandifolia) Dogbane Added to gutta perchagutta niger (Ficus platyphylla) Mulberry Africa; a local chewing gum basegutta percha (Palaquium gutta) Sapote Malayan; excellent electrical conductorIndia rubber (Ficus elastica) Mulberry Also a very popular ornamentalintisy rubber (Euphorbia intisy) Spurge Leafless shrub of Malagasy Rep.juletong (Dyera costulata) Dogbane Malayan; now a chicle substituteKirk's rubber vine (Landolphia kirkii) Dogbane Important African rubber plantlagos rubber (Funtumia elastica) Dogbane West Africa; badly exploitedlandolphia rubber (Landolphia heudelotii) Dogbane West African vineleche-caspi (Couma macrocarpa) Dogbane S. America; chicle substitutemangabeira (Hancornia speciosa) Dogbane S. America; rubber cementmanicoba rubber (Manihot spp.) Spurge Brazil; latex viscousmilkweed (Asclepias spp.) Milkweed Several American species usednoire du Congo (Clitandra orientalis) Dogbane Tropical Africa; good latexpalay (Cryptostegia spp.) Dogbane Fastest growing of all latex plantsPanama rubber (Castilla elastica) Mulberry Tropical America; once importantPara rubber (Hevea brasiliensis) Spurge S. America; chief latex now in userubber vine (Cryptostegia spp.) Milkweed Latex found in stems, leaves, and seedsRussian dandelion (Taraxacum koksaghyz) Sunflower Tuberous root yields latexserapat (Urceola esculenta) Dogbane Malaysian areasirva (Couma macrocarpa) Dogbane S. America; chicle substitutetau-saghys (Scorzonera tau-saghys) Sunflower Grown commercially in RussiaVogel fig (Ficus vogelii) Mulberry Africa; high resin contentWest African gum vine (Landolphia owariensis) Dogbane Common West African vine-141-8.5 ! GUMS, RESINS, ANDEXUDATESIf there is a more familiar term for gums, resins, andvarious plant exudates, it would be oozings or gunk. The discussion that follows is not that satisfactory,mainly because it is so difficult to distinguish thecategories from one another.GUMSGums are noncrystalline mixtures of carbohydratesand organic acids that exude from plants. They oftenharden on exposure to air and swell to produce aviscous dispersion or solution when added to water.They are insoluble in alcohol, ether, and many otherreagents. They will char, but will not burn freely. Theirrole within the plant body is not thoroughlyunderstood. Some experts believe that gums help toheal wounded plants and to store water. We are notable to digest gums completely, so to us they areessentially inert substances.Gums have a variety of uses. Many of them aresizings, substances spread on cloth or paper to glazeor coat them. They stiffen and strengthen fibersduring processing. We often wash or steam the sizingsout of clothing before we wear them.Four of our most important gums are derived frommembers of the bean family (Leguminosae). GumArabic (Acacia spp., especially A. senegal) comes froma plant that lives in North Africa, India, and Arabia.The gum exudes from exposed underbark. It is usedin adhesives, confections, polishes, inks, andmedicines. Gum tragacanth (Astragalus spp. ), comesfrom plants native to western Asia and southeasternEurope. It also yields sizings, adhesives, andmedicines. Gum from the locust bean (Ceratoniasiliqua) is used in papermaking and as a stabilizer infoods. Guar (Cyamopsis tetragonoloba) is an Indianplant used in salad dressings and ice cream. RESINS AND OTHER EXUDATESThis assemblage of exudates is not easilycharacterized. Many resins appear to be the result ofreduction and polymerization of starches and othercarbohydrates. Others seem to be oxidative productsof essential oils. Resins often have high molecularweights. They are typically brittle, and more or lesstransparent. Resins are insoluble in water and more orless soluble in ordinary reagents. Their function withinthe plant remains incompletely understood. They areusually seen when it is wounded. Resins are typicallyfound in special ducts or canals within the plant.Resins have been used since ancient times as acaulking material, in all-weather torches, asembalming agents, medicine, and materials forpainting. While resins are found in many plants, theycome primarily from species in three families -- thepines (Pinaceae), legumes (Leguminosae), and thedipterocarps (Dipterocarpaceae).TURPENTINE is a mixture of the resins and essentialoils, an oleoresin, found in the resin canals in the barkand sapwood of various conifers. The crude materialthat exudes from the plant is called pitch. It isdistilled to separate the resin from the essential oil.The production and processing of pitch is called thenaval stores industry. Turpentine manufacture inthe U. S. started in the Carolinas. Longleaf pine andslash pine were the principal sources. The tappingprocedures themselves have remained relativelyunchanged. Crude pitch is gathered every week. Thepitch is then diluted and filtered. It is then treatedwith acid to yield a lighter, more valuable grade ofresin. Water is added to remove the traces of acid. Itis then distilled. Oil or spirit of turpentine boils offfirst. A heavier residue, rosin, remains behind. Therosin is screened, cooled, and hardened. The oil will beused as a solvent. The rosin will be used in soaps,varnishes, inks, waxes, and lubricants. It is alsorubbed on violin bows.AMBER is the resin of an extinct pine (Pinussuccinifer). Its origin remained a mystery for manycenturies.