A plant that uses atmospheric carbondioxide as its source of carbon in its life processes.auxin. A hormone that promotes elongation of cells.axillary. Of or pertaining to the interior angle formedby a stem and the leaf that it bears. It is derived fromthe Latin word for armpit.awn. A substantial hair or bristle that arises from aplant part. The term is most commonly applied tosuch bristles on grass spikelets.- B -backcross. The result of hybridization between a firstgeneration offspring and either one of its parents. Theterm is also used for the process itself.bacteriology. The science that deals with the studyof bacteria.bacterium. Any of the microscopic, unicellularorganisms that lack nuclei and other subcellularorganelles typical of other kinds of plants and animals.Bacteria are of great economic importance because oftheir role in fermentation, spoilage and decay, and asthe source of antibiotics.bagasse. The dry, fibrous byproduct that remainsafter juice has been extracted from sugar cane stems.It may be burned as fuel or used to make paper.balsam. A fragrant, thick, oily or resinous exudatederived from various plants, as in Canada balsam andbalsam of tolu. Many are used to make medicinalointments.Banks, Sir Joseph (1743-1820). British aristocrat,explorer, botanist, and long-time President of theRoyal Society. Banks explored the South Pacific onone of Captain Cook's voyages. His herbarium is atthe Natural History Museum in London.barbasco. A general term for fish poisons.bark. The tough, dead outer covering on the trunksand branches of woody plants and on the exterior ofsome roots. It includes the epidermis, cork, cortex,and phloem tissues.base. A chemical substance that in solution combineswith and removes hydrogen and protons, and whichreacts with an acid to yield a salt and water; mosthave a pH of greater than 7.basidiomycetes. Those fungi that reproduce bymeans of basidiospores and that form the familiarmushrooms, toadstools, puffballs, and shelf or bracketfungus at some point in their life cycle. They arecollectively known as club fungi. The less familiar rustand smut fungi also belong here.bast fibers. Any of various plant fibers derived fromstem tissue. Common examples include hemp andflax.-246-Beadle, George Wells (1903-1989). Americanbotanist and geneticist. He was one of the leadingstudents of the origin of maize. Beadle won the NobelPrize in 1958 for his development of the "one gene-one enzyme" hypothesis.beautiful. Of or pertaining to plants of the grassfamily (Gramineae).B. C. E. Before the Current (or Common or Christian)era.beer. A fermented beverage made from water, yeast,and a carbohydrate. A more restricted definition callsfor malt and hops to be used, as well.belladonna alkaloids. The group name given toatropine, hyoscyamine, scopolamine, and similaralkaloids derived from Atropa belladonna and relatedplants. They are known more technically as thetropane alkaloids.beri-beri. A disease characterized by inflammation ofthe nerves. It is caused by a deficiency of vitamin B1.berry. A multi-seeded, indehiscent fruit in which the fruit wall is fleshy throughout, as in the tomato andgrape. The term is also used for certain cereal grains,as in the wheat berry.biennial. A plant that lives for two years, oftenflowering and setting seed during the second year.binomial system of nomenclature. A system ofnaming, popularized by Carolus Linnaeus, in whicheach plant or animal bears a two word name -- thegenus and specific epithet.biotechnology. The use of biological processes,especially genetic manipulation, for industrial ormedical purposes.blight. Any one of a variety of plant diseases causedby fungi or insects, as in the late blight of potato thatcaused the potato famine in Ireland.bolting. The premature onset of flowering caused bygenetic control or environmental stimulus, such as achange in day length.Borlaug, Norman (1914-). American agronomist.He developed strains of dwarf wheat and is one of thefathers of the Green Revolution. Borlaug won theNobel Prize for Peace in 1970.botany. The science concerned with the study ofplants. Ambrose Bierce, in his The Devil's Dictionarydefined it as "... the science of vegetables -- thosethat are not good to eat, as well as those that are. Itdeals largely with their flowers, which are commonlybadly designed, inartistic in color, and ill-smelling."BP. Before the present time, which by convention, isset as 1950.bract. A much-reduced leaf, particularly one locatedjust below a flower or associated with a flower cluster.bran. The outer fibrous layers of cereal grains. It isoften removed during processing.brandy. A beverage made by distilling wine or someother fermented fruit.bromelain. An enzyme found in the pineapple. It isan ingredient in meat tenderizers.bryophytes. The collective term for mosses andliverworts; multicellular, vessel-less plants with truestems and leaves, but that lack true roots.Bt. A shorthand notation for Bacillus thuringiensis, thebacterium that causes crown gall disease in cropplants and that is now used in genetic engineering asthe vehicle for transferring a gene from one plant toanother.bud. An immature shoot, typically covered byprotective bracts (bud scales). It will elongate into astem that bears leaves and, in some cases, flowers.bulb. An underground structure consisting of a seriesof overlapping leaf bases inserted on a much-reducedstem axis, as in the onion. - C -caffeine. The xanthine alkaloid found in tea leaves,coffee beans, and several other plants.cake. The solid portion of a fruit, seed, or other plantpart that remains behind after oils have been pressedfrom them.calabash. A kind of gourd used to store materials oras a drinking vessel.callus. The undifferentiated plant tissue that formsduring tissue culturing. The term is also used for thetissue that forms over a wound.calorie. The amount of heat needed to raise thetemperature of 1 gram of water 1O C. It is often usedto measure the energy value in food.Candolle, Alphonse Louis Pierre Pyramus de(1806-1893). Professor of Natural History at theUniversity of Geneva. Author of numerous importanttaxonomic works and the author of Origine des PlantesCultivees, an encyclopedic survey of crop plants andtheir origins.caoutchouc. The aboriginal name for the latex fromvarious trees native to Central and South America.capsaicin. The oleoresin found in the fruits of chilipeppers and their relatives (Capsicum spp.) thatcauses the sensation of heat and pain. It also hasbecome popular in the treatment of arthritis pain andas an ingredient in pepper-spray.capsule. A dry, multi-seeded, dehiscent fruit derivedfrom 2 or more united carpels. It opens by variousmeans to release the seeds.carbohydrate. An energy producing organicsubstance composed of carbon, hydrogen, andoxygen, typically in the form of Cx(H2O)y. Commonexamples include starch, cellulose, and a wide varietyof sugars.Carboniferous. The portion of the Paleozoic Era thatlasted from about 360 to 286 million years ago. It waspreceded by the Devonian and followed by thePermian. It is the compressed vegetation of thisperiod that formed coal deposits around the world.carcinogen. A substance that causes cancer.carminative. A substance that reduces gas formationand relieves flatulence, as in ginger and peppermint.-247-carpel. The female reproductive organ in a flower. Itis typically differentiated into a terminal stigma, aneck-like style, and a basal ovary where the seeds areborne. A flower typically has 1 or more carpels, whichmay be separate from one another or united.caryopsis. A dry, 1-seeded, indehiscent fruit in whichthe seed coat and fruit wall are more or lesscompletely fused to one another, as in the variouscereal grains. This fruit type is characteristic of thegrass family (Gramineae).catalyst. A substance that initiates or speeds up achemical reaction, but that is not itself consumedduring the process.cathartic. A substance that causes a purging of thebowels, as in castor oil.C. D. C. Centers for Disease Control.C. E. Current or common or Christian Era. Analternative to A. D.cell theory. The fundamental biological principledeveloped by Schleiden and Schwann that states, inpart, that all living organisms are composed of cellsand that all cells come from pre-existing cells.cellulose. An insoluble straight-chain polysaccharidecomposed of repeating glucose units. It is the basicbuilding material in plants and has been called themost common organic compound on earth.Cenozoic. The era of geologic time that began about65 million years ago and continues to the present.center of diversity. The geographic region of theworld where a crop shows its greatest geneticdiversity.center of origin. The geographic region of the worldwhere a crop is thought to have originated. Thisconcept is not distinct from that of "center ofdiversity," in that the primary criterion for determiningsite of origin cited by N. I. Vavilov, who developed theconcept, is the degree of diversity found there.cereal. Any kind of grain used for food. The term alsorefers to any grass, such as wheat, rice, or maize,that yields these grains and to breakfast foods madefrom these grains.chaff. The dry, papery bracts (husks) that separatefrom cereal grains or from seeds during winnowingand threshing.chicha. A fermented beverage made from variousplants, especially maize.chlorophyll. A green pigment in plants. Duringphotosynthesis, light falling on the plant removes anelectron from the chlorophyll molecule. Most terrestrialplants make chlorophyll a and b.chloroplast. A subcellular organelle that consists ofstacks of membranes that bear photosyntheticpigments. It also contains genetic material used todirect its protein synthesis.chromosome. A thread-like structure found in thecell nucleus. Each contains a series of features,including a linear sequence of genes.citric acid cycle. See Kreb's cycle.clarify. To make clear by removing impurities, as inwine making.clone. A group of genetically identical individuals orcells derived asexually from a single ancestor.CMS. Cytoplasmic male sterility.cocaine. An alkaloid present in the leaves of cocaplant (Erythroxylum coca) and related species ofSouth American shrubs. It is a powerful psychoactivesubstance and is used in medicine as a localanesthetic.cocarcinogen. A non-cancer causing substance thatactivates or enhances the effects of one that does.codeine. An alkaloid present in the latex of the opiumpoppy (Papaver somniferum). It is used to relieve painand to control coughing.codex. An ancient manuscript, usually in book form.coir. The fiber obtained from the middle layer of thefruit wall (mesocarp) of the coconut. It is used forstuffing and to make ropes, mats, etc.colchicine. An alkaloid found in the autumn crocus(Colchicum autumnale) and related plants. It is apowerful mitotic poisoner and causes hair loss andother symptoms if ingested.colloid. A mixture of microscopic or ultramicroscopicparticles (0.1 to 0.0001 microns) uniformlysuspended or dispersed through a second substance,often forming a viscous solution. Examples includemilk and the various latexes found in plants.complementation or complementarity. Theprinciple of nutrition that recognizes that one food orplant may provide one of the eight essential aminoacids that is missing in another, such that eating thetwo will provide the complete set, as in a diet thatincludes both maize and black beans.compound. A mixture with two or more ingredients,as in certain medicines.compound leaf. A leaf in which the blade is dividedinto two or more discrete segments, as in the walnutand many plants of the bean family.conifers. The largest and economically mostimportant group of gymnosperms. Most are resinoustrees with needle-like leaves. Their wood lacks vessel.Reproductive structures are borne in separate maleand female cones. Conifers are the source of timber,paper pulp, and resins. Common examples includepines, spruces, and hemlocks.convergent evolution. The process of evolvingsimilar features in unrelated plants as an adaptationto living in the same environment. The succulentgrowth form seen in cacti and spurges offer anexcellent example.Cook, James (1728-1779). English naval captainand one of history's greatest explorers andcartographers. Cook's voyages brought to light newknowledge of the world's plants and its peoples.copal. A resin derived from a variety of tropical treesused to make varnish.copra. The dried inner fruit wall (endocarp) of thecoconut. It is processed to yield coconut oil. Fresh-248-endocarp is the source of shredded and flaked coconutused in cooking.coprolite. Fossil poop. Human fecal material oftencontains seeds or seed-like fruits that reveal what thelong dead person ate.cork. A layer of protective tissue that forms inside thebark of woody plants. At maturity it is composed ofdead cells that are impregnated with suberin, whichrenders them waterproof. Commercial cork comesfrom the cork oak (Quercus suber).corm. An underground plant structure consisting of areduced stem axis that bears dry, papery leaves, as inthe gladiola "bulb."cortex. The region of a stem, as seen in cross-section, that lies between the epidermis and thevascular bundles.cortisone. A steroidal hormone derived originallyfrom yams (Dioscorea spp. ), used medicinally to treatinflammations and as the basis for oral contraceptives.cotyledon. An embryonic leaf of a seed plant.Flowering plants typically have one or two, which isthe basis for the terms monocots and dicots.coumarin. An aromatic compound with a vanilla-likeodor made by various grasses and legumes. It givesthe smell to freshly mown fields. Coumarin is a bloodthinner used in medicine and in rat poisons.crack. The crystalline form of cocaine that is brokeninto small pieces and inhaled or smoked.crop. The product of a cultivated plant or the plantitself.crop rotation. The practice of raising different cropsin a field, often to replenish soil nutrients.cross-pollination. The transfer of pollen from oneflower to the stigma of another flower, usually of thesame species. The transfer is accomplished by wind,insects, birds, etc.cultivar. A cultivated strain or variety of plant. Theword is a contraction of cultivated variety.cultivation. The act or process of caring for a plant,which involves preparing the soil, watering, fertilizing,weeding, pruning, etc.curandero. A native healer proficient in the use ofmedicinal herbs.curare. Any of various arrow and dart poisonscontaining alkaloids derived from the bark of SouthAmerican Chondrodendron and Strychnos. Curarerecipes vary with tribe. The toxins paralyze motornerves, thereby blocking the transmission of impulsesto muscles, including the diaphragm.cure. To preserve by means of drying, salting, etc.,as in tobacco leaves and animal skins.cuticle. The thin, waxy protective covering on stemsand leaves.cv. Cultivar.cycad. A small group of gymnosperms (about 100species) that are palm-like in general appearance andthat bear male and female reproductive structures inseparate cones.cytology. The science that deals with the study ofcells.cytoplasm. The portion of a cell inside the plasmamembrane, but excluding the nucleus.- D -dammar. A hard resin derived from various SoutheastAsian trees. It is used in oil paints, varnishes, lacquers, and inks.Darwin, Charles Robert (1809-1882). Englishnaturalist and one of the greatest figures in thehistory of the biological sciences. He is best known forhis book, On the Origin of Species by Means of NaturalSelection, which set forth his theory of the evolutionof life on earth. It remains today the core concept inexplaining the diversity of life around us. Darwincontributed significantly to our knowledge of economicplants in his Voyage of the Beagle and "TheDomestication of Plants and Animals...."dead. In today's politically correct environment, wedo not say "dead." The organism is metabolicallychallenged.deciduous. Falling from a plant, as in leaves that fallat the end of the growing season.decoction. The process of boiling down a liquid toextract an essence from it. The term is also used forthe material that is extracted.dehiscent. Opening at maturity by slits, pores, etc. torelease seeds, as legumes and various fruit typescommonly called "pods."dendrochronology. The science that deals with thestudy of tree-rings as a means of determining the ageof trees and of past climatic conditions.denitrification. The conversion by bacteria of nitrateand nitrite to nitrogen and/or nitrous oxide. It occurstypically in the absence of oxygen.deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). A nucleic acidcomposed of a sugar and a series of four bases. It isthe genetic material of all living organisms. The exactsequence of the four bases determines the geneticcode for that individual.dermatitis. An inflammation of the skin.diaphoretic. A substance that induces perspiration.dicots. The semitechnical name for those floweringplants that typically have two seed leaves on theirembryos, net-veined leaf blades, and flower parts in4's, 5's, or multiples thereof.digestion. The process by which heat, enzymes, or asolvent decompose a substance. For us, it is theprocess of breaking down food stuffs in the stomachand bowels.digitalis.