Syreniusalso describes the diaphoretic and diuretic effects of the herbalong with the roots or the root itself. The root boiled in wine hasa diuretic effect. As diaphoretic remedy Syrenius recommendedtaking dry bath of celandine herb, which would cause extensivesweating and expulsion of excess water from the body as wellas drinking decoction from roots boiled in rose vinegar orwhite wine with great water dock (Rumex hydrolapathum). Inaddition, the celandine could be used to dye the hair yellow,and to lighten the freckles and hyperpigmentation on the face(Syrenius, 1613).The British Flora Medica (Barton and Castle,1845) cites the traditional applications of C. majus in treatmentof jaundice, visceral obstructions, fevers, dropsies, scrofula,syphilitic affliction, gout, cataract, ophtalmia, and specks asdescribed previously by Dioscorides and Galen.In countries, where C. majus is the native species, it becameone of the most widespread drug of folk herbal medicine. Thescope of its applications in folk medicine shows high similarityamong many regions of Central and Eastern Europe. It is worthto mention its prevalent application to treat warts, eczemaand other skin diseases, gastrointestinal parasites, jaundice, andliver complaints, inflammatory eye infections and other diseases,including cancer.Skin DiseasesIn folk medicine, C. majus was most commonly used to removewarts. Herb juice or latex were used most frequently for thispurpose, however, use of leaves and flowers was also noted. InPoland it was common to rub the fresh juice from the brokenstem of the celandine onto warts (DeVerdmon, 1936; Kuz'niewskiand Augustyn-Puziewicz, 1999; Kujawska et al., 2016). In theBieszczady Mountains and in the Podkarpacie Region (S-EPoland) the juice was used directly on warts, or they were firstscrubbed off and then the juice was applied on the wound (Szary,2013). A cataplasm made of flowers that was supposed to bechanged every few days was used in the Kielce Region (CentralPoland) (Szot-Radziszewska, 2012). Occasionally, fresh leaveswere also used (Kujawska et al., 2016). The juice of the aerialpart of the plant was used in the Ukrainian Carpathians (Szary,2010, 2013) and in Russia (Zevin et al., 1997). The herb juicewas applied to treat warts also in the Balkan countries (RedzicV,2007; Ti ,ta et al., 2009; Menkovic' et al., 2011; Mustafa et al.,2012; Koleva et al., 2015) as well as in Central Italy (Menaleet al., 2006) and Great Britain (Barton and Castle, 1845). Otherdermatologic conditions were also treated. All around Polandit was common to apply fresh leaves or juice on wounds. InPodolia (Ukraine) corns were treated by rubbing with a rootof celandine and by application of fresh leaves. After a week,corns softened and ruptured. A salve from celandine, olive oil,fir resin and beeswax was a remedy for pustules (Kujawska et al.,2016). In the Bieszczady mountains (Polish-Slovakian-Ukrainianfrontier), juice of celandine was applied to eczema and cuts, anddecoction of root was used for baths and rinse for dermatologicconditions (Szary, 2013). In the Rzeszowszczyzna (S-E Poland)region leaves were applied to ulcers to stimulate picking up andrupture (Wdowiak and Bielecka-Grzela, 2013). The juice was alsoused to lighten freckles (Kuz'niewski and Augustyn-Puziewicz,1999). In Russia the juice of aerial parts was used in the treatmentof skin wounds, skin irritation, allergic rashes and dermatitis,leaves, and flowers in the treatment of boils (Mamedov et al.,2004). The aerial parts of the plant were used by the people ofMontenegro to cure blisters, rashes, and scabies (Menkovic' et al.,2011). In Central Serbia, juice was applied directly on skin in skineruptions, psoriasis and eczema (Jaric' et al., 2007).Liver DiseasesC. majus is one of the best-known folk medicine remedyfor jaundice and liver diseases, such as inflammation, spasticconditions, and gallstones. In Poland, infusion made of youngcelandine leaves was used as a cholagogue and to regulate actionof the digestive tract (Kuz'niewski and Augustyn-Puziewicz,1999). Jacques (De Verdmon, 1936) in case of jaundice advisedinfusion made of half of a teaspoon celandine per cup. Allaround Poland it was common to bath children with jaundicein celandine and to give celandine infusion to drink (Kujawskaet al., 2016). In the Bieszczady and in the Ukrainian Carpathians,herb infusion was drunk to relieve liver conditions (Szary, 2010).In Western Ukraine, infusion was used as relaxant in colicattacks (Szot-Radziszewska, 2007). Also in Balkan countries,celandine was employed in the treatment of liver disorders. In theAlbanian Alps to treat hepatitis a decoction of fresh aerial partshas been drunk with sugar in small portions--half coffee cup(Pieroni et al., 2005). In Serbia celandine was used internally forinflammation of the gallbladder, bile duct, jaundice, and hepatitis(Jaric' et al., 2007; Savikin et al., 2013). The use of celandine issimilar in Gollak region in Kosovo (Mustafa et al., 2012), in theProkletije Mountains (Menkovic' et al., 2011) and in Zagori inEpirus, North-West Greece (Vokou et al., 1993).Against Digestive Tract ParasitesPolish name of C. majus "glistnik" (roundworm herb) comesfrom a common traditional usage of this plant to expelroundworms. For this reason decoction of the herb had tobe drunk for 12 days (De Verdmon, 1936). In the BieszczadyMountains children were bathed in decoction of the celandineherb and were given celandine infusion to drink (Szary, 2013).Decoction of seeds was also used in the Kielce Region (Szot-Radziszewska, 2012). In western Ukraine, infusion of the herbwas prepared (Szot-Radziszewska, 2007).Eye DiseasesContrary to ancient phytotherapy, celandine was rarely used totreat eye conditions in folk medicine. Wdowiak (2015) reportsthat in the Podolia Region (Ukraine) drops of celandine juicemixed with vodka were put into eyes. In west Ukraine a tincturemade from celandine was applied. Moreover, a popular beliefamong people of the Podolia Region, as well as the Lubelszczyznaand Podkarpacie Regions (Eastern Poland) said that feces of aswallow can cause sight loss, if they fall into the eye, which canbe only cured by C. majus. In the small town Giby, of Polish-Lithuanian-Belarusian borderland, the celandine pollen was usedagainst eye infections (Kujawska et al., 2017).Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299167Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majusOther UsagePeople of S-W Romania and Zagori in Greece were applyingcelandine as diuretic (Vokou et al., 1993; Ti ,ta et al., 2009).In the central Serbia and in Podolia (Ukraine), celandine wasconsidered a remedy for gout. Occasionally, it was used astonic and stimulant of cardiac functions, also increasing bloodpressure (Vokou et al., 1993). In the Bieszczady Mountainspeople incensed aching teeth with the smoke from the burningherb (Szary, 2015). In Poland, juice was used internally to curehydropsy (Kujawska et al., 2016). In Romania it was esteemedas an antidote for snake venom (Ti ,ta et al., 2009). Peopleof Russian descent, called Russlanddeutschen, living in S-WGermany used celandine as depurative (Pieroni and Gray, 2008).Among the Hutsuls living on the Ukrainian side of Bukovina (S-W Ukraine), tea from aerial parts of celandine was employed inthe treatment of cancer (SoVukand and Pieroni, 2016). In Bosniaand Herzegovina it was used to cure cancer of lungs (RedzicV,2007). In veterinary treatments, herb decoction was given to cowssuffering from inflammation of the udder, in case of dermatologicconditions animals were rubbed with leaves. Furthermore, cowswere given root to eat to cause vomit to relieve bloat. Besides,herb overcooked in milk was applied to ulcers (Kujawska et al.,2016). In the Bieszczady Mountains celandine was a symbol ofpurification of living world from threatening death, it was used astalismans to protect from demons (Szary, 2015). Dried herb wasused to incense the interiors of huts to deter flies and mosquitosas well as during plague and other epidemics. Grains soaked incelandine juice were used as fish and bird poison (Szary, 2013).PHYTOCHEMISTRYFor the therapeutic purposes, dried herb of C. majus is used(European Pharmacopeia). In some regions (Central and EasternEurope) roots are also exploited. European Pharmacopeiacalls for total alkaloid content as chelidonine [1], assayedspectrophotometrically with additional TLC screening andmicroscopic authentication.AlkaloidsPharmacologically relevant substances of C. majus areisoquinoline alkaloids (Figures 1-7, Table 1). These are thecomponents of latex produced in all plant parts, but flowers.Latex is stored in special secretory cells called laticifers. Presenceof articulate laticifers with yellowish content is also used asan authentication microscopic mark in powdered herb bypharmacopoeial monographs. The composition of latex is plantorgan specific (Tome- and Colombo, 1995; Sowa et al., 2018).Generally, five groups of alkaloids were found in C. majus. Theseare the derivatives of phenanthridine (3,4-benzoisoquinoline),protoberberine, protopine [37], quinolizidine, aporphine (Kadanet al., 1990, 1992; Pavao and Pinto, 1995; Taborska et al., 1995;Petruczynik et al., 2002; NecVas et al., 2005; Sa-rkozi et al., 2006;Zhou et al., 2012; K ,edzia et al., 2013; Grosso et al., 2014;Poormazaheri et al., 2017). More than forty alkaloids of differenttypes were isolated and identified from C. majus (Figures 1-7).Major phenanthridine derivatives that were found in aerial andunderground parts are (+)-chelidonine [1], chelerythrine [9],(Kadan et al., 1990; Sa-rkozi et al., 2006; Zhou et al., 2012).Protoberberine derivatives that accumulate in higher amountsare coptisine [31], berberine [28], stylopine [33] (Slavikand Slavikowa, 1977; Fulde and Wichtl, 1994; Shafiee andJafarabadi, 1998; Sa-rkozi et al., 2006). Aporphine alkaloidslike corydine [39] also appear (Slavik and Slavikowa, 1977;Shafiee and Jafarabadi, 1998; Kopytko et al., 2005). Twoprotopines were found in C. majus, allocryptopine [36]and protopine [37] (Fulde and Wichtl, 1994; Shafiee andJafarabadi, 1998; Kopytko et al., 2005). Sparteine [38] is theonly representative of quinolizidine alkaloids (Kopytko et al.,2005) but no other publications report its presence. Moreover,new unusual turkiyenine-type alkaloid named (-)-turkiyenine[42] was found in C. majus from Turkey (Kadan et al.,1990).Alkaloid content in different plant organs was found tobe unstable (Kustrak et al., 1982; Tome- and Colombo, 1995).Daily variations were probably due to the alkaloid degradationrather than translocation, because of similar time-course of thecompounds accumulation in all plant parts. Significant increaseof sanguinarine [12], chelerythrine [9], chelidonine [1], andcoptisine [31] was observed during the day, with the highestcontent in the evening, whereupon the alkaloids diminishedduring the night (Tome- and Colombo, 1995). Day light seems tobe the crucial factor influencing alkaloid biosynthesis in C. majus,especially in underground parts of the plants (Kustrak et al.,1982; Tome- and Colombo, 1995). Diurnal changes of alkaloidcontent seem to be less dependent on temperature, what wasobserved during winter time, when the alkaloid content was lowand stable, due to the reduced metabolism and the senescence ofthe aerial parts. According to Tome- and Colombo (1995) totalcontent of alkaloids in leaves was lower than in undergroundparts. In latex the content was 32 times higher than in leavesand 9 times higher than in roots. These results suggest that theamount of alkaloids in plant organs depend on the number oflaticifers in which they are stored. Moreover, the number oflaticifers is probably organ specific. Laticifers in C. majus areunbranched (without anastomoses), articulated with perforatedtransverse cells (Hagel et al., 2008). Articulated laticifers developfrom multiple cells. The structures form longitudinal rowscomposed of series of superimposed cells with perforated endwalls. The type of laticifers can differ even within the sameplant family. In another Papaveraceae species--opium poppy, theperforation of lateral walls leads to the formation of anastomoses(connections) between adjacent laticifer elements, unlike that ofGreater celandine (Hagel et al., 2008). From wounded laticifers, amatrix emerges with various organic substances suspended in it.This excretion is called latex and depending on the plant species,it contains proteins, organic acids, alkaloids, sterols, tannins, andmucilage. The growth and development of laticifers runs close tothe surrounding phloem, which affects the composition of latex.Amajor site of alkaloid accumulation in the protoplast of laticifercells are vesicular organelles, that had been found in opium poppybetween early 70's and 80's of the last century (Dickenson andFairbairn, 1975; Roberts et al., 1983). Unfortunately, researchon the site of alkaloid biosynthesis in Greater celandine hasFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299168Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majusFIGURE 1 | Structures of phenanthridine (3,4-benzoisoquinoline) alkaloids--chelidonine [1] derivatives.not been continued since then. Recent reports concern proteindetermination in latex and confirm its complex composition(for more information see the separate "Protein subsection"underneath).The presence and number of laticifers is due to thephysiological functions of aerial parts and underground parts ofthe plant, such as responses to environmental factors, defenseagainst herbivory, metabolic reserves, and energy store (Agrawaland Konno, 2009). Coptisine [31] was found mostly in fruitsand herb (Sa-rkozi et al., 2006; K ,edzia et al., 2013; Sowa et al.,2018), whereas berberine [28] showed no significant differencebetween aerial parts and roots (Tome- and Colombo, 1995).Larger amounts of phenanthridine alkaloids like chelidonine [1],chelerythrine [9], sanguinarine [12] were observed in roots ratherFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org April 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 299169Zielin'ska et al. Medicinal Uses of Chelidonium majusFIGURE 2 | Further structures of phenanthridine (3,4-benzoisoquinoline) alkaloids--chelerythrine [9] and sanguinarine [12] derivatives.than in aerial parts of the plants (Tome- and Colombo, 1995; Sowaet al., 2018).Total alkaloid content (%) in in vitro shoots and embryosexpressed as chelidonine [1] was 1.53 and 1.58%, respectively(Ciric' et al., 2008).Phenolic CompoundsSeveral flavonoids were found in aerial parts ofC.