Considering the academic programs, the followingstudy curricula are offered: undergraduate studies in Laboratory Bio-engineering (1st cycle, 3 yrs, 180 ECTS-credits), graduate studies in Mas-ter of Pharmacy (1st and 2nd cycle, 5 yrs, 300 ECTS-credits) as well aspostgraduate studies (MSci studies) in Pharmacoeconomics & HealthManagement (2nd cycle, 2 yrs, 120 ECTS-credits). Two of the postgrad-uate studies are in procedure for accreditation; these are the MScistudies in Cosmetology and Phytotherapy (2nd cycle, 2 yrs, 120 ECTS-credits). Objectives of the MPharm and postgraduate academic cur-ricula are to provide students with the basic knowledge in the designand development of drug and drug delivery systems, to introduce stu-dents in the methods and techniques for drug quality control, to de-velop communication skills for effective interaction with patients andwith other health practitioners, to enable students to integrate theclinical knowledge in the solution of real problems and to develop stu-dents' awareness of their responsibility for giving pharmaceutical careto their patients. Case-, project- and problem-based learning as well asexperiential learning are teaching methods which prepare studentsthe best for the practice after graduation and/or for continuing theirprofessional and scientific development. Integrated MPharm program leads directly to Doctoral level program(s)and other continuing education options. Aims of the PhD study cur-riculum in pharmacy are to provide scientific development in the fieldof pharmaceutical, biomedical and health sciences, to create sociallyresponsible scientists with ability for critical thinking, healthy skepti-cism and sense for team work, to provide scientifically, competenthuman potential for continuing support to the development of thefuture generations and to create competitive researchers and insti-tutions for creating and inclusion into domestic and international sci-entific networks and projects. PhD studies, for the first time organizedaccording to Bologna as 3rd level study in 2011, include design of cur-riculum depending on the scientific interest of the PhD student under(co)mentorship. Subjects for acquiring generic knowledge and researchskills, doctorial seminars, conferences, workshops, student mobility,education in the scientific field and preparation of PhD thesis are allplanned for the period of 6 semesters (180 ECTS- credits) by which thestudent obtain the title Doctor in pharmaceutical sciences.Professional (specialist) studies are organized both as academic at 2ndlevel, (Pharmacoeconomics & Health Management and Pharmaceuti-cal regulation, 1 yr, 60 ECTS-credits), Cosmetology and Phytotherapy(in accreditation, 2nd cycle, 1 yr, 60 ECTS-credits), and health special-ist studies. Study programs for the health specialist studies are com-pletely modernized in 2011 and new curricula are introduced as well,with science and research, clinical decision, communication skills,team building, management, education and teaching skills, ethics andregulation and health promotion as common topics for all the healthspecialist programs. With these programs, the students acquire titlespecialist and competence in different fields, such as the Drug Qual-ity Control, Sanitary Chemistry, Pharmaceutical Technology, HerbalDrugs (pharmacognosy), Clinical pharmacy, Pharmacoinformatics, Tox-icological Chemistry, Medicinal Biochemistry, and Community Phar-macy and Laboratory Medicinal Genetics as new ones. In conclusion, pharmacy is demanding curricula as it is the pharma-cist's role, constantly developing, hugely varied and rewarding profes-sion. Globalization, scientific and technology advances, informationand communication technology, changes in societal and health caresystem are all driving force for constant creation of new curricula atthe Faculty of Pharmacy (UKIM), at all levels of study according toBologna, with an aim to prepare pharmacists to face the challenges inthe new millennium.357Macedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011ACADEMIC SECTION oral presentationsFIFTH CONGRESS OF PHARMACY OF MACEDONIA WITH INTERNATIONAL PARTICIPATIONAKADEMSKA SEKTsIJAposter prezentatsiiACADEMIC SECTIONposter presentationsPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOPHARMACEUTICAL CARE IN THE CURRICU-LUM OF FACULTY OF PHARMACY AND BIO-CHEMISTRY: PAST EXPERIENCE ANDFUTURE CHALLENGESZ. Juricic, L. Bach-Rojecky, S. Vladimir-Knezevic, R.Jurisic GrubesicUniversity of Zagreb, Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry, A. Ko-vacica 1, HR-10000 Zagreb, CroatiaINTRODUCTIONPharmaceutical care is the new concept of pharmacists' services. Theidea of pharmaceutical care focuses on the responsibility of the phar-macist to meet all of the patient's drug related needs, be held ac-countable for meeting those needs, and assist the patient in achievinghis or her medical goals through collaboration with other health pro-fessionals (1). Therefore, pharmaceutical care should be incorporatedinto the training of pharmacists in the conduct of their professionalwork. OBJECTIVESOne of the recent aims in pharmacy education at the Faculty of Phar-macy and Biochemistry, University of Zagreb, Croatia has been adop-tion of the concept of pharmaceutical care - concept which mustidentify and articulate the caring behaviors or acts which pharmacistsperform in order to fulfill or advocate for fulfillment of individual pa-tient needs. These behaviors must become expected in the profes-sional standards of practice, resulting in routine performance inpatient care (2). Pharmacists also have the responsibility of helpingpeople to maintain good health. Becoming a skilled pharmacist re-quires appropriate training, assessment and feedback throughout thecurriculum in developing pharmaceutical care. Therefore, it is essen-tial that students begin their pharmaceutical care training already inthe university when students have a valuable opportunity for devel-oping skills in the delivery of care and to continue rehearsing in prac-tical training (3). APPLIED METHODSThe course "Pharmaceutical care" was first introduced in the curricu-lum of Faculty of Pharmacy and Biochemistry in Zagreb in academicyear 2009/2010, on the fifth year of the module Pharmacy. The courseis consisted of lectures, seminars and workshops, using the simulatedpatient method, case scenario, case analysis, structured interview, andproblem-based study (4). RESULTSThe lectures comprised the important and frequent subjects referredto pharmaceutical care, such as: The role of pharmacists in the ra-tional use of antibiotics; Pharmaceutical care in diabetes; Pharma-ceutical care for oncology patients; Pharmaceutical care in paintreatment; The role of pharmacists in pharmacovigilance; The role ofthe pharmacist in the selection of OTC drugs; Pharmaceutical care incardiovascular disease; Ethics in pharmaceutical science and profes-sion; Pharmacy access to rational phytotherapy; The role of quality inthe implementation of pharmaceutical care; Documenting pharma-ceutical care, etc. The students' seminars included some specific is-sues related to pharmaceutical care: Pharmaceutical care for patientswith allergic rhinitis, seasonal flu, acute bronchitis, diabetic foot, mi-graine, atopic dermatitis, and menopause; Counseling patients aboutcomplementary medicines, nutritional supplements, herbal prepara-tions, emergency contraception, using OTC and phytotherapeutics inpregnancy, and topical application of drugs; Consulting chronic pa-tients about self-care; Cooperation between pharmacists and physi-cians; The role of pharmacist in recognition of medication errors;Development of communication skills in pharmacy. The workshopsdealt with the role of pharmacists in recognition of medication errors,as well as their general mission to create a helpful, trusting, and em-phatic relationship with patient. The questionnaire about the purposeand benefit of the course "Pharmaceutical care" was carried outamong student population in order to improve contents and methodsof the course. The results showed that students generally recognizedthe importance and usefulness of such concept as the essential stepto pharmacy practice. CONCLUSIONSImproving pharmaceutical care skills is a challenging combination oftheoretical, practical, and self-regulative knowledge. The main prob-lem is to provide a well-defined method for structuring patient coun-seling skills, observation and giving feedback. Improvingpharmaceutical care requires internal motivation and the training ofpharmacists so that they understand their role as a part of the healthcare system. The greatest challenge is to change the communicationculture of the pharmacy environment and increase collaboration be-tween professions.REFERENCES1. Cipolle RJ, Strand LM, Morley PC. Pharmaceutical Care Practice: the Clinician'sGuide. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2004.2. Galt KA. The Need to Define "Care" in Pharmaceutical Care: An ExaminationAcross Research, Practice and Education. American Journal of PharmaceuticalEducation, Vol. 64 (2000) 223-233.3. Hyvarinen M-L, Tanskanen P, Katajavuori N, Isotalus P. Feedback in patientcounseling training - Pharmacy student's opinions. Patient Education andCounseling, Vol. 70 (2008) 363-369.4. Vladimir-Knezevic S. Ishodi ucenja - studij farmacije: In: Mesic M i Pinter Lj, eds.,Ishodi ucenja na Sveucilistu u Zagrebu. Zagreb: Sveuciliste u Zagrebu, pp. 115-117.360Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011AKADEMSKA SEKTsIJA poster prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOSTUDENTSKA SEKTsIJAoralni prezentatsiiSTUDENTS SECTIONoral presentationsPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOTITLES OF ORAL PRESENTATIONS (IN ORDER OF APPEARANCE)1. Physical stability analysis of total parenteral nutrition admixtureM. Pavlovic, M. Antunovic, D. Mirkovic, A. Petrovic2. Design and synthesis of new sulphonamide compound with potential for biological activityE. Veljanova, E. Popovski, A, Poceva Panovska, K. Mladenovska3. Design and synthesis of new coumarine compound with potential for biological activityE. Stanojevska, E. Popovski, A. Poceva Panovska, K. Mladenovska4. Influence of formulation variables on particle size distribution of L. casei loaded whey protein-alginate microparticlesJ. Hadzieva, K. Smilkov, T. Petreska Ivanovska, R. Petkovska, L. Petrusevska Tozi, K. Mladenovska5. Techniques for the preparation of biological samples: theoretical aspects of SPES. Petrovski, J. Tonic-Ribarska, S. Trajkovic-Jolevska6. In vivo biodistribution of amphiphilic nanoparticles: influence of physico-chemical propertiesD. Kuneski, M. Simonoska Crcarevska, S. Kuzmanovska, K. Goracinova7. Hybrid silica particles for local colon delivery of BudesonideO. Memed, N. Geskovski, M. Glavas Dodov8. Examination of phenol antioxidants in berries and needles of Juniperus species from R. MacedoniaI. Spasovska, D. Stojanovski, A. Grozdanovska, M. Grozdanovska, M. Karapandzova, T. Kadifkova Panovska, G. Stefkov, S. Kulevanova9. Macedonian Pine: potential natural source of antioxidantsG. Petrovska, I. Josifovska, V. Filipovski, A. Maslarova, M. Karapandzova, G. Stefkov, T. Kadifkova Panovska, S. Kulevanova10. Represantives of genus Sideritis in R. Macedonia: pharmacognostic aspectsB. Petrushevski, A. Mishevska, M. Jovanovska, M. Karapandzova, G. Stefkov, S. Kulevanova11. Polifenol and antioxidant capacity of Mountain tea (Sideritis scardica and Sideritis raeseri, Lamiaceae) from R. MacedoniaV. Apostolovska, B. Petrovska, M. Matovska, E. Kralevska, M. Karapandzova, G. Stefkov, T. Kadifkova Panovska, S. Kulevanova362Makedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011STUDENTSKA SEKTsIJA oralni prezentatsiiPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOSTUDENTSKA SEKTsIJAposter prezentatsiiSTUDENTS SECTIONposter presentationsPETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOHARMFUL EFFECTS OF UV RADIATION ON HUMANDaliborka Jovanova, Katerina Andonovska, Biljana Bauer PetrovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, University of St. Cyril and Methodius, SkopjeThe increase in UV radiation has a significant impact on human healthbecause of depletion of the ozone layer in the stratosphere. Potentialrisks include increased incidence of morbidity from: eye diseases, skincancer, infectious diseases and cancers. Looking at this issue from ascientific point of view is driven by different views on the impact of UVradiation on human health over the years, to take radical measuresfor protection from UV radiation. But only a few decades its effectswere considered beneficial in conditions such as vitiligo, psoriasis,tuberculosis, and vitamin D stimulation. That is why there has beendone a literary review of contemporary data on the harmful effects ofUV radiation on human health.Ultraviolet (UV), proton damages DNA molecules of living organismsin different ways. One such phenomenon is detrimental in linkingbases that are adjacent to each other, rather than along the DNAsequence. This makes the bulge, and a distortion of the DNA moleculethat does not work properly (1). However, throughout human evolutionit evolved a defense mechanism, the enzyme T4 endonucleasisprotective enzyme that performs correction of the damaged DNAsegment, but this protection is far from sufficient to avoid the effectsof UV radiation (4).Quantitative risk assessments are available for some effects (skincancer), while others (infectious diseases), and are not possible due tolack of data (3). Results based on experiments with animals had giveninsufficient information on the quantitative assessment of the linkageof the effects of UV-B radiation due to biological differences betweenspecies, but they are quite sufficient to prove a link between exposuresto the sun with harmful effects (3).Exposure to a high cumulative dose of UV-B radiation is one of severalfactors clearly associated with risk of cataract of the eye. Evaluationsof the effect of ozone depletion on cataract have been made andconfirm the negative effect of UV-B radiation in this condition (8).The immune system is directly affected by UV radiation in humans. UV-A radiation is used for therapeutic treatment of certain skin diseases,which have immunological component. On the other hand,autoimmune diseases are aggravated by UV-B exposure. It is involvedin the pathogenesis of some photo allergic and photosensitivedisorders. Increasing UV-B radiation can have different and adverseeffects of autoimmune and other diseases, but it is not possible tomake any predictions about its impact (7).Studies on cancer of the skin confirmed the connection betweenexcessive exposure to sunlight and burns with the emergence of non-melanoma cancer (5). This is demonstrated in experiments with miceand testing in people with skin cancer. The connection with the sunand frequent burns in these patients and skin cancer can not beneglected as fact (6).Contrary to public belief that Hypericum perforatum is good aprotection from the sun, the plant has photosensitive action by whichthe masses are not familiar and can inflict serious damage due to itsmisuse. The general application of the plant is as a sunscreen, but theabsorption of radiation in large doses causes redness, burns, andpermanent damage to the skin epithelium (9).Today, ultraviolet radiation has medical applications in the treatmentof skin conditions like psoriasis and vitiligo. UV-A radiation is muchused in combination with psoralens (PUVA treatment) of psoriasis. Thismulti-treatment is used less today because the combination produceddramatic increases in skin cancer and because treatment with limiteddoses of UV-B radiation alone is a more effective method. In cases ofpsoriasis and vitiligo, ultraviolet light with a wavelength of 311 nm ismost effective (10).Protection from UV radiation mostly involves prevention of ozonedamage because chemical substances such as methyl bromide andchlorfluorcarbons have been omitted from use by order of EPA(Environment Protection Organization), and introduced theirsubstitutes which do not react with free radicals (10).The damages to the ozone moves upwards and despite all attempts toawaken the awareness of the human nation, and the harmful effectsof UV-B radiation to human health grow. Most effective action on theissue would be preventive action, i.e., use of protective measuresagainst the sun like clothes from appropriate materials, sunglasses,hats, and avoiding excessive exposure to solar radiation (2).REFERENCES1. Available from: http://www. vtaide. com/png/images/atmosphere. jpg - accessedat 06. 05. 2011.2. Available from: http://www. epa. gov/ozone/ - accessed at 06. 05. 2011.3. Available from: http://earthobservatory. nasa. gov/Features/Ozone/ - accessedat 06. 05. 2011.4. Available from: http://www. health. gov. au/internet/skincancer/publishing.nsf/Content/fact-u - accessed at 06. 05. 2011.5.