reducedand (f) development of coupled (hyphenated) analytical techinques,such as liquid chromatography-NMR spectroscopy (LC-NMR).The application of 2D NMR techniques, revealing connectivities basedon structural and spatial proximities (scalar and dipolar couplings, re-spectively), in many cases also enable resolution of the ovelapped NMRsignals. The most popular current 2D NMR experiments for small mo-lecules are listed below:a) Homonuclear correlation(i) h,h-cosY (correlated spectroscopY), connectivity via scalar (J) cou-pling through chemical bonds. (ii) noesY (nuclear overhauser effect spectroscopy)/eXsY (eXchangespectroscopY), connectivity via dipolar coupling (through space r < 4- 5 A) or chemical (conformational) exchange, respectively. (iii) tocsY (total correlation spectroscopY), or hohAhA (homonuc-lear hArtman hAhn spectroscopy), connectivity among all spins fromthe J-coupling network, e.g. protons in a single amino acid from a pep-tide.b) Heteronuclear correlation (HETCOR) with proton (inverse) detection(i) hsQc (heteronuclear single Quantum coherence) and hMQc (he-teronuclear Multiple Quantum coherence), connectivity between he-teronuclei (e.g. 13C,1H or 15N,1H) via direct scalar coupling (1JC,H or1JN,H). (ii) hMBc (heteronuclear Multiple Bond correlation), connectivity bet-ween heteronuclei (e.g. 13C,1H) via long-range scalar coupling (2JC,H,3JC,H).In this lecture the potential of the 2D NMR experiments listed aboveis demonstrated on few selected examples of natural products such assesquterpene lactones (1 and 2), a coumarin (3) and a xanthone (4) iso-lated from plant species Amphoricarpos autariatus, Anthemis carpa-tica (Asteraceae), Seseli montanum ssp. tommasinii (Apiaceae) andSwertia punctata (Gentianceae), respectively, as a part of our com-prehensive project regarding secondary metabolites of wild growingplants aimed at discovery of new compounds of pharmacologic interst(reviewed in refs. 1 - 4).In addition, a brief overview of possibilities and recent developmentsof LC-NMR, a coupled (hyphenated) technique which has emergedsince the mid 1990s, is presented in this lecture. The coupling of highperformance liquid chromatography with nuclear magnetic resonancespectroscopy (LC-NMR) is one of the most powerful methods for theseparation and structural elucidation of unknown compounds in mix-tures. An analysis of the future development of the technique with re-spect to its application in phytochemical analysis is presented.referencesS. Milosavljevic, V. Vajs, V. Bulatovic, D. Djokovic, I. Aljancic, N. Juranic and S. Macura,"Application of two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance methods for structureelucidation of sesquiterpene lactones (guaianolides) from Anthemis carpatica andditerpenes (kauranes) from Achillea clypeolata. ", Recent Res. Devel. in Phytochemi-stry, 2, 383-395 (1998)S. Milosavljevic, V. Bulatovic and M. Stefanovic, "Sesquiterpene lactones from the Yu-goslavian wild growing plant families Asteraceae and Apiaceae", J. Serb. Chem. Soc.64, 397-442 (1999)I.S. Aljancic, V.E.Vajs, V. V. Tesevic, S. M. Milosavljevic, "Some Wild-Growing Plant Spe-cies from Serbia and Montenegro as the Potential Sources of Drugs", Current Phar-maceutical Design , 14 (29): 3089-3105 (2008)K. Savikin, T. Jankovic, D. Krstic-Milosevic, N. Menkovic, S. Milosavljevic, SecondaryMetabolites and Biological Activities of some Gentianaceae Species from Serbia andMontenegro, Studium Press LLC, USA, Comprehensive Bioactive Natural ProductsExtraction, Isolation & Characterization, Vol. 6, 323-340 (2010)176PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011MEDITsINSKI I AROMATIChNI RASTENIJA oralni prezentatsiithe surVeY of species, Belongingto gentiAnceAe fAMilY of centrAlBAlkAns, phArMAcognosticAllYinterestingNebojsa MenkovicThe Institute for medicinal plant research "Dr Josif Pancic" - Belgrade,SerbiaFamily Gentianaceae comprises 87 genera and ca. 1600 species. Thelargest genera are Gentiana (360 species), Gentianella (250 species),Swertia (135 species), Centaurium (50 species). At the same time thesegenera are pharmacgnostically most interesting.The Gentianaceae species are cosmopolitan and are distributedthroughout the world, mainly at the mountains of northern hemisp-here, in temperate and arctic region. Besides, they can be found athigh mountains of tropic regions and Ands, as well as in New Zeland,Tasmania, south Australia, and in Africa, although in these regions theyare not abundant.In European flora 9 genera belonging to family Gentianaceae are li-sted. As far as pharmacognosy and chemotaxonomy is concerned themost important genera are: Gentiana and Gentianella, containing 51species classified into 11 sections, Centaurium (12 species, 4 sections),as well as two members of genus Swertia.The area of central Balkans (Montenegro, Macedonia, Bulgaria and Ser-bia) is inhabited by 4 members of genus Centaurium classified in twosections, 23 species of Gentiana and Gentianella (seven sections) andtwo species of Swertia (one section).It is well known that these genera synthesize xanthones, secoiridoidsand flavone-C-glucosides. as main secondary metabolites The factthat xanthones are not widespread in plant world but are the mostabundant in Gentianaceae and Guttiferae families, gives them impor-tant role as chemotaxonomic markers (especially for these two fami-lies). Hitherto investigation of xantone distribution in Gentianaceaewas mostly focused on genera Centaurium, Gentiana, Gentianella andSwertia.The substitution pattern of xanthones and the types of substituents,are rather characteristics for particular genus. For example, xanthone-O-glycosides are chemotaxonomically important in genus Gentiana.The structure investigation of saccharide units bonded to xanthonesin Gentiana, Gentianella, Gentianopsis and Swertia pointed out somedifferences among the genera.The active principles of Gentianceae are xanthone, flavonoids and se-coiridoids, exhibiting various interesting biological activities whichmakes these family very important from pharmacognostic point of view.In this lecture the results of our investigations regarding secondarymetabolites of the species from central Balkans belonging to familyGentianceae will be presented.ApproAchesin phArMAcognosY reseArchGjose Stefkov, Svetlana KulevanovaInstitute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University"Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Skopje, R. MacedoniaPharmacognosy research areas are continuing to expand, and now inc-lude aspects of cell and molecular biology in relation to natural pro-ducts (NP), ethnobotany and phytotherapy, in addition to the moretraditional analytical method development and phytochemistry.The Institute of Pharmacognosy (IP), has undergone significant changein recent years and today represents a highly interdisciplinary educa-tional-scientific entity. The systematic scientific approach offers ourpharmacognosy group attractive and diverse areas of research, including:1. Phytochemistry, whereas the long experience in extraction techni-ques, excellent laboratory facilities equipped with preparative HPLCs,GC/FID/MS and LC-MS enables our research group an insight into thechemical composition of many wild growing domestic medicinal andaromatic plants (MAPs) with a focus on flavonoids, phenolic acid, phe-nil-ethanoids, triterpen saponosides, alkaloids, therpenoids and es-sential oils.2. The microscopic evaluation and species verification of MAPs are re-gularly conducted at IP, as well as microscopic research studies onMAPs (Sideritis spp. ; Eringium spp.) deficent in such data.3. Development and use of analytical methods for quality control ofNP from the marketplace (Tribulus terrestris, Poppy, Liquorice) is animportant part of our routine activities.4. The study of the medicinal properties of NP, for the purposes ofdrug discovery and understanding mechanism of action comprises se-veral steps. A typical protocol to isolate a pure chemical agent fromnatural origin is bioassay-guided fractionation, meaning step-by-stepseparation of extracted components based on differences in their phy-sicochemical properties, and assessing the biological activity. The end-goal of the work is to identify which one(s) of the scores or hundredsof compounds are responsible for the observed in vitro activity, isola-tion of a target substance and elucidation of its chemical structure. Invitro assays are therefore used to identify chemical components ofthe crude drug that may rationally be expected to have a given phar-macological effect in humans. Seven flavonoids were identified in themost bioactive fraction of the extract of Teucrium polium that showeda distinct insulinotropic effect on INS-1E cells (in vitro assay for as-sessing antidiabetic properties). The final effect of any extract can bea product of the interactions between the constituents and the ef-fect of each constituent on its own. To effectively study the existenceand affect of such interactions, scientific studies must examine the ef-fect that multiple constituents. All flavonoids from the Teucrium ex-tract were also studied separately and showed a less significantinsulinotropic effect on INS-1E cells. Additionally, different antimi-crobial and antioxidant (DPPH, radical scavenging) test are appliedwith purpose of assessing these activities in many aromatic plants andspices, especially in NP with potential use as food preservatives (ex-tracts from Pine, Juniper, Sage, Oregano, Mountain tea).In vitro activity does not necessarily translate to activity in humans orother living systems. Hepatoprotective and antidiabetic in vivo testingof characterized plant extracts (Teucrium spp., Vaccinium spp., Cen-taurium erythrea, Arctostaphylos uva ursi, ect) in normal and SZT dia-betic rats were conducted, revealing slightly different results thanthose obtained in vitro.177fifth congress of phArMAcY of MAcedoniA With internAtionAl pArticipAtionMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011MEDICINAL AND AROMATIC PLANTS oral presentations5. The assessment of the safety and toxicity of any extract, crude drugformulation or NP is obligation before approaching clinical trials onhumans. Within our in vivo experiments, evaluation of biochemicalmarkers (hepatic and renal enzymes) as well as the histomorphologicalexamination of the vital organs are performed, thus having an insightinto safety of the tested extract/NP.6. IP's phytotherapy research program lays its future focus on incor-porating NP into intelligent carriers as a part of its.7. The ethnopharmacology knowledge of the pharmacological quali-ties and use of traditional medicinal remedies, its holistic and syste-matic approach, can serve as an innovative and powerful discoveryengine for newer, safer and affordable medicines. Collecting ethnop-haramcological data from domestic folk's medicine, have been a con-tinuing project, carried out by IP together with Students ResearchAssociation. Another experience shows that utilizing the fact thatmany bitter herbs are traditionally applied as antidiabetics and com-bining this fact with the chemotaxonomy data, we have obtained ex-cellent choice of Centaurium erythrea (bitter plant withchemotaxonomical similarity with Swertia chiriata-traditionally usedantidiabetic herb in India and Japan).8. Molecular study and manipulation of genetic biosynthetic pathwaysfor the purpose of enhancing the production of natural compounds isin inclination. Chemical synthesis of NP can be extremely difficult andexpensive, and isolation from their natural sources is often low yiel-ding. Nowadays, metabolic engineering and synthetic biology offer analternative approach, as the tools for engineering microbes are furtherdeveloped. We have modified the existing ergosterol metabolic path-way into the genetically tractable host system Saccharomices cerevi-siae that showed high capacity for production of the endogenousisoprene precursors as well as different classes of terpenes from ine-xpensive sugar-based carbon starting materials. Using these strainswe expressed one monoterpene and one sesquiterpene synthase fromtwo Salvia species. Besides gene-mining and gene-mapping, employingmolecular research in many studies is inevitably nowadays. Molecularcharacterization of MAPs through molecular markers is important forresolving taxonomic problems (Sideritis raeseri/ S.scardica/ S.syriaca),and is integral part of the data needed in the Genebank conservationprogram (Origanum vulgare, Salvia off.) as well as guide through bree-ding program (Papaver somniferum).9. Enhanced practices and breeding programs for specific agriculturalpurposes and production of NP. There is ongoing long-term project fo-cused on poppy alkaloids enclosing a breeding program based on bo-tanical, phytochemical and molecular markers;10. The world is facing extend species extinction due to habitat lossand overharvesting. Along with the species, traditional knowledge ofmedicinal practices is fast disappearing as well. In the domain of pro-tection/conservation of biodiversity, IP is having one of the crucialroles in founding the National Gene Bank, maintaining and managingthe ex situ MAPs collection. As species face loss of habitat or over-harvesting, there have been new issues to deal with in sourcing crudedrugs. These include developing sustainable collection practices (Vac-cinium spp., Sideritis spp. ), developing farming practices (Sideritis rae-seri, Poppy). Promoting organic harvesting has been enduringoccupation of IP, encompasing mapping and resource assessment ofMAPs (Osogovo Mtn. Blueberries study) as well as MAPs chemical cha-racterization as additional qualities in this value added system. Also IPhas a long-standing commitment for chemical characterization of allendemic plants of R.M.ISTRAzhUVAChKI PRISTAPIVO FARMAKOGNOzIJATAGjoshe Stefkov, Svetlana KulevanovaInstitut za Farmakognozija, Farmatsevtski Fakultet, Univerzitet,,Sv. Kiril i Metodij", Skopje, R. MakedonijaFarmakognostichkite istrazhuvachki oblasti kontinuirano se eks-pandiraat, vkluchuvajkji aspekti na kletochna i molekularna biolo-gija vo relatsija so prirodni produkti (PP), etnobotanika ifitoterapija, kako i fitokhemija i razvoj na analitichki metodi.Institutot za Farmakognozija (IF) ostvari znachajni promeni voposlednite godini i denes pretstavuva visoko interdistsiplina-ren nauchno-istrazhuvachki entitet. Sistematskiot nauchen pristapna nashata farmakognostichka grupa rezultirashe so involviranostvo raznoobrazni i atraktivni istrazhuvachki domeni, tuka vklu-chuvajkji gi:1. Fitokhemijata, kade shto dolgogodishnoto iskustvo vo ekstraktsi-ski tekhniki, sovremeni laboratorii opremeni so preparativniHPLC aparati, GC/FID/MS i LC-MS i ovozmozhuvaat na nashata istra-zhuvachka grupa uvid vo khemiskiot sostav na mnogu meditsinski i aro-matichni rastenija (MAR) so fokus na flavonoidite, fenolnitekiselini, fenil-etanoidite, triterpenskite saponozidi, alkalo-idite, terpenoidi i isparlivite masla.2. Mikroskopska evaluatsija i verifikatsija na MAR redovno sesproveduvaat vo IF, kako i mikroskopski studii na MAR (Sideritisspp. ; Eringium spp.) za koi nedostasuvaat podatotsi.3.Razvoj na analitichki metodi za kontrola na kvalitet na PP odpazarot (babin zab, afion, sladok koren) kako del od rutinskiaktivnosti.4. Prouchuvanjeto na meditsinskite osobini na PP, potragata ponovi lekovi i razjasnuvanje na mekhanizmite na deluvanje opfakjarazlichni istrazhuvanja.