Milutinovic1, S. Brankovic2, N. Cujic Nikolic3, K. Savikin3, M. Kostic1, N. Kitic4, B. Miladinovic1, D. Kitic11 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis, Serbia2 Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis, Serbia3 Institute for Medicinal Plants Research ,, dr Josif Pancic", Belgrade, Serbia 4 Faculty of Medicine, University of Nis, SerbiaIn recent years, the interest of pharmaceutical and medicinal science has been focused on the research of berry fruits and their possible therapeutic effects and nutritional value. The chokeberry (Aronia melanocarpa (Michx.) Elliott) has been used for centuries as a rich source of phenolic compounds, mainly anthocyanins. Functional gastrointestinal and motility disorders are considered to be the most common gastrointestinal disorders amongst the human population.The aims of the study were to analyze the chemical composition and the antispasmodic effects of the chokeberry ethanolic extract, waste extract and the juice in the isolated rat ileum. The HPLC method was used for quantification of the anthocyanins and flavonoids in extracts and juice. The study examined the influence of the chokeberry preparations and cyanidin-3-O-galactoside, the main anthocyanin compound, on the spontaneous ileum smooth muscle contraction, as well as on contraction induced by acetylcholine and potassium chloride.Results demonstrated that anthocyanins were the most represented compounds in all tested chokeberry preparations. Chokeberry waste extract contained the highest amount of examined bioactive compounds. The chokeberry preparations, in a concentration dependent manner, significantly relaxed the rat ileum spontaneous and induced contractions, due to the concentration of bioactive polyphenolic compounds. The dominant anthocyanin, cyanidin-3-O-galactoside, also expressed the spasmolytic effect and therefore may be responsible for the relaxant activity.Based on the results obtained, our study offers an important insight into the gastrointestinal activity and the potential use in phytotherapy of not only the chokeberry ethanolic extracts and juice but also its waste extracts. Hence, the chokeberry could be used as a herbal remedy for the control of gut motility. However, it would be necessary to carry out clinical studies to confirm its spasmolytic effects in humans.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 20320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP091. Leaf Methanolic extract of a traditional medicinal plant of North-East India prevents hepatic steatosis via regulating AMPK mediated pathways.S. Bharadwaj1,2, P. Manna1, J.C. Borah1, N.C. Talukdar1,21 Biochemistry and Drug Discovery Lab, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and Technology (IASST), Paschim Boragaon, India2 Cotton University, Panbazar, IndiaNon-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has attracted scientific attention in the pathogenesis of metabolic syndrome and its related health disorders. NAFLD includes a wide spectrum of liver dysfunction ranging from hepatic steatosis (intracellular triglyceride accumulation) to steatohepatitis. The present study has been undertaken to examine the beneficial effect of an indigenous medicinal plant of North East India against hepatic steatosis by using both cell culture and animal models. Male SD rats were used for this study (20 weeks' experiment). A total of 18 SD rats were divided into 3 groups (n=6), Normal chow diet (G1), High-fat high-fructose (HFFD) diet with treatment of vehicle (G2) or methanolic plant extract (G3). The extract formulated in 0.3% w/v Carboxy Methyl Cellulose (CMC) was administered to the animals through oral gavage at a dose of 250 mg/kg. Bioactivity guided fractionation of the extract has been carried out by using rodent hepatocyte (CC1) cell line treated with sodium palmitate (PA, 0.75 mM) with or without different extracts/fractions. Molecular mechanism has been dissected by using immunoblotting studies. Animal studies showed a positive effect of the plant extract in upregulating AMPK phosphorylation and reducing the levels of both triglyceride (TG) and total cholesterol (TC) in hepatic tissues compared to HFFD-fed animals. Cell culture studies further demonstrated a decrease in intracellular TG level upon treatment with methanolic leaf extract in PA-treated cells. Interestingly, ethyl acetate fraction of the methanolic extract also showed a significant decrease in TG level in PA-treated cells compared to others fractions, namely hexane, butanol, and water. Chemical profiling demonstrated the presence of verbascoside as one of the bio-active principle(s). The present study for the first time demonstrates a positive effect of the leaf methanolic extract of a traditional medicinal plants of North East India in reducing hepatic steatosis via upregulating AMPK signaling pathway.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org20420th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP092. Zerumbone promotes hyaluronic acid production and enhances aquaporin-3 expression in human keratinocytes.I.C. Wu1, H.L. Yang2, Y.C. Hseu11 Department of Cosmeceutics, College of Biopharmaceutical and Food Sciences, China Medical University, Taiwan2 Institute of Nutrition, College of Biopharmaceutical and Food Sciences, China Medical University, TaiwanSolar ultraviolet (UV) radiation is the most important external factor causing skin photoaging. We evaluated the skin hydration/moisturizing efficacies of Zerumbone (Zer, 2.5-10 mM), a natural sesquiterpene of Zingiber zerumbet, with UVB-irradiated human skin keratinocyte (HaCaT) cells and underlying molecular mechanism. We found that Zer promotes skin hydration by increasing the expression of hyaluronan synthase-2 (HAS-2) and aquaporin-3 (AQP-3) with or without UVB (30 mJ/cm2)-irradiated HaCaT cells. Notably, Zer dose-dependently activates ERK pathways and pre-treatment cells with the Pharmacological ERK inhibitor (U0126), HAS-2 and AQP-3 expression was attenuated. Further, the increased Src phosphorylation was confirmed by treatment with Zer in HaCaT cells. Notably, silencing of Src (siRNA transfection) significantly diminished Zer-mediated skin hydration, as evidenced by impaired HAS-2 and AQP-3 expression. We may suggest that Zer-induced HAS-2 and AQP-3 expression was mediated by the Src and ERK signaling cascades. RT-PCR confirmed that Zer increased the expression of natural moisturizing factor-related genes HAS-2 and AQP-3. Together, these results suggest that Zerumbone might be used as a cosmetic ingredient with positive effects on skin hydration and moisture retention.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 20520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP093. Components of a herbal combination against inflammatory disorders from Benin: In vitro anti-inflammatory and phytochemical screening of Combretum collinum Fresen, Piliostigma thonningii (Schum.) Milne-Redh. and Ficus natalensis Hoechst.P. Marquardt1, R. Seide1, C. Vissiennon2, V. Ahyi3, K. Fester1,41 Leipzig University, Institute of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmaceutical Biology, Leipzig, Germany2 University of Leipzig, Institute for Medical Physics and Biophysics, Leipzig, Germany3 IRGIB Africa University, Inter-Regional University of Industrial Engineering, Biotechnologies and Applied Sciences, Cotonou, Benin4 Zittau/Gorlitz University of Applied Sciences, Faculty of Natural and Environmental Sciences, Zittau, GermanyA herbal combination of Combretum collinum Fresen, Piliostigma thonningii (Schum.) Milne-Redh., Ficus natalensis Hoechst., Fadogia agrestis Schweinf. Ex Hiern, Entada Africana Guill. & Perr. and Chasmanthera dependens Hoechst. is traditionally used for the treatment of musculoskeletal disorders and pain in the North of Benin and has already shown anti-inflammatory effects in a preliminary observational trial [1]. The present study aims to characterize the phenolic composition of C. collinum, P. thonningii and F. natalensis leaf extracts and to investigate the in vitro anti-inflammatory effects in TNFa-stimulated immortalized human keratinocytes (HaCaT). To mimic an inflammatory process on skin, HaCaT cells were stimulated with 20 ng/ml TNFa for 24 hours to overproduce interleukins 8 and 6. Dilutions of the plant extracts were tested for their anti-inflammatory effects by co-incubation with TNFa. Subsequently, cytokine levels in supernatants were measured by ELISA. The phytochemical analysis of the hydrophilic extracts by HPLC, LC-MS and partially NMR after fractionation identified the following major phenolic compounds: myricetin-3-O-rhamnoside and myricetin-3-O-glucoside (C. collinum), quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside (P. thonningi) and quercetin-3-O-rutinoside and chlorogenic acid and its isomers (F. natalensis). Aqueous leaf extracts of C. collinum (CCL) and P. thonningii (PTL) decreased IL-6 and IL-8 release in TNFa-stimulated HaCaT cells (PTL: IC50 values of 74.37 ug/mL for IL-8 and 89.28 ug/mL for IL-6, CCL: IC50 of 142.5 ug/mL for IL8 and a decrease of IL-6 release by 29.3 % for the highest extract concentration of 200 ug/mL). For F. natalensis aqueous leaf extract no anti-inflammatory effect could be demonstrated. Regarding the identified phenolic compounds, only myricetin-3-O-rhamnoside showed an anti-inflammatory effect. Quercetin-3-O-rhamnoside, however, showed no influence on IL-6 or IL-8-release. The in vitro anti-inflammatory effect of C. collinum and P. thonningii supports the application of the herbal combination in traditional Beninese medicine and represents a potential alternative treatment strategy for inflammatory diseases. [1] Vissiennon, Z., Ahyi, V., Koupkaki, E., & Nieber, K. (2011). Anti-inflammatory effects of novel gel-formulations with traditional used plants in Benin. Planta Medica, 77(12), PF67.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org20620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP094. Sideritis genus: Traditional medicine herbs for thousands of years and a source of various therapeutic agents.E.M. Tomou1, C. Kloukina1, K. Lytra1, H. Skaltsa11 Department of Pharmacognosy & Chemistry of Natural Products, School of Pharmacy, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, GreeceSideritis L. genus consists one of the most important ethnopharmacological genus around the world1. Considering as highly beneficial source for human health, Sideritis species are widely used as pharmaceutical herbal products in food and cosmetic industries. Being known as Greek mountain tea, has been listed by European Medicine Agency (EMA) as a traditional medicine for the relief of mild gastrointestinal discomfort and against the common cold2. In the past few years, vigorous research studies have provided significant pharmacological activities related to the phytochemical profile of the specific genus1,2. A currently clinical study carried out by Wightman et al. (2018) showed that Greek mountain tea improved the aspects of cognitive function and mood in a group of healthy, older adults, leading to new therapeutic approaches3. A challenge, however, is to provide the market with standardized medicinal plants with known concentration of interesting bioactive ingredients. To address the aforementioned challenge, our research goal is to thoroughly identify the chemical profiles, as well as to examine the biological activities of cultivated Sideritis species. Up to date, we have studied three cultivated Sideritis species; one endemic species of Greece S. euboea Heldr. and two endemic species of Cyprus, S. perfoliata L. subsp. perfoliata and S. cypria Post. Their total extracts and infusions were investigated and their major compounds were isolated using chromatographic techniques. In total, so far, from the methanol extract of S. euboea 16 compounds were isolated4, from the traditional infusion of the S. perfoliata subsp. perfoliata 12 compounds were isolated5, while from the traditional infusions (both flowers and leaves) of the S. cypria 11 compounds were isolated. All the structure elucidations were carried out by means of 1D and 2D NMR methods (COSY, HSQC, HMBC, NOESY). [1][1] Aneva et al. 2019. DARU J. Pharm. Sci. 27, 407-421. [2] EMA/HMPC/39455/2015. [3] Wightman et al. 2018. Nutrients 10, 955. [4] Tomou et al. 2019. Phytochem. Anal., 1-9. [5] Chrysargyris et al. 2019. Ind. Crop. Prod. 140, 111694.The research work was supported by the Hellenic Foundation for Research and Innovation (HFRI) and the General Secretariat for Research and Technology (GSRT), under the HFRI PhD Fellowship grant (GA. 16228).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 20720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP095. Antioxidant potential of Schisandra rubriflora - extracts from parent plant material and from biomass of in vitro culturesA. Szopa1, M. Klimek-Szczykutowicz1, P. Kubica1, M. Dziurka2, H. Ekiert11 Chair and Department of Pharmaceutical Botany, Jagiellonian University, Collegium Medicum. Krakow, Poland2 Polish Academy of Sciences, The Franciszek Gorski Institute of Plant Physiology, Krakow, PolandAntioxidant activity of plant extracts is a very desirable attribute in the modern phytotherapy. Recent studies proved that fruits and leaves of Schisandra chinensis (Turcz.) Baill. show considerable antioxidant activities [1,2]. Biological properties of this plant are attributed mainly to dibenzocyclooctadiene lignans and phenolic compounds [2]. The object of this research was another, endemic for Sichuan province of China, less known species - Schisandra rubriflora Rehder & E.H.Wilson [1]. The aim of the study was to investigate the antioxidant potential of extracts from S. rubriflora fruit and leaf extracts of male (M) and female (F) specimens collected in May 2017 ("Clematis" company, Poland), using in vitro models. The estimations were performed also for microshoot culture extracts (M and F lines) growing on agar Murashige-Skoog [3] medium with 1 mg/l 6-benzylaminopurine and 1 mg/l indole-3-butyric acid (for 30 days). The antioxidant potential was evaluated using: CUPRAC (cupric ion reducing antioxidant activity), QUENCHER-CUPRAC (quick, easy, new, cheap and reproducible treatment, involving forced solubilization of bound phenolics by oxidizing TAC (total antioxidant capacity), FRAP (ferric reducing ability of palsma) and DPPH (1,1-diphenyl-2-picrylhydrazyl) methods. Additionally estimation of total polyphenol content using Folin-Ciocalteu method was performed. Using all applied methods the highest antioxidant potential was confirmed for leaf extracts. The antioxidant activity of fruit and in vitro microshoot (M, F) extracts were comparable, but lower than for leaf extracts. This is the first report documented the antioxidant potential of S. rubriflora extracts. [1] Szopa A., Barnas M., Ekiert H. Phytochemistry Reviews, 2019; 18:109-128. [2] Mocan A., Crisan G., Vlase L. et al. Molecules 2014, 19, 15162-15179. [3] Murashige T, Skoog F. Physiologia Plantarum, 1962, 15:473-497Funded by National Science Centre, Poland, 2016/23/D/NZ7/01316.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org20820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP096. Wound healing potential of crocin and safranal, main saffron (Crocus sativus L.) active constituents, in excision wound model in rats.N. Deldar1, M. Monsefi1, M. Salmanpour1, M. Ostovar1, M. Heydari11 Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, IranSaffron is traditionally suggested for wound healing in Persian medicine. It is investigated for wound healing effect in multiple studies with promising results. It is not examined that which ingredient of saffron contributes more to this effect.