Polyphenols inhibits the growth and angiogenesis of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo.W.T. LiaoInstitute of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung, TaiwanChinese medicine department, Show Chwan Memorial Hospital, Changhua, TaiwanPhenolic compounds, for example, flavonoids, lignans, stilbenes, and phenolic acids, are plant metabolites found in herbs, beans, fruits, tea, cocoa, and coffee and may contribute to inhibition breast cancer cells. Chlorogenic acid, the main phenolic compound in coffee, has also been found in the leaves of Hibiscus sabdariffa and select herbs such as Lonicera japonica (honeysuckle) and Eucommia ulmoides. Chlorogenic acid (CGA) exhibits potentials towards liver, breast and skin cancer. Cancer cells stimulated with CGA exhibits differential expression of transcriptional factors and regulatory molecules. In the present study, we investigated the effects of chlorogenic acids (CGA) and cisplatin (CDDP). on proliferation, apoptosis, and angiogenesis of breast cancer cells in vitro and in vivo. It was found that co-treatment of CGA and CDDP could not only induce tumor cells into apoptosis through activating the mitochondria pathways, but also suppress the angiogenesis in xenograft animal model. These effects were associated with downregulation of the expression of MMP2/9, VEGF, and VEGFR-2, up-regulation of P53 signaling. CGA suppress the angiogenesis in xenograft animal model. These effects were associated with downregulation of the expression of MMP2/9, VEGF, and VEGFR-2, up-regulation of P53 signaling. Thus, CGA and CDDP in combination showed a better anti-tumor effects in breast cells than either CGA or CDDP presence alone and might represent an effective therapeutic strategy for breast cancer therapy.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org19620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP084. Physalin a attenuates inflammatortory responses through inhibiting the toll-like receptor 4-mediated c-jun n-terminal kinase pathways and up-regulating the antioxidant activity.W.R. Lin1, Y.H. Lin2, Y.H. Hsiao2, K.L. Ng3, Y.H. Kuo4, W.T. Hsieh21 Graduated Institute Biomedicine Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan2 Department of Pharmacology, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan3 Department of Bioinformatics and Medical Engineering, Asia University, Taichung, Taiwan4 Department of Chinese Pharmaceutical Sciences and Chinese Medicine Resources, China Medical University, Taichung, TaiwanPhysalin A (PA) is a withanolide isolated from Physalis angulata L. In this study, and PA could inhibit the production of inflammatory cytokines, including prostaglandin E2 (PGE2), nitric oxide (NO), interleukin-1b (IL-1b), interleukin-6 (IL-6), and tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) in lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced RAW 264.7 cells. However, PA inhibited the level of pro-inflammatory factor, including inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2), and suppressed the inhibitor of nuclear transcription factor kB (IkB)/nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kB) and toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) /activator protein 1 (AP-1) inflammatory signaling pathways in LPS-stimulated RAW 264.7 cells. Moreover, in the carrageenan-induced hind paw edema in mice, PA has been shown to inhibit the production of inflammatory mediators NO, malondialdehyde (MDA), and TNF-a production. In contrast, PA increased the antioxidant factor levels of superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), glutathione peroxidase (GPx). According to the result data, suggest the anti-inflammatory effects of PA may be through the suppression of the TLR4/JNK/AP-1 and IkB/NF-kB signaling pathways and up-regulation of the anti-oxidative activity.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 19720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP085. Antrodia salmonea induces autophagic and apoptotic cell death in human glioblastoma cells.Y.B. Lin1, H.L. Yang2, Y.C. Hseu31 Ph.D. program for Biotechnology Industry, China Medical University, Taiwan2 Department of Nutrition, China Medical University, Taiwan3 Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, TaiwanWe investigated the in vitro anticancer properties of Antrodia salmonea (AS), as well-known edible/medicinal mushroom in Taiwan, on human glioblastoma (GBM8401) cells; and revealed the underlying molecular mechanisms involved in autophagic- and apoptotic-cell death. Treatment of GBM8401 cells with fermented culture broths of AS (0-200 mg/mL) inhibited cell viability/growth. The results showed that AS significantly decreased the cell viability of GBM8401 cells with IC50 values of 75.5 ug/mL. AS-induced autophagy was evidenced via increased LC3-II accumulation and AVOs formation in GBM8401 cells. These events are associated with increased SQSTM1/p62, decreased ATG 4B, and dysregulated Beclin-1/Bcl-2 ratio. Inhibition of autophagy by 3-methyladenine (3-MA)/chloroquine (CQ) diminished AS-induced death in GBM8401 cells. AS-induced apoptosis through increased cleaved form Caspase-3, PARP cleaved and Bax expression. Further, inhibition of apoptosis by Z-VAD-FMK suppressed AS-induced cell death. Interestingly, blockade of AS-induced reactive oxygen species (ROS) production by N-acetylcysteine (NAC) pretreatment substantially attenuated AS-induced cell death. We also demonstrated that NAC pretreatment inhibited AS-induced autophagic cell death by decreased LC3-II. Taken together, Antrodia salmonea crucially involved in execution/propagation of ROS-mediated autophagic or apoptotic cell death in human glioblastoma cells, which can be used in the development of novel anticancer drugs.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org19820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP086. Mikania micrantha Inhibits Melanogenesis By Regulation of Autophagy In Melanocytes.J.T. Yeh1, Y.C. Hseu1, H.L. Yang21 Department of Cosmeceutics, China Medical University, Taiwan 2 Institute of Nutrition, China Medical University, Taiwan With the increasing interest in skin beauty, the development of new skin brighteners has attracted widespread attention, and environmental awareness has increased. Modern people like to be able to use green resources as raw materials to develop products. The alien invasive species Mikania micrantha is growing too fast, causing serious damage to Taiwan's native ecosystem. The research team found that the entire plant, rich in polysaccharides and antioxidant phenols, is rich in polysaccharides and antioxidant phenols, whether in flowers, roots, stems, or leaves. It has a strong ability to keratinocyte proliferation and wound healing. Activity and telomerase activity, it is found that its anti-inflammatory effect is much higher than the chemical drug L-NAME. Another study showed that Mikania micrantha has antioxidant and anti-blood cancer effects, and can be developed into a health food to prevent free radical diseases and anti-cancer. Autophagy is a cooperative process between autophagosomes and lysosomes that degrades organelles. Recent research suggests that autophagy regulators may play an important role in the initial formation of melanosomes, a lysosomal-related organelle that synthesizes melanin pigments. In this study, we found that Mikania micrantha has the effect of increasing autophagy mechanism and reducing tyrosinase activity to inhibit melanin production. The purpose of this study was to determine whether Mikania micrantha inhibits melanin production by activating autophagy.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 19920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP087. Public's perceptions of the emerging role of Cannabidiol (CBD) products.S.K. Bhamra, A. Desai, P. Imani-Berendjestanki, M. HorganMedway school of Pharmacy, University of Kent and University of Greenwich, Chatham Maritime, Kent, United KingdomCannabidiol (CBD) products, derived from hemp (Cannabis sativa) are becoming more popular as people seek alternative ways of managing their health; sales rose 333% in the US in 20181. The market value of CBD is estimated to be worth PS1billion by 20252. The objectives were to explore the public's perceptions and use of CBD products including where products are sourced, how knowledge is obtained and opinions on quality, safety and efficacy of CBD products. A questionnaire comprising open and closed questions was developed to consider quantitative and qualitative perspectives. An online platform, SurveyMonkey, was used to distribute the survey using social and professional networks (September - November 2019), which led to snowball sampling. A total of 596 responses were collected (63% female, 40% White-British) internationally. In total, 11% (n=66) claimed to use CBD products including oils, balm, tinctures and vapes for a range of ailments such as pain, stress and anxiety. Participants who did not personally use CBD products (n=530), 35% claimed they would like to try them, while 42% of participants knew of someone who was already using a CBD product for conditions such as arthritis and epilepsy and "generally improving quality of life". Knowledge of CBD was commonly attributed to social media and news articles. Perceptions on safety and efficacy were positive with the notion of natural medicines being superior. Quality of products was associated with well-known brands or products which had a marketing authorisation; participants identified it was difficult to determine the quality of products brought online and better regulation is required. This study identifies that people continue to seek natural alternatives to supplement and maintain their health, thus the popularity of CBD continues to rise. The lack of clinical evidence to help make informed decisions about using CBD products needs to be addressed with more research. [1] Smith T, Gillespie M, Eckl V, Knepper J, Morton-Reynolds C. (2019) Herbal Supplement Sales in US Increase by 9.4% in 2018. 123. HerbalGram. p62-73. [2] Gibbs, B. Yates, A. Liebling, J. (2019) CBD in the UK: Executive summary. Centre for Medicinal Cannabis.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org20020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP088. Chemical investigation and Antioxidant activity of cultivated Sideritis cypria Post: A preliminary study.K. Lytra1, E.M. Tomou1, A. Chrysargyris2, N. Tzortzakis2, H. Skaltsa11 Department of Pharmacognosy & Chemistry of Natural Products, School of Pharmacy, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece2 Department of Agricultural Sciences, Biotechnology and Food Science, Cyprus University of Technology, Lemesos, CyprusSideritis species (Lamiaceae) have been used for many years in the folk medicine. In Cyprus, three endemic Sideritis species have been found; S. curvidens Stapf, S. perfoliata L. and S. cypria Post1. S. cypria is a perennial herb belonging to the section Empedoclia Rafin., growing in Pentadactylos Mountains (Cyprus). Traditionally, the infusion of S. cypria is locally used as diaphoretic, tonic, as well as against stomach disorders, headache and common cold2,3. Previous studies reported the chemical characterization of wild S. cypria of its essential oil4 and extracts1. In the present study, we report, here in, the first study of the cultivated S. cypria. The infusions of flowers and leaves were examined separately for their contents. So far, eleven compounds have been isolated using chromatographic techniques; four flavones, five phenylethanoid glucosides, one iridoid and one quinic acid derivative. Furthermore, the antioxidant activities, as well as the total phenolic and flavonoid contents from both the infusions and the decoctions of flowers and leaves were investigated. As far as we know, no literature concerning the antioxidant activity of the specific species has been reported previously. The compounds were identified using 1D and 2D NMR spectroscopy (COSY, HSQC, HMBC, NOESY). [1] Hanoglu, D. Y. et al., 2019. Rec. Nat. Prod. 14, 105-115. [2] Karousou, R., and Deirmentzoglou, S., 2011. J. Ethnopharmacol. 133, 191-203. [3] Yoney, A. et al., 2010. Phytother. Res. 24, 731-740. [4] Hanoglu, D. Y. et al., 2016. J. Essent. Oil Res. 29, 228-232.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 20120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP089. Essential Oil Composition of Ginger Rhizomes and Its Ethnopharmacological Validation.R. Bachar1, Md. Aslam Hossain1, S.C. Bachar21 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Dhaka, Bangladesh2 Department of Pharmacy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Dhaka, BangladeshThe essential oils of Zingiber officinale Roscoe, Zingiber zerumbet Smith, Curcuma amada Roxb. and Z. montanum Koen available in Bangladesh were obtained through hydro-distillation. They yielded 0.22%, 0.228%, 0.18%, 0.20%, and 0.24% on a fresh weight basis, respectively. The chemical compositions of different fresh ginger essential oils were identified, quantified, and validated by GC-MS analysis. The major chemical constituents characterized as monoterpene, diterpene and sesquiterpene hydrocarbons such as camphene, beta-phellandrene, neral, geranial, Zingiberene, 1,5-heptadiene-3-yne, alpha-curcumene, (1R)-2,6,6-Trimethyl bicyclo[3,1,1]hept-2-ene, delta-3-carene, limonene, alpha-humulene, bicyclo[2,2,1]heptan-2-one-1,7,7-trimethyl-(1S), zerumbone, 2,6,9,9-tetramethyl-2,6,10 cycloundecatrien-1-one, 2(3H)- naphthalenone, 4,4a,5,6,8-hexahydro and 3,7-cyclodeccadien-1-one,10-(1-methylethenyl-). The LC50 values in brine shrimp lethality bioassay of volatile oils obtained from four samples exhibited a significant mortality rate at 1.614, 1,351, 1,514, and 0.796, respectively, in comparison to reference standard vincristine sulfate (0.474mg/ml). The DPPH free radical scavenging activity of the fresh volatile oil samples was 46.67 mg/mL, 71.01 mg/mL, 22.02 mg/mL, and 19.55 mg/mL, respectively, where the reference standard butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) showed the IC50 value of 21.10 mg/mL. The thrombolytic activity of oils samples 10.05%, 2.92%, 17.90%, and 29.48% was also evaluated, where streptokinase showed 40% clot lysis. The samples exhibited no promising antimicrobial and antifungal activity due to low concentration selection. Among the test samples, the most encouraging results obtained in Zingiber montanum Koen (Bon ada) in chemical composition showed the highest cytotoxicity with LC50 of 0.796 mg/ml free radical scavenging activity with 19.55 mg/mL and potential thrombolytic activity with 29.48% clot lysis. The cytotoxic activity, antioxidant activity, thrombolytic activity of the volatile oils exhibited in the study may be due to major compounds present in their compositions. The above findings validated the ethnomedicinal use of ginger as an herbal spice in food or condiment, diet supplements, drug additives, therapeutic substances. Thus Bangladesh can preserve foreign currency, preventing importation from foreign countries, thus commercial exploration of the potentials of Bangladeshi varieties.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org20220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSPharmacological and clinical studies of medicinal plants & natural productsP090. Chokeberry fruit in gastrointestinal motility disorders therapy.M.