The milk contained on average 5.9% (+-0.7%) protein and 7.4% (+-1.2) fat, whereas the main fatty acids detected were the palmitic (C16:0), oleic (C18:1) and stearic acid (C18:0). In addition, the analysis of the Kefalograviera hard cheese samples showed that it contained on average 26.5% (+-2.4%) protein and 31.5% (+- 3.1) fat and its main fatty acids were the palmitic (C16:0), myristic (C14:0) and oleic acid (C18:1). To conclude, dietary supplementation with flaxseed and lupins in sheep may improve milk production and omega-3 fatty acid composition of both milk and Kefalograviera cheese.Acknowledgment: This research has been co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund) in context "Research - Create - Innovate" within the Operational Program (Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation (EPANEK) of the NSRF 2014-2020. Project Code: T1EDK-04727. Acronym "GreenFeeds".www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 12320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP020. Production of an innovative functional product based on traditional vegetables and medicinal-aromatic plants stabilized with novel technologyE. Maloupa1, M. Giannoglou2, G. Katsaros2, D. Fotakis3, Ch. Nouska1, K. Grigoriadou1, D. Lazari4, N. Krigas1 A. Oikonomou5 1 Hellenic Agricultural Organization-DEMETER, Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Laboratory of Protection and Evaluation of Native and Floricultural Species, Thessaloniki, Greece.2 Hellenic Agricultural Organization-DEMETER, Institute of Technology of Agricultural Products, Attica, Greece.3 Hellenic Agricultural Organization-DEMETER, Forest Research Institute, Thessaloniki, Greece.4 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Department of Pharmacy, School of Health Science, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece.5 ASPAITE, Thessaloniki, Greece.The modern trend is to consume healthy food products with functional characteristics. Co-creation plays an important role for novel products' development. Rrepresentatives of the food industry, chefs and restaurant owners, food researchers, nutritionists, conservationists and people involved with health and quality control of food products co-created a novel soup based on various vegetables and medicinal-aromatic plants (MAPs), enriched with aromatic oils, extra virgin olive oil, extractions of herbal teas and others (>30 traditional Greek food ingredients).To increase the product's functionality, encapsulated probiotics were added for stability throughout processing and storage time. High-pressure (HP) technology was used to cold-pasteurize the final product, preserving its functional-nutritional characteristics.The product formulation was based on the high nutritional value of the ingredients used and their superior organoleptic characteristics compared to conventional products readily available. Lactic acid bacteria were used for adding functionality to the final product. The bacteria were encapsulated in a solution of sodium alginate and pectin to maintain their viability after pasteurization. The final product-soup was pasteurized using thermal (75-90degC for 5-20min) or High-Pressure technology (HP at 400-600 MPa, 25degC, for 5-15min). The results showed that encapsulated bacteria could not survive from thermal treatment, while HP treatment maintained 30-80% of their viability, depending on the conditions used. For the finally treated product at 400MP-25degC-5min, a shelf-life test was performed at storage temperatures 0-15degC, measuring the dominant deterioration factors. The optimum shelf-life was estimated to 2 months after storage at 4degC, with 65% retention of bacteria viability (total bacteria population>106CFU/g) and >90% retention of ingredients' nutritional value.The results indicated that a superior functional vegetable- and MAP-based product can be produced using appropriate ingredients and novel technology for stabilization as an alternative to thermal treatment.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org124Aromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsPosters20th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP021. Comparison of total phenolic content of Cretan wild edible herbs (horta).V. Klontza, E.-F. Varvouni, K. Graikou, I. ChinouDivision of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, Dept. of Pharmacy, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece The Greek island of Crete is well known for its traditional cuisine, which is depending exclusively on the local agricultural products and is dating all the way back to the ancient times. Medical studies revealed that Cretan diet, milestone of the Mediterranean diet, contributes to the highest longevity and low mortality rate of the Cretans. High consumption of olive oil, vegetables, herbs, fruits, fish, wine are the main principles of this diet. Moreover, wild edible green herbs, which grow in all regions of Crete, are an integral part of the traditional gastronomy. They are mainly consumed boiled or stir fried but also raw in salads. Nowadays, there is a growing interest on these plants, mainly due to their high nutritional value and their potential therapeutic properties (Camara et al., 2016; Goncalves et al., 2018). In the present work, eight wildly grown edible green herbs, so called "horta", were collected from East Crete: aerial parts of Dioscorea communis (L.) Caddick & Wilkin, Echium italicum L., Erodium cicutarium (L.) L'Her, Glebionis segetum (L.) Fourr., Plantago lagopus L., Verbena officinalis L., aerial parts and roots of Scolymus hispanicus L. and bulbs of Muscari spreitzenhoferi (Heldr.) H.R. Wehrh. Different extracts of all eight studied plants were evaluated for their total phenolic content (TPC) using the Folin-Ciocalteu method. The aqueous and methanol extracts of Erodium cicutarium (201 mg GAE/g and 149 mg GAE/g) and Verbena officinalis (136 mg GAE/g, 140 mg GAE/g) showed the highest TPC among the tested samples, confirming their valuable nutritional importance in Crete, while their phenolic chemical profiles, are also in accordance to the expressed TPC as rich sources in flavonoids (flavonol and flavon derivatives) and phenolic acids (rosmarinic, chlorogenic, p-coumaric acids). [1] Camara, M., Fernandez-Ruiz, V., & Ruiz-Rodriguez, B. M. (2016). Wild Edible Plants as Sources of Carotenoids, Fibre, Phenolics and Other Non-Nutrient Bioactive Compounds. Mediterranean Wild Edible Plants, Springer, pp. 187-205. [2] Goncalves, S., Moreira, E., Andrade, P. B., Valentao, P., & Romano, A. (2018). Effect of in vitro gastrointestinal digestion on the total phenolic contents and antioxidant activity of wild Mediterranean edible plant extracts. European Food Research and Technology 245(3).Acknowledgment: Ms. Varvouni on behalf of the authors, is grateful to the Hellenic Society of Ethnopharmacology for funding her participation in this Congress, through personal grant.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org12620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP022. The seeds of Greek cultivar Cynara cardunculus hybrid, as a bioproduct of potential high nutritional value.P.-M. Kourti1, K. Graikou1, E.-F. Varvouni1, O. Gortzi2, N. Danalatos3, I. Chinou11 Division of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, Dept. of Pharmacy, National & Kapodistrian University of Athens, Greece 2 Department of Food Technology, University of Thessaly, Karditsa, Greece3 Department of Agriculture, Crop Production and Rural Environment, University of Thessaly, Volos, GreeceCynara cardunculus L.- artichoke, is a perennial plant of the Mediterranean basin, known since antiquity as food and for its leaves highly appreciated therapeutic properties (EMA, 2009). In our days, the plant has been widely used as a bioenergy crop. The shifting from conventional crops to artichoke cultivation has brought economical and environmental advantage according to the literature (Danalatos, 2008). In this particular study, the seeds of a certain established Greek cultivar of C. cardunculus hybrid, that has been cultivated in the experimental field and used as biofuel, have been investigated. The main purpose of our study was to evaluate the chemical profile, the total phenolic content and the nutritional value characterization of its seeds, not previously studied and till now just wasted as a bioproduct. The non-polar cyclohexanic extract was saponificated, esterificated and subjected to GC/MS analyses, where to our results appeared as a rich source in o-6 and other fatty acids (linoleic, palmitic, oleic and arachidonic acid). Several secondary metabolites have been further isolated and structurally elucidated by NMR from the methanol extract (arctiin, cynarinine, tracheloside, caffeoyl derivatives) and the dichloromethane one (arctigenin, trachylogenin, fatty acids and aryl ester derivatives). Moreover, the methanolic extract displayed the highest content of total phenolic content (142.83 mg GAE/g) followed by aqueous (88.87 mg GAE/g) and dichloromethane extract (64.32 mg GAE/g). Furthermore, the raw seeds have been shown remarkably high nutritional value (fiber, protein, vitamins, minerals, antioxidants etc) compared to the famous for their nutritional value sesame- and flax-seeds. [1] Danalatos N. G. (2008). Changing roles: Cultivating perennial weeds vs conventional crops for bio-energy production. The case of Cynara cardunculus. Clean Technology, 2008. [2] EMA/HMPC/150218/2009-Community herbal monograph on Cynara scolymus L., folium.Acknowledgment: Ms. Varvouni on behalf of the authors, is grateful to the Hellenic Society of Ethnopharmacology for funding her participation in this Congress, through personal grant.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 12720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP023. The adventurous trip of Origanum vulgare smells along a transect from its southernmost (Crete) to the northernmost (Norway) native range in Europe.D. Mertzanidis1,3, A. Assimopoulou2,3, S. Kokkini1,31 Laboratory of Systematic Botany and Phytogeography, School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Organic Chemistry Laboratory, School of Chemical Engineering, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece3 CIRI- AUTH Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation - Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GreeceOriganum vulgare L. is found as a native plant almost all over Europe. It is a very popular herb widely used in food flavoring, tea infusions, and dietary supplements. It is also used as an ornament in house gardens. Several therapeutic properties are attributed to the plants of that species, mainly related to the variety of their organoleptically distinct smells [1]. Through a review of scientific publications [2][3] of the last 26 years, we attempt to find out the O. vulgare "smell identity" along a transect of Europe, from the southernmost (island of Crete) to the northernmost part of its native range (Norway). Published information on essential oils (EO) responsible for the plant smells, were recorded in respect to their total content (intensity of smell) and their main constituents (type of smell). Plants of O. vulgare are highly variable in respect to their EO content, with the lowest value recorded in Bulgaria (Rhodopi Mountains, 0,03 mL 100g-1 dry weight) and the highest on the island of Crete, Greece (8,8%). The different types of plant smells are related to the dominant compounds of their total EO composition and can be described under the following four groups: (i) Plants with an oregano smell (EOs rich in carvacrol, up to 93,8% in Greece), (ii) thyme smell (rich in thymol up to 90,2%, in Greece), (iii) lavender smell (rich in linalool up to 57,9% in Austria), and (iv) marjoram smell (characterized by sabinene and isomers of sabinene hydrate, up to 28,7% in Norway). The results so far indicate that along their adventurous trip of approx. 3200Km, the native plants of the species O. vulgare give arise to four commercially valuable chemical "species" distinct by their smell profile. [1] Kokkini, S. (1997) In Podulosi S (ed.) Oregano. Proceedings of the IPGR International Workshop on Oregano IPGRI 2-12[2] Kokkini, S.; Karousou, R.; Hanlidou, E.; Lanaras, T. (2004) J Essent Oil Res 16:334-338[3] Mockute, D.; Bernotiene, G.; Judzentiene, A. (2001) Phytochemistry 57:65-69Acknowledgements: This research has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE (project code: T1EDK-04174).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org12820th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP024. Herbal teas in Thessaloniki: From the old tradition to the modern lifestyle.T. Pallia1, M. Keki2, D. Mertzanidis2,3, S. Kokkini2,31 Postgraduate Studies Program "Conservation of Biodiversity and Sustainable Exploitation of Native Plants", School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Laboratory of Systematic Botany and Phytogeography, School of Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece3 CIRI- AUTH Center for Interdisciplinary Research and Innovation - Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GreeceThe use of herbs in Greece has its roots in ancient times [1]. Herbal teas, particularly infusions, with both medicinal and nutritional value have a long history of traditional use among cultures and regions of Greece. Until today, several aromatic and medicinal plants are consumed because of their flavor and a long-time traditional knowledge for their therapeutic activities [2][3]. In the frame of a wider project about the most common herbs and spices used in Thessaloniki (North Greece), the plant species used for the preparation of herbal teas have been explored. Thessaloniki is a multi-cultural city populated, besides Greeks, by several ethnic communities throughout its history, with a long tradition in the herbal trade [1]. In this study, three central open markets were visited and citizens from different ages and origins were interviewed about their customs and preferences in flavors of teas, using a questionnaire. The results so far indicate that a high number of taxa is used for herbal teas and infusions, plain or mixed, most of them native in Greece and Mediterranean area. The best represented families are Asteraceae (chiefly represented by the genus Matricaria), Lamiaceae (mainly taxa of the genera Mentha, Origanum, Thymus and Sideritis), and Tiliaceae (species of the genus Tilia). According to citizens, the majority of the herbs are collected from the wild of the surroundings of the city areas. Besides there is a remarkable number of plant taxa are imported from the Old and New World countries. Finally, it appears that the preference of citizens is largely based on their traditional knowledge and they choose their herbal tea according to their origin, while their age is a decisive factor to whether the herbs are collected from the wild or purchased from herbal markets. [1] Hanlidou, E.; Karousou, R.; Kleftoyianni, V.; Kokkini, S. (2004) J Ethnopharmacol 91:281-299[2]Atoui, AK. ; Mansouri, A.; Boskou, G.; Kefalas, P. (2005) Food chem 89:27-36[3] Directive European Parliament (2004). OJEU L136/85Acknowledgements: This research has been co-financed by the European Union and Greek national funds through the Operational Program Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation, under the call RESEARCH-CREATE-INNOVATE (project code: T1EDK-04174).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 12920th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP025. Taxonomic identification and essential oils of spearmint (eduosmos) plants used in the traditional cooking of North Greece.D.