Rock samphire responds to increased salinity levels with a differentiated profile of essential oil composition when grown in an aquaponics system.F. Papagiannidou1, C.S. Chatzimavroudis2, D. Lazari2, N. Krigas3, E. Maloupa3, N. Vlachos4, E. Mente5, E. Levizou11 Department of Agriculture Crop Production and Rural Environment, University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece2 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece 3 Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Hellenic Agricultural Organization DEMETER, Thessaloniki, Greece4 Department of Animal Production, Fisheries and Aquaculture, School of Agricultural Sciences, University of Patras, Mesolonghi, Greece5 Department of Ichthyology and Aquatic Environment, University of Thessaly, Volos, GreeceRock samphire (Crithmum maritimum, Apiaceae family) is an edible, aromatic, rock-dwelling halophyte of Mediterranean coastal areas which is considered as a functional food mainly due to its high content in bioactive compounds. In the present study we aimed at evaluating for the first time the performance of rock samphire in terms of physiology, biomass production and essential oil yield when grown at different salinity levels in co-cultivation with fish, i.e. a brackish aquaponics system (modern production method combining aquaculture and hydroponics in a recycled system which exploits fish waste for plant nutrition). Nine independent re-circulating aquaponic systems with rock samphire and sea bream (Sparus aurata) were used comprising three salinity treatments, i.e. 14dS/m, 23dS/m and 32dS/m. In vivo chlorophyll a fluorescence and photosynthetic pigments concentration were monitored during the two months growth period. At the final harvest, several plant growth parameters were measured and the essential oils were obtained from the aerial parts by hydrodistillation and identified by GC-MS analyses. Fluorescence parameters indicated moderate stress of the photosynthetic apparatus of C. maritimum in high salinity individuals compared to control plants (14dS/m). The final harvest revealed significantly stunted plant growth in plants grown in high salinities compared to control plants (80% and 60% reduction of the aerial part's fresh weight under 32dS/m and 23ds/m, respectively). Essential oil yield was highest in the plants of the 32dS/m treatment. Concerning the main compounds' relative content, limonene responded with a gradual increase to increasing salinity levels, while the opposite trend was detected for thymol methyl ether and 1-terpinen-4-ol. On the contrary, b-phellandrene and g-terpinene exhibited the highest relative content in the intermediate salinity level. In conclusion, when grown in an aquaponics system with no external inputs and increased salinity, rock samphire experiences considerable growth inhibition but responds interestingly with a differentiated essential oil profile.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org13620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP032. Study of biological activity of beverages derived from aromatic plants of Greek flora.S. Zaikou1, E-G. Deligiannidou2, M. Syrpas3, K. Filaktakidou1, E. Pontiki4, D. Lazari4, D. Hadjipavlou-Litina4, G. Kolios5, C. Kontogiorgis21 Laboratory of Organic Biochemistry and Natural Products, Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Democritus University of Thrace (DUTH), Alexandroupolis, Greece2 Laboratory of Hygiene and Environmental Protection, Department of Medicine, Democritus University of Thrace (DUTH), Alexandroupolis, Greece 3 Department Food Science and Technology, Kaunas University of Technology (KTU), Kaunas, Lithuania 4 Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, School of Pharmacy, Aristotelian University of Thessaloniki (AUTH), Thessaloniki, Greece 5 Laboratory of Pharmacology, Department of Medicine, Democritus University of Thrace (DUTH), Alexandroupolis, GreeceTo determine the active ingredients and antioxidant capacity of beverages from five aromatic plants of Greek flora, namely: Calendula (Calendula officinalis), Louisa (Aloysia citrodora), Lemon balm (Melissa officinalis), Achillea (Achillea millefolium), and Althaea (Althaea officinalis). Beverages of the samples were prepared by mixing the dried herb with water, the mixture was left to boil for 5 minutes and then allowed to cool in room temperature, the water phase was collected and subsequently freeze-dried. The obtained extracts were examined with respect to their phenolic content (Folin-Ciocalteu), antioxidant capacity (DPPH), OH- radical scavenging ability, the ability to inhibit linoleic acid peroxidation (LLA) induced by AAPH and the inhibition of plant-derived lipoxygenases (LOX). Finally, chromatographic analysis (UPLC-Q-TOF-MS) was performed. This study showed a correlation between increased phenolic content and antioxidant capacity for Louisa and Calendula (Phenolic content: 81.49mg/l of extract, 77.59mg/l of extract respectively, DPPH radical scavenging activity: 70.7% and 50.5%, respectively), whereas the strongest correlation was observed in Lemon balm (Phenolic Content: 270.65mg/l and DPPH Interaction: 95.4%) whose extract showed strong interaction with DPPH radical (63.1%) even in the diluted (1:10) sample. Moderate OH- radical scavenging capacity (50% and 57.5%) was observed in the extracts of Althaea and Achillea respectively. These two extracts along with Lemon balm, showed the highest linoleic acid (LLA) and lipoxygenase (LOX) inhibitory capacity. In the LLA assay the highest capacity was shown by Lemon balm (92.6%), followed by Achillea (81.3%) and Althaea (80.8%), whereas for LOX assay values were 87.4% for Lemon balm, 38.1% for Althaea and 39.9% for Achillea respectively. Finally, more than 20 compounds were tentatively identified in the samples after chromatographic analysis. Overall, this study highlighted the antioxidant capacity of these commonly consumed beverages. Lemon balm presented the best antioxidant profile of all the samples tested. Achillea and Louisa showed close results in most experiments, but the latter had no effect on neutralizing OH- radicals. Finally, Calendula, which had a moderate phenolic content, also had minimal effect on OH- radicals and little ability to inhibit the action of LLA and LOX. These variations may be due to the composition of the samples to phenolic or other constituents, the study of which is also part of our ongoing research.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 13720th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants of the Mediterranean basin as food and dietary supplementsP033. Antioxidant evaluation of Virgin Olive Oil and Green Olive Oil of "Makris" and Oregano oil with Oregano from Samothrace and Alexandroupolis.E-G. Deligiannidou1, A. Nikolaou2, C. Kontogiorgis1, A. Tselemponis1, D. Lazari3, T. Konstantinidis11 Laboratory of Hygiene and Environmental Protection, Department of Medicine, Democritus University of Thrace (DUTH), Alexandroupolis, Greece2 Laboratory of Applied Microbiology & Biotechnology, Department of Molecular Biology & Genetics, Health Sciences Faculty Democritus University of Thrace (DUTH), Alexandroupolis, Greece3 Laboratory of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, (DUTH), Thessaloniki, GreeceTo evaluate Virgin Olive Oil and Green Olive Oil of the local variety named "Makris' olive" (Makri, Alexandroupolis, Greece) with respect to their antioxidant properties alone and as a mixture with Oregano from Samothrace and Alexandroupolis. Two types of Olive Oil locally produced in Makri Alexandroupolis, (Virgin Olive Oil (VOOL) and Green Olive Oil (GOO)) and two types of Oregano (Oregano from Samothrace (OS) and Oregano from Alexandroupolis (OA)) were evaluated on their antioxidant and antimicrobial properties. Initially, OS, OA and dried olive leaves (OL) were investigated as aqueous extracts (AEs). Respectively, VOOL and GOO were also investigated. Additionally, four mixtures of Oregano with Olive Oil were produced (OS+VOOL, OS+GOO, OA+VOOL and OA+GOO). The mixtures were examined in 5 different times (after maceration for 24h, 72h, 10d, 20d and 30d). Assays performed included: Evaluation of total phenolic content (Folin-Ciocalteu), antioxidant capacity (DPPH and ABTS assays), antimicrobial activity and the volatile composition of the samples (GC/MS). The AEs of OS, OA and OL resulted in low antioxidant profile, although positive results were observed in phenolic content. GOO resulted in slightly lower antioxidant capacity and phenolic content than VOOL. Regarding the Oregano and Olive Oil mixtures, the combination OS/VOOL had overall higher results on antioxidant profile and antimicrobial activity. Finally, maceration time had an effect on the assays performed, however, even in the shortest maceration time examined (24h) all mixtures presented DPPH radical scavenging activity higher than 65% during the second measurement (60min). The nutritional value of olive oil and oregano is well established in the framework of Mediterranean Diet, however, the characteristics of the varieties proposed in this work as well as the combination there of has not yet been thoroughly investigated. Further analysis will provide a better understanding of the potential use of these natural products and is a part of this on-going research.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org138Conservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesPosters20th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP034. Preserving mature Pyrus spinosa Forskk. plant material through an efficient micropropagation protocol.S. Alexandri1, M. Tsaktsira1, I. Nianiou-Obeidat2, P. Tsoulpha11 Laboratory of Forest Genetics and Plant Breading, Department of Forestry and Natural Environment, School of Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Environment, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece2 Lab of Genetics and Plant Breeding, School of Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Environment Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece Pyrus spinosa Forskk. is a native tree of Greek forests, rich in antioxidants. An effective micropropagation protocol was developed in order to preserve and maintain mature elite trees of high antioxidant content for future pharmaceutical use. Winter branches of different Pyrus spinosa mature trees (> 15-year-old) were selected from the area of Agia Anastasia, Chalkidiki, Greece. Plant material was maintained in a growth chamber under controlled environmental conditions (16h photoperiod, temperature 24+-1degC and light intensity 35 mmol m-2s-1) and newly emerged shoots (2-3cm) were used as explants. In the multiplication stage, among the different nutrient media tested, namely: modified MS (thiamine-HCl 1 mg/l-1, nicotinic acid 1 mg/l-1, pyridoxine-HCl 1 mg/l-1), WPM, DKW, Pear Medium 1 and 2, supplemented with 5 mM BA, Pear Medium 1 proved the most efficient. Subsequently, of the four BA variants (0, 5, 10, 20 mM) assessed in combination with Pear Medium 1, 5 mM BA was the best for shoot production (22.7+-1.6/explant) and elongation (2.4+-0.1 cm). Rooting evaluation included a modified rooting MS medium ( 1/2 NH4NO3,  1/2 KNO3) and Pear Medium 1 combined with 20"-quick-dip in different IBA concentrations (0, 2.46, 4.90, 24.6, 49.0 mM). Modified rooting MS and Pear Medium 1 in combination with 49.0 mM IBA were equally effective for rooting: (79%+-7.2) and (80%+-7.0), respectively. A well-formed rooting system in terms of root number (2.7+-0.3) and length (3.9+-0.3 cm) without the presence of callus was developed on modified rooting MS, whereas Pear Medium 1 was less effective for the same parameters, (root number: 2.4+-0.2 and length: 1.8+-0.2 cm). Acclimatization of plantlets was successfully conducted (87.5%) on perlite under the controlled conditions of the plant growth chamber, five weeks after their establishment.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org14020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP035. Effects of nitrogen fertilization on growth and yield of milk thistle (Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn).V. Liava, A. Karkanis, N. Danalatos, N. TsiropoulosDepartment of Agriculture Crop Production and Rural Environment, University of Thessaly, Volos, Greece Milk thistle (Silybum marianum (L.) Gaertn.) is an annual or biennial plant that is classified as weed although, this plant can be an alternative crop since the seeds contain silymarin which has important pharmaceutical properties. A field experiment was conducted for the growing period of October 2018 through June 2019, following a randomized complete block design with three treatments and three replicates. The wild population "Mesopotamia", originated from Central Greece, were used for crop establishment. Treatments were i) control-N0 (0 kg ha-1 N), ii) nitrogen fertilizer A rate-N75 (75 kg ha-1 N), and iii) nitrogen fertilizer B rate-N125 (125 kg ha-1 N), while the inorganic fertilizer was applied at two doses in late January and in early March. The aim of the study was to assess the impact of nitrogen fertilization on plant growth (rosette diameter, plant height, fresh and dry weight, chlorophyll content), silymarin and oil content, inflorescences per plant, 1000-seed weight, and seed yield. The determination of silymarin and oil content is in progress. The results showed that fresh and dry weight, height, rosette diameter, yield, and chlorophyll content were increased significantly by fertilization compared to control. Specifically, dry biomass was positively affected by both N75 and N125 fertilization rates and increased by 26.24% and 35.78% respectively. Moreover, the N125 fertilization rate led to the highest height (185.8 cm) and seed yield (1860.8 kg ha-1). In addition, a positive correlation was observed between dry biomass and yield (r=0.958, p<0.001). To summarize, this study indicated that nitrogen fertilization could influence the growth of milk thistle, reaching greater biomass and seed yield.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 14120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSConservation and sustainable use of herbal resourcesP036. Development of a fast HPLC-PDA-MS protocol for the determination of carnosic acid in Greek genotypes of Rosmarinus officinalis L.C. Paloukopoulou, A. Kanellis, A. KariotiLaboratory of Pharmacognosy, School of Pharmacy, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GreeceIn the framework of a national project aiming at exploring the biodiversity for the selection, development and sustainable use of Greek Medicinal and Aromatic plants, the species Rosmarinus officinalis was selected. The selection was done based on its high content of carnosic acid which is a recognized antioxidant with wide applications in the food and cosmetic industry [1,2]. The project includes collection of a large number of genotypes, genetic analysis by use of microsatellites and genotyping by sequencing, chemical analyses by HPLC-PDA-MS for the monitoring of production of carnosic acid. A fast analytical protocol was developed to ensure reliable quantification of the sensitive carnosic acid. In brief the fresh plant material is ground in liquid N2, to ensure the viability of both enzymes and carnosic acid. Optimization of the extraction showed that acetone 100% and 15 minutes of ultrasonication gave the best results. Under these conditions carnosic acid is quantitatively extracted without being degraded. A short HPLC-PDA-MS method based on a RP-C18 column was developed and optimized for the separation of carnosic acid from carnosol and its degradation products. The method was validated as required prior to metabolomic analysis and showed adequate precision (%RSD ranging from 0.20 to 4.03) and accuracy (less than 15% in three concentration levels). Quantitative results showed a great variance of the chemical content of carnosic acid among different genotypes. [1] Rosemary Extract. Chemical and Technical Assessment (CTA). Available at: http://www.fao.org/3/a-br565e.pdf[2] Safety Assessment of Rosmarinus Officinalis (Rosemary)-Derived Ingredients as Used in Cosmetics. Cosmetic Ingredient Review, 2014.