Developing official monographs, establishing a national repository of botanical standards, and producing validated analytical methods is a fundamentally important prerequisite to encourage research and commercialisation of Africa's medicinal flora. The unfortunate underrepresentation of pharmacognosy in the curricula of many pharmacy schools has left a void of expertise, which has hampered the development of a comprehensive herbal Pharmacopoeia. A further challenge involves the inherent complexity of medicinal plants, exacerbated by extensive chemotypic variation. Chemical fingerprinting is a crucial component in characterising plant material and requires a dedicated approach to develop analytical methods for the profiling of complex herbal extracts. Funding from the National Research Foundation (NRF/DST SARChI Initiative) and the South African Medical Research Council has catalysed initiatives at the Tshwane University of Technology to develop herbal monographs that aid in the identification and quality control of important South African herbal medicines. Selected examples will be presented to illustrate the daunting workflow, which includes extensive sampling, the development of analytical methods to profile volatile and non-volatile compounds using GC-MS and LC-MS, HPTLC, vibrational spectroscopy, as well as the use of preparative chromatography to isolate biomarkers. The powerful tandem application of analytical chemistry and chemometric modelling will be highlighted. Developing comprehensive species monographs requires a multidisciplinary collaborative effort which will inevitably contribute to the safety, efficacy and quality of African Traditional Medicines and commercial herbal formulations.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org3020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES KS06. Functional consequences of stimulation of multiple biological targets by botanical extracts and their bioactive compounds - hops as an example.G. VollmerFaculty of Biology, Technische Universitat Dresden, GermanyThe multiple biological targets of hops (humulus lupulus L.) and its bioactive constituents have recently been reviewed [1]. Spent hops, among other constituents contains the chalcone xanthohumol (XH) as the major prenylated flavonoid. However, less abundant but biologically important prenylated flavonoids contained in the extract in addition are isoxanthohumol (IX), 8-prenylnaringenin (8-PN), and 6-prenylnaringenin (6-PN). Importantly XH undergoes phase I metabolism to form IX, 6-PN and particularly 8-PN, which is the most potent phytoestrogen known to date. As would be expected from a potent phytoestrogen, 8-PN triggers numerous estrogen receptor-initiated responses among them growth and proliferation of experimental uterine and mammary gland models. The latter responses are associated with an increased risk for cancer of these hormone dependent organs. For 8-PN contained in hops extracts, these activities are not detectable, although at least in vivo a rapid metabolism of XH to relatively high levels of 8-PN occurs. In vitro data suggest that in the case of the extracts 6-PN attenuates the estrogen receptor dependent activities of 8-PN through activation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) pathway. In summary, constituents of hops extracts stimulate multiple pathways. These activated pathways interact and result in modulation of functional outcomes. For hops, the activation of the AhR pathway attenuated unfavorable and estrogen receptor dependent proliferative events induced in mammary gland and uterus by 8-PN. In conclusion, these results are relevant for prevention strategies of tumorigenesis in hormone dependent organs. [1] J.L. Bolton, T.L. Dunlap, D.A. Hajirahimkhan, O.C. Mbachu, S.-N. Chen, L. Chadwick, D. Nikolic, R.B. van Breemen, G.F. Pauli, B.M. Dietz (2019) The Multiple Biological Targets of Hops and Bioactive Compounds, Chem. Res. Toxicol. 32: 222-233.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 3120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021KEYNOTE SPEECHES KS07. Risk assessment of chemicals that occur as mixtures: additivity and interactions. C. HogstrandKing's College London, School of Life Course Sciences, London, United KingdomChemical risk assessment has traditionally been carried out for single chemicals in isolation. However, chemicals can have combined effects and it is therefore reason to assess effects caused by chemical mixtures. Risk assessment of combined exposure to multiple chemicals presents numerous challenges to researchers, risk assessors and risk managers, particularly because of the complexity of the problem formulation, the vast numbers of chemicals that potentially could be involved, and the amount of data needed to characterize hazard of and exposure to chemical mixtures. It is therefore a priority area to develop methodologies for combined exposure to multiple chemicals. Like for single chemicals, frameworks to assess risk of chemical mixtures consists of problem formulation, exposure assessment, hazard assessment, and risk characterisation, and can be applied for both the whole mixture and the combined effect of components of the mixture. The default assumption is usually that chemicals act in an additive fashion, but in some cases synergism or antagonism exist. For component-based approaches chemicals are grouped into assessment groups based on the same or similar modes of action and a common critical effect.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org3220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES KS08. The use of aromatic plants, extracts and essential oils as feed additives in animal nutrition.I. GiannenasEBVS(r) European Specialist in Poultry Veterinary ScienceLaboratory of Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, School of Health Sciences,Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, GreeceAnimal production globally depends on feed efficiency to sustain growth and profitability. Sustainability of poultry and pig industries should be further regarded as a crucial factor to match worldwide increased food demands and reservation of feed sources. Similarly egg and milk production need support to sustain health and profitability. Several feed additives have been used in animal nutrition in order to increase sustainability of the Agrofood sector, in both organic and conventional livestock. The aim of the current report is to provide a comprehensive description on the use of aromatic plants, extracts and essential oils as feed additives alone or in combination with feed additives of different categories in our most recent research studies. Combinations of phytogenics with synbiotics and acidifiers have been investigated in terms of efficacious replacement of antimicrobial growth promoters in poultry, pig and dairy animals. These feed additives may further support animals to overcome long-standing health problems including bacterial challenges, as well as promote welfare especially for layer hens. This report will finally explore the potential of the aforementioned feed additives to tackle with environmental problems. Examples include use of local feed additives together with enzymes, which can enhance the use of local feedstuffs, especially in cases where high fibre content is the main constraint. Emphasis will be placed on the consequences of using local feed sources versus imported feedstuffs on global warming potential, primary energy use, nutrient excretion and the feed additive influence on lessening the pollution from animal operations. In vitro testing of antioxidant and antimicrobial bioactive herbal compounds and novel tools, such as life cycle assessment and genomic microbiota analysis, are necessary to verify effectiveness of aromatic plants, extracts and essential oils as feed additives in supporting livestock health, performance and sustainability. Further, practical examples and solutions for the production of broiler, turkey, pork meat or eggs with functional properties and minimal environmental impact are provided. The sustainability of meat, egg or milk industry is based on health, environmental protection and steady farmer income.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 3320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021KEYNOTE SPEECHES KS09. Safeguarding threatened species and promoting the use of plant resources in research and development.E. MaloupaHellenic Agricultural Organization-DEMETER, Institute of Plant Breeding and Genetic Resources, Laboratory of Protection and Evaluation of Native and Floricultural Species, Thessaloniki, GreecePlant diversity in Greece and the Balkans is exceptionally rich and unique, presenting a higher degree of endemism in relation to surface than any other comparable area of Europe or the Mediterranean region.Throughout history, botanic gardens have continuously responded to pressing environmental changes. Their collections of living plants provide an essential resource for scientific research, conservation and public engagement.Botanic gardens attract many of the diverse audiences which Responsible Research and Innovation (RRI) seeks to engage aiming to align the outcomes of scientific and technological advances with the values and needs of the society.Plant diversity is disappearing as a direct impact of the way humankind uses the natural resources. Our flora is fundamentally important to human life as a source of food, shelter and medicine amongst many other things. Wild plants offer a wealth of services and goods of essential livelihood value.Since its establishment, the BBGK has been focused on the conservation and the sustainable use of native plants of Greece and the Balkans, leaving aside the exotic and ornamental plants. The Balkan Botanic Garden of Kroussia (BBGK) was founded on 19 May 2001. It is member of the Botanic Gardens Conservation International (BGCI). Aiming first to promote to urban citizens environmental awareness issues regarding native plant conservation and second in order to facilitate the maintenance of the increasing mother plantations, the BBGK has recently established the Garden of Environmental Awareness (GEA) in Thermi at sea level. The BBGK is situated in northern Greece, about 70km from Thessaloniki, near the mountain village of Pontokerasia in the Prefecture of Kilkis (41deg05'N/23deg06'E).Greece has an exceptionally rich flora with more than 6,600 taxa (species and subspecies) with almost 20% with medicinal and aromatic properties. These plants produce a great variety of chemical compounds. As a result, the beneficial properties in the human body are countless and complex. The importance of diet for maintenance of optimal health was known from the ancient times. Aromatic and medicinal plants extensively used as flavorings and seasonings, for the preservation and storage of various foods and help to maintain their organoleptic properties. Plants that are often used are: oregano (Origanum vulgare ssp. hirtum), sage (Salvia officinalis), thyme (Thyumus spp.) and rosemary (Rosmarinus officinalis). Through this presentation we are going to identify successful models and draw lessons from sustainable management and commercialization of unique native flora and its products.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org3420th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES KS10. Natural products loaded in nanocarriers to cross biological barriers.AR. BiliaDepartment of Chemistry "Ugo Schiff", Florence, ItalyNatural products (NPs) are fascinating molecules not exclusively for their exciting structure variability but also for their ability to interact with diverse targets. In spite of these advantages, in many cases, the impressive in vitro activity to less or not significant in vivo efficacy is generally due to drug poor water solubility, low lipophilicity and inappropriate molecular size resulting in reduced absorption due to difficulties to cross biological barriers. In the gastrointestinal tract, a variety of physiological and morphological barriers such as gastric pH, proteolytic enzymes, colonic microflora and mucus layer can severely affect NPs bioavailability. Skin is a further physiological barrier, which essentially consists of four layers, and the stratum corneous, the outer layer of the skin (nonviable epidermis) represents the rate-controlling barrier for diffusion for almost all compounds. Small lipophilic NPs such a mono- and sesquiterpenes have high permeation properties and largely used as penetration enhancers, but they can also need of specific formulations because susceptible to volatilization and degradation, mainly by oxidation and isomerization. Other important barriers are the pulmonary and nasal mucosae where NPs bioavailability is often limited by rapid degradation and/or clearance by the mucociliary system and alveolar macrophages. Additionally, blood retinal barrier and blood-brain barrier (BBB) are among the most challenging, ensuring proper homeostasis, mainly due to very selective and restrictive bidirectional transport of endogenous and exogenous compounds. Absorption through each pathway is dependent on different physical characteristics, such as molecular weight, hydrophobicity, ionization constants, and stability of absorbing molecules as well as biological barriers. Different approaches can be used to increase barrier-crossing properties of NPs, based on chemical permeation enhancement using small lipophilic NPs, polysaccharides, dendrimers, cyclodextrins, and the design and production of appropriate drug delivery systems, in particular nanosized ones, which is the most attractive to enhance the permeation through paracellular, transcellular, carrier-mediated, and receptor-mediated transport. Some properties such as mucoadhesion and retention to the mucosa can also be used to increase the cross biological barriers to achieve optimal pharmacological action at pathological sites.Bilia et al. (2018) Nanocarriers: A Successful Tool to Increase Solubility, Stability and Optimise Bioefficacy of Natural Constituents. Curr Med Chem. 2018 Nov 1. doi: 10.2174/0929867325666181101110050. Bilia et al. (2017). Improving on Nature: The Role of Nanomedicine in the Development of Clinical Natural Drugs. Planta Med. 83(5):366-381. doi: 10.1055/s-0043-102949Bilia et al. (2014). Essential oils loaded in nanosystems: a developing strategy for a successful therapeutic approach. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 651593. doi: 10.1155/2014/651593.Bilia et al. (2016). Vesicles and micelles: two versatile vectors for the delivery of natural products. Journal of Drug Delivery Science and Technology, 32, 241-255.Bilia et al. (2014). Flavonoids loaded in nanocarriers: an opportunity to increase oral bioavailability and bioefficacy. Food Nutr Sci. 5: 1212-1227Bilia et al. (2018). Plants Extracts Loaded in Nanocarriers: an Emergent Formulating Approach. NPC, 13 1157-1160 https://doi.org/10.1177/1934578X1801300914www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 3520th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021KEYNOTE SPEECHES KS11. Chemical profile and nutraceutical features of some Mediterranean food plants.A. BracaDepartment of Pharmacy, University of Pisa, Italy From an epidemiological standpoint, natural active principles from fruits and vegetables have been reported to protect humans from several diseases. In recent years, the scientific community has strongly emphasized the role played by diet in the prevention of chronic degenerative pathologies [1]. The mechanism of action of these dietary components is not completely understood, however, at least partially the effectiveness of these substances may be explained in terms of antioxidant and anti-inflammatory properties, since the different pathogenesis of many diseases are marked by the role played by free radicals [2].In Italy, many spontaneous plants are used as food in folk traditions and are now being re-evaluated as healthy products with high nutritional value. In this context, our recent research is focused on chemical study of some Mediterranean food plants selected because they are simply forgotten or poorly investigated. Among them, "common dogwood" or "bloody dogwood" (Cornus sanguinea L., Cornaceae), "albero dei coralli" (Elaeagnus umbellata Thunb., Elaeagnaceae), "agretti" or "barba di frate" (Salsola soda L., Amaranthaceae) [3], and some old Tuscany cherry cultivars (Prunus avium L., Rosaceae) were selected. Plant materials were extracted and subjected to different column chromatographies to isolate and structurally characterize, through NMR and MS analyses, their main chemical components that were assayed to evaluate their beneficial effects as antioxidant or anti-inflammatory remedies. In some cases extracts were simply analysed by LC-PDA/UV-MS. Results on kaempferol 3-O-b-D-glucopyranosyl-(1-2)-b-D-galactopyranoside 7-O-a-L-rhamnopyranoside isolated from E. umbellata as possible local protective agent against oxidative stress and inflammatory stimuli in gingival tissue, revealed this new property for a flavonoid glycoside; while the appreciable inhibitory effectiveness of quercetin 3-O-glucuronopyranoside from S. soda on enzyme involved in diabetic complications and inflammatory process is indicative of its valuable nutraceutical potential. Extracts of cherry displayed a potential anti-angiogenic activity in the CAM e zebrafish assays. [1] Traka, Maria H.; Mithen, Richard F. Plant science and human nutrition: challenges in assessing health-promoting properties of phytochemicals. Plant Cell 2011; 23: 2483-2497. [2] Han, X.; Shen, T.; Lou, H. Dietary polyphenols and their biological significance. International Journal of Molecular Sciences 2007; 8: 950-988. [3] Pignatti S. Flora d'Italia, Edagricole: Bologna, 2017.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org36Invited lecturesInvited Lectures20th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021INVITED LECTURES IL01. Traditional Chinese Medicine for Cancer Patients in Taiwan.H.-R. YenSchool of Chinese Medicine, College of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan Chinese Medicine Research Center, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan Department of Chinese Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, TaiwanMany cancer patients seek complementary therapies. We investigated the adjunctive use of traditional Chinese medicine (TCM) by Taiwanese cancer patients and conducted basic and clinical studies to delineate its potential benefits. We analyzed the registry database of the National Health Insurance Research Database and included all cancer patients in Taiwan. Patients were categorized as adjunctive TCM users or non-TCM users, followed by matching with age, sex, comorbidity, conventional treatment, and index year to compare the risk of mortality and survival rate. The prescribed Chinese herbal medicine (CHM) was further investigated in the laboratory or clinical trial.