B. Environ. Contam. Tox. 84(6), 759-764.Rohlf, F.J., 1994. Numerical Taxonomy and Multivariate Analysis System. Version 1.70. Exeter Software, Setauker, NY.Stafilov, T., Sajn, R., Pancevski, Z., Boev, B., Frontasyeva, M.V., Strelkova, L.P., 2010. Heavy metal contamination of surface soils around a lead and zinc smelter in the Republic of Macedonia. J. Hazard. Mater. 175, 896-914.Villatoro-Pulido, M., Font, R., Obregon-Cano, S., Moreno-Rojas, R., Amaro-Lopez, M.A., Anter, J., Munoz-Serrano, A., De Haro Bailon, A., Alonso-Moraga, A., Del Rio-Celestino, M., 2013. Cytotoxic and genotoxic effects of metal (oid)s bioactivated in rocket leaves (Eruca vesicaria subsp. sativa Miller). Chemosphere 93(10), 2554-2561.Zhiyi, R., Haowen, Y., 2004. A method for genotoxicity detection using random amplified polymorphism DNA with Danio rerio. Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf. 58, 96-103. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 297 - 298 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.277.035.1Short communicationBiochemical pathways in cancer progression as pharmacological targetsMilena Prculovska*, Ivana Angelovska, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska, Marija Hiljadnikova-BajroInstitute for Applied Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University SS Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* milena.prculovska@gmail.comBackgroundDespite the public awareness and technological ad-vancement in early cancer detection as well as the discov-ery of many novel therapeutic treatments, cancer takes away many lives worldwide each year. The limited ther-apeutic effects of the traditional treatments and their nu-merous side effects which compromise patients' compli-ance, urge the need for development of new medicinal an-ticancer agents. Therefore, numerous new research studies have been directed towards development of more specific targeted therapy.The most common reason for mortality among cancer patients is the tumor progression and formation of metasta-sis within organs distant to the location of the primary tu-mor. The purpose of this paper is to review the most rele-vant biomolecular factors that enable the metastatic pro-cess, and their potential for employment as targets for fu-ture development of new therapeutic anticancer agents. AngiogenesisThe access to the host's vascular system and the de-velopment of a blood network around and within the tu-mor, a process known as angiogenesis, is of crucial impor-tance for tumor's supply with oxygen and nutritional sub-stances and subsequent increase of the tumor mass, inva-sion and cancer dissemination. A lot of experimental and clinical data evidence that tumors can't grow beyond a di-ameter of 2-3 mm until the blood network is created, i.e. they can't progress until they acquire angiogenic ability. Hence, it has been proposed that the inhibition of angio-genesis could suppress the tumor's growth and its targeting has an important clinical validity for development of new approaches for cancer treatment.The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and its receptor vascular endothelial growth factor receptor(VEGFR) have major roles in the process of an-giogenesis and they can often be overexpressed in tumor-ous cells. Having in regard the role of VEGF as a potent angiogenic factor, many therapeutic strategies that target the angiogenesis via inhibition of VEGF signal pathway have been developed. These therapeutic strategies include use of: small molecule tyrosine kinase inhibitors of VEGF receptors, neutralizing monoclonal antibodies against VEGF or its receptor, soluble VEGF receptors which act as VEGF traps and ribozymes which specifically target VEGF mRNA (Cardones and Banez, 2006).Other important biochemical mediators are the fibro-blast growth factors (FGFs), which belong to the family of heparin binding proteins. The fibroblast growth factors and their receptors participate in the proliferation and migra-tion of endothelial cells, production of proteases and an-giogenesis. Recent studies show that FGFs synergize with VEGF during neovascularization and that FGFs could be involved in the mechanism for resistance towards anti-VEGF agents. Therefore, the new plausible therapeutic ap-proaches are focused either on the combined or the con-secutive inhibition of these two crucial angiogenetic signal pathways (Lieu et al., 2011).Angiopoietins are growth factors that also participate in the formation of blood vessels in several tumor types. Angiopoietin-1 and -2 are the best characterized cyto-kines which accomplish their biological function by bind-ing to the Tie-2 receptor. Angiopoietin-1 enables survival of endothelial cells, formation and stabilization of the vas-cular network. On the other hand, the positive regulation S3 PP 139298Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 297 - 298 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationsof angiopoietin-2 disrupts the interaction between angio-poietin-1 with its receptor leading to destabilization of the blood vessels and subsequent enabling of VEGF-inducted angiogenesis. Because of this, the targeting of angiopoet-in-2 has a promising potential for cancer treatment. A nov-el therapeutic strategy involves development of agents that target the angiopoietin/Tie-2 signaling pathway. The first such agent which has reached advanced stages of clinical trials is AMG-386. AMG-386 is an anti-angiopoietin pepti-body which inhibits the interaction between the ligands an-giopoietin-1 and angiopoietin-2 with Tie-2 receptor (Neal and Wakelee, 2010).Cell detachment and extracellular matrix degradationApart from its relation to the angiogenesis, the acquisi-tion of metastatic potential is also related to the detachment of the malignant cell from the primary tumor and degrada-tion of proteins which comprise the surrounding extracel-lular matrix (ECM). The loss of cell-cell adhesion capacity enables the malignant cells to dissociate from the primary tumor, while the changes in the cell-matrix interaction en-able the cells to invade the surrounding stroma and dissem-inate. The most important adhesive molecules which have been considered as potential therapeutic anticancer targets are E-cadherin and integrin. E-cadherin is type-1 transmembrane protein that me-diates the cell-cell interaction. The reduced expression of E-cadherin is associated with an increase of the metastatic potential. One of the possible approaches for reduction of the invasive capacity of cancer cells implies enhancement of the inter-cell adhesive capacity through overexpression of E-cadherin.The integrins are surface receptors which mediate the cell-ECM interaction. The integrin's role in the metasta-sis of malignant cells, their localization on the cell's sur-face and sensitivity to a pharmacological blockade, makes them attractive for pharmacological targeting. Small mol-ecule integrin antagonists, including the avb3 and avb5 inhibitor Cilengitide, have shown encouraging activity in controlling cell proliferation and metastasis. Beside from the small molecule antagonists, monoclonal antibodies against integrins, such as CNTO95, etaracizumab (MEDI-522), and volociximab are being subjected to clinical trials (Xiangming, 2015).ECM is composed of a thick network of proteins such as collagen and fibronectin. It must be invaded by the inva-sive cancer to enable itself space for migration. The most important proteolytic enzymes are the matrix metallopro-teinases (MMPs) which belong to the group of zinc-depen-dent endopeptidases. These enzymes have an important role in tumor invasion, metastasis, and angiogenesis and are considered the major mediators of changes in the new microenvironment at the time of progression of the can-cer. As such, they are an attractive target for its treatment.The Epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway is a dynamic process that enables the polarized epithelial cells to lose the epithelial differentiation and acquire mesenchy-mal phenotype via numerous biochemical and morpho-logical changes. Thus, they gain higher migratory ability and Felicity's group suggests the Epithelial-mesenchymal transition pathway as promising target for development of therapeutic agents for prevention of tumor dissemination and metastasis (Felicity et al., 2014).ConclusionUnderstanding the biomolecular mechanisms under-lying the process of malignant progression and identifica-tion of the factors involved in this process should enable new therapeutic agents that would target the key molecu-lar pathways of cancer growth and dissemination to be de-veloped in future. In that way, selective action, higher effi-ciency and minimization of side effects of anticancer drugs would be accomplished.ReferencesCardones, A.R., Banez, L.L., 2006. VEGF inhibitors in cancer therapy. Current Pharmaceutical Design 12(3), 387-394.Felicity, M.D., Teneale, A.S., Erik, W.T., Gregory, R.M., 2014. Targeting EMT in cancer: Opportunities for pharmacological intervention. Trends in Pharmacological Sciences 35(9), 479-488.Lieu, C., Heymach, J., Overman, M., Tran, H., Kopetz, S., 2011. Beyond VEGF: Inhibition of the fibroblast growth factor pathway and antiangiogenesis. Clinical Cancer Research 17(19), 6130-6139.Neal, J., Wakelee, H., 2010. AMG-386, a selective angiopoietin-1/-2-neutralizing peptibody for the potential treatment of cancer. Current Opinion in Molecular Therapeutics 12(4), 487-495.Xiangming, G., 2015. Cancer metastases: Challenges and opportunities. Acta Pharmaceutica Sinica B 5(5), 402-418.Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 299 - 300 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 615.277.035.1Short communicationBiomolecular mechanisms of cancer initiation as targets for therapeutic interventionIvana Angelovska*, Milena Prculovska, Tatjana Kadifkova Panovska, Marija Hiljadnikova-BajroInstitute for Applied Biochemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University SS Cyril and Methodius, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* angelovska_i@yahoo.comIntroductionThe term cancer is broadly used to describe over a hun-dred malignant diseases in the human population. The inci-dence and prevalence of cancer are constantly increasing. It is presumed that by 2030 the annual number of newly di-agnosed cases will reach 23 600 000 which is an increase of 68% compared to the reported cases in 2012 (Bray et al., 2012). This fact points out the expansive tendency of cancer worldwide and emphasizes the need for dedicating higher attention both to prevention and treatment of this disease. The traditional methods for cancer treatment have lim-ited efficiency and high toxicity, exerting inevitable ag-gressiveness towards healthy tissues. Hence, medical prac-titioners and scientists are faced with the need for consider-ing the options of targeted action of the therapeutic agents and for focusing further research efforts on their develop-ment. The targeted therapy would be directed towards nor-malization of what is changed or cessation of some of the active cascades that initiate tumor development. There are already established molecular targets which can contribute to the inhibition of tumor's growth and restoration of nor-mal functions. The aim of this study is to review current-ly available data on the biomolecular processes involved in the early steps of cancer initiation and the possibility of their use as therapeutic targets in order to achieve maximal efficacy and minimal toxicity of the anticancer treatments.Cyclin and cyclin dependent kinasesCyclin and cyclin dependent kinases (CK/CDK) are responsible for the normal function and control over the cell cycle. They are check-up points which control the pos-sible irregularities during the cell cycle. It is known that, in certain tumors, the levels of CK/CDK are constitutive-ly increased, continuously encouraging the cell cycle and the creation of new cells. As such, CK/CDK are serious target candidates towards which new therapeutic agents can be directed in order to reduce their expression and nor-malize the cell division. Studies have been done on cyclin E which is important for controlling the cell cycle in G1 phase and its activation is important for postponing the ma-lignant processes. It is believed that the new medicaments should act at the level of inhibiting distinct phases of the cell cycle. Recently, several preclinical and phase I/II clin-ical studies have been conducted using a novel, reversible CDK4/6 inhibitor named Palbociclib. It was shown that Palbociclib has the role of CDK4/6 as a potential target in estrogen receptor-positive (ER+) breast cancers (Finn et al., 2016).Oncogenes and tumor suppressor genesThe activation of oncogenes and inactivation of tumor suppressive genes have an important role in the process of malignant cell transformation. One of the cancer treatment modalities has the opposite goal. The suppression of the RAS-pathway is a significant target regarding the mech-anism of oncogene inactivation. This can be achieved by several mechanisms. One of them is disabling the bind-ing of the Epidermal Growth Factor (EGF) to its receptor (EGFR), so that the dimerization of the intercellular part of the receptor, which associates with the adapter protein Son of Sevenless (SoS) and the receptor of the growth-binding protein 2 (Grb-2), is prevented. It is very important to at-tain this blockade, as the SoS-Grb-2 complex directly ac-S3 PP 140300Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 299 - 300 (2016)Clinical biochemistry / Toxicology / Food and nutritionPoster presentationstivates the RAS-oncogene. RAS-induces intracellular cas-cade of kinases for promotion of proliferation. On the other hand, with activation of the RAS-oncogene, an activation of RAF-oncogene happens, which encourages RAF-Mito-gen-activated protein kinases and direct signals are sent to the core for starting cell division. The function of the RAS-oncogene is related to the proliferation, genetic expression, differentiation, emphasizing the cell survival and apopto-sis. Because of the fact that RAF-MEK-ERK cascade is very complex and it is difficult to find RAF and MEK in-hibitors or inhibitors for RAS genes, the new strategies for inhibition of the RAS-oncogene are directed towards mu-tations of RNA and RAS-oncogene (Baines et al., 2011).A significant representative of the group of tyrosine kinases is the BCR-ABL oncogene. This oncogene is re-lated to the Philadelphia chromosome-positive leukemia. The kinase activity of BCR-ABL is the primary factor for stimulation of myeloid cells proliferation. As such, BCR-ABL oncogene is considered as a potential target, during treatment of chronically myeloid leukemia, for Imatinib, which inhibits both the ABL and BCR-ABL tyrosine kinas-es. However it was discovered that in some patients, white blood cells become resistant to Imatinib. One newer ap-proach presents BMS-354825 developed by Bristol-My-ers Squibb, that binds to the active form of ABL and over-comes 14 of 15 Imatinib-resistant mutants (Scholar et al., 2005)When it comes to the tumor suppressive genes, a meth-od should be developed for their activation in order to de-lay cell's growth and proliferation and to re-establish the processes of DNA reparation and apoptosis. The most studied gene is p53 which is also most frequently inacti-vated in cancer processes. Research directed towards new targets should take into consideration the suppression, the possible induction of p53 in normal, healthy cells, as well as the fact that increased levels of MDM2 are expected. The increased levels of MDM2 arise from the activation of p53 with its potential target and are expected to cause sup-pression of p53 as negative regulator (Wang et al., 2010).ApoptosisApoptosis is a genetically controlled form of cell death with a huge importance for physiological tissue remodel-ing during embryogenesis and maintaining homeostasis later in cell's life. The process of apoptosis is regulated via extrinsic and intrinsic pathways. The extrinsic pathways are activated through cell surface receptors such as the tu-mor-necrosis factor receptor (TNFR), death receptors and the CD95/FAS/APO1 receptor. The intrinsic pathways are activated through intracellular stimuli caused by cytotoxic medicaments, hypoxia, DNA damage. These paths are es-pecially interesting for investigation as potential targets for anti-cancer agents. One of the possible targets are Smac peptidomimetics which act as mimetic agents but the poor pharmacokinetic properties prevents their clinical applica-tion (Elsayed et al., 2015).ConclusionThe above mentioned pathways involved in initia-tion and development of malignant neoplasm, as well as those which are to be identified in future, will have a sig-nificant contribution in the development of a suitable ther-apy for this disease, by specifically and selectively target-ing malignant cells and aberrant signaling pathways with-out harming the physiologically healthy cell processes. ReferencesBaines, A., Xu, D., Der, C.J., 2011. Inhibition of Ras for cancer treatment: the search continues. Future Medicinal Chemistry 3,1787-1808. Bray, F., Jemal, A., Grey, N., Ferlay, J., Forman, D., 2012.