 
 
 
 
 
Discourse, Materiality and Power: Dietary 
Supplements and their Users  
 
 
Susan Roberton Bidwell 
 
 
A thesis submitted for the degree of  
Doctor of Philosophy 
of the University of Otago, Dunedin 
 
March 2020 
  
i 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Throughout human existence people have used herbs and other medicinal substances to protect 
themselves against illness and treat their ailments.  Gathering wild herbs has, however, been 
replaced today by the many products on the shelves of health stores and pharmacies in 
developed countries with health systems similar to New Zealand.  Previous studies of 
supplements and their use have largely focused on how many people use them, or subsumed 
supplement use within wider studies of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM).  
Supplement use, however, has characteristics that make it different from CAM therapies more 
broadly.  Yet there have been only a few investigations where supplement users have been 
asked directly about their practices, and those that have been done have tended to be under-
theorised and so lack depth.  
This study used a constructionist approach, within which supplements and their users were 
examined from both humanist and post-humanist perspectives. I used semi-structured 
interviews to generate data with 36 participants who were regular users of supplements. The 
interviews were supplemented by observations of the displays of products that participants 
brought to my attention in the home and retail settings where the interviews took place.  A 
critical theoretical analysis was undertaken, framed by Deleuze and Guattari’s concept of the 
rhizomatic assemblage of multiple, interconnected actants which are always in a process of 
change. Within this wider framework, aspects of the data were examined using other theoretical 
concepts including deconstruction, the agency of matter, and Foucault’s ideas of power and 
caring for the self.  
The study revealed that popular assumptions about supplements as being natural, holistic and 
risk free can be deconstructed to show a wide variety of nuances and competing interpretations. 
Material things are significant in supplement use; not only the products themselves but the non-
human communication technologies that allow individuals and companies the means to 
research, promote, sell or buy supplements when and where they choose across the globe. 
Using the experience and new knowledge acquired through these non-human things, 
supplement users become confident in their ability to resist over-scrutiny of their practices by 
the orthodox health system and this confidence becomes woven in to how they present 
themselves and their life story.     
ii 
 
 
I conclude the study by drawing on Barad’s work on intra-action and agential realism.  These 
concepts show supplement practices to be a simultaneous production of human and non-human 
agency, with each affecting and being affected by the other.  Each time a product is sold, bought 
or ingested can be understood as a temporary event that entangles meaning and matter at one 
moment in time.  Yet within the passing event, enacted through the physical piece of matter, 
many social, cultural and economic effects are contained, as well as the personal meanings of 
the individual user and their hopes for the future. There is also a ritual element to these events, 
symbolising the user’s expectation that they can keep the disruption of ill health and injury away 
and so preserve their capacity to pursue the ongoing quest for what makes life meaningful for 
them.  
 
  
iii 
 
 
Table of contents 
 
Abstract 1 
Table of contents 3 
Acknowledgements 5 
Preface 6 
Chapter 1: Introduction 7 
Scope of the study 7 
Previous studies of supplements 9 
Research gaps 15 
Structure of the thesis 18 
Chapter 2: Ingested substances: ancient and modern 20 
Legends and literature 20 
Traditional medicines 24 
The beginnings of professional and ‘alternative’ health care 28 
Informal home remedies in colonial New Zealand 29 
The persistence of home remedies into the mid-20th century 31 
Chapter 3: Methodology and methods 33 
Introduction 33 
Epistemological approach 33 
Reflexivity 36 
Methods 38 
The sample 40 
Ethical approval and Māori consultation 43 
The interview process 44 
Analytical approach 45 
Theoretical framing 48 
Chapter 4: Natural, holistic and safe: deconstructing discourses about supplements 51 
Introduction 51 
Nature and naturalness 54 
How natural is ‘natural’? 57 
The evolving assemblage of the natural: traditional, exotic, novel, ethical 60 
Holism and holistic health 68 
Balance and uniqueness of the person 71 
iv 
 
 
The desire for wholeness 75 
Safety from risk: the body under siege 80 
Repelling external invaders 83 
The quiet invader within 87 
Conclusion 94 
Chapter 5: Supplements as lively matter: the importance of material things 96 
Introduction 96 
The power of the material product 100 
Things for the body and mind 103 
Things for the spirit 110 
Things in the evolving assemblage 119 
Interconnecting things 123 
Marketing things 130 
Conclusion 140 
Chapter 6: Supplements: through responsibility and expertise to power 142 
Introduction 142 
Being a responsible citizen 145 
Reconfiguring responsibility: supplement users 148 
Reconfiguring responsibility: as a supplement seller 155 
Becoming your own expert 157 
Becoming expert enough to advise others 167 
Supplements and evolving identity 173 
Conclusion 179 
Chapter 7:  Discussion 181 
Supplement practices: the intra-action of discourse, materiality and power 181 
Supplement practices: entangled phenomena 185 
Meaning, matter, ritual and symbolism 190 
References 198 
Appendices 265 
Appendix A:  Information sheet for supplement users 265 
Appendix B:  Consent form for supplement users to participate 268 
Appendix C: Information sheet for supplement seller participants 270 
Appendix D:  Consent form for supplement sellers participants 273 
Appendix E: interview guides 275 
 
v 
 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
My grateful thanks to all the participants without whom the study could never have taken place.  
All of them shared their experiences generously, allowing me insights into difficult times in their 
lives and how they had coped with them.  Many of them welcomed me into their homes and 
treated me hospitably with warmth and openness.  The insights they provided from their life 
stories will never leave me.   
I want to record my deep gratitude for the thorough, consistent and patient help I received 
throughout from my wonderful supervisors.  They read through draft after draft and provided 
insightful comments every time, guiding me where I needed improvement, steering me through 
thickets of theory and preventing me from despair on the one hand, or enthusiastically setting 
off down irrelevant ‘rabbit holes’ on the other.  I owe more than words can say to their 
mentoring.   
I also thank my family, especially my wonderful husband Vince Bidwell who, as ever, was a rock 
of stability and quiet support throughout, my four adult children and two grandchildren.  
Between them they variously provided encouragement, entertainment or diversions that kept 
me on track and allowed me to retain perspective about the most important things of life.  
Special thanks to go to Simon and Cecilia for reading and commenting on some of the draft 
chapters, to Vince for proof reading the final draft, to Alex for creating the word cloud in Chapter 
5 and to my dear friend Chris for pointing me to the lesser known mythological sources in the 
background chapter.  I also thank my good friends Kristi, Sarah, Chidimma, Sandra, Ann and 
Yvonne for sticking with me over all these years of study and always taking an interest in my 
progress.    
Thanks also to the other students and staff of the Department of Population Health University of 
Otago, Christchurch for all the useful conversations over encounters in the kitchen and to my 
lovely colleagues at Pegasus Health for their encouragement and support throughout.  Special 
thanks to Jen Williams for her advice and assistance on the details of formatting. 
I also acknowledge the assistance of the administrative staff members of the Department of 
Population Health University of Otago, Christchurch including Katrina, Fran, Bernadette and 
Susannah and the IT assistance provided by Anna Young in sorting out time consuming issues 
related to systems and access of which there were many during the years the thesis was written. 
vi 
 
 
Preface 
 
In 2013 I was a co-investigator in a piece of research where we were interviewing community 
pharmacists.  For their convenience, most of the interviews took place in their pharmacies, and 
as we waited for them to become free to talk to us, I had more time than ever before to observe 
the pharmacy space.  I could not help but notice the large displays of dietary supplements and 
herbal medicines that usually took up one whole wall of the pharmacy with the sign ‘Natural 
Health’ above them.  Judging by the proportion of space they took up, it seemed that these 
products represented an important part of the business transacted in the pharmacy.  Our 
research questions focused on the advice that pharmacists gave people about their prescribed 
medicines as well as other health advice they provided to general enquiries from the public who 
came to the pharmacy.  In the course of our interview we would ask, gesturing at the wall of 
‘Natural Health’, “What about these other things you sell?”  
My interest was sparked when we found the pharmacists seemed reluctant to discuss these 
products.  They tended to give us a somewhat defensive standard answer, namely, that the 
products were not evidence-based, but ‘our customers’ ask for them, and as they needed to 
maintain a viable business, their role was to ensure they stocked high quality, safe products with 
accurate labelling.    I became curious after hearing this response several times and decided to 
take a look at the literature for myself to see why they were so popular, yet the pharmacists 
treated them with such apparent caution.  If they were not evidence-based, then why were so 
many of them for sale?  What I found only made me more curious.  Sales of such products had 
been increasing steadily over the years in all Western countries.  The market in them was now 
worth many billions every year and still growing.  However, they were frowned on by medical 
professionals and considered to be either ineffective and a waste of money, or, on the other 
hand, to be putting people at risk from contaminated ingredients or interaction with prescribed 
medicines.  There seemed to be only a few studies where investigators had spoken directly to 
users of these products.  Here, I concluded was a topic that was begging for further 
investigation.  This thesis is the account of what I discovered.  
7 
 
 
Chapter 1: Introduction 
Scope of the study 
I set out to investigate how the people who buy and use the products I had seen in the 
pharmacies discussed why they had come to use them and how they made sense of their 
experiences.  ‘Natural health,’ the description above the products I had seen in the pharmacies, 
is an interesting juxtaposition that manages to sound succinct and yet vaguely intriguing at the 
same time.  It is a skillful commercial phrase that suggests to the unwell that they may buy 
health, and it will be the ‘natural’ kind rather than the medicines in the dispensary that are 
associated with illness.  At the same time it hints to those who feel completely healthy now, that 
they could perhaps be even healthier, or store up some extra health for the future in a ‘natural’ 
way.  Yet the language used is belied by the appearance of the products themselves which are 
clearly a product of human, not natural, provenance, showing every sign of being mass produced 
and packaged up, their contents hidden away behind layers of plastic and cardboard.   
To refine the scope of my study I began by researching what had already been written about the 
products which are sold under the banner of ‘natural health’.  For simplicity, I will use the term 
supplements throughout the thesis to refer to them, though strictly speaking they cover both 
dietary supplements and herbal medicines, as well as combinations of both.  Defining exactly 
what can be called a supplement is not exact as the vocabulary tends to be vague and all-
encompassing.  The Medical Subject Headings (MeSH), often used as a standard in medical 
publications, define dietary supplements as “products in capsule, tablet, or liquid form that 
provide dietary ingredients that are intended to be taken by mouth to increase the intake of 
nutrients.  Dietary supplements can include macronutrients such as proteins, carbohydrates and 
fats, and/or micronutrients such as vitamins, minerals, and phytochemicals.”  The New Zealand 
Adult Nutrition Survey (Ministry of Health, 2009) took a different approach, carefully avoiding  
being limited to nutrient intake alone.  Instead, the survey asked respondents about their use of 
more specific categories of products: vitamins, minerals, oils, botanicals, bee products, animal 
and fish extracts, enzymes, and sports supplements.  The New Zealand definition has been used 
for this study both for its local relevance and for its broader implications across the potential for 
both nutritional and medicinal supplement use.   
When deciding what to include in my study, it was clear that in order to keep it within achievable 
limits I would need to exclude some areas as they were topics in their own right.  My interest 
8 
 
 
had originated in pharmacies from my previous research and was directly related to the use of 
supplements for medicinal purposes, to improve or maintain health.  I decided early on 
therefore, that I would exclude sports supplements and protein powders.  I also excluded 
substances prepared individually for Chinese medical herbalism and acupuncture and other 
similar products that were not commercially packaged for sale on the general retail market. 
Similarly I excluded consideration of ‘functional foods’ (Landstrom et al., 2007) which, it might 
be argued, cross over with the definition I adopted.  It is important to note here, too, that I was 
not aiming to examine anything to do with the biomedical effectiveness of supplements, 
(whether they ‘work’ or not) or answer the criticisms of supplements and their users that have 
been put forward in the medical literature.  While these issues have been touched on where the 
participants raised them, they were not the focus of the study.  
One of the first issues that becomes apparent when researching why people might use 
supplements, is that these products are very often treated as just another one of the different 
therapies within complementary and alternative medicine or CAM.  CAM includes, according to 
Ernst and Singh (2008), everything that orthodox medicine considers falls outside what orthodox 
medicine does. This bundling together under one umbrella term of the “the vast range of 
paradigmatically different therapies” (Lewis, 2019: 843) is a common approach, even among 
qualitative studies which have examined the reasons why people may be drawn to seeking 
health care outside orthodox medicine (for example, Doel & Segrott, 2003; Stoneman et al., 
2013).  Supplements, however, have particular characteristics that set them apart from other 
CAM therapies. Unlike modalities such as chiropractic, acupuncture, reiki and homeopathy, they 
do not require mediation through a therapist.  Individuals can buy and take products solely on 
their own initiative without consulting anyone else.  Even if they do seek advice or are provided 
with products by a pharmacist, herbalist or other therapist, the consumption of the products is 
an unsupervised, solo act. It is completely under the control of the individual, can be started or 
stopped at any time and is not recorded as a medication that may be checked on for adherence 
by a doctor or pharmacist.  Secondly, supplements as a category are not supported by an overall 
theory of practice, as, for example, are homeopathy or acupuncture, both of which draw from 
underlying principles which set out how they are believed to work.  Thirdly, the term 
‘supplements’ collapses widely different categories of substances under the one collective 
signifier.  A supplement can be anything from a single vitamin, mineral or herb or any of the 
other individual substances mentioned in the list above or it can be one of the seemingly endless 
number of combinations of two or more of these (Marcus, 2016). These differences from other 
9 
 
 
CAM therapies make a sound case for investigating supplements and the people who use them 
as a topic in their own right.   
Research questions 
My research questions therefore were:  
How do people who use or sell supplements explain why they came to engage with them 
initially? 
How do people who use or sell supplements describe and make sense of their experiences with 
supplements?  
To put the study of supplements in a wider context, however, it is useful to briefly outline what 
the academic literature has to say about them.    
Previous studies of supplements   
It is well established that supplements and herbal products are widely used in developed 
countries with health systems similar to New Zealand’s.  National surveys of the general public 
have been carried out in the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada and New Zealand (Bates 
et al., undated; Gahche et al., 2011; University of Otago and Ministry of Health, 2011; 
Vatanparast et al., 2010)  as well as large studies in Australia and Sweden (Brownie & Rolfe, 
2004; Messerer et al., 2001). The percentage of adults reporting supplement use in these studies 
ranged from 52% in the United States, to 33% percent in Sweden with the other countries in 
between. The New Zealand Nutrition Study (Ministry of Health 2009) found that 30.7% of 
respondents were regular users and a further 16.9% were occasional users. While it is not easy 
to compare countries, as surveys may be done infrequently, the use of supplements appears to 
be increasing.  The Council for Responsible Nutrition in the United States (CRN, 2018) reported 
that 75% of all adults surveyed used dietary supplements, up 10% from their previous survey in 
2009. This is an industry, not government organisation so needs to be treated accordingly, 
however their data are considered reliable by other academic investigators (Dickinson et al., 
2014). The New Zealand survey (Ministry of Health 2009) is now ten years old and has not been 
repeated but recent reports in the New Zealand media, based on a health insurance company 
survey, found that 35% of those surveyed were regular users, also suggesting an increase (New 
Zealand Herald, 2015). One measure of growing use is the amount of interest and attention paid 
to dietary supplements by the business media.  International reports confirm that the appetite 
from the global public for these products is high and continues to grow (Persistence Market 
10 
 
 
Research, 2017).  According to Lewis (2019), in 2016 in Australia alone, herbal and nutritional 
supplements were a $4.2 billion industry.   One market research company has estimated that the 
global supplement market will be worth in excess of $220 billion by 2024 (Grand View Research, 
2018).   
Analysis of the demographic information collected in both large national surveys and smaller 
studies tends to be consistent in showing that women use more dietary supplements than men, 
and older people, particularly those with chronic diseases such as arthritis, use more than those 
who are younger (Hirayama et al., 2008; Ma et al., 2011; Murphy et al., 2011; Ried, 2016). 
Market research companies also mention pregnant women, infants and children, and older 
adults as key markets for these products (Grand View Research, 2018).  Socio-economic factors 
appear to influence use; an analysis of data  by Statistics Canada (Vatanparast et al., 2010) found 
that a higher household income and higher level of education were positively associated with 
vitamin and mineral supplement use.  In New Zealand, use of dietary supplements was lowest 
among the least well off with regular use around 10% lower than other groups.  However, those 
in the middle three quintiles by socio-economic status used more supplements than the those 
with the highest household income (University of Otago and Ministry of Health, 2011).   
Some surveys have also included questions about reasons for use.  Analysis of the data from the 
2007-2010 US National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey found that adults most 
commonly reported that they took supplements to improve or maintain overall health (Bailey et 
al., 2013; Cardini et al., 2010; Dickinson et al., 2014). Perceptions that herbal medicines were 
natural and less harmful than prescription drugs were reported in a number of investigations 
(Durante et al., 2001; Taylor et al., 2006).  Several smaller surveys have looked at supplement 
use by people who are being treated for cancer or who are cancer survivors (Damery et al., 
2011; Ma et al., 2011; Saquib et al., 2011). There are also many surveys of people with a 
particular condition (for example, tart cherry juice to relieve gout (Singh et al., 2015)), but these 
are narrowly focused rather than relating to general supplement use.    
There is considerable commentary on supplement use in the academic medical literature, much 
of which notes the lack of evidence of biomedical effectiveness of supplements. The phrase 
“expensive urine and little else” (Binns et al., 2018: 413) tends to be used in the literature 
lamenting the futility of taking supplements. They have been described as “pseudoscience and 
nonsense” (Lewis, 2019: 840) or the “province of modern day Humpty Dumptys”(Freeman, 
2005: 155).  ‘Alternatives’ that is, anything not accepted by orthodox medicine, are considered 
to be ineffective (Ernst & Singh, 2008) and their use to be regrettable and even dangerous.  
11 
 
 
Cases have been reported where supplements have been contaminated with harmful substances 
(Genuis et al., 2012; Geyer et al., 2008; Maughan, 2005; Stickel et al., 2009), or caused 
interactions with prescribed medicines (Fugh-Berman, 2000; Izzo, 2004; Sarino et al., 2007). 
Other investigations have reported poor communication between supplement users and health 
professionals and recommended that hospital and family physicians need to question patients 
more closely because people tend not to disclose what they are taking to their health 
professionals (Ben-Arye et al., 2017; Gardiner et al., 2015; Tarn et al., 2014)et al 2014).  A 
number of researchers have looked at issues related to regulation, particularly the intricacies of 
the United States Dietary Supplements Health Education Act (DSHEA) of 1994, its strengths and 
weaknesses, issues of enforcement, and the loopholes that marketing companies have been able 
to exploit (Cooper, 2010; Noonan & Patrick Noonan, 2006; Onel, 2005; Temple, 2010). Several 
studies have examined websites that promote dietary supplements for their compliance with 
the Act (Dennehy et al., 2005; Jordan & Haywood, 2007; Morris & Avorn, 2003) and have 
recorded concerns about those that do not mention adverse effects or interactions in their 
promotional material. A Canadian study took a different approach, speaking directly to key 
informants from 20 companies about their intention to comply with the Canadian Natural Health 
Products (NHP) regulations of 2004 (Laeeque et al., 2006).   
Investigations of the advice provided by pharmacists and health food stores to customers have 
found a lack of emphasis on safety and interactions with prescribed medicines, 
recommendations for products which were contraindicated in pregnancy, and recommending 
costly products judged to be unsupported by evidence (Buckner et al., 2005; Mills et al., 2003).  
Pharmacies were generally found to give more reliable advice than health stores (Jefferies et al., 
2012; Sarino et al., 2007; Temple et al., 2009), but even so their advice was found to frequently 
be inadequate, particularly at identifying potentially serious interactions (Sarino et al., 2007; 
Waddington et al., 2015). Pharmacists, for their part, have long maintained that, while they are 
strongly supportive of their role in advising the public about supplements, they feel poorly 
equipped to do so and in need of further training (Howard et al., 2001; Kemper et al., 2003; 
Kwan et al., 2006; Zeolla & Cerulli, 2008). Two systematic reviews ten years apart (Boon et al., 
2009; Ung et al., 2017) investigated pharmacist knowledge about supplements. Both reported 
the expectations placed on pharmacists that they would know about supplements and provide 
well-informed advice, yet they did not have the training to do so and lacked guidance on the 
scope of their responsibilities.  Many of these studies concluded by calling for stronger 
regulation of supplements unless under the guidance of a doctor (Dwyer et al., 2018; Starr, 
12 
 
 
2015). However, the limited number of studies that have investigated the knowledge of medical 
professionals about supplements found that they too needed to be better informed so as to 
have the knowledge and confidence to discuss supplement use with patients (Kemper et al., 
2006; Ventola, 2010).   
There appear to be few articles in the health literature on the marketing of supplements, an 
exception being a small study of Taiwanese students (Wu et al., 2012) examining the role of 
endorsements, framing and rewards on the effectiveness of dietary supplement advertisements.  
Commentary and opinion in the health marketing literature itself (Cunningham, 2001; LaPenna, 
2010; Tanaka & Blatman, 2010) has tended to discuss how to frame their products in a positive 
light, partner with health organisations, and offset negative publicity about supplements from 
health professionals.   It also features success stories, for example a report of a consumer 
website campaign which had promoted supplements as one of “three pillars” of health and 
wellness (healthy diet, exercise, and supplements) (LaPenna, 2010).  It is interesting to note the 
discrepancy between the marketing literature which tends to target affluent, middle-aged 
women, with a good education (Cunningham, 2001) as a primary user group, in contrast to the 
framing of supplement users in the health literature as being  poorly educated, having no 
understanding of science and as being duped by marketing claims into wasting money on 
ineffective products and are lining the pockets of the companies that market them (Lewis, 2019; 
Morris & Avorn, 2003; Stoneman et al., 2013; Temple, 2010). 
There have been some qualitative investigations where supplement users have been 
interviewed in more depth about their practices. These studies have reported that users 
believed supplements were more natural and therefore safer than prescribed medicines, were 
effective for some ailments, helped to prevent chronic disease, gave them peace of mind, 
supplemented a poor diet, and saved money on health care (Eliason et al., 1999; Peters et al., 
2003; Thompson & Nichter, 2007; Vickers et al., 2006).  Women with diabetes were found to be 
focused on preventing or lessening diabetic complications (Oldham et al., 2004), and cancer 
patients to be motivated by the desire to support their immune system and to offset the effect 
of conventional drugs that they were taking for their illness (Haddon, 2001; Hok et al., 2011; 
Humpel & Jones, 2006; Paul et al., 2013).  
The qualitative studies also showed that though supplement users appear to be aware of the 
risks publicised in the medical literature, rather than deterring them, it was more likely to 
discourage them from sharing information about what they take with their doctor.  Participants 
were reported as saying they believed their doctors would disapprove and, even if they did not 
13 
 
 
actively oppose their use, were poorly informed about supplements and lacked the ability to 
provide clear guidance about them (Chang & Wang, 2009; Eliason et al., 1999; Peters et al., 
2003; Reedy et al., 2005; Vickers et al., 2006). Participants in these studies tended to believe 
they were more knowledgeable than their doctor about their supplements and were sceptical 
about the reliance that conventional medicine placed on clinical trial evidence as the standard 
for proving effectiveness.  They noted, for example, that trials did not take place in real world 
conditions and they cited instances where trial data had later been proved wrong or the drugs 
had led to unexpected adverse events (Little, 2009; Thompson & Nichter, 2007).  Instead, 
supplement users drew their information from friends and family members, social networks,  all 
types of public media, and conducting their own internet research including accessing scientific 
papers (Humpel & Jones, 2006; Oldham et al., 2004; Peters et al., 2003; Sekhri & Kaur, 2014; 
Thompson & Nichter, 2007).   
Investigations of herbalism and naturopathy have a degree of commonality with studies of 
supplement use, as ingested products form a key part of the treatment offered in those 
modalities. There is a limited body of literature, however, that has examined naturopathy or 
herbalism independently of other CAM treatments (Zick et al., 2009), and within it, only a few 
studies appear to have directed their attention to the substances used. One example that does 
focus on the products was a study of traditional herbal remedies from the Andes used by 40 
Peruvian and Bolivian immigrants living in London (Ceuterick & Vandebroek, 2017).  Three 
distinctive but overlapping positions in the way the participants made sense of their practices 
were identified. They connected the participants to their home country, to their traditions and 
therefore to their identity.  They also served as a means of coping for those who were not doing 
well in their new location, were economically marginalised and struggling to access orthodox 
health care.  In contrast, they were also put to use as a way for these immigrants to demonstrate 
that their practices were in keeping with currently popular discourses in their new country; that 
they were health conscious consumers who preferred natural products and wished to avoid the 
side effects of pharmaceuticals.  
Similar studies of Ukranians living in the United States and Koreans in Australia, have found that 
links to traditional knowledge played a large part in their choice to use herbal therapists and 
remedies, though often they relied on home-prepared rather than commercially marketed 
products (Franic & Kleyman, 2012; Han, 2001). Concepts of identity and tradition in users of 
herbalism and naturopathy were also identified in naturopathy practitioners and clients in rural 
areas of Australia (Wardle et al., 2010).  This study concluded that country people had an 
14 
 
 
enduring affinity with familiar natural substances which had always been part of their lives and 
were likely to maintain traditional knowledge and remedies that had been passed down to them 
from previous generations. These notions of tradition and identity cross over with independent 
supplement use (Bignante & Tecco, 2013), where people make decisions about caring for health 
that draw on knowledge and remedies passed down to the current generation from their 
mothers, grandmothers and others, mostly women, in their families (Thompson & Nichter, 
2007).    
Even though they may use some of the same products, herbalism and naturopathy are 
nevertheless very different from self-prescribed over-the-counter supplement use.  The formal 
modalities are whole systems of healing, underpinned by bodies of theory and practice which 
guide practitioners’ decisions about prescribing and advising their clients.  Herbalism has a 
number of different approaches depending on the framework within which herbal products are 
used as a source of healing.  These include bodies of traditional knowledge, such as Native 
American or Māori healing, broader philosophical approaches within Ayurvedic, Chinese or 
Tibetan systems that integrate herbal medicine into mental and physical practices, and Western 
herbal medicine based on traditions that arise from European thought (Hoffmann, 1988; Nissen, 
2010). Naturopathy is wider than herbalism as it includes treatment with herbal and 
homeopathic substances, but also employs acupuncture, massage, chiropractic and any other 
CAM modalities considered relevant for a particular individual (College of Naturopathic 
Medicine, undated ). Ingested substances are also a key part of homeopathy, a system based on 
the premise of  ‘like cures like’ or, what a substance can cause in large amounts, it can also cure, 
when taken in small amounts (Owen, 2007; Waisse & Bonamin, 2016).   Homeopathy, however, 
is different from herbalism and naturopathy; the substances prescribed are diluted so that they 
are present in infinitesimal amounts, and the precise remedy that has been chosen is not always 
revealed to the patient, particularly before they have tried it (Eyles et al., 2012; Frank, 2002).  
The other major feature of herbalism, naturopathy and homeopathy is the importance of the 
well-developed relationship between the practitioner and the patient or client who seeks their 
help.  Supplement users, in contrast, tend to have only short interactions in a retail outlet, or, for 
those who order online, no interaction at all.  Herbalists, naturopaths and homeopaths all place 
an emphasis on carrying out an in-depth investigation of each individual’s history, taking plenty 
of time (sometimes several hours), and the intuition combined with reasoned deduction that the 
practitioner brings to bear on the person’s concerns (Brien et al., 2011; Bussing et al., 2010; 
Eyles et al., 2012; Eyles et al., 2011; Legenne et al., 2015; Little, 2009; Oberg et al., 2014; 
15 
 
 
Viksveen & Relton, 2017; Wardle et al., 2010).  The dominant themes in these studies are around 
the empathy and skill shown by practitioners, providing the ability for people to tell their stories, 
and the resulting optimism and feelings of coping that they engender.  Patients and clients 
report that they appreciate these skills, feel listened to and like the collaborative approach 
where the practitioner treats them in a way that is “understandable in a personalised rather 
than theoretical way” (Little, 2009: 304).  These studies are aligned with broader investigations 
across the spectrum of CAM therapies where the primary focus is on the benefits of the patient-
practitioner experience and its implied (or explicitly stated) contrast with orthodox care (Wardle 
et al., 2010).  Participants commented in such studies that they wanted a more holistic approach 
to health than the orthodox system offered; they desired a system of care that took into account 
the importance of the mind-body interaction for healing and wellness, and offered a spiritual 
component (Chang & Wang, 2009; Haddon, 2001; Little, 2009).   Additionally, CAM treatments 
were said to allow individuals to have more autonomy over their personal health care and 
experience a more collaborative and empowering form of care than they received with 
conventional care (Haddon, 2001; Hedderson et al., 2004; Stoneman et al., 2013).  However, 
although it was common for participants in many of these studies to report that they sought out 
alternative treatments because of negative experiences with orthodox health care (Furnham et 
al., 1995; Klein et al., 2005; O'Callaghan & Jordan, 2003), most people continued to use the two 
systems in parallel, seeing them as complementary rather than mutually exclusive (Legenne et 
al., 2015; Nichol et al., 2013; Viksveen & Relton, 2017).   
Research gaps   
In spite of the number of studies covered above, they provide only a limited understanding 
about the reasons that underlie the widespread and growing use of supplements. It is one thing 
to hear from users that they consider these products more natural, that they want to improve 
and maintain their health or that they are disillusioned with experiences from their usual health 
care provider so they turn elsewhere.  However, these statements simply raise more complex 
questions that beg for further investigation.  What did people mean by ‘natural’ for example?  
What experiences had led them to distrust usual medical care?  Why did they believe that 
treating themselves in this way would keep them healthy?  What was behind their satisfaction 
with these independent health practices?  Moreover, many of the studies available are now 
more than a decade old.  It appeared that after a flurry of studies published between 2000 and 
2010, interest had waned.  Was this an indication that there was little more to investigate?  Was 
the continually increasing popularity of these products simply a result of clever marketing to 
16 
 
 
those who continued to ignore expert advice?  And if these products were as ineffective and/or 
risky as claimed, how, in such a risk- averse age (Lupton, 1999) could more and more of them 
continue to be so widely sold to the public without the regulation that medical professionals 
were calling for?  It seemed important to hear more from supplement users themselves about 
their supplement use; why they had started taking them and what their experiences had been.   
As a broad framing of the study overall, I wanted to look briefly at the role of ingested 
substances on a wider historical scale.  The literature around supplement use appeared to 
assume that it was a modern phenomenon, yet the taking of substances which become 
embodied and lead to feelings of healing and enablement has been a focus of traditional 
medicine from the earliest times.  Moreover, references to the power of substances are 
threaded through myths and legends as well as literature both ancient and modern. It seemed to 
me that there was a long tradition of ingesting substances that was linked to human efforts to 
enhance wellbeing and overcome obstacles that must be playing some part in self-care practices 
with supplements, yet I had not seen any reference to this in the literature I had read.   
Within this wider framework, several other key areas stood out as in need of investigation.  The 
first of these was the taken-for-granted assumption in reported studies that ‘natural’ products 
were intrinsically safe and a means of offsetting risks to health.  These concepts had been 
frequently raised by participants in previous investigations but appeared to be under-theorised; 
they had largely been treated at face value and the discourses about them assumed to be clear-
cut and unproblematic, having a single uncontested meaning that everyone understood and 
shared (Durante et al., 2001; Eliason et al., 1999; Joos et al., 2012; Little, 2009; Peters et al., 
2003; Rozin et al., 2004; Taylor et al., 2006; Thompson & Nichter, 2007; Vickers et al., 2006). 
From previous work I had carried out in the context of environmental risk (Bidwell & Thompson, 
2012; Bidwell, 2011) I was aware that both naturalness and risk are complex constructs with 
individual, social, cultural and moral dimensions (Duncan & Duncan, 2004; Lupton, 2013; Pawson 
& Brooking, 2013; Petersen & Lupton, 1996; Zinn, 2008).  It seemed important to pay much 
closer attention to what was going on behind these surface statements that were so often 
repeated about the attractive qualities of supplements.    
Secondly, the physical presence of the supplement products in pharmacies, health stores and in 
the homes of people I interviewed appeared to have been almost entirely overlooked.  It was 
the sheer volume of these ‘natural health’ products that had first drawn my attention to the 
topic, and yet I had found nothing in the literature that had examined what role their materiality 
might play.  There were however, some leads in studies that had examined how medicinal 
17 
 
 
substances (of all kinds, not just supplements) acted in the home setting.  A study by Hodgetts et 
al (2011), for example, framed medicines as ‘objects from outside’ that became woven in to 
relationships and meanings within domestic settings.  During the course of my research, two 
further papers explored the home as a centre of medication practices in a way that was different 
from but aligned to my thinking (Dew et al., 2014; Dew et al., 2015).  Recently too, a Swedish 
study (Reichenpfader et al., 2019) looked at the human and non-human actors that are brought 
together in medication practices when people are discharged from hospital to home with newly 
prescribed medications.  While none of these papers focused specifically on supplements, and 
none on retail settings, the theoretical approaches and the consideration of the medicines 
themselves as ‘actors’ in the home setting were relevant to gaps I had identified and wanted to 
investigate.   
Thirdly, while some investigations had looked at empowerment and personal control over health 
(Haddon, 2001; Hedderson et al., 2004; Sointu, 2013; Stoneman et al., 2013), they had largely 
been limited to wider studies of CAM treatments, with supplements only one minor component 
available to people who seek alternative therapies. They included Sointu’s (2013) study on 
embodied subjectivity, expertise and experiences of healing in people who sought out CAM 
treatments, and the studies by Danish researchers (Baarts & Pedersen, 2009; Pedersen, 2013, 
2018; Pedersen & Baarts, 2018) on CAM therapies as an expression of technologies of the self 
(Foucault, 1988) which people engaged in as a low risk health regimen. Also relevant were 
aspects of the study by Reichenpfader et al., (2019) which had noted the way people make the 
change from being passive recipients of medicines in hospital to taking control of their regime 
once at home.  None of these studies, however, had looked at supplements alone, which, given 
that they are more directly under an individual’s personal control than therapist-dependent 
treatments or prescribed medicines, would seem to warrant a separate and more detailed 
investigation.  
These gaps in the research were the starting points for the investigation.  Although this seems 
clear with hindsight, when I look back to the start of my study, the direction of the argument 
was still somewhat uncertain at the beginning, and it was a process that developed gradually 
over time.  The journey from my initial inspiration for the topic to the submission of the 
completed thesis was a lengthy and continual evolution that began with the core ideas for 
investigation that I have set out above and incorporated others as they proved to be relevant.  
How my study was finally structured is set out below.      
18 
 
 
Structure of the thesis 
Chapter 2 is a background chapter giving a brief overview of the place that ingested substances 
have occupied firstly in myths and legends of the life quest and some well-known examples from 
literature and popular culture that echo this tradition.  This is followed by a historical overview 
of traditional and folk medicines, the gradual separation of orthodox medicine from lay health 
practices, and the persistence of home remedies in Western societies.   
Chapter 3 sets out the methodology and methods for the study.  It describes my epistemological 
stance, and discusses my own position in relation to the topic and the generation of the data.  It 
covers the selection and interviewing of the participants, their characteristics, and the analytical 
approach.  It concludes with a short overview of the major theoretical framing of the study.   
Chapter 4 investigates the main discourses about supplements that the participants raised, using 
ideas drawn from Derrida’s writing on deconstruction.  It examines in detail three main concepts 
that were highlighted as reasons for supplement use: their naturalness, holistic characteristics, 
and their role in counteracting risks to health.  The chapter shows how diverse and fluid these 
concepts are, continually developing and changing over time.  
Chapter 5 turns attention directly to the physical presence of the supplements themselves which 
played a key role in the interviews. Materialist concepts are used to examine the agency of these 
non-human things to create effects in people’s lives and to inter-connect with the discourses 
examined in the previous chapter. 
Chapter 6 focuses on negotiations of power in relation to the way participants managed their 
health with supplements.  Drawing from Foucault’s writing on governmentality and the 
formation of subjects in the neoliberal state, it examines the participants’ attitude to personal 
responsibility and expertise as a way of building a sense of control over health options.  In time 
the confidence they acquired became part of their sense of identity as someone who knew 
about supplements and could pass on what they had learned to others.       
Chapter 7, the discussion and conclusion, first draws the analysis chapters together using ideas 
from Barad to show how discourse, materiality and power come together and are enacted in the 
supplement practices that take place in everyday life.  It looks at the human quest for a 
meaningful life, and the role that the ritual element of supplement practices play in deferring 
fears of disability and decay. Finally the conclusion links back to the ancient theme of the quest 
and the need for enablers that support the life journey.   
19 
 
 
  
20 
 
 
Chapter 2: Ingested substances: ancient and modern 
Legends and literature 
Throughout human history, people have sought out substances to protect them against the 
harms that threaten to disrupt their life journey. The motif of the powerful substance that 
enables, protects and cures is woven into both myths and legends and what is known about the 
history of traditional medicines from before the start of recorded history (Anderson, 2005). 
Indeed magic and medicine are hard to separate one from the other because both offered a 
means of protecting and preserving life, and the natural and supernatural powers they appealed 
to were intimately linked (Smith, 1953: 847).  This chapter provides a brief overview of ancient 
and modern healing and protective substances as a background to the use of supplements 
today.    
The tale of the person who sets out on a perilous journey, the hardships and barriers they face 
and their ultimate salvation is a universal generic narrative (ur-narrative) that is found in almost 
all cultures (Berger, 2016).  Campbell (1973) in his study of cross cultural mythology traces the 
common characteristics in the many different narratives of the archetypical hero or heroine who 
is called to set out from home on a quest during which he or she will need to battle against both 
internal and external forces  to achieve their reward.  The universal life journey (termed the 
‘monomyth’ by Campbell), can be found in myths, legends, and religions throughout the ages 
and continues in popular culture in the present day.   The life journey is, however, fraught with 
obstacles and grave dangers that stand in the way of the central character reaching their goal.  
These perils are symbolised in various ways, but it is in the process of the journey and 
overcoming its difficulties that the hero or heroine achieves self-realisation and personal growth, 
becomes a force for good, and, in some myths, returns to become a leader of their people.  The 
characters in these ancient stories have exceptional qualities that make them stand out from 
others, but their journey also provides a template for the ordinary person who is faced with 
obstacles that threaten to disrupt their lives and which they need to overcome (Hubbell, 1990). 
Whether exceptional or ordinary, however, the ultimate success is by no means certain, and 
some will suffer or even die in the attempt.  It is the quest and the ongoing journey that is 
important, not whether or not the destination is reached.    
A recurrent motif in many of these narratives is the supernatural object or substance which 
comes in to the story at a critical time to protect the hero or heroine from harm, cure their 
injuries, and revive them so that they can continue pursuing their quest (Campbell, 1973: 57).  
21 
 
 
Myths, fairy tales and legends across many cultures are rich in these powerful supernatural 
‘things’ such as a ring, a cloak, a sword that enable impossible obstacles to be overcome and the 
journey to progress. Alternatively the ‘thing’ may be a substance with mysterious properties to 
be consumed in the form or food or drink or rubbed onto the body to be absorbed through the 
skin.   The substance is subtly different from the artefacts like the swords, cloaks, and rings; 
these latter are already imbued with power which the hero can use but they do not become part 
of him or her.  In swallowing or absorbing the substance, however, the power is embodied in the 
hero or heroine, enabling them to become braver, plan more strategically and be more able to 
withstand and overcome the perils of the ongoing journey.  In the ancient Greek legend of Jason 
and the Argonauts, for example, Medea gives Jason a potion she has concocted from the blood 
red juice of the crocus  (Graves, 1977).  Once he has swallowed1 it, Jason is protected from the 
bull with the fiery breath and enabled to fight off the armed men and that spring from the 
dragon’s teeth that block his way to claiming the golden fleece.  Similarly, in the Odyssey, the 
sorceress Circe has given Odysseus a magic herb which protects him from her enchantment.  
Thus enabled, he forces Circe to turn his men back to human form so they can continue with 
their  journey (Rouse, 1957:175).  Potions are also found in many fairy tales; in the Grimm’s fairy 
tale of the Twelve Dancing Princesses, a draught of drugged wine administered to their worldly 
suitors allows the princesses to escape them and pursue their evening adventures dancing in the 
enchanted forest (Sideman & Kredel, 1977).  Probably the best known of all in the Western 
world is Hans Christian Anderson’s tale of the Little Mermaid. In this story, the mermaid wants 
above all to win the heart of the prince with whom she has fallen in love but knows she can 
never be with him unless she can become human.  Begging the sea witch to help her, she obtains 
a magic potion.  When she reaches the shore and drinks it, it enables her to grow legs and take 
on a human form of great beauty and gracefulness, so that she achieves her desire and marries 
the prince (Andersen, 1996 [1930]). The little mermaid must, however, pay a high price for her 
human form, losing her voice and living a life of pain as every step on her human legs is like 
walking on knives.  So the magic potions are not always benign.  The witches in Shakespeare’s 
Macbeth, for example, are brewing “poisoned entrails” in their cauldron with obvious malign 
intent, and the apple that Snow White chokes on was intended to kill her and put an end to her 
beauty overshadowing the wicked stepmother.  Whether positive or negative, however, these 
supernatural substances have agency, they cause effects, and carry the action of the narrative 
forward. A fascinating aspect of these examples, (though outside the scope of the study to 
                                                          
1 In some versions Jason anoints himself with a liquid rather than swallowing it.  
22 
 
 
explore) is that in almost all cases the substance is supplied by a female protagonist, counter to 
the usual gendered stereotypes of women as beautiful but passive in these traditional tales 
(Evans 1998; West 1993; Haase 2004; Rowe 1979).   
Closely related to the powerful and protective substance of legend, is the substance that revives 
and resuscitates after injury or even death so that the hero is enabled to return to full strength 
and continue with their quest. Strengthening and restorative herbs feature in the Fellowship of 
the Ring when Frodo is lying wounded:  
…Aragorn bathed the hurts with water in which athelas was steeped.  The pungent 
fragrance filled the dell … soon Frodo felt the pain leave him, and his breath grew easy 
(Tolkien, 1974: 319).   
The same idea is found in the Grimm’s fairy tale of the Two Brothers where a hare places a 
magic herb in the dead man’s mouth to revive him (Varecha, 1982), and in the Celtic tales of the 
Horned Women and the Battle of the Birds, where dead and bewitched children are brought 
back to life by sprinkling them with water mixed with blood (Jacobs, 1994). The elixir of life motif 
(or the elixir of immortality) also occurs across many cultures including Chinese and Indian 
myths, and throughout Polynesia.  Variations on the myth of the Land of the Water of Life of the 
Gods can be found in many of the Pacific Island groups including New Zealand, Tonga, Samoa, 
Tahiti as well as the Hawaiian islands (Beckwith, 1970). The land lies beyond the horizon where 
there is a lake of living water and where the gods have immortality.  This water is called Ka wai 
ola a Ka-ne or the water of life of Ka-ne and has the power to restore humans to life.  One story 
concerns a king who was gravely ill.  His three sons each went searching after the water of life, 
two of whom met with disastrous fates, until eventually it was found by one son and brought to 
the king who immediately regained his health and strength (Westervelt, 1993). It is this same 
water of life that features in the Māori legend of the moon:   
 when the moon sickens, wanes and comes nigh to death, she goes afar off across the 
ocean to seek the waters of life, or fountain of youth, the Waiora a Tāne.  In a far region 
she bathes her wasted form in the healing waters of Tāne and so returns to this world as 
Hina-keha, once more young and beautiful (Best, 1951:137-138).   
Ingested substances with supernatural properties are also recurring motifs in Jewish and 
Christian traditions.  In the Biblical story of the flight of the Israelites from Egypt, manna comes 
23 
 
 
down from heaven (Exodus Chapter 16)2 and later on in the journey when the Israelites were 
dying in the desert in their flight from Egypt, Moses struck the rock and “water gushed in 
abundance” (Numbers 20:11) thus allowing them to continue their journey to the promised 
land.  Jesus, too spoke about living bread and living water.  In the incident where he meets the 
Samaritan woman at the well (John 4:13) Jesus tells her, “whoever drinks the water I give them 
will never thirst.  Indeed, the water I give them will become in them a spring of water welling up 
to eternal life.” A little further on Jesus refers to himself as being “the living bread that came 
down from heaven. If anyone eats of this bread, he will live forever.”  These instances lead up to 
the symbolic gift of the Last Supper where Jesus designates the bread and wine as giving 
everlasting life to those who “do this as a memorial of me” (Luke 22: 19).   
These ancient motifs appear in modern guises in both literary and popular works.   The 
monomyth of the hero who overcomes the dangers and trials that hinder their quest is the 
principal theme of the Harry Potter series and Dorothy in the Wizard of Oz, among many others 
(Robbins, 2005).  George Lucas has acknowledged that the Star Wars series was heavily 
influenced by the “Hero with a Thousand Faces” (Tiffin, 1999), Joseph Campbell’s scholarly work 
on the many versions of the monomyth of the hero’s journey (1973). The mysterious and 
powerful substance motif is repeated in Lewis Carroll’s Alice in Wonderland.  After falling down 
the rabbit hole and then drinking the potion in the bottle she finds on the table at the bottom, 
Alice shrinks to a height of ten inches.  Now she is small enough to get access to the new world 
she has found, and “her face brightened up at the thought that she was now the right size for 
going through the little door into the lovely garden” (Carroll, 1865 [1898]: 10).  Thus enabled she 
can embark on her journey to independence and self-discovery.  In humorous form, the same 
motif is found in the Asterix series where the venerable Druid Getafix brews magic potions that 
endow the person who drinks them with superhuman strength (Goscinny & Uderzo, 1974).  
Similarly, Mad Max in the Princess Bride revives the dead hero Wesley with the aid of a 
chocolate covered capsule so he can rescue the princess and defeat the forces of evil (Goldman, 
2003).  In short, the notion of the ingested magical substance that protects, enables, cures, and 
revives is a motif that runs through many of the “symbolic stories that embody the enduring and 
universal qualities of our experiences”(Smith, 2002: 2).  As Armstrong (2005: 4) has observed, 
“mythology speaks of another plane that exists alongside our own world and that in some sense 
supports it.”    
                                                          
2 All Biblical references are from The Jerusalem Bible 1968. Jones, A. (ed).  London: Longman.  
24 
 
 
Running in parallel with this other-worldly plane, are the substances that have been used from 
the earliest times for healing in traditional medicine. The art of medicine implicitly acknowledges 
its debt to Asclepios (Asclepius in Latin), the god of healing in the Greek myths, whose staff with 
the coiled snake, chosen because the sloughing of the snake skin was believed to renew youth, is 
still associated with medicine.  The connection between magic and healing is not always clear 
cut; there is a blurred boundary where they cross over or at least complement each other.  As 
Porter (1997: 33) has commented, “because illness raises the spectre of that mystery of 
mysteries, death”, medicine, religion, and magic have always been closely intertwined.  Healing 
takes place through magic substances in myth and legends and traditional healers have often 
been credited with magic powers, particularly in situations where illness may be attributed to 
supernatural causes (Adewuya & Makanjuola, 2008; Bartocci & Littlewood, 2004; Petrus & 
Bogopa, 2007; Razali et al., 1996). Many traditional healers have been credited with 
supernatural powers to do good, or if their healing arts did not work as expected, have been 
demonised and suspected of being witches (Horsley, 1979; Mead, 1965; Minkowski, 1992).  The 
vast history of traditional medicinal substances across the many cultures of the world is far more 
than can be covered here.   The next section, however, highlights some aspects of relevance to 
the topic of the thesis.  
Traditional medicines 
Archeological records show that since prehistoric times, people have always sought traditional 
medicines from healers to ease their pain and cure their ailments (Anderson, 2005; Smith, 1953). 
Evidence is available, for example, that shows plant substances were used in prehistoric times to 
treat intestinal worm infestations (Chaves & Reinhard, 2006) or to reduce the pain of dental 
extractions (Facco & Zanette, 2017). Indian Aryurvedic medicine and Chinese healing systems 
using herbs and acupuncture are highly developed systems that reach back into history and have 
continued into the present day (Kumar & Navaratnam, 2013; Yang et al., 2011). Although less 
known in developed countries, healing traditions from indigenous peoples in all continents also 
date back over centuries and are still practised, including those from Canadian First Nations 
(Cook, 2005; Wilson, 2003; Wilson & Rosenberg, 2002), New Zealand Māori (known as rongoā) 
(Ahuriri-Driscoll et al., 2008; Durie, 1993) South American peoples (Neuwinger, 2000; 
Vanderbroek et al., 2004) and the many traditions from Africa (Mahomoodally, 2013), each of 
which is a topic in its own right.   
25 
 
 
The origin of making medicinal substances that eventually developed into the practice of 
medicine as it is known today in Western countries was influenced, according to Court (2005), by 
five civilisations: Mesopotamia, Egypt, Greece, Rome and Arabia.  However, it was with the 
Greeks that particular individuals first became identified with medicine, starting with 
Hippocrates (460-377 BC), and followed by the two Romans, Dioscorides (50-100 AD) and Galen 
(129-199AD), and then the Arabic scholar Ibn Sina (980-1037AD), known as the Hippocrates of 
the Arab world (Court, 2005: 35). It appears however, that folk medicine continued as it always 
had independently from the writings of these learned men of the time.  For ordinary people 
traditional remedies were passed down from one generation to another or learnt by observation 
and experience.  The folk healing practices of the time are not well documented and what is 
known about them has been constructed from the arts of the period: engravings, sculpture, song 
and story (Minkowski, 1992). In this period before the founding of university medical schools, 
healing was pragmatic and non-academic, practised by those of both high and low birth, using 
therapies based on botanicals, traditional home remedies, bloodletting and native intelligence, 
sometimes accompanied by amulets, incantations and magic (Demaitre, 2013). The ‘healer’ was 
a fluid concept and could extend to anyone who treated the sick; medical care outside the family 
circle was available from herbalists and ‘wise women’, as well as specialist infirmarians in 
convents and monasteries (Minkowski, 1992). The hospitals offered care rather than cure, and 
what welfare they provided was linked to the health of the soul as well as the body, offering 
their services as a religious expression that combined the prayers of the sick and their living 
benefactors to help the souls of the departed through purgatory to heaven (Horden, 1988).      
There were in existence, however, a number of medical manuals for educated people who could 
read Latin, with literacy being a distinguishing mark of the elite healer.  Demaitre (2013), lists 24 
manuals of practica medicinae  (the practice of medicine) evenly spread across the period from 
1000 to 1500.   Several of the earliest of these were translations of Arabic texts, particularly the 
translation into Latin by Gerard of Cremona (1114-1187) of a large volume compiled by Avicenna 
that incorporated Greek and Roman as well as Persian, Arabic and far Eastern teaching 
(Demaitre, 2013: 10).  This volume became known as the Canon of Medicine.  In Chaucer’s 
Canterbury Tales, the description of the Doctor of Physic shows his status by itemising all the 
learned men of medicine with whom he (and clearly Chaucer himself) was familiar:     
  Well knew he the old Esculapius,  
And Deiscorides and eek Rufus, 
26 
 
 
Old Ypocras, Hali and Galien, 
Serapion, Razis, and Avicen, 
Averrois, Damascien, and Constantin, 
Bernard, and Gatesden, and Gilbertin. (Demaitre, 2013: 4) 
These fifteen authorities span one and a half millennia from classical Greece through the peak of 
Islamic culture, right through to Chaucer’s own time. Illustrations from the illuminated 
manuscripts of the time show that many of the medical practitioners were monks, identified by 
the way they were depicted with their tonsure and robes.  Manuscripts were rare and prized 
items, copied by hand on to parchment or vellum, and they became closely associated with 
advanced medical learning, leading to a situation where pieces of parchment became a proxy for 
medicine and gullible people could be exploited by being sold them as ‘healing’ amulets 
(Demaitre, 2013: 5-6).    
The foundation of hospitals in Europe can be documented from around the beginning of the 13th 
century and at the same time the teaching of medicine in universities became increasingly 
structured, drawing from the classical sources and the texts mentioned by Chaucer.  Ideas about 
health and illness of the time were based on the four humours that were said to make up the 
human body: blood, phlegm, yellow bile and black bile.  These components were associated, 
respectively, with sanguine, phlegmatic, choleric and melancholic characteristics.  The individual 
combination of each of these components was believed to shape each person’s emotional make 
up and determine the working of their bodily organs (Demaitre, 2013: 17).  The details of how 
the medieval practitioners thought about the body and its workings are complex and the 
concepts that underpinned their approach to healing are completely different from the modern 
understanding of anatomy and physiology that are the foundation of modern biomedicine. 
However, two factors that resonate with contemporary critiques of the biomedical model of 
medicine are important:  firstly, that each person was considered to be unique and the 
treatment was individually designed for them alone, and secondly, that treatment had a 
conservative approach, starting with lifestyle changes, or advising the use or avoidance of 
certain foods and drinks rather than employing drugs.  Wallis (2006: 18) cites the casebook of a 
physician from the 16th century showing that in only 12 percent of cases did patients receive a 
potion or pill.  According to Cook (1994: 1), people who consulted the physicians of the time 
were more likely to receive “good advise [sic] and little medicine.”   
27 
 
 
In the late medieval and early modern period before industrialisation in Britain, the sick person 
had a range of options to choose from in seeking treatment.  Curth (2006: 4) describes this 
period as the era of “kitchen physik”.  Anybody could buy drugs, including poisons, from 
druggists or apothecaries and make up their own medicines as the craft guilds of spicers and 
grocers carried out an organised trade in the supply of drugs in the major cities of England 
(Holloway, 1995). The translation into English in the early modern period of the Latin 
Pharmacoepoeia by Nicholas Culpeper was also instrumental in giving access to information 
about curative plants and remedies.  Doctors were not particularly esteemed socially, and were 
considered as inferiors to their better-off clients. They anyway had limited means at their 
disposal for curing illness, and if people wanted someone outside their family, they might, 
instead of consulting a doctor, just as well ask a ‘wise woman’ or take advice from their squire or 
local members of the clergy (Porter, 1993).  
As well as trading in drugs, apothecaries also prescribed, compounded and administered 
medicines and were the mainstay of the general public of London and more likely than the 
physicians to assist the less well-off (Cook, 1990; Curth, 2006; Holloway, 1995; Porter, 1993). At 
some point most people would pay for medical advice from a practitioner, but self-care or 
advice and care from family or friends was usually the first line of treatment.  Common herbs 
and ingredients were freely available in the wild or in gardens and these could be supplemented 
with drugs and compounds from apothecaries. Throughout the early modern period and “well 
into the nineteenth century all drugs – even dangerous ones like opium- and poisons could be 
freely bought over the counter” (Porter, 1993: 24). There was nothing to prevent a lay person 
using the entire range of medicines as they wished and no one thought that they would offend a 
doctor by trying to treat themselves first.  In this period, it was “virtually impossible to draw a 
line between ‘lay’ or ‘folk’ herbal remedies and those of learned medicine” (Wallis, 2006: 15). 
The separation of healing professions into formal experts credentialed through registration in 
colleges or associations and endorsed by the state in contrast to those ‘alternative’ therapies 
that did not have official authorisation took place only gradually.  It had its beginnings in the 16th 
century when various guilds of druggists, apothecaries and physicians combined into societies so 
as to have a greater power of numbers over the prescribing and selling of medicines.  The Royal 
College of Physicians was founded in 1518 and the Society of Apothecaries in 1617.  Both had 
governmental authorisation to practice pharmacy and medicine and they jockeyed for control of 
‘physic’ during the 17th Century (Holloway, 1988: 79).  Court cases brought by the College of 
Physicians with the aim of undermining the status of apothecaries during this period were not 
28 
 
 
successful. The legal points turned on what exactly ‘physic’ was, and even if physicians practised 
it, whether they had the right to stop others from doing it too (Cook, 1990; Curth, 2006; 
Holloway, 1995; Porter, 1993). 
The transition from a guild-based economy to a free market in Britain during the 17th and 18th 
centuries had a far-reaching effect on the supply of medicines (Holloway, 1995).  The 
commercial possibilities available in the open market saw the emergence of an increasing 
number of chemists and druggists who advertised and sold their own brand of medicines which 
they publicised in the popular press along with testimonials from satisfied customers (Curth, 
2006).  Although the College of Physicians made attempts to limit this activity, it appears that 
their members too, actively developed and marketed their own patented products.  Bivins 
(2007: 6) describes this era as a “flowering of medical commercialism and ingenuity and 
luxuriant growth in the medical marketplace”. Those marketing or providing the different cures 
and therapies did not propose different medical systems or models of the body or even a 
different understanding of disease processes but just that their remedies were more effective 
than those of anyone else (Bivins, 2007).    A wide range of what would now be considered 
‘alternative therapies’ flourished including homeopathy, mesmerism, and Coffinism3 (medical 
botany).  There were also therapies from Chinese systems such as acupuncture, moxibustion 
(the burning of dried mugwort on acupuncture points of the body), and Ayurvedic medicines 
from India which had come to Europe from the spread of European trade and colonisation of 
those countries (Bivins, 2007).    
The beginnings of professional and ‘alternative’ health care  
The professionalisation of medicine and pharmacy that saw them gradually develop into the way 
they are in New Zealand today dates from the 19th century in Britain.  Worling (2005) describes 
the period between 1617 and 1841 as a time of constant disputes between physicians and 
apothecaries and between apothecaries and chemists and druggists.  It was a period when 
medical practitioners increased their efforts to contain the power of the chemists and druggists 
by emphasising the value of their specialist training and knowledge and sought to place 
consumers firmly under the doctor’s expertise.   At the same time pharmacists gradually became 
established as the officially sanctioned dispensers of the medicines that doctors prescribed, with 
the Pharmaceutical Society of Great Britain being formed in 1841 and granted a Royal Charter 
                                                          
3 Named after American herbalist Albert Isaiah Coffin whose book The Botanic Guide to Health (1845) was 
a guide for lay people to treat themselves using the properties of plants.   
29 
 
 
two years later (Worling, 2005).  During the 1850s, several pieces of legislation were enacted4 
which restricted the title pharmacist, chemist or druggist to registered persons, gave the 
Pharmaceutical Society the right to examine and register those who were licensed and therefore 
legally able to operate under these titles (Hunt, 2005: 79).  However, it was not until the early 
years of the 20th century that registered pharmacists secured the exclusive right to dispense 
prescriptions for those people who were insured under the National Insurance Act of 1911.  By 
1946 when the National Health Service Act extended health coverage to the entire population, it 
became normal for medical prescriptions to be dispensed only by qualified pharmacists (Hunt, 
2005: 92).  The changes that began in Britain in the mid-nineteenth century were paralleled in 
New Zealand though at slightly later dates (Combes, 1981), so that by the middle of the 20th 
century registered medical professionals controlled all the prescribing of medicines, and 
registered pharmacists controlled their dispensing.5 The regulation and professionalisation of 
medicine and pharmacy created a context where forms of health care that operated under the 
mandate of government authorisation through registered professions could therefore be 
contrasted with informal ‘alternative’ practices which were not.   
Informal home remedies in colonial New Zealand  
While this formalisation of the respective roles of medicine and pharmacy was taking place, 
ordinary people continued to use home remedies and informal treatments as they had always 
done. During the 19th century, the period of European colonisation of New Zealand, treating 
most injuries and illnesses independently of medical advice whenever possible was a feature of 
almost all households.  It was essential outside the main centres as travel was difficult and 
doctors often many hours journey away (Coleborne & Godtschalk, 2013). Moreover, even in 
bigger towns, doctors and medicines were expensive unless people were well resourced, so that 
home remedies were a necessity rather than a choice. Substances (including poisons) could be 
purchased directly from pharmacies without a doctor’s prescription and pharmacists also made 
up their own products, and sold patent medicines, so that self-prescribed ‘alternative’ medicines 
continued in parallel with the formal system (Homan, 2005). In the colonial era, the current 
distinction between herbal and formally prescribed medicines was less clear anyway as 
pharmacists primarily worked with “natural or crude drugs, ie. roots, rhizomes, leaves, barks and 
                                                          
4The  Arsenic Act of 1851, followed by the Pharmacy Act of 1852 and the Pharmacy and Poisons Act 1868 
(Bartrip 1992:55).   
5 This remains largely the same today apart from the extension of some prescribing rights to nurses and 
pharmacists.  
30 
 
 
flowers using the processes of maceration, percolation and infusion”  (Combes, 1981: 41) to 
extract the active ingredients.    Contemporary letters, recipe books, and compendia of 
household hints illustrate the advice that was given and the substances used to treat various 
conditions; Coleborne and Godtschalk (2013), drawing from 19th century diaries of pioneer 
families, describe the need for households to help one another out at times of illness or 
accident, and the financial difficulties that resulted if a doctor needed to be called in.  Women 
generally bore the greatest load in tending to the sick, even when they themselves were unwell.  
Brewis (1982), in her compilation of recipes from letters, diaries and cookbooks of the period  
includes a section of home remedies for treating conditions ranging from asthma to 
‘melancholia’ and dropsy.  Brett’s Colonists Guide and Cyclopedia of Useful Knowledge (Leys, 
1883) has a medical care section curiously sandwiched between a section on raising poultry and 
another on curing and storing produce.  It includes ‘family doctor’ advice from a member of the 
Royal College of Surgeons, followed by a section on homeopathy by one James A. Pond, 
described as a homeopathic chemist. Both these sections on health have a similar alphabetical 
list of advice on the treatment of illness, except that general preventive advice on diet, exercise, 
fresh air, and cleanliness are given at the start of the homeopathy section but absent from the 
‘family doctor’ list.  Interestingly, there is considerable cross over between the two lists of 
remedies mentioned with sulphur, camphor, opium and laudanum among those that are 
mentioned in both.  These last two were in frequent use and easily available for anyone to buy in 
the 19th century (Acker, 1995).  One remedy for diarrhoea and ‘English cholera’ (Brewis, 1982: 
123) calls for 40 drops of peppermint, 80 drops of laudanum and half a pint of brandy with a 
large tablespoon to be taken half hourly and the warning that it is for adults only.   
Māori also had an established system of healing known as rongoā consisting of five modalities; 
karakia (prayer and incantation), rongoā rakau (medicinal herbs), mirimiri (massage), 
wai/hauwai (water or steam and matakite (prophecy) (Ahuriri-Driscoll et al., 2008; Durie, 1993). 
The 19th century colonists, particularly the chemists among them, took a considerable interest in 
the properties of the plants used in Māori medicines.  A four page entry in the Colonists’ Guide 
described them as being a fruitful area that chemists might benefit from further researching.  
The author of this section was said to have  “rescued from oblivion nearly all that is known of the 
old Maori [sic] uses of the New Zealand medicinal plants” (Leys, 1883: 480). The article treated 
rongoā purely from a pharmaceutical effectiveness standpoint, describing individual plants and 
their known application for particular conditions.  Plants such as kawakawa (Piper excelsum), 
mānuka (Leptospermum scoparium), and koromiko (Hebe salicifolia), for example, were among 
31 
 
 
those listed, the last being noted as a treatment for diarrhoea.  There was no recognition in 
these pages of the wider spiritual context of rongoā Māori as a whole system of healing, which is 
much more complex than herbal medicines alone (Ahuriri-Driscoll, 2014). .   
The persistence of home remedies into the mid-20th century  
The home remedies and self-help therapies mentioned in the Colonists’ Guide may sound quaint 
and outdated today, but many of them were still current until at least the early 1970s.  My own 
memories stretch back to my early childhood in the 1950s when pharmacists stocked a wide 
range of components for making up home remedies.  They could be purchased by members of 
the public in small quantities or made up in the pharmacy on request (Combes, 1981). Home 
remedies in widespread use at the time included Bonnington’s Irish Moss cough mixture, 
different brands of indigestion tablets, California syrup of figs (a laxative), gripe water for babies, 
and the patent medicines brought round by the Rawleigh’s man.6  Our local chemist made up his 
‘own brand’ range of basic products in brown glass bottles, labelled with his credentials.  
Diarrhoea and vomiting (sometimes known euphemistically as ‘summer sickness’) were subject 
to a range of recommendations for home remedies that were supposed to ‘settle the stomach’ 
including grated apple, dry toast, a Rawleigh’s product known as Pleasant Relief, flat lemonade, 
and even ice cream.  Basic products and the patent medicines along with aspirin, beef tea, and 
bed rest were used as supportive care in the days before vaccinations were available for 
measles7, mumps, rubella and chicken pox.  All children were expected to contract them at some 
stage and my siblings and I were no exception.  Non-ingested products such as antiphlogistine 
for boils, hydrogen peroxide and antiseptic dyes for skin abrasions, thrush and tinea, salt water 
gargles for sore throats, and camomile lotion for bites and skin rashes were also common.  From 
my own experience, the remedies used were largely limited to treating an illness or skin 
infection; it was not usual to take a product for prevention apart from patent medicine ‘tonics’ 
that were available.  Vitamin C tablets appeared in our household for the first time during the 
mid-1960s as a protection from winter colds and bronchitis, and during the late 1960s large fizzy 
                                                          
6 Rawleighs: a Australasian company that sold patent medicines and cooking essences door to door.  It still 
exists today though the method of sale and the range of products have changed, see 
https://www.rawleighs.com/  
7 The first measles vaccine was licensed in 1963 (Bloch et al 1985), with the others following.  
32 
 
 
tablets containing 1000mg doses of Vitamin C became a remedy for hangovers after student 
parties among some of the young men I knew.   
Developments in medical care that offered more treatments with prescribed antibiotics, anti-
fungals and anti-histamines beginning in the 1940s became more widely available during the 
1950s (Gaynes, 2017). In the following couple of decades, the advent of mass production of pre-
packaged medicines saw many of the home remedies become outdated or the substances needed 
to make them no longer readily available.  Compounding by community pharmacists was less 
necessary except in specialised cases, and is now likely to be less than one percent of prescriptions 
according to Krochmal (2009).  Moreover, pharmacists were reluctant to stock ingredients for 
which there was only minor demand and which had to be discarded before their expiry date 
(Louise Kennedy pharmacist, personal communication).  ‘Own brand’ basics and ingredients for 
home remedies were gradually replaced by commercially produced products that could be bought 
off the shelf or ordered independently in an increasingly globalised market. These were 
sometimes simply older remedies in a new guise. Garlic, for example, which has been recognised 
as having medicinal properties since ancient times (Rivlin, 2001), no longer needs to be peeled, 
crushed and ingested in its raw state but can be bought in a pharmacy or health food store as a 
prepackaged concentrated and odourless extract known as Kyolic® (Balamash et al., 2012).  So 
while the ‘natural health’ products on pharmacy and health store shelves may appear to be a new 
phenomenon, they would seem, rather, to be part of a long continuum of obtaining substances to 
treat illness or maintain health that is connected to the history of humanity from earliest times.   
The difference is that the physical substances formerly used in home remedies and self-care have 
been reimagined, repackaged and marketed in a way that resonates with the contemporary citizen 
and can be obtained over-the-counter in a convenient ready-made form.   
  
33 
 
 
Chapter 3: Methodology and methods  
Introduction 
The key focus of my research was to gain an insight into the perspectives of people who used 
supplements regularly. I wanted to find out why they first started to take supplements, how they 
decided what to take, and what kind of effects they reported on their health and wellbeing. I 
was also interested in their sources of information about supplements, how they chose where to 
buy them and what their general relationship was with the orthodox health system.  In addition I 
was interested in investigating whether people who used supplements were influenced by social 
attitudes and discourses that were evident in popular and academic publications and how these 
related to contemporary and historical ideas and expectations of health, illness and wellbeing 
throughout the life course.  When I started out on the study, I had thought that building a 
greater understanding of the reasons people chose to use supplements might give a greater 
insight into the criticism that supplement use attracts in orthodox health care and perhaps go 
some way to reconciling the disparate views between users and critics.  As the study progressed, 
however, I discovered that it was more important to examine supplement use as a practice in its 
own right rather than attempting to compare it to or reconcile it with other views.      
Epistemological approach 
A fundamental consideration in qualitative research is the ontological and epistemological 
position of the researcher; that is, their beliefs about what it is possible to find, and how to go 
about finding it (Giacomini, 2010). The individual researcher’s beliefs about the nature of reality 
shape his or her view of the world; they affect how they approach the topic, how they generate 
and analyse the data and how they view the topic within the broader social and political context 
(Giacomini, 2010; Green & Thorogood, 2009).  Realist assumptions assume that facts are stable 
and independent of values, and that researchers can and must distance themselves from the 
data and take an objective stance (Green & Thorogood, 2009: 13). Constructionists on the other 
hand, consider that reality is shaped by human processes that influence how the material world 
is experienced and interpreted and that one person’s reality will differ from another’s. Extreme 
constructionists take the view that all reality is relative and depends entirely on how it is 
constructed by human processes (Green and Thorogood 2009).  An individual researcher may sit 
anywhere along this spectrum from positivist assumptions that reality is fixed at the one end, to 
34 
 
 
extreme constructionist view that nothing has independent reality and everything is relative at 
the other end.    
This study started from a constructionist standpoint in which I took the view that while reality 
exists, human beliefs and attitudes have a major influence on how people perceive and engage 
with it.  Moreover that each individual will construct these influences in different ways and that 
their beliefs will change over time according to new experiences that they have, and new ideas 
they come across, as well as their own stage in life (Tulloch & Lupton, 2003). People’s 
constructions of the world are developed as the result of an interaction between their own 
private, cognitive processes and their exposure to the publicly shared discourses and social 
norms of the age they live in (Giacomini, 2010).  My study aimed to understand more about the 
phenomenon of supplements and their use by investigating perspectives and subjective 
experiences of the individual participants by talking to them and so gain a more comprehensive 
and nuanced understanding from their point of view (Kelly, 2010; Liamputtong, 2013).   
As the study progressed, however, it became obvious that the role of the supplement products 
themselves needed to be included as an important part of the study.  This led me to consider a 
post-humanist element in the overall approach so that these products could be given due 
consideration.  Post-humanism or materialist thinking, encompasses a diverse range of ideas 
(Bennett, 2010, 2012; Braidotti, 2006; Coole & Frost, 2010; Law, 1999), but they are all 
consistent in contesting the binary opposition that sees matter as simply inert and passive until 
humans take an interest in it (MacLure, 2015: 96).  This way of thinking disturbs the privileged 
position of human agency and the primary importance it accords to human “language, discourse, 
culture and values” (Coole & Frost, 2010: 3).  It acknowledges that material factors are 
influential in what happens both in individual lives and more generally within society.  Matter is 
seen as having agency of its own, and that it can be “…active … productive, unpredictable” 
(Coole & Frost, 2010: 9).  Bringing matter back into consideration does not  mean excluding the 
human, but rather restoring materiality to its place and recognising that matter and discourse 
come together “…in complex and shifting arrangements from which the world emerges” 
(MacLure, 2015:96).  
To write about both the human and non-human in the context of this study, I have chosen to use 
the term ‘actants’.  Actants is a neutral term which simply describes the many and various 
elements that come together in a phenomenon and avoids the limitations of language that 
always categorises people and things as being essentially different in their capacities.  An actant 
35 
 
 
can be any entity, whether human or non-human, that “modifies a state of affairs by making a 
difference” (Latour, 2005: 71); people, material things, discourses, practices, relationships, or 
concepts.  Using materiality thinking to examine supplements and supplement practices made it 
possible to incorporate any actants which proved to be important in the study and allowed a 
greater range of insights than would have been possible by focusing on human discourse alone.   
Venturing into a post-humanist approach and combining it with the study’s original 
constructionist intention created a number of tensions in bringing these potentially divergent 
approaches together.  Nevertheless there were compelling reason for including both.  Much of 
the data entailed participants’ perceptions about what was natural, holistic and safe about 
supplement practices.  I believed that constructionist analysis was the most fitting way to do 
justice to these data, which had been generated through talking to participants, and was the 
dominant mode of investigation throughout the study.  On the other hand, I considered it 
equally important not to leave aside the unexpected demonstrations that had occurred during 
the interviews about the role that the material products played in their lives.  This dual approach 
was a direct result of being confident enough to stay with one of the core strengths of 
qualitative research, that is, the researcher needs to remain open to being surprised by 
developments that come to light in the course of their investigation and not set them aside if 
they do not fit with prior intentions or assumptions (Green & Thorogood, 2009).   
A number of authors have listed criteria against which qualitative research should be measured, 
citing characteristics such as validity, reliability and transferability (Pope & Mays, 2006) or 
credibility, authenticity, dependability and confirmability (Liamputtong, 2013).  Lists of desirable 
qualities, however, tend to raise more questions than they answer.  These terms are “quite loose 
and imprecise as far as criteria go…and are themselves subject to interpretation…and seem 
resistant to ever being translated into relatively stable and general standards” (Smith, 1990: 185-
186).  I found that a more helpful approach was Liamputtong’s general comment that “validity 
lies more in a subjective, human estimation of what it means to have done something well, to 
have made an effort that is worthy of trust and to have written it up convincingly” (2013: 43)  
This was the guidance I attempted to follow in being clear about the evolving process that 
resulted in moving between a constructionist and a post-humanist approach in different parts of 
the thesis.   
36 
 
 
Reflexivity 
One measure of being trustworthy as a researcher working within a constructionist frame is to 
acknowledge that they do not sit outside the data as an authority who creates categories that 
interpret and explain the subjects of the research.  Rather they need to consider how their own 
experience, context and broader world view may influence what is found (Green & Thorogood, 
2009: 23; Liamputtong, 2013: 29-30; Potvin et al., 2010: 447).  They need to reflect critically on 
the preconceptions and values that they bring to the topic and subject them to the same 
analysis that they use with the data (Green and Thorogood, 2009). Essentially the researcher 
needs to acknowledge that a completely objective and value-free stance is not possible, and that 
their findings from research will inevitably be coloured by their own views and experience. 
Malterud (2001:484) defines this as “the knower’s mirror: an attitude of attending to the context 
of knowledge construction, especially to the effect of the researcher, at every step of the 
research process.”  That means researchers need to examine how their own assumptions and 
background have influenced their choice of topic, their research methods, and the analyses, 
interpretations, and writing methods that contribute to the final result (Bourke, 2014; Moser, 
2008; Wiederhold, 2015). Rather than this being a disadvantage, explicit acknowledgement of 
personal and intellectual preconceptions enhances rather than detracts from the credibility of 
the research findings as the different ways that each researcher approaches the same subject 
help to generate a more complex understanding of the phenomenon in question (Malterud, 
2001).  In the following paragraphs, I set out my reflections on my own prior experience and 
assumptions I brought into the research.   
As a mature student with a wide range of life experience over more than six decades, I believed 
that I came to the topic with the advantage of having witnessed many changes in social thinking 
that had come about over this time.  I had lived through major changes in technology and 
communications, advances in treatment and prevention of health and disease, the globalisation 
of trade and dissemination of goods, and an increasing diversity of the New Zealand population 
through immigration.  Another important difference from my early years had been the change 
over the last 60 years from beliefs that nature was there to be used by humans for their 
purposes and benefit, to the belief that the natural environment must be protected from 
exploitation and sustained for generations to come.   These changes had brought new ideas, 
discourses, and practices that were widely different from the homogeneous society of my 
childhood in the 1950s and I believed they had all played some part in contemporary notions of 
health and illness and had an influence on the use of supplements.   
37 
 
 
On a personal front, I was also well aware that I had led a secure and relatively privileged life 
compared to many others. I had the advantage of a stable upbringing and had enjoyed access to 
a wide variety of educational and occupational experiences across a variety of fields.  I had 
studied and worked in the humanities, then in health sciences information, and over the last 
several decades in public health and primary health care research. I was conscious of the fact 
that this experience would have inevitably influenced how I thought about supplements and 
their users, and that I would need to guard against a potential tendency on my part to privilege 
the accounts of people who were more like me, and perhaps to place less credibility on those 
reporting attitudes and behaviour in relation to supplement use that was beyond what I would 
be comfortable with.  Yet I was also aware that participants whose views were framed by a 
different world view from mine (that is, without the same longstanding exposure to the 
academic and health world), would be the most likely to contribute new and unknown 
information that would enrich my study.    
Although I used supplements myself from time to time, particularly to ward off respiratory 
infections, it was not something I had given much thought to or felt strongly about before the 
piece of previous research which had aroused my interest. I also believed I had a relatively 
neutral position towards the orthodox health system, seeing its practitioners as necessary and 
valuable, particularly in acute care.  At the outset of my study, I believed I had no fixed opinion 
either for or against supplement use and believed I had a good grasp of the main issues.   Just 
how superficial this turned out to be became apparent as I progressed through the study and 
heard the diverse views of the participants.  It was oddly reassuring, however, as it confirmed 
that the topic I had chosen was worthwhile investigating in depth.   The contact with the 
participants, the settings in which we met, the data itself and the reading and theory I examined 
opened up a whole new range of ideas about supplements and insights about their place in 
people’s lives and at a more complex level than I had considered previously. Jackson and Mazzei  
(2012:6) have remarked on the way a researcher’s memory of the interviews and their 
interactions with the participants, their personal and professional knowledge and their “shifty 
selves as researchers”, inevitably has an effect on the way they think.  This very much reflected 
what happened to me during the course of the study where my own thinking evolved in 
unexpected directions as a result of my experiences in conducting the research and becoming 
immersed in the theory and data.  I note in the following chapters the instances where this 
happened.   
38 
 
 
Methods 
I chose in-depth interviews as being the most suitable method of generating data for this study 
as they work well with an inductive approach when new and unknown information is being 
sought to fill a gap in knowledge about a topic (Pope & Mays, 2006; Rice & Ezzy, 1999).  A key 
advantage of in-depth interviews is that they allow time for the perspective of one individual to 
be explored in detail, so producing new knowledge through the interaction between the 
interviewer and interviewee (Kvale 2007 cited in Liamputtong, 2013: 52). They also avoid a 
participant being interrupted or dominated by the ideas of another person as can sometimes 
happen in focus groups.   Individual interviews within a constructionist epistemology allow the 
opportunity for new ideas which one participant may introduce to be taken forward into 
subsequent interviews, thus developing the richness and depth of the data as the process 
proceeds (Green & Thorogood, 2009; Pope & Mays, 2006; Rice & Ezzy, 1999) For this study, 
interviews were also the most practical method of generating data from supplement users, who 
were not a defined group and who needed to be recruited individually over a relatively lengthy 
period of time.   
In qualitative research within a constructionist epistemology, the interviewer and participant 
collaborate in generating the data as “interaction partners” (Kelly, 2010: 308) and the resulting 
data are explicitly understood to be the product of this interaction.  The relationship should be 
understood as one of reciprocity and co-creation where the researcher and participant make 
different contributions to a matter of common interest, “developing and constructing new 
knowledge” (Ben-Ari & Enosh, 2013: 246).  Subjectivity on the part of both interview partners 
needs to be acknowledged (Liamputtong, 2013).  Interviews in this framework are not 
transparent accounts, however, and can only record what participants say they think or do 
rather than being “a direct window into their lives, thoughts, and meanings” (Kelly, 2010: 309). 
Moreover, because it is the interaction between the researcher and participant that generates 
the data, the interviewee may give a different account on another occasion, or to another 
researcher, depending on the particular context for each one of them and the social, cultural 
and personal attributes that each one brings to the interview on the day (Liamputtong, 2013). 
Interviews need to be treated as ‘accounts’ rather than an objective report of firm beliefs (Green 
& Thorogood, 2009: 104).   
The circumstances in which the interview takes place have an important role in “construct[ing] 
the power and positionality of the participants” (Elwood & Martin, 2000: 650).  It is more likely 
39 
 
 
that the interview will generate rich data if the participants feel comfortable, and that they will 
be more guarded if they feel at any kind of disadvantage (Elwood & Martin, 2000; Sin, 2003).   It 
is well documented that the gender, ethnicity, age, nationality, and the social and educational 
status of both the researcher and participants influence the way the researchers present 
themselves to the participants and how the participants react to them (Green & Thorogood, 
2009:107; Kelly, 2010:309; Liamputtong, 2013:71). Ensuring that participants are able to choose 
the venue and time of the interview and paying attention to matters such as choice of language 
and even dress may all contribute to putting the participant at their ease.   The cautions about 
the power differential usually assume that the researcher is the one whose power is the greater, 
and while this may often be the case (Ben-Ari & Enosh, 2013), it may also be the reverse, where 
a participant feels the researcher is of lesser importance or professional standing than 
themselves, and does not take them seriously (Harvey, 2010; Neal & McLaughlin, 2009). Even 
though the researcher has set the agenda by their choice of topic and asks the questions, the 
generation of data depends on how well the researcher is able to build rapport between 
themselves and the interviewee to establish a sympathetic relationship and sense of mutual 
trust (Karnieli-Miller et al., 2009: 283).  Moreover, the researcher is dependent on the 
participants’ agreement to take part and the degree of openness with which they choose to 
share their experiences, so the power differential can be weighted in their favour if they decide, 
for any reason, to limit their cooperation. Once the researcher has the data, however, the power 
lies with the researcher who takes away the participants’ words and works with them to 
transcribe them, select what they find to be salient, analyse and interpret what they find.  
In arranging the interviews for my study, I tried to address all these factors as best as I could and 
in the light of my previous experience of conducting many interviews with a diverse range of 
people over the years. All participants received information about the study before the interview 
and had consented to participate.  Each of them was invited to choose the time and venue 
where the interview would take place.  Most of the participants had busy lives and by 
interviewing them individually I was able to accommodate myself to their schedule rather than 
ask them to work around mine.  Most of them chose to invite me into their own environment, 
whether their home or workplace.  A few chose to come to my office either for the convenience 
of the location or because I was able to provide a private room without interruptions.  Several 
chose a café close to their workplace as they had no suitable space to talk privately where they 
worked and they needed to avoid disturbing the work of others.  It also ensured a higher level of 
confidentiality for those participants with business interests who may have been reluctant to 
40 
 
 
disclose particular types of information in a more open forum such as a focus group or did not 
wish others to know they were participating.   
The words of the interviewees that are recorded and then transcribed to become data, however, 
are not a full reflection of what happens during an interview.  The transcriptions cannot convey 
in totality the emphases and tone of the participants, or their use of humour and irony, their 
facial expressions and body language, and the ambience of the setting in which the interview 
takes place.  These can perhaps to some extent be captured by interpolating a phrase in brackets 
to indicate laughing or underlining to indicate emphasis but are still a relatively pale reflection of 
the dynamics of the interview, which all, to some extent remain with me to this day.  However, it 
was the unexpected addition to the spoken word that proved so influential in the course of the 
study which prompted me to look beyond the limits of the spoken data itself and allow room for 
the material things that formed a significant presence in so many of the interviews.  These 
included displays of supplements participants showed me, websites they opened up for my 
benefit, and brochures and other printed material they gave me.  This aspect became 
increasingly pertinent as the interviews progressed and I came to see that these ‘extras’, though 
unexpected, were also part of the overall data.  During the study I also collected and made an 
informal study of the free magazines distributed widely in Christchurch by a health store chain, 
finding the language and images they used to promote their products of particular interest as 
well as the products themselves.     
The sample  
For this study, absolute numbers were less relevant than being able to hear the perceptions of a 
diverse range of people in terms of gender, ethnicity, and age as well as socio-economic and 
cultural backgrounds, within the constraints of what I could realistically expect to achieve within 
the scope of a PhD study.  Guidance from qualitative methods texts indicates that there is no set 
formula for deciding on the number of participants (Liamputtong, 2013).  The key points are that 
the number should be sufficient to explore the research questions in depth within a broad 
spectrum of opinion so as to obtain “as full a range of observations of the phenomenon as 
possible” (Charmaz 2004: 986 cited in Bourgeault et al., 2010: 9) from people who would be 
most likely to contribute information-rich data (Green & Thorogood, 2009: 138; Kelly, 2010: 
317). Liamputtong (2013: 19) recommends continuing to recruit additional participants until no 
new information is being generated, the state known as data saturation.  It has been suggested 
that this may occur with as few as twelve participants (Guest et al., 2006). However, there are 
41 
 
 
other considerations, such as the scope of the project, the type of research question, the 
available pool of participants from which to recruit, and the amount of useful data generated in 
each interview (Hagaman & Wutich, 2017; Hennink et al., 2017; O'Reilly & Parker, 2013).  Even 
though The New Zealand study (Ministry of Health, 2009) was already five years old at the time 
of recruitment of participants and is even older now, it was the only New Zealand wide study 
available, was therefore locally relevant and provided a clear definition of dietary supplements.  
According to the 2009 survey, ‘regular’ users - defined as  those who took a supplement or 
herbal medicine more frequently than once a week – were more likely to be female than male, 
older rather than younger, and of non- Māori, non-Pacific ethnicity.  Without any defined user 
group to be approached, however, I found I needed a combination of methods to recruit 
participants, something which is not unusual in qualitative research (Liamputtong, 2013: 20).  
   
In accordance with the focus of my study, the participants I recruited needed to be using 
supplements more frequently than once a week for a specific health reason or for supporting 
their general wellbeing.  I made it clear that I was not studying protein powders or sports 
supplements for performance enhancement.  I began by using snowball sampling, the method 
where a researcher selects an initial few participants whom they know meet the criteria and ask 
them to recommend others who might be interested in taking part (Liamputtong, 2013). 
Snowball sampling is suitable for studies where there is no identifiable group that can be 
approached and participants are relatively difficult to locate.  I recruited the first four 
participants from known contacts who had already expressed an interest in my study.  Each of 
my four initial participants came from a different background; two were known to each other 
(though each was unaware the other was participating in the study); each of the other two were 
self-employed, and were unknown to any of the other three.  This approach was only 
moderately successful in recruiting a further group of participants. However, one of these initial 
participants introduced me to the organisers of a Māori hui (community meeting), and was able 
to get permission for me to talk about my study there and appeal for volunteers to participate. 
This was successful in enabling me to recruit further Māori participants.  After that I simply 
approached people I had contact with through my current and previous workplaces, and people 
I came across on social occasions or through interest groups that I and other members of my 
family belonged to.  I focused on those I considered were more likely to put me in touch with 
people from different age groups and with different cultural and social backgrounds.  I had been 
prepared to advertise on noticeboards or use social media, but this did not prove necessary.  An 
unexpected issue that arose in the course of recruiting was that a number of my friends and 
42 
 
 
acquaintances took a keen interest in my study and wanted to participate themselves.  I had to 
explain that it was not appropriate to include people whom I knew well or include too many 
participants who were too much like me, and turn them down as tactfully as possible.   
I had planned to include people who sold supplements and/or provided advice about them in 
pharmacies and health stores so as to get another perspective on the way people approached 
the buying of supplement products. I wanted to find out the kind of queries they received, what 
advice they provided, and more generally how they decided what products to stock, and if they 
observed trends in the rise and fall of sales of particular products.  I excluded supermarkets and 
online sales outlets even though supplements are easily (and often more cheaply) available from 
both sources, as I was interested in the face-to-face contact between buyers and sellers.  
However, I discovered fairly quickly that my assumptions about the users and sellers of 
supplements being two distinct categories had been too simplistic; people’s roles were much 
more complex and blurred across the spectrum of user/advisor/provider/seller than I had 
supposed.  So while I did approach a number of retail businesses directly in recruiting, and used 
a different information sheet for them, the concept of two separate categories of participants 
proved to be unsustainable.  All but a very small minority of those who sold or advised on 
supplements also spoke at length about their own use.  As well, a considerable number of the 
participants who initially presented themselves as users when approached for the study, also 
proved to have a stake in selling or recommending supplements in some way.  Several had 
current or previous experience as providers of different kinds of alternative therapies (medical 
herbalism, acupuncture, homeopathy), and some were currently or had previously been 
involved in network marketing of supplements and herbal products through international 
companies.  There proved to be a two-way avenue into these mixed roles; some had begun 
selling or promoting products as a business venture or being assigned to a workplace role and 
then begun to find the products useful for themselves; others had been users and subsequently 
had taken on working in a business as their interest in the area grew and to offset the cost of 
their own supplies.    
These methods were ultimately successful in recruiting a total of 37 participants, all but two 
from within Canterbury and two from a connection in the Auckland region.  One participant 
subsequently asked to withdraw, leaving a total of 36 participants:  23 women and 13 men 
ranging in age from their early 20s to late 70s.  There were five participants with Māori and two 
with Pacific ethnicity; five were originally from countries other than New Zealand.  Most were 
currently employed full or part time; six were officially retired but three of these also ran a part-
43 
 
 
time small business selling supplements.  All but five participants lived in the greater 
Christchurch area and three of these lived rurally.  I did not ask participants their exact age, their 
educational background or financial status, as I considered it irrelevant to the study, and that it 
would therefore have been over intrusive.  I was confident that this number of participants 
ensured a diverse range of perspectives as the participants easily covered the main 
characteristics that had been listed in the New Zealand study and included others as well.  All 
interviewees were sent the information sheet judged to be more relevant to their primary 
involvement with supplements (i.e. as a user or seller) prior to the interview (Appendix A,C), and 
a consent form to read and sign (Appendix B,D).  An interview guide was developed as an aide 
memoire for areas to be explored during the interview and to ensure that none were omitted 
(Appendix E).     
Ethical approval and Māori consultation 
Ethical considerations are important for protection of the participants, to ensure that they are 
fully informed and that there is no pressure put on them to consent to take part.  For this study, 
the ethics application outlined the purpose of the study, the general nature of the questions, 
and noted that participants could refuse to answer any particular question, or could withdraw 
from the study at any time without explanation up until the submission of the thesis.  Issues of 
confidentiality were covered; that participants would not be identified by name, initials, 
occupation or location in the thesis or any subsequent publication, and that their identity would 
not be disclosed to any other participant.  It was noted, however, that the use of snowball 
sampling as one method of recruitment meant that a recommender would potentially know the 
identity of another individual who had been approached to participate. The ethics application 
also set out the arrangements for ensuring that the audio recordings and completed transcripts 
would be held securely and only seen by myself and my two supervisors.  Consultation with the 
Māori Research Advisor of the University of Otago, Christchurch was also carried out, and on her 
advice I undertook to include Māori participants in the study in proportion to their percentage of 
the population in the region, at the time, approximately 7% (Statistics New Zealand, 2013). The 
participants I subsequently recruited comfortably met this requirement.  The ethics application 
was submitted and approval was subsequently confirmed by the University of Otago Human 
Ethics Committee in June 2014. Ethics reference number: D14/187.   
44 
 
 
The interview process 
I began each interview by going over the consent form and the purpose of the study.  After these 
preliminaries the order of discussion varied as a number of interviewees began to tell me their 
ideas about their supplement use as soon as I arrived, even before I could ask the first question.  
However, the flexibility of the semi-structured approach meant it was not a problem to move 
between the areas of interest in any order.  Five initial interviews were carried out during the 
months of August and September 2014.  These were recorded and transcribed in full before 
going any further, to allow for some preliminary analysis and reflection on the content and to 
identify any further areas that should be explored with subsequent participants.  This process of 
moving back and forth between examining the data and then conducting further interviewing 
allows the researcher to examine and reflect on the data generated so far (Liamputtong, 2013). 
It allows refinements and adjustments if needed to the interviewing technique, and the ideas 
from the initial interviews taken forward to generate new areas for discussion and data 
generation.  This process can also prove to be “a healthy corrective for built in blind spots” 
(Liamputtong, 2013: 242).  The remaining participants were interviewed between mid-January 
and mid-October 2015.    All participants were given a $30 petrol voucher for their participation 
in the research.    
At the end of each interview I explained the arrangements about returning transcripts so that 
interviewees could review them and comment further if they wished.  Forbat and Henderson 
(2005) discuss at length the appropriateness and complexities of returning verbatim transcripts 
to participants.  They note that the purpose is not to check the accuracy or truthfulness of the 
account generated, but can be fruitful in allowing participants to reflect further on the topic as 
well as providing a check on details, for example if words have been misheard in the 
transcription. They and others have pointed out that there are challenges for participants in 
revisiting the interview in written form and the process is not unproblematic, with participants 
sometimes feeling embarrassed about what they had said or how they had said it (Forbat & 
Henderson, 2005; Karnieli-Miller et al., 2009) and becoming concerned at how they would be 
represented in the finished document.  Corden and Sainsbury (2006) also studied participant 
reaction to verbatim excerpts in completed research reports, finding that opinions were divided 
on whether or not they should be ‘tidied’ up.  While some preferred the oral account to be 
represented exactly as it had been said, others felt that unedited excerpts of their interviews 
presented them in a negative light as being uneducated or unattractive, and would mean that 
their comments would not be taken seriously.  My experience in a previous study had been 
45 
 
 
consistent with the latter response, and based on this as well as the literature, I believed a 
limited amount of ‘tidying’ was warranted.  I transcribed all interviews verbatim myself, though I 
made the decision to omit the ‘fillers’ such as ‘I mean’, and ‘you know’ where I felt these added 
nothing to the meaning.  The decision also had a practical basis in that omitting these filler 
phrases helped speed the transcribing, particularly in cases where the participant used them 
numerous times. In my covering email with the transcripts I warned participants that oral speech 
was likely to look different from a written document when transcribed, and as long as the 
meaning was clear, any disjointed phrases or repetitions were no reflection on their credibility.  I 
also drew their attention to the fact that my own questions were sometimes disjointed and took 
care not to edit my own questions to look smoothly phrased when they had not been.  
Nevertheless, one participant did spend the time editing their transcript before returning it to 
me some months later.     
When I had completed all interviewing and transcribing I prepared a descriptive overview of the 
main ideas that had come from the interview data but without any verbatim excerpts from the 
transcripts and sent it out to all participants.  As it was going to be several years before the final 
thesis was ready, I believed it was important to acknowledge their contribution to the research 
by sharing my findings in this preliminary way.  Somewhat disappointingly, I received only one or 
two brief acknowledgements thanking me for sending it but no comments on the content.  It 
was a salutary reminder for me that while I was to spend the next few years thinking in depth 
about what they had said, being interviewed for my study was likely to have been a passing 
event of little importance in their lives and they would have long since moved on from that day. 
Compiling the overview, however, was helpful as a basis from which to approach the analysis.  I 
assigned pseudonyms to each of my participants, as a means of retaining their anonymity but 
being more interesting and recognisable in a lengthy text than referring to them by a participant 
number. 
Analytical approach 
I had originally intended to conduct a critical thematic analysis, that is, coding the data in a 
systematic iterative process to identify recurring themes as described in the literature by various 
authors on qualitative methods (Braun & Clarke, 2006; Green & Thorogood, 2009; Pope & Mays, 
2006).  Essentially this means taking an aspect of the data and summarising it using a particular 
word, phrase, or theme.  For example, the idea of having personal control over one’s health, 
which was mentioned in various ways by many of the interviewees, could be represented as 
46 
 
 
‘control’ whenever this idea appeared in the transcripts.  Once the major themes were 
identified, I would draw from the theoretical and other literature to present an in-depth and 
nuanced analysis, supported by the data, to develop an understanding of how people use 
dietary supplements and herbal medicines to care for their own health, and how this fits with 
contemporary ideas of maintaining health and preventing illness.  I could easily have identified 
and presented several major themes and patterns from the interview data in an analysis based 
on this type of coding.  Sections would have included, for example, personal empowerment by 
taking control over one’s own health; holistic health care versus the biomedical model of health; 
the concept of natural versus artificial therapeutic products; and the influence of marketing on 
health conscious consumers.  My summary for the participants included all these aspects and 
several more.   All these ideas, however, had already been identified and explored to some 
extent in the literature, even though supplements were very often treated as just one of the 
modalities in studies of complementary and alternative medicine (CAM) users in general (Barrett 
et al., 2003; Brosnan et al., 2018; Furnham, 2002; Lewis, 2019; Stoneman et al., 2013). While it 
could be argued that a more intensive analysis of these themes, or examining them in 
combination with one another might add to the body of literature, it seemed unlikely that it 
would deepen thinking about the underlying personal and societal forces at play within and 
around the topic.   
During the interview process I became more and more convinced that limiting my analysis to an 
iterative thematic approach based only on the spoken data would be a mechanistic and 
unsatisfactory way of capturing the wide range of complex ideas and the connections and 
disconnections between them that had been generated through my interaction with the 
participants.  Brinkman’s remark (2014) that he experienced “astonishment, mystery and 
breakdowns in understanding” resonated with the way I felt as I reflected on the experiences 
over the 14 months of interviewing.  Limiting the analysis to the transcribed words of the 
participants alone would certainly fail to do justice to some of the non-verbal elements of my 
contact with them that I have already mentioned above.  I wanted to capture the new 
possibilities that might be developed using a different approach from simply relying on 
conventional coding.  Jackson and Mazzei (2012: 12) make the case for moving beyond coding 
alone, arguing that the focus on reducing the different codes into a few “macro” codes “locks us 
into more of a territorialized placed of fixed, recognizable meaning”  limited by the current 
knowledge of the participants and the researcher and works against the production of new 
knowledge.   
47 
 
 
I needed to find an approach that would offer something different and at another level from the 
studies I had already examined and which would include more than just the recorded data from 
the discussions with the participants.  I did this in a two stage process.  The first stage was to do 
a preliminary coding exercise, which was helpful in allowing me to familiarise myself with the 
interview data in its entirety.  It also provided the basis for the descriptive overview (see 
previous section) that I sent out to the participants.  However, I then, under the guidance of my 
supervisors, turned to Jackson and Mazzei’s (2012) concept of ‘thinking with theory’.  These 
authors propose that through a process of “arranging, organising, fitting together” (Jackson & 
Mazzei, 2012: 1), the data, relevant theoretical concepts, the variety of actants that are involved 
in a phenomenon, as well as the researcher’s own prior knowledge and the recollections they 
take away from their contact with the research participants generates  “something new, 
something different, from mere themes and patterns generated by coding (Jackson & Mazzei, 
2012: 6).   
This idea from Jackson and Mazzei resonated with me as I had the same rich assemblage of 
previous personal and professional experiences, the transcribed data, memories of the 
interviews with the participants and especially of the way they engaged with the material 
substances of their supplements.  I wanted to be able to take the whole experience into account, 
not just the transcribed words of the participants which I believed were of course, important, 
but only one part of the whole.  MacLure (2015: 106-107) too, draws attention to the limitations 
of analyses that privilege the spoken word without taking into account how discourse is 
intermingled with “matter, affect and virtuality”.  She acknowledges that this involves giving up 
the safety and comfort of well-known methodology and casting oneself into an adventure into 
the unknown.  I did not find I needed to jettison the results of the coding exercise entirely, but 
rather to take them forward into a second stage of analysis where I was able to incorporate both 
discourse and materiality by exploring them using different theoretical concepts.   
This proved, however, to be more than just one step into the unknown but an ongoing process 
of exploring new territory throughout much of the writing of the thesis.  Little did I know when I 
began, what a broad range of literature in diverse subject areas and how many theoretical ideas 
I would need to read and think about during the study.  The trajectory of my own understanding 
of the theoretical ideas I came across, in particular, changed my way of thinking about 
qualitative research entirely.   My initial ideas about the quest (see Chapter 2) became a 
personal journey that had rich discoveries but also many difficult and thorny paths.  I was 
constantly reminded that while I was making observations about other people and things and 
48 
 
 
writing about them, I was also contemporaneously in a process of my own quest, striking out 
into new territories as I learned about the theoretical ideas I had chosen to use, and grappled 
with understanding them and putting them to work in analysing my research in a convincing 
way.  The next section gives a brief overview of the theoretical framing that I chose to work with.   
Theoretical framing  
The theoretical framework for the analysis draws from Deleuze and Guatttari’s concept of the 
rhizomatic network of actants that are interconnected in a moving assemblage around a 
particular phenomenon (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987)8.   Assemblages are not a domain of reality or 
a ‘thing’, but are a process that designates movement and transformation (Jackson and Mazzei 
2012:1; Latour 2005:64).  The rhizomatic network takes its inspiration from the botanical world.  
Bamboo, the ginger plant, couch grass, and the mushroom mycelium are all examples of 
rhizomes, that is, structures which are made up of an untidy, tangled network of nodes and 
connections and that spread out randomly, largely under the ground, with no apparent starting 
or finishing point.  Like the botanical rhizome, Deleuze and Guattari’s conceptual rhizome is 
similarly made up of heterogeneous threads (Holland, 2013) that are in a constant process of 
spreading into new areas without any regular pattern or organised structure.  The rhizomatic 
network has been described as a “chaotic network of habitual and non-habitual connections, 
always in flux, always reassembling in different ways” (Potts, 2004: 19) like “a crazy patchwork 
quilt” (Holland, 2013: 37).  Any thread in the rhizome can be connected to any other one, and 
the threads can merge or split apart (Dewsbury, 2011), breaking away in a new direction, yet 
remaining connected to where they came from.    
I have applied the concept of the rhizomatic network to my study as a way of thinking about the 
multiple actants that come together in the assemblage around supplements and their use.  
These include the individual people, their cultural background and personal experiences, their 
relationships with others, and the products, discourses, regulations, and commercial activities, 
all of which are temporarily in a dynamic relationship with one another.  Each of these actants is 
connected to the others in some way, and as the supplement assemblage evolves over time with 
new products, users, information and events coming in, the actants within it change it and are 
changed by it.  This process of constant flux was described by Deleuze and Guattari as 
“movements of deterritorialisation and processes of reterritorialisation that are always 
                                                          
8 I used a 2013 reprint of A Thousand Plateaus but have not indicated this in the reference to avoid the 
clumsy 2013 [1987] being repeated multiple times.  
49 
 
 
connected, caught up in one another” (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987: 9). In other words, some 
products or ideas fall out of fashion (are deterritorialised) and others move in to take over their 
space (reterritorialise); the new developments are seeded from the experience and knowledge 
that went before them which is never entirely discarded or ‘unlearned.’  Moreover, the previous 
actants may ‘reterritorialise’ in a newly animated form that fits with the discourses of the time.  
As a current example, one need only think of the way the cloth and jute shopping bags of former 
decades have reterritorialised the space left vacant by the plastic ones that were dominant for 
so long but are now being ‘deterritorialised’ by current environmental concerns. These changes 
in the rhizomatic assemblage may build incrementally in a constant slow process, or at times 
may also be abrupt and swift.  These are the unexpected developments that Deleuze and 
Guattari described as “lines of flight”:   
There is a rupture in the rhizome whenever segmentary lines explode into a line of flight, 
but the line of flight is part of the rhizome (Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987: 9).     
The ‘explosion’ indicates a dramatic shift; perhaps a chance discovery or random encounter.  Yet 
even while there is a transformative change in one direction, the connection to the overall 
network remains in place.  As a practical illustration of this concept Deleuze and Guattari (1987: 
10) used the example of a virus which can “take flight, move into the cells of a different species 
but not without bringing with it genetic information from the first host.” Deleuze suggested that 
his theories should be used like a box of tools to “pry open vacant spaces” (Massumi, 1992: 8). 
Deleuze himself used his toolbox to examine areas as diverse as linguistics, geology, 
psychoanalysis, and music but the ideas can equally be applied to “any body of choice:  a sexual 
body; a bicycle; a language, a body of art, a film” – the concepts work for them all” (Malins, 
2004: 85). The aim of using Deleuze’s toolkit to pry things open is not to define how things are in 
the world or what they mean in a bounded way, but to trace their tendencies and how they 
evolve – their way of becoming (Holland, 2013).  
The concept of the rhizomatic assemblage of actants is used throughout the analysis and 
discussion of the thesis to conceptualise the in-process nature of the supplement assemblage 
and its constant state of moving away from sameness to become something different.  This 
“philosophy of immanence” as Jackson and Mazzei (2012: 87) have termed it, has no absolutes 
or boundaries but embraces the idea of flow and change (Dovey, 2011). Becoming, with its 
nature of being always “au milieu” - in process (Deleuze, 1997: 226), is not understood as going 
towards a designated destination.  It is a “stream without beginning or end” (Deleuze and 
Guattari 1987: 27) that operates in the spaces in between.  It is not an essence or a position but 
50 
 
 
a tendency, an orientation to change (Holland 2013: 34). It opens up the possibility of competing 
interpretations, avoids attempting to create categories and definitions and brings into view the 
ambiguities that are threaded through people’s lives (Biehl & Locke, 2010).     
Within this overall framework, I have taken an eclectic approach, drawing on a range of other 
theoretical concepts as they became appropriate. Examining the data from a range of different 
perspectives as I worked through the analysis, was somewhat akin to shaking up the pieces of a 
kaleidoscope, revealing new patterns that emerge from the same fragments of material when 
they are arranged differently.  While this approach was important and useful, it was also 
challenging, because separating some actants from the whole assemblage was, to some extent, 
counter to the whole idea of the inextricably interconnected nature of their relationship with 
one another.   Aspects from one chapter constantly threatened to intrude on others and risk 
repetition, and yet structuring the thesis required some form of separating them out in order to 
avoid becoming overwhelmed with trying to write about them all at once.   
Each of the next three chapters discusses in turn one major theme that proved to be integral to 
the overall thesis.  Chapter Four investigates and deconstructs the discourses around 
supplements that were raised by the participants. Chapter Five then examines the role of the 
material products of the supplements in the participants’ lives.  Chapter Six looks at the way 
participants developed a sense of power in their decisions about their health management 
through combining their experiences of supplement use with ideas of personal responsibility, 
expertise, and narratives of identity.   The discussion chapter brings all these ideas together – 
discourse, materiality, and power - to show how they form a new way of understanding 
supplements and those who use them.   
  
51 
 
 
Chapter 4: Natural, holistic and safe: deconstructing discourses 
about supplements 
Introduction 
In the discussions I had with the participants, many of them spoke about the particular qualities 
of supplements as being the reason why they used them; that they were natural, holistic and 
safe.  They also contrasted these qualities in terms of what supplements were not; that is, not 
artificial or made from ‘chemicals’, not narrowly focused on biomedical health, and not risky.  On 
the surface, these remarks seemed to add little to what had been reported in previous studies 
(Durante et al., 2001; Rozin et al., 2004; Taylor et al., 2006; Vickers et al., 2006).   However, 
examining the data closely, it was clear that even though the participants seemed to understand 
that these qualities were self-evident and uncontested, they interpreted them in widely varying 
ways. This chapter, therefore, aims to get beyond the assumptions in previous studies that have 
taken these qualities of supplements for granted and by deconstructing them, to show “the 
tensions and omissions which have been produced without interrogation” (Jackson and Mazzei, 
2012: 15).   
To think more deeply about the way these concepts were expressed by the participants, this 
chapter draws on theoretical concepts from Derrida’s (1997) writing on deconstruction. While 
deconstructing the binaries in the debate around these three concepts is hardly new (see for 
example, (Anderson, 2009; Lupton, 1999; Thorne, 2001; Tulloch & Lupton, 2003), it has not 
necessarily been applied to supplements and herbal medicines in any detail.  The basic concept 
of deconstruction is that things – whether beliefs, practices, institutions, texts or anything else - 
do not have exactly determinable meanings and are always more than they currently seem 
(Caputo, 1997). For Derrida, there is no such thing as a bounded definition; everything has 
differences within it and the more one tries to tie anything down and limit it, the more it slips 
away from “…every attempt to totalize, to gather…” (Derrida, 1997: 13), to bring things together 
and make them into a totality that closes off possibilities for difference, development and 
change.  Deconstruction, on the other hand, means being open to different understandings, new 
interpretations and to meanings that are emerging as well as those that are current.  It does not 
mean simply tearing things apart into multiplicity or disassociation.  That would mean only 
“anarchistic relativism” (Caputo, 1997: 36) where words or texts could mean anything the reader 
wanted them to mean. On the contrary, deconstruction should be “affirmative, not in a way that 
52 
 
 
is simply positive… repeating the given” (Derrida, 1997: 5-6) but transformative, opening [the 
thing examined] to the future. It must reveal what is not obvious, unspoken or overlooked:   
…something in the text which tends to drop out of view [which can]…open things up, to 
find a way to read “otherwise” (autrement) in the name of the incoming of the other 
(l’invention de l’autre) (Derrida, 1997: 77). 
I understand Derrida’s writing on deconstruction to mean that nothing is fixed in a state where it 
is utterly stable and consistent through and through; there are always differences and shades of 
meaning that can be revealed.   
Seeing things as fluid in this way, transforms the kind of attitudes that seek to shut down 
differences as being threatening and instead welcomes them because they indicate multiplicity, 
evolution and refreshment.   
We do not have to choose between unity and multiplicity …you see, pure unity or pure 
multiplicity – when there is only totality or unity and when there is only multiplicity or 
disassociation – is a synonym of death….A culture is different from itself; language is 
different from itself; the person is different from itself.  Once you take into account this 
inner and other difference then you pay attention to the other (Derrida, 1997: 13-14). 
Derrida rejected the criticism of his theory of deconstruction as being a negative concept and 
emphasised that it was a productive process, that used “the tension between memory, fidelity, 
the preservation of something that has been given to us, and at the same time, heterogeneity, 
something absolutely new, and a break” (Derrida, 1997: 6).    
For this study, deconstructing the concepts of naturalness, holistic health and safety from risk 
meant carefully examining the participants’ remarks on these qualities of supplements to see 
how they unsettled the dominant interpretations about them as being concepts that ‘everyone’ 
understood in the same way  (Jackson & Mazzei, 2012).  It meant being alert to the wide 
spectrum of views that were expressed in the discussions with the participants, as well as paying 
attention to the nuances that were implied but less directly stated.   It meant noticing that some 
participants implicitly engaged in their own form of deconstruction, offering both 
complementary and competing explanations about the qualities of supplements in the course of 
their remarks.  It did not mean undermining or negating what any of them said or treating some 
remarks as insignificant, but opening up the ideas around the qualities of supplements to show 
how they were evolving.     
53 
 
 
Using deconstruction within the wider framework of Deleuze and Guattari’s rhizomatic 
assemblage that underpins this study overall allows it to act as a force that diversifies the 
assemblage of actants.  Rather than competing ideas participants put forward about naturalness, 
for example, being put aside as outliers because they were inconsistent with one another, all 
interpretations had their place among the heterogeneous components of the assemblage.  This 
diversification resulted in an exponentially greater capacity for connections to be made between 
the components, which in turn could be seen to be changing the way that the supplement 
assemblage was spreading out in different directions as it evolved.   
According to Bearn (2000, 2013), the crucial difference between Derrida and Deleuze is that 
Derrida sees deconstruction within a framework of success or failure.  Opening up to the ‘other’, 
according to Derrida (1997: 6), “this newness, this novelty is a risk … it is guaranteed by no 
previous rules.” Deleuze, in contrast, moves right outside the framework of winning or losing in 
the ‘game of existence’ and “the point of the game floats away, leaving us just playing” (Bearn, 
2013: 53-54).  Using both Derrida and Deleuze to think about supplements, then, is a way of 
looking at supplements as ongoing health practices, comprised of multiple components, that are 
undertaken in the course of individual lives, not focused on any particular end point, and which 
are always in process, “in the middle, between things, interbeing, intermezzo” (Deleuze and 
Guattari, 1987:26).  This approach avoids deciding whether deconstructing the discourses 
around supplements ‘succeeds’ or not.  Instead, it shows the variety of interpretations around 
the common discourses about supplements to be unique interconnections that individuals make 
between the many  components in the assemblage, mobilizing them according to what they do 
in their everyday life, the “plastic habits … dynamics and ruptures … that affect bodily states, 
modes of attention, and ways of experiencing time and space” (Dewsbury, 2011: 149, 150).   
The chapter has three major sections which deconstruct in turn the discourses of naturalness, 
holistic health, and safety from risk.  In each of the three sections I have firstly examined the 
participants’ comments to show the way they unsettled the assumed meaning of each of these 
qualities and showed up the “absent present…which has been ignored in an attempt to preserve 
the illusion of truth as a perfectly self-contained and self-sufficient present” (Jackson and 
Mazzei, 2012: 18).  I then look at the evolving assemblage of actants that surrounded the idea of 
supplements as natural, holistic and safe: the products themselves, what the participants said 
about them, what they said about their own background, relationships, attitudes and 
experiences of health and life, their reference to discourses in wider society, and their use of 
information.  I show that there were both commonalities and differences in the way the 
54 
 
 
participants thought about the natural, holistic and safe qualities of their supplements, drawing 
from the past but moving and changing as the participants themselves moved on with their lives, 
being influenced by new experiences and new social discourses.  To conclude, the chapter looks 
at the three assemblages as part of a greater and even more tangled assemblage where all these 
connections are intimately linked in shifting arrangements that are always changing, a process 
which Bearn (2013: 53) terms “the liquid time of becoming.” This resonated not only with the 
study participants as individuals who were striving to pursue a healthy life, but also with the idea 
of the life quest, where individuals evolve in themselves through the ‘becomings’ that take place 
on the journey.   
Nature and naturalness   
That supplements and herbal medicines are ‘natural’ is arguably the most dominant discourse 
around these products and one which formed a frequent topic in the discussions with the 
participants.  Many of them expressed straightforward views that constructed natural products 
as being simpler and better for them.   
I just liked the more natural kind of things rather than getting too carried away with pills 
and potions.  I like them to be a bit more natural.  … I went to a herbalist … and they 
would recommend things if I had something wrong … if you had a sore throat they would 
recommend this might actually be better for you rather than having something that’s got 
chemicals in it.  I guess if I was given the option I would rather something that was 
natural. (Johnny) 
Johnny here seems to assume that there is a standard meaning of what is natural and that the 
two of us who are discussing the issue share an understanding about the positive benefits that it 
brings to mind. Johnny is not unusual in contemporary times in the way he talks about 
naturalness, as others have also remarked (Devcich et al., 2007; Li & Chapman, 2012; Rozin et 
al., 2012; Rozin et al., 2004).  Amos et al (2014: 268) suggest that labelling a product as natural 
evokes “sentimental pastoral associations” for consumers that they transfer to the product 
itself, crediting it with being free of contamination and offering health benefits.  All kinds of 
products - fabrics, foods, construction materials – as well as supplements, draw on naturalness 
in promoting their benefits to consumers (Childs & Poryzees, 1998; Lähteenmäki, 2013; Rozin et 
al., 2004). The closer one looks at what is ‘natural’, however, the more it demonstrates Derrida’s 
notion that there are “tensions, contradictions, heterogeneity” (1997: 9) within what appears on 
the surface to be a single understanding.  Deconstructing the ‘natural’ reveals that it is deeply 
55 
 
 
imbued with complex economic, cultural, social and political currents (Pawson & Brooking, 
2013), with many contested meanings, all of which depend to a greater or lesser extent on the 
contrast between nature and humanity (Kellert, 1993; Rozin et al., 2004; Soper, 1998; Van 
Koppen, 2000).  
Nature has never been a neutral, value-free concept (Kearns & Gesler, 1998); it has been 
associated with sacredness, beauty and peace, as well as fear and destruction.  So while nature 
is beautiful and beneficent it is also terrifying (Kellert, 1993). Awe and worship of the natural 
environment are considered the most ancient form of religious belief (Shibley, 2011; Snodgrass 
& Tiedje, 2008).   Many modern customs, too, both secular and religious, have their roots in 
ancient rites associated with natural features such as springs, hills and rocks (Gesler, 1996: 102; 
Strang, 2004: 111). Yet nature also brings horror and death through cyclones, earthquakes, 
volcanic eruptions, wildfires and floods.  So in spite of the positive associations that labelling of 
food products and supplements draws on, for example, nature has many layers of meaning that 
have differed across historical eras and varied between individuals according to their experience 
and attitudes to the world (Heintzman, 2009; Lee, 2010; Soper, 1995, 1998).  
Until relatively recently, mastering, and improving on nature was seen as a universal ‘good’ for 
the human race because it increased the chance of survival in an unpredictable world where no 
one, however wealthy or important, was exempt from sudden death through disease or the 
vagaries of natural events (Rozin et al., 2004).  During the late 19th and first half of the 20th 
century, however, major advances in engineering, science and food safety saw these fears 
moderate as life became less uncertain (Stanziani, 2008). Longevity improved and confidence 
increased in “Western models of progress” (Soper, 1998: 5) which would improve on the natural 
world through science and technology.   By the second half of the 20th century, however, it 
became clear that conquering nature was not an unalloyed good and that human disregard for 
the importance of the natural eco-system had created a range of disastrous consequences (Beck, 
2000; Chapman et al., 2003; Johnson et al., 2016; Meffe, 1992). Environmental and human 
disasters such as the dust bowl in the US in the 1930s (Romm, 2011), the Bhopal chemical 
explosion (Varma & Varma, 2005), and the nuclear accident at Chernobyl (Bouville et al., 2005; 
Møller & Mousseau, 2006) to name just a few, saw a realisation that exploiting and damaging 
the natural environment would ultimately rebound on humanity.   
More recently, the series of reports from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC, 
2019), and the linking of extreme weather events to human-induced climate change rather than 
to exclusively natural causes (Mann et al., 2017; Stott et al., 2016), have added even more 
56 
 
 
compellingly to the acknowledgement that the natural environment needs to be respected and 
cared for and that damage done will eventually have to be addressed. There has been a 
widespread societal change in attitudes to environmental protection, encompassing several 
strands of interwoven ideas.  Firstly, that natural resources need to be preserved for sustainable 
use for future generations (Hansen et al., 2013; Holden et al., 2014); secondly, that human 
health and global environmental health are intimately linked (Rabinowitz & Conti, 2013; 
Stephenson et al., 2013) and thirdly, that the natural environment and non-human species have 
an intrinsic value that humans have a moral responsibility to preserve (Batavia & Nelson, 2017; 
Chan et al., 2016; Piccolo, 2017).  
These dominant, though not uncontested, social discourses appear to underpin the attitude to 
nature and natural things as pure, simple and superior to the non-natural (Amos, 2014; Li & 
Chapman, 2012; Rozin et al., 2012).  One particular way that preference for natural things 
manifests itself is in relation to substances that are ingested as food, drink and medicines (Aprile 
et al., 2016; Li & Chapman, 2012; Saher et al., 2006; Thompson, 2003).  Johnny, in the excerpt 
above, demonstrates this attitude in his comments, yet he also implicitly acknowledges that 
there are gradations within naturalness.  He does not explain, for example, what he means by ‘a 
bit more natural’ and he constructs the herbalist’s products as different from ‘pills and potions’  
because they do not have ‘chemicals’ even though he may well take them, too, in the form of 
pills or potions.   
Many participants also seemed to see it as self-evident that ‘natural products’ and 
pharmaceuticals were on separate sides of a divide in medicinal products and had their own idea 
of where the boundary between them should be drawn.  Prescribed medicines, constructed as 
‘drugs’ were on the other side of that boundary for most of them and not thought of as natural 
products:    
Certainly with the things I use for my family, I think I’m doing the right thing. It’s quite 
empowering in a way.  Because it’s shown to be natural you feel like you’re doing 
something – you’re not pumping drugs into your body.  (Vonnie) 
It is noticeable that Vonnie’s use of the expression ‘pumping drugs’ calls to mind syringes and 
hospitals, which emphasise the sharp contrast she is making between the two constructs; one 
draws on the idea of treating oneself with a simple product from nature, while the other draws 
on concepts of interventionist medicine over which the individual has limited control.  Olivia 
57 
 
 
brought this out even more directly in her account of treating her child’s eczema with a paste 
made from chickweed (Stellaria media) from her own garden:   
In a couple of days it had gone.  You know, nothing else – we were trying all those 
remedies - we had gone to get those lipid creams, steroid stuff and then it would go and 
then come back.  With this, a few days – a week and it was gone until maybe the next 
season and we would try it again.  We did that a few seasons and it never came back 
again.  (Olivia) 
Olivia makes her point by pointing to the clear contrast between the (natural) home-made 
herbal remedy and the (non-natural) ‘steroid stuff’ of the prescribed medicines. Yet a large 
number of prescription drugs are either directly plant-based or a chemically modified version of 
compounds from plants, so that the difference between a natural health product and a 
pharmaceutical medicine can be very small (Holt & MacDonald, 2008: 22-23).     
A number of participants, however, without any prompting, commented on the indeterminate 
line between what was natural and what was not.  I did not specifically ask them to articulate 
what they meant by ‘natural’ but it is possible that participating in the study led them to think 
more critically about their practices than before.  Whether or not this was the case, they 
engaged in their own form of deconstruction, reflecting on the competing meanings that 
existed, including in their own practices.  
How natural is ‘natural’?    
Participants’ comments ranged from the sceptical to the pragmatic and the (relatively) idealistic.   
Some of them acknowledged that thinking of supplements as natural required a certain amount 
of willing suspension of disbelief, an awareness that the ‘natural’ label on a product was not 
something that stood up to investigation and could simply be a marketing tool.  Iris, for example, 
indicated that she chose not to think too deeply about the substances she took which were 
“meant to be all natural but it’s in a powder so you have to wonder how natural that is”.  Bryony 
shared Iris’s scepticism about the products available for sale. She noted that though she bought 
so-called ‘natural medicines’ for herself and her family, they were usually powdered extracts in 
capsules bought from a shop, and quite possibly made in a factory by the same company that 
made pharmaceuticals:   
 Just because it is on a shelf and is labelled as natural doesn’t mean it doesn’t have an 
effect on your whole body balance.  …natural to me would be if I went and picked 
58 
 
 
something and I could see all the bits of dried leaves and twigs and dried berries and 
made some kind of something out of it and drink it.  To me that’s natural. (Bryony) 
However, she acknowledged that this artisan ideal was unrealistic for her and most others, as 
they would have neither the ingredients nor the desire to formulate their own products.   Her 
compromise was to get products that were “just as close to natural as I can get in the form of 
medicine that you get from a health food store or from a pharmacy.”   As Bryony indicates here, 
if the original substances are going to be sold in shops, they need to be packaged into a stable 
format that can be shipped to different destinations and still retain their active properties, but in 
doing so they lose their completely ‘natural’ qualities.    Almost all participants relied on 
commercially sold products and even for those few who made some of their own, it was only as 
a complement to other products that they bought.     
The standardisation needed to produce and market herbal medicines on a large scale so that 
they are consistently the same quality is another contested area which unsettles the idea of 
‘true’ naturalness. The commercial marketing of supplements has been seen as distancing herbal 
traditions from their craft-based origins in order to turn them into a globalised industry.  Some 
have interpreted standardisation as being politically and economically motivated by “seemingly 
inevitable biomedical hegemony” (Singer & Fisher, 2007: 25) that wants to force traditional 
healing modalities to “play the evidence game” (Barry, 2006: 2650) and be brought within the 
“structurally dominant scientific paradigm” (Jagtenberg & Evans, 2003: 321). The contrasting 
view is that ‘natural’ (that is, alternative) and orthodox medical approaches have much to offer 
each other and that they can and should work together for mutual benefit.  Wahlberg (2008) for 
example, supports the standardisation of plant extracts as being an avenue through which they 
may be accepted as potential treatments available either within orthodox medicine or as an 
additional support to what has been prescribed.  One of the pharmacist participants voiced a 
similar view; his experience was that an integrated approach provided a greater range of options 
and ultimately benefited his customers:   
[the customer] would come with a prescription and say, well I don’t know about this but 
anyway I was sort of thinking about another alternative, what is there?   And so you 
would still support the doctor who prescribed it but on the other hand you could say, well 
there are other options, maybe as a helper for what you have been given …So in a sense 
it helps that person.  Or they will come in and say I’ve heard that ginko biloba is really 
good for the brain, what do you think about that?  (Lou) 
59 
 
 
Participants generally seemed to agree in principle with this practical, open approach.   They 
drew from the assemblage of the natural whatever fitted with their own concept and they felt 
was appropriate in a particular situation.  Although some of their comments indicated that they 
saw natural products and prescribed medicines as ideologically separate categories, they 
generally seemed to take the view that having access to all kinds or products in both categories 
gave them greater choice.  Even those, like Vonnie, who made the comment about “pumping 
drugs into your body”, were not averse to using prescribed medicines if they believed them 
appropriate to particular circumstances.  They appeared to see this as practical and realistic 
rather than being concerned that it was inconsistent with their views on naturalness.  Some did, 
however, comment on how disappointing it was that their doctors did not seem to have an 
equally open and flexible attitude to suggesting natural products as an option:  
I feel I have had some really good doctors through the years, I just don’t feel that they 
ever even give the option for the natural way forward.  It’s usually, here’s your whatever 
medication it is. (Penny) 
Another participant, Paul, drew attention to the way perceptions of a product could be 
manipulated by a simple labelling change; privileging a popular or botanical name of a herbal 
product would point out its simplicity and naturalness, but the chemical name component could 
be used in other circumstances to create a different impression:   
…because of having chemical names for everything, people are actually looking for it to 
be simpler than that.  The ones in our shampoo are extracted from the palm tree.  The 
neem tree.  And the active ingredient in it has got a chemical name - Azarydin 
[Azadirachtin]. So, people say, are they chemical free?  But in actual fact they have got 
chemicals in them because everything has a chemical symbol of some sort. (Paul)   
Other examples of constructing products using different discourses that frame them as either 
‘natural’ or a ‘chemical’ product are also easy to find.  The wholesome sound of ‘pure spring 
water’  or ‘naturally fermented cider vinegar’ on labels, for example, creates quite a different 
perception than if the same products are described as H2O  or E260 on another (Beebee & 
Sabbarton-Leary, 2010; Plessi, 2003).  
Naturalness is clearly not the “perfectly self-contained and self-sufficient” truth (Jackson and 
Mazzei, 2012: 18) that it may appear to be on the surface.  The ‘naturalness’ of supplement 
products can easily be deconstructed to show the multiplicity of understandings and perceptions 
about them that unsettle the idea of a dualistic division between them and prescribed 
60 
 
 
medicines.  While some participants appeared to accept their naturalness as being obvious and 
simple, they also seemed well aware that labelling something as ‘natural’ did not necessarily 
make it so.  Others were self-reflexive, presenting thoughtful insights about the inconsistencies 
in what they said and what they actually did in their practices with supplements.  The 
participants’ comments reflected the tension and multiplicity that Derrida spoke about that keep 
ideas alive and make them productive instead of closing them in on themselves.  ‘Natural’, it 
seemed, was a flexible enough descriptor to retain its overall salience as a concept but one that 
could be interpreted from a variety of perspectives and fit a variety of circumstances.  As other 
writers have also noted, while everyday understandings about the natural are imprecise and can 
easily be deconstructed, it is a mistake to overlook the sentiments that they give rise to; the 
concept of naturalness has a broad and enduring appeal across cultural and philosophical 
differences, values and self-image (Johar & Siergy, 1991; Soper, 1998: 181).  
Importantly, ideas about what was natural were in process of change. It was clear from talking to 
the participants that their practices and the particular substances they thought of as natural 
were becoming even more nuanced as they continued to evolve.  New products, new 
circumstances and experiences continued to arise, and new discourses and information 
continued to come to hand which fitted in one way or another with various individuals’ view of 
what naturalness consisted of.  Some of these changing aspects of the natural assemblage were 
highlighted by the participants, and are discussed below.   
The evolving assemblage of the natural: traditional, exotic, novel, ethical   
Many of the participants looked back to the past, referring to practices that had been used by 
their parents and grandparents when they spoke about their preference for natural products.  
They frequently drew on childhood memories, recalling simple home remedies that had been 
used at the time.  They gave accounts of family illnesses being treated successfully with a 
minimum of fuss.   There was a strong element of nostalgia in the way participants recalled 
these traditional practices using products that were readily to hand: 
My mother was a country girl, and my grandmother.  In those days they were isolated, I 
suppose. There was always lemon honey for a sore throat, those sort of things.  Baking 
soda for bites, vinegar for stings … (Frances) 
Comments like this evoked an idyllic and comfortable past “… as it should have been” (Thomson, 
2008: 4-5), when simple remedies sourced from home kitchens sufficed to soothe all ailments.  
61 
 
 
But as the epigram rather cleverly puts it, “Nostalgia is like grammar:  the present is tense but 
the past is perfect” (Lowenthal, 2015).9   
Common cultural narratives which draw on memories of a better, simpler past from which 
unpleasantness has been brushed away are a known phenomenon (Horton, 2008; Taylor, 2000). 
The (re)construction of childhood as being a utopian time, a golden age that has been displaced 
by modernity, according to Soper (1988: 188) is not just a contemporary phenomenon but can 
be found as far back as the beginning of recorded history.  Many of the participants’ 
reminiscences drew on this sort of familiar narrative.  Interestingly, no matter whether their 
childhood years were quite recent or many decades behind them, participants of all ages spoke 
of their childhood as a time when household remedies had been used at home for family 
illnesses and “you didn’t just  pop down to the doctor for anything” (Johnny).   They indicated 
that they were simply continuing this tradition by being self-reliant and using the knowledge 
that they had been brought up with.  They framed their practices learned from their earlier years 
as ‘natural’ but it was clear that, even if they did not recognise it, both the participants and their 
‘natural’ practices had changed and evolved considerably over time.       
Two of the Māori participants illustrated precisely how their traditions had drawn from the past 
but evolved over time, and for each of them in a different way.  Caro had grown up in a farming 
family where rongoā (Māori traditional healing) was in everyday use. She explained that her 
grandmother was a skilled practitioner and her treatments worked “for us in the old days” but 
since then, attitudes and practices had changed:   
In my Nanny’s days, there was always karakia [prayer], there was always a big process.  
It wasn’t just about making rongoā and selling it and using it.  There was all this pre-
stuff, you stuff.   …  See, at the Matatini [the national festival of Māori culture], and I’m 
not bagging them, but they had a tent with people in there doing massage and things 
and they had things in bottles.  In my day, they didn’t have that.  You became unwell, 
Nanny went into the bush or wherever, got stuff, made stuff, and did the karakia, and did 
all the things before she applied or you took the stuff.  It wasn’t about going somewhere 
and buying stuff and taking it.  That’s where the difference is.  (Caro) 
                                                          
9 Lowenthal (2015) cites this epigram and indicates in a footnote that this remark is of doubtful origin and 
is “attributed to radio historian Owens Lee Pomeroy or speechwriter Robert Orben.”  I have not been able 
to find any further source for this.  
62 
 
 
Caro was now a grandmother herself, and while she clearly regretted that the old ways were 
disappearing, she acknowledged that the social context had changed and the practices could not 
remain static, but had to adapt.  The positive aspect, she went on to remark, was that interest in 
traditional Māori medicine was growing and being opened up to a much wider range of people.  
She wished that she knew enough to “educate people correctly”,  but noted that keeping strictly 
to the old traditions would not be an option for most people as the necessary natural substances 
were hard to find in urban environments.  Another participant, Marama and her family, had a 
different way of adapting the older ways they knew.  They had prioritised retaining one 
traditional practice they considered important to carry out in the original way they had learned.  
She and her husband had first-hand knowledge from elders in their family for brewing infusions 
from the leaves of the kawakawa tree (Piper excelsum).  They went on family expeditions to rural 
areas to gather the leaves themselves, recited the traditional karakia (prayers) that had come 
down to them from older generations, and kept special utensils for brewing and processing the 
leaves into a liquid.  In keeping with changing times, however, they kept the infusion in the 
fridge and mixed it with orange juice for their children to drink.   
Many of the other participants who recounted home health care practices from their past could 
also be seen to have adapted them as time passed and the context changed.  They might still fall 
back on old home remedies like lemon and honey drinks, but equally they had added new and 
different options that were readily available.  Glucosamine and magnesium, for example, which 
are clearly not kitchen cupboard essentials, were the most frequently mentioned products in the 
study, with many participants taking one or the other (or both) regularly.  The evolution of 
health practices in just this way appears to be inevitable and is not necessarily something to be 
regretted. Moreover, it also happens in less developed countries where people’s use of 
traditional practices is common but changes over time and when new circumstances arise.  An 
example reported in a study of traditional health practices in Tanzania (Bignante & Tecco, 2013) 
showed that although some aspects of traditional medicines had been lost, people now had 
access to a wider range of health care options:  herbal remedies and traditional healers, as well 
as doctors and allopathic medicines, all of which they found valuable.    
Somewhat paradoxically, the interest in home-made traditional medicines has given rise also to 
a surge of interest in the traditional medicines of distant societies that are made from 
substances little known to Western consumers (Connell, 2006; May, 1996).  This fascination has 
been attributed to a type of nostalgia, not for a personal past, but for a utopian ‘ideal’ and a way 
of getting in touch with a simpler and more natural way of life that has retained what has been 
63 
 
 
lost by those living in contemporary Western society (Holbrook & Schindler, 2003; Pickering & 
Keightley, 2006).  While this is clearly an oversimplification of the complexities involved (see 
Snodgrass & Tiedje, 2008), part of the appeal of  unfamiliar substances seems to be in their 
exoticism, their ‘otherness’ and novelty “rather than any particular efficacy or medical merit” 
(Bivins, 2007: 12).  There also appears to be an element of the mythologisation of indigenous 
cultures as exemplifying an authentic and uncorrupted way of living harmoniously with nature, a 
phenomenon that Davidov describes as: 
burgeoning worldwide, creating instances of performed culture through a web of 
commodification connecting the indigenous producers, brokering their own culture with 
Western consumers that come in search of their fantasies (2012: 482). 
Two examples of these ‘new’ products sought by Western consumers are powdered maca root 
(Lepidium meyerii) from the Peruvian Andes (Gonzales 2012), and Garcinia cambogia (Nayak et 
al 2010), a fruit from Indonesia.  The medicinal uses of maca and garcinia have been well known 
for centuries in their places of origin but have only recently entered the ‘natural health’ range in 
health stores and pharmacies.  Loyer and Knight (2018) in their case study of maca, show that 
the discourses around this so-called ‘Inca superfood’ draw on an idealised framing of the people 
of the Andes as living in a nutritional utopia where plants are grown using traditional and 
timeless methods, presenting it in contrast to the industrialisation of the developed countries 
where it has suddenly become popular. Certainly, products containing maca or garcinia were heavily 
promoted in the print publications that I collected during the course of this study, often with reference to 
their exotic origins.   
 So while the assemblage of the natural includes discourses of simplicity, homeliness, and 
memories of the past, it may also evolve to encompass those products which are unfamiliar but 
seem appealing both because of their exoticism in the individual’s particular context and the 
idea they convey of a more ‘natural’ way of life. Pickering et al (2006) have argued that nostalgia 
is not necessarily a regressive longing for the past, but can also accommodate progressive ideals 
for change.   One participant, for example, spent much of the interview enthusiastically 
describing his recent discovery of a new and exotic product known as etherium gold, which, he 
told me had originated with the pharaohs of ancient Egypt 2000 years ago, and which he was 
able to obtain online:    
….this is a white powder a nano-particle white powder.  They found that throughout 
Egypt  …  there’s some temples in Syria that are Egyptian that have every pharaoh there 
64 
 
 
and it’s dedicated to gold and all they found inside was massive amounts of this white 
powder.   And this is what they put in the bread and the mana and everything else that 
the pharaohs ate that let them contact the after-life. (Cliff) 
It seemed as if its main appeal for him was in its novelty, exoticism and links to a distant mythical 
past rather than any particular naturalness.  But rather than nostalgia for his own, or an ancient 
past, he appeared to be using the novel substance as a means to progress and renew his life in 
which, he told me, he had at times become trapped in negative and damaging behaviour 
patterns which he regretted and had now put behind him.    
Some participants, in contrast, were uncomfortable about the idea of exotic products, 
commenting on their decided preference for products to which they felt a connection to their 
own environment:  
 I feel like our natural environment where we live affects us and what is grown in that 
environment I feel generally is what is good for the climate and the people that are living 
there.  And when you start getting things from overseas and all over the place out of 
season and what not, then sometimes you can disturb the balance that you have to you 
as a person living in the environment and right now. (Bryony) 
People with this kind of preference for the local product have been described elsewhere as 
‘ethnocentric’ consumers (Batra et al., 2000; Haque & Maheshwari, 2015), that is, individuals 
who relate their health and social practices to feelings about their own culture and 
environmental surroundings.   Olivia was another such individual; even more than Bryony, she 
voiced active disapproval of exoticism and found it to be a form of cultural appropriation, an 
attempt to  ‘buy’ into traditions that had no place out of their own context:  
 I have a distaste for a lot of that … new ageism, stuff that goes into things that I don’t 
understand why you would want to connect to something that is so foreign.  … On the 
other hand, if you are connecting to traditions that your ancestors have practised for 
thousands and thousands of years but have been displaced through colonisation or other 
effects of migration, for me, that’s an entirely appropriate way back to source.  (Olivia) 
Olivia is not alone in viewing the ‘exotic’ in this way.  Davidov (2011:483), while primarily 
discussing eco-primitivism, has referred to the appeal of the exotic as a form of retro-
colonialism, where fragments of nature serve to connect the user to “post-colonial fantasies of 
an authentic pre-industrial harmonious fusion of nature and culture”.   But this too is not as clear 
65 
 
 
cut as it seems; what is ‘natural’ and what is ‘exotic’ evolves over time and space and is never 
static.  Many plants now perceived as being local and natural in New Zealand, are not natives, 
but arrived with European colonisation in the 19th century.  Centuries before that, the kumara, a 
staple of the pre-European diet for Māori, was in its turn brought to New Zealand from islands in 
the Pacific and adapted for New Zealand growing conditions (Law, 1970; Yen, 1963). 
Additionally, participants’ interpretations of what was ‘naturally’ found locally tended to vary 
depending on their own life trajectory.  Bryony quoted above, indicated that for her, it was 
plants that grew in her own garden and nearby, regardless of where they were originally from.  
Devon, on the other hand, who had come to New Zealand quite recently as an adult, did not 
consider the herbs she knew from her home country as being ‘local’ to her new surroundings: 
So that is perhaps another unique thing here, that we use western medicine – or western 
herbs, which actually have to be  [imported] – well some of them grow here now – but 
they are not natives here. (Devon) 
Even very recent ‘exotics’ that have come into favour as components in natural products, such as 
the goji berry plant (Lycium barbarum), can now be bought from plant nurseries in New Zealand 
by the home gardener, demonstrating that being ‘local’ is a dynamic concept that resists being 
bounded to a physical place once it becomes established in another. Modern communications 
and population movements, globalisation and multiculturalism give rise to co-mingling and 
fusion of cultures that at the same time “dilutes, enriches and alters individual cultures” (Craig & 
Douglas, 2006: 323). So the assemblage of the ‘local’ and ‘exotic’ is made up of individual 
connections, and is continually evolving, including, in the world of herbal medicines.   
Another evolving meaning of the ‘natural’ that came to light in the study was an implication that 
natural products are environmentally sustainable and therefore an ethically responsible choice 
(Soper, 1998: 2; Todd, 2004).  A considerable number of the participants commented on their 
preference for the Kiwiherb® range of herbal medicines, where both the name and the use of 
New Zealand native plant products indicate that it is literally, ‘rooted’ in the local environment:  
…we are developing a whole lot more natural based products within New Zealand 
compared to way back then, which is interesting…maybe it’s the clean, green image that 
we have.  …  Maybe the greeny side of people in New Zealand who are conscious of the 
carbon footprint as well, whether that comes into it  …  accessibility, I think we are more 
looking after our own in our own little space. (Lesley) 
66 
 
 
Here Lesley is drawing on discourses that construct the New Zealand environment as a pristine 
land of natural landscapes symbolised by the international marketing promotion that has been 
used to advertise New Zealand tourism and agricultural products as  ‘100 percent pure’ 
(Desmarais, 2015; Patil, 2019). Though easily deconstructed to show that the New Zealand 
environment cannot live up to this impossible claim, the belief that New Zealand has a unique 
and largely unspoilt natural environment has tended to persist.  The use of New Zealand 
products in supplements resonated strongly with other ‘ethnocentric’ (Batra et al., 2000) 
participants who valued home-grown products that they found familiar and culturally congruent 
with their own upbringing.  Lesley’s comment about being conscious of the carbon footprint also 
touches on the concept of reducing the environmental impact of bringing imported products in 
to New Zealand when they can be produced on site, and implicitly draws on concepts related to 
the wider discourses around climate change and human behavior that affect the natural 
environment (Holden et al., 2014; Stephenson et al., 2013).     
While the Kiwiherb® products appear to live up to their reputation of using (at least some) home 
grown ingredients, labels that claim naturalness do not always live up to what they imply.  The 
phenomenon of ‘borrowing’ an aura of naturalness but without any grounds for doing so is 
known as ‘greenwashing’ and is a way of promoting sales by linking to discourses of 
sustainability and naturalness that resonate with consumers.  ‘Greenwashing’ has been 
described in the supplement field (Todd, 2004), as well as in the marketing of organic foods and 
fair trade products (Jaffee, 2010; Jaffee & Howard, 2010).  Moreover, even if products 
themselves are genuinely naturally grown and produced, there may be other perverse effects if 
a particular plant becomes the focus of a wave of global attention.  One participant raised this 
issue in relation to the surge of interest in honey and oils from mānuka [Leptospermum 
scoparium], a New Zealand native plant that grew prolifically in her home area:      
An American company had come in to the Hokianga [a rural area in the north of New 
Zealand] and bought some land up there that had loads and loads of mānuka.  There 
were acres of it full of mānuka ….  it is going to America and they are putting it in 
plasters and bandages. … What that spoke to me was, why didn’t Māori get on to this?  
Why are we leaving Americans to come and buy our land and we can’t even buy it? Then 
they speak of – we are going to bring work into the Hokianga, we’re going to bring 
revenue – of course it hasn’t happened.  I think they are getting Norwegians and 
Germans, you know, tourists, student visas, to work, to do that, and not the locals. 
(Marama) 
67 
 
 
Not only had the local population missed any benefit as Marama suggested, but the swift rise in 
global demand for mānuka products had been acutely negative.  The  so-called ‘mānuka honey 
wars’ had broken out; thefts, vandalism, violent beatings of competitors, outsiders coming into 
the area, uplifting or sabotaging competitors’ hives, poisoning the bees, and putting long-term 
beekeepers who understood the sensitivity of the local ecology out of business (Neal, 2016; Roy, 
2016).  A different set of adverse consequences from the same popular demand for naturally 
grown herbal products in Nepal was reported by Kunwar et al (2013).  Whereas local people had 
been able to gain an extra means of livelihood for their families by gathering and selling the 
plants (Larsen & Olsen, 2007; Olsen & Larsen, 2003), the lack of an overall strategic plan for 
sustainability had “pushed many of Nepal’s medicinal plants to the brink of extinction” (Kunwar 
et al., 2013:1).  So while both the mānuka products and the Nepalese medical plants were 
certainly ‘natural’ by one reckoning, they resulted in environmentally and ethically questionable 
situations.     
This kind of blending of the natural into the different, new, or ‘other’ also seemed to be linked to 
a further phenomenon that I encountered on my pharmacy and health store visits.  Some of the 
products in the ‘natural health’ section were branded with names that made them seem more 
like a chemical or pharmaceutical, rather than anything obviously ‘natural’.  Examples included 
CoQ10 (Co-enzyme Q10), Kyolic (a garlic extract), and curcumin (from turmeric), all of which are 
derived directly from natural substances. Kerry, a participant who worked in one of the stores I 
visited showed me sample sachets of both Kyolic and CoQ10 that she gave out as a trial for 
customers who wanted something that might enable them to cut down or even substitute for 
some of their prescribed medicines that they believed were giving them negative reactions:  
…there seems to be a little bit more sensitivity coming in to drugs.  I can’t take that 
because it reacts with me so I take CoQ10 and Kyolic instead for my blood pressure, that 
sort of thing.  I’m not sure whether that’s because I am dealing with it more often or 
because that’s a trend.  (Kerry) 
Deliberately branding products with a name that conveys neither what the product does, nor the 
common name for what it is, seems a puzzling strategy.    Several things may possibly be 
happening here at once that make the seemingly counter-intuitive label work:  the name is both 
novel and intriguing so that a certain mystique is generated for those who are attracted to 
something ‘other’.  Moreover, because it is shelved in the ‘natural health’ space and alongside 
products with functional names for similar conditions, those whose prime need is to stick with 
‘natural’ products may be reassured, even though the name seems obscure at first sight. 
68 
 
 
Conversely, it may also be that the more ‘medicinal’ sounding name may reassure others new to 
or suspicious of ‘alternatives’.  
Deconstructing the natural shows how it “opens things up for] the “incoming of the other” 
(Derrida, 1997: 77) and undermines the notion of a sharp dividing line between what is natural 
and what is not.  The participants’ comments about what was natural were at once far more 
nuanced and also far more productive of change and development than the polarised 
oppositions that see separately bounded categories between natural products and prescribed 
medicines.   A spectrum of meanings of naturalness could be accommodated within the 
assemblage around supplements no matter where individual participants drew their own line 
between what they considered natural or not. The diverse products, public and private 
discourses, experiences and understandings of the participants and the unique connections that 
each person had made between them formed a complex network of actions and interactions 
around ideas of what was natural.  Past and present, novelty and tradition, exoticism and 
localness, environmental sustainability, all were tangled together and connected to naturalness 
in different ways.  Names of products could be highlighted as simple natural substances, or 
presented to appear more like a medicine.  Older ideas might fall out of favour and be discarded, 
or just as easily be reformulated or reimagined to suit changing times. The connections and 
relationships between the many components could be arranged and rearranged according to the 
interpretation of different individuals, in a constant state of immanence, connecting to “the 
semantic and pragmatic contents of statements, to collective assemblages of enunciation, to a 
whole micropolitics of the social field” (Deleuze and Guattari, 1987: 6).  Together all these 
perspectives of the natural formed an intricate and complex rhizomatic assemblage that was 
constantly in a state of becoming and changing.  
Woven into the components of the natural was a further notion as yet only touched on; the idea 
that natural products have integrity; they are pure, complete in themselves, whole and 
untampered with by human interference.  As such they are often described as ‘holistic’ and the 
use of them to be a part of an ‘holistic’ approach to health care.  The next section of the chapter 
examines the various interpretations of this ubiquitous word that were manifested in the 
discussions with the participants.   
Holism and holistic health    
Studies examining the preferences of users of alternative products and therapies have 
commonly accepted participants’ assertions of the preference for ‘holistic’ health without 
69 
 
 
further analysis or comment (Barrett et al., 2003; Doel & Segrott, 2003; Sointu, 2013; Vickers et 
al., 2006). Peters et al (2003: 121) for example, report without further comment, that the people 
they talked to stated they wished “to take a more holistic approach to treatment and health.” 
Similarly, Vickers et al. (2005: 5) found that participants in their study “preferred a more natural 
way of healing embedded in a holistic approach”.  The underlying idea in all these attempts 
seems to be that holistic health care is everything that ‘reductionist’ health care is not (Bell et 
al., 2002; Plsek & Greenhalgh, 2001).  Participants, too, talked about holistic health as a desirable 
approach that went beyond biomedical care. Lesley, a health store owner, for example 
described her approach to clients as: 
 …. putting the jigsaw puzzle together for them and then I can make a much better go at 
supporting whatever system is down or supporting where they are coming from – a 
holistic approach, if you know what I mean. (Lesley) 
The term holistic as it is used in general speech today, however, is itself an assemblage of ideas 
that span almost any area of human endeavour.   While ‘holistic’ is frequently seen in relation to 
health and health care, it is also used as a descriptor for fields as diverse as computing (Soomro 
et al., 2016), religion (Parmer & Rogers, 1997), organic farming (Hole et al., 2005), 
entrepreneurialism (Jensen, 2014), human resources management (Hecklau et al., 2016), the 
organisation of government services (Dawes et al., 2004) and many more.  Health practitioners 
who describe themselves as holistic range from registered medical professionals in general 
practice on the one hand (RNZGP, Undated), to alternative therapists offering services such as “a 
holistic pulsing journey to peace awareness and healing” (Murray, Undated). It is no wonder 
then there is a “plurality of understandings of holism, [that] encapsulate a fluid spectrum of 
perspectives”(Nissen, 2011: 80) covering scientific, sociological and metaphysical world views.  
As Kretchmar (2013: 23) notes succinctly, “much traffics under the name of holism today”.   
There are two vastly different philosophical approaches to holism.  The first of these, the cosmic 
or metaphysical view of holism, has its origins in the eastern religions of Hinduism, Taoism, and 
Buddhism (Cobb et al., 2012; Erickson, 2007; Shroff, 2011). Holism in this sense is the belief that 
all matter, whether human or non-human, is unified by a life force; the self is merely a small part 
of the collective which in turn is part of the wider cosmos (Joshanloo, 2014; Shroff, 2011). The 
abnegation of the self and its desires are viewed as the way to achieve inner peace and harmony 
rather than the individualism and autonomy which are more generally admired in Western 
societies (Ricard, 2011; Shamasundar, 2008). The same fundamental belief in a unifying life force 
that permeates all matter is also shared by many indigenous cultures including Canadian First 
70 
 
 
Nations (Auger et al., 2016; Hunter et al., 2006), African and South American traditional healing 
systems (Izquierdo, 2005; Truter, 2007).  Similarly, in the Māori world, the life force (mauri) 
exists in all things, binding people to the environment and to the whole cosmos (Mark & Lyons, 
2010; Roberts et al., 1995):   
Everything is related – people (living and dead), land, sea, flora and fauna, and the 
spiritual world. Land, sea, wind, and other environmental elements ….   A person’s well-
being [is] intimately linked to the wellbeing of all others, human or non-human 
(Waitangi Tribunal, 2011: 64).  
In the metaphysical view of holism, an individual is intimately connected with everything around 
them and their health and wellbeing will be disrupted if their body, mind, and spirit are out of 
balance within themselves, or within their wider family, society or natural environment.  
The other major approach to holism was first proposed by Smuts in his 1926 publication Holism 
and Evolution (Erickson, 2007; Freeman, 2005; Nissen, 2011).  Smuts’ defined holism as a state 
where the body, mind, and spirit are in perfect balance within each individual.  If this state is 
achieved, the totality constitutes more than the sum of its parts.  It is a creative synthesis where 
“all parts reciprocally influence and determine each other...” (Smuts 1926: 86 cited in Nissen 
2011:77).  Adherents to this view of holism dismiss the life-force, or metaphysical approach to 
holism as belonging to “primitive and closed belief systems” (Baum, 1998). They prefer to 
distance themselves from it, terming it ‘vitalism’, and describe it as superstitious, anti-scientific, 
and lacking in intellectual rigour (Nissen, 2011). Smuts himself described cosmic holism as “…a 
vague expression, already ruined by popular use and abuse” (Smuts 1926: 86 cited in Nissen 
2011:77).   
Much contemporary writing, however, seems to subscribe to neither of the two theoretical 
approaches entirely but to draw from both in a range of widely different combinations.  Where 
definitions are attempted they seldom agree with one another; some incorporate metaphysical 
elements while others do not (Erickson, 2007; Goldstein et al., 1988; Hoffmann, 1988; McColl, 
1994; Shroff, 2011; Sointu, 2013).  One commentator, for example, states that holistic health 
promotes “integrative energy that pervades, unites and directs all human dimensions” 
(Goddard, 1995: 810), while another (Shroff, 2011: 245) proposes that the term ‘holistic health 
care’ can be used “interchangeably with alternative or complimentary [sic] medicine”.  Orthodox 
medical practices too draw very different meanings from the term.  A New Zealand ‘integrative’ 
medical practice indicates it follows “an holistic philosophy…addressing body, mind and spirit” 
(Helios Health, Undated), but  the definition by the Royal New Zealand College of General 
71 
 
 
Practitioners omits any reference to things spiritual, or even emotional.  Their definition, 
instead, refers to the way health services are provided, contrasting specialist with generalist 
care:      
Where hospital doctors often focus on just one part of your body, a GP looks at your 
whole body, your background, and the environment you live in when diagnosing 
illnesses and prescribing treatments. This is known as holistic healthcare (RNZGP, 
Undated). 
McEvoy and Duffy (2008: 413) attempt to pin down exactly what holism is and provide a detailed 
analysis of what they term the “nebulous and subjective” concept of holism. However, the 
lengthy table of components they list appears to add further to the confusion and demonstrates 
the futility of trying to provide a bounded definition.  Their efforts underline yet again Derrida’s 
insistence that any attempt to “totalize, to gather” into a unified and bounded definition is 
doomed to failure and will always run up against “the limit it had to encounter” (Derrida 1997: 
13).  
My own ideas about holism and holistic health were just as ill-defined at the time of the 
interviews and I accepted what the participants said without exploring further how they 
understood the concept of holism. It was only on analyzing the data that I realised how vague 
and undefined the participants’ statements were when they mentioned holistic health, although 
clearly they all recognised it as something positive to aspire to.  None of them referred directly 
to either of the philosophical approaches to holism, and none reflected on the meaning of the 
term as several had done when talking about what was natural.  Nevertheless, on closer 
examination of the participants’ comments, I was able to distinguish a number of underlying 
concepts that provided some insights into the meanings that they associated with the aspiration 
for an holistic approach to caring for their health.      
Balance and uniqueness of the person 
Foremost among the ideas participants expressed regarding holistic health were their various 
interpretations of ‘balance’.  Balance (or harmony) is an important and uncontroversial concept 
in holism (McEvoy & Duffy, 2008; Shroff, 2011) and one which is common to both the cosmic 
‘life force’ and the ‘integrated individual’ theoretical approaches.   
72 
 
 
 I would say I am into holistic, without being over the top.  I’m into the whole thing about 
doing the best you can for your body, looking after yourself, everything in moderation 
kind of. (Frances) 
Frances here interprets the idea of balance as moderation and avoiding extremes. There is a 
suggestion in her comment that she applies the idea of balance not only to her physical health 
but to other areas of her life as well.  For Murray on the other hand, the idea of balance was 
about the physical body alone and the use of supplements was to ensure he had what he 
believed to be the ‘correct’ mix of nutrients for good health:  
…the unpaired electrons attack unhealthy cells trying to balance themselves.  Well if, for 
whatever reason, the body is slightly run down, the baddies can overwhelm the goodies 
and invade the body.  So if the body is healthy through having all the sufficient minerals, 
vitamins and amino acids, it can stay at that higher level of health and fitness. (Murray) 
Wendy similarly focused on the body and the importance that she and her husband placed on 
“getting the balance right” by adding various supplements to their diet in addition to the food 
they ate.  Bryony’s views, on the other hand, were more aligned with the concept of the body as 
an integrated whole; in her view, she said, any health care treatment should be designed to 
address a person’s “unique way of disharmony” and restore their “whole body balance”.    
 
Other participants, however, seemed to connect their idea of balance with cosmic holism.  In the 
discussion with Tracy, for example, she referred to being guided by the Māori model of health 
which uses the metaphor of a house with four pillars, all of which must be equally strong to keep 
everything in balance.  The four pillars encompass physical, mental, spiritual and family health 
and are all linked together, reaching beyond the individual to the extended community and the 
wider cosmos (Waitangi Tribunal, 2011: 64).   
 
 I don’t know, whether because of being Māori or thinking differently that I look at it as 
more holistic, it’s every part of you.  So for example, really simply to put it, te whare tapa 
wha [the Māori model of health].  [If] you are not looking after one particular area …you 
can balance, but if there’s any stress comes on, then you can lapse.  (Tracy) 
A second theme that came through strongly from the participants was when they spoke about 
using supplements and other alternative health care modalities because they desired ‘more 
holistic’ health care.  Although the statement is vague, in essence there seemed to be several 
73 
 
 
related aspects that were important to participants.  Holistic health for Trudy was about having 
underlying beliefs that supported their whole persona and enabled them to enjoy living; it was 
not necessarily about their physical state:    
How do you know what perfect health is?  I don’t know.  What is it?  What does it look 
like for people?  Perfect health might be you are able to walk?  That for some people 
might be perfect health.  For other people it is never being sick.  I don’t know, is it a 
worthwhile quest for people?  I don’t know that it is.  I think there is a lot of time and 
effort wasted in not enjoying what you’ve got currently …  my family are all completely 
different and they all have their own set of beliefs equally as valid as what mine are and 
just as soul nurturing in their own way.  So really, the holistic thing coming into it.  
(Trudy) 
It is interesting here that Trudy refers to the idea of the quest, indicating that it goes beyond 
health to the meaning that can be drawn from life even if physical health has limitations.  Sally 
also saw holistic health as being beyond the biomedical approach.  She related how 
disappointed and humiliated she felt at the attitude she had experienced from doctors in 
relation to her longstanding pain.  She had been through many investigations and referrals 
without any explanation being found, yet her pain persisted.  Her account showed that she 
believed that the medical profession had come to find her tiresome because they were unable to 
find any cause that fitted their disease model and had ‘washed their hands’ of her problem:  
…the doctors just don’t want to know.  Put me into pain clinic.  All in the head in the end.  
And that was the most awful thing. (Sally) 
Sally’s comment here suggests that she interpreted the referral to the pain clinic as a rejection 
by the medical people she had consulted; a message without precisely saying so, that she was 
imagining her pain and so they were unable to help her any more.  The referral was the catalyst, 
she reported, for consulting an alternative therapist who treated her with kinesiology, massage 
and supplements and whom she found to be: 
 …the loveliest guy… a nice guy who is effective”: … I mentioned it [the abdominal pain] 
to this guy and he tested me – I was lying down...and he massaged it and it has been 
absolutely fine.  So I go to him when I need.  …   Oh, I will tell you what it’s called, the 
iliocecal valve and it’s either open or shut … and he has shut it or opened it. (Sally) 
74 
 
 
Sally’s account seems to indicate that it was the empathy of the alternative practitioner and the 
therapeutic touch of the massage  (Monroe, 2009) that finally relieved her longstanding 
problem.  Other participants also spoke about massage, oils, and supplements that had been 
used or recommended by alternative therapists.  These tangible ‘things appeared to be an 
important element of alternative approaches for Sally and for other participants and are 
examined in detail in the following chapter.   
Sally’s experiences also had an element of another aspect of holistic care that the participants 
spoke of; the desire to be treated as unique individuals rather than being categorised, referred 
between services, or boxed into standard treatments that took no account of their personal 
situation and context:    
…each time we’ve had medical contacts is seeing that GPs are just trying to throw statins 
at people or whatever the drug of choice is.  (Wendy) 
Models of primary health care in New Zealand are continually evolving, with many beginning to 
branch out into health hubs with collaboration between various professionals offering services 
such as physiotherapy, massage, nutrition, counselling and social work consultations (Breton et 
al., 2017; Pullon et al., 2016). There is also more explicit acknowledgement in recent 
commentary that doctors need to deal with people as individuals, yet the model of care they 
work within is still one where “the evidence is steeped in averages” (Lawson, 2019: 441). The 
aspiration may be to provide ‘person centred care’ (Richards et al., 2015; Van Royen et al., 2010) 
but it does not yet appear to have been translated into the type of doctor-patient encounters 
that the study participants said they were looking for.  Moreover, in the publicly subsidised 
primary care system in New Zealand, the time allowed for each appointment with a general 
practitioner is usually no more than 15 minutes (RNZCGP undated), well below the hour or more 
that the participants who practiced as alternative therapists said they allocated for each client:    
At an initial consultation sometimes it is quite hard to fit into an hour and a half; longer 
than that and it feels like it’s getting too long for the client but the longer the better in 
terms of getting information.  (Catherine) 
This last is an important point; as well as their own decisions about supplements, some 
participants had consulted alternative therapists of various kinds who had recommended 
various products to take (or avoid), and sometimes provided them directly to their clients as part 
of the treatment. However, rather than the supplements, it was the time that the therapists 
were willing to spend to listen to them and understand their individual concerns in detail that 
75 
 
 
appeared to be congruent with the participants’ construction of what holistic health care should 
be.  Invariably, the participants commented first on these interpersonal factors and the rapport 
they felt with the therapists, only afterwards mentioning what help they found for their health 
concerns. Holistic care was also consistently framed by participants as simply ‘nicer’ than 
orthodox care.  Olivia contrasted her experiences of the orthodox health system with her visits 
to alternative health providers:   
 Gosh people are nice in alternative health.  …  They’ve got a perspective that you are a 
whole person so they are willing to engage with whatever your questions are … it’s just a 
much nicer experience. … The [orthodox medical] system, you know, you go in feeling 
sick, to a place that deals with sick people, and you end up coming out feeling more sick 
– at least mentally – by the experience that you have had there. (Olivia) 
The therapeutic effect of an empathetic practitioner who provides reassurance by listening to 
their client intently and taking their concerns seriously, thereby sparking a sense of relief and 
corresponding improvement, is well documented (Feller & Cottone, 2003; Kaptchuk et al., 2008; 
Kelley et al., 2009; Larson & Yao, 2005). It was clear that those participants who had developed a 
rapport with a particular practitioner found it to have a healing effect. 
The desire for wholeness 
The participants also appeared to transfer the positive associations of therapist-mediated 
holistic care to supplement products that were described as being an overall or ‘all-in-one’ way 
of looking after themselves.   Although supplement product labelling does not tend to draw on 
holism vocabulary directly (or at least I did not come across any during my study), the 
implication that a product will cover all needs links to both philosophical approaches to holism, 
which both carry the idea of unity, whether in all things (metaphysical holism) or within the one 
individual.  Many participants made special mention of products that they used because they 
were a whole ‘package’ that would work on any need, even if the need could not be identified 
precisely.  Frances was one of several who took a product labelled ‘A to Zinc’; it seemed that the 
all-encompassing ‘A to Z’ descriptor answered her need to deal with non-specific symptoms she 
was experiencing but which she was unable to attribute to any particular cause:   
Well, lately I seem to be losing a lot of hair and I noticed I’ve got ridges in my nails – that 
can be a zinc deficiency, so I went off the Biomag and put myself just on a general 
Centrum vitamin that’s got a bit of zinc and everything in it.   (Frances) 
76 
 
 
The name seemed to reassure her that it would take care of whatever was causing her 
symptoms, and set her mind at rest about whether she ought to be doing more to look after 
herself.  The same idea seemed to underpin the ‘Manager’ products. Like the A to Zinc, such 
products do not tend to make a feature of their naturalness but the (very) small print on the 
container generally shows a range of vitamins, minerals and herbal ingredients.  They have 
down-to-earth names describing their function and seem to suggest that the consumer can do 
their part by buying and taking the product, then relax because the product will take over and do 
everything they need:      
I currently take a product, one called Cholesterol Manager and I basically probably 
haven’t stopped taking that for eight or nine years.  Another one called Glucose Manager 
because I am diabetic and the longer I can stay off, or keep the medications from the 
doctor lower, the better.  Whether it’s actually doing any good or not I’ve got no idea.  It 
certainly doesn’t seem to be doing me any harm.  (Paul) 
Paul’s lack of concern here suggests that he leaves everything up to his ‘managers’.  He describes 
being on them for a long time, and even though he claims he does not know whether they are 
doing him any good, there is an implication in his comment that he is confident that the 
products are ‘taking care’ of his conditions for him.  
Other supplements also draw from concepts implicit in holism by using generalised words for 
desirable qualities such as balance, ‘multi-zone’ and ‘all in one’.  They appear to be a modern 
version of the 19th and early 20th century health tonic, an all-encompassing general remedy that 
was said to have an enlivening effect on the whole body (Hands, 2018).  Tonics were popular in 
the past for a wide range of non-specific conditions such as ‘weakness’, ‘nervous instability’, 
nutritional deficiencies or to ‘purify the blood’ (Crellin, 2004: 65-66).  Patented tonics in 
advertisements from old magazines and newspapers include items such as Dr William’s Pink Pills 
for Pale People (Brewis, 1982: 125) which were said to give “pure blood and strong nerves” to 
‘ladies’ who took them.  Not so very long ago, orthodox medicine too, subscribed to the idea of a 
tonic, advising substances such as cod liver oil, malt, iron, alcohol, and even cocaine (Houston, 
1959; Musto, 1992; Nabarro, 1934). However, by the 1950s, tonics had fallen out of favour and 
came to be seen as unsophisticated and unscientific compared to vitamins, antibiotics and other 
modern drugs (Crellin, 2004). Today, the concept of the tonic appears to be undergoing a revival.  
The free magazines from the health food store chain that I collected during the study had 
products billed as “a century old immune booster” (Anonymous, 2017: 11) and many examples 
77 
 
 
of ‘detox’ products which, like the tonics of the 19th century, were promoted as having an overall 
effect by purifying the blood or the liver (Anonymous, 2018a: 6).    
Yet another form of the all-encompassing ‘holistic’ product was raised by participants who used 
or sold the ‘total nutrition’ supplement packages available through network marketing 
companies.  Usually these were in a powdered ‘shake’ format to be mixed with milk or water, 
and as they were said to provide a complete range of nutritional needs, they could be used as 
meal replacements.   Molly, who both used and sold these packages, was enthusiastic about 
their benefits.  She described them as being “like a tonic. …basically that just helps your system 
process things and all that sort of stuff”.  Several participants gave me brochures about products 
which used similar language (energy, vitality etc) as those sold in health stores and pharmacies, 
but also coined their own terms, ‘neo-life plus’ being one example.  Unlike the retail products, 
however, the contents on these packages were not specified.  Instead the products were 
described in an accompanying pamphlet as:  
… based in nature: backed by science …  delivered in highly bio-efficient forms in 
exclusive clinically proven formulas that maximize nutrient absorption, utilisation and 
benefits by using the most advanced scientific methods and proprietary processes 
(Anonymous, Undated).   
The idea of a tonic for ‘everything’ appears to have a particular power.   It may be that choosing 
not to know what is in a product or how it works somehow invests the substance with a type of 
mystique which may be spoilt for the user if it were to be itemised into a list of active 
ingredients and their percentages.  One herbal handbook I examined seemed to endorse this 
view, stating that herbal tonics are “… gifts of Mother Earth to her children.  To ask how they 
work, is to ask how life works” (Hoffmann, 1988: 87-88). The implication here is that the process 
at work is beyond human understanding and there is no need to know more or try to investigate 
it.  It may be that the concept links back to memories of the substances in myths and fairy tales, 
as discussed in Chapter 2, that have such powerful effects.  While these views may seem 
counter-intuitive in the modern age, several participants with widely differing world views 
indicated that they were not interested in how things they ingested worked.  Olivia, speaking 
about the products she used, remarked simply that “It works; I don’t need to know how it 
works.”  Molly, rather more pragmatically simply placed her faith in the expertise of the 
international product company she used, noting that “They [the company] do all the science so 
we [the users/sellers] don’t have to.”   While she did not deny that science needed to be 
78 
 
 
involved, she seemed to prefer not to know anything about the details and to simply take 
assurances on trust.   
World views like these clearly clash with those who like to find out exactly what is in their 
products and understand the scientific basis behind them.  Moreover they give a ready platform 
to critics of alternative health care products to label the people who use them indiscriminately 
as being superstitious and anti-science (Ernst & Singh, 2008; Freeman, 2005: 155). A more 
measured view than these opposing dualisms, suggests that people who have faith in products 
like tonics because they see them as holistic rather than directed solely at a biomedical result is 
a result of a strong medical counterculture in the last several decades which has led to:   
 …an increasing awareness of the limits to orthodox biomedicine in terms of safety and 
efficacy and a desire by consumers to gain greater control over their own health care 
and well-being – especially when orthodoxy had failed to produce results for them 
individually (Saks, 2003: 144).       
As Saks points out, there are many more nuances across the spectrum of products and opinions 
about supplements and alternative medicines that sit between the avid supporters on the one 
end and the vociferous critics on the other.  The issue cannot simply be dismissed as one 
between ‘experts’ on the one hand and misguided or ignorant members of the public on the 
other.  It is just as well documented that a degree of faith, rather than strong evidence, 
underpins some of the most widely used drugs in orthodox medicine.  The mechanism of action 
of paracetamol (acetaminophen) is still regarded as not entirely certain (Bonnefont et al., 2003; 
Graham et al., 2013; Graham & Scott, 2005), and evidence about whether SSRIs (selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors) are effective for depression is said by a number of commentators 
to be weak (Ioannidis, 2008; Moncrieff & Kirsch, 2005).   
While the comments of the participants about holistic approaches to health were framed in an 
entirely positive light, holism and the concept of holistic health does have its critics.   Both   
metaphysical holism and the integrated individual approaches to holism have been seen as 
moralistic and to have a tendency to blame people who do not use illness or adversity as an 
opportunity for personal growth; they are expected to use their experiences to finding meaning 
in all aspects of life, including those which are unpleasant or painful (Erickson, 2007; Goldstein et 
al., 1988; Hoffmann, 1988; McColl, 1994). Because both approaches require the individual to 
take responsibility for rising above their problems - putting aside their worldly desires 
(metaphysical holism) or reconciling their body, mind, and spirit – they have been criticised as 
79 
 
 
ignoring social determinants of health such as poverty and unemployment, over which 
individuals have little control (Lowenberg & Davis, 1994; Madden, 2012; Marmot, 2005). 
Condemning the individual regardless of their circumstances if they ‘fail’ to achieve the desired 
level of integration or inner peace, according to this critique, as Madden (2012: 31) has 
commented, may “actually strengthen biomedical hegemony.”   
None of the participants mentioned or even appeared to be aware of the negative views of 
holism and holistic health. The criticisms raised in the academic literature were simply absent 
from the discussion.   Moreover, participants’ comments indicated that they were acutely aware 
of the problems faced by their own networks of family and friends and how these in turn were 
often driven by societal conditions.  They appeared to see this as an additional reason to seek 
what they interpreted as holistic care rather than being in conflict with it or burdening them 
with more responsibility than they desired. As Caro pointed out, there are much wider 
contributors to wellbeing than health care services alone:   
So you have to sweep the yard before you can see the floor sort of thing …   all the other 
things around that need to be good before you can get to the Type 2 diabetes … the 
person with the diabetes is thinking about their mokopuna [grandchildren] not having 
any shoes or not being able to pay.  …. when you are working in a Māori holistic, a 
kaupapa Māori organisation, you are looking at the whole picture, not just the Type 2 
diabetes. (Caro) 
Many of the participants made comments in a similar vein; it was a rare conversation that did 
not touch on the influence of socio-economic circumstances and the wider environment on their 
own health and that of others.  Far from it being an oppressive duty, almost all participants 
indicated that being responsible for their health was something they aspired to, and wanted to 
be actively involved in. Moreover, given that the terms holism and holistic health now have such 
a fluid interpretation in common parlance, and are used with such frequency, these criticisms 
seem to have lost their relevance, except within academic theoretical discussion.  The idea of 
responsibility is taken up again in Chapter 6.     
The two theories of holism have quite distinct beliefs and are markedly different from each 
other. It seems, however, that ideas about holism and holistic health have been adopted in a 
form that has become distanced from either of these defined theoretical origins and has taken 
on a much more diffuse understanding.  The variety of ways that holistic health is interpreted 
appears to defy efforts at defining it (Goddard, 1995; McEvoy & Duffy, 2008) and to demonstrate 
80 
 
 
precisely what Derrida meant about the futility of attempting to pin things down into a fixed 
state.  Deconstructing holistic health shows a range of diverse discourses being applied across a 
wide spectrum.  They have similarities around themes of connectedness, integration, balance, 
harmony, and wholeness. However, holistic health is also being stretched to accommodate 
competing nuances that range from the mysterious healing power of tonics to the statements of 
the Royal New Zealand College of General Practitioners about the way the health care services 
they provide are organised.  With the term ‘holistic’ being applied to almost anything, it might 
seem that it has become no more than a feel-good buzzword’ (Cornwall, 2007) in danger of 
dissolving into “multiplicity and disassociation” (Derrida 1997: 13).  On the other hand, it may be 
that its very ambiguity and vagueness (Davis, 2008: 69) allows the overall concept to evolve in 
new ways that produce change and development.  Whatever the future, however, the important 
point is that all the different discourses about holistic health were being discussed and were 
interconnecting with the many other actants in the rhizomatic assemblage, changing and being 
changed in a constant process of becoming.  
Quite different from the vagueness of holistic health, however, were the very specific ideas 
about risk that the participants held.  Every one of them had something to say about risk, had 
clearly thought about risk in some detail.    As Zinn (2008: 3) comments, “risk looms large in 
present day society”, with new risks highlighted daily across a vast spectrum of scientific and 
everyday situations. Risk drives both societal and individual actions in responses that seek to 
measure it, contain it, eliminate it, or even in some circumstances, to embrace it.  The next 
section outlines the way the participants viewed risk. 
 Safety from risk: the body under siege  
Participants connected their supplement use directly with efforts to address the risks that they 
believed they might have been exposed to or were a continuing concern in the lives.  Jordan for 
example, told me that:   
Twenty five years ago I would have told you that supplementation was a complete waste 
of time.  That all you needed was a good diet.  Then someone challenged me to go and 
investigate what’s actually in our food.  I now take up to 25 supplements a day.  (Jordan)  
Safety and risk are two sides of the same coin as people seek certainty in an uncertain and 
insecure world (Tierney, 1999; Walklate, 2004).  But risk tends to be by far the more dominant 
discourse (Derby & Keeney, 1981; Spencer & Triche, 1994; West, 2000). The predominance of 
risk across so many aspects of life has led to what Lupton describes as “an apparatus of expert 
81 
 
 
research, knowledge and advice [about risk] … in areas as far-ranging as medicine and public 
health, finance, the law, and business and industry” (2013: 10).   There are two main approaches 
to investigating risk.  Realist perspectives use statistical methods to quantify the current and 
future likelihood and magnitude of events or dangers occurring and model what actions can be 
taken to reduce such risks.  In health care, for example, they may measure a person’s risk of 
heart disease or diabetes, and to what extent the risk might reduce if certain interventions are 
made (Agborsangaya et al., 2013; Finegold et al., 2013).  Constructionist approaches, on the 
other hand, examine the different contexts in which risks come to be understood (Lupton, 2013; 
Zinn, 2008), seeing risk as always being mediated through social and cultural views and 
experiences.  Some constructionist approaches propose that the emphasis placed on risk is a 
general social response to the uncertainty of modern times and a growing distrust by the public 
in the capability of science and technology to address the problems that they have created or 
recognise new ones that emerge. The concept of an overall social response is fundamental to 
the idea of modernity as a “risk society” (Beck, 1992, 2000; Giddens, 1990). A more 
individualised and nuanced approach to risk was taken by Lupton (1999) and Tulloch and Lupton 
(2003), who demonstrated that rather than being generalised as an overall public response, risk 
perceptions are strongly shaped by individual factors such as cultural background, gender, and 
nationality. Moreover, that responses to risk change over time as a person moves through life, 
depending on their experiences, their social standing, their access to resources, and the people 
they come into contact with.  The participants’ comments on risk were consistent with this latter 
approach.  Most of them drew on current social discourses about risk, and some of them also 
cited statistics that drew on realist understandings, but it was clear that they saw risk as 
personal and contextual to their own lives.   They might couch their initial comments in general 
terms, for example, speaking about the risk that environmental contamination posed to health, 
but then go on to explain in more detail the personal or family health problems which they 
believed had come about because of the risks they had experienced and actions they had taken.  
Their reactions to risk were selective and individualised, illustrating Zinn’s comment that the way 
people handle risk is as much about “different values and lifestyles, power relations and 
emotions” (Zinn 2008: 4) as it is about any ‘reality’ of risk.    
While the risks that the participants raised were mostly related to personal health, they also 
ranged more widely, particularly into adjacent issues of food safety and quality, environmental 
contamination, and potential risks to global security.   Each person had a different story to 
recount as to how they had arrived at their particular position where health risk intersected with 
82 
 
 
supplements, but common to them all was the idea that the positive ‘naturalness’ of 
supplements was one avenue that could be mobilised to offset the negative health risks that 
concerned them. Bernie described occupational exposures that had influenced his present 
views:    
… ten years working in very chemically intensive environments and huge amount of 
stress as well.  There were lots of tests, some of those were sent over to America, and 
some of those came back as quite chronic deficiencies in quite a few areas.  So nothing 
else had actually worked medically, so we were using nutritional supplements to get me 
back on my feet again.  (Bernie) 
As a result of his experiences, Bernie had undergone a series of training courses to become 
knowledgeable about supplements and was now an owner-operator of a health food store with 
several staff.   As well, he grew his own vegetables and ensured that any other produce he 
consumed was ‘spray-free’ so that he reduced exposure to any pesticide residues.  
Importantly, the risks participants talked about were not just those they knew were definite, and 
those which they suspected were possible or likely, but they also had an awareness that there 
may be other unknown risks ‘out there’ which they as yet could not even imagine.   As Daase 
and Kessler (2007: 411) have described, the spectrum of risk encompasses everything from the 
immediate and specific to those which are entirely unsuspected:        
We might have reliable methods of identifying observable facts, thus producing known 
knowns.  But we might also have some methods of dealing with phenomena that we are 
not 100% sure of, thus creating known unknowns.  On the other hand, we must accept 
that there might be things we do not even dream of and have no method of anticipating; 
these are the unknown unknowns.  
This excerpt comes from the apparently unrelated sphere of global terrorism, but it exactly 
parallels the categories of risk that the participants raised.  These included health problems they 
already had and feared could worsen; those they did not yet have but felt they might be at risk 
of developing; and those that may well exist ‘out there’ somewhere, even though as yet they 
were unknown and unsuspected.  They also differentiated between external risks that might 
invade them from outside the body, and those that they might be carrying already within 
themselves and which were lurking there ready to make themselves evident.   Using 
supplements was a defence strategy that could be mobilised in all these categories.     
83 
 
 
Repelling external invaders  
The most obvious of the risks that participants spoke about were the viruses and temporary 
ailments that might invade the body and take hold at an inconvenient time.  Participants used 
supplements to try and ward off risks that seemed imminent, in the hope that they would be 
able to keep on with their work commitments, continue to run a business or take care of their 
family’s needs:      
All the staff were sick, coughing over me, and I started having a sore throat.  I thought, oh 
no, … I cannot get sick if I’m going off on a trip like that so I took the prescribed dose of 
this particular Echinacea product and OK, maybe my body got on top of it or what but I 
went on the trip, was fine, came back to find that I had no more symptoms or anything 
and they were still sick when I came back.  (Lou) 
Fortifying themselves with supplements was an easily mobilised strategy that people could 
employ as an attempt to protect against illness, which at best would be an interruption to usual 
activities or at worst, cause financial hardship.   
Rather than the familiar hazard of being laid low by a virus, it was the risk of exposure to 
environmental contamination through air, soil, and water that the participants raised more 
frequently as a concern.  Several spoke heatedly about the lack of control that individual 
members of the public like themselves had over these dangerous substances that were 
everywhere and were constantly threatening to invade their bodies and make them ill:       
….  we have 27,000 chemicals left over from the Vietnam war, only five of which have 
been tested in singularity for safety and these are being used now in the agricultural 
industries.  We’ve got the timber industry; we’ve got the dairy industry and other 
industries, all these toxins that we’ve been exposed to, many of which have in some ways 
unknown effects on our DNA especially when they are given in combinations.  …  I believe 
the reason that a lot of chronic diseases are on the increase is because of chromosomal 
mutations, and I believe that‘s why things like cancers are rife, and diabetes and all these 
other things.  (Jordan) 
Jordan suggests that these invaders may be operating at an insidious and unknown level, 
attacking the very building blocks of the body, its DNA.  Bernie, too, was also concerned about 
being exposed to environmental contamination.  He also had statistics at hand, telling me “there 
are nine new chemicals released every day untested and there are huge amounts of chemicals in 
84 
 
 
our food.”  Noticeably, they both draw attention to the lack of testing, implying that harm to 
health is already happening and yet there is a cavalier disregard on the part of the unnamed 
authorities they consider responsible.   The concerns Jordan and Bernie express are not unusual; 
they align with wider societal concerns about environmental contamination causing health risks  
(Werner, 2014) as well as the level of uncertainty as to how these hazards can be managed 
(Campbell-Lendrum et al., 2015; Costello et al., 2009; Springmann et al., 2016)  
Bernie and Jordan’s comments drew on realist ideas of risk, citing statistics and indicating that 
they believed the risks ought to be better quantified and controlled by those in authority.  Yet 
while their statements were put forward as resulting from their cognitive reasoning, both Bernie 
and Jordan also described personal health problems which they attributed to environmental 
exposures, and which had clearly influenced their views.  Moreover, they indicated that they 
were making their own assessment about risk without waiting for any official announcement.  
They both went on to speak of the strategies they used, including taking supplements, to 
respond to the risks they believed were important. This reaction is what Beck (1992) termed  
‘reflexive modernisation’, that is where individuals feel they cannot trust science or 
governments and are left to their own devices to decide what is risky and what is not and then 
take action accordingly.  
As well as concerns about contamination from chemicals in the environment, many participants 
also worried about substances that were deliberately added to foods during processing:  
...it is almost like we are getting attacked through the foods we eat and the chemicals we 
take [in]. …   To me, the best way is to get everything as foods and eat well but with 
everything being processed so much now ….there is sort of a lot of stuff to say that food, 
processed foods, all these chemicals, all these numbers … and that’s not good. (Cliff)   
The ‘numbers’ Cliff refers to are the E-codes used by the International Numbering System for 
identifying Food Additives (World Health Organisation & Food and Agricultural Organisation, 
2019). The list of synthetic and natural additives is itself a diverse and moving assemblage; new 
substances are added and deleted over time, and each country has their own regulatory regime 
which stipulates which ones are allowable in foods manufactured and consumed there  (Carocho 
et al., 2014). These additives were a welcome advance in health and food safety when they were 
first introduced in the early 20th century and enforced by regulations to prevent spoilage of food 
(Carocho et al., 2014; Doyle & Glass, 2010; Holzapfel et al., 1995; Shahidi & Zhong, 2010).  Today, 
however, when food safety tends to be taken for granted, additives and preservatives have 
85 
 
 
become unnatural ‘undesirables’, viewed with suspicion and mistrust by an increasing number of 
consumers (Cox et al., 2004) whether or not they are officially approved as safe (Carocho et al., 
2014; Devcich et al., 2007). Indeed caution about additives is growing in scientific writing as well, 
as a recent study of the association between ‘ultraprocessed’ foods and mortality shows 
(Schnabel et al., 2019).  
Along with environmental contaminants and food additives, prescribed medicines were 
constructed by some participants as a separate category of dangerous external invaders.   None 
of them were opposed to pharmaceuticals in principle, but many had become wary about taking 
prescription medicines because of previous negative experiences. Several suggested that doctors 
were too ready to prescribe drugs without cautioning them about possible harm of long term 
use or following up to check how they were reacting:  
… it was the pharmaceuticals, sadly, that got my children into trouble.  My eldest son 
went on to a product called Roaccutane. … And he developed depression. And kids that 
have a face that looks like a pizza, actually tend to get depression, and Roaccutane can 
actually push them over the edge with suicidal tendencies.  And that’s what it did.  I 
didn’t lose him but I came close a few times and he was never monitored properly.  
(Lesley) 
Moreover, some had found that if they raised their concerns with their doctor, they might 
simply be offered more of the same medicines or different ones rather than be given any 
suggestions for non-pharmaceutical treatments. Trudy reported that a family member had been 
prescribed “stronger and stronger pain medication … to the point where he couldn’t function.  
It’s not safe”.  Another participant found the tendency to simply escalate the dose of medication 
if it did not seem to be working was concerning, particularly in the light of her own experiences; 
she had become dependent on pain medication after a sports injury:    
…  my GP would just write me out some more prescriptions if I needed it and I was just - 
no I don’t want it, I’m coming off it.  … The specialist offered to give me anti-depressant 
pills which would help relax my nerves and help me sleep.  But he said oh, they’re really 
terrible and lots of people have lots of issues with this one but we won’t really know until 
you try it.  (Tracy) 
She went on to relate how she realised that her doctors either could not, or were not interested, 
in helping her overcome her dependence and she would have to take the initiative herself and 
use strategies outside of formal medicine.  With the help of a pharmacist who suggested 
86 
 
 
gradually reducing her dose and adding a natural sleep remedy she reported she was able to 
gradually wean herself off the prescription drugs and cope with the withdrawal symptoms, but it 
had left her disillusioned with medical experts and sceptical about all prescribed drugs, 
particularly if they were taken over a long period.     
Other participants with chronic conditions such as diabetes, cardiovascular or joint problems 
were also uneasy about some of the medications that they depended on.  Several of them 
mentioned that, knowing the side effects of the drug they took, they were anxious to maintain 
their dose at the lowest possible level and supplements were a strategy that they believed could 
help do this:      
I take vitamin B12 because of the metformin that is used to treat diabetes.  ….  Doing the 
research on the ‘net about that I discovered that metformin was one of the reasons you 
have low B12 levels …  I just brought it up on the smartphone and was reading through it 
and discovered the link to metformin and I thought gee … (Paul)  
Participants such as Tracy and Paul found it disturbing that they had not been given any 
warnings about possible negative effects of the drugs they were prescribed and were taking long 
term.  They indicated that they felt let down by what they perceived as the lack of care on the 
part of health professionals they had trusted to have their best interests at heart.  If they had 
known, they suggested, they would have been alert to the risk from the start and would have 
taken steps themselves to counter it.  Situations like these create a lack of trust in those who 
have experienced them.  Some commentators have blamed the popular media for the distrust of 
health risk experts; they maintain that the media has over-emphasised unusual and exotic health 
risks and downplayed those that are more mundane, such as poor diet and smoking, to the point 
that it has “…undermined [the general public’s] view of their own health, [and] increased their 
worries about environmental causes of poor health and fostered a migration to complementary 
medicine” (Petrie & Wessely, 2002: 690). Lupton however, takes the opposite view, finding that 
being sceptical of official advice and making up one’s own mind about what is risky and what is 
not, is a “highly rational response to the failure of technico-scientific rationality in late 
modernity” (Lupton, 1999: 68).   The participants appeared to be thinking along the same lines 
and acting accordingly, particularly when their lack of trust was grounded in personal 
experience.   As well as the fears about external substances that they might be ingesting or 
inhaling, many of them also raised concerns about being invaded stealthily from within by 
processes that were already going on in their bodies.  Supplements, it seemed, could also be 
87 
 
 
mobilised as a protection against these internal risks, which might be lurking passively waiting 
their time to become active and damage their health and wellbeing.    
The quiet invader within   
Even if individuals are leading exemplary lives, and following all the recommended advice about 
taking care of their health there is always the possibility that they may suddenly find themselves 
‘at risk’ of an unexpected disease or condition. There is no doubt that the ‘body at risk’ is a 
constant theme in both the general and academic media. Popular publications tend to grasp new 
studies of risk and highlight the most alarming points out of context, particularly if they are 
linked to dreaded conditions like cancer or dementia (Behuniak, 2011; McDonald et al., 2016). 
Medical systems too tend to give the impression that everyone is at risk, highlighting one risk 
after another followed by a constant stream of advice and warnings to individuals about how 
they should conduct themselves in the face of these risks (Crawford, 2004). People who are 
otherwise perfectly well are routinely assessed for cardiovascular risk, checked for diabetes, and 
urged to participate in cancer screening programmes (Ali et al., 2015; Canadian Task Force on 
Preventive Health Care, 2012; Goff et al., 2014; Wardle et al., 2016; Weng et al., 2017).  
Additionally, technical advances in DNA analysis that have resulted from the human genome 
project, and the popularity of low-cost direct-to-consumer genetic testing has greatly increased 
the genetic conditions that can be identified far ahead of any symptom development (Manolio 
et al., 2019; Peterson et al., 2019). Members of the public can send samples of their saliva for 
testing and may find out they have a genetic makeup which is a risk factor for conditions which 
may never develop, or diseases which the individuals concerned may never have heard of 
(Armstrong et al., 2003; Gollust et al., 2003; Heshka et al., 2008; Hogarth et al., 2008; Ransohoff 
& Khoury, 2010). While these advances have been advantageous in some respects (Wise et al., 
2019), they have also exacerbated anxiety about risks that would never have previously been 
anticipated (Oliveri et al., 2016). As Lupton (2013) has pointed out, the widespread focus on risk 
rather than making people feel safer may increase their anxiety through highlighting it as 
something to which they need to direct their attention.  It is well documented, for example, that 
cancer screening programmes generate anxiety in some individuals, simply by inviting them in to 
be checked even leaving aside the inexactitude of some of the measures used (Byrne et al., 
2008; Consedine et al., 2004; Yeh et al., 2015).    
A number of participants with arthritis or residual discomfort from sports injuries worried about 
their conditioning worsening to the point where it would prevent them doing their usual 
activities. Their fears were not about the present but of chronic illness and disability lurking in 
88 
 
 
the body and which could flare up and hit them with permanent ‘biographical disruption’ (Bury, 
1982; Morden et al., 2017; Williams, 2000).  They had turned to supplements to try to defer the 
anticipated deterioration in their health as long as they could.  Murray explained what it meant 
to him to have found supplements that helped:      
everything…my mobility, independence, not relying on anyone for help  … the 
procosamine – the glucosamine sulphate – helps  joint health and build …cartilage … [I 
have] full mobility  …  and without it my hip wouldn’t have done, wouldn’t have lasted. 
(Murray) 
Others had no problems as yet but worried about the unknown future if they did not take 
preventive measures now, based on the history of older family members.  Johnny’s experience 
of his mother’s poor health at a relatively young age and her distress at being dependent and in 
pain had made him fear what could be ahead for himself.  He said it had been a strong incentive 
for him to resolve to stop smoking, and generally lead a healthier life in the expectation that he 
could avoid having his quality of life eroded in the same way:  
Seeing what my mother is like, I don’t want to actually be like that myself.  You know, she 
feels like she is a burden on people.  … Mum, she’s overweight so she finds it harder to 
exercise and then with her heart problem the way it was, she couldn’t actually get up 
and walk anywhere.  …  She has to have a knee replacement but she doesn’t get the knee 
replacement until she loses some weight …. (Johnny) 
He had not smoked for many years now, exercised more, and was taking “all the vitamins and 
minerals and things” as well as using different alternative therapies to do his best to stay fit and 
healthy.   
A further category of unknown risk raised by participants was the concept of ‘subtractives’ 
(Rozin et al., 2009), that is, concern about nutrients that were missing from their ordinary foods.  
So rather than worrying about chemicals or additives in food that could harm them, their 
concerns related to what was assumed to be in food but was not:  
…  the amino acids which are not in our proteins anymore because they put on farms – 
super phosphates that kills …   microbes, there’s no worms on the farms; the minerals 
can’t get into the plants; there’s no vitamins in the plants.  They sit up; the grass looks 
green but there is no nutrition in it.  Therefore the animals are eating that and everything 
is on the back foot.  (Clara) 
89 
 
 
The food might look fresh and wholesome, but Clara and several other participants spoke of 
their concerns about the possibility that the food they consumed was deficient in nutrients and 
that their health was therefore being gradually undermined.  Murray, similarly, raised a point 
about the properties of plants that had been manipulated for commercial reasons, further 
reducing their nutrient value.  He said he believed that something was wrong with modern 
cultivation methods though was uncertain of the exact details:     
…we are not getting the minerals and vitamins from our foods that we used to, because 
wheat is stripped of twenty two and then replaced with six or whatever ….   (Murray) 
Pat, who had worked in a bakery also talked about the reduction in the quality and nutrient 
value of bread during his time there because of new methods that were brought in to speed up 
the process and avoid the long hours needed for ‘natural’ rising of the dough. This had resulted 
in “this crap bread that you get in the supermarkets.  It’s not good for us”. 
The concern about harm from what has been taken out of food is less often voiced than that 
relating to what has been added.  Rozin et al (2009) found that only a tiny minority of the more 
than 1000 comments they collected from the public about naturalness in foods mentioned what 
he termed  ‘subtractives’, while almost two thirds mentioned additives.  The participants in my  
(much smaller) study, however, highlighted the issue of foods that lacked nutrients a number of 
times, suggesting perhaps that there may have been a growing concern about what is lacking in 
food in the decade that has passed since the Rozin study was published.  What has not changed 
is that, in common with the findings by Rozin et al (2009), turning to supplements, a positive 
form of ‘additive’ was a strategy to overcome the unknown shortfall and allay their concerns.  
Almost all participants were also worried about the unknown risk of stress on their health.  
Although stress can have positive as well as negative connotations (Baum, 1990; Bernstein, 
1996; Lazarus, 1993; Selye, 1973; Skjong, 2005), the participants tended to see it only in a 
negative light. The issue of stress was particularly salient at the time the participants were 
interviewed, as it was only a few years after a series of major earthquakes in Christchurch, when 
many of them had lost their homes or had them seriously damaged.  Some were still fighting to 
get insurance payouts for their homes and/or business and were uncertain about their future 
housing and financial position. Even those who had not been materially affected were still 
suffering from a degree of anxiety and uncertainty that the long running series of earthquakes 
had provoked. While their comments indicated that they attributed the cause of stress to 
external events and circumstances, they interpreted the effect of stress as being an eroding 
90 
 
 
force from within and one which could have unknown, but potentially far-reaching effects on 
their health.   
…one of the biggest influences on health is stress because I feel like it has a huge impact 
on your ability to stay healthy and happy in the world.  (Bryony) 
The natural characteristics of supplements were viewed as a positive buffer against stress and a 
safeguard against the long-term, quiet undermining of their health without resorting to 
antidepressants or sleeping tablets, and, as Vonnie remarked, a far better option than “using 
more crutches ….alcohol, also drugs, smoking”.   
The most acute expression of unknown risk, however, came from one participant whose 
pessimistic view of the future had been a trigger for a radical revision of her family’s lifestyle to 
include natural products, supplements and self-sufficiency strategies:   
 I was into the essential oils  - essential oils and natural stress [relief] coming here after 
the earthquakes … I think if anything major happens in the world we are going to have to 
go back to natural stuff.  That was one of the reasons we had started back then, us 
believing in a doomed world – you know, if there was fighting in certain areas then you 
are not going to be able to access it.  So then what are you going to do?  What are you 
going to be able to use?  So we have started – we are not great at it – but we have 
started growing vegetables, trying to do a few more things. (Wendy) 
Wendy here draws on the link between the ‘unknown unknowns’ that are part of the risk 
assemblage and links them with the assemblage of the natural to frame her view of the future 
and the strategy that she and her family were evolving to cope with it. She did not raise climate 
change but her comments about a ‘doomed world’ do appear to be connected to the same 
discourses of the perilous future regarding global planetary health (Hansen et al., 2013; Kendall 
et al., 2018; Sundström et al., 2014). Her ideas were unusual among the participants at the time, 
but in the few years since we spoke, they have become part of general discourse.    
In contrast, the one risk that appeared to be almost entirely disregarded by all by participants 
was any notion that they might be at risk from taking self-prescribed supplements and herbal 
medicines.  They saw them as an avenue whereby they could “do something safely for myself” 
(Charles).  Their lack of concern about taking products they chose for themselves was in sharp 
contrast to their concerns about prescribed medicines. It was also in direct contrast to the 
volume of medical literature which frames supplements as risky, and consumers as vulnerable 
91 
 
 
and in need of protecting from taking products without professional supervision (Geyer et al., 
2008; Lewis, 2019; Stickel et al., 2009; Tsai et al., 2012). Many participants indicated that they 
were well aware of this disapproval by the medical profession but did not consider it relevant to 
their decisions about supplements.  Most would, however, usually avoid discussing their 
supplement use with their doctor to avoid any conflict.  The juxtaposition of these opposite 
points of view is taken up again in Chapter 6.   
Those who sold supplements, on the other hand, appeared to be keenly aware of the discourse 
of risk from self-prescribed supplements that emanated from health professionals.  Although I 
was not the one to raise the issue in the interview, almost all of them appeared to be positioning 
themselves in relation to the criticism that they attract for selling such products to members of 
the general public.  They all outlined in detail the steps they took to ensure the safety of their 
products and advice. They spoke about the attention they paid to ensure that they stocked good 
quality products that were accurately labelled and complied with regulations.  They reported 
that they questioned their customers carefully about any prescribed medicines they took so that 
they could check for potentially dangerous interactions. They drew attention to the importance 
of being confident themselves in their products and maintaining their reputation for providing 
professional and reliable advice which did not put their customers ‘at risk’. As Kerry noted,  
All the brands that we have got down there [in the shop] are good brands.  I would feel 
really safe recommending any of them.  (Kerry) 
 One of them also pointed out that the product manufacturers, too, had their reputation at stake 
and would lose a great deal if their merchandise was found to be contaminated or of poor 
quality:  
And all the providers through the [name of health store chain] are randomly audited and 
regularly tested through the Ministry of Health as well and they know… if there was 
anything in those products – it would just wreck their multi-million dollar business 
overnight.  They are extremely careful to be clean. (Bernie) 
At the time of the interviews there had been a flurry of news in the popular media based on a 
recent study of fish oils that were on sale locally (Albert et al., 2015). The reports described fish 
oil as being more like  ‘snake oil’, noting that it was often oxidised, in which state if could be 
harmful to those taking it.  One of the pharmacists commented on this controversy:  
92 
 
 
…from what I saw and what I heard was that it was a storm in a teacup; it was a 
misinformed article and it wasn’t actually relevant to what we use in New Zealand.  
Primarily it came back to storage conditions.  You will get an article that will be quite 
inflammatory – everyone that is for it [for example, fish oil] says ‘pile of rubbish’ and 
everyone against it and doesn’t believe it in the first place says ‘Oh, I thought so, I had 
my suspicions, I knew all along’.  (Jo) 
Subsequent stories about fish oil across various popular websites over the next couple of years 
cycled back and forth through positive and then negative framings and back again.  Fish oil was 
presented in some items as preventing diabetes, helping heart health and being beneficial for 
pregnant women. Other headlines pronounced that fish oil products often lacked the ingredients 
they claimed, were ineffective, a waste of money, or potentially harmful if they had been stored 
too long.  It is well documented that popular and social media tend to provide this kind of 
contradictory advice on health issues to readers with eye-catching headlines (Ramachandran et 
al., 2018).  The end result of this kind of reporting, as Jo noted, is that people tend to dismiss 
those that do not coincide with their own views and interpret those they agree with as an 
endorsement for what they practice.10   
The participants’ approach to risk was different again from the way they talked about either 
naturalness or holistic health. Whereas naturalness was shown to be much richer and more 
nuanced than the straightforward meaning many participants assumed, and holism was revealed 
to be evolving towards meaning almost anything, it was the detailed discussions and 
explanations that participants put forward about the risks that concerned them that stood out.    
The shifting nature of risk is well recognised in modern everyday life because of the focus of 
attention that it receives from the media, the orthodox health system, and many other fields.   It 
was interesting that none of the participants contested the idea that they were ‘at risk’ or found 
risks to be over-stated.  On the contrary, most seemed to accept that there were known and 
unknown risks everywhere that could affect them and it was up to them to take action to 
counteract them.  However, the risks they singled out from the amorphous assemblage were 
individualised, reflecting adverse health events experienced or witnessed in their own lives, but 
also overlaid with interpretations in the light of prominent public discourses that had resonated 
with them. Participants, in effect deconstructed risk themselves.  Their comments showed their 
recognition that risk was heterogeneous, always evolving and always open to the appearance of 
                                                          
10 The paper that sparked the controversy was retracted in September 2019, after acknowledging that it 
contained ‘fundamental calculation errors’ (Rucklidge et al 2019). 
93 
 
 
something new and ‘other’ (Derrida 1997).  They also implicitly recognised the rhizomatic nature 
of risk as something which was connected to a wide variety of actants in the assemblage around 
supplements, including foods, medicines, the environment, their genetic makeup and familial 
disposition to disease and to ideas about a ‘doomed world’.   
The focus on risk in this section may give a somewhat misleading impression of the participants 
as a group of over-anxious people, the kind that are dismissively referred to as the ‘worried well’ 
(Lapsley, 2006; Lentjes, 2019) obsessed with their health status, and constantly on the watch for 
emerging risks that could strike them from within or without.  However, their concerns are not 
out of line with general popular and academic discourses.   An endless stream of studies and 
reports continues to be published that investigates many of the very issues that the participants 
raised and these are taken seriously by the scientific community and a considerable proportion 
of society (Bergé et al., 2013; Chang et al., 2014; Kendall et al., 2018; Meeker, 2012; Mink et al., 
2011; Sundström et al., 2014; Weber et al., 2018). Moreover, the shifting boundaries in the 
classification of disease through the construct of pre-disease states, create categories of people 
who are in an ambiguous position between normal health and pathology (Swallow, 2019).  Being 
in this uncertain state leads to even greater feelings of risk and uncertainty and the need to 
respond to it in some way.  Ironically, it seems that the climate of risk promulgated, at least in 
part, by orthodox medicine, may assist the flourishing of the supplement industry as people such 
as the participants turn to products that they believe will offer protection.  So rather than being 
disproportionately obsessed with risk, it may be that it is their independent decision making that 
bypasses the need for ‘expert’ advice that underlies a good deal of the criticism that supplement 
users attract from health professionals.   
Indeed, once the participants recognised a risk, they did not dwell on it obsessively, but used 
their concerns in a productive way.  They made decisions and took action to address those risks 
they believed were important in the light of their own experiences and context.  Supplements 
offered a strategy to defuse their anxiety, and get on with living their lives, at least for the time 
being.  This was the impression I got from talking to them; that having decided that they could 
do something about their concerns, they could then set their mind at rest. They did, however, 
appear to view risk as evolving and changing all the time rather than something that they had 
dealt with permanently and were alert to risks that might develop in the future.   
94 
 
 
Conclusion 
This chapter has endeavoured to examine and unsettle the concepts that are deeply embedded 
behind the everyday discourse about supplements and herbal medicines. Naturalness, holistic 
health and keeping safe from risk have been discussed at some length to show the wide variety 
of understandings that the participants expressed in their comments.  The assemblage of ideas 
and practices generated from the discussion about these three concepts showed that 
participants expressed views ranging from repeating uncontested assumptions to putting 
forward thought-provoking insights about competing meanings that they observed in their own 
or others’ practices.   
Deconstructing these three discourses in the light of the data from the participants, has revealed 
a number of new insights about that go beyond the previous understandings of how naturalness, 
holistic health and risk are related to supplement use.  Firstly, the discussion has shown how 
individualised and fluid the concepts are; that every participant saw them in a slightly different 
light.  Rather than simply being gradations of the one idea, the viewpoints put forward stretched 
and contested general assumptions in widely different ways, depending on the individual 
participant’s background experiences, their own interpretations of the discourses of the present 
and their concerns about the future.  The variety of perspectives provided by the participants 
demonstrates how inadequate it is to treat supplement use as a single phenomenon, where 
both products and their users are “lumped together, indistinguishable from each other” (Lewis, 
2019: 840). Secondly, this chapter has highlighted the way that the concepts of naturalness, 
holistic health, and risk are never static, but always open to something new and different in 
relation to supplement practices.  They are mobilised by users and sellers in an ever-changing 
scene of ideas, interpretations, therapies and products that draw from the past and are 
constantly evolving into the future.  Thirdly, although the discourses in question have been 
deconstructed separately here for the purposes of the analysis, all three concepts are deeply 
interconnected; their entanglement forms a network of random and rich connections that adds 
to the complexity of the assemblage of actants around supplements and their use.  Finally, it is 
important to recognise that even though the surface assumptions around these common 
discourses can easily be deconstructed to show that each one is diffuse and contested, yet the 
ideas of naturalness, holistic health, and risk retain their salience as descriptors around which 
supplement users and sellers can frame their practices as meaningful to them and others.   
Within this vast assemblage, it is the material products of the supplements themselves which 
provide the connecting point in the network and without which there would be no discussion.  
95 
 
 
The next chapter now turns the spotlight directly on these products and examines the part they 
play in the assemblage.    
96 
 
 
Chapter 5: Supplements as lively matter: the importance of 
material things 
Introduction 
The previous chapter looked at characteristics that people attribute to supplements.  This 
chapter takes a different angle, examining the capacity of these material products – 
supplements and herbal medicines – to have their own power and presence that create effects 
in the lives of contemporary individuals.  In my interviews with the participants my attention was 
drawn to the importance that they seemed to place on the physical presence of their 
supplements, which many had specially assembled for me to view.  This happened in all the 
settings where I conducted interviews, whether private homes, health stores and pharmacies, or 
in other places where participants brought them along to show me.  These instances were 
enacted so many times during the interviews that they compelled me to take more notice of the 
physical matter of the supplements and their containers as things of importance in their own 
right, not merely inert objects that were a means to an end in the individuals’ health practices.   
This chapter uses materiality thinking from writers such as Coole and Frost (2010), Maclure 
(2015), and especially Bennett (2010) to examine the agency of ‘things’ to change events and 
create effects in people’s lives.  Thinking about things in this way contests the “notion of nature 
as merely the backdrop for the humanist adventure of culture, or of matter as ‘dumb’ and 
passive until awakened to meaning by human interest and interpretation” (MacLure, 2015: 96).  
Materiality thinking views the dualistic idea that considers humans as having agency and matter 
as inert to be anthropocentric and artificial (Bennett, 2010; Law, 1999: 3). It brings back non-
human things into contention, not just as being important in the assemblage of actants, but 
having their own agency and energy to:  
 Act as quasi agents or forces with trajectories, propensities, and tendencies of their 
own….What if they could be considered not simply as a resource, commodity or 
instrumentality but as an ‘actant’, something, whether human or non-human, which has 
efficacy, can do things, has sufficient coherence to make a difference, produce effects, 
alter the course of events (Bennett, 2010: viii) 
The renewed interest in materiality in recent decades has been driven, at least in part, by the 
development of artificial intelligence, advanced biological techniques, and virtual 
communication technologies which have forced humans to recognise that “objects do not exist 
97 
 
 
in ontological isolation” (Fraser et al., 2005: 5) but have the power, whether welcome or 
unwelcome, to create an impact on humans.  
The problem with writing about ‘things’ is that any argument put forward is always open to the 
criticism that things are interpreted by a person, “a self-conscious, language wielding human” 
(Bennett, 2010: 120).  Attributing agency to the non-human, therefore, is elusive and difficult.  
The traditional tools provided by language seem to be inadequate for the task of understanding 
non-human agency.  Bennett herself, has written about the difficulties she encountered in trying 
to write about why things matter, describing it as “both necessary and impossible” because 
language always assigns “activity to people and passivity to things” (Bennett, 2010: 119).  One 
approach, according to Coole and Frost (2010), is to engage in a detailed analysis of the material 
objects which are part of the daily environment.   
This chapter, therefore, treats the containers of supplements and herbal medicines that 
participants showed me as vital matter, enmeshed with human discourse and activity, but also 
having  their own “emergent, generative powers and agentic capacities” (Coole & Frost, 2010: 
9).   Supplements, moreover, are a special category of actant that differ from most other types 
of non-human matter because they are designed to be ingested into the human body.  Bennett 
considers edible matter to be a special category of non- human actant because it enters into 
what we become as it is metabolised; “the outside and the inside mingle and recombine… it 
reveals the swarm of activity subsisting below and within formed bodies and recalcitrant things, 
a vitality obscured by our conceptual habit of dividing the world into inorganic matter and 
organic life“(2010: 50-51). Like foodstuffs, the taking of supplements results in a process where 
“human and nonhuman bodies recorporealise in response to each other; both exercise 
formative power and both offer themselves as matter to be acted on” (Bennett: 2010: 49). 
The power of edible substances to do good or ill is not difficult to understand; what to ingest and 
what not to, has been an enduring motif throughout history and continues to be scrutinised 
intensely from all points of view today.   In religion, folk tales and fairy stories throughout the 
ages eating or drinking some kind of substance often catalyses forward action (Pinsent, 2002; 
Reddan, 2016); these non-human things may bring magical powers to the human protagonists, 
promote healing, give access to new visions of the world and allow personal growth or 
alternatively they can be a force for evil, corruption, and death.  Outside the realm of myth and 
fairy tale, ingested substances have been the subject of health advice from ancient times 
(Totelin, 2015) and throughout recorded history right up to the present day.  Contemporary 
scientific literature abounds with a wide range of conflicting advice about the things that should 
98 
 
 
or should not be eaten or drunk for good health (Archer, 2015; Lifschizt & Lifschitz, 2014). There 
is a daily “cacophony of voices” (Mayes 2015: 6) across all media, ranging from medical journals 
citing ‘alarm’ about rising rates of child obesity or diabetes (Cefalu et al., 2014; Wang et al., 
2017) to popular websites issuing dramatic warnings about the “16 cancer causing foods you 
should avoid completely” (Bayard, 2019) or the reassuring “top 10 supplements for preventing 
and reversing Alzheimers”(Rona, 2018).   The intense interest shown by such a diverse range of 
sources suggests that edible things have a particularly potent influence on human lives that goes 
beyond their analysable nutritional or medicinal components; that these non-human ‘things’ 
have their own power and energy to generate effects in people’s lives.    
To expand and further develop the concept of the assemblage of actants in which the 
participants and their supplement ‘things’ were enmeshed I have again turned to Deleuze and 
Guattari’s (1987) metaphor of the rhizomatic assemblage with its tangled network of nodes, 
connections and random lines of flight.  In the assemblage material things and discourses about 
them are entangled and interconnected; the containers with their capsules, tablets and liquids, 
promotion and marketing activities and discourses, retail outlets, and regulatory regimes, 
together with an individual’s biological make up, their past and present experiences, their 
interpersonal contacts, their cultural background, spiritual beliefs, personality traits, health 
practices, the communication and information sources they use, their shopping habits and 
income.  It is necessary and important to tease out some of the threads of the assemblage to 
gain some partial insights into how they create effects.  The challenge is, however, to do so in a 
way that does not make them appear linear, isolated, at risk of being reduced to merely a list of 
this component or that, but retains the idea of their inter-relationship in a dynamic and evolving 
network of connections.   
The first half of this chapter focuses on the ‘things’ that made up the supplement displays 
presented by the participants:  the containers of products and the other material things that the 
participants brought to my attention, as well as the physical surroundings where they were 
arranged.  I move on to analyse what the participants told me about the physical and 
psychological effects on their wellbeing that they ascribed to these ‘things.’  I revisit the concept 
of the life force in all things, this time to reflect on what was said and implied about things as 
enablers to spiritual or transcendent experiences and how this linked with participants’ remarks 
about their wellbeing, and their purpose in life.    
99 
 
 
I draw briefly on Bourdieu’s (1990) concept of the habitus to look separately and in combination 
at the cultural histories and social discourses about material things that participants reported 
they had used in self-care remedies.  In general terms, the habitus has been described as:   
 …a system of schemes of perception and discriminations embodied as disposition 
reflecting the entire history of the [cultural] group and acquired through the formative 
experiences of childhood.  The structural code of the culture is inscribed as the habitus 
and generates the production of social practice (Nash, 1999: 177).    
For individuals, the notion of the habitus refers to the embedded cultural capital that underlies 
beliefs and assumption about how to behave (Bourdieu, 1990; King, 2000). The habitus has been 
seen as deterministic, limiting and constraining, and a means of social control (Garnham & 
Williams, 1980), that is, entirely contrary to the concept of the tangled rhizomatic assemblage 
which is always unpredictable, changing and becoming.  The two are, however, not necessarily 
opposed; according to McNay (1999), the habitus should not be read in this way, but as a 
generative structure which “establishes an active and creative relation” between an individual 
and the world, giving rise to a wide variety of behaviour patterns,  though remaining only 
“relatively unpredictable” (McNay 1999: 100-101).  Dovey (2011) directly links Bourdieu and 
Deleuze and Guattari’s thinking, showing how the two, although they have differences, are 
conceptually connected:     
Both habitus and assemblage are immanent to everyday life rather than transcendent 
abstractions; the rules of the habitus can be read as codes of the assemblage.  …. the 
major contrast is that Bourdieu stresses the inertia embedded in the habitus, whereas 
Deleuze and Guatarri stress flow, change and potential (Dovey 2011: 350-51).  
While the supplements remain the ‘things’ of key focus, in the second half of the chapter I look 
at a range of other actants that were prominent in the evolving assemblage and were connected 
with the participants and their supplement practices.  These include the cell phones and 
computers that participants used to find what they wanted to know about products and where 
to get them, or to search for information about the kind of treatments that might be useful for 
particular health needs they had.  They also include the online systems that track what 
individuals are looking for and amass sets of data that allow companies to target them with 
promotions for products they are likely to find relevant.  I note the way the participants were 
engaged in different ways with all these actants, but at the same time were actants in the 
100 
 
 
assemblage themselves, caught up in a dynamic process of evolution that linked the human and 
non-human.     
The power of the material product  
By far the majority of my interviews for the study took place in the participants’ homes and 
nearly all of them invited me to view a display of their supplements.   Often the person I was 
interviewing had arranged their bottles and jars on a table or other surface in a relatively public 
space of their home apparently specially for our meeting (see Figure 1 below).  These were often 
accompanied by offers of hospitality.  Others showed me in to more private areas of their 
kitchen or bedroom to point out their supplements in their usual place in a pantry or on a shelf.  
A few of the participants who had chosen to meet me in my office or a café also brought their 
products along to show me.  As if following a script known to them all (although none of them 
knew one another) they pointed to them or picked them up one by one, telling me where they 
bought each one, which brand they favoured and why.   
 
Figure 1: Supplement products arranged for showing.  Author’s photo simulation. 
 
101 
 
 
A similar phenomenon on a parallel scale occurred in most of the health stores and pharmacies I 
visited.  While these were shop displays for the public rather than a private home, the 
participants who showed me round demonstrated that they were just as personally invested in 
their products as the people I had visited at home. The person I was interviewing would invite 
me on a viewing tour of their ‘natural health’ section.  They walked me through it, explaining 
why they stocked the particular ranges, the brands they preferred and why, and the emphasis 
they placed on the quality of the various products they sold. There was the same focus on the 
supplements’ materiality, the packages of ‘things’.  This was in spite of the information I had 
sent out to all participants explaining that I was interested in how and why people came to be 
regular supplement users or sellers, and not in the details of what they took or what they sold.  
Initially I considered these displays to be a distraction I needed to get past so I could ask the 
questions I had formulated, but as it happened again and again, I realised I was in danger of 
overlooking something vitally important about the power and presence of these material ‘things’ 
in the participants’ lives; that they represented people’s “hopes, imaginings and desires… an 
element in identity construction, moralities, routines, relationships, care, healing and home 
making” (Hodgetts et al., 2011: 353).  
An interesting aspect of the displays was that the supplements and their containers appeared to 
be one and the same thing.  In the entire course of the study, not one of the participants ever 
opened up a container to show me the contents and no one commented on the respective 
formats (tablets versus capsules or liquids), the type of coating, or any other characteristic.  The 
physical appearance or the texture of the ‘things’ that were ingested appeared to be a matter in 
which no one was interested.  Later, when reflecting on this, I found that the same phenomenon 
held true for the marketing and promotional literature that I collected during the study; there 
were no images of the tablets, capsules or liquids, either on their own, or being taken by people.  
The container and its contents appeared to be synonymous – a total package, but one that was 
loaded with meaning beyond its mundane appearance.  The package and the understanding 
about its contents seemed to symbolise meaningful experiences and events in the individual 
participant’s life that had come together in these material things and which formed an 
important part of their story that they wanted me to hear. The communicative and symbolic 
power of packaging is well recognised:    
 Packaging is tangible in nature, a three dimensional marketing communication vehicle 
that is integrally tied to the product offering.  The package resides in the home [or on 
102 
 
 
the shelf] potentially becoming part of the consumer’s life; a phenomenon that 
represents a type of lived experience (Underwood, 2003: 62).   
Compelling product packaging, however, seemed to be only a partial and largely unsatisfactory 
explanation for what I had witnessed in my visits to the participants.  Their displays of products 
also brought to mind the incense, flowers, fruits and other everyday objects I had seen displayed 
on altars in Hindu or Buddhist households, or descriptions I had read of the altars to the 
household gods of the Romans – the Lares and Penates - where offerings such as wheat, honey, 
and wine were placed as part of private religious practices (Bodel, 2008). I experienced the same 
feeling of ‘thing power’ that Bennett (2010: 4) has described; the containers of supplements 
“issued a call … I caught a glimpse of an energetic vitality inside each of these things, things that I 
generally conceived of as inert”.   
While these displays were one way that the ‘thing power’ showed itself in the study, it was not 
the only one.  Quite a different manifestation occurred in a small group of participants, all of 
whom were involved in a professional capacity with selling products and providing advice or 
therapy to members of the public.    In contrast to the majority of participants who were so 
clearly positively engaged with their supplements, these few took pains to distance themselves 
from any personal investment in the ‘things’.  Their comments seemed to be designed to 
construct themselves to me as being only peripherally engaged with the supplement side of 
their workplace.  One referred several times to having a hands-off approach to the ‘natural 
health’ side of the business, and that the day-to-day activities were left to “the girls” (Lyndsay) 
to manage.  Another, rather than giving a personal view, cited the general approach of their 
workplace in neutral terms:  
  We operate in what I would say is a traditional pharmacy way that everyone knows 
most things… so any member of staff has to be able to help with any area, but we do 
have  a member of staff who primarily looks after that area [natural health products]… 
(Jo)   
The use of ‘we’ rather than ‘I’ which was noticeable among this group of participants, seemed to 
be a way of contributing to the discussion but remaining non-committal.  As Morison and 
MacLeod (2014: 696) point out, words that are used to cover a ‘silence’ may serve to mask an 
unwillingness to talk about a potentially sensitive topic, but also give hints about concerns which 
are unacknowledged.   The comments were carefully neutral, acting as means of being 
cooperative with the study, and saying something, but ensuring that their own attitude as to 
103 
 
 
what supplements might or might not do was not stated.  To me, this silencing of the personal,  
much in contrast with the behaviour of the other participants, highlighted the tension involved 
in balancing a proactive health professional role with the commercial drivers of working in a 
retail business (Thompson & Bidwell, 2015). The viability of such a business depends on being 
able to sell ‘things’ and retain customers, but these same things may be an uncomfortable fit 
with the need to retain the respect of their medical and research colleagues who are generally 
unenthusiastic about the sale of supplements directly to the general public (Jefferies et al., 2012; 
Martinez et al., 2012; Slashinski et al., 2012; Ventola, 2010). Their distancing suggested, not that 
they were indifferent or uninterested, but that the products they sold also had a complementary 
‘thing’ power that potentially threatened their professional identities.  Nevertheless, whether 
participants were deeply engaged with their products like the majority, or took care to ‘silence’ 
them like the few, it was clear that the material supplements had the power to cause effects for 
those who engaged with them. The next section of the chapter looks at the participants’ reports 
of the physical and psychological effects they had experienced from the supplements that they 
took.   
Things for the body and mind  
The lived body crosses both the biological and social worlds. People have a body, a physical 
entity, but their body is also who they are, how they interact with the world, how they feel and 
experience sensation, how they think, reflect and act (Fox, 2012; Sointu, 2013):     
The possession of a physical body, its mediation between the world around us on one 
hand and our internal world of thoughts, feelings and sensations on the other, is 
fundamental to the human experience (Fox 2012:1) 
When the body is in robust health, it tends to be taken for granted (Corbin, 2003). Only when 
something goes awry, such as pain or illness, is attention suddenly brought to bear on the body 
and what it can or cannot do (Fox, 2012; Lawton, 2003). Chronic conditions that cannot be 
permanently ‘fixed’ but must be lived with, in particular, bring attention to a body that is 
reluctant to cooperate with what an individual would like to do (see Fox 2012: 27-30).  A number 
of participants (though far from all of them) were in this category; some had conditions that had 
been medically diagnosed such as diabetes, arthritis, or hypertension, others had more nebulous 
concerns like unexplained abdominal pain, sleep issues, pain from old sports injuries or recurring 
bouts of low mood.  Some of these participants had been through medical investigations or 
treatment while others had not, but all of them appeared to have become aware that their 
104 
 
 
bodies were imperfect and they would need to cope with living with them as best they could.  It 
was this realisation that seemed to have been the connection with one of the tangled threads of 
the assemblage surrounding the supplement ‘thing’; it offered an avenue to explore in the hope 
that they might find a way of managing a condition they could not change.  Some of them 
reported considerable success, outlining in our discussion how these ‘things’ had effected 
improvements for them once they made the decision to take them.   
Murray, for example, had been involved in running and rowing for years when younger and was 
a keen tennis player.  He had developed joint problems over the years and had a ‘bad hip’ but 
reported that he had found products through a network marketing company had been able to 
keep him fully active in spite of his initial scepticism about them:  
A friend of mine …. was interested in alternative health and so on … he told me.  So as I 
say, the rest’s history…I didn’t believe in them [supplements] in the 90s but I’ve got 
osteoarthritis in the right hip and it was bothering me and so for the last fifteen and a 
half years I’ve been on their products and I lead a normal life.  It won’t cure it but I’ve got 
quality and comfort level that is sustainable and not bothersome. (Murray) 
Caro had a history of leg cramps, especially at night which had become so bad that they 
disrupted her sleep and that of her husband as well:     
I’d gone into one of those health shops and I heard the lady talking to the shop assistant 
about this, so I said to the lady, tell me about it.  Because people say you’ve got to take 
magnesium.  …. whether I’m doing right, I don’t know but it’s working for me.  …  And I 
don’t even have to tell my husband and push him out of bed anymore!  So that’s how bad 
I was.  I mean, I cramp, but I can feel it and I can manage it.  I’m managing it. (Caro) 
The material product, as she reported, had created a positive effect, and the interconnection 
with what she had heard ‘people say’ appeared to reinforce for her that she was managing 
something that had previously been troublesome.  She does not suggest her problem has 
disappeared, but only that she can now cope with it better.  Some of these reports had elements 
of the ‘transformation narratives’ that occur in accounts of religious conversion (Popp-Baier, 
2001), or turning one’s life around after a criminal past (Liem & Richardson, 2014). In the case of 
the participants, it was the supplement product which appeared in the right place at the right 
time, and acted as a catalyst to change (Bennett 2010: 9). As with these reports from other areas 
of life, the central idea in participants’ stories seemed to be the preservation of a core sense of 
self and the regaining of a sense of control and agency over the future that the ‘thing power’ of 
105 
 
 
the supplements had given them.  While some of their narratives mentioned particular 
supplements which they had found helpful, the key point was less about a particular product  
and more focused on being enabled to overcome a barrier that was in their way and “get on 
with life” (Cartwright, 2007: 1692).  This increased optimism and coping parallels reports in other 
studies of supplement users (Joos et al., 2012; Oldham et al., 2004; Sointu, 2013).      
The physical problems that the participants talked about, however, were far outnumbered by 
the number of times they focused on stress and their need to have a physical ‘thing’ that would 
deal with it.  Supplements seemed to be particularly valued for stress, partly because of their 
naturalness, as outlined in the previous chapter, but also because they were a thing that could 
be grasped to fill a gap where there were few alternatives.  Almost every participant raised the 
issue of stress at some point; most often it was not related to any particular circumstance, 
illness, or injury, but a low-level, undefined feeling of being worn down from meeting the 
expectations that they had set for themselves in daily life:  They spoke of stress as if it were self-
explanatory, taking it for granted that I knew and understood what it was:  
…when you’re stressed …  when you’re rushed you’re eating not as good as you normally 
would … you’re not getting as many nutrients as your body needs but you are also not 
taking that time out to help it repair … and that goes on continually … making bad 
choices round food, that add to the stress and not feeling well and that’s when I have .… 
look[ed] at the bottle and it says, this will help you feel more energetic … you know, 
balance up everything because you’re kind of thinking maybe I’m not balanced in what 
I’m taking in.  (Tracy) 
Tracy here draws on ideas of nutritional imbalance and modern life as being too busy, resulting 
in an unease about ‘bad choices’ that keep happening because she is rushed.  However, she 
finds a suitable ‘thing’ to take as a way of countering the rushed and inadequately nutritious 
meals and setting at rest the feeling of stress she has about not taking care of herself when she 
knows that she should be.  She verbally sketches out an easily imaginable vignette that portrays 
her in a shop looking at the bottle - a graspable, material thing – that she hopes will do 
something to help.  It seems that in her mind she already attributes these ‘things’ with the 
“active power to affect and create effects” (Bennett 2010: 49) and that will take care of the 
balance in her diet.   
Stress has been conceptualised in a range of different ways: as physiological (Rees, 1976; Selye, 
1973); as a psychological reaction to negative experiences (Somerfield & McCrae, 2000); or as a 
106 
 
 
mind/body interaction that contributes to conditions such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, 
auto-immune disease and slow wound healing (Chida et al., 2008; Cohen et al., 2007; Reiche et 
al., 2004; Thaker et al., 2007). A feature of stress is the “strange circular way [it] seems to stand 
on its own as a plausible, complete, self-contained explanation” (Monroe, 2008: 47) in both 
scientific and popular literature:  
Everybody knows what stress is and nobody knows what it is… although it has become 
part of our daily vocabulary.  Is it effort, fatigue, pain, fear, the need for concentration, 
the humiliation of censure, loss of blood, or even an unexpected success that requires 
complete reformulation of one’s life?  … Every one of these conditions can produce 
stress, and yet none of them can be singled out as being ‘it’ (Selye 1973: 692).     
The indeterminate and subjective nature of stress makes it resistant to being ‘fixed’ particularly 
when the conditions that produced the stress cannot be changed.  However, it seemed that the 
‘thing power’ of supplements is something that can be mobilised to fill this gap.  Kerry, who 
managed a ‘natural health’ section in a pharmacy, reported that many of her customers found 
supplements to be an appealing method for addressing concerns about the constant effect of 
stress on their health:   
It doesn’t matter whether you think it’s stressful and I don’t think it’s stressful, it’s how 
you perceive it and at what level you cope with it.  It’s quite a big thing and it does open 
you up for multivitamins, sleeping, something to help with that…  (Kerry) 
Kerry’s remark here draws attention to the individuality of stress and that it is not up to her to 
judge what is stressful that matters, but whether the person she is assisting finds supplements 
to be a useful way of dealing with what is bothering them.  Parents of young children in 
particular often featured in the discussions about stress.  The participants who worked in health 
stores and pharmacies reported that they were often asked for advice by busy parents who 
appeared to be stressed by the dual demands of being under pressure at their workplaces and 
not wishing to take time off, but also caring for children who had to be kept away from school or 
day care when they were sick with coughs and colds especially during winter. Interestingly, 
although it was the parents who appeared stressed, the supplement products they bought were 
for their children; ‘immunity boosters’ to help prevent illness, (homeopathic) ‘sleep drops’ for 
babies to try to help the household get some rest, and herbal products for soothing children’s 
coughs and colds. Neither the parents nor the retailers seemed convinced that the products 
were particularly effective; indeed, several participants noted that for coughs at least, the 
107 
 
 
traditional lemon and honey drinks were likely to be just as good.  However, the ‘thing power’ of 
the bought product appeared to be more sought after than the ‘thing’ that could be made at 
home.  It appeared that by searching out and finding a product, parents could feel they had done 
everything possible to keep their child well.  For their part, the pharmacists and health store 
staff also had a concrete product – a material thing – to offer, and one that could be used 
immediately.   
You [the parents] feel better because you have done something.  You feel better and that 
child feeds off that and feels better.  I think there is an element of that …so much of what 
we [the staff] are dealing with here is reassurance particularly for parents.  (Jo) 
Providing simple advice, even if the home remedy was potentially as useful as the commercial 
product, would mean that the people seeking help would be sent away empty handed (without 
a ‘thing’) and, moreover, add to their stress by having the additional burden of going elsewhere 
to buy the lemons and honey if they were not already in stock and then making them up when 
they arrived home. Participants who sold these types of products noted that they provided only 
those which they were confident would not do any harm, and that the main benefit was likely to 
be reduced anxiety and eased tension for individuals or households.      
The effect of the ‘thing’ they bought could not necessarily be explained in material terms but 
seemed to ‘work’ all the same, even though the product filled a different role for the parent and 
child respectively. That is not to discount the possibility that the properties of particular 
substances remain to be discovered, given the fact that many are poorly researched and that 
new evidence emerges from time to time about the properties of even the most common of 
vitamins and minerals (Aghajanian et al., 2015; Carr & McCall, 2017; Lapillonne, 2010; Nowson et 
al., 2012). As Marchant (2016: 298) points out, “the medicine we end up with depends on the 
trials that are carried out”, so that if no trials have been done on a substance, then it will ipso 
facto be considered ineffective.   
When the mechanism of effect cannot be explained, the placebo response is often invoked.  At 
one time thinking about placebos implied that they were a “treatment for neurotic patients 
when the clinician has nothing better to offer” (McQueen et al., 2013: 162). Current thinking, 
however, has moved beyond this dismissive attitude, with more nuanced concepts being put 
forward.  One of them, expectancy theory  (McQueen et al., 2013; Schwarz et al., 2016), has 
been proposed as a way of explaining why a certain proportion of people in the placebo arm of 
108 
 
 
drug trials will improve in spite of not receiving any active components.  However, as several 
participants pointed out, this does not explain the effect in babies or animals:   
We had a dog where we used homeopathics and their psoriasis disappeared.  The dog 
didn’t believe it.  We had a baby who had some issues and we used homeopathics and 
the baby improved; the baby didn’t believe it.  (Jordan) 
Recent investigations of the placebo effect have reported that it may be the result of natural 
opioids that are released from the brain, indicating that people are effectively self-medicating 
(Wager et al., 2007: 11060). But even these studies have concluded that the full picture is not 
yet understood and that the placebo effect is likely to be a diverse group of phenomena rather 
than having a single explanation (Marchant, 2016; Wager & Atlas, 2015).  
A number of participants commented on the placebo concept as a possibility for the effects they 
reported experiencing from their supplements, but went on to remark that, even if that were 
the case, they considered it to be unimportant.  Tessa, for example, was well aware that the 
homeopathic remedy she used was unsupported by ‘evidence’, but found it irrelevant, saying 
that “I swear rescue remedy works for me”.   As one participant remarked,  
If people think it works, then it does work for them.  If it makes them sleep better and 
they feel better then that’s fantastic.  Isn’t that what we want? (Kerry) 
It could also be argued that reassurance and the handing over of a ‘thing’ from a pharmacy or 
health store borrows from the function of the paper prescription for medicines that is handed to 
the patient by the doctor at the end of a medical consultation and then dispensed by a 
pharmacist.   The paper prescription has been described by Cooper (2011) as a ‘boundary 
object’, that is, it has equal salience across the worlds of the prescriber, the patient and the 
pharmacist.  It symbolises the professional authority of the doctor, while also serving to instruct 
the pharmacist what to dispense and reassure the patient their concerns have been taken 
seriously and the doctor has ‘done something’.  Boundary objects act as a ‘common coin’ that 
works within the “constraints of the parties employing them but are robust enough to maintain 
a common identity across all of them” (Star & Griesemer, 1989: 393). In the case of 
supplements, handing over of ‘things’ to be taken as capsules, tablets or liquid in a pharmacy or 
health store, even though there is no doctor or paper prescription involved, may be seen as 
acting in a similar way, bridging the culturally defined boundary between the spheres of 
orthodox and alternative health practice (Derkatch, 2008; Fox, 2011: 70; Owens, 2015). The 
supplement products may be invested with the same expectations that are associated with a 
109 
 
 
prescribed medicine, particularly if the individual buys their supplies from the same pharmacy 
where they have their medicines dispensed.  Moreover, the people buying supplements in 
pharmacies may already know the pharmacist who gives them advice about both prescribed and 
over-the-counter products for their health needs and therefore view them as trustworthy based 
on previous experience.      
A number of participants acknowledged that the reassurance of ‘doing something’ was at least 
partly responsible for a sense of improvement.  A few of them talked about a special person or 
business that they trusted - a pharmacist, natural therapist, or health store manager - from 
whom they took advice that they had always found helpful.  However, most others, in contrast,  
simply shopped around for products they had read or heard about, whether in a walk-in store or 
online, and were satisfied with being able to have independent and immediate access to the 
‘thing’  without the mediation of any advisor or ‘gatekeeper’ to recommend it or provide 
guidance and reassurance.  With or without advice, however, it required more than just  
reassurance alone; a material product appeared to be indispensable for participants to feel that 
they were ‘doing something’.   As one participant commented, if simple reassurance that one 
was ‘doing something’ worked, then why would supplements work for some people when 
pharmaceuticals prescribed by a doctor had failed to?  
… if the placebo thing was going to have an effect it would have an effect with the doctor 
and the medical agents, because that’s their [my customers’] strong belief.  They didn’t 
come to me first.  They gave up, walked in the door and said, “what have you got here?”   
(Bernie) 
Here Bernie constructs himself as being a place of last resort for those who have ‘given up’ on 
formal medical intervention. However, rather than suggesting that he too can provide such 
reassurance, he went on to talk in detail about the specific ‘things’ he was able to offer that 
others did not, including particular products, special tests that were sent for analysis and 
referrals to a medical herbalist who was more qualified than he, and able to prescribe things he 
could not.    
None of the participants appeared to be concerned about finding a definitive explanation for 
how or why their supplements created the effects they reported.  They seemed to be open to 
supplements being more than simply for physical and mental wellbeing but also having a calming 
spiritual effect. Being spiritually at ease is acknowledged to be an important part of being truly 
healthy (Egan, 2010; Goddard, 1995; Holmes, 2010). Spirituality has been described as “‘the 
110 
 
 
primordial thing’…the engine that propels the search for connectedness, meaning, purpose and 
contribution. …it speaks to what it means to be human” (Benson & Roehlkepartain, 2008).  The 
following section looks at the various ways the participants linked this ‘primordial thing’ with 
their material supplement products.    
Things for the spirit 
Participants commented both directly and by implication that a spiritual aspect was linked to 
their supplement taking.  Cliff, for example, who sent away for the etherium gold product 
mentioned in the previous chapter as being linked to the Pharoahs, found that taking it was ‘a 
very spiritual thing.”  More numerous, however, were those participants who did not overtly 
speak of spirituality as such but indicated they were searching for something beyond physical or 
mental health; a longing for a sense of purpose, an existential need to come to terms with their 
own imperfect condition, to find some ‘thing’ that would fill an empty space in their lives even 
though they lived with every material comfort:   
We think we should be perfect; we think our life should be perfect.  Because, look, we’ve 
got everything at our disposal.  And then we get really shocked when life isn’t quite like 
that.  We have money to spend, we have all this stuff going for us, and yet we’re still not 
happy.  … Inner peace, inner calm … I think people are searching for that and they’re not 
sure how to embrace it without – maybe going to church.  You know, how do I live a 
spiritual life that isn’t based on whether I’m an Anglican or a Methodist, or becoming a 
Buddhist nun? (Tessa) 
Ingested substances have been interwoven with spiritual practices since ancient times (Berlant, 
2005; Sayin, 2014); traditions of fasting from foods, offering or sacrificing foods to a higher 
being, religious rituals to be observed before eating, prohibited foods, and symbolic foods that 
represent deeper spiritual realities are found in most belief systems (Dietler, 2011). Depriving 
the physical body by abstaining from foods in order to reach a purer state of spiritual 
enlightenment is found in a number of religions (Lambert, 2003); ingesting herbal substances 
accompanied by prayers or incantations are used in others, and sometimes the two approaches 
are combined (Jones & Olsan, 2015). The idea that greater spiritual insight is achieved by 
depriving the body of comfort tends to construct the body and soul as opposing forces; the body 
as a source of sin and a barrier to salvation of the soul (Glucklich, 2001). Contemporary 
spirituality, in contrast, tends to view the perfect body as a spiritual force in itself, harmonious 
and serene, rather than being conflicted between the desires of the body and the aspirations of 
111 
 
 
the spirit (Giordan, 2009). Therefore ingesting things with the aim of perfecting the body 
becomes an end in itself.  In essence, however, the two approaches share the same idea of being 
on a quest towards perfection, and to overcome the limitations of the body bound by physical 
illness or psychological dysfunction.  Non-human things, often including the taking of 
substances, have always been implicated in this quest.   
 The idea that inanimate things have spiritual force is found in many indigenous belief systems 
(Donald, 2012; James, 2015). For Māori too, whakapapa (geneology) links animate and 
inanimate, known and unknown phenomena in the terrestrial and spiritual worlds (Roberts et 
al., 1995; Taonui, 2014).  Entities are not separated into human and non–human but everything 
in the universe is considered to be connected, with each individual being connected to things in 
the natural environment: 
   Belief in God is one reflection of wairua [spirituality] but it is also evident in relationships 
with the environment.  Without a spiritual awareness and a mauri (spirit or vitality, 
sometimes called the life force) an individual cannot be healthy and is more prone to 
illness or misfortune.  Land, lakes, mountains, reefs, have a spiritual significance … 
[access to] the natural environment is considered integral to identity and fundamental 
to a sense of wellbeing (Durie, 1994: 71).  
 
The non-human environmental features of their birth place are part of identity for all Māori 
people.  Spirituality or wairua is one of the four cornerstones of health in the Māori world view 
along with physical, mental, and family health (Durie, 1994). All of these are equally important 
for a healthy individual, family and society as a whole.  The substances used in traditional Māori 
medicine (rongoā) are therefore always considered to have an intrinsically spiritual aspect. 
Several of the participants spoke about the interconnectedness of medicinal substances, 
spirituality, and health.  Caro, for example, who was familiar with Māori rongoā, spoke about her 
belief that swallowing any kind of medicine in isolation from other aspects of a person’s life was 
unlikely to ‘fix’ anyone’s problems, whether Māori or non-Māori.  She referred to the way 
rongoā had been used in her family, which had always been “about the pre-prayer and your 
whole holistic being.” 
These ideas are connected to the concept of the life-force that unites all things (Erickson, 2007; 
Ricard, 2011), and which is central to one view of holism, as discussed in the previous chapter.  
In this view, non-human things can generate healing but cannot be expected to do so unless 
embedded in a wider context of spiritual awareness about the interconnectedness of all things, 
112 
 
 
both human and non-human.  Lou spoke about his conception of the interconnectedness 
between the body and spirit that mobilised the power of things to have effects on people 
ingesting substances:  
… if you try to divorce the spiritual side of somebody and put that in a little box and say 
that’s not relevant because we are trying to treat the body here, to my mind that is 
actually duping yourself really because a person’s belief will start spiritually and affects 
the whole way they’re taking the medicine, respond to it.   (Lou)  
Other participants too, referred to the essential part that spirituality played in health.  Tracy 
likened a person without spirituality to a chair or table with one leg missing so that even if the 
problems of the physical body were treated with things, there would always be an 
incompleteness and a lack of balance within that person.      
The feeling of incompleteness is also prominent in religious thought, reflecting the idea of the 
lifelong search for God, or Nirvana, or however a particular religion conceptualises ultimate 
Being.  As the early Christian Saint Augustine wrote, “our heart is restless, until it rests in you, O 
God” (Kreeft, 2016: 21).  Some researchers have argued that material prosperity has created 
dissatisfaction if there is nothing to fill the vacuum created by the formal religious belief.  The 
wish to experience something beyond the mundane is therefore behind the surge in popular 
interest in exploring forms of spirituality that derive from ancient belief systems unfamiliar to 
people in developed countries. These include Ayurdevic, indigenous and traditional Chinese 
medicines, but can also include ‘New Age’ spirituality, pantheistic religions, and metaphysical 
traditions (Cobb et al., 2012).  The ‘things’ of these religions appear to be part of the appeal, 
linked to ideas of the exotic, ’other’ that were outlined in the previous chapter.  One participant 
drew attention to this point, noting that, in his view, a focus on the ‘things’ themselves without 
the wider context of spirituality was ultimately unsatisfying:  
I would say some people want a pot pourri.  My meaning is that they will get those 
traditional medicines if they are going to help a bit; they’ll get natural medicines; they’ll 
go to a meditation class; they’ll do something else – the aim being some of this must help 
so I will go for all I can do to get help, excluding the fact that actually maybe a really 
consistent spiritual side might be the answer to what they need anyway.  (Lou) 
The attraction of these alternative healing therapies has been interpreted as part of “post-
Christian” spirituality in Western countries, presenting an alternative to both Christian faith and 
secular rationalism, perfecting the body in order to “become better versions of [themselves] 
113 
 
 
emotionally and spiritually…” (Brownell, 1991; Cederstrom & Spicer, 2015: 12; Marzano-Parisoli, 
2001; Sheldon, 2010).   Although bodily perfection tends to be viewed as a recent phenomenon, 
the body as a spiritual project can be traced back to the early Christian era and to classical 
antiquity (Shilling, 2002). In the late modern age, however, what was once a nearly universal 
belief in the soul’s progress towards the divine ‘other’ as the purpose of life on earth has come 
to be replaced by a belief in “the body the starting point for accessing the spiritual dimension of 
experience” (Giordan, 2009: 230).   
Those involved do not pursue meaning and identity from pre-given authoritative 
sources, located outside the self (e.g., the answers offered by science and the Christian 
churches), but want to rely on an internal source, located in the self’s deeper layers… 
the late-modern condition conjures up nagging questions that haunt the late-modern 
self:  What is it that I really want? Is this the sort of life I want to live?  What sort of 
person am I really? (Houtman & Aupers, 2007: 307,309).     
A number of participants reflected this idea of a missing dimension in their life, but they were 
unable to pinpoint it to anything specific that was wrong.  Though they did not refer directly to 
the lack of a spiritual dimension themselves, what they said implied to me that they felt a gap in 
their lives and were searching for something meaningful to fill it and make their lives feel 
complete. Turning to material things appeared to be one avenue that they were exploring; 
finding ‘things’ that might fill the gap and hoping that these ingested substances would address 
the nebulous feeling that something in their life was lacking or out of place:     
…  if I feel like I might be lacking in something …It’s probably just from reading bits and 
pieces and thinking, oh, that makes sense.  You think, well, we are full of minerals and 
vitamins and all sorts of things, if something’s a bit out of kilter to me it makes sense that 
if you are lacking in something you may well need a top up of something else. (Frances) 
Frances’ comment here has echoes of the idea that Tracy put forward of being ‘out of balance’, 
that is, missing some kind of important element that is needed to make up the whole person.  
These ideas are clearly linked to holism and to have an underlying spiritual dimension but 
Frances here focuses on the physical body.  It appears, from her comment, that she has nothing 
overtly wrong, but she still feels she is ‘lacking’ and a product with vitamin and mineral ‘things’ 
that she can ingest to  ‘top up’ , is a way of satisfying this feeling of incompleteness.   
Another motif in participants’ comments was the attraction of ingesting ‘things’ that cleansed.  
The notion of ‘dirt’ within the body that needs cleansing is a profoundly spiritual concept linking 
114 
 
 
back to ancient ideas of ritual purity and defilement, with ‘dirt’  being an ancient symbol of 
ambiguity, disorder and danger (Douglas, 1966), that is, something with negative ‘thing’ power.  
Seeking cleansing in a spiritual sense is deeply ingrained in many ancient traditions. Māori 
tikanga (the correct way of doing things) for example designates all things as either sacred (tapu) 
or profane/ordinary (noa) and prescribes rituals for the correct way to behave, for example, with 
body waste or the handling of human tissue, that are still powerful  and observed today (Cheung 
et al., 2007). The Jewish and Christian traditions both feature the need for purification and 
cleansing from sin; in Christianity the water of baptism washes away original sin, and in the Old 
Testament of the Bible, the Psalmist proclaims the need to be cleansed:  
God in your goodness wash me clean of my guilt, purify me from my sin …wash me until 
I am whiter than snow (Psalm 51:2,6). 
Some of the participants’ comments on cleansing clearly invoked a spiritual dimension, providing 
additional and complementary insights to those that raised cleansing as a protection against risk 
which were discussed in the previous chapter.  Cleansing in this context had characteristics of a 
ritual undertaken for its own sake, intrinsically worthwhile, rather than in response to any kind 
of risk. Cleansing was a special feature of a range of products from a network marketing 
company that Molly used herself and also sold to others:     
 They [the company] talk about cleanses a lot…  we are of the understanding that our 
body needs a break from time to time and that is why you have these cleanse days, or 
they talk about you have a “cleanse for life” once a day, which is just a drink and you 
drink that.  I love the idea of a cleanse … (Molly) 
The appeal of the “cleanse for life” here, though clearly more commercialised and centred 
around a ‘thing’, echoes the themes of purity and ritual cleansing that, according to Lupton, live 
on in modern obsessions about hygiene, and anxiety about viruses and infections which “reveal 
deeper concerns about the integrity of the body in an age where potential contaminants are 
invisible” (Lupton 2013: 36).   The fear of having others see you as ‘dirty’ and unable to control 
your bodily wastes (Lupton 2013: 187) appears to lie behind the promotion of the many 
products that are sold to reduce body odours, or sanitise parts of the body in contemporary 
society.   Moreover, what is ‘dirty’ and therefore in need of cleaning/cleansing is socially and 
culturally constructed across different societies and different epochs in the same society; “what 
is unclean in relation to one thing may be clean in relation to another, and vice versa” (Douglas, 
1966: 9).  ‘Dirty’ as an insult, has a long history in many cultures and its use seldom relates to 
115 
 
 
being physically dirty, but is more often directed at people who stand out from the social norm 
by their behaviour, different appearance (Douglas, 1966), or are thought of as inferior, 
uncivilised or unfit to participate in society (Boullosa & Schnee, 2013; Colloredo-Mansfeld, 1998; 
Guimares, 2003; Paredes, 2007).    
Closely related to cleansing is the idea of ‘toxins’, another currently popular way of expressing 
fear of inner dirt and contamination.  Rather than ideas of physical risk, as discussed previously, 
the idea of inner toxins that must be purged appears to relate to spiritual rather than physical 
unease (Rindfleish, 2005; Russo-Netzer & Mayseless, 2017). Dozens of recipes for detoxing 
things - pills, or drinks to ‘flush your liver’ - can be found with the most casual of online searches, 
(Pelton, 2014). The biomedical explanation is that these ideas stem from misplaced beliefs that 
toxins in the intestine can enter the circulation and poison the body (Acosta & Cash, 2009; 
Richards et al., 2006). Koteyko and Nerlich see this as a replacement for the fear of infectious 
organisms, which has waned in the age of antibiotics, and substituting ‘detoxification’ as a 
means of “strengthening the body’s internal armour” (2007: 22). However, this seems a limited 
explanation for the persistence of the phenomenon and the “current of disgust” (Kjær, 2019: 
136) that is associated with the fear of bodily imperfections, and inner ‘dirt’.  It also misses the 
point of the symbolism and ritual purification that people appear to be seeking in these practices 
and the need for a physical ‘thing’ as an enabler.  
The spiritual focus to detoxification becomes clear in its association with fasting, a practice long 
associated with expiation of sin and the search for spiritual cleansing and purity in many forms 
of religion (Brick, 2010; Morinis, 1985). The Jain religion in India shows its most extreme form in 
that people who have fasted to death are held up as the most advanced examples of holiness 
and spirituality (Laidlaw, 2005). It was clear that Molly’s cleanses were a form of fasting, though 
she did not refer to them as such; she went to some lengths to emphasise that she took great 
care that her young son did not realise that she and her husband were going without meals.  
They “always, always have a little bit of toast or something like that just so he sees it because 
kids are always watching you.”  This kind of food restriction with ‘fast days’ is advocated in some 
quarters as an avenue not only to better health, but to the quest for spiritual enlightenment.  
Nash (2006: 310) describes the fasting body as “…an expanded field of energetic confluences” 
that seeks to overcome the hunger for material food and replaces it with the “hunger for pure 
immanence” that is, the desire to achieve a sense of integrated unity with what lies beyond the 
physical plane.  
 
116 
 
 
An alternative and more exotic route to spiritual enlightenment in both ancient and modern 
traditions is the pilgrimage.  Pilgrims in both ancient and modern traditions leave behind their 
normal lives for a time and travel to a place which is often far away (Barber, 1991; Gesler, 1996; 
Rountree, 2006). In this state of “liminality” (Gesler, 1996: 96), bracketed between their 
departure and return, they are open to healing and transformation, “… a journey both outward 
to new, strange, dangerous places, and inwards to spiritual improvement, whether through 
increased self-knowledge or through the braving of physical dangers” (Barber, 1991: 1).   
One participant had made a pilgrimage to just such a faraway place, drawn by the idea of 
experiencing a mysterious substance:    
I went to Peru to see a shaman. …  I booked myself onto a lodge in the middle of nowhere 
in the Amazon … just did ayahuasca to see what it was all about.  … The stories I have 
read is that potentially a serpent will appear and will talk to you.  I didn’t have that.  I 
just had this kind of strange experience where I ended up getting sick.  It’s more of a 
cleansing than anything – cleansing your body of all these toxins, evil. …it’s referred to in 
the Amazon as the healing vine maybe more at an emotional level than a physical level, I 
don’t know.   (Duncan)  
Duncan’s account had easily recognisable echoes of the hero’s journey (Campbell, 1973) in myth 
and legend, where the protagonist sets out on a strange and potentially dangerous journey to a 
remote place, drawn by the idea of being able to find a ‘magic’ substance or the ‘water of life’ 
that will endow  them with special powers.  Whereas mystics may be able to take the journey 
inwardly without leaving home, pilgrims need a concrete object or place - an exteriorised, 
physical ‘thing’ - as a focus for the spiritual experience (Barber, 1991: 3).  It may be a natural 
phenomenon that has special spiritual significance like the river at Benares for Hindus, the grotto 
and spring at Lourdes for Christians seeking healing (Gesler, 1996), or a man-made structure of 
special significance like the Neolithic stones at Stonehenge or the Glastonbury Tor that have 
become the focus for neo-pagan pilgrimages (Rountree, 2006).  Duncan’s pilgrimage was not 
only to an outwardly strange (to him) place that was hard to reach, but focused on obtaining an 
exotic ‘thing’ as an enabler to inward cleansing and healing.  Although he told me that he had 
made this journey without much thought, his reference to evil and to the deeply ambivalent 
symbolism of the serpent makes the underlying spiritual meaning of his journey impossible to 
overlook.  According to Mundkur (1983; Mundkur et al., 1976) the cult of the serpent (also 
known as ophiolatry) can be traced back into distant antiquity and has always excited the human 
imagination, inspiring reverence but also a primeval fear.   Serpents are woven into myths and 
117 
 
 
depicted in art from Mesopotamia, to Australia and from Asia to all parts of the Americas.  In the 
Garden of Eden myth of Christian and Jewish tradition, the serpent brings expulsion from 
paradise but also knowledge, underlining its dual appeal as “the garden of double messages” 
(Slivniak, 2003: 439). Duncan’s comments during our discussion suggested that, in spite of not 
encountering the serpent, he had found the ‘thing’ unsettling and possibly more than a little 
frightening, and now saw his youthful confidence as being somewhat misplaced: 
In hindsight I think I should potentially have been a little more cautious.  …  Looking at it 
now, yes, I’m glad I did it but I don’t know if I would necessarily recommend it to people.  
(Duncan) 
Some participants also implied in their comments that they experienced spiritual effects from 
other therapies that they had used to complement their health practices with supplements.  
While these were not the focus of the study, and I did not wish to be drawn into the diverse 
assemblage of therapies described as CAM (complementary and alternative medicine), two 
particular modalities – reiki and kinesiology – stood out for the number of times they were 
mentioned by participants and the mysterious ‘thing’ power they seemed to create for them.   
Both reiki (Miles & True, 2003) and kinesiology (Hamilton, 2011) are therapies that share the 
concept of energy flows which can be released to relieve physical and emotional pain and 
promote healing.  They both involve a therapist as a conduit, but the ‘thing’ enabled through the 
therapist’s touch appears to be something beyond its surface appearance and not something 
that can be rationally explained. Reiki is of Japanese origin and is said to “redistribute stagnant 
energy” within a person to promote emotional and physical healing (Raingruber & Robinson, 
2007). Kinesiology originated as a muscle testing therapy developed in Sweden by a 
physiotherapist (Ottosson, 2010).   However, the kinesiology practice that the participants 
reported attending in Christchurch appeared to be an expanded version of applied kinesiology 
(Rosner & Cuthbert, 2012). According to the information on this practice’s website the therapists 
there have their own technique for “evaluation of physical, emotional, psychological and 
spiritual systems of the body” (Integrated Health, undated). Both reiki and kinesiology resemble 
the ‘laying on of hands’ that is used in religious ceremonies to transfer conviction and power to 
the recipient (Carr, 2000). They also draw on the idea of therapeutic touch that itself forms an 
assemblage encompassing an entanglement of orthodox and alternative healing modalities.  As 
well as reiki and kinesiology, therapeutic touch and its ally, massage, is found in nursing (Bulette 
Coakley & Duffy, 2010; Hart, 2012), physiotherapy (Weerapong et al., 2005), and Māori 
traditional massage (mirimiri) where it is accompanied by karakia (prayer) (Ahuriri-Driscoll et al., 
118 
 
 
2008). Therapeutic touch has been used to relieve distress and pain in people with cancer 
(Currin & Meister, 2008), to relieve depression (Field et al., 2012), to ease low back pain (Furlan 
et al., 2015) and to calm preterm infants (Hernandez-Reif et al., 2007).    
The spiritual benefits from the healing touch have been described as “a little understood enigma 
of a signally human interaction”(Krieger, 1975: 784). However, it is the ‘thing’ beyond 
explanation in human terms (the enigma), that appears to be the crucial component.  All 
participants who commented on reiki and kinesiology struggled to put into words how they 
imagined the therapies created the effects they reported.  Johnny likened reiki to meditation, 
saying that it reduced his stress and helped him during times when he had chronic sleeping 
problems but was unable to be more specific.  Duncan had taken a basic training course in reiki 
but although he reported that “… you just put your hands on top of [a person] and kind of feel for 
blockers and stoppages”, his explanation served only to underline the mysterious nature of the 
effect.  Participants who talked about kinesiology were equally unable to say what happened in 
their treatments.  Jane, Sally, and Rana (who were not known to one another) had all consulted 
the same kinesiology practice in Christchurch and spoke about their experiences during our 
discussions.  I was interested to know more about kinesiology from them as it was a modality I 
was unfamiliar with.  Each of these participants had sought help for markedly different problems 
and each of them had found it helped them, but none of them was able to pinpoint why.  Jane 
referred to inflammation in the body that kinesiology had been able to reduce but followed it up 
by saying “to be quite honest, half of it I couldn’t [explain]”.  Sally had found resolution for long 
lasting pain which had not been identified even after a cascade of medical appointments and 
tests.   She mentioned that the kinesiologist pressed her arm down and massaged the site of the 
pain in her side, and was “a lovely guy… a nice guy who is effective…not dodgy stuff either” but 
followed it up by saying “I don’t know what it is or what it does.”  Rana, who indicated that her 
problems were psychological rather than physical distress, was also unable to say in more than 
the vaguest terms what happened during the treatment:   
So he works on  - I don’t know what you call it now – but uses those oils and things – 
sprays them into you and the resistance in your joints, so he did that and I noticed a 
difference almost immediately in my being, in the way I was thinking , in the way I was 
feeling, I noticed a difference.  (Rana) 
It is interesting here that they all attempt to explain the effect in physical terms; Jane draws on 
constructions of inflammation and both Sally and Rana focus on the outward signs; the touch 
and the ‘oils and things’ and ‘joint resistance’ in the minimal descriptions they were able to 
119 
 
 
come up with, but they hardly provide an explanation of why any of them were able to report 
feeling so much better.  The intimacy involved in touch therapies certainly requires a degree of 
empathetic rapport between the therapist and the client/patient.  However, there seemed to be 
a spiritual ‘thing’ operating here, which went beyond empathy, an enigma beyond rational 
explanation which generated effects in those who found the treatment so helpful.   
It may seem simplistic or even nonsensical to ascribe the alleviation of bodily and spiritual ‘dis-
ease’ to a particular substance, whether every-day or exotic, a ‘cleansing’ drink, or an 
undefinable energy that comes from a particular treatment.  Nevertheless, the participants’ 
diverse reports showed their conviction that they had drawn energy from whatever ‘thing’ they 
used and had gained in wellbeing.  Some reported improved biomedical symptoms; others did 
not, but still found that the ‘things’ enabled them to cope better with whatever had been 
bothering them.  As one participant pointed out directly, a biomedical cure is not always the way 
to find healing.  She had witnessed a healing ceremony embedded in Māori traditional medicine 
where a family member had their partial vision restored to full sight. This had a profound effect 
on her and she was unworried that the sight improvement had been only temporary:   
…it [the improved sight] didn’t stay, but it gave us enough of a window into a different 
world of healing.  We were like, O my goodness, there is some really strong energy and 
effective practice going on here that we don’t understand.  So that …   started the 
journey of learning … (Olivia) 
The ‘journey’ referred to by Olivia is an aptly chosen word.  It points ahead to the way that the 
participants’ practices with supplements had been an influence for change and development, 
enabling them to move forward in their lives.  So far, this chapter has highlighted only the 
participants themselves and their connections with the supplementary and therapeutic ‘things’ 
that they engaged in.  Their lives, however, were much richer than this suggests.  Far from being 
focused on these ‘things’ for their health, they were ‘ordinary’ citizens who were well engaged 
socially and economically across a diverse range of fields.  Drawing from the participants’ 
accounts, the next section looks at the wider context of their lives and traces some of the human 
and non-human components in the network of actants that interacted with the supplement 
things in the evolving assemblage.    
Things in the evolving assemblage  
All participants were part of the study because they had rich experience with supplements and 
herbal medicines.  So it goes without saying that at the time I spoke to them, this connection had 
120 
 
 
already happened at some time in the past, they considered their health practices with 
supplements to be important, and they were able to speak about their experiences at some 
length.  When discussing with them how they first started to take supplements, I could see that 
an apparently simple decision to start using a particular product was the result of a long chain of 
events within a network of many connections, some deliberate and others quite random.  While 
the immediate situations that precipitated the action may have been a health problem of some 
kind, it was far from a simple connection.  Entangled in the decision were their own views about 
health and illness that came from their cultural background and life experiences, examples of 
families, friends and acquaintances who also took supplements, wider social discourses of health 
and illness, heterogeneous pieces of information from many different kinds of commercial, 
health, and social media, and previous contacts with the orthodox health system.  All these came 
together at a node in the network when each participant made the decision to take action.  They 
bought and took a particular product which then became ingested matter and part of their 
being.   Moreover, the chain of events did not terminate at that point, but went on to inform 
subsequent decisions and produce new connections which led to further actions.   
Deleuze and Guattari’s (1987) rhizome again helps to conceptualise the tangled relationships 
within such an assemblage. While it is the synthesis between the connections and interactions of 
the rhizome which creates the forward movement, it is still useful to look at several of the 
individual actants in more detail to elucidate the range of personal, social, and economic factors 
that were apparent across the data generated in the study.  Of course, a single interview of 
around an hour could not expect to reveal the multitude of connecting points that had come 
together for each of the participants and set off their engagement with supplements.  
Nevertheless it was possible to distinguish several broader categories that had been influential 
for all of them, and to trace the connecting threads between the vital matter of the supplements 
and how they were linked to previous experiences in their lives, contacts with other people that 
had been influential, and wider social and economic discourses that they had come across.   
It was clear from the discussions with the participants that many of them assumed it was both 
obvious and sensible to find things to treat themselves with whenever possible, and to only 
consult a health professional as a back-up approach if they needed more than they could do 
alone.  This self-sufficient attitude appeared to be derived from their family and the wider 
cultural milieu in which they had grown up.  It echoed constructions of the ‘do-it-yourself’ (DIY) 
New Zealander which places a high value on being a “Kiwi bloke” (Cox, 2016) who takes pride in 
being able to bring together their own materials and skills and solve most problems 
121 
 
 
independently. This was even more pronounced in those participants who lived or had lived in 
rural areas, where self-sufficiency and independence is assumed to be part of the ethos of small 
communities (Herbert-Cheshire, 2000; Powell et al., 2016; Swaffield & Fairweather, 1998):    
We were farmers so we had our own orchard ….  But I think cod liver oil and Vicks were 
the staple things that my mother had in her first aid bag…. Whenever we went to the 
sea, my mother would go, just go and put it in the sea, salt water was very healing. 
(Caro) 
This type of embodied cultural capital that Caro articulated and which forms people’s 
assumptions is accumulated, largely unconsciously, over a lifetime, strongly affecting people’s 
ideas and beliefs (Calhoun et al., 1993). This is Bourdieu’s notion of the habitus.  A person’s 
habitus results in actions that are “neither fully determined nor fully willed” (McNay 1999: 100) 
but played out in what Bourdieu termed “le sens pratique” generally translated as ‘the rules of 
the game’ (King 2000; McNay 1999). This means that the response to particular circumstances is 
variable and creative within the bounds of what an individual finds to be reasonable behaviour 
for their family, group or social class (Garnham and Williams 1980: 213). Individuals become 
skilled at the game, evolving beyond its original limitations and (using an analogy with tennis), 
develop “… the practical flexibility to know when they should run to the net or into space” (King 
2000: 419).   
The comments made by participants like Caro and others tended to focus on the household 
items and patent medicines from which they had acquired their ‘sense of the game’ and formed 
their independent attitude towards looking after themselves in most circumstances:  
Ok, you’ve got some sunburn, let’s get out some – whatever it is – and put that on.  
Rawleighs [a patent medicine company] I guess was really big then as well, so that’s 
what you would do.  You get a cold, so you get the Vicks Vaporub™ [mentholated cough 
and cold remedy] on.  My older brother used to get croup quite bad so they would get all 
the stuff they needed to and get the old preserving thing out and make lots of steam 
with it and have it in a tent sort of. (Johnny) 
Here Johnny looks back to his childhood and describes the material things that had been 
meaningful to him as simple DIY remedies.  His description shows that he had observed the 
adults in his life interacting with them had provided the template for how he went about 
managing his minor health problems now although the ‘things’ themselves had moved on.  The 
patent remedies he mentioned in his early years had mostly evolved over time, becoming more 
122 
 
 
elaborate and less likely to be common household ingredients, but the underlying concept of 
practical independence using simple material products and applying learned skills had not.  
Johnny now said he took multivitamins, omega-3 tablets, magnesium, and sleepy tea if he was 
having “a few sleep issues”.  Several of the participants who had immigrated to New Zealand 
from different European countries continued with the alternative products they had been 
prescribed by doctors there but had learned to be self-reliant and seek them out independently 
because they were not available in the standard health system in New Zealand.  Similarly, 
participants who had knowledge of Māori traditional medicine from their childhood were also 
continuing to use adapted forms that fitted around their current circumstances.  All of them 
were using their ‘sense of the game’ to adapt and change in a flexible way, making use of what 
worked for them at the time I met them. Each had their unique assemblage of actants around 
their health practices to which their habitus from the past had clearly contributed the ‘codes’ of 
the assemblage.  However, it was constantly changing and evolving with the material things 
being, adapted, or woven in with new ideas and discourses as time moved on and they 
themselves were changed.   
Rather than simply adapting the codes of the assemblage as times changed, some participants 
related stories of a dramatic departure from their normal practices that sparked radical change, 
as  ‘lines of flight’ from the usual actants in the rhizomatic assemblage.  These transformation 
stories consistently combined elements of a crisis and a material ‘thing’ which resulted from it, 
as Derrida would say “something absolutely new and a break” (Derrida 1997:6):    
…my father was very, very, very ill and the priest came to basically give him the last rites 
and his father said…  I’m going to this friend of mine who’s got homeopathic stuff, came 
back, gave it to my father and from that point the fever broke.  They firmly believed it 
was related to the homeopathic medicine and from that point forward Dad always, his 
parents, always used that in conjunction with mainstream medicine.  So it has been part 
of our culture, our family culture for a long time and our family continues as a whole to 
use alternative medicine in different forms. (Trudy)  
Trudy draws attention to this as a seminal event marking a crucial watershed in her family’s 
history which she designates as a moment of change “from that point forward”.  However, as 
the events took place when her father was a child, and therefore before her own lifetime, it 
appears it had created a new assemblage around homeopathic ‘things’ which had become part 
of her own cultural habitus.  She went on to note that, as a child, she found her family’s habitus 
somewhat difficult; her European immigrant family was ‘different’ from the accepted norm, not 
123 
 
 
just in their use of homeopathy but the things they ate, which marked her out as unusual, 
especially at school where she was often “reeking of garlic”.  Her family experiences, however, 
had been a stronger influence on her subsequent attitudes and practices than the opinions of 
outsiders and according to her comments, it had strongly influenced her throughout her adult 
life.   
For another participant the ‘rupture’ was also a ‘line of flight’ that took place in a crisis.  A crucial 
moment of decision, in her case, was at a point when she rejected taking a ‘thing’ she believed 
would have intolerable effects:  
..[the doctor] said, well go to the pain specialist and see what he says but I think he will 
want to put you on morphine.  I said, well I am not going.  …  I thought well if I’m only 
going to be told I’ve got to go on morphine I’m not going to take it so I will try other 
things.  So I tried reflexology, [name of therapist] for the kinesiology and chiropractic, 
and of course I had to give up walking.  I could hardly get out of bed at times.  I did push 
myself and go swimming and all that but I found the omega-3 and those people with 
reflexology and kinesiology – my back’s not any different – I haven’t done anything – I 
haven’t had an operation, but I do not take one thing.  I don’t even take a Panadol for it.  
(Jane) 
Here the things Jane ended up using appear to have been of lesser importance than the thing 
she was avoiding.  Rather than the positive agency that Trudy attributed to the homeopathic 
medicines in her family crisis, it was the negative agency of the morphine that was the turning 
point for Jane.   She does not say why she was so determined not to take the morphine, and it 
appeared to be something within her own assemblage of cultural and background assumptions.   
These two accounts were each examples of the way that both positive and negative ‘thing 
power’ had agency that could be seen to generate effects for the participants, acting as a 
catalyst that was mobilised at a time of crisis in their lives.     
Interconnecting things  
Naturally, in the course of their everyday lives, participants came across the ideas and stories 
about supplements in their interactions with other people within and beyond their own circle of 
friends and acquaintances and reciprocated with their own experiences.  So supplements were a 
topic of discourse in their lives, ‘things’ that started conversations with others.  It was apparent 
from the participants’ accounts that personal recommendations, especially those made face-to-
face, were a powerful way of disseminating information about supplements and encouraging 
124 
 
 
others to adopt them. They gave numerous examples of ideas that they had heard from their 
family members or other people they came into contact with through shared activities.  Hearing 
recommendations for products from people in their own network appeared to set up a 
background of common social capital between them and the participants which reinforced the 
trustworthiness and salience of the advice.  Trudy had started taking fish oil on the 
recommendation of a friend:  
… a friend of mine had been telling me about fish oil  ….  I looked up online because I 
always like to know and there didn’t seem to be any negative side effects as such, not 
any serious ones,  and most of what I could see it was actually quite beneficial so I 
thought, yes, I’ll start taking it.  (Trudy) 
Rana, had confided in a work colleague about an emotionally stressful time she was going 
through and her thoughts about needing to see a doctor for antidepressants.  The colleague 
recommended instead that she consult a kinesiologist first and see if it helped.  Rana acted on 
the advice in spite of her initial skepticism, and found it so helpful that she had since encouraged 
three others in her family network to do the same. The advice does not necessarily need to 
come from someone well known to the recipient; it can be important and influential from a 
mere acquaintance if that person is knowledgeable in an area that is of mutual interest.  Sally 
heard about cranberry for preventing urinary tract infections through the rest home where her 
mother lived: 
It’s pretty amazing stuff…(indicating the cranberry) I just hate having urinary tract 
infections.  Having to go to the jolly doctor – [being given] the same old things … But I 
don’t need it now. (Sally) 
Similarly, Bob heard about his supplements from passing acquaintances that he met through 
different social activities.  In all cases the advice was also timely, coming along at a time when 
these participants were grappling with a specific problem and open to hearing about ‘things’ 
that might resolve it.   The intersection of the problem to be solved coinciding with the right 
person offering advice at the right time seemed to be a trigger to act on the advice and take up 
the ‘thing’ suggested, particularly as it was readily available from any number of easily accessed 
sources.  Personal recommendations like this tap into the cultural meanings that the endorser 
brings to the product (Biswas et al., 2006; McCracken, 1989), giving rise to emotional, cognitive 
and behavioural responses in the recipient that make the advice trustworthy and personally 
relevant (Lewis and Weigert, 1985).   
125 
 
 
The personalisation of the advice appears to hold true even if the recommender is not 
personally known, but familiar through exposure in the media, or if their credentials are 
meaningful to the person viewing or hearing the advice (Briggs et al., 2002).  Celebrity and 
expert endorsements work in the same way as personal recommendations because they are 
easily recognised by diverse members of the public who admire their achievements (Walseth, 
2008). Murray, for example, was eager to point out to me that the brand of supplements he 
used were also used by well-known elite sports people:   
 …they [the company] sponsor the Women’s Tennis Association, 16 of the top 20 women’s 
tennis players are on [product brand name] and seven of the top ten. (Murray)    
Murray was a former tennis player himself, and the endorsement of these famous tennis players 
who were familiar to him through the media seemed to be in the same category as if it had 
come from someone he knew well.  His respect for these players, based on his knowledge of 
their sporting prowess, translated into an affirmation for him that he was taking the right 
products, even though he was never likely to meet any of these people face-to-face or have a 
conversation with them.     
As well as personal contacts, the rhizomatic assemblage connects human actants through the 
popular and  scientific media with an enormous variety of ideas about things that may help or 
harm (for example, (Bergé et al., 2013; Crighton et al., 2013; Hatch et al., 2010; Meeker, 2012; 
Nicolopoulou-Stamati et al., 2015). The perceptions of risk these give rise to were discussed in 
detail in the previous chapter.  However, it is worth drawing attention to these discourses of 
harmful/helpful things from another angle, that is, to highlight the constant presence of the 
‘thing’ that one either must use or must avoid for their health’s sake, which is never far from the 
headlines.   Against this background, the actual ’thing’ that is the object of interest comes and 
goes over time.  Bernie, for example, talked about the changes he had seen in the years that he 
had been in his shop: 
Sixteen years ago it used to be multivitamins, Vitamin C and treatments for a bit of 
congestion but I don’t think I’ve sold a multivitamin now for months.  Now it is people 
coming in looking for answers that they’re not getting elsewhere.  That would be for 
things like rheumatoid arthritis, allergies, eczema, ankylosing spondylitis, MS, cancer, a 
whole variety of illnesses.  (Bernie)  
A particular ‘thing’ may become the object of attention in the media that creates a flurry of 
interest and/or concern only to be replaced by something else a few days or weeks later.   Very 
126 
 
 
often the media items are based on research studies but the limited framings of science 
journalism create a cycle which oscillates back and forth “from Gee whiz to Shock Horror” (Reed, 
2002: 43), omitting the important caveats and nuances that the original study may well have 
presented.  Over the last several years in the Christchurch area, concerns about various bad 
‘things’ have come and gone in just such a cycle; studies about the weed killer glyphosphate 
(Roundup) and the migration of the plastics in food packaging and storage containers into foods 
(Chang et al., 2014; Guart et al., 2011; Mink et al., 2011; Portier et al., 2016) became headlines in 
popular and local media during 2018 (Anonymous, 2018b; Hutching, 2018). By 2019 these 
appeared to be fading and being replaced by concerns about nitrates in drinking water (Clague 
et al., 2015; Foote et al., 2015) and the effects of climate change exposing old and still toxic 
landfills (Brand et al., 2018; Northcott, 2019). Though the ‘gee whiz’ (‘amazing thing’) headline is 
also popular, for example, reports of break through discoveries in cancer or dementia, that hold 
out hope for a cure where none was previously available (Clopton, 2019; Haridy, 2018), the 
‘shock horror’ stories about ‘bad things’ tend to be more powerful. Bad news is held to engage 
more people and to sell better, leading to the belief that the popular media are generally biased 
towards highlighting the negative aspects of any issue (not just health) and that the general 
public also has an asymmetric response that is drawn to reports about bad things rather than 
good (Arango-Kure et al., 2014; Garz, 2014; Soroka, 2006).    
The concept of bad things was aligned to, but different from the social discourses discussed in 
the previous chapter when participants had been personally affected by a specific bad thing.  
The bad things that were reported in the media then seemed to act as a reinforcement of their 
personal experiences. Charles was one participant who held very strong views about prescribed 
medicines as being ‘bad things.’ He gave an account of a life-threatening adverse drug reaction 
where he had ended up in intensive care for a lengthy period.  He had been intensely disturbed 
by this event, and, had lost trust in doctors and prescribed medicines.  He indicated that other 
accounts he had read or heard about since had led him to believe that his experiences were 
widespread and applied much more widely to ‘people’ in general who, like him, were using 
supplements instead:  
… why are people turning to these things?  The thing is that they are getting so hacked 
off what they get from the medical world.  They are not getting the results they expect; 
some of the stuff they are being given is so discomforting that it drives them demented.   
(Charles) 
127 
 
 
Another participant, Wendy, reported that her husband had a similar intense dislike of 
prescribed medicines which he believed were harmful things promoted by drug companies for 
their own profit.  He would go to great lengths to avoid them:      
My husband absolutely hates pharmaceuticals.  He thinks it’s a racket… he got a really 
horrendous chest infection …   that morning I was thinking O my God, I am going to have 
to take him to A&E.  But Mister had been upstairs on the internet and he had read these 
things about silver, so being ready to try anything … he went and found his silver ring and 
he went and grated it and put it into hot water and then inhaled it.  …. within 24 hours 
most of those crackles had subsided and by 72 hours he was practically back to normal.  
(Wendy) 
This somewhat unusual reaction was not typical of the majority of participants, most of whom 
comfortably combined prescribed medicines with their supplements.  Nevertheless, the ‘harmful 
thing’ headline appears to have much capacity to cause confirmation bias (Montibeller & von 
Winterfeldt, 2015) for those who are looking for it.  There are plentiful reports of adverse 
reactions to prescribed drugs that can be found on even the most casual of searches (for 
example, (Bellosta & Corsini, 2012; Hoffelt & Gross, 2016; Perucca & Gilliam, 2012), as well as 
items in both the academic and popular media that show the pharmaceutical industry in a poor 
light (Davis & Abraham, 2013; MacDonald, 2018). 
The channels of communication that spread the discourses about the good or bad things are an 
additional category of non-human actants with their own agency that are an integral part of the 
assemblage of supplement things.  People use them to access information and opinion, solicit 
advice, buy products, and connect with one another through a vast network of modern and 
traditional communication tools that are available across the globe in real time and are 
constantly changing and evolving.  They link across the globe, connecting things with people who 
may seek them out deliberately or come across them by chance.  These communication things, 
which form immense rhizomatic assemblages in their own right, enable people to have 
convenient access any time of the day or night to the vast pool of resources that is the world of 
the modern internet (Siliquini et al., 2011; Suziedelyte, 2012; Tustin, 2010). Moreover, the 
electronic things through which consumers connect with this assemblage of information 
continue to evolve in their ease of use, their connection speed and the amount of information 
they can hold.  Even the cheapest devices - the mobile phones, tablets, computers – are now 
able to connect to online databases of vast capacity (Maggiani, 2009). These tools have not 
completely replaced older media formats such as radio and print but they have greatly enhanced 
128 
 
 
the ability of anyone with an internet-enabled device to connect more often and more widely to 
an immense pool of information.  They can find out what products are available anywhere in the 
world and buy them, given that they have the financial resources, all without leaving home.  
Moreover, individuals such as the participants are not just passively waiting for reports of things 
that help or harm to come to them.  They are also testing their own ideas and searching for new 
ones, and adding their own pieces of information to the mix, so that the evolving assemblage of 
information about these things is always in process.   
Almost all participants mentioned using a variety of communication channels to search for, find, 
and follow up supplement products.  They might search online to cross check their own ideas or 
advice they had received in person or read about in a magazine to discover whether it tallied 
with what they found online.  Alternatively they might follow a link from something they found 
online and then seek further online and in-person advice from another source they considered 
reliable.  Paul was a particularly adept user of all sorts of communication modes as his story of 
bee pollen shows:  
I started taking bee pollen … I heard about bee pollen because I was listening to Radio 
Pacific….   allegedly it boosted your immune system and gave you energy. …  I guess 
initially I felt that I was getting a boost specially if I felt that I was getting run down or a 
cold I would up the intake of it for a while and feel a little better   (Paul) 
As Paul indicated, he was not searching deliberately for a supplement here but came across the 
information incidentally when listening to the radio. However, he then used his online resources 
to find a source of supply and order the pollen, firstly for himself, and then in bulk.  For a while 
he and his wife would fill gelatin capsules by hand and sell them as a sideline to the online 
section of their gardening business or at garden shows they attended. Although it was time-
consuming, they did well enough out of it, he said, at a time when the product was little known.  
The communication actants involved in this small part of the complex network covered both the 
old (radio) and new (online) communication tools which were variously used to learn 
information, obtain the ‘thing’ (the pollen) and then to market and sell it online through his 
business connections.  In turn the communication things were part of a wider web of human 
actants and social discourses which focused on a particular thing, bee pollen.        
Other participants, like Cliff, had developed proficiency in searching the internet as a direct 
result of wanting to learn more about supplements and obtain them:  
129 
 
 
I only got computer literate about two years ago – I’m a total newbie in all those, 
Youtube all that sort of stuff.  But if you use it right you can get information and also I 
buy most of my herbs from I-Herb now in America – I can go on their research sites. (Cliff) 
By the time I spoke to Cliff, he was an adept internet user who described a range of products he 
had bought to try out for himself and recommended websites that he thought I should look at to 
help with the study. He pointed out that supplements can be ordered from anywhere with the 
click of a mouse and a credit card and are often cheaper than in a local store. In addition, the 
non-human devices and websites that enable users to make these transactions never get tired, 
stop work or go on holiday as a human would, so can be used any time of the day or night in any 
part of the world.  Once the buyer initiates the order, the entire subsequent chain of reaction is 
handled through technological things, acknowledging the order, charging the credit card, then 
the packing, dispatching and delivery.  Although there are humans involved along the way, the 
personal interaction between buyer and seller is replaced with the non-human devices, software 
and connections.  Walk-in stores promote the personal service and advice they can offer, but 
once a person is confident about what they need, the appeal and convenience of online 
shopping seems hard to resist.  Sally described what she liked about the online system:   
And they’ve [the local health shop] been very good … until I thought, well I’ll go on the 
internet and it’s brilliant, absolutely brilliant.  Order it and I get it the next morning.  It’s 
couriered.  It’s absolutely amazing.  They tell me exactly when they have packaged it.  It’s 
just a two second operation now that I know how to use the thing.  (Sally) 
It is interesting to note that Sally encapsulates this whole process and underlines its anonymity 
in describing it as “knowing how to use the thing”.   Her ‘sense of the game’ shows how she has 
understood that buying things can be adapted from the walk-in shop to use other actants in the 
assemblage that are now at her disposal.  She already knows what ‘things’ she needs, she uses 
her skills with modern communication things to find an online source where she can buy her 
products more conveniently - no need to go out to visit the store - and even more cheaply, 
becomes familiar with how it works, places orders, and receives messages in return, with the 
result that the package of supplements lands on her doorstep the next morning.   
The agency of the material things drives these transactions in a way that humans may use but 
over which they have only limited control.  People bring various levels of skill to seek what they 
want but what they find is largely determined by the non-human things that are unseen but lie 
behind the user interface: the systems on which the search engines run, the algorithms that 
130 
 
 
determine what they see, and the capacity and speed of the internet connections and the 
phones or laptops which the human users employ as tools. Most participants appeared to be 
aware of both the advantages and limitations of these technical things and would cross check 
what they found from several angles and compare prices and sources of supply.  They were also 
continuing to develop expertise in interpreting what they found and recognising which were the 
more reliable sources of information and which were simply driven by marketing and promotion 
of particular products.  This last point leads on to the economic and commercial actants that are 
deeply entangled in the sources that generate the information about supplements things.  They 
include the products themselves, the companies that develop and market them (and their share-
holders), the buyers and sellers and the channels through which they are disseminated.   The 
next section tackles the implications of these actants, the levers of supply and demand, and how 
they were manifested in the data generated in the discussions with the participants.   
Marketing things 
Undoubtedly, commercial interests have played a part in the increasing use and availability of 
supplements and herbal products across all developed countries in recent decades (McCann, 
2005; Van Buul & Brouns, 2015). There is much money invested in their manufacture and 
marketing (Persistence Market Research, 2017), with companies from large corporates to small 
independent businesses always aiming for new ways to attract new customers, and retain them 
by providing a point of difference from other similar products (Sosna et al., 2010; Suleria et al., 
2015). The underlying demand, however, does not appear to be driven only by the pull of 
advertising but the push from consumers who are searching for new products and new ways of 
managing their health (Khedkar et al., 2017; Shepherd & Bachis, 2014; Wrick, 1995). Whether 
push or pull, the marketing revolves around ‘things’ to sell backed up by discourses and images 
to encourage buyers and communication channels to disseminate the message widely.  The 
‘things’ themselves may not necessarily be new, but older products that have been reimagined 
and repackaged to appeal to the contemporary consumer by combining, formatting or naming 
them differently.  Cod liver oil once spooned out of a bottle to previous generations of children 
has become the more scientific sounding omega-3 fish oil in easy-to-swallow capsules now 
promoted as having benefits for people of any age.  Garlic, already familiar from its use in 
everyday recipes or herbal remedies for generations, has been reformulated into tablets that 
avoid the mess and smell of the natural product and combined with other herbs and vitamins as 
an immunity booster (Percival, 2016; Ried, 2016; Totelin, 2015). As discussed in the previous 
chapter, traditional medicines from other societies that are new and exotic to western 
131 
 
 
consumers have also become increasingly incorporated into mainstream ranges in health stores 
and pharmacies (Connell, 2006; Loyer & Knight, 2018; May, 1996).    
With the market for supplements well established, but highly competitive, participants who sold 
supplements and herbal products were keenly aware of the pressure on their business to remain 
viable by keeping abreast of current trends. They described a constantly moving scene at the 
point of sale, with new products, combinations, and formulations constantly vying for the 
attention of customers, who, it seems have a constant demand for novelty (Gallagher, 2012).  
They talked about the need to find a balance between anticipating or responding rapidly to 
consumer demands for new things, and being wary of investing too much in any particular one 
thing, as consumer demand was volatile, with interest prone to flare and then wane just as 
quickly:  
There tend to be trends – definitely trends as to what is the ‘in product’ … for instance 
turmeric is quite big at the moment so everybody comes out with their turmeric …things 
like R3 was on the radio for ages and ages.  We couldn’t get it.  We didn’t know who 
supplied it.  Huge demand for it.  As soon as we got it, it started to back off a little bit. 
…it’s not sold so we put it out on special and wait for the next trend. (Kerry)  
Rarely, it appeared, a small businessman like Paul, might see a trend coming and capitalise on it 
early before others caught up.  However, the market was always changing and there appeared 
to be a small window of time before, as Paul found out, “people were able to find it in health 
shops and in supermarkets and that sort of thing and our market slowly dried up.”    
Marketing makes good use of communication channels which underpin much of the waxing and 
waning of trends.   Online marketing in particular has a wide reach as it spans geographical 
distance in a way that other marketing tools cannot.  Moreover, online advertising makes use of 
advanced technological algorithms to remember what people have searched for and 
automatically display similar but related products that are likely to appeal to them (Alagöz et al., 
2010). However, marketing alone cannot make the promotion successful; if consumers do not 
find some advantage in a particular product, then it is likely to fade away, just as Kerry describes 
above.  Although almost all the participants talked about their use of online sources, more 
traditional marketing was still a powerful influence on their purchases.  Radio has already been 
mentioned by both Paul and Kerry as connecting potential users with a supplement of interest 
and many others mentioned reading about products in a magazine or other print publication.  
One retailer participant advertised his products and services in a full page advertisement in a 
132 
 
 
local newspaper every two weeks and local pharmacy chains promoted their ‘specials’ in print 
publications in their stores, as well as online.  A health store chain continued to publish a 
substantial free magazine every month, with products and advice focusing on a particular theme 
each time, for example, sleep, stress, immunity or surviving winter illnesses.  These magazines 
provided a rich source of informal data over the course of the study about the mix of typical 
communication and marketing actants that are used to appeal to the widest possible range of 
potential customers. While they clearly had human input into their design, they stood out as 
using the material form to connect with discourses that would maximise the appeal of the things 
they were promoting.  
Well-chosen images are powerful actants that create positive associations with the things they 
are promoting (Roininen et al., 2006). In these magazines, images of glossy leaves, luscious-
looking fruits and berries, scenic landscapes and happy, smiling families accompanied by bland 
descriptions of products as ‘healthy’, ‘natural’ and ‘good for you’ appeared to confirm the 
wisdom of the old adage that ‘a picture is worth a thousand words’.  Supplement users were 
depicted as young, good looking, often in exercise gear, jumping for joy and full of ‘get up and 
go’. Personalised testimonials complete with signatures and photographs of satisfied users, 
ordinary citizens, or locally well-known sports or media personalities also featured, adding 
authentication and conviction to the marketing message (Koteyko & Nerlich, 2007). Older 
people, a key market for many of the products because of their concerns about aching joints, 
prostate problems, heart disease, and dementia, were not often depicted, but when they were, 
they also appeared in full health, engaging in active outdoor pursuits.  
Supplements in these sort of media are constructed as things with the power and agency to 
create desirable effects in people’s lives through strategic combinations of linguistics and 
images.  The healthy and active ‘lifestylism’ they promote (Koteyko and Nerlich,  2007) is 
commonly reinforced by the imperative voice, seeming to speak directly to the reader in a 
personal way and instruct them to be active participants in making themselves healthy, for 
example the exhortation to  “Jump start your exercise mojo!!“ (Dobson, 2016).  There is a 
relentless positivity about almost all the language used to communicate and market the benefits 
of supplement things to users in these publications (see Figure 2).  They ‘cleanse’, ‘balance’, 
‘renew’, ‘boost’ and ‘soothe’; they improve immunity, give ‘kids calm’ and provide ‘tranquil 
sleep’.  Most frequently they ‘support’: in a single issue of the one magazine I examined, various 
products were said to  ‘support’ menopause, sleep, stamina, healthy cartilage, joint comfort and 
mobility, the prostate, digestive balance, the body’s response to allergens, and to give extra 
133 
 
 
support that would ‘lift brain power’.  The framing of supplements like this serves several 
purposes; it conveys overwhelmingly positive associations; it chooses language that is open to 
being applied and interpreted in any way; and, importantly, it constructs the products as distinct 
from the therapeutic claims associated with pharmaceuticals.  This last contrast is a useful one; 
not only does it construct supplements as being for wellness rather than illness (in contrast to 
prescribed medicines) but it is able to make a virtue out of the necessity of complying with 
regulatory regimes in most developed countries that prohibit supplement marketing from 
claiming to treat or cure a health condition (Crawford & Leventis, 2005).    
 
Figure 2: Marketing things: graphic by Alex Bidwell, used with permission 
Participants were clearly aware of and entangled with the assemblage of marketing actants as 
almost all of them commented about them in some way.  Most indicated that they believed they 
could distinguish between genuine information and unrealistic marketing promises and few 
would admit to being swayed by advertising.  Tessa, however, confessed that she had 
sometimes felt foolish for believing claims she had read in product promotions:     
I get a bit enthusiastic, excited when I see something online about a new product, or 
something that’s going to have an effect on my brain functioning and all that kind of 
stuff and improve my memory and make me feel really fantastic.  ….  So I do have to be 
careful because I am a bit – because I can make decisions a bit too quickly. (Tessa)  
There is also an awareness among marketers and advertisers, however, that they need to attract 
those users who are sceptical of promotional discourses and images, but can be reached through 
their sensitivity to price.  Price was definitely a major consideration for many of the participants 
134 
 
 
who were frank about how costly they found supplements.  Most of them knew the exact price 
they paid for a particular product and how it compared to other brands or sources of supply.  
Iris, Marama, and Caro all referred to items they would never buy because of the price; Trudy 
described changing from a pharmacy product to a cheaper supermarket generic brand, and Sally 
and Cliff now both bought primarily from online outlets because they could save money.  Even 
those who seemed not to worry about the absolute cost, were keen to ensure that if they did 
spend more than the cheapest price, it should be money well spent.  As Penny remarked 
“sometimes they are quite expensive and you don’t actually want to spend that money if you 
don’t think it is actually going to work.”   There is a different set of marketing actants that come 
into play around price; discounts, ‘two for one deals’, loyalty cards, or ‘free gift with purchase’ 
offers.  Additionally, ‘price plus advice’ combinations do seem to attract regular customers who 
just want their usual product rather than looking for novelty.  Several participants reported that 
they always went to the same store, even if it meant travelling out of their way because they got 
regular discounts for their loyalty and also felt they were given good advice.  Companies use 
these sorts of drawcards to build a ‘brand community’ (Gommans et al., 2001; Hur et al., 2011; 
McAlexander et al., 2002) that creates a link:  
…between the customer and the brand, the customer and the firm, the customer and 
the product in use, and between fellow customers (McAlexander et al 2002: 38)  
This so-called ‘community’ is itself an evolving assemblage built around a set of human and non-
human actants connected in a network of shifting interactions.  Online outlets cannot provide 
face-to–face advice but offset this by being able to generate ‘e-loyalty’ (Gommans, 2001), 
connecting users via their website without being bounded by time zones or geographical 
distance, and encouraging interactive customer-to-customer comments. Additionally, a 
company ‘expert’ may offer advice through their website.  A participant who regularly bought 
products online from the same outlet reported her experience of requesting their advice:    
I’ve just swapped to this one here [indicating new product] …my arthritis seemed to be 
just getting worse.  … So I just actually typed on the helpline and told them my situation 
… and I pretty well got an instant reply.  And they said, you know, probably the arthritis is 
getting worse because there is no difference in the ingredients.  Anyway, it didn’t really 
help but it’s much better. (Sally) 
The experience Sally reports here serves to underline the complex entanglement of ‘things’ in 
the assemblage around the material substances of the supplements; the technical connection 
135 
 
 
through the online help service provided by the product retailer and the prompt communication 
of information in a personal (though disembodied) response.   Although the advice appeared to 
change nothing for her physical problem, Sally appeared reassured, confident she was coping 
with her condition, felt better anyway and was overall a satisfied customer who was likely to 
keep using the same outlet for her supplies.  
A number of participants in the study were engaged in network marketing, a differently 
organised set of similar actants connected together in their own rhizomatic assemblage around a 
specific set of supplement things.  These participants were a relatively small group within the 
study, but the data generated from the discussions with them are worth examining in some 
detail because of the intensity of their engagement with their ‘things’.  Network marketing 
differs from everyday transactions where people buy things from a range of stores or other 
outlets that sell to the general public; the ‘things’ are familiar but they are differently organised 
and sold.  The network marketing model is focused around material products and familiar 
discourses but mobilised through economic enticements, entrepreneurial discourses, personal 
relationships and the transformation narratives of company heroes.  Products are sold through a 
network of distributors, who sell directly to friends and contacts but are also urged to recruit 
these contacts and anyone else in their networks to become distributors themselves (Kong, 
2001). The emphasis on making money by selling through personal contacts is a key feature 
differentiating network marketing from other marketing strategies.    Distributors generally 
receive commissions and bonuses on both the amount of product they sell, and the successful 
recruitment of others as salespersons (Keep & Vander Nat, 2014; Kong, 2001). Supplements 
have been a key product in network marketing right from the beginning; during the 1940s, an 
American supplement manufacturing company was the first to use this model of sales (Keep & 
Vander Nat, 2014; Kong, 2001; Msweli & Sargeant, 2001) and supplements have continued to be 
a mainstay of this mode of selling.   
During the course of the study I heard from participants about a number of different network 
marketing companies that they had been, or were currently, involved with.  Their accounts 
provided a clear picture of the various strategies that were used to attract users. One of these 
drew on the same social discourses of harmful things that have already been described in the 
previous chapter, as Clara’s experience showed:  
He [the presenter] talked about the nutrition that is not in our food any more, it is all 
processed out.  The foundation food for health is gone, essential fatty acids, is gone, for 
shelf life. (Clara) 
136 
 
 
This is not a new strategy; Cardwell (1998) noted more than 20 years ago that network 
marketing recruits are commonly exposed to an identical scenario, which portrays the food 
supply as deficient in essential nutrients, and that all health problems are related to these 
deficiencies, but they can be remedied by taking the particular company’s products on offer. 
There was a two-way entry into network marketing it seemed.  Some participants, like Clara, had 
used the products and had begun selling them to offset the cost of their own supplies;  others 
like Molly and Murray, became involved as a business opportunity and an entrepreneurial 
challenge while also ‘doing good’ for others, but had then begun to take the products 
themselves. Molly explained how the two-pronged approach had been precisely what had 
inspired her to give up her previous job to take on network marketing as a distributor:   
…there are different levels [of commission] as you keep going and enrol more people ….  
once you hit executive, you get ten percent of everything everyone else earns as well … it 
sounds really cheesy but we are not focusing on the money at the moment because you 
can’t rely on it at this stage of the game it’s more about just getting people into it and 
when I do get paid it’s great, it’s awesome, and I’m definitely getting way more than I 
was this time last month but I’m not just sitting there waiting for the pay cheque.  I’m 
sitting there going right, who else can I help.  Because I think if you start to focus on the 
money it just all goes out the window. … You’ve got to have dreams and you’ve got to 
want the cars and that sort of thing or you won’t do anything to get there but I think if 
your number one goal is to help people, life’s going to be better off.   (Molly) 
However, network marketing is more than a business opportunity that has a mildly idealistic 
flavour.  The distributors are encouraged to identify with the company and show loyalty and 
commitment to it, becoming emotionally as well as financially invested, so that their personal 
and business lives are interlinked.  The creation of an identity and a group of like-minded 
contacts built around the material ‘things’ (the products) draws on an assemblage of 
entrepreneurialism, social capital (Lin, 2007), brand commitment and loyalty (Hur et al., 2011), 
while also being inspired by the idea of helping (or saving) others whose health is affected.  The 
implicit promise is not only of health and happiness, but also prosperity for those who are 
prepared to place their trust in the company and its products.  Pratt (2000: 456) interprets this 
strategy as a necessary one to ‘win the hearts and minds’ of those who work for a network 
marketing organisation in the absence of regular hours, work colleagues, a physical location, and 
the psychological contract of job security provided in the traditional workplace.    
137 
 
 
Part of the identity creation appears to be the implicit invitation to the distributor to model 
themselves on the inspirational life story of the company founder which, as Cardwell (1998:17) 
describes, commonly follows a nearly identical trajectory in all companies:      
 …the guru as head of the company [who] …was told by conventional medicine that he … 
had only six weeks/months/hours to live.  Fortunately they found one or more ‘natural’ 
plant based products that cured their cancer … and now they have a fundamental and 
evangelistic desire to sell their amazing product to the world.    
This was indeed closely paralleled by four stories that were related to me by different 
participants about four different brands of products.  Each time it was presented as a type of 
hero’s journey (Campbell, 1973); the quest of the company founder to overcome a health threat 
to themselves or a close family member; the breakthrough discovery after a period of isolation 
or intense study; the struggle to overcome others’ disbelief; and their subsequent dedication to 
sharing their discovery for the betterment of the world and making a fortune in the process.  
Here is just one of them:     
The history behind it was a guy from South Korea [who] was a billionaire.  He was an 
industrialist and the story is that he got stomach cancer.  So he went and lived up in the 
mountains somewhere and started eating an aloe plant, and basically lived off an aloe 
vera plant for quite a long time and then went back down and got tested and his 
stomach cancer was gone.  So he took all his money and basically sold all his assets from 
his steel and invested it in this technology for aloe vera plants and then built these big 
farms and then started a system where you buy in, you sell it to your friends and you get 
a profit.  …. they would give this big seminar to everyone and tell them how this special 
herbal – medicine I guess – has changed their life.  Everything from people’s stomach 
cramps to all these different types of healing, almost like miracles that they’ve 
experienced with this.  (Duncan) 
These narratives with their tales of the quest, seclusion from the world, and return with “the 
goods of salvation” (Rey, 2004: 331), had unmistakable overtones that resonated with the 
myths, legends, and religious figures that were described in the background chapter.  Albertson 
(2011: 127) draws attention to the implicit appeal of religious language in societies where 
“…religion has old roots in the lives of many … people carry emotional and cognitive residue 
from their pasts that are at work in their current political attitudes and choices.” Even for those 
without these religious echoes from their past, the narratives in fairy tales abound with the 
138 
 
 
same elements of quest and salvation.  These generic tales or “ur-narratives …contain the seeds 
of many genres” (Berger 2016: 71); in them the heroes are often aided by magic objects or 
‘things’ through which they manage to find the inner strength to prevail over difficulties. The 
universal appeal of the hero(ine) winning the battle against the odds would seem to be not only 
deeply rooted in the ancient myths of humanity’s distant past but to be always evolving, 
rearranging itself to any context without losing its intrinsic qualities. Rey (2004: 333) has drawn 
attention to the way these ur-narratives are echoed in economic success stories of this sort, 
when the company founder, the ‘charismatic prophet’ produces symbolic goods for benefit of 
the people.  Even in network marketing the reworking of these themes with their origins in the 
distant past demonstrates that “mythology shows itself to be as amenable as life itself to the 
obsessions and requirements of the individual, the race, the age” (Campbell 1973: 330).   
All the companies named by study participants were based in the United States, where there is a 
lengthy history of network marketing companies being investigated by the US Food and Drug 
Administration for deceptive marketing practices or conducting illegal pyramid selling schemes 
focused around the material products (Anonymous, 2003; Berg, 1994; Herbig & Yelkurm, 1997). 
One controversial area has been the evangelistic nature of network company distributors in their 
efforts to recruit others.   The fascination and fear associated with such companies has led to 
them being described as cults (Bhattacharya & Mehta, 2000; Krzywirzeka, 2013) who use “mind 
control” (Pratt, 2000: 456) to exert overly strong attachments among their adherents.  Certainly 
those participants who were currently distributors for network marketing companies at the time 
I spoke to them were fulsome and evangelistic in the way they spoke about the products (the 
‘things’).  They demonstrated high levels of commitment, enthusiasm, and a sense of making a 
worthwhile contribution by making the company products available to people who needed help.  
While they at no time appeared to be in the grip of a cult, I gained the impression that too much 
confidence in the company’s products could lead to potentially overblown claims about what 
their ‘things’ could achieve.  One network marketer gave an account of stepping in to help an 
acquaintance who was awaiting an amputation in hospital because of diabetic complications:  
So it is a very simple programme getting rid of diabetes and our shake just puts your 
blood sugar right straight away.  …   Well!  The next day he is sitting up in bed and he is 
coming to life already. Each day they said, Oh, he’s getting stronger by the day.  Well, 
when they got him back [to hospital], his blood sugar was exactly right …  Everything was 
coming right after four days and then the surgeon looked at his leg and said, “I must 
have made a mistake.  He doesn’t need his leg off!” (Clara)  
139 
 
 
Clara here represents the ‘shake’ that she gave to her acquaintance as being the ‘goods of 
salvation’ mentioned above, that saved his leg.  Molly, however, was much more reserved about 
what she claimed to do herself, noting that she would never give more than generic advice but 
would always refer to other sources in her company:  
There’s certain things you can and can’t do.  So if you are not a qualified nutritionist you 
can’t give nutrition advice.  ….  You’ve just got to be really careful and that’s fair enough 
because if you are not qualified I don’t feel you should do it anyway.  (Molly) 
Another major criticism of network marketing has highlighted the high rates of turnover among 
disillusioned distributors, with some said to be filled with hatred for the companies they 
formerly belonged to (Pratt, 2000; Mswelli and Sargeant, 2001).  There were a few study 
participants who were ex-network marketers, but they were neutral about the companies they 
had been involved with.  It seemed that they had mostly been drawn in to oblige a friend or 
relative but and had never fully ‘bought in’ emotionally to the assemblage of discourses that 
hinged on the ‘thing power’ of the products that the companies sold.  Moreover, the expense of 
the products deterred younger people who were not yet well established financially and they 
found the commitment more than they could maintain on their limited budget:  
I think it was about $60 … I remember I got a discount I think of 20%.  That was still a lot 
for me anyway.  I think they would expect you to get a new one [pack] every one or two 
months.  I can’t really afford that. (Iris) 
Duncan also had a history of being both a user and distributor and although he had extricated 
himself from the company without great difficulty, he admitted that the entanglement of 
personal and business relationships had made it awkward.  He too had found it an expensive 
exercise:  
It’s a community; you make friends, you get involved and it almost turns into a 
community group.  You know, you go to meetings together and you make friends…    And 
then they would say, well you know, you purchase this.  The thing was that a bottle like 
this [indicating size] was about $90 so it would last you a month.  (Duncan) 
Network marketing proved to be an interesting way of examining the assemblage of actants 
around supplements from a different angle.  It encompassed the same levers of supply and 
demand, and the same discourses of naturalness and risk.  However, it differed in that it drew 
directly on personal commitment to a particular company and appealed more intensely to 
140 
 
 
emotional engagement with ‘things’ which not only had value as supplements but also 
symbolised the underlying narrative of altruism and salvation more overtly entangled with the 
economic values of entrepreneurialism and personal profit (Berger, 2016: 71), in a way that was 
absent from those participants who sold products in health stores and pharmacies.   
Conclusion 
In concluding this chapter, it is useful to return to Bennett’s words quoted at the beginning of 
the chapter, framing non-human matter as:  
…an actant inside and alongside intention-forming, morality-(dis)obeying, language 
using, reflexivity wielding and culture making human beings and as an inducer-producer 
of salient, public effects (Bennett, 2010: 39).    
Assemblages of ingested matter, whether supplements, pharmaceuticals or ordinary foods, 
whether helpful or harmful, have been analysed from countless medical, public health, 
commercial, and sociological perspectives but human behaviour has almost always been at the 
centre of these analyses (Flegal et al., 2012; Gotay et al., 2013; Mayes, 2015; Mitchell, 2001; 
Wang & Lim, 2012).  Here, in contrast, non-human things have been brought into the foreground 
as vital matter that acted as an important catalyst in the participants’ lives.  What may have 
begun as a minor or random decision to take a supplement ‘thing’ appeared to have had the 
power to generate physical, mental and spiritual effects in their lives and given them hope for 
the future, even if their basic conditions were still troublesome.  They had developed a personal 
story around their supplement use that resulted from a maze of connections in which the 
material products - the things – had a central role in making their story what it was. The meaning 
was what mattered; the precise mechanism by which the ‘thing’ mattered, appeared to be 
irrelevant.    
Humans organize their experiences into temporarily meaningful episodes.  Narrative is 
both a mode of reasoning and a mode of representation.  People can “apprehend” the 
world narratively and people can “tell” about the world narratively.  … Explanation in the 
narrative mode is contextually embedded, whereas the logico-scientific explanation is 
extracted from spatial and temporal events.  Both modes are rational ways of making 
meaning (Richardson, 1990: 118).   
Moreover, the meaning they drew from their products was not static but always in process, 
constantly forming and reforming as it evolved and changed.  The participants were part of this 
141 
 
 
dynamic evolution, contributing to its onward movement through the effects of their actions to 
research, purchase and consume supplements to look after their health.  These activities were 
also changing the participants themselves as they gained experience and expertise as 
‘supplement users’.  The effect of their interaction with the ‘thing power’ of the supplements 
appeared to have given them a sense of control over their health care options and to be an 
important influence in their decision making not only for themselves but in their interactions 
with orthodox health care options.  The next chapter moves on to tackle the issue of power and 
expertise over health and to look at the part supplements played in identity building for 
participants in their ongoing life journey.     
  
142 
 
 
Chapter 6: Supplements: through responsibility and expertise to 
power 
Introduction 
The previous chapter ended by looking forward to the sense of control that the participants 
experienced through making independent decisions around supplements and health.  This 
chapter examines the assemblage of ideas that had come together to build that sense of control.  
Primarily, these focused around two prominent themes that were raised by the participants: 
being responsible about their health, and developing expertise in doing so. The participants 
clearly saw themselves as responsible people who were taking every care to look after their 
health, yet they were quite well aware that supplement use was not endorsed as a responsible 
practice by health experts.  They did not see this as a conflict, however, but viewed their 
supplements as something extra that they could do over and above following the recommended 
precepts about living a healthy life.  Moreover, they explained, they were becoming their own 
experts about supplements and their uses, searching out information from a wide range of 
sources and putting their new knowledge into practice as they learned more about them.   For 
those participants who also sold supplements, this included building expertise in how to advise 
others in their use.    
To examine these issues relating to the tension between authorised advice and independent 
decisions that deviate from it, this chapter draws from Foucault’s concepts of biopower and 
governmentality as they are manifested in the modern neoliberal state.  As Foucault described 
it, biopower is the guiding and shaping of citizens to be “eminently governable” neoliberal 
subjects (Lorenzini, 2018: 155). Biopower operates through what Foucault termed the ‘conduct 
of conduct’ (Burchell et al., 1991; Foucault, 1988; Lemke, 2002),  that is, the provision of 
guidance by officially authorised experts so that people internalise the approved way to behave 
and do so freely, but in a way which also serves the interests of the state (Danaher et al., 2000; 
Petersen & Lupton, 1996).  In the sphere of health, governmentality works by encouraging 
people to take responsibility for looking after themselves according to the advice of medical 
professionals and public health experts who are credentialed and sanctioned by the state.  They 
are seen as the repository of expert knowledge which is deployed in “shaping the thoughts and 
actions of subjects in order to make them more useful and ‘governable’”(Petersen & Lupton, 
1996: 14).  Choosing to follow the advice and make ‘correct’ choices, they reduce their likelihood 
of becoming unwell and therefore creating a burden for themselves and for the state to look 
143 
 
 
after.  Responsible citizens who have internalised this advice and willingly submit to this 
‘conduct of conduct’, have the greatest likelihood of being considered well-ordered and healthy, 
thereby contributing to the productivity of the state as a whole.  While individuals are not forced 
to conform to these norms, they are encouraged to see them as being in their own interests.   
Nevertheless, many people do resist being ‘conducted’ according to recommended advice. They 
may continue to smoke, drink too much alcohol or keep on with ‘unhealthy eating’ that makes 
them overweight, even though they know quite well that these are not considered responsible 
health practices.  Yet all these behaviours are quite legal and the products that enable them are 
easily available, often heavily advertised with special offers and discounting that make them 
even more attractive.  Viewed from an economic perspective, the buying and selling of such 
things is generally seen as uncontroversial, for they fit with the modern neoliberal state’s focus 
on ensuring that the freedom of the market is maintained, that consumers keep spending, and 
that the economy continues to grow.  The interests of the market, therefore, frequently run 
directly counter to expert advice on health and take precedence over policies which would be 
likely to constrain commercial activity and inhibit growth.  Instead, the onus is placed on 
individuals to be ‘responsible’ and refrain from indulging in behaviours which are not approved 
(Herrick, 2011).   Clearly, supplements are in a different category from these overtly harmful 
products, but they too are frowned on by health experts, albeit for different reasons.  There are 
continuing calls for more restrictions on their availability or to bring them under the control of 
health professionals.  Yet the importance of the commercial activity these products generate 
(Grand View Research, 2019) appears to outweigh the voices of health experts when it comes to 
policy making and regulations.   
By resisting authorised health advice and instead turning to the market for their products, 
however,  it may be that individuals who wish to use or sell supplements are merely exchanging 
one form of being conducted for another, that is, the subtle and less overtly stated form of 
control that commercial interests exercise over people who buy their products (Kasabov, 2004).   
Foucault’s concept of governmentality has been taken up and applied to this viewpoint as well, 
showing that the ever increasing use of digital surveillance is continually and relentlessly 
gathering and analysing the personal details and habits of those who buy, whether they shop 
online or in person  (Ganesh, 2016).  This digital surveillance has been likened to an “electronic 
super-Panopticon” (Zwick & Knott, 2009: 227) that constructs consumers as passive 
commodities to be manipulated by personalised advertising (Couldry & Turow, 2014).  They are 
seen as being induced to spend money on products that merely enrich commercial companies 
144 
 
 
and their shareholders and that do nothing to benefit the people that buy them (Boyd & 
Crawford, 2012; Brayne, 2017; Ganesh, 2016).   
This construction, however, would seem to underestimate the power of ordinary citizens.   The 
tensions between the two competing forces – that is, the conduct of citizens by expert health 
advice and the machinations of the market to control them – create areas of “fragility and 
blindspots” where the modern neoliberal state is at cross purposes with itself (Lorenzini, 2018: 
157).  Individuals such as the participants may engage in what Foucault termed “strategic games 
between liberties” (Foucault 1988 cited in Lemke 2002: 53), that is, they may use their freedom 
creatively to exploit those tensions and resist being ‘conducted’ quite so much (Lorenzini, 2018).  
In effect, this response by individuals is another example of the far reaching interconnections 
that are possible in the rhizomatic network of actants that are interconnected in a moving 
assemblage around a particular issue.  By exploring and experimenting with ways to benefit from 
all the options that are available from both orthodox health advice and the commercial market, 
and resisting and avoiding those aspects they dislike, they may develop expertise in using both 
to maximum advantage for themselves, thereby gaining a sense of control and independence 
from both.   
This chapter has three sections that discuss these issues in the light of the participants’ reports.  
The first focuses on the participants’ construction of themselves as responsible and morally 
‘good’ people who took great care to look after their health.  It then follows on to show how 
their ideas of responsibility had evolved, continuing to be underpinned by basic health advice 
from orthodox medicine and public health, but developing, in addition, their own individualised 
approach through their use of supplements.  I show how they navigated their way between the 
contrasting forces of being responsible in terms of official health advice on the one hand, and 
the societal encouragement to participate avidly in the supplement market on the other.  I look 
at the influence of marketing models on orthodox health itself and how the development of the 
‘health consumer’ has encouraged people like the participants to mobilise their ability to buy 
and sell in any market, including ‘shopping around’ for health care.  The second half of the 
chapter moves on to focus on the participants’ evolving expertise about supplements as their 
experience with them grew.  Drawing again from the concept of the rhizomatic network 
(Deleuze & Guatarri, 1987), it shows the range of actants that the participants were able to bring 
together to create individualised assemblages of knowledge, connecting multiple and disparate 
threads of information and experience to gain confidence and control over choosing appropriate 
health care options in different circumstances.  For those who also sold supplements, their 
145 
 
 
personal expertise was further enhanced as they took steps to learn more about their products 
so as to feel confident in advising others. A final section then looks at the way the participants’ 
enhanced skills and confidence had become woven into their life narrative and was contributing 
to their ongoing identity formation.   
Being a responsible citizen    
As an overall group, the participants appeared to exemplify the ideal neoliberal citizen who has 
internalised the importance of monitoring and self-managing their health. They made numerous 
unprompted comments about the importance they placed on being responsible and took pains 
to demonstrate that they knew about the basic principles of a healthy lifestyle and were doing 
their best to put them into practice:   
 I’m into the whole thing about doing the best you can for your body, looking after 
yourself.  (Frances)   
Without exception they indicated that they saw responsibility as a positive thing in their lives. 
They did not consider it to be a burdensome duty, but something in which they chose freely and 
in which they could take pride and satisfaction.  Bryony, for example, saw being responsible for 
one’s health as a positive aspiration that everyone should work towards: 
  ….  my biggest thing is about people taking responsibility – checking in with their body 
and learning to be able to understand what it needs, when it needs, and be their own 
director of health.  ….  So they are actually the person living in their body and they have 
chosen to take responsibility for how they are and how well their body is.  So to me, that 
is the ultimate. (Bryony)  
Bryony and Frances both indicate here that they see responsibility as being in their own interests 
and as the ‘right’ thing to aspire to.  They both appear to draw on the idea of the physical body 
as something that needs tending carefully as a mediator between “the world around us and our 
internal thoughts, feelings and sensations” (Fox, 2012: 1).  Bryony’s remarks in particular seem 
to construct the body as an “eminently governable subject” (Lorenzini, 2018: 155) of the overall 
person, nicely reflecting in microcosm the concept of the person as a subject of the state.  Her 
comment suggests that the underlying concepts of governmentality have become deeply, if 
unconsciously, internalised into her world view.  All participants represented themselves in 
much the same way as Bryony and Frances; as ‘good subjects’, consciously doing their best to 
keep themselves healthy in the present and using strategies they hoped would maintain and 
146 
 
 
protect their health into the future.  As far as I could tell, none of them smoked and none were 
obese; if they had indulged in ‘bad’ health behaviours in the past, which one participant did 
speak about, they had long left them behind.  Moreover, they were not simply refraining from 
poor health habits, but had also adopted the proactive diet and exercise behaviours that are 
recommended by authorised experts for a healthy lifestyle (Steptoe et al., 2002).  Many 
mentioned the importance of eating well, especially ensuring they ate enough vegetables, for 
example, this comment from Bob: 
Well I’ve always been a bit diet conscious.  I don’t have butter and I don’t have 
margarine.  I’m not an absolute fanatic.  I don’t sit down and have a roast meal now … 
I’ve always eaten a lot of vegetables; I’ve got a fairly good vege garden now... I 
consciously think I should drink more water.   
A considerable number of participants were actively engaged in various sports, with some of 
them having been involved for most of their lives.  Even those that did not undertake regular 
sporting activities talked about the importance of ensuring they had some form of exercise.  
Wendy had “started exercising, cycling and stuff … you know, you have to balance exercise with 
diet and mix that up with vegetables”.  It was clear from the way that participants presented 
themselves that they saw their behaviour as being congruent with the framing of responsibility 
as a positive and autonomous way to exercise freedom of choice about looking after oneself and 
ensuring that they lived a healthy life.  
Several of the participants had also adopted a distinctly moral tone towards those whose 
behaviour they perceived as being less responsible than the standards they applied to 
themselves.  Johnny, for example, said he had noticed that he took care of himself “a little bit 
more than maybe some people”.  Lesley more overtly constructed herself as responsible in 
contrast to others whom she considered were failing to do the right thing in spite of her efforts 
as a health store owner to inform and guide them about the correct way to live in a healthy way:      
 I think it is important that people understand that they actually have to be responsible 
for their own health in lots of ways.  They have to take the bull by the horns themselves. 
…  I give them information [original emphasis]  …  I know usually whether they are ready 
to run with it … you can tell, I mean, you know if someone’s just after a quick fix …  
(Lesley).   
Lesley implies that people who just want a ‘quick fix’ are too lazy or irresponsible to make any 
effort themselves even when she has told them what to do.   She echoes the judgemental 
147 
 
 
‘othering’ of people who are believed to be shirking their responsibility to be healthy (Thompson 
& Kumar, 2011).  There are clear moral meanings in pursuing healthy living that affirm people’s 
self-image as being ‘good’ and allow them to contrast themselves with others whom they view 
as having less healthy habits.  Those who continue to smoke, take illegal drugs, drink too much 
alcohol, or are obese tend to be seen as irresponsible, even deviant, if they persist in keeping up 
their behaviours rather than address them with expert advice (Greener et al., 2010; LeBesco, 
2011; Measham & Brain, 2005; Pennay & Moore, 2010; Rideout & Barr, 2009).  Such people  may 
be considered personally undeserving of the health care they will need in the future because of 
their poor choices, as well as an economic drain on the health system and therefore a cost to all 
of society (Frohlich et al., 2012; Lupton, 1999).  As Herrick (2011: 21) succinctly puts it, “health 
and responsibility rarely venture out unaccompanied by each other because individual lifestyle 
choices condition the risk of chronic disease.” Lesley and Johnny’s comments indicate that this 
attitude does not just emanate from health authorities but also tends to become the norm 
among those who see themselves as ‘good’ subjects.  Viewing others as bringing ill health on 
themselves through failing to address their ‘irresponsible’ lifestyle habits has been interpreted 
as a modern manifestation of ancient concepts of illness as a retribution for sin (Douglas, 1992; 
Lupton, 2013). Although modern medicine makes a feature of being scientific, unbiased, and 
therefore that it stands outside moral considerations, “morals remain deeply embedded in our 
considerations of health and disease” (Brandt & Rozin, 1997: 2).  It is not hard to see how these 
ideas embedded in religious belief systems from earliest times can easily be transferred into 
secular society so that:     
 … ‘health’ and ‘illness’ become tools of government.  What was once part of a system of 
control based on a belief in divine retribution is now embedded in a network of power 
relations which is integral to the notions of freedom of choice (Galvin, 2002: 130).   
A few participants, resisted being drawn into the good/bad, responsible/irresponsible citizen 
discourse.  Vonnie talked about the life circumstances that limited many people’s capacity to be 
responsible about their health, indicating that she was speaking from her own experiences as a 
worker in community health.  She recognised that the issue was a great deal more nuanced and 
complex than telling people what to do and then getting them to ‘choose’ to do it: 
…. sometimes people are just overwhelmed by life – overwhelmed by the lack of choices. 
In some cases there is some personal responsibility certainly [but] I notice that often in 
the community, people really, really try very hard but if you are on a really strict budget 
and you are working two part time jobs and you’ve got kids to get to school and you’ve 
148 
 
 
got your elderly mum living with you or your extended whanau [family] living with you, 
you try and make ends meet and try and be ‘healthy’ or try and stay ‘well’ – it’s really 
difficult.  (Vonnie) 
Vonnie’s comments here draw on the concept of the determinants of health – the resources 
available to a person in terms of income, food and housing security, cultural background, 
education and social connectivity – that influence the amount of responsibility that each 
individual is able to have over managing their health even if they know what they ought to be 
doing (Marmot, 2005).  Vonnie’s reflections, based on her working knowledge of others’ 
disadvantage, were unusual among the participants, who generally appeared to take it for 
granted that being responsible about health was something that everyone could and should be 
able to do as they themselves were doing.  
Reconfiguring responsibility: supplement users 
In spite of their ‘good’ citizen behaviour, participants presented something of a paradox from 
the perspective of official advice, as they were all keenly engaged with supplements as users, 
sellers, or both.  Although supplements are hardly in the same category as smoking, obesity, and 
too much alcohol, they were quite well aware of the orthodox view that treating oneself with 
supplements was both potentially risky and probably futile (Eliason et al., 1999; Hensrud et al., 
1999; Walji et al., 2010) and that by using or selling them they had moved outside the sphere of 
recommended health protecting behaviour.  However, rather than seeing themselves as 
irresponsible, participants seemed to consider that their supplement use was a way to be even 
more proactive about being healthy – a type of ‘responsibility plus’.  Pam explained, for example, 
that she had been taking multivitamins for some while but had recently decided to change to a 
new brand with more components and had added glucosamine as well:   
Susan: So did you start taking the glucosamine off your own bat?  
Pam:  Yes, well pretty much so.    Just having problems with muscular problems and 
things like that… I thought taking that would be an added bonus for me and it 
seems to have helped.  And that there (indicating the container), the multivite.  I 
always have really, been taking multivitamins…  It’s the first time I’ve taken it 
right through, you know – from A to Zinc … so it will be interesting to see.  Seems 
to be OK.  (Pam) 
149 
 
 
There were many other instances like Pam’s where participants reported a particular trigger that 
had led them to start on supplements, none of which had been on the advice of a health 
professional.  It appeared that having a firm belief in themselves as responsible, autonomous 
citizens, they were confident in deciding what was appropriate to try for themselves. There was 
no indication from any of them that their actions were deliberately designed to resist expert 
advice; none gave the impression that they were  on a personal crusade  or that they were 
activists in a social movement with a “politicized collective illness identity” (Brown et al., 2004: 
60,64), that had been formed to challenge accepted knowledge and practice.  Most often their 
comments simply indicated that their involvement with supplements had begun as a pragmatic 
strategy that filled an unmet need for them at the time and was, as Pam said, ‘an added bonus’  
to anything that medical professionals might offer them. As Rana commented, about her 
decision to take evening primrose oil for her menopausal symptoms, “I’d read the material, and 
OK, this is what I want.  It won’t harm me.”  Nevertheless, even though they did not articulate 
their decision as such, they were, in effect, challenging the power of expert health authorities to 
decide what was good or not good for them.  It was their own form of counter-conduct, a 
resistance to being conducted by experts, and making the decision to “conduct …the domain of 
[their] own conduct or behaviour” (Foucault 1997 cited in Lorenzini 2018: 194-5) and go straight 
to the market for what they wanted. In contrast to the interpretation of the disordered body 
that represents a “moral failing” because it needs to be reordered with prescribed medicines 
(Dew et al., 2015: 272) , the participants clearly saw their self-chosen ingestion of supplements 
as quite the opposite; that was an additional way of responsibly ‘ordering’ themselves and, by 
implication, also morally good.  
This reconfiguring of responsibility into independent, “hybridised medication practices beyond 
the purview of medicine’s centres of calculation” (Dew et al., 2014: 39), however, meets with 
disapproval from experts; people are not supposed to treat themselves without consulting a 
health professional (Bond & Hannaford, 2003; Ventola, 2010).  Doing so is framed from the 
orthodox perspective as lay people being over-confident about their own judgement and “at risk 
of being exploited, losing their money and damaging their health” (Ernst & Singh, 2008: 281). In 
response, health professionals over the years have continued to call for more regulation over 
supplement sales citing the same concerns about effectiveness and safety as noted above 
(Dwyer et al., 2018; Fontanarosa et al., 2003; Starr, 2015). Yet while these statements come 
from one branch of authorised expertise and appear to be taken seriously, the importance of the 
supplement industry to commercial activity and economic growth (Grand View Research, 2019) 
150 
 
 
seems to outweigh the imposition of any further restrictions.  In New Zealand, for example, a 
survey of New Zealand companies engaged in the manufacture and marketing of supplements 
estimated that the industry had a turnover of $1.4 billion with projections that there would be 
between 30-50% growth over the next three years (Crowe Horwath, 2014).  Moreover, the 
export of dietary supplements containing locally grown botanical ingredients is enthusiastically 
supported by New Zealand Trade and Enterprise, an agency of government (Natural Health 
Products New Zealand, 2019).  From this point of view, it appears, growth in the market that 
results in an increasing number of people buying supplements is framed as an entirely positive 
thing.  
For responsibility and healthy behaviour are only one aspect of what the modern state needs 
from its citizens.  It also requires them to be ‘good’ at participating in the market, buying and 
selling products and services that keep the economy growing.  Messages urging people to be 
responsible and restrain themselves from indulging in ‘unhealthy’ behaviour compete constantly 
with counter messages that urge consumers to keep consuming. People are strongly encouraged 
to spend, no matter if they spend on ‘irresponsible’ products:  
The one thing that would utterly destroy the new capitalism is the serious practice of 
deferred gratification. (Bell 1976: 78 in Starr, 2007: 214) 
Economic growth is seen as not only important, but “morally necessary” (Baumol et al., 2007: 
33) and is helped along by commercial interests that encourage a recurring cycle of acquisition, 
use and disposal of a vast array of products and services for the general public to consume 
(Gregson et al., 2007; McCollough, 2009).  If consumer spending falls in any one quarter, there 
are immediate concerns about faltering growth and the viability of the economy, underlining the 
“tensions that mark out neoliberalism as continually at odds with its own ends and means” 
(Herrick, 2011: 33).    
These tensions between expert advice on the one hand and strong encouragement to spend, no 
matter on what, provide opportunities for people to navigate between the two forces, 
mobilising their autonomy as responsible citizens to bypass the official ‘expert’ power of 
orthodox health care, and decide for themselves how to act independently.   The participants’ 
choice to buy (or sell) supplements was a manifestation of the way that the ordinary citizen can 
carry out independent choices about how to implement their responsibility on their own terms, 
bypassing orthodoxy and turning to the market.    But could their claims of positive and 
independent action to be extra responsible about their health be taken at face value?  Or was 
151 
 
 
their resistance to expert messages about avoiding supplements simply a sign that they were 
unwittingly moving into the grasp of yet another manifestation of power, and one which does 
not pretend to aim at public good, but at profit?  The participants’ remarks strongly suggested 
that they were not so easily duped.  
All participants, whether they used or sold supplements (or both), talked about cost in our 
discussions.  Many of them, without prompting, explained their methods for navigating their 
way through the market, assessing products carefully so that they obtained the best buy for the 
lowest cost.  Trudy outlined how she carried out her own investigation, comparing prices and 
quality of a magnesium supplement from three different sources – a pharmacy, a health store, 
and a supermarket - to ensure she got value for her money:   
….   when I went to the chemist they had exactly the same brand [name] that the 
supermarket had but slightly more expensive …So I thought …  I am going to try a generic 
brand because if it helps, it helps; if it doesn’t, I wasted huge amounts of money. So I 
tried it, found it really good and I went to a health store [name of store] … and asked 
them and they said that’s fine …but this particular magnesium is more pure and it is from 
a different source and so we would probably recommend you take this.  …  So I tried it, 
but if I am totally honest, I couldn’t tell the difference.  It wasn’t significantly better, or 
significantly worse and anyway it was pretty much the same so I thought, why pay an 
extra twenty dollars.  (Trudy) 
Trudy constructs herself here as a sensible consumer, using personal responsibility and informed 
choice, the “bedrocks of neoliberal health policy” (Herrick, 2011: 17).  Her independent decision 
making shows she does not need a health professional to tell her what to take or advise her on 
its use, but at the same time, she resists being treated as a ‘commodity’ in the market, carrying 
out her own tests on what works for her and disregarding the claims that the health store staff 
make about the advantage of their more expensive product.   
Participants cited many instances to demonstrate that they had a well-developed sense of 
scepticism about overblown advertising claims that were designed to encourage them to buy 
products they did not want.  Far from being cynically manipulated by the wiles of self-interested 
commercial entities, they tended to approach their supplements purchases or sales much as any 
other commercial transaction, many mentioning their sensitivity to various brands, prices and 
services that gave them the best value.  As a group, they appeared well able to use their 
considerable consumer skills to resist being turned into a “commodity item to be utilised for 
152 
 
 
commercial advantage” (Lewis, 2019; Sturgeon, 2014: 414). They were also conscious that they 
were fortunate to have the personal and financial resources that allowed them this freedom of 
choice in the market:   
It’s bloody expensive.  To actually treat yourself with supplements is extremely expensive 
so obviously not everybody can do it. So I’m very lucky that I can experiment with these 
things.  When I retire it might be a slightly different thing. (Tessa)   
Supplements and alternative therapies are not cheap and the full range of the products in the 
health ‘supermarket’ is only accessible to those who are well established economically 
(Vatanparast et al., 2010).   Although I chose not to question participants about their income 
level, education, or other circumstances, it was nevertheless clear from the discussions with 
them that most were well enough off to have at least some level of discretionary income that 
gave them the capacity to buy supplements.  
In spite of the participants’ apparent success in resisting commercial pressure, it is nevertheless 
clear that supplement marketing is highly successful on a global scale (Grand View Research, 
2019).  The promotion of products for personal health is sophisticated and extensive so that they 
appeal to the widest range of people who might be encouraged to buy them, whether they need 
them or not.  Supplements were the consumer choice for the participants, but they are just one 
part of the much wider assemblage of health-associated products.  These include extensive 
ranges of exercise and sports equipment, clothing, and special accessories designed to appeal to 
individuals of any age, personality type, or physical ability whether they are already leading a 
purist healthy lifestyle or are “merely mainstream people who are attempting to live a little 
healthier” [sic] (Divine & Lepisto, 2005: 276).  These products are continually being developed 
and refreshed in the same way as supplements to fill the needs of people who are looking for 
products and services that make the pursuit of the responsible, healthy lifestyle “both 
pleasurable and possible” (Herrick, 2011: 29).   
The success of the techniques that ‘sell health’ in this way (Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2012) is just 
one of the ways that health and commerce have become entangled.  Individuals, such as the 
participants do appear to view health care as a ‘product’ that they can assess for value against 
other alternatives in the same way as they would do with any commercial transaction.   Jordan, a 
pharmacist, reported that he frequently became aware of a history of ‘shopping around’ in the 
people who came to him hoping they might be able to ‘buy’ better health:   
153 
 
 
“I don’t like my doctor or what he’s doing any more.  What else can you give me 
instead?”  “I’m sick and tired of being sick and tired and I’ve gone to the doctor and tells 
me that I am old and put up with it.” Or “I’m this or I’m that and this is all he can do”, or 
“I don’t like doctors at all; I’m not going to the doctor at all, I would much rather come to 
you.”  Or, “I’ve been to six specialists, three GPs and a crystal gazer and massage and 
none of them have helped so I thought I would try you”.  (Jordan) 
The promotion of supplements may be one factor that has contributed to people taking a 
commercial approach to health care, but there are others too.  Within health care itself, ‘social 
marketing’ campaigns have widely adopted tactics that “mimick the political rationality of the 
market … and reflect the dominance of capitalist logics of production, consumption and 
organisation” (Crawshaw, 2012: 2000-2201).   Social marketing is constructed as being different 
from ‘ordinary’ marketing because it aims for social good rather than commercial gain 
(Aschemann-Witzel et al., 2012; Farr et al., 2008).  The uncritical adoption of such overtly 
commercial techniques, however, has been recognised as being an uncomfortable fit with health 
(Peattie & Peattie, 2003) and credited with causing a “creeping commodification” (Sturgeon, 
2014: 405) of public attitudes to health care (Pellegrino, 1999; Wildes, 1999).  In parallel, the 
change in vocabulary whereby the patient has been reframed a ‘health care consumer’ and the 
doctor as a ‘health care provider’ has also, according to Tomes (2006), led to an undermining of 
the nature of the one-to-one doctor-patient relationship. Indeed the normalisation of the 
terminology implies that the health care consumer can simply go elsewhere and ‘shop’ in a 
different place if they do not feel they are being well served.  It is easy to see how the shift to 
the provider/consumer vocabulary in health care subtly undermines the idea of continuity of 
care and the personal rapport that is assumed to be present in the doctor-patient relationship. 
Certainly many participants seemed to take it for granted that it was part of being a responsible 
health consumer to weigh up competing care options before deciding the best value for money 
in a particular situation.  For example, they would balance the cost of self-treatment with 
supplements against the cost of a medical visit when they had an issue that they thought they 
could treat themselves.  Vonnie had been used to a public insurance scheme for health cover in 
her home country, and considered “the cost of seeing a GP here is incredible”.  She reported that 
she found it cheaper to use supplements and herbal therapies as a preventive measure – in her 
case for her reported tendency to depression – and for minor illnesses in her family.  Others 
weighed up more than the monetary cost, including time and convenience. Pharmacies and 
154 
 
 
health stores, for example, gave free advice, there was no need to make an appointment and 
little or any waiting:    
… well, it’s cheaper.   It’s probably cheaper to go and buy some supplements than it is to 
sit down with the doctor.  It’s also quicker to whip in there and grab something and the 
pace of life is quick.    (Bryony) 
Being made more welcome and comfortable with a service was also something to weigh up 
against other options even if both were costly in monetary terms.  Olivia reported that she 
preferred to consult a herbalist for most health problems to avoid the unpleasant situations 
which she had encountered with medical services in the past, particularly when she had needed 
care during weekends:     
It’s expensive. …  If I have to go in the weekend, maybe I can’t afford do that and wait 
until next pay to eat so I might not pay it immediately.  I’ve had arguments at the 
counter with After Hours, saying I’m not going to pay before I go in … you’re going to 
have to invoice me and it’s caused a big [fuss]. Well why should that be a drama?  I’ve 
said, look, I will pay your invoice but I can’t pay today.  And that’s not their policy.  It 
goes completely against their policy.  So they had to go and ask the GP manager.  I know 
if I’m doing something like that to get myself seen I know the majority of Pacific11 people 
in the world are not going to do that.  They’re just going to go away, go home, they are 
going to stay in pain all weekend – or they might go to the hospital.  But I know that 
that’s a really dumb idea, so I don’t want to do that.  …it is so unpleasant and just causes 
you another headache when you are weighing up the emotional cost, the monetary cost. 
(Olivia) 
These criticisms of orthodox health care did not, however, make participants any more willing to 
accept poor treatment in the sphere of alternative health products and therapies.  They 
expected equally high standards, perhaps because of the considerable costs, and were able to 
bring together their ideas of responsibility, their consumer skills and purchasing power to walk 
away from non-orthodox providers if they felt they had been taken advantage of, as this incident 
related by Molly demonstrates:  
 I went to the naturopath and then my brother did as well and we are different people 
and we got literally the same things….   I think that’s what naturopaths should be about 
                                                          
11 That is, of Pasifika ethnicity. 
155 
 
 
– an individual person.  He took a photo of your eye up close and he was a bit of a fear 
monger because …he was looking at it and he was “Oh, I don’t know how you ever walk 
around, man you must be so tired all the time.”  And then of course then you go, actually 
I am quite tired.  And then after I walked out I thought, what a sucker.  I felt like he was 
there to make money… But he hasn’t done very well.  His business seems to have moved 
several times and it doesn’t seem to go very well so I’m not really too surprised. (Molly) 
These comments and others made it clear that the participants had a well-honed sense of 
scepticism that they applied to buying any kind of product or service – health related or 
otherwise - and they were fully able to mobilise their consumer skills when it came to deciding 
what supplements or alternative therapies they would buy.   
Reconfiguring responsibility: as a supplement seller 
Almost all of the participants who sold supplements were engaged in balancing different types 
of responsibility within their business context.  Nearly all of them also spoke about their own 
supplement use, but once they became sellers, their responsibilities had an additional layer of 
complexity. On the one hand they needed to become well informed about the full range of 
products they sold so that they could provide accurate guidance to their customers, but on the 
other, they needed to maintain the viability of their businesses and ensure they kept their 
customers coming to them rather than going elsewhere. While these two responsibilities were 
aligned, they required more than simply being knowledgeable about their products and willing 
to pass on what they knew.  One of the pharmacists, for example, noted the importance of 
considering what their customers could afford and pricing products accordingly so that they 
were offering good value.  She spoke about the benefits of joining with a group of pharmacies 
who all sourced their products from the same supplier.  Through the group’s purchasing power 
they were able to reduce their own costs and offer discounting on supplements which made the 
prices more attractive to customers:       
Natural health is definitely getting more affordable than it has been.  …. being with a 
group …   the price comes down significantly.  You get some really good prices for things 
that previously would have been really expensive.  …  Fish oil is an interesting example 
because they are a dime a dozen and basically from a price perspective people chop and 
change between brands because of whatever’s on special because it is going to do the 
same thing.  (Jo) 
156 
 
 
Pat, one of the health store managers, openly discussed the commercial imperative needed to 
maintain sales and therefore the viability of his business.  Without any prompting on my part, he 
spoke about the importance of his staff being both knowledgeable about the products they 
stocked but also to have commercial flair:     
It’s not about selling for the sake of selling, it’s what will complement what they want. So 
when they walk in, let’s greet them …don’t pounce on them but “Oh how are you going, 
John? How are you going Sue?”  You know, keep them engaged.  ….  You’ve got to be 
able to sell stuff.  Because how do you survive?   You survive based on your profit.  If 
you’re not making a profit you are not going to survive.  So they have to know how to 
sell.  (Pat) 
He went on to speak enthusiastically about the extra services he offered to attract customers 
and give good value for money.  He noted that he stocked unique products; he prided himself on 
his responsiveness to customer requests and inquiries, and the quick turnaround he provided for 
phone or email orders so that he retained their good will and future business.   The network 
marketers too were quite open about the necessity of their work being financially worthwhile 
but all of them also emphasised that they aimed to help others while also helping themselves:  
So initially my focus was creating a residual income – royalties for life – and then it 
changed to helping people with health issues, challenges and chronic conditions. 
(Murray) 
Some seller participants largely skirted round the necessity of remaining commercially viable but 
instead focused on their responsibility to take on the role of being an expert in supplements so 
that they could care for and guide members of the public.  I did not interpret this as being a 
particularly significant or deliberate omission; I had made it clear that my principal interest was 
in people’s practices in relation to supplements and I did not question any of the providers about 
the commercial side of their business. The existence of such a variety of well-established sellers 
and providers suggested that each of them had carved out a place in the market that appealed 
to and satisfied a particular group of clients and that they had mastered what was needed to 
remain in business.  Moreover, the commercial aspects of all these businesses were entirely 
consistent with the neoliberal encouragement for economic activity. The fact that they provided 
a source of products which were generally frowned on by official health care experts was just 
another example of the different discourses and interests that are loosely tied together under 
neoliberal policy but interact in different configurations of power and resistance (Herrick, 2011).   
157 
 
 
From my discussions with the participants, it appeared that the combination of normative 
consumer behaviour with its emphasis on choice and spending to support the economy, 
combined with the critical awareness developed through taking responsibility for themselves 
had brought them to the point where they were confident in their own expertise as 
knowledgeable consumers or sellers of supplements.  They had learnt to make judicious choices, 
even if, at times, by trial and error, and to navigate their way round the pressures of the 
supplement and alternative health market.  For those who used supplements, it lessened their 
chances of spending money to no purpose and for those who sold supplements, it provided a 
feeling of having a more secure and informed footing in the particular niche they occupied in the 
commercial space.  How they had reached this level of self-direction where they were willing 
and able to challenge authorised wisdom about health was something that I explored directly 
with the participants.  Their perceptions and practices are detailed in the following section.   
Becoming your own expert 
Almost all the participants were independent and avid seekers and users of health information 
within a continually evolving network of interconnecting online, print, and interpersonal sources.  
They drew from it but then in their turn added to it through interacting with others and sharing 
their experiences.  The key area that many focused on in our discussions was their ability to 
discover what they wanted to know by searching the internet:   
You can find information out about anything via the internet, so you know, people are 
checking things out themselves, feeling like they want to be more – I don’t know – more 
in charge of their own health.  That it’s not always about an expert.  That you are the 
expert, to a certain extent…Information – that whole “information is power” thing.  It’s 
so much bigger now because we’ve got so much access to a huge range of information 
that wasn’t as easily accessible in the past.  (Tessa) 
As Tessa points out, there is a vast spectrum of resources that is now available to anyone who 
takes the time to search for it.  She does not specify the kind of information that she was not 
able to access in the past, but appears to be referring to the advent and exponential growth of 
the internet and the accompanying changes in technology which have democratised ‘expert’ 
material to a large extent since the mid-1990s.  The Open Access movement for academic 
publications (Albert, 2006; Davis, 2011; Xia, 2010) has been a major change, allowing members 
of the public to find literature that was previously restricted to those in professional circles.  
Perhaps even more significant have been the links provided by powerful search engines to the 
158 
 
 
abstracts of expert material from databases such as Medline even if the full documents remain 
behind paywalls. The result has been that knowledge which was once the exclusive preserve of 
health professionals is now more accessible for the lay public to access and interpret for 
themselves. Moreover, thanks to the advantages of global internet coverage and intuitive user 
interfaces both for publishing and accessing material, many other sources of information have 
developed that provide commentary and opinion on health issues.  These cover a wide variety of 
perspectives, including those run by consumer health support groups, websites of companies 
that market products, and unfiltered opinion pieces or personal stories from individual members 
of the public.   
Some participants had well-established skills with online searching through their work or 
interests elsewhere, while to others it was a novelty that they were still excited about as they 
discovered more and more.  Cliff, for example, had acquired his skills only recently as a direct 
result of wanting to research the supplements he used and order them online.  Others such as 
Bob appeared to take it for granted that they would look up anything they wanted to know 
about supplements online and would be able to compare various opinions:  
 I looked up, when I first went on to glucosamine, that’s how I knew it came from the 
green mussel and I’ve read articles about it and of course you’ve got the sceptics who 
think that it doesn’t do any good.  There’s articles on that.   (Bob) 
The participants clearly found that locating information and advice on health topics was a simple 
matter.  They could get immediate access on virtually any topic, use what they read to develop 
ideas of their own and decide whether to seek professional help or to treat themselves 
independently. Moreover, even recent users, like Cliff, had quickly become aware that the 
information they found was variable and they need to treat it with caution:  
Advertising is huge into all that and a lot of these things, you know, if you can believe 
even ten percent of what you read, you’ve got to take it with a grain of salt…you’ve really 
got to be careful with the quality.   (Cliff) 
The participants’ positivity and confidence, however, is not generally shared by health 
professionals, who tend to take an opposite view.   
 It was recognised early in the era of widespread internet availability that the stream of 
unregulated and widely variable information presented an unprecedented challenge to 
medicine’s privileged status.  As early as 20 years ago, there was a realisation that this increased 
159 
 
 
availability to health information had, in effect, ended the “exclusive access to expert knowledge 
and the ability to define areas of expertise and practice” (Hardey, 1999: 823) that had hitherto 
existed.  By the mid-1990s, health professionals were already expressing concerns that losing 
their exclusive knowledge would see medicine become deprofessionalised as patients turned to 
online sources of information and made their own decisions about what health care they 
needed (Coiera, 1996).  More than two decades later, ‘Dr Google’ is here to stay (Lee et al., 
2014, 2017), a fact which no longer surprises health professionals, even if they only reluctantly 
accept its reality (Huovila & Saikkonen, 2016; Naghieh & Parvizi, 2016; Robertson et al., 2014).   
According to Naghieh & Parvisi (2016:332) the availability of these widespread sources of 
information creates a “complex medical predicament …” where consumers form their health 
knowledge from “non-medically sanctioned online information”.  The same arguments about 
ignorance and over-confidence  that put people ‘at risk’ are put forward, as have been 
previously discussed (Fugh-Berman, 2000; Izzo & Ernst, 2009; Jefferies et al., 2012; Martinez et 
al., 2012; Mazzanti et al., 2008; Morris & Avorn, 2003; Stoneman et al., 2013).  There is also a 
belief that people who consult online information or seek alternative therapies are more likely 
to under-report their use to their doctor (Hensrud et al., 1999; Wold et al., 2007), thereby 
undermining the supposedly better outcomes they might have gained by consulting a health 
professional, and increasing the risk of something serious being overlooked. The excerpt below 
is representative of the tone taken by the majority of these commentators:  
Arguably, consumers who possess the required operant resources and use e-health tools 
appropriately can become more engaged in effectively managing their own health.  
Unfortunately however, the majority of consumers are resource deficient and have 
difficulty effectively engaging with these online services…[which is likely to] negatively 
influence consumer wellbeing … including consumers’ disengagement with health care 
professionals.  (Robertson et al., 2014: 253) 
However, in the light of the discussions with the participants, these are simplistic explanations 
which overlook the nuances that underpin the relationship between patient and doctor.  They 
miss the different frame of reference within which the participants were acting and the wider 
network of interconnections that underpinned their actions; the complex interconnections 
between the material things they used, their ideas on naturalness and risk, and their intention to 
genuinely ‘self- manage’ their health options rather than under the guidance and monitoring of a 
health professional (Bodenheimer et al., 2002).  Developing their own network of expertise was 
a deliberate strategy that enabled them to resist being made fully and transparently visible as 
160 
 
 
governed subjects (Hansen & Flyverbom, 2015) within the “surveillant assemblage” of orthodox 
medicine (Haggerty & Ericson, 2000: 605).  
While the impersonal sources of online expertise that they deliberately sought out were a 
prominent focus for participants, they also mentioned gathering information serendipitously 
from items they read or heard about, and talking to friends and family who could offer relevant 
advice about supplements from their own experience.  Murray, for example, mentioned a friend 
and Rana a work colleague who had recommended products to try or people to ask for advice.  
Although doctors tended to be avoided in their professional capacity, personal contacts with 
health professionals were valued even if their area of expertise was remote from anything to do 
with the particular health issue. Bob, for example, made a special point of noting that a doctor 
acquaintance he knew slightly through his running group had directed him to a particular 
supplement, but he had not mentioned anything of this to his own doctor.  Even those few 
participants who were not confident in their own judgement still preferred to outsource 
expertise on supplements to anyone other than their doctor.   Jane was one who mentioned that 
she found too much conflicting advice when she looked online herself and instead trusted the 
guidance of the alternative therapists she consulted:  
…most of the alternate medicines I take are through either naturopaths, reflexologists, 
chiropractors, or B [her kinesiologist].  (Jane) 
The network marketers too, rather than become involved with researching information 
themselves, tended to rely on the expertise claimed by their international companies, who, they 
reported, had their own teams of doctors and scientists:  
So that’s the big thing for us – they do all the science so we don’t have to. …   I have met 
them – they are amazing [original emphasis]. … they talked about the science behind the 
products (Molly) 
Participants demonstrated, moreover, that they had become skilled at analysing and 
synthesising the various threads of information on offer in the wide assemblage that was at their 
disposal. They frequently sought advice from several sources before making a decision.  Before 
trying a new supplement most would conduct their own online research first and then check it 
with a pharmacist or health store staff member; others would seek advice first from a pharmacy 
or health store and then cross check themselves with online information:  
161 
 
 
I would probably look it up on the internet.  I would also speak to the pharmacist, but no 
matter what I was purchasing I would look it up on the internet to see if there was any 
good evidence, and wouldn’t just take that advice.  Even though I went in and spoke to 
the pharmacist about it, I still had to look it up for myself. (Penny) 
In the same way as Penny, others mentioned that they assessed each situation on its own merits 
and considered the level of advice needed.  They spoke confidently about judging if and when 
they needed to call on someone whom they judged more expert than themselves at interpreting 
conflicting advice that they had found:  
… sometimes if it’s something that I  think I don’t really know enough about I’d go  to the 
herbal dispensary and actually talk to a herbalist.  …so in that case, I’d definitely ask for 
advice.  Other things – I read a lot about what works and what doesn’t work, so I do read 
stuff, because there have been more and more trials of supplements, so I definitely look 
all that up, look all that stuff up, so I try to make an informed choice, I suppose.  (Tessa) 
Both Tessa and Penny talk about ‘trials’, and ‘evidence’, implying, though not directly stating 
that they have internalised and accepted, at least to some extent, the value of scientific 
orthodoxy about evidence of effectiveness,  (i.e. what works).  They both ‘look up’ and find what 
they want, constructing themselves as well informed and independent consumers but also speak 
about getting additional opinions as confirmation if they have any uncertainty about their 
decision. ‘Expert’ advice is not necessarily rejected, but is also brought into consideration.  Then 
all of these threads are gathered together to compile their personal assemblage of expertise.  
Other investigators have also shown that people gather together ‘hybrids’ of “experiential 
expertise” (Castro et al., 2019) from multiple sources that they trust to make decisions about 
their health.  These bodies of personal expertise, in the same way as those the participants 
spoke of, form a challenge to orthodox medicine because they are “not readily visible and 
therefore not readily disciplined” (Dew et al., 2014: 29).  
While very different from one another, an important characteristic that all participants shared 
was being willing to be “undisciplined patients” (Keshet & Popper-Giveon, 2018) who 
consciously chose to be active health consumers rather than ‘patients’.12  Being aware that their 
doctor was likely to disapprove if they did mention the supplements they took was a disincentive 
to enter into discussion on the topic and there was usually no need to. As Paul remarked, “I 
imagine that a long discussion with him [his doctor] would probably produce the result that, no, I 
                                                          
12 The word ‘patient’ is derived from the Latin passive verb patior meaning I suffer.   
162 
 
 
wouldn’t recommend that.”  Those who had mentioned their supplement use might be 
reprimanded as Frances had been:  
He said, well you are probably very silly to have done that because you just don’t know.  
You have to be careful. (Frances) 
Rather than being told they were ‘silly’, they were more likely to avoid the issue altogether, 
actively choosing to obscure some of their practices from becoming questioned and contested. 
They were then free to decide what to do or not to do without comment from a professional; 
their purchases did not have to be recorded against dispensing data or their health records and 
they did not need to be checked on to see if they were ‘adherent’ as is the case with prescribed 
medicines (Náfrádi et al., 2016).  Moreover, as their experience of supplement use grew and 
they gained more confidence and expertise about them, the participants reported that they 
believed their doctor would not necessarily know more than they did, even if they did ask them 
for advice:  
Well, personally I feel that the doctors – not being disrespectful – but to be honest, they 
don’t have any training in nutrition and diet. (Pat) 
Other participants too had found that doctors usually prescribed a drug as the first option and 
were unlikely to give advice on alternatives:  
  I think drugs have got their place but I just feel it would be nice if alternatives were 
offered, were pushed as much as medication is.  …  I don’t particularly want to move the 
girls and myself to a practice that just does natural medicine because I think that swings 
completely the other way so yes, I just feel that it’s not very well balanced perhaps in 
terms of the advice you get.  (Penny) 
The perceptions of the generally poor knowledge of health professionals about the use of 
alternatives and their unwillingness to enter into discussions about them was not unique to the 
study participants but is consistent with studies done elsewhere (Chang & Wang, 2009; Eliason 
et al., 1999; Humpel & Jones, 2006; Peters et al., 2003; Reedy et al., 2005; Vickers et al., 2006).  
The point is not so much whether any piece of information that consumers come across is right 
or wrong, scientifically based or not, ‘objective’ or commercially biased (Schwitzer et al., 2005) 
but that they all exist and all make use of up-to-date communication strategies to disseminate 
their particular version of expertise and therefore extend their influence.  The sheer variety of 
the information and the way it is interpreted undermines the idea that there can ever be one 
163 
 
 
authorised, stable version of expertise held by an all-knowing medical profession (Annas & Elias, 
1999; Waxman 2005). Given this plethora of conflicting information about health and medicine, 
it does not seem surprising that some consumers may ‘tune out’ official advice and take their 
own steps to become informed.   
Indeed, several participants mentioned that they made use of their personal expertise as 
another type of counter-conduct to reverse the surveilling gaze (Ganesh, 2016) and scrutinise 
the experts themselves:    
Susan: If you decided to take something would you look it up on the internet first to see? 
Frances:  Oh, yes I would.  Even sometimes if I am given a prescription I will look up 
sometimes what it is. 
A particular trigger which generated ‘counter conduct’ and the resistance to orthodox expertise 
among participants was what they referred to as being ‘fobbed off’.  This expression was used by 
a number of participants as a way of capturing their frustration about their need for a problem 
to be taken seriously by their doctor but receiving only a disappointing and dismissive response:  
I had irritable bowel and basically got fobbed off by the doctors as you would imagine so 
I went to a naturopath, changed the way I ate and changed my lifestyle and took on 
board a lot of the common sense suggestions that she made at the time. Some that you 
probably already know yourself but you have got too lazy to do any more. (Trudy) 
It is interesting here how Trudy comments “as you would imagine” underlining her low 
expectations of the medical profession.  Others too expressed frustration at aspects of medical 
treatment they had received.  Wendy felt that she had been disregarded as an individual, being 
“thrown statins or whatever the drug of choice is” and Olivia was even more emphatic, speaking 
about being “disempowered” by the “extreme, awful experiences with people working in health”.    
The participants’ independent actions were directly in contrast to the concept of ‘patient 
empowerment’ through shared decision making, an approach that is promoted for people with 
chronic disease so that they become able to better ‘self-mange’ their conditions (Elwyn et al., 
2012; Nolte & Osborne, 2013; Schulman-Green et al., 2012). This approach is presented as 
handing over power to the patient (not referred to here as a health consumer), who will then 
achieve ‘activation’ and ‘engagement’ in their own care, leading to better outcomes and fewer 
health care costs (Brady et al., 2013; Nolte & Osborne, 2013; Powers et al., 2015).  The 
discourses around self-management construct the patient as receiving expert advice on the 
164 
 
 
correct behaviours to adopt and why they will benefit, and therefore being motivated to carry 
out what is recommended, clearly reflecting that Foucauldian concept of the autonomous 
subject and the conduct of conduct (Andreassen & Trondsen, 2010; Veitch, 2010).  Any reading 
of the literature, however, demonstrates the underlying assumption that the doctor is in charge 
but the patient takes on the responsibility of doing what they are told.  Salmon and Hall argue 
that constructing patients in this way allows the doctor to withdraw from the “problematic 
responsibilities” (2003: 1971) presented by people with chronic illness and that the approach is 
more likely to disempower patients rather than offer them control.  In contrast, the participants’ 
version of self-management, in which they were highly engaged, needed no authorisation or 
instruction from an expert. 
Nevertheless, none of the participants, no matter what their previous experiences, had turned 
away entirely from mainstream health care when they believed it was appropriate.   The 
concerns raised in the literature, particularly the idea that consumers who treat themselves with 
supplements will fail to seek treatment for serious conditions (Robertson et al., 2014) were 
simply not borne out in this study.  All participants were very aware that self-care could only be 
used up to a point and that there were times when the expertise and professional training of 
health professionals was essential:  
I am very grateful that there is a whole medical environment out there in case of 
emergency, serious stuff, but I would also have to say that we keep getting letters from 
the doctor saying “Are you still enrolled, because we haven’t seen you for three years” 
(Catherine) 
In Foucauldian terms, they were willing to submit to being ‘conducted’ and their bodies opened 
to the gaze of the health professions in some situations when they considered it appropriate, 
but it would be their own, active decision to do so.  They did not appear to have any difficulty in 
making the distinction between such cases and the routine, chronic, or simply annoying 
conditions that they believed they could confidently look after themselves:  
I mean, obviously it’s a bit different when you are thinking about diagnosing cancer and 
all of that stuff, but there are things you can work out for yourself.  (Tessa) 
It may seem an obvious point that serious or emergency conditions need orthodox medicine, 
and that self-care or alternatives are suitable only for less serious conditions but it is worth 
highlighting that this group of participants, at least, believed they were able to make the 
distinction.  Seen in this way, not raising their supplement use with their doctor was also likely to 
165 
 
 
be driven by the practicality of avoiding unsettling an ongoing and positive relationship which 
they knew they may need in the future.     
The participants not only balanced orthodox care against their own self-care alternative 
behaviour, but were willing to ‘shop around’ for a doctor that suited them.  They were cognisant 
that there was a spectrum of views within the ranks of health professionals and were able to use 
this variation to their own advantage.   One enterprising participant reported that in addition to 
his own self-care practices, he consulted two different doctors in different parts of town to 
achieve the balance of orthodox and alternative health care he felt was most appropriate 
depending on the particular circumstances:    
I’ve got one doctor there but I’ve got a doctor out here as well.  The one at [name of 
integrative practice] will treat me naturally because he knows who I am but it got to the 
point that something I was dealing with – try this and try that, it’s not working. … I took 
the antibiotic, I got myself right then I went back to him … and I have been good ever 
since.    At some point you can’t keep saying bean sprouts and garlic juice will fix it 
because it may not fix it, so you hit it hard. (Pat) 
As individuals are not able to be enrolled in two practices at once in the New Zealand system, 
Pat must have been prepared to pay the extra costs that unenrolled patients attract for some of 
his consultations, but appears to have felt it was worthwhile.  Other participants also spoke 
about weighing up what they would tolerate and what was unacceptable in a medical provider.  
Devon, a herbalist, for example, had a neutral approach to selecting a doctor but had a ‘bottom 
line’ in that she would not deal with anyone “who openly antagonises the idea of using herbal 
medicine, which doesn’t really happen so much anymore”.   Moreover, all participants were 
willing to exercise consumer behaviour and take their ‘custom’ elsewhere if they were 
unsatisfied with the service they received:  
I changed medical practice because I wasn’t satisfied with the doctor that I was seeing. … 
I wasn’t getting anywhere with the other fellow and I said to [current doctor] I’ve got 
this, this and this and he sorted it all out.  (Murray) 
It was clear here that Murray believed he knew what his diagnosis was and had decided in this 
particular case, self-care was not appropriate.  He was calling on a doctor with an appropriate 
level of expertise to “sort it out” and was prepared to move from one practice to another to find 
one.  Murray does not say why he believed he was “not getting anywhere” and at the time I 
spoke to him I did not follow up on the reason.  It is unclear whether he had lost confidence in 
166 
 
 
the “other fellow’s” competence, or whether he felt that he was not being listened to and his 
concerns ‘fobbed of’ as other participants called it.  In any case, he, like the participants above, 
knew what level of expertise he wanted and was prepared to use his resources to engage what 
he judged was necessary.   Being willing to switch between health providers requires a degree of 
assertiveness to declare oneself a dissatisfied ‘customer’ from that particular practice and being 
prepared to accept the potential bad feeling and emotional cost it may involve in explaining 
oneself to get one’s medical records transferred elsewhere.   As Rose (1996) writes, the 
conjunction of individuals seeking to have improved quality of life and professionals claiming to 
provide objective rational answers, is an alliance:  
The mechanism of this alliance is the market, the ‘free’ exchange between those with a 
service to sell and those who have been brought to want to buy (156-157).  
Terminating the relationship with a doctor in a “patient walk out” (Stokes et al., 2004: 512) as 
happened with Murray, is a signal to the provider that this alliance has broken down.   The 
willingness of participants to assert themselves in this way also demonstrated the confidence 
that they gained through their growing expertise in deciding what health care options they 
would use and under what circumstances.    
So far the discussion has focused on individual expertise and decisions about selecting personal 
care options.  Considerably more complex is the position of those who offer their expertise as 
sellers of supplements and advice on how to use them.  They comprise a network of 
‘alternatives’ that ranges from the pharmacists, on the one hand, who are credentialed as part 
of the orthodox health system to those whose expertise is based only on their own claims to 
know more than the general public.   This space is busy, even cluttered, and hotly competitive 
with a diverse collection of providers all claiming various types of expertise that can help 
individuals.   They compete not only with one another but also with orthodox medicine, 
demonstrating once again the tensions at work in the neoliberal economy which, though it 
officially endorses the primacy of ‘experts’ in orthodox medicine, also upholds a parallel universe 
of economic opportunities for marketing alternatives even if they be counter to the orthodox 
line.   A number of the participants in the study were directly engaged as ‘alternative providers’ 
as well as consumers in this market and therefore had perspectives on expertise from both 
angles.  The next section looks at how being on the other side of the consumer/provider divide 
affected their practices and the range of conduct and counter-conduct that they too were able 
to mobilise in their position.   
167 
 
 
Becoming expert enough to advise others   
Among the participants there were pharmacists, pharmacy technicians, health store managers, 
and those who offered different modalities of alternative therapy.  They were a diverse group, 
but had two noticeable characteristics in common.  Firstly, all of them ultimately made their 
living from marketing their products, expertise, or both. Secondly, that once on the other side of 
the customer/provider divide, all of them were convinced that the public needed their advice.  
Each of them offered a different ‘assemblage’ of orthodox and non-orthodox expertise which 
they used to justify their claim to the particular section of the public – and the market – that 
they advised.  
The pharmacists were the most ‘expert’ in biomedical terms, but arguably also the most likely to 
have difficulty balancing their practice with alternative health products so it did not conflict with 
their role in dispensing medicines prescribed by a doctor.  Pharmacists are considered to be a 
key part of the primary health care team (Lloyd et al., 2010; Smith, 2012).  They rely on the 
doctors whose prescriptions they dispense having confidence in their expertise and 
professionalism, but are generally seen as lower in the health hierarchy compared to the doctor 
in spite of their greater knowledge of pharmaceuticals (Bradley et al., 2018; Hughes & McCann, 
2003; Weiss & Sutton, 2009).  Their position has been somewhat unflatteringly compared to that 
of ‘sheepdogs’ by Waring and Latif (2018) who drew from Foucault’s work on pastoral power, to 
suggest that:    
… the docile patient (sheep) [is] herded and checked by the pharmacist (sheepdog) and 
…  both patient and pharmacist are supervised and directed from a distance by the GP 
(shepherd)  (Waring and Latif, 2017: 8).  
All pharmacists in the study referred to their biomedical training and put it forward as the 
special level of expertise they could offer to the individuals who came to their premises seeking 
advice. In addition, they noted that they were able to access the records of all medicines that 
their regular customers had been prescribed by doctors, and therefore they were able to 
provide an extra level of safety regarding possible interactions.  They largely avoided negative 
depictions of their customers as poorly informed and focused much more on the positive advice 
they could offer.  As the following excerpt shows, however, there were a number of underlying 
tensions in their role:   
If I put my hand on my heart and say I’m a white coat health professional – which I 
consider myself – that’s part of what makes me who I am, then I think we are going to 
168 
 
 
run the risk of actually not helping patients if we say, I don’t actually know about that 
[supplements/herbal medicines]. …we do need to know what we are talking about and I 
do actually think that some of the natural health products do have a lot of validity. …by 
using natural health people see that they can do that without the middle man.  But at 
times that’s where exactly it is crucial to have a middle man such as a pharmacist 
because the reality is it is not quite as straightforward – you know – this should work for 
this or this may work for this so I will take that. (Jo) 
Much is implied in this comment.  There is an initial alignment by this pharmacist with orthodox 
expertise, and one that deals with ‘patients’ rather than consumers.  However, because these 
‘patients’ do come directly to the pharmacy, and avoid the ‘middle man’ (i.e. the doctor), we 
(now speaking on behalf of pharmacist colleagues in general), cannot opt out of giving informed 
advice.  Instead, they have a responsibility to occupy the position of the expert intermediary, 
offering advice directly to people who come to them for guidance, not on behalf of a doctor (as 
they do with prescribed medicines), but directly.  All the pharmacists interviewed in the study 
positioned themselves in this way as being responsible and knowledgeable experts needed by 
members of the public to steer them in the right direction with the correct use of supplements 
and herbal medicines.    
The information is available there but is the person qualified to understand the 
information?  …this is where I have always believed in pharmacy …So if somebody wants 
to go down that track [researching their own information] they actually need someone 
who’s qualified. (Jordan) 
Both Jo and Jordan are enacting a form of counter conduct to the ‘sheepdog’ role who merely 
chases up the sheep when the shepherd instructs them.  As Waring and Latif (2017) note, there 
are tensions in the relationship between doctors and pharmacists and the latter may resent the 
way that they are viewed as someone who is merely there to carry out what is delegated to 
them by a ‘superior’ profession. These include comments about pharmacists which discount 
their professional qualifications and refer to them as ‘shopkeepers’ (Hughes & McCann, 2003),  
or compare them to “firms that sell computers or mobile phones” (Clarke, 2014: 148).  They all 
reported taking on the role of the shepherd by ‘prescribing’ directly when they were asked for 
help, and, in doing so, they were by implication, also distancing themselves from the authorised 
view that supplements are largely unnecessary and/or ineffective:    
169 
 
 
What are you going to give the woman who is four weeks pregnant?  What are you 
going to do for the 97 year old frail 47 kilo lady who is on 17 medications?   …  Are you 
just going to say, sorry love, go home and put up with the symptoms because I have 
nothing to give you. (Jordan) 
All these excerpts from pharmacists appeared to be drawing on the concept that pharmacists 
have a duty to give ‘best advice’ according to their professional judgement (Roche & Kelliher, 
2014).  Pharmacists also commented on issues around the sufficiency of evidence, noting that 
levels of ‘evidence’ derived from trials were not clear cut and had been challenged in orthodox 
medicine itself (Ioannidis, 2008; Kennedy-Martin et al., 2015).  Lyndsay remarked in particular on 
the blurriness around how much evidence was needed to be sufficient:    
So it’s not black and white; it’s pretty grey.  And so, I mean what’s acceptable evidence if 
you’ve got something that has a series of positive double blind studies involving a 
reasonable number of people that have been positive.  Is that acceptable evidence?  Or 
do you need a meta-analysis involving 100,000 people.  Glucosamine is a classic example 
of that in that originally there were quite a large number of positive studies and then 
there is a meta-analysis but then the meta-analysis can be criticised as well.  So often 
evidence is pretty murky on its own.  (Lyndsay) 
Pharmacists were also aware, however, that their orthodox training had not prepared them for 
the position that they found themselves in between needing to know enough about 
supplements to answer the requests for advice they received, yet in doing so they faced the 
general disapproval of their medical colleagues whose prescriptions they dispensed.   Kerry, a 
pharmacy technician pointed out that the perception of superior expertise of pharmacists about 
supplements was not necessarily well founded: 
They [pharmacists] don’t know any more.  They know more about the [prescribed] drugs 
but they have had no training [in other products]. But because they are the pharmacist 
they are seen to have that – look I am not dissing them – it’s their responsibility at the 
end of the day.  (Kerry) 
All of the pharmacists had taken steps to learn more but it appeared they got no help from their 
own professional association and had to turn elsewhere to become more knowledgeable.  One 
of them mentioned he was completing an international qualification in natural medicines and 
others had found that the product companies were the most readily available source for 
upskilling themselves:  
170 
 
 
Well at the beginning I felt quite ignorant about it.  ….  I thought, this is silly because I 
should be able to at least give them [customers/patients] an account or know where to 
look properly to find some good information for them.  …  So we then, with the suppliers 
that we were dealing with …they linked me up with seminars that were going on with 
one of the companies to look at certain aspects of alternative medicines for a particular 
condition or conditions.  (Lou) 
So the pharmacists, too, were drawing from an evolving assemblage of expertise, adding to their 
orthodox training, their many interactions with the public, the feedback they received, the 
information from product companies, and, for some who were willing to discuss it, their own 
experience with taking the products. They undertook these educational activities outside their 
usual realm at the risk of attracting the negative discourse that pharmacists have often received 
as suppliers of supplements and herbal products.   
A different situation existed for those participants who offered alternative therapies in 
acupuncture, homeopathy, and medical herbalism, all of whom also either provided or 
recommended supplements to their clients.  Each of them had a New Zealand recognised 
qualification in the modality they practised, but were not eligible to practise within the public 
health system.13  This, however, avoided the tension faced by pharmacists in maintaining 
working relationships with orthodoxy.  They simply presented themselves as well qualified in 
their modality and able to offer an alternative to the biomedical approach to anyone who 
wished to consult them and was able to pay for it.  They did, however, share the view of the 
other providers that members of the public could go astray without their guidance:  
I believe that people often will have an idea of what might be good for them or what 
might work for them.  I see that as an OK thing to do in the short term.  I see that 
problems start happening when people decide to take something and then they take it 
for five years– the same supplement for maybe five years – and they’ve got these really 
unusual symptoms   because they’ve taken the supplement for such a long time that 
they’ve made some kind of disharmony in the body… (Bryony) 
The three participants who managed health stores were different again.  None was able to call 
on the same level of officially approved educational or orthodox health expertise as the 
                                                          
13 The Accident Compensation Commission (ACC) does fund acupuncture, chiropractic and osteopathy 
treatments, but these are limited to people who meet the accidental injury criteria (ACC 2019), and have 
treatment from a therapist that ACC has approved 
171 
 
 
pharmacists or alternative therapists.  However, they all made unprompted comments assuring 
me of the wealth of resources they drew on for support.  They reported that they or someone 
on their staff had undertaken training either through their parent company, or they employed a 
staff member who was qualified in one of the alternative modalities, usually herbalism. More 
than the other ‘seller’ participants, they went into detail, emphasising their awareness of 
interactions between supplements and prescription drugs, their protocols for questioning 
people about the prescribed medicines they took and the references they kept on hand.  They 
stressed their readiness to refer outside the business, for example, to medical herbalists, if they 
were unsure of what to advise and believed customers should get a second opinion.    
We pride ourselves and [name of business] on giving people accurate information based 
on research.  (Pat) 
Their seemingly over-emphatic reaction appeared to me to be a way of constructing themselves 
as running a serious, well-informed, ethically sound, and responsible business, possibly in an 
unspoken acknowledgement of the unfavourable way health stores are often portrayed in the 
academic literature as being profit-driven providers of poor advice (Coon et al., 2015; Gotay & 
Dumitriu, 2000; Sarino et al., 2007; Temple et al., 2009).  A particular aspect that the health 
store providers mentioned was their special niche in providing hope for those who felt let down 
by the orthodox health system and had ‘given up’ believing that they would get any help except 
from sources they explored themselves:    
 Very, very rarely do people with serious illnesses and long term health problems, very 
rarely do they come and see us first.  (Bernie) 
Pat and Lesley also made comments in a similar vein, with Lesley suggesting that people had lost 
faith in conventional treatment:     
  They’re not actually getting the fix that they initially thought they should get from the 
doctors.  Once upon a time he was God; he knew how to fix it. (Lesley) 
This overt use of religious imagery recalled the notion of the doctor as the shepherd or pastor 
that was noted earlier (Jones, 2018; Waring & Latif, 2018) and the vacuum in guidance that the 
health stores presented themselves as being able to fill.  An interesting feature of the health 
store managers was their uniformly low opinion of the public’s ability to know what was good 
for them and that they, as health store managers, needed to step in and provide their greater 
level of expertise:   
172 
 
 
No health shop likes the internet.  We hate it with a passion …. It’s hugely frustrating 
….people walk in with bags of stuff they’ve bought off the internet and they’re going for 
an operation in two days and they say I’ve been taking this, and this – and it’s completely 
wrong what they’ve been taking.  I wish they could turn it [the internet] off sometimes. 
(Bernie) 
Even though all those who provided advice on supplements felt that the public needed a degree 
of guidance from them, the health store managers were by far the most emphatic in their 
insistence that people would go astray without their help.  Their comments appeared to fall back 
on precisely the same discourse as that used by orthodox medicine; the construction of the 
general public as an ignorant bloc, who were ‘at risk’, and needed to be more ‘disciplined’ and 
submit to their guidance.  I interpreted this an attempt by the health store managers to counter 
the perceptions of them as being commercially motivated (Temple, 2012), emphasise their 
altruistic intentions and shore up their own place in the provision of expertise. In contrast, the 
pharmacists and alternative therapists, who also believed that their customers needed their 
guidance, were much more positive about them and did not speak about them in such strongly 
negative terms.    
In summing up this section on expertise, its principal characteristic was just how complex and 
generally ‘messy’ it was.  The participants’ accounts showed that the care options they chose 
were “dispersed, heterogeneous and variegated” (Death, 2010: 235) not a binary opposition of 
alternative versus orthodox care. All participants readily mixed both, drawing from their own 
experiences and background knowledge derived over their life to this point.  They used diverse 
sources of information they could call on through online searching, media and advertising, then 
added in what they learned from people they came across, and combined it all with their first 
hand experiences of the products they took. The convenient dichotomies of expert versus lay, 
normative versus non-normative, orthodox versus alternative, or care versus commerce were 
blurred; all participants bridged and muddled these divides and moved beyond them to a state 
where each of them had developed their own assemblage of expertise that was relevant to their 
own unique context.  Moreover, the interconnections in the assemblage around their 
supplement practices that had led to the participants developing their new skills and knowledge 
had become woven into their process of ‘becoming’ as they moved through their life journey.  
‘Becoming’ is an active, creative process, driven by the “capacity to form new relations and the 
desire to do so” (Buchanan, 1997: 83) and it creates the conditions for ongoing identity 
formation, (Fox and Ward (2008), as the next section explores.  
173 
 
 
Supplements and evolving identity  
When they spoke about supplements, the participants provided many examples of their own 
processes of ‘becoming’, the unexpected twists and turns during their lives, the multitude of 
interconnected but unplanned relations that they had formed with people and things, and that 
were continually evolving and changing.  Their accounts demonstrated the unpredictability of 
the connections that take place in a person’s life and their capacity “…to form new relations and 
in turn enable other new relations” (Buchanan, 1997:82), as their life progressed.  The chance 
encounters and the variety of incidents that had proved to be influential reflected the 
randomness of the rhizomatic assemblage with its many connections “always branching and 
twisting, in flux and reassembling in different ways”(Fox, 2012: 67).   Each of the participants’ 
stories as they explained how crucial events in their lives had unfolded contrasted with “the 
modern fantasy of the body as a stable, unified, bounded entity” (Malins, 2004: 85).  Their 
accounts revealed the constant developments that come about in people’s lives, the many 
connections that they make and the decisions they take to follow one path or another.   
Sections of Bob’s story showed how this could happen.  Bob had been involved in competitive 
running for more than 50 years, ever since he had been singled out for special running coaching 
as a schoolboy.  At a point in his fifties (he was now almost 70), he started to find running was 
becoming more difficult:    
 …your legs start to react especially when you are in your mid 50s and then I gave up 
running on the track and I was still running and then I was thinking, oh, my running is 
coming to an end and I don’t want it to.  I want to keep on going.  And for about three 
months I felt I was going to have to give up.  I was so stiff and not feeling too good at all, 
hobbling when I am running – didn’t have a specific injury but my legs were very, very 
tight.  (Bob) 
After his decades’ long participation in running, it was clearly an important activity for Bob and 
part of his identity was that he was ‘a runner’.  Being faced with losing this part of himself set 
him off on a line of flight when a chance conversation at a church service with a passing 
acquaintance alerted him to the possibility of taking glucosamine for his joints as his informant 
was “sure it worked”.  The random interaction with this person set off a series of actions where 
he formed new connections with different people, places and things.  Some were deliberate and 
planned; he did his own research online, noting that he read a spectrum of opinions, articles by 
“sceptics” as well as those that were positive. Through his decision to buy the glucosamine he 
174 
 
 
found a pharmacy where he believed he received trustworthy advice, and owing to the repeat 
business he brought, he now received a discount on his products. Other connections were quite 
random; he chanced to hear from a different acquaintance, a doctor stationed with the US Navy 
in their base in New Zealand, who told him that fish oil was also “great for the joints and it 
lubricates the eyes”.  This was an important connection in another and completely unexpected 
direction; Bob’s father had gone blind at the end of his life and Bob thought it was likely to be 
hereditary, so he was drawn to the idea fish oil may help him in both ways.  He had added fish 
oil to the glucosamine, and since then made refinements to his supplement regime, taking more 
before a competitive event or a planned long run, but otherwise a little less.  Through all this he 
believed he had been able to retain his identity as a runner that he feared he might lose, and 
keep his body fit for what he wanted to do.  He also commented that being able to do so had 
reduced his stress and “kept me mentally sound …That’s the odd thing.  You go for a run, instead 
of being tired, you actually power up”.   
The aptness of the rhizome metaphor is shown here through Bob’s narrative.  Its multiple 
connections with people that passed unexpectedly in and out of his acquaintance, pieces of 
information they happened to mention by chance that they did not know would be important to 
him, the non-human actors that were part of the overall story - the information modalities, the 
material substances he took, and even the loyalty card that he had at his favourite pharmacy.  
These were all part of the evolving direction of the lines of flight as they twisted and turned; the 
chance discovery about eye health, and the optimism he reported about his future mental and 
physical health that had kept him moving in an away direction from the blockage he had come 
up against in his desire to keep running.  Tracy, similarly, described in moving terms how her 
back pain had become an unwanted presence, dominating her life and stopping her doing what 
she wanted to:   
  All I wanted to do was to go for a run. ….  I was feeling so frustrated and I just wanted to 
cry all the time.  I still actually – the thought of it makes me cry again because I was so 
miserable… (Tracy)  
The continuation of her story into better times, like Bob’s, illustrated the role that 
interconnections with people and things had played for her, reinvigorating her with the desire to 
take action, keep evolving, or in the language of the rhizome, to continue ‘becoming’.  Illness, 
wrote Deleuze (1997: 228), is not a process but the stopping of the process of becoming.  It is a 
“state into which we fall”.   In contrast to this stoppage:  
175 
 
 
Becoming begins as a desire to escape bodily limitation.  Whether the constraint in 
question is generally characterized as a ‘natural’ or ‘cultural’ necessity makes little 
difference. …  What matters is that the constraint is there, and there is a counterdesire 
[sic] to leave it behind (Massumi, 1992: 94).  
This counter desire was a recurrent theme in all the discussions I had with the participants; their 
desire to do rather than just be, to be active, to avoid their lives becoming stuck in a place where 
they were centred on the limitations imposed by pain or dysfunction.  Some of them were just 
small vignettes that presupposed a long background story which would have taken much time to 
relate. Interestingly, most participants could recall the precise event that connected them with 
the supplement assemblage and in most cases it was because of a physical or mental health 
problem which threatened to create a blockage in their life that would undermine their identity.  
Jane, for example, recalled the precise moment when, after an unsatisfactory medical 
encounter, she made the decision to turn away from accepting that she was always going to be a 
medical problem (Shilling, 2002) and actively seek out other options, noting that “I am prepared 
to experiment if there is nothing to lose”.  Such situations were presented as a turning point in 
participants’ lives, where they realised that they had an opportunity to assume control over 
circumstances, explore other avenues that were open to them and find other possibilities on 
which they could act.    
These encounters where there was a chance to grasp an opportunity that offered or allow it to 
pass by, also featured among those who provided advice to the public.  All the pharmacists 
spoke about being confronted with situations where they felt the tension between remaining 
strictly within their formal training or branching out beyond the orthodox response.  Jo found 
she was not able to opt out of helping people who asked for advice about alternative products 
and say “I don’t know anything about that”.  Lou similarly reported he was driven to learn more 
because he felt “quite ignorant” and “silly” when people asked for his advice. According to their 
accounts, these opportunities had led down a line of flight that opened up a different world view 
beyond their professional training, even if they set off down that road as a sceptic:   
If you’ve got someone that is addicted to sleeping pills …   which is better?  Either going 
to the GP and getting prescribed something that may result in a life-time addiction, or 
get some placebo which might just help them think they are going to get a good night’s 
sleep and actually does.  And they help.  (Lyndsay) 
176 
 
 
Many others in the study referred in a similar way to a point where there had taken up an 
opportunity to learn, to change, to take on a different world view, to become rather than 
remaining the same.  They had experienced:  
… a tension between two modes of desire – being and becoming; sameness and 
difference.  At the point of departure from the constraint, there is a ‘bifurcating future’ 
and a choice whether to fall back into the one or to set out instead on a singular path of 
becoming, leading into undreamed of horizons (Massumi 1992: 95).   
Coming up against a barrier that affects what their body can do ‘deterritorialises’ people 
(Deleuze and Guattari 1987: 9), figuratively, cutting the ground from under their feet, and 
moving their sense of self from autonomy to dependency (Fox 2012: 78).  Being diagnosed with 
a chronic disease or becoming disabled even in the medium term through accident or injury 
threatens to disrupt  how they envisaged their future unfolding (Morden et al., 2017; Williams, 
2000).  They may lose the ability to engage in sport or other activities which are part of their 
identity and their opportunities for social contact with others are narrowed (Theou et al., 2017).  
They may no longer be able to get themselves independently to where they want to go, and so 
their lives become restricted to a smaller circle of contacts and interactions and they become 
dependent on others. Becoming socially isolated leads to feelings of loss, a decline in feelings of 
competence and self-worth, a feeling of purposeless and an erosion of identity (Alpass & Neville, 
2003; Pinquart & Sorensen, 2001):   
Identity is a feature of the clustering of relations around specific aspects of embodiment, 
such as health, gender, sport and exercise, body medication, disability or growing old. 
Just as embodiment emerges from activity and practice (what a body can do), so does a 
sense of self (Fox 2012: 80) 
Taking action, on the other hand is an opening up to becoming, and evolving, making the 
decision to move forward wherever it might lead. It does not presuppose a particular destination 
or an end goal.   Participants’ descriptions captured this idea of openness and emphasis on 
taking action, as the following excerpt where Bryony describes what being healthy meant to her:     
… [it’s] an absence of symptoms, but it’s also just a general state of mind.  So it’s my 
body being able to move freely and do all the things I need to do in a day; and it’s my 
mind being happy, bright, and alert and me having energy ….  So that’s healthy 
(Bryony/VB)  [underlining added for emphasis]  
177 
 
 
Numerous studies have documented the importance to overall wellbeing of being able to 
maintain activities which allow people to participate in society in the way they choose (Mammen 
& Faulkner, 2013; Teychenne et al., 2008; Warburton et al., 2006).  If illness and disability, or 
even fear of it, can deterritorialise a person’s sense of self, then taking action in the way the 
participants had done was a process of reterritorialisation. This is not to suggest that 
participants found their health problems magically ‘cured’ – though certainly some reported 
improvements - but rather that they gained a sense of control and coping, allowing them to face 
whatever might lie ahead in the future.      
Moving outwards from any blockage and ‘reterritorialising’ seemed to infuse participants with 
new energy, determination and a sense of purpose, a feeling of being “creative rather than 
reactive to meet their real (not symbolic) needs” (Fox & Ward, 2008: 1008). Their accounts 
focused almost entirely on what they believed the supplements had allowed them to do, rather 
than expecting to find a perfect cure from whatever physical condition they had:   
 …   I’ve got arthritis, mainly in my thumbs …..   I’ve been on these for ages – glucosamine 
with chondroitin and it’s the chondroitin that helps.  When I’m only on glucosamine I 
need more.  And that has kept it at bay.  It’s amazing actually, combined with the fish 
oil….   Well I’m 63 and I feel young and I want to be young for my grandchildren.  I’ve got 
two grandchildren now, so doing what I’m doing, is allowing that to happen. (Sally) 
Sally’s comment indicates that she feels she is moving into the future with confidence that she 
will be able to evolve with her grandchildren. Another participant, Vonnie, similarly spoke about 
the supplement she took now and again for her low mood had “helped me through some really 
rough patches”.  The way she phrased it suggests a sense of movement, overcoming a barrier 
and an increase in confidence that she can move on and cope with what may come.  For both 
Sally and Vonnie, their supplement use seems to have become be part of their identity, 
incorporated into how they see themselves and how they wish to be seen by others, in the same 
way that pharmaceuticals may be for those who rely on them as an enabler to participating  in 
everyday activities (Dew et al., 2015). It was clear from talking to these participants that though 
they were optimistic, they were also realistic. Their focus was much more about keeping their 
problem “at bay”, so that it did not cut them off from whatever opportunities they might come 
across in the future.    
Deleuze and Guatarri argued that the root of a person’s identity was in the dynamic interaction 
between the social context and “… the affirming, creative, and embodied 
178 
 
 
experimentation/engagement of the living body ….  the sum of psychological, emotional and 
physical connections that a body has (Fox and Ward 2008: 1008).  Many of the participants 
clearly enjoyed being creative in all sorts of ways, experimenting and improvising, not simply in 
trying out supplements and other alternative health care options, but in other areas of their lives 
as well.  None illustrated this more vividly than Duncan’s account of his diverse experiences.  He 
had a thirst for experimentation and although he grew up in a somewhat unconventional family 
who already used alternative health modalities, as a young adult he wanted to explore horizons 
beyond what he already knew:  
… out of curiosity [I] went into other things …  to see what was out there and how it 
worked. I wanted to try a bunch of different healers to see which one I liked and see what 
I would potentially be interested in …I got hypnotherapy … I’ve done all sorts of things.   
Duncan’s adventures took him to Peru to visit a shaman and take ayahuasca, as I have already 
described, but that was only one of many lines of flight through diverse modalities, therapies 
and alternative products that he experimented with.  He had briefly been involved with network 
marketing, and had enrolled in various courses in modalities that interested him.  He had 
touched on Chinese medicine through an acquaintance, experimented with body building 
supplements as well as herbals, and dabbled in reiki.  Tracing Duncan’s narrative,  was a verbal 
representation of  a rhizomatic network in the process of becoming; a heterogeneous mix of 
connections with many people, things, sources of information, therapies, world views on health 
and illness, various countries he had lived in or passed through and jobs he had been engaged in. 
It traced his deterritorialisation and reterritorialisation both literally in terms of changing 
modalities, countries and employment, and figuratively in terms of his changing views. At the 
time I spoke to him he told me that he was tending towards a greater interest in and respect for 
orthodox medicine but still mixed in a range of other practices, such as using reiki to calm his 
young son, and was clearly still evolving his ideas and practices as he accumulated more life 
experiences.    
A number of other participants echoed this theme of “experimentation in the world” (Holland, 
2013: 34). Far from being the earnest people portrayed in the academic literature as ‘worried 
well’, they seemed to find it engaging and fun to explore various products and therapies that 
they came across.  Pat, Tessa and Molly all commented directly that they enjoyed experimenting 
with a range of alternative options, and many others recounted the different products and 
therapies, both orthodox and alternative that they had come into contact with and tried.  Rana 
179 
 
 
related her experience with a product that had not worked out for her.  It appeared to be from a 
network marketer rather than bought over the counter from a pharmacy or health store:    
…there was somebody that was selling them.  I can’t remember the name of the product 
but they were selling supplements and I tried them and what happened was I ended up 
getting more migraines.  So I stopped taking that particular brand and then I went and I 
bought some evening primrose oil.  It would have been from the health food shop. (Rana) 
She was undeterred by the failure of the first product and pleased she had learned from the 
experience. Similarly, Tessa also spoke about experimenting with products, in her case 
homeopathics, some that she had bought herself and others that she had prescribed by a 
homeopath. Although she considered them to have been harmless, she believed they had been 
a waste of money in her case, and not something that she would buy again:   “I don’t think 
homeopathics work very well for me in general…I really don’t think it’s made much difference.  
The same with bach flower remedies.” The key factor in these experiences was that the 
participants continued to learn what suited them and what did not.  They seemed unconcerned 
about ‘failures’. In contrast to the ideas of health risk as something to avoid, covered in Chapter 
5, these forays into new fields were more like counter-risk discourses (Casas-Cortés et al., 2008; 
Keshet & Popper-Giveon, 2018; Soane et al., 2010) that pushed boundaries and created new 
knowledge about products that suited them or not. They clearly viewed whatever element of 
risk there might have been as something they could control and felt comfortable, even 
enthusiastic about (Lyng, 2008).  They spoke just as if it were a hobby or creative outlet, trying 
out new cooking styles, attempting new sports, or delving into different forms of art or music. In 
effect it was the same sort risk taking that Lupton and Tulloch (2002: 117) identify as self-
improvement, that gives “movement and progression … to the trajectory of one’s life.” Their 
‘failures’ thus were not something that they regretted, but became a further step on the path to 
greater knowledge and their overall identity development 
Conclusion 
The sense of self and life-satisfaction that the participants appeared to have gained from their 
experiences with supplements is where all three aspects of this chapter come together and 
address the research gap identified in the introduction.   At one point each of the participants 
had made a seemingly small decision to take (or sell) a product for a health concern, a decision 
which had its origins in the coming together of their internalised ideas of responsibility and the 
freedom to wield that responsibility.  They had set their own terms as to when they would use 
180 
 
 
orthodox medicine and when they would use that freedom to resist its control and use 
alternative methods of health care they chose for themselves. Similarly, the same responsibility 
and freedom could be mobilised to participate in the commercial market to the extent that it 
suited them but resist being drawn in to its power.  Because they were also well connected to 
other areas of the modern neoliberal economy they had been able to use economic and 
technical means to experiment with what supplements and alternative therapies they found 
useful and so were continually developing expertise in the way they chose to care for 
themselves.  This ongoing process was contributing to their sense of self through the bringing 
together of the many inter-related connections within the assemblage around the activities they 
enjoyed participating in, which were in turn enriching their feeling of meaning and purpose as 
they moved on with their life journey.   
This chapter draws to a close the analysis of the data generated in the interviews with the study 
participants.  The chapter that follows moves on from the participants and draws from the wider 
assemblage of ideas developed from all three analysis chapters to discuss what they add to a 
new understanding of people’s engagement with practices around supplement use.  
  
181 
 
 
Chapter 7:  Concluding discussion 
Supplement practices: the intra-action of discourse, materiality and power  
This study set out to investigate how people make sense of their supplement use; to explore 
what they say about the products they take and to develop a greater understanding of how and 
why they had come to use them.  The aim was to focus on supplement use as a practice in its 
own right, rather than to view it as just another one of the broader range of complementary and 
alternative (CAM) therapies or to provide an answer to the criticisms of orthodox medicine 
about supplements and those who use them. However, these issues have been taken into 
account at times when the data were directly relevant to them. The methods for the study were 
primarily humanist; that is, the data were generated in interviews with participants.  As the 
study progressed, however, it became clear that the material products of the supplements were 
also important and that they needed to be recognised as having a force of their own rather than 
being treated as inert matter of incidental relevance only (Coole & Frost, 2010). The 
methodology and analysis, therefore, have incorporated a broadly post-humanist approach so as 
to give due weight to the material presence of the supplements.  I have taken the view in this 
study that non-human ‘things’, are always culturally and socially produced (Coole & Frost, 2010; 
Jackson & Mazzei, 2012) just as the knowledge and practices of their users are deeply entwined 
in materiality. Moreover, that the practices that result from this co-production of the human and 
non-human have the power to influence not only individual lives, but also wider social, cultural, 
commercial, and regulatory discourses, relationships, and activities.    
Assemblage thinking using Deleuze and Guattari’s metaphor of the rhizome (1987) has been 
used throughout the analysis. The concept of the rhizomatic assemblage reveals the messy 
tangle of interconnected and competing actants that are involved in supplement use and the 
way that they constantly form and reform in temporary arrangements: material things, people, 
discourses, relationships, social, political and economic concerns, technologies, and power.  So 
that the reason why any individual uses supplements is likely to be interwoven with a complex 
network of actants that come from their background and upbringing, their life experiences and 
current world view, personal connections, social interactions and discourses, commercial 
transactions, previous contacts with orthodox health services, and information acquired through 
the global and local media (Gubbi et al., 2013; Zanella et al., 2014). Supplement users are not 
outside the assemblage, ‘pulling the strings’ but are themselves actants within the complex and 
constantly evolving network.  They act but are also acted upon by the multiplicity of 
182 
 
 
components, and while their actions add to its complexity and richness, they themselves are also 
enriched and changed in an ongoing process, experimenting with what they are now and what 
they might become (Fox 2012: 99).   
Within the overall concept of the evolving rhizomatic assemblage, the three analysis chapters 
focused in turn on a particular set of actants that addressed the research gaps identified in the 
introduction.  Each chapter drew on different theoretical concepts to examine the multiple 
connections between them in the light of the data.  Chapter 4, focused in depth on popular 
discourses about supplements.  Using Derrida’s ideas of deconstruction, naturalness, holistic 
health, and health risk were examined in turn, shown to be contested and diverse, yet rather 
than losing their overall salience, the complex nuances of these discourses added exponentially 
to the interconnections that took place between them and from which the participants drew.   
Chapter 5 foregrounded the physical matter of the supplement products. Using Bennett’s 
concept of ‘thing power’ it demonstrated how the non-human and human interacted to create 
effects that spread out far beyond the actions of individuals.  Chapter 6 then looked at issues of 
power drawing from Foucault’s notion of biopower and its manifestation in the modern 
neoliberal state.  It showed how supplement users were bringing together their views on 
responsibility, the material products of supplements, the freedom of the market, and their 
access to global information to develop an identity as experts in their own health.  All three 
chapters demonstrated how the ongoing interaction between the various actants in the 
assemblage gave rise to continual change and development.   
Discourse, materiality and power, though examined separately in the analysis chapters, come 
together in this final chapter.  I have found that these three aspects are deeply and inextricably 
entangled together in the way supplements and supplement practices are manifested in the 
world.  Each of them is necessary but none is sufficient on its own to understand how people 
make sense of their practices with supplements.  By taking all three into account together, I 
believe a different and potentially more comprehensive understanding of what supplements do 
for those who use them is produced.  This is the principal result of my research and I believe it 
opens up a new way of thinking about supplements and those who use them.   I stop short of 
calling it a definitive ‘finding’; the theoretical framework of the rhizomatic assemblage of actants 
would appear to preclude any such absolute conclusion. Instead I describe it as revealing new 
insights into the possibilities that supplements create for those whose lives are entangled with 
them. Seeing supplements in this way gets beyond the previous approaches which do not 
appear to have considered these three forces in combination.   
183 
 
 
To further explain how I believe these three aspects to be co-constituted in the many ways that 
supplements are used and understood I have turned to the concept of intra-action proposed by 
Karen Barad (2007). Barad’s ideas originated from her work in quantum physics, but she came to 
apply them more generally to the ordinary events of daily life.  Barad’s key concept is her 
insistence that: 
Matter and meaning are not separate elements.  They are inextricably fused together, 
and no event, no matter how energetic can tear them asunder (Barad 2007: 3).  
Therefore all phenomena, as the results of this fusion are termed, are contextual rather than 
absolutes, brought about by what Barad terms intra-action, that is, the mutual entanglement of 
both the “human and non-human, material and discursive, natural and cultural factors” (Barad 
2007: 26) [original emphasis].  The most crucial point about intra-action is that it is more than 
simply an inter-connection where the connecting bodies (whether human or non-human) retain 
their separate identities:     
 …in contrast to the usual ‘interaction’, which assumes that there are separate individual 
agencies that preceded their interaction, the notion of intra-action recognizes that 
distinct agencies do not precede but rather emerge through, their intra-action (Barad 
2007: 33). 
So when bodies intra-act, they come together to produce something quite new and different 
that emerges from “within the relationship rather than outside it” (Kerr et al 2014).   The 
phenomena that come into being through intra-action are temporary, existing for that moment 
only, and each of them is just one of an endless array of possibilities that are always ongoing.  
They are  “forever being reenfolded and reformed” (Barad, 2007: 177), brought into being by  
“different agential cuts that materialize different phenomena” (Barad, 2007: 178).  The ‘agency’ 
here is the action or the ‘doing’ of the process, an enactment that “reworks [or ‘cuts’ together]  
what matters and what is excluded from mattering” in that moment (Barad, 2007: 178).  The 
concept of agential cuts is a way of conceptualising how these differences are made or unmade 
depending on how the various components of matter and meaning, nature and culture, human 
and non-human are ‘cut together’ (or entangled) through intra-action to bring about the 
different events, actions, things, and ideas that go to make up the world as we know it. 
Interestingly, Barad credits Foucault’s concept of the disciplined subject as a co-production of 
bodies, knowledge and power as prefiguring her ideas of intra-action, but considers that 
something more than biopower is now needed to account for “contemporary technoscientific 
184 
 
 
practices which provide for a much more intimate, pervasive and profound reconfigurings of 
bodies, power, knowledge” (Barad 2007: 200).     
I chose to use Barad at this point in addition to Deleuze and Guattari’s overarching concept of 
the rhizomatic network of actants, because I found that the concepts of intra-action and agential 
cuts enabled me to better understand the way that discourse, materiality and power come 
together in a such a variety of combinations to produce the multiple phenomena of supplements 
and their use.  I viewed these concepts from Barad as building further on the idea of the 
rhizomatic network (at least as I understood it), where the nodes, shoots, and lines of flight, 
though tangled together, seemed to be inter-connected rather than engaged in creating new 
phenomena.  Fox and Alldred (2017: 26) also appear to make this distinction between Barad and 
Deleuze and Guattari, writing that the latter “consider how the physical and cultural assemble 
together to produce bodies, social formations and events.” While something akin to intra-action 
may be implied by Deleuze and Guattari (1987), or at least not ruled out, Barad’s ideas appear to 
be arguing for something beyond simply ‘assembling together’.  Assembling, suggests, to take an 
example from the very practical world of food preparation, a salad of greens, tomatoes, 
cucumber and capsicum tossed together in a bowl.  While they are interconnected – or 
assembled together to make the salad - the individual pieces retain their identity and can be 
picked out again, perhaps if someone dislikes the cucumber.  A cake or custard, on the hand, is a 
result of intra-action; an entirely new ‘thing’ which cannot be disassembled into the parts from 
which it has been co-constituted. 
Barad’s concept was also helpful for me in bringing a more practical focus to Deleuze and 
Guattari’s rather abstract philosophy (Jackson & Mazzei, 2012: 111). She has applied intra-action 
to specific contemporary issues in technology, science, education, politics, and gender and given 
useful concrete examples: the material-discursive enactments that produce ultrasound images, 
for instance, or the ‘the worker’ in a factory (Barad 2007: 243).  The concepts of intra-action and 
agential cuts therefore seemed to illuminate the myriad of diverse phenomena of everyday life 
which are mostly taken for granted, as described in the food preparation example above.  They 
seemed therefore to be directly relatable to the apparently mundane actions of buying, selling, 
and ingesting supplements.     
Turning to Barad, however, did not mean setting aside the other theoretical concepts I had used 
but seeing them all as complementing one another. All of them are consistent with the ideas of 
fluidity, change, the rejection of fixed divisions and categories, and the recognition that 
185 
 
 
competing elements exist within all unities, even those that appear entirely coherent (see Barad, 
2010: 176).  Barad and Deleuze and Guattari all understand the world as being in a constant 
state of continual, but non-linear evolution; Barad uses the term dynamic, whereas Deleuze and 
Guattari (1987: 27) write about “a stream without beginning or end.”   Both include the idea of 
randomness in the way this evolution happens; Barad describes unexpected happenings as 
contingent, while for Deleuze and Guattari they are the lines of flight.  Derrida does not focus 
directly on the non-human, but insists that there are no fixed states and bounded entities 
(1997), and Bennett writes of the dynamic agency of material things that while not intentional, is 
“bound up with the idea of a trajectory, a directionality, a movement away from somewhere, 
even if the toward-which it moves is obscure or absent” (Bennett 2010: 32).  Foucault’s 
genealogical approach also sees “history in terms of an ongoing chaotic struggle between 
different forces and between different levels - or patterns – of time” (Danaher et al., 2000: 101).  
These ideas underpin the discussion that follows.  In the first section, I show how different 
agential cuts materialise the multitude of different phenomena that are enacted around 
supplements and supplement practices. I look not just at the products themselves and the 
people who use them but also at the phenomena that constitute their manufacture, promotion 
and sale, regulation, and the counter-discourses about them.  The second section then returns 
to focus on the supplement users and the core aim of the thesis; to provide new insights into 
why and how supplement users make meaning from their practices.  The chapter, and the thesis, 
concludes with final comments on the contribution of supplement practices to the ongoing life 
journey, and how they link back to ancient themes of the quest and the substances that 
strengthen and fortify those who pursue it.   
Supplement practices: entangled phenomena  
Drawing from Barad’s concept of intra-action, supplements and supplement practices can be 
seen as series of never ending temporary phenomena, constituted from the entanglement of 
elements of materiality, discourse and power in different agential cuts.  I start the discussion 
here with the entangled phenomena of personal supplement purchase and ingestion, as they 
were the original inspiration for the thesis.  These are the spontaneous or deliberate decisions 
people make, the purchases they conclude, and the products they ingest, all of which emerge 
from the intra-action of the human and non-human actors.  Each individual action may seem 
unremarkable on the surface, yet every one is the end result of a chain of complexities which has 
brought together a product (matter), the surrounding context of the individual’s beliefs about 
186 
 
 
the product (discourse and meaning) and capabilities that allow them to control how and where 
they obtain and use the material products (power).  Moreover each enactment is unique to that 
moment, depending on the particularities of the individual’s needs, the product they are taking 
at that point, the technologies and sources of supply through which they have learnt about and 
obtained it, their personal history, relationships, world views, and their expertise and knowledge 
of options for managing their health.  All these and more are entangled together in an agential 
cut that “reworks what matters and what is excluded from mattering” at that particular moment 
(Barad 2007: 177).  The moment is both in and outside of linear time in a dimension Barad calls 
“spacetimemattering” (2014: 176).  So while it is taking place in the here and now, each agential 
cut carries within it different memories, habits and meanings of the past as well as expectations 
and hopes for the future (Neale & Flowerdew, 2003), all bound together in a “thick web of 
specificities” (Barad 2014: 176) that come together in that momentary enactment.   
A different entanglement occurs where personal supplement use merges with commerce in the 
assemblage around supplement users who also enact an identity as user-sellers. They may 
embrace this role with enthusiasm if they believe in the material products they sell and see 
themselves as helping and guiding others or enact it somewhat reluctantly if they see it as 
peripheral to their core role, for example in a pharmacy.  Whatever their underlying attitude, 
however, they enter a space that brings into being the “marriage of pragmatism and idealism” 
(Bardaglio, 2005: 18) that goes to make up entrepreneurship.  Even those who deal reluctantly 
with the commercial side of selling and are motivated primarily by idealism and a desire to help 
others, are pragmatic enough to know that meeting the customer demand for supplements is 
necessary to maintain the viability of their business in a competitive market.  While a certain 
amount of selectivity may take place among user sellers when talking about their work, with 
most highlighting the ideological aspects and downplaying the commercial side, it is too 
simplistic to see them as being driven solely by self-interest (see Lewis, 2019).  Rather their 
activities are a co-production of matter and discourse “laced together in an entrepreneurial 
entity that maintains its overall integrity” (Jones et al., 2008: 330) in the context of the 
neoliberal economy that values activities that promote innovation and growth (Herrick; 
Morrison, 2000: 68), and encourages citizens to be entrepreneurs of the self (Foucault, 1988).   
These personal practices, however, are not the only way that elements of discourse, materiality 
and power come together around supplements.  The production and marketing of supplements 
too, from large corporations to small niche companies can also be seen as a series of material 
discursive phenomena where the raw materials that make up the products, the technical 
187 
 
 
processes, data analytics, the human shareholders and staff are all brought together.  All these 
can be cut together with discourses of profit making and commercial power to confirm the 
company’s viability to the share market and wider business world, or alternatively be presented 
through idealistic discourses of health and wellbeing to market products to the public.  While 
not all of these phenomena will succeed in their aim of profitability and may sometimes fade 
out, the overall co-production of commerce, technology and discourse is never static but simply 
moves on to a new iteration (perhaps leaving the retailer to unload those surplus products).  
Loyalty cards, for instance, are a perfect example of the intra-action of matter and discourse 
which brings together the material products, a range of discourses about cheaper prices, good 
value, and rewards for repeat business for the consumers.  The same discourses and products 
are cut together in another way for the product companies and their shareholders that results in 
power to amass the personal details and buying habits of card holders to track sales and create 
data to support future promotions and product developments.    
The products themselves can also be seen as phenomena emerging through intra-action of 
meaning and matter.  A single material product like echinacea or olive leaf, for example, can 
perform as a natural-simple-safe ‘thing’, an ethically produced sustainable thing; it can enact a 
story of historical use in traditional societies, or a story of modern technology that has found a 
new way of extracting it in a more concentrated form or combining it with other products for a 
novel or more powerful effect.  Other products offer the reassurance and support of a being a 
‘helping-hand’, calming stress, or ‘managing’ blood sugar.  Equally they can be constituted to 
offer vitality and energy, or bargain prices and value for money.  Nor do these individual 
phenomena necessarily have inner coherence, but may be co-constituted from contradictory 
elements.  Take for example, the obvious discordance between the heavily promoted ‘natural’ 
aspects of the products and their manufactured capsule or powdered formats and packaging.  
Whichever way that the differences are brought together, however, they keep (be)coming, a 
constant stream of products that combine matter and meaning in a seemingly endless variety of 
combinations that fit with the discourses of the moment.  
At the same time, however, other phenomena materialise to resist the ‘things’ that are 
produced by the commercial supplement producers, and continually push back against their 
power.  These come not only from orthodox health care and regulatory authorities (discussed 
below) but also from the co-production of discourses about consumer rights, the purchasing 
power of consumers, and the learned experience of operating in the modern neoliberal 
economy, which, after all, exists on a much wider scale than the supplement market alone 
188 
 
 
(Izberk-Bilgin, 2010; Mejri et al., 2012; Ulver-Sneistrup et al., 2011). The supplement companies, 
on their part, are well aware of scepticism and resistance that exists around their products and 
take pains to understand and develop strategies to counteract it (Amawate & Deb, 2019; Elving, 
2013; Mimouni Chaabane, 2016). In this way, the push-pull of supply and demand, cost and 
value are constantly moving material-discursive enactments that bring together bodies, 
discourses, material products and power.  None would come into being without the others; if 
there were no discourses, the products would have no place or meaning, and without the 
products, there would nothing to discourse about and nothing over which to assume power.   
The policies and regulations around supplements, too, are worthy of attention as an area where 
discourse, matter and power intra-act to produce supplements as legitimate or not, and 
therefore freely accessible or not to consumers. Supplements are valuable economically within 
an economy that promotes growth in the sale of material things even if they are incompatible 
with the advice recommended by orthodox health experts. They therefore continue to be 
produced as (mostly) legitimate items in the policy and regulatory world, depending on the 
particular bodies that hold the power of decision-making about them.  Melatonin, is one 
example of a product that may be freely sold over the counter in the United States for 
promoting sleep and reducing jet lag, but is restricted to being prescribed by a doctor or 
pharmacist in New Zealand and for certain ages and conditions only (Medsafe, 2018).  The same 
kind of variable differentiation takes place within orthodox medicine itself in a number of 
situations.  Products may be approved ‘evidence-based’ entities if prescribed by a health 
professional exercising the power vested in them (Bjelakovic et al., 2014) but cut apart from 
legitimacy as ‘alternative’ and ‘risky’ if sold or used without medical direction (Geyer et al., 2008; 
Sarino et al., 2007; Stickel et al., 2009; Werner, 2014). Alternatively, they may be enacted as 
legitimate or not over time.  The status of calcium supplements, for example, which were 
commonly prescribed as bone strengthening medicinal products for menopausal women at one 
time, has been called into question, with the risk of engendering adverse cardiac events now 
said to outweigh any benefits  they might have (Li et al., 2013; Reid et al., 2015; Zittermann et 
al., 2011).   On the other hand, a form of glucosamine and some probiotic supplements now 
appear to be hovering on the cusp of being legitimised treatments rather than their previous 
status as non-effective supplements (AGA, 2019; Kucharz et al., 2016).  Evolution across time in 
the way particular substances are produced as suitable or unsuitable for the public is nothing 
new.  Throughout the history of medicine from blood-letting and leeches to cocaine, laudanum 
and tonics (Crellin, 2004) matter and discourse have been cut together in different ways to enact 
189 
 
 
medicinal treatments as legitimate or not.  These examples serve to demonstrate that not only 
in the world of supplements, but across the entire world of health care, there is constant fluidity 
in the way medicinal substances are enacted; nothing is fixed and permanent, but always 
evolving and changing.  And, while “intra-actions always involve particular 
exclusions…possibilities aren’t narrowed in their realisation; new possibilities open up as others 
are excluded” (Barad, 2007: 177).   
This fluidity also applies to the intra-action of matter, discourse, and power in the ongoing 
critique of supplements and their users by orthodox medicine.  While the focus of the study was 
to explore supplements in depth rather than to answer the objectivist-realist arguments about 
ineffectiveness and lack of evidence, it would seem incomplete not to raise these issues at all, 
particularly as it was partly the nature of the oppositional discourses about supplements that 
sparked my original engagement with the topic. Moreover, these discourses are well rehearsed, 
frequently appear in the popular media and were raised, unprompted, by many of the study 
participants themselves.  Lewis (2019) has discussed the concerted efforts of a particular group 
of actors in Australia through the use of media releases and other material-discursive 
enactments to produce all complementary and alternative practices (CAM) in Australia as 
illegitimate.  Although Lewis (2019) does not overtly take a post-humanist stance, her critique 
highlights the way these statements about alternatives tend to be presented as a truth that is 
“altogether natural, self-evident, and indispensable” (Foucault, 1991: 75).  Her analysis shows, 
however, that the arguments have also evolved and changed over time, gradually moving away 
from discourses about the potential harm and ineffectiveness of supplements to focus on those 
that see them as being driven by commercially motivated global businesses that are exploiting a 
naïve public taken in by slick marketing.   
By “foregrounding  rather than bracketing” (Mauthner, 2015: 327) the concerted campaign of 
this particular group of Australian actors to issue press releases and other statements that 
support their viewpoint (Lewis, 2019), the same process of material-discursive intra-action can 
be seen to be taking place.  The material products (supplements), assertions of power through 
professional knowledge and control over health treatments, and discourses of commercial self-
interest and problematisation of lay claims to understand their own health are brought together 
in a series of agential cuts that materialise supplement use as a baffling and frustrating  
phenomenon to health professionals (Guallar et al., 2013; Lewis, 2019; Ronda et al., 2009), or, at 
times, as a purposeful undermining of expertise developed through professional training and 
practice in the prescribing of  medicines (Barnes et al., 2016; Guallar et al., 2013).  For even 
190 
 
 
though groups of health professionals may disagree over inclusion or exclusion of a particular 
treatment or  who should be credentialed in a particular sphere of practice, they are 
nevertheless all part of an assemblage that has a common philosophy based on the currently 
accepted form of scientific knowledge that may be mobilised for patient care (Lamont & Molnár, 
2002). Supplement users, however, are enacting their own material-discursive practices 
resulting from different agential cuts in the assemblage of actants.  As Jackson and Mazzei 
(2012: 126) point out, multiple becomings can result from intra-action, not only between 
different groups of people (for example the health professionals and supplement users 
described above), but there is a multiplicity of becomings for every individual as well.  As Barad 
puts it (2010: 176) “each moment is alive with different possibilities for the world’s becoming 
and different reconfigurings of what may yet be possible”.   
Many supplement users do ascribe a range of physical, mental, and spiritual effects to the 
products that they take and relate these to their overall health and wellbeing. While these 
effects are clearly meaningful to those who report them, others note that they continue to take 
products even if they have no idea if they ‘work’ or not, suggesting that the meanings that 
matter lie elsewhere.  For supplement users, the question is not about bioavailability or any 
other physiological explanation of how the products work (Wahlberg, 2008),  but rather what 
they do for those who use them, what that means, and why it matters. Thinking about 
supplements in this way cuts across the rival epistemologies of realism and constructionism and 
focuses on the “dynamic, generative and rhizomatic production and actualisation of the world in 
which both matter and meaning play a part” (Fox and Alldred, 2017: 26).   The next section, 
therefore, examines the meanings that may be produced from intra-action in the supplement 
assemblage and how these become woven in to their users’ continuing quest for a meaningful 
life.     
Meaning, matter, ritual and symbolism     
What makes a meaningful life is one of the ‘big questions’, perhaps the big question; it has been 
endlessly explored since antiquity in philosophy, literature, the arts, and science and continues 
to be the subject of fascination in contemporary times. Tolstoy, Socrates, Camus, among many 
others considered it to be the ultimate philosophical question (Martela & Steger, 2016: 535-
536). If we do not believe our lives are meaningful then we may feel that everything we do is 
simply displacement activity until we die,  or in Shakespeare’s words, “a tale told by an idiot, full 
of sound and fury, signifying nothing” (Macbeth V:V). Discussions of what makes for a 
191 
 
 
meaningful life often begin by referring to Aristotle’s concept of eudaimonia, a word made up 
from the Greek daimon being the ‘true self’ and the prefix eu meaning ‘good’ or ‘well’ 
(Waterman, 1990).  Eudaimonia has been interpreted in a variety of different ways by 
philosophers and psychologists, but all of them convey the idea of a continual striving after what 
an individual perceives as being the most desirable and truly worthwhile kind of life (Bauer et al., 
2008; Baumeister et al., 2013; Deci & Ryan, 2008; Hardie, 1979; Martela & Steger, 2016; Nagel, 
1972; Ryan et al., 2008; Ryan & Martela, 2016; Ryff, 2012; Ryff & Singer, 2008; Waterman, 1990).  
Qualities that have been proposed as contributing to eudaimonia have included coherence, 
autonomy, self-understanding, competence, relatedness and existential mattering where 
mattering is “transcending the trivial”…, [and feeling] “that one’s actions make a difference in 
the world” (Costin & Vignoles, 2019: 2). As this variety of explanations demonstrates, 
eudaimonia eludes any precise definition. Perhaps its greatest strength is its openness to be 
interpreted as Derrida would have it, in different ways (autrement) (1997: 77), according to the 
complexities of the personal, cultural, and societal contexts and relationships which differ for 
every individual.  Nevertheless, there are two consistent ideas that can be drawn from the 
concept of eudaimonia: firstly, that it involves living in a way that feels personally meaningful 
and true to oneself, whatever that might be, and secondly, that living meaningfully is continually 
being enacted, a process of becoming, not a state that can be achieved once and for all.   
Religious belief has traditionally provided a way of making meaning from the joys and 
vicissitudes of human life and reducing uncertainty about our purpose for being in the world 
(Emmons, 2005; Hogg et al., 2010; Krause & Hayward, 2012; Park, 2005; Park et al., 2013) but 
religious belief, at least in established religions has declined in the modern age (Gorski & 
Altınordu, 2008; Houtman & Mascini, 2002). A large number of people in Western countries hold 
to rationalist beliefs that exclude any notion of life after death (García & Blankholm, 2016; 
Manning, 2016; O'Brien & Noy, 2015). New Zealand in particular is said to have an identity as a 
“pre-eminently secular country” (Matheson, 2006: 177). If we are no longer living on earth as 
preparation for a life in some kind of divine hereafter, we are left with the need to find some 
other way to come to terms with the existential anxiety that is generated by the awareness of 
our own mortality (Hoelterhoff, 2015; Marino & Mountain, 2015; Varki, 2009), and a longing to 
find an explanation for “our birth, our death, and the pain of the journey in between” 
(McCormick, 1996: 620).  
Alternatively, the absence of a belief in a life after death may instead inspire a determination to 
make the most of the life we have, exploring all the opportunities that offer to make it 
192 
 
 
meaningful (Hoelterhof, 2015).  Physical or mental illness, however, can creep up slowly or arrive 
dramatically and reduce or close off possibilities and hopes for the future (Bury, 1982; Locock et 
al., 2009; Sanders et al., 2002; Sinding & Wiernikowski, 2008).  This dilemma of theoretical 
freedom to live fulfilling lives but only if we can ward off the bodily constraints of illness or 
disability, has become more pressing with the extension of longevity since the mid-20th century 
(Carey & Judge, 2001; Kinsella, 2005; Kraai et al., 2013).  Advances in medical care over the past 
half century have made it possible for people who would otherwise have died in previous eras to 
live longer and better than at any time in history (Gawande, 2014). Modern medicine has tended 
to promote the idea that everything can be ‘fixed’ by following guidelines for a healthy life, and 
submitting oneself to the care and guidance of health professionals who will ensure that health 
problems are identified, treated and ‘managed’ (Fishman et al., 2008; Lamb, 2014; Mykytyn, 
2006). Research studies lend their weight to the same assemblage of optimistic discourses of 
‘longevism’ (Dumas & Turner, 2015) by demonstrating incremental gains in survival for particular 
drugs or interventions (Berger et al., 2011; Prinz & Endres, 2011; Wald & Wald, 2012). There 
have even been suggestions that the normal life span can be almost indefinitely extended with 
the assistance of ‘regeneration medicine’ (Lafontaine, 2009, 2015), including strategies such as 
genetic manipulation and the availability of computer printed organs and other body parts 
(Dumas & Turner, 2015; Katz & Gish, 2015).   As Crawford (2004:505) argues, death itself has 
been deconstructed into innumerable specific causes against which “a technical war – a spiritual 
war in fact – must be waged.”   
In contrast with these discourses that appear to promote an endlessly positive future, the same 
medical advances have also created a continually growing number of people who may be alive, 
but are also chronically ill, unable to carry out daily activities as they would wish, and sometimes 
also cognitively impaired (Bähler et al., 2015; Lafontaine, 2015; Lehnert et al., 2011).   Moreover, 
those who have lost independence and agency, may become stigmatised as contributors to the  
‘silver tsunami’ that is depriving current and future generations of their access to health and 
social services (Bartels & Naslund, 2013; Bluethmann et al., 2016; Bodker et al., 2019; Dumas & 
Turner, 2015; Hartt & Biglieri, 2018).  It has become clear that simply extending the number of 
years of life may not be desirable if the quality of that life is more and more limited in scope, 
leading to social isolation and depression (Blakemore et al., 2014; DeJean et al., 2013; Duggleby 
et al., 2012; Earnshaw & Quinn, 2012; Liddy et al., 2014).  It is this fear, the horror of ending up 
in a life without the agency to create ongoing meaning that would seem to underlie many of the 
fundamental urges that give rise to supplement practices.    
193 
 
 
Supplement users of all ages appear to have a keen feeling of uncertainty about their imagined 
future. While they do not seem to be fearful of death itself, many have already encountered the 
shadow of disability and appear to share a horror of being humiliated (Waskul & van der Riet, 
2002) by the “precarious dependencies” (Bodker et al., 2019: 1358) that accompany the loss of 
physical and cognitive function leading to terminal decline and the final end-of-life cascade 
(Gerstorf et al., 2013; Rajan et al., 2012). They may have the beginnings of a chronic disease and 
are fearful of it worsening; they may have experienced long-lasting sports injuries, depression, or 
witnessed someone they love dwindle and deteriorate slowly and have resolved to avoid the 
same fate.  Even if they are in the best of health now, and are proactive about maintaining their 
healthy status, somewhere in the past, they have become aware that at any time their body has 
the potential to turn on them and betray them.  Minor and “mundane exposures” (Hoelterhof, 
2015: 1) can trigger anxiety that the body which they had commanded at will, might turn on 
them and let them down, or as Kristeva (1982: 4) has so pertinently put it, become “the friend 
who stabs you.” Kristeva’s concept of the abject (1982) is a useful way of conceptualizing the 
horror that supplement users seem to sense of ceasing to become, being “excluded from the 
rhythms of daily life, [experiencing] a pitiable loss of personal control and social agency” 
(Gilleard & Higgs, 2011: 139).   For what use is a longer life if it is merely an existence without the 
possibility of meaning, purpose and enjoyment?  Being abject in this way is repugnant, 
loathsome, defiling; it is something that needs to be “thrust aside in order to live” (Kristeva, 
1982: 3).  But once the thought is recognised, it seems that it can never quite be banished:  
 In the heartlands of non-disability the abject is a cause for concern because it is too 
close for comfort…Repressed, denied but lurking, hovering, whispering barely audibly 
from some liminal place in the recesses of the imaginary… it is the stranger that we 
despise but fear we might become (Hughes, 2009: 405,406).  
Moreover, because health and morality are so intertwined (Brandt & Rozin, 1997; Conrad, 1994; 
Crossley, 2003; Metzl & Kirkland, 2010), there is an implication that ‘virtuous’ people will 
manage to fight off disease, overcome disability and achieve ‘successful’ ageing (Cosco et al., 
2014; Geard et al., 2018; Lamb, 2014), while those who do not manage to do so have failed to 
take responsibility for themselves and are now paying the price (Agborsangaya et al., 2013; 
Lakerveld et al., 2013). Nevertheless, just as everyone must face death eventually, no matter 
how virtuous or responsible they have been about their health, so ultimately, everyone must, 
sooner or later, fail at the moral task of being healthy, for “there is no escaping the tragedy of 
life; that we are all aging from the day we are born” (Gawande, 2014: 8). 
194 
 
 
Rather than doing nothing and simply hoping that this will not happen, supplement practices are 
an outward and visible enactment each day that confirms for the users their responsibility and 
vigilance and symbolises their determination to defer disability and the stigma of moral failure. 
Their practices are a personally constructed and controlled form of ‘conduct of conduct’ through 
which they resist being drawn into the cul-de-sac of “patienthood” (O'Mahony, 2019: 1799) 
where they have no agency and decisions about them will be guided by ‘experts’ who will decide 
what is best. The daily ritual of taking the material products down from the shelf and swallowing 
them allows their users to continue their narrative in “the voice of the healthy” (Hydén, 1997: 
62) who are able to look forward confidently to having power and control over their future.  
While these rituals may “bypass the frameworks of rationalism and functionalism” (Bell, 1990: 
300), they nevertheless create effects. They provide certainty, meaning, and continuity to 
people’s lives (Horner, 2000; Markson & Fiese, 2000) and cannot be dismissed as irrational or 
merely placebos (Gale, 2014).  
Rituals tend to be associated with religious practices and superstition, and therefore may be 
considered to have no place in the modern, scientifically-enlightened world (Quack and Sax 
2010).  Nevertheless, contemporary life is still punctuated with many kinds of normalised rituals, 
even if they are not recognised or described as such (Islam & Zyphur, 2009). The public rituals of 
state memorials and the quasi-religious rituals of competitive sport (Brevers et al., 2011; 
Hutchinson, 2009; Jackson & Baker, 2001; King, 2010; Schippers & Van Lange, 2006),  the 
structured rituals of professional practice, for example, in law and medicine (Arluke, 2018; 
Parissopoulos et al., 2013; Robinson, 2001; Robinson, 2006) and the many personal and family 
rituals in the small activities of everyday life (Hammerschlag, 1997; Hannam, 1997; Morris, 2017; 
Thomson & Hassenkamp, 2008; Verma, 2013).    In short, rituals bring structure, continuity and 
order into people’s lives on both a large and small scale:    
 Rituals are conscious, intentional and often repetititive bodily actions that attempt to 
impose meaning on one or other aspect of the world ….a body acting out of what sort of 
situation one is in and what ought to be done about it. (Brody, 2010: 153)  
Rituals across the many different areas of human experience can be seen as enactments, in 
which material things, discourses, and the power of meaning are brought together for those that 
enact them and those for whose benefit they are enacted.  Not only do they involve material 
things – for example the wreaths of poppies at war memorials or the birthday cake at family 
celebrations - but they also draw on intuitive connections to modes of thought that are beyond 
scientific rationality.  They have performative, aesthetic, and cultural components that go 
195 
 
 
beyond their cognitive elements, linking to the imagination, the unique meanings they carry for 
each individual and their placement both within and outside linear time (Wulf et al., 2010). 
Rituals connect to another dimension alongside the world of ‘reality’, where “rites and myths 
help people face the unspeakable … to cope with the problematic human predicament” 
(Armstrong, 2005: 6), that is, the inevitable prospect that life ends in extinction and nothingness.    
Supplement rituals can be seen in the same way, as a bringing together of discourse, materiality 
and power in rituals that enact personal, cultural and symbolic meanings which far exceed their 
mundane appearance and the simple act of swallowing them each day. The products themselves 
compel attention as projecting a certain type of power in which “symbolic images and gestures 
exercise a particularly persuasive effect on the participants’ sense of identity and social reality” 
(Bell, 1990:299).  The specially assigned spaces that containers of supplements occupy in 
people’s homes also serve to point up their ritual agency.  Almost always stored in the more 
private areas of the kitchen or bedroom rather than the rooms where guests are admitted and 
entertained, the supplement space is thus the site of a private daily ‘devotion’, but rather than 
the flowers, incense and prayers offered on other altars, the supplement ritual is an offering on 
the altar of personal responsibility that holds the hope of preserving the future from decline and 
decay.  The ritual act of swallowing them may take place at a moment of linear time but also 
within the dimension of “spacetimemattering” described by Barad (2014:176). Bound up in the 
present action are the past events that have been continually evolving towards that point and 
the hopes and desires for the continuation of possibilities into an expanding future (Neale & 
Flowerdew, 2003: 193).  Maintaining the ritual is a sign of a belief that by continuing to observe 
it, they will be able to “keep on keeping on” (Lundberg, 2019: unpaged) doing what they want to 
do and warding off disability and decay for at least another day.  
Supplement practices can thus be seen as ongoing ritual enactments that help provide a sense of 
predictability and independent agency in users’ lives as they seek to keep control over their 
health and avoid disruptions to the future they plan for themselves (Morden et al., 2017: 369).  
The difference between supplement users and others is that they have chosen supplements as 
their preferred method of assuming control over the risks they perceive as being the most 
relevant to their own context. Others may choose a different ritual, for example, the socio-
material practice of surgical mask wearing in Japan as a “risk ritual” that acts as a “safety 
blanket” against the threat of illness and disease for the wearer (Burgess & Horii, 2012: 1193). 
Health rituals such as these have been interpreted as a symbolic way of ordering and gaining 
power over the “inherently untidy experience” of illness and disease (Williams, 1998: 449) and 
196 
 
 
calming “the escalating spiral of control and anxiety” Crawford, 2004: 506) that is generated by a 
contemporary culture that identifies more and more risks to health. 
This is not to suggest that the supplement ritual is the central activity around which those who 
use them live their lives.  It is rather a means to an end, something that allows them to defuse 
their anxiety about risks with confidence about the future and control anxiety over its 
uncertainty and to focus on other, more enjoyable and meaningful aspects of their life instead.  
By undertaking the supplement ritual each day, they can then feel they have ‘done something’ 
to deal with their concerns and can set them aside so they can get on with the activities and 
relationships which are meaningful to them as their life journey evolves in its continual 
‘becoming’.  The supplement enactments become an additional thread that is woven into and 
enriches their personal narrative as it evolves over time (Jones et al., 2008; Lindgren & Wåhlin, 
2001; Morrison, 2000).  They come to see themselves as being ‘someone who knows’ about 
these things (supplements and their effects), and can pass on what they know to others, hence 
the trajectory for some supplement users into roles where they advise others.  McAdams and 
McLean (2013: 234) give seven examples of “life story constructs” that people use in identity 
stories.  Of these, supplements users’ accounts of their experiences are strongly connected to 
constructs of agency (control over circumstances) and meaning making (learning something and 
gaining insight about their life).  While the coherent accounts supplement users present may 
have been honed and smoothed through reflection and reconstruction over months or years by 
the time they are related to a researcher (McLean, 2008), they nevertheless identify events and 
experiences which the people telling their story have selected as being important and 
meaningful to them.   Each of these stories, unique narratives by “self-conscious language 
wielding humans” (Bennett 2010: 120) provides insight into the way supplement users convey 
“…to the self and others, who they are now, how they came to be there and where they think 
their lives may be going in the future” (McAdams & McLean, 2013: 233). Supplements primarily 
appear in these accounts, as the ‘vital matter’ that has given them the power to overcame a 
hurdle, and thereby set off a chain of events, creating an intra-action between the non-human 
products, the many other actants in the assemblage and the world views of the individuals 
themselves.  Moreover, the strength of the personal narrative is that it does not have a 
particular destination or foreseeable end but is always in process, open to the pursuit of many 
possible future meanings that might be made in the life yet to come.   
 Even at the most pragmatic and widely understood level of protecting and maintaining health, 
supplements are infused with meanings that link to ideas about the potential that the future 
197 
 
 
holds to engage in activities and experiences that an individual desires to pursue.  Their 
supplements are enablers on the life quest, the journey in which individuals are their own ‘hero’ 
and through which they find meaning and purpose in their lives and build their identity 
narrative.  For the life quest, whether in Greek mythology or in the 21st century, is a universal 
story whereby the protagonist gradually moves through life in a process of evolving and 
changing as they go, “becoming” in the Deleuzian sense.  The transformational narratives that 
came from the discussions, echoed one of the universal themes from the hero’s journey; the 
helping substance which gives the protagonist the power to resist and overcome difficulties, to 
be or do more than they could unaided  (Applegate & Grivetti, 1997: 869S).  Supplement users 
appear to have this sense of quest in their lives, not to reach the ‘golden fleece’ of Jason and the 
Argonauts, or the ‘water of life’ of Polynesian legend by doing extraordinary deeds.  It is rather 
that their daily practices with supplements symbolise their continuing involvement “in the divine 
game” of existence” (Bearn, 2013:54) without coming up against the barriers of illness and 
disability that will stop them participating.  Whether Odysseus in the ancient world, Alice and 
her adventures in Wonderland, or the modern day-to-day adventures of the 21st century citizen, 
the point is not necessarily the destination, but for the journey itself to be meaningful along the 
way.  Supplements, like the magic potions or reviving waters of myth and legend are enablers to 
this end - the desire to pursue enjoyment, meaning and purpose in life, rather than to merely 
stay alive.  
