Your country lies twentythousand leagues away; but for all that the Way ofHeaven holds good for you as for us, and yourinstincts are not different from ours.We have heard that in your honorable nation, too, thepeople are not permitted to smoke [opium]... Thoughnot making use of it one's self, to venturenevertheless to manufacture and sell it, and with it toseduce the simple folk of this land, is to seek one'sown livelihood by exposing others to death, to seekone's own advantage by other men's injury.... We nowwish to find, in cooperation with your honorablesovereignty, some means of bringing to a perpetualend this opium, so hurtful to mankind; we in this landforbidding the use of it, and you, in the nations of youdominion, forbidding its manufacture.Let us suppose that foreigners came from anothercountry, and brought opium into England, andseduced the people of your country to smoke it. Wouldnot you ... look upon such a procedure with anger,and in your just indignation endeavor to get rid of it?Now we have always heard that Your Highnesspossesses a most kind and benevolent heart. Surelythen you are incapable of doing or causing to be doneunto another that which you should not wish anotherto do unto you.I now give my assurance that we mean to cut off thisharmful drug forever. What is here forbidden toconsume, your dependencies [India] must beforbidden to manufacture, and what has already beenmanufactured, Your Majesty must immediately searchout and throw to the bottom of the sea.... The lawsagainst consumption of opium are now so strict inChina that if you continue to make it, you will find thatno one buys it.Do not say you have not been warned in time. Onreceiving this, Your Majesty will be so good as toreport to me immediately on the steps that have beentaken at each of your ports. "TIMELINE: THE OPIUM WARS1000: Opium introduced into China1729: Emperor of China prohibits sale of opium1793: British East India Co. establishes opiummonopoly1796: Emperor prohibits importation of opium1799: Emperor bans opium cultivation1833: British Parliament ends East India Co.monopoly1838: China confiscates British/American opium atCanton docks1839: High Commissioner Lin Zexu writes to QueenVictoria-202-1839: First Opium War: Britain vs. China (to 1842)1840: Lord Palmerston affirms China's right toprohibit use1841: British fleet arrives at Canton1842: Wm. Gladstone writes of a "national iniquitytowards China"1842: China forced to sign Treaty of Nanking("Unequal Treaty")1843: Treaty of Bogue opens 5 Chinese ports1856: Second Opium War: Britain & France vs. China(to 1860)1858: Treaty of Tientsin (Tianjin) legalizesimportation 1910: England and China agree to end India-Chinaopium tradePROCESSINGOpium is the dried milky latex that exudes fromincised fruits of Papaver somniferum, the opiumpoppy. All parts of the plant seem to contain the latex,but the leaves lack the alkaloids that are the activeprinciple. The seeds are essentially devoid of alkaloidsas well, so poppy seed rolls may be eaten without fearof addiction.A few days after the delicate petals have fallen fromthe poppy flowers, workers enter the fields and makeincisions in the fruits. These cuts are not deep and donot pierce the seed chamber. The incisions bleed alatex that hardens in about a day. The latex is thenscraped from the fruits, removing some of theepidermis as well. This crude dried exudate is opium.Externally opium is a pale olive-brown or gray, with acoarse surface. It is often covered with poppy leavesor the plant parts from other packing material. Insideit is reddish-brown and granular. It has a very bittertaste. The use of crude opium has declined greatly inrecent years, although the tincture and camphoratedtincture of opium are still popular.THE ACTIVE PRINCIPLESOpium contains about 25 alkaloids. Morphine andcodeine are probably the best known. Their relativepercentages vary. Opium may be 5-15% morphineand 0.1-2% codeine. The function of these alkaloids inthe plant is uncertain. It has been suggested that thebitter latex may protect the plants against insects orthat the alkaloids provide a nitrogen reserve formaking proteins.Morphine is the chief narcotic principle in opium. Thereare various ways of separating it and purifying it. Inone of these, macerated opium is mixed with waterand the morphine precipitated by ammonia. Thecrystals are then purified. A similar process involvesammonia and sulfuric acid. Morphine was first isolatedin 1803. The effects of the alkaloid are a state ofpleasant drowsiness and muscular relaxation. There isa freedom from anxiety, a shortening of the sense oftime, an increased ability to discriminate, a decreasedability to concentrate, a lessening of physical activity,dimness of vision, and lethargy. Finally the subjectdrifts into a restful sleep. The advantages to medicineof such an alkaloid are immediately apparent.Morphine became one of the chief pain killers,permitting surgery under greatly improved conditions.Unfortunately, morphine exhibits both physiologicaland psychological dependence. The subject becomestolerant of it so that increased dosages are required toachieve desired results, and the withdrawal frommorphine is especially painful.Codeine is generally like morphine, but much milder.The effects of codeine are approximately 1/6 to 1/10those of morphine. Codeine is a common ingredient incough preparations. It is a narcotic and produces bothphysical and psychological dependence. Withdrawalsymptoms are present, but they are much milder thanthose associated with morphine. Tolerance to codeinealso develops.THE SYNTHETIC DERIVATIVESHeroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine. Itis not, therefore, a naturally occurring alkaloid. Heroinis made by adding acetic anhydride or acetylchlorideto morphine. The result is a white, odorless,crystalline powder that is very bitter. It is soluble inwater. Heroin was developed in Germany in 1898 asan analgesic more powerful than morphine. Ananalgesic is a painkiller that does not render thepatient unconscious, unless it is administered in largedoses. Heroin is three or four times stronger thanmorphine. Strangely enough, it was widely used tohelp morphine addicts through their difficultwithdrawal periods and was hailed as a cure formorphine addiction. Several years passed before itbecame apparent that heroin was itself addictive.Today heroin plays no significant role in medicine. Itis under strict government supervision. Heroin addictseither inject the material, as with morphine, or theymay inhale it. Heroin is the only opiate that has aneffect on the mucous membranes of the nose.Methadone is to heroin what heroin was oncethought to be to morphine. Methadone is a syntheticdrug used to break addiction to heroin. It is slightlymore potent than morphine and it is nearly aseffective taken orally as it is by injection. Methadoneis both physically and psychologically addictive.Former heroin addicts who are using methadone mustcontinue to use methadone in its place.THE EFFECTS OF THE OPIATESThe naturally occurring and synthetic derivatives havethe following effects in humans:' pleasant drowsiness' muscular relaxation' freedom from anxiety' shortens sense of passage of time' increased ability to discriminate' decreased ability to concentrate' lessened physical activity' contracted pupils' dimness of vision' lethargy' slowed respiration' sleep' delays in emptying of stomach' slows peristalsis in small and large intestines' stimulates, then depresses the central nervoussystem' pain-killing, hypnotic, and narcotic effectsADDICTION & WITHDRAWAL SYMPTOMSA number of studies have focused on the long termeffects of addiction to opiates. One of the best knownof these is the "Philadelphia General Hospital Study. "It concluded that:' addiction is not characterized by physicaldeterioration;' there is no evidence of changes in circulatory,hepatic, renal, or endocrine functions;' addiction does not cause emaciation;-203-' pale complexions are result of sedentary lifestyles;' 60% had gum disease and carries;' chronically-inflamed throats resulted fromcigarette use;' sexual potency and libido normal;' pupils were constricted, which impairs nightvision' chronic constipation was common.We have tended to confuse the effects of using opiatesover a long period of time with those that occur fromwithdrawal. They include:' constant flow of mucous;' chills and sweats;' delusions;' nausea;' diarrhea;' hemorrhaging; and' death.MARIJUANA"They have a sort of hemp growing in this country,very like flax, except in thickness and height; in thisrespect hemp is far superior.... When therefore theScythians [inhabitants of a region in southeast Europeand Asia] have taken some seed of this hemp, theycreep under the cloths, and then put the seed on thered hot stones; but this being put on smokes, andproduces such a steam, that no Grecian vapour-bathwould surpass it. The Scythians, transported with thevapour, shout aloud; and this serves them instead ofwashing, for they never bathe the body in water.... (Herodotus. Ca. 425 B. C.)' ' ' ' 'TIMELINE: MARIJUANABCE:2800 Hemp used for rope (China)2700 First recorded use as medicine (China)1200 Cited as a sacred plant in Hindu text500 Zoroaster puts hemp at top of his list ofmedicinal plants430 Herodotus observes ritual/recreational usesof hemp by ScythiansCE:70 Dioscorides writes of widespread use ofmedicinal hemp in Rome800 Prophet Mohammed permits its use1100 Smoking cannabis now widespread in MiddleEast1378 Ottoman Emir Soudoun Scheikhouni issues edictagainst eating cannabis1430 Joan of Arc accused of using cannabis to hearvoices1484 Pope Innocent VIII condemns use in Satanicmasses1545 Spanish introduce into Chile1597 John Gerard warns that cannabis will "dryeth upseed" (semen)1611 British introduce into Virginia1621 Robert Burton suggests use against depression1653 Nicholas Culpeper claims cannabis cures avariety of diseases1753 Linnaeus publishes Cannabis sativa1783 Lamarck publishes Cannabis indica1798 Napoleon bans use by his soldiers in Egypt1894 Indian Hemp Commission Report1890 Queen Victoria's physician prescribes its use 1899 T. B. Wood et al. isolate cannabinol1901 British Royal Commission concludes it is more orless harmless1924 Janischewsky publishes C. ruderalis1924 Geneva Conference on Opium outlaws cannabis1928 Dangerous Drug Act outlaws cannabis use inBritain1937 Congress passes Marijuana Tax Act1943 U. S. D. A. plants 146,000 acres of hemp forwar effort1944 La Guardia Report1965 Mechoulan & Gaoni isolate delta-1-THC1968 Wootton Report1970 Le Dain Report1972 Shafer Commission Report1973 Oregon minimizes penalty for possession ofsmall amounts1973 Drug Enforcement Agency set up; vows to ridcountry of cannabis1974 Frederich Blanton reports use to treat glaucoma1976 New York Acad. Sci. Conference on ChronicCannabis Use1976 Dutch legalizes sale of cannabis1982 National Academy of Sciences Report1996 California voters pass Proposition 2151999 National Inst. of Medicine calls for clinical trials2000 British P. M. Tony Blair supports use for medicialpurposes2001 Canada becomes first country to allow medicaluse2001 U. S. Supreme Court rules medicinal useviolates federal lawMarijuana (or marihuana, hemp, Indian hemp, grass,pot, weed, reefer, boo, Maui Wowie, muggles, mooter,greefa, griffo, Mary Warner, Mary Meaver, Mary Jane,Indian hay, loco weed, love weed, joy smoke, gigglesmoke, bamba-lacha, mohasky, mu, moocha, etc.) isnative to Central Asia, although it is now widelycultivated and escaped. Marijuana does very well indisturbed, nitrogen-rich wastelands near humans. Theplant has been used for about 12,000 years as thesource of fibers, oils, food, medicine, and it remainsone of the most widely used psychoactive plants.Historical references to the use of marijuana aboundin the literature. One of the more interesting tales,perhaps an apocryphal one, concerns Hassan-Ibn-Al-Sabbah, the 12th century leader of a band ofmountain raiders who swooped down on unsuspectingcaravans and Crusaders. According to legend, Hassanused to instill courage and the ability to endure painby having his men take one of the strongerpreparations from the hemp plant. The group becameknown as Hashishins, from which our modern wordassassin is derived.CLASSIFICATIONHemp was named by Linnaeus. He recognized onlyone species, Cannabis sativa, a view that is still widelyheld. Other competent experts in the field of plantsystematics argue that there are at least three speciesof: C. sativa, a taller plant of the northern latitudes;C. indica, a low-growing plant of more southerndistribution; and C. ruderalis, a small, unbranchedplant native to Russia and Europe. At various times,Cannabis has been placed in the mulberry family(Moraceae), the nettle family (Urticaceae), and in itsown family (Cannabaceae). The last opinion hasprevailed and now most botanists put marijuana inCannabaceae, along with hops (Humulus lupulus).The plants are large perennials, with male and femaleflowers occurring on separate plants. The active-204-principle is concentrated in the bracts associated withthe female flowers, although the leaves and stemsalso contain the resinous material.PREPARATIONSThe marijuana cigarette is the only form known tomost users in this country. The leaves, flowering tops,and sometimes the stems are often mixed withtobacco and then smoked. In the Old World, however,where Cannabis has been in use for thousands ofyears, several different preparations and modes of useare employed.Hasheesh or hashish, derived from the resin ofrecently fertilized female flowers, is popular amongthe Muslim peoples of northern Africa and westernAsia where it is smoked (often through a water pipe),eaten, or drunk.In India, Cannabis is used in a variety of ways. Threepreparations are commonly encountered.Bhang, is prepared from uncultivated plants. Thedried parts are powdered and then mixed with wateror milk. It is smoked or drunk. It is the weakestpreparation.Ganja or ganjah is prepared by gathering theflowering tops of very carefully selected female plants.It is usually smoked with tobacco, but it may be eatenor drunk like bhang. It is considered superior to bhangin its psychoactive effects.Charas is prepared from pure resinous materialcollected from especially cultivated female plants. It isnormally smoked, but it may be eaten. It isconsidered the most potent preparation, in that itcontains the highest percentage of active resins.ACTIVE PRINCIPLESThe resin contains a series of active and inactive non-nitrogenous compounds derived from terpenes. Theyinclude cannabinol, cannabidiol, cannabigerol,cannabichromene, cannabidiolic acid, tetra-h y d r o c a n n a b i n o l - c a r b o x y l i c a c i d ,tetrahydrocannabinol, and its various stereo-isomers.The latter group is collectively calledtetrahydrocanninols or THC. Delta-9-trans-tetrahydrocannabinol appears to be the activeprinciple responsible for producing euphoria. It is alsoavailable medically to control the nausea associatedwith cancer chemotherapy. Some forms have beensynthesized recently and are now available for clinicalstudy. Common cultivars average about 1.0-1.5%THC; some of the very potent sinsemilla (Spanish forseedless) and various hybrids now reach 12-13%. "BCBuds" from Vancouver, British Columbia contain 25-30% THC!PHYSIOLOGICAL EFFECTS' Dizziness, vertigo, and light-headedness' Increased heart beat' Slight rise in blood pressure (sometimes)' Dryness of mouth and throat' Impaired coordination (ataxis)' Hunger and/or craving for sweets' Nausea and vomiting (sometimes)' Burning of the eyes' Ringing or pressure in the ears' Urge to urinate and defecate (sometimes)PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS' Vague dread/anxiety (among inexperienced)' Disorientation of thinking' Disturbance to memory' Euphoria, giggling, hilarity' Desire to speak more freely' Depersonalization' Spatial/temporal distortions' Floating sensation' Detachment' Drowsiness' Stimulation or depression or both' Heightened perception of colors, music, etc.The effects of a single, inhaled marijuana cigaretteappear to reach their maximum intensity within about30 minutes, to be diminished after about 1 hour, andto be dissipated after about 3 hours according to Weil,Zinberg, and Nelson (1968).EFFECTS FROM CHRONIC USEThere have been numerous studies looking at the longterm effects of Cannabis on the human body.