vaviloviana (Vavilov's oat) AABBHexaploids [2n = 6x = 42]:A. fatua var. fatua (wild oat) AACCDDA. fatua var. sativa (cultivated o.) AACCDDA. sterilis (wild red oat) AACCDDA. byzantina (red oat) AACCDDOats, until quite recently, were not widelyappreciated, even though they are very nutritious(protein content of 13.8%). Samuel Johnson, in his1755 dictionary, defined oats as, "A grain which inEngland is generally given to horses, but in Scot-landsupports the people. "Oats are used to make flour, rolled oats, and even asa beverage (avena). The crop is often rotated withcorn. Iowa is the leading U. S. producer.Wild Rice. Zizania spp. are native to North America.The common name is confusing, because wild rice isnot a kind of rice. The plants are robust aquatics. Asin maize, the two sexes are found in separatespikelets on different parts of the plant. NativeAmericans gathered the grains by boat. Until recently,wild rice has eluded cultivation with most of the cropcoming from Minnesota. It is now being grown here inCalifornia.JOB'S TEARS. Although native to southeastern Asia,Coix lacryma-jobi is now very common through all ofthe tropical and subtropical regions of the world whereits grains are used as food. It is not highly regarded,even though it has a very high protein content. Manyof you will have seen these grains because they arealso used to make rosaries and tourist trinkets. Thecommon name may derive from an Old Testamentfigure named Job who experienced great suffering.MILLETS. This is the group name for a series of truegrasses that have small grains. Most of the commonones belong to the genera Pennisetum, Setaria,Panicum, and Eleusine. They are also used for forage.Most of us in North America and Europe, except forcollege students who frequent hippie co-op foodstores, have never eaten any of the millets and weprobably do not appreciate the role that they play inthe diet of about one-third of the world's people. Wesee their relatives as roadside weeds or asconstituents in bird seed mix. This unfortunatelycauses us to underestimate their importance ashuman food.-76-THE MINOR CEREALSCommon Name (Scientific Name) Commentacha (Digitaria exilis) African; quite palatable and nutritiousAdlay (Coix lacryma-jobi) See Job's tearsAfrican millet (Eleusine coracana) Widely used in China, India, and Africabarley (Hordeum vulgare) Old World; one of the ancient cerealsbarnyard grass (Echinochloa crusgalli) Known to us also as an agricultural weedbroom millet (Panicum miliaceum) Cultivated especially in the Old Worldbrowntop (Brachiaria ramosa) A relative of the Panicum cerealsbulrush millet (Pennisetum americanum) A relative of elephant and Napier grasschannel millet (Echinochloa turnerianum) A relative of our barnyard grassclub wheat (Triticum compactum) Grown mostly in Chile, USA, and Indiacommon millet (Panicum miliaceum) In use since prehistoric times; Eurasiadurum wheat (Triticum durum) High in gluten; used to make spaghettieinkorn wheat (Triticum monococcum) Primitive diploid, 1-seeded wheatemmer wheat (Triticum dicoccon) Ancient Mediterranean wheat; still usedfinger millet (Eleusine coracana) Important cereal in Africa and Indiafonio (Digitaria elixis) Used in tropical Africafoxtail millet (Setaria italica) Native to India; Near East & ChinaGerman millet (Setaria italica) See foxtail milletguinea grass (Panicum maximum) A perennial grass of tropical areashog millet (Panicum miliaceum) See common milletHungarian millet (Setaria italica) Old World; now widely cultivatedItalian millet (Setaria italica) See Hungarian milletJapanese millet (Echinochloa crusgalli) See barnyard grassJob's tears (Coix lacryma-jobi) SE Asia; ornamental use in jewelrykoda millet (Paspalum commersonii) Old World; relative of Dallis and bahia grasslittle millet (Panicum sumatrense) Grown extensively in Indiamanna grass (Glyceria spp.) Used especially in North Americanaked oat (Avena nuda) Upland regions of Chinaoats (Avena spp.) Hexaploids most importantpearl millet (Pennisetum glaucum) Highly nutritious; hybrids grown in USApod corn (Zea mays) A maize with well-developed bracts around grains; S. AmericaPolish wheat (Triticum polonicum) S. Europe and n. Africa, not Polandproso millet (Panicum miliaceum) Ancient; grown mostly in USSR and Asiaragi (Eleusine coracana) See finger milletrye (Secale cereale) Probably native to southeast Asiasanwa millet (Echinochloa frumentacea) Used primarily as cereal in Far Eastshama millet (Echinochloa colona) Old World; now also a widespread weedsorghum (Sorghum bicolor) Ancient cereal of Asia and Africatartarian oats (Avena orientalis) One-sided spikelet clustersteff (Eragrostis tef) Ethiopia & African highlands; pancakesteosinte (Zea mays ssp. mexicana) A close relative of maizeteosinte, perennial (Zea mays ssp. diploperennis) Recently discovered in Mexicotriticale (X Triticosecale) Artificial wheat/rye hybridwild-rice (Zizania spp.) Only recently domesticated5.7 ! PSEUDOCEREALSA few plants produce fruits that somewhat resemblethe true grains of the cereals and may be confusedwith them, particularly if you are terribly far-sightedand have difficulty distinguishing items that have littlein common. Because they are derived from plantfamilies other than Gramineae, they are called falsecereals or pseudocereals.BUCKWHEAT. Fagopyrum esculentum is grown incool, moist regions. The northeastern United States isone of the major production areas. Buckwheat isrelated to knotweeds, smartweeds, and docks. All arecommon weeds over much of the country. Thepyramid-shaped, one-seeded fruit makes it easy toidentify. We use them to make pancakes, soup, andporridge. We also feed buckwheat to our domesticatedanimals.Kasha, in this country, refers to toasted buckwheatgroats or to a gruel made from them. In Russia andother countries where kasha is a popular food, thename applies to a gruel made from buckwheat or anyof several major/minor cereals.QUINOA. Also known as quinua, Chenopodiumquinoa, is a member of the goosefoot family. Its seedswere first cultivated in about 3000 BCE on the highplains of the Andes. It has been and continues to be-77-an important food plant in South America. Accordingto the Baron Alexander von Humboldt, quinoa was tothe inhabitants of that region what "wine was to theGreeks, wheat to the Romans, cotton to the Arabs. "Quinoa seeds are not only rich in protein, but they arehigh in certain essential amino acids (particularlylysine and methionine) that are deficient in mostcereals and legumes. The seeds also contain toxicsaponins that must be leached out or removed by amilling process to render them edible.GRAIN AMARANTHS (Amaranthus spp.) aresometimes advertised as the miracle grain of theancient Aztecs. In North America, we mainlyencounter plants of this genus as undesirable weeds,with names such as pigweed and red root. But, inMexico the small, one-seeded fruits were an importantfood, especially before the Conquest. Spanish clericsinsisted that the growing and use of the grainamaranths cease because the Aztec priests usedthem, combined with human blood, to form figurinesthat were part of their religious ceremonies. The seedsare quite nutritious; relatively high in protein, rich inlysine and oils. Seeds must be boiled, baked, orpopped to render them edible.SUNFLOWER. Helianthus annuus, of the aster ordaisy family, is both a food plant and an industriallyimportant one. The familiar stripped sunflower seed ofour markets is actually a 1-seeded fruit. When wecrack open the shell, we are discarding the fruit wallto gain access to the seed itself. We consume theseseeds and we feed them to our domesticated animals.The seeds are also rich in sunflower oil, which is usedin cooking and in various industrial applications.Argentina is the world's leading producer of sunfloweroil.5.8 ! PULSES(THE EDIBLE LEGUMES)"And let them give us pulse to eat, and water todrink." (Book of Daniel 1:12)' ' ' ' 'The edible fruits and seeds that we derive from thebean or legume family (Leguminosae) are second onlyto the cereals in importance as food plants to us. Theterm pulse is the collective noun for these edibleproducts. The word has been part of the Englishlanguage for hundreds of years, as in the biblicalquote above, but it has almost disappeared fromcurrent usage. In common parlance, we typically referto various edible members of the family as beans orpeas. While there is no clear botanical distinctionbetween the two, there is a tendency for the seeds ofmost kinds of bean to be oval or kidney-shaped andfor most peas to be spherical, except for the black-eyed pea. A gram is a seed or entire legume used forhuman food or animal fodder that is grown in Asia oron the Indian Subcontinent. Examples include thechick-pea, and the black, green, and golden grams.It should be noted that not all plants that have "bean"as part of the common name are members of thelegume family. The coffee bean is from a plant in themadder family (Rubiaceae); the castor bean andMexican jumping bean are from plants in the spurgefamily (Euphorbiaceae).The domesticated pulses of the Old World includelentils, peas, vetches, and the soybean. The peoplesof the New World domesticated a variety of beans. Wehave good archeological remains from 5000 BP inMexico and 3000 BP in Peru.The fruit, generally called a pod, splits open along aseam or suture at maturity. We often eat the fruitbefore it is fully mature because it can become tough,fibrous, or almost woody. There are usually severalseeds inside. Technically the fruit is called a legume.Botanists do not recognize "pod" as a fruit type.NUTRITIONAL VALUEThe primary nutritional significance of pulses lies intheir protein content. The immature pods are oftenabout 10% protein; mature pods may be 22-40%protein! There may also be a complementationbetween the proteins of the cereals and those inlegumes. For example, the alpha and beta globulins inblack beans complement those of zein, the principalprotein in maize. Lysine is the limiting amino acid inzein. The globulins of black beans are high in lysine.The protein of one complements the other.Although not terribly high in tryptophan (an aminoacid), many pulses supplement that found in maize.Tryptophan acts as a precursor of niacin and itsuccessfully replaces the niacin lost in tortilla making.This helps to explain the lack of pellagra in thoseareas in Central America where the inhabitants eatboth beans and tortillas. This disease is brought aboutby a deficiency in niacin (nicotinic acid). It causes skinlesions, inflammation of the soft tissues of the mouth,diarrhea, and central nervous systems disorders.Maize and beans were not domesticated together.Many of our legume crops have entered into asymbiotic relationship with bacteria. Thesemicroscopic creatures have the ability to fixatmospheric nitrogen. The legume plant uses thisnitrogen in the manufacture of protein, an essentialpart of its life processes. When the plant dies, thisprotein returns to the soil making it richer.FLATULENCE"Beans, beans, the musical fruit. The more you eat,the more you toot!" (Kinky children's verse)And, of course, there is the social problem associatedwith eating beans. It is nicely captured in thechildren's poem quoted above. Bowel gases arecomposed of nitrogen, oxygen, carbon dioxide,hydrogen, and methane. They are derived fromswallowed air, production within the gut itself, anddiffusion from the blood into the gut. Hydrogen andmethane are combustible and in proper mixtures withoxygen may even be explosive. The unpleasant odorsthat we associate with other people's bowel gasescome from skatole, indoles, ammonia, and hydrogensulfide.The cause of flatulence is that many of the beans thatwe eat are high in raffinose sugars. They escapedigestion in our intestinal tract because we lack anecessary enzyme (alpha-galactosidase). Bacteria inthe lower portion of our gut act on these sugars toform large amounts of carbon dioxide and hydrogenand to lower the pH of our intestine. Appreciableamounts of methane are also formed. Navy beansseem to have the highest yield: 5-465 cc of gas per-78-hour, with an average of 179 cc. Hot water treatmentsand alcohol extraction may be useful techniques inlowering gas production.TOXICITY"Wretches, utter wretches, keep your hands offbeans!" (Empedocles, 5th century BCE)"I tell you too, as did Pythagoras, withhold your handsfrom beans, a hurtful food. "(Callimachus, a 3rd century BCE Greek poet)"Avoid beans as you would matricide. "(Pythagorus, Golden Verses)"One should abstain from eating beans because theyare full of the material of which our souls are made. "(Diogenes Laertius, 1st century, BCE)' ' ' ' 'These quotes may surprise you. But since the days ofthe ancient Greeks, legumes have been regarded asdangerous. Pulses, fresh or dried, are often boiled orcooked for a sufficiently long time before they areeaten. Several experts recommend at least 10minutes. Not only does this render them morepalatable, but the heating process destroys toxins inthe legume seeds.Here are four syndromes of poisoning that can occurfrom eating improperly prepared legumes, or toomany of them:Lectins are plant proteins that can cause stomachcramps, nausea, and diarrhea. They can also causered blood cells to clump together. Peas and lentils arerelatively low in lectins and it is generally sufficient tobring them to a brief boil before they are cooked.Many beans must be boiled for about 10 minutesbefore you continue to simmer them.Hydrogen cyanide is present at toxic levels in somepulses, such as the lima bean and chick pea. The U. S.Department of Agriculture monitors the HCN contentof various cultivars and will not allow those above acertain level to be sold in this country. The MinimumLethal Dose (MLD) for HCN taken orally is estimatedat 0.5 to 3.5 milligrams per kilogram in humans. Thewhite Burma cultivar has 100 mg; the black PuertoRican strain has 300 mg! Cyanide, contrary to popularbelief, does not kill its victims by paralyzing the lungs.It works at the cellular level to impair cellularrespiration.Favism comes from eating too many fava or broadbeans. It is a form of acute anemia. It occursespecially in males of Mediterranean extraction. Thecause is a deficiency of glucose-6-phosphatedehydrogenase (G-6-PD).Lathyrism, caused by eating too many sweet pea orgrass pea seeds, again affects primarily males andcauses skeletal deformation and loss of bowel andbladder control. Thousands have died from thisdisorder, particularly in developing countries afterdroughts have killed more desirable food plants andpeople were forced to eat too many seeds.SURVEY OF PULSESBEANS. The genus Phaseolus is the most importantsource of many of our beans, such as the lima, scarletrunner, string, shell, white, and black. Most of themare cultivars of Ph. vulgaris. The plants typicallyrequire hot weather and good moisture. In somecases, we eat the entire fruit; in others we shell awaythe fruit wall and eat only the seeds. Many of ourbeans are of New World origin.FAVA BEAN. Also called broad bean (because of itslarge, flat seeds), Vicia faba is native to northernAfrica or to the Near East. It was the only widelycultivated bean in the Old World before the spread ofthe New World beans after Columbus.GARDEN PEA. Pisum sativum, also called the Englishpea, is native to central and western Asia.Archeological remains go back to 5700 BCE. Anancient Greek play mentions "pease porridge." Agroup of cultivars called the marrowfats have large,wrinkled seeds. They are commonly used in canningand in frozen foods.GARBANZO BEAN. Also called the chick pea, Cicerarietinum is native to western Asia where it has beencultivated since ancient times. Its seeds are groundinto flour from which a very nutritious bread may bemade. Hummus is a thick paste made of mashedgarbanzo beans, lemon juice, garlic, and tahini oil(from crushed sesame seeds).BLACK-EYED PEA. Vigna unguiculata, also called thecowpea, is native to Africa.