However, since thecytotoxic activity of the isolated compounds was more prominentthan the antibacterial, we presented here cytotoxic activity inmore detail while the data on antibacterial activity are availablein the Supplementary Material.Crystal Violet (CV) bioassay, which measures the DNA massof living cells, was used for initial activity screening. The cytotoxiceffect of the isolated compounds 1 to 6 was monitored with theCV test for 24 h at 5 and 10 uM on a panel of three murineand three human cancer cell lines. 5-Fluorouracil was used asa positive control at equimolar concentrations as the studiedcompounds (Figures 4, 5). The isolated flavonoids 1 and 2 didnot demonstrate cytotoxic activity against the majority of cancercell lines at the applied concentrations. Only compound 3 exerteda noticeable cytotoxic effect against HeLa cells (Figure 4). Amongthe isolated STLs, 5 showed the most prominent cytotoxicactivity. In particular, compound 5 reduced the cell survival ofSCCVII cells to 42% at 10 uM and 50% at 5 uM concentration(Figure 5). It also exhibited promising activity against Caco-2cells at 10 uM and HeLa cells at both concentrations applied(Figure 5). On the other hand, 5 had weak (cell survival was85% at 10 uM) or no activity (> 95% at 5 uM) againstnormal fibroblasts (V79). Moreover, while compound 4 did notshow significant cytotoxic effects on any cell line at the appliedconcentrations, compound 6 showed noticeable effects againstSCVII and FsaR cells at 10 uM.Cytotoxic Activity of Ragusinin (5) inHeLa Cell LineIn order to determine the biological effect of the most activecompound 5 (Figure 5) in more detail, we used MTT assay andHeLa cells as experimental model (Cimbora-Zovko et al., 2011).Ragusinin decreased cell survival of HeLa cells in aconcentration-dependent manner in comparison to untreatedcells (Figure 6). The dose that killed 50% of the cell population(IC50 value) after 72 h of continuous treatment with 5 wasbetween 1.8 and 2.3 uM (Figure 6).To better understand the mechanism underlying the cellgrowth impairment by 5, the cell cycle progression wasinvestigated. HeLa cells were treated with increasing doses of5 during 48 h. As shown in Figure 7A, compound 5 triggersthe accumulation of HeLa cells in the G2 phase of cell cycle.Moreover, a compound 5 induced dose-dependent increase ofcells in the Sub G1 population indicates a ragusinin-triggered celldeath (Figure 7A). The same was confirmed by treatment of cellswith 10 uM of 5 during 24-72 h. Time-dependent accumulationof HeLa cells in the G2 phase is detectable as well as time-increaseof cells in the Sub G1 phase of the cell cycle (Figure 7B).In order to determine the type of cell death triggered by 5,the cells were treated with increasing doses of the compoundand 48 h later, FACS-Annexin V/PI staining was performed.Our results show a ragusinin-induced dose-dependent apoptosis(Figure 7C). We then performed Western blot analysis of specificcell death markers, PARP and caspase-3 cleavage, followingtreatment with 1.25 and 2.5 uM of 5 for 24-72 h. Theobtained results were interesting since 5 did not induce PARP(Figure 7D) and caspase-3 cleavage (Figure 7E). The assumedcaspase-independent cell death triggered by 5 was in additionconfirmed by measuring the absence of caspase activity 3/7 byCaspase-Glo R(c) 3/7 Assay (data not shown). The occurrence ofcaspase and PARP cleavage independent cell death indicatessome alternative cell death pathway described in the literatureto be triggered by a different type of cell stressors (Kroemer andMartin, 2005; Tait and Green, 2008). This is the first example ofcaspase independent cell death described for compound 5.Role of Glutathione (GSH) in Protectionof Cells From Ragusinin (5)We were further interested in the possible role of GSH asa protector of cells in ragusinin-induced cell death. For thatpurpose, HeLa cells were either pre-treated with 5 mM NAC,the precursor for GSH synthesis, for 2 h prior to treatmentwith compound 5 or overnight with a specific inhibitor of GSHsynthesis, i.e., 0.001 mM BSO. The conditions used were testedpreviously to be effective (Brozovic et al., 2008; Brozovic et al.,2014). The obtained data showed that an increased level ofGSH protects HeLa cells from ragusinin's toxicity (Figure 8A).At the same time, depletion of GSH decreased cell survival ofHeLa cells compared to cells treated with compound 5 only(Figure 8B).Due to the fact that GSH instills several vital roles withina cell including antioxidation, maintenance of the redox state,modulation of the immune response, and detoxification ofxenobiotics (Balendiran et al., 2004), we discussed first its possiblerole as an antioxidant. It is known that the cytotoxicity of thesesquiterpenes helenalin and cynaropicrin can be affected viageneration of intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Choet al., 2004; Jang et al., 2013). We examined that possibility forFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 97217fphar-09-00972 August 21, 2018 Time: 8:18 # 10Grienke et al. Centaurea ragusina L. Isolates' BioactivityFIGURE 7 | Cell cycle progression and induction of cell death in HeLa cells following treatment with ragusinin (5). The cells were treated either with 2.5, 5, and10 uM of compound 5 for 48 h (A) or with 10 uM during 24-72 h (B). Cell cycle analysis was performed by flow cytometry upon cell staining with PI. Therepresentative data of three independent experiments which yielded similar results are shown. The cells were either non-treated or treated with 2.5, 5, and 10 uM of5. After 48 h and staining with Annexin V and PI, the cell death was measured by flow cytometry. The representative data of three independent experiments whichyielded similar results are shown. The statistical analysis of data for three independent experiments are presented as means of percentage of viable (V), earlyapoptotic (EA), late apoptotic/necrotic (LA/N), and necrotic (N) cell populations +- standard deviation (C). 24-72 h after exposure to 1.25 and 2.5 uM of 5, proteinlevel of cleaved PARP (D) and activated (i.e., cleaved) caspase-3 (Cas 3) (E) and cleaved PARP was analyzed in whole cell extracts by Western blot analysis. ERK1/2protein expression was used as internal protein loading control. The representative data of three independent experiments which yielded similar results are shown.Zero or C, non-treated cells; PM, protein marker PageRuler Prestained Protein Ladder (Thermo Fisher Scientific, United States). FL1-H/Annexin V-FITC,FL2-H/Propidium iodide.ragusinin by pre-treating HeLa cells either with tempol or trolox,two antioxidant compounds (Aliaga et al., 2003). Results showedthat antioxidants, as well as salubrinal (Brozovic et al., 2013), i.e.,an inhibitor of endoplasmic reticulum stress, had no impact onragusinin's toxicity (Supplementary Material, in SupplementaryFigure S6). Thus, we further explored the capability of 5 to reachfunctional protein targets in living cells without being deactivatedby reaction with GSH. The combination treatment of HeLa cellswith the well-known inhibitor of glutathione S-transferase (GST)ethacrynic acid (Osmak et al., 1998) (c = 5 ug/mL) decreased cellsurvival compared to cells treated with 5 only (Figure 9). The dataimply the enzymatically regulated formation of a detoxificationcomplex between GSH and 5.DISCUSSIONAmong the isolates (1 to 6) from the traditionally used herbalremedy C. ragusina L. leaves, we discovered an interestingpharmacological profile for the rare guajanolides ragusinin (5)and hemistepsin A (6). Compound 5 was only once described asa constituent from the aerial parts of the Australian HelipterumFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 97218fphar-09-00972 August 21, 2018 Time: 8:18 # 11Grienke et al. Centaurea ragusina L. Isolates' BioactivityFIGURE 8 | The role of GSH in ragusinin's (5) toxicity. The cells were either pre-treated for 2 h with 5 mM NAC (A) or overnight with 0.001 mM BSO (B). After that,the cells were treated with different concentrations of 5. 72 h later, an MTT assay was performed. Bars represent the mean of quadruplicates +- SD. Different lettersindicate significant difference at p < 0.05. All experiments were performed at least three times.FIGURE 9 | The treatment of HeLa cells with ethacrynic acid (ETA). The cellswere pre-treated with 5 ug/mL ETA. Two hours later the cells were treatedwith different concentrations of 5. 72 h later an MTT assay was performed.Bars represent the mean of quadruplicates +- SD. Different letters indicatesignificant difference at p < 0.05. All experiments were performed at leastthree times.maryonii S. Moore (Zdero et al., 1989) and is characterized byan isovalerate residue in position C-9a; compound 6 has beendescribed previously as a constituent from leaves and flowers ofHemisteptia lyrata Bunge (Jang et al., 1999).Whereas both natural compounds showed no antibacterialactivity against the Gram-negative A. baumannii, they exhibitedmoderate inhibitory activity against S. aureus ATTC 25923(MIC value of 31.3 ug/mL, Supplementary Material). Forcomparison, three STLs (13-acetylsolstitialin A, centaurepensin,and chlorojanerin) isolated from the aerial parts of Centaureasolstitialis L. ssp. solstitialis showed inhibitory activity againststandard S. aureus with MIC values of 16 ug/mL (Ozceliket al., 2009). In line with these findings, we focused on a moreprominent cytotoxic activity of the isolated compounds and theinvestigation of the mechanism of action of the most activecompound 5.We investigated the binding of isolated compounds to DNAsince studying the interactions of compounds with potential drugtargets and the knowledge of their antiproliferative activity canhelp in forming the hypothesis about the mechanism of action ofnovel compounds.The isolated flavonoids (1-3) exhibited only weak interactionswith DNA which may explain the absence of cytotoxic effectsagainst the majority of studied cell lines. The somewhat strongercytotoxic activity of flavonoids against HeLa cells can be ascribedto interactions with biological targets other than DNA (Chenet al., 2012). Compound 3 with the highest number of hydroxygroups on the flavonoid skeleton exhibited the most pronouncedcytotoxic activity. This finding is in agreement with literature data(Beutler et al., 1998; Jeong et al., 2007; Csupor-Loffler et al., 2009).While there are numerous reports on DNA binding affinitieswith flavonoids (Kanakis et al., 2005; Rusak et al., 2010), thereis little data on DNA binding interactions with sesquiterpenes(VujcVic' et al., 2007). Regarding the structure of 5 and literaturedata (Gates, 2009; Chadwick et al., 2013), the interactionwith DNA can be achieved via noncovalent binding todouble-stranded DNA (dsDNA) or by alkylation of DNAnucleophiles through reaction with the a-methylene-g-lactonegroup. Several studies on the reactivity of STLs toward OH-or N-nucleophiles (Atta-ur-Rahman, 2011) and CD changeswhich were not consistent with an alkylation effect (Agarwalet al., 2014) (Supplementary Figure S4) do not support thelatter possibility. In addition, the -SH group was found to bemuch more susceptible to alkylation by sesquiterpenes than othernucleophiles (Gewirtz et al., 2007). A reasonable explanationbased on our results from ITC and CD is noncovalent bindingof 5 most probably inside a hydrophobic interior of the DNAgroove. Due to its rather moderate binding affinity to ctDNA, itcan be concluded that the cellular DNA is not 5's primary targetin the living cell.Among the isolated STLs, compound 5 showed the strongestcytotoxic activity, especially on murine SCVII as well as humanCaco-2 and HeLa cell lines, while no cytotoxic effect on normalV79 fibroblasts was observed. Similar to the antibacterial activity,a correlation between the cytotoxic activity and the type andproperties of the substituents on the central ring in the vicinity ofthe a-methylene-g-lactone group was observed. In comparisonto less lipophilic substituents of sesquiterpenes, as observed forFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org August 2018 | Volume 9 | Article 97219fphar-09-00972 August 21, 2018 Time: 8:18 # 12Grienke et al. Centaurea ragusina L. Isolates' BioactivityFIGURE 10 | A summary of the most significant results obtained in this study.6 and especially 4, the hydrophobic character of the isovalerateresidue of 5 most probably enables better penetration throughthe cell membrane and consequently better antibacterial andcytotoxic activity. In the literature, cytotoxic effects of variousSTLs have been explained by selective alkylation of growthregulatory macromolecules such as enzymes which control celldivision and thus a variety of cellular functions (Lyss et al., 1998;Rasul et al., 2012).Since compound 5 (ragusinin) showed the strongest activitycompared to other isolates and since the biological activityof 5 was not described before we decided to investigate themechanism of its toxicity in more details. The IC50 value ofragusinin was between 1.8 and 2.3 uM (Figure 6). This isconsistent with data from the literature, where compounds ofsimilar chemical structure, i.e., sesquiterpene lactones such ashelenalin (Gertsch et al., 2003), neoambrosin (Saeed et al.,2015), and damsin (Villagomez et al., 2013), are reported tobe cytotoxic against various cell lines in the micromolar range.Further analysis revealed time-dependent accumulation of HeLacells upon ragusinin treatment in the G2 phase and Sub G1phase of the cell cycle (Figure 7B). But, the occurrence ofcaspase and PARP cleavage independent cell death indicatessome alternative cell death pathway described in the literatureto be triggered by a different type of cell stressors (Kroemerand Martin, 2005; Tait and Green, 2008). The phenomenon isinteresting to follow up further, especially because it is knownthat helenalin, a STL isolated from Arnica montana, inducesthe same atypical form of cell death which does not includethe activation of classical mediators of apoptosis (caspases,AIF, Omi/HtrA2, and Apaf/apoptosome) (Hoffmann et al.,2011).In a series of noteworthy reports on the reactivity andkinetics of helenalin and helenanolide type STLs with GSH,it was demonstrated that at physiological pH helenalin reactswith GSH almost exclusively via its cyclopentenone structurewhile the a-methylene-g-lactone site is less reactive (Schmidtet al., 1999). Since the guajanolide 5 possesses one reactivesite, i.e., the a-methylene-g-lactone group that can reactwith GSH, we decided to investigate the role of GSH indeactivation of 5.From the literature is known that GSH is one of the majorendogenous antioxidants. In the cytoplasm, GSH is used as asubstrate for glutathione peroxidase in the reduction of H2O2and lipid hydroxyperoxides, a reaction that produces glutathionedisulfide, the so-called oxidative form of GSH. Glutathionedisulfide is rapidly reduced to GSH by glutathione reductase. Thisredox cycling of GSH plays a role in the maintenance of cellularredox homeostasis. GSH binds to endogenous and diversexenobiotic electrophilic compounds either catalytically, throughthe action of glutathione S-transferase, or non-catalytically(Townsend and Tew, 2003; Brozovic et al., 2014). The formedGSH conjugates can be exported from cells, resulting in the loss ofcellular GSH. Our data showed that variation of GSH amount inthe cell induced by a specific precursor in GSH synthesis, NAC ora specific inhibitor of GSH synthesis, BSO had an impact on HeLasurvival upon treatment with 5 (Figure 8). Similar results wereobtained in human colon tumor cells upon BSO and helenalintreatment (Jordan et al., 1987).