The results from the present study confirmed theseobservations: the defatted methanol-water (7:3, v/v) extract fromthe blackthorn flowers (MED), demonstrated to be a rich sourceFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 680292Marchelak et al. Bioactivity Potential of Prunus spinosa L. Flower ExtractsTABLE 5 | Inhibitory activity of P. spinosa flower dry extracts on lipoxygenase(LOX) and hyaluronidase (HYAL).Analyte LOX HYALIC50 (ug/mL)a IC50 (ug/U)b IC50 (ug/mL)a IC50 (ug/U)bMED 327.36 +- 5.93F 7.85 51.74 +- 2.16E 23.00DEF 150.36 +- 4.47C 3.60 21.40 +- 0.76B 9.51EAF 135.36 +- 5.55B 3.25 21.27 +- 0.16B 9.45BF 171.10 +- 1.36E 4.11 42.23 +- 0.99D 18.77WR 479.50 +- 3.38G 11.50 121.72 +- 5.73F 54.10QU 89.23 +- 2.13A 2.14 30.78 +- 1.84C 13.65RT 162.70 +- 3.70D 3.90 54.63 +- 2.61E 24.23CHA 166.83 +- 7.15D,E 4.00 28.59 +- 1.21C 12.68IND 92.60 +- 3.71A 2.22 12.77 +- 0.91A 5.66Results are presented asmean values+- SD (n= 3) calculated per dry weight of the extractor positive control (QU, quercetin; RT, rutin; CHA, chlorogenic acid; IND, indomethacin).For extract codes see Table 1. Different superscripts (capitals) in each column indicatesignificant differences in the means at p < 0.05. a,b Inhibition concentration (amount ofanalyte needed for 50% inhibition of enzyme activity) expressed as follows: a in ug of thedry extract or standard/mL of the enzyme solution; b in ug of the extracts/enzyme unit (U).FIGURE 3 | Viability of peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PMBCs) after 60and 120 min of incubation with P. spinosa flower dry extracts at 5ug/mL.of phenolic compounds, could be further enriched by liquid-liquid partitioning with organic solvents (Table 2). The TPC inthe richest fractions EAF and DEF, as determined by the Folin-Ciocalteu (FC) assay, were comparable to those found in theextracts considered important in CVD prevention, for instancein commercial ethanol extracts of grape seed (ca. 630-670 mgGAE/g dw) (Baydara et al., 2004) or in ethyl acetate fractionsof green tea and green mate (ca. 480-580 mg GAE/g dw) (Erolet al., 2009). The previous literature data referring to P. spinosaare limited to studies on fruits, branches, and leaves. Accordingto Pinacho et al. (2015), the highest TPC level quantified bythe Prussian Blue method (PB) was found for ethanol fractionfrom branches (732.34 mg GAE/g dw), followed by those fromfruits (359.11 mg GAE/g dw) and leaves (228.56 mg GAE/gdw). Despite some differences in chemistry of the PB assayin comparison to the standardized FC test, in the preliminarystudies focused on selection of the plant material for the presentwork, we have observed the magnitude of phenolic levels to someextent similar, which enables ordering of the blackthorn tissues inrespect to the TPC values as follows: branches > flowers > fruits>= leaves. Therefore, the flowers were found promising for furtherstudies.The present paper is the first presenting comprehensive LC-MS profile of P. spinosa flowers (Figure 1, Table 1). The previousstudies aimed at isolation and resulted in structure elucidationof 16 flavonoids (Sakar and Kolodziej, 1993; Olszewska andWolbis', 2001, 2002a) and five proanthocyanidins (Kolodziejet al., 1991), the presence of which was now confirmed inthe flower dry extracts. In addition, 36 constituents, mainlyflavonoids, and phenolic acids, were reported here for thefirst time for the blackthorn flowers (Table 1). With nearly60 components detected, in contrast to only 25 observed inthe leaves (Owczarek et al., 2017), 26 in branches (Pinachoet al., 2015), and 29 in fruits (Guimaraes et al., 2013), thephenolic matrix of the flowers is obviously the most complex.A distinctive qualitative feature of the flower extracts is a vastdiversity of the flavonoid fraction (thirty seven peaks). Whileaccording to Owczarek et al. (2017) flavonoids prevail also inthe leaf samples, only 14 structures have been detected in thisorgan. The branches and fruits of P. spinosa may be in turndistinguished by the presence of numerous proanthocyanidins(twelve peaks in branches) and anthocyanins (eight peaks infruits), respectively (Guimaraes et al., 2013; Pinacho et al., 2015).In phytotherapy, the blackthorn flowers are indeed recognized asa flavonoid herbal product (Hoppe, 1981; Poonam et al., 2011).High content of flavonoids found in the present study and theirprevalence in flower dry extracts (Table 2), were in agreementwith these findings. In addition to flavonoids, the analyzedextracts contained moderate levels of proanthocyanidins andphenolic acids (Table 2). The TPA level of MED is in accordancewith the results reported recently by Ropiak et al. (2016) foraqueous acetone extracts of blackthorn flowers (40 mg/g dw). Asindicated in the latter paper, the average degree of polymerizationof flower procyanidins is 2.9, which means that the majorityof TPA fraction is within the bioavailable range of molecularmasses (Manach et al., 2005). Thus, the composition of theflower extracts of blackthorn appears promising in the contextof CVD and potential industrial application. Regular intakeof flavonoids with the diet or supplements is associated withreduced risk of cardiovascular episodes and mortality (Alissaand Ferns, 2012). In in vivo studies, they have been shownto improve antioxidant status, exert anti-atherosclerotic andanti-atherothrombotic effects in early stages of atherosclerosisdevelopment (e.g., decrease LDL oxidation), modulate lipidmetabolism (e.g., normalize LDL/HDL profile), improve capillarypermeability (vasoprotective effects) and endothelial function,and increase nitric oxide release (vasodilatory effects) (Middletonet al., 2000; Alissa and Ferns, 2012). As the most commongroup of polyphenols in the human diet, flavonoids are alsoregarded as safe in internal applications. Like flavonoids, bothlow-molecular-mass proanthocyanidins and phenolic acids havebeen shown to modulate lipid metabolism, increase plasmaantioxidant capacity, improve vascular functions, and reduceplatelet activity in humans (Manach et al., 2005).As antioxidant activity of polyphenols is one of the mostimportant aspects of their beneficial effects in CVD (Middletonet al., 2000; Alissa and Ferns, 2012; Quinones et al., 2013;Frontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 680293Marchelak et al. Bioactivity Potential of Prunus spinosa L. Flower ExtractsSantilli et al., 2015) we decided to verify it in complementarychemical and biological models that reflect various direct andcomplex mechanisms. Although simple chemical in vitro assaysare hardly relevant to in vivo conditions, they enable preliminaryscreening for potential mechanisms and comparison with theliterature data. In the present study, we employed three the mostfrequently used tests of both single electron transfer (DPPH,FRAP) and hydrogen atom transfer basic mechanisms (TBARS)to explore direct interactions of the extracts with free-radicalsand transition metal ions as well as to study some of these effectsin a model of lipid peroxidation. The results demonstrated thatthe flower extracts are potent and universal antioxidants, andthat their dose-dependent activity is determined by the contentsof phenolics, primarily flavonoids, and strongly influencedby the fractionation solvent (Tables 3, 4). Also the extractsproduced from other organs of P. spinosa have recently beenreported effective DPPH scavengers, as well as inhibitors oflipid peroxidation (Guimaraes et al., 2014; Pinacho et al., 2015).Comparing our results to those of Pinacho et al. (2015) and interms of capacity of BHA after 60 min of incubation, it seems thatthe activity of flower extracts (EAF, DEF) is comparable to that ofbranches, and superior to those of leaves and fruits. Moreover,the comparison of our results from TBARS assay and the resultsobtained by Guimaraes et al. (2014) in terms of activity of Trolox,shows that the lipid peroxidation inhibitory activity of flowerextracts (EAF, DEF) is higher than that of phenolic-enrichedextracts from wild fruits. On the other hand, the outcomes fromDPPH test suggest similar scavenging activity for flower and fruitextracts.To give a more accurate approximation of the possible invivo effects of the flower extracts, we extended the in vitrostudy to the model of human plasma exposed to oxidativestress. The stress conditions were induced by peroxynitrite(ONOO-), a powerful oxidative and nitrative species, generatedin vivo by the reaction of nitric oxide (NO) and superoxideanion (O*-2 ), and involved in the pathophysiology of variousinflammatory, neurodegenerative, and especially cardiovasculardisorders including atherosclerosis, myocardial infarction andchronic heart failure (Ronson et al., 1999). The concentration ofONOO- used in our in vitro study (100uM) enables quantitativemeasurements of the changes induced in plasma componentsand corresponds to its levels in vivo, that can be reached inlocal compartments in the conditions of accelerated productionof NO and O*-2 , e.g., during a serious inflammation of bloodvessels, when its synthesis can increase up to 50-100 uM/min(Szabo et al., 2007). During the study, the plasma samples werepre-incubated with the extracts at the levels of 1-50ug/mL,equivalent to 0.06-29.2 ug GAE/mL, depending on the extract.From the physiological point of view, the concentrations ofphenolic substances that are likely to occur in blood plasmain vivo after oral supplementation can reach up to 5-7 uM,depending on the foodmatrix (Manach et al., 2005). For example,it has been reported that 100-mg dose of quercetin from onionsand 150-mg dose of pure isoquercitrin (quercetin-3-glucoside)resulted in the concentrations up to 7.6 and 5 uM in plasma,respectively, which is an equivalent of 1.5-2.3ug/mL of quercetin(Hollmann, 2004; Manach et al., 2005). It has also been suggestedthat the bioavailability of kaempferol and its glycosides, thedominant flavonoids of blackthorn flowers according to ourresults, is higher than that of quercetin (DuPont et al., 2004).Therefore, the lower levels of the extracts (1-5ug/mL) used in thestudy appear to closely correspond to the range of physiologicallevel of plant-derived phenolic compounds available after oraladministration. In accordance with the common practice of invitro studies (Kolodziejczyk et al., 2011; Kolodziejczyk-Czepaset al., 2013, 2014), the extracts were studied also at 50ug/mLto enable that of observation of all possible effects of theirinteraction with peroxynitrite.The results from biological model confirmed our hypothesisthat antioxidant activity of the P. spinosa flower extracts may becrucial in understanding their beneficial effects in CVD in vivo.The analyzed extracts not only enhanced the total antioxidantstatus of the ONOO--treated plasma but also effectively reducedthe levels of well-known oxidative stress biomarkers--productsof protein nitration (3-nitrotyrosine) and lipid peroxidation(hydroperoxides and TBARS) (Figure 3). In CVD patients, theincreased levels of these biomarkers are good predictors ofcardiovascular events and are correlated with prothrombotic,proatherogenic, and pro-inflammatory intravascular effects,plaque instability, and endothelial dysfunctions (Lee et al., 2012;Thomson, 2015). The mechanism of action of the blackthornextracts in the protection of plasma proteins and lipids probablyinvolves a direct scavenging of peroxynitrite or/and secondaryradicals formed in the induced chain reactions. It is consistentwith the noticeable scavenging potential of the extracts towardthe model radical (DPPH), and with the accumulating evidenceof anti-radical effects of polyphenols against ONOO- andONOO--related radicals operating in plasma, such as O*-2 , NO,*NO2,*OH, etc. (Heijnen et al., 2001). Despite some argumentsbeing presented for the impact of blackthorn polyphenolson the target activity in plasma, the differences between theexamined extracts were not as evident as in the case of chemicaltests. The discrepancies may be an effect of complexity andontogenetic diversity of blood plasma, as well as differencesin the sensitivity to ONOO- between the plasma samples.Some interactions between endogenous plasma constituents andblackthorn phenolics could also be the reason. On the otherhand, the complexity of the extracts and synergic effects of theirindividual components are probably behind the superior activityprofile revealed by the extracts comparing to the pure standards.Finally, it is of note that all beneficial effects of the extractson plasma were measurable at physiological concentrations (1-5ug/mL), which do not deteriorate the viability of PBMCs andmay be regarded as safe.Pathogenesis of CVD covers, apart from oxidative stress,also a closely related process of inflammation (Biswas, 2016).To evaluate the potential anti-inflammatory effects of theblackthorn extracts, we decided to study their impact on twomodel pro-inflammatory enzymes. The first belongs to thefamily of lipoxygenases, enzymes catalyzing dioxygenation ofpolyenoic fatty acids in biological membranes and lipoproteins,and producing key chemokines and ROS, such as leukotrienesand O*-2 , associated with the development of oxidativestress-related inflammatory pathologies of CVD, e.g., myocardialinfarction/reperfusion injury (Schneider and Bucar, 2005). Thesecond one--hyaluronidase--is a spreading factor increasingFrontiers in Pharmacology | www.frontiersin.org October 2017 | Volume 8 | Article 680294Marchelak et al. Bioactivity Potential of Prunus spinosa L. Flower Extractstissues (i.a. vascular) permeability during the inflammatoryprocesses by degrading hyaluronan, an anti-inflammatoryextracellular matrix component (Girish et al., 2009). Bothenzymes are targets of many synthetic drugs used in anti-inflammatory therapies, but it has been shown that plant extracts,especially those containing phenolics, can also significantlyinhibit their activity (Schneider and Bucar, 2005; Piwowarskiet al., 2011). Indeed, the investigated extracts, rich in polyphenols,were found to be inhibitors of both enzymes (Table 5).The activity of the most active fractions was between thoseof the commercial agents--indomethacin (nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug) and rutin (flavonoid vasoprotective agent),while the basic methanol-water extract was slightly lessactive. However, with the results of antioxidant activity tests,these findings suggest that the extracts might influence bothinterdependent processes of oxidative stress and inflammation.CONCLUSIONSThis work is the first comprehensive phytochemical and activitystudy of the flower extracts of P. spinosa. The detailed LC-MSpatterns presented here can be recommended as referencefingerprints useful in authentication and standardizationstudies of blackthorn flowers and flower extracts. Distinctphenolic profiles, significant antioxidant effects comparable toor surpassing the activity of pure phenolics in both chemicaland biological models, noticeable inhibitory effects on pro-inflammatory enzymes, and cellular safety suggest thatthe investigated extracts may be promising candidates forthe production of pharma- and nutraceuticals effective incardiovascular protection. Considering both the yield and theactivity, the defatted methanol-water (7:3, v/v) extract andits diethyl ether and ethyl acetate fractions appear to be themost advantageous for biological applications. As the observedcapacities might be considered as some of the mechanismsbehind the activity of blackthorn phenolics within the circulatorysystem, the present study forms a basis for their further studiesin the context of CVD. For instance, the demonstrated protectiveeffects of the extracts against ONOO--induced changes inplasma components and ability to inhibit pro-inflammatoryenzymes might be cross-linked with their possible anti-atherogenic, anticoagulant, and antiplatelet functions or abilityto influence endothelium, which should be addressed in futureresearch.AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONSAM, AO, and MO planned the experiments and wrote themanuscript. AM, AO, MM, AP, and JK-C performed theexperiments. AM and AO carried out data analysis.