Tselta na ovoj trud beshe da se odrediprofilot na nekoi makedonski tsrveni vina dobieni od razlichnisorti na grozje, Vranets, Merlo, Kaberne Sovinjon i Pino Noar voodnos na nivnata sodrzhina na vkupni fenoli, poedinechni antotsi-janski soedinenija, kolornite karakteristiki i antioksidativ-niot potentsijal. Za taa tsel, bea obezbedeni nekolku reprezen-tativni primerotsi na tsrveni vina od lokalnite vinarnitsi dobenivo tekot na rekoltite 2004-2008 god. i testirani. Kolornite kara-kteristiki na vinata bea odreduvani spektrofotometriski, a so-drzhinata na vkupni polifenoli so Folin-Ciocalteau metodot. Technakhromatografija pod visok pritisok so UV detektsija se koristesheza odreduvanje na poedinechnite antotsijani, a sodrzhinata navkupni antotsijani beshe izmerena i so metodot po Boulton.Antioksidativniot potentsijal na vinata beshe odreden so primenana DPPH metodot. Testiranite vina pokazhaa razlichni khromatskiprofili shto e vo golema merka povrzano so rekoltata koga seproizvedeni i sortata na grozje od koja se dobieni. Za sodrzhinatana vkupni fenoli bea dobieni kontsentratsii vo opsegot of 23-59mg/100ml. Utvrdivme deka povisoki kontsentratsii na vkupnifenoli se dobivaat kaj vinata so povisok intenzitet na boja.Vinata od sortata Vranets bea najbogati so vkupni antotsijani, sle-deni od Merlo i Kaberne Sovinjon. Kaj pomladite vina, sodrzhinatana slobodni antotsijani beshe povisoka vo sporedba so odlezhanitevina. Antiradikalnata aktivnost (I50%) na ispitanite vina sedvizheshe vo opsegot od 12-59 ml wine i beshe vo silna korelatsija sosodrzhinata na vkupni polifenoli. Vinata od sortata Vranetspokazhaa najvisok antioksidativen potentsijal shto ukazhuva na toadeka nekoi tsrveni vina bi mozhele da pridonesat kon zdravstve-nata sostojba na konsumentite.lITERATURA1. Arnous A., Makris D., Kefalas P. (2001) Effect of principal polyphenolic componentsin relation to antioxidant characteristics of aged red wines, J. Agric. Food. Chem.,49:5736-57422. Cimino F., Sulfaro V., Trombetta D., Saija A., Tomaino A. (2007) Radical-scavenging capacity of several Italian red wines, Food Chem., 103: 75-813. Cliff M. A.,King M.C., Schlosser J. (2007) Anthocyanin, Phenolic Composition, ColourMeasurement and Sensory Analysis of BC Commercial Red Wines, Food Res.International, 40: 92-100Determination of coenzymeQ10 content in Dietary suPPlementsanD raw materials using hPlc-DaDMaja Dimitrovska1, Biljana Culeva1,Anita Najdenkoska11Laboratory of Food Safety and Control, Instituteof Public Health of Republic of Macedonia, 50 Divizija, 6, SkopjeCoenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone, ubidecarenone) is a biologically activecompound that is similar in chemical structure to menaquinones (vit-amin K2). It is found in numerous cellular structures within the body,including the endoplasmic reticulum, lysosomes and mitochondria,where it is an important part of the electron transport chain. Becauseof its ability to transport electrons it is considered as potent antioxi-dant with numerous health benefits. There is some evidence thatCoQ10 supplementation could help to prevent and/or treat some dis-eases including cancer, AIDS, Parkinson's disease, and neurodegener-ative diseases, and it also seems to be an energy booster and immunesystem enhancer. However, these data are still needed to be con-firmed.As a result of these recent findings, a large number of dietary supple-ments containing CoQ10 have currently emerged on the market inMacedonia. These products include softgels, hardshell capsules, andtablets. CoQ10 may be present as a single active compound or in com-bination with other active ingredients, such as plant extracts, vitaminsor oils.In this work, dietary supplements containing coenzyme Q10 of six dif-ferent brands sold over the counter in Macedonia and one raw mate-rial were tested to check the content of the active ingredient claimedon the label. The samples, representing hardshell gelatin capsules andtablets were previously extracted by sonication with a suitable solventand submitted to HPLC analysis using a C18 column. The mobile phaseconsisting of absolute ethanol and 2-propanol was delivered isocrati-caly. Detection was carried out using DAD detector at 275 nm andquantitation was performed by using external CoQ10 standard andcalibration curve.It was observed that replacement of the absolute ethanol with 96%ethanol in the mobile phase gave unsatisfactory results concerningthe retention time of the analyte of interest. No matrix effects influ-enced the separation, so detection and quantification was unam-biguous. The results of the study demonstrated that there were nodeviations from the manufacturer's indicated content of coenzymeQ10 in all the tested dietary supplements.references1. Lunetta S., Roman M. (2008) Determination of coenzyme Q10 content in raw ma-terials and dietary supplements by high-performance liquid chromatography-UV: col-laborative Study, J AOAC Int. , 91(4): 702-7082. Kettawan A., Kunthida C., Takahashi T., Kishi T, Chikazawa J., Sakata Y., Yano E.,Watabe K., Yamamoto Y., Okamoto T. (2007) The quality control assessment of com-mercially available coenzyme Q10-conatining dietary and health supplements inJapan, J. Clin. Biochem. Nutr., 41:124-1313. Rodriguez-Acuna R., Brenne E., Lacoste F. (2008) Determination of coenzyme Q10and Q9 in vegetable oils, J.Agric. Food Chem., 56: 6241-6245160PETTI KONGRES NA FARMATsIJATA SO MEGjUNARODNO UChESTVOMakedonski farmatsevtski bilten 57 (dodatok), 2011KLINIChKA BIOKhEMIJA / TOKSIKOLOGIJA/ KhRANA I ISKhRANA poster prezentatsiiOPREDElUVAnjE NA SODRzhINATANA KOENzIM Q10 VO DODATOTsINA ISkhRANATA I SUROVINSKIMATERIJAlI SO PRIMENA NA hPlc-DaDMaja Dimitrovska, Biljana Chuleva,Anita NajdenkoskaLaboratorija za ispituvanje na khrana, Institutza javno zdravje na Republika Makedonija, 50. Divizija, 6, SkopjeKoenzimot Q10 (ubikhinon, ubidekarenon) e bioloshki-aktivno so-edinenie koe e slichno po khemiska struktura so menakhinonite (vita-min K). Se srekjava vo pogolem broj kletochni srukturi, vkluchitelnoi vo endoplazmatskiot retikulum, lizozomite i mitokhondriite,kade shto ima znachajna uloga vo lanetsot na transport na elektroni.Zaradi negovata sposobnost da prenesuva elektroni, koenzimotQ10 se smeta za mokjen antioksidant so znachitelen zdravstven pri-dones. Postojat izvesni podatotsi deka vkluchuvanjeto na koenzimQ10 kako dodatok vo iskhranata e povrzano so sprechuvanje i/ililekuvanje na nekoi bolesti kako kantser, SIDA, Parkinsonova bo-lest i nevrodegenerativni zaboluvanja. Isto taka, ova soedineniese smeta kako energetski promotor i zajaknuvach na imunoloshkiotsistem.. Sepak, neopkhodno e site ovie podatotsi da se potvrdat sodopolnitelni istrazhuvanja.Kako rezultat na gorenavedenite sko-reshni soznanija, vo posledno vreme na pazarot vo Makedonija sezgolemi brojot na dodatotsi na iskhranata koi sodrzhat koenzim Q10.Vo ovie produkti spagjaat meki i tvrdi kapsuli i tableti, vo koikoenzimot mozhe da e prisuten kako edinechna aktivna komponentaili vo kombinatsija so drugi aktivni sostojki kako rastitelniekstrakti, vitamini ili masla.Vo ova istrazhuvanje bea testirani6 tipovi dodatotsi na iskhrana od razlichni proizvoditeli, koi seprodavaat bez lekarski retsept vo aptekite vo Makedonija i edensurovinski materijal so tsel da se proveri sodrzhinata na koenzimQ10 deklarirana na etiketata na prozivodot. Primerotsite koipretstavuvaa tvrdi zhelatinski kapsuli i tableti pretkhodno beaekstrakhirani na ultrazvuchna banja so soodveten rastvoruvach. Potoabeshe izvrshena khromatografska analiza na ekstraktot na C18kolona. Razdvojuvanjeto na komponentite se postigna so izokratnopumpanje na mobilnata faza sostavena od apsoluten etanol i 2-propanol. Komponentata od interes ja detektiravme so upotrebana DAD detektor na branova dolzhina od 275nm. Kvantifikuvanjetobeshe izvrsheno so pomosh na nadvoreshen standard na koenzim Q10 ikonstruiranje na kalibratsiona kriva. Beshe utvrdeno deka zamenatana apsolutniot etanol so 96% etanol vo mobilnata faza ne davazadovolitelni rezultati vo odnos na retentsionoto vreme na analitotna interes. Interferentsii od matriksot na preparatite ne beazabelezhani, taka shto detektsijata i kvanitifikatsijata na koenzimotQ10 bea nedvosmisleni. Rezultatite od ispituvanjeto pokazhaa dekaotstapuvanjata od deklariranata sodrzhina na koenzim Q10 kaj sitetestirani dodatotsi na iskhrana se vo ramkite na dozvolenoto.lITERATURA1. Lunetta S., Roman M. (2008) Determination of coenzyme Q10 content in rawmaterials and dietary supplements by high-performance liquid chromatography-UV:collaborative Study, J AOAC Int. , 91(4): 702-7082. Kettawan A., Kunthida C., TakahashiT., Kishi T, Chikazawa J., Sakata Y., Yano E., Watabe K., Yamamoto Y., Okamoto T.(2007) The quality control assessment of commercially available coenzyme Q10-conatining dietary and health supplements in Japan, J. Clin. Biochem. Nutr., 41:124-1313. Rodriguez-Acuna R., Brenne E., Lacoste F. (2008) Determination of coenzymeQ10 and Q9 in vegetable oils, J.Agric. Food Chem., 56: 6241-6245justification of the useof fungi in nutritionMileva Elena, Stefanoska Anita,Biljana Bauer PetrovskaFaculty of Pharmacy, University of St. Cyril and Metodi, SkopjeThe number of fungi recorded in Republic of Macedonia isapproximately 1500 species of wich 1300 types belong to theBasidiomycota and 200 types of Ascomycota, and is believed to havearound 10,000 species. Representatives which are eatable are about500 but most of them are: Amanita caesarea (Scop.) Pers. (Caesar'sMushroom), Agaricus bisporus (Lge.) Sing. (Champignon), Macrolepiotaprocera (Scop. : Fr.) Sing. (Parasol Mushroom), Boletus edulis Bull (pennybun), Lactarius deliciosus (L. ex Fr.) SFGray s (Saffron milk cap),Cantharellus cibarius Fr. (golden chanterelle) and others. (1) Registeredhuman-toxic fungi are about 100 of which 20 are deadly poisonous,such as Amanita muscaria (L.: Fr.) Lam. (fly Amanita), A. pantherina(DC. ex Fr.) Krombh. (Panther cap), A. phalloides (Vaill. ex Fr.) Link (deathcap), A.verna (Bull. : Fr.) Lam. (fool's mushroom) and many others. (1)Fungi are useful and delicious members of the biosphere. Today, theyare considered as an alternative source of food for adequate nutrition.With their consumption comes to lowering serum cholesterol and 40%for four weeks. Wild and cultivated mushrooms are considered a goodsource of protein and protein level varies depending on the geneticstructure of the fungus and chemical composition of the locationwhere they grow. Generally cultivated fungi have higher amounts ofprotein in itself apart from the wild species. The content of traceelements varies depending on the type, location, composition andpollution of the soil of the part that has been reviewed. (2) The fungicontain high levels of trace elements and heavy metals like copper andzinc and it's presence should not be considered harmful, but ratherlike an excellent source of it. (3) Vitamins are also present and mostvitamins are from group B, then folic acid, vitamin D. We should notforget the essential amino acids that are also present in sufficientquantities. (4) In this paper we are going to look at some details wichare worked out literature data for six genera of fungi, such as: genusAgaricus (champignon), genus Boletus (wild mushrooms), genusLactarius (spurge), genus Morchella (cup fungi), genus Pleurotus(oyster), genus Lentinus (shiitake). Of the tests performed on the min-eral composition of the tested genera could be noted that the richestgenus with trace elements, and excellent potassium / sodium ratio isBoletus. (3) This genus is characterized by high accumulative abilities, sospecies that grow in soiled environment containing large amounts ofheavy metals. Due to the increasing amount of metals, the content ofother trace elements is reduced, thereby reducing the quality of mush-rooms. Besides Boletus, genus Pleurotus contains high amounts oftrace elements. (3) For the genus Agaricus is known that due its preser-vation it loses significant amounts of potassium and zinc, so it is ad-visable to consume it fresh. (3) Genera Lentinus and Morchella containlower levels of trace elements. (3) On the contents of trace elements in-fluence has the pollutiont of the location of where the mushroom isgaderd and acumulative abilities of the fungi, so in the genus Boletuswas recorded the largest quantity of the them. (3) Fungi despite the con-tent of trace elements they contain significant amounts of nutrients.The genus Pleurotus contains high levels of nutrients, followed by thegenus Agaricus. (4) With the lowest nutritional value are genera Lactar-ius and Lentinus. (4) Fresh species of the genus Agaricus are richer withprotein than canned and cultivated. Also, their energy value is lower161fifth congress of Pharmacy of maceDonia with international ParticiPationMacedonian Pharmaceutical Bulletin 57 (suppl), 2011CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY / TOXICOLOGY/ FOOD AND NUTRITION poster presentationsdue to lower fat content. Unlike the genus Agaricus, cultivated speciesof genera Boletus and Pleurotus are with higher nutritional value thanwild species. (5) In addition to keeping an eye on whether fungi are cul-tivated or not, an important role are the age of the fungus. (5) Thus inthe genera Lactarius and Lentinus should be prefered the youngerspecies, unlike genus Pleurotus where more nutritional are the oldspecies. Characteristic are that the genus Lentinus contains the high-est value of fat, which has the highest energy value compared to otherdisplay genera.