In this study, 49 individuals from five different populations of the North Pindus mountains were sampled in August 2017. The essential oil of the leaves of each individual was isolated by hydrodistillation using a Clevenger-type apparatus. The distillation yield did not present significant difference among populations (range: 1.95-2.44 mL / 100g of dry leaves), but it showed a high variation among individuals (1.09-3.58 mL / 100g of dry leaves). The volatile chemical components were identified and semi-quantified by gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry. Sixty-eight components were identified; the main of them being camphor (24,31-30,95%), cis-thujone (8.17-22.86%), 1,8-cineole (6.21-10.16%), camphene (4.27-7.96%) and a-humulene (3.32-5.22%). Statistical analysis with Kruskal-Wallis test, by non-parametric ANOVA, demonstrated that cis-thujone was significantly (p<0.05) lower in the population of Konitsa (8.17%), which on the contrary had the highest camphene participation (7.96%). Significant differences among populations were also found in other important components like borneol, bornyl acetate, b-caryophyllene and manool. Even though the four examined wild populations belonged to the camphor / cis-thujone chemotype and the one to the camphor chemotype, the analysis of their individuals demonstrated a very high variation, even within populations.Acknowledgements: We acknowledge support of this work by the project "PlantUP" (MIS 5002803) which is implemented under the Action "Reinforcement of the Research and Innovation Infrastructure", funded by the Operational Programme "Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation" (NSRF 2014-2020) and co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org11020th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP008. Highly glycosylated crocins in styles of wild spring-flowering crocuses from Greece.K. Mikeli1, S. Varemenos1, K. Zeliou1, V. Dimaki1, A. Zografidis2, G. Iatrou2, F.N. Lamari1 1 Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, Rio, Greece2 Department of Biology, University of Patras, Rio, Greece Laboratory of Pharmacognosy and Chemistry of Natural Products, Department of Pharmacy, University of Patras, GreeceThe genus Crocus L. (Iridaceae) consists of 160 taxa (sp and subsp) worldwide and among them 14 taxa are endemic of Greece. Depending on the time of the year in which they bloom and the climatic conditions of the area, Crocus species are separated in autumn and spring flowering taxa. In the current study, styles of Crocus olivieri J. Gay (from Panachaiko mountain, Achaia, Greece), Crocus nivalis Bory and Chaub (from Panachaiko mountain, Achaia, Greece) and Crocus veluchensis Herb (from Veluchi, Euritania, Greece) were analyzed by LC-ESI-MS and RP-HPLC. The major constituents were quantified by the method of external standard and compared to those of Crocus sativus L. (from Central Macedonia) which is the only Crocus species that is being cultivated. The extraction of the dried styles was performed with MeOH: water (1:1, v/v) at room temperature for 24h, in the absence of light. For the quantification of the major compounds of the four different Crocus species, trans-crocin 6, trans-crocin 4, trans-crocin 3, trans-crocin 3', trans-crocin 2 and kaempferol 3-sophoroside were isolated from C. sativus and C. nivalis extracts by semi-preparative HPLC and identified by MS/MS spectroscopy. Calibration curves were made for all the compounds. Highly glycosylated crocins in wild species were identified. Trans-crocin 6 was the major compound in C. nivalis and C. veluchensis at an average concentration of 88 mg/g style and 17 mg/g styles, respectively. In C. olivieri, the major constituent was kaempferol 3-sophoroside at an average concentration of 19 mg/g style and it was also the major flavonoid at C. nivalis with an average concentration of 12 mg/g style. We herein present the chemical analysis of styles of three spring-flowering crocuses for the first time.Acknowledgements: We acknowledge support of this work by the project "PlantUP" (MIS 5002803) which is implemented under the Action "Reinforcement of the Research and Innovation Infrastructure", funded by the Operational Programme "Competitiveness, Entrepreneurship and Innovation" (NSRF 2014-2020) and co-financed by Greece and the European Union (European Regional Development Fund).www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 11120th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP009. NMR metabolic profiling of Pistacia lentiscus L. leaves and fruit extracts from the Greek island of Chios for the identification of biomarkers with skin beneficial effects.P. Papalexis1, A. Cheilari1, A. Vontzalidou1, I. Smyrnioudis2, N. Aligiannis11 Department of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Panepistimioupolis Zografou, 15771, Athens, Greece.2 Chios Mastic Gum Growers Association, 1 K. Monomachou St., Chios, GR 82100, Greece.Herbal preparations of Pistacia lentiscus L. shrub (mainly the resinous exudate) have traditionally been used in the Mediterranean basin for their significant healing properties for more than 2500 years. The famous mastic gum from the Greek island of Chios is a Protected Designation of Origin natural product with well-known antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, antiatherogenic, and other activities [1]. However, the fruit and leaves of P. lentiscus have not been thoroughly investigated and additionally, they are discarded as considered by-products of the mastic tree cultivation. In continuation of our research [2], this study emphasises on the exploration of the skin beneficial effects of fruit and leaves extracts and the comparison of the phytochemical profile of samples collected from the region of Mastichochoria and Leonidio in SE Peloponnese. From both regions, leaves (60 samples) and fruit (114 samples) were collected from different altitudes and distance from the sea during the maturing period. Samples were extracted with methanol-d4 and their NMR metabolic profiling spectra were acquired in a Bruker Avance III 600 MHz magnet. In parallel, their enzyme inhibition properties related to skin whitening (tyrosinase) and antiaging (e. g. elastase, collagenase) were evaluated. Finally, NMR data were introduced to SIMCA and Multivariate Statistical Analysis (MVSA) was used to evaluate the quality characteristics of the samples and facilitated their classification. In parallel, HetCA approach was implemented in MATLAB in order to directly identify potential biomarkers linked to their enzyme inhibition activities. Both approaches resulted in the detection of spectral features (SIMCA) and the structure elucidation of secondary metabolites (HetCA) in all of the extracts prior to their isolation.To the best of our knowledge, this investigation is the first to study and compare the NMR-based chemical profiling of P. lentiscus fruit and leaves from two regions, Chios and Leonidio, and correlate their enzyme inhibition activity by MVSA. [1] Termentzi, A., Fokialakis, N., Skaltsounis, A.L., 2011. Natural resins and bioactive natural products thereof as potential antimicrobial agents. Curr. Pharm. Des. 17(3), 1267-1290[2] Bampouli, A., Kyriakopoulou, K., Papaefstathiou, G., Louli, V., Aligiannis, N., Magoulas, K., Krokida, M., 2015. Evaluation of total antioxidant potential of Pistacia lentiscus var. chia leaves extracts using UHPLC-HRMS. J. Food. Eng. 167, 25-31.Acknowledgements: The authors are grateful to the Chios Mastic Gum Growers Association and especially to agronomist Telemachos Vassilakis. The research is supported from <<EXANDAS>> project, H2020-MSCA-RISE-2015.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org11220th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP010. The "superstitious" Mandragora autumnalis (Solanaceae) roots, leaves and fruits after a phytochemical investigation and extended LC-HRMS & HRMS/MS characterization.I. Kyziropoulos1, M. E. Sakavitsi1, I. K. Tseti2, M. Halabalaki1 A. L. Skaltsounis11 Department of Pharmacognosy and Natural Products Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Athens, Athens, Greece2 Intermed Pharmaceutical Laboratories, Ioulia and Eirini Tseti ABEE, Athens, GreeceFrom ancient Greece, to medieval northern Europe, the potent pharmaceutical activity of Mandragora spp. (Bertol, Solanaceae) was exploited by several civilizations, due to its therapeutic, recreational, and even lethal impact. Although this forgotten genus holds a significant ethnopharmacological background, a comprehensive description of its phytochemical composition is deficient, focused mainly on the detection of tropane alkaloids and identification of volatile compounds occurring in its fruits [1,2]. Therefore, the purpose of the present research is the thorough phytochemical investigation and the isolation of secondary metabolites from Mandragora autumnalis, collected in Mykonos (Greece), via state-of-the-art scientific techniques. Root, leaf and fruit extracts of sequential polarities subjected to qualitative control through chromatographic and spectrometric analytical methods (TLC, HPLC-DAD, UHPLC-ESI-HRMS/MS). The methanolic extracts of roots and leaves were subjected to preliminary fractionation employing FCPC while the received fractions were evaluated qualitatively aiming towards a targeted isolation and structure elucidation (1D&2D NMR) of representative secondary metabolites. The phytochemical investigation of the methanolic extracts of all plant parts through LC-HRMS/MS-based dereplication techniques revealed a plethora of secondary metabolites belonging to glycoalkaloids, flavonoids, phenylamides and withanosides which are detected for the first time on genus Mandragora. Overall, during the present study customized analytical and preparative protocols were developed for all plant parts of Mandragora autumnalis. This approach led to the targeted isolation of secondary metabolites, also detected for the first time in Mandragora genus and could contribute to a further interpretation of its ethnopharmacological uses and probably to new pharmacological targets. [1] Mion M. From "Circe's Root" to "Spongia Soporifera": The Role of the Mandrake as True Anesthetic of Ancient Times. J Anesth Hist 2017; 3: 128-133[2] Hanus LO, Rezanka T, Spizek J, Dembitsky VM. Substances isolated from Mandragora species. Phytochemistry 2005; 66: 2408-2417www.ethnopharmacology2021.org 11320th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSApplication of hyphenated techniques in quality assurance of ethnopharmacological sourcesP011. Phytoindustry sourcing in nature - comparative study of the control system in two European countries.J. Sucholas, A. zur Loye, M. Ukhanova, R. LuickRottenburg University, Schadenweilerhof, 72108 Rottenburg am Neckar, GermanyAccording to the latest data, the majority of medicinal and aromatic plants (MAPs) traded on European phytopharmaceutical market, has wild origin. Having in mind the loss of biodiversity and ecosystem degradation we claim that policy regulating wild collection is crucial to balance conservation needs and sustainable use of MAPs. To understand the situation, we compare policy regimes regulating the wild collection of MAPs in two leading exporter countries in the EU - Germany and Poland. The analysis shows mixed results. There is a variety of governing bodies granting permits and a number of unharmonised regulations on different levels in both countries. In Germany, commercial wild collections are regulated by the Federal Nature Conservation Act - for every form of commercial wild collection, a permit is needed. In almost all German federal states these permits are granted by the Lower-Nature-Conservation-Agency, with one exception of control on a higher level. Permits set quantity restrictions and impact regulations. These regulations differ greatly among federal states. Similarly, no central entity is responsible for granting collection permits in Poland. Various authorities control wild collection. Collection of several groups of plants (e. g. forest species, protected species, and plants gathered from protected areas) requires a permit and is regulated by separate nature conservation acts. Nevertheless, a significant portion of collection remains unmonitored. In Poland, that leads to insufficient monitoring of the MAPs collection and lack of information about the real conditions of populations. In Germany, on the other hand, lack of unified countrywide decision-process for permit granting undermines the competitive potential of single federal states as MAPs sourcing areas. To conclude, development and implementation of a coherent and consistent countrywide policy regime, including unified regulations, restrictions, and decision processes regarding commercial wild collection is needed to balance conservation and sustainable use of the wild plants for phytopharmaceutical production.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org114Aromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachPosters20th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP012. The effect of ethanolic and water propolis extracts to inhibit DPPH free radical and hydrogen peroxide.P. Pukklay1, T. Chuesaard21 Department of Applied Biology, Maejo University Phrae Campus, Phrae, Thailand 2 Division of Basic Science, Maejo University Phrae Campus, Phrae, ThailandThe various chemical compounds and their biological activities are determined to the source of apiculture and plant species such as Populus nigra. Propolis extract consisted of polyphenols and flavonoids which are well known active compounds as well as their biological activities such as the antioxidant, protective role in cardiovascular diseases or other chronic diseases. The objective of this study is to investigate the chemical substances of the ethanolic extract and water extract propolis by using HPLC. Samples were vigorously shaken in 70 % w/v ethanol and distilled water after that crude extract was evaporated until dryness. Wax was removed and crude extracts were dissolved. The antioxidant activity was determined by using the spectrophotometric method with DPPH scavenging assay and hydrogen peroxide inhibition assay. The result showed that ethanolic extract propolis was significantly higher DPPH scavenging than water extract propolis. The highest percent inhibition of EEP and WEP was about 84.56 and 49.23, respectively. In hydrogen peroxide inhibition assay, EEP and WEP completely inhibited hydrogen peroxide which affects cellular toxicity. Therefore, propolis from Thailand is the new source of polyphenols that scavenge free radicals for further research and application.www.ethnopharmacology2021.org11620th International Congress of the International Society for Ethnopharmacology Virtual Congress * 18-20 April 2021POSTER PRESENTATIONSAromatic and medicinal plants in animal health ethnopharmacological approachP013. An in vitro investigation into the potential benefits of Psychotria zombamontana as a poultry feed additive.L.J. McGaw1, B.M. Querl1, G. Fouche2, Q. Kritzinger31 Phytomedicine Programme, Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, University of Pretoria, South Africa2 Department of Paraclinical Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Sciences, University of Pretoria, Pretoria, South Africa3 Department of Plant and Soil Sciences, Faculty of Plant and Soil Sciences, University of Pretoria, South AfricaThe poultry industry forms the largest individual agricultural industry in South Africa. Microorganisms present in poultry feed include fungi and bacteria which may have detrimental effects on the feed or the birds consuming it. With the shift away from antibiotic feed additives and growing interest in alternative means of protecting feed from spoilage, biologically active plants may be an effective substitute. Psychotria zombamontana (Rubiaceae) was investigated as a possible plant-based poultry feed additive with dual benefits in protecting feed from spoilage and poultry from disease. The leaf acetone extracts of this rapidly growing shrub or small tree had promising antifungal activity in preliminary studies against Fusarium species.In this investigation, leaf acetone extracts were tested against field isolates and reference strains of various fungi and bacteria implicated in poultry feed contamination and chicken infections. A rapid broth microdilution method was used to elucidate minimum inhibitory concentrations (MIC) of the extracts. Antioxidant and anti-inflammatory efficacy in terms of free radical scavenging and lipoxygenase inhibition were also determined, as was cytotoxicity against normal mammalian cells. The crude extract had reasonable activity against various fungal and bacterial organisms including Aspergillus flavus, Fusarium verticilloides, Salmonella Enteritidis and Salmonella Gallinarum.