They are characterized by extended dynam-ic concentration range (several orders of magnitude) and are multi-elemental in nature, thus they possess high sensi-tivity and suitable detection power (Marrero et al., 2013). Inductively coupled plasma-optical emission spec-trometry (ICP-OES) is a multi-element technique that al-lows the determination of major, minor and trace elements in complex samples. This technique offers high sample through output enabling analysis of large batches, simul-taneous determination of many elements in a single sam-ple, large dynamic liner range and low chemical and ma-trix interferences (Gupta and Gupta, 2012). For the major-ity of analyses for ICP-OES it is necessary to convert solid samples into liquid solution by acid digestion. For this pur-pose, the closed -vessel microwave oven has been used, due to short heating times, reduced risk of contamination and low volume reagent requirements. The utilization of closed-vessel microwave oven improves limits of detec-tion of ICP-OES at the same time reducing reagent quanti-ties and cost of analysis. Given all the advantages of ICP-OES as well as the characteristics of the dietary supple-ments (complex matrix, presence of various elements in wide range of concentrations), it is slowly but surely be-coming the method of choice for determination of mac-ro and microelements in different types of dietary supple-ments (Barbosa et al., 2015; Castro et al., 2009; Marrero et al., 2013; Pytlakovska et al., 2012). Conclusion The data clearly demonstrates the effectiveness and productivity of ICP-OES as compared to more traditional methods such as atomic absorption spectrometry. The ICP-OES can make measurements across a wide range of con-centrations, thus allowing the analysis of a single solution per sample for all the elements of interest. In future, it seems more likely that sensitive methods such as ICP-OES will be-gin to play even greater role in the analysis of macro and mi-croelements in different types of dietary supplements. The performances of modern ICP-OES instruments make it pos-sible to meet the challenges of the complicated dietary sup-plement matrix and low limits of detection in order to ad-dress both product safety as well as product quality. ReferencesBarbosa, U.A., Fereira dos Santos, I., Ferreira, S.L.C., Pinto dos Santos, A.M., 2015. Determination of micro and macro elements in iron supplements used for treatment of anemia and evaluation employing chemometric analysis tools. RSC Advan. 5, 54046-54052. Baysal, A., Nil, O., Akman, S., 2013. Determination of trace metals in waste water and their removal processes. In: Dr Farrukh, M.A. (Ed. ), Atomic absorption spectroscopy, InTech, Croatia, pp. 145-171.Castro, J., Spraul, J.C., Kenneth-Marcus, R., 2009. Metals analysis of botanical products in various matrices using a single microwave digestion and inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES) method. Anal. Methods 1, 188-194. Gupta, A.P., Gupta, S., 2012. Elemental profiling: Its role and regulations. In: Dr Farrukh, M.A. (Ed. ), Atomic absorption spectroscopy, InTech, Croatia, pp. 37-60.Korfali, S.I., Hawi, T., Mroueh, M., 2013. Evaluation of heavy metal content in dietary supplements in Lebanon. Chem. Cent. J. 7, 1-13. Lesniewiecz, A., Jamorska, K., Zyrnicki W., 2006. Macro- and micro-nutrients and their bioavailability in polish herbal medicaments. Food Chem. 99, 670-679. Lewen, N., 2011. The use of atomic spectroscopy in the pharmaceutical industry for the determination of trace elements in pharmaceuticals. J. Pharm. Biomed. Anal. 55, 653-661. Marrero, J., Rabagliati, R.J., Leiva, E., Londonio, A., Smichowski, P., 2013. Inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometric determination of fifteen elements in dietary supplements: Are the concentrations declared on the label accurate? Microchem. J. 108, 81-86.Pytlakovska, K., Kita, A., Janoska, P., Polowniak, M., Kozik, V., 2012. Multi-element analysis of mineral and trace elements in medicinal herbs and their infusions. Food Chem. 135, 494-501. Sander, L.E., Sharpless, K.E., Wise, S.A., 2006. Dietary supplement standard reference materials. Life Sci. 78, 2044-2048.Tumir, H., Boshnir, J., Vedrina-Dragojevic, I., Dragun, Z., Tomic, S., Puntaric, D., Jurak, G., 2010. Monitoring of metal and metalloid content in dietary supplements on the Croatian market. Food Control 21, 885-889. Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 671 - 672 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 631.416:582.688.3Short communicationMineral composition of soil substrate of Arctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. fam. EricaceaeElena Petrova1*, Mile Markoski2, Gjoshe Stefkov11Institute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Majka Tereza 47,1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia2Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food, Department of Soil Sciences, University "Ss Cyril and Methodius", Blvd. Aleksandar Makedonski bb, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* petrova_elena@live.comIntroductionArctostaphylos uva-ursi (L.) Spreng. fam. Ericaceae, also known as red bearberry, bearberry or bear's ear, is a trailing, evergreen woody ground cover shrub with pad-dle-shaped leaves on flexible branches. It has thick, leath-ery leaves, rolled under the edges, which are yellow-green in spring, dark green in summer and reddish-purple in the fall, remaining on the bearberry for 1-3 years before fall-ing. The flowers are small, white or pink, bell-shaped and grouped in nodding clusters that bloom in summer. The fruits are white-red berries and they persist into winter. The bearberry is widely distributed on a global level.The use of bearberry leaves for the first time was lit-erally documented in the middle Ages in the Welsh "Phy-sicians of Nyddfai" from the 13th century. From the be-ginning of 19th century, bearberry is in official use. It was used for treatment of different diseases such as hydrops, lithiasis, in diabetes, for the therapy of gonorrhoea, etc. Nowadays only the use as urinary tract antiseptic and di-uretic remains due to the presence of arbutin and hydroqui-none (Jurica et. al., 2015). The herb also contains tannins that have a powerful astringent effect and protect from ear-ly stage of infections (Head, 2008). The usual form of ad-ministration is as infusion and it is of great value in diseas-es of the bladder and kidneys, it strengthens and tones the urinary passages. In Republic of Macedonia the natural populations of bearberry represent a unique source of leaves which are distributed in the following areas: Skopje Valley, moun-tains of Jakupica, Karadzica, Dautica, Shar Mountain, Os-ogovo Mountains and Mariovo. The knowledge of the tex-ture of these soils has a great importance, since these soils are formed only on certain substrates (pure and compact limestones and dolomites), where all physical, physical - mechanical, chemical and biological properties greatly de-pend on the parent material. The mechanical composition of these soils varies extensively and depends on the me-chanical composition of the residuum from which the min-eral part of the soil is composed, on the character of the limestone and the dolomite (the degree of weathering and silicification), on the deposition of nearby materials (from the higher fields) and on the degree of erosion (Filipovs-ki, 1997). Bearberry thrives on rocky ground in the light woods of black and white pine and in subalpic plant communities on limestone and dolomite ground. The content of bear-berry is tightly connected to the environmental conditions. Basic precondition for normal growth are the soils which is important to be rich in CaCO3. According to the field surveys the bearberry mostly grows on two soil types: cal-comelanosol, regosol (WRB, 2006). Here in Republic of Macedonia there are soils formed upon lime stones and do-lomites (Markoski et. al., 2013). Also important conditions for this plant are the climate conditions and sea level. Bear-berry usually lives at sea level over 1500 m on soils with high humidity, it cannot be seen in urban areas. Although it is an indigenous species for this region there is no liter-ature data for the composition of the soils that bearberry thrives on.Therefore the aim of this study was to analyze the min-eral composition of the soils that bearberry grows on.S8 PP 321672Maced. pharm. bull., 62 (suppl) 671 - 672 (2016)Student sessionPoster presentationsMaterials and methodsSoil samples S2, S3, S4 and S6 collected from four lo-cations on Mountain Korab, where bearberry populations are growing.Soil samples were collected from 10cm, 20cm and 30cm depth and used in ruined condition for the laboratory analyzes. The mean values are given in the results.The following methods were used for the analyses of the soils:- pH (reaction) of the soil solution was deter-mined electrometrically with a glass electrode in a water suspension and a suspension of 1M HCl (Mitrikeski andMitkova, 2006),- Content of CaCO3 determineted by Schebler calcimetar (Mitrikeski and Mitkova, 2006),- Content of organic matter was determined ac-cording to total Carbon (Orlov et. al.. 1981),- Total N was determined by calculation (Fili-povski, 1974),- Easily available forms of Phosphorus and Potassium were determined by Al-method (Pelivanovska, 2011),- Determination of cations (Al, Fe, Mg, Mn, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn) was done on Agilent Technolo-gies 700 Series ICP - OES.Results and discussionCommon chemical characteristics of the soil (pH, CaCO3, organic matter, total N, P2O5, K2O) were evaluat-ed. The obtained data showed pH=7.7 for S2, pH=8 for S3, pH=7.9 for S4 and pH=7.6 for S6 in a water soil suspen-sion. The values of the pH reaction of the soil solution were closely correlated with the content of CaCO3. Highest val-ue for CaCO3 was found in S3 (60.81%) and lowest in S2 (44.16%). Regarding the content of easily accessible forms of Phosphorus and Potassium, these soils are poor in P2O5 and little to middle supplied with K2O.The presence of target elements (CaO, Al, Fe, Mg, Mn, Cr, Cu, Ni, Pb, Zn) was analyzed with ICP OES. CaO was most present in S3 and least in S6, Al was most present in S2 and least in S3, Fe was most present in S2 and least in S3, Mg was most present in S6 and least in S3, Mn was most present in S6 and least in S3, Cr was most present in S2 and least in S4, Cu was most present in S2 and least in S3, Ni was most present in S2 and least in S4, Pb was most present in S4 and least in S3, Zn was most present in S4 and least in S3.ConclusionBearberry population viability and the content of bio-active compounds in bearberry are tightly connected to the environmental conditions. pH value of analyzed samples varied from 7.6 to 7.9. Precondition for normal growth of this plant that lives on limestone and dolomite ground are the soils which is important to be rich in CaCO3 and highest value of CaCO3 (60.81%) found in S3 and lowest (44.16%) found in S2 confirms that. CaO was most present in S3 and least in S6. These soils are poor in P2O5 and lit-tle to middle supplied with K2O. Regarding cations, when the analyzed soil samples were compared between them self, S2 was richest in Fe, Cr, Ni and Cu and S6 in Mg and Mn; S3 was poorest with Al, Fe, Mg, Mn, Cu, Pb and Zn.ReferencesFilipovski, G., 1997. Soil of the Republic of Macedonia. Macedonian academy of sciences and arts. Skopje. Vol III. p.p. 130 - 213.Head, K.A., 2008. Natural approaches to prevention and treatment of infections of the ower urinary tract. Altern. Med. Rev. 13, 227-244.Jurica, K., Karaconji, I.B., Segan, S., Opsenica, D.M., Kremer, D., 2015. Quantitative analysis of arbutin and hydroquinone in strawberry tree (Arbutus unedo L., Ericaceae) leaves by gas chromatography-mass spectrometry. Arh. Hig. Rada Toksikol. 66, 197-202. Markoski, M., Mitkova, T., Tanaskovic, V., Vasilevski, K., Neckovski, S., 2013. The influence of mechanical composition and organic matter on the retention curves at soil moisture in the humic calcaric regosol. 1st International congress for soil-water-plants XIII Congress in soil sciences. Mitrikeski, J., Mitkova, T., 2006. Practicum on pedology, second edition. University "Ss. Cyril and Methodius", Faculty of Agricultural Sciences and Food, Skopje.Orlov, S.D., Grishina, A.L.,1981. Practicum on chemistry on humus. Moscow University Press, pp.1- 271.Pelivanovska, V., Jordanoska, B., Mitkova, T., Markoski, M., 2011. Heavy metal content in soil and oriental tobacco manufactured in Republic of Macedonia. International Conference 100 years Bulgarian Soil Science. Proceedings May, 2011 Sofia, Bulgaria.WRB - World reference base for soil resources (2006): ftp://ftp.fao.org/agl/agll/docs/wsrr103e.pdf (accessed on 22.03.2016).Poster presentationsMacedonian pharmaceutical bulletin, 62 (suppl) 673 - 674 (2016)ISSN 1409 - 8695UDC: 547.918:543.544.5.068.7Short communicationHPLC determination of amygdalin in different plant materialCvetanka Petrevska*, Ivana Cvetkovikj, Gjose StefkovInstitute of Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, "Ss Cyril and Methodius" University, Majka Tereza 47, 1000 Skopje, Republic of Macedonia* cvetanka.petrevska@outlook.comIntroductionAmygdalin (D-mandelonitrile-b-Dgentiobioside) is a cyanogenic glycoside derived from the aromatic amino acid phenylalanine. Amygdalin is hydrolysed in the pres-ence of the enzyme amygdalase and water, involving a two-stage process to produce glucose along with an agly-cone made up of benzaldehyde and odourless hydrocyanic acid. Natural amygdalin has a dextrorotatory (R) configu-ration that is considered to be the active form. Neo-amyg-dalin is its inactive (S) isomer and does not occur in nature. Isoamygdalin is the name of the mixture of the epimers R-amygdalin and S-amygdalin. The term 'laetrile' (D-man-delonitrile-ss-glucuronide) is an acronym from laevorotato-ry and mandelonitrile, used to describe a purified form of amygdalin (Fenselau et al., 1977). The occurrence of cya-nogenic glycosides is widespread. Amygdalin is very com-mon among plants of the Rosaceae, particularly the Prunus genus. This includes not only the bitter almond but also the kernels of apricots, peaches and plums (Pengelly, 2004). Hydrocyanic acid, which is the product of the hydrolysis of amygdalin reflexively stimulates the respiratory center and produces antitussive and antiasthmatic effects (Lv et al., 2005).Amygdalin is supposed to be useful in tretman of can-cer, but still there is no reliable clinical evidence for this in-dication (Blahata et al., 2016). Many hypotheses have been proposed to explain the anticancer effects of amygdalin, among them, amygdalin enhances the functions of pancre-atic enzymes, which may prevent transformation of can-cer primordial germ cells or has the capacity to restores the vitamin deficiency that could lead to metabolic disorders in cancer patients (Chang et al., 2006). Moreover, treat-ment with high concentrations of amygdalin on the human DU145 and LNCaP prostate cancer cells can induce apop-totic cell death (Chang et al., 2006). On the other hand, Chang et al.